Joint Learning-Based Stabilization of Multiple
Unknown Linear Systems
Mohamad Kazem Shirani Faradonbeh, Aditya Modi
Abstract
Learning-based control of linear systems received a lot of attentions recently. In popular settings,
the true dynamical models are unknown to the decision-maker and need to be interactively learned by
applying control inputs to the systems. Unlike the matured literature of eﬃcient reinforcement learning
policies for adaptive control of a single system, results on joint learning of multiple systems are not
currently available. Especially, the important problem of fast and reliable joint-stabilization remains
unaddressed and so is the focus of this work.
We propose a novel joint learning-based stabilization
algorithm for quickly learning stabilizing policies for all systems understudy, from the data of unstable
state trajectories. The presented procedure is shown to be notably eﬀective such that it stabilizes the
family of dynamical systems in an extremely short time period.
1
Introduction
Study of reinforcement learning algorithms for sequential learning-based decision-making in unknown linear
systems has become increasingly popular in the recent years. In the canonical version of the problem, the
true dynamics matrices of the plant are unknown, and the goal consists of adaptive design of the control
input for minimizing deviations from optimal policy.
Still, the control actions must be diverse enough
to lead to accurate identiﬁcation of the unknown parameters [1]. The existing literature is notably rich,
including adaptive policies based on optimistic approximations of the dynamics matrices over a conﬁdence
region [2, 3], as well as plugin estimates of unknown parameters after leveraging a dither signal [4, 5, 6],
Bayesian approaches [7, 8, 9], and statistical bootstrap [10].
An important problem in in diﬀerent areas of control theory is that of stabilization. In adaptive control
that the true dynamical model is not available, a reinforcement learning algorithm needs to stabilize the
system, prior to designing and applying an eﬃcient policy for minimizing the cost function. For a single
system, stabilization procedures based on conﬁdence regions around dynamics matrices [2, 11, 5] and plugin
estimates of them [12, 13, 14] are proposed.
However, an interesting version of the problem that aims to stabilize multiple unknown linear systems is
not addressed in the existing literature and so will be considered in this work. It is shown for the simpler
version of the problem that by utilizing known similarities among a group of sub-systems, the total regret of
reinforcement learning policies can decrease [9]. However, the more interesting version of the problem that
similarities are not known is not addressed. Indeed, in the existing literature it is assumed that stabilization
of the systems is a priori completed and stabilizing policies are provided to the reinforcement learning
policy [15].
In this work, we study joint stabilization of multiple unknown stochastic linear dynamical systems in
a general framework and under minimal assumptions.
That is, we consider a joint estimator that can
learn dynamics matrices of multiple linear systems, without having access to the similarities among them.
Technically, the presented procedure jointly learns the linear systems in a commonly used and realistic setting
that the true dynamics matrices are unknown linear combinations of some unknown basis matrices ([16], see
the equation in (4)).
For learning multiple linear systems, a recent work establishes that if all systems are (marginally) stable,
the identiﬁcation error rates signiﬁcantly decrease by jointly learning the dynamics matrices [17]. Therefore,
notably short state-input trajectories are capable of providing accurate estimates. However, since during a
stabilization procedure the system is with high probability unstable [1], the existing analysis is not applicable
1
arXiv:2201.01387v1  [eess.SY]  1 Jan 2022

to the setting of this work. Accordingly, we aim to study if joint-stabilization can guarantee system stabilities
faster.
Note that for stabilization purposes, shortness of trajectories is extremely crucial since unstable
evolution of the plants for a long time, defeats the purpose and is exactly what we aim to preclude.
The structure of this work is provided next.
In Section 2, we discuss the backgrounds and relevant
technical preliminaries. That includes the precise formulation of the problem, followed by brief review of
stabilization of unknown linear systems, as well as an overview of joint-learning of multiple unknown systems.
Then, in Section 3, we introduce an algorithm for joint learning-based stabilization and discuss its details
together with intuitions of diﬀerent steps. The analysis of the proposed algorithm as well as interpretation
of the results and tuning of parameters presented in Section 4. Finally, we investigate future directions for
extending the results and express interesting problems that this work paves the roads towards.
Notation:
For a positive integer n, deﬁne [n] = {1, · · · , n}. For vectors, we use ||·|| to refer to Euclidean
norm. To measure matrices, we use the operator norms |||M|||, which for M ∈Rd1×d2, is deﬁned as the
maximum value of ||Mv||/||v|| among all non-zero v ∈Rd2. Moreover, ρ (M) denotes the spectral radius of
the square matrix M. For a linear dynamical control system that with the open-loop transition matrix A
and the input matrix B, we use θ = [A, B]⊤to denote the dynamics parameter (see (1)).
2
Setup and Preliminaries
In this section, we discuss the problem of joint stabilization for multiple unknown linear system. To that end,
we ﬁrst introduce the technical framework including a general setting that relates the dynamics parameters of
diﬀerent systems. Then, we discuss the widely-used concept of Riccati equation, followed by its applications
as a universal standard method for stabilizing linear systems based on fully accurate knowledge of the
dynamics matrices.
Next, the statistical learning framework for jointly estimating multiple linear systems will be brieﬂy
explained. We present a reliable estimator that utilizes possible similarities among the systems understudy
for accurate identiﬁcation of the unknown dynamics parameters. The proposed method fully learns the
dynamics matrices from the observed state trajectories such that no knowledge about the similarities between
the systems is required.
2.1
Problem Formulation
Suppose that there are m linear dynamical systems, where system i ∈[m] follows the stochastic state
equation
xi (t + 1) = A⋆
i xi (t) + B⋆
i ui (t) + ξi (t) .
(1)
Above, the state of system i at time t is represented by xi (t) ∈Rdx, while ui (t) ∈Rdu is the control action
applied to system i at time t and ξi (t) represent the exogenous stochastic disturbance. Therefore, a control
policy designs ui (t) for all i ∈[m], t ≥0 and at time t applies ui (t) to system i. Then, the policy observes
the resulting state trajectories xi (t) , i ∈[m] over time. Note that the decision-maker is completely oblivious
about the disturbance noise. The overall goal is to ensure that all systems perform in a stable manner, as
elaborated below.
Importantly, all dynamics matrices θ⋆
i = [A⋆
i , B⋆
i ]⊤are unknown to the control policy. Thus, design of
the control inputs for all systems is merely based on the observed data of multidimensional state trajectories.
More precisely, a reliable method for designing the input and using the observations for accurately learning
{A⋆
i , B⋆
i }m
i=1 is required for learning to stabilize the systems. Note that for stabilization, approximations of
dynamics parameters are required for all m dynamical systems. Furthermore, the lengths of the trajectories
is extremely limited since uncertainties about the dynamical models in (1) destabilize (a majority or all of)
the systems. Accordingly, one needs to learn under data scarcity since unstable dynamics cannot operate
in long-term. This issue of limited data renders joint learning doubly important. So, the goal is to learn to
stabilize fast and under instabilities, as well as to study eﬀectiveness of doing so in a jointly manner.
To proceed, denote the true dynamics parameter of system i by θ⋆
i = [A⋆
i , B⋆
i ]⊤∈R(dx+du)×dx. To have
a nontrivial problem, we assume that all systems are stabilizable in the sense that for all i ∈[m], there
2

exists some unknown Gi ∈Rdu×dx such that all eigenvalues of the closed-loop matrices A⋆
i +B⋆
i Gi are inside
the unit-circle (i.e., their magnitudes as complex numbers are less than 1). Clearly, this is the most general
setting that stabilization of linear dynamical systems is feasible.
2.2
Stabilization of Linear Systems
Now, we discuss the hypothetical situation of stabilizing linear systems with exactly known dynamics matrices
and Riccati equations. It is well-known that stabilizability is a suﬃcient and necessary condition for existence
of solutions for Riccati equations for strictly convex quadratic cost functions [18, 19, 11]. Furthermore, Riccati
equations provide a stabilizing feedback in a computationally fast procedure. To proceed, let Q ∈Rdx×dx
and R ∈Rdu×du be arbitrary positive deﬁnite matrices. Then, suppose that the positive semideﬁnite matrix
P (θ⋆
i ) solves the ﬁxed-point matrix equation
P (θ) = Q + A⊤P (θ) A −A⊤P (θ) B
 B⊤P (θ) B + R
−1 B⊤P (θ) A,
(2)
for A = A⋆
i , B = B⋆
i , and use P (θ⋆
i ) to deﬁne the feedback matrix
G (θ⋆
i ) = −

B⋆
i
⊤P (θ⋆
i ) B⋆
i + R
−1
B⋆
i
⊤P (θ⋆
i ) A⋆
i .
So, the algebraic Riccati equation in (2) provides stabilizing feedback matrices G (θ⋆
i ), for all systems
i = 1, · · · , m, as stated below.
Theorem 1 It holds that ρ (A⋆
i + B⋆
i G (θ⋆
i )) < 1.
Note that θ⋆
i is unknown and so G (θ⋆
i ) is unavailable. However, it is shown that coarse-grained approxima-
tions of θ⋆
i , i ∈[m] are suﬃcient for stabilizing the systems such that if


bθi, −θ⋆
i


 is small enough, G

bθi,

suﬃces for stabilization and we have ρ

A⋆
i + B⋆
i G

bθi,

< 1. Technical statements and details are beyond
the scope of this work and can be found in the relevant literature [12, 11, 13, 5, 14].
2.3
Joint Learning of Linear Systems
Next, we discuss joint learning of multiple unknown linear dynamical systems. Later on, we propose an
algorithm for utilizing the following joint-learning procedures for learning-based stabilization of the unknown
systems understudy. First, we rewrite the dynamics in (1) based the aforementioned notation θ⋆
i , together
with the observation vector of system i at time t, denoted by zi (t) =
h
xi (t)⊤, ui (t)⊤i⊤
. So, the data
generation model is
xi (t + 1) = θ⋆
i
⊤zi (t) + ξi (t) , i ∈[m], 0 ≤t ≤T,
(3)
for some joint-stabilization time length T. Clearly, it is of crucial importance to ﬁnd the smallest possible
T, yet ensuring that stabilization will be successful.
We assume that the systems understudy share some commonalities such that for some shared bases
Γ⋆
j ∈R(dx+du)×dx, j ∈[ℓ], it holds that
θ⋆
i =
ℓ
X
j=1
ω⋆
i,jΓ⋆
j,
(4)
where ω⋆
i,j are the coeﬃcients reﬂecting the contributions of shared bases in constructing the dynamics
matrices of the systems.
Importantly, all the coeﬃcients ω⋆
i,j and matrices Γ⋆
j are fully unknown and
need to be learned from the data. Settings of the form of (4) are ubiquitous in the literature of jointly
learning multiple parameters and provide a realistic and eﬀective framework for utilizing (possibly unknown)
similarities among quantities of interest in diﬀerent disciplines [20, 16, 21, 22].
For succinctness, denote Θ⋆= [θ⋆
1, · · · , θ⋆
m], Γ⋆= [Γ⋆
1, · · · , Γ⋆
ℓ], and ω⋆=

ω⋆
i,j

1≤i≤m,1≤j≤ℓ. So, the
goal of learning is to approximate Θ⋆leveraging the fact that it accepts the representation in (4) based on
Γ⋆, ω⋆. For this purpose, (3) recommends that we compute bΘT that minimizes the total sum of squares of
3

deviations xi (t + 1) −θ⋆
i
⊤zi (t);
bΘT = argmin
Γ,ω
m
X
i=1
k
X
j=1
1
||zi (τj−1)||2 ∨1
τj−1
X
t=τj−1


xi (t + 1) −


ℓ
X
j=1
ωi,jΓj


⊤
zi (t)


2
.
(5)
Further details of this estimation procedure will be discussed shortly. Theoretical performance analyses
of this estimator for stable systems is recently established [17].
However, eﬀectiveness of such learning
methods in unstable dynamics and for learning-to-stabilize is not studied to the date, and is the focus of the
subsequent sections. Finally, although the objective quantity of interest is a non-convex function of Γ⋆, ω⋆,
it admits computationally eﬃcient solutions and accurate minimizers can be found fast [23, 24, 25, 22].
3
Joint Learning-based Stabilization
Broadly speaking, the joint learning-based stabilization Algorithm 1 applies random control inputs in diﬀerent
epochs, collects the observed data, and calculates the joint estimate of all dynamics matrices using a properly
deﬁned loss function.
Then, Algorithm 1 uses learned-parameters to design stabilizing feedbacks for all
systems according to discrete time algebraic Riccati equations. The randomization of the control inputs
consists of both random feedback matrices as well as additive stochastic dither signals, as elaborated below.
The inputs of Algorithm 1 are the time length T that the algorithm can interact with all dynamical
systems, the standard deviation σG that determines the normal distribution from which the columns of
random feedback matrices are sampled, the standard deviation of the stochastic dither signals ηi (t) denoted
by ση, and the integer k that indicates the number of epochs of interacting with the system, such that at
the beginning of each epoch a new random feedback matrix is employed.
Algorithm 1 takes T and divides the time window 0 ≤t ≤T to k epochs of (almost) equal lengths.
During each epoch j ∈[ℓ], a random feedback matrix Gj is generated by independently sampling all du
columns of Gj from the multivariate Gaussian distribution N (0, σGIdx), where the standard deviation σG is
provided to the algorithm as an input parameter. Random feedback matrices of this form are used before for
stabilization of a single system [13]. The rationale of employing random matrices is that some singularities
can occur for a measure-zero set of closed-loop matrices, making acceptable learning impossible [26]. To
avoid these singularities that prevent accurate learning of dynamical systems, the loops in all systems are
closed through random linear feedback matrices [11]. Further details are beyond the framework of this paper
and can be found in the cited literature.
The control inputs are also randomized through an additive dither signal, in order to improve exploration,
as will be explained shortly. In fact, during epoch j, the algorithm employs the control action ui (t) =
Gjxi (t) + ηi (t) to system i, where the random signals ηi (t) are generated independently from the du-
dimensional Gaussian distribution N (0, σηIdu). Intuitively, adding ηi (t) to the feedback control signal helps
to enrich the data and obtain acceptable approximations of the unknown parameters Γ⋆, ω⋆. In fact, since
the covariates xi (t) and ui (t) are highly correlated through the feedback matrix Gj, the dither signals ηi (t)
weaken the correlation rendering the data of state trajectories more diverse and richer.
Then, the designed control inputs as well as the resulting state vectors of all systems are gathered and
used for jointly learning all dynamics parameters. So, the data for designing m stabilizing policies consists of
{zi (t) : 1 ≤i ≤m, 0 ≤t ≤T}, as deﬁned before (3). Now, the unknown dynamics parameters of all systems,
which is denoted by Θ⋆, is estimated by (5). It is based on a sum-of-squares loss function, together with an
appropriate rescaling factor so that the estimator will be able to address the (possibly) unstable behavior of
the systems which are destabilized by the random feedback matrices Gj. Thus, the algorithm jointly learns
the unknown true dynamics of the systems by calculating bΘT in (5).
Note that in (5), the time frame τj−1 ≤t < τj corresponds to epoch j. So, the data observed during
epoch j forms the deviation


xi (t + 1) −
 
ℓP
j=1
ωi,jΓj
!⊤
zi (t)


2
. Then, adding up over all times t of epoch j,
4

Algorithm 1 : Joint Learning-based Stabilization
Inputs: joint-stabilization length T, feedback scale σG, dither signal scale ση, number of epochs k
Output: stabilizing feedbacks
n
G

bθi,T
om
i=1
Let τ0 = 0
for epoch j = 1, · · · , k do
Draw independent columns of Gj from N (0, σGIdx)
Let τj = ⌊jT/k⌋
for epoch τj−1 ≤t < τj do
for system i = 1, · · · , m do
Draw ηi (t) from N (0, σηIdu), independently
Apply control action ui (t) = Gjxi (t) + ηi (t)
end for
end for
end for
Using (5), calculate bΘT =
h
bθ1,T , · · · , bθm,T
i
Return
n
G

bθi,T
om
i=1, according to (6)
we divide the obtained loss of system i by the quantity ||zi (τj−1)||2, where τj−1 is the start time of epoch j.
Then, the summation of the resulting rescaled squared deviations over all systems and all epochs constitutes
the total loss function.
The reason for adding the above rescaling is that instabilities of the dynamical
systems make the state vectors exponentially growing as time grows [26]. Therefore, state vectors of future
epochs are much larger than those of the current epoch. To ensure that data of all epochs are balanced and
will be eﬀectively used in the learning procedure, we employ this rescaling factor.
Now, because the joint estimate bΘT =
h
bθ1,T , · · · , bθm,T
i
contains estimates for all system dynamics, bθi,T
is used to stabilize system i. That is, since we expect bθi,T to provide an acceptable approximation of θ⋆
i ,
according to the discussions in Subsection 2.2, we expect G

bθi,T

to stabilize the system i, where
G (θ) = −
 B⊤P (θ) B + R
−1 B⊤P (θ) A.
(6)
Therefore, Algorithm 1 returns the feedback matrices
n
G

bθi,T
om
i=1 as stabilizers for the systems.
4
Analysis of Algorithm 1
In this section, we report various analyses for studying Algorithm 1 and its performance for successfully
learning to stabilize all the systems. In the sequel, eﬀects of diﬀerent parameters in the success rates of the
algorithm for utilizing similarities of dynamical systems are studied.
We simulate m = 100 diﬀerent linear dynamical systems of dimensions dx = 10 and du = 6. Entries of
the ℓ= 5 basis matrices Γ⋆
j, as well as the coeﬃcients ω⋆
i,j in (4), are generated randomly. Then, the true
dynamics parameters of all systems θ⋆
i , i = 1, · · · , m, are calculated according to (4). In the above procedure,
the open-loop spectral radius values {ρ (A⋆
i )}m
i=1 vary in the range from 1.2 to 1.5.
Therefore, all systems are open-loop unstable and proper design of stabilizing policies are required to
steer those eigenvalues of A⋆
i outside the unit-circle towards inside of that, through the input matrices B⋆
i , i =
1, · · · , m. Furthermore, all stochastic disturbance vectors ξi (t) are independent and have the distribution
N

0, σ2
ξIdx

, for σξ = 2. Unless otherwise explicitly mentioned, the matrices Q, R used in the Riccati
equation (2) are Q = Idx and R = rIdu, where r = 0.25. In all experiments, for each curve, the numbers
are generated by running the simulation with 10 diﬀerent random seeds and the standard errors bars are
plotted.
In order to solve the optimization problem in (5), Adam optimizer in PyTorch is employed [27]. The
gradient steps are properly scaled according to a mini-batch stochastic gradient descent approach.
For
5

Figure 1: The graphs indicate the portion of systems stabilized by Algorithm 1 versus the joint-stabilization
length T. Each plot corresponds to a value σG ∈{0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2}, for diﬀerent number of epochs k = 3, 4, 5.
Dashed curves present the stabilized portion by individual stabilization methods.
6

Figure 2: The graphs indicate the portion of systems stabilized by Algorithm 1 versus the joint-stabilization
length T. Each plot corresponds to a value ση ∈{0.3, 0.9, 2, 5}, for diﬀerent number of epochs k = 3, 4, 5.
Dashed curves present the stabilized portion by individual stabilization methods.
Figure 3: The fraction of stabilized dynamical systems by Algorithm 1 is plotted versus r, where the
matrices in the Riccati equation are Q = Idx, R = rIdu. The graphs correspond to the joint-stabilization
lengths T = 15, 25, for diﬀerent number of epochs k = 3, 4, 5. As before, dashed lines depict the fraction of
individually stabilized systems under the same conditions. Note that the ranges of y-axes are diﬀerent for
the graphs.
7

solving the discrete-time Ricatti equation in (2), we use the SciPy library in Python. On the other hand,
to compare to individual stabilization of dynamical systems, the least-squares method that is known to be
eﬀective, is applied [11, 13].
In Fig. 1, the fraction of m = 100 systems that Algorithm 1 successfully stabilizes is reported versus the
joint-stabilization length T. Each graph corresponds to diﬀerent value of σG, while the scaling of the dither
signal is ﬁxed to ση = 2. Each curve represents a ﬁxed number of epochs k ∈{3, 4, 5}, as speciﬁed in the
legends. Moreover, the dashed curves depict corresponding stabilization rates through individual learning
methods that apply to each system separately. These plots indicate that small values of σG leads to eﬀective
joint-stabilization, remarkably faster than individual stabilization of the systems.
However, for large σG , the random feedback matrices Gj diversify the systems and deteriorate their
similarities.
Further, the eigen-spectrum of the resulting closed-loop matrices are so diﬀerent that the
magnitudes of the state vectors of m systems scale diﬀerently. Therefore, such chaotic dynamical behaviors
defeat the purpose of joint-learning and deteriorate the performance of the joint stabilization algorithm. This
phenomena indicates that in practice the value of σG needs to be selected carefully and suﬃciently small.
Still, it cannot be too small, since random feedback matrices of negligible magnitude practically reduce the
number of epochs k to 1, which does not provide an acceptable performance.
Next, the performance of Algorithm 1 for diﬀerent values of ση are depicted in Fig. 2. The scale of
random feedback matrices σG = 0.3 is ﬁxed, while for ση four values of 0.3, 0.9, 2, 5 are performed, each of
which in one graph. Again, diﬀerent number of epochs k are distinguished by colors. Similar to the previous
ﬁgure, the fraction of dynamical systems that are stabilized by individual learning methods are reﬂected by
dashed curves in each plot. According to Fig. 2, larger ση values help the joint-stabilization algorithm to
success slightly faster.
The above positive eﬀect of ση on the success rate of Algorithm 1 is reasonable because larger dither signals
ηi (t) increase explorations by randomizing ui (t) around the state-feedback vectors of Gjxi (t). However, this
eﬀect is not very large since instabilities during the implementation of the algorithms makes exponentially
growing state vectors dominant, compared to ηi (t). Furthermore, since the stochastic dither signals are
drawn independently at every time step and so does not have any signiﬁcant future consequences, ση can
be relatively large without deteriorating inﬂuences on the performance. Note that this is totally opposite to
the eﬀect of large σG we discussed in the previous paragraph.
Fig. 3 contains the rates of successful stabilization among all m = 100 linear dynamical systems. The
horizontal axes reﬂect diﬀerent values of r, which is the scaling of the matrix R = rIdu that is used in (2) for
calculating P

bθi,T

and G

bθi,T

. As can be seen in Fig. 3, smaller values of r yield to better stabilization
rates. That is intuitively consistent with the roles of Q, R in (2) for linear dynamical systems with quadratic
cost functions [28]. Indeed, smaller R matrices penalize the control actions ui (t) less severely compared to
the penalty for state vectors through Q = Idx. Accordingly, for smaller r, the control inputs have more
freedom for stabilizing the dynamical systems.
5
Concluding Remarks and Future Work
We studied the problem of stabilization of multiple linear systems with unknown dynamics matrices. The
focus is on utilization of similarities of the dynamical systems for joint learning-based stabilization of all of
them. Importantly, the framework consists of a general setting that the dynamics matrices are unknown
linear functions of some unknown matrices. We propose a joint-stabilization algorithm for learning to stabilize
all the systems, despite the compound uncertainties about the dynamics matrices. The performance of the
algorithm is studied in extensive numerical experiments, showing that the main objective of fast stabilization
is achieved signiﬁcantly better compared to individual learning-based methods.
To the authors’ knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst that considers joint learning-based control of multiple
unknown systems in a general setting. Accordingly, the roadmap towards several interesting problems are
pointed out in this paper. An immediate future work of interest is that of theoretical analysis of the algorithm
and its provable eﬀectiveness. Extending the framework to other problems in multi-agent control such as
cooperative and non-cooperative distributed adaptive control of dynamical systems is another direction for
future studies.
8
