IEEE Copyright Notice
Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE
Personal use of this material is permitted. Per-
mission from IEEE must be obtained for all other
uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising
or promotional purposes, creating new collective
works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists,
or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work
in other works.
Accepted to be published in: 6th Annual Conf.
on Computational Science & Computational Intel-
ligence (CSCI’19); Dec 05-07, 2019; Las Vegas,
Nevada, USA;
https://american-cse.org/csci2019/#!/home
DOI 10.1109/CSCI49370.2019.00033
arXiv:2001.02300v2  [cs.CR]  17 Mar 2020

Plunge into the Underworld: A Survey on
Emergence of Darknet
Victor Adewopo
School of Information Technology
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA

Bilal Gonen
School of Information Technology
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA

Said Varlioglu
School of Information Technology
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA

Murat Ozer
School of Information Technology
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA

Abstract—The availability of sophisticated technologies and
methods of perpetrating criminogenic activities in the cyberspace
is a pertinent societal problem. Darknet is an encrypted network
technology that uses the internet infrastructure and can only be
accessed using special network conﬁguration and software tools
to access its contents which are not indexed by search engines.
Over the years darknets traditionally are used for crimino-
genic activities and famously acclaimed to promote cybercrime,
procurements of illegal drugs, arms deals, and cryptocurrency
markets. In countries with oppressive regimes, censorship of
digital communications, and strict policies prompted journalists
and freedom ﬁghters to seek freedom using darknet technologies
anonymously while others simply exploit it for illegal activities.
Recently, MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
augmented a tool that can be used to expose illegal activities
behind the darknet. We studied relevant literature reviews to
help researchers to better understand the darknet technologies,
identify future areas of research on the darknet and ultimately
to optimize how data-driven insights can be utilized to support
governmental agencies in unraveling the depths of darknet
technologies. This paper focuses on the use of internet for crimes,
deanonymization of TOR-services, darknet a new digital street
for illicit drugs, research questions and hypothesis to guide
researchers in further studies. Finally, in this study, we propose
a model to examine and investigate anonymous online illicit
markets.1
Index Terms—Darknet, Surface web, Deep web, Tor-services,
Illicit Drugs, cryptocurrency, Cybercrime.
I. INTRODUCTION
Darknet is referred to as the encrypted part of internet char-
acterized with illegal and criminal activities. Darknet gained
recognition in 1971, when two students of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Stanford Universities traded illegal
drugs (i.e., marijuana) using the Advanced Research Projects
1This paper was presented in 6th Annual Conference on Computational
Science & Computational Intelligence (CSCI’19); Dec 05-07, 2019; Las
Vegas, Nevada, USA; https://americancse.org/events/csci2019,
(c)2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CSCI49370.2019.00032
Fig. 1. Surface Web, Deep Web, And Dark Web Explained [5]
Agency Network (ARPANET) [1]. There are often misconcep-
tions with the terms “Surface web”, “Deep web”, and “Dark
web” which are relatively interconnected but does not mean
exactly the same thing.
The surface web are web pages that are unencrypted and
can be accessed using traditional search engines (e.g. Google,
Bing, Yahoo). The surface web consists of billions static
webpages and it occupies only 10% of the internet space [2].
The dark web is a layer within the deep web and is not
accessible using a standard browser. A number of techniques
and tools have been designed to understand and crawl the
deep web. A recent report indicated that the low harvest
rate of deep web, about 647,000 distinct web forms, were
found by sampling 25 million pages using Google index
which constitutes only 2.5% [3] [4]. Deep web are contents
available on the web that cannot be indexed or accessed by
using search engines but can be accessed using a speciﬁc
URL address. The deep web contains about 96% of contents
available on the internet [3]. Darknet is an encrypted network
technology that uses the internet infrastructure and can only
be accessed using special network conﬁguration and software
tools to access its contents [6]. The darknet uses peer-to-peer
connection and privacy networks such as I2p, Tor & Freenet
to ensure the anonymity of users [7]. Traditionally, darknet
is used for criminal activities, cybercrime, procurement of

2019 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI)
illegal drugs, child pornography, cryptocurrency markets, and
hacking. The use of cryptocurrencies aided the sales of ille-
gal and counterfeit products.Cryptocurrency (i.e., Bitcoins) is
adopted as a method of payment in darknet market because
of its anonymous characteristics which make it more difﬁcult
to link the users with any speciﬁc bank account details. A
Cybersecurity ﬁrm “UpGuard” reported 419 million Facebook
user’s data breach in April 2019. Data exposed publicly on the
Amazon server includes; passwords, user IDs, and check-ins
[8]. Similarly, in September 2018, over 50 million Facebook
users’ breached data was auctioned at a bitcoin value of 3$
per each user’s data on the darknet [9].
II. CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES ON DARKNET
A. Use of Darknet for Internet Crimes
The danger inherent in Tor services is signiﬁcantly high
compared to the perceived beneﬁt. Oppressive regimes increas-
ingly wants to monitor all digital communication, however
lack of national laws and international cooperation by agencies
is a big challenge in combating cyber-crimes on darknet
websites [10]. Tor is a software that ensures user’s anonymity
using three (3) relay nodes. Entry relay serves as a point
of entry to the Tor network. The middle relay transports
trafﬁc from an entry relay to the exit relay. This is used to
ensure anonymity and bridge gap between the entry and exit
relay. The exit relay is the ﬁnal relay that Tor trafﬁc passes
through before it reaches it’s destination. The IP address of
the exit relay is interpreted as the source of the trafﬁc. The
Tor software emerged through the US-government funded The
Onion Routing project (TOR) in 2001. Unethical contents are
signiﬁcantly high in darknet websites and users are inclined to
engage more in unethical activities through support received
in Tor service communities [11].
In October 2019, US department of justice charged two
residents of Utah and 337 site users in a worldwide take down
of largest darknet child pornography website called “Welcome
to Video” [12]. Cyberspace is a platform for us to share ideas
and create improvements within our society, the increment
in the utilization of cyberspace is faced with vulnerabilities.
The increased rate on the use of cyberspace by fraudsters
to generate malicious activities such as spam, identity theft
DDoS, DRDoS requires a swift intervention. DDoS is the
largest amount of cyber threat with over 48% of cyber-attacks
[13].
An alarming DDoS attack hit a peak of 400Gbps using a
Network Time Protocol (NTP), CompTIA research revealed
that a greater percentage of security breaches comes through
inadvertent oversight of non-technical staffs. A novel approach
is proposed to train and raise awareness of end-users on the
overlooked basic security measures [14] [15].
Darknet can be used in monitoring cyber threats through
deployment of technology visualization and image processing
techniques. Darknet based monitoring system is designed to
trap unused IP addresses with non-interactive hosts as a source
of investigating and gathering intelligence [16]
B. Deanonymization of Tor Services
Tor services are considered one of the most popular
anonymizing services. The survey of Saleh et al., [17] classi-
ﬁed anonymity and security as the highest recurring keywords
associated with TOR services in 26 years of research on
TOR services. Identiﬁcation of users’ anonymity is a common
phenomenon that has been studied by researchers. Many kinds
of research have been carried out on deanonymization and
development of new algorithms to crawl the Tor services,
over 55% of Tor researches focused on deanonymization and
only 25% of the studies focused on performance analysis and
improvement. Studies show that differentiation of Tor services
can ultimately be used to block TOR trafﬁc [18]
The Dark Web may perhaps be smaller compared to what
we all project. The research of Owenson et al. [19] seeks
to identify the actual size of the darknet services, the study
illustrated that the dark web is not as huge as many researchers
perceived. The use of web crawlers was implemented to
retrieve the contents of long-lived and short-lived hidden
services. It was revealed that more than half of the services
discovered disappeared within 24 hours. Furthermore, HTTP
is commonly used for longer-lived onions and zeroNet for the
shorter-lived onions [20].
Over the years, closure of a new darknet service leads
to evolution of another in a new form [21]. The darknet
is a dynamic and agile environment for market activities,
vendor activities declined after operation onymous which lead
to the termination of 410 hidden services and arrest of site
vendors, over time criminal activities progressed geometrically
in a new form [22]. Lane et al. studies analyzed market
activities to understand vulnerabilities to the interference of
darknet markets using EAST (Event Analysis of systemic
Teamwork) broken-links. This approach was proposed as a key
component that law enforcement agencies can use to target
the intentional disruption of services. [23] The use of IoT
devices including wearables, smart devices, and smart homes
has proven beneﬁcial to human activities. Utilization of these
devices is on the rise and is vulnerable to cyber-attack. A study
on a famous malware of the IoT was conducted to propose new
methods of detecting cyberattacks before they occur. Ozawa et
al. study focused on TCP (Transfer Control Protocol) and SYN
(Synchronization ﬂag) packets to characterize scan attacks. A
new approach was proposed using Association Rule Learning
to scan destination ports & TCP/IP header information for
attacks on packets found on darknets. The approach was
successful in detecting malware attacks before they occur [24].
The availability of sophisticated technologies for cyber-
crimes has risen to a high level of pertinent concern and
societal problems. The anonymity of actors in cyberspace
facilitates freedom of speech, privacy and empowers nefarious
actors to perpetrate illegal activities [23].
Benjamin et al. developed a framework for identiﬁcation
of darknet data, method of data collection, evaluation and
ethical concerns in researching darknets [25]. Haughey et al.
developed an algorithm capable of reducing the anonymity
3

2019 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI)
of Tor users. Adaptive Trafﬁc Fingerprinting for Darknet
Trafﬁc Intelligence (ATABI) with HTML injection, Border
Gate Protocol (BGP) routing attack, and a Detection technique
was perpetrated against a simpliﬁed version of (MITM) Man
in the Middle Attack which yielded a positive response, while
low sensitivity was observed in non-targets without MITM
[26].
Fidalgo et al. developed an approach to support law enforce-
ment agencies to discover evidence of criminal activities on
darknet. The approach deployed the automatic classiﬁcation
of digital images uploaded on darknet websites using Bag of
Vision Words (BOVW) to eliminate pixels of background and
foreground images of interest. A ﬁltering strategy, Semantic
Attention Key-point Filtering (SAKF) is compared against a
well-known convolutional neural network to detect images
with illicit visual contents [27].
Dalins et al. also developed a Tor-use Motivation Model
(TMM) to explicitly distinguish sites contents from moti-
vations in Tor websites. The TMM utilize bots to crawl
web-pages of Tor services, which was classiﬁed into illegal
activities, child pornography, and narcotics. This model was
developed to help law enforcement in prioritizing and appraisal
of evidence for further investigations. Majority of the contents
on the pages revolve around criminal activities (Narcotics and
illegal ﬁnancial services) [28].
Pang et al. proposed a method of identifying malicious
activity through trafﬁc ﬂow of darknet in identifying groups of
malicious events from historical darknet trafﬁc. The behavioral
grouping of malicious activities on darknet trafﬁc is a useful
tool in observing patterns of cyber threats [29].
Darknet is a secretive anonymous place, the use of the
services for legitimate or illegal activities is a factor centered
on individual actors. The Tor services concept of entering
the network through a relay with details packaged by hidden
services with public key sent to hash tables on exit, networks
are sent to a different IP making it untraceable is ﬁlled with
vulnerabilities, law enforcement agencies can run sponsored
Tor relays to lure unsuspecting actors to utilize the services
[30].
III. DARKNET, DIGITAL STREET FOR ILLICIT DRUGS
Crypto markets are online market place on Darknet websites
which provides an anonymous platform for trading of illicit
drugs and services. Over 75% of darknet market activities
are associated with illegal drug deals with speciﬁc goods
being sought for in several originating and speciﬁc destination
countries [31] [32]. Perfect markets do not exist in darknet
cryptomarkets, communities of interest participate in negotia-
tion and supply of drugs which have a signiﬁcant impact on
street sales of drugs. Stimson’s & Gerry studies indicated a
positive relationship between the demand rates of drugs and
cost in a non-participant observation and in-person interview
of darknet users [33].
The ﬁrst illicit drug darknet market Silk Road with an
approximate life span of 2 years; opened in January 2011 and
was seized by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
on October 2013. Shortly after, Silk Road 2.0 was launched
to continue market activities. Several drug market activities
have emerged on darknet websites and are functional till date,
darknet marketplaces-maintained anonymity of users through
the use of cryptocurrencies introduced in 2008 [34].
Espinosa et al. study accessed impact of e-reputation on
online darknet markets. Vendors often build a good reputation
online while vendors with bad reputation close down their
account and reopen a new one with another identity which is
synonymous to activities on clearnet markets. The E-reputation
of sellers is used to signal the quality of products and build
trust with sellers in darknet markets [35] [36]. Three perfor-
mance metrics often used to identify the quality of drugs in
darknets include; purity, chemical knowledge of components
and embodied experience [30].
A theoretical ﬁgure of the conﬁguration used to gather
communications between actors in ﬁve darknet markets iden-
tiﬁed external threats relating to risks in darknet markets.
Actors do not fully trust communication between each other
as possibilities of law enforcement agencies could disguise to
gather intelligence from unsuspecting users [37].
Only a few studies explored the impact of illegal drug
activities on healthcare. The upsurge of illegal drugs, child
trafﬁcking, and pedo-pornography have a sheer impact on en-
vironmental wellbeing. More than 11.4 million people misused
opioids in 2018, and in 2017 over 70,000 deaths occurred
due to drug overdose [38]. 300% increments in deaths due
to drug overdose was observed between 1997 and 2013 [39].
Some hackers have successfully been able to hack medical
data which are sold on darknet markets or siphoned fake
medical insurance claims. Vulnerabilities in healthcare data
can be reduced through effective synergism of effort between
engineers, medical professionals, and other professionals [40].
The distribution of illegal drugs via darknets allows the
marketers of drugs to locate potential buyers and send drugs
via legitimate means such as mail posts without been traced.
New accessibility to drugs on Tor services increased the
rate of patients abusing drug use [41]. Cunliffe et al. study
collected data over a period of three years using data crypto
software through web crawling in over thirty-one darknet
markets addressed the purchase of Non-medical Prescription
Psychiatric Drug Use (NMPDU). The occurrence of NMPDU
drugs are signiﬁcantly low on surveyed markets, however, the
sales of sedatives and stimulants are on the far high side in
US [42].
Soska and Christin [21] examined the online anonymous
marketplace ecosystem for four years. According to their
research, “Silk Road” was one of the most popular darknet
websites in the world after 2011. Silk Road announced that
it was an anonymous marketplace where people can ﬁnd
whatever they want, just like eBay. However, Silk Road
provided stronger anonymity with Tor hidden services which
use a decentralized network. Silk Road has a rating system
for buyers and sellers. Also, it was widely used as smuggling
including drug and weapon selling way, and it was trendy
among criminals. Finally, its provider was arrested, and the
4

2019 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI)
website has been shut down by the government and police.
Buyers and sellers moved to another darknet website, that is
Silk Road 2.0. Besides, many darknet websites used the same
marketplace method. In the evolving period, many deep web
marketplaces have experienced police raids or court closure
orders. They demonstrate how real-world criminals develop an
ecosystem on the internet. Illegal drug selling or buying is 70%
of all sales. There is no physical transaction among sellers,
buyers and marketplace owners. Police was not able to track
the transactions. Silk Road used Bitcoin’s multisig feature
that ensures transaction validation. Furthermore, Silk Road
provided a feedback system to measure quality control on the
sales. Evolution and Agora marketplaces which are popular
darknet platforms used same methods. The authors collected
35 marketplace data. They observed that marketplaces have
pretty low reliability under 70%. They found and analyzed
79,512 products, and about 5% of them have very high prices.
In Silk Road, the amount of Bitcoin transactions was $300,000
per day. Thus, it could reach $100 million US dollar within a
year. There are a couple of related works. Finally, the paper
demonstrated that Silk Road made $650,000 daily transaction.
The authors recommended that there is an urgent need to re-
evaluate the anonymous online marketplaces.
Brosus et al. [31] examined “Evolution” online anonymous
marketplace. They collected 92,980 unique sale proposal with
4171 distinct vendors in 2014 and 2015. The study demon-
strated that a vendor handle 22 products on average. 63% of all
sales were illicit drugs and paraphernalia in all the countries.
69% of all vendors were selling those illicit drugs. On the other
hand, about 1,000 out of 92,980 products were ﬁrearms. There
were 93 shipping countries with 164 distinct destinations.
26.1% of all vendors were shipping their products to United
States. 32% of all illicit drugs were shipping to United
States. In 2014, 53% of all illicit drugs sales is Cannabis
for United States. The top 5 shipping destination countries
are United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands
and Australia. The results suggested that some vendors had
big number of products and dominate the darknet market.
Also, this website provided ID theft including driving licenses,
passports, illegitimate documents such as fake bank statements

security number, date of birth, mothers maiden name.
IV. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
With the comprehensive literature review’s light, it is clear
that researching darknet activities is vital for public safety
and the future of our community. Notably, drug overdose
deaths are related to the darknet activities. Our hypothesis
is that street illicit drug dealers are becoming darknet online
illicit drug vendors. Also, since easy and untraceable shipping
and payment system that relies on cryptocurrency transactions
(especially Bitcoin), drug addicts tend to buy illicit drugs
from darknet. Thus, our primary goal fundamentally is to
research darknet illegal market transactions to help in reducing
drug overdose incidents. The secondary goal is to reveal
darknet secrets. We are considering examining three darknet
platforms to dive deeply into the darknet world. We will
conduct not only research with descriptive statistics but also
with a revealing examination of traceability of darknet illegal
market transactions. Thus, we will follow up with the research
questions below in the next study.
1) What are the values embedded in information extracted
from darknet websites through research in supporting
government agencies, and how can that be optimized?
2) How can information sharing across agencies be im-
proved to support investigations and prosecution strate-
gies, whether to build an instant case or connect other
potentially related cases?
3) How can we track down the illicit drug trafﬁcking
payments on cryptocurrency activities?
We will offer a model that covers a combined technique
to de-anonymize darknet related bitcoin transactions. The raw
model will be consisted of ten steps.
1) Method-1: Test proposed algorithms by researchers to
de-anonymize bitcoin transactions used in darknet ac-
tivities
2) Method-2: Identify darknet activities related to Bitcoin
addresses and track the incoming and outgoing trafﬁc
3) Method-3: Analyze for abnormalities in Bitcoin prices
in order to detect likely darknet transactions
4) Method-4: Automatically check real-time transactions
to capture catched Bitcoin addresses used in previous
darknet activities
5) Server-1: Monitor Bitcoin Ledger
6) Server-2: Blacklisted Bitcoin data analysis
7) Action-1: Open Source analysis through automated
scans to ﬁnd pseudonyms of darknet activities related
to Bitcoin addresses
8) Action-2: Analytical analysis (link analysis) that con-
stantly augments de-anonymization by associating pre-
viously unlinked Bitcoin addresses
9) Action-3: Manual data entry from different users/victims
to increase de-anonymization process
10) Action-4: Constant feedback from the ﬁeld to evolve the
accuracy of the system
