Architect, Regularize and Replay (ARR): a Flexible
Hybrid Approach for Continual Learning
Vincenzo Lomonaco
Department of Computer Science
University of Pisa

Lorenzo Pellegrini
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Bologna

Gabriele Grafﬁeti
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Bologna

Davide Maltoni
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Bologna

Abstract
In recent years we have witnessed a renewed interest in machine learning method-
ologies, especially for deep representation learning, that could overcome basic
i.i.d. assumptions and tackle non-stationary environments subject to various dis-
tributional shifts or sample selection biases. Within this context, several compu-
tational approaches based on architectural priors, regularizers and replay policies
have been proposed with different degrees of success depending on the speciﬁc
scenario in which they were developed and assessed. However, designing compre-
hensive hybrid solutions that can ﬂexibly and generally be applied with tunable
efﬁciency-effectiveness trade-offs still seems a distant goal. In this paper, we
propose Architect, Regularize and Replay (ARR), an hybrid generalization of the
renowned AR1 algorithm and its variants, that can achieve state-of-the-art results
in classic scenarios (e.g. class-incremental learning) but also generalize to arbitrary
data streams generated from real-world datasets such as CIFAR-100, CORe50 and
ImageNet-1000.
1
Introduction
Continual Machine Learning is a challenging research problem with profound scientiﬁc and engineer-
ing implications [22]. On one hand, it undermines the foundations of classic machine learning systems
relying on iid assumptions, on the other hand, it offers a path towards efﬁcient and scalable human-
centered AI systems that can learn and think like humans, swiftly adapting to the ever-changing
nature of the external world. However, despite the recent surge of interest from the machine learning
and deep learning communities on the topic and the proliﬁc scientiﬁc activity of the last few years,
this vision is far from being reached.
While most continual learning algorithms signiﬁcantly reduce the impact of catastrophic forgetting
on speciﬁc scenarios, it is difﬁcult to generalize those results to settings in which they have not
been speciﬁcally designed to operate (lack of robustness and generality). Moreover, they are mostly
Book Chapter Preprint.
arXiv:2301.02464v1  [cs.LG]  6 Jan 2023

focused on vertical and exclusive approaches to continual learning based on regularization, replay or
architectural changes of the underlying prediction model.
In this paper, we summarize the effort made in the formulation of hybrid strategies for Continual
Learning that can be more robust, generally applicable and effective in real-world application contexts.
In particular, we will focus on the deﬁnition of the “Architect, Regularize and Replay" (ARR) method:
a general reformulation and generalization of the renowned AR1 algorithm [30] with all its variants
[23, 36], and, arguably, one of the ﬁrst hybrid continual learning methods proposed [34] (Sec. 4).
Through a number of experiments on state-of-the-art benchmarks such as CIFAR-100, CORe50 and
ImageNet-1000, we show the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the proposed approach with respect to
other existing state-of-the-art methods (Sec 5). Then, we discuss tunable parameters to easily control
the effectiveness-efﬁciency trade-off such as the selection of the latent replay layer (Sec. 5.4) and the
replay memory size (Sec. 5.5). Finally, we discuss current ARR implementation porting in Avalanche
[27] (Sec 6).
2
Background and Problem Formulation
Continual Learning (CL) is mostly concerned with the concept of learning from a stream of ephemeral
non-stationary data that can be processed in separate computational steps and cannot be revisited if not
explicitly memorized. In an agnostic continual learning scenario data arrives in a streaming fashion
as a (possibly inﬁnite) sequence S of, what we call, learning experiences e, so that S=e1, . . . , en.
For simplicity, we assume a supervised classiﬁcation problem, where each experience ei consists of a
batch of samples Di, where each sample is a tuple ⟨xi
k, yi
k⟩of input and target data, respectively, and
the labels yi
k are from the set Yi, which is a subset of the entire universe of classes Y. However, we
note this formulation is very easy to generalize to different CL problems. Usually Di is split into a
separate train set Di
train and test set Di
test. A continual learning algorithm ACL is a function with
the following signature [19, 2]:
ACL: ⟨f CL
i−1, Di
train, Mi−1, ti⟩→⟨f CL
i
, Mi⟩
(1)
where f CL
i
is the model learned after training on experience ei, Mi a buffer of past knowledge
(can be also void), such as previous samples or activations, stored from the previous experiences
and usually of ﬁxed size. The term ti is a task label that may be used to identify the correct data
distribution (or task). All the experiments in this paper assume the most challenging scenario of ti
being unavailable. Usually, CL algorithms are limited in the amount of resources that they can use
and they should be designed to scale up to a large number of training experiences without increasing
their memory / computational overheads over time. The objective of a CL algorithm is to minimize
the loss LS over the entire stream of data S, composed of n distinct experiences:
LS(f CL
n
, n)=
1
nP
i=1
|Di
test|
n
X
i=1
Lexp(f CL
n
, Di
test)
(2)
Lexp(f CL
n
, Di
test)=
|Di
test|
X
j=1
L(f CL
n
(xi
j), yi
j),
(3)
where the loss L(f CL
n
(x), y) is computed on a single sample ⟨x, y⟩, such as cross-entropy in
classiﬁcation problems. Hence, the main assumption in this formulation is that all the concepts
encountered over time are still relevant (the drift is only virtual) and there’s no conﬂicting evidence.
This is quite a common assumption for the deep continual learning literature which is more concerned
with building robust and general representations over time rather than building systems that can
quickly adapt to changing circumstances.
3
Towards Hybrid Continual Learning Approaches
We show in Fig. 1 some of the most popular and recent CL approaches divided into the above-
introduced categories and their combinations. In the diagram, we differentiate methods with rehearsal
(replay of explicitly stored training samples) from methods with generative replay (replay of latent
2

Figure 1: Venn diagram of some of the most popular CL strategies: CWR [24], PNN [40], EWC [17], SI
[44], LWF [21], ICARL [38], GEM [29], FearNet [15], GDM [35], ExStream [13], Pure Rehearsal, GR [41],
MeRGAN [42] and AR1 [31]. Rehearsal and Generative Replay upper categories can be seen as a subset of
replay strategies.
representations or the training samples). Crucially, although an increasing number of methods have
been proposed, there is no consensus on which training schemes and performance metrics are better
to evaluate CL models. Different sets of metrics have been proposed to evaluate CL performance
on supervised and unsupervised learning tasks (e.g. [12, 16, 10]). In the absence of standardized
metrics and evaluation schemes, it is unclear what it means to endow a method with CL capabilities.
In particular, a number of CL models still require large computational and memory resources that
hinder their ability to learn in real time, or with a reasonable latency, from data streams.
It is also worth noting that, while a multitude of methods for each main category has been proposed,
it is still difﬁcult to ﬁnd hybrid algorithmic solutions that can ﬂexibly leverage the often orthogonal
advantages of the three different approaches (i.e. architectural, regularization and replay), depending
on the speciﬁc application needs and target efﬁciency-effectiveness trade-off. However, some evidence
shows that effective biological continual learning systems (such as the human brain) make use of all
these distinct functionalities.
In this paper, we argue that in the near and long term future of lifelong learning machines we will
witness a signiﬁcantly growing interest in the development of hybrid continual learning algorithms
[28] and we propose ARR as one of the ﬁrst methodologies that practically implement such a vision.
4
ARR: Architect, Regularize and Replay
The Architect, Regularize and Replay algorithm, ARR for short, is a ﬂexible generalization of the AR1
algorithm and its variants (CWR+, CWR*, AR1*, AR1Free) [26, 36]. ARR, with a proper initialization
of its hyper-parameters, can be instantiated in the aforementioned algorithms based on the desired
efﬁciency-efﬁcacy trade-off [37]. It can use pre-trained parameters as suggested by a consolidated
trend in the ﬁeld [7] or start from a random initialization. The pseudo-code 1 describes ARR in detail
which is based on three main components: architectural, regularization and replay.
4.1
Architectural Component
The core concept behind an architectural approach is to isolate and preserve some parameters
while adding new parameters in order to house new knowledge. CWR+, an evolution of CWR [24]
whose pseudo-code is reported in Algorithm 2 of [30] maintains two sets of weights for the output
classiﬁcation layer: cw are the consolidated weights (for stability) used for inference and tw the
temporary weights (for plasticity) used for training; cw are initialized to 0 before the ﬁrst experience
and then iteratively updated, while tw are reset to 0 before each training experience.
3

Figure 2: Architectural diagram of ARR [36].
In [30], the authors proposed an extension of CWR+ called CWR* which works both under Class-
Incremental [39] and Class-Incremental with Repetition settings [6]; in particular, under Class-
Incremental with Repetition the coming experiences include examples of both new and already
encountered classes. For already known classes, instead of resetting weights to 0, consolidated
weights are reloaded. Furthermore, in the consolidation step, a weighted sum is now used: the ﬁrst
term represents the weight of the past and the second term is the contribution from the current training
experience. The weight wpastj used for the ﬁrst term is proportional to the ratio pastj
curj , where pastj
is the total number of examples of class j encountered in past experiences whereas curj is their count
in the current experience. In case of a large number of small non-i.i.d. training experiences, the
weight for the most recent experiences may be too low thus hindering the learning process. In order
to avoid this, a square root is used in order to smooth the ﬁnal value of wpastj.
4.2
Regularization Component
The well-known Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) pure regularization approach [17] controls
forgetting by proportionally constraining the model weights based on their estimated importance with
respect to previously encountered data distributions and tasks. To this purpose, in a classiﬁcation
approach, a regularization term is added to the conventional cross-entropy loss, where each weight θk
of the model is pulled back to their optimal value θ∗
k with a strength Fk proportional to their estimated
importance for modeling past knowledge:
L=Lcross(·) + λ
2 ·
X
k
Fk · (θk −θ∗
k)2.
(4)
Synaptic Intelligence (SI) [44] is an equally known lightweight variant of EWC where, instead of
updating the Fisher information F at the end of each experience1, Fk are obtained by integrating the
1In this paper, for the EWC and ARR implementations we use a single Fisher matrix updated over time,
following the approach described in [30].
4

loss over the weight trajectories exploiting information already available during gradient descent. For
both approaches, the weight update rule corresponding to equation 4 is:
θ
′
k=θk −η · ∂Lcross(·)
∂θk
−η · Fk · (θk −θ∗
k)
(5)
where η is the learning rate. This equation has two drawbacks. Firstly, the value of λ must be carefully
calibrated: in fact, if its value is too high the optimal value of some parameters could be overshoot,
leading to divergence (see discussion in Section 2 of [30]). Secondly, two copies of all model weights
must be maintained to store both θk and θ∗
k, leading to double memory consumption for each weight.
To overcome the above problems, the authors of [26] propose to replace the update rule of equation 5
with:
θ
′
k=θk −η · (1 −
Fk
maxF
) · ∂Lcross(·)
∂θk
(6)
where maxF is the maximum value for weight importance (we clip to maxF the Fk values larger
than maxF ). Basically, the learning rate is reduced to 0 (i.e., complete freezing) for weights of
highest importance (Fk=maxF ) and maintained to η for weights whose Fk=0. It is worth noting
that these two update rules work differently: the former still moves weights with high Fk in the
direction opposite to the gradient and then makes a step in direction of the past (optimal) values;
the latter tends to completely freeze weights with high Fk. However, in the experiments conducted
in [26], the two approaches lead to similar results, and therefore the second one is preferable since
it solves the aforementioned drawbacks. Regularization of learning parameters can be enforced
both on the low-level generic features as well as on the class-speciﬁc discriminative features as
implemented in AR1*. However, for the sake of simplicity in ARR we consider only the application of
such regularization terms to the last group, since freezing or slowly ﬁnetuning the low-level generic
features already proved to be an effective strategy.
4.3
Replay Component
In [36, 33] it was shown that a very simple rehearsal implementation (hereafter denoted as native
rehearsal), where for every training experience a random subset of the experience examples is added
to the external storage to replace a (equally random) subset of the external memory, is not less
effective than more sophisticated approaches such as iCaRL. Therefore, in [36] the authors opted for
simplicity and compared the learning trend of CWR* and AR1* of a MobileNetV12 trained with and
without rehearsal on CORe50 NICv2 – 391 [26]. They used the same protocol and hyper-parameters
introduced in [25] and a rehearsal memory of 1,500 examples. It is well evident from their study that
even a moderate external memory (about 1.27% of the total training set) is very effective to improve
the accuracy of both approaches and to reduce the gap with the cumulative upper bound that, for this
model, is ∼85%.
In deep neural networks the layers close to the input (often denoted as representation layers) usually
perform low-level feature extraction and, after a proper pre-training on a large dataset (e.g., ImageNet),
their weights are quite stable and reusable across applications. On the other hand, higher layers
tend to extract class-speciﬁc discriminant features and their tuning is often important to maximize
accuracy.
A latent replay (see Figure 2) approach [36] can then be formulated: instead of maintaining copies of
input examples in the external memory in the form of raw data, we can store the activations volumes
at a given layer (denoted as latent replay layer). To keep the representation stable and the stored
activations valid we propose to slow down the learning at all the layers below the latent replay one and
to leave the layers above free to learn at full pace. In the limit case where lower layers are completely
frozen (i.e., slow-down to 0) latent replay is functionally equivalent to rehearsal from the input, but
achieves a computational and storage saving thanks to the smaller fraction of examples that need to
ﬂow forward and backward across the entire network and the typical information compression that
networks perform at higher layers.
2The network was pre-trained on ImageNet-1k.
5

Algorithm 1 ARR pseudocode: ¯Θ are the class-shared parameters of the representation layers; the notation
cw[j] / tw[j] is used to denote the groups of consolidated / temporary weights corresponding to class j. Note that
this version continues to work under New Classes (NC), which is seen here as a special case of New Classes and
Instances (NIC) [24]; in fact, since in NC the classes in the current experience were never encountered before,
the step at line 7 loads 0 values for classes in Di because cwj were initialized to 0 and in the consolidation
step (line 13) wpastj values are always 0. The external random memory RM is populated across the training
experiences. Note that the amount h of examples to add progressively decreases to maintain a nearly balanced
contribution from the different training experiences, but no constraints are enforced to achieve a class-balancing.
λ is the regularization strength, α is the replay layer. The three input parameters default to 0 if omitted.
1: procedure ARR(RMsize, λ, α)
2:
RM=∅, cw[j]=0 and pastj=0 ∀j
3:
init ¯Θ randomly or from pre-trained model (e.g. on ImageNet)
4:
for each training experience ei:
5:
tw[j]=
(
cw[j],
if class j in Di
0,
otherwise
6:
mbe=
(
|Di|
(|Di|+RMsize)/mbsize ,
if ei>e1
mbsize,
otherwise
7:
mbr=mbsize −mbe
8:
for each epoch:
9:
Sample mbe examples from Di and mbr examples from RM
10:
train the model on sampled data (replay data to be injected at leyer α):
11:
if ei=e1 learn both ¯Θ and tw
12:
else learn tw and ¯Θ with λ to control forgetting.
13:
for each class j in Di:
14:
wpastj=
q
pastj
curj , where curj is the number of examples of class j in Di
15:
cw[j]=
cw[j]·wpastj+(tw[j]−avg(tw))
wpastj+1
16:
pastj=pastj + curj
17:
test the model by using ¯Θ and cw
18:
h= RMsize
i
19:
Radd= random sampling h examples from Di
20:
Rreplace=
(
∅
if i==1
random sample h examples from RM
otherwise
21:
RM=(RM −Rreplace) ∪Radd
In the general case where the representation layers are not completely frozen, the activations stored
in the external memory may suffer from an aging effect (i.e., as time passes they tend to increasingly
deviate from the activations that the same pattern would produce if feed-forwarded from the input
layer). However, if the training of these layers is sufﬁciently slow, the aging effect is not disruptive
since the external memory has enough time to be updated with newly acquired examples. When
latent replay is implemented with mini-batch SGD training: (i) in the forward step, a concatenation is
performed at the replay layer (on the mini-batch dimension) to join examples coming from the input
layer with activations coming from the external storage; (ii) the backward step is stopped just before
the replay layer for the replay examples.
5
Empirical Evaluation
In order to empirically evaluate the overall quality and ﬂexibility of ARR, we evaluate its performance
on three commonly used continual learning benchmarks for computer vision classiﬁcation tasks:
CIFAR-100 (Section 5.1), CORe50 (Section 5.2) and ImageNet-1000 (Section 5.3). Then, we
provide a more in-depth analysis of the impact of the latent replay layer selection (Sec: 5.4) and the
memory size in terms of memorized activations volumes (Sec: 5.5).
6

5.1
CIFAR-100
CIFAR-100 [18] is a well-known and largely used dataset for small (32 × 32) natural image classi-
ﬁcation. It includes 100 classes containing 600 images each (500 training + 100 test). The default
classiﬁcation benchmark can be translated into a Class-Incremental scenario (denoted as iCIFAR-100
by [38]) by splitting the 100 classes into groups. In this paper, we consider groups of 10 classes thus
obtaining 10 incremental experiences.
Figure 3: Accuracy on iCIFAR-100 with 10 experiences (10 classes per experience). Results are averaged on
10 runs: for all the strategies hyperparameters have been tuned on run 1 and kept ﬁxed in the other runs. The
experiment on the right, consistently with the CORe50 test protocol, considers a ﬁxed test set including all the
100 classes, while on the left we include in the test set only the classes encountered so far (analogously to results
reported in [38]). Colored areas represent the standard deviation of each curve. Better viewed in color. [30]
The CNN model used for this experiment is the same used by [44] for experiments on CIFAR-10/100
Split [30]. It consists of 4 convolutional + 2 fully connected layers; details are available in Appendix
A of [44]. The model was pre-trained on CIFAR-10 [18]. Figure 3 compares the accuracy of the
different approaches on iCIFAR-100. The results suggest that:
• Unlike the Naïve approach, Learning without Forgetting (LWF) [21] and Elastic Weights
Consolidation (EWC) provide some robustness against forgetting, even if in this incremental
scenario their performance is not satisfactory. SI, when used in isolation, is quite unstable
and performs worse than LWF and EWC.
• The accuracy improvement of CWR+ over CWR is here very small because the experiences are
balanced (so weight normalization is not required) and the CNN initialization for the last
level weights was already very close to 0 (we used the authors’ default setting of a Gaussian
with std = 0.005).
• ARR (λ=4.0e5) consistently outperforms all the other approaches.
It is worth noting that both the experiments reported in Figure 3 (i.e., an expanding (left) and ﬁxed
(right) test set, from left to right) lead to the same conclusions in terms of relative ranking among
approaches. However, we believe that a ﬁxed test set allows to better appreciate the incremental
learning trend and its peculiarities (saturation, forgetting, etc.) because the classiﬁcation complexity
(which is proportional to the number of classes) remains constant across the experiences. For example,
in the right graph it can be noted that SI, EWC and LWF learning capacities tend to saturate after 6-7
experiences while CWR, CWR+ and ARR continue to grow; the same information is not evident on the
left because of the underlying negative trend due to the increasing problem complexity.
7

Figure 4: Accuracy results on the CORe50 NICv2 – 391 benchmark of ARR(α=pool6), ARR(λ=0.0003),
DSLDA, iCaRL, ARR(RMsize=1500, α=conv5_4), ARR(RMsize=1500, α=pool6). Results are averaged
across 10 runs in which the order of the experiences is randomly shufﬂed. Colored areas indicate the standard
deviation of each curve. As an exception, iCaRL was trained only on a single run given its extensive run time
(∼14 days).
Finally note that absolute accuracy on iCIFAR-100 cannot be directly compared with [38] because
the CNN model used in [38] is a ResNet-32, which is much more accurate than the model here used:
on the full training set the model here used achieves about 51% accuracy while ResNet-32 about
68.1%.
5.2
CORe50
While the accuracy improvement of the proposed approach w.r.t. the state-of-the-art rehearsal-free
techniques have been already discussed in the previous section, further comparison with other state-
of-the-art continual learning techniques on CORe50 may be beneﬁcial for better appreciating its
practical impact and advantages in real-world continual learning scenarios and longer sequences of
experiences. In particular, while ARR and ARR(α=pool6) have been already proven to be substantially
better than LWF and EWC on the NICv2 - 391 benchmark [26], a comparison with iCaRL[39], one of
the best know rehearsal-based techniques, is worth to be considered.
Unfortunately, iCaRL was conceived for Class-Incremental scenarios and its porting to Class-
Incremental with Repetition (whose experiences also include examples of know classes) is not
trivial. To avoid subjective modiﬁcations, the authors of [26] started from the code shared by its
original authors and emulated a Class-Incremental with Repetition setting by: (i) always creating
new virtual classes from examples in the coming experiences; (ii) fusing virtual classes together
when evaluating accuracies. For example, let us suppose to encounter 300 examples of class 5 in
experience 2 and other 300 examples of the same class in experience 7; while two virtual classes
are created by iCaRL during training, when evaluating accuracy both classes point to the real class
5. Such iCaRL implementation, with an external memory of 8000 examples (much more than the
1500 used by the proposed latent replay, but in line with the settings proposed in the original paper
[38]), was run on NICv2 - 391, but we were not able to obtain satisfactory results. In Figure 4
we report the iCaRL accuracy over time and compare it with ARR(RMsize=1500, α=conv5_4/dw),
ARR(RMsize=1500, α=pool6) as well as the top three performing rehearsal-free strategies introduced
before: ARR(α=pool6), ARR(λ=0.0003) and DSLDA. While iCaRL exhibits better performance than
LWF and EWC (as reported in [25]), it is far from DSLDA, ARR(α=pool6) and ARR(λ=0.0003).
Furthermore, when the algorithm has to deal with a so large number of classes (including virtual ones)
and training experiences its efﬁciency becomes very low (as also reported in [30]). In Table 1 of [26]
the total run time (training and testing), memory overhead and accuracy difference with respect to the
cumulative upper bound are reported. We believe ARR(RMsize=1500, α=conv5_4/dw) represents a
8

Method
Final Accuracy
Fine Tuning (Naive)
27.4
EWC-E [17]
28.4
RWalk [5]
24.9
LwM [9]
17.7
LwF [20]
19.8
iCaRL [39]
30.2
EEIL [3]
25.1
LUCIR [14]
20.1
IL2M [1]
29.7
BiC [43]
32.4
ARR [30]
33.1
Table 1: Final accuracy on ImageNet-1000 following the benchmark of [32] with 25 experiences composed
of 40 classes each. For each method, a replay memory of 20,000 examples is used (20 per class at the end of
training). Results for other methods reported from [32].
good trade-off in terms of efﬁciency-efﬁcacy with a limited computational-memory overhead and
only a ∼13% accuracy gap from the cumulative upper bound. For iCaRL the total training time was
∼14 days compared to a training time of less than ∼1 hour for the other learning algorithms on a
single GPU.
5.3
ImageNet-1000
In order to further validate the ARR algorithm scalability the authors of [11] performed a test on
a competitive benchmark such as ImageNet-1000, following the Class-Incremental benchmark
proposed by [32], which is composed of 25 experiences, each of them containing 40 classes. The
benchmark is particularly challenging due to the large number of classes (1,000), the incremental
nature of the task (with 25 experiences), and the data dimensionality of 224 × 224 (as with ImageNet
protocol).
In this experiment, [11] tested ARR against both regularization-based methods [8, 17, 21] and replay-
based approaches [1, 3, 4, 14, 39, 43]. They used the same classiﬁer (ResNet-18) and the same
memory size for all the tested methods (20,000 examples, 20 per class); for the regularization-based
approaches, the replay is added as an additional mechanism.
For ARR, they trained the model with an SGD optimizer. For the ﬁrst experience, the algorithm was
tuned with an aggressive learning rate of 0.1 with momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 10−4. Then,
the initial learning rate was multiplied by 0.1 every 15 epochs. The model was trained for a total of
45 epochs, using a batch size of 128. For all the subsequent experiences SGD with a learning rate of
5 · 10−3 for the feature extractor’s parameters φ and 5 · 10−2 for the classiﬁer’s parameters ψ were
used. The model was trained for 32 epochs for each experience, employing a learning rate scheduler
that decreases the learning rate as the number of experiences progresses. This was done to protect old
knowledge against new knowledge when the former is more abundant than the latter. As in the ﬁrst
experience, the batch size was set to 128, composed of 92 examples from the current experience and
36 randomly sampled (without replacement) from the replay memory.
The results are shown in Table 1. Replay-based methods exhibit the best performance, with iCaRL
and BiC exceeding a ﬁnal accuracy of 30%. ARR(RMsize=1500, α=pool6) outperforms all the
baselines (33.1%) achieving state-of-the-art performance on this challenging benchmark, and proving
the advantage of ﬂexible hybrid continual learning approaches. However, considering that top-1
ImageNet accuracy for a ResNet-18 when trained on the entire dataset is 69.76%3, even for the best
methods the accuracy gap in the continual learning setup is very large. This suggests that continual
learning, especially in complex scenarios with a large number of classes and high dimensional data,
is far to be solved, and further research should be devoted to this ﬁeld.
3Accuracy taken from the torchvision ofﬁcial page: https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.
html
9

5.4
Replay Layer Selection
Figure 5: ARR with latent replay (RMsize=1500) for different choices of the latent replay layer. Setting the
replay layer at the “images” layer corresponds to native rehearsal. The saturation effect which characterizes the
last training experiences is due to the data distribution in NICv2 – 391 (see [25]): in particular, the lack of new
instances for some classes (that already introduced all their data) slows down the accuracy trend and intensiﬁes
the effect of activations aging.
In Figure 5 we report the accuracy of ARR(RMsize=1500, α=. . . ) for different choices of the rehearsal
layer α for the CORe50 experiment. As expected, when the replay layer is pushed down the
corresponding accuracy increases, proving that a continual tuning of the representation layers is
important. However, after conv5_4/dw there is a sort of saturation and the model accuracy is no
longer improving. The residual gap (∼4%) with respect to native rehearsal is not due to the weights
freezing of the lower part of the network but to the aging effect introduced above. This can be simply
proved by implementing an “intermediate” approach that always feeds the replay pattern from the
input and stops the backward at conv5_4: such an intermediate approach achieved an accuracy at the
end of the training very close to the native rehearsal (from raw data). We believe that the accuracy
drop due to the aging effect can be further reduced with better tuning of Batch Re-Normalization
(BRN) hyper-parameters and/or with the introduction of a scheduling policy making the global
moment mobile windows wider as the continual learning progresses (i.e., more plasticity in the early
stages and more stability later); however, such ﬁne optimization is application speciﬁc and beyond
the scope of this study.
To better evaluate the latent replay with respect to the native rehearsal we report in Table 2 the
relevant dimensions: (i) computation refers to the percentage cost in terms of ops of a partial forward
(from the latent replay layer on) relative to a full forward step from the input layer; (ii) pattern size
is the dimensionality of the pattern to be stored in the external memory (considering that we are
using a MobileNetV1 with 128×128×3 inputs to match CORe50 image size); (iii) accuracy and
∆accuracy quantify the absolute accuracy at the end of the training and the gap with respect to a
native rehearsal, respectively. For example, conv5_4/dw exhibits an interesting trade-off because the
computation is about 32% of the native rehearsal one, the storage is reduced to 66% (more on this
point in subsection 5.5) and the accuracy drop is mild (5.07%). ARR(RMsize=1500, α=pool6) has a
really negligible computational cost (0.027%) with respect to native rehearsal and still provides an
accuracy improvement of ∼4% w.r.t. the non-rehearsal case (∼60% vs ∼56% as it is possible to see
from Figure 5 and Figure 6, respectively).
5.5
Replay Memory Size Selection
To understand the inﬂuence of the external memory size we repeated the experiment with different
RMsize values: 500, 1,000, 1,500, 3,000. The results are shown in Figure 6: it is worth noting that
increasing the rehearsal memory leads to better accuracy for all the algorithms, but the gap between
1500 and 3000 is not large and we believe 1500 is a good trade-off for this dataset. ARR(RMsize=
10

Table 2: Computation, storage, and accuracy trade-off with Latent Replay at different layers of a MobileNetV1
ConvNet trained continually on NICv2 – 391 with RMsize=1500.
Layer
Computation %
vs Native Rehearsal Example Size Final Accuracy %
∆Accuracy %
vs Native Rehearsal
Images
100.00%
49152
77.30%
0.00%
conv5_1/dw
59.261%
32768
72.82%
-4.49%
conv5_2/dw
50.101%
32768
73.21%
-4.10%
conv5_3/dw
40.941%
32768
73.22%
-4.09%
conv5_4/dw
31.781%
32768
72.24%
-5.07%
conv5_5/dw
22.621%
32768
68.59%
-8.71%
conv5_6/dw
13.592%
8192
65.24%
-12.06%
conv6/dw
9.012%
16384
59.89%
-17.42%
pool6
0.027%
1024
59.76%
-17.55%
. . . ) works slightly better than ARR(RMsize=. . . , λ=0.003) when a sufﬁcient number of rehearsal
examples are provided but, as expected, accuracy is worse with light (i.e. RMsize=500) or no
rehearsal.
It is worth noting that the best ARR conﬁguration in Figure 6, i.e. ARR(RMsize=3000), is only 5%
worse than the cumulative upper bound and a better parametrization and exploitation of the rehearsal
memory could further reduce this gap.
Figure 6: Comparison of main ARR conﬁgurations on CORe50 NICv2 – 391 with different external memory
sizes (RMsize=500, 1000, 1500 and 3000 examples).
6
ARR Implementation in Avalanche
The Architect, Regularize and Replay (ARR) method we proposed in this paper is the result of a
comprehensive re-formalization of different variants and improvements proposed over the last few
years starting from [24, 30]. Original implementations of such methods (CWR, CWR+, CWR*, AR1, AR1*
and AR1* with Latent Replay) exist in Caffe and PyTorch. However, given their diversity, it is quite
difﬁcult to move from one implementation to the other and apply them to settings and scenarios even
slightly different from the ones on which they have been proposed.
In order to exploit the general applicability and ﬂexibility of the ARR method, we decided to re-
implement it directly in Avalanche [27]. Avalanche, an open-source (MIT licensed) end-to-end library
for continual learning based on PyTorch, was devised to provide a shared and collaborative codebase
for fast prototyping, training, and evaluation of continual learning algorithms.
Thanks to the Avalanche portable implementation (soon to be integrated into the next stable version
of the library), ARR can be conﬁgured to reproduce the experiments presented in this paper (Fig. 7,
conform to the previously proposed strategies (e.g. AR1*, CWR*, etc.) as well as being ready to be
11

Figure 7: ARR implementation in Avalanche. Given a set of hyper-parameters ARR can be instantiated and
properly conﬁgured to be tested on a large set of benchmarks already available in Avalanche.
tested on a large set of benchmarks already available in Avalanche or that can be easily added to the
library.
7
Conclusion
In this paper we showed that ARR is a ﬂexible, effective and efﬁcient technique to continually learn
new classes and new instances of known classes even from small and non i.i.d. experiences. ARR,
instantiated with latent replay, is indeed able to learn efﬁciently and, at the same time, the achieved
accuracy is not far from the cumulative upper bound (about 5% in some cases). The computation-
storage-accuracy trade-off can be deﬁned according to both the target application and the available
resources so that even edge devices with no GPUs can learn continually. Moreover, ARR can be
easily extended to support more sophisticated replay memory management strategies (also to contrast
the aging effect) and even be coupled with a generative model trained in the loop and capable of
providing pseudo-activations volumes on demand as initially showed in [11].
