Fairness Certification for Natural Language
Processing and Large Language Models
Vincent Freiberger1 and Erik Buchmann2
Dept. of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany1,2
Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI)
Dresden/Leipzig, Germany1,2

Abstract. Natural Language Processing (NLP) plays an important role
in our daily lives, particularly due to the enormous progress of Large Lan-
guage Models (LLM). However, NLP has many fairness-critical use cases,
e.g., as an expert system in recruitment or as an LLM-based tutor in ed-
ucation. Since NLP is based on human language, potentially harmful
biases can diffuse into NLP systems and produce unfair results, discrim-
inate against minorities or generate legal issues. Hence, it is important
to develop a fairness certification for NLP approaches.
We follow a qualitative research approach towards a fairness certifica-
tion for NLP. In particular, we have reviewed a large body of literature
on algorithmic fairness, and we have conducted semi-structured expert
interviews with a wide range of experts from that area. We have system-
atically devised six fairness criteria for NLP, which can be further refined
into 18 sub-categories. Our criteria offer a foundation for operationaliz-
ing and testing processes to certify fairness, both from the perspective
of the auditor and the audited organization.
Keywords: Fairness, Certification, NLP
1
Introduction
Fairness is important for Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches: NLP
is used in high-stakes contexts such as healthcare [1]. It is also integrated into
daily-use technologies, e.g., voice assistants like Amazon Alexa [2] or AI-based
chatbots like ChatGPT [3]. A lack of fairness often materializes as allocative or
representational harm [4] for marginalized groups [5]. An example of allocative
harm is a resume filtering system, that prefers male applicants [6]. Representa-
tional harm would be a translation app that translates to gender stereotypes [7],
cultural stereotypes or demeaning language [6,8,9]. To avoid harm, a fair NLP
application must not only resist gender bias [10–13], but also ableist [14], eth-
nical [11, 15, 16], age-related [17], religion-related [18] or sexuality bias [11, 19].
Performant NLP models tend to be opaque and complex [20, 21]. Interactions
with such sociotechnical systems are typically also complex [22]. Hence, it is not
practically achievable for users or affected individuals to verify fairness. Fairness
certification could be embraced to reduce information asymmetries [23].
arXiv:2401.01262v2  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2024

2
Freiberger et al.
The concern of this paper is to develop a broad set of criteria, that can
be used by an auditor to assess and certify the fairness of an approach that
makes use of NLP, be it a large language model, a recruiting-tool or an AI-
chatbot for teaching. This is challenging: First, many different definitions of
fairness exist [24, 25], and some of them are contradictory [26, 27]. Second, it
is still unclear yet, which fairness criteria are important for NLP approaches
and how they impact each other. For instance, residual unfairness may remain
after bias mitigation has been resolved [28]. Third, efforts towards fair NLP and
certifying fairness of related AI approaches exist [29–34]. But there is neither
an established nor a holistic framework on how fairness could be certified and
what could be audited [35, 36]. To approach certification criteria that can be
applied in practice, we need to consider the challenges of professionals tasked
with auditing the fairness of a system, as well as the challenges of developers
that encounter fairness issues when creating NLP systems. Thus, our research
question is as follows:
What criteria are relevant to consider for fairness certification for NLP ap-
proaches from a practitioner’s point of view?
To approach our research question, we strive for broad, qualitative research.
We have decided to derive a basic set of auditable fairness criteria from litera-
ture on NLP, AI fairness and AI certification. Based on this set of criteria, we
have developed a concept for a semi-structured interview with stakeholders from
business and research. We have analyzed the interview transcripts in order to
find out (a) which measures for ensuring fairness need to be considered for NLP
approaches, and (b) how they influence each other. We make four contributions:
– We outline and structure an extensive, up-to-date body of research literature
on NLP fairness, AI fairness and fairness auditing from the last years.
– We describe our qualitative research approach, which is based on a series
of semi-structured interviews with 14 experts from various areas related to
NLP and algorithmic fairness.
– We devise a hierarchical coding scheme for the certification of fairness for
NLP approaches.
– We provide an overview of the six main criteria, with 18 sub-criteria on the
second hierarchy level for the auditing of NLP approaches, which we have
devised from the interview transcripts.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to devise a holistic, hierar-
chical coding scheme for the fairness certification of NLP approaches, which is
backed up by literature and expert interviews. Our findings allow to develop a
fairness certification for a wide range of NLP applications, including large lan-
guage models and other text-generating AI approaches. Fairness is related to
trust [37] and reduces information asymmetries [23]. Thus, our results help to
establish a selling point for consumers, particularly marginalized groups. From
a legal perspective, a certification can be a precautionary measure [34].
Paper structure: Section 2 reviews related work and gives a theoretical
background. Section 3 outlines our research method. The Sections 4 and 5 eval-
uate and discuss our findings. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

Fairness Certification
3
2
Related Work
In this section, we review existing literature on the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) workflow and its modes of use. We provide an overview of fairness in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) approaches on which NLP builds. Finally, we describe
existing certification approaches for such AI approaches.
2.1
Natural Language Processing
NLP makes human language computable [38], and can be distinguished into Nat-
ural Language Understanding (NLU) and Natural Language Generation (NLG) [38].
NLU refers to a machine’s comprehension of human language and “extracting
valuable information for downstream tasks” [38]. Text summarization [39, 40],
intend recognition [40], machine translation [40], named entity recognition [41],
sentiment analysis [42] or text classification [40] are examples for NLU.
NLG refers to producing human-understandable text or speech in natural
languages [43]. This is done by predicting the next token in a sequence of words,
based on data sources like graphics, video, text, or audio. Prominent examples
are AI-based Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT [3].
Modern NLP is based on language models that allow the creation of word
embeddings [40,44] in the semantic space of a language. Building an NLP model
starts with selecting the corpus, a “collection of linguistic data, either compiled
from written texts or transcribed from recorded speech” [41]. Models are typi-
cally large-scale Deep Learning models, which are pretrained on very large sets
of text data [40]. Word embeddings resulting from language models can also
be utilized as features for downstream NLP models [10]. Evaluation is typically
performed on specific benchmark data sets for the field [40].
2.2
Artificial Intelligence Fairness
Fairness can be defined as the equally performant treatment of all humans by AI,
without discriminating against any individuals or communities [45]. The whole
life cycle of AI needs to be considered, as fairness problems can occur at all
stages [46]. We employ the Cross Industry Standard Process for Data Mining
(CRISP-DM) [47] when referring to the life cycle of AI. We chose a broad and
generalist definition of fairness to encapsulate different conceptualizations of
fairness brought up by interview partners (cf. Sec. 4). Fairness and its perception
are context-dependent and communally derived [48,49]. For measuring fairness,
numerous metrics have been discussed in literature [24, 27, 50], some of which
even (partially) contradict each other.
Assessing fairness is pursued on different levels. This necessitates differenti-
ating between individual fairness and (sub)group fairness, which in themselves
have substantial normative differences [25,51]. Bias [25] is often brought up when
fairness is discussed, even if it is not necessarily correlated to fairness [52]. Bias
is a “dynamic and social and not [just] a statistical issue” [46]. Mitigating biases
can be handled during preprocessing, inprocessing or postprocessing [53, 54] in

4
Freiberger et al.
a software life cycle. Preprocessing captures the data processing before infer-
ence. Inprocessing targets the inference process itself. Postprocessing addresses
operations performed after inference.
To understand how biases impact fairness, understanding in what ways they
are harmful to which specific groups is required [4]. Biases can result in discrim-
ination, i.e., in differences in the predictive power of models for an individual
based on membership in different protected groups [55,56]. It may occur directly
by utilizing protected attributes such as gender, race, disability, or sexuality.
It can also be indirectly, via correlations to excluded protected attributes [25].
These attributes may overlap for certain social groups, causing multi-dimensional
discrimination like intersectionality [57].
Different social groups use language differently [58]. NLP approaches tend
to perform worse for marginalized groups because their usage of language is
underrepresented [5]. Language also transmits beliefs about social groups and
imposes labels on them, representing their societal position [4]. Language use
reflects power relationships and social discrimination [11]. Biases in human lan-
guage are surfaced in word embeddings [10, 11]. This is problematic, because
word embeddings are used for downstream NLP models, and biases diffuse into
these models [11]. There they can cause allocative or representational harm, and
must be targeted by debiasing [10,59].
2.3
Artificial Intelligence Certification
According to ISO/IEC 17000:2020 [60], certification is a “third party attestation
(· · · ) related to an object of conformity assessment” [60]. The object of confor-
mity assessment refers to an entity to which specific needs and expectations are
put into place [60]. A certification authority performs a provider-independent
audit with comprehensive checks to assess conformity with certification criteria,
standards, or performance claims [35,61,62]. Third-party auditors are “indepen-
dent organizations or individuals with no obligation or contractual relationship
to the audit target” [35]. A certification communicates information, signals qual-
ity to the system user, and assurance raises trust [62, 63]. This is important in
high-stakes domains [64]. It helps providers to show their legitimacy and to
improve their services and products [34]. Certifications are defined by content,
source, and process elements [63, 64]. Content captures the specific subject of
assessments in an audit. The source describes the institution providing accredi-
tation. Process describes how an assessment for certification is conducted.
For AI auditing, use-case-specific approaches have been suggested [35]. Com-
mon auditing standards do not exist [29, 35] yet. This is problematic, as such
systems are increasingly deployed in high-stakes domains [29]. Current fairness
audits [30, 32, 33] focus on quantitative aspects. Such audits evaluate system
outputs according to mathematical fairness definitions without procedural or
qualitative assessment, and without considering intersectionality [35]. This does
not necessarily result in a fair system.

Fairness Certification
5
3
Our Research Method
Because fairness certification of NLP approaches [35, 65] is a novel, barely de-
fined research topic (cf. Sec. 2), we approach our research question with semi-
structured expert interviews. Such interviews bring consistency, focus, and struc-
ture to the interview while offering room for improvisation [65,66]. In particular,
we follow Myers’ qualitative research methodology [65] and Corbin & Strauss’
approach to data analysis [66,67].
Our research method consist of the steps literature review, interview guide,
interviewee selection, conducting and transcribing the interviews, coding the in-
terview transcripts, annotation and reflection and refinement of the interviews.
In the following, we explain these 8 steps.
Literature Review: This step provides us with all the information nec-
essary to develop an interview guide and to interpret the interview results. In
particular, we need an overview of NLP, AI fairness, and certification (cf. Sec. 2).
Interview Guide: On the basis of the literature review, we developed an
interview guide with open questions (see Appendix 3). Our guide structures the
interview into 8 parts. In the first part, (1) we welcome our interviewees and (2)
explain the organization of the interview. Next, (3) we capture the professional
background of the interviewee, and (4) clarify the terminology for the interview.
Then (5) we ask for criteria for NLP development and (6) for sustaining NLP
fairness over time. After that, (7) we leave room for open topics to talk about.
Finally, (8) we thank our interviewee and conclude the interview.
Interviewee Selection: Our research question calls for practically appli-
cable research results drawn from the entire life cycle of NLP approaches. To
investigate relevant criteria for fairness certification, we decided to select inter-
viewees as follows: The interviewees should be working in the private sector on
NLP in a relevant role like data scientist, consultant, or manager. They should
have a minimum of two years of industry experience in NLP and, ideally, expo-
sure to fairness in AI. To broaden our findings [65,68], we wanted to gain diverse
experts in the dimensions of age, gender, and cultural background.
To identify matching candidates, we browsed LinkedIn and Xing as well as
the authors’ professional networks. Matching candidates received a flyer with
basic information on the research project and the interview guide in advance, to
let them judge whether they could provide value and reflect on the topic.
On this basis, we selected 12 interviewees. In addition, we made an exception
to include two more interviewees with a background in academia. These inter-
viewees were involved in algorithmic audits. Both had more than three years of
experience in algorithmic fairness. Table 1 gives an overview of the interview
partners in the order in which they were interviewed. The first column of the
table contains the ID of the interview partner. In the following, we will use the
ID to relate a statement to a person. The second and third columns describe the
role of the interviewee and the business area of the interviewee’s company. The
last column contains the interviewee’s professional expertise.
Conducting the Interviews: We conducted one interview in English and
13 in German, all of them via video conferences. The interviews followed the

6
Freiberger et al.
Table 1. Overview of interview partners
ID Profession
Affiliation
Expertise
I1 CTO
Regional,
AI Solutions
NLU, whole life cycle
I2 Data Scientist
International,
IT Consulting
Wide variety in NLP, whole
life cycle
I3 Data Scientist
National,
IT Services
Wide variety in NLP, whole
life cycle
I4 Team Lead NLP
National,
AI and Research
Wide variety in NLP
I5 CTO
National, Conversational
AI Solutions
NLG
I6 Head of NLP
National,
IT Services
NLG
I7 Data Scientist
International,
IT
NLU, search query handling
I8 Associate Vice
President AI
International,
IT Consulting
Wide variety in NLP
I9 Senior Program
Manager
International, IT
Conversational AI, ASR
I10 Consultant
Multinational,
IT Consulting
NLU
I11 Tech Lead NLP
International,
IT Consulting
Wide variety in NLP
I12 Research Scientist
National, Research
Algorithmic fairness
I13 Co-Founder
National,
IT Services
NLU, focus: preprocessing
I14 Senior Applied
Scientist
Multinational,
E-Commerce
Algorithmic fairness,
certification
interview guide, as explained in the second step. During the main section of the
interview, we generally encouraged further input on topics verbally and non-
verbally by active listening, open questions, and reflecting back to the intervie-
wee [65]. The average duration of all 14 interviews was 51 minutes.
Transcribing the Interviews: We transcribed all interviews manually, fol-
lowing the guidelines of Dresing and Pehl [69]. We adapted the guidelines by
leaving out timestamps, which were not needed. To ensure correctness, we asked
the interviewees to check our transcripts.
Coding the Transcriptions: To gain insight from the transcripts, we de-
veloped a coding scheme in an iterative approach based on open and axial cod-
ing [67]. Open coding allows us to freely name concepts represented in interview
data. We use axial coding to understand concepts’ context, cause, and con-
sequence. We identify concepts for the coding scheme by interviewees naming
them explicitly, by abstracting from specific ideas to concepts, or by identifying
examples for a concept.

Fairness Certification
7
Fig. 1. Top-level codes for the fairness certification of NLP approaches
In advance of our results in Sec. 4, Figure 1 shows the main criteria identified
in our coding scheme. On this level, the coding scheme consists of six criteria,
that are relevant for NLP certification. The scheme is divided into the auditing
organization and the audited one. Governance Criteria are relevant for the
certification process for both of them, from opposite points of view. The general
characteristics and aims of the certification are explained by Process Criteria.
Finally, Data-Related Criteria, Project Planning Criteria, Modeling &
Evaluation Criteria and Operations Criteria specify processes and contents
of the audited organization. Note that coding is an iterative process, i.e., Figure 1
illustrates the last version of dynamic refinement.
Annotation and Reflection: We annotated 1162 text passages, utilizing
memos to capture the central ideas and concepts represented in the passage.
After multiple iterations over the scheme, 1095 coded passages contained 587
overall codes, with 124 belonging to open coding and 473 to axial coding.
Refinement: Conducting interviews is a dynamic process. After conduct-
ing and analyzing our first four interviews, we adapted our interview guide. In
particular, we worked on our questions to simplify the interview process and to
avoid unnecessary follow-up questions. Furthermore, we learned that our broad
approach puts a lot of time pressure on the interviewer, which does not allow us
to ask in-depth questions. Thus, we decided to ask our interviewees about prior
experiences and thoughts on fairness certification first. This allows us to skip
topics in the subsequent interview, that the interviewees did not feel qualified
enough to talk about.

8
Freiberger et al.
4
Interview Findings
This section gives an overview of all criteria for NLP certification that we have
identified. Figure 2 illustrates our hierarchy of codes and sub-codes. Note that
we further subdivided the sub-codes, which we omit here for lack of space. Ap-
pendix B contains a more detailed description of our results.
Fig. 2. Mind map of the coding scheme for the fairness certification of NLP approaches
In the following, we explain the coding of our six criteria together with their
sub-criteria captured by sub-codes. The intervieweees who addressed them are
denoted in brackets. Criteria that were mentioned by many interviewees tend to
be more important for a fairness certification of NLP approaches.
Process Criteria refer to the implementation of a fairness certification pro-
cess. Our interviewees identified three distinguished aspects of process criteria,
which we modeled as sub-codes.
The sub-code Fairness Understanding captures properties of fairness concep-
tion, that should be considered for fairness certification according to our inter-
views. Examples include cultural dependence (I9, I13, I14), use case dependence
(I1, I3, I5, I6, I7, I8, I12, I13, I14), dynamic (I13, I14) and non-binary (I12) prop-
erties. It also covers the interviewees’ conceptions of what is to be considered
fair, which is nuanced, and varies between conceptions like conditional statistical
parity (I1, I4, I6, I7), counterfactual fairness (I3, I4, I5, I10, I13) and notions of
inclusiveness (I2, I4, I7, I8, I9, I11).
The sub-code Certification Market Factors covers how a certification and
regulation may affect each other (I1, I3, I4, I6, I14), the market which may
build around certification (I1) and the adoption of certification dependent on
alignment with corporate goals (I1, I10, I11, I13, I14).
In Design of Assessment, we capture properties for an assessment and its
scope. A requirement is finding a way to create an audit process that is as
holistic as possible (I1, I6, I8, I9, I11, I12, I13, I14). A certification shouldn’t
put small companies at a disadvantage (I3, I5, I6, I11). Interviewees discuss
the approach to certification. They propose, for instance, to certify individuals

Fairness Certification
9
instead of processes (I5, I6, I8). Building a certification on existing standards
and best practices is also agreed upon (I1, I5, I8, I10, I11, I13, I14). Another
major point of discussion was to what extent a certification process should be
risk-dependent in its scope (I1, I2, I9, I14) or in its obligation to be performed
(I2, I10, I11).
Governance Criteria refer to all measures the certified organization should
undertake to ensure the integrity of its processes and management. Recall that
governance is important both from the perspective of the auditing and the au-
dited organization. We have identified two sub-codes for governance criteria,
which encompass several aspects.
The sub-code Model Reporting & Transparency follows the idea of disclosing
biases, basic information, data understanding, model explanations, and evalua-
tion. For basic information, our interviewees want fields of application (I4, I13),
the underlying fairness definition, and the frameworks the system was built on
(I4) to be disclosed. Data understanding covers all relevant information about the
data the system utilizes and how it is processed (I4, I12, I13). Model explanations
cover disclosing the model with its architecture (I4, I8, I12) and explainability
of the model (I2, I3, I4, I6, I8, I12). For evaluation, interviewees bring up that
reporting should contain what has been tested regarding the robustness of the
model against biases (I2, I4). Evaluation metrics and their resulting data from
testing should be publicly documented (I4, I8). Reporting data bias (I4), model
bias (I3), and countermeasures against biases that are implemented (I3, I13)
should also be done. As disclosure mechanisms, our interviewees suggest utiliz-
ing Model Cards (I2, I3, I4, I8, I12, I13, I14), open sourcing the model entirely
(I8) or giving the users an option to access relevant information to the prediction
the model made for them on demand (I8).
The sub-code Organizational Criteria targets both the audited and the au-
diting organization. Interviewees highlight that the context of the auditing or-
ganization should be reflected because it can impede its ability to make neutral
and holistic assessments. This involves the region it is located in (I13), the po-
litical system it is integrated into (I13), its initiator (I13), its integration in the
economic system (I2, I10), or the lack in diversity of professional backgrounds of
its auditors (I6, I9). The auditing organization consolidates best practices (I2,
I6, I9, I12). For the audited organization the diversity of the development team
(I2, I4, I10, I11, I13), internal accountability mechanisms and employee qualifi-
cation and training should be checked. Internal accountability involves checking
for internal assessments regarding fairness that are put in place by the audited
organization (I7, I14). Roles should be assigned clear responsibilities regarding
fairness (I1, I2, I3, I6, I7, I9, I10, I11, I14). Interviewees mention that account-
ability also needs someone who is responsible for fairness in the organization
and supervision targeted at fairness (I3, I5, I6, I7, I11). Employee qualification
& training are seen by interviewees to provide a reasonable job fit for employees
(I3, I6). A holistic overview of the process of training and operating an NLP sys-
tem and what could go wrong regarding fairness (I6, I8) should also be provided.

10
Freiberger et al.
Moreover, the interviews reveal the importance of raising general awareness of
bias issues and ensuring general knowledge about biases (I1, I3, I4, I6, I7, I11).
Project Planning Criteria address processes in the planning stage of a
product and its underlying business problem that the certification institution
should assess. Their scope ends right before data understanding in the CRISP-
DM framework. This involves two sub-codes.
For sub-code Define & Assess the Planned Application, the interviewees agree
about checking definitions of use case (I4, I8, I9, I12, I13, I14) and stakeholders
(I6, I7, I8, I11) provided by the audited organization. This entails an assessment
for the latter regarding fairness issues or vulnerabilities to fairness risks. This
involves checking that mechanisms are in place to properly understand users and
stakeholders, as well as the fairness properties of the use case itself. Moreover,
the planned solution should fit the use case, also from a fairness perspective
(I3, I4, I5, I12). The sub-code Fairness Targets in Requirements implies checking
if a standardized set of requirements has been established to ensure fairness
regarding the project over its life cycle (I2, I4, I9).
With Data-related Criteria, we refer to all assessment processes regarding
data used for training and retraining as well as regarding procedures for handling
and transforming data. Those procedures are described by six sub-codes.
The sub-code Data Assessment comprises an assessment of data quality re-
garding fairness by checking representativeness via distribution checks (I1, I4,
I8, I9, I13) and by assessing regarding harmful, toxic or incorrect data (I2, I4,
I10, I13, I14). Interviewees suggest introducing processes for bias checks (I1, I2,
I4, I5, I7, I9, I11) and assessments of the sourcing (I1, I2, I4, I5, I6, I8, I12, I13)
and collection (I3, I12, I14) of data. Sub-code Annotation captures characteris-
tics of the annotation process to support fairness. Annotating fairness relevant
attributes (I1, I2, I11) is suggested by interviewees. Moreover, comprehensive an-
notation guidelines (I4, I6, I7) and inter-annotator agreements (I4, I7, I10, I13)
are important considerations. Sub-code Preprocessing focuses on requirements
for filtering (I3, I4, I13), selecting (I1, I4, I7, I8, I10, I12, I13), anonymizing (I3,
I5, I7, I14) or mapping the data robustly (I2) to ensure fairness. The sub-code
Data for Evaluation entails that suitable, representative data is used (I2, I9, I11)
and discusses where to take it from. Interviewees highlight the importance of
fairness invariance testing (I2, I3). Sub-code Data for Continuous Improvement
comprises a monitoring process during the operation of the model and a feed-
back loop targeting improvements and counteracting fairness issues. As criteria
for monitoring, interviewees mention fairness test sets (I2, I3, I6, I8, I9), drift
monitoring (I2, I3, I4, I5, I6, I7, I13), as well as a request assessment for under-
represented groups (I2) as practices to be implemented by the audited company.
Feedback loop practices regarding data need to consider how in-use data like user
behavior, usage data or prediction confidence (I5, I9, I10) and user-made correc-
tions (I4) are handled to improve or maintain fairness. Finally, the sub-code
Data Storage covers how data should be stored in development and operations
(I10) and cached in operations (I1).

Fairness Certification
11
The Modeling & Evaluation Criteria include the two sub-codes Modeling
and Evaluation, which can be explained as follows:
Modeling is about embedding fairness into the model architecture itself. In-
terviewees mention integrating hard-coded elements into the system to ensure
fairness (I4, I5, I6, I14), training a separate fairness classifier for the model out-
puts (I5), working with constraints (I2) or embedding fairness into the model’s
optimization itself (I4, I5, I7, I10).
Evaluation investigates what tests should be conducted to evaluate a model
and how to assess the fairness of a trained model. At the center of this intervie-
wees discuss functional testing criteria which take an outside perspective on the
system’s outputs given some specific inputs. Interview partners came up with six
concepts relevant to this which are validation of predictions (I1, I4, I6), involving
affected stakeholders in evaluation (I5), adversarial testing (I1, I4, I7), data sets
or benchmarks for testing (I2, I3, I6, I8, I9, I11, I13), criteria focused on human-
computer interaction (I2, I7, I11) and ethics criteria (I4, I11). Another important
consideration for evaluation is what metrics should be utilized to test a system’s
fairness. Interviewees name metrics focused on robustness or generalization as
an essential element to measure the model’s likelihood of generating unexpected,
unfair results (I2, I4, I8). Impact-based metrics depend on the chosen fairness
paradigm (I3, I7, I8, I12, I14). Another approach proposed by I10 introduces a
metric that penalizes the model’s use of sensitive attributes or unethical content
when calculating loss.
Operations Criteria center around what should be considered regarding
fairness when deploying a model and what mechanisms must be implemented to
maintain fairness over time. That subsumes three sub-codes.
Sub-code Deployment centers around assessments suited to shipping differ-
ent model sizes and pruning models, which affect their fairness behavior (I2,
I3, I6). Interviewees define the sub-code Monitoring as a continuous assessment
procedure of the audited company. This is to ensure its system’s fairness over
time, involving fairness tests with the roll-out of updates (I1, I2, I3, I7) and
intervention strategies to counteract adversarial or unintentional, but harmful,
misuse (I9, I10, I13). Finally, with the sub-code Feedback Loop, interviewees aim
to get the flow of information back from the operational model assessed. This
involves checking for the option of flagging system outputs that are perceived as
unfair by users and for an option for users to make corrections (I1, I2, I3, I7).
Interviewees consider leveraging the data which is acquired by that to under-
stand fairness issues (I1, I2, I3, I7) and, in some cases, trigger retraining (I1, I3,
I4). An assessment includes checking if data utilized for retraining the system
in continuous improvement is subjected to the same assessments, filtering and
preprocessing steps as the initial data (I10).
Table 2 provides an overview of which of our interviewees addressed which
(sub-)code. A comparison of this table with Table 1 indicates that we indeed
obtained a broad range of experts, which are likely to cover the entire range of
the fairness certification process for NLP approaches.

12
Freiberger et al.
Table 2. Second-level coding scheme for fairness certification of NLP approaches
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10 I11 I12 I13 I14
Process
Criteria
Fairness
Understanding
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Design of Assessment ✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Certification Market
Factors
✓
✓
Project
Planning
Criteria
Define & Assess the
Planned Application
✓
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Fairness
Targets
in
Requirements
✓
✓
✓
Data-related
Criteria
Data Assessment
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Annotation
✓✓
✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Preprocessing
✓
✓✓✓
✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Data for Evaluation
✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
Data for Continuous
Improvement
✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓✓
✓
Data Storage
✓
✓
Modeling &
Evaluation
Criteria
Modeling
✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
Evaluation
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Operations
Criteria
Deployment
✓✓
✓
Monitoring
✓✓✓
✓
✓✓✓
✓
Feedback Loop
✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓✓✓
Governance
Criteria
Model Reporting &
Transparency
✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
Organizational
Criteria
✓✓✓✓
✓✓✓✓✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
5
Discussion
In this section, we briefly discuss our results. We were interested to learn the en-
tire range of criteria that must be considered to establish fairness certification for
an NLP approach. To this end, we have conducted and coded 14 semi-structured
interviews with a wide span of diverse experts from business and research. Thus,
we think that our findings are well applicable to certifying fairness in a corpo-
rate environment. However, we did not cover other sectors, such as public or
military. Furthermore, we might not have reached theoretical saturation with
14 interviewees. Moreover, designing and testing a fairness certification process
itself was beyond our scope.
One might wonder if this work on fairness and bias was influenced by bias
itself. We explicitly tried to exclude the following biases: Selection bias (selecting
interview partners on personal preferences), bias in materials (providing docu-

Fairness Certification
13
ments before the interviews could have influenced the interviewees), verbal/non-
verbal bias (due to misunderstandings between interviewer and interviewee) and
bias in data analysis (subjective coding).
We observed, that our interviewees focused particularly on criteria for data
and functional testing of solutions. However, there is a bias in the relevance
perception of modeling between NLP fairness research and interviewees’ per-
spectives. Existing research already considers model architectures inhibiting so-
cial biases, for instance, via regularization [70–72], adversarial training [6,72] or
adapting the loss function to support fairness [73,74]. Even though approaches
mentioned in interviews are consistent with the literature, the topic was barely
mentioned or deemed relatively unimportant in interviews (I1, I5). Future re-
search may investigate this mismatch.
6
Conclusion
Fairness certification for natural language processing approaches such as large
language models, AI-based chatbots or healthcare applications is an important
issue, that is still unresolved. In this paper, we have conducted and analyzed 14
semi-structured expert interviews with mostly NLP experts in the industry and
two algorithmic fairness experts in academia. Our interviewees helped us identify
six main criteria and 18 criteria on the second hierarchy level of an open coding
scheme for certifying the fairness of an NLP approach. Those criteria are an
important building block towards operationalizing and testing NLP processes to
certify fairness, from the perspective of the auditor as well as from the perspective
of the audited organization.
Our interviewees have raised plenty of open questions for future research.
For instance: How should a certification process handle the use case dependence
of fairness or its non-binary nature and subjectiveness while in a dynamic en-
vironment? To what extent would it make sense to make such a certification
mandatory? On which best practices and standards should a certification be
built? How extensive should it be? Finally, how must a certification process be
structured to specifically address large language models?
