From Quantitative Spatial Operator to Qualitative Spatial Relation Using 
Constructive Solid Geometry, Logic Rules and Optimized 9-IM Model  
A Semantic Based Approach 
 
Helmi Ben Hmida, Frank Boochs 
Institut i3mainz, am Fachbereich Geoinformatik und 
Vermessung 
Fachhochschule Mainz, Lucy-Hillebrand-Str. 2 55128 
Mainz, Germany 

mainz.de 
Christophe Cruz, Christophe Nicolle 
Laboratoire Le2i, UFR Sciences et Techniques 
 
Université de Bourgogne 
B.P. 47870, 21078 Dijon Cedex, France 

 
 
Abstract—The Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) is a data 
model providing a set of binary Boolean operators such as 
Union, Difference and Intersection. In this work, these 
operators are used to compute topological relations between 
objects defined by the constraints of the nine Intersection 
Model (9-IM) from Egenhofer. With the help of these 
constraints, we define a procedure to compute the topological 
relations on CSG objects. These topological relations are 
Disjoint, Contains, Inside, Covers, CoveredBy, Equals and 
Overlaps, and are defined in a top-level ontology with a 
specific semantic definition on relation such as Transitive, 
Symmetric, 
Asymmetric, 
Functional, 
Reflexive, 
and 
Irreflexive. The results of topological relations computation are 
stored in the ontology allowing after what to infer on these 
topological relationships. In addition, logic rules based on the 
Semantic Web Language allows the definition of logic 
programs that define which topological relationships have to 
be computed on which kind of objects. For instance, a 
“Building” that overlaps a “Railway” is a “RailStation”. 
Keywords-component; 
Topological 
relations 
; 
9-IM; 
Constructive Solid Geometry; Ontology; logic rules; OWL; 
SWRL;" 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
“Qualitative spatial relations are symbols abstraction of 
geometric 
representation, 
which 
allow 
computational 
analyses independent of, but consist with, graphical 
depiction” [1]. Qualitative spatial relationships are used in 
many areas of Computer Science. Actually, reasoning about 
such relationships is fundamental to infer about graphical 
depiction through logic mechanisms. In addition, these 
relationships facilitate the access to data by a query 
processing mechanism that refers to objects and their 
relationships. Qualitative spatial reasoning is appropriate for 
prediction and diagnoses of physical systems in a qualitative 
manner, especially when no quantitative description is 
available or computationally intractable. Methods for 
modelling spatial relationships have been compiled in 
several surveys such as [3][4]. Current models for 
topological relationships belongs to two main categories – 
connection based [4], and intersection based [5]. The both 
models fall to the same topological relationships for the two 
simple 2D regions. From a logical point of view, the 
qualitative models are defined to infer on topological 
relations without taking into account real geometries. 
Operators were defined on these relationships allowing the 
specification of a spatial query language. The Open 
Geospatial 
Consortium 
(OGC) 
defined 
a 
standard 
nomination to the basic topological relations [6]. Topological 
operators are used to query the topological relationship 
between two spatial entities. These relations and operators 
are between intervals in ℝ and for regions in ℝ. Zlatanova 
in [7][18] gives a survey on different 3D models and 
relations in ℝ. The spatial operators available for spatial 
query language consist of 3D Topological operators 
(disjoint, within, contains, etc.) [8], 3D Metric operators 
(distance, closerThan, fartherThan, etc.) [9], 3D Directional 
operators (above, below, northOf, etc.) [10] and finally 3D 
Boolean operators (union, intersection, etc.) [11]. 
From the ℝ space implementation point of view in [9], 
the octree-based implementation [13] and the B-Rep 
approaches are used to define the spatial operators of a query 
language [12]. In the octree-approach, octrees allows the 
application of recursive algorithms that successively increase 
the discrete resolution of the spatial objects employed. The 
B-Rep, approach is used for metric operators such as mindist, 
maxdist, isCloserto and isFartherfrom relations. The 
bounding facets of each operand are indexed by a, so-called, 
axis-aligned bounding boxes tree (AABB tree). The 
algorithm uses the AABB-tree structure to identify candidate 
pairs of facets, for which an exact, but expensive distance 
algorithm is employed. 
From the semantics point of view, the qualitative spatial 
relations are used to perform inference and to identify 
inconsistencies on these relations. An ontology based 
approach is described in [14] and focuses on regions in ℝ. 

In our current work, we will focus more on the ℝdimension 
environment where the 3D topologic relation computation is 
carried out by external libraries which made the execution 
process more optimal. The presented approach aims at 
defining topological relations based on the optimized 9 
Intersection Model in ℝ[2], and compute them with the 
Boolean operators defined by Constructive Solid Geometry 
(CSG) [21]. Actually, the 9-IM model is widely used to 
represent spatial relations in ℝ. These relations exist also 
in  ℝ  with much more variation and complexity. In the 
actual contribution, the quantitative spatial operators are 
implemented using built-ins based the Semantic Web Rules 
Languages (SWRL) which allows the definition of logic 
program base on Horn-like clauses. This language is 
designed to perform logical program on Ontology Web 
Language (OWL). Consequently, the results of these 3D 
spatial operators may enrich the ontology with spatial 
relations between the different object represented via CSG 
model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  General overview of the process sequence from ontology to 
CSG geometric data model. 
Figure 1 depicts the process sequence for the enrichment of 
an ontology containing 3D objects. The ontology is 
populated with topological relationships based on SWRL 
rules. Once done, the inference process on these 
relationships makes a step forward to infer new knowledge 
out. The used logic rules are based on new topological built-
ins defined based on the 9-IM constraints, and computed for 
each object´s relation using 3D CSG objects and Boolean 
operators. The following example is a SWRL rule that uses 
the “topo:overlaps” built-ins. 
 
Building(?b) ^ Railway(?r) ^ topo: overlaps(?b, ?r)  
RailStation(?b) 
 
This paper is divided into 5 sections. Section 2 introduces 
the technical background on 9-IM, Constructive Solid 
Geometry operators, and logic rules. Section 3 deals with 
the important elements of the topologic qualification process 
implementation. Section 4 shows the first results and section 
5 concludes this paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Spatial object representation can be divided into two 
main categories, the surface-based representation and the 
volume-based representation [19]. The surface-based 
representations are materialized by the grid model, the shape 
model, the facet model and the boundary representation (B-
Rep). The volume-based representations are taking place via 
the 3D array, the octree, the constructive solid geometry 
(CSG) and the 3D TIN. Such a spatial object representations 
are used to compute spatial and topological relations by the 
use of unary or binary operators. Among the different 
defined spatial relationship, we put the light in this paper on 
the 3D topological operators. 
A. Topological relationships 
Spatial reasoning is a process that uses spatial theory and 
artificial intelligence to model and to analyze spatial 
relations between objects. The standard models are 
composed by the Simple Feature Relations, the Egenhofer 
Relations and the RCC8 Relations [17]. The Simple 
Features Relations are based on the defined standard of 
OGC and are composed of the following relationships: 
Equals, Disjoint, Intersects, Touches, Within, Contains, 
Overlaps, and Crosses [16]. The Egenhofer Relations [15] 
are composed of the following relationships: Equals, 
Disjoint, Overlap, Covers, Covered by, Inside, Contains [1]. 
Finally, the RCC8 Relations are presented by: Equals, 
Disconnected, Externally connected, Partially overlapping, 
Tangential proper part inverse, Tangential proper part, Non-
tangential proper part, Non-tangential proper part inverse 
[17]. Initially, binary topological relations between two 
objects, A and B, are defined in terms of the four 
intersections of A’s boundary (δA) and interior (A°) with 
the boundary (δB) and interior (B°) of B. Recently, this 
model has been extended by considering the location of 
each interior and boundary with respect to the other object’s 
exterior. Therefore, the binary topological relation between 
two objects A and B, in  ℝ is based upon the intersection of 
A’s interior (A°), boundary (δA), and exterior (A-) with B’s 
interior (B°), boundary ( δ B), and exterior (B-). The 9 
intersections between the six object´s parts describe a 
topological relation and can be concisely represented by a 
3x3 matrix, called the 9-Intersection Model. The binary 
relationship R(A,B) between the two objects is then 
identified by composing all the possible set intersections of 
the six topological primitives, i.e. A°∩B° , δA∩B° ,A− ∩ B° , 
A°∩δB , δA∩δB , A− ∩δB , A°∩ B− , δA∩B−, A− ∩ B− , and 
qualifying empty (∅ ) or non-empty (¬∅) intersections. For 
example, if two objects have a common boundary, the 
intersection between the boundaries is non-empty, i.e. 
δA∩δB = ¬∅. Ιf they have intersecting interiors, then the 
intersection A°∩ B° is not empty, i.e. A°∩ B° = ¬∅, Table 
1.  
 

TABLE I.  
THE 9-IM MATRIX 
	
,
 = 
A° ∩°
° ∩
° ∩
 ∩°
 ∩
  ∩
 ∩°
 ∩
 ∩
 
 
 Actually, a spatial region (BIM or GIS) has simply three 
topologically distinct parts: the interior, the boundary, and 
the exterior. Specifying any part of the first geometry will 
completely determines the region of the other parts. Based 
on this observation, it appears reasonable to assume that 
topological relations between regions can be characterized 
by considering the intersections of any pair of parts, for 
example, boundary/exterior or interior/exterior, rather than 
only the boundary/interior intersections. To assess such 
alternatives, one has to determine whether the 4-intersection 
based on the boundary / interior / intersections is equivalent 
to one based on boundary / exterior or interior / exterior 
intersections. If so, the characterization of topological 
relations would have to be the same in each case. Based on 
this assumption, we opt to use the 9-IM principle in more 
optimal way by reducing it to a four intersection model 
based on the interior / exterior of each 3D geometry, Table2. 
TABLE II.  
OPTIMIZED 9IM MODEL (LEFT) AND THE CORRESPONDENT 
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION (RIGHT) 
 
	
,
 = A° ∩°
° ∩
 ∩°
 ∩  
B. CSG-based implementation of 3D topological relations 
The Constructive Solid Geometry is defined by Friedrich A. 
Lohmüller in [21]. It is a technique used in solid modelling. 
It allows the modeller to create a complex surface or object 
by using Boolean operators such as union, intersection or 
difference to combine objects. A CSG object can be 
represented by a tree, where each leaf represents a primitive 
and each node a Boolean operation. There are only five 
CSG standard defined operations, which are materialized by 
the union, the intersection, the difference, the inverse and 
Clipped_by. These methods return the resulting solid of the 
operation and are restricted to objects including a closed 
space. Actually, lines and planes are both objects which do 
not enclose a volume, as consequence, no possible CSG 
operations can be applied on them. As a conventional 
solution, a solid will be created from a line and plane by 
adding a small noise rate to the above mentioned geometry, 
always with respect to the fact that the added noise rate is 
always less than those related to the used instrument during 
the survey of real objects. In the next, we will mainly focus 
on the implication of the CSG topologic operator within the 
optimized 9-IM model to qualify directly 3D topologic 
relation. 
C. Ontology and rules 
The term Ontology has been used for centauries to define 
an object philosophically. Within the computer science 
domain, ontology is a formal representation of the 
knowledge through the hierarchy of concepts and the 
relationships between those concepts. In theory, ontology is 
a formal, explicit specification of shared conceptualization 
[24]. In any case, ontology can be considered as 
formalization of knowledge representation and Description 
Logics (DLs) and provides a logical formalization to the 
Ontologies [25].  
Description logics (DLs) [26][27] are a family of knowledge 
representation languages that can be used to represent 
knowledge of an application domain in a structured and 
formally well-understood way. The following example 
defines a Mother as a Woman which has at least a child type 
of Person. By inference, it means that every individual type 
of Women which as at least a relation with a Person and the 
type of the relation is “hasChild”, then this Woman is of 
kind of Mother. 
 
ℎ ≡!"#$ ⨅ ∃ℎ#'(ℎ)*+. -'$  
 
As the Semantic Web technologies matured, the need of 
incorporating the concepts behind description logic within 
the ontology languages was realized. It took few generations 
for the ontology languages defined within Web environment 
to implement the description language completely. The Web 
Ontology Language (OWL) [28] is intended to be used 
when the information contained in documents needs to be 
processed by applications and not by human [29]. The horn 
logic, more commonly known the Horn clauses has been 
used as the base of logic programming and Prolog languages 
[31] for years. These languages allow the description of 
knowledge with predicates. The Horn logic has given a 
platform to define Horn-like rules through sub-languages of 
RuleML [23]. Summarizing, it could be said that ontology 
defines the data structure of a knowledge base and this 
knowledge base could be inferred through various inference 
engines. They can be performed under Horn logic through 
Horn-like rules languages. The following Horn-like rule is 
specified with the help of the SWRL language used to 
define rules. It means any parent of a child and the parent 
has a brother, then the brother is an uncle. 
 
Parent(?p, ?c) ^ Brother(?p, ?b)  Uncle(?b, ?c) 
 
The set of built-ins for SWRL is motivated by a modular 
approach that will allow further extensions in future releases 
within a (hierarchical) taxonomy. SWRL's built-ins 
approach is also based on the reuse of existing built-ins in 
XQuery and XPath, which are themselves based on XML 
Schema by using the Data types. These built-ins are keys for 
any external integration, like the integration of the 
topological operators. Built-ins in the SWRL can be used 
with the standard SWRL expressions. The built-ins process 
the rule expressions to deduce the result and couple with the 

standard expression to return the results. For example  
 
Person(?x) ^ hasHeight(?x, ?h) ^ swrlb:greaterThan(?h, 
6.5)  Tall(?x) 
D. Enrichment of the ontology from Boolean operators 
using CSG model 
The use of CSG model and its associated Boolean 
operator allows us to model the topological relationships. In 
order to combine SWRL rules with topological operators, 
news built-ins are defined to compute the operator. 
Consequently, the results of the operators can be used to 
define queries or enrich the ontology with new topological 
relationships between two objects. The following rule 
specifies that a “Building” defined in the ontology that 
overlaps a “Railway” defined as well in the ontology, is a 
“RailStation”.  
 
Building(?b) ^ Railway(?r) ^ topo: overlaps(?b, ?r) 
RailStation(?b) 
 
To make it realistic, two issues appear and have to be 
solved. First, the semantic definition of the relationships has 
to be defined in the ontology level regarding their own 
properties. 
Second, 
the 
calculation 
of 
topological 
relationships using Boolean operators has to be defined 
regarding the constraints of the optimized 9-IM model.  
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
This section is divided into three sub-sections. The first 
one describes how Boolean operators are used to compute 
the optimized 9-IM matrix for a topological relation. The 
second introduces news relationships in the top-level 
ontology and its built-in. Finally, the last section deals with 
the translation engine which allows the computation of the 
topological built-ins to enrich the ontology.  
A. Calculation of 9-IM topological relationships using the 
CSG Boolean operators 
Regarding the optimized 9-IM matrix, Table 2, only 
operators about intersection (A ∩B), interior (A° equivalent 
A), complement (A is equivalent to ̅) are necessary. Table 
3 presents relatively the new suggested mask for 3D 
topologic operations based on the interior and the exterior of 
each solid geometry. In parallel, it presents the relative CSG 
operation corresponding to each part of the mask. 
TABLE III.  
OPTIMIZED 9IM MODEL (ON THE LEFT) WITH THE 
EQUIVALENT MASK USING CSG OPERATORS (ON THE RIGHT) 
	
,
 = ° ∩°
° ∩
 ∩°
 ∩
	
,
 = / ∩
\
\
̅ ∩12
Table 4 shows the optimized 9-IM matrices of the 
topological predicates defined by Egenhofer.  
 
TABLE IV.  
THE OPTIMIZED 9-IM MATRIX 
 
 
 
0
1
1
1 
 
1
1
0
1 
1
1
1
1 
A disjoint B 
B disjoint A 
A contains B 
B inside A 
A overlaps B 
B overlaps A 
 
Table 5 presents the equivalent qualitative relations for 
each CSG operator. If one of these equations is false, the 
relation between the two objects cannot be verified. 
TABLE V.  
EQUIVALENT QUALITATIVE RELATIONS TO QUALITATIVE 
CSG OPERATOR 
spatial 
relation 
CSG operators 
Disjoint 

 ∩ = ∅ ∧
\ = ¬∅ ∧
\ = ¬∅ ∧
̅ ∩1 = ¬∅ 
Contain 

 ∩ = ¬∅ ∧
\ = ¬∅ ∧
\ = ∅ ∧
̅ ∩1 = ¬∅ 
Overlaps 

A ∩B = ¬∅ ∧
A\B = ¬∅ ∧
B\A = ¬∅ ∧
A8 ∩B8 = ¬∅ 
B. Definition of topological relationships in the ontology 
and new built-ins 
Regarding the ontology, the top level ontology is created 
to model the topological relationships. This ontology is used 
to enrich an existing knowledge base to make it possible to 
define topological relationships between objects. The next 
table summarizes for each topological relation, its name in 
the ontology using the prefix “swrl_topo”, its semantic 
characteristics and the new built-in to automatize the 
computation of relations with the help of SWRL rules. The 
swrl_topo:inside relation is the inverse relation of 
swrl_topo:contains, and the relation swrl_topo:covers is the 
inverse relation of swrl_topo:coveredBy.  
TABLE VI.  
DEFINITION OF THE TOPOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS AND ITS 
SEMANTICS 
Topological 
relationships 
Property 
Name 
Characteristics 
SWRL built-ins 
Disjoint 
topo:disjoint 
Transitive, Symmetric 
Irreflexive 
swrl_topo:disjoint 
(?x, ?y) 
Contains 
topo:contains 
Transitive, Asymmetric 
Irreflexive 
swrl_topo:contains
(?x, ?y) 
Overlaps 
topo:overlaps 
Symmetric irreflexive 
swrl_topo:overlaps
(?x, ?y) 
C. Translation engine 
The translation engine allows the computation of spatial 
SWRL rules which can also be queries. It interprets the 
statements in order to parse the spatial components. Once 
parsed, they are computed through relevant spatial functions 
and operations by the translation engine through the 
operations provided at the CSG level. The results are 
populated in the knowledge base, thus making it spatially 

rich, Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The translation engine that process 3D topologic SWRL rules 
with topological built-ins. 
 
IV. 
QUALITATIVE 3D TOPOLOGICAL RELATION 
EMPLOYMENT, TESTS AND RESULTS 
Let´s first remind that our solution is based on a 
knowledge base structure instead of any standard data bases 
to improve the portability, the sharing degree of the 
document and mostly to add a new semantic dimension to 
the acquired data. Figure 3 shares a print screen of the 
qualified 3D topological relationships between geometries 
detected from an airport scene. In the next, two main kind of 
spatial queries on the knowledge base with a strongly 
formalized foundation to maximize the exploitation of the 
implemented semantic 3D topological relations will be 
highlighted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Qualified 3D topologic relations between an ontology 
individuals 
A. SWRL based use case 
Known as SWRL, Semantic Web Rules Languages with 
the extended built-Ins to support the 3D topological 
processing is performed. As seen in mentioned SWL rule, 
the antecedent part is composed by classes like Wall in this 
case, data properties, but also built-Ins for 3D topology that 
will be later on converted to simple object properties in this 
case. In the consequent part, and once the topological 
assertion is verified, overlaps in this case, the (?y) elements 
will be classified as a semantic element from the class Wall. 
Wall(?x) ∧ VerticalBoundingBox(?y) ∧ swrl_topo:overlaps(?x,?y) 
∧ hasheight(?y,?h) ∧ swrlb:greaterThan(?h,3)→ Wall(?y) 
B. SQWRL based uses cases 
As we have already selected a qualitative manner based 
on semantic knowledge to define spatial operators, SQWRL 
(Semantic Query-Enhanced Web Rule Language) language 
can be used as a query language to query the knowledge 
base. The next equation is an example of a query that 
selections all distinct overlapping bounding box in the 
current knowledge base.  
Vertical_BoundingBox(?x) ∧ Vertical_BoundingBox(?y) ∧ 
swrl_topo:overlaps(?x, ?y) → sqwrl:selectDistinct(?x,?y) 
To test the performance of the quantitative 3D 
topological operators, a various number of geometries were 
created. The geometries can be much more complex but has 
to be closed without whole. During the tests, the query 
execution time is stored, Figure 4. Fewer than 500 boxes, 
the computation time stay almost constant. But upper than 
500 boxes, the computation time is asymptotic. This is 
explained by the fact that the query process computes the 
Cartesian 
product 
of 
all 
the 
geometrical 
objects. 
Consequently, for k=2 and n=1000, the number of 
operations is almost an half million, and for n=10000 
geometries the number of operations is almost 50 million. 
Consequently, after the computation of all relations, the 
query can be done only on the knowledge base without 
Boolean operators. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The SQWRL test performance up to 1000 boxes. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has presented a method to compute 
automatically topological relations using SWRL rules. The 
calculation of these rules is based on the definition of 
Constructive Solid Geometry. Some simplification will be 
undertaken regarding the 9-IM computation of each 
topological relationship in order to reduce the calculation 
volume. Future work on topological relationships will be 
undertaken also about basic rules that can be defined from 
[32] and depicted in the next SWRL rule. This can also be 
done by a composition of relations, meet ∘contains ⊑
Disjoint. 
 
meet (?a, ?b) ^ contains(?a, ?c)  disjoint (?a, ?c)
