1 
       The Data Big Bang and the Expanding Digital Universe:  
High-Dimensional, Complex and Massive Data Sets in an Inflationary Epoch 
 
 
          Meyer Z. Pesenson*, Isaac Z. Pesenson**, Bruce McCollum*  
 
                  *California Institute of Technology, **Temple University 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
                  
 
Recent and forthcoming advances in instrumentation, and giant new surveys, are creating 
astronomical data sets that are not amenable to the methods of analysis familiar to astronomers. 
Traditional methods are often inadequate not merely because of the size in bytes of the data sets, 
but also because of the complexity of modern data sets.  Mathematical limitations of familiar 
algorithms and techniques in dealing with such data sets create a critical need for new paradigms 
for the representation, analysis and scientific visualization (as opposed to illustrative 
visualization) of heterogeneous, multiresolution data across application domains. Some of the 
problems presented by the new data sets have been addressed by other disciplines such as 
applied mathematics, statistics and machine learning and have been utilized by other sciences 
such as space-based geosciences. Unfortunately, valuable results pertaining to these problems are 
mostly to be found only in publications outside of astronomy.  Here we offer brief overviews of a 
number of concepts, techniques and developments, some "old" and some new.  These are 
generally unknown to most of the astronomical community, but are vital to the analysis and 
visualization of complex datasets and images.  In order for astronomers to take advantage of the 
richness and complexity of the new era of data, and to be able to identify, adopt, and apply new 
solutions, the astronomical community needs a certain degree of awareness and understanding of 
the new concepts. One of the goals of this paper is to help bridge the gap between applied 
mathematics, artificial intelligence and computer science on the one side and astronomy on the 
other. 
           
 
I. 
Introduction 
 
 
Astronomy is undergoing a rapid, unprecedented and accelerating growth in both the 
amount and the intrinsic complexity of data. This results partly from past and future large sky 
surveys: the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (York et al. 2000), the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope 
(LSST) (Tyson et al. 2008; see also Szalay et al. 2002), ESA’s GAIA mission (Perryman 2002), 
Pan-STARRS (Hodapp et al. 2004; Price et al. 2007), the Palomar Transient Factory (Law et al. 
2009), LAMOST (Zhao et al. 2006), and the Palomar-Quest Survey (Djorgovski et al. 2009). 
Smaller surveys and catalogs comprised of ~103 -104 objects appear annually.  The increasing 
availability of multiple-object spectrographs deployed at ground-based observatories enables 
observers to obtain spectra of hundreds of objects in a single exposure (Barden & Armandroff 
1995; Bigelow et al. 1998; Lewis et al. 2002; Sharples et al. 2004; Wagner 2006; Freeman & 
Bland-Hawthorne 2008; Eto et al. 2004).  Million-object spectrographs have been proposed and 
are undergoing design studies (e.g. Barden et al. 2004; Ditto & Ritter 2008). All together, and 
sometimes individually, such projects are creating for astronomy massive multitemporal and 
multispectral data sets comprised of images spanning multiple wavebands and including billions 
of objects.  Furthermore, the Virtual Observatory (VO) is undertaking to combine existing 
historical data from all wavelengths into what will be, from the user’s perspective, a single data 

 
2 
set of gigantic size and unprecedented complexity (http://www.ivoa.net).  
In addition, mathematically new (for astronomy) forms of data are starting to appear, 
such as those of the ESA Planck mission in which the cosmic microwave background (CMB) is 
characterized by a 2×2 matrix at each point in the sky (Zaldarriaga & Seljak 1996).  
 
Other great challenges arise from the so-called three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions. 
For example, a very important and difficult problem of solar astrophysics is 3D reconstruction of 
coronal mass ejections (Frazin, et al. 2009). The resulting reconstruction problem cannot be 
solved via classical methods and must be addressed by more modern image processing methods 
like compressed sensing (see section V). Another example of tomographic reconstruction is 
coming from the neutral hydrogen mapping using the redshifted 21 cm line that has recently 
emerged as a promising cosmological probe. A number of radio telescopes are currently being 
proposed, planned or constructed to observe the redshifted 21 cm hydrogen line from the Epoch 
of Reionization (e.g. Fast Fourier Transform Telescope, Tegmark & Zaldarriaga 2009). 
The richness and complexity of new data sets will provide astronomy with a wealth of 
information and most of the research progress expected from such sets inherently rests in their 
enormity and complexity. In order to take full advantage of immense multispectral, 
multitemporal data sets, their analysis should be automated, or at least semi-automated, and 
should consist of the following steps: detection, characterization and classification of various 
features of interest, followed, if necessary, by automated decision-making and possibly by 
intelligent automatic alerts (e.g. for follow-up observations or data quality problems). 
Moreover, a real-time processing may be required. Complex data also call for scientific 
visualization rather than ordinary illustrative visualization. By scientific visualization we mean 
visualization that does not simply reproduce visible things, but makes the things visible, thus 
enabling extraction of meaningful patterns from multiparametric data sets and ultimately 
facilitating analysis.  
All this requires the development and adaption of modern methods for data 
representation, analysis and visualization. Methods now standard in astronomy are often 
ineffective because the data sets are too large and too complex for existing tools to be scaled in a 
straightforward way from handling several parameters up to dozens or more. There are also 
important limitations inherent in the mathematical algorithms familiar to astronomers. Scientific 
visualization, dimensionality reduction, and non-parametric methods in general are among the 
least-advanced categories of tools in astronomy because until this century there have not been 
data sets requiring new approaches related to those aspects of the data.  All this not only creates a 
critical need for new sophisticated tools, but moreover urgently calls for new paradigms for the 
analysis, visualization and organization of heterogeneous, multiresolution data across application 
domains.   
The astronomical community is becoming increasingly aware of the fact that new and 
advanced methods of applied mathematics, statistics and information technology should be 
developed and utilized. Three of the State of the Profession Position Papers submitted to the 
Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey strongly emphasized astronomy’s need for new 
computational and mathematical tools in the coming decade (Loredo et al. 2009; Borne et al. 
2009; Ferguson et al. 2009) (see: http://sites.nationalacademies.org/bpa/BPA_049492).  A 
variety of individual and organizational initiatives and research projects have been proposed or 
are underway to at least partially address this looming challenge by developing or implementing 
a new generation of methods of data representation, processing and visualization. 
However, there is a large communication gap between astronomy and other fields where 
adequate solutions exist or are being developed: applied mathematics, statistics and artificial 

 
3 
intelligence.  
The principal objectives of this paper are twofold. First, we wish to bring attention to 
some specific needs for new data analysis techniques.  Second, we describe some innovative 
approaches and solutions to some of these problems and give examples of novel tools that permit 
effective analysis, representation, and visualization of the new multispectral/multitemporal data 
sets that offer enormous richness if they are mined with the appropriate tools. The extensive 
amount of relevant work already accomplished in disciplines outside of astronomy does not 
allow us to offer a complete review of all aspects of these complex topics and problems, but we 
have selected a number of important examples. 
 
The structure of the paper is as follows. In part II we discuss challenges related to semi-
automated processing of low-dimensional images and describe briefly our framework for 
advanced astronomical image processing. Part III describes problems posed by complex 
astronomical data sets; part IV addresses some of these problems and presents some innovative 
methods for nonlinear data dimension reduction, data representation and sampling on graphs and 
manifolds; it also describes briefly a new unifying method for image segmentation and 
information visualization that is based on physical intuition derived from synchronization of 
nonlinear oscillations; part V reviews some recent approaches to the challenges posed by high-
dimensional, complex data sets and their importance for cosmological and astrophysical 
problems; in particular, we briefly discuss in this part a new tool called needlets for processing 
data that is laying on the sphere, applications of needlets to the analysis of CMB data, and a 
generalization of the wavelet-like transforms to Riemannian manifolds. The paper ends with a 
conclusion.  
 
 
 
 
II.  Framework for Processing and Visualizing Astronomical Images 
 
Vast data sets demand automated or semi-automated image processing and quality 
assessment of the processed images. Indeed, the sheer number of observed objects awaiting 
analysis makes obvious the need for sophisticated automation of object detection, 
characterization and classification. Adapting recent advances of computer vision and image 
processing for astronomy and designing and implementing an image processing framework (see 
below) that would utilize these continuing achievements, remains, however, a major challenge. 
Developers and users alike have realized that there is more to creating an application than 
simple programming. The objective of creating a flexible (see below) application is customarily 
achieved by exploiting the object-oriented paradigm (Grand 1998; Booch et al. 2005). In 
computer science such systems are called frameworks (Fayad et al. 1999). Frameworks are 
flexible, and users can extend frameworks’ capabilities by installing plug-ins without having to 
rewrite the basic code. An application framework consists of computational (processing) 
modules, data, and an interactive interface. Frameworks are extendable (i.e., they can easily 
adopt software products to changes of specification) and reusable (the software elements are able 
to serve for construction of many different new applications).  
The keystone elements of a system that unifies a wide range of methods for astronomical 
image processing should be computational and visualization modules. Such a platform-
independent framework with an integrated environment was described in Pesenson, Roby & 
McCollum (2008). It provides many common visualization features plus the ability to combine 
these images (overlays, etc.) in new and unique ways.  The framework has a very intuitive GUI 

 
4 
that allows the user to set up a custom pipeline interactively and to process images singly or in a 
batch mode. The final products, as well as the results of each step, are viewable with the 
framework. It also provides access to different data archives and can easily incorporate custom 
modules written in any programming language. Figures 1-4 give a few self-explanatory 
examples that demonstrate some of the framework’s functionality.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. ESO-La Silla; courtesy of A. Grado, INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte. 
Left: overlaid pre- and post-processed images; the red cross shows approximately the edge of the 
diffuse halo. Right: Flux-cut through the overlaid pre- and post-processed images (red and green 
respectively); the vertical grey line (close to the center of the plot) corresponds to the red cross in 
the plot on the left; after the preprocessing the average level "outside" of the halo is lower than 
the average level ‘inside’, thus enabling a better automated separation of the diffuse halo from 
the background.  
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
Figure 2. Morphology unveiling (Pesenson, Roby & McCollum 2008). Left: IC 405, Spitzer 
IRAC camera 8.0 µm image (France et al. 2007); filaments and a bow shock near HD34078 (see 
the red cross “x” in Figure 3, left). The brightness is proportional to the flux (logarithmic scale). 
Right: Brightness is proportional to the module of the gradient of flux (logarithmic scale); this 
way of looking at astronomical images facilitates analysis of nebular morphology, outflows, jets, 
embedded sources, and shock fronts. 
 
 
 

 
5 
      
     
 
   
Figure 3. Overlaid pre- and postprocessed images (Pesenson, Roby & McCollum 2008). Left: 
Three overlaid images of IC 405: Spitzer IRAC camera 8.0 µm image, the module of its gradient, 
and the angle of its gradient (red, green, and blue respectively). The line through the red cross 
“x” indicates the crosscut. Right: Three profiles for the crosscut through ‘‘x’’. The crosshair goes 
through the ridge point and a local minimum of the module of the gradient. Note the different 
scales on the left and right vertical axes. 
 
 
        
 
 
Figure 4. Three different visualizations of the bow shock structure (Pesenson, Roby & 
McCollum 2008). Left: IC 405, Spitzer IRAC camera 8.0 µm image, the bow shock (red crosses) 
near HD 34078. The brightness is proportional to the flux (logarithmic scale). Middle: The bow 
shock area where the brightness is proportional to the module of the gradient of flux (logarithmic 
scale). Right: The bow shock area where the front of the bow shock is immediately apparent as a 
curve of 1 pixel width (red crosses); the brightness is proportional to the angle of the gradient of 
flux (logarithmic scale). 
 
 
The framework deals primarily with image smoothing (regularization) and segmentation. 
These are fundamental first steps for the detection and characterization of image elements or 
objects and as such they play principal roles in the realization of automated computer vision 
applications. Image segmentation can roughly be described as the process that subdivides an 
image into its constituent parts (objects) and extracts those parts of interest. Since the inception 
of image segmentation in the 1960s, a large number of techniques and algorithms for image 
segmentation have been developed.  
Lately, due to revolutionary advances in instrumentation, the complexity of images has 
changed significantly: the extension of grey level images to multi- and hyperspectral images, 
from 2-D images to 3-D, from still images to sequences of images, tensor-valued images 
(polarization data), etc. Some modern, cutting-edge methods for image processing have been 
developed lately, and are being developed today, by information scientists outside of astronomy. 
The substantial progress in this direction made by the image processing and computer vision 
communities (Bovik 2005; Paragios et al. 2006), has found multiple applications in physics, 
technology, and bio-/medical sciences. Unfortunately, for the most part these advances have not 

 
6 
yet been utilized by the astronomical community. 
Multiscale image representation and enhancement are such approaches. They have 
become important parts of computer vision systems and modern image processing. The 
multiscale approach has proven to be especially useful for image segmentation for feature and 
artifact detection. It enables a reliable search for objects of widely different morphologies, such 
as faint point sources, diffuse supernova remnants, clusters of galaxies, undesired data artifacts, 
as well as unusual objects needing detailed inspection by a scientist. It is well known that in 
astronomical images one often sees both point sources and extended objects such as galaxies 
embedded in extended emission (see, for example, Figs. 2, 6, 7).  Because of the issue of 
robustness with respect to noise (section IV), a careful preprocessing is required before one can 
safely apply image segmentation or dimension reduction. So, an adequate way of preprocessing 
is what needs to be addressed first.  
One effective approach to denoising is based on partial differential equations and may be 
seen as the local adaptive smoothing of an image along defined directions that depend on local 
intensities. One wants to smooth an image while preserving its features by performing a local 
smoothing mostly along directions of the edges while avoiding smoothing orthogonally to these 
edges. Many regularization schemes have been developed so far for the case of simple two-
dimensional scalar images. An extension of these algorithms to vector-valued images is not 
straightforward. For a gray-scale image, the gradient is always perpendicular to the level set 
objects of the image; however, in the multi-channel case, this quality does not hold. Applying 
nonlinear diffusion to each channel or spectral band separately is one possible way of processing 
multi- and hyperspectral cubes; however, it does not take advantage of the richness of the 
multi/hyperspectral data. Moreover, if the edge detector acts only on one channel, it may lead to 
an undesirable effect, such as color blurring, where edges in multicolor images are blurred due to 
the different local geometry in each channel. Hence, a coupling between image channels should 
appear in the equations through the local vector geometry. We achieve this by implementing a 
nonlinear diffusion on a weighted graph, thus generalizing the approach adopted by Pesenson, 
Roby & McCollum (2008). The governing equation is linear, but the nonlinearity enters through 
the weights assigned to the graph edges. This algorithm respects the local smoothing geometry 
and thus serves well as a preprocessing step required for dimension reduction (section IV).  
Our framework handles two-dimensional scalar images and paves the way to the semi-
and automated image processing and image quality assessment. However, the ability to extract 
useful knowledge from high-dimensional data sets is becoming more and more important 
(section III). It is closely related to finding complicated structural patterns of interrelated 
connections and heavily depends on the ability to reduce dimensions of the raw data. This 
problem constitutes a big challenge for the scientific and technology communities. To extend the 
framework’s functionality to high-dimensional images and data sets we have been developing 
novel, practical algorithms for dimension reduction. In the next section we describe some of the 
challenges presented by modern, high-dimensional data sets. 
 
 
III. Complex, Massive Data Sets  
 
 
Astronomy has long found the use of multiple data dimensions to be crucial aids to 
progress. For example, surveys of H-alpha sources when cross-correlated with spectral types 
guided astronomy to discover interesting new types of objects such as Herbig AeBe stars (Herbig 
1960).  Cross-comparison of brightnesses, redshifts, and optical object morphologies led to the 

 
7 
discovery of quasars.  X-ray emission proved to be a highly efficient method of identifying pre-
main sequence objects in a large field of view (e.g. review by Feigelson & Montmerle 1999). 
The fact that the same object (SS 433) was noticed to exhibit H-alpha emission and strong radio 
and optical variability led astronomers to investigate further and thus discover the existence of 
microquasars (Clark & Murdin 1978; Feldman et al. 1978; Margon et al. 1979).  Other 
discoveries from the use of multidimensional data using just a few dimensions include such 
things as Be X-ray binaries and soft gamma ray repeaters.  
 
Simple color-magnitude diagrams are another traditional tool taking advantage of 
multiple data dimensions (e.g. cataloging YSO candidates from Spitzer survey data, Whitney et 
al. (2008)). In addition, it is well known that simple color-color plots using four colors provide 
ways to efficiently and fairly reliably classify into physical types a large number of objects 
(IRAS data, e.g. van der Veen et al. 1989, van der Veen & Habing 1990; 2MASS data, e.g. 
Finlator et al. 2000; MSX data, e.g. Egan et al. 2001, Ortiz et al. 2005; Spitzer data, e.g. Ramirez 
et al. 2008) as well as to discover interesting new objects as outliers (e.g. Luminous Red Novae, 
Munari et al. 2002, Bond 2003).  The meaning and usefulness of more complicated 
multiwavelength cross-correlations across widely-separated wavelength domains remain a 
nontrivial but fruitful challenge still being explored (for example, microquasars identified by 
comparing radio, IR, and X-ray properties (Combi et al. 2008)).  
 
As multiwavelength data have become available for huge numbers of objects in the past 
few decades, the number of data dimensions for a typical object has grown beyond what can be 
visualized and studied using classical color-color plots and correlations using only a few 
dimensions. For example, Egan et al. (2001) write - “six-dimensional data are difficult to 
represent; in addition, it is not clear that all of the colors yield completely independent 
information” (see Figure 5). 
 
 
 
                      
 
Figure 5. Color-color plots are a familiar form of scientific visualization. This example (from 
Egan et al. 2001) shows, simultaneously, infrared color-color information for several different 
categories of objects.  Different object classes are represented by different symbols or different 
hues.  Thus several data dimensions (the four IR colors and the several classes of object) are 
represented.   
 
While the above figure successfully permits one to identify meaningful patterns, it is 
easily imagined that attempting to display a much larger number of data dimensions by simply 
using many more colors and symbols overlaid on the same plot and same region of parameter 
space would not be a useful form of scientific visualization.  Also, two-dimensional plots are 

 
8 
obviously not useful for expressing relationships among more than four colors.  Effective 
scientific visualization of a large number of data dimensions requires new techniques. 
The catalog information available for a great many objects already includes such 
information as magnitude, several optical and IR colors, metallicities, spectral types, and so on.  
A galaxy catalog would of course include other parameters such as morphology and redshift.  
When spectra are considered and compared in detail, the huge number of emission and 
absorption features obviously compounds the problem vastly.  Still more complexity is added 
when one attempts to correlate a large grid of models with a large data set having many 
dimensions (e.g. the YSO analysis by Whitney et al. 2008) in order to create feedback for models 
based on statistically significant samples rather than on a few putative prototypes.  
Other examples of high-dimensional data include, but are not limited to, multiparametric 
data sets (e.g. the manifold of galaxies: Brosche, 1973; Djorgovski & Davis, 1987), 
multitemporal, multispectral and hyperspectral data sets and images, and high-resolution 
simulations on massively parallel computers. The magnitude of the computational challenge for 
pattern recognition and classification algorithms is suggested by the fact that the VO will contain 
billions of data points each having hundreds of dimensions (Djorgovski et al. 2003).  
All these examples clearly demonstrate that the automated and semi-automated 
processing required by the unprecedented and accelerating growth in both the amount and the 
complexity of astronomical data demands new ways of information representation. In the next 
section we discuss such approaches and describe some of the original algorithms we have 
developed in the course of this ongoing work. 
 
 
 
IV. Dimensionality Reduction and Sampling for Complex and Large Data Sets 
 
Because approaches to complex data require advanced mathematics, astronomers who 
wish to take advantage of them will need at least some basic knowledge of new, unfamiliar 
mathematical concepts and terminology. The full practical adoption of such methods requires 
interdisciplinary scientists who understand the new approaches in depth and are interested in 
working with astronomers to adapt and apply the methods to astronomical data sets.  This is 
already happening as part of some research. The first step for a “neophyte” astronomer, however, 
is to learn “what is out there” as a basis for further investigation and consideration of the utility 
of various methods. The goal of this section is to offer a very basic introduction and explanation 
of some of these unfamiliar concepts. 
Machine learning (Haykin 2009) is becoming increasingly important in astronomy (see 
an extensive review by Ball & Brunner 2009; also Longo et al. 2004). The main objectives of 
machine learning are clustering (automatic identification of groups of similar objects), and 
classification (assigning labels to instances).  However, high dimensionality complicates 
machine learning and can easily thwart the entire effort (Haykin 2009 and references there). It 
also becomes a formidable obstacle in computing numerical solutions in Bayesian statistics for 
models with more than a few parameters.  
R. Bellman (1961) coined the term “curse of dimensionality”, to describe how difficult it 
was to perform high-dimensional numerical integration. For example, 100 evenly-spaced sample 
points suffice to sample a unit interval with no more than 0.01 distance between points; an 
equivalent sampling of a 10-dimensional unit hypercube with a lattice with a spacing of 0.01 
between adjacent points would require 1020 sample points. Thus, in some sense, the 10-

 
9 
dimensional hypercube can be said to be a factor of 1018 "larger" than the unit interval.  
Obviously, this will make many computational tasks intractable for high-dimensional data sets. 
Euclidian spaces are usually used as models for traditional astronomical data types 
(scalars, arrays of scalars). Another general manifestation of high dimensionality is the fact that 
in a high-dimensional Euclidean space, volume expands far more rapidly with increasing 
diameter than it expands in lower-dimensional spaces. Indeed, if one compares the size of the 
unit ball with the unit cube as the dimension of the space increases, it turns out that the unit ball 
becomes an insignificant volume relative to that of the unit cube. Thus, in some sense, nearly all 
of the high-dimensional space is "far away" from the center. This is called the “empty space 
phenomenon” (Scott 1992; Matousek 2002): the high-dimensional unit space can be said to 
consist almost entirely of the "corners" of the hypercube, with almost no "middle". One more 
important example of the unexpected properties of high-dimensional Euclidean spaces is the 
following behavior of the Gaussian distribution in high dimensions: the radius of a hypersphere 
that contains 95% of the distribution grows as the dimensionality increases. 
These sorts of unexpected mathematical properties demonstrate that in order to make 
practical the extraction of meaningful structures from multiparametric, high-dimensional data 
sets, a low-dimensional representation of data points is required. Dimension reduction (DR) is 
motivated by the fact that the more we are able to reduce the dimensionality of a data set, the 
more regularities (correlations) we have found in it and therefore, the more we have learned from 
the data. Data dimension reduction is an active branch of applied mathematics and statistics 
(Haykin 2009). It consists of methods for finding lower-dimensional representation of high-
dimensional data, without losing a significant amount of information, by constructing a set of 
basis functions that capture patterns intrinsic to a particular state space. DR methods greatly 
increase computational efficiency of machine learning algorithms, improve statistical inference 
and enables effective scientific visualization and classification. From a large set of images 
obtained at multiple wavebands, effective dimension reduction provides a comprehensible, 
information-rich single image with minimal information loss and statistical details, unlike a 
simple coadding with arbitrary, empirical weights (see a simple four-wavelengths example in 
Fig. 6,7). 
 
 
            
 
 
Figure 6. Spitzer IRAC camera 8.0 µm image, 1-4 channels. Upper row: channels 1-3. Lower 
row: channel 4; the result of applying dimension reduction; sum of the channels 1-4. 
 
 
 

 
10 
         
 
 
Figure 7. Spitzer IRAC camera 8.0 µm image, Left: channel 1, morphology unveiling following 
Pesenson, Roby & McCollum, 2008. Right: morphology unveiling performed on the reduced 
image from Fig. 6. It demonstrates that dimensionality reduction retains the important features 
from all channels. This is especially useful for dealing with large numbers of images. 
 
 
Classical approaches to dimension reduction not unfamiliar to astronomy are principal 
components analysis (PCA) (Bijaoui 1974) and multidimensional scaling (Borg & Groenen 
2005). Although first used in astronomy by Bijaoui (1974), PCA was not commonly used until 
the 1990's (Boroson & Green, 1992 and Francis et al. 1992; see also a general introduction to 
PCA by Francis & Wills, 1999). It has been used for such things as classification of galaxies and 
quasars (Francis et al. 1992; Connolly et al. 1995), photometric and spectroscopic redshift 
estimation (e.g. Glazebrook, Offer, & Deeley 1998; Yip et al. 2004), sky subtraction (Wild & 
Hewitt, 2005) and optical spectral indicators (Wild et al. 2007).  PCA has been used for the 
simultaneous analysis of dozens of data parameters for each member of a sample of 44 active 
galactic nuclei (Kuraszkiewicz et al. 2009), which appears to be the largest number of parameters 
yet analyzed using PCA in an astronomical study. 
PCA has a serious drawback in that it does not explicitly consider the structure of the 
manifold on which the data may possibly reside. In differential geometry an n-dimensional 
manifold is a metric space that on a small scale resembles the n-dimensional Euclidean space; 
thus a circle is a one-dimensional manifold, while a sphere is a two-dimensional manifold.  PCA 
is intrinsically linear, so if data points form a nonlinear manifold, then obviously, there is no 
rotation & shift of the axis (this is what a linear transform like PCA provides) that can “unfold” 
such manifold. In other words, if the data are mainly confined to an almost linear low- 
dimensional subspace, then simple linear methods such as PCA can be used to discover the 
subspace and estimate its dimensionality. If, on the other hand, the data lie on (or near) a highly 
nonlinear low-dimensional submanifold, then linear methods are not effective in capturing the 
fine meaningful structures in the data. A blind application of linear methods may result in a 
complete misrepresentation of the data.  
We have recently developed some advanced, original methods for performing nonlinear 
DR, which do not suffer from the limitations of PCA. In what follows, we briefly describe these 
methods. First, we introduce some more concepts and methods that have proved to be effective 
in the area of machine learning. 
   
Graphs. In the context of data retrieval and processing, dimensionality reduction methods based 
on graph theory have proved to be very powerful. In mathematics and computer science, graph 
theory is the study of mathematical structures to model relations between objects (Gross & 
Yellen 2004). Graph theory has been successfully applied to a wide range of very different 

 
11 
disciplines, from biology to social science, computing and physics. Among many applications, 
graphs and manifolds have been used to address mining databases, Internet search engines, 
computer graphics, computation reordering, image processing, etc. In what follows we discuss 
various data structure and algorithms that we have already developed and are developing. 
 
The graph representation of structured data provides a fruitful model for the relational 
data mining process. A graph is a collection of nodes and links between them; the nodes 
represent data points and the weights of the links or edges indicate the strength of relationships. 
A graph in which each graph edge is replaced by a directed graph edge is called a directed graph, 
or diagraph (Gross & Yellen 2004). Diagraphs are used for context-sensitive browsing engines 
and for ranking hyper-linked documents for a given query.  
 
The modern approach to multidimensional images or data sets is to approximate them by 
graphs or Riemannian manifolds. The first important, and very challenging, step is to convert 
such a data cloud to a weighted finite graph. The next important problem is the choice of "right" 
weights that should be assigned to edges of the constructed graph. The weight function describes 
a notion of “similarity” between the data points and as such strongly affects the analysis of the 
data. The weights should entirely be determined by application domain. The most obvious way 
to assign weights is to use a positive kernel like an exponential function whose exponent depends 
on the local Euclidean distance between data points and a subjectively chosen parameter called 
“bandwidth”. (There are also other ways of assigning weights, which depend on more complex 
mathematics than we discuss in this article.) 
Next, after constructing a weighted graph, one can introduce the corresponding 
combinatorial Laplace operator (Chung 1996; Gross & Yellen 2004). In machine learning, 
methods based on graph Laplacians have proved to be very powerful (Haykin 2009). The 
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Laplacian form a basis, thus allowing one to develop a 
harmonic or Fourier analysis on graphs. By further developing harmonic analysis on graphs and 
manifolds (Pesenson 2004-2009; Pesenson & Pesenson 2009; Pesenson, Pesenson, & McCollum 
2009), we have devised innovative algorithms for data compression and nonlinear data 
dimension reduction. These results enable one to overcome PCA’s limitations for handling 
nonlinear data manifolds and also allow one to deal effectively with incomplete data (such as 
missing observations or partial sky coverage). 
 
Hypergraphs. Most existing data mining and network analysis methods are limited to pairwise 
interactions. However, sets of astronomical objects usually exhibit multiple relationships, so 
restricting analysis to the dyadic (pairwise) relations leads to loss of important information and to 
missing discoveries. Triadic, tetradic or higher interactions offer great practical potential. This 
has led to the approach based on hypergraphs (e.g. Zhou, Huang & Scholkopf 2005). 
Hypergraphs constitute an important extension of graphs that allow edges to connect more than 
two vertices simultaneously. Thus hypergraphs provide a more comprehensive description of 
feature relations and structures. Hypergraphs furnish a much more adequate approach to real 
world data sets and allow one to deal with clustering and classifications using higher order 
relations. It has been shown that, in general, there does not exist a graph model that correctly 
represents the cut properties of the corresponding hypergraph (Ihler et al. 1993). Thus new 
mathematical methods are required to take advantage of the richness of information available in 
hypergraphs. In order to provide means for analysis of databases with multiple relationships, we 
are currently developing extensions of the original methods described in the previous subsection.  
 
 

 
12 
Fractals. Data sets having fractional dimensions ("fractals": Mandelbrot 1977; Schroeder 1991; 
Faloutsos 2003) have been suggested to represent many phenomena in astronomy.  Examples 
include star formation on galactic scales (Elmegreen & Elmegreen 2001), the stellar initial mass 
function (Larson 1992), galaxy distributions in space (Einasto et al. 1991; Kurokawa, Morikawa 
& Mouri 2001), cloud distributions in active galactic nuclei (Bottorff & Ferland 2001), the 
cosmic microwave background (de Gouveia dal Pino et al. 1995), thermonuclear flame velocities 
in Type Ia supernovae (Ghezzi, de Gouveia dal Pino & Horvath 2004), and the mass spectrum of 
interstellar clouds (Elmegreen & Falgarone 1996). Such data sets exhibit a dimensionality which 
is often much lower than the dimension of the Euclidian space they are embedded into. For 
example, the distribution of galaxies in the universe has dimension D ~ 1.23. The difference 
between the two dimensions occurs because the fractal dimensionality is intrinsic.  The intrinsic 
dimension of a graph reflects the intrinsic dimension of the sampled manifold.  
Obviously, an important first step in practical dimensionality reduction is a good estimate 
of the intrinsic dimension of the data. Otherwise, DR is no more than a risky guess since one 
does not know to what extent the dimensionality can be reduced. To enable analysis of 
astronomical data sets that exhibit a fractal nature, we are currently developing a practical 
concept of spectral dimensionality, as well as original algorithms for sampling, compression and 
embedding fractal data. 
 
The Petascale Connection. The approaches described above dealt with compact manifolds and 
finite graphs.  However, massive data sets are more adequately described by non-compact 
manifolds and infinite graphs. In order to deal with extremely large data sets we extended 
dimension reduction to non-compact manifolds and infinite graphs. We are also working on 
generalizing the Fourier analysis to non-compact Riemannian  manifolds and infinite quantum 
and combinatorial graphs, directed graphs, hypergraphs and some fractals.  Implementation of 
these algorithms, and incorporation of them into the framework described in section II, will 
enable a more adequate analysis of massive data sets.   
 
 
Robustness of Dimension Reduction Algorithms with Respect to Noise. Despite the important 
and appealing properties of the above mentioned dimension reduction algorithms, both linear and 
nonlinear approaches are sensitive to noise, outliers, and missing measurements (bad pixels, 
missing data values). Because noise and data imperfections may change the local structure of a 
manifold, locality preservation means that existing algorithms are topologically unstable and not 
robust against noise and outliers (Balasubramanian & Schwartz 2002). 
This is obviously a serious drawback because astronomical data are always corrupted by 
noise. Budavari et al. (2009) presented a robust version of PCA and applied it to astronomical 
spectra. Their approach addressed the issues of outliers, missing information, large number of 
dimensions and the vast amount of data by combining elements of robust statistics and recursive 
algorithms that provide improved eigensystem estimates step by step. However, as it was 
mentioned earlier, the PCA method is intrinsically linear and cannot be applied to data points 
residing on a nonlinear manifold.  
Thus the practical usage of dimension reduction demands careful improvement of signal-
to-noise ratio without smearing essential features. Implementing a nonlinear diffusion on 
weighted graphs (section II) enables us to apply dimension reduction to noisy data sets as well. 
 
 
 

 
13 
Image Segmentation, Smoothing and Information Visualization.  In what follows we briefly 
describe a new, original unifying approach to segmentation of images in particular and pattern 
recognition and information visualization in general. Image segmentation (see section II) plays a 
principal role in the realization of automated computer processing, as a previous stage for the 
recognition of different image elements or objects.  
Solutions to the manifold learning problem can be based on intuition derived from 
physics. A good example of this is the approach of Horn & Gottlieb (2002) that is based on the 
Schrödinger operator, where they constructed an approximate eigenfunction, and computed its 
corresponding potential. The clusters were then defined by the minima of the potential.  
We developed (Pesenson & Pesenson 2010) an alternative that is also based on physical 
intuition, this one being derived from synchronization of nonlinear oscillations (Kuramoto 1984; 
Pikovsky et al. 2001). Approximating a multidimensional image or a data set by a graph and 
associating a nonlinear dynamical system with each node enables us to unify the three seemingly 
unrelated tasks: image segmentation, unsupervised learning and data visualization. Pattern 
recognition may benefit significantly from new methods of visualization and representation of 
data, since they may uncover important relationships in multidimensional data sets. Bringing out 
patterns by setting data points into oscillatory motion is a very effective way of visualizing data 
(Ware & Bobrow 2004). Our method is a feature-based, multilevel algorithm that finds patterns 
by employing a nonlinear oscillatory motion. At the same time, the oscillatory motion reveals to 
the eye patterns by making them oscillate coherently with a frequency different from the rest of 
the graph. Patterns are detected recursively inside the graph, and the found features are either 
collapsed into single nodes, forming a hierarchy of patterns or can be zoomed in and studied 
individually. This method can be described as a pre-computed animation and it enables both 
qualitative (by eye) and quantitative discovery of correlations (see Figure 8). 
 
                       
 
           
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Testing the algorithm on synthetic data.  A simulated three-dimensional set of a 
thousand uniformly distributed random points with a double-diamond pattern created by 
assigning large weights to the edges connecting the points in the pattern (while the rest of the 
weights are negligible). Left and middle: two screen shots from a running animation - each point 
in the set oscillates (in this case in three dimensions) with its own, random frequency.  Right: 
synchronization made the points that are connected with high-weight edges oscillate in-phase 
thus allowing to reveal the pattern visually (to avoid extra clutter, the edges are not displayed in 
the animation), or by automatically selecting in-phase oscillating points and highlighting the 
pattern in red. 
 
 

 
14 
The approaches presented in this section enable interpolation, smoothing and immersions 
of various complex (dozens or hundreds of useful parameters associated with each astronomical 
object) and large data sets into lower-dimension Euclidean spaces. Classification in lower 
dimensional space can be done more reliably than in high dimensions. Thus, DR can be 
significantly beneficial as a pre-processing step for many existing astronomical packages, such 
as for example, the popular source extractor SExtractor (Bertin & Arnouts 1996). We also 
described a new method for pattern recognition (clustering) and visualization of 
multidimensional data. Altogether, these approaches provide important generalizations of the 
tools for spectral clustering and dimensionality reduction, and enable more adequate 
representation, effective data retrieval and analysis of complex, modern astronomical data sets.  
 
 
 
V. Some Recent Approaches to the Challenges of Data Intensive Astronomy 
 
 
Data intensive astrophysics requires an interdisciplinary approach that will include 
elements of applied mathematics (Goodman & O'Rourke 2004; Gross & Yellen 2004), modern 
statistical methods (Feigelson & Babu 2003: Silk 2003), machine learning (Haykin 2009), 
computer vision (Paragios et al. 2006) and image processing (Bovik 2005). The breadth and 
complexity of the work relevant to modern astronomical data challenges is large, and does not 
permit a full treatment here. However, it is valuable to briefly mention a number of other 
important problems, approaches and efforts that have been pursued.   
 
The problem of processing data that lay on a manifold is very important for cosmological 
data analysis. The standard, powerful data analysis package HealPix (Gorski et al. 2005) 
processes data on a two-dimensional manifold – the sphere. The concept of needlets (second 
generation spherical wavelets) has recently attracted a lot of attention in the cosmological 
literature. The first application of needlets to cosmological data was provided by Pietrobon et al. 
(2006). They analyzed cross-correlation of Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) 
CMB data with NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) radio galaxy data. The approach based on 
needlets enabled more accurate statistical results related to the dark energy component. The 
investigation of needlets from the probabilistic viewpoint and their relevance for the statistical 
analysis of random fields on the sphere was done for the first time by Baldi et al. (2006).  A 
thorough presentation of the spherical needlets for CMB data analysis is given by Marinucci et 
al. (2008). Various issues related to CMB, such as spectrum estimation, detection of features and 
anisotropies, mapmaking were addressed by Fay et al. (2008), Pietrobon et al. (2008) (see also 
references there). The CMB models are best analyzed in the frequency domain, where the 
behavior at different multipoles can be investigated separately; on the other hand, such problems 
as missing observations or partial sky coverage make impossible the evaluation of spherical 
harmonic transforms. The needlets allow for a very efficient simple reconstruction formula that 
enables one to perform frequency analysis by using only partial information about data and 
providing means for handling masked data. Besides, needlets exemplify other important 
properties that are not generally shared by other spherical wavelet constructions: they do not rely 
on any kind of tangent plane approximation; they have good localization properties in both pixel 
and harmonic space; and needlet coefficients are asymptotically uncorrelated at any fixed 
angular distance (which makes their use in statistical procedures very promising).  All these 
unique properties make needlets a very valuable tool in various areas of CMB data analysis. 
Recently, Geller & Marinucci (2008) introduced spin needlets (a new form of (spin) wavelets) as 
a tool for the analysis of spin random fields.  Geller et al. (2008) adopted the spin needlet 

 
15 
approach for the analysis of CMB polarization measurements. Lately Geller & Mayeli (2009) 
constructed continuous wavelets and nearly tight frames (needlets) on compact manifolds.  
 
The essential part of the general analysis based on the wavelet-like constructions is 
sampling of bandlimited functions. The mathematical foundations of sampling on arbitrary 
Riemannian manifolds of bounded geometry were laid down by Pesenson (1995, 2000). Recently 
Geller & Pesenson (2010), constructed bandlimited and highly concentrated tight frames on 
compact homogeneous manifolds. These results can be considered as an extension of the 
wavelet-like transforms to Riemannian manifolds, thus enabling one to reconstruct information 
from incomplete data defined on an arbitrary manifold. 
 
Multiscale data analysis has proved to be a very powerful tool in many fields.  Applications 
of multiscale image analysis to astronomy were pioneered by Starck, Murtagh & Bijaoui (1998) 
and Starck & Murtagh (2002).  
 
Spectral methods and diffusion maps have recently emerged as effective approaches to 
nonlinear dimensionality reduction (Belkin & Nyogi 2005; Coifman & Lafon 2006; Lafon & Lee 
2006) The diffusion maps approach has successfully been applied to analysis of astronomical 
spectra by Richards at al. 2009. 
 
Manifold learning may be seen as a DR procedure aiming at capturing the degrees of 
freedom and structures (clusters, patterns) within high-dimensional data. Manifold learning 
nonlinear algorithms such as isometric mapping (ISOMAP) by Tenenbaum et al. (2000) and 
local linear embedding (LLE) by Roweis & Saul (2000) project high-dimensional manifold data 
into a low-dimensional space by preserving the local geometric features. Ball & Brunner (2009) 
provide a very broad review of the current state of machine learning and data mining in 
astronomy. 
 
The AstroNeural collaboration group (Longo et al. 2004) implemented tools based on 
neural networks, fuzzy-C sets and genetic algorithms, and applied them to perform complex 
tasks such as unsupervised and supervised clustering and time series analysis. D’Abrusco et al. 
(2007) present a supervised neural network approach to the determination of photometric 
redshifts. D’Abrusco et al. (2009) describe a method for the photometric selection of candidate 
quasars in multiband surveys based on the probabilistic principal surfaces. Pasian et al. (2007) 
give a general review of the development of tools to be subsequently used within the 
international VO. 
 
  Comparato et al. (2007) show how advanced visualization tools can help the researcher in 
investigating and extracting information from data. Their focus is on VisIVO, a new 
open‐source graphics application that blends high performance multidimensional visualization 
techniques and up‐to‐date technologies to cooperate with other applications and to access 
remote, distributed data archives.  
 
   Draper et al. (2007) discuss the GAIA application for analyzing astronomical image and 
show how the PLASTIC protocol has been used to inter-operate with VO enabled applications.
 
The Center for Astrostatistics (CASt) at Pennsylvania State University provides a wealth of 
resources (codes, data, tutorials, programs, etc.) related to challenges in statistical treatments of 
astrophysical data: http://astrostatistics.psu.edu/ 
A large amount of practical and up-to-date information (texts, tutorials, preprints, 
software, etc.) related to Bayesian inference in astronomy and other fields is provided by T. 
Loredo on the website BIPS (Bayesian Inference for the Physical Sciences (BIPS) at 
http://www.astro.cornell.edu/staff/loredo/bayes/index.html  
 
  The International Computational Astrostatistics (InCA) Group at Carnegie Mellon 
University develops and applies new statistical methods to inference problems in astronomy and 

 
16 
cosmology, with an emphasis on computational nonparametric approaches (see for details 
http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~inca/index.html). 
 
 The AstroMed project at Harvard University’s IIC is dedicated to the application of 
medical image visualization to 3D astronomical data (Borkin et al. 2007).   
 
Compressed sensing and the use of sparse representations offer another promising new 
approach. Traditionally it has been considered unavoidable that any signal must be sampled at a 
rate of at least twice its highest frequency in order to be represented without errors.  However, a 
technique called compressed sensing that permits error-free sampling at a lower rate has been the 
subject of much recent research.  It has great promise for new ways to compress imaging without 
significant loss of information, thus ameliorating analysis limitations deriving from limitations of 
computing resources. The power of compressed sensing was strikingly illustrated when an object 
was successfully imaged in some detail by a camera composed of a single pixel (Chan et al. 
2008).  Bobin et al. (2008) discuss recent advances in signal processing that use sparse 
representations. Relatively nontechnical introductions to compressed sensing may be found in 
Candes & Wakin (2008) and Romberg (2008). The first astronomical results in the literature 
based on the use of compressed sensing are that of Wiaux et al. (2009).   
 
Various data types together with methods used for their representation are briefly 
summarized in Table 1. The table is not comprehensive, but it provides a quick overview of what 
was discussed above. 
 
 
Data Types 
       Some     
 Astronomical 
  Applications 
Traditional Approaches 
to Data Representation    
      & Processing 
   Advanced Approaches  
  to Data Representation  
          & Processing      
Vector Data 
1.Multiwavelength 
observations. 
2. Multitemporal 
observations. 
3. VO 
4. Spectra. 
1. Linear dimension reduction: 
PCA and its modifications. 
 
1. Spectral methods, eigenmaps,   
    diffusion maps, LLE, ISOMAP. 
2. Sampling on graphs. 
3. Methods based on nonlinear  
    dynamics. 
4. Neural networks, fuzzy-C sets. 
5. Genetic algorithms. 
6. Scientific visualization. 
7. Compressed sensing.  
 
  Manifold -  
   Valued 
 
    and/or 
 
  Manifold -    
   Defined 
1. Polarization 
measurements 
(CMB). 
2. Gravitational 
lensing. 
3. Solar 
astrophysics. 
 1. Various sampling 
distributions on the sphere. 
1. Healpix (data on 2D sphere). 
2. Needlets. 
3. Sampling on manifolds. 
4. Scientific visualization. 
 
 
 
Table 1. Examples of complex data types and some of the methods for their representation and 
processing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
       Conclusion 
 
Extremely large data sets, as well as the analysis of hundreds of objects each having a 
large number of data dimensions, present astronomy with unprecedented challenges.  The 
challenges are not only about database sizes in themselves, but about how intelligently one 
organizes, analyzes, and navigates through the databases, and about the limitations of existing 
data analysis approaches familiar to astronomy. The answers to these challenges are not trivial, 
and for the most part lie in complex fields of research well outside the training and expertise of 
almost all astronomers. Fortunately, other disciplines such as imaging science and earth sciences 
have for many years been grappling with the same sorts of problems.  Fruitful interdisciplinary 
work has already become a regular feature of research in those other disciplines, and has resulted 
in applications of crucial value to other sciences seeking to take advantage of complex, giant data 
sets in their respective fields.  This work has brought about many helpful applications and 
promising paths for further progress that potentially have significant value to astronomy.   
Multidimensional image processing, image fusion (combining information from multiple 
sensors in order to create a composite enhanced image) and dimension reduction (finding lower-
dimensional representation of high-dimensional data) are effective approaches to tasks that are 
crucial to multitemporal, multiwavelength astronomy: study of transients, large-scale digital sky 
surveys, archival research, etc. These methods greatly increase computational efficiency of 
machine learning algorithms and improve statistical inference, thus facilitating automated feature 
selection, data segmentation, classification and effective scientific visualization (as opposed to 
illustrative visualization). Dimensionally reduced images also offer an enormous savings in 
storage space and database-transmission bandwidth for the user, without significant loss of 
information, if appropriate methods are used.  
To effectively use the large, complex data sets being created in 21st Century astronomy, 
significant interdisciplinary communication and collaboration between astronomers and experts 
in the disciplines of applied mathematics, statistics, computer science and artificial intelligence 
will be essential. The concepts and approaches described in this paper are among the first steps 
in such a broad, long-term interdisciplinary effort that will help bridge the communication gap 
between astronomy and other disciplines. These concepts, and the approaches derived from 
them, will help to provide practical ways of analysis and visualization of the increasingly large 
and complex data sets. Such sophisticated new methods will also help to pave the way for 
effective automated analysis and processing of giant, complex data sets. 
 
 
 
 
 
      Acknowledgement 
  
 
The authors would like to thank Alanna Connors for stimulating discussions and useful 
suggestions. One of us (MP) would like to thank Michael Werner for support. We would also 
like to thank the referee for constructive suggestions that led to substantial improvements of the 
article. This work was carried out with funding from the National Geospatial-Intelligence 
Agency University Research Initiative (NURI), grant HM1582-08-1-0019, and support from 
NASA to the California Institute of Technology and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
 
 
 
 

 
18
