arXiv:1005.4447v1  [cs.AI]  24 May 2010
Evidence Algorithm and
System for Automated Deduction:
A Retrospective View
(In honor of 40 years of the EA announcement)
Alexander Lyaletski1 and Konstantin Verchinine2
1 Faculty of Cybernetics, Kiev National Taras Shevchenko University
2, Glushkov avenue, 03680 Kiev, Ukraine

2 Math-Info Department, Paris 12 University
61, avenue du General De Gaulle, 94010 Creteil, France

Abstract. A research project aimed at the development of an automated theorem
proving system was started in Kiev (Ukraine) in early 1960s. The mastermind of
the project, Academician V.Glushkov, baptized it “Evidence Algorithm”, EA3.
The work on the project lasted, off and on, more than 40 years. In the framework
of the project, the Russian and English versions of the System for Automated De-
duction, SAD, were constructed. They may be already seen as powerful theorem-
proving assistants. The paper4 gives a retrospective view to the whole history of
the development of the EA and SAD. Theoretical and practical results obtained
on the long way are systematized. No comparison with similar projects is made.
1
Introduction
The research project entitled “Evidence Algorithm” was initiated by V.Glushkov in
the early 60-s in Kiev. At that time, some fundamental facts concerning formal proof
search and opportunities (potential in most cases) to use computers to ﬁnd a proof,
were already known. The domain that was called “automated theorem proving” (ATP
or “machine reasoning” in the AI community) became a challenging one for logicians as
well as for computer scientists (see e.g. [92] for short history). There were hopes! Recall
the title of an early Hao Wang’s paper: “Towards mechanical mathematics” [104].
V.Glushkov as he personally told us, was motivated by two main reasons:
(1) To get an aid while verifying long and routine algebraic transformation (as a
working mathematician he obtained valuable results concerning Hilbert’s 5th problem).
(2) To try the strength of the existent computers pushing them to run on the limits
of their abilities.
V.Glushkov formulated the main question in a slightly unusual way.
Let us consider some relatively well formalized mathematical theory, e.g. Lie al-
gebras. There are a small number of basic facts (axioms) which are considered to be
3 Below, we explain why this title was chosen; it was used ﬁrst in [9].
4 The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com

evident even for beginners. Let’s apply simple purely logical tools to obtain several
consequences. They are also evident. Then one can apply the same logical tools to the
conclusions and so on. Are the results still evident? If the conclusions were obtained by
a programmed inference engine, the answer is “yes, they are”. From the viewpoint of
this engine. But probably not from the human point of view. Thus, provided the above-
mentioned engine, we would be able to prove/verify something that is not evident for
humans. Further to that, this “evidence maintaining engine” may be reinforced with
heuristics, proof methods, lemma application, deﬁnition expansion, and so on. In this
way, we could enlarge the notion of “being evident” to the extent that might include
nontrivial facts/theorems. Well, “now do it, guys!”.
That is why the algorithmic part of the project (and afterwards the project as the
whole) has got the name “Evidence Algorithm”, EA, or ∃∀for fun.
It was also already clear at that time that nobody would like to formalize the math-
ematical knowledge/reasoning in the usual ﬁrst order language. Hence a formal but
human-friendly language had to be developed to provide a possibility for the construc-
tion of a mathematical assistant system convenient for a wide range of scientists.
So, three major components of such a system should be:
(1) a powerful input language that must be close to the natural mathematical lan-
guage and easy to use;
(2) an inference engine that implements the basic level of evidence (sometimes, we
call it a “prover” below);
(3) an extensible collection of tools that reinforce the basic engine (sometimes, we
call it a “reasoner” below).
In what follows, we give a short description in chronological order of what has been
done in each of the above-mentioned directions.
Please note that our main goal is to trace the long path of the project development
and to recall the results obtained. That is why the reference list is so long. For the
same reason, we could neither make any comparison with similar existing systems, nor
give an illustrative set of examples. Sorry for that. We frequently got an impression
that the automated reasoning community is not sufﬁciently acquainted with EA project
(for instance, SAD was not mentioned in F.Wiedijk’s book [106]) though we think that
some ideas and results might be useful to know. We hope that the text given below will
partially meet the lack of such information.
Note on the bibliography. Almost all papers published before 1992 were written in
Russian and therefore are hardly available now. We translated the titles and put them
onto the list just to indicate what was done in the old time. All the papers are listed in
chronological order.
The rest of the paper contains three parts according to the three periods in the history
of the EA project. They are as follows.
The ﬁrst one: 1962 - 1970. We call it “Pre-EA Stage” below.
The second one: 1970 - 1992. It is called “EA and Russian SAD” below.
The third one: 1998 - nowadays. Below it is called “Post-EA Stage and English
SAD”.
Several ﬁnal remarks conclude the paper.

2
Pre-EA Stage (1962–1970)
Few people remember now that the Soviet computer history began in Kiev. The ﬁrst von
Neuman computer was assembled and tested at the turn of 1950 in a small laboratory
headed by the academician S.Lebedev. In 1955 S.Lebedev left for Moscow and the di-
rector of Kiev Institute for Mathematics, prominent mathematician B.Gnedenko invited
V.Glushkov to take the supervision of the laboratory (which was transformed into the
Institute of Cybernetics 5 years later).
On the other hand, at that time there was a powerful logic, linguistic and algebraic
team at the mathematical department of the Kiev University. Professor L.Kaluzhnin
who was the head and the heart of the team, invited V.Glushkov to join their efforts.
So the Kiev school in the ATP domain appeared really at the borderline of computer
science and mathematical logic.
In 1962, V.Glushkov published a paper [1] where he analyzed several rather sim-
ple proofs in Group Theory and suggested that the proofs might be built automatically
with the help of a not too complex procedure. The idea attracted three people who be-
gan their research on the subject: A.Letichevsky, one of the ﬁrst Glushkov’s disciples,
(in 1962), F.Anufriev (in 1962) and V.Fedyurko (in 1963). A bit later, V.Kostyrko and
Z.Aselderov had joined the team. The ﬁrst-time approach to the problem was purely
empirical – they analyzed a lot of proofs taken from textbooks, monographs and arti-
cles for trying to formalize all them and to ﬁnd (almost by feeling) methods, heuristics
and representation details that might help to construct a proof of a theorem under con-
sideration automatically. As a result an algorithm of proof search in Group Theory was
constructed and even implemented (the corresponding program run on the monstrous
Ural-1 computer). The ﬁrst communication about it was done at the First All-Union
Symposium on the Machine Methods of Logical Inference Search, that took place in
Lithuania in 1964 [97] (see also [93]). Later a paper on the subject was published [4]
(and translated afterwards into English).
The algorithm, though being comparatively simple, contained nevertheless:
- a method of inference search for some class of ﬁrst-order formulae;
- a reduction technique for simplifying search space;
- a collection of heuristics (e.g. the inclusion relation was exploited);
- special methods of equation solving.
So we can say that it was the ﬁrst problem-oriented prover for Group Theory. Here
is an example of proved theorem: “The centralizer Z of any subgroup P is a normal
subgroup of the normalizer N of P”.
The above-mentioned proof-search method resembled, in some sense, well known
backward chaining, but some features were added to make it applicable to non-Horn
formulae. Later on, the method was generalized by F.Anufriev and extended to the
whole ﬁrst-order classical logic without equality [5, 8]. It can be interpreted as a goal-
oriented sequent calculus not requiring skolemization and using an analog of Kanger’s
notion of substitution admissibility. Later, the method was transformed into a correct
and complete sequent calculus [22] with skolemization. It had got the name “Auxiliary-
Goals Search calculus” (“AGS calculus” below) and served as a prototype for various
sequent-type inference engines of the EA project.

Solving equations in free groups became the subject of Z.Aselderov’s PhD thesis
[7], which was defended in 1968.
Now let’s cast a glance at the list of required components of the conceived EA sys-
tem. No convenient input language was yet proposed at the time being. On the other
hand, it was difﬁcult to continue the project without it. To see why, try to convert the
theorem above to the ﬁrst-order language. On this subject, there were only two Kaluzh-
nin’s papers: [2] and [3]. Some time later, V.Kostyrko made an attempt to solve the
problem and after some period, a paper was published [10] where a contour of such a
language was outlined. The main idea was as follows.
Let’s consider an atomic ﬁrst-order formula. It is always of the form R(t1,t2,...,tn)
where R is an n-ary relation symbol, whereas a “natural” atomic statement is of the
form < sub ject group > < predicate group >. Well, one can:
- select an argument among t1,t2,...,tn , say t1,
- consider it as the subject,
- “reduce” R to something (n −1)-ary N(t2,...,tn),
- add a new connector to “attach” t1 to N(t2,...,tn) (ε was chosen in the original
version).
Now R(t1,t2,...,tn) can be written as t1 ε N(t2,...,tn) and read as t1 is a
N(t2,...,tn). For example, Subgroup(H,G) gives H ε Subgroup o f G and so on. Was it
not more than syntactic “sugar” or one could gain something interesting with it? Below
we demonstrate what was made in this direction later.
For the completeness of the description of that time, it may be needed to remind the
last implementation of the propositional part of Anufriev’s procedure, which was made
by A. Malashonok on the BESM-2 computer at the beginning of 1970 [13].
3
EA and Russian SAD (1971 - 1992)
In 1970, V.Glushkov published one more paper on the subject [9]. At that time, he asso-
ciated the progress in the domain of ATP with the general tendency to make computers
more intelligent (see also [14]). As to the project in question (except the fact that it
had got its name “Evidence Algorithm”), V.Glushkov emphasized the importance of a
natural formal language for writing mathematical texts in [9]. We should also note that
for the ﬁrst time, the term “automated theorem proving” was used instead of “automatic
theorem proving” and the problem of how to construct something like an “interactive
proof environment” was explicitly formulated. In fact, a proof assistant was conceived
at that time.
It seems that somewhen in the middle of 1970, V.Glushkov decided to add “young
forces” to the existing EA team, and he charged one of his former pupil V.Bodnarchuk
to became the leader of the new team. At that time, V.Bodnarchuk was the head of
a computer department; its members had just ﬁnished their work under a specialized
mini-computer for engineering computation with the language “Analitik” [11].
The input language “Analitik”, being convenient for engineers and having its hard-
ware implementation, was one of the distinguishing features of the computer, and
V.Bodnarchuk was its main creator. Besides, V.Bodnarchuk was very intimate with
L.Kaluzhnin, and these exerted great inﬂuence on the development of the EA.

At the same time, four young people became the postgraduate students at the Insti-
tute of Cybernetics, both authors were among them.
Two of them, A.Degtyarev and K.Verchinin, were graduated from the Mechanical
and Mathematical Faculty of the Moscow State University. Other two, A.Lyaletski and
N.Malevanyi – from the Cybernetics Faculty of the Kiev State University. So, we had
joined the EA team and V.Bodnarchuk became our “local supervisor” (the global one
was V.Glushkov). We were young, full of energy and illusions...
At the very beginning, V.Bodnarchuk has formulated the following tasks:
- careful revision of everything that was done previously by the “old team”;
- detailed analysis of mathematical texts in various domains;
- preparation of two surveys: (1) of combinatorial proof-search methods (published,
see [16]) and (2) of using heuristics in proof search (published, see [18])
The revision of the existing version of the AGS method demonstrated that, ﬁrst,
the use of the Kanger’s notion of substitution admissibility instead of skolemization
complicates drastically an eventual implementation and, second, the method requires a
special technique for equality handling. So, to advance the whole project, one needed:
- either to improve the AGS method paying special attention to redundancy avoid-
ance and equality handling, or to adapt one of existing combinatorial methods of proof
search for the role of inference engine in the EA project;
- to develop a practically usable version of the “mathematical language” along with
the whole syntactical service around it;
- to ﬁnd a convenient formalization of what is frequently used in mathematical texts
to make them available for human reader – “proof method”, “proof scheme”, “lemma
application”, “deﬁnition dependency”, etc.
- to ﬁnd methods of what is called “knowledge management” now, e.g. to try to
understand what the “relevancy relation” on mathematical facts might be;
- to develop an implementation base (it became clear at the very beginning that
experimental work was strongly needed and it could not be done in the paper-and-pencil
mode).
We began in quite favorable setting. Two circumstances should be especially noted.
At that time, it was easy to establish scientiﬁc contacts in the ex-USSR and we have
done that: with famous Leningrad logic school, with excellent Novosibirsk logic school
(founded by A.Maltsev), with strong Moscow logic school, with linguists, psycholo-
gists, etc. The second point is that last-year students of the new Cybernetics department
of the Kiev University used to pass their six month professional training at the Insti-
tute of Cybernetics. In this way the second EA team had got two very capable young
researchers: A.Zhezherun (in 1973) and M.Morokhovets (in 1978).
3.1
Theoretical work
Here is a brief description of research interests and results obtained by members of the
second EA team.
At the beginning, A.Degtyarev studied the role of heuristics in formal proofs. He
restricted himself with linear algebra and showed that for large class of theorems, the
proof search (by resolution with paramodulation) may be controlled in a way and re-
duced to the problem of ﬁnding solution to a set of linear equations [17, 21]. It was quite

interesting result but A.Degtyarev did not continue that direction and devoted himself
to the problem of equality handling in resolution-like methods. As a “side effect” he
obtained an efﬁcient uniﬁcation algorithm (published later in [23,42]) that was based
on the same principles that the well-known Martelli and Montanary algorithm [95] for-
mulated later.
His main results concern various paramodulation strategies and the problem of com-
patibility the paramodulation rule with term orderings. The most known is so called
monotonic paramodulation [30,31, 50] subsequently used in many other researchs on
the subject.
A.Lyaletski occupied himself with the careful analysis of combinatorial proof
search methods trying to put them in a common setting and ﬁnd (or build) the best
candidate for a resolution-type inference engine. He suggested a modiﬁcation of the
resolution rule which operated with more general objects than clauses – conjunctive
clauses or c-clauses. (Later, V.Lifschitz [94] independently proposed something sim-
ilar and called them “super-clauses”). Two different c-clause calculi were build [24,
25] which permitted to reformulate well-known Maslov’s Inverse Method [96] in a
resolution-like manner.
Another problem was the skolemization. Is it bad or not? Anufriev’s method did
not use skolemization, but it adds new entities as in the case of Kanger’s method. On
the other hand, skolemization simpliﬁes the algorithmic part of proof search methods.
A.Lyaletski found an original notion of admissible substitution that allowed him to get
in some sense a compromise. He built a series of sequent calculi with resolution style
inference rules, that, on one hand, don’t require skolemization and, on the other hand,
are not less efﬁcient than the usual resolution calculus ([34,35,53]).
K.Verchinine was strongly involved in the language problem. We had to formalize
mathematical texts, not only isolated statements. A text may be considered as a struc-
tured collection of sections: chapters, paragraphs, deﬁnitions, theorems, proofs, etc. So
a part of the language was designed to represent this structure, its “semantics” was
given by the “trip rules”. Another part served to formalize a statement. New units were
added to the standard ﬁrst-order syntax which permitted to use nouns, adjectives, spe-
cial quantiﬁers, etc. The language was developed and has got the name TL – Theory
Language [15,20]. Here is a formal TL phrase: “there is no remedy against all deseases
but there is a desease against all remedies”. (That time the vocabulary as well as the
syntax was certainly Russian.)
Two kind of semantics were deﬁned for that part: a transformational one (an al-
gorithm to convert a TL statement into its ﬁrst-order image) and another one – in the
traditional set-theoretical style where ε was interpreted as the membership relation [19].
The last semantics permitted to deﬁne the “extension” of every notion (e.g. the exten-
sion of “subgroup of G” is the class of all subgroups of G) and to introduce a structure
on the set of notions which restrict quantiﬁers in the given sentence. That structure was
called “situation” and was used in attempts to formalize a relevancy relation.
At the beginning, A.Zhezherun took active part in the TL language development. He
designed and implemented the whole syntactic service for the linguistic part of the fu-
ture system. As usual, there were funny side effects of the work. For instance, computer
linguists have always searched for some invariant (called profound semantic structure)

that could be used in machine translation algorithms. A.Zhezherun and K.Verchinine
showed that the ﬁrst-order image of a TL statement can play the role of such invari-
ant. So just changing the superﬁcial decorations in some regular way, one can translate
mathematical statements from Russian into English and vice versa (provided the dictio-
nary). A.Zhezherun wrote a program to play with, and it worked surprisingly well! Be-
sides, he studied the opportunity to formalize mathematical reasoning in a higher-order
logic and proved in particular the decidability of the second-order monadic uniﬁcation
[39].
M.Morokhovets occupied herself with the problem of “reasoner” (see above). As
the reasoner must have a prover to cooperate with, the last was badly needed. The
AGS based prover didn’t ﬁt well to that purpose, so we decided to develop and im-
plement a resolution-and-paramodulation based prover with a ﬂexible architecture that
could be adapted to various strategies and auxiliary inference rules. M.Morokhovets
has done it. The ﬁrst observation showed that some particular premises are strongly re-
sponsible for the search space explosion. The transitivity axiom clearly is among them.
M.Morokhovets proved that for some large class of transitive relations, this axiom may
be eliminated and replaced by a special inference rule which can be controlled to shorten
the search space [57].
Another idea was to use the fact that all quantiﬁers in the TL statement are re-
stricted (bounded). Is it possible to “forget” the restrictions, to ﬁnd an inference and
then just to verify that all substitutions are correct w.r.t. these restrictions (bounds).
M.Morokhovets has found several classes of statements for which the answer is “yes”,
and has implemented corresponding procedure [56]. One more question was as fol-
lows. Let’s suppose that a conjecture is proved and the resolution style inference is
constructed. How to present it in a human readable form? The set of conversion rules
that permit to do it (based on an early result of K.Verchinine), was designed and imple-
mented by M.Morokhovets, too.
3.2
Experimental work
Certainly, some computer experiments have been done from the very beginning of EA
project development (it was one of Glushkov’s ideas – to be permanently accompanied
with computers while doing theoretical research). Still in 1971 K.Verchinine used the
syntactic tools taken from another system (developed in the same department) to im-
plement a part of TL grammar. A.Malashonok have programmed AGS prover to make
local experiments with. Also local experiments with paramodulation strategies were
maid by A.Degtyarev. N.Malevanyi began to prepare something like a specialized li-
brary for future experiments on the BESM-6 machine – another Lebedev’s creation –
one of the most powerful computer in the ex-USSR.
Systematic programming was initiated after A.Zhezherun appeared. He became the
main designer and programmer of the system for mathematical text processing. But no
doubt, we all were involved in programming. At that time, the IBM System 360/370
(cached under the name “ES Line Computer”) was admitted in the ex-USSR as the
main platform. With the native operating system and the PL/1 as the main programming
language – what a hell!!!

Nevertheless the work advanced and the ﬁrst experiments with the whole system
were done in 1976/1977. The main task was formulated as mathematical text veriﬁca-
tion and may be presented as follows.
Let a TL text be given. The system can:
- parse the text informing the user about syntactic errors (if any);
- convert the text to some tree-like internal form;
- run the main loop: choose a goal sentence to verify and ﬁnd its logical predeces-
sors;
- construct an initial proof environment for one of available provers5;
- start the prover and wait;
- if the prover fails then ask to help;
- if the prover succeeds then output the proof, choose the next goal and repeat the
main loop until the end of the text be reached.
The ﬁrst public presentation of the system in question was made at the All-Union
symposium “Artiﬁcial intelligence and automated research in Mathematics” (Kiev,
Ukraine, 28-30 November 1978). It worked!
In 1980, V.M. Glushkov gave the name “System for Automated Deduction” (SAD)
to the implemented system and it has this name now.
The further work consisted in improving the system and adding new features to
it. We extended the mathematical texts library and developed a conception of further
extension of TL language with “imperative” (algorithmic) constructions. A method of
using auxiliary statements in proof search (based on the notion of situation) was imple-
mented by V.Atayan [47]. Efﬁcient paramodulation strategies were added and tested by
A.Degtyarev. A resolution-based prover was implemented by M.Morokhovets.
In the meantime four PhD thesis were defended at the Institut for Cybernetics:
A.Zhezherun has got his PhD in 1980 [46], A.Lyaletski [53], A.Degtyarev [51] and
K.Verchinine [54] – in 1982. M.Morokhovets’ thesis was in preparation.
We understood that to advance the project we need to try the SAD system in some
more or less practical applications. One possible application was the automated pro-
gram synthesis and we established a contact with professor Enn Tyugu (Tallinn, Esto-
nia) and his team. Another interesting application was the deduction tool for expert sys-
tems. The problem is that classical logic is rarely used in this domain. So, the question
appeared: is it possible to adapt SAD for the inference search problem in non-classical
logics?6.
But everithing comes to its end. Sooner or later.
5 At that time, the SAD system prover was constructed and implemented on the base of an orig-
inal sequent-type calculus [48]. It had the following features: it was goal-oriented, skolemiza-
tion was not obligatory, and equality handling was separated from deduction. Now, the native
prover of the current (English) SAD possesses the same features.
6 Later, a theoretical answer on this question was obtained in a number of papers of A.Lyaletski
(see, for example, [77, 86]); from this point of view, some researches on Herbrand theorems
([78, 79, 82, 90]) also may seem to be interesting.

3.3
Team evolution (or the sad part of the SAD history)
Already in the end of 1972, V.Bodnarchuk falled seriously ill and, actually, he
abandoned the research activity for a long time. From 1973 to 1975 F. Anufriev,
Z. Aselderov, V. Kostyrko, and A. Malashonok left the team because of various reasons,
they never came back to the subject area afterwards. In 1982, V.Glushkov was dead.
The administration style in the Institut for Cybernetics changed and we were not the
favorit director’s team any more. In the middle of 1983, A. Lyaletski and A. Zhezherun
left for the Kiev University. In 1984, K. Verchinine moved to another department and
changed his research area. Finally, in 1987, A. Degtyarev left for the Kiev University,
too. M.Morochovets stayed at our former department of the Institute of Cybernetics.
The EA team did no more exist...
4
Post-EA Stage and English SAD (1998-nowadays)
In 1998, the Evidence Algorithm project moved into a new stage. That year the IN-
TAS project 96-0760 “Rewriting techniques and efﬁcient theorem proving” started and
brought ﬁnancial support for resumption of work on SAD. The new working group in-
cluded Alexander Lyaletski at Kiev National University (KNU), Marina Morokhovets
at the Institute of Cybernetics in Kiev, Konstantin Verchinine at Paris 12 University in
France, and Andrei Paskevich, fourth-year undergraduate student of KNU.
The work started in 1999, with re-implementation of the TL language on IBM PC.
The programs were written in C on the Linux platform. In a year, towards March 2000,
parsing and translation of TL sentences into a ﬁrst-order language was implemented.
The English-based version of TL had been given the name ForTheL, an acronym for
“FORmal THEory Language” (also a Russian word meaning “trick” or “stunt”). The
language was presented ﬁrstly at the Fifth International Conference “Information The-
ories and Applications” in September 2000 in Varna, Bulgaria [67].
The same summer the work started on re-implementation of the deductive tools of
SAD. By January 2001, A.Paskevich created the ﬁrst prototype of the prover (the prover
had gotten the name “Moses”). A bit later the technique of admissible substitutions by
A. Lyaletski which permitted to dispense with skolemization and preserve the initial
signature of a proof task, was also implemented. Later, the equality elimination proce-
dure by Brand [91] was added to handle the problems with equality. By June 2001, the
complete “workﬂow” of the initial SAD: from ForTheL text to ﬁrst-order representa-
tion to proof task to proof tree, was reestablished. Of course, a lot of functionality of
the previous implementation has not been transferred into the new system.
In September 2001, A. Paskevich started his doctoral study under the joint supervi-
sion of Konstantin Verchinine and Alexander Lyaletski. His work aimed at the develop-
ment of a new, two-level architecture of a mathematical assistant.
In the ﬁrst prototype of the English SAD system, the reasoner was virtually non-
existent. The theoretical development of the reasoner started with the work on “local
validity”, which allowed to perform sound logical inferences inside a formula, possi-
bly under quantiﬁers. This technique could provide a basis for in-place transformations
(such as deﬁnition expansions) as well as for handling of partial functions and predi-
cates [71].

By the end of 2003, tools for supporting proofs by case analysis and by general
induction (with respect to some well-found ordering) were implemented in the SAD. In
2004, an experimental support for binding constructions, such as summation and limit,
was also added [81].
An algorithm for generation of atomic local lemmas was constructed and imple-
mented: these lemmas help to prove a lot of simple statements without using a prover
at all.
An interesting feature of the SAD is that the prover does not depend on the rest of
the system. It means that various provers can be used as the system inference engine
(provided the interface be written). The following ones were used in our experiments:
SPASS [105], Otter [98], E Prover [103], Vampire [100] and Prover9 [99].
In July, 2007, the “enriched” SAD system was presented at the 21st Conference
on Automated Deduction in Bremen, Germany [85]. A. Paskevich has made several
improvements since then. The current version of the system is freely available at
http://www.nevidal.org . Here is a short list of texts (proofs) that were successfully ver-
iﬁed by the SAD: Tarski’s Fixed Point theorem, Newman’s lemma, Chinese Remainder
theorem, Inﬁnite Ramsey theorem, “The square root of a prime number is not ratio-
nal”, Cauchy-Bouniakowsky-Schwartz inequality for real vectors, Fuerstenberg’s proof
of the inﬁnitude of primes.
Finally, note that the EA project leaded to the carrying out of new investigations in
automated reasoning (see the last publications in the reference list).
5
Conclusion
Let’s imagine an ideal Mathematical Assistant. What its architecture might be from the
EA position?
A user communicates with the system with the help of texts written in a high-level
formal input language close to the natural one. She or he submits a problem like “verify
whether the given text is correct” or “how to prove the following statement”, or “what is
the given text about” and so on. The text, provided being syntactically correct, is treated
by the part of the system that we call “reasoner”. The reasoner analyzes the problem and
formulates a series of tasks that it submits to the inference engine, a prover. If the prover
succeeds, the resulting conclusion (e.g. human-readable proof) is given to the user and
the game is over. If it fails then a kind of “morbid anatomist” makes a diagnosis and
supplies it to the reasoner who tries to repair the situation. In particular, the reasoner
can decide that an auxiliary statement (lemma) might be useful and start the search for
those in the mathematical archives. To do that it submits a request to the archive service,
we call it “librarian”. After getting an answer, the reasoner begins a new proof search
cycle with the modiﬁed problem and the process goes on.
The user can interact with the system by playing for the reasoner, librarian, for the
morbid anatomist (provided that she or he understands the internal prover’s life) or for
the prover itself, deciding whether a given conjecture should be considered as valid.
Where we are with respect to the ideal? Optimistic answers are welcome.

6
