arXiv:1701.06532v1  [cs.LO]  23 Jan 2017
ENIGMA:
Eﬃcient Learning-based Inference Guiding Machine
Jan Jakub˚uv1 and Josef Urban1

Abstract
ENIGMA is a learning-based method for guiding given clause selection in saturation-
based theorem provers. Clauses from many proof searches are classiﬁed as positive and
negative based on their participation in the proofs.
An eﬃcient classiﬁcation model is
trained on this data, using fast feature-based characterization of the clauses . The learned
model is then tightly linked with the core prover and used as a basis of a new parameterized
evaluation heuristic that provides fast ranking of all generated clauses. The approach is
evaluated on the E prover and the CASC 2016 AIM benchmark, showing a large increase
of E’s performance.
1
Introduction: Theorem Proving and Learning
State-of-the-art resolution/superposition automated theorem provers (ATPs) such as Vampire
[15] and E [20] are today’s most advanced tools for general reasoning across a variety of math-
ematical and scientiﬁc domains. The stronger the performance of such tools, the more realistic
become tasks such as full computer understanding and automated development of complicated
mathematical theories, and veriﬁcation of software, hardware and engineering designs. While
performance of ATPs has steadily grown over the past years due to a number of human-designed
improvements, it is still on average far behind the performance of trained mathematicians. Their
advanced knowledge-based proof ﬁnding is an enigma, which is unlikely to be deciphered and
programmed completely manually in near future.
On large corpora such as Flyspeck, Mizar and Isabelle, the ATP progress has been mainly
due to learning how to select the most relevant knowledge, based on many previous proofs
[10, 12, 1, 2]. Learning from many proofs has also recently become a very useful method for
automated ﬁnding of parameters of ATP strategies [22, 9, 19, 16], and for learning of sequences of
tactics in interactive theorem provers (ITPs) [7]. Several experiments with the compact leanCoP
[18] system have recently shown that directly using trained machine learner for internal clause
selection can signiﬁcantly prune the search space and solve additional problems [24, 11, 5].
An obvious next step is to implement eﬃcient learning-based clause selection also inside the
strongest superposition-based ATPs.
In this work, we introduce ENIGMA – Eﬃcient learNing-based Internal Guidance MA-
chine for state-of-the-art saturation-based ATPs. The method applies fast machine learning
algorithms to a large number of proofs, and uses the trained classiﬁer together with simpler
heuristics to evaluate the millions of clauses generated during the resolution/superposition proof
search. This way, the theorem prover automatically takes into account thousands of previous
successes and failures that it has seen in previous problems, similarly to trained humans. Thanks
to a carefully chosen eﬃcient learning/evaluation method and its tight integration with the core
ATP (in our case the E prover), the penalty for this ubiquitous knowledge-based internal proof
guidance is very low. This in turn very signiﬁcantly improves the performance of E in terms of
the number of solved problems in the CASC 2016 AIM benchmark [21].

2
Preliminaries
We use N to denote the set of natural numbers including 0. When S is a ﬁnite set then |S|
denotes its size, and Sn where n P N is the n-ary Cartesian product of S, that is, the set of all
vectors of size n with members from S. When x P Sn then we use notation xris to denote its
i-th member, counting indexes from 1. We use xT to denote the transposed vector.
Multiset M over a set S is represented by a total function from S to N, that is, Mpsq is the
count of s P S in M. The union M1 Y M2 of two multisets M1 and M2 over S is the multiset
represented by function pM1 Y M2qpsq “ M1psq ` M2psq for all s P S. We use the notation
ts1 ÞÑ n1, . . . , sk ÞÑ nku to describe a multiset, omitting the members with count 0.
We assume a ﬁxed ﬁrst-order theory with stable symbol names, and denote Σ its signature,
that is, a set of symbols with assigned arities. We use L to range over the set of all ﬁrst-order
literals (Literal), C to range over the set of all ﬁrst-order clauses (Clause). Finally, we use
C to range over sets of clauses (Clauses).
3
Training Clause Classiﬁers
There are many diﬀerent machine learning methods, with diﬀerent function spaces they can
explore, diﬀerent training and evaluation speeds, etc. Based on our previous experiments with
premise selection and with guiding leanCoP, we have decided to choose a very fast and scalable
learning method for the ﬁrst ENIGMA instantiation. While more expressive learning methods
usually lead to stronger single-strategy ATP results, very important aspects of our domain are
that (i) the learning and proving evolve together in a feedback loop [23] where fast learning
is useful, and (ii) combinations of multiple strategies – which can be provided by learning in
diﬀerent ways from diﬀerent proofs – usually solve much more problems than the best strategy.
After several experiments, we have chosen LIBLINEAR: open source library [4] for large-scale
linear classiﬁcation. This section describes how we use LIBLINEAR to train a clause classiﬁer to
guide given clause selection. Section 3.1 describes how training examples can be obtained from
ATP runs. Section 3.2 describes how clauses are represented as ﬁxed-length feature vectors.
Finally, Section 3.3 describes how to use LIBLINEAR to train a clause classiﬁer.
3.1
Extracting Training Examples from ATP Runs
Suppose we run a saturation-based ATP to prove a conjecture ϕ in theory T . When the ATP
successfully terminates with a proof, we can extract training examples from this particular
proof search as follows. We collect all the clauses that were selected as given clauses during the
proof search. From these clauses, those which appear in the ﬁnal proof are classiﬁed as positives
while the remaining given clauses as negative. This gives us two sets of clauses, positive clauses
C‘ and negative clauses Ca.
Re-running the proof search using the information pC‘, Caq to prefer clauses from C‘
as given clauses should signiﬁcantly shorten the proof search. The challenge is to generalize
this knowledge to be able to prove new problems which are in some sense similar. To achieve
that, the positive and negative clauses extracted from proof runs on many related problems are
combined and learned from jointly.
3.2
Encoding Clauses by Features
In order to use LIBLINEAR for linear classiﬁcation (Section 3.3), we need to represent clauses
as ﬁnite feature vectors. For our purposes, a feature vector x representing a clause C is a ﬁxed-

“
f
x
y
g
sko1
sko2
x
‘
“
f
f
f
g
d
d
f
Figure 1: The tree representing literal L1 from Example 1 (left) and its corresponding feature
tree (right).
length vector of natural numbers whose i-th member xris speciﬁes how often the i-th feature
appears in the clause C.
Several choices of clause features are possible [14], for example sub-terms, their generaliza-
tions, or paths in term trees. In this work we use term walks of length 3 as follows. First we
construct a feature vector for every literal L in the clause C. We write the literal L as a tree
where nodes are labeled by the symbols from Σ. In order to deal with possibly inﬁnite number
of variables and Skolem symbols, we substitute all variables and Skolem symbols with special
symbols. We count for each triple of symbols ps1, s2, s3q P Σ3, the number of directed node
paths of length 3 in the literal tree, provided the trees are oriented from the root. Finally, to
construct the feature vector of clause C, we sum the vectors of all literals L P C.
More formally as follows. We consider a ﬁxed theory T , hence we have a ﬁxed signature
Σ. We extend Σ with 4 special symbols for variables (f), Skolem symbols (d), positive literals
(‘), and negative literals (a). A feature φ is a triple of symbols from Σ. The set of all features
is denoted Feature, that is, Feature “ Σ3. Clause (or literal) features Φ is a multiset of
features, thus recording for each feature how many times it appears in a literal or a clause.
We use Φ to range over literal/clause features and the set of all literal/clause features (that is,
feature multisets) is denoted Features. Recall that we represent multisets as total functions
from Feature to N.
Hence every member Φ P Features is a total function of the type
“Features Ñ N” and we can write Φpφq to denote the count of φ in Φ.
Now it is easy to deﬁne function features of the type “Literal Ñ Features” which extracts
features Φ from a literal L. For a literal L, we construct a rooted feature tree with nodes labeled
by the symbols from Σ. The feature tree basically corresponds to the tree representing literal
L with the following exceptions. The root node of the tree is labeled by ‘ iﬀL is a positive
literal, otherwise it is labeled by a. Furthermore, all variable nodes are labeled by the symbol
f and all nodes corresponding to Skolem symbols are labeled by the symbol d.
Example 1. Consider the following equality literal L1 : fpx, yq “ gpsko1, sko2pxqq with Skolem
symbols sko1 and sko2, and with variables x and y. In Figure 1, the tree representation of L1
is depicted on the left, while the corresponding feature tree used to collect features is shown on
the right.
Function features constructs the feature tree of a literal L and collects all directed paths of
length 3. It returns the result as a feature multiset Φ.
Example 2. For literal L2 : Ppxq we obtain featurespL2q “ tp‘, P, fq ÞÑ 1u.
For literal
L3 : ␣Qpx, yq we have featuresp␣Qpx, yqq “ tpa, Q, fq ÞÑ 2u.
Finally, for literal L1 from

Example 1 we obtain the following multiset.
t
p‘, “, fq ÞÑ 1 ,
p‘, “, gq ÞÑ 1 ,
p“, f, fq ÞÑ 2 ,
p“, g, dq ÞÑ 2 ,
pg, d, fq ÞÑ 1
u
Finally, the function features is extended to clauses (features : Clause Ñ Features) by
multiset union as featurespCq “ Ť
LPC featurespLq.
3.2.1
A Technical Note on Feature Vector Representation
In order to use LIBLINEAR, we transform the feature multiset Φ to a vector of numbers of length
|Feature|. We assign a natural index to every feature and we construct a vector whose i-th
member contains the count Φpφq where i is the index of feature φ. Technically, we construct a
bijection sym between Σ and t0, . . . , |Σ|´1u which encodes symbols by natural numbers. Then
we construct a bijection between Feature and t1, . . . , |Feature|u which encodes features by
numbers1. Now it is easy to construct a function vector which translates Φ to a vector from
N|Feature| as follows:
vectorpΦq “ x such that xrcodepφqs “ Φpφq for all φ P Feature
3.3
Training Clause Classiﬁers with LIBLINEAR
Once we have the training examples pC‘, Caq and encoding of clauses by feature vectors, we
can use LIBLINEAR to construct a classiﬁcation model. LIBLINEAR implements the function
train of the type “ClausesˆClauses Ñ Model” which takes two sets of clauses (positive and
negative examples) and constructs a classiﬁcation model. Once we have a classiﬁcation model
M “ trainpC‘, Caq, LIBLINEAR provides a function predict of the type “Clause ˆ Model Ñ
t‘, au” which can be used to predict clause classiﬁcation as positive (‘) or negative (a).
LIBLINEAR supports several classiﬁcation methods, but we have so far used only the de-
fault solver L2-SVM (L2-regularized L2-loss Support Vector Classiﬁcation) [3]. Using the func-
tions from the previous section, we can translate the training examples pC‘, Caq to the set
of instance-label pairs pxi, yiq, where i P t1, . . . , |C‘| ` |Ca|u, xi P N|Feature|, yi P t‘, au. A
training clause Ci is translated to the feature vector xi “ vectorpfeaturespCiqq and the corre-
sponding yi is set to ‘ if Ci P C‘ or to a if Ci P Ca. Then, LIBLINEAR solves the following
optimization problem:
min
w
`1
2wT w ` c
lÿ
i“1
ξpw, xi, yiq
˘
for w P R|Feature|, where c ą 0 is a penalty parameter and ξ is the following loss function.
ξpw, xi, yiq “ maxp1 ´ y1
iwT xi, 0q2 where y1
i “
#
1
iﬀy1 “ ‘
´1
otherwise
LIBLINEAR implements a coordinate descend method [8] and a trust region Newton method [17].
The model computed by LIBLINEAR is basically the vector w obtained by solving the above
optimization problem.
When computing the prediction for a clause C, the clause is trans-
lated to the corresponding feature vector x “ vectorpfeaturespCqq and LIBLINEAR classiﬁes
C as positive (‘) iﬀwT x ą 0. Hence we see that the prediction can be computed in time
Opmaxp|Feature|, lengthpCqqq where lengthpCq is the length of clause C (number of symbols).
1 We use codepφq “ sympφr1sq ¨ |Σ|2 ` sympφr2sq ¨ |Σ| ` sympφr3sq ` 1.

4
Guiding the Proof Search
Once we have a LIBLINEAR model (classiﬁer) M, we construct a clause weight function which
can be used inside the ATP given-clause loop to evaluate the generated clauses. As usual,
clauses with smaller weight are selected before those with a higher weight. First, we deﬁne the
function predict which assigns a smaller number to positively classiﬁed clauses as follows:
predict-weightpC, Mq “
#
1
iﬀpredictpC, Mq “ ‘
10
otherwise
In order to additionally prefer smaller clauses to larger ones, we add the clause length to the
above predicted weight. We use lengthpCq to denote the length of C counted as the number of
symbols. Furthermore, we use a real-valued parameter γ to multiply the length as follows.
weightpC, Mq “ γ ¨ lengthpCq ` predict-weightpC, Mq
This scheme is designed for the E automated prover which uses clause evaluation functions
(CEFs) to select the given clause.
A clause evaluation function CEF is a function which
assigns a real weight to a clause. The unprocessed clause with the smallest weight is chosen
to be the given clause. E allows combining several CEFs to jointly guide the proof search.
This is done by specifying a ﬁnite number of CEFs together with their frequencies as follows:
pf1 ‹ CEF 1, . . . , fk ‹ CEF kq. Each frequency fi denotes how often the corresponding CEF i
is used to select a given clause in this weighted round-robin scheme. We have implemented
learning-based guidance as a new CEF given by the above weight function. We can either use
this new CEF alone or combine it with other CEFs already deﬁned in E.
5
Experimental Evaluation
We use the AIM2 category of the CASC 2016 competition for evaluation. This benchmark
ﬁts our needs as it targets internal guidance in ATPs based on training and testing examples.
Before the competition, 1020 training problems were provided for the training of ATPs, while
additional 200 problems were used in the competition. Prover9 proofs were provided along with
all the training problems. Due to several interesting issues,3 we have decided not to use the
training Prover9 proofs yet and instead ﬁnd as many proofs as possible by a single E strategy.
Using fast preliminary evaluation, we have selected a strong E4 strategy S0 (see Appendix A)
which can by itself solve 239 training problems with a 30 s timeout.
For comparison, E’s
auto-schedule mode (using optimized strategy scheduling) can solve 261 problems. We train
a clause classiﬁer model M0 (Section 3) on the 239 proofs and then run E enhanced with
the classiﬁer M0 in diﬀerent ways to obtain even more training examples. Either we use the
classiﬁer CEF based on M0 (i.e., function weightpC, M0q from Section 4) alone, or combine it
with the CEFs from S0 by adding weightpC, M0q to S0 with a grid of frequencies ranging over
{1,5,6,7,8,9,10,15,20,30,40,50}. Furthermore, every combination may be run with a diﬀerent
value of the parameter γ P t0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.7, 1, 2, 4, 8u of the function weightpC, M0q. All the
methods are run with 30 seconds time limit, leading to the total of 337 solved training problems.
As expected, the numbers of processed clauses and the solving times on the previously solved
problems are typically very signiﬁcantly decreased when using weightpC, M0q. This is a good
2AIM is a long-term project on proving open algebraic conjectures by Kinyon and Veroﬀ.
3E.g., diﬀerent term orderings, rewriting settings, etc., may largely change the proof search.
4We use E 1.9 and Intel Xeon 2.6GHz workstation for all experiments.

sign, however, the ultimate test of ENIGMA’s capability to learn and generalize is to evaluate
the trained strategies on the testing problems. This is done as follows.
On the 337 solved training problems, we (greedily) ﬁnd that 4 strategies are needed to cover
the whole set. The strongest strategy is our classiﬁer weightpC, M0q alone with γ “ 0.2, solving
318 problems. Another 15 problems are added by combining S0 with the trained classiﬁer using
frequency 50 and γ “ 0.2. Three problems are contributed by S0 and two by the trained classiﬁer
alone using γ “ 0. We take these four strategies and use only the proofs they found to train
a new enhanced classiﬁer M1. The proofs yield 6821 positive and 219012 negative examples.
Training of M1 by LIBLINEAR takes about 7 seconds – 2 seconds for feature extraction and 5
seconds for learning. The classiﬁer evaluation on the training examples takes about 6 seconds
and reaches 97.6% accuracy (ratio of the correctly classiﬁed clauses).
This means that both the feature generation and the model evaluation times per clause are
at the order of 10 microseconds. This is comparable to the speed at which clauses are generated
by E on our hardware and evaluated by its built-in heuristics. Our learning-based guidance
can thus be quickly trained and used by normal users of E, without expensive training phase
or using multiple CPUs or GPUs for clause evaluation.
Then we use the M1 classiﬁer to attack the 200 competition problems using 180 s time limit
as in CASC. We again run several strategies: both weightpC, M1q alone and combined with
S0 with diﬀerent frequencies and parameters γ. All the strategies solve together 52 problems
and only 3 of the strategies are needed for this. While S0 solves only 22 of the competition
problems, our strongest strategy solves 41 problems, see Table 1. This strategy combines S0
with weightpC, M1q using frequency 30 and γ “ 0.2.
7 more problems are contributed by
weightpC, M1q alone with γ “ 0.2 and 4 more problems are added by the E auto-schedule
mode.
For comparison, Vampire solves 47 problems (compared to our 52 proofs) in 3*180
seconds per problem (simulating 3 runs of the best strategies, each for 180 seconds).
auto-schedule
0
1
5
10
15
30
50
8
0
29
22
-
-
-
-
18
17
16
0.2
-
-
23
31
32
40
41
33
40
8
-
-
23
31
31
40
41
33
35
Table 1: Performance of the diﬀerently parameterized (frequency and γ of weightpC, M1q combined
with S0) trained evaluation heuristics on the 200 AIM CASC 2016 competition problems. Frequency 0
(third column) for weightpC, M1q means that S0 is used alone, whereas 8 means that weightpC, M1q
is used alone. The empty entries were not run.
5.1
Looping and Boosting
The recent work on the premise-selection task has shown that typically there is not a single
optimal way how to guide proof search. Re-learning from new proofs as introduced by MaLARea
and combining proofs and learners usually outperforms a single method. Since we are using a
very fast classiﬁer here, we can easily experiment with giving it more and diﬀerent data.
First such experiment is done as follows. We add the proofs obtained on the solved 52
competition problems to the training data obtained from the 337 solved training problems.
Instead of immediately re-learning and re-running (as in the MaLARea loop), we however ﬁrst
boost all positive examples (i.e., clauses participating in the proofs) by repeating them ten times
in the training data. This way, we inform the learner to more strongly avoid misclassifying the
positive examples as negative, than the other way round. The resulting clasiﬁer M2 has lower

overall accuracy on all of the data (93% vs. 98% for the unboosted), however, its accuracy on
the relatively rare positive data grows signiﬁcantly, from 12.5% to 81.8%.
Running the most successful strategy using M2 instead of M1 indeed helps. In 180 s, it
solves additional 5 problems (4 of them not solved by Vampire), all of them in less than 45 s.
This raises ENIGMA’s performance on the competition problems to 57 problems (in general in
600 s). Interestingly, the second most useful strategy (now using M2 instead of M1) which is
much more focused on doing inferences on the positively classiﬁed clauses, solves only two of
these new problems, but six times faster. It is clear that we can continue experimenting this
way with ENIGMA for long time, producing quickly a large number of strategies that have
quite diﬀerent search properties. In total we have proved 16 problems unsolved by Vampire.
6
Conclusions
The ﬁrst experiments with ENIGMA are extremely encouraging. While the recent work on
premise selection and on internal guidance for leanCoP indicated that large improvements
are possible, this is the ﬁrst practical and usable improvement of a state-of-the-art ATP by
internal learning-based guidance on a large CASC benchmark. It is clear that a wide range of
future improvements are possible: the learning could be dynamically used also during the proof
search, training problems selected according to their similarity with the current problem,5 more
sophisticated learning and feature characterization methods could be employed, etc.
The magnitude of the improvement is unusually big for the ATP ﬁeld, and similar to the
improvements obtained with high-level learning in MaLARea 0.5 over E-LTB (sharing the
same underlying engine) in CASC 2013 [13]. We believe that this may well mark the arrival of
ENIGMAs – eﬃcient learning-based inference guiding machines – to the automated reasoning,
as crucial and indispensable technology for building the strongest automated theorem provers.
7
