Similarity Preserving Representation Learning for
Time Series Clustering
Qi Lei⋆, Jinfeng Yi§, Roman Vaculin†, Lingfei Wu†, and Inderjit S. Dhillon⋆‡
⋆UT Austin
§ JD AI Research
† IBM Research
‡ Amazon

June 4, 2019
Abstract
A considerable amount of clustering algorithms take instance-feature matrices as their inputs. As such, they cannot
directly analyze time series data due to its temporal nature, usually unequal lengths, and complex properties. This is a
great pity since many of these algorithms are effective, robust, efﬁcient, and easy to use. In this paper, we bridge this
gap by proposing an efﬁcient representation learning framework that is able to convert a set of time series with various
lengths to an instance-feature matrix. In particular, we guarantee that the pairwise similarities between time series
are well preserved after the transformation, thus the learned feature representation is particularly suitable for the time
series clustering task. Given a set of n time series, we ﬁrst construct an n × n partially-observed similarity matrix
by randomly sampling O(n log n) pairs of time series and computing their pairwise similarities. We then propose an
efﬁcient algorithm that solves a non-convex and NP-hard problem to learn new features based on the partially-observed
similarity matrix. By conducting extensive empirical studies, we show that the proposed framework is more effective,
efﬁcient, and ﬂexible, compared to other state-of-the-art time series clustering methods.
1
Introduction
Modeling time series data is important but highly challenging. It is considered by [37] as one of the 10 most challenging
problems in data mining. Although time series clustering has attracted increasing attention, the time series clustering
algorithms are still much fewer than the clustering algorithms developed for static data. The latter category of models,
which usually take instance-feature matrices as their inputs, cannot directly partition time series data due to its temporal
nature, typically unequal lengths, and complex properties [21]. This is a great pity since many static clustering algorithms
are effective, robust, efﬁcient, and easy to use. Introducing them to time series clustering can signiﬁcantly advance this
ﬁeld.
In this work, we bridge this gap by proposing an efﬁcient unsupervised representation learning framework that can
convert a set of uni- or multi-dimensional time series data with equal or unequal lengths to an instance-feature matrix. In
particular, the learned features preserve the pairwise similarities between the raw time series data, thus are particularly
suitable to the time series clustering problem. Notably, the proposed framework is ﬂexible to any time series distance or
similarity measures such as Mikowski distance, cross-correlation, Kullback-Leibler divergence, dynamic time warping
(DTW) similarity, move-split-merge (MSM) distance, and short time series (STS) distance. Here, we slightly abuse
the notation and use the term similarity measure to denote both similarity and distance measures, as they are usually
interchangeable. In this paper, we use widely-used DTW similarity as an example to illustrate our approach, and then
empirically show that the proposed approach also works well with other time series similarity measures.
Given a total of n uni- or multi-dimensional time series, our ﬁrst step generates an n × n similarity matrix A with
Aij equaling to the DTW similarity between the time series i and j. However, computing all the pairwise similarities
requires calling the DTW O(n2) times, which is time-consuming when n is large. As a concrete example, generating a
full similarity matrix for n = 150, 000 time series of length 30 takes more than 28 hours on an Intel Xeon 2.40 GHz
1
arXiv:1702.03584v3  [cs.AI]  2 Jun 2019

processor with 256 GB of main memory. To signiﬁcantly reduce the running time, we note that time series similarity
measures, including DTW, usually capture the co-movements of time series, which has shown to be driven by only a
small number of latent factors [33]. This suggests that the similarity matrix A can be well approximated by a low-rank
matrix. According to the theory of (noisy) matrix completion [20, 34], only O(n log n) randomly sampled entries are
needed to recover an n × n low-rank matrix. This allows us to sample only O(n log n) pairs of time series to generate
a partially-observed similarity matrix ˜A. In this way, the time spent on generating similarity matrix is signiﬁcantly
reduced by a factor of O(n/ log n). For n = 150, 000 time series of length 30, it only takes 3 minutes to construct a
partially observed similarity matrix with [20n log n] observed entries.
Given the generated partially-observed similarity matrix ˜A, our second step learns a new feature representation for
n time series such that their pairwise DTW similarities can be well approximated by the inner products of new features.
To this end, we solve a symmetric matrix factorization problem to factorize ˜A, i.e., learn a d-dimensional matrix
X ∈Rn×d such that PΩ( ˜A) ≈PΩ(XX⊤), where PΩis a matrix projection deﬁned on the observed set Ω. Despite its
relatively simple formulation, this optimization problem is NP-hard and non-convex. To address this challenge, we
propose a highly efﬁcient and parameter-free exact cyclic coordinate descent algorithm. By wisely updating variables
with the sparsely observed entries in ˜A, the proposed algorithm incurs a very low computational cost, and thus can
learn new feature representations in an extremely efﬁcient way. For example, with n = 150, 000 and d = 15, it only
takes the proposed algorithm 25 seconds to learn new features. We summarize our contributions as below:
1. We bridge the gap between time series data and static clustering algorithms by learning a feature representation
that preserves the pairwise similarities of the raw time series data. The underlying low-rank assumption of the
similarity matrix is veriﬁed both theoretically and empirically.
2. We propose a parameter-free algorithm for symmetric matrix factorization on a partially-observed matrix.
3. We conduct extensive experiments on over 80 real-world time series datasets. The results show that our learned
features working with some simple static clustering methods like kMeans can signiﬁcantly outperform the
state-of-the-art time series clustering algorithms in both accuracy and efﬁciency.
2
Related Work
In this section, we brieﬂy review the existing work on learning feature representations for time series data. A majority of
them were designed for time series classiﬁcation instead of clustering. A family of methods uses a set of derived features
to represent time series. For instance, [27] proposed to use the mean, standard deviation, kurtosis, and skewness of time
series to represent control chart patterns. The authors in [36] introduced a set of features such as trend, seasonality,
serial correlation, chaos, nonlinearity, and self-similarity to partition different types of time series. [7] used some
easy to compute features such as mean, standard deviation and slope temporal importance curves to guide time series
classiﬁcation. To automate the selection of features for time series classiﬁcation, the authors in [12] proposed a greedy
forward method that can automatically select features from thousands of choices. Shapelet-based classiﬁers [15] extract
shapelet features from the time series, and then convert the time series to a regular feature table. [17] proposed to use
the DTW distances from a training example to create new features for time series data. Besides, several techniques have
been proposed to represent time series by a certain types of transformation, such as discrete Fourier transformation [11],
discrete cosine transformation [19], Laplace transformation [28, 14], discrete wavelet transformation [5], piecewise
aggregate approximation [18], and symbolic aggregate approximation [23]. Also, deep learning models such as Elman
recurrent neural network [9] and long short-term memory [16] are capable of modeling complex structures of time
series data and learn a layer of feature representations.
Despite the remarkable progress, most feature representations learned by these algorithms are problem-speciﬁc and
are not general enough for applications in multiple domains. Besides, these learned features cannot preserve similarities
of the raw time series data, thus are not suitable for the clustering problem that is sensitive to the data similarity. These
limitations inspire us to propose a problem-independent and similarity preserving representation learning framework
for time series clustering.
2

3
Similarity Preserving Representation Learning for Time Series Clustering
In this section, we ﬁrst present the general framework of our similarity preserving time series representation learning
method, and then propose an extremely efﬁcient algorithm that is signiﬁcantly faster than a naive implementation.
3.1
Problem Deﬁnition and General Framework
Given a set of n time series T = {T1, · · · , Tn} with equal or unequal lengths, our goal is to convert them to a matrix
X ∈Rn×d such that the time series similarities are well preserved after the transformation. Speciﬁcally, we aim to
learn a mapping function f : T →Rd that satisﬁes
S(Ti, Tj) ≈⟨f(Ti), f(Tj)⟩∀i, j ∈[n],
(1)
where ⟨·, ·⟩stands for the inner product, a common similarity measure in analyzing static data. S(·, ·) denotes the
pairwise time series similarity that can be computed by a number of functions. In this work, we use dynamic time
warping (DTW) algorithm as an example to illustrate our approach. By warping sequences non-linearly in the time
dimension, DTW can calculate an optimal match between two given temporal sequences with equal or unequal lengths.
Due to its superior performance, DTW has been successfully applied to a variety of applications, including computer
animation [26], surveillance [31], gesture recognition [4], signature matching [8], and speech recognition [25].
Normally, DTW outputs a pairwise distance between two temporal sequences, thus we need to convert it to
a similarity score. Since the inner product space can be induced from the normed vector space using ⟨x, y⟩=
(∥x∥2 + ∥y∥2 −∥x −y∥2)/2 [1], we generate the DTW similarity by
S(Ti, Tj)= DTW(Ti, 0)2+DTW(Tj, 0)2−DTW(Ti, Tj)2
2
,
(2)
where 0 denotes the length one time series with entry 0. The similarity computed via the above equation is a more
numerically-stable choice than some other similarity measures such as the reciprocal of distance. This is because
when two time series are almost identical, their DTW distance is close to 0 and thus its reciprocal tends to inﬁnity. An
alternative way to convert DTW is via the Laplacian transformation e−DTW2(Ti,Tj)/t [14], where t is a hyperparameter.
However, our experimental results shows that it yields a worse performance than the proposed method (2).
In order to learn the matrix X, an intuitive idea is to factorize the similarity matrix A ∈Rn×n where Aij =
S(Ti, Tj). In more detail, this idea consists of two steps, i.e., a similarity matrix construction step and a symmetric
matrix factorization step. In the ﬁrst step, we construct A by calling the DTW oracle at least (n + 1)n/2 times to
compute the pairwise similarites and the distance. In the second step, we learn an optimal data-feature matrix X by
solving the following optimization problem
min
X∈Rn×d
∥A −XX⊤∥2
F ,
(3)
where i-th row of X indicates the feature vector of sample i. The problem (3) has a closed form solution, i.e.,
X = Q1:n,1:d ×
p
Λ1:d,1:d ,
where A = QΛQ⊤and the notation Q1:k,1:r represents the upper left k by r sub-matrix of Q.
Although the inner products of features in X well preserve the DTW similarities of the raw time series, the idea
described above is impractical since both construction and factorization steps are extremely time-consuming when
n is large. To generate an n × n similarity matrix, we need to call the DTW algorithm O(n2) times. Meanwhile,
a naive implementation of eigen-decomposition takes O(n3) time. We hereby introduce our Similarity PreservIng
RepresentAtion Learning (SPIRAL) framework that only calls DTW O(n log n) times for similarity matrix construction,
with an additional O(nd log n) ﬂops on learning d features from the similarity matrix.
3

3.2
The Low-rankness of the Similarity Matrix
To signiﬁcantly improve the efﬁciency of the ﬁrst step, we make a key observation that the similarity matrix A can be
well approximated by a low-rank matrix. In the following, we show that this observation is valid when the time series
are generated from some distinguishable clusters.
Assumption 1. Suppose all the time series belong to k clusters C1, C2, · · · , Ck. For simplicity, let cluster C0 to be the
set of a unique length-one time series with entry 0. Deﬁne the cluster distance dab between clusters Ca and Cb to be
dab = minT1∈Ca,T2∈Cb DTW(T1, T2), 0 ≤a ̸= b ≤k. We consider the following conditions:
1. Deﬁnition of clusters: For each cluster Ca, we have DTW(Ti, Tj)2 ≤ϵ, ∀Ti, Tj ∈Ca, 1 ≤a ≤k;
2. Clusters are distinguishable: ϵ ≪d2
ab, ∀0 ≤a ̸= b ≤k;
3. Proxy for triangle inequality: For any two different clusters Ca and Cb, DTW(Ti, Tj)2 ≤d2
ab + O(ϵ), ∀Ti ∈
Ca, Tj ∈Cb, 0 ≤a ̸= b ≤k;
Under such assumptions, we have:
Theorem 2. Let T1, T2, · · · Tn be n time series generated from k (≪n) clusters satisfying Assumption 1, then the
generated similarity matrix A can be written as L + N, where matrix L has a small rank of at most k(k −1) + 2, and
N is a noise matrix satisfying |Nij| ≤O(ϵ).
We defer the proof to the appendix. Some alternative intuitions on the low-rankness of matrix A are: (i) time series
similarity functions, including DTW, usually measure the level of co-movement between time series, which has shown
to be dictated by only a small number of latent factors [33]; and (ii) since the matrix A is a special case of Wigner
random matrix, the gaps between its consecutive eigenvalues should not be small [24]. This implies the low-rank
property since most of its energy is concentrated in its top eigenvalues [10]. Our experiments on an extensive set of
real-world time series datasets also verify the low-rankness of the similarity matrix A.1
3.3
A Parameter-free Scalable Algorithm
Given a low-rank similarity matrix, we are now able to signiﬁcantly reduce the computational costs of both steps.
According to the theory of matrix completion [34], only O(n log n) randomly sampled entries are needed to perfectly
recover an n × n low-rank matrix. Thus, we don’t need to compute all the pairwise DTW similarities. Instead, we
randomly sample O(n log n) pairs of time series, and then compute the DTW similarities within the selected pairs. This
leads to a partially-observed similarity matrix ˜A with O(n log n) observed entries:
˜Aij =

S(Ti, Tj)
if Ωij = 1
unobserved
if Ωij = 0,
(4)
where Ω∈{0, 1}n × {0, 1}n is a binary matrix indicating the indices of sampled pairs. In this way, the running time
of the ﬁrst step is reduced by a signiﬁcant factor of O(n/ log n). Since this factor scales almost linearly with n, we
can signiﬁcantly reduce the running time of generating the similarity matrix when n is large. As an example when
n = 150, 000, it now only takes 194 seconds to construct ˜A with [20n log n] observed entries, more than 500 times
faster than generating a full similarity matrix.
Given the partially-observed similarity matrix ˜A, our second step aims to learn a new feature representation matrix
X. To this end, we propose an efﬁcient and parameter-free algorithm that can directly learn the feature matrix X ∈Rn×d
from minimizing the following optimization problem
min
X∈Rn×d
∥PΩ( ˜A −XX⊤)∥2
F ,
(5)
where PΩ: Rn×n →Rn×n is a projection operator on Ω. The objective function (5) does not have a regularization
term since it already bounds the Frobenius norm of X. Despite its relatively simple formulation, solving problem (5) is
1We omit the details due to space limitation, but instead provide one example in Figure 1.
4

non-trivial since its objective function is non-convex. To address this issue, we propose a very efﬁcient optimization
algorithm that solves problem (5) based on exact cyclic coordinate descent (CD). Our proposed coordinate descent
algorithm has the following two advantages: (i) for each iteration, our CD algorithm directly updates each coordinate to
the optimum. Thus, we do not need to select any hyper-parameter such as the learning rate; and (ii) by directly updating
coordinates to the optimums using the most up-to-date information, our CD algorithm is efﬁcient and converges at a
very fast rate.
At each iteration of the exact cyclic CD method, all variables but one are ﬁxed, and that variable is directly updated
to its optimal value. To be precise, our algorithm consists of two loops that iterate over all the entries of X to update
their values. The outer loop of the algorithm traverses through each column of X by assuming all the other columns
known and ﬁxed. At the i-th iteration, it optimizes the i-th column X1:n,i by minimizing the following subproblem
∥R −PΩ(X1:n,iX⊤
1:n,i)∥2
F ,
(6)
where R is the residual matrix deﬁned as R = PΩ( ˜A −P
j̸=i X1:n,jX⊤
1:n,j). In the inner loop, the proposed algorithm
iterates over each coordinate of the selected column and updates its value. Speciﬁcally, when updating the j-th entry
Xji, we solve the following optimization problem:
min
Xji ∥R −PΩ(X1:n,iX⊤
1:n,i)∥2
F
⇐⇒min
Xji ∥R∥2
F −2⟨R, PΩ(X1:n,iX⊤
1:n,i)⟩+∥PΩ(X1:n,iX⊤
1:n,i)∥2
F
⇐⇒min
Xji X4
ji + 2(
X
k∈Ωj, k̸=j
X2
ki −Rjj)X2
ji
−4(
X
k∈Ωj, k̸=j
XkiRjk)Xji + C
⇐⇒min
Xji ψ(Xji) := X4
ji + 2pX2
ji + 4qXji + C,
where Ωi, i = 1,· · ·, n contains the indices of the observed entries in the i-th row of matrix ˜A, and C is a constant.
Algorithm 1 describes the detailed steps of the proposed exact cyclic CD algorithm that updates ψ(Xji) to its minimum.
The proposed algorithm incurs a very low computational cost in each iteration. Lines 7-11 of the algorithm can
be computed in O(n log n) operations. This is because the costs of computing p and q are only proportional to the
cardinality of Ωj. Besides, the derivative ∇ψ(Xji) is a third-degree polynomial, thus its roots can be computed in
a closed form. By using Cardano’s method [3], the optimal solution of Xji can be calculated in a constant time
given the computed p and q. Likewise, lines 6 and 12 of the algorithm also take O(n log n) time since matrix R can
be updated by only considering the observed entries. To sum up, the proposed algorithm has a per-iteration cost of
O(dn log n), which is signiﬁcantly faster than direct factorization of the whole matrix that take at least O(dn2) time in
each iteration [35].The following theorem shows that Algorithm 1 guarantees to converge to a stationary point of (5).
We defer the proof to the appendix.
Theorem 3. Let (X(0), X(1), . . . ) be a sequence of iterates generated by the Algorithm 1. If it converges to a unique
accumulation point, then the point is a stationary point of Problem (5).
In addition to a low per-iteration cost, the proposed algorithm yields a fast convergence. This is because our
algorithm always uses the newest information to update variables and each variable is updated to the optimum in a
single step. This is veriﬁed by a convergence test conducted on the UCR Non-Invasive Fetal ECG Thorax1 testbed [6].
This testbed contains a total of 3, 765 time series with a length of 750. In this test, we generate a full similarity matrix
A by computing the DTW similarities between all time series pairs, and then randomly sample [20n log n] of its
entries to generate a partially-observed matrix ˜A. We call the proposed algorithm to factorize matrix ˜A by setting the
dimensionality d = 15. To measure the performance of the proposed method, we compute two error rates, i.e., the
observed error ∥PΩ( ˜A −XX⊤)∥F /∥PΩ( ˜A)∥F and the underlying true error rate ∥A −XX⊤∥F /∥A∥F , at each
iteration. Figure 1 shows how they converge as a function of time. This ﬁgure clearly demonstrates that the proposed
exact cyclic CD algorithm converges very fast – it only takes 1 second and 8 iterations to converge. Besides, the
5

Algorithm 1 Efﬁcient Exact Cyclic Coordinate Descent Algorithm for Solving the Optimization Problem (5)
1: Inputs:
• ˜A ∈Rn×n: partially-observed similarity matrix. Ωi, i = 1,· · ·, n: indices of the observed entries in the i-th
row of matrix ˜A. I: # iterations, d: # features
2: Initializations:
• X(0) ←0n×d. R ←PΩ( ˜A −X(0)X(0)⊤).
3: for t = 1, · · · , I do
4:
X(t) ←X(t−1)
5:
for i = 1, · · · , d do
6:
R ←R + PΩ(X(t)
1:n,iX(t)⊤
1:n,i)
7:
for j = 1, · · · n do
8:
p ←P
k∈Ωj X(t)2
ki
−X(t)2
ji
−Rjj
9:
q ←−P
k∈Ωj X(t)
ki Rjk + X(t)
ji Rjj
10:
X(t)
ji ←argmin{X4
ji + 2pX2
ji + 4qXji}
11:
end for
12:
R ←R −PΩ(X(t)
1:n,iX(t)⊤
1:n,i)
13:
end for
14: end for
15: Output: X(I)
reconstruction accuracy is also very encouraging. The observed error and the underlying true error rates are close to
each other and both of them are only about 0.1%. This result not only indicates that the inner products of the learned
features well approximate the pairwise DTW similarities, but also veriﬁes that we can learn accurate enough features by
only computing a small portion of pairwise similarities. In addition, this test validates the low-rank assumption. It shows
that a rank 30 matrix can accurately approximate a 3, 765 × 3, 765 DTW similarity matrix. To further demonstrate the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of our proposed algorithm, we compare our model with the naive gradient descent [13]. For
the 85 UCR time series datasets [6], our average running time is only 2.7 seconds, roughly 3 times more efﬁcient than
the gradient descent method [13] with a learning rate 0.1 to converge to a similar accuracy.
4
Experiments
Experimental setup: In this section, we thoroughly evaluate the proposed framework, i.e., Similarity PreservIng
RepresentAtion Learning (SPIRAL for short), on the time series clustering task. We conduct extensive experiments on
all the 85 datasets in the UCR time series classiﬁcation and clustering repository [6] – the largest public collection of
class-labeled time-series datasets.
These datasets have widely varying characteristics: their training and testing set sizes vary from 16 to 8, 926 and
20 to 8, 236, respectively; the numbers of classes/clusters are between 2 and 60; and the lengths of the time series
range from 24 to 2, 709. Besides, this repository encompasses a wide range of domains such as medicine, engineering,
astronomy, entomology, ﬁnance, and manufacture.
In our experiments, we set |Ω| = [20n log n], and # features d = 15. The convergence criteria is deﬁned as the
objective decreases to be less than 1e-5 in one iteration. Given the learned features, we then feed them into some
static clustering models and compare them with some state-of-the-art time series clustering methods. To conduct fair
comparisons, in all DTW related algorithms and all datasets, we set the DTW window size to be the best warping size
reported in [6].
To further verify that the proposed SPIRAL framework is ﬂexible enough and works well on other similarity
measures, we also conduct experiments that use move-split-merge (MSM) distance [32] in our framework. We denote
6

Figure 1: Two error rates as a function of CPU time on UCR Non-Invasive Fetal ECG Thorax1 dataset
them as SPIRAL-DTW and SPIRAL-MSM, respectively. All the results were averaged from 5 trials and obtained on
a Linux server with an Intel Xeon 2.40 GHz CPU and 256 GB of main memory. Our source code and the detailed
experimental results are publicly available. 2
Since data clustering is an unsupervised learning problem, we merge the training and testing sets of all the datasets.
Given the features learned by the proposed framework SPIRAL with DTW similarity, we feed them into the kMeans
algorithm as our clustering method, denoted as SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans.
method
SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans
SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans
Laplace-DTW-kMeans
Laplace-MSM-kMeans
k-Shape
NMI
0.332
0.365
0.171
0.179
0.281
<(%)
59 (69.4%)
N/A
69 (81.2%)
67 (78.8%)
76 (89.4%)
method
kMedoids-DTW
kMedoids-MSM
kMeans-DTW
kMeans-MSM
CLDS-kMeans
NMI
0.291
0.294
0.217
0.235
0.285
<(%)
65 (76.5%)
64 (75.3%)
72 (84.7%)
70 (82.4%)
63 (74.1%)
Table 1: The overall clustering performance of all the proposed and baseline methods. The notation < denotes the number (percentage
in parenthesis) of datasets over which the baseline methods perform worse than our method SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans.
Baseline methods: We feed the features learned by our proposed framework into the kMeans algorithm as our
clustering method, denoted as SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans. To compare it with the existing time series representation
methods, we respectively use the Laplacian transformation [14] and the complex-valued linear dynamical systems
(CLDS) [22] for extracting the same number of features as ours. We then feed the learned features into the kMeans
algorithm, forming two baselines Laplace-DTW-kMeans and CLDS-kMeans.
Another baseline is the state-of-the-art time series clustering algorithm k-Shape [30], which has been shown to
outperform many state-of-the-art partitional, hierarchical, and spectral time series clustering approaches. Besides, we
also compare our method with clustering algorithms kMeans-DTW and kMedoids-DTW since our ideas are similar
in some respects. kMeans-DTW is a popular time series clustering algorithm that uses DTW algorithm to measure
pairwise distances between data points. Although it looks similar to the idea of our SPIRAL-kMeans that also utilizes
the DTW and kMeans algorithms, it is less desirable than SPIRAL-kMeans mainly because: (i) kMeans-DTW suffers
from a very high computational cost since it needs to compute the pairwise DTW distances between all the time series
and all the cluster centers at each iteration; and (ii) the DTW distance does not satisfy the triangle inequality, thus
can make the cluster centers computed by averaging multiple time series drift out of the cluster [29]. By designing an
efﬁcient algorithm that only needs to call the DTW function O(n log n) times and by embedding time series data to the
2https://github.com/cecilialeiqi/SPIRAL
7

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
k-Shape
(a) SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans vs. k-Shape
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CLDS
(b) SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans vs. CLDS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
LAPLACE-MSM-kMeans
(c) SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans vs. Laplace-MSM-kMeans
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kMedoids-MSM
(d) SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans vs. kMedoids-MSM
Figure 2: Comparison of our method with existing clustering algorithms over all the 85 UCR time series datasets. Top two:
comparison between our method SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans with two state-of-the-art methods k-Shape, and CLDS. Bottom two:
comparisons between MSM based methods, our method SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans with Laplace-MSM-kMeans and kMedoids-MSM.
Circles below the diagonal indicate datasets over which our method yields better clustering performance in terms of NMI.
Euclidean space while preserving their original similarities, the proposed method SPIRAL successfully addresses both
these issues.
Experimental results: We use the normalized mutual information (NMI for short) to measure the coherence
between the inferred clustering and the ground truth categorization. NMI scales from 0 to 1, and a higher NMI score
implies a better partition. Figure 2 (a)(b) show that SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans performs better in 62 (which is 72.9%)
and 52 (61.2%) out of 85 datasets in comparison to k-Shape and CLDS, respectively. Though not plotted, it is also
higher in 57 (67.1%), 57 (67.1%) and 66 (77.6%) datasets compared with Laplace-DTW-kMeans, kMedoids-DTW, and
kMeans-DTW. In all these comparisons, the statistical test demonstrates the superiority of SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans.
In addition to using DTW similarity in the SPIRAL framework, we also test our framework with another similarity
measure move-split-merge (MSM), and denote this clustering method as SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans. Figure 2 (c)(d)
summarize the performance of all the MSM-based algorithms. The ﬁgures show that SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans performs
better in 69 (which is 81.2%) and 64 (75.3%) out of 85 datasets in comparison to Laplace-MSM-kMeans and kMedoids-
MSM, respectively. Table 1 reports the average NMIs of all the algorithms, and the percentage of datasets over which
the baseline methods perform worse than our algorithm SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans. The table clearly shows that our
proposed methods SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans and SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans yield the overall best performance. Besides, the
MSM-based methods perform slighly better than the DTW-based methods, which is consistent with the observation
in [2]. Moreover, the results also verify that the proposed method (2) is a better choice than the Laplacian method for
converting DTW and MSM distances.
In addition to superior performance, our proposed framework has a signiﬁcantly lower running time than all the
8

baseline algorithms. For instance, clustering the ElectricDevice (ED) dataset with 16, 637 time series takes k-Shape,
kMeans-DTW and Laplace-DTW-kMeans 20 minutes, 169 minutes and 5 hours, respectively. As a comparison, our
clustering algorithms SPIRAL-DTW-kMeans and SPIRAL-MSM-kMeans only spend less than 2 and 9 minutes,
respectively, to partition the ED dataset.
According to the extensive experimental results, we have the following observations:
• The proposed framework SPIRAL is ﬂexible to multiple time series distance or similarity measures, including
DTW and MSM. In more detail, the MSM-based method usually yields a better performance while the DTW-based
method is more efﬁcient. Both of them are orders of magnitude faster than the baseline algorithms.
• Our experimental results show that even simple clustering algorithms like kMeans can yield strong performance
on our learned representations. By using some more advanced clustering algorithms, we may achieve an even
better performance.
• The proposed framework learns a feature representation instead of directly developing a time series model. In
this way, our method is more ﬂexible and can exploit the strengths of different clustering algorithms.
To sum up, the proposed framework is effective, efﬁcient, and ﬂexible. In addition to the superior performance, it is
ﬂexible in the choice of similarity measures and static learning algorithms. This enables the design of problem-speciﬁc
algorithms to tackle various time series clustering problems.
5
Conclusions
In this paper, we show that the pairwise time series similarity matrix is close to low-rank, and propose a scalable
representation learning framework that preserves pairwise similarities for time series clustering task. Our extensive
empirical studies verify the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed method.
