Self-supervised Learning of Image Embedding for
Continuous Control
Carlos Florensa∗
University of California, Berkeley,

Jonas Degrave
DeepMind
London, N1C FCQ, UK

Nicolas Heess
DeepMind
London, N1C FCQ, UK

Jost Tobias Springenberg
DeepMind
London, N1C FCQ, UK

Martin Riedmiller
DeepMind
London, N1C FCQ, UK

Abstract
Operating directly from raw high dimensional sensory inputs like images is still
a challenge for robotic control. Recently, Reinforcement Learning methods have
been proposed to solve speciﬁc tasks end-to-end, from pixels to torques. However,
these approaches assume the access to a speciﬁed reward which may require
specialized instrumentation of the environment. Furthermore, the obtained policy
and representations tend to be task speciﬁc and may not transfer well. In this work
we investigate completely self-supervised learning of a general image embedding
and control primitives, based on ﬁnding the shortest time to reach any state. We also
introduce a new structure for the state-action value function that builds a connection
between model-free and model-based methods, and improves the performance of
the learning algorithm. We experimentally demonstrate these ﬁndings in three
simulated robotic tasks.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement Learning methods have shown great success in learning complex behaviors, like
robotic locomotion [Heess et al., 2017, Florensa et al., 2017a], manipulation of objects [Florensa
et al., 2017b, Rajeswaran et al., 2018], or super-human game strategies [Mnih et al., 2015, Silver
et al., 2016]. These approaches hold the promise of end-to-end learning of policies that select the
optimal action to apply at every state, only leveraging direct interaction with the environment, and
a reward signal indicating the desired behavior. Nevertheless, in continuous control many of these
approaches still avoid learning from raw sensory input like camera images, or have a separately
engineered vision module trained to provide some state information that is known to be relevant for
the task [Andrychowicz et al., 2018]. This is a considerable drawback to scale up robotic learning
and bring them out of instrumented lab environments.
In this work we ask ourselves what a robot could learn solely through self-supervised interaction
with the environment, and its high-dimensional sensory input, without any further instrumentation or
reward. We show that we can learn a goal-reaching value function [Schaul et al., 2015] as well as a
corresponding policy that is conditioned on a previously collected observation, and is able to bring
the system to a state where the observation closely matches the desired one. This policy is able to
connect states even if it has never attempted to reach one from the other. It could later be used in a
∗Work done during a summer internship at DeepMind
Infer to Control: NIPS 2018 Workshop on Probabilistic Reinforcement Learning and Structured Control.
arXiv:1901.00943v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2019

hierarchical fashion to perform sequence of operations (like following a desired path, or an assembly
instruction manual), or for more meaningful exploration in other downstream tasks [Hausman et al.,
2018].
The underlying idea of our algorithm is to learn a state representation where the Euclidean distance
between two embedded states corresponds to the minimum number of actions or time-steps needed to
connect them. Such an embedding must satisfy a recursive formula that corresponds to the Bellman
equation when the reward is the indicator function signaling a perfect match of the observation
and the goal. This reward requires no additional instrumentation, but unfortunately the probability
of observing it is negligible for any high-dimensional sensory input. To sidestep this issue we
can re-label the trajectories as trying to recreate an observation that happened along the trajectory
[Andrychowicz et al., 2017], therefore observing this reward as often as needed. This idea was
originally studied with low-dimensional state representations, and required a suitably deﬁned distance
function to give rewards based on ϵ-Balls around the goals. Here, we show that both limitations can
be lifted. Furthermore, we introduce a novel architecture for the state-action value function that ties
this model-free Reinforcement Learning technique to model-based counterparts.
2
Background
In this section we formally introduce the Reinforcement Learning framework, its extension for
goal-oriented tasks, and efﬁcient model-free learning algorithms that leverage goal relabeling. We
also review the basics of model-based learning as we will draw a connection between the two later
on.
2.1
Reinforcement Learning framework
We deﬁne a discrete-time ﬁnite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP) by a tuple M
=
(S, A, P, r, ρ0, T), in which S is a state set, A an action set, P : S × A × S →R+ is a tran-
sition probability distribution, r : S × A →R is a bounded reward function, ρ0 : S →R+ is a start
state distribution, and T is the horizon. Our aim is to learn a stochastic policy πθ : S × A →R+
parametrized by θ that maximizes the expected return, ηρ0(πθ) = Es0∼ρ0R(π, s0). We denote by
R(π, s0) := Eτ|s0[PT
t=0 r(st, at)] the expected cumulative reward starting when starting from a
s0 ∼ρ0, where τ = (s0, a0, , . . . , aT −1, sT ) denotes a whole trajectory, with at ∼πθ(at|st), and
st+1 ∼P(st+1|st, at).
2.2
Visual goal tasks
In this work we assume that we have access to the state only through camera readings, or observations
ot. Observations are a function of the current state of the world st, usually higher dimensional, noisy,
and prone to aliasing, like robotic sensory inputs. Technically observations might not be Markovian,
but if this is anyhow critical for the task we can always set as state the collection of all previous
observations (see Section 6 for further discussion). Our objective is to train a policy π(at|ot, og) that
is conditioned on the current observation and a goal observation og, such that its sampled actions
modify the world to obtain an observation that matches og. We employ ideas from Universal Value
Function Approximators [Schaul et al., 2015] but for tasks in continuous action spaces and where the
goals are in the same space as the observations.
2.3
Off-policy training with goal re-labeling
When we execute a policy conditioned on a certain goal, it might be that the policy fails to reach that
goal, hence does not receive any reward. And if no reward is ever observed, no learning can take place.
Fortunately, the goal only affects the reward, but not the dynamics of the environment. Therefore,
if the training is done with an off-policy RL algorithm like DDPG [Lillicrap et al., 2016], we can
re-label in hindsight the trajectories to learn about other goals than the one we were originally trying
to achieve [Andrychowicz et al., 2017]. In particular, if using as goal a point along the trajectory, we
are sure to observe a reward.
2

2.4
Model-Based Learning
A forward model is a function f : O × A →O that predicts the next observation from the current
observation and action. A standard way to learn such a model is to ﬁt a parameterized function fθ by
solving
min
θ
X
i,t
∥fθ(oi
t, ai
t) −oi
t+1∥,
(1)
where

(oi
t, ai
t, oi
t+1)
	
i,t are observed transitions of different trajectories τ i. Once such a model has
been learned, it could be used by search and planning algorithms to select actions that reach a given
goal observation og. One approach would be Model Predictive Control (MPC) methods [Rao, 2009,
Nagabandi et al., 2017], where a full sequence of T actions is selected based on the solution to
min
a0,...,aT ∥f(f(f(o0, a0), a1) . . . ), aT ) −og∥,
(2)
Despite considerable progress in the area [Finn et al., 2016, Lee et al., 2018], it is still challenging to
learn a visual model useful for long-horizon planning, specially due to the intractability of solving
equation 2 exactly, the model-bias and compounding errors in higher dimensions.
3
Related work
One of the closes recent work is Temporal Difference Models [Pong et al., 2018], where the authors
also try to link model-based and model-free RL through the state-action value function of trying to
reach all states. Nevertheless, instead of using directly the minimum number of time-steps to reach a
state as we do, they ﬁt the distance at which they will be from the intended goal after h time-steps
(with h also given as input to the Q function). Therefore they need to deﬁne a distance metric, which
is exactly what we try to avoid in our work. Furthermore, this limitation makes them work only from
state-space (i.e. positions), where the Euclidean distance is more informative than in image space.
Finally, although they sketch a similar connection between MB and MF, theirs only holds for γ = 0,
which is not the discount used in practice.
Several work learn a representations of the image observations with some auto-encoding technique
[Lange and Riedmiller, 2010]. For example, in [Finn et al., 2015] an auto-encoder with spatial
soft-max is learned on data from trajectories that already succeed at a task 10% of the time, and then
its features are used as the state in a GPS algorithm [Levine and Abbeel, 2014] to solve that speciﬁc
task. On the other hand, Visual RL from Imagined Goals [Nair et al., 2018] has the same objective of
trying to reach any reachable observation. They do so training a β-VAE [Higgins et al., 2016] and
directly using a distance in that learned space. They obtain interesting results, despite their encoding
not reﬂecting anyhow the dynamics of the environment not what states are actually close to each
other in terms of minimum number of actions needed to join them.
Other recent methods have proposed to learn an image embedding spaces where the planning problem
could be easier [Kurutach et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2018]. All these methods require more complex
methods to learn the embedding than just replacing ot by φ(ot) in equation 1. Only performing this
change would just lead to collapse of the embedding space (φ(·) = 0, f(·, ·) = 0 trivially satisﬁes
the equation).
Successor features [Dayan, 1993] or representations [Barreto et al., 2018, 2016] constitute another
related body of work. They also tackle the problem of using the collected transitions for learning
policies that can perform well under many rewards. Unfortunately such rewards need to be expressed
as a linear combination of some features, and the collection of all indicator rewards cannot be
expressed with a ﬁnite number of such features. See Appendix C for more details.
4
Method
In an MDP setting, two states are considered “nearby” if a small number of actions are required
to reach one from the other. Unfortunately, a simple distance between states, like the Euclidean,
might be uninformative about how nearby two states are. Most prior work in Reinforcement Learning
assumes access to a carefully deﬁned state representation such that a reward based on a distance in
3

that space provides enough shaping to learn the desired policy. The problem is considerably harder
when we only have access to high dimensional observations, like images.
Our aim is to learn an embedding space where the distance between embedded observations is
representative of (e.g. proportional to) the minimum number of time-steps needed to reach one
observation from any other. The main idea is to leverage all collected trajectories to learn such
embedding, and, as a by-product, obtain a policy able to reach any past observation upon request. In
this section we ﬁrst recast this as an RL problem, and explain a goal relabeling strategy to solve it.
Then we introduce a novel structure for the Q function, that can be seen as bridging the gap between
model-based and model-free RL.
4.1
Minimum time to observation as RL
Knowing the minimum number of time-steps needed to reach a desired observation as a function of
the current state and action is arguably sufﬁcient to perform goal reaching tasks. A discount-based
equivalent of this function can be deﬁned by the recursive equation
Q(ot, at, og) = Eot+1∼p(·|ot,at)
h
1{ot+1 == og} + 1{ot ̸= og}γ max
a
Q(ot+1, a, og)
i
.
(3)
If the environment is deterministic and the transition (ot, at, ot+1) exists, then Q(ot, at, og = ot+1) =
1. Equivalently, if at least h steps are needed to reach a certain state ot+h from ot, then we have
Q(ot, at, ot+h) = γh. Note that the equation above is exactly the Bellman equation deﬁning the
optimal Q-function [Sutton and Barto, 1998] for the reward r(ot, at, ot+1, og) = 1{ot+1 == og}.
In continuous observation spaces (or discrete but high-dimensional) this reward is not practical since
even a near-optimal policy might never reach exactly the observation that it is trying to achieve.
Therefore to train this value function we use the relabeling strategy outlined in section 2.3. In the
next section we describe the speciﬁc algorithm we use.
4.2
Goal relabeling and Q ﬁtting
The ideas outlined in the previous section are not tied to any particular algorithm choice for learning
Q. For our experiments we use a goal-conditioned variant of MPO [Abdolmaleki et al., 2018]. This
algorithm combines a Q ﬁtting done with Retrace [Munos et al., 2016] to propagate the discounted
returns faster, and a policy improvement step. See details in the Appendix A.
Algorithm 1: Learning Loop
Input
:Discount γ, parameterized policy πθ, action-value function Qη, Sequence size h,
replay buffer R, hindsight pg, Batch Size B
while True do
Sample (ot, at, rt, . . . , ot+h, rt+h|og) ∼R ;
// og was the goal observation
Sample p ∼Unif([0, 1]) ;
// Use achieved observations as goals
if p < pg then
Sample k ∼Unif({1, 2, . . . , h});
Set og = ot+k and rt+k+1 = 1 ;
// All other rs = 0 already
end
Minimize the loss in equation 6;
Improve policy by solving equation 7;
end
The learning loop of our full algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. Note that there are three sample
procedures involved: ﬁrst obtain a trajectory from the replay buffer, then decide to relabel the
trajectory with probability pg (we use 0.5, but we have seen that, surprisingly, any value between 0.2
and 0.8 yields similar results!). Finally, if we are relabeling the trajectory, we pick a time-step within
h = 32 in the future and use the observation at that time as the goal (also replacing the reward at that
time).
The data collection loop executes the most recent policy πθ by conditioning it on any previously
observed state as goal. In the next subsection we motivate a new architecture for the Q function, and
outline a connection with model learning.
4

4.3
Q structure and model-learning
A general architecture for the Q would be to have two independent feature extractors, one for the
current observation and another for the goal observation, followed by a Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) acting on the concatenated representations. Such an architecture is depicted in Fig. 1a. Is
there a more sensible choice of structure for Q? First of all, see that this is an universal value function
[Schaul et al., 2015] that depends on a goal, and in this case the goal also belongs to the observation
space. Therefore it is reasonable to apply the same processing to both inputs. Furthermore, the action
has no effect on the goal, it only affect the current state. Finally, the Q function should be positive
everywhere and evolve exponentially in the minimum number of time-steps needed to reach a state.
This suggest the following architecture:
Q(ot, at, og) = γ∥f(φ(ot),at)−φ(og)∥
(4)
where f and φ are parameterized functions. A scheme of our proposed architecture can be found in
Fig. 1b.
(a) Q unstructured
(b) Q structured
Figure 1: Two Q-function architectures we compare to learn a visual goal-reaching policy.
Given the observations from the previous subsections, we realize that using this architecture to
optimize equation 3 enforces:
∥f(φ(ot), at) −φ(ot+1)∥= 0 ⇐⇒f(φ(ot), at) = φ(ot+1).
(5)
Therefore f can be understood as a model in embedding space. Critically, this is not the only equation
being ﬁtted, otherwise the embedding would tend to collapse (equation 5 is trivially satisﬁed by
f(·, ·) = 0, φ(·) = 0). Indeed Q is also trained to satisfy equation 3 which enforces ∥f(φ(ot), at) −
φ(ot+h)∥= h when h steps are the minimum needed to reach ot+h from ot. Assuming that equation 5
holds true, we are imposing that the embedding satisﬁes ∥φ(ot+1) −φ(ot+h)∥= h. Therefore this
can be understood as a model enhanced with stronger planning capabilities, also giving an embedding
where distances are proportional to shortest paths between points.
As an additional observation, the sample efﬁciency of model-based RL is often attributed to the ability
to make use of all observed data, as any valid transition is informative of the dynamics. Relabeling
procedures as the one used here achieves a similar effect, and along with the speciﬁc structure
introduced above we blur the lines between both types of methods.
5
Experiments
We investigate the following questions: 1) Can we learn a goal-reaching policy solely from visual
input and no rewards? 2) Does adding structure to the Q function improve the performance of the
algorithm? 3) Does the learned embedding carry dynamics information like time-steps between
points along a trajectory? We analyze this questions in three environments implemented with the
physics simulator MuJoCo [Todorov et al., 2012]: visual point-mass, wall point-mass, and Jaco arm
reacher. The ﬁrst two environments have a two-dimensional action-space corresponding to a force
applied to a spherical object. For both the observation is a fully top-down view of the scene, as seen
in Fig. 2a-2b. The only difference is a wall blocking 3/4 of the middle division in the wall task,
creating a sort of U-maze. The Jaco arm has a seven-dimensional action-space to control the velocity
of each joint actuator. The observation is a frontal view. All trajectories last 10 seconds and the
agents operate at 10Hz for the point-mass and at 20Hz for the Jaco. Our algorithm works solely from
visual inputs with the resolution observed in Fig. 2: 64x64 pixels for the point-mass environments
and 96x96 pixels for the Jaco arm.
5

(a) Point mass
(b) Wall point mass
(c) Jaco arm reacher
Figure 2: Task observation, at the resolution given to the agent. No other proprioceptive or geometric
information is used. The goal is also speciﬁed as an observation like the above.
5.1
Self-supervised learning image-conditioned policies
In this subsection we show that we can learn goal-conditioned policies that control the agent to
reach a state which observation matches any previously seen goal observation. No reward, nor
state information, is ever used in the learning process. Nevertheless, we use the L1 distance in
position-space as learning progress metric given that distances in pixel-space are more noisy and less
interpretable. For the point-mass tasks, the position is the (x, y) coordinates of the Center of Mass.
For the Jaco arm, it is the seven-dimensional joint angles.
In Fig. 3 we compare three versions of the algorithm, differing only in the structure of the Q-function.
Q unstructured does not impose any structure on the Q function, Q shared encoding uses the same
vision stack to process the current observation and the goal observation, and Q structured additionally
imposes the structure given in equation 4. To answer our ﬁrst question, we observe that the algorithm
is able to reduce the ﬁnal distance to the given goal using any of the three models. The performance
reported in these plots is computed based on collecting trajectories conditioned on previously seen
observations as goals. Therefore, as the replay buffer grows, the evaluation criteria gets harder at
the start of learning, specially for the higher dimensional environments like the Jaco. To answer our
second question, we see that the structure that we introduced in the previous section substantially
increases convergence speed and ﬁnal performance attained.
(a) Point mass
(b) Wall point mass
(c) Jaco arm reacher
Figure 3: Learning curves for the three environments plotting ﬁnal L1 goal distance in position-space
against collected environment steps.
5.2
Embedding analysis
In this section we study the evolution of three types of distances to the goal along a successful
trajectory for the Wall point-mass task. Similar plots can be found for the other environments. In the
top row of Fig. 4 we observe three frames obtained at t = 0, 2, and 8 seconds, as well as the goal
image og. In the bottom row we monitor, from left to right, our structured Q function, the distance in
pixel space and the distance in position space. From the left ﬁgure we see that the agent reaches the
exact position that generated the goal observation at t = 4, and stays there with small oscillations. We
see in the pixel distance plot that this is an uninformative distance before having reached the vicinity
of the goal (all observations before t = 4 seconds are at the same noisy distance), and even after
reaching the goal it is never reduced to 0 because the observations never match exactly. Therefore
6

Figure 4: Analysis of some distances along a trajectory
it is hard to interpret or use this distance as a reward to learn a goal-reaching policy. Finally, in the
left ﬁgure we see that the distance in embedding space trained through our structured Q follows γh,
where h is the remaining number of time-steps to the goal. The fact that it does not reach exactly 1 is
because it never exactly reaches the same observation, but it understands that only a few time-steps
would be needed (in theory, as in practice it will never match the exact same observation).
6
Failure modes and future work
Both in the Wall point-mass, and the Jaco arm environments we do not obtain a complete convergence
with our algorithm. Here we describe some existing issues, suggest an hypothesis about their source,
and some experiments to check their validity.
First, in all the environments we observe some oscillation around the goal position. For the point-mass
environments this is not critical, but for the Jaco arm we have observed that this is the cause of
most of the ﬁnal distance to goal. We know that in many robotic environments, a knowledge of the
velocities is critical to act optimally to reach speciﬁed states (like estimating if the agent is going in
the right direction). Nevertheless this information cannot be conveyed in a single image. Furthermore,
working from images directly may introduce issues with observation aliasing when several states
produce similar observations. Both problems could be mitigated by adding as input to the Q and π the
observations from some previous time-steps. For example, the model could be f(φ(ot), φ(ot−1), at),
or be an RNN taking in all previous observations. Another solution to the oscillation problem would
be a change in the action space: if the system allows the use of delta-position commands this would
greatly alleviate the issue.
Second, in the wall point-mass we observe some difﬁculties in reaching goals that are very far into
the other leg of the U-shape. We think this might be an exploration problem. Indeed our method
completely overlooks this issue (ie, is orthogonal to it), solely relying on the random initialization,
and on the maximum entropy policy given by MPO. This might not give enough structure to the
space, speciﬁcally to link far away states. To alleviate this issue we could either use some intrinsic
motivation reward to expand the set of observed goals, or add to the replay buffer some demonstrations
performing the hardest connections.
Finally, we would like to point out at some limitations of the exact formulation we propose here, and
possible ﬁxes. An underlying assumption of our work is that the environment is reversible, otherwise
there is no embedding space where a distance (which by deﬁnition is symmetric) can be equal to
the minimum time-steps between states. This is true for a wide range of practical tasks like all
quasi-static manipulation, but might not hold when acting on deformable objects or highly dynamic
7

tasks like throwing objects. In such cases, we should replace the distance in the Q function model by
a non-symmetric comparison between states.
7
Conclusions
We have shown it is possible to learn goal-reaching policies in a completely self-supervised setup,
and only from high dimensional sensory inputs like images. Our approach does not use any auxiliary
learning signal. Instead, it relies solely on computing the minimum number of time-steps needed to
connect different states. This can be written as a Bellman equation that we efﬁciently solve with a
modiﬁed off-policy algorithm paired with goal relabeling. We also introduce a novel structure of the
Q function that connects model-free and model-based RL methods, as well as improving the learning
speed and ﬁnal performance.
