EQUALITY SATURATION FOR TENSOR GRAPH SUPEROPTIMIZATION
Yichen Yang * 1 Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana 2 Yisu Remy Wang 3 Max Willsey 3 4 Sudip Roy 2
Jacques Pienaar 2
ABSTRACT
One of the major optimizations employed in deep learning frameworks is graph rewriting. Production frameworks
rely on heuristics to decide if rewrite rules should be applied and in which order. Prior research has shown that one
can discover more optimal tensor computation graphs if we search for a better sequence of substitutions instead of
relying on heuristics. However, we observe that existing approaches for tensor graph superoptimization both in
production and research frameworks apply substitutions in a sequential manner. Such sequential search methods
are sensitive to the order in which the substitutions are applied and often only explore a small fragment of the
exponential space of equivalent graphs. This paper presents a novel technique for tensor graph superoptimization
that employs equality saturation to apply all possible substitutions at once. We show that our approach can
ﬁnd optimized graphs with up to 16% speedup over state-of-the-art, while spending on average 48x less time
optimizing.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning frameworks and compilers have enabled di-
verse kinds of machine learning models to run efﬁciently
on numerous compute platforms. Neural network models in
these frameworks are typically represented as tensor com-
putation graphs. To improve the runtime performance of
a tensor graph, these frameworks perform various impor-
tant optimizations, among which is graph rewriting. Graph
rewriting takes in a tensor graph g and a set of semantics-
preserving graph rewrites R. By applying rewrites to g,
it seeks to ﬁnd a semantically equivalent g′ with a lower
cost according to some objectives. The current industry-
standard approach adopted by most frameworks is to use a
manually curated set of rewrite rules and rely on a heuristic
strategy to determine the order in which to apply the rewrite
rules. However, this approach often leads to sub-optimal
results both due to the non-comprehensive set of rewrite
rules, as well as the sub-optimal graph substitution heuristic
(Jia et al., 2019a;b).
This paper aims to address the sub-optimality problem
of graph rewrite strategies, while leveraging the existing
rewrite rules generation technique (Jia et al., 2019a). Prior
* Work done during internship at Google
1MIT EECS &
CSAIL
2Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
3University of
Washington, Seattle, USA 4OctoML, Seattle, USA. Correspon-

Proceedings of the 4 th MLSys Conference, San Jose, CA, USA,
2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
Search time (s)
Runtime speedup (%)
TASO
TENSAT
TASO
TENSAT
NasRNN
177.3
0.5
45.4
68.9
BERT
13.6
1.4
8.5
9.2
ResNeXt-50
25.3
0.7
5.5
8.8
NasNet-A
1226
10.6
1.9
7.3
SqueezeNet
16.4
0.3
6.7
24.5
VGG-19
8.9
0.4
8.9
8.9
Inception-v3
68.6
5.1
6.3
10.0
Table 1. Comparison of optimization time and runtime speedup
of the optimized computation graphs over the original graphs,
TASO (Jia et al., 2019a) v.s. TENSAT.
research has shown that searching for sequences of substi-
tutions (Jia et al., 2019a;b; Fang et al., 2020) outperforms
heuristic approaches. However, both heuristic- and search-
based solutions rely on sequential application of substitu-
tions. Since rewrites often depend on or enable one another,
optimization depends heavily on the order in which rewrites
are applied; this classically tricky problem is known in the
compilers community as the “phase-ordering” or “rewrite-
ordering” problem.
This paper presents TENSAT, a tensor graph superoptimiza-
tion framework that employs equality saturation (Tate et al.,
2009; Stepp et al., 2011; Willsey et al., 2020), a recent
technique that mitigates the phase-ordering problem by ap-
plying all possible rewrites at once. Equality saturation
splits program optimization into two phases: exploration
and extraction. The exploration phase uses a data structure
called e-graph to compactly generate and store all rewritings
arXiv:2101.01332v2  [cs.AI]  17 Mar 2021

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
of the input program. The exploration can continue until sat-
uration, where the e-graph stores all possible ways to write
the input program using a given set of rewrites. Finally, the
extraction phase selects from the e-graph the equivalent pro-
gram with the lowest cost according to a given cost model.
The compact representation of the exponentially large search
space using e-graphs enables extraction algorithms to ﬁnd
the globally optimal equivalent program quickly.
Applying equality saturation to tensor graph rewriting re-
quires non-trivial extensions in both the exploration and
extraction phases. We extend the exploration phase to sup-
port complex, non-local rewrite rules that are necessary to
produce highly efﬁcient tensor graphs. Additionally, we in-
troduce a novel method to ﬁlter out invalid subgraphs from
an e-graph, which enables our extraction procedure based
on Integer Linear Programming (ILP) to quickly ﬁnd the
optimal solution.
We evaluated TENSAT on a number of well-known machine
learning models executing on a GPU1. As highlighted in
Table 1, TENSAT can synthesize optimized graphs that are
up to 16% faster in runtime than state-of-the-art (Jia et al.,
2019a) (up to 68.9% faster than the unoptimized graph),
while reducing the optimization time by up to 300x. By hav-
ing the e-graph compactly representing an exponential num-
ber of equivalent graphs, TENSAT is able to cover a larger
search space more efﬁciently than the sequential search
methods. As a result, our search approach is both extremely
effective and fast enough to be used as part of a normal
compilation ﬂow.
2
EQUALITY SATURATION BACKGROUND
Term rewriting is a time-tested approach to program opti-
mizations. TENSAT employs equality saturation, a recent
technique that provides a search-based approach to term
rewriting that can avoid problems encountered by the tradi-
tional approach.
2.1
Term Rewriting
In the term rewriting paradigm, the input to the optimizer is
an initial program expression (term) e and a set of rewrite
rules R. Each rewrite in R takes the form l →r, where l and
r are both patterns – terms from the program grammar with
placeholder variables. Each rewrite rule states the semantic
equivalence between l and r. To apply a rewrite l →r to e,
the optimizer searches for the pattern l in e, yielding a list of
matches, where a match σ maps variables in l to subterms
of e. The matches can then be applied to the right-hand side,
denoted r[σ], to produce the subterms to be replaced in e.
1Code is available at: https://github.com/uwplse/
tensat
Example
Let e = (a × 2)/2 and the rewrite l →r be
x × 2 →x ≪1. To apply l →r to e, the optimizer ﬁrst
searches for l in e, yielding a single match σ = {x 7→a}.
Then, the term r[σ] = a ≪1 replaces the matched subterm
in e, giving the ﬁnal result: (a ≪1)/2.
As the above example suggests, term rewriting for optimiza-
tion suffers from the problem of choice: applying the wrong
rewrite at the wrong time can “hide” optimizations from
other rewrites. In our example, the classical strength re-
duction x × 2 →x ≪1 is beneﬁcial in some contexts,
but in this case will prevent the ultimate goal of rewriting
(a × 2)/2 to a. The problem stems from the fact the term
rewriting is typically destructive; i.e., applying a rewrite
“forgets” the initial term.
2.2
E-graphs
An e-graph is a data structure originally devised for use in
theorem provers (Nelson, 1980; Detlefs et al., 2005) that
compactly encodes an equivalence relation over many terms.
An e-graph is a set of equivalence classes (e-classes), each
of which is a set of equivalent e-nodes. An e-node is an
operator from the language paired with a list of children
e-classes. An e-graph represents the terms that can be seen
by choosing a representative e-node for each e-class. More
formally,
• An e-graph represents a term if any of its e-classes do.
• An e-class represents a term if any of its equivalent
e-nodes do. All terms represented by an e-class are
equivalent.
• An e-node f(c1, ..., cn) represents a term f(t1, ..., tn)
if each e-class ci represents ti. A childless e-node a
represents a constant term a.
Figure 1 shows an e-graph that represents the term (a×2)/2.
The e-class containing the division e-node is called the root
e-class since it represents our initial term. Figure 1 also
demonstrates how e-graphs can support rewriting. Similar
to traditional term rewriting, applying a rewrite l →r to an
e-graphs ﬁrst entails searching for instances of the left-hand
pattern l. This yields matches, but now each match σ maps
pattern variables to e-classes instead of subterms. Then r[σ]
is added to the matched e-class, only adding information
to the e-graph, instead of destructively replacing the term.
Applying the rule x × 2 →x ≪1 in Figure 1 only adds
information (white e-nodes on the right).
2.3
Equality Saturation
A recent technique called equality saturation (Tate et al.,
2009; Stepp et al., 2011; Willsey et al., 2020) mitigates the
rewrite-choice problem by allowing rewrites to be applied
simultaneously. Na¨ıvely generating all possible rewritings

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
/
a
*
2
/
a
*
2
1
<<
Figure 1. Left: An e-graph representing the term (a×2)/2. Dotted
boxes show e-classes, and arrows connect e-nodes to their e-class
children. Right: The e-graph after applying the rewrite x × 2 →
x ≪1. Only a few e-nodes were added (highlighted in white),
and the result represents both the initial and rewritten terms.
of a term would require exponential space and time, so
equality saturation uses e-graphs to efﬁciently represent the
massive space of equivalent terms.
Equality saturation takes in a term to optimize and a set of
rewrites. First, an initial e-graph is created from the input
term. Then, the rewrites are applied until either saturation
is reached, meaning the rewrites added no new information
to the e-graph, or until a speciﬁed timeout. The resulting
e-graph encodes an equivalence relation over a large set of
terms, all of which were built by applying rewrites to the
initial term. Finally, a procedure called extraction selects
the best represented term from the root e-class according
to a user-provided cost function. Extraction procedures
can vary in their speed and the cost functions they support;
both simple greedy algorithms (Panchekha et al., 2015) and
more complex ILP-powered solutions (Tate et al., 2009;
Wang et al., 2020) have been used. The extracted term
is guaranteed (if the rewrites themselves are sound) to be
equivalent to the input term, and is thus returned as the
optimized program.
Equality saturation effectively breaks down optimization
into two phases: the exploration phase grows an e-graph by
applying rewrites, and then the extraction phase selects the
best term from the search space. This decomposition avoids
the rule choice problem in conventional term rewriting;
instead of having to choose which rewrite to apply to end up
at the best term, the algorithm ﬁrst generates all rewritten
terms, leaving the choice of which term to select to the
extraction procedure.
Equality saturation can handle rules that could lead to non-
termination in other rewriting settings, such as x+y →y+x
and a →a × 1. These rules may not be useful on their own,
but applying them may allow other, more useful rewrites
to ﬁre. Equality saturation allows fewer, smaller rules to
compose to prove large equalities, where other rewriting
systems have to use many larger, similar rewrite rules to
avoid problematic, non-terminating rewrites.
Equality saturation can also prove things that directed rewrit-
ing could not, even with an oracle to choose the correct
rewrite at the correct time.
Consider the two rewrites
f(a, b) →c and a →b, and let the input term be
f(b, a). Directed rewriting could only rewrite the term to
f(b, b), but applying a →b in a e-graph would prove that
f(a, b) = f(b, a) = f(a, a) = f(b, b), i.e., those would all
be represented in the same e-class. Once the ﬁrst rewrite
is applied, c would also be added to the e-class. While
contrived, this example demonstrates that rewriting with e-
graphs can give strictly more proving power; in other words,
if equality saturation can rewrite e to e′ with ruleset R, there
may not be a way to do the same with R using traditional
rewriting.
3
TENSAT’S REPRESENTATIONS
This section describes how TENSAT represents tensor com-
putation graphs and rewrite rules.
3.1
Representing Tensor Computation Graphs
We use a representation based on the one in TASO (Jia et al.,
2019a), with modiﬁcations to make it suitable for equality
saturation. Table 2 shows the set of operators we consider.
Each operator oi corresponds to a node ni in the graph; the
node represents the output tensor of the operator. The nodes
corresponding to the inputs of oi are the children nodes of
ni. Each tensor computation graph is a DAG under this
representation.
The formulations in equality saturation becomes simpler if
a graph is single-rooted. Therefore, we combine all the ﬁnal
output nodes of a graph with noops to make the graph single-
rooted. The noop nodes do not have any actual operators
associated with them, and they will not be altered during
the exploration phase, so there is no side effects.
3.2
Representing Rewrite Rules
A rewrite rule for tensor computation graph speciﬁes that
some local subgraph pattern (source pattern) is equivalent to
another subgraph pattern (target pattern). The input tensors
to the source and target patterns are variable nodes, which
can be substituted with any concrete nodes (or e-class in
equality saturation) in the current graph. Each output tensor
in the source pattern corresponds to an output tensor in the
target pattern. The two corresponding output nodes are
called a pair of matched outputs. A rewrite rule states the
equivalence between each pair of matched outputs.
We represent each source (and target) pattern using symbolic
expressions (S-exprs) with variables. Patterns with a single
output is represented with an S-expr rooted on the output.
Rewrite rules with such patterns are called single-pattern
rewrite rules. Patterns with multiple outputs are represented

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
Table 2. Operators supported by TENSAT. There are four types for the nodes in our representation: tensor type (T), string type (S), integer
type (N), and tensor tuple type (TT). The integer type is used to represent parameters of the operators, such as stride, axis, and also
padding and activation modes (by representing different modes using different integers). The more complex, variable-length parameters
(e.g. shape, axes permutation) are represented using the string type according to the speciﬁed formats.
Operator
Description
Inputs
Type signature
ewadd
Element-wise addition
input1, input2
(T, T) →T
ewmul
Element-wise multiplication
input1, input2
(T, T) →T
matmul
Matrix multiplication
activation, input1, input2
(N, T, T) →T
conv a
Grouped convolution
strideh, stridew, pad., act., input, weight
(N, N, N, N, T, T) →T
relu
Relu activation
input
T →T
tanh
Tanh activation
input
T →T
sigmoid
Sigmoid activation
input
T →T
poolmax
Max pooling
input, kernel{h,w}, stride{h,w}, pad., act.
(T, N, N, N, N, N, N) →T
poolavg
Average pooling
input, kernel{h,w}, stride{h,w}, pad., act.
(T, N, N, N, N, N, N) →T
transpose b
Transpose
input, permutation
(T, S) →T
enlarge c
Pad a convolution kernel with zeros
input, ref-input
(T, T) →T
concatn
d
Concatenate
axis, input1, . . . , inputn
(N, T, . . . , T) →T
split e
Split a tensor into two
axis, input
(N, T) →TT
split0
Get the ﬁrst output from split
input
TT →T
split1
Get the second output from split
input
TT →T
merge f
Update weight to merge grouped conv
weight, count
(T, N) →T
reshape g
Reshape tensor
input, shape
(T, S) →T
input
Input tensor
identiﬁer h
S →T
weight
Weight tensor
identiﬁer h
S →T
noop i
Combine the outputs of the graph
input1, input2
(T, T) →T
a Same representation as TASO (Jia et al., 2019a). Normal and depth-wise convolutions are special cases of grouped convolutions.
b Axis permutation for transpose is speciﬁed using a string with format: axis1 axis2 . . . .
c Pad a convolution kernel (input) with zeros to make it the same size as ref-input.
d Since each type of node needs to have a ﬁxed number of inputs, we have a separate concat for each number of inputs.
e Split the tensor in the given axis. The position of the split is at the place of the most recent concat.
f Merge every count number of groups in the grouped convolution. See TASO (Jia et al., 2019a) for more details.
g Specify the target shape using a string with format: dim1 dim2 . . . .

i For combining the outputs of the graph to make the graph single-rooted. No actual operator is associated with noop.
matmul
input_1
input_2
input_3
matmul
matmul
input_1
input_2
input_3
concat_2
1
split
split_0
split_1
Source: (matmul ?input1 ?input2), (matmul ?input1 ?input3)
Target: (split0 (split 1 (matmul ?input1 (concat2 1 ?input2 ?input3)))),
(split1 (split 1 (matmul ?input1 (concat2 1 ?input2 ?input3))))
Figure 2. Example rewrite rule and its representation in S-
expressions. Identiﬁers starting with ”?” denote variable nodes.
For clarity, we omit the activation mode inputs to matmul. Ar-
rows point from parent nodes to children nodes. 1 is the axis for
split and concat operators.
as a list of S-exprs rooted on each output. Rewrite rules with
multiple matched outputs are called multi-pattern rewrite
rules. Figure 2 shows an example rewrite rule and its repre-
sentation.
4
TENSAT’S EXPLORATION PHASE
We initialize the e-graph with the original tensor computa-
tion graph. In each iteration of the exploration phase, we
search for matches of all rewrite rules in the current e-graph,
and add the target patterns and equivalence relations to the
e-graph. This process continues until either the e-graph
saturates or a user-speciﬁed limit (in terms of time, e-graph
size, or number of iterations) is reached. Before applying
a rewrite at a found match, we perform a shape checking
to verify if the tensor shapes in the target pattern are com-
patible. This is necessary since some rewrite rules requires
input tensor shapes to satisfy speciﬁc preconditions, in addi-
tion to the syntactic match. We perform shape checking in
the same way as TASO (Jia et al., 2019a).
Multi-Pattern Rewrite Rules
Multi-pattern rewrite rules
are an important type of rules for tensor graph superopti-
mization (Jia et al., 2019a). However, most equality satura-
tion toolkits only support efﬁcient search methods to ﬁnd
matches for single-pattern rewrite rules (Willsey et al., 2020;
de Moura & Bjørner, 2007). We introduce an algorithm for

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
Algorithm 1 Applying multi-pattern rewrite rules
Input: starting e-graph G, set of multi-pattern rewrite rules Rm.
Output: updated e-graph G.
1: canonicalized S-expr ec = Set({})
2: for rule r ∈Rm do
3:
for i = 0, . . . , |r| −1 do
▷|r|: #S-exprs in source pattern
4:
(e, rename map) = CANONICAL(r.source[i])
5:
ec.insert(e)
6:
r.map[i] = rename map
7:
end for
8: end for
9: for iter = 0, . . . , MAX ITER do
10:
M = SEARCH(G, ec)
▷all matches for all patterns
11:
for rule r ∈Rm do
12:
for i = 0, . . . , |r| −1 do
13:
canonical matches mci = M[r.source[i]]
14:
matches mi = DECANONICAL(mci, r.map[i])
15:
end for
16:
for (σ0, . . . , σ|r|−1) ∈m0 × · · · × m|r|−1 do
17:
if COMPATIBLE((σ0, . . . , σ|r|−1)) then
18:
APPLY(G, r, σ0, . . . , σ|r|−1)
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
end for
22: end for
23: return G
applying multi-pattern rewrites, as shown in Algorithm 1.
Our algorithm leverages the existing efﬁcient search routine
for single-pattern rewrites as a subroutine.
At the beginning of the exploration phase, we collect the
set of unique S-exprs present in the source patterns of the
rewrite rules after canonicalization. Here, if one S-expr
can be transformed into another S-expr by variable renam-
ing only, they will be mapped to the same canonicalized
S-expr. In each iteration of the exploration phase, we use
the single-pattern search subroutine to search for matches
of the canonical S-exprs. Then for each multi-pattern rule,
we take the Cartesian product of the matches found, de-
canonicalize the variable-to-e-class map into the original
variables (using the variable renaming map stored during
canonicalization), and check if the matches are compati-
ble at the shared variables between the S-exprs (i.e., if the
shared variables refer to the same e-class after the mapping).
We apply the matches that are compatible.
In our experience, one feature of multi-pattern rules for
tensor graph is that they can grow the e-graph extremely
rapidly. Let’s consider again the example rewrite rule in
Figure 2. This rule can be matched with any two matmul
nodes with a shared input (input1). By applying this rule
once on some match, a new matmul node will be created
and added to the e-graph (the one on the RHS of Figure 2),
which also has input1 as its input. If the e-graph contains N
matmul nodes that has some input1 at the beginning, then
after iteration 1, O(N 2) new matmul nodes sharing input1
will be created. In iteration 2, each pair in these O(N 2)
nodes will be a match, which will create O(N 4) new nodes.
Such double exponential growth can quickly explode the
e-graph.
Based on this feature, we set a separate limit kmulti on the
number of iterations to apply the multi-pattern rules. After
kmulti iterations, we only apply the single-pattern rules until
saturation or some user-speciﬁed limit.
5
TENSAT’S EXTRACTION PHASE
During extraction, the goal is to pick one e-node from each
e-class in the e-graph to obtain an optimized graph. The
optimized graph should minimize the total cost with respect
to a given cost model. In tensor graph superoptimization,
the cost model reﬂects the inference time taken by the graph.
Cost model
We use the same cost model as TASO (Jia
et al., 2019a). Each operator has a separate and independent
cost, which is the measured runtime of that operator (with
the speciﬁc input sizes and parameters) on hardware. The
total cost of a graph is the sum of costs of each of its nodes.
This cost model is suitable for GPUs, since GPUs typically
run one operator at a time when executing a graph 2. Note
that an operator can be a fused operator, consisting of mul-
tiple primitive operators, such as a fused convolution and
ReLU.
5.1
Extraction Algorithms
Greedy extraction
We ﬁrst experiment with a greedy ex-
traction strategy that has been shown to be effective for
certain domains (Panchekha et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2020;
Willsey et al., 2020). For each e-class, the greedy strategy
computes the total cost of the subtrees rooted on each of the
e-nodes, and picks the e-node with the smallest subtree cost.
Greedy extraction is not guaranteed to extract the graph
with the minimum cost, even under our independent cost
model. For example, if two children of an e-node share a
subgraph, greedy extraction would ignore the sharing and
overestimate the cost.
ILP extraction
The second approach we experiment with
is formulating the extraction problem as an Integer Linear
Program (ILP).
Let i = 0, ..., N −1 be the set of e-nodes in the e-graph. Let
m = 0, ..., M −1 be the set of e-classes in the e-graph. Let
em denote the set of e-nodes within e-class m: {i|i ∈em}.
2There could be more complex hardware that may execute
multiple kernels in parallel, which means an accurate cost model
might involve many non-local dependencies. For such cases, one
may need a different extraction approach, for example using a
learned approach to perform extractions. We leave this for future
work.

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
Let hi denote the set of children e-classes for e-node i. Let
g(i) denote the e-class of e-node i, i.e. i ∈eg(i). Let m = 0
be the root e-class. Each e-node is associated with a cost ci.
We then formulate our problem as follows:
Minimize: f(x) =
X
i
cixi
Subject to:
xi ∈{0, 1},
(1)
X
i∈e0
xi = 1,
(2)
∀i, ∀m ∈hi, xi ≤
X
j∈em
xj,
(3)
∀i, ∀m ∈hi, tg(i) −tm −ϵ + A(1 −xi) ≥0,
(4)
∀m, 0 ≤tm ≤1,
(5)
Here we introduce a binary integer variable xi for each
e-node i; node i is selected if xi = 1, and not selected
otherwise. Constraint (2) ensures that one node is picked
in the root e-class. Constraint (3) ensures that if a node
is picked, then at least one node in each of its children e-
classes needs to be picked. We rely on the fact that at the
optimal solution, each e-class can have at most one picked
node (otherwise we can remove more picked nodes in this
e-class to reduce the objective while still satisfying all the
constraints). Constraints (1)–(3) and the objective encode
the main extraction logic.
A more subtle requirement on the extraction phase is that the
extracted graph cannot contain cycles. While the e-graph
can (and likely will) contain cycles, the extracted graph is
meant to map directly to an executable tensor DAG. The
extraction procedure must therefore take care to respect the
acyclic invariant of DAGs.
Figure 3 shows an example to illustrate how valid rewrites
can produce cycles in the e-graph. To ensure the extracted
graph does not contain cycles, we introduce a real variable
tm for each e-class m in the ILP. Constraint (4) ensures that
the order deﬁned by tm’s is a valid topological order for
the extracted graph. Here ϵ < 1/M is a small constant for
effectively encoding strict inequalities in ILP. A is a large
enough constant such that A > 1 + ϵ. Constraint (5) is to
limit the range for the topological order variables tm’s.
We also experiment with using integer variables for tm’s.
In this case, tm’s are constrained to take integer values
between 0 to M −1. Constraint (4) changes accordingly to:
∀i, ∀m ∈hi, tg(i) −tm + A(1 −xi) ≥1, where A ≥M.
Unlike greedy extraction, the optimal solution to the ILP is
guaranteed to give a valid graph (no cycles) with the lowest
cost.
matmul
X
Y
matmul
matmul
X
Y
matmul
split
split_0
split_1
matmul
concat_2
1
Figure 3. Example on how a valid rewrite can introduce cycles into
the e-graph. RHS is the resulting e-graph after applying the rewrite
rule from Figure 2 to the LHS. Dotted lines circles the e-classes.
We omit the e-classes with a single node for clarity. If the node
split1 is picked in the right e-class, then the resulting graph will
have a cycle (indicated by the red edges).
5.2
Cycle Filtering
Similar to previous work that uses ILP extraction (Tate et al.,
2009; Wang et al., 2020), we ﬁnd that as the size of the e-
graph grows bigger, the ILP solver takes a long time and
becomes the main bottleneck. This is mainly due to the cycle
constraint (4): ILP solver struggles to ﬁnd a feasible solution
with these constraints. Therefore, we explore an alternative
approach by ﬁltering cycles during the exploration phase to
make sure that the e-graph does not contain any cycles at
the end of the exploration phase. This way, we can get rid
of the cycle constraints in the ILP.
Vanilla cycle ﬁltering
The ﬁrst method is to check if ap-
plying a substitution introduces cycles to the e-graph, and
discard such a substitution. This check is run every time be-
fore applying a substitution. Each check requires a pass over
the entire e-graph. For one iteration during the exploration
phase, this vanilla cycle ﬁltering has complexity O(nmN),
where N is the current size of the e-graph and nm is the
total number of matches of the rewrite rules on the e-graph.
Efﬁcient cycle ﬁltering
As the number of matches nm is
typically large and scales with N, vanilla cycle ﬁltering can
be slow. We therefore design a novel and more efﬁcient cy-
cle ﬁltering algorithm, consisting of a pre-ﬁltering step and
a post-processing step. Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode
for the exploration phase with efﬁcient cycle ﬁltering.
At the start of each iteration, we do one pass over the e-graph
to record the set of descendent e-classes for each e-node
(stored in a descendants map). During the iteration, for each
match of the rewrite rules, we use the pre-stored descendants
map to check if applying a rule introduces cycles to the e-
graph; if so, we skip this match. Line 3–9 implements the
pre-ﬁltering step. Notice that this check is sound but not
complete: a match that passes this check can still introduce
cycles to the e-graph. This is because new descendants
relations introduced by the previous rewrite in this iteration
are not included in the pre-stored descendants map.

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
Algorithm 2 Exploration phase with efﬁcient cycle ﬁltering
Input: starting e-graph G, set of rewrite rules R.
Output: updated e-graph G, ﬁlter list l
1: l = {}
2: for iter = 0, . . . , MAX ITER do
3:
descendants map d = GETDESCENDANTS(G, l)
4:
matches = SEARCH(G, R, l)
5:
for match ∈matches do
6:
if not WILLCREATECYCLE(match, d) then
7:
APPLY(G, match)
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
while true do
11:
cycles = DFSGETCYCLES(G, l)
12:
if len(cycles) == 0 then
13:
break
14:
end if
15:
for cycle ∈cycles do
16:
RESOLVECYCLE(G, l, cycle)
17:
end for
18:
end while
19: end for
20: return G, l
To resolve the cycles we missed in the pre-ﬁltering step,
we add a post-processing step at the end of each iteration
(line 10-18). We make a pass over the e-graph in DFS order
and collect a set of cycles in the e-graph. For each cycle,
we choose the last node that is added to the e-graph, and
add that node to a ﬁlter list. The nodes in the ﬁlter list are
considered as removed from the e-graph. We make sure
those nodes are not picked during extraction by explicitly
adding constraints ∀i ∈l, xi = 0 to the ILP.
By constructing a descendants map once before each itera-
tion, each of the checking in the pre-ﬁltering step takes con-
stant time. The worst case complexity of the post-processing
step is O(ncN), where nc is the number of cycles in the
e-graph. Since nc is typically much smaller than nm, this
algorithm is much faster than the vanilla cycle ﬁltering. In
practice, each DFS pass over the e-graph can ﬁnd many
cycles, making O(ncN) a very conservative upper bound.
6
EVALUATION
We implement TENSAT in Rust using egg (Willsey et al.,
2020), an open source equality saturation library. For the
extraction phase, we use SCIP (Gamrath et al., 2020) as
the ILP solver, wrapped by Google OR-tools (Perron &
Furnon).
We utilize egg’s e-class analysis feature for the shape check-
ing discussed in Section 4. An e-class analysis associates
data with each e-class to support rewrites that are not purely
syntactic. We store all the relevant information of the ten-
sors (shape, layout, split locations) in the analysis data and
use these information for shape checking.
6.1
Experimental Setup
We compare TENSAT with TASO (Jia et al., 2019a) to evalu-
ate our equality saturation based search. We use the same set
of rewrite rules as TASO for our experiments 3. We evaluate
on the inference graphs of 7 models: BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), ResNeXt-50 (Xie et al., 2017), NasNet-A (Zoph
et al., 2018), NasRNN (Zoph & Le, 2017), Inception-
v3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), VGG-19 (Liu & Deng, 2015),
and SqueezeNet (Iandola et al., 2017). This benchmark
set covers a wide range of commonly used state-of-the-art
models, including both models for computer vision tasks
and models for NLP tasks, both human-designed models
and automatically-discovered models by neural architecture
search. We perform all experiments on a Google Cloud
instance with one NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU, a 16-core CPU,
and 60 GB of memory. We also experiment with ResNet-50
(He et al., 2016), but ﬁnd that on T4 GPU, the rewrite rules
from TASO cannot provide any speedup to the graph.
For TENSAT, our full approach uses the efﬁcient cycle ﬁl-
tering algorithm (Section 5.2) during the exploration phase
and the ILP method without the cycle constraints (Section
5.1) for extraction. We set a limit on the number of nodes in
the e-graph Nmax = 50000 and the number of iterations for
exploration kmax = 15. We terminate the exploration phase
when any of the limit is reached, or the e-graph is saturated.
We set a separate limit kmulti on the number of iterations to
apply the multi-pattern rules. We use a default of kmulti = 1
for the main results in Section 6.2 and 6.3, and study the
effect of varying kmulti in Section 6.4. We set a timeout of 1
hour for the ILP solver.
For TASO’s backtracking search, we use their default set-
tings from their artifact evaluation code on the number of
iterations4 n = 100 and the hyperparameter α = 1.0 for
each benchmark. We also test α = 1.05 as mentioned in
their paper, and ﬁnd that the difference is tiny (difference
in speedup percentage is less than 0.1% on average over
the benchmarks). Increasing to n = 1000 leads to less
than 1% speedup gain with the cost of over 11x longer in
optimization time on average.
6.2
Program Speedup
We compare the speedup percentage of the optimized graph
with respect to the original graph between TENSAT and
TASO. We use TASO’s cuDNN backend to measure the
runtime of the full computation graphs. Figure 4 shows the
results. We can see that TENSAT discovers better optimized
3TENSAT supports ﬂexible choices of rewrite rules. All rewrite
rules from TASO are supported by TENSAT. egg (the equality
saturation library we use) also supports conditional rewrite rules
(applying a rule only when a condition is met).
4The number of iterations of the outer loop, see Algorithm 2 in
(Jia et al., 2019a) for more details.

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
NasRNN
BERT
ResNeXt
NasNet-A
Squeeze.
VGG
Incept.
Incept. k=2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Speedup percentage
TASO
Tensat
Figure 4. Speedup percentage of the optimized
graph with respect to the original graph: TASO v.s.
TENSAT. Each setting (optimizer × benchmark)
is run for ﬁve times, and we plot the mean and
standard error for the measurements.
NasRNN
BERT
ResNeXt
NasNet-A
Squeeze.
VGG
Incept.
Incept. k=2
100
101
102
103
Optimizer time (seconds)
379.4x
9.5x
34.6x
115.7x
59.9x
20.0x 127.4x
13.4x
TASO total
TASO best
Tensat
Figure 5. Optimization time (log scale): TASO
v.s. TENSAT. “TASO total” is the total time of
TASO search. “TASO best” indicates when TASO
found its best result; achieving this time would
require an oracle telling it when to stop.
0
20
40
60
Optimizer time (seconds)
0
2
4
6
8
10
TASO
Tensat
Speedup percentage
Figure 6. Speedup over opti-
mization time for TASO and
TENSAT, on Inception-v3. We
use a timeout of 60 seconds.
graphs compared with TASO’s backtracking search in most
benchmarks, with the largest speedup improvements on
NasRNN and SqueezeNet. This improvement comes from
the fact that equality saturation covers a much larger space of
equivalent graphs than sequential backtracking search. By
using e-graph as a compact representation of an exponential
number of equivalent graphs, TENSAT is able to cover orders
of magnitude more equivalent graphs than TASO.
Note that for Inception-v3, TENSAT with kmulti = 1 gives
a smaller speedup than TASO, but increasing kmulti to 2
achieves a better speedup than TASO while still being 13.4×
faster than TASO’s search (see Figure 5). In general, an
optimizer can achieve a better speedup given longer op-
timization time. Therefore, to compare the performance
between TASO and TENSAT on Inception-v3 more clearly,
we plot the tradeoff curves of how speedup varies with opti-
mization time in Figure 6. We can see that TENSAT achieves
a better tradeoff curve.
We inspect the optimized graphs from TENSAT and recorded
some rewrite patterns that is used in them. We present
several examples of useful patterns in the Appendix.
6.3
Optimization Time
Another important metric is the time taken by the optimizer
itself. For TENSAT, this is the sum of time of the exploration
phase and the extraction phase. For TASO, we record two
times: the ﬁrst is the total time of the backtracking search
with the default number of iterations (Ttotal); the second is
the time taken to ﬁrst reach the best graph found during its
search (Tbest). Tbest is the best possible time for TASO’s se-
quential search. In practice, it is difﬁcult (if not impossible)
to achieve Tbest since the sequential search algorithm would
Time (s)
Exploration
Extraction
NasRNN
0.10
0.37
BERT
0.83
0.60
ResNeXt-50
0.68
0.05
NasNet-A
8.81
1.79
SqueezeNet
0.16
0.12
VGG-19
0.42
0.02
Inception-v3
4.38
0.75
Table 3. Optimization time breakdown for TENSAT.
have no way to know that it can stop at that point.
Figure 5 shows the time taken by the optimizers across
benchmarks. We can see that TENSAT runs 9.5x to 379x
faster than TASO’s Ttotal, and 1.8x to 260x times faster than
Tbest. This shows that TENSAT can not only cover a much
larger search space, but also achieve this in drastically less
time. Furthermore, TENSAT’s optimization time is small
enough that we believe our approach can be integrated into
a default compilation ﬂow instead of running the search as
an additional ofﬂine autotuning process. Table 3 shows the
optimization time breakdown for TENSAT.
6.4
Varying Iterations of Multi-Pattern Rewrites
As we discuss in Section 4, multi-pattern rewrite rules can
grow the e-graph in a extremely rapid manner. Here we
study the effect of varying the number of iterations for multi-
pattern rewrites kmulti. Figure 7 shows the results. We can
see the explosion of the number of nodes in the e-graph as
kmulti increases (due to the double exponential growth). For
NasRNN, Inception-v3, BERT, NasNet-A, and ResNeXt-50,
by increasing kmulti, TENSAT discovers better graphs with
larger speedups. But for SqueezeNet, speedup decreases

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
#iter of multi pattern rewrites
0
10
20
30
Speedup percentage
0
1
2
3
#iter of multi pattern rewrites
10
1
100
101
102
103
Optimizer time (seconds)
0
1
2
3
#iter of multi pattern rewrites
102
103
104
105
106
107
#enodes
NasRNN
BERT
ResNeXt
NasNet-A
Squeeze.
VGG
Incept.
Figure 7. Effect of varying the number of iterations of multi-pattern rewrites kmulti. For BERT, NasNet-A, NasRNN, Inception-v3, the ILP
solver times out at one hour for kmulti = 3. Left: speedup of the optimized graphs (the y-axis is split for clarity). Middle: time taken by
TENSAT. Right: ﬁnal e-graph size (number of e-nodes). The middle and right ﬁgures are in log scale.
with kmulti. This is due to the discrepancy between the
cost model and the real graph runtime. As kmulti increases
for SqueezeNet, the cost model suggests that certain new
rewrites can reduce the cost, while they in fact increase
full graph runtime. Despite this special case where the
discrepancy has an effect, TENSAT on SqueezeNet with
kmulti = 3 still achieves a better speedup than TASO. By
increasing kmulti, TENSAT can explore a larger search space
and ﬁnd better optimized graphs for most benchmarks, at
the cost of longer time taken by the optimizer.
For larger and more complex networks, the current tech-
nique can only explore up to a certain number of iterations of
multi-pattern rewrites, beyond which the e-graph becomes
too big for the extraction phase. A potential approach to
further improve the scalability of TENSAT is to selectively
apply rules during exploration that are more likely to pro-
vide speedup. One potential direction for future work is to
explore using ML techniques to learn the decisions on when
and where to apply certain rules.
6.5
Ablation Study
In this section, we study the effect of the important design
choices in our approach.
Greedy v.s. ILP extraction
Table 4 shows the compar-
ison between greedy extraction and ILP extraction. Al-
though greedy extraction works ﬁne on some benchmarks
(e.g. NasRNN), it fails to extract an optimized graph on
others (e.g. BERT and NasNet-A). This is due to the nature
of greedy extraction: it makes the choices on which node to
pick separately and greedily, without considering the inter-
dependencies between the choices. Consider the rewrite in
Figure 2 (merging two matmuls by concat and split)
as an illustrative example. After applying this rewrite to
the e-graph, there will be two e-classes that have multiple
e-nodes: one e-class per each output. This rewrite can re-
duce the cost only if both e-classes choose the split node,
since the RHS subgraph can be reused by the two outputs.
However, greedy extraction will never pick the split nodes,
Graph Runtime (ms)
Original
Greedy
ILP
BERT
1.88
1.88
1.73
NasRNN
1.85
1.15
1.10
NasNet-A
17.8
22.5
16.6
Table 4. Comparison between greedy extraction and ILP extrac-
tion, on BERT, NasRNN, and NasNet-A. This table shows the
runtime of the original graphs and the optimized graphs by greedy
extraction and ILP extraction. The exploration phase is run with
kmulti = 1.
since it does not know the RHS subgraph is shared between
the two split nodes.
ILP with or without cycle constraints
Here we study
the effect of whether or not to include the cycle constraints
in ILP. Table 5 presents the effect on extraction time as
kmulti (thus e-graph size) varies. With the cycle constraints,
ILP solver time quickly increases with the e-graph size, and
reaches timeout when kmulti = 2. In our experiments, the
ILP solver has not yet found a feasible solution at time-
out. Removing the cycle constraints leads to approximately
10x–1000x speedup on ILP solving time on larger e-graphs.
These results show that the main difﬁculty for the ILP solver
is to satisfy the cycle constraints. Thus, removing the cycle
constraints makes it possible for our approach to scale to
larger e-graphs.
Efﬁcient cycle ﬁltering
To remove the cycle constraints
from ILP, we need to perform cycle ﬁltering during the
exploration phase. Here we compare the two cycle ﬁltering
techniques introduced in Section 5.2. Table 6 shows the
effect on the exploration phase time, as kmulti varies. We
can see that the efﬁcient cycle ﬁltering algorithm achieves
up to 2000x speedup compared with the vanilla algorithm,
making it possible to explore a larger e-graph.

Equality Saturation for Tensor Graph Superoptimization
Extraction
kmulti
With cycle
Without
time (s)
real
int
cycle
BERT
1
0.96
0.98
0.16
2
>3600
>3600
510.3
NasRNN
1
1116
1137
0.32
2
>3600
>3600
356.7
NasNet-A
1
424
438
1.81
2
>3600
>3600
75.1
Table 5. Effect of whether or not to include cycle constraints in ILP
on extraction time (in seconds), on BERT, NasRNN, and NasNet-
A. For the cycle constraints, we compare both using real variables
and using integer variables for the topological order variables tm.
Exploration time (s)
kmulti
Vanilla
Efﬁcient
BERT
1
0.18
0.17
2
32.9
0.89
NasRNN
1
1.30
0.08
2
2932
1.47
NasNet-A
1
3.76
1.27
2
>3600
8.62
Table 6. Comparison between vanilla cycle ﬁltering and efﬁcient
cycle ﬁltering, on the exploration phase time (in seconds) for BERT,
NasRNN, and NasNet-A.
7
RELATED WORK
Graph Rewrite Optimizations
Our work improves the
search mechanism for ﬁnding the most optimal tensor graph
substitutions upon existing work (Jia et al., 2019a;b; Fang
et al., 2020). TASO (Jia et al., 2019b;a) uses a backtrack-
ing search algorithm with a hard threshold for allowing
substitutions that increase runtime. Compared to TASO, a
subsequent work (Fang et al., 2020) presents a more efﬁcient
sampling-based search algorithm that prunes redundant sub-
stitutions. While the sampling-based approach is faster than
TASO, it does not lead to discovering more optimized pro-
grams, unlike our approach.
An optimization via graph substitutions is also critical to
other domains outside deep learning. NeuRewriter (Chen
& Tian, 2019) exploits reinforcement learning to iteratively
select which rewrite rule to apply on which region of the
graph for multiple problem domains, including algebraic ex-
pression simpliﬁcation, job scheduling, and vehicle routing.
This technique is complement to our approach. In particular,
we can enhance our approach by applying machine learn-
ing to select more promising multi-pattern rules to apply in
each iteration when we cannot apply multi-pattern rules to
saturation.
Unlike our approach, these prior techniques suffer from the
reliance on iteratively applying substitutions in sequences.
Superoptimization
Superoptimization is a program opti-
mization technique that searches for a correct and optimal
program with respect to a cost model. Most superoptimizers
optimize relatively short sequences of low-level instructions
(Massalin, 1987; Joshi et al., 2002; Bansal & Aiken, 2006;
Schkufza et al., 2013; 2014; Phothilimthana et al., 2016a;b;
Sasnauskas et al., 2017). While most of them do not rely on
rewrite rules, Denali (Joshi et al., 2002) takes the approach
of using rewrite rules for scalability but sacriﬁcing some
optimality guarantee. Similar to ours, Denali (Joshi et al.,
2002) employs e-graphs and extracts optimal programs us-
ing a constrain solver. Unlike our work, none of these prior
research focuses on tensor graph superoptimization.
Equality Saturation Applications
The core of TEN-
SAT’s approach is the application of equality saturation,
which has been successfully applied in other domains as
well. The ﬁrst works (Tate et al., 2009; Stepp et al., 2011)
focused on traditional compiler optimizations, but more re-
cent applications include CAD simpliﬁcation, numerical
accuracy, and code search (Nandi et al., 2020; Panchekha
et al., 2015; Premtoon et al., 2020).
Wang et al. (2020) also use equality saturation to optimize
machine learning programs. However, they optimize lin-
ear algebra kernels consisting of few simple operations like
matrix multiplication and summation, whereas TENSAT op-
timizes at the computation graph level. We contribute the
multi-pattern extension to better explore the search space
of deep learning models, as well as the cycle-ﬁltering algo-
rithm to make ILP extraction efﬁcient.
8
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a new approach to tensor graph opti-
mization using equality saturation. We explained necessary
extensions to equality saturation to make it work for our
problem domain: supporting multi-pattern rewrite rules, and
introducing a new extraction algorithm with an efﬁcient cy-
cle ﬁltering for scalability. We show that our approach can
ﬁnd optimized graphs with up to 16% speedup over state-of-
the-art, while spending on average 48x less time optimizing.
Our approach is able to ﬁnd graphs that are globally optimal,
and is fast enough that it can be integrated into the normal
compilation ﬂow for inference graphs.
