1
FICE: Text–Conditioned Fashion Image Editing
With Guided GAN Inversion
Martin Pernuˇs, Student Member, IEEE1, Clinton Fookes, Senior Member, IEEE2, Vitomir ˇStruc, Senior
Member, IEEE1, and Simon Dobriˇsek, Member, IEEE1
1University of Ljubljana
2Queensland University of Technology
https://github.com/MartinPernus/FICE
Abstract—Fashion–image editing represents a challenging com-
puter vision task, where the goal is to incorporate selected apparel
into a given input image. Most existing techniques deal with this
task by ﬁrst selecting an example image of the desired apparel
and then transferring the clothing onto the target person. Such
techniques are commonly referred to as Virtual Try-On methods.
Conversely, in this paper, we consider editing fashion images
with text descriptions. Such an approach has several advantages
over example–based virtual try-on techniques, e.g.: (i) it does not
require an image of the target fashion item, and (ii) it allows the
expression of a wide variety of visual concepts through the use of
natural language. Existing image–editing methods that work with
language–based inputs are heavily constrained by their require-
ment for training sets with rich attribute annotations or they are
only able to handle simple text descriptions. To address these
constraints, we propose a novel text–conditioned editing model,
called FICE (Fashion Image CLIP Editing), capable of handling
a wide variety of semantically diverse text descriptions to guide
the editing procedure. Speciﬁcally with FICE, we augment the
common GAN inversion process by including semantic, pose-
related, and image-level constraints when generating the desired
images. We leverage the capabilities of the pretrained CLIP
model to enforce the targeted semantics, due to its impressive
image–text association capabilities. We furthermore propose a
latent–code regularization technique that provides the means to
better control the ﬁdelity of the synthesized images and ensures
that images are generated from latent codes coming from a
well-deﬁned part of the latent space. We validate FICE through
comprehensive experiments on a combination of VITON images
and Fashion-Gen text descriptions and in comparison with sev-
eral state-of-the-art text–conditioned image editing approaches.
Experimental results demonstrate FICE generates highly realistic
fashion images and leads to stronger editing performance than
existing competing approaches.
I. INTRODUCTION
F
ASHION–image editing refers to the task of changing the
appearance of a person in a given image by incorporating
a desired fashion item (e.g., different apparel) in a realistic
and visually convincing manner. Successful applications of
such algorithms enable users to visualize and virtually try-
on selected clothing from the comfort of their homes. This
functionality has the potential to enable easier online apparel
sales, reduce costs for retailers, and reduce the environmental
footprint of the fashion industry by minimizing returns [1]. As
a result, signiﬁcant research efforts have been directed towards
fashion–image manipulation (or Virtual Try-On – VTON)
techniques that deliver convincing photorealistic editing results
over the years [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
Fig. 1: Fashion–image editing with language–based inputs.
In this paper, we propose FICE (Fashion Image CLIP Editing),
a text–conditioned image editing model, capable of handling
a wide variety of text inputs with the goal of manipulating
fashion images toward the desired target appearance.
Recent Virtual Try-On solutions have achieved great success
in synthesizing photorealistic fashion images by building on
advances made in convolutional neural networks and adver-
sarial training objectives [11]. Most existing techniques in this
area condition their editing models on example images of the
target clothing, which is typically warped and stitched onto the
given input image. Considerably less attention has been given
to text–conditioned fashion–image editing, despite the fact that
such methods represent an attractive alternative to example–
based editing techniques and allow the manipulation of images
through more natural high-level language–based descriptions
of the desired apparel. While, to the best of our knowledge,
only a modest amount of work has been conducted on this
topic so far, existing text–conditioned methods are commonly
limited to very basic descriptions, mostly due to the small size
of suitable training datasets that are publicly available [12].
To mitigate these problems, some text–conditioned fashion
works proposed to parse the input text into closed sets of
arXiv:2301.02110v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2023

2
categories [13] for easier text processing, simplifying the task
to a more basic, categorical problem.
Meanwhile, various image–text association models have
emerged. These models are trained on hundreds of millions
of image–text pairs [14] and represent powerful tools for
associating visual data and language descriptions [15], [16],
[17], [18]. As a result, they have been successfully deployed
for text–conditioned image editing in combination with recent
state-of-the-art generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19].
Such solutions typically ﬁrst embed the given input image into
the latent space of a pretrained GAN model through a process
referred to as GAN inversion [20], and then perform text–
conditioned manipulations in the latent space that eventually
lead to semantically meaningful changes in the corresponding
output images [19], [21], [22], [23]. While general–purpose
text–conditioned GAN–based editing techniques have shown
success in various settings, a straightforward application to
the fashion domain is challenging and, more importantly,
does not guarantee optimal editing results. This is due to
the inherent reconstruction–editability trade–off [24] of such
techniques, which typically result in a signiﬁcant loss of
identity information as well as pose changes when inverting
an image into a GAN latent code. Furthermore, despite the
recent advances in disentangled editing in the GAN latent
space [19], [25], such methods are still problematic to use
in the context of text–conditioned editing due to the high
sensitivity to hyperparameter choices [26].
In this paper, we address these open challenges through
the introduction of FICE (Fashion Image CLIP Editing) –
a novel text–conditioned image–editing approach tailored to-
wards fashion images. FICE builds on the standard GAN in-
version framework, but extends the GAN inversion process to
allow for the integration of novel capabilities that enable text–
conditioned fashion image editing. In contrast to works that
edit fashion images with the help of categorical attributes [12],
FICE enables fashion image editing through text as the only
(semantics–related) conditioning signal. To facilitate editing
of fashion images with FICE, we propose an iterative GAN
inversion procedure that utilizes several constraints, when op-
timizing for the latent code with the desired target semantics,
i.e.: (i) a pose–preservation constraint that ensures that the
pose of the subject in the image is not altered during the
editing process, (ii) a composition constraint that uses a
segmentation model (i.e., a body parser) to identify regions
(head and garment areas) in the input image to preserve and/or
alter, and (iii) a semantic–content constraint that enforces
the semantics expressed in the provided text descriptions. We
use various differentiable deep learning models to implement
the constraints and leverage the CLIP model, a recent state-
of-the-art image–text association approach, to enforce the
desired semantics. Furthermore, we propose a latent–code
regularization objective to ensure more realistic editing results.
Finally, we also utilize an image–stitching step to combine
relevant image regions from the original and edited images in
the ﬁnal overall result.
To demonstrate the capabilities of FICE, we perform
rigorous experiments on images from the VITON image
dataset [2], combined with text descriptions from the Fashion-
Gen dataset [27]. We compare FICE to several general text–
conditioned GAN–based editing methods and show that the
proposed approach leads to superior editing results for fashion
images. A few of these results can be seen in Fig. 1 for three
different text descriptions. Our research leads to the following
main contributions that are presented in this paper:
• We propose FICE, a GAN–inversion based approach for
text–conditioned fashion image editing, which can be
used with a wide variety of textual inputs and leads to
realistic and visually convincing editing results.
• We introduce a regularization technique for the GAN
inversion procedure to minimize the generation of images
outside the GAN learned distribution.
• Through quantitative and qualitative evaluations, we show
the beneﬁts of text–based editing of fashion images and
demonstrate that FICE convincingly outperforms compet-
ing (state-of-the-art) text–based editing techniques.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review relevant prior work and discuss
existing research on (i) generative adversarial networks, (ii)
text–conditioned image generation and editing, (iii) GAN
inversion techniques, and (iv) the use of computer vision in
fashion. The goal of the section is to provide the necessary
background for our work. A more comprehensive coverage
of these topics can be found in some of the recent surveys,
e.g., [20], [28], [29].
A. Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] have in
recent years become the de-facto method for unconditional
image synthesis, allowing convincing high resolution image
synthesis and reasonable training times with consumer-grade
hardware. DCGAN [30] introduced convolutional GANs and
provided architectural pointers to achieve successful GAN
convergence. ProGAN [31] was the ﬁrst GAN model that
achieved megapixel-sized images thanks to a progressive lear-
ning scheme. StyleGAN [32] introduced a non-linear mapping
of the latent space and an alternative generator design, inspired
by the style transfer literature. StyleGAN2 [33] further ad-
justed the generator architecture to remove the frequent droplet
artefacts and regularized the training with path-length regular-
ization. StyleGAN2-ADA [34] proposed several augmentation
techniques to enable learning a high-quality GAN with limited
training data. StyleGAN3 [35] presented a continuous inter-
pretation of the generator signals to prevent the dependence
of the generated image on the absolute pixel coordinates, in
turn, enabling more natural latent code interpolations.
Next to the architectural advances, considerable progress
has also been made in the ﬁeld of GAN regularization and
training. Various techniques of stabilizing the GAN conver-
gence by modifying the training objective were proposed
in [36], [37], [38]. Other successful methods include weight
normalization [39] and various regularization approaches [40].

3
B. Text–Conditioned Image Generation and Editing
Text–conditioned image generation models are focused on
generating realistic images that match the semantics of the
provided text descriptions. Conversely, corresponding editing
techniques try to realistically manipulate images in a way
that preserves the image characteristics irrelevant to the text
description. Thus, text–conditioned image editing aims to
alter only the semantic content that is expressed in the text
description, while preserving all other parts of the data.
Image Generation. The seminal work of Reed et al. [41]
proposed a text–conditioned GAN model by feeding the text
information to both, the generator and discriminator of the
GAN design. StackGAN [42] and StackGAN++ [43] proposed
stacked generators, where the resolution of the generated
images increased progressively with each generator in the
stack. AttnGAN [44] proposed an attention mechanism to
attend to relevant words, on which to condition the image–
generation process. MirrorGAN [45] proposed a cyclic GAN
architecture that regularized the generated image by enforcing
correct (re)descriptions.
While these early models discussed above already provided
for competitive performance, more recent text–conditioned
generative models are several orders of magnitude larger in
size and are trained on several orders of magnitude larger
datasets. DALL-E [16], for example, trained a 12-billion pa-
rameter autoregressive transformer on 250 millions of image–
text pairs, and considerably outperformed previous models in
the considered (zero–shot) evaluation experiments. The model
was further improved in DALL-E 2 [17] through the use of
diffusion techniques. Imagen [46] proposed to increase the size
of the text encoder to achieve better results in terms of image
ﬁdelity and image–text alignment.
Image Editing. An early approach to text–conditioned
image editing methods was described by Dong et al. in [47].
Here, the authors proposed a conditional encoder-decoder
GAN model and reported impressive results on two diverse
datasets. Nam et al. [48] proposed so-called word-subset
local discriminators that enabled ﬁne-grained image editing.
ManiGAN [49] proposed a different strategy for merging
image and text representations while adding a detail correction
module for enhanced image quality.
Another notable group of methods performs image editing
by ﬁrst converting a given image into the latent code of
some pre-trained GAN, in a process known as GAN inversion,
then performing various latent code manipulations to achieve
the desired edits. InterFaceGAN [21], for example, identiﬁed
directions in the latent space of StyleGAN2 that corresponded
to speciﬁc semantic changes (given by binary attribute labels)
in the corresponding output image. Image2StyleGAN [50],
[51] performed several face image edits using GAN inversion
and StyleCLIP [19] proposed different methods for text-guided
image editing, where the general idea is based on combining
the generative capabilities of StyleGAN with the image–text
matching capabilities of the CLIP model [14]. TediGAN [52]
introduced a control mechanism based on style mixing in
StyleGAN to achieve the desired semantics in face images
driven by text descriptions.
C. GAN Inversion
As can be seen from the literature review presented above, a
considerable amount of existing editing techniques deals with
the process of GAN inversion to retrieve the image’s latent
code for editing. How to conduct the GAN inversion is a
key consideration with these techniques that has a signiﬁcant
impact on the ﬁnal editing capabilities. Richardson et al. [53],
for example, proposed an encoder, called pSp, for projecting
images into the StyleGAN latent space, and demonstrated its
feasibility through several image-to-image translation tasks.
E4e [24] adjusted the pSp model so that the latent codes
follow a similar distribution as the original StyleGAN latent
codes and performed image edits with several latent code
manipulation techniques. ReStyle [54] presented an iterative
procedure to obtain the latent code, while HyperStyle [55]
adjusted the StyleGAN generator weights on a per-sample
basis to achieve better image reconstructions. Additional GAN
inversion methods can be found in the recent survey [20].
Similarly to the techniques discussed above, the proposed
FICE model also relies on GAN inversion to perform fashion
image editing. However, different from alternative techniques,
our model is geared towards the characteristics of fashion im-
ages and exploits an iterative inversion process that explicitly
considers pose preservation and image stitching constraints in
addition to the targeted semantics to ensure both the desired
garment appearance as well as identity preservation.
D. Computer Vision in Fashion
A considerable cross-section of fashion-related computer-
vision research focuses on Virtual Try-On technology, where,
given an image of a person and some target garment, the goal
is to realistically ﬁt the garment, while preserving the origi-
nal person pose and appearance. VITON [2], CP-VTON [3]
proposed to warp the target clothing by conditioning the
warping procedure on a coarse human shape and pose map
before blending it with the input image. VTNFP [4] and C-
VTON [6] adopted semantic segmentation models to guide the
synthesis. Yang et al. [5] constrained the fashion item warping
and introduced adaptive content generation and preservation
constraints. MG-VTON [7] proposed a network that enabled
multi–pose try-on. VITON-HD described a Virtual Try-On
method for higher resolution image generation. DCTON [8]
utilized cycle–consistency for the editing procedure [56], and
WUTON [9] and PF-AFN [10] proposed a teacher–student
setup that removed the need for intermediate auxiliary models
(e.g., for parsing, pose-estimation) during the editing step.
Work has also been performed to enable text conditioning
for editing or generating target images. FashionGAN [12], for
example, edited images conditioned on text inputs, segmen-
tation masks and several image–speciﬁc categorical attributes
using encoder–decoder GANs. Fashion-Gen [27] introduced
a dataset of image–text pairs and experimented with un-
conditional and text–conditioned image generation. Recently,
Text2Human [13] proposed generating human images based
on a description of clothes shape and texture. With this
approach, the text–encoding method mapped the input text

4
Fig. 2: High-level overview of the proposed FICE editing model. The model uses a constrained GAN inversion procedure
over the latent space of the pretrained StyleGANv2 model G to incorporate the semantics expressed in the provided text
description into the output image Ig. Here, the optimization–based GAN inversion is performed by enforcing: (i) the presence
of semantic content (determined by the image–text association model C), (ii) pose preservation (ensured by the pose parser
D), (iii) image consistency (through the segmentation model S), and (iv) latent code regularization. An image stitching step
is also incorporated into FICE to improve the image ﬁdelity and further enhance the model’s identity preservation capabilities.
into a number of closed sets of categories, which limits the
language expressiveness of the input text.
Unlike the methods presented above, FICE uses text as the
only condition/input for processing fashion images. Further-
more, the model is not focused on image generation but rather
image editing, i.e. on redressing persons, similarly as Virtual
Try-On methods, but using only text descriptions as input
instead of image examples. Finally, unlike some methods, that
parse the text into a closed set of categorical attributes, FICE
relies on CLIP [14], an image–text association model, trained
on 400 million image–text pairs, that allows the proposed
approach to process a wider set of linguistic concepts than
alternative solutions from the literature.
III. METHODOLOGY
The main contribution of this paper is a novel text–
conditioned model for (fashion) image editing, named FICE
(Fashion Image CLIP Editing). In this section, we provide an
in-depth description of the proposed model and elaborate on
its characteristics.
A. Problem Formulation and FICE Overview
The aim of FICE is to edit the given (fashion) image
I ∈R3×n×n in accordance with some (appearance–related)
text description t and to synthesize a corresponding output
image If ∈R3×n×n that adheres as closely as possible to the
semantics expressed in t. Here, the synthesis process needs to
meet the following criteria: (1) the synthesized output image
If should preserve the pose, identity and other appearance
characteristics of the subject in I, (2) the editing process
should be local and only affect the desired fashion items
(e.g., apparel), while leaving other parts of I unchanged, (3)
clothing appearances, encoded in t, need to be realistically
and seamlessly integrated into If taking the initial pose and
body shape into account, and (4) a wide variety of textures and
clothing designs need to be supported. Thus, the goal of FICE
is to implement an image-to-image mapping ψt conditioned
on t, i.e.
ψt : I →If ∈R3×n×n,
(1)
under the constraints discussed above. As illustrated in Fig. 2,
FICE deﬁnes the mapping through a three–stage procedure
that consists of: (i) an Initialization stage, (ii) a Constrained
GAN–inversion stage, and (iii) an Image Stitching stage. A
high-level summary of the three (key) steps is given below:
• Initialization. In the ﬁrst step, the model initializes
a latent code w based on the image input I using
a GAN inversion encoder E, which serves as a ﬁrst
approximation of the targeted latent code. This initial
code approximates the original appearance of the input
image, when interpreted through the pretrained GAN
generator G, i.e., I ≈G(w), as shown on the left
of Fig. 2. Additionally, a dense-pose representation and
segmentation masks corresponding to different body parts
are also computed from I during this step.
• Constrained
GAN
Inversion. Next, the initial la-
tent code w is further optimized using a (constrained)
optimization–based GAN inversion technique. At each
step of the optimization procedure, the latent code w
is fed to the generator G to synthesize an intermediate
image Ig = G(w). An optimization objective (loss) L
is then deﬁned over Ig to drive the GAN inversion that
ensures that: (i) the semantics deﬁned in t are present in
Ig, (ii) the pose in I and Ig are the same, (iii) the editing
procedure appears natural, and that (iv) the optimized
latent code lies in a well-deﬁned part of the GAN

5
latent space. The result of the (ﬁxed-step) optimization
procedure is a latent code w∗,
w∗= arg min
w
{L(I, G(w), t)},
(2)
that corresponds to the ﬁnal optimized output image I∗
g =
G(w∗). A number of (auxiliary) differentiable models are
utilized to facilitate the optimization procedure – see Step
2 in Fig. 2. Details on the models are provided in the
following sections.
• Image Stitching. In the ﬁnal stage, a simple image–
composition process is utilized to combine the (opti-
mized) GAN synthesized/optimized image I∗
g with the
original image I to ensure identity preservation and to
produce the ﬁnal output image If.
B. FICE Structure
FICE relies on several (differentiable) models to infer in-
formation on the high-level characteristics of the given input
image for the constrained GAN inversion procedure:
• Generator (G). The key component of FICE is the
(pretrained) GAN generator G, which is responsible for
synthesizing the fashion images based on the provided
latent code w and deﬁnes the characteristics of the
generated data. To this end, we selected the StyleGANv2
model from [33], which is capable of generating high-
quality images of a resolution up to 1024 × 1024 px.
• CLIP (C). The Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training
model (or CLIP for short) [14] is a neural network trained
for pairing images and text. It consists of separate image
and text encoders that produce embeddings for the pair-
ing. The model has been trained on 400 million (image,
text) pairs and was demonstrated to be suitable for zero–
shot transfer to various downstream tasks. Inspired by
these zero–shot capabilities, we use CLIP to provide
semantic knowledge to our model and edit the image
according to the provided text description t.
• DensePose (D). A critical aspect for realistic results,
when editing fashion images, is pose preservation. To pre-
serve the complete body structure and pose information,
we employ a sophisticated parsing model, i.e., Dense-
Pose [57], capable of parsing individual human body parts
from the given input image. The model provides for a
comprehensive and dense pose description that is utilized
in FICE to ensure that the subject’s pose in the original
I and optimized image I∗
g match.
• Segmentation Model (S). A simple segmentation model
based on the DeepLabv3 [58] architecture is used to iden-
tify image regions to either alter or preserve. Additionally,
the goal of the model is also to ensure consistent image
characteristics, so the ﬁnal stitched image is artifact-free,
photorealistic and visually convincing.
• Encoder (E). The last model needed for image editing
with FICE is a GAN inversion encoder that computes the
initial latent space embedding w from the input image I.
We select the E4e (Encoder for editing [24]) encoder for
this task for its competitive performance.
Input
Parsed by D
Parsed by S
Fig. 3: Sample images parsed with D and S. The DensePose
model D generates a parsed body representation consisting of
24 body parts in a clothing agnostic manner. The segmentation
model S, on the other hand, parses the input image into three
classes: head (with hair), body (with clothing) and background.
C. Constrained GAN Inversion
The main component of FICE is a (novel)
constrained
GAN inversion technique that, given the input image I and
text description t, optimizes for the latent code w∗that
ﬁts a number of predeﬁned constraints – see Eq. (2). After
initializing the latent code w and computing the corresponding
output image Ig = G(w), the goal of the optimization–based
inversion process is to adjust the latent code to best match
the text description while preserving various appearance char-
acteristics of the input image. Thus, given a latent code w
and the associated image Ig = G(w), we deﬁne the several
optimization objectives for FICE, as detailed below.
Semantic Content. To ensure that the (appearance-related)
semantic content, expressed in the text description t, is present
in the generated image Ig, we implement a CLIP–based
optimization objective/loss,
Lclip = 1 −cos(Ci(Ig), Ct(t)),
(3)
where Ci and Ct represent the image and text encoder of
the CLIP model, respectively. The objective penalizes angular
differences between the image and text embeddings, and, thus,
promotes the presence of the semantics from t in the generated
image Ig, where Ig = G(w).
Pose Preservation. To achieve perceptually convincing
editing results, it is critical to preserve the position of all
body parts from the input image in the edited output. Because
our goal is a detailed and accurate pose preservation, where
individual body parts retain their size and shape regardless of
the overlaid clothing, we utilize the powerful DensePose model
D, which predicts the position and shape of individual body
parts in a clothing-agnostic manner. The pose–preservation
constraint is, therefore, deﬁned through the following loss,
Lpose =
1
ND
ND
X
j=1
||Dj(I) −Dj(Ig)||2
2,
(4)

6
TABLE I: Overview of the fashion datasets used in the paper. Three different datasets are selected for the experiments and
used to train and test various components of FICE.
Dataset
# Images
Segmentations
Text
# Text Descriptions
Aim
VITON [2]
16, 253
Coarse

n/a
G, E training/testing†
DeepFashion Retrieval [59]
52, 713
Fine

n/a
S training
Fashion-Gen [27]
293, 018


293, 018
Source of text descriptions
† Training and testing data are disjoint.
where ND is the number of parsed body parts, D is the pose
parsing model and Dj(·) denotes the parsed mask of the j-th
body part. A couple of example outputs produced by the pose
parser D are shown in Fig. 3.
Latent Code Regularization. FICE operates in the ex-
tended latent vector space W+ of the pretrained StyleGAN
generator, which is commonly used with (GAN–inversion)
editing techniques from the literature [50], [51]. The latent
code w ∈W+ consists of several latent codes, each impacting
an individual convolutional layer in the StyleGAN generator
network G. The number of individual latent codes depends on
the resolution of the generator network. However, it needs
to be noted that StyleGAN’s extended latent space is an
artiﬁcial extension of the original latent space that, while
being capable of embedding a wider variety of images, does
not guarantee the synthesis of as photorealistic images as the
original latent space [24]. We, therefore, propose a simple
regularization mechanism for the latent codes by minimizing
the distance of the coarsest latent code to the latent codes
from all other layers. Concretely, given an extended latent
code w = {w1, w2, ..., wNw}, where Nw denotes the number
of individual codes, we deﬁne the following loss function,
Lreg =
1
Nw −1
Nw
X
j=2
||w1 −wj||2
2.
(5)
The presented loss term aims at minimizing the differences
between the latent codes corresponding to different convolu-
tional layers in the StyleGAN model, which directly correlates
with the minimization of the image distribution discrepancy
between the vanilla and the extended latent spaces.
Image Composition. Finally, to ensure seamless image
stitching, FICE uses an additional segmentation model S that
parses the following three categories from the given input
image: ‘background’ (Sbg), ‘body’ (Sbody) and ‘head’ (Shead).
Different from the pose-parsing model D, the components
inferred by S contain additional features, i.e., Sbody also
captures the clothing of the subject and the Shead also captures
the hair shape, as shown in Fig. 3.
We deﬁne two optimization objectives based on the segmen-
tation model S. The ﬁrst (the image loss Lim) aims to preserve
the background and face regions of the image. This term is
necessary because although the face region is stitched with the
synthesized image in the ﬁnal step, this term helps to preserve
the skin tone of the subject and the color characteristics of the
input image. The loss term is deﬁned as,
M = 1 −Sbody(I)
(6)
Lim = ||M ⊙(Ig −I)||2
2,
(7)
where 1 ∈Rn×n is a matrix of all ones and ⊙denotes the
Hadamard product. Furthermore, we use a second loss term
that preserves the ‘head’ region,
Lhead = ||Shead(I) −Shead(Ig)||2
2.
(8)
This loss is used primarily to preserve the hair of the input
image and to account for interactions of the hair/head and
body regions that cannot be managed solely by the image loss
term Lim deﬁned above.
Final Optimization Objective. The ﬁnal optimization ob-
jective for the constrained GAN inversion techniques used by
FICE is deﬁned as a weighted superposition of the individual
losses, as follows,
L =λclipLclip + λposeLpose + λregLreg
+ λimLim + λheadLhead,
(9)
where λclip,λpose,λreg,λim, and λhead are balancing weights.
D. Image Stitching
In order to preserve the identity of the input person, we
perform image stitching as the ﬁnal step of FICE. The ﬁnal
image If is obtained as,
If = Shead(I) ⊙I + (1 −Shead(I)) ⊙I∗
g,
(10)
where I∗
g = G(w∗) is the image that corresponds to the
optimized latent code w∗based on Eq. (2).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we describe the experimental setup used to
demonstrate the capabilities of FICE. Speciﬁcally, we discuss
datasets and evaluation protocols, the baseline techniques
considered as well as relevant implementation details.
A. Datasets
Three types of datasets are selected for the experiments. The
selected datasets, summarized in Table I, provide image and
text data for training and testing of the main FICE components.
Example images from the three datasets are presented in Fig. 4.
Image Dataset. We use the VITON dataset as our main
image database. VITON is a fashion dataset with 16, 253
frontal-view images of female models with different tops. The
images are split into a training and a test set with 14, 221
and 2, 032 images, respectively. We use the training set to
train the GAN model (including G) and E4e encoder (E) and
the disjoint test set for performance evaluations. Similarly to
related studies from the literature [50], [51], [60], we select a

7
VITON
Fashion-Gen
DeepFashion
Fig. 4: Sample images from the experimental datasets. We
train and test FICE with fashion images from the VITON,
Fashion-Gen and DeepFashion datasets.
test set of manageable size and use the ﬁrst 120 images of the
ofﬁcial VITON test set for the experiments.
Segmentation Dataset. To train the segmentation model
S needed for FICE, we utilize the DeepFashion dataset [59],
speciﬁcally, the In-shop Clothes Retrieval part of the dataset.
We minimize the discrepancy with the distribution of the
VITON data by ﬁltering the images to women subjects with
frontal pose and restricting the fashion categories to ‘Blouses
& Shirts’ and ‘Tees & Tanks’. Furthermore, the reference
segmentation masks of different classes are merged to ﬁt the
requirements of FICE, resulting in three ﬁnal segmentation
targets: Body, Face & Hair and Background. The images and
segmentation masks are padded to a square shape and then
downscaled to a resolution of 256×256 px, as shown in Fig. 3.
Text Dataset. The last dataset used for the experiments is
Fashion-Gen [27]. We use this dataset to obtain the cloth-
ing descriptions needed for testing. Fashion-Gen consists of
293, 008 images, each paired with a corresponding text de-
scription. We perform our experiments with image–text pairs
that belong to the ‘top’ fashion category to match the VITON
dataset characteristics. The Fashion-Gen text descriptions were
created by professional stylists and, as a result, contain many
fashion-speciﬁc technical terms that are regarded difﬁcult for
general text–image matching models, such as CLIP due to the
signiﬁcant shift in comparison to the training data distribution.
Thus, we only consider the sentences with a high match rate
to the corresponding image. Speciﬁcally, we process each
image and its corresponding description to obtain a CLIP
matching score, then sort the image–text pairs by the match–
score magnitude. We keep 120 sentences with the highest
matching scores, as these are the sentences that the CLIP
model ‘understands’ the best. During testing, we combine
each test image and with every text example to construct
all possible image–text combinations, resulting in a total of
120 · 120 = 14, 400 test combinations.
B. Baseline Models
We note that, to the best of our knowledge, no direct
competitor addressing the same task has been presented in the
literature so far. We, therefore, compare FICE to methods that
fall under the umbrella of zero–shot text–based image edit-
ing [14]. Speciﬁcally, we use various GAN inversion methods
to obtain the latent code of the image, and then process the
latent code using the global StyleCLIP method [19], which
modiﬁes the latent code to enforce the desired semantics.
GAN inversion. Given our trained GAN model, we train
several GAN inversion encoder models to use as baselines
in the experiments presented in the next section. Details on
considered encoding techniques are given below:
• pSp [53]. The pSp model has been proposed for the
tasks of conditional image synthesis, face frontalization,
inpainting, and super-resolution and due to this broad
application range has also been selected for our experi-
ments. The architecture of pSp is based on a ResNet–style
feature pyramid [61] and multiple encoder networks. The
encoders predict a particular StyleGAN latent code from
each convolutional layer of the feature pyramid and, in
this way, embed images into the StyleGAN latent space.
• E4e [24]. E4e follows the architecture of the pSp model,
but uses a distinct training process to ensure that the
predicted (extended) latent code approximates the code
deﬁned in the original StyleGAN latent space. This allows
the model to perform more convincing image manipula-
tions when using techniques that try to alter the given
latent code to achieve semantically meaningful edits.
• ReStyle [54]. While pSp and E4e embed images in the
latent space in a single (forward) pass, ReStyle uses an
iterative procedure that gradually improves the embed-
ding so it corresponds better to the given input image.
We consider two ReStyle versions for the experiments,
one with the pSp and one with the E4e encoder.
• HyperStyle [55]. Different from the inversion methods
above, HyperStyle predicts the latent code of an input
image, while also modifying the weights of the StyleGAN
generator on a per-sample basis. The model ﬁrst predicts
an approximate latent code using the vanilla StyleGAN
generator. This initial prediction, along with the original
image, then serve as an input to a hyper-network that
predicts offsets for the StyleGAN weights. The weights
are ﬁnally modulated with the offsets and the resulting
StyleGAN is used to synthesize the ﬁnal image.
StyleCLIP Implementation. To provide editing capabilities
for the GAN inversion techniques, we use StyleCLIP’s global
editing method, which displaces the latent code of the given
input image along a certain editing direction in accordance
with the semantics encoded in some text description. Style-
CLIP relies on two hyperparameters (α, β), where α deﬁnes
the magnitude of the displacement in the latent space and β
represents a threshold that controls the entanglement of the
edited attributes. The choice of α determines the strength of
the semantic content (from the text) present in the edited
image. However, large values of α are known to degrade
image quality and alter both the pose and identity of the
input subject. These adverse effects can be reduced by using
a disentanglement mechanism with a certain value of β.
However, large values of β reduce the presence of the desired
semantic presence. A suitable trade–off is therefore required.

8
Input
“Sleeveless
hand-embroidered
sequin camisole
featuring a camo
pattern throughout in
tones of green, brown,
and black”
“Long sleeve silk crepe
de chine shirt featuring
graphic pattern printed
in tones of blue”
“Short sleeve ﬁne
mercerized cotton piqu´e
polo in navy”
“Short sleeve rufﬂed
cotton poplin and jersey
blouse in pink”
“Short sleeve cotton
jersey t-shirt featuring
ﬂoral pattern in tones
of army green and
off-white.”
“Short sleeve cotton
piqu´e polo in soft
black”
Fig. 5: Example results generated by FICE for various text descriptions. As can be seen, FICE is capable of synthesizing
complex fashion styles (e.g., see the camouﬂage pattern in the second column), while preserving the pose and identity of the
subjects as well other image characteristics. Note the realism and seamless integration of different clothing items (in various
designs, materials and shapes) without any 3D modelling. Best viewed electronically and zoomed-in.
We consider this trade–off in our comparative assess-
ment
and
perform
StyleCLIP
experiments
with
several
different combinations of (α, β) values. Speciﬁcally, we
use α values of {3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 7.5, 10.0} and β values of
{0.00, 0.025, 0.050, 0.075, 0.100, 0.125}, which represent a
reasonable cross-section of values for the evaluation.
C. Implementation Details
The generator G of FICE is based on StyleGAN2 [33] and
was trained on the training split of the VITON dataset. Prior
to training, the image from the dataset were ﬁrst cropped
to 192 × 192 px by removing the bottom part of the image
and then resized to 256 × 256 px using bilinear interpolation.
The training was performed for a total of 450, 000 iterations,
achieving a ﬁnal Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) of 3.83.
For pose-parsing, we utilized the DensePose model [57] D
with a ResNet50 backbone and the Panoptic FPN head [62].
We used the pre-trained model from the Detectron2 repos-
itory [63]. The selected model is capable of parsing 24
individual body parts (e.g. upper left arm). For our imple-
mentation, we only considered body parts that are suitable (or
applicable) for the VITON dataset, i.e., the upper body indices.
The segmentation model S was trained on the DeepFashion
dataset [59]. We used cross-entropy as the learning objective
and weighted the predictions according to the class imbalance
of the training split of the dataset. The learning procedure was
performed for 19 epochs (until convergence) using the Adam
optimizer [64] and a ﬁxed learning rate of η = 10−4.
The GAN inversion E4e [24] encoder E was trained on the
VITON training dataset, using G as the target GAN model
to invert. Finally, the CLIP RN50x4 network architecture was
chosen as the image encoder for the CLIP model. For the
optimization–based GAN inversion procedure in Eq. (2), bal-
ancing weights were chosen based on preliminary experiments
and visual inspection of the results on the training data, so
that λclip = 1, λim = 30, λpose = 10, λhead = 1, λreg = 1.
The number of GAN inversion optimization iterations was
ﬁxed and set to 500 for all experiments. We used the Adam
optimization algorithm [64] with a learning rate of η = 5·10−2
when optimizing the latent code to compute w∗.

9
“Short sleeve ﬁne
mercerized cotton
piqu´e polo in navy.”
“Long sleeve cotton
sateen shirt in
white.”
“Short sleeve cotton
piqu´e; polo in vivid
red.”
“Sleeveless woven
silk top in metallic
silver-tone.”
Text
description
Input image
pSp [53]
E4e [24]
ReStyle-pSp
[54]
ReStyle-E4e
[54]
HyperStyle
[55]
FICE (Ours)
Fig. 6: Example results with the Same image–different text (SI-DT) conﬁguration. While most techniques are able to
incorporate the desired semantics, FICE leads to the most realistic results and most convincingly preserves identity.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we report results that: (i) demonstrate the
capabilities of FICE for fashion image editing through several
qualitative examples, (ii) compare the proposed model to
several competing techniques, (iii) highlight the importance
of various components through rigorous ablation studies, and
(iv) explore the model’s limitations. Some additional results
are available in the Supplementary material.
A. Qualitative Results
FICE Evaluation. We ﬁrst evaluate the editing capabili-
ties of FICE in Fig. 5 over a number of test images with
different pose characteristics and (initial) clothing styles (e.g.,
long and short sleeves, different material, designs, etc.) and
different text descriptions. We observe that FICE is able to:
(i) synthesize complex clothing styles (see, for example, the
camouﬂage pattern in the second column), (ii) convincingly
incorporate the semantics expressed in the text descriptions
into the edited images, (iii) preserve the pose and identity of
the subjects, (iv) add or remove sleeves from initial clothing
(and hallucinate initially obscured objects, e.g., arms), and
(v) ensure a seamless ﬁt with realistic clothing characteristics
(e.g., with creases) without explicit 3D modelling. The pre-
sented examples speak of the impressive editing capabilities
of FICE and illustrate the ﬂexibility of text–based editing.
Comparative Evaluation. Next, we compare FICE to the
competing models introduced in the previous section. For the
evaluation, we consider two distinct cases:
• Same image–different text (SI-DT). In this conﬁguration,
we test all models on the same input image and pair it
with different target text descriptions to demonstrate how
the models handle different types of semantics.
• Same text–different image (ST-DI). Here, we use different
input images and pair them with the same target text
description to explore the consistency of the edits made
by the models with diverse inputs.
From the results in Fig. 6 (SI-DT) and Fig. 7 (ST-DI),
we see that the competing models do not preserve identity
nearly as well as FICE. The reason for that is twofold. First,
when an image is embedded in the GAN latent space, there
occurs some loss of identity information due to imperfect
reconstruction through the generator G. The second reason
lies in the entanglement of the latent code space that causes
several undesired changes to the edited image. Even though
StyleCLIP integrates a disentanglement mechanism, a shift of
the latent code still partially affects the person’s identity. FICE,
on the other hand, preserves the identity due to the image
stitching formulation of the model. Moreover, we observe that
the editing results of the competing models exhibit certain
entanglement issues, as can be seen well in the third row of
Fig. 6, where a change to red clothes also adds red lipstick.
Finally, FICE performs better when editing certain clothing
styles such as ‘polo shirt’ as seen in a more convincing collar
in ﬁrst and third row of Fig. 6. While the semantics from the
target text can be seen in most edited images, the results for
the proposed model are visually clearly the most convincing.
When looking at Fig. 7, we see that the competing models

10
Input
pSp [53]
E4e [24]
ReStyle-pSp
[54]
ReStyle-E4e
[54]
HyperStyle [55]
FICE (Ours)
Fig. 7: Visual examples generated with the Same text–different image (ST-DI) experimental conﬁguration. All models
were tested with the same target description “Sleeveless rib knit wool bodysuit in black”. Note how all models are able to
infuse the targeted semantics, but except for FICE, often also produce pose/position changes as well as visual artifacts.
often have problems with exact positioning of the person in
the edited image. The person is often shifted with respect to
the original image, as seen best in the result of the E4e model
in Fig. 7. Such pose shifts make it impossible to integrate
image stitching techniques into the competing models. The
main reason for the observed behavior can be attributed to
the use of perceptual losses [65] when training the encoder
models. The perceptual losses generally increase image ﬁdelity
at the expense of precise object localization. While such a
trade–off is reasonable for other image processing tasks, it is
not optimal for the task of Virtual Try-On, where the pose
and position of the input person should be preserved exactly.
FICE integrates a pose–preserving loss term with a pixel–
level loss term to avoid such positioning problems. We note
that all tested models generate consistent edits in terms of
desired semantics, but except for FICE, also often introduce
considerable visual artifacts.
B. Quantitative Results
To be able to evaluate the performance of the generated
images quantitatively, we deﬁne four distinct criteria that
address different aspects of the editing process, i.e.:
• Semantic Relevance. The synthesized images should
contain semantics that are relevant with respect to the
input text t. We evaluate this aspect in the experiments
with the CLIP model, deﬁning a CLIP similarity score
between a given image I and the target text t as,
S(I, t) = cos(Ci(I), Ct(t)),
(11)
where Ci and Ct are again the CLIP image and text
encoders, respectively.
• Pose Preservation. The edited image should preserve the
pose of the input person. We evaluate pose–preservation
capabilities using the Intersection over Union (IoU), a
commonly used metric in the ﬁeld of semantic segmen-
tation [66]. We utilize DensePose for pose prediction
because the model is insensitive with respect to overlaid
clothing and compute an IoU score between the pose
predictions from the input and edited images.
• Identity Similarity. The editing model should preserve
the identity and facial appearance of the input image.
We therefore use the RetinaFace model [67] to detect the
face region, and then process it with ArcFace [68], a face
recognition model, to extract a face embedding vector. To
quantify the similarity between the input and edited image
in terms of identity, we compute the cosine similarity
between the corresponding face embedding vectors.
• Image Fidelity. The editing methods should synthesize
high ﬁdelity images that are comparable to the inputs.
To measure the quality of the generated images, we use

11
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE
(ours)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Id. similarity
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE
(ours)
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
IoU
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE
(ours)
60
80
100
120
140
160
FID
Fig. 8: Boxplots of different performance indicators for the tested editing models. The competing models were tested with
hyperparameter settings that resulted in the highest semantic–relevance score to ensure a fair comparison. Results are reported
in terms of variation over the text descriptions. The individual scores are obtained by averaging over all images for a given text
description. We observe that FICE performs best across all performance indices, while ensuring the most consistent results.
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
CLIP score
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Id. similarity
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE (ours)
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
CLIP score
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
IoU
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE (ours)
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
CLIP score
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
FID
E4e
pSp
R-E4e
R-pSp
HS
FICE (ours)
Fig. 9: Fine-grained comparison across multiple hyperparameter values. For the StyleCLIP based models, we consider
the β value of the best-performing (α, β) combination and α ∈{3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 7.5, 10.0}. Increasing α generally increases the
semantic–relevance score, but above a certain point degrades the results.
the Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) [69]. The metric is
based on the difference between the statistics of image
embeddings as extracted by the InceptionV3 neural net-
work [70] and has been used as one of the main metrics
to evaluate the image quality of different image synthesis
models [31], [32], [33], [34].
When calculating the ﬁnal scores for performance reporting,
the scores for images and text descriptions are averaged for the
semantic relevance score, IoU, and identity similarity metrics.
The FID score is averaged only over the text descriptions,
since the metric is already calculated over a set of images.
In general, all methods exhibit some trade–off, where higher
semantic relevance of the image is associated with worse
performance on all other performance indicators considered.
Therefore, we decide to evaluate the results for the competing
methods for several sets of hyperparameter values. We directly
compare FICE with the competitors at the hyperparameters
values (α, β), where the maximum semantic score was ob-
tained to ensure a reasonable and fair evaluation.
The results of the outlined experiments are shown in Fig. 8
in terms of variability with respect to text descriptions and in
Table II as average (overall) results. As can be seen, FICE
signiﬁcantly outperforms the competing methods in terms of
all evaluated metrics. The image stitching technique helps
FICE achieve a superior result in terms of identity preservation
when compared to other models. Only the minute artifacts of
the image stitching prevent FICE from achieving a perfect
identity similarity score. In Fig. 9 we show the results for
several α values, where the β value is ﬁxed to the value from
the best (α, β) combination. Increasing the α value leads to
a higher CLIP score (higher semantic relevance), but only up
to a certain point, after which the results become worse. All
other metrics worsen when the α value is increased.
C. Ablation Study
We ablate various components of FICE to study the impact
of: (i) the latent space choice made, (ii) the initialization
scheme used, and (iii) the contribution of different loss terms.
The motivation for the ablation is to further justify the design
choices made with the proposed editing approach.
Latent Space and Initialization. To demonstrate the im-
portance of the latent space choice made for FICE as well

12
Input
w ∈W
w ∈W+ (FICE)
Fig. 10: Visual ablation study results – latent space. Exam-
ples of FICE–edited images when the latent space is restricted
to w ∈W. The target description is set to “Structured
knit bandeau top in yellow and off-white stripes”. Due to
lower expressiveness of the vanilla StyleGAN latent space
W, the generated results exhibit limited pose preservation and
semantic correctness.
as the importance of the initialization procedure, we consider
the vanilla W and the extended W+ latent code spaces, and
initializations with either the latent code mean w ←¯w or
the GAN inversion encoder predicted latent code w ←E(I).
Because the utilized GAN inversion E encoder (E4e) is based
on the extended W+ space, we train a separate E4e encoder
(denoted as ˆE) for the vanilla latent code space W using the
proposed method from the E4e repository1.
From the results in Table III, we see that the vanilla latent
space W has limited expressive power, which adversely affects
the semantic–relevance scores. The extended latent space W+
contributes towards higher semantic scores, but requires a
careful initialization scheme. The trivial mean initialization
scheme leads to a degradation in image ﬁdelity, whereas a
GAN–inversion based initialization leads to signiﬁcant ﬁdelity
gains. We show visual examples that illustrate the impact
of the latent–space choice in Fig. 10. Note how due to the
limited expressiveness of the W space (compared to W+) the
editing procedure is not able to infuse proper semantics into
the images shown in the middle column.
Loss Function. Next, we evaluate the contribution of the
individual loss terms from Eq. (9) on the generated results.
Speciﬁcally, we ablate three distinct terms by setting the
corresponding loss weights to 0: (i) the pose preservation
term (λpose = 0), (ii) the image composition term (λim = 0
and λhead = 0), and (iii) the latent–code regularization term
(λreg = 0). We keep the semantic-related CLIP term as text–
based editing is not possible without it.
The results of loss-related ablations are shown quantitatively
in Table IV and qualitatively in Fig. 11. We observe that
the image composition term signiﬁcantly improves all metrics
by ensuring that composition does not cause unnatural visual
1Available at https://github.com/omertov/encoder4editing
Input
Semantic
term
+ Compo-
sition
+ Reg.
+ Pose
(FICE)
Fig. 11: Visual ablation study results – loss terms. An
optimization objective that relies exclusively on the semantic
term (2nd column) produces unsatisfactory image composition
results. Adding the image composition term (3rd column)
ensures pleasing image stitching results, but the output image
still often contains visual artifacts. The addition of the latent–
code regularization term (3rd column) helps mitigate these
artifacts. Finally, the pose preservation term ensures more
realistic and true results compared to the input.
TABLE II: Quantitative comparison. FICE is compared
to several competing techniques and across four difference
performance indicators. The arrows denote whether higher or
lower scores imply better performance.
Model
Semantics (↑)
Identity sim. (↑)
IoU (↑)
FID (↓)
pSp [53]
0.377
0.390
0.922
67.74
e4e [24]
0.402
0.298
0.834
86.74
ReStyle-pSp [54]
0.403
0.337
0.907
75.01
ReStyle-e4e [54]
0.391
0.327
0.835
91.92
HyperStyle [55]
0.399
0.368
0.849
84.70
FICE (Ours)
0.446
0.926
0.949
60.96
artifacts. Interestingly, the absence of the composition term
strongly degrades the identity similarity score, even though the
face is preserved by the image–stitching step. Regularization
of the latent code slightly degrades the semantic–relevance
score, but contributes to image ﬁdelity. Finally, the pose
preservation term also slightly lowers the semantic–relevance
score, but contributes signiﬁcantly to the IoU index and further
improves the FID score.
TABLE III: Ablation study w.r.t. latent spaces. We analyze
the choice of the latent space (vanilla W and extended W+)
as well as the procedure for initializing the latent code w.
Latent space variant
Semantics (↑)
Id. sim. (↑)
IoU (↑) FID (↓)
¯w, W
0.422
0.923
0.914
72.11
¯w, W+
0.443
0.918
0.919
77.13
ˆE(I), W
0.378
0.911
0.886
63.16
E(I), W+ (FICE)
0.446
0.926
0.949
60.96

13
TABLE IV: Ablation study results w.r.t. loss terms. We
analyze the impact of individual FICE optimization objectives
across four performance measures.
Objective
Semantics (↑)
Id. sim. (↑)
IoU (↑)
FID (↓)
Semantic term (Lclip)
0.453
0.819
0.781
82.52
+ composition (Lim/head)
0.466
0.924
0.888
68.94
+ latent reg. (Lreg)
0.450
0.924
0.884
64.14
+ pose pres. (Lpose)†
0.446
0.926
0.949
60.96
† Complete FICE
“Skull graphic at front in
black”
“Multi-colour lightning bolt
print at front”
“Saints Pauls cathedral
landmark graphic printed
in black and grey at front.”
Fig. 12: Illustration of FICE limitations. When presented
with text descriptions involving objects and speciﬁc logos to be
shown on the garment, the model is only capable of generating
approximate results. In the presented examples, the model fails
to produce a convincing skull graphic (left column), a lightning
bolt (middle column) or a cathedral (right column).
D. Limitations
While the proposed FICE model achieves high-quality com-
petitive image editing results, it still exhibits certain limita-
tions. Speciﬁcally, the model inherits the constraints of CLIP
on the length of the text description, which is limited to 76
tokens, as extracted by the byte-pair encoding technique [71].
Furthermore, FICE uses gradient optimization as the basis for
processing the fashion images. We batch the images to process
20 images at a time for a given text description, which takes
about 5 minutes or 16 seconds per image on average (measured
using NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090). Meanwhile, an encoder–
based method typically retrieves a latent code in less than
a second and when followed by StyleCLIP’s global direction
method generates a new latent vector in less than an additional
100 ms. Finally, with respect to the text description semantics,
FICE sometimes struggles with sleeve length (see 3rd row
of Fig. 5) as well as text descriptions that contain detailed
descriptions of objects/logos to be shown on the garment, as
exempliﬁed in Fig. 12. We suspect that the reason for the
limited performance in such cases is a combination of limited
GAN synthesis capabilities and limited CLIP knowledge. A
possible solution to this problem could be to extend the
GAN training dataset and ﬁne-tune CLIP on large text–image
fashion datasets.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented FICE, a novel model for real-
istic text–conditioned fashion image editing. The core of the
approach is based on GAN latent code optimization guided by
CLIP semantic knowledge as well as pose, regularization, and
composition constraints. We showed through rigorous experi-
ments that FICE is able to convincingly edit fashion images,
and that it signiﬁcantly outperforms competing methods on
all evaluated metrics, especially when it comes to identity
preservation and semantic relevance of the edited images.
