arXiv:1204.4051v1  [cs.AI]  18 Apr 2012
Solution Representations and Local Search for the
bi-objective Inventory Routing Problem
Thibaut Barthélemy1,∗
Martin Josef Geiger1
Marc Sevaux2
1Helmut Schmidt University,
University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg
Logistics Management Department
Hamburg, Germany
2Université de Bretagne-Sud
Lab-STICC
Lorient, France
1
Introduction
The solution of the biobjective IRP is rather challenging, even for metaheuristics. We are still lacking
a profound understanding of appropriate solution representations and eﬀective neighborhood structures.
Clearly, both the delivery volumes and the routing aspects of the alternatives need to be reﬂected in an
encoding, and must be modiﬁed when searching by means of local search. Our work contributes to the
better understanding of such solution representations. On the basis of an experimental investigation, the
advantages and drawbacks of two encodings are studied and compared.
2
Representations
Due to the high complexity of the problem, many solution approaches introduce some simplifying as-
sumptions. Some authors restrict quantities to deliver [2] or allow backlogging [1]. Cycling visiting was
also studied [8] and other authors limit routing possibilities [6].
To reduce the combinatorial complexity, we choose a speciﬁc replenishment strategy such that shipped
amounts are not part of the searched variable set anymore; moreover, visits are periodic [4]. In our ﬁrst
representation, only the visiting frequency fi of each customer i has to be decided; shipping amounts are
deduced from our replenishment strategy. In our new representation, the starting date si of the periodic
visiting sequence is adjustable; one delivery before the starting date is allowed if required to cover ﬁrst
consumptions of some customers.
Our search algorithms will have to explore values of n or 2n variables, instead of up to Hn variables
for other approaches (H is the size of the time horizon). Such simpliﬁcations make us miss solutions and
in particular some non-dominated ones. Nevertheless, we expect that the loss of freedom in quantities
and visiting dates is balanced by the higher local search speed.
3
Local Search and Evaluation
Not surprisingly, solution approaches often employ heuristics and meta-heuristics [7]. Following in these
footsteps, we began to experiment our representation with an heuristic. For the moment, our neighbor-
hood operator is simple and we investigate representations and solution selection strategies.
The ﬁrst selection strategy uses reference points [5]. At each iteration, among all non dominated
solutions, we select the R closest solutions to R evenly spread reference points. Our second strategy is
inspired from NSGA-II [3]. At each iteration, among all non dominated solutions, a subset of R solutions
is randomly chosen. The probability that a solution is taken depends on its crowding distance.
Neighbors are generated for each of the R alternatives then inserted among all other solutions and
dominated solutions are removed. This process is repeated until the total number of evaluations reaches
a limit chosen by the user.
The local search adjusts starting dates and frequencies of the visits. From our short representations,
the role of the evaluation phase is to compute holding costs and routing costs of each solution. Whereas

1

inventory costs are fast to compute exactly with our replenishment strategy, the routing cost evaluation
is a NP-Hard problem and we must restrict ourselves to a rough value.
The sum of inventory levels Lt
i of all customers i over all dates t represents the overall holding cost:
z1 = PH
t=1
Pn
i=1 Lt
i. Evaluation of inventories takes Θ(Hn).
Concerning routing costs, we get them from the sum of the costs of the VRP solutions for all dates:
z2 = PH
t=1 VRP(qt), where qt is the set of quantities to deliver to customers visited at the date t.
The route planning is preliminary solved by the Clarke & Wright’s heuristic, which allows for a fast
construction of tours in O(n2 log n). Then, a 2-Opt operator optimizes the tours independently in O(n2)
in average.
4
Experiments and Results
We denote by ev the number of solutions evaluated since the beginning of the search. It is interesting
to note that the number of modiﬁcations done on any initial solution during search is at most
ev
4nR and
that the average number of modiﬁcations applied per customer can not exceed
ev
4n2R. In our previous
approach, a customer was served for the ﬁrst time just before going to stockout [4]. As described above,
starting dates are now movable. We noticed that this new freedom for delivery dates is always beneﬁcial
when
ev
4n2R is constant with regard to n. This is a typical result on the left:
0 
10 k
20 k
30 k
40 k
50 k
60 k
70 k
80 k
90 k
inventory
5 k
6 k
7 k
8 k
9 k
10 k
11 k
12 k
13 k
14 k
routing
frequency only
starting & frequency
0 
10 k
20 k
30 k
40 k
50 k
60 k
70 k
80 k
inventory
4 k
5 k
6 k
7 k
8 k
9 k
10 k
11 k
12 k
13 k
14 k
routing
reference points
random selection
On the right, we notice that our random selection method reduces the gaps, but sometimes at the expense
of the solution quality.
In addition to those experiments, we deﬁned the similarity between two solutions by considering either
their values in the objective space or in the decision space. The purpose is to remove identical solutions.
Better results are obtained if only the objective values are compared.
