What do we learn about development from baby robots?1 
 
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 
Inria and EnstaParisTech, France 
http://www.pyoudeyer.com 
 
 
To understand the world around them, human beings fabricate and experiment. 
Children endlessly build, destroy, and manipulate to make sense of objects, forces, 
and people. To understand boats and water,for example, they throw wooden sticks 
into rivers. Jean Piaget, one of the pioneers of developmental psychology, 
extensively studied this central role of action in infant learning and discovery (Piaget, 
1952).  
 
Scientists do the same thing: To understand ocean waves, we build giant aquariums. 
To understand cells, we break them down to their component parts. To understand 
the formation of spiral galaxies, wemanipulate them in computer simulations. 
Constructing artifacts helps us construct knowledge. 
 
But what if we want to understand ourselves? How can we understand the 
mechanisms of human learning, emotions,and curiosity? Here, the physical 
fabrication of artifacts can also be useful. Researchers can actually build baby robots 
with mechanisms that model aspects of the infant brain and body, and  thenalter 
these models systematically (see figure 1). We can compare the behavior we 
observe with the mechanisms inside. Indeed, robots are now becoming an essential 
tool to explore the complexity of development, a tool that allows scientists to grasp 
the complicated dynamics of a child’s mind and behavior. 
 
EXPLORING COMPLEX SYSTEMS 
 
Modern developmental science has now invalidated the old divide between nature 
and nurture. We now know that genes are not a static program that unfolds 
independently of the environment. We also understand that learning in the real world 
can only work if there are appropriate constraints during development (Gottlieb, 
1991; Lickliter& Honeycutt, 2009). Finally, we know that many behavioral and 
cognitive patterns cannot be explained by reducing them to single genes, organs, or 
isolated features of the environment: they result from the dynamic interaction 
between cells, organs, learning mechanisms, and the physical and social properties 
of the environment at multiple spatiotemporal scales. Development is a complex 
dynamical system, characterized by the spontaneous self-organization of patterns, 
sometimes called "emergent patterns" (Thelen and Smith, 1996).  
 
The concepts of complex systems and self-organization revolutionized physics in the 
20th century. They characterize phenomena as diverse as the formation of ice 
crystals, sand dunes, water bubbles, climatic structures, and galaxies. A key to these 
scientific advances was the use of mathematics and computer simulations. Indeed, it 
                                                        
1
The text of this document isCreative CommonsCC-BY-SA. Citation : « What do we learn about development from baby 
robots? Pierre-Yves Oudeyer (2015), http://www.pyoudeyer.com»  
 

is hard to imagine how we could understand the dynamics of ice crystals or the 
formation of clouds without mathematics and computer simulations. At the end of the 
20th century, biologists began to use these concepts, for example, to understand the 
formation of termite nests (Ball, 2001, see figure 2). They used computer simulations 
to show how the local interaction between thousands of little termites, with no plan of 
the global structure, could self-organize sophisticated and functional large-scale 
architectures. Other mathematical and computational models were similarly used to 
study the self-organization of stripes and spots on the skin of animals, spiral of horns 
and mollusk shells, patterns of the dynamics of predator-prey populations or of the 
dynamics of heart beat (Ball, 2001).  
 
 
Figure 1Open-Source Baby Robots. Robots can help us model and study the complex interaction between the 
brain, the body and the environment during cognitive development. Here we see two open-source robotic 
platforms used in laboratories. Being open-source allows open science through revealing all details in the 
experiments as well as replicability. Based on 3D printing, the Poppy platform allows fast and efficient 
exploration of various body morphologies (Lapeyre et al., 2014), such as leg shape (see alternatives on the right 
(a) and (b)), and how this can impact development of skills. Left: ICubhttp://www.icub.org , right: Poppy 
http://www.poppy-project.org. 
 
 
 
Figure 2Termite Nest. The architecture of termite nests is the self-organized result of the interaction of 
thousands of insects, but none of these insects has a map of the architecture. Computer simulations 
contributed to understanding this process.Photo: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Termite%27s_nest.jpg 

 
Child development also involves the interaction of many components, but in a way 
that is probably orders of magnitude more complicated than crystal formation or 
termite nest construction. Hence, to complement the (tremendously useful) verbal 
conceptual tools of psychology and biology, researchers have begun building 
machines that model pattern formation in development. Such efforts can play a key 
role in 21st century developmental science. 
 
Building machines that learn and develop like infants is actually not a new idea. Alan 
Turing, who helped invent the first computers in the 1940s, already had the intuition 
that machines could be useful to understand processes of psychology : 
 
“Instead of trying to produce a programme to simulate the adult mind, why not 
rather try to produce one which simulates the child's? If this were then 
subjected to an appropriate course of education one would obtain the adult 
brain. Presumably the child brain is something like a notebook as one buys it 
from the stationer's. Rather little mechanism, and lots of blank sheets. “ 
(Turing, 1950) 
 
For several reasons, Turing’s vision was not transformed into a concrete scientific 
program until the very end of the 20th century. First, the 1950s saw the rise of 
cognitivism and artificial intelligence, views which promoted the (unsuccessful) idea 
that intelligence could be seen as an abstract symbol manipulation system that could 
be handcrafted directly in its adult form. Second, Turing missed two important 
elements:A)Learning from a blank slate-a tabula rasa—could not work in real 
organisms facing the complex flow of information and action in the world. Rather, 
development needsconstraints. B) Turing missed the role of the body: behavior and 
cognition arise in a physical substrate, and this physical substrate strongly influences 
development (Pfeifer and Bongard, 2007). The key role of the body is the reason why 
robots, and not simply abstract computer simulations, can be key in developmental 
science.  
 
THE ROLE OF THE BODY IN BIPED WALKING 
 
Let us look at some examples, beginning with the behavior of biped walking. While 
this is a very familiar skill, we are nevertheless far from understanding how we walk 
with two legs, and how infants learn to do this. What is walking? What does it mean 
to acquire the capability to walk on two legs? Walking implies the real-time 
coordination of many body parts. Each of our bones and each of our muscles are like 
the musicians of a symphonic orchestra: they must produce a movement impulse (or 
silence) at the right moment; and it is the juxtaposition and integration of all these 
impulses and silences which builds the symphony of the whole body walking forward 
with elegance and robustness.  
 
But is there a musical score which plans these coordination details? Is there a 
conductor driving the movement? In technical terms, is walking equivalent to 
calculating? Does the brain, every few milliseconds, observe the current state of the 
body and environment and compute the right muscular activations to maintain 
balance and move forward with minimal energy consumption? 
 

Viewing walking as pure computation is the approach which has long been taken by 
specialists who study human walking. Viewed in this context, understanding the 
development of walking requires understanding how the child could develop the 
capability to achieve all these real-time computations and make predictions about the 
dynamics of its body. Some roboticists interested in having biped robots walk also 
tried this approach.Yet, even if sometimes there are beautiful performances (Hirose 
and Ogawa, 2007), this has so far led to humanoids that fall very easily, with a very 
unnatural walking style. 
 
 
Figure 3Passive dynamic walker robot. A robot that walks but does not have a brain ! It has neither electric 
power nor computer. Through its shape, its steps are spontaneously generated through the physical interaction 
between its structure and gravity (Adapted from http://dyros.snu.ac.kr/concept-of-passive-dynamic-walking-
robot/). 
Perhaps, then, walking is much more than calculation.Twenty years ago, a genius 
roboticistnamed 
Tad 
McGeerconducted 
an 
experiment 
that 
changed 
our 
understanding of biped walking in humans and machines. He built a pair of 
mechanical 
legs 
(see 
Figure 
3 
and 
video 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WOPED7I5Lac), without a motor and without a 
computer (thus without the possibility to make calculations), and reproduced the 
geometry of human legs (McGeer, 1990).Then, he threw the robot on a little slope, 
and the robot walked: automatically, through the physical interaction between the 
various mechanical parts and gravity, the two legs generated a gait that looked 
surprisingly similar to a human gait, and was robust to disturbances. Other 
laboratories 
replicated 
the 
experiment 
many 
times 
(e.g. 
see 
video 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rhu2xNIpgDE) and showed that this biped 
movement could last forever on a treadmill (Collins et al., 2005). The coordination of 
the set of mechanical parts of this robot, interacting only locally through their physical 
contacts, is self-organized: there is no predefined plan for the coordination, and no 
conductor synchronizing every part of the score. Walking is a dynamic emergent 
pattern where physics and the body have a fundamental role, each providing 
structure and constraints for the other.  
 
These very clever experiments show how robots can be used to disentangle the roles 
of the body and the neural system within a model of walking. And at the same time, 
they articulate experimentally concepts that enlight our understanding of human 
development. Here, we observe the self-organization of a pattern (biped walking) that 
is neither innate (there are no genes and no program) nor learned (there is no 
learning taking place). This concretely demonstrates that the divide between 
innateness and learning can be meaningless. Structure can appear spontaneously 

through complex biophysical interactions. And such structure can then be leveraged 
for learning and development. Such an experiment allowed to formulate and ground 
solidly the hypothesis that learning how to walk may boil down to learning to reuse 
and tune a movement structure already embedded in the dynamics of the body.  
 
SELF-ORGANIZATION 
OF 
CURIOSITY-DRIVEN 
DEVELOPMENTAL 
PROCESSES 
 
Let us examine a second example that concerns the role of curiosity in child 
development. Human children learn many things, often in a progressive way with a 
specific timing and ordering. For example, before they learn to walk with their two 
legs, they first explore how to control their neck, then to roll on their belly, then to sit, 
to stand up, and walk with their hands on the walls. Why and how do they follow this 
particular progression? Also, many steps of developmental trajectories appear in a 
similar ordering in many children, but at the same time some children follow quite 
different developmental paths. How can we explain the apparent universal 
tendencies on one hand and the individual variability on the other? Is universality the 
result of a “program”? And when we observe diverging developmental paths, does 
this mean that something in the “program” is necessarily broken? 
 
The social environment plays a big role in guiding developmental process, and has 
been the object of study of robot modeling work focusing on the roles of imitation 
(Breazeal and Scassellati, 2002; Nehaniv and Dautenhahn, 2007; Demiris and 
Meltzoff, 2008), joint attention (Nagai et al., 2006), language (Steels, 2012; Cangelosi 
et al., 2010), andinteractive alignment of tutor and learner (Vollmer et al., 2014). But 
there is another fundamental force which drives all of us: curiosity, which pushes us 
to discover, to create, to invent. 
 
Research in psychology and neuroscience has identified that our brains have an 
intrinsic motivation to explore novel activities for the sake of learning and practicing 
(Lowenstein, 1994). Yet we still understand little about curiosity and how it impacts 
development. Neuroscientists are only beginning to identify brain circuits involved in 
spontaneous exploratory behaviors (Gottlieb et al., 2013).  
 
Several research teams have proposed to advance our understanding of curiosity 
and its impact on development by fabricating robots that learn, discover, and 
generate their own goals with models of curiosity-driven learning (Baldassarre and 
Mirolli, 2013; Gottlieb et al., 2013; Oudeyer and Kaplan, 2007). An example comes 
from 
the 
Playground 
experiment 
(see 
Figure 
4 
and 
video 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAoNzHjzzys ;Oudeyer et al., 2007; Oudeyer and 
Smith, 2014). Here, a robot learns by making experiments: he tries actions, observes 
effects, and detects regularities between these actions and their effects. This allows 
him to make predictions. The way he chooses actions is like a little scientist: he 
chooses experiments which he thinks can improve his own predictions, which can 
provide new information, which make it progress in learning, while continuously 
allocating some proportion of time to exploring other activities in search of new 
potential niches of progress. The robot is also equipped with a mechanism that 
simultaneously 
categorizes 
its 
sensorimotor 
experiences 
into 
different 
categoriesbased on how similar they are in learnability and controllability.  
 

At any moment in its development, the robot mainly focuses on exploring activities 
that are sources of learning progress, those that are neither too easy nor too difficult. 
This models the idea that what the brain finds interesting to practice is what is just 
beyond the current level of knowledge or competencies (Csikszenthmihalyi, 1991; 
Schmidhuber, 1991; Kidd, Piantadosi, &Aslin, 2012). Such a model also leads to a 
concrete definition of curiosity as a motivational mechanism that pushes an organism 
to explore activities for the primary sake of gaining information (as opposed to 
searching for information to achieve an external goal like finding food or shelter). 
 
 
Figure 4Curiosity-driven learning in the Playground Experiment. The Playground Experiment (Oudeyer et al., 
2007 ; Oudeyer and Smith, 2014). The robot in the center explores and learns to predict the effects of its 
actions, driven by a form of artificial curiosity. The behaviors and know-how it acquires spontaneously evolve 
and self-organize into developmental stages of increasing complexity, without an initial program specifying 
these stages. For example, the robot learns at its own initiative how to grasp an object in front of him, or how 
to produce vocalizations which provoke reactions in the other robot. 
In the Playground experiment, one observes that not only is the robot able to learn 
skills based on its own initiative—for example, by learning how to grasp the object in 
front of it—but also to spontaneously evolve and self-organize its behavior, 
progressively increasing in complexity. Cognitive stages appear, but they are not pre-
programmed. For example, after beginning through relatively random body babbling, 
the robot often focuses first on moving the legs around to predict how it can touch 
objects, then focused on grasping an object with its mouth, and finally ends up 
exploring vocal interaction with the other robot. Critically, the engineer 
preprogrammed neither of these specific activities, nor did the engineer preprogram 
their timing and ordering. 
 
This self-organization results from the dynamic interaction between curiosity, 
learning, and the properties of the body and environment.If the same experiment is 
repeated several times with the same parameters, one observes that often the same 
coarse developmental stages appear. Yet, sometimes individuals invert stages, or 
even generate qualitatively different behaviors. This is due to random small 
contingencies, to even small variability in the physical realities, and to the fact that 

this developmental dynamic system has what mathematicians call“attractors”: a 
collection of differentiated states towards which the system spontaneously evolves as 
soon as it finds itself in their vicinity, called “basins of attraction”.  
 
This robot experiment helps us to understand and formulate hypotheses about how 
development works. It suggests a way to model the mechanisms of curiosity-driven 
learning, and to assess how curiosity can be modeled as a concrete mechanism 
within a physical agent. It also shows how in the long-term curiosity-driven 
developmental process can self-organize developmental stages of increasing 
complexity, without a predefined maturational schedule.  Finally, it offers a way to 
understand individual differences as emergent in development, making clear how 
developmental process might vary across contexts, even with an identical underlying 
mechanism. 
 
SUMMARY 
 
Understanding infant development is one of the greatest scientific challenges of 
contemporary science, and we are only beginning to uncover its basic mechanisms. 
A large source of difficulty comes from the fact that the development of skills in infant 
results from the interactions of multiple mechanisms at multiple spatial (molecules, 
genes, cells, organs, bodies, social groups) and temporal scales. Like spiral galaxies 
which shape is neither the programmatic unfolding of a plan nor the result of learning, 
infant development is pervaded with patterns that form spontaneously out of a 
complex distributed network of forces. The concepts of “innate” or “acquired” are not 
any more adequate tools for explanations, which call for a shift from reductionist to 
systemic accounts.  
 
As physics realized a long time ago, systemic explanations of pattern formation in 
complex systems require the use of formal models based on mathematics and 
algorithms, which allow us to fabricate and simulate aspects of reality. In the words of 
Nobel prize physicist Richard Feynman: 
 
“What I cannot create I cannot understand” 
 
Such an approach is now being taken to developmental science, where algorithmic 
and robotic models are used to explore the dynamics of pattern formation in 
sensorimotor, cognitive and social development. Formulating hypothesis about 
development using such models, and exploring them through experiments with 
simulation and robots, allows us to consider the interaction between many 
mechanisms and parameters. This crucially complements traditional experimental 
methods in psychology and neuroscience where only a few variables can be studied 
at the same time.  
 
Furthermore, the use of robots is of particular importance. The laws of physics 
generate everywhere around us spontaneous patterns in the inorganic world (ice 
crystals, clouds, dunes, river deltas, …). They also strongly impact the living, and in 
particular constrain and guide infant development through the properties of its 
(changing) body in interaction with the physical environment. Being able to consider 
the body as an experimental variable, something that can be systematically changed 
in order to study the impact on skill formation, has been a dream to many 

developmental scientists. This is today becoming possible with robotics (Kaplan and 
Oudeyer, 2009).
