Constraint-free natural image reconstruction from fMRI signals based 
on convolutional neural network 
Chi Zhang1, Kai Qiao1, Linyuan Wang1, Li Tong1, Ying Zeng1,2, Bin Yan1* 
1National Digital Switching System Engineering and Technological Research Center, Zhengzhou, 
China  
2Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and 
Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China 
* Correspondence:  
Bin Yan 

Keywords: image reconstruction, functional magnetic resonance imaging, convolutional neural 
network, visual representation, brain decoding  
Abstract 
In recent years, research on decoding brain activity based on functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) has made remarkable achievements. However, constraint-free natural image reconstruction 
from brain activity remains a challenge, as specifying brain activity for all possible images is 
impractical. The existing research simplified the problem by using semantic prior information or just 
reconstructing simple images, including letters and digitals. Without semantic prior information, we 
present a novel method to reconstruct natural images from the fMRI signals of human visual cortex 
based on the computation model of convolutional neural network (CNN). First, we extracted the unit 
output of viewed natural images in each layer of a pre-trained CNN as CNN features. Second, we 
transformed image reconstruction from fMRI signals into the problem of CNN feature visualization by 
training a sparse linear regression to map from the fMRI patterns to CNN features. By iteratively 
optimization to find the matched image, whose CNN unit features become most similar to those 
predicted from the brain activity, we finally achieved the promising results for the challenging 
constraint-free natural image reconstruction. The semantic prior information of the stimuli was not 
used when training decoding model, and any category of images (not constraint by the training set) 
could be reconstructed theoretically. We found that the reconstructed images resembled the natural 
stimuli, especially in position and shape. The experimental results suggest that hierarchical visual 
features can effectively express the visual perception process of the human brain. 
1 
Introduction 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become an effective tool for decoding brain 
activity, especially in visual decoding. A large number of studies have implemented the classification 
of stimulus categories [1, 2], memories [3], imagination [4], and even dreams [5] by multi-voxel pattern 
analysis (MVPA) [6]. More precisely, encoding model has been built to identify stimulus [7]. Very 
few studies focused on visual image reconstruction. The goal of reconstruction is to produce a literal 
picture of the stimulus image. Visual image reconstruction is a more challenging problem because it 
needs much more decoded information than classification or identification, especially for natural 
images containing infinitely variable complex information.  

 
 
 
 
2 
To simplify the problem of stimulus image reconstruction, most studies focused on the reconstruction 
of simple images. Thirion et al. [8] first implemented image reconstruction based on fMRI. They 
estimated the response model of each voxel in the retinotopic mapping experiment and reconstructed 
the simple images composed of quickly rotating Gabor filters in the passive viewing experiment and 
imagery experiment for the same subject. Miyawaki et al. [9] realized the reconstruction of simple 
letters and graphics (10×10 resolution) by solving the linear mapping model from the voxels of visual 
cortex to each pixel of image. Schoenmakers et al. [10] introduced the idea of sparse learning and the 
forward linear Gauss model to reconstruct the handwritten English letter “BRAINS” from the fMRI 
signals of the visual cortex. They further improved the results of letter reconstruction by introducing 
the Gauss hybrid model [11, 12]. Yargholi et al. [13, 14] used the Gauss Network to reconstruct six 
and nine digital handwritten numerals, but it is more like a problem of classification in essence. 
Naselaris et al. [15] first implemented the reconstruction of natural images using a priori information 
and a combination of structural coding and semantic coding models. However, it is essentially an image 
recognition problem in a limited natural image library. On this basis, they realized the reconstruction 
of video via image reconstruction frame by frame [16].  
At the same time, deep neural network (DNN) has become the focus of scholars in recent years due to 
its strong capability of feature representation. Deep learning has achieved a breakthrough in image 
detection/classification [17, 18], speech recognition [19] and natural language processing [20, 21]. 
More and more research have applied DNN to fMRI visual decoding [22]. Agrawal et al. [23] first 
encoded fMRI signals using the features extracted from images by convolutional neural network 
(CNN). Güçlü et al. used a DNN tuned for object categorization to probe neural responses to 
naturalistic stimuli. The result showed an explicit gradient for feature complexity existed in the ventral 
[24] and dorsal [25] visual pathways of the human brain. Cichy et al. [26] compared temporal 
(magnetoencephalography, MEG) and spatial (fMRI) brain visual representations with representations 
in the DNN tuned to the statistics of real-world visual recognition. The results showed that the DNN 
captured the stages of human visual processing in both time and space from early visual areas toward 
the ventral and dorsal streams. Horikawa et al. [27] proposed a generic decoding model based on 
hierarchical visual features generated by DNN. They found that hierarchical visual features could be 
predicted from fMRI patterns and used them to identify seen/imagined object categories from a set of 
computed features for numerous object images. Furthermore, they found that the features decoded from 
the dream fMRI data had a strong positive correlation with the intermediate and advanced DNN layer 
features of the dreamed objects [28]. Du et al. [29] achieved better performance in simple images 
reconstruction through deep generation networks, but this method still has some problems with natural 
image reconstruction. Using the convolution kernels of the first layer of CNN, Wen et al. [30] 
implemented the reconstruction of dynamic video frame by frame. However, the results still had a gap 
with natural images, although the position information was restored well. In a word, all these studies 
suggested that DNN could help in providing more detailed interpretation of human brain visual 
information. Constraint-free natural images may be reconstructed well due to the efficient feature 
representation of DNN. 
Recently, Mahendran et al. [31, 32] proposed a method about the input image generation for each CNN 
layer feature. Inspired by the research, this paper presents a novel visual image reconstruction method 
for natural images based on fMRI (Figure 1). By training the decoders that predict the CNN features 
of natural stimuli from fMRI activity patterns, we transformed image reconstruction from fMRI signals 
into the problem of CNN feature visualization. Then, iteratively optimization was performed to find 
the matched image whose CNN unit features became most similar to those predicted from the brain 
activity. Finally, the matched image was taken as the reconstruction result from the brain activity. By 

 
 
 
 
3 
analyzing the experimental results, we verified the effectiveness of the method and the homology 
between human and computer visions. 
 
Figure 1: Main process of visual image reconstruction. When the subject was seeing natural stimuli, 
fMRI responses were acquired through a MRI scanner. Then, the CNN features of natural stimuli were 
predicted by the decoder trained on the training set. The predicted CNN features were visualized by 
iteratively optimization to find the matched image whose CNN unit features became most similar to 
those predicted from the brain activity. Finally, the matched image was taken as the reconstruction 
result from the brain activity. 
2 
Materials and Methods 
2.1 
Experimental data 
The data used in this paper were the same as [7], downloaded from an online data sharing database 
(http://crcns.org/data-sets/vc/vim-1). The data consisted of the blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) 
activities of two human subjects (S1 and S2) acquired using a 4T INOVA MR scanner (Varian, Inc., 
Palo Alto, CA, USA). Eighteen coronal slices were acquired covering occipital cortex (slice thickness 
2.25 mm, slice gap 0.25 mm, field of view 128128 mm2). fMRI data were acquired using a gradient-
echo EPI pulse sequence (matrix size 6464, TR 1 s, TE 28 ms, flip angle 20°, spatial resolution 22
2.5 mm3). 

 
 
 
 
4 
The dataset is divided into two sets: training set and validation set. In the training phase, the subjects 
viewed 1750 grayscale natural images (20°20°) randomly selected from a database. Subjects were 
fixated on a central white square (0.2°0.2°). Stimuli were flashed at 200 ms intervals for 1 s followed 
by 3 s of gray background in successive 4 s trials. During the validation phase, the subjects viewed 120 
novel natural images presented in the same way as the training phase. Each training image was repeated 
two times, and each test image was repeated 13 times. Five sessions of data were collected as subjects 
were presented with natural images. Training and test data were collected in the same scan sessions.  
First, functional images were manually co-registered to correct differences in head positioning across 
different sessions. Then, automated motion correction and slice timing were applied to the data 
acquired within the same session by SPM (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) software. 
2.2 
Extracting hierarchical visual features based on CNN 
We used a deep CNN (Caffe–Alex [caffe]) [33], which closely reproduced the network by Krizhevsky 
et al. [17] to extract hierarchical visual features from the stimuli. Table 1 details the structure of the 
Caffe–Alex model. This and many other similar networks use alternately the following computational 
building blocks: linear convolution, rectified linear unit (ReLU) gating, spatial max-pooling, and group 
normalization. This CNN was trained to achieve the best performance of object recognition in Large 
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge 2012.  
This model can be succinctly divided into eight layers: the first five are convolutional layers (consist 
of 96, 256, 384, 384, and 256 kernels), and the last three layers are fully connected for object 
classification (consist of 4096, 4096, and 1000 artificial neurons). Each convolutional layer is 
composed of some or all of the following four stages: linear convolution, ReLU gating, spatial max-
pooling, and group normalization. For classification, layers 6 and 7 are fully connected networks with 
a rectified linear threshold, and layer 8 uses a softmax function to output a vector of probabilities by 
which the input image belongs to individual categories.  
For each image inputted to the CNN, the output of each layer was extracted to form the image hierarchy 
features. The dimensions of each layer features are shown in Table 1. We used the matconvnet toolbox 
[34] for implementing CNNs. 
Table 1: Structure of Caffe–Alex model 
Layer 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Name 
conv1 relu1 mpool1 norm1 conv2 relu2 mpool2 norm2 conv3 relu3 conv4 relu4 conv5 relu5 mpool5 fc6 relu6 fc7 relu7 fc8 
Type 
cnv 
relu mpool 
nrm 
cnv 
relu mpool 
nrm 
cnv 
relu 
cnv 
relu 
cnv 
relu mpool cnv relu cnv relu cnv 
Channels 
96 
96 
96 
96 
256 
256 
256 
256 
384 
384 
384 
384 
256 
256 
256 
4096 4096 4096 4096 1000 
2.3 
Decoding fMRI signals to CNN features 
Using the training images, we estimated multivariate regression models to predict the feature maps of 
CNN layers based on distributed cortical fMRI signals. For each layer, a linear model was defined to 
map the distributed fMRI signals to the output features of artificial neurons in the CNN. For a specific 
feature of a particular CNN layer, it is expressed as Eq. (1): 
y
w
X ,     (1) 

 
 
 
 
5 
where, y stands for the CNN features of training images, which is an m-by-1 matrix, where m is the 
number of training images. X  stands for the observed fMRI signals within the visual cortex, which is 
an m-by-(n+1) matrix, where m is the number of training images, and n is the number of voxels. The 
last column of X  is a constant vector with all elements equal to 1. w is the unknown weighting vector 
to solve. It is an (n+1)-by-1 matrix.  
As the number of training samples m is far less than the number of voxels in visual field n, the problem 
is actually the solution of ill-posed equation, and no unique solution can be found. In addition, several 
theoretical studies suggest that a sparse coding scheme is used to represent natural images in primary 
visual cortex [35, 36]. It means that only a small number of active neurons are for a special stimulus. 
By contrast, only a small number of visual stimuli can make a neuron active. As a proxy of neural 
activities, expecting that the responses of neurons can also reflect the sparse property is reasonable. 
Thus, w should be sparse to be more in line with visual characteristics.  
Based on the above assumption, the major problem of constructing is how to solve a sparse 
representation problem. Traditional sparse recovery is formulated as a general NP-Hard problem as 
follows:  
0
min
     subject to  
w
w
w
y

X
      (2) 
Two approximate solutions could be used to solve the problem. One is transforming the NP-Hard L0 
optimization problem into the L1 optimization problem. Donoho et al. showed that for some 
measurement matrix X , this NP-Hard problem is equivalent to its relaxation [37]: 
1
min
     subject to  
w
w
w
y

X
.     (3) 
L1-minimization method provides uniform guarantees for sparse recovery. If the measurement matrix 
satisfies the restricted isometry property (RIP) condition, it works correctly for all sparse signals. In 
this paper, we used YAll1 [38] to solve the L1 optimization problem. 
An alternate approach for sparse recovery problem is greedy algorithm. Greedy algorithms are quite 
fast by computing the support of the sparse signal iteratively, although it lacks the strong guarantees 
which L1-minimization provides. Considering that decoding model must be estimated for each CNN 
feature, the approximation method should be fast enough and simple to decrease the time cost. 
Therefore, we focused more on greedy algorithms to investigate the sparseness of decoding model. In 
this paper, we selected regularized orthogonal matching pursuit (ROMP) [39, 40] to solve the decoding 
model. Finally, we compared both YAll1 and ROMP and selected ROMP as the solution for the 
decoding model.  
2.4 
Reconstructing image from CNN features 
In a recent study, Mahendran et al. proposed a method to reconstruct original images from CNN 
features by gradient descent optimization [32] to better understand deep image representations. This 
paper used the method to reconstruct the image from the decoded CNN features. We provided 
representation function 
:
H W C
D




(represents the process of the extracting CNN features of a 
layer) and decoded the CNN features of one layer 
0
0
= (x )


. The image reconstruction aims at 
finding the image x
H W C



 that minimizes the following objective:  

 
 
 
 
6 
*
0
x
x =argmin  ( (x),
)+λ (x)
H W C






,    (4) 
where the loss  compares the image representation 
(x)

 and the target one 
0
, and 
:
H W C




 
stands for regularized constraint item. We used the Euclidean distance as the loss function and the 
regularized constraint item constants of two regularizers. The first one is simply the norm
(x)= x




, 
where x  is the vectorized and meansubtracted image. By selecting a relatively large exponent ( = 6 
is used in the experiments), the range of the image is encouraged to stay within a target interval instead 
of diverging. The second richer regularizer is the total variation (TV), encouraging images to stay 
within a target interval instead of diverging and to consist of piece-wise constant patches. In addition, 
extended gradient descent used momentum [17] to solve (4) more effectively.  
2.5 
Quantification of model performance  
To quantify how well the voxel responses predicted CNN features, we defined CNN feature prediction 
accuracy as the Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) between their actual and predicted feature values 
on the test set. To achieve better image reconstruction performance, all the decoded features of one 
layer for image reconstruction should be similar to the features extracted from the actual natural image 
as far as possible. For a layer of CNN features, the mean r was used to express its prediction accuracy.  
To solve (2) more precisely and achieve better image reconstruction, we compared ROMP and YALL1 
with prediction accuracy. Moreover, we compared the prediction accuracy of different layers of CNN 
to find a most suitable layer to decode fMRI signals into and reconstruct the original image from. 
Finally, considering the prediction accuracy of each CNN layer and the characteristics of the image 
reconstruction method (with the same prediction accuracy, more low-level features, and better 
reconstruction performance), we selected pool1 layer as the image representation  (see 2.4 for more 
details) to reconstruct the original image from the voxel response. 
Given the sparsity of the decoding model, the decoding process included voxel selection. During the 
decoding of fMRI signals into the features of each layer, we selected the 300 most frequently utilized 
voxels as significant voxels and defined the contribution of each visual area (V1, V2, V3, and V4) as 
the proportions of each visual area in the significant voxels. By analyzing the segmentation of 
significant voxels, the hierarchical structure similarity between CNN and the visual cortex can be also 
verified.  
We used the weighted complex wavelet structural similarity metric (CWSSIM) to assess the accuracy 
of the reconstructions [41]. The metric used the coefficients of a complex wavelet decomposition of 
two images to compute a single number that described the degree of structural similarity between the 
two images. 
3 
Results 
3.1 
Comparative analysis of ROMP and YALL1 for decoding model 

 
 
 
 
7 
 
Figure 2: Prediction accuracy of the pool1 layer features decoded from the fMRI data of S1. CNN 
feature prediction accuracy are defined as the Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) between their actual 
and predicted feature values on the test set. The average prediction accuracy of ROMP was 
significantly higher than that of YALL1 on t-statistics at a significance level of 10–5. 
ROMP and YALL1 were used to solve the decoded model, and the prediction accuracy of the pool1 
layer features decoded from the fMRI data of S1 is shown in Figure 2. The average prediction accuracy 
of ROMP reached 0.266, which was significantly higher than that of YALL1 on t-statistics at a 
significance level of 10–5. This finding might indicate that ROMP better reflected the sparsity of visual 
perception. Furthermore, ROMP was much faster than YALL1, which was particularly important for 
tens of thousands of CNN features. In conclusion, we finally selected ROMP as our decoding model 
solution. 
3.2 
Prediction accuracy of different layers of CNN  
We calculated the prediction accuracy of all layers of CNN based on both the fRMI data of S1 and S2. 
As shown in Figure 3, higher prediction accuracy was obtained in pool1, conv2, conv3, conv4, conv5, 
fc6, fc7, and fc8 layers, whereas the prediction accuracy in conv1, relu1, relu2, relu3, relu4, relu5, 
relu6, and relu7 layers was low possibly because the ReLU function reduced the predictability of the 
linear decoding model. Intuitively, image reconstruction performed better when it utilized the features 
of the layer with higher prediction accuracy as image representations. However, under the same 
prediction accuracy, the reconstruction method used in this paper had better accuracy rate in the lower 
layer because the more distortion was generated during back propagating the higher layer features. 
Thus, we finally selected pool1 layer as the image representation  (see 2.4 for more details) to 
reconstruct the original image from the voxel response. 

 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b)  
Figure 3: Prediction accuracy of all layers of CNN. (a) and (b) show the prediction accuracy of all 
layers based on fMRI signals of S1 and S2, respectively. All the prediction accuracy levels are 
significantly higher than chance (p<0.01, T-test). The prediction accuracy levels of pool1, conv2, 

 
 
 
 
9 
conv3, conv4, conv5, fc6, fc7, and fc8 layers are all significantly higher than those of conv1, relu1, 
relu2, relu3, relu4, relu5, relu6, and relu7 layers for both subjects (p<0.001, T-test).  
3.3 
Contribution of each visual area when decoding fMRI signals into each layer feature 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
45.00%
50.00%
Visual area assignments of significant voxels
V1
V2
V3
V4
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
45.00%
50.00%
Visual area assignments of significant voxels
V1
V2
V3
V4

 
 
 
 
10 
Figure 4. Visual area assignments of significant voxels. (a) and (b) show the result of S1 an S2, 
respectively. The total numbers of voxels in V1, V2, V3, and V4 are 1294/1399, 2083/1890, 1790/1772, 
and 484/556 (S1/S2). For each subject, 300 voxels with the highest frequency selected for decoding 
each layer feature served as significant voxels.  
The visual area assignments of the significant voxels across all CNN layers are shown in Figure 4. The 
results showed that the assignments of the significant voxels in V1 and V2 had a decreasing trend 
(Mann–Kendall test, p<0.05) with the CNN layer, whereas the assignments of the significant voxels in 
V3 and V4 had an increasing trend (Mann–Kendall test, p<0.05) for both subjects. That is, most 
significant voxels assigned to shallow convolutional layers were located in early visual areas, whereas 
most significant voxels assigned to deep convolutional layers were located in downstream visual areas. 
As we know, CNN is hierarchically organized with feature complexity. Thus, these findings provided 
quantitative evidence again for the thesis that the visual ventral stream was hierarchically organized 
[42], with downstream areas processing increasingly complex features of the retinal input.  
3.4 
Performance of image reconstruction 
Image reconstruction was implemented on the test set based on the pool1 features decoded from the 
voxel responses using the decoding model trained in the training set. Part of the original images of the 
test set and the corresponding reconstructed images are shown in Figure 5. Most reconstructed images 
were found to clearly capture the position, shape, and even the texture information of the object in the 
original image in the case that the stimuli were grayscale. Moreover, we found that most of 
reconstructed images reproduced foreground objects well but were less sensitive to perceptually less 
salient objects or backgrounds. To some extent, this finding showed that the visual perception of the 
brain measured by fMRI was selective during image understanding, which might be the main reason 
why reconstruction images tended to regenerate those image parts relevant to visual perception. In 
addition, accuracy of the reconstructions was assessed by CWSSIM (Figure 6). The average accuracy 
of the reconstructions for S1 and S2 reached 0.3921 and 0.3938, respectively. In addition, both S1 and 
S2 were significantly more accurate than chance (p<10–5, T-test).  As a way that computers can judge, 
the accuracy of the reconstructions assessed by CWSSIM may be not consistent with the judgment of 
humans. 
 
Original 
image 
Reconstructed 
image 
(S1) 
 
0.5727 
0.4384 
0.4572 
0.4875 

 
 
 
 
11 
Reconstructed 
image 
(S2) 
 
0.5618 
0.4159 
0.5188 
0.5069 
Original 
image 
Reconstructed 
image 
(S1) 
 
0.4608 
0.3449 
0.3713 
0.2664 
Reconstructed 
image 
(S2) 
 
0.5547 
0.3943 
0.4882 
0.3053 
 
Figure 5: Performance of image reconstruction. The numbers below the reconstructed image represent 
the accuracy of the reconstructions assessed by CWSSIM. 

 
 
 
 
12 
 
Figure 6: Accuracy of reconstructions. The red line indicates chance performance. Error bars show 
the standard deviation of the mean accuracy. 
4 
Discussion  
Same as most studies, the linear model was selected in this paper to decode fMRI signals to CNN 
features. A more complex model inspired by visual mechanism may be able to improve the decoding 
effect, including the Gabor wavelet pyramid model [7] to predict the responses of voxels in early visual 
areas. We compared the ROMP and YALL1 to select a better one to solve the decoding model and 
found that sparsity was a good feature for solving algorithms. However, we just compared two typical 
algorithms in two classes of sparse optimization methods. Thus, better algorithms need to be explored 
to improve the decoding accuracy. 
The existing studies mostly only analyzed the relationship between the response of visual voxels and 
the hierarchical features of the five convolutional layers of CNN and three fully connected layers. In 
this paper, the decoding accuracy of all layers in CNN was analyzed (Figure 3) and some interesting 
phenomena that have not been discovered before were found. For example, the prediction accuracy of 
convolutional and fully connected layers were relatively higher (except for conv1), which might be the 
reason why most studies only analyzed them. We found that the prediction accuracy of conv1 layer 
was low but that of the next layer pool1 was higher. The reason might be that the fMRI signals were 
more like pool1, which reflected the responses of a group of nerve cells rather than a single nerve cell, 
thus it was constrained to decode fMRI signals into the lowest level but most sophisticated features in 
the first layer of CNN. Moreover, all the layer features of ReLU had relatively low prediction accuracy. 
As we know, ReLU function is originally an approximate simulation of the activation model of brain 
neurons for faster and better training of a deeper network model. This phenomenon may lead to the 
characteristics of the relu layer deviating from the visual perception process of the human brain 
(measured by fMRI). These findings based on fMRI may be useful for the improvement of CNN. 
Recently, several research found the similarity between CNN and the visual pathway through visual 
encoding [23-25, 43, 44] or decoding [27, 28, 30]. These findings were verified more carefully in this 
paper through the analysis of the contribution of each visual area during the decoding of fMRI signals 
to all the layer features of CNN (Figure 4). From another point of view, these cases may be because 

 
 
 
 
13 
CNN is closer to the human brain in image understanding, thus it can achieve various essential 
improvements in image target recognition and detection and other functions. 
In the final process of image reconstruction, we obtained better reconstruction performance by 
inverting pool1 layer feature decoded from fMRI signals, although the prediction accuracy of pool1 
was not the highest. We tried to reconstruct images based on the high-level layer with higher accuracy 
(such as that of conv3) but did not work well probably due to the ultimate goal of the CNN to identify 
the target in images. Thus, the higher layer features contained more semantic information and less low-
level features of images. This case led to larger distortion in the reconstructed images by inverting 
higher layer features even when the features were extracted directly from the original image [31, 32]. 
In the case of similar prediction accuracy, better reconstruction could be implemented based on the 
pool1 layer but could also lead to the recovered information that are almost low-level information, such 
as location, edge, texture, and so on. To achieve better image reconstruction performance, a fusion 
method based on CNN multi-layer features rather than single-layer features is encouraged. In this way, 
the details of the image can be recovered better by using the low-level layers of CNN, whereas the 
semantics of the image can be guaranteed by the high-level features. 
5 
Conclusion 
This paper presents a novel method for reconstructing constraint-free natural images from fMRI signals 
based on CNN. Different from direct reconstruction from fMRI signals, we transferred the 
understanding of brain activity into the understanding of feature representation in CNN by training a 
mapping from fMRI signals to hierarchical features extracted from CNN. Thus, image reconstruction 
from fMRI signals became the problem of CNN feature visualization. By iteratively optimizing to find 
the matched image, we finally achieved the promising results for the challenging constraint-free natural 
image reconstruction. Furthermore, the homology of human and machine visions was validated based 
on the experimental results. As the semantic prior information of the stimuli were not used when 
training decoding model, any category of images (not constraint by the training set) could be 
reconstructed theoretically based on the CNN pre-trained on the massive samples of ImageNet. To 
achieve better image reconstruction performance on colorful images or videos, CNN multi-layer 
features representing different levels of image features should be taken into account. 
6 
Conflict of Interest 
The authors declared no conflict of interest. 
7
