arXiv:1101.2279v1  [cs.AI]  12 Jan 2011
Planning with Partial Preference Models
Tuan Nguyen∗,∗∗,a, Minh Dob, Alfonso Gerevinic, Ivan Serinad, Biplav Srivastavae,
Subbarao Kambhampatia
a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University Brickyard Suite 501, 699 South Mill
Avenue, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
b Embedded Reasoning Area, Palo Alto Research Center 3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
cDipartimento di Elettronica per l’Automazione, Universit degli Studi di Brescia, Via Branze 38, I-25123 Brescia, Italy
dFree University of Bozen-Bolzano, Viale Ratisbona, 16, I-39042 Bressanone, Italy
eIBM India Research Laboratory, New Delhi and Bangalore, India
Abstract
Current work in planning with preferences assume that the user’s preference models are com-
pletely speciﬁed and aim to search for a single solution plan. In many real-world planning sce-
narios, however, the user probably cannot provide any information about her desired plans, or in
some cases can only express partial preferences. In such situations, the planner has to present
not only one but a set of plans to the user, with the hope that some of them are similar to the plan
she prefers. We ﬁrst propose the usage of different measures to capture quality of plan sets that
are suitable for such scenarios: domain-independent distance measures deﬁned based on plan
elements (actions, states, causal links) if no knowledge of the user’s preferences is given, and
the Integrated Convex Preference measure in case the user’s partial preference is provided. We
then investigate various heuristic approaches to ﬁnd set of plans according to these measures,
and present empirical results demonstrating the promise of our approach.1
Key words: Planning, Preferences, Heuristics, Search
1. Introduction
Most work in automated planning takes as input a complete speciﬁcation of domain mod-
els and/or user preferences and the planner searches for a single solution satisfying the goals,
probably optimizing some objective function. In many real world planning scenarios, however,
the user’s preferences on desired plans are either unknown or at best partially speciﬁed (c.f.
Kambhampati (2007)). In such cases, the planner’s job changes from ﬁnding a single optimal
plan to ﬁnding a set of representative solutions (“options”) and presenting them to the user with
the hope that she can ﬁnd one of them desirable. As an example, in adaptive web services com-
position, the causal dependencies among some web services might change at the execution time,
1This work is an extension of the work presented in Srivastava et al. (2007) and Nguyen et al. (2009).
∗Corresponding author.
∗∗Authors listed in alphabetical order, with the exception of the ﬁrst and the last.

Preprint submitted to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
October 26, 2018

and as a result the web service engine wants to have a set of diverse plans/compositions such that
if there is a failure while executing one composition, an alternative may be used which is less
likely to be failing simultaneously (Chaﬂe et al., 2006). However, if a user is helping in selecting
the compositions, the planner could be ﬁrst asked for a set of plans that may take into account the
user’s trust in some particular sources and when she selects one of them, it is next asked to ﬁnd
plans that are similar to the selected one. The requirement of searching for a set of plans is also
considered in intrusion detection (Boddy et al., 2005) where a security analysis needs to analyze
a set of attack plans that might be attempted by a potential adversary, given limited (or unknown)
information about the adversary’s model (e.g., his goals, capabilities, habits, ...), and the result-
ing analyzed information can then be used to set up defensive strategies against potential attacks
in the future. Another example can be found in Memon et al. (2001) in which test cases for
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) are generated as a set of distinct plans, each corresponding to a
sequence of actions that a user could perform, given the user’s unknown preferences on how to
interact with the GUI to achieve her goals. The capability of synthesizing multiple plans would
also have potential application in case-based planning (e.g., Serina (2010)) where it is important
to have a plan set satisfying a case instance. These plans can be different in terms of criteria such
as resources, makespan and cost that can only be speciﬁed in the retrieval phase. In the problem
of travel planning for individuals of a city in a distributed manner while also optimizing public
resource (e.g., road, trafﬁc police personel), the availability of a number of plans for each per-
son’s goals could make the plan merging phase easier and reduce the conﬂicts among individual
plans.
In this work, we investigate the problem of generating a set of plans in order to deal with
planning situations where the preference model is not completely speciﬁed. In particular, we
consider the following scenarios:
• Even though the planner is aware that the user has some preferences on solution plans, it
is not provided with any of that knowledge.
• The planner is provided with incomplete knowledge of the user’s preferences. In particular,
the user is interested in some plan attributes (such as the duration and cost of a ﬂight, or
whether all packages with priority are delivered on time in a logistic domain), each with
different but unknown degree of importance (represented by weight or trade-off values).
Normally, it is quite hard for a user to indicate the exact trade-off values, but instead more
likely to determine that one attribute is more (or less) important than some others—for
instance, a bussinessman would consider the duration of a ﬂight much more important
than its cost. Such kind of incomplete preference speciﬁcation could be modeled with a
probability distribution of weights values2, and is therefore assumed to be given as an input
(together with the attributes) to the planner.
Even though, in principle, the user would have a better chance to ﬁnd her desired plan from a
larger plan set, there are two problems to consider—one computational, and other comprehen-
sional. The computational problem is that synthesis of a single plan is often quite costly already,
and therefore it is even more challenging to search for a large plan set. Coming to the second
problem, it is unclear that the user will be able to inspect a large set of plans to identify the plan
2Even if we do not have any special knowledge about this probability distribution, we can always start by initializing
it to be uniform, and gradually improve it based on interaction with the user.
2

she prefers. What is clearly needed, therefore, is the ability to generate a set of plans, among
all sets of bounded (small) number of plans, with the highest chance of including the user’s pre-
ferred plan. An immediate challenge is formalizing what it means for a meaningful set of plans,
in other words what the quality measure of plan sets should be given an incomplete preference
speciﬁcation.
We propose different quality measures for the two scenarios listed above. In the extreme
case when the user could not provide any knowledge of her preferences, we deﬁne a spectrum
of distance measures between two plans based on their syntactic features in order to deﬁne the
diversity measure of plan sets. These measures can be used regardless of the user’s preference,
and by maximizing the diversity of a plan set we increase the chance that the set is uniformly
distributed in the unknown preference space, and therefore likely contains a plan that is close to
a user’s desired one.
This measure can be further reﬁned when some knowledge of the user’s preferences is pro-
vided. As mentioned above, we assume that the user’s preference is speciﬁed by a convex com-
bination of plan attributes, and incomplete in the sense that the distribution of trade-off weights
is given, not their exact values. The whole set of best plans (i.e. the ones with the best value
function) can be pictured as the lower convex-hull of the Pareto set on the attribute space. To
measure the quality of any (bounded) set of plans on the whole optimal set, we adapt the idea
of Integrated Preference Function (IPF) (Carlyle et al., 2003), in particular its special case Inte-
grated Convex Preference (ICP). This measure was developed in the Operations Research (OR)
community in the context of multi-criteria scheduling, and is able to associate a robust measure
of representativeness for any set of solution schedules (Fowler et al., 2005).
Armed with these quality measures, we can then formulate the problem of planning with
partial preference models as ﬁnding a bounded set of plans that has the best quality value. Our
next contribution therefore is to investigate effective approaches for using quality measures to
bias a planner’s search to ﬁnd a high quality plan set efﬁciently. For the ﬁrst scenario when the
preference speciﬁcation is not provided, two representative state-of-the-art planning approaches
are considered. The ﬁrst, GP-CSP (Do and Kambhampati, 2001), typiﬁes the issues involved
in generating diverse plans in bounded horizon compilation approaches, while the second, LPG
(Gerevini et al., 2003), typiﬁes the issues involved in modifying the heuristic search planners.
Our investigations with GP-CSP allow us to compare the relative difﬁculties of enforcing diversity
with each of the three different distance measures (elaborated in later section). With LPG, we
ﬁnd that the proposed quality measure makes it more effective in generating plan set over large
problem instances. For the second case when part of the user’s preferences is provided, we
also present a spectrum of approaches for solving this problem efﬁciently. We implement these
approaches on top of Metric-LPG (Gerevini et al., 2008). Our empirical evaluation compares
these approaches both among themselves as well as against the methods for generating diverse
plans ignoring the partial preference information, and the results demonstrate the promise of our
proposed solutions.
Our work can be considered as a complement to current research in planning with prefer-
ences, as shown in Figure 1. Under the perspective of planning with preferences, most current
work in planning synthesize a single solution plan, or a single best one, in situations where user
has no preferences, or a complete knowledge of preferences is given to the planner. On the
other hand, we address the problem of synthesizing a set of plans when knowledge of user’s
preferences is either completely unknown or partially speciﬁed.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives fundamental concepts in preferences, and
formal notations. In Section 3, we formalize quality measures of plan set in the two scenarios.
3

Figure 1: An overview picture of planning with respect to knowledge of user’s preferences.
Sections 4 and 5 discuss our various heuristic approaches to generate plan sets, together with
the experimental results. We discuss related work in Section 6, future work and conclusion in
Section 7.
2. Background and Notation
Given a planning problem with the set of solution plans S, a user preference model is a transitive,
reﬂextive relation in S×S, which deﬁnes an ordering between two plans p and p′ in S. Intuitively,
p ⪯p′ means that the user prefers p at least as much as p′. Note that this ordering can be
either partial (i.e. it is possible that neither p ⪯p′ nor p′ ⪯p holds—in other words, they are
incomparable), or total (i.e. either p ⪯p′ or p′ ⪯p holds). A plan p is considered more preferred
than a plan p′, denoted by p ≺p′, if p ⪯p′, p′ ̸⪯p, and they are equally preferred if p ⪯p′
and p′ ⪯p. A plan p is an optimal (i.e., most preferred) plan if p ⪯p′ for any other plan p′. A
plan set P ⊆S is considered more preferred than P′ ⊆S, denoted by P ≺P′, if p ≺p′ for any
p ∈P and p′ ∈P′, and they are incomparable if there exists p ∈P and p′ ∈P′ such that p and
p′ are incomparable.
The ordering ⪯implies a partition of S into disjoint plan sets (or classes) S0, S1, ... (S0 ∪
S1 ∪... = S, Si ∩Sj = ∅) such that plans in the same set are equally preferred, and for any set
Si, Sj, either Si ≺Sj , Sj ≺Si, or they are incomparable. The partial ordering between these
sets can be represented as a Hasse diagram (Birkhoff, 1948) where the sets are vetices, and there
is an (upward) edge from Sj to Si if Si ≺Sj and there is not any Sk in the partition such that
Si ≺Sk ≺Sj. We denote l(Si) as the “layer” of the set Si in the diagram, assuming that the
most preferred sets are placed at the layer 0, and l(Sj) = l(Si) + 1 if there is an edge from Sj
to Si. A plan in a set at a layer with the smaller value, in general, is either more preferred than
4

Figure 2: The Hasse diagrams and layers of plan sets implied by two preference models. In (a), S1 ≺S2 ≺S3, and any
two plans are comparable. In (b), on the other hand, S1 ≺S2 ≺S4, S1 ≺S3, and each plan in S3 is incomparable
with plans in S2 and S4.
or incomparable with ones at high-value layers.3 Figure 2 show examples of Hasse diagrams
representing a total and partial preference ordering between plans.
When the preference model is explicitly speciﬁed, answering queries such as comparing two
plans, ﬁnding a most preferred (optimal) plan becomes an easy task. This is possible, however,
only if the set of plans is small and known upfront. Many preference languages, therefore, have
been proposed to represent the relation ⪯in a more compact way, and serve as starting points for
algorithms to answer queries. Most preference languages fall into the following two categories:
• Quantitative languages deﬁne a value function V : S →R which assigns a real number
to each plan, with a precise interpretation that p ⪯p′
⇐⇒V (p) ≤V (p′). Although
this function is deﬁned differently in many languages, at a high level it combines the
user’s preferences on various aspects of plan that can be measured quantitatively. For
instance, in the context of decision-theoretic planning (Boutilier et al., 1999), the value
function of a policy is deﬁned as the expected rewards of states that are visited when the
policy executes. In partial satisfaction (over-subcription) planning (PSP) (Smith, 2004;
Van Den Briel et al., 2004), the quality of plans is deﬁned as its total rewards of soft goals
achieved minus its total action costs. In PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long, 2003), the value func-
tion is an arithmetic function of numerical ﬂuents such as plan makespans, fuel used etc.,
and in PDDL3 (Gerevini et al., 2009) it is enhanced with individual preference speciﬁca-
tion deﬁned as formulae over state trajectory using linear temporal logic (LTL) (Pnueli,
1977).
• Qualitative languages provide qualitative statements that are more intuitive for lay users to
specify. A commonly used language of this type is CP-networks (Boutilier et al., 2004),
where the user can specify her preference statements on values of plan attributes, possibly
given speciﬁcation of others (for instance, “Among tickets with the same prices, I prefer
airline A to airline B.”). Another example is LPP (Bienvenu et al., 2006) in which the
3If ⪯is a total ordering, then plans at smaller layer is more preferred than ones at higher layer.
5

Figure 3: The metamodel (Brafman and Domshlak, 2009).
statements can be speciﬁed using LTL formulae, and possibly being aggregated in different
ways.
Figure 3 shows the conceptual relation of preference models, languages and algorithms. We
refer the reader to the work by Brafman and Domshlak (2009) for a more detailed discussion
on this metamodel, and by Baier and McIlraith (2009) for an overview of different preference
languages used in planning with preferences.
From the modeling point of view, in order to design a suitable language capturing the user’s
preference model, the modeler should be provided with some knowledge of the user’s interest
that affects the way she evaluates plans (for instance, ﬂight duration and ticket cost in a travel
planning scenario). Such knowledge in many cases, however, cannot be completely speciﬁed.
Our purpose therefore is to present a bounded set of plans to the user in the hope that it will
increase the chance that she can ﬁnd a desired plan. In the next section, we formalize the quality
measures for plan sets in two situations where either no knowledge of the user’s preferences or
only part of them is given.
3. Quality Measures for Plan Sets
3.1. Syntactic Distance Measures for Unknown Preference Cases
We ﬁrst consider the situation in which the user has some preferences for solution plans, but the
planner is not provided with any knowledge of such preferences. It is therefore impossible for the
planner to assume any particular form of preference language representing the hidden preference
model. There are two issues that need to be considered in formalizing a quality measure for plan
sets:
• What are the elements of plans that can be involved in a quality measure?
• How should a quality measure be deﬁned using those elements?
For the ﬁrst question, we observe that even though users are normally interested in some
high level features of plans that are relevant to them, many of those features can be considered as
“functions” of base level elements of plans. For instance, the set of actions in the plan determine
the makespan of a (sequential) plan, and the sequence of states when the plan executes gives the
total reward of goals achieved. We consider the following three types of base level features of
plans which could be used in deﬁning quality measure, independently of the domain semantics:
• Actions that are present in plans, which deﬁne various high level features of the plans such
as its makespan, execution cost etc. that are of interest to the user whose preference model
could be represented with preference languages such as in PSP and PDDL2.1.
6

Basis
Pros
Cons
Actions
Does not require
No problem information
problem information
is used
States
Not dependent on any speciﬁc
Needs an execution
plan representation
simulator to identify states
Causal links
Considers causal proximity
Requires domain theory
of state transitions (action)
rather than positional
(physical) proximity
Table 1: The pros and cons of different base level elements of plan.
• Sequence of states that the agent goes through, which captures the behaviors resulting
from the execution of plans. In many preference languages deﬁned using high level fea-
tures of plans such as the reward of goals collected (e.g., PSP), of the whole state (e.g.,
MDP), or the temporal relation between propositions occur in states (e.g. PDDL3, PP
(Son and Pontelli, 2006) and LPP (Fritz and McIlraith, 2006)), the sequence of states can
affect the quality of plan evaluated by the user.
• The causal links representing how actions contribute to the goals being achieved, which
measures the causal structures of plans.4 These plan elements can affect the quality of
plans with respect to the languages mentioned above, as the causal links capture both the
actions appearing in a plan and the temporal relation between actions and variables.
A similar conceptual separation of features has also been considered recently in the context
of case-based planning by Serina (2010), in which planning problems were assumed to be well
classiﬁed, in terms of costs to adapt plans of one problem to solve another, in some unknown
high level feature space. The similarity between problems in the space were implicitly deﬁned
using kernel functions of their domain-independent graph representations. In our situation, we
aim to approximate quality of plan sets on the space of features that the user is interested in using
distance between plans with respect to base level features of plans mentioned above (see below).
Table 1 gives the pros and cons of using the different base level elements of plan. We note
that if actions in the plans are used in deﬁning quality measure of plan sets, no additional problem
or domain theory information is needed. If plan behaviors are used as base level elements, the
representation of the plans that bring about state transition becomes irrelevant since only the
actual states that an execution of the plan will take is considered. Hence, we can now compare
plans of different representations, e.g., four plans where the ﬁrst is a deterministic plan, the
second is a contingent plan, the third is a hierarchical plan and the fourth is a policy encoding
probabilistic behavior. If causal links are used, then the causal proximity among actions is now
considered rather than just physical proximity in the plan.
Given those base level elements, the next question is how to deﬁne a quality measure of plan
sets using them. Recall that without any knowledge about the user’s preferences, there is no way
for the planner to assume any particular preference language, because of which the motivation
4A causal link a1
p→a2 records that a predicate is produced by a1 and consumed by a2.
7

behind a choice of quality measure should come from the hidden user’s preference model. Given
a Hasse diagram induced from the user’s preference model, a k-plan set that will be presented to
the user can be considered to be randomly selected from the diagram. The probability of having
one plan in the set classiﬁed in a class at the optimal layer would increase when the individual
plans are more likely to be at different layers, and this chance in turn will increase if they are less
likely to be equally prefered by the user.5 On the other hand, the effect of base level elements of
a plan on high level features relevant to the user suggests that plans similar with respect to base
level features are more likely to be close to each other on the high level feature space determining
user’s preference model.
In order to deﬁne a quality measure using base level features of plans, we proceed with the
following assumption: plans that are different from each other with respect to the base level
features are less likely to be equally prefered by the user, in other words they are more likely to
be at different layers of the Hasse diagram. With the purpose of increasing the chance of having
a plan that the user prefers, we propose the quality measure of plan sets as its diversity measure,
deﬁned using the distance between two plans in the set with respect to a base level element. More
formally, the quality measure ζ : 2S →R of a plan set P can be deﬁned as either the minimal,
maximal, or average distance between plans:
• Minimal distance:
ζmin(P) = min
p,p′∈P δ(p, p′)
(1)
• Maximal distance:
ζmax(P) = max
p,p′∈P δ(p, p′)
(2)
• Average distance:
ζavg(P) =
|P|
2
−1
×
X
p,p′∈P
δ(p, p′)
(3)
where δ : S × S →[0, 1] is the distance measures between two plans.
3.1.1. Distance measures between plans
There are various choices on how to deﬁne the distance measure δ(p, p′) between two plans using
plan actions, sequence of states or causal links, and each way can have different impact on the
diversity of plan set on the Hasse diagram. In the following, we propose distance measures in
which a plan is considered as (i) a set of actions and causal links, or (ii) sequence of states the
agent goes through, which could be used independently of plan representation (e.g. total order,
partial order plans).
5To see this, consider a diagram with S1 = {p1, p2} at layer 0, S2 = {p3} and S3 = {p4} at layer 1, and
S4 = {p5} at layer 2. Assuming that we randomly select a set of 2 plans. If those plans are known to be at the same
layer, then the chance of having one plan at layer 0 is 1
2. However, if they are forced to be at different layers, then the
probability will be 3
4.
8

• Plan as a set of actions or causal links: given a plan p, let A(p) and C(p) be the set of
actions or causal links of p. The distance between two plans p and p′ can be deﬁned as the
ratio of the number of actions (causal links) that do not appear in both plans to the total
number of actions (causal links) appearing in one of them:
δA(p, p′) = 1 −|A(p) ∩A(p′)|
|A(p) ∪A(p′)|
(4)
δCL(p, p′) = 1 −|C(p) ∩C(p′)|
|C(p) ∪C(p′)|
(5)
• Plan as a sequence of states: given two sequence of states (s0, s1, ..., sk) and (s′
0, s′
1, ..., s′
k′)
resulting from executing two plans p and p′, and assume that k′ ≤k. Since the two se-
quence of states may have different length, there are various options in deﬁning distance
measure between p and p′, and we consider here two simple options. In the ﬁrst one, it
can be deﬁned as the average of the distances between state pairs (si, s′
i) (0 ≤i ≤k′),
and each state sk′+1,... sk is considered to contribute maximally (i.e. one unit) into the
difference between two plans:
δS(p, p′) = 1
k × [
k′
X
i=1
∆(si, s′
i) + k −k′]
(6)
On the other hand, we can assume that the agent continues to stay at the goal state s′
k′ in
the next (k −k′) time steps after executing p′, and the measure can be deﬁned as follows:
δS(p, p′) = 1
k × [
k′
X
i=1
∆(si, s′
i) +
k
X
i=k′+1
∆(si, s′
k′)]
(7)
The distance measure ∆(s, s′) between two states s, s′ used in those two measures is
deﬁned as
∆(s, s′) = 1 −s ∩s′
s ∪s′
(8)
Example: Figure 4 shows three plans p1, p2 and p3 for a planning problem where the initial
state is {r1} and the goal propositions are {r3, r4}. The speciﬁcation of actions are shown in
the table. The action sets of the ﬁrst two plans ({a1, a2, a3} and {a1, a2, a4}) are quite similar
(δA(p1, p2) = 0.5), but the causal links which involve a3 (a2 →r3 −a3, a3 →r4 −aG) and
a4 (aI →r1 −a4, a4 →r4 −aG) make their difference more signiﬁcant with respect to causal-
link based distance (δCL(p1, p2) = 4
7). Two other plans p1 and p3, on the other hand, are very
different in terms of action sets (and therefore the sets of causal links): δA(p1, p3) = 1, but they
are closer in term of state-based distance ( 13
18 as deﬁned in the equation 6, and 0.5 if deﬁned in
the equation 7).
9

Figure 4: Example illustrating plans with base-level elements. aI and aG denote dummy actions producing the initial
state and consuming the goal propositions, respectively (see text for more details).
3.2. Integrated Preference Function (IPF) for Partial Preference Cases
We now discuss a quality measure for plan sets in the case when the user’s preference is partially
expressed. In particular, we consider scenarios in which the preference model can be repre-
sented by some quantitative language with an incompletely speciﬁed value function of high level
features. As an example, the quality of plans in PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long, 2003) and PDDL3
(Gerevini and Long, 2005) are represented by a metric function combining metric ﬂuents and
preference statements on state trajectory with parameters representing their relative importance.
While providing a convenient way to represent preference models, such parameterized value
functions present an issue of obtaining reasonable values for the relative importance of the fea-
tures. A common approach to model this type of incomplete knowledge is to consider those
parameters as a vector of random variables, whose values are assumed to be drawn from a distri-
bution. This is the representation that we will follow.
To measure the quality of plan sets, we propose the usage of Integrated Preference Function
(IPF) (Carlyle et al., 2003), which has been used to measure the quality of a solution set in a
wide range of multi-objective optimization problems. The IPF measure assumes that the user’s
preference model can be represented by two factors: (1) a probability distribution h(α) of pa-
rameter vector α such that
R
α h(α) dα = 1 (in the absence of any special information about the
distribution, h(α) can be assumed to be uniform), and (2) a value function V (p, α) : S →R
combines different objective functions into a single real-valued quality measure for plan p. This
incomplete speciﬁcation of the value function represents a set of candidate preference models,
for each of which the user will select a different plan, the one with the best value, from a given
plan set P ⊆S. The IPF value of solution set P is deﬁned as:
IPF(P) =
Z
α
h(α)V (pα, α) dα
(9)
10

with pα = argmin
p∈P
V (p, α) is the best solution according to V (p, α) for each given α value. Let
p−1
α
be its inverse function specifying a range of α values for which p is an optimal solution
according to V (p, α). As pα is piecewise constant, the IPF(P) value can be computed as:
IPF(P) =
X
p∈P
Z
α∈p−1
α
h(α)V (p, α) dα

.
(10)
Let P∗= {p ∈P : p−1
α
̸= ∅} then we have:
IPF(P) = IPF(P∗) =
X
p∈P∗
Z
α∈p−1
α
h(α)V (p, α) dα

.
(11)
Since P∗is the set of plans that are optimal for some speciﬁc parameter vector, IPF(P)
now can be interpreted as the expected value that the user can get by selecting the best plan in
P. Therefore, the set P∗of solutions (known as lower convex hull of P) with the minimal IPF
value is most likely to contain the desired solutions that the user wants and in essense a good
representative of the plan set P.
While our work is applicable to more general planning scenarios, to make our discussion on
generating plan sets concrete, we will concentrate on metric temporal planning where each action
a ∈A has a duration da and execution cost ca. The planner needs to ﬁnd a plan p = {a1 . . . an},
which is a sequence of actions that is executable and achieves all goals. The two most common
plan quality measures are: makespan, which is the total execution time of p; and plan cost, which
is the total execution cost of all actions in p—both of them are high level features that can be
affected by the actions in the plan. In most real-world applications, these two criteria compete
with each other: shorter plans usually have higher cost and vice versa. We use the following
assumptions:
• The desired objective function involves minimizing both components: time(p) measures
the makespan of the plan p and cost(p) measures its execution cost.
• The quality of a plan p is a convex combination: V (p, w) = w × time(p) + (1 −w) ×
cost(p), where weight w ∈[0, 1] represents the trade-off between the two competing
objective functions.
• The belief distribution of w over the range [0, 1] is known. If the user does not provide any
information or we have not learnt anything about the preference on the trade-off between
time and cost of the plan, then the planner can assume a uniform distribution (and improve
it later using techniques such as preference elicitation).
Given that the exact value of w is unknown, our purpose is to ﬁnd a bounded representative
set of non-dominated plans6 minimizing the expected value of V (p, w) with regard to the given
distribution of w over [0, 1].
Example: Figure 5 shows our running example in which there are a total of 7 plans with their
time(p) and cost(p) values as follows: p1 = {4, 25}, p2 = {6, 22}, p3 = {7, 15}, p4 = {8, 20},
6A plan p1 is dominated by p2 if time(p1) ≥time(p2) and cost(p1) ≥cost(p2) and at least one of the inequali-
ties is strict.
11

30
P
15
20
25
st
P1
P4
P3
P2
P5
P6
5
10
Cos
P7
P5
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time
Figure 5: Solid dots represents plans in the pareto set (p1, p2, p3, p5, p7). Connected dots represent plans in the lower
convex hull (p1, p3, p7) giving optimal ICP value for any distribution on trade-off between cost and time.
p5 = {10, 12}, p6 = {11, 14}, and p7 = {12, 5}. Among these 7 plans, 5 of them belong to a
pareto optimal set of non-dominated plans: Pp = {p1, p2, p3, p5, p7}. The other two plans are
dominated by some plans in Pp: p4 is dominated by p3 and p6 is dominated by p5. Plans in
Pp are depicted in solid dots, and the set of plans P∗= {p1, p3, p7} that are optimal for some
speciﬁc value of w is highlighted by connected dots.
IPF for Metric Temporal Planning: The user preference model in our target domain of tempo-
ral planning is represented by a convex combination of the time and cost quality measures, and
the IPF measure now is called Integrated Convex Preference (ICP). Given a set of plans P∗, let
tp = time(p) and cp = cost(p) be the makespan and total execution cost of plan p ∈P∗, the
ICP value of P∗with regard to the objective function V (p, w) = w × tp + (1 −w) × cp and the
parameter vector α = (w, 1 −w) (w ∈[0, 1]) is deﬁned as:
ICP(P∗) =
k
X
i=1
Z wi
wi−1
h(w)(w × tpi + (1 −w) × cpi)dw
(12)
where w0 = 0, wk = 1 and pi = argmin
p∈P∗V (p, w) ∀w ∈[wi−1, wi]. In other words, we divide
[0, 1] into non-overlapping regions such that in each region (wi−1, wi) there is a single solution
pi ∈P∗that has better V (pi, w) value than all other solutions in P∗.
We select the IPF/ICP measure to evaluate our solution set due to its several nice properties:
• If P1, P2 ⊆S and ICP(P1) < ICP(P2) then P1 is probabilistically better than P2
in the sense that for any given w, let p1 = argmin
p∈P1
V (p, w) and p2 = argmin
p∈P2
V (p, w),
then the probability of V (p1, w) < V (p2, w) is higher than the probability of V (p1, w) >
V (p2, w).
• If P1 is obviously better than P2, then the ICP measure agrees with the assertion. More
formally: if ∀p2 ∈P2, ∃p1 ∈P1 such that p2 is dominated by p1, then ICP(P1) <
ICP(P2).
12

Empirically, extensive results on scheduling problems in Fowler et al. (2005) have shown
that ICP measure “evaluates the solution quality of approximation robustly (i.e., similar to visual
comparison results) while other alternative measures can misjudge the solution quality”.
In the next two sections 4 and 5, we investigate the problem of generating high quality plan
sets for two cases mentioned: when no knowledge about the user’s preferences is given, and
when part of its is given as input to the planner.
4. Generating Diverse Plan Set in the Absence of Preference Knowledge
In this section, we describe approaches to searching for a set of diverse plans with respect to a
measure deﬁned with base level elements of plans as discussed in the previous section. In partic-
ular, we consider the quality measure of plan set as the minimal pair-wise distance between any
two plans, and generate a set of plans containing k plans with the quality of at least a predeﬁned
threshold d. As discussed earlier, by diversifying the set of plans on the space of base level fea-
tures, it is likely that plans in the set would cover a wide range of space of unknown high level
features, increasing the possibility that the user can select a plan close to the one that she prefers.
The problem is formally deﬁned as follows:
dDISTANTkSET : Find P with P ⊆S, | P | = k and ζ(P) = min
p,q∈P δ(p, q) ≥d
where any distance measure between two plans formalized in Section 3.1.1 can be used to im-
plement δ(p, p′).
We now consider two representative state-of-the-art planning approaches in generating di-
verse plan sets. The ﬁrst one is GP-CSP (Do and Kambhampati, 2001) representing constraint-
based planning approaches, and the second one is LPG (Gerevini et al., 2003) that uses an efﬁ-
cient local-search based approach. We use GP-CSP to comparing the relation between different
distance measures in diversifying plan sets. On the other hand, with LPG we stick to the action-
based distance measure, which is shown experimentally to be the most difﬁcult measure to en-
force diversity (see below), and investigate the scalability of heuristic approaches in generating
diverse plans.
4.1. Finding Diverse Plan Set with GP-CSP
The GP-CSP planner (Do and Kambhampati, 2001) converts Graphplan’s planning graph into a
CSP encoding, and solves it using a standard CSP solver. The solution of the encoding represents
a valid plan for the original planning problem. In the encoding, the CSP variables correspond
to the predicates that have to be achieved at different levels in the planning graph (different
planning steps) and their possible values are the actions that can support the predicates. For
each CSP variable representing a predicate p, there are two special values: i) ⊥: indicates that a
predicate is not supported by any action and is false at a particular level/planning-step; ii) “noop”:
indicates that the predicate is true at a given level i because it was made true at some previous
level j < i and no other action deletes p between j and i. Constraints encode the relations
between predicates and actions: 1) mutual exclusion relations between predicates and actions;
and 2) the causal relationships between actions and their preconditions.
13

4.1.1. Adapting GP-CSP to Different Distance Metrics
When the above planning encoding is solved by any standard CSP solver, it will return a solution
containing ⟨var, value⟩of the form {⟨x1, y1⟩, ...⟨xn, yn⟩}. The collection of xi where yi ̸= ⊥
represents the facts that are made true at different time steps (plan trajectory) and can be used as a
basis for the state-based distance measure7; the set of (yi ̸= ⊥) ∧(yi ̸= noop) represents the set
of actions in the plan and can be used for action-based distance measure; lastly, the assignments
⟨xi, yi⟩themselves represent the causal relations and can be used for the causal-based distance
measure.
However, there are some technical difﬁculties we need to overcome before a speciﬁc distance
measure between plans can be computed. First, the same action can be represented by different
values in the domains of different variables. Consider a simple example in which there are two
facts p and q, both supported by two actions a1 and a2. When setting up the CSP encoding, we
assume that the CSP variables x1 and x2 are used to represent p and q. The domains for x1 and
x2 are {v11, v12} and {v21, v22}, both representing the two actions {a1, a2} (in that order). The
assignments {⟨x1, v11⟩, ⟨x2, v21⟩} and {⟨x1, v12⟩, ⟨x2, v22⟩} have a distance of 2 in traditional
CSP because different values are assigned for each variable x1 and x2. However, they both
represent the same action set {a1, a2} and thus lead to the plan distance of 0 if we use the action-
based distance in our plan comparison. Therefore, we ﬁrst need to translate the set of values in
all assignments back to the set of action instances before doing comparison using action-based
distance. The second complication arises for the causal-based distance. A causal link a1
p→a2
between two actions a1 and a2 indicates that a1 supports the precondition p of a2. However, the
CSP assignment ⟨p, a1⟩only provides the ﬁrst half of each causal-link. To complete the causal-
link, we need to look at the values of other CSP assignments to identify action a2 that occurs at
the later level in the planning graph and has p as its precondition. Note that there may be multiple
“valid” sets of causal-links for a plan, and in the implementation we simply select causal-links
based on the CSP assignments.
4.1.2. Making GP-CSP Return a Set of Plans
To make GP-CSP return a set of plans satisfying the dDISTANTkSET constraint using one of
the three distance measures, we add “global” constraints to each original encoding to enforce
d-diversity between every pair of solutions. When each global constraint is called upon by the
normal forward checking and arc-consistency checking procedures inside the default solver to
check if the distance between two plans is over a predeﬁned value d, we ﬁrst map each set of
assignments to an actual set of actions (action-based), predicates that are true at different plan-
steps (state-based) or causal-links (causal-based) using the method discussed in the previous
section. This process is done by mapping all ⟨var, value⟩CSP assignments into action sets
using a call to the planning graph, which is outside of the CSP solver, but works closely with the
general purpose CSP solver in GP-CSP. The comparison is then done within the implementation
of the global constraint to decide if two solutions are diverse enough.
We investigate two different ways to use the global constraints:
1. The parallel strategy to return the set of k plans all at once. In this approach, we create
one encoding that contains k identical copies of each original planning encoding created
using GP-CSP planner. The k copies are connected together using k(k −1)/2 pair-wise
7We implement the state-based distance between plans as deﬁned in equation 6.
14

global constraints. Each global constraint between the ith and jth copies ensures that two
plans represented by the solutions of those two copies will be at least d distant from each
other. If each copy has n variables, then this constraint involves 2n variables.
2. The greedy strategy to return plans one after another. In this approach, the k copies are not
setup in parallel up-front, but sequentially. We add to the ith copy one global constraint to
enforce that the solution of the ith copy should be d-diverse from any of the earlier i −1
solutions. The advantage of the greedy approach is that each CSP encoding is signiﬁcantly
smaller in terms of the number of variables (n vs. k ∗n), smaller in terms of the number
of global constraints (1 vs. k(k −1)/2), and each global constraint also contains lesser
number of variables (n vs. 2 ∗n).8 Thus, each encoding in the greedy approach is easier
to solve. However, because each solution depends on all previously found solutions, the
encoding can be unsolvable if the previously found solutions comprise a bad initial solution
set.
4.1.3. Empirical Evaluation
We implemented the parallel and greedy approaches discussed earlier for the three distance mea-
sures and tested them with the benchmark set of Logistics problems provided with the Blackbox
planner (Kautz and Selman, 1998). All experiments were run on a Linux Pentium 4, 3Ghz ma-
chine with 512MB RAM. For each problem9, we test with different d values ranging from 0.01
(1%) to 0.95 (95%)10 and k increases from 2 to n where n is the maximum value for which
GP-CSP can still ﬁnd solutions within plan horizon. The horizon (parallel plan steps) limit is 30.
We found that the greedy approach outperformed the parallel approach and solved signiﬁ-
cantly higher number of problems. Therefore, we focus on the greedy approach hereafter. For
each combination of d, k, and a given distance measure, we record the solving time and output
the average/min/max pairwise distances of the solution sets.
Baseline Comparison: As a baseline comparison, we have also implemented a randomized ap-
proach. In this approach, we do not use global constraints but use random value ordering in the
CSP solver to generate k different solutions without enforcing them to be pairwise d-distance
apart. For each distance d, we continue running the random algorithm until we ﬁnd kmax solu-
tions where kmax is the maximum value of k that we can solve for the greedy approach for that
particular d value. In general, we want to compare with our approach of using global constraint
to see if the random approach can effectively generate diverse set of solutions by looking at: (1)
the average time to ﬁnd a solution in the solution set; and (2) the maximum/average pairwise
distances between k ≥2 randomly generated solutions.
Table 2 shows the comparison of average solving time to ﬁnd one solution in the greedy
and random approaches. The results show that on an average, the random approach takes sig-
niﬁcantly more time to ﬁnd a single solution, regardless of the distance measure used by the
greedy approach. To assess the diversity in the solution sets, Table 3 shows the comparison of:
(1) the average pairwise minimum distance between the solutions in sets returned by the random
approach; and (2) the maximum d for which the greedy approach still can ﬁnd a set of diverse
plans. The comparisons are done for all three distance measures. For example, the ﬁrst cell
(0.041/0.35) in Table 3, implies that the minimum pairwise distance averaged for all solvable
8However, each constraint is more complicated because it encodes (i-1) previously found solutions.
9log-easy=prob1, rocket-a=prob2, log-a = prob3, log-b = prob4, log-c=prob5, log-d=prob6.
10Increments of 0.01 from 0.01 to 0.1 and of 0.05 thereafter.
15

Prob1
Prob2
Prob3
Prob4
Prob5
Prob6
δa
0.087
7.648
1.021
6.144
8.083
178.633
δs
0.077
9.354
1.845
6.312
8.667
232.475
δc
0.190
6.542
1.063
6.314
8.437
209.287
Random
0.327
15.480
8.982
88.040
379.182
6105.510
Table 2: Average solving time (in seconds) to ﬁnd a plan using greedy (ﬁrst 3 rows) and by random (last row) approaches
Prob1
Prob2
Prob3
Prob4
Prob5
Prob6
δa
0.041/0.35
0.067/0.65
0.067/0.25
0.131/0.1*
0.126/0.15
0.128/0.2
δs
0.035/0.4
0.05/0.8
0.096/0.5
0.147/0.4
0.140/0.5
0.101/0.5
δc
0.158/0.8
0.136/0.95
0.256/0.55
0.459/0.15*
0.346/0.3*
0.349/0.45
Table 3: Comparison of the diversity in the plan sets returned by the random and greedy approaches. Cases where random
approach is better than greedy approach are marked with (*).
k ≥2 using the random approach is d = 0.041 while it is 0.35 (i.e. 8x more diverse) for the
greedy approach using the δa distance measure. Except for 3 cases, using global constraints to
enforce minimum pairwise distance between solutions helps GP-CSP return signiﬁcantly more
diverse set of solutions. On average, the greedy approach returns 4.25x, 7.31x, and 2.79x more
diverse solutions than the random approach for δa, δs and δc, respectively.
Analysis of the different distance-bases: Overall, we were able to solve 1264 (d, k) combi-
nations for three distance measures δa, δs, δc using the greedy approach. We were particularly
interested in investigating the following issues:
• H1: Computational efﬁciency - Is it easy or difﬁcult to ﬁnd a set of diverse solutions
using different distance measures? Thus, (1) for the same d and k values, which distance
measure is more difﬁcult (time consuming) to solve; and (2) given an encoding horizon
limit, how high is the value of d and k for which we can still ﬁnd a set of solutions for a
given problem using different distance measures.
• H2: Solution diversity - What, if any, is the correlation/sensitivity between different dis-
tance measures? Thus, how comparative diversity of solutions is when using different
distance measures.
Regarding H1, Table 4 shows the highest solvable k value for each distance d and base δa,
δs, and δc. For a given (d, k) pair, enforcing δa appears to be the most difﬁcult, then δs, and δc is
the easiest. GP-CSP is able to solve 237, 462, and 565 combinations of (d, k) respectively for δa,
δs and δc. GP-CSP solves dDISTANTkSET problems more easily with δs and δc than with δa due
to the fact that solutions with different action sets (diverse with regard to δa) will likely cause
different trajectories and causal structures (diverse with regard to δs and δc). Between δs and δc,
δc solves more problems for easier instances (Problems 1-3) but less for the harder instances, as
shown in Table 4. We conjecture that for solutions with more actions (i.e. in bigger problems)
there are more causal dependencies between actions and thus it is harder to reorder actions to
create a different causal-structure.
For running time comparisons, among 216 combinations of (d, k) that were solved by all
three distance measures, GP-CSP takes the least amount of time for δa in 84 combinations, for δs
16

d
Prob1
Prob2
Prob3
Prob4
Prob5
Prob6
0.01
11,5, 28
8,18,12
9,8,18
3,4,5
4,6,8
8,7,7
0.03
6,3,24
8,13,9
7,7,12
2,4,3
4,6,6
4,7,6
0.05
5,3,18
6,11,9
5,7,10
2,4,3
4,6,5
3,7,5
0.07
2,3,14
6,10,8
4,7,6
2,4,2
4,6,5
3,7,5
0.09
2,3,14
6,9,6
3,6,6
2,4,2
3,6,4
3,7,4
0.1
2,3,10
6,9,6
3,6,6
2,4,2
2,6,4
3,7,4
0.2
2,3,5
5,9,6
2,6,6
1,3,1
1,5,2
2,5,3
0.3
2,2,3
4,7,5
1,4,4
1,2,1
1,3,2
1,3,3
0.4
1,2,3
3,6,5
1,3,3
1,2,1
1,2,1
1,2,3
0.5
1,1,3
2,4,5
1,2,2
-
1,2,1
1,2,1
0.6
1,1,2
2,3,4
-
-
-
-
0.7
1,1,2
1,2,2
-
-
-
-
0.8
1,1,2
1,2,2
-
-
-
-
0.9
-
1,1,2
-
-
-
-
Table 4: For each given d value, each cell shows the largest solvable k for each of the three distance measures δa, δs,
and δc (in this order). The maximum values in cells are in bold.
δa
δs
δc
δa
-
1.262
1.985
δs
0.485
-
0.883
δc
0.461
0.938
-
Table 5: Cross-validation of distance measures δa, δs, and δc.
in 70 combinations and in 62 for δc. The ﬁrst three lines of Table 2 show the average time to ﬁnd
one solution in d-diverse k-set for each problem using δa, δs and δc (which we call ta, ts and tc
respectively). In general, ta is the smallest and ts > tc in most problems. Thus, while it is harder
to enforce δa than δs and δc (as indicated in Table 4), when the encodings for all three distances
can be solved for a given (d, k), then δa takes less time to search for one plan in the diverse plan
set; this can be due to tighter constraints (more pruning power for the global constraints) and
simpler global constraint setting.
To test H2, in Table 5, we show the cross-comparison between different distance measures
δa, δs, and δc. In this table, cell ⟨row, column⟩= ⟨δ′, δ′′⟩indicates that over all combinations
of (d, k) solved for distance δ′, the average value d′′/d′ where d′′ and d′ are distance measured
according to δ′′ and δ′, respectively (d′ ≥d). For example, ⟨δs, δa⟩= 0.485 means that over
462 combinations of (d, k) solvable for δs, for each d, the average distance between k solutions
measured by δa is 0.485 ∗ds. The results indicate that when we enforce d for δa, we will likely
ﬁnd even more diverse solution sets according to δs (1.26 ∗da) and δc (1.98 ∗da). However,
when we enforce d for either δs or δc, we are not likely to ﬁnd a more diverse set of solutions
measured by the other two distance measures. Nevertheless, enforcing d using δc will likely give
comparable diverse degree d for δs (0.94 ∗dc) and vice versa. We also observe that ds is highly
dependent on the difference between the parallel lengths of plans in the set. The distance ds
seems to be the smallest (i.e. ds < da < dc) when all k plans have the same/similar number of
time steps. This is consistent with the fact that δa and δc do not depend on the steps in the plan
execution trajectory while δs does.
17

4.2. Finding Diverse Plan Set with LPG
In this section, we consider the problem of generating diverse set of plans using another planning
approach, in particular the LPG planner which is able to scale up to bigger problems, compared to
GP-CSP. We focus on the action-based distance measure between plans, which has been shown
in the previous section to be the most difﬁcult to enforce diversity. LPG is a local-search-based
planner, that incrementally modiﬁes a partial plan in a search for a plan that contains no ﬂaws
(Gerevini et al., 2003). The behavior of LPG is controlled by an evaluation function that is used
to select between different plan candidates in a neighborhood generated for local search. At
each search step, the elements in the search neighborhood of the current partial plan π are the
alternative possible plans repairing a selected ﬂaw in π. The elements of the neighborhood are
evaluated according to an action evaluation function E (Gerevini et al., 2003). This function is
used to estimate the cost of either adding or of removing an action node a in the partial plan p
being generated.
4.2.1. Revised Evaluation Function for Diverse Plans
In order to manage dDISTANCEkSET problems, the function E has been extended to include an
additional evaluation term that has the purpose of penalizing the insertion and removal of actions
that decrease the distance of the current partial plan p under adaptation from a reference plan
p0. In general, E consists of four weighted terms, evaluating four aspects of the quality of the
current plan that are affected by the addition (E(a)i) or removal (E(a)r) of a
E(a)i = αE · Execution cost(a)i + αT · T emporal cost(a)i+
+ αS · Search cost(a)i + αD · |(p0 −p) ∩pi
R|
E(a)r = αE · Execution cost(a)r + αT · T emporal cost(a)r+
+ αS · Search cost(a)r + αD · |(p0 −p −a) ∩pr
R|.
The ﬁrst three terms of the two forms of E are unchanged from the standard behavior of
LPG. The fourth term, used only for computing diverse plans, is the new term estimating how the
proposed plan modiﬁcation will affect the distance from the reference plan p0. Each cost term in
E is computed using a relaxed temporal plan pR (Gerevini et al., 2003).
The pR plans are computed by an algorithm, called RelaxedPlan, formally described and
illustrated in Gerevini et al. (2003). We have slightly modiﬁed this algorithm to penalize the
selection of actions decreasing the plan distance from the reference plan. The speciﬁc change to
RelaxedPlan for computing diverse plans is very similar to the change described in (Fox et al.,
2006), and it concerns the heuristic function for selecting the actions for achieving the subgoals
in the relaxed plans. In the modiﬁed function for RelaxedPlan, we have an extra 0/1 term that
penalizes an action b for pR if its addition decreases the distance of p + pR from p0 (in the plan
repair context investigated in (Fox et al., 2006), b is penalized if its addition increases such a
distance).
The last term of the modiﬁed evaluation function E is a measure of the decrease in plan
distance caused by adding or removing a: |(p0−p)∩pi
R| or |(p0−p−a)∩pr
R|, where pi
R contains
the new action a. The α-coefﬁcients of the E-terms are used to weigh their relative importance.11
11These coefﬁcients are also normalized to a value in [0, 1] using the method described in Gerevini et al. (2003).
18

The values of the ﬁrst 3 terms are automatically derived from the expression deﬁning the plan
metric for the problem (Gerevini et al., 2003). The coefﬁcient for the fourth new term of E (αD)
is automatically set during search to a value proportional to d/δa(p, p0), where p is the current
partial plan under construction. The general idea is to dynamically increase the value of αD
according to the number of plans n that have been generated so far: if n is much higher than k,
the search process consists of ﬁnding many solutions with not enough diversiﬁcation, and hence
the importance of the last E-term should increase.
4.2.2. Making LPG Return a Set of Plans
In order to compute a set of k d-distant plans solving a dDISTANCEkSET problem, we run the
LPG search multiple times, until the problem is solved, with the following two additional changes
to the standard version of LPG: (i) the preprocessing phase computing mutex relations and other
reachability information exploited during the relaxed plan construction is done only once for all
runs; (ii) we maintain an incremental set of valid plans, and we dynamically select one of them
as the reference plan p0 for the next search. Concerning (ii), let P = {p1, ..., pn} be the set of n
valid plans that have been computed so far, and CPlans(pi) the subset of P containing all plans
that have a distance greater than or equal to d from a reference plan pi ∈P.
The reference plan p0 used in the modiﬁed heuristic function E is a plan pmax ∈P which
has a maximal set of diverse plans in P, i.e.,
pmax = ARGMAX{pi∈P} {|CPlans(pi)|} .
(13)
The plan pmax is incrementally computed each time the local search ﬁnds a new solution.
In addition to being used to identify the reference plan in E, pmax is also used for deﬁning the
initial state (partial plan) of the search process. Speciﬁcally, we initialize the search using a
(partial) plan obtained by randomly removing some actions from a (randomly selected) plan in
the set CPlans(pmax) ∪{pmax}.
The process of generating diverse plans starting from a dynamically chosen reference plan
continues until at least k plans that are all d-distant from each other have been produced. The
modiﬁed version of LPG to compute diverse plans is called LPG-d.
4.2.3. Experimental Analysis with LPG-d
Recall that the distance function δa, using set-difference, can be written as the sum of two terms:
δa(pi, pj) = |A(pi) −A(pj)|
|A(pi) ∪A(pj)| + |A(pj) −A(pi)|
|A(pi) ∪A(pj)|
(14)
The ﬁrst term represents the contribution of the actions in pi to the plan difference, while
the second term indicates the contribution of pj to δa. We experimentally observed that in some
cases the differences between two diverse plans computed using δa are mostly concentrated in
only one of the δa components. This asymmetry means that one of the two plans can have many
more actions than the other one, which could imply that the quality of one of the two plans is
much worse than the quality of the other plan. In order to avoid this problem, we can parametrize
δa by imposing the two extra constraints
δA
a ≥d/γ and δB
a ≥d/γ
19

 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the cpu-time for the pfile20 problem of 
 gamma=3 - DriverLog Time domain
cpu-time
d
k
 0.45
 0.5
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the Average distances for the pfile20 problem of 
 gamma=3 - DriverLog Time domain
Distance
d
k
Figure 6: Performance of LPG-d (CPU-time and plan distance) for the problem pﬁle20 in the DriverLog-Time domain.
where δA
a and δB
a are the ﬁrst and second terms of δa, respectively, and γ is an integer parameter
“balancing” the diversity of pi and pj.
In this section, we analyze the performance of the modiﬁed version of LPG, called LPG-d, in
three different benchmark domains from the 3rd and 5th IPCs. The main goals of the experimen-
tal evaluation were (i) showing that LPG-d can efﬁciently solve a large set of (d, k)-combinations,
(ii) investigating the impact of the δa γ-constraints on performance, (iii) comparing LPG-d and
the standard LPG.
We tested LPG-d using both the default and parametrized versions of δa, with γ = 2 and
γ = 3. We give detailed results for γ = 3 and a more general evaluation for γ = 2 and the
original δa. We consider d that varies from 0.05 to 0.95, using 0.05 increment step, and with k
= 2...5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32 (overall, a total of 266 (d, k)-combinations). Since
LPG-d is a stochastic planner, we use the median of the CPU times (in seconds) and the median
of the average plan distances (over ﬁve runs). The average plan distance for a set of k plans
20

 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the cpu-time for the pfile20 problem of 
 gamma=3 - Satellite Strips domain
cpu-time
d
k
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the Average distances for the pfile20 problem of 
 gamma=3 - Satellite Strips domain
Distance
d
k
Figure 7: Performance of LPG-d (CPU-time and plan distance) for the problem pﬁle20 in the Satellite-Strips domain.
solving a speciﬁc (d, k)-combination (δav) is the average of the plans distances between all pairs
of plans in the set. The tests were performed on an AMD Athlon(tm) XP 2600+, 512 Mb RAM.
The CPU-time limit was 300 seconds.
Figure 6 gives the results for the largest problem in IPC-3 DriverLog-Time (fully-automated
track). LPG-d solves 109 (d, k)-combinations, including combinations d ≤0.4 and k = 10, and
d = 0.95 and k = 2. The average CPU time (top plots) is 162.8 seconds. The average δav
(bottom plots) is 0.68, with δav always greater than 0.4. With the original δa function LPG-d
solves 110 (d, k)-combinations, the average CPU time is 160 seconds, and the average δav is
0.68; while with γ = 2 LPG-d solves 100 combinations, the average CPU time is 169.5 seconds,
and the average δav is 0.69.
Figure 7 shows the results for the largest problem in IPC-3 Satellite-Strips. LPG-d solves
211 (k, d)-combinations; 173 of them require less than 10 seconds. The average CPU time is
12.1 seconds, and the average δav is 0.69. We observed similar results when using the original
21

 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the cpu-time for the pfile15 problem of 
 gamma=3 -  storage Propositional  domain
cpu-time
d
k
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
 0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
 1  0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
dDISTANCEkSET: Median of the Average distances for the pfile15 problem of 
 gamma=3 -  storage Propositional  domain
Distance
d
k
Figure 8: Performance of LPG-d (CPU-time and plan distance) for the problem pﬁle15 in the Storage-Propositional
domain.
δa function or the parametrized δa with γ = 2 (in the second case, LPG-d solves 198 problems,
while the average CPU time and the average δav are nearly the same as with γ = 3).
Figure 8 shows the results for a middle-size problem in IPC-5 Storage-Propositional. With
γ = 2 LPG-d solves 225 (k, d)-combinations, 39 of which require less than 10 seconds, while
128 of them require less than 50 seconds. The average CPU time is 64.1 seconds and the average
δav is 0.88. With the original δa LPG-d solves 240 (k, d)-combinations, the average CPU time
is 41.8 seconds, and the average δav is 0.87; with γ = 3 LPG-d solves 206 combinations, the
average CPU time is 69.4 seconds and the average δav is 0.89.
The local search in LPG is randomized by a “noise” parameter that is automatically set and
updated during search (Gerevini et al., 2003). This randomization is one of the techniques used
for escaping local minima, but it also can be useful for computing diverse plans: if we run the
search multiple times, each search is likely to consider different portions of the search space,
22

which can lead to different solutions. It is then interesting to compare LPG-d and a method in
which we simply run the standard LPG until k d-diverse plans are generated. An experimental
comparison of the two approaches show that in many cases LPG-d performs better. In particular,
the new evaluation function E is especially useful for planning problems that are easy to solve for
the standard LPG, and that admit many solutions. In these cases, the original E function produces
many valid plans with not enough diversiﬁcation. This problem is signiﬁcantly alleviated by the
new term in E. An example of domain where we observed this behavior is logistics.12
5. Generating Plan Sets with Partial Preference Knowledge
In this section, we consider the problem of generating plan sets when the user’s preferences
are only partially expressed. In particular, we focus on metric temporal planning where the
preference model is assumed to be represented by an incomplete value function speciﬁed by a
convex combination of two features: plan makespan and execution cost, with the exact trade-off
value w drawn from a given distribution. The quality value of plan sets is measured by the ICP
value, as formalized in Equation 12. Our objective is to ﬁnd a set of plans P ⊆S where |P| ≤k
and ICP(P) is the lowest.
Notice that we restrict the size of the solution set returned, not only for the comprehension
issue discussed earlier, but also for an important property of the ICP measure: it is a monotoni-
cally non-increasing function of the solution set (speciﬁcally, given two solution sets P1 and P2
such that the latter is a superset of the former, it is easy to see that ICP(P2) ≤ICP(P1)).
5.1. Sampling Weight Values
Given that the distribution of trade-off value w is known, the straightforward way to ﬁnd a set
of representative solutions is to ﬁrst sample a set of k values for w: {w1, w2, ..., wk} based on
the distribution h(w). For each value wi, we can ﬁnd an (optimal) plan pi minimizing the value
of the overall value function V (p, wi) = wi × tp + (1 −wi) × cp. The ﬁnal set of solutions
P = {p1, p2, ....pk} is then ﬁltered to remove duplicates and dominated solutions, thus selecting
the plans making up the lower-convex hull. The ﬁnal set can then be returned to the user. While
intuitive and easy to implement, this sampling-based approach has several potential ﬂaws that
can limit the quality of its resulting plan set.
First, given that k solution plans are searched sequentially and independently of each other,
even if the plan pi found for each wi is optimal, the ﬁnal solution set P = {p1, p2...pk} may
not even be the optimal set of k solutions with regard to the ICP measure. More speciﬁcally,
for a given set of solutions P, some tradeoff value w, and two non-dominated plans p, q such
that V (p, w) < V (q, w), it is possible that ICP(P ∪{p}) > ICP(P ∪{q}). In our running
example (Figure 5), let P = {p2, p5} and w = 0.8 then V (p1, w) = 0.8 × 4 + 0.2 × 25 = 8.2 <
V (p7, w) = 0.8 × 12 + 0.2 × 5 = 10.6. Thus, the planner will select p1 to add to P because
it looks locally better given the weight w = 0.8. However, ICP({p1, p2, p5}) ≈10.05 >
ICP({p2, p5, p7}) ≈7.71 so indeed by taking previous set into consideration then p7 is a much
better choice than p1.
12E.g., for logistics a (prob3 of Table 2) LPG-d solved 128 instances, 41 of them in less than 1 CPU second
and 97 of them in less than 10 CPU seconds; the average CPU time was 16.7 seconds and the average δav was 0.38.
While using the standard LPG, only 78 instances were solved, 20 of them in less than 1 CPU seconds and 53 of them in
less than 10 CPU seconds; the average CPU time was 23.6 seconds and the average δav was 0.27.
23

Algorithm 1: Incrementally ﬁnd solution set P
Input: A planning problem with a solution space S; maximum number of plans required
1
k; number of sampled trade-off values k0 (0 < k0 < k); time bound t;
Output: A plan set P (|P| ≤k);
2
begin
3
W ←sample k0 values for w;
4
P ←ﬁnd good quality plans in S for each w ∈W;
5
while |P| < k and search time < t do
6
Search for p s.t. ICP(P ∪{p}) < ICP(P)
7
P ←P ∪{p}
8
end
9
Return P
10
end
11
Second, the values of the trade-off parameter w are sampled based on a given distribution, and
independently of the particular planning problem being solved. As there is no relation between
the sampled w values and the solution space of a given planning problem, sampling approach
may return very few distinct solutions even if we sample a large number of weight values w. In
our example, if all w samples have values w ≤0.67 then the optimal solution returned for any of
them will always be p7. However, we know that P∗= {p1, p3, p7} is the optimal set according
to the ICP measure. Indeed, if w ≤0.769 then the sampling approach can only ﬁnd the set
{p7} or {p3, p7} and still not be able to ﬁnd the optimal set P∗.
5.2. ICP Sequential Approach
Given the potential drawbacks of the sampling approach outlined above, we also pursued an
alternative approach that takes into account the ICP measure more actively. Speciﬁcally, we
incrementally build the solution set P by ﬁnding a solution p such that P ∪{p} has the lowest
ICP value. We can start with an empty solution set P = ∅, then at each step try to ﬁnd a new
plan p such that P ∪{p} has the lowest ICP value.
While this approach directly takes the ICP measure into consideration at each step of ﬁnding
a new plan and avoids the drawbacks of the sampling-based approach, it also has its own share
of potential ﬂaws. Given that the set is built incrementally, the earlier steps where the ﬁrst “seed”
solutions are found are very important. The closer the seed solutions are to the global lower
convex hull, the better the improvement in the ICP value. In our example (Figure 5), if the ﬁrst
plan found is p2 then the subsequent plans found to best extend {p2} can be p5 and thus the ﬁnal
set does not come close to the optimal set P∗= {p1, p3, p7}.
5.3. Hybrid Approach
In this approach, we aim to combine the strengths of both the sampling and ICP-sequential
approaches. Speciﬁcally, we use sampling to ﬁnd several plans optimizing for different weights.
The plans are then used to seed the subsequent ICP-sequential runs. By seeding the hybrid
approach with good quality plan set scattered across the pareto optimal set, we hope to gradually
expand the initial set to a ﬁnal set with a much better overall ICP value. Algorithm 1 shows the
pseudo-code for the hybrid approach. We ﬁrst independently sample the set of k0 values (with
24

k0 pre-determined) of w given the distribution on w (step 4). We then run a heuristic planner
multiple times to ﬁnd an optimal (or good quality) solution for each trade-off value w (step 5).
We then collect the plans found and seed the subsequent runs when we incrementally update the
initial plan set with plans that lower the overall ICP value (steps 6-8). The algorithm terminates
and returns the latest plan set (step 9) if k plans are found or the time bound exceeds.
5.4. Making LPG Search Sensitive to ICP
Since the LPG planner used in the previous section cannot handle numeric ﬂuents, in particular
the totalcost representing plan cost that we are interested in, we use a modiﬁed version of the
Metric-LPG planner (Gerevini et al., 2008) in implementing our algorithms. Not only is Metric-
LPG equipped with a very ﬂexible local-search framework that has been extended to handle
various objective functions, but also it can be made to search for single or multiple solutions.
Speciﬁcally, for the sampling-based approach, we ﬁrst sample the w values based on a given
distribution. For each w value, we set the metric function in the domain ﬁle to: w×makespan+
(1 −w) × totalcost, and run the original LPG in the quality mode to heuristically ﬁnd the best
solution within the time limit for that metric function. The ﬁnal solution set is ﬁltered to remove
any duplicate solutions, and returned to the user.
For the ICP-sequential and hybrid approach, we can not use the original LPG implementation
as is and need to modify the neighborhood evaluation function in LPG to take into account the
ICP measure and the current plan set P. For the rest of this section, we will explain this procedure
in detail.
Background: Metric-LPG uses local search to ﬁnd plans within the space of numerical action
graphs (NA-graph). This leveled graph consists of a sequence of interleaved proposition and
action layers. The proposition layers consist of a set of propositional and numerical nodes, while
each action layer consists of at most one action node, and a number of no-op links. An NA-graph
G represents a valid plan if all actions’ preconditions are supported by some actions appearing
in the earlier level in G. The search neighborhood for each local-search step is deﬁned by a set
of graph modiﬁcations to ﬁx some remaining inconsistencies (unsupported preconditions) p at a
particular level l. This can be done by either inserting a new action a supporting p or removing
from the graph the action a that p is a precondition of (which can introduce new inconsistencies).
Each local move creates a new NA-graph G′, which is evaluated as a weighted combination
of two factors: SearchCost(G′) and ExecCost(G′). Here, SearchCost(G′) is the amount of
search effort to resolve inconsistencies newly introduced by inserting or removing action a; it is
measured by the number of actions in a relaxed plan R resolving all such inconsistencies. The
total cost ExecCost(G′), which is a default function to measure plan quality, is measured by
the total action execution costs of all actions in R. The two weight adjustment values α and β
are used to steer the search toward either ﬁnding a solution quickly (higher α value) or better
solution quality (higher β value). Metric-LPG then selects the local move leading to the smallest
E(G′) value.
Adjusting the evaluation function E(G′) for ﬁnding set of plans with low ICP measure:
To guide Metric-LPG towards optimizing our ICP-sensitive objective function instead of the
original minimizing cost objective function, we need to replace the default plan quality mea-
sure ExecCost(G′) with a new measure ICPEst(G′). Speciﬁcally, we adjust the function
for evaluating each new NA-graph generated by local moves at each step to be a combination
of SearchCost(G′) and ICPEst(G′). Given the set of found plans P = {p1, p2, ..., pn},
25

ICPEst(G′) guides Metric-LPG’s search toward a plan p generated from G′ such that the re-
sulting set P ∪{p} has a minimum ICP value: p = argmin
p
ICP(P ∪{p}). Thus, ICPEst(G′)
estimates the expected total ICP value if the best plan p found by expanding G′ is added to the
current found plan set P. Like the original Metric-LPG, p is estimated by pR = G′ S R where
R is the relaxed plan resolving inconsistencies in G′ caused by inserting or removing a. The
ICPEst(G′) for a given NA-graph G′ is calculated as: ICPEst(G′) = ICP(P ∪pR) with the
ICP measure as described in Equation 12. Notice here that while P is the set of valid plans, pR is
not. It is an invalid plan represented by a NA-graph containing some unsupported preconditions.
However, Equation 12 is still applicable as long as we can measure the time and cost dimensions
of pR. To measure the makespan of pR, we estimate the time points at which unsupported facts
in G′ would be supported in pR = G′ ∪R and propagate them over actions in G′ to its last
level. We then take the earliest time point at which all facts at the last level appear to measure
the makespan of pR. For the cost measure, we just sum the individual costs of all actions in pR.
At each step of Metric-LPG’s local search framework, combining two measures ICPEst(G′)
and SearchCost(G′) gives us an evaluation function that ﬁts right into the original Metric-LPG
framework and prefers a NA-graph G′ in the neighborhood of G that gives the best trade-off
between the estimated effort to repair and the estimated decrease in quality of the next resulting
plan set.
5.5. Experimental Results
We have implemented several approaches based on our algorithms discussed in the previous
sections: Sampling (Section 5.1), ICP-sequential (Section 5.2) and Hybrid that combines both
(Section 5.3) with both the uniform and triangular ditributions. We consider two types of dis-
tributions in which the most probable weight for plan makespan are 0.2 and 0.8, which we will
call “w02” and “w08” distributions respectively (Figure 9 shows these distributions). We test all
implementations against a set of 20 problems in each of several benchmark temporal planning
domains used in the previous International Planning Competitions (IPC): ZenoTravel, Driver-
Log, and Depots. The only modiﬁcation to the original benchmark set is the added action costs.
The descriptions of these domains can be found at the IPC website ( ipc.icaps-conference.org).
The experiments were conducted Intel Core2 Duo machine with 3.16GHz CPU and 4Gb RAM.
For all approaches, we search for a maximum of k = 10 plans within the 10-minute time limit for
each problem (i.e., t = 10 minutes), and the resulting plan set is used to compute the ICP value.
In the Sampling approach, we generate ten trade-off values w between makespan and plan cost
based on the distribution, and for each one we search for a plan p subject to the value function
V (p, w) = w × tp + (1 −w) × cp. In the Hybrid approach, on the other hand, the ﬁrst Sampling
approach is used with k0 = 3 generated trade-off values to ﬁnd an initial plan set, which is then
improved by the ICP-Sequential runs. As Metric-LPG is a stochastic local search planner, we run
it three times for each problem and average the results. In 77% and 70% of 60 problems in the
three tested domains for Hybrid and Sampling approaches respectively, the standard deviation
of ICP values of plan sets are at most 5% of the average values. This indicates that ICP values
of plan set in different runs are quite stable. As the Hybrid approach is an improved version of
ICP-sequential and gives better results in almost all tested problems, we omit the ICP-Sequential
in discussions below. We now analyze the results in more detailed.
The utility of using the partial knowledge of user’s preferences: To evaluate the utility of tak-
ing partial preferences into account, we ﬁrst compare our results against the naive approaches that
26

Figure 9: The distributions: (a) uniform, (b) w02, (c) w08 (see text).
Figure 10: Results for the ZenoTravel, DriverLog and Depots domains comparing the Sampling and baseline LPG
approaches on the overall ICP value (log scale) with the uniform distribution.
generate a plan set without explicitly taking into account the partial preference model. Speciﬁ-
cally, we run the default LPG planner with different random seeds to ﬁnd multiple non-dominated
plans. The LPG planner was run with both speed setting, which ﬁnds plans quickly, and diverse
setting, which takes longer time to ﬁnd better set of diverse plans. Figure 10 shows the com-
parison between quality of plan sets returned by Sampling and those naive approaches when
the distribution of the trade-off value w between makespan and plan cost is assumed to be uni-
form. Overall, among 20 tested problems for each of the ZenoTravel, DriverLog, and Depots
domains, the Sampling approach is better than LPG-speed in 19/20, 20/20 and 20/20 and is bet-
ter than LPG-d in 18/20, 18/20, and 20/20 problems respectively. We observed similar results
comparing the Hybrid and those two approaches: in particular, the Hybrid approach is better
than LPG-speed in all 60 problems and better than LPG-d in 19/20, 18/20, and 20/20 problems
respectively. These results support our intuition that taking into account the partial knowledge
about user’s preferences (if it is available) increases the quality of plan set.
Comparing the Sampling and Hybrid approaches: We now compare the effectiveness of the
Sampling and Hybrid approaches in terms of the quality of returned plan sets with the uniform,
w02 and w08 distributions.
ICP value: We ﬁrst compare the two approaches in terms of the ICP values of plan sets returned
indicating their quality evaluated by the user. Table 6, 7, and 8 show the results in three domains
ZenoTravel, DriverLog and Depots. In general, Hybrid tends to be better than Sampling in
this criterion for most of the domains and distributions. In particular, in ZenoTravel domain it
returns higher quality plan sets in 15/20 problems when the distribution is uniform, 10/20 and
13/20 problems when it is w02 and w08 respectively (both approaches return plan sets with
equal ICP values for two problems with the w02 and one problem with the w08 distribution).
27

Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
1*
840.00
839.98
1
972.00
972.00
1
708.00
708.00
2*
2,661.43
2,661.25
2
3,067.20
3,067.20
2*
2,255.792
2,255.788
3*
1,807.84
1,805.95
3*
2,083.91
2,083.83
3*
1,535.54
1,535.32
4*
3,481.31
3,477.49
4*
4,052.75
4,026.92
4*
2,960.84
2,947.66
5*
3,007.97
2,743.85
5*
3,171.86
3,171.73
5*
2,782.16
2,326.94
6*
3,447.37
2,755.25
6*
4,288.00
3,188.61
6*
2,802.00
2,524.18
7*
4,006.38
3,793.44
7*
4,644.40
4,377.40
7*
3,546.95
3,235.63
8*
4,549.90
4,344.70
8*
5,060.81
5,044.43
8*
3,802.60
3,733.90
9*
6,397.32
5,875.13
9*
7,037.87
6,614.30
9*
5,469.24
5,040.88
10*
7,592.72
6,826.60
10*
9,064.40
7,472.37
10*
6,142.68
5,997.45
11*
5,307.04
5,050.07
11*
5,946.68
5,891.76
11*
4,578.09
4,408.36
12*
7,288.54
6,807.28
12*
7,954.74
7,586.28
12
5,483.19
5,756.89
13*
10,208.11
9,956.94
13*
11,847.13
11,414.88
13*
8,515.74
8,479.09
14
11,939.22
13,730.87
14
14,474.00
15,739.19
14*
11,610.38
11,369.46
15
9,334.68
13,541.28
15
16,125.70
16,147.28
15*
11,748.45
11,418.59
16*
16,724.21
13,949.26
16
19,386.00
19,841.67
16
14,503.79
15,121.77
17*
27,085.57
26,822.37
17
29,559.03
32,175.66
17
21,354.78
22,297.65
18
23,610.71
25,089.40
18
28,520.17
29,020.15
18
20,107.03
21,727.75
19
29,114.30
29,276.09
19
34,224.02
36,496.40
19
23,721.90
25,222.24
20
34,939.27
37,166.29
20
39,443.66
42,790.97
20
28,178.45
28,961.51
(a)
(b)
(c)
Table 6: The ICP value of plan sets in ZenoTravel domain returned by the Sampling and Hybrid approaches with the
distributions (a) uniform, (b) w02 and (c) w08. The problems where Hybrid returns plan sets with better quality than
Sampling are marked with (*).
In the DriverLog domain, Hybrid returns better plan sets for 11/20 problems with the uniform
distribution (and for other three problems the plan sets have equal ICP values), but worse with
the triangular distributions: 8/20 (another 2 equals) and 9/20 (another one equals) with w02 and
w08. The improvement on the quality of plan sets that Hybrid contributes is more signiﬁcant in
the Depots domain: it is better than Sampling in 11/20 problems with the uniform distribution
(and equal in 3 problems), in 12/20 problems with the w02 and w08 distributions (with w02 both
approaches return plan sets with equal ICP values for 4 problems, and for 2 problems when it is
w08).
In many large problems of the ZenoTravel and DriverLog domains where Sampling performs
better than Hybrid, we notice that the ﬁrst phase of the Hybrid approach that searches for the ﬁrst
3 initial plans normally takes most of the allocated time, and therefore there is not much time
left for the second phase to improve the quality of plan set. We also observe that among the
three settings of the trade-off distributions, the positive effect of the second phase in Hybrid
approach (which is to improve the quality of the initial plan sets) tends to be more stable across
different domains with uniform distribution, but less with the triangular, in particular Sampling
wins Hybrid in DriverLog domains when the distribution is w02. Perhaps this is because with
the triangular distributions, the chance that LPG planner (that is used in our Sampling approach)
returns the same plans even with different trade-off values would increase, especially when the
most probable value of makespan happens to be in a (wide) range of weights in which one
single plan is optimal. This result agrees with the intuition that when the knowledge about user’s
preferences is almost complete (i.e. the distribution of trade-off value is “peak”), then Sampling
approach with smaller number of generated weight values may be good enough (assuming that a
good planner optimizing a complete value function is available).
28

Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
1
212.00
212.00
1
235.99
236.00
1
188.00
188.00
2*
363.30
348.38
2*
450.07
398.46
2*
333.20
299.70
3
176.00
176.00
3
203.20
203.20
3
148.80
148.80
4*
282.00
278.45
4*
336.01
323.79
4*
238.20
233.20
5*
236.83
236.33
5
273.80
288.51
5*
200.80
199.52
6*
222.00
221.00
6
254.80
254.80
6*
187.47
187.20
7
176.50
176.50
7*
226.20
203.80
7
149.20
149.20
8*
338.96
319.43
8
387.53
397.75
8
300.54
323.87
9*
369.18
301.72
9*
420.64
339.05
9*
316.80
263.92
10*
178.38
170.55
10*
196.44
195.11
10*
158.18
146.12
11*
289.04
232.65
11*
334.13
253.09
11*
245.38
211.60
12
711.48
727.65
12*
824.17
809.93
12*
605.86
588.82
13*
469.50
460.99
13
519.92
521.05
13
388.80
397.67
14
457.04
512.11
14
524.56
565.94
14
409.02
410.53
15*
606.81
591.41
15*
699.49
643.72
15
552.79
574.95
16
4,432.21
4,490.17
16
4,902.34
6,328.07
16
3,580.32
4,297.47
17
1,310.83
1,427.70
17
1,632.86
1,659.46
17
1,062.03
1,146.68
18*
1,800.49
1,768.17
18
1,992.32
2,183.13
18
1,448.36
1,549.09
19
3,941.08
4,278.67
19
4,614.13
7,978.00
19*
3,865.54
2,712.08
20
2,225.66
2,397.61
20
2,664.00
2,792.90
20
1,892.28
1,934.11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Table 7: The ICP value of plan sets in DriverLog domain returned by the Sampling and Hybrid approaches with the
distributions (a) uniform, (b) w02 and (c) w08. The problems where Hybrid returns plan sets with better quality than
Sampling are marked with (*).
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
Prob
Sampling
Hybrid
1
27.87
27.87
1
28.56
28.56
1*
28.50
27.85
2
39.22
39.22
2
41.12
41.12
2
38.26
38.26
3*
51.36
50.43
3*
54.44
52.82
3*
49.49
48.58
4
43.00
43.00
4
46.00
46.00
4*
40.87
40.00
5
80.36
81.01
5
82.93
84.45
5
75.96
78.99
6
99.40
111.11
6
102.58
110.98
6
94.79
98.40
7*
38.50
38.49
7*
40.53
40.40
7*
37.04
36.60
8*
59.08
58.41
8*
62.15
62.08
8*
55.89
54.67
9
95.29
103.85
9
100.59
106.00
9
87.93
95.05
10*
52.04
50.00
10
52.40
52.40
10*
47.86
47.60
11
101.43
107.66
11*
110.18
108.07
11
97.56
99.06
12
123.09
129.34
12*
144.67
135.80
12
124.58
128.01
13*
57.37
57.22
13*
60.83
60.72
13
54.66
54.66
14*
62.75
62.33
14*
70.32
69.87
14*
65.20
62.02
15
116.82
117.86
15
113.15
124.28
15
101.09
124.43
16*
50.77
49.36
16*
54.98
54.12
16*
47.04
46.35
17*
38.38
37.77
17*
42.86
41.50
17*
37.56
36.92
18*
88.28
85.55
18*
94.53
90.02
18*
76.73
75.29
19*
82.60
82.08
19*
94.21
89.28
19*
74.73
72.45
20*
137.13
133.47
20*
150.80
135.93
20*
122.43
120.31
(a)
(b)
(c)
Table 8: The ICP value of plan sets in Depots domain returned by the Sampling and Hybrid approaches with the distribu-
tions (a) uniform, (b) w02 and (c) w08. The problems where Hybrid returns plan sets with better quality than Sampling
are marked with (*).
29

Median of makespan
Median of cost
Domain
Distribution
S > H
H > S
S > H
H > S
ZenoTravel
uniform
3
17
16
4
w02
6
12
14
4
w08
6
13
13
6
DriverLog
uniform
6
11
7
11
w02
10
8
8
10
w08
10
7
9
9
Depots
uniform
9
8
9
7
w02
7
9
5
9
w08
11
7
7
11
Table 9: The numbers of problems for each domain, distribution and feature where Sampling (Hybrid) returns plan sets
with better (i.e. smaller) median of feature value than that of Hybrid (Sampling), denoted in the table by S > H (H > S,
respectively). We mark bold the numbers of problems that indicate the outperformance of the corresponding approach.
Since the quality of a plan set depends on how the two features makespan and plan cost are
optimized, and how the plans “span” the space of time and cost, we also compare Sampling and
Hybrid approaches in terms of those two criteria. In particular, we compare plan sets returned
by the two approaches in terms of (i) their median values of makespan and cost, which represent
how “close” the plan sets are to the origin of the space of makespan and cost, and (ii) their
standard deviation of makespan and cost values, which indicate how the sets span each feature
axis.
Table 9 summarizes for each domain, distribution and feature the number of problems in
which each approach (either Sampling or Hybrid) generates plan sets with better median of each
feature value (makespan and plan cost) than the other. There are 60 problems across 3 different
distributions, so in total, 180 cases for each feature. Sampling and Hybrid return plan sets with
better makespan in 40 and 62 cases, and with better plan cost in 52 and 51 cases (respectively),
which indicates that Hybrid is slightly better than Sampling on optimizing makespan but is pos-
sibly worse on optimizing plan cost. In ZenoTravel domain, for all distributions Hybrid likely
returns better plan sets on the makespan than Sampling, and Sampling is better on the plan cost
feature. In DriverLog domain, Sampling is better on the makespan feature with both non-uniform
distributions, but worse than Hybrid with the uniform. On the plan cost feature, Hybrid returns
plan sets with better median than Sampling on the uniform and w02 distribution, and both ap-
proaches perform equally well with the w08 ditribution. In Depots domain, Sampling is better
than Hybrid on both features with the uniform distribution, and only better than Hybrid on the
makespan with the distribution w08.
In terms of spanning plan sets, Hybrid performs much better than Sampling on both features
across three domains, as shown in Table 10. In particular, over 360 cases for both makespan
and plan cost features, there are only 10 cases where Sampling produces plan sets with better
standard deviation than Hybrid on each feature. Hybrid, on the other hand, generates plan sets
with better standard deviation on makespan in 91 cases, and in 85 cases on the plan cost.
These experimental results support our arguments in Section 5.1 about the limits of sampling
idea. Since one single plan could be optimal for a wide range of weight values, the search in
Sampling approach with different trade-off values may focus on looking for plans only at the
same region of the feature space (speciﬁed by the particular value of the weight), which can
reduce the chance of having plans with better value on some particular feature. On the opposite
side, the Hybrid approach tends to be better in spanning plan sets to a larger region of the space,
30

SD of makespan
SD of cost
Domain
Distribution
S > H
H > S
S > H
H > S
ZenoTravel
uniform
8
12
6
14
w02
4
14
7
11
w08
6
13
8
11
DriverLog
uniform
5
11
6
10
w02
7
10
7
9
w08
8
9
10
7
Depots
uniform
10
7
7
9
w02
7
9
5
10
w08
5
13
7
11
Table 10: The numbers of problems for each domain, distribution and feature where Sampling (Hybrid) returns plan
sets with better (i.e. larger) standard deviation of feature value than that of Hybrid (Sampling), denoted in the table
by S > H (H > S, respectively). We mark bold the numbers of problems that indicate the outperformance of the
corresponding approach.
as the set of plans that have been found is taken into account during the search.
Contribution to the lower convex hull: The comparison above between Sampling and Hybrid
considers the two features separately. We now examine the relation between plan sets returned
by those approaches on the joint space of both features, in particular taking into account the
the dominance relation between plans in the two sets. In other words, we compare the relative
total number of plans in the lower convex-hull (LCH) found by each approach. Given that this
is the set that should be returned to the user (to select one from), the higher number tends to
give her a better expected utility value. To measure the relative performance of both approaches
with respect to this criterion, we ﬁrst create a set S combining the plans returned by them. We
then compute the set Slch ⊆S of plans in the lower convex hull among all plans in S. Finally,
we measure the percentages of plans in Slch that are actually returned by each of our tested
approaches. Figures 11, 12 and 13 show the contribution to the LCH of plan sets returned by
Sampling and Hybrid in ZenoTravel, DriverLog and Depots domains.
In general, we observe that the plan set returned by Hybrid contributes more into the LCH
than that of Sampling for most of the problems (except for some large problems) with most of the
distributions and domains. Speciﬁcally, in ZenoTravel domain, Hybrid contributes more plans to
the LCH than Sampling in 15/20, 13/20 (and another 2 equals), 13/20 (another 2 equals) problems
for the uniform, w02 and w08 distributions respectively. In DriverLog domain, it is better than
Sampling in 10/20 (another 6 equals), 10/20 (another 4 equals), 8/20 (another 5 equals) problems;
and Hybrid is better in 11/20 (another 6 equals), 11/20 (another 4 equals) and 11/20 (another 4
equals) for the uniform, w02 and w08 distributions in Depots domain. Again, similar to the ICP
value, the Hybrid approach is less effective on problems with large size (except with the w08
distribution in Depots domain) in which the searching time is mostly used for ﬁnding initial plan
sets. We also note that a plan set with higher contribution to the LCH is not guaranteed to have
better quality, except for the extreme case where one plan set contributes 100% and completely
dominates the other which contributes 0% to the LCH. For example, consider the problem 14 in
ZenoTravel domain: even though the plan sets returned by Hybrid contribute more than those of
Sampling in all three distributions, it is only the w08 where it has a better ICP value. The reason
for this is that the ICP value depends also on the range of the trade-off value (and its density) for
which a plan in the LCH is optimal, whereas the LCH is constructed by simply comparing plans
in terms of their makespan and cost separately (i.e. using the dominance relation), ignoring their
31

Figure 11: The contribution into the common lower convex hull of plan sets in ZenoTravel domain with different distri-
butions.
Figure 12: The contribution into the common lower convex hull of plan sets in DriverLog domain with different distri-
butions.
relative importance.
The sensitivity of plan sets to the distributions: All analysis having been done so far is to
compare the effectiveness of approaches with respect to a particular distribution of the trade-
off value. In this part, we examine how sensitive the plan sets are with respect to different
distributions.
Optimizing high-priority feature: We ﬁrst consider how plan sets are optimized on each feature
(makespan and plan cost) by each approach with respect to two non-uniform distributions w02
and w08. Those are the distributions representing scenarios where the users have different pri-
ority on the features, and plan sets should be biased to optimizing the feature that has higher
priority (i.e. larger value of weight). In particular, plans generated using the w08 distribution
should have better (i.e. smaller) makespan values than those found with the w02 distribution
(since in the makespan has higher priority in w08 than it is in w02); on the other hand, plan set
returned with w02 should have better values of plan cost than those with w08.
Table 11 summarizes for each domain, approach and feature, the number of problems in
which plan sets returned with one distribution (either w02 or w08) have better median value
than with the other. We observe that for both features, the Sampling approach is very likely to
“push” plan sets to regions of the space of makespan and cost with better value of more interested
feature. On the other hand, the Hybrid approach tends to be more sensitive to the distributions
on both the features in ZenoTravel domain, and is more sensitive only on the makespan feature
in DriverLog and Depots domain. Those results generally show that our approaches can bias the
search towards optimizing features that are more desired by the user.
32

Figure 13: The contribution into the common lower convex hull of plan sets in Depots domain with different distributions.
Median of makespan
Median of cost
Approach
Domain
w02 > w08
w08 > w02
w02 > w08
w08 > w02
Sampling
ZenoTravel
5
13
11
8
DriverLog
6
10
13
5
Depots
6
12
10
7
Hybrid
ZenoTravel
5
10
10
4
DriverLog
4
10
6
9
Depots
8
10
4
11
Table 11: The number of problems for each approach, domain and feature where plan sets returned with the w02 (w08)
distribution with better (i.e. smaller) median of feature value than that with w08 (w02), denoted in the table by w02 >
w08 (w08 > w02, respectively). For each approach, we mark bold the numbers for domains in which there are more
problems whose plan sets returned with w08 (w02) have better makespan (plan cost) median than those with w02 (w08,
respectively).
Spanning plan sets on individual features: Next, we examine how plan sets span each feature,
depending on the degree of incompleteness of the distributions. Speciﬁcally, we compare the
standard deviation of plan sets returned using the uniform distribution with those generated using
the distributions w02 and w08. Intuitively, we expect that plan sets returned with the uniform
distribution would have higher standard deviation than those with the distributions w02 and w08.
Table 12 shows for each approach, domain and feature, the number of problems generated
with the uniform distribution that have better standard deviation on the feature than those found
with the distribution w02. We observe that with the makespan feature, both approaches return
plan sets that are more “spanned” on makespan in the Depots domain, but not with ZenoTravel
and DriverLog. With the plan cost feature, Hybrid shows its positive impact on all three domains,
whereas Sampling shows it with the ZenoTravel and Depots domain. Similarly, table 13 shows
the results comparing the uniform and w08 distributions. This time, Sampling returns plan sets
with better standard deviation on both features in the ZenoTravel and Depots domains, but not in
DriverLog. Hybrid also shows this in ZenoTravel domain, but for the remaining two domains, it
tends to return plan sets with expected standard deviation on the plan cost feature only. From all
of these results, we observe that with the uniform distribution, both approaches likely generate
plan sets that span better than with non-uniform distributions, especially on the plan cost feature.
In summary, the experimental results in this section support the following hypotheses:
• Instead of ignoring user’s preference models which are partially speciﬁed, one should take
them into account during plan generation, as plan sets returned would have better quality.
33

SD of makespan
SD of cost
Approach
Domain
U > w02
w02 > U
U > w02
w02 > U
Sampling
ZenoTravel
9
10
10
7
DriverLog
6
8
7
8
Depots
9
6
8
7
Hybrid
ZenoTravel
9
10
12
7
DriverLog
6
9
8
7
Depots
8
6
9
4
Table 12: The numbers of problems for each approach, domain and feature where plan sets returned with the uniform
(w02) distribution have better (i.e. higher) standard deviation of the feature value than that with w02 (uniform), denoted
in the table by U > w02 (w02 > U, respectively). For each approach and feature, we mark bold the numbers for
domains in which there are more problems whose plan sets returned with the uniform distribution have better standard
deviation value of the feature than those with the w02 distribution.
SD of makespan
SD of cost
Approach
Domain
U > w08
w08 > U
U > w08
w08 > U
Sampling
ZenoTravel
11
8
15
4
DriverLog
5
10
5
9
Depots
12
7
12
6
Hybrid
ZenoTravel
10
9
15
4
DriverLog
7
7
8
6
Depots
5
8
11
4
Table 13: The numbers of problems for each approach, domain and feature where plan sets returned with the uniform
(w08) distribution with better (i.e. higher) standard deviation of feature value than that with w08 (uniform), denoted in
the table by U > w08 (w08 > U, respectively). For each approach and feature, we mark bold the numbers for domains
in which there are more problems whose plan sets returned with the uniform distribution have better standard deviation
value of the feature than those with the w08 distribution.
34

• In generating plan sets sequentially to cope with partial preference models, Sampling ap-
proach that searches for plans separately and independently of the solution space tends to
return worse quality plan sets than Hybrid approach.
• The resulting plan sets returned by Hybrid approach tend to be more sensitive to the user’s
preference models than those found by Sampling approach.
6. Related Work
Currently there are very few research efforts in the planning literature that explicitly consider in-
completely speciﬁed user preferences during planning. The usual approach for handling multiple
objectives is to assume that a speciﬁc way of combining the objectives is available (Refanidis and Vlahavas,
2003; Do and Kambhampati, 2003), and search for one optimal plan with respect to this function.
Brafman & Chernyavsky (2005) discuss a CSP-based approach to ﬁnd a plan for the most pref-
ered goal state given the qualitative preferences on goals. There is no action cost and makespan
measurements such as in our problem setting. Other relevant work includes Bryce et al. (2007),
in which the authors devise a variant of LAO* algorithm to search for a conditional plan with
multiple execution options for each observation branch that are non-dominated with respect to
objectives like probability and cost to reach the goal.
In the context of decision-theoretic planning, some work has been focused on scenarios where
the value function is not completely deﬁned, in particular due to the incompleteness in specify-
ing the reward function. In those cases, one approach is to search for the most robust policy
with different robustness criteria (e.g., Delage and Mannor, 2007; Regan and Boutilier, 2010;
Nilim and Ghaoui, 2005). The idea of searching for sets of policies has also been considered
recently in reinforcement learning. Speciﬁcally, in (Natarajan and Tadepalli, 2005) the reward
function is incomplete with weight values changing over time, and a set of policies is searched
and stored so that whenever the weights change a new best policy can be found by improving
those in the set. On the other hand, Barrett and Narayanan (2008) provide Bellman equations for
the Q-values using all vectors on convex hull to search for the whole pareto set.
Our work on planning with partial user’s preferences is also related to work on preference
elicitation and decision making under uncertainty of preferences. For instance, Chajewska et al
(2000) consider a decision making scenario where the utility function is assumed to be drawn
from a known distribution, and either a single best strategy or an elicitation question will be sug-
gested based on the expected utility of the strategy and the value of information of the question.
Boutilier et al. (2010) considers preference elicitation problem in which the user’s preference
model is incomplete on both the set of features and the utility function. However, these scenarios
are different from ours in two important issues: we focus on efﬁcient approach to synthesizing
plans with respect to the partial preferences, whereas the “outcomes” or “conﬁgurations” in their
cases are considered given upfront (or could be obtained with low cost), and we aim to search
for a set of plans based on a quality measure of plan sets (instead of a quality measure over
individual outcome or conﬁguration).
Our approach to generating diverse plan sets to cope with planning scenarios without knowl-
edge of user’s preferences is in the same spirit as (Tate et al., 1998) and Myers (Myers, 2006;
Myers and Lee, 1999), though for different purposes.
Myers, in particular, presents an ap-
proach to generate diverse plans in the context of her HTN planner by requiring the meta-
theory of the domain to be available and using bias on the meta-theoretic elements to control
search (Myers and Lee, 1999). The metatheory of the domain is deﬁned in terms of pre-deﬁned
35

attributes and their possible values covering roles, features and measures. Our work differs from
hers in two respects. First, we focus on domain-independent distance measures. Second we
consider the computation of diverse plans in the context of state of the art domain independent
planners.
The problem of ﬁnding multiple but similar plans has been considered in the context of re-
planning. A recent effort in this direction is (Fox et al., 2006). Our work focuses on the problem
of ﬁnding diverse plans by a variety of distance measures when the user’s preferences exist but
are completely unknown.
Outside the planning literature, our closest connection is to the work by Hebrard et al. 2005,
who solve the problem of ﬁnding similar/dissimilar solutions for CSPs without additional domain
knowledge. It is instructive to note that unlike CSP, where the number of potential solutions is
ﬁnite (albeit exponential), the number of distinct plans for a given problem can be inﬁnite (since
we can have inﬁnitely many non-minimal versions of the same plan). Thus, effective approaches
for generating diverse plans are even more critical. The challenges in ﬁnding interrelated plans
also bear some tangential similarities to the work in information retrieval on ﬁnding similar or
dissimilar documents (c.f. (Zhang et al., 2002)).
7. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we consider the planning problem with partial user’s preference model in two sce-
narios where the knowledge about preference is completely unknown or only part of it is given.
We propose a general approach to this problem where a set of plans is presented to the user
from which she can select. For each situation of the incompleteness, we deﬁne different quality
measure of plan sets and investigate approaches to generating plan set with respect to the quality
measure. In the ﬁrst scenario when the user is known to have preferences over plans, but the
details are completely unknown, we deﬁne the quality of plan sets as their diversity value, spec-
iﬁed with syntactic features of plans (its action set, sequence of states, and set of causal links).
We then consider generating diverse set of plans using two state-of-the-art planners, GP-CSP and
LPG. The approaches we developed for supporting the generation of diverse plans in GP-CSP are
broadly applicable to other planners based on bounded horizon compilation approaches for plan-
ning. Similarly, the techniques we developed for LPG, such as biasing the relaxed plan heuristics
in terms of distance measures, could be applied to other heuristic planners. The experimental
results with GP-CSP explicate the relative difﬁculty of enforcing the various distance measures,
as well as the correlation among the individual distance measures (as assessed in terms of the
sets of plans they ﬁnd). The experiments with LPG demonstrate the potential of planning using
heuristic local search in producing large sets of highly diverse plans.
When part of the user’s preferences is given, in particular the set of features that the user is
interested in and the distribution of weights representing their relative importance, we propose
the usage of Integrated Preference Function, and its special case Integrated Convex Preference
function, to measure the quality of plan sets, and propose various heuristic approaches based
on the Metric-LPG planner (Gerevini et al., 2008) to ﬁnd a good plan set with respect to this
measure. We show empirically that taking partial preferences into account does improve the
quality of plan set returned to the users, and that our proposed approaches are sensitive to the
degree of preference incompleteness, represented by the distribution.
While a planning agent may well start with a partial preference model, in the long run, we
would like the agent to be able to improve the preference model through repeated interactions
with the user. In our context, at the beginning when the degree of incompleteness of preferences
36

is high, the learning will involve improving the estimate of h(α) based on the feedback about
the speciﬁc plan that the user selects from the set returned by the system. This learning phase
is in principle well connected to the Bayesian parameter estimation approach in the sense that
the whole distribution of parameter vector, h(α), is updated after receiving feedback from the
user, taking into account the current distribution of all models (starting from a prior, for instance
the uniform distribution). Although such interactive learning framework has been discussed
previously, as in Chajewska et al. (2001), the set of user’s decisions in this work is assumed to
be given, whereas in planning scenarios the cost of plan synthesis should be incoporated into the
our interactive framework, and the problem of presenting plan sets to the user needs also to be
considered. Recent work by Li et al. (2009) considered learning user’s preferences in planning,
but restricting to preference models that can be represented with hierachical task networks.
Acknowledgements: We thank Menkes van den Briel for drawing our attention to ICP mea-
sure initially. Tuan Nguyen’s research is supported by a Science Foundation of Arizona fellow-
ship. Kambhampati’s research is supported in part by an IBM Faculty Award, the NSF grant
IIS˘2013308139, ONR grants N00014-09-1-0017, N00014-07-1-1049, N000140610058, and by
a Lockheed Martin subcontract TT0687680 to ASU as part of the DARPA Integrated Learning
program.
