Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning in
Sequential Social Dilemmas
Joel Z. Leibo1
DeepMind, London, UK

Vinicius Zambaldi1
DeepMind, London, UK

Marc Lanctot
DeepMind, London, UK

Janusz Marecki
DeepMind, London, UK

Thore Graepel
DeepMind, London, UK

ABSTRACT
Matrix games like Prisoner’s Dilemma have guided research
on social dilemmas for decades. However, they necessarily
treat the choice to cooperate or defect as an atomic action.
In real-world social dilemmas these choices are temporally
extended. Cooperativeness is a property that applies to poli-
cies, not elementary actions. We introduce sequential social
dilemmas that share the mixed incentive structure of matrix
game social dilemmas but also require agents to learn poli-
cies that implement their strategic intentions. We analyze
the dynamics of policies learned by multiple self-interested
independent learning agents, each using its own deep Q-
network, on two Markov games we introduce here: 1. a fruit
Gathering game and 2. a Wolfpack hunting game. We char-
acterize how learned behavior in each domain changes as a
function of environmental factors including resource abun-
dance. Our experiments show how conﬂict can emerge from
competition over shared resources and shed light on how
the sequential nature of real world social dilemmas aﬀects
cooperation.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies →Multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning; Agent / discrete models; Stochastic games;
Keywords
Social dilemmas, cooperation, Markov games, agent-based
social simulation, non-cooperative games
1.
INTRODUCTION
Social dilemmas expose tensions between collective and
individual rationality [1]. Cooperation makes possible bet-
ter outcomes for all than any could obtain on their own.
However, the lure of free riding and other such parasitic
strategies implies a tragedy of the commons that threatens
the stability of any cooperative venture [2].
1These authors contributed equally.
Appears in: Proceedings of the 16th International Confer-
ence on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AA-
MAS 2017), S. Das, E. Durfee, K. Larson, M. Winikoﬀ
(eds.), May 8–12, 2017, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil.
Copyright © 2017, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.
The theory of repeated general-sum matrix games pro-
vides a framework for understanding social dilemmas. Fig.
1 shows payoﬀmatrices for three canonical examples: Pris-
oner’s Dilemma, Chicken, and Stag Hunt. The two actions
are interpreted as cooperate and defect respectively.
The
four possible outcomes of each stage game are R (reward
of mutual cooperation), P (punishment arising from mu-
tual defection), S (sucker outcome obtained by the player
who cooperates with a defecting partner), and T (tempta-
tion outcome achieved by defecting against a cooperator).
A matrix game is a social dilemma when its four payoﬀs
satisfy the following social dilemma inequalities (this formu-
lation from [3]):
1. R > P
Mutual cooperation is preferred to mutual
defection.
(1)
2. R > S
Mutual cooperation is preferred to being
exploited by a defector.
(2)
3. 2R > T + S
This ensures that mutual cooperation is
preferred to an equal probability of unilateral cooper-
ation and defection.
(3)
4. either greed: T > R
Exploiting a cooperator is
preferred over mutual cooperation
or
fear: P > S
Mutual defection is preferred
over being exploited.
(4)
Matrix Game Social Dilemmas (MGSD) have been fruit-
fully employed as models for a wide variety of phenomena
in theoretical social science and biology. For example, there
is a large and interesting literature concerned with mecha-
nisms through which the socially preferred outcome of mu-
tual cooperation can be stabilized, e.g., direct reciprocity [4,
5, 6, 7], indirect reciprocity [8], norm enforcement [9, 10],
simple reinforcement learning variants [3], multiagent rein-
forcement learning [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], spatial structure [16],
emotions [17], and social network eﬀects [18, 19].
However, the MGSD formalism ignores several aspects of
real world social dilemmas which may be of critical impor-
tance.
1. Real world social dilemmas are temporally extended.
2. Cooperation and defection are labels that apply to poli-
cies implementing strategic decisions.
3. Cooperativeness may be a graded quantity.
arXiv:1702.03037v1  [cs.MA]  10 Feb 2017

C
D
C
R, R
S, T
D
T, S
P, P
Chicken
C
D
C
3, 3
1, 4
D
4, 1
0, 0
Stag Hunt
C
D
C
4, 4
0, 3
D
3, 0
1, 1
Prisoners
C
D
C
3, 3
0, 4
D
4, 0
1, 1
Figure 1: Canonical matrix game social dilemmas. Left: Outcome variables R, P, S, and T are mapped to
cells of the game matrix. Right: The three canonical matrix game social dilemmas. By convention, a cell of
X, Y represents a utility of X to the row player and Y to the column player. In Chicken, agents may defect out
of greed. In Stag Hunt, agents may defect out of fear of a non-cooperative partner. In Prisoner’s Dilemma,
agents are motivated to defect out of both greed and fear simultaneously.
4. Decisions to cooperate or defect occur only quasi-si-
multaneously since some information about what player
2 is starting to do can inform player 1’s decision and
vice versa.
5. Decisions must be made despite only having partial
information about the state of the world and the ac-
tivities of the other players.
We propose a Sequential Social Dilemma (SSD) model to
better capture the above points while, critically, maintaining
the mixed motivation structure of MGSDs. That is, analo-
gous inequalities to (1) – (4) determine when a temporally-
extended Markov game is an SSD.
To demonstrate the importance of capturing sequential
structure in social dilemma modeling, we present empiri-
cal game-theoretic analyses [20, 21] of SSDs to identify the
empirical payoﬀmatrices summarizing the outcomes that
would arise if cooperate and defect policies were selected as
one-shot decisions. The empirical payoﬀmatrices are them-
selves valid matrix games.
Our main result is that both
of the SSDs we considered, Gathering and Wolfpack, have
empirical payoﬀmatrices that are Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD).
This means that if one were to adhere strictly to the MGSD-
modeling paradigm, PD models should be proposed for both
situations. Thus any conclusions reached from simulating
them would necessarily be quite similar in both cases (and
to other studies of iterated PD). However, when viewed as
SSDs, the formal equivalence of Gathering and Wolfpack
disappears. They are clearly diﬀerent games. In fact, there
are simple experimental manipulations that, when applied
to Gathering and Wolfpack, yield opposite predictions con-
cerning the emergence and stability of cooperation.
More speciﬁcally, we describe a factor that promotes the
emergence of cooperation in Gathering while discouraging
its emergence in Wolfpack, and vice versa.
The straight-
forward implication is that, for modeling real-world social
dilemmas with SSDs, the choice of whether to use a Gathering-
like or Wolfpack-like model is critical. And the diﬀerences
between the two cannot be captured by MGSD modeling.
Along the way to these results, the present paper also
makes a small methodological contribution. Owing to the
greater complexity arising from their sequential structure, it
is more computationally demanding to ﬁnd equilibria of SSD
models than it is for MGSD models. Thus the standard evo-
lution and learning approaches to simulating MGSDs cannot
be applied to SSDs. Instead, more sophisticated multiagent
reinforcement learning methods must be used (e.g [22, 23,
24]). In this paper we describe how deep Q-networks (e.g
[25]) may be applied to this problem of ﬁnding equilibria of
SSDs.
Figure 2:
Venn diagram showing the relationship
between Markov games, repeated matrix games,
MGSDs, and SSDs. A repeated matrix game is an
MGSD when it satisﬁes the social dilemma inequal-
ities (eqs.
1 – 4).
A Markov game with |S| > 1 is
an SSD when it can be mapped by empirical game-
theoretic analysis (EGTA) to an MGSD. Many SSDs
may map to the same MGSD.
2.
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION
We model sequential social dilemmas as general-sum Markov
(simultaneous move) games with each agent having only a
partial observation onto their local environment.
Agents
must learn an appropriate policy while coexisting with one
another. A policy is considered to implement cooperation
or defection by properties of the realizations it generates. A
Markov game is an SSD if and only if it contains outcomes
arising from cooperation and defection policies that satisfy
the same inequalities used to deﬁne MGSDs (eqs. 1 – 4).
This deﬁnition is stated more formally in sections 2.1 and
2.2 below.
2.1
Markov Games
A two-player partially observable Markov game M is de-
ﬁned by a set of states S and an observation function O :
S ×{1, 2} →Rd specifying each player’s d-dimensional view,
along with two sets of actions allowable from any state A1
and A2, one for each player, a transition function T : S ×
A1 × A2 →∆(S), where ∆(S) denotes the set of discrete
probability distributions over S, and a reward function for
each player: ri : S × A1 × A2 →R for player i. Let Oi =
{oi | s ∈S, oi = O(s, i)} be the observation space of player i.
To choose actions, each player uses policy πi : Oi →∆(Ai).
For temporal discount factor γ ∈[0, 1] we can deﬁne the
long-term payoﬀV ⃗π
i (s0) to player i when the joint policy

⃗π = (π1, π2) is followed starting from state s0 ∈S.
V ⃗π
i (s0) = E⃗at∼⃗π(O(st)),st+1∼T (st,⃗at)
" ∞
X
t=0
γtri(st,⃗at)
#
. (5)
Matrix games are the special case of two-player perfectly
observable (Oi(s) = s) Markov games obtained when |S| =
1. MGSDs also specify A1 = A2 = {C, D}, where C and D
are called (atomic) cooperate and defect respectively.
The outcomes R(s), P(s), S(s), T(s) that determine when
a matrix game is a social dilemma are deﬁned as follows.
R(s) := V πC,πC
1
(s) = V πC,πC
2
(s),
(6)
P(s) := V πD,πD
1
(s) = V πD,πD
2
(s),
(7)
S(s) := V πC,πD
1
(s) = V πD,πC
2
(s),
(8)
T(s) := V πD,πC
1
(s) = V πC,πD
2
(s),
(9)
where πC and πD are cooperative and defecting policies as
described next. Note that a matrix game is a social dilemma
when R, P, S, T satisfy the inequalities (1) – (4).
2.2
Deﬁnition of Sequential Social Dilemma
This deﬁnition is based on a formalization of empirical
game-theoretic analysis [20, 21]. We deﬁne the outcomes
(R, P, S, T) := (R(s0), P(s0), S(s0), T(s0)) induced by ini-
tial state s0, and two policies πC, πD, through their long-
term expected payoﬀ(5) and the deﬁnitions (6) – (9). We
refer to the game matrix with R, P, S, T organized as in
Fig. 1-left. as an empirical payoﬀmatrix following the ter-
minology of [21].
Deﬁnition:
A sequential social dilemma is a tuple
(M, ΠC, ΠD) where ΠC and ΠD are disjoint sets of poli-
cies that are said to implement cooperation and defection
respectively. M is a Markov game with state space S. Let
the empirical payoﬀmatrix (R(s), P(s), S(s), T(s)) be in-
duced by policies (πC ∈ΠC, πD ∈ΠD) via eqs. (5) – (9).
A Markov game is an SSD when there exist states s ∈S
for which the induced empirical payoﬀmatrix satisﬁes the
social dilemma inequalities (1) – (4).
Remark:
There is no guarantee that ΠC S ΠD = Π, the
set of all legal policies. This reﬂects the fact that, in practice
for sequential behavior, cooperativeness is usually a graded
property. Thus we are forced to deﬁne ΠC and ΠD by thresh-
olding a continuous social behavior metric. For example, to
construct an SSD for which a policy’s level of aggressiveness
α : Π →R is the relevant social behavior metric, we pick
threshold values αc and αd so that α(π) < αc ⇐⇒π ∈ΠC
and α(π) > αd ⇐⇒π ∈ΠD.
3.
LEARNING ALGORITHMS
Most previous work on ﬁnding policies for Markov games
takes the prescriptive view of multiagent learning [26]: that
is, it attempts to answer “what should each agent do?” Sev-
eral algorithms and analyses have been developed for the
two-player zero-sum case [22, 27, 28, 29, 30]. The general-
sum case is signiﬁcantly more challenging [31], and algo-
rithms either have strong assumptions or need to either track
several diﬀerent potential equilibria per agent [32, 33], model
other players to simplify the problem [34], or must ﬁnd a
Figure 3:
Left: Gathering. In this frame the blue
player is directing its beam at the apple respawn
location. The red player is approaching the apples
from the south. Right: Wolfpack. The size of the
agent’s view relative to the size of the map is il-
lustrated.
If an agent is inside the blue diamond-
shaped region around the prey when a capture
occurs—when one agent touches the prey—both it
and its partner receive a reward of rteam.
cyclic strategy composed of several policies obtained through
multiple state space sweeps [35]. Researchers have also stud-
ied the emergence of multi-agent coordination in the decen-
tralized, partially observable MDP framework [36, 37, 38].
However, that approach relies on knowledge of the underly-
ing Markov model, an unrealistic assumption for modeling
real-world social dilemmas.
In contrast, we take a descriptive view, and aim to answer
“what social eﬀects emerge when each agent uses a partic-
ular learning rule?” The purpose here then is to study and
characterize the resulting learning dynamics, as in e.g., [13,
15], rather than on designing new learning algorithms. It is
well-known that the resulting “local decision process” could
be non-Markovian from each agent’s perspective [39]. This
is a feature, not a bug in descriptive work since it is a prop-
erty of the real environment that the model captures.
We use deep reinforcement learning as the basis for each
agent in part because of its recent success with solving com-
plex problems [25, 40]. Also, temporal diﬀerence predictions
have been observed in the brain [41] and this class of rein-
forcement learning algorithm is seen as a candidate theory
of animal habit-learning [42].
3.1
Deep Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Modern deep reinforcement learning methods take the
perspective of an agent that must learn to maximize its cu-
mulative long-term reward through trial-and-error interac-
tions with its environment [43, 44].
In the multi-agent setting, the i-th agent stores a function
Qi : Oi × Ai →R represented by a deep Q-network (DQN).
See [25] for details in the single agent case.
In our case
the true state s is observed diﬀerently by each player, as
oi = O(s, i). However for consistency of notation, we use a
shorthand: Qi(s, a) = Qi(O(s, i), a).
During learning, to encourage exploration we parameter-
ize the i-th agent’s policy by
πi(s) =
 argmaxa∈AiQi(s, a)
with probability 1 −ϵ
U(Ai)
with probability ϵ
where U(Ai) denotes a sample from the uniform distribution

over Ai. Each agent updates its policy given a stored batch1
of experienced transitions {(s, a, ri, s′)t : t = 1, . . . T} such
that
Qi(s, a) ←Qi(s, a) + α

ri + γ max
a′∈Ai
Qi(s′, a′) −Qi(s, a)

This is a“growing batch”approach to reinforcement learn-
ing in the sense of [45]. However, it does not grow in an un-
bounded fashion. Rather, old data is discarded so the batch
can be constantly refreshed with new data reﬂecting more
recent transitions.
We compared batch sizes of 1e5 (our
default) and 1e6 in our experiments (see Sect. 5.3).
The
network representing the function Q is trained through gra-
dient descent on the mean squared Bellman residual with the
expectation taken over transitions uniformly sampled from
the batch (see [25]). Since the batch is constantly refreshed,
the Q-network may adapt to the changing data distribution
arising from the eﬀects of learning on π1 and π2.
In order to make learning in SSDs tractable, we make
the extra assumption that each individual agent’s learning
depends only on the other agent’s learning via the (slowly)
changing distribution of experience it generates. That is, the
two learning agents are “independent” of one another and
each regard the other as part of the environment. From the
perspective of player one, the learning of player two shows
up as a non-stationary environment. The independence as-
sumption can be seen as a particular kind of bounded ratio-
nality: agents do no recursive reasoning about one another’s
learning.
In principle, this restriction could be dropped
through the use of planning-based reinforcement learning
methods like those of [24].
4.
SIMULATION METHODS
Both games studied here were implemented in a 2D grid-
world game engine. The state st and the joint action of all
players ⃗a determines the state at the next time-step st+1.
Observations O(s, i) ∈R3×16×21 (RGB) of the true state st
depended on the player’s current position and orientation.
The observation window extended 15 grid squares ahead
and 10 grid squares from side to side (see Fig.
3B). Ac-
tions a ∈R8 were agent-centered: step forward, step back-
ward, step left, step right, rotate left, rotate right, use beam
and stand still. Each player appears blue in its own local
view, light-blue in its teammates view and red in its oppo-
nent’s view. Each episode lasted for 1, 000 steps. Default
neural networks had two hidden layers with 32 units, in-
terleaved with rectiﬁed linear layers which projected to the
output layer which had 8 units, one for each action. During
training, players implemented epsilon-greedy policies, with
epsilon decaying linearly over time (from 1.0 to 0.1). The
default per-time-step discount rate was 0.99.
5.
RESULTS
In this section, we describe three experiments: one for
each game (Gathering and Wolfpack), and a third experi-
ment investigating parameters that inﬂuence the emergence
of cooperation versus defection.
5.1
Experiment 1: Gathering
The goal of the Gathering game is to collect apples, repre-
sented by green pixels (see Fig. 3A). When a player collects
1The batch is sometimes called a “replay buﬀer” e.g. [25].
Figure 4: Social outcomes are inﬂuenced by envi-
ronment parameters.
Top:
Gathering.
Shown is
the beam-use rate (aggressiveness) as a function of
re-spawn time of apples Napple (abundance) and re-
spawn time of agents Ntagged (conﬂict-cost). These
results show that agents learn aggresssive policies in
environments that combine a scarcity of resources
with the possibility of costly action. Less aggressive
policies emerge from learning in relatively abundant
environments with less possibility for costly action.
Bottom: Wolfpack.
Shown is two minus the aver-
age number of wolves per capture as a function of
the capture radius and group capture beneﬁt (rteam).
Again as expected, greater group beneﬁt and larger
capture radius lead to an increase in wolves per cap-
ture, indicating a higher degree of cooperation.
an apple it receives a reward of 1 and the apple is temporar-
ily removed from the map. The apple respawns after Napple
frames. Players can direct a beam in a straight line along
their current orientation. A player hit by the beam twice
is “tagged” and removed from the game for Ntagged frames.
No rewards are delivered to either player for tagging. The
only potential motivation for tagging is competition over the
apples. Refer to the Gathering gameplay video2 for demon-
stration.
Intuitively, a defecting policy in this game is one that
is aggressive—i.e., involving frequent attempts to tag rival
players to remove them from the game. Such a policy is mo-
tivated by the opportunity to take all the apples for oneself
that arises after eliminating the other player. By contrast,
a cooperative policy is one that does not seek to tag the
other player. This suggests the use of a social behavior met-
2https://goo.gl/2xczLc

ric (section 2.2) that measures a policy’s tendency to use
the beam action as the basis for its classiﬁcation as defec-
tion or cooperation. To this end, we counted the number
of beam actions during a time horizon and normalized it by
the amount of time in which both agents were playing (not
removed from the game).
By manipulating the rate at which apples respawn after
being collected, Napple, we could control the abundance of
apples in the environment. Similarly, by manipulating the
number of timesteps for which a tagged agent is removed
from the game, Ntagged, we could control the cost of po-
tential conﬂict. We wanted to test whether conﬂict would
emerge from learning in environments where apples were
scarce. We considered the eﬀect of abundance (Napple) and
conﬂict-cost (Ntagged) on the level of aggressiveness (beam-
use rate) that emerges from learning. Fig. 4A shows the
beam-use rate that evolved after training for 40 million steps
as a function of abundance (Napple) and conﬂict-cost (Ntagged).
Supplementary video 3 shows how such emergent conﬂict
evolves over the course of learning. In this case, diﬀerences
in beam-use rate (proxy for the tendency to defect) learned
in the diﬀerent environments emerge quite early in training
and mostly persist throughout. When learning does change
beam-use rate, it is almost always to increase it.
We noted that the policies learned in environments with
low abundance or high conﬂict-cost were highly aggressive
while the policies learned with high abundance or low conﬂict-
cost were less aggressive. That is, the Gathering game pre-
dicts that conﬂict may emerge from competition for scarce
resources, but is less likely to emerge when resources are
plentiful.
To further characterize the mixed motivation structure
of the Gathering game, we carried out the empirical game-
theoretic analysis suggested by the deﬁnition of section 2.2.
We chose the set of policies ΠC that were trained in the high
abundance / low conﬂict-cost environments (low aggression
policies) and ΠD as policies trained in the low abundance
and high conﬂict-cost environments (high aggression poli-
cies), and used these to compute empirical payoﬀmatrices
as follows. Two pairs of policies (πC
1 , πD
1 ) and (πC
2 , πD
2 ) are
sampled from ΠC and ΠD and matched against each other
in the Gathering game for one episode. The resulting re-
wards are assigned to individual cells of a matrix game, in
which πC
i
corresponds the cooperative action for player i,
and πD
j , the defective action for player j. This process is
repeated until convergence of the cell values, and generates
estimates of R, P, S, and T for the game corresponding to
each abundance / conﬂict-cost (Napple, Ntagged) level tested.
See Figure 5 for an illustration of this workﬂow. Fig. 6A
summarizes the types of empirical games that were found
given our parameter spectrum. Most cases where the social
dilemma inequalities (1) – (4) held, i.e., the strategic sce-
nario was a social dilemma, turned out to be a prisoner’s
dilemma. The greed motivation reﬂects the temptation to
take out a rival and collect all the apples oneself. The fear
motivation reﬂected the danger of being taken out oneself
by a defecting rival. P is preferred to S in the Gathering
game because mutual defection typically leads to both play-
ers alternating tagging one another, so each gets some time
alone to collect apples. Whereas the agent receiving the out-
come S does not try to tag its rival and thus never gets this
3https://goo.gl/w2VqlQ
chance.
5.2
Experiment 2: Wolfpack
The Wolfpack game requires two players (wolves) to chase
a third player (the prey). When either wolf touches the prey,
all wolves within the capture radius (see Fig. 3B) receive a
reward. The reward received by the capturing wolves is pro-
portional to the number of wolves in the capture radius. The
idea is that a lone wolf can capture the prey, but is at risk
of losing the carcass to scavengers. However, when the two
wolves capture the prey together, they can better protect
the carcass from scavengers and hence receive a higher re-
ward. A lone-wolf capture provides a reward of rlone and a
capture involving both wolves is worth rteam. Refer to the
Wolfpack gameplay video4 for demonstration.
The wolves learn to catch the prey over the course of train-
ing.
Fig.
4B shows the eﬀect on the average number of
wolves per capture obtained from training in environments
with varying levels of group capture bonus rteam/rlone and
capture radius. Supplementary video 5 shows how this de-
pendency evolves over learning time. Like in the Gathering
game, these results show that environment parameters in-
ﬂuence how cooperative the learned policies will be. It is
interesting that two diﬀerent cooperative policies emerged
from these experiments. On the one hand, the wolves could
cooperate by ﬁrst ﬁnding one another and then moving to-
gether to hunt the prey, while on the other hand, a wolf
could ﬁrst ﬁnd the prey and then wait for the other wolf to
arrive before capturing it.
Analogous to our analysis of the Gathering game, we choose
ΠC and ΠD for Wolfpack to be the sets of policies learned
in the high radius / group bonus and low radius /group
bonus environments respectively.
The procedure for esti-
mating R, P, S, and T was the same as in section 5.1. Fig.
6B summarizes these results. Interestingly, it turns out that
all three classic MGSDs, chicken, stag hunt, and prisoner’s
dilemma can be found in the empirical payoﬀmatrices of
Wolfpack.
5.3
Experiment 3: Agent parameters inﬂuenc-
ing the emergence of defection
So far we have described how properties of the environ-
ment inﬂuence emergent social outcomes. Next we consider
the impact of manipulating properties of the agents. Psy-
chological research attempting to elucidate the motivational
factors underlying human cooperation is relevant here. In
particular, Social Psychology has advanced various hypothe-
ses concerning psychological variables that may inﬂuence co-
operation and give rise to the observed individual diﬀerences
in human cooperative behavior in laboratory-based social
dilemmas [2]. These factors include consideration-of-future-
consequences [46], trust [47], aﬀect (interestingly, it is nega-
tive emotions that turn out to promote cooperation [48]),
and a personality variable called social value orientation
characterized by other-regarding-preferences. The latter has
been studied in a similar Markov game social dilemma setup
to our SSD setting by [49].
Obviously the relatively simple DQN learning agents we
consider here do not have internal variables that directly cor-
respond to the factors identiﬁed by Social Psychology. Nor
4https://goo.gl/AgXtTn
5https://goo.gl/vcB8mU

Figure 5:
Workﬂow to obtain empirical payoﬀmatrices from Markov games.
Agents are trained under
diﬀerent environmental conditions, e.g., with high or low abundance (Gathering case) or team capture bonus
(Wolfpack case) resulting in agents classiﬁed as cooperators (πC ∈ΠC) or defectors (πD ∈ΠD).
Empirical
game payoﬀs are estimated by sampling (π1, π2) from ΠC × ΠC, ΠC × ΠD, ΠD × ΠC, and ΠD × ΠD. By repeatedly
playing out the resulting games between the sampled π1 and π2, and averaging the results, it is possible to
estimate the payoﬀs for each cell of the matrix.
should they be expected to capture the full range of human
individual diﬀerences in laboratory social dilemmas. Never-
theless, it is interesting to consider just how far one can go
down this road of modeling Social Psychology hypotheses
using such simple learning agents6. Recall also that DQN
is in the class of reinforcement learning algorithms that is
generally considered to be the leading candidate theory of
animal habit-learning [50, 42]. Thus, the interpretation of
our model is that it only addresses whatever part of coop-
erative behavior arises “by habit” as opposed to conscious
deliberation.
Experimental manipulations of DQN parameters yield con-
sistent and interpretable eﬀects on emergent social behavior.
Each plot in Fig. 7 shows the relevant social behavior metric,
conﬂict for Gathering and lone-wolf behavior for Wolfpack,
as a function of an environment parameter: Napple, Ntagged
(Gathering) and rteam/rlone (Wolfpack). The ﬁgure shows
that in both games, agents with greater discount parame-
ter (less time discounting) more readily defect than agents
that discount the future more steeply. For Gathering this
likely occurs because the defection policy of tagging the
other player to temporarily remove them from the game only
provides a delayed reward in the form of the increased op-
portunity to collect apples without interference. However,
when abundance is very high, even the agents with higher
discount factors do not learn to defect. In such paradisia-
cal settings, the apples respawn so quickly that an individ-
ual agent cannot collect them quickly enough.
As a con-
sequence, there is no motivation to defect regardless of the
temporal discount rate. Manipulating the size of the stored-
and-constantly-refreshed batch of experience used to train
each DQN agent has the opposite eﬀect on the emergence of
defection. Larger batch size translates into more experience
with the other agent’s policy.
For Gathering, this means
that avoiding being tagged becomes easier. Evasive action
beneﬁts more from extra experience than the ability to tar-
get the other agent. For Wolfpack, larger batch size allows
6The contrasting approach that seeks to build more struc-
ture into the reinforcement learning agents to enable more
interpretable experimental manipulations is also interesting
and complementary e.g., [24].
greater opportunity to learn to coordinate to jointly catch
the prey.
Possibly the most interesting eﬀect on behavior comes
from the number of hidden units in the neural network be-
hind the agents, which may be interpreted as their cogni-
tive capacity. Curves for tendency to defect are shown in
the right column of Fig. 7, comparing two diﬀerent network
sizes. For Gathering, an increase in network size leads to
an increase in the agent’s tendency to defect, whereas for
Wolfpack the opposite is true: Greater network size leads to
less defection.
This can be explained as follows.
In Gathering, defec-
tion behavior is more complex and requires a larger network
size to learn than cooperative behavior.
This is the case
because defection requires the diﬃcult task of targeting the
opposing agent with the beam whereas peacefully collecting
apples is almost independent of the opposing agent’s behav-
ior. In Wolfpack, cooperation behavior is more complex and
requires a larger network size because the agents need to co-
ordinate their hunting behaviors to collect the team reward
whereas the lone-wolf behavior does not require coordina-
tion with the other agent and hence requires less network
capacity.
Note that the qualitative diﬀerence in eﬀects for network
size supports our argument that the richer framework of
SSDs is needed to capture important aspects of real social
dilemmas. This rather striking diﬀerence between Gathering
and Wolfpack is invisible to the purely matrix game based
MGSD-modeling. It only emerges when the diﬀerent com-
plexities of cooperative or defecting behaviors, and hence the
diﬃculty of the corresponding learning problems is modeled
in a sequential setup such as an SSD.
6.
DISCUSSION
In the Wolfpack game, learning a defecting lone-wolf pol-
icy is easier than learning a cooperative pack-hunting pol-
icy.
This is because the former does not require actions
to be conditioned on the presence of a partner within the
capture radius. In the Gathering game the situation is re-
versed. Cooperative policies are easier to learn since they
need only be concerned with apples and may not depend

Figure 6:
Summary of matrix games discovered within Gathering (Left) and Wolfpack (Right) through
extracting empirical payoﬀmatrices. The games are classiﬁed by social dilemma type indicated by color and
quandrant. With the x-axis representing fear = P −S and the y-axis representing greed = T −R, the lower
right quadrant contains Stag Hunt type games (green), the top left quadrant Chicken type games (blue),
and the top right quadrant Prisoner’s Dilemma type games (red). Non-SSD type games, which either violate
social dilemma condition (1) or do not exhibit fear or greed are shown as well.
on the rival player’s actions.
However, optimally eﬃcient
cooperative policies may still require such coordination to
prevent situations where both players simultaneously move
on the same apple. Cooperation and defection demand dif-
fering levels of coordination for the two games. Wolfpack’s
cooperative policy requires greater coordination than its de-
fecting policy. Gathering’s defection policy requires greater
coordination (to successfully aim at the rival player).
Both the Gathering and Wolfpack games contain embed-
ded MGSDs with prisoner’s dilemma-type payoﬀs. The MGSD
model thus regards them as structurally identical.
Yet,
viewed as SSDs, they make rather diﬀerent predictions. This
suggests a new dimension on which to investigate classic
questions concerning the evolution of cooperation. For any
to-be-modeled phenomenon, the question now arises: which
SSD is a better description of the game being played? If
Gathering is a better model, then we would expect coop-
eration to be the easier-to-learn “default” policy, probably
requiring less coordination. For situations where Wolfpack
is the better model, defection is the easier-to-learn “default”
behavior and cooperation is the harder-to-learn policy re-
quiring greater coordination.
These modeling choices are
somewhat orthogonal to the issue of assigning values to the
various possible outcomes (the only degree of freedom in
MGSD-modeling), yet they make a large diﬀerence to the
results.
SSD models address similar research questions as MGSD
models, e.g. the evolution of cooperation. However, SSD
models are more realistic since they capture the sequential
structure of real-world social dilemmas. Of course, in mod-
eling, greater verisimilitude is not automatically virtuous.
When choosing between two models of a given phenomenon,
Occam’s razor demands we prefer the simpler one. If SSDs
were just more realistic models that led to the same conclu-
sions as MGSDs then they would not be especially useful.
This however, is not the case. We argue the implication of
the results presented here is that standard evolutionary and
learning-based approaches to modeling the trial and error
process through which societies converge on equilibria of so-
cial dilemmas are unable to address the following important
learning related phenomena.
1. Learning which strategic decision to make, abstractly,
whether to cooperate or defect, often occurs simulta-
neously with learning how to eﬃciently implement said
decision.
2. It may be diﬃcult to learn how to implement an eﬀec-
tive cooperation policy with a partner bent on defection—
or vice versa.
3. Implementing eﬀective cooperation or defection may
involve solving coordination subproblems, but there is
no guarantee this would occur, or that cooperation and
defection would rely on coordination to the same ex-
tent.
In some strategic situations, cooperation may
require coordination, e.g., standing aside to allow a
partner’s passage through a narrow corridor while in
others defection may require coordination e.g. block-
ing a rival from passing.
4. Some strategic situations may allow for multiple dif-
ferent implementations of cooperation, and each may
require coordination to a greater or lesser extent. The
same goes for multiple implementations of defection.

Scarcity
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Aggressiveness
+
Discount: 0.99
Discount: 0.995
Scarcity
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
_
Batch size: 1e+04
Batch size: 1e+05
Scarcity
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
+
Network size: 16
Network size: 64
Group benefit
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
Lone-wolf capture rate
+
Discount: 0.99
Discount: 0.995
Group benefit
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
_
Batch size: 1e+04
Batch size: 1e+05
Group benefit
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
_
Network size: 16
Network size: 64
Figure 7: Factors inﬂuencing the emergence of defecting policies.
Top row: Gathering.
Shown are plots
of average beam-use rate (aggressiveness) as a function of Napple (scarcity) Bottom row: Wolfpack. Shown
are plots of (two minus) average-wolves-per-capture (Lone-wolf capture rate) as a function of rteam (Group
Beneﬁt). For both Gathering and Wolfpack we vary the following factors: temporal discount (left), batch size
(centre), and network size (right). Note that the eﬀects of discount factor and batch size on the tendency to
defect point in the same direction for Gathering and Wolfpack, network size has the opposite eﬀect (see text
for discussion.)
5. The complexity of learning how to implement eﬀec-
tive cooperation and defection policies may not be
equal. One or the other might be signiﬁcantly easier
to learn—solely due to implementation complexity—
in a manner that cannot be accounted for by adjusting
outcome values in an MGSD model.
Our general method of tracking social behavior metrics
in addition to reward while manipulating parameters of the
learning environment is widely applicable. One could use
these techniques to simulate the eﬀects of external inter-
ventions on social equilibria in cases where the sequential
structure of cooperation and defection are important. No-
tice that several of the examples in Schelling’s seminal book
Micromotives and Macrobehavior [51] can be seen as tempo-
rally extended social dilemmas for which policies have been
learned over the course of repeated interaction, including
the famous opening example of lecture hall seating behav-
ior. It is also possible to deﬁne SSDs that model the extrac-
tion of renewable vs non-renewable resources and track the
sustainability of the emergent social behaviors while taking
into account the varying diﬃculties of learning sustainable
(cooperating) vs. non-sustainable (defecting) policies. Ef-
fects stemming from the need to learn implementations for
strategic decisions may be especially important for informed
policy-making concerning such real-world social dilemmas.
