How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
Sheshera Mysore

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
Mahmood Jasim

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
Haoru Song

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
Sarah Akbar

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
Andre Kenneth Chase Randall

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
Narges Mahyar

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
USA
ABSTRACT
Keeping up with the research literature plays an important role in
the workflow of scientists – allowing them to understand a field, for-
mulate the problems they focus on, and develop the solutions that
they contribute, which in turn shape the nature of the discipline.
In this paper, we examine the literature review practices of data
scientists. Data science represents a field seeing an exponential rise
in papers, and increasingly drawing on and being applied in numer-
ous diverse disciplines. Recent efforts have seen the development
of several tools intended to help data scientists cope with a deluge
of research and coordinated efforts to develop AI tools intended to
uncover the research frontier. Despite these trends indicative of the
information overload faced by data scientists, no prior work has
examined the specific practices and challenges faced by these sci-
entists in an interdisciplinary field with evolving scholarly norms.
In this paper, we close this gap through a set of semi-structured
interviews and think-aloud protocols of industry and academic data
scientists (𝑁= 20). Our results while corroborating other knowl-
edge workers’ practices uncover several novel findings: individuals
(1) are challenged in seeking and sensemaking of papers beyond
their disciplinary bubbles, (2) struggle to understand papers in the
face of missing details and mathematical content, (3) grapple with
the deluge by leveraging the knowledge context in code, blogs, and
talks, and (4) lean on their peers online and in-person. Furthermore,
we outline future directions likely to help data scientists cope with
the burgeoning research literature.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Users and interactive retrieval; Dig-
ital libraries and archives; Collaborative and social comput-
ing systems and tools; • Human-centered computing →HCI
design and evaluation methods.
ACM Reference Format:
Sheshera Mysore, Mahmood Jasim, Haoru Song, Sarah Akbar, Andre Ken-
neth Chase Randall, and Narges Mahyar. 2023. How Data Scientists Review
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0035-4/23/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3576840.3578309
the Scholarly Literature. In ACM SIGIR Conference on Human Information In-
teraction and Retrieval (CHIIR ’23), March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3576840.3578309
1
INTRODUCTION
Literature reviews play an important role in the workflow of various
scientists - with researchers spending upwards of 11 hours a week
reading the research literature [91]. They seek this literature with a
variety of intents ranging from exploring the frontier of problems
and solutions, keeping up their understanding, to quick look-up of
facts, etc [46, 94]. A challenge in this space is presented by an in-
creasing volume of papers with studies estimating that the past few
decades have seen a doubling of published research every 9 years
[71, 129]. This deluge of information, as Chu and Evans [23] notes,
presents a situation in which scientific progress as a whole sees a
slowdown with individual scientists and peer-reviewers struggling
to recognize and understand novel ideas. In this work, we examine
the literature review practices of a currently emerging group of
knowledge workers: data scientists.
Mirroring broader trends in the sciences, recent years have seen
a surge in data science publications with a doubling every 2 years
[11, 14, 66], the development of several tools intended specifically
to aid data scientists1, and coordinated efforts to develop AI tools
to identify the data science research frontier [66]. This hints at the
information overload faced by this group. Further, data science as
a discipline has had a significant impact in business [103], govern-
ment [98], and science [13], among others. Despite these trends, to
the best of our knowledge, no prior work has examined the prac-
tices or challenges of data scientists as they review the research
literature. Our goal is to address this gap.
Here, we view data scientists as individuals engaged in data
work, applied engineering, and research work and with training
in computer science and statistics as well as disciplines of specific
application domains such as economics and biology [24]. We view
literature reviews as a knowledge-building process involving the
gathering of research literature, development of relationships be-
tween gathered data, and the emergence of synthesized information
— spanning the tasks of information seeking, sensemaking, and com-
position [122, 140]. However, in this work, we omit examination
of composition given its narrower focus on publication and the
difficulty of clearly demarcating these stages [126, Sec 3].
Specifically, we examine the practices and challenges in the it-
erative process of information seeking and sensemaking, where
1https://search.zeta-alpha.com/, https://papers.labml.ai/papers, https://alphasignal.ai/
arXiv:2301.03774v1  [cs.IR]  10 Jan 2023

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Mysore, Jasim, Song, Akbar, Randall, and Mahyar
Search
Selecting 
sources
Interacting with 
sources
Synthesis & 
Figure 1: In this work, we examine the literature review practices of data scientists. We examine practices and challenges
spanning information seeking and sensemaking: search and discovery, selection of literature, skimming and reading, and
formation of a synthesized understanding of a collection of papers. §4 presents the results of our thematic analysis anchored
to these stages. However, we omit the study of longer-term synthesis and composition.
research literature is searched for, selected, read, and then synthe-
sized into a mental model to achieve task-specific goals [110, 133].
In studying both information seeking and sensemaking as closely re-
lated activities, we draw on a line of work in search as learning that
views search as a learning process closely tied with sensemaking,
and advocates support for users in both gathering information and
use of the found results [69, 78, 117, 126]. Our study differs from the
body of prior work which has examined practices of information
seeking and sensemaking in isolation – focusing on search behav-
iors [7], use of academic social networks [4], use of information
management systems [92], and note taking to capture ideas [52]. In
cases when information seeking and sensemaking have been exam-
ined in conjunction it is in the context of specific literature-review
systems [80, 122] or through the lens of abstract cognitive processes
[6, 125] with limited focus on application grounded examination of
literature review by expert knowledge workers.
Furthermore, in examining the literature review practices of data
scientists our work also extends a recent body of work shedding
light on the work practices of data scientists ranging from: teaching
practices [68], code and data workflows [79, 88, 120], to documen-
tation practices [130], and others. Our special focus on examining
the practices of data scientists is also necessitated by prior work
noting differences in literature review practices of scientists in dif-
ferent disciplines due to differences in research methods, norms of
communication, and disciplinary values [4, 12, 17, 49].
To conduct this study we recruited 20 data scientists from in-
dustry and academic institutions and employed two different meth-
ods of gathering data for analysis: semi-structured interviews and
think-aloud observations of open-ended search tasks conducted
by participants. Our analysis used multiple rounds of coding and
thematic analysis. In part, our study corroborates past findings,
but also unearths several new and under-studied findings across
information seeking and sensemaking: 1) Participants struggled
in seeking literature, skimming, and establishing the credibility of
literature outside their domains of expertise. 2) They struggled to
understand papers in the face of missing details and mathematical
content. 3) They faced an onslaught of seemingly similar papers and
sought to understand them through their differences. 4) In coping
with these problems they leveraged their peers and a range of on-
line resources forming the knowledge context of papers: discussion
forums and social media, code, talks, and blogs. Given our findings,
we highlight under-explored areas providing a rich canvas for fu-
ture work and meaningful solutions for data scientists reviewing
the literature.
2
RELATED WORK
Here we overview four relevant lines of work. The first line of work
overviews information seeking systems and practices for various
knowledge workers. Alongside this, we overview the sensemaking
systems and practices for the scholarly literature. In examining the
practices of knowledge workers we ground our findings of data
scientists’ practices in prior work. Similarly, our examination of
existing systems combined with the challenges of data scientists
(§4) allows us to discuss meaningful future work (§5). Following
this work, we outline work on search as learning which has exam-
ined the use of search systems in the context of learning tasks -
much like literature reviews. Complementary to work on informa-
tion seeking and sensemaking, this line of work also contributes
important findings on the effects of tasks such as search, reading,
and note-taking on learning-oriented goals. While these three lines
of work have been explored in somewhat disjoint communities
they may be seen as closely related, with each information seeking,
sensemaking, and learning following one other [78]. Finally, we
overview the recent work examining data scientists practices – our
work most directly extends this literature.
2.1
Info-seeking & Sensemaking - Practices
2.1.1
Information seeking. A large body of work has studied the
information-seeking practices of a range of different knowledge
workers, ranging from medical researchers conducting systematic
literature reviews [63], their use of search interfaces [76], design
students’ use of search for ideation [95], social science and educa-
tion researchers practices [51], astrophysicists practices [112], and
engineering professors perceptions of institutional library services
[29]. Niu et al. [91] and Alhoori et al. [4] present extensive reviews

How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
of early work in this area. Given our focus on data scientists, we
review studies that have examined information-seeking practices
of populations in related disciplines [4, 7, 53, 81, 118].
Athukorala et al. [7] examine computer scientists for their goals
in conducting literature searches and their tools. Their primary
findings indicate that respondents used search most frequently to
stay up to date on topics and find the exploration of unknown
areas most challenging. They find that the most common form of
navigating papers involves following citations to and from a known
seed paper, often obtained via an initial keyword search. Alhoori
et al. [4] examine STEM researchers’ information-seeking behavior
in conjunction with social media use and reference management
tools. Hoeber et al. [46] examine the differences in practices of
STEM researchers across levels of seniority. Finally, recent work of
Soufan et al. [118] presents a large-scale survey of STEM researchers
intended to reveal the alignment between theoretical models of
exploratory search and actual practices followed by researchers.
A few studies have also examined behaviors grounded in specific
systems: Ishita et al. [53] investigate which sections of a paper
returned in search results researchers examined, while McCay-Peet
et al. [81] examine the difference between social scientists and
computer scientists in using control features of digital libraries.
2.1.2
Sensemaking. While a sizable body of work has examined
information-seeking behaviors, a smaller body of work has exam-
ined practices in sensemaking tasks such as managing gathered
literature, reading, and note-taking. Nosheen et al. [92] examines
the challenges of personal information management in engineering
researchers, finding fragmentation of data across different systems
and difficulty determining the future value of information to be a
challenge. Similarly, Inie et al. [52] explore researchers’ tool use pat-
terns in managing ideas, finding interoperability between tools to
be important. Finally, Morabito and Chan [85] studies researchers’
use of tools to support the capture of context and metadata for
documents to facilitate the effective reuse of found information.
In contrast with this body of work which has examined information-
seeking and sensemaking tasks in isolation, our work examines the
two in conjunction through a series of interviews and think-aloud
observations. This combined examination more faithfully examines
the iterative processes of information seeking and sensemaking
[110, 133], especially in the early stages of sensemaking. This allows
our work to shed light on the practices and challenges at the inter-
section of these activities informing the development of systems
for both activities.
2.2
Info-seeking & Sensemaking - Systems
2.2.1
Information seeking. Prior work building information-seeking
systems for the scientific literature has explored a range of strate-
gies: discovery through seed papers and citation chaining [21, 40,
74, 101], through metadata such as authors or keyword [27, 28, 60,
102], and systems exploring more specialized querying methods
[19, 22, 30, 61, 106].
AgroScholar [74] and PaperQuest [101] facilitate visualization
and interaction with the citation network starting from a seed set
of papers - allowing incremental addition of papers to a core set of
papers based on which others may be recommended. Work in Apolo
[21] and PaperPoles [40], further supports user interactions such as
grouping of papers and specification of preferences over keywords
to influence the set of recommended papers. While this line of
work has focused on citation-based discovery others leverage paper
metadata more heavily. PivotPaths [28] presents a visualization
system to allow researchers to explore paper collections through
author and keyword metadata with a special emphasis on explor-
ing the relationships between metadata elements and facilitating
serendipitous discovery. Similarly, Portenoy et al. [102] and Kang
et al. [60] enable the discovery of relevant authors and papers from
disciplines different than that of the seed author or paper. Finally, a
range of work has explored specialized querying methods going
beyond papers or their metadata, more heavily leveraging the paper
content. Work of Chan et al. [19] and Kang et al. [61] allow search-
ing for papers based on the “challenges”, “solutions”, or “results”
they tackle and work in DataHunter [31] allows search of datasets
based on research problem queries.
2.2.2
Sensemaking. We organize prior systems for sensemaking
into aids for a collection of documents [45, 80, 113], and systems to
facilitate reading [32, 42, 131, 139] and note-taking [38, 58, 121, 142]
of individual documents .
Since sensemaking often consists of iterative stages of informa-
tion seeking and construction of mental models of gathered data
[100], systems for sensemaking from collections of documents also
contain components to aid information seeking - allowing users to
examine and construct relationships while also allowing discovery
of additional work [21, 28]. Other work has sought to help users
determine salient time-aligned trends in the scientific literature.
Shahaf et al. [113] construct “metro maps” from collections of scien-
tific papers to depict the evolution of multiple lines of related work,
similarly Heimerl et al. [45] leverage a streamgraph metaphor to
allow users to examine patterns in citations, topics, and research
communities over time. Finally, PaperForager [80] targets a dif-
ferent problem – minimizing the context switches in document
filtering, skimming, and reading. It represents paper collections
entirely as persistently visible document images.
In augmenting reading experiences prior work has sought to
help readers relate documents to other concepts and papers or have
sought to enrich the reading experience of individual documents.
Zhang et al. [139] leverage bubble-tree maps to help visualize and
explore hierarchies of concepts in a document. Similarly, Wang
et al. [131] helps users better understand the related work sections
of individual papers. On the other hand, reading aids for individual
papers have examined aids for skimming through highlights over
salient text [32], while others have explored augmentations for
reading equations and terms defined in a paper [42]. Besides reading,
work has also explored various forms of note-taking support to
allow the synthesis and reorganization of gathered data. Work in
Passages [38] and Threddy [58] help users to generate and organize
text snippets and notes from reading papers that persist across
applications and documents. While Passages emphasize persistent
metadata and cross-application movement to retain the provenance
of information, Threddy emphasizes the discovery of additional
papers based on note collections. Finally, a line of work has also
explored integrated systems for a literature review, spanning search
and discovery, organization, synthesis, and composition [122, 140].
Compared to work developing systems that study practices in the

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Mysore, Jasim, Song, Akbar, Randall, and Mahyar
context of a specific system we conduct a more exploratory study
examining scientists in their natural workflows aiming to contribute
broader directions for future systems.
2.3
Search as Learning
The body of work on search as learning has studied several different
aspects of how learning occurs in the context of the search process
and provides several findings relevant to information-seeking and
sensemaking. A bulk of the focus has been directed at studying
learning outcomes while varying factors such as 1) user charac-
teristics 2) search system characteristics, and 3) search behaviors
[126]. Here, learning has most generally been considered the for-
mation of mental models of knowledge, their retention over time,
and their application [78]. This work also provides a perspective
on search that goes beyond the finding and gathering of results.
Instead, viewing search as a series of tasks in a constructive process
- necessitating support for search as well as the use of search results
[69, 78, 117, 126]. It is worth noting, however, that the bulk of work
in SAL has focused on classroom students or drawn inferences with
controlled experiments with crowd workers rather than knowledge
workers such as data scientists.
2.3.1
User characteristics. Work on user characteristics has often
examined users’ domain knowledge. Willoughby et al. [134] exam-
ine the outcome of domain knowledge alongside the use of search
engines in an essay writing task. They find searching to only benefit
essays where participants had greater domain knowledge, with par-
ticipants noting domain knowledge to be beneficial for searching.
Roy et al. [108] examine learning with vocabulary assessments in
the course of a search session as participants explore a topic, finding
participants with greater prior topic knowledge to gain knowledge
toward the end of their search session, while those without gaining
more at the start of the session. While work examining user char-
acteristics has often focused on domain knowledge Vakkari et al.
[128] also find domain knowledge to influence searching only for
users with knowledge of the search system.
2.3.2
System characteristics . In examining system characteristics,
prior work has explored search features [18, 25, 104] as well as
features relating to reading and note-taking [33, 109, 123]. Here,
di Sciascio et al. [25] find a transparent and controllable search
system to deliver better learning outcomes than the widely used
PubMed, and Qiu et al. [104] find web-search interfaces to lead
to better knowledge gain compared to conversational search in-
terfaces though the latter lead to improved knowledge retention.
In studying reading experiences, Freund et al. [33] find simpler
text environments to lead to improved comprehension, Roy et al.
[109] find highlights in reading to improve topic coverage in essay
writing tasks and note taking to lead to the inclusion of more facts,
and Syed et al. [123] finding automatically generated questions
embedded in the text to improve learning outcomes.
2.3.3
Search behaviors. Work examining search behaviors has con-
tributed several findings. Vakkari et al. [128] find psychology stu-
dents to use more specific queries as their vocabulary improved
though their search strategies employed remained consistent. Dosso
et al. [26] find domain knowledge to not influence the number or
length of queries across medicine and computer science students,
though they find medicine students to use more domain-specific
vocabulary in queries. Vakkari and Huuskonen [127] find increased
effort in examining documents to be associated with improved
essays even in the face of lower precision search results, finding
students to compensate for bad search results – a result also mir-
rored elsewhere [76, 116]. Work of Moraes et al. [86] finds search
paired with instructor lectures to have improved learning outcomes
than the lectures alone. Finally, Urgo and Arguello [125] abstract
away from specific interactions and characterizes the “pathway”
toward learning objectives in terms of learning-oriented sub-goals
for tasks varying in cognitive complexity. This also ties to a line of
work examining task complexity and learning outcomes.
In our work, rather than focusing on specific learning outcomes
and implementing interventions to facilitate learning, we contribute
an exploratory needs-finding study for highlighting the practices
and challenges throughout the process of search and the use of
search results by data scientists in a learning-oriented task. In this
respect, we draw on SAL by viewing search as a constructive process
necessitating a focus on both information-seeking and sensemaking
rather than the gathering of search results alone [69, 126].
2.4
Practices of Data Scientists
Besides the lines of work covered above, a sizable body of recent
work has examined the broader practices of data scientists – a
currently emerging body of knowledge workers [24], we briefly
discuss this work. Work of Crisan et al. [24] helps paint a picture
of who data scientists are by conducting a review of prior work
examining data scientists. A few papers have also examined the
dataset-related information-seeking needs of data scientists. Kross
and Guo [68] interview individuals engaged in training data sci-
entists in industry and academia and identify that instructors find
searching for pedagogically-relevant datasets to be one of their
challenges. Koesten et al. [64] investigate data scientists’ challenges
in searching for structured data repositories. A range of work also
examines data science workflows via codebooks [79, 120], their
documentation practices [130], and how they arrive at analysis de-
cisions [62]. Other recent work examines the challenges and needs
of data scientists in developing fair machine learning systems [48],
and their adoption of explainable machine learning systems [67].
While this body of work has examined aspects of how data
science is conducted, how data scientists seek and make sense
of expanding research literature remains unknown – as we have
noted, the recent proliferation of tools aimed at data scientists
and the expanding scholarly literature indicates that this is an
important challenging activity. Therefore, in conducting our needs-
finding exercise, our work serves to extend the understanding of
the working practices of data scientists with a specific focus on
information-seeking and sensemaking of the scholarly literature.
3
STUDY METHODS
3.1
Study Design
Our study primarily consisted of two components, a semi-structured
interview followed by a think-aloud observation in the working
environment of the participants’ choice. While our semi-structured
interviews probed participants’ self-described practices and chal-
lenges, the think-aloud aimed to observe more tacit behaviors,

How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Table 1: Description of our participants. Research Areas were self-described in our semi-structured interview and our pre-
sentation respects participant requests for maintaining confidentiality about their research areas. Of 20 participants 13 were
enrolled in Ph.D. programs in Universities across the USA and EU, and 7 participants held Data Scientist, ML Engineer, or
Statistician designations at for-profit industry or non-profit organizations.
Participant
Organization
Designation
Research Areas
P1
Industry
Data Scientist
Conversational Information Retrieval
P2
Non-profit
Statistician
Statistics
P3
Industry
Data Scientist
Computer Vision
P4
Industry
Data Scientist
NLP for Legal Text
P7
Industry
Data Scientist
Speech Processing
P5
University
Ph.D. Student
ML for Public Health
P6
University
Ph.D. Student
Video Processing
P8
University
Ph.D. Student
Search as Learning
P9
University
Ph.D. Student
Robustness in NLP
P10
University
Ph.D. Student
Question Answering and Reasoning
P11
University
Ph.D. Student
Robustness in NLP and Hate Speech
P12
University
Ph.D. Student
NLP for Journalism
P13
University
Ph.D. Student
Variational Inference
P14
Industry
ML Engineer
NLP
P15
University
Ph.D. Student
NLP for Scientific Documents
P16
University
Ph.D. Student
Differential Privacy
P17
University
Ph.D. Student
CS Theory
P18
Non-profit
Data Scientist
Cryptography
P19
University
Ph.D. Student
Reinforcement Learning and Causal Inference
P20
University
Ph.D. Student
Data Management
workflows, and practices in a realistic task scenario. In our think-
aloud participants conducted a literature review of their choice in
response to one of three open-ended task prompts. The design and
content of our study were developed in a pilot study with 15 partici-
pants run from February-May 2022. In our pilot study, we sought to
probe information-seeking behaviors involved in literature review,
however, in initial results we observed substantial sense-making ac-
tivities closely tied to information-seeking. In the second iteration
of our study with 20 new participants, run from July-August 2022,
we updated our study to also probe broader sensemaking activities
in literature reviews - our paper reports on this second iteration.
Appendix A includes our questions and think-aloud prompts.
3.2
Study Participants
We invited participants for our study using social media posts on

ing lists. In recruitment forms, a broad definition of "data scientist"
was displayed and respondents were asked if they identified as data
scientists. Further, participants were also asked to submit links/titles
of 3 research papers they found useful or enjoyable to read in the
past year. Of the respondents, 20 were selected as participants for
our study (P1-P20) on a first-come-first-serve basis while ensuring
that they identified as data scientists and had read papers in the
past year. Participants were compensated for their time with a $25
gift card and all study procedures and materials were approved by
the university IRB. Appendix A includes our recruitment form.
Of 20 participants 11 noted gender pronouns he/him, 9 noted
she/hers, and 2 noted they/them, with some noting multiple pro-
nouns. 14 participants were enrolled in or had completed Ph.D.
degrees and 6 had completed master’s degrees. 13 participants
worked in universities and 7 worked in non-profit or for-profit
industry labs. On average participants had published 4 research
papers. Table 1 describes participants’ research areas and the type
of organization where they conducted work.
3.3
Study Procedure
Each study session was conducted by the authors and lasted about 1
hour with an equal split between the semi-structured interview and
the think-aloud. The whole session was conducted over Zoom. We
began each session by explaining the study procedure, obtaining
participants’ consent for participation, and having them fill out a
short demographic survey. This was followed by a semi-structured
interview. Here participants were asked about their research focus
and their goals, practices, and challenges for conducting literature
reviews. Participants were encouraged to think of literature reviews
as broader than a single directed search and discuss all interactions
with the scientific literature. This was followed by a think-aloud
where participants conducted a literature review over Zoom screen-
share. Participants were shown 3 broad task scenarios and selected
one as a prompt for their think-aloud. One prompt asked them
to recall and demonstrate a previous literature review, another
asked them to enhance their knowledge on a known topic, and
the final asked them to research the literature for a future project
of their interest, an area they had lesser experience in. The latter
two scenarios were drawn from the work of Hoeber et al. [46]. Our
analysis revealed that participants distributed uniformly between
the 3 scenarios. Note that simple look-up searches were not used
as task scenarios since we sought to understand more complex
exploratory searches. If any papers were relevant enough to require
in-depth reading participants were invited to move on and continue
their search or terminate the study session. Audio and video of the
study were recorded for analysis.

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Mysore, Jasim, Song, Akbar, Randall, and Mahyar
3.4
Data Collection and Analysis
All our analyses used transcribed audio of the interview with the
video examined for our think-aloud session. Automatic transcrip-
tion of the audio was obtained from Zoom and was corrected sub-
stantially for errors. This was followed by 3 rounds of coding by
3 authors of this paper and a thematic analysis of the interview
and think-aloud transcripts – this process was conducted from
Aug-October 2022. In our first round of coding 2 authors indepen-
dently examined 5 transcripts and generated a set of codes using
open and axial coding, then, these codes were consolidated into a
unified set of codes. In consolidation, both authors examined each
other’s codes independently, then met to discuss any differences
and consolidated them into a unified set of codes. This was fol-
lowed by application of the unified codes to the 5 transcripts by
both coders. We observed an agreement of 0.92 in terms of nominal
Krippendorff’s alpha. This unified set contained 167 codes of which
51 noted names of tools used by participants or logistic aspects
of the study. This was followed by discussion and resolution of
disagreements in codes and application of the resultant codes to
the remaining 15 transcripts while also adding any new codes to
our initial codebook. This process added 59 new codes of which
32 noted names of tools or logistic aspects. The coded transcripts
were then used for thematic analysis - which resulted in themes
corresponding in part with the stages of the Information Search
Process [126, Sec 3], we present our themes next. Our codes and
extended quotes per theme may be examined online.2
4
RESULTS
In presenting the results of our thematic analysis we broadly orga-
nize our themes by the Information Search Process as consisting of
the formulation of an information need (§4.1), query formulation
and search (§4.2), assessment of search results through skimming
and reading (§4.4, §4.3), and synthesis of a collection of documents
(§4.4, §4.3). Besides these, our final theme elaborates on how par-
ticipants relied on social ties at various stages of the ISP (§4.5).
Importantly, while these stages provide an organizing model to
aid understanding, they are iterative processes with poorly defined
boundaries. In presenting our results we present each theme fol-
lowed by specific relevant prior work where appropriate.
4.1
Why do data scientists access the scientific
literature?
4.1.1
Actively understanding disciplinary norms. Participants most
sought the literature actively as a means to understand disciplinary
norms where they lacked this familiarity (18/20). Here, they sought
to understand disciplinary vocabulary, form a mental model of the
discipline, understand the contexts and community preferences of
problems, solutions, and evaluation practices:
“The first question that comes to mind for any re-
searcher is what has been already done, are there
similar problems which have already been tackled
or related problems whose corresponding methods
might be used in my problem.” - P16
2Codes and extended quotes: https://github.com/MSheshera/dslitreview-study
“When I’m starting work in a problem ... I’m not suffi-
ciently familiar with to work to know what the typical
approaches are, how is this evaluated, what kinds of
approaches are falling out of favor versus becoming
more accepted by the community.” - P15
Participants focus on understanding problems and solutions reflect
prior understanding across scientific and creative problem-solving
disciplines with individuals often thinking in terms of “problem”
and “solution” [44, 95]. A focus on evaluations and metrics also
matches understanding of a large focus on quantitative performance
in data science [12].
4.1.2
Passively following a discipline. Besides actively seeking to
understand a discipline, participants also noted accessing the lit-
erature more passively (10/20) – keeping up with trends in the
community or keeping updated on the work of peers: “Where the
community is going, or what people that I have previously followed
the works of are up to right now” - P10, and remaining on the lookout
for future projects: “Relevant reading for my own research what I
had in mind ... at some point, I thought I would do future research in.
[But] now I think that that’s been on the back burner” - P17. This
motivation to keep up is also mirrored in related work [7].
4.1.3
Brainstorming solutions. A majority of participants also lever-
aged existing scientific literature as a resource to aid brainstorming
(18/20). Here participants leveraged the literature to find open prob-
lems (12/20): “Making sure I’m not redoing what has been done before,
that’s one major aspect – figuring out like open questions and existing
work that I could work on” - P10. Others examined the space of
solutions in prior work (13/20): “I am looking for existing methods
which do what I am doing. What are other people doing to solve this?
Is it even solved? Are there methods that already solve this problem?
- P16. While others established the novelty of their own ideas by
seeking similar solutions (10/20): “After you figure out [the problem],
it’s like I have an idea for what you could do better, and then it’s
seeing if others have done something similar before” - P5.
This process of seeking problems, developing solutions, and
establishing the novelty of their ideas formed an iterative brain-
storming loop. The use of search for creative brainstorming has
been noted elsewhere [95], and the desire for finding problems
and solutions in the scientific literature has seen the development
methods and resources intended to facilitate this [19, 61, 89] - our
findings further support this effort. Focus on novelty and building
on prior work also matches understanding their importance in data
science research [12] and creative disciplines more broadly [52].
4.1.4
Seeking solutions for application. Besides seeking the liter-
ature for developing solutions, several participants also sought
solutions to problems (17/20). Here, participants often sought solu-
tions for direct application: “The other thing I will look this how other
people have applied [this method], to see if other people have applied
it to similar data or use cases to mine” - P2, or as baseline systems
to aid research: “What are the general approaches that people have
taken to solve a given task... That helps when we are trying to publish
a paper... So this forms what are the existing baseline methods to
compare against for quantitative research” - P6.
Seeking solutions as baselines for comparison or as solutions for
application matches findings from citation analysis indicating that

How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
solutions either assume the role of vetted methods which are widely
adopted or ones on the frontier of research knowledge and seeing
current development, necessitating comparisons [57, Sec 8]. Further,
the acts of “creating” and “applying” also correspond to cognitive
processes often used to precisely define learning objectives [125].
4.2
How do data scientists access the scientific
literature?
4.2.1
Data scientists seeking the literature. Expectedly, most partic-
ipants sought the literature through keyword-based web searches
(17/20), following citations to and from source articles (15/20) ob-
tained via search or recommendations, or by examining papers
of authors of relevant publications (13/20). This largely matches
prior understanding [7] and has seen the development of several
tools intended to aid citation chaining behaviors [21, 101, 102].
Despite these methods being well established, participants often
lamented the challenge of coming up with appropriate keywords
to describe their information needs (13/20), sometimes requiring
weeks to stumble into the right keywords. This was further exacer-
bated in unfamiliar disciplines:
“I had an idea in my head, but I was not sure how to
map this into normative terms used by communities
or even necessarily what communities are interested
in this ... Ultimately it just took trial and error like
finding some papers and coming back to it over sev-
eral weeks, and eventually I kind of started to find
things that actually matched.” - P15
To tackle this challenge in complex searches, prior work has ex-
plored query recommendation strategies [22, 83, 96], with large-
scale systems also implementing them [115]. More generally, chal-
lenges in formulating queries in corroborated in prior work noting
literature searches to be exploratory with evolving, ill-defined, and
open-ended searches – where users often learn terms in the course
of search [118]. While many systems have been developed for ex-
ploratory search (see §2.2), large-scale systems for literature search
lack support for it [90].
Finally, in the face of not knowing where to begin a search,
participants also noted soliciting recommendations from expert
peers (4/20): “If you don’t know where to start and you just reach out
to someone, especially in a company like [redacted] it’s a lot easier,
there are a lot of subject matter experts and they help us.” - P7. As we
note next support for leveraging social ties remains under-explored.
4.2.2
The literature finding data scientists. Besides seeking the lit-
erature through search, participants also discovered scientific litera-
ture more passively (20/20). Their methods for obtaining automated
recommendations primarily relied on following individuals on so-

Scholar (7/20), following the work of specific authors (13/20), or
newsletters intended to curate the literature (4/20). Here, however,
participants noted being overwhelmed with the alerts which were
supposed to inform them (5/20): “It would be nice to keep up with
people’s work ... Maybe at least you open up 10% of this stuff instead
of being like this is just junk mail.” - P1. Further, participants also
noted tools for discovery often trapped them in a disciplinary bub-
ble (4/20): “I’m probably heavily in my own bubble of papers ... if
I’m working on hate speech, most of my recommendations will be
very computer science based but maybe there’s relevant stuff in social
science that I’m probably never going to come across.” - P11.
Besides automated methods for discovering literature, a majority
of participants noted receiving recommendations from their peers
(14/20) – albeit less frequently than automated methods. This had
several advantages - peers had a close understanding of participant
interests, had vetted the paper, and offered deeper engagement:
“There are some of my peers from both industry and
academia, who if they come across something inter-
esting and they know [name] is working in these
problems or she finds them interesting they just send
it over. Sometimes it’s, not even a paper it’s just a blog
post, which has links to papers.” - P9
“I guess the benefit [of recommendations from peers
is] its gone past one set of eyes. So there’s some added
incentive to read it, somebody said it was interesting
and that the claims make sense.” - P10
Recent work of Kang et al. [59] finds even the addition of automatic

prove engagement and retention while allowing scientists to see
themselves as part of the community.
4.3
How do data scientists select papers?
4.3.1
An onslaught of papers. Having obtained literature through
search and discovery participants are now faced with filtering and
organizing literature. Here they often reported being faced with
a large volume of similar papers (16/20) and credited it to heavily
crowded disciplines of data science. This made it hard to distinguish
between many similar or incremental steps and seminal papers:
“If the field is very crowded - sometimes I find RL, and
the problems I am focusing on to be crowded, then it
becomes frustrating and you’re always finding papers
[that do the same thing].” - P19
“There are a lot of papers that are incremental updates
so to find that one seminal paper that actually started
it all is going to be painful and unless someone helps
you out it’s actually very hard.” - P7
To cope with this deluge participants turned to surveys or good
reviews of the literature to find salient papers (7/20). Some choose
to focus on a handful of papers, minimizing the overlap between
papers they examined, and pairing the examination of a few papers
with citation chaining to balance the breadth and depth of exploring
results (9/20). Others also leveraged repeated references to specific
concepts or papers as a sign of having found the papers worthy of
examination (6/20): “Usually there will be a collection of papers cited
in all of [the papers] and for me that is a good proxy of here is the core
papers I should be looking at.” - P16. In the presence of many similar
variants, work in information foraging notes that users understand
variants in terms of their differences or as time-aligned stories
[119]. While this is explored in the context of seeking code, we note
a similar desire in the more challenging case of text documents,
further elaborated on in §4.4.3.
4.3.2
Establishing the credibility of papers. An important challenge
of coping with this deluge was establishing the credibility of papers

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Mysore, Jasim, Song, Akbar, Randall, and Mahyar
(13/20). Here participants relied upon expected indicators: relying
on known authors, affiliations, publication venues, and citation
counts as markers of credibility. As we noted in §4.2.2 some relied
on the vetting provided in peer recommendations, others sought
forum discussions: “One thing is that its hard to figure the credibility
of a paper, so it’s sort of trying to figure out the credibility based on
discussions by online forums like Twitter, Reddit or Openreview. Even
if this is highly reviewed what do other people who have worked in
similar domains think about it”- P14.
Challenges with credibility however did not end with the se-
lection of papers, participants also noted the content of papers
sometimes betray their information scent (12/20). While this could
in part be attributed to disciplinary writing norms [50], participants
also noted the challenge of papers with unclear or exaggerated con-
tributions, re-branding of ideas, and papers not structured with
information needs of a reader:
“People do a lot of re-branding, sometimes a lot of
ideas are not very new but the motivation section is
like poetry and when you read the details you feel
[its] not what they are claiming they do. ... [or] ex-
aggerating their contribution and not meeting the
expectation in their experiments. So identifying those
trends from papers is very important.” - P19
The use of publication metadata is well implemented in popular
search engines, and its use for determining credibility has seen
critical examination [10, 36]. However, methods and systems to
facilitate the use of social discourse around papers to augment
skimming and filtering have been under-explored. Further, while
challenges like exaggerated contributions have been examined in
science communication [132] it remains understudied in literature
searches by experts - we see evidence for this phenomenon here.
These challenges arising from exaggerated/re-branded claims and
needing to sift through many similar papers (§4.3.1) may be a result
of the crowded and highly incentivized disciplines of data science.
While we present, to the best of our knowledge, the first report of
these challenges they warrant deeper examination in data science
and other rapidly expanding disciplines.
4.3.3
Everyone skims papers. Finally, in the selection of results all
participants skimmed individual papers (20/20) often to make quick
decisions of correctness or glean contributions of a paper. They
often relied on knowing the discipline to know where to look for
specific information and being challenged otherwise:
“I try to jump to wherever they say “in this paper”
because I’m fairly familiar with the space I don’t need
to actually look at the introduction.” - P7
“One challenge was that [this discipline] was very
active in the 90s. ... They were published in different
venues, and the approaches that they used were not
familiar to me. That made it much harder to skim a
paper and get the essence of its contribution.” - P15
Skimming is often interspersed with information seeking with
frequent context changes between the two, however, few prior lines
of work have examined close integration of information seeking
and skimming [80], or tools to aid skimming of papers [32].
4.4
What challenges do data scientists face in
reading papers?
4.4.1
Understanding the hidden details. In reading and understand-
ing papers, participants also noted the challenge born from missing
details in a paper (13/20). Here they noted that papers were written
to be accepted with little incentive for authors to include the details
which made a solution effective: “Often the things that are in the
paper or the things that make a good story, but the things that actually
matter in the paper, for example, like how you set the hyperparameters
are missing.” - P5. Some also noted a tension between including
a lot of detail which would interfere with readers hoping to get a
high-level idea of a paper: And then of course there’s always a thing
that I have the time to read a paper and you are getting into it and you
face a lot of detail. Sometimes, thanks to the length and sometimes
these certain details have to be omitted and, at times, those are the
very details that would cause certain confusion to a reader. - P9. In
a bid to cope with missing details, participants noted the value of
augmentations provided by code (7/20).
[I ask authors if] there is any publicly available code
for what you’re doing. Because many of these pa-
pers look well on paper but then its unclear how to
implement them. Or its unclear which specific hyper-
parameter choices they made. - P16
While platforms such as paperswithcode.com, pair papers and code,
use of code to augment reading experiences for scientific papers
presents a future venue for improvement. More broadly, the chal-
lenges arising from unclear documentation for models and data
have led the data science community to pursue initiatives intended
to document these artifacts [34, 84], sometimes incentivizing them
at publication.3 However, even availability of code alongside papers
remains at 25% as of Sep 20224 with an understanding of incentives
for documentation currently emerging [20].
4.4.2
Understanding the math on display. While participants noted
the absence of details the flipside was the inclusion of extensive
math which also presented challenges (10/20). Here participants
noted disciplinary subcultures which often rewarded papers with
extensive math, equating hardness to understand with quality:
In writing for niche audiences it requires having to
show that [an idea] is important or useful and often
that means that they will add equations or theorems
[for an idea] that really are not as complicated ... if
there’s a lot of math or if it’s hard to understand it
must be impressive. - P5
In coping with this, participants noted the importance of alternative
sources such as code, blogs, and talks, or the inclusion of examples in
papers to aid understanding (9/20). Also noting that talks and blogs
presented better incentives to ensure understanding in audiences:
Blogs help because sometimes the writing [in a paper] is not easy to
understand compared to an informal way of writing [I: So maybe
papers are more mathematical but blogs have the high-level ideas?]
Exactly - P6.
Aids for understanding math in reading papers have seen some
precedent in recent work in the form of reading tools intended to
3https://naacl2022-reproducibility-track.github.io/
4https://paperswithcode.com/trends

How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
better define mathematical symbols in papers [42, 43]. However,
this presents an open problem, with no work having explored aug-
mentations from code, blogs, or talks to aid math understanding. It
is also worth noting that challenges arising from missing details
in papers and of understanding math, and the coping strategies of
leveraging code and the knowledge context surrounding papers
represent challenges that are likely specific to interdisciplinary and
computational disciplines such as data science – our work presents
an initial report of this.
4.4.3
Struggling to understand the increments of progress. In read-
ing papers, participants often noted the importance of understand-
ing the specific “delta” that papers offered in comparison to other
work that was influential or known papers (9/20). This was impor-
tant to forming an understanding of the discipline and contextual-
izing their contributions:
“Once you’ve read 10, 20, 30 papers it becomes a lot
clearer what the core idea is and what the delta from
the core is. ... For things you’re not as well versed
in, it’s often a nightmare when you don’t know the
context in which the paper is being written. Under-
standing what exists in the literature and what doesn’t
is hard, then what the contribution is and why the
contribution matters is hard.” - P5
To understand the increments participants noted the importance
of gaining familiarity with the norms of a sub-discipline and the
challenge in its absence: In grad school a professor synthesizes these
things and says hey, this is the main theme of all these papers. When
that information is there for you and you start reading the paper it
tells you what to expect otherwise you’re spending a lot of time and
don’t understand how different it is from previous papers” - P7.
However, it was a challenge to establish if a paper was poorly
written or if the participants were missing necessary context: “The
lack of clarity on their contribution - it might come from how they
wrote that paper or it might come from my complete lack of under-
standing of what they might be doing” - P19.
As we note in §4.3.1 in the presence of many variants of an item,
prior work has noted users seeking to understand the differences
between items [119] - we see this here. Methods and systems to
explore free text differences in documents to aid filtering, skimming
and sense-making of collections remain under-explored. However,
recent work in NLP has begun to examine this problem - Luu et al.
[77] explore methods for explaining relationships between papers,
while Rajagopal et al. [107] and Kuznetsov et al. [70] have studied
textual edits in other application contexts.
4.5
How do data scientists lean on social ties?
Besides leveraging social ties for the discovery of papers in §4.2.2,
participants also leaned on their peers in other ways.
4.5.1
Collaboratively brainstorming and making sense of papers.
All participants noted leveraging social ties in making sense of the
literature (20/20). Here they noted the value of group discussions
centered on papers to keep up with the literature, help brainstorm
ideas, or spark new research directions (12/20):
“In independent research at the very least, I talk about
my idea with someone else just to see if I’m in the
right direction. On the other hand, we have bi-weekly
brain-storming sessions in which we discuss at least
one paper that is very relevant to our work and so we
get a lot of inputs ... this might be useful, this might
be a limitation, it might not work.” - P7
Others noted the value of discussions with collaborators to under-
stand the details of specific important papers (11/20):“If I’m having
one on one meetings then we dig into why people made certain deci-
sions in their paper, and if we should be following the same” - P10.
Finally, a few participants (5/20) noted the value of sharing notes
and literature with collaborators to establish the provenance of
ideas: I usually share these notes with collaborators to give them a
sense of where I am getting this idea from or where this hypothesis is
coming from - P19 or correctness of information: It also helps with
collaborators double checking my writing. - P6.
Besides close peers, participants also sought weaker social ties
and online discussions (14/20). Here, they noted many of the same
benefits that interaction with peers provided - seeking recommen-
dations from experts on forums: You will find a Quora or Yahoo
answer which is dominated by exceptional mathematicians. Someone
will have asked a similar question [to yours] and someone will have
pointed them to some relevant work - P17, establishing the credibility
of papers as in §4.3.2, and engaged in discussion to understand the
specifics of papers: [The ML Collective] discord channel has a lot of
volunteers and contributors if you can figure out someone interested in
the same kind of work ... you can be talking about how the algorithm
goes from this step to another or what is this variable - P14.
A body of work has examined collaborative information seeking
[87], with some examining social reading [97, 138], and sensemak-
ing with collaborative annotations [114, 143]. However, examina-
tions of collaborative reading and sensemaking in specific task
contexts are understudied avenues that are likely to present spe-
cific challenges, as noted in cases of information re-use in software
teams [75] or collaboratively verifying the credibility of claims [41].
4.5.2
Leveraging authors. While peers were useful in-person and
online, participants also found value in interacting with authors
(11/20). While some contacted them actively (5/20), others noted
more passively seeking them in recorded talks and forums such
as Twitter or Reddit (6/20). Direct communication ensured a fuller
understanding of work, helped develop ties with other researchers,
and sometimes turned into fruitful collaborations (2/20): A little
while ago a new paper got released that was very similar to my work

to create a conversation and also connect with researchers who are

where we discussed things and I wanted to confirm the differences [of
my method] with them, which was extremely helpful - P18. Others
also found these useful to broach under-discussed aspects: I send
them a message congratulating them about the work they’ve released
and understand some of the secrets behind their work - P4.
Here, prior work has explored recommending expert peers [102]
and “people recommendation” more broadly [37]. However, impor-
tant challenges remain in how incentive structures must be set up to
facilitate these interactions e.g. Breitinger et al. [15] note a trade-off
in the discovery of ongoing research and keeping it confidential.

CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
Mysore, Jasim, Song, Akbar, Randall, and Mahyar
While an active engagement was important for a deep under-
standing, passively interactions with authors through talks or forum
posts made work easier to understand than their papers. Partici-
pants noted the value of visual communication and an incentive
for authors to communicate their idea for understanding: Some-
times getting a very good intuition of what their motivation helps
understanding. It might be not that clear in the paper but when they
explain it to you in the video it’s much more exciting. I think visual
communication [is useful], their talk used a lot of good design and
slide animations ... that cannot be communicated in a paper - P19.
However, some noted that talks were only recorded for “famous
people”: But [use of talks] isn’t always applicable because it’s only
the more famous people’s projects that get this much coverage. But
I’m presuming I’m going into a brand new area and starting with the
most famous people around - P9.
Examination of authors’ engagement through social media has
only recently begun to be studied [35, 65] and incorporation of this
into aids for sensemaking remains under-explored. The usefulness
of author interactions beyond their papers also indicates the value
of alternative publication formats [1, 47], once again, challenges
remain in setting up incentives for publishers and authors [124].
5
DISCUSSION
In our Results, we examined the practices and challenges of data
scientists reviewing the scientific literature, while anchoring our
results along the formulation of an information need, query formu-
lation and search, assessment of search results through skimming
and reading, synthesis of a collection of documents, and leveraging
social ties to accomplish a number of these tasks. Next, we note
challenges that spanned across these themes and speculate future
work likely to present solutions.
5.1
Support cross-disciplinary access
Data science is seeing exponential growth in the number of papers
– a doubling every two years [66]. As fields develop several sub-
disciplines emerge around specific problems and methods each
with their own disciplinary vocabulary and norms [57]. Individual
scientists are now tasked with conducting work in increasingly
fragmented disciplines only some of which are familiar to them
while knowing that significant innovation and progress is to be
had from drawing across multiple disciplines [111]. The challenges
stemming from fragmented knowledge are echoed in our findings
at each examined stage of the information search process. Future
work necessary to support information seeking and sensemaking
of cross-disciplinary research can take several forms.
To tackle the challenge of search in unknown disciplines aids
such as query recommendation have been explored (§4.2.1), how-
ever querying strategies intended to allow richer specification of
user context remain under-explored. These may take the form of
verbose queries [2, 89], conversational and interactive searches
[5, 39] paired with mechanisms for cross-domain retrieval – Kang
et al. [60] present a preliminary example. Further, the exploration
of papers in unfamiliar disciplines is likely to benefit from the pre-
sentation of “explanations” to aid in understanding their credibility
and relevance. While explanations have been extensively studied
in recommender systems [141], examination of explanations for
cross-disciplinary exploration remains an open question. Aids may
also be developed for skimming. Since skimming relies on knowing
norms of writing in a discipline, these aids may take the form of
adaptive document layouts [54] or automatically generated “FAQs”
for a paper [8], personalized to the discipline of a reader. Similarly,
reading aids may take the form of paraphrasing text for different
disciplinary audiences or presenting “pre-requisite” concepts or
papers necessary to understand a given paper [73] – thereby aid-
ing readers to judge the quality of a paper independent from their
own knowledge gaps. However, since scientists see better learning
outcomes in tasks perceived as challenging the trade-offs involved
in easing this process remains to be seen [76, 127].
5.2
Facilitate reliance on close peers
At several stages in reviewing the literature, participants relied on
close peers — teammates, lab members, collaborators, mentees, and
mentors. From peers, they received recommendations, engaged in
brainstorming, established the credibility of papers, and understood
the details of papers. The collaborative practices of data scientists
have been examined in the context of code and data work [137] –
we extend this to include the creation and understanding of ideas.
Careful understanding and support for these practices are likely to
be fruitful – especially with the move toward remote work [135].
The dominant line of work in information-seeking has taken an
egocentric perspective and exploration of methods and systems to
leverage communities has been examined largely in early work in
collaborative search [87] and group recommendations [55]. This
line of work may fruitfully be re-explored in our present circum-
stance – evidence for this is provided in recent work of Piao et al.
[99] who find bringing “friends-into-the-loop” of recommender
systems to result in more accurate and diverse recommendations.
Re-incarnations of early work melding sensemaking, reading, and
discovery in a collaborative feed-reader [3] also promise to leverage
the trust scientists have in their peers for selection and consump-
tion of research. A different line of work is suggested by Morris
[87] where users preferred to interleave egocentric search with
lightweight communication. Templates for this work are provided
in aids to summarize group chats [136] or collaborative conversa-
tional agents [9] – as aids in brainstorming. Implementing these
tools requires careful design, however – Brucks and Levav [16] note
virtual communication through video conferences to curb creative
ideation. Similarly, the work of Inie et al. [52] notes users’ prefer-
ences for their own scholarly tool chains, making interoperability
of new tools important for uptake.
5.3
Leverage the knowledge context of papers
While a close community of expert peers was important this was
not always available to participants. As an expanding discipline
with many new entrants, this is also likely in data science [56]. In
this scenario, a variety of other resources were sought to augment
papers – forum and social media discussions, recorded talks and
videos, blogs, and code. These resources provided starting points for
exploration, helped establish the credibility of papers, and aided in
understanding missing details and math in papers. Traditionally this
information (e.g. entity cards, videos) referred to as the knowledge
context has seen use in web search engine result pages (SERP) and

How Data Scientists Review the Scholarly Literature
CHIIR ’23, March 19–23, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
aids users in making information literate decisions. Smith and Rieh
[117] advocate for greater use of this knowledge context instead of
their reduction and search engines “getting out of the way” of users.
Here, we echo this push and observe its values for data scientists
searching the literature. Furthermore, we also note its value in
augmenting reading and skimming aids for found documents.
In the presentation of the knowledge context alongside academic
search numerous questions remain. Prior work in the TREC Blog
Track has examined blog retrieval with an emphasis on their sub-
jective contents – similar efforts are necessary for the retrieval of
knowledge contexts for academic publications [93]. The presenta-
tion of this information is also likely to require further investigation,
e.g. Levi et al. [72] report that only some queries benefit from the
presentation of a cluster of results from a Community Question An-
swering site. Further, questions remain about the fairness implica-
tions of augmenting academic search results with their knowledge
context [82]. Besides use in information seeking, this knowledge
context is likely to benefit skimming and reading aids. Recent work
of Rachatasumrit et al. [105] presents an early example and places
discussions from follow-on work into the margins of a paper. There
is room however for more complex augmentations – This may take
the form of using blogs, and videos for aiding math understanding,
using code to infer missing details, or use of social media and blogs
to aid skimming. This space remains under-explored with each type
of information presenting challenges to retrieval, presentation, and
the subsequent implications of use.
6
FUTURE WORK AND LIMITATIONS
We note three limitations to our study, each of which points toward
future work. These stem from our study design, our choice of par-
ticipants, and the nature of the challenges probed. First, given that
our study spanned a single session we did not probe longer-running
activities such as longer-term synthesis and composition, it is likely
that examining this aspect is also likely to shed more light on the
organizing and note-taking strategies of scientists. This will require
longer-term observation and introspection from participants. Sec-
ond, in the recruitment of participants we noted that all participants
were based in the USA or EU with ample infrastructural access, it
is likely that a more varied participant pool will result in different
findings. Further larger-scale studies are also likely to be beneficial.
Third, in several cases we noted challenges arising from incentive
structures surrounding disseminating research, while reasonable
in hindsight, these were under-examined in our study and warrant
future work [20]. Finally, while unlikely to be a limitation, we also
note that our study was conducted in the aftermath (February to
October 2022) of the COVID-19 pandemic and its influence on work
practices [135] – this likely influenced our study and results.
7
CONCLUSIONS
An exponential rise in the number of scholarly publications, its
expanding influence, a large number of new entrants, and its likely
impact on data science drove us to examine information seeking
and sensemaking practices of data scientists reviewing the litera-
ture. In our examination, we ran an exploratory interview study
with 20 data scientists recruited from both industry and academic
institutions. Here, we established their goals for accessing the liter-
ature, then we examined their practices and challenges in search
and discovery, selection of search results, skimming and reading,
and their reliance on peers in a number of these tasks. A number
of our results corroborate those seen in prior work – here, our
work offers a synthesis of disparate prior work. Next, our work
also uncovers specific results stemming from our focus on data
scientists and our joint examination of information-seeking and
sensemaking. In our findings, we highlighted challenges arising
from fragmented scientific disciplines influencing all stages of the
information search process – we believe this represents a special
challenge of data science given its inter-disciplinary nature. Besides,
we highlighted the challenges of missing detail and mathematical
content in reading papers – likely, a feature of computational disci-
plines such as data science. Our joint examination of information
seeking and sensemaking revealed the nature of information sought
at the intersection of these two activities: a desire to establish the
credibility of papers owing to exaggerated/re-branded claims or
unfamiliarity with the discipline, and a desire to understand the
incremental differences between many seemingly similar papers –
this likely represents a consequence of crowded and incentivized
sub-disciplines of data-science. To cope with these challenges, we
found our participants to leverage the knowledge context surround-
ing scientific papers in the form of code, blogs, talks, and forums
and by leaning on their peers – these practices were also examined
in our work. Finally, examination of our participants’ challenges
and coping mechanisms lead us to carefully speculate on future
work likely to present meaningful solutions to these challenges
while also presenting meaningful scientific questions for future
work in the IR, NLP, HCI, and CSCW communities.
