SPAGAN: Shortest Path Graph Attention Network
Yiding Yang1 , Xinchao Wang1∗, Mingli Song2 , Junsong Yuan3 and Dacheng Tao4
1Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
2College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
4UBTECH Sydney Artiﬁcal Intelligence Centre, University of Sydney

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCN) have re-
cently demonstrated their potential in analyzing
non-grid structure data that can be represented as
graphs. The core idea is to encode the local topol-
ogy of a graph, via convolutions, into the feature
of a center node.
In this paper, we propose a
novel GCN model, which we term as Shortest Path
Graph Attention Network (SPAGAN). Unlike con-
ventional GCN models that carry out node-based
attentions within each layer, the proposed SPA-
GAN conducts path-based attention that explicitly
accounts for the inﬂuence of a sequence of nodes
yielding the minimum cost, or shortest path, be-
tween the center node and its higher-order neigh-
bors. SPAGAN therefore allows for a more infor-
mative and intact exploration of the graph struc-
ture and further a more effective aggregation of in-
formation from distant neighbors into the center
node, as compared to node-based GCN methods.
We test SPAGAN on the downstream classiﬁcation
task on several standard datasets, and achieve per-
formances superior to the state of the art. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/ihollywhy/
SPAGAN.
1
Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved a great
success in many ﬁelds especially computer vision, where they
can automatically learn both low- and high-level feature rep-
resentations of objects within an image, thus beneﬁting the
subsequent tasks like classiﬁcation and detection. The input
to such CNNs are restricted to grid-like structures such as im-
ages, in which square-shaped ﬁlters can be applied.
However, there are many other types of data that do not
take form of grid structures and instead represented using
graphs. For example, in the case of social networks, each per-
son is denoted as a node and each connection as an edge, and
each node may be connected to a different number of edges.
The features of such graphical data are therefore encoded in
their topological structures, which cannot be extracted using
∗Corresponding Author
Figure 1: Comparing neighbor attention and shortest path atten-
tion.
Conventional approaches focus on aggregating information
from ﬁrst-order neighbors within each layer, shown on the left, and
often rely on stacking multiple layers to reach higher-order neigh-
bors. The proposed SPAGAN shown on the right, on the other hand,
explicitly conducts shortest-path-based attention that aggregates in-
formation from distant neighbors and explores the graph topology,
all in a single shot.
conventional square or cubic ﬁlters tailored for handling grid-
structured data.
To extract features and utilize the contextual information
encoded in graphs, researchers have explored various possi-
bilities. [Kipf and Welling, 2016] proposes a convolution op-
erator deﬁned in the no-grid domain and build a graph convo-
lutional network (GCN) based on this operator. In GCN, the
feature of a center node will be updated by averaging the fea-
tures of all its immediate neighbors using ﬁxed weights deter-
mined by the Laplacian matrix. This feature updating mecha-
nism can be seen as a simpliﬁed polynomial ﬁltering of [Def-
ferrard et al., 2016], which only considers ﬁrst-order neigh-
bors. Instead of using all the immediate neighbors, Graph-
SAGE [Hamilton et al., 2017] suggests using only a fraction
of them for the sake of computing complexity. A uniform
sampling strategy is adopted to reconstruct graph and aggre-
gate features. Recently, [Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018] introduces
an attention mechanism into the graph convolutional network,
and proposes the graph attention network (GAT) by deﬁning
an attention function between each pair of connected nodes.
All the above models, within a single layer, only look at im-
mediate or ﬁrst-order neighboring nodes for aggregating the
graph topological information and updating features of the
center node. To account for indirect or higher-order neigh-
bors, one can stack multiple layers so as to enlarge the size of
receptive ﬁeld. However, results have demonstrated that, by
doing so, the performances tend to drop dramatically [Kipf
and Welling, 2016]. In fact, our experiments even demon-
arXiv:2101.03464v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2021

Figure 2: The overall training workﬂow of SPAGAN. Given a graph,
for each center node we compute a set of shortest paths of varying
lengths to its high-order neighbors denoted by P, and then extract
their features as path features. Next, a shortest path attention mech-
anism is used to compute their attention coefﬁcients with respect
to the center node. The features of each center node can therefore
be updated according to the feature of paths and also their attention
coefﬁcients to minimize the loss function. Afterwards, P will be re-
generated according to these new attention coefﬁcients and used for
the next training phase.
strate that simply stacking more layers using of the GAT
model will often lead to the failure of convergence.
In this paper, we propose a novel and the ﬁrst dedi-
cated scheme, termed Shortest Path Graph Attention Net-
work (SPAGAN), that allows us to, within a single layer, uti-
lize path-based high-order attentions to explore the topologi-
cal information of the graph and further update the features of
the center node. At the heart of SPAGAN is a mechanism that
ﬁnds the shortest paths between a center node and its higher-
order neighbors, then computes a path-to-node attention for
updating the node features and coefﬁcients, and iterates the
two steps. In this way, each distant node inﬂuences the cen-
ter node through a path connecting the two with minimum
cost, providing a robust estimation and intact exploration of
the graph structure.
We highlight in Fig. 1 the difference between SPAGAN and
conventional neighbor-attention approaches.
Conventional
methods look at only immediate neighbors within a single
layer. To propagate information from distant neighbors, mul-
tiple layers would have to be stacked, often yielding the afore-
mentioned convergence or performance issues. By contrast,
SPAGAN explicitly explores a sequence of high-order neigh-
bors, achieved by shortest paths, to capture the more global
graph topology into the path-to-node attetion mechanism.
The training workﬂow of SPAGAN is depicted in Fig. 2.
For each center node, a set of shortest paths of different
lengths denoted by P, are ﬁrst computed using the attention
coefﬁcients of each pair of nodes that are all initialized to be
the same. The features of P will then be generated. After-
wards, a path attention mechanism is applied to generate the
new embedded feature for each node as well as the new at-
tention coefﬁcients. The embedded features will be used for
computing the loss, and the attention coefﬁcients, on the other
hand, will be used to regenerate P for the next iteration.
Our contribution is therefore a novel high-order graph at-
tention network, that explicitly conducts path-based attention
within each layer, allowing for an effective and intact encod-
ing of the graphical structure into the attention coefﬁcients
and thus into the features of nodes. This is achieved by, dur-
ing training, an iterative scheme that computes shortest paths
between a center node and high-order neighbors, and esti-
mates the path-based attentions for updating parameters. We
test the proposed SPAGAN on several benchmarks for the
downstream node classiﬁcation task, where SPAGAN consis-
tently achieves results superior to the state of the art.
2
Related Work
In this section, we review related methods on graph convolu-
tion and on graph attention mechanism, where the latter one
can be considered as a variant of the former. The proposed
SPAGAN model falls into the graph attention domain.
Graph Convolutional Networks.
Due to the great success
of CNNs, many recent works focus on generating such frame-
work to make it possible to apply on non-grid data structure
[Gilmer et al., 2017; Monti et al., 2017a; Morris et al., 2018;
Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018; Simonovsky and Komodakis, 2017;
Monti et al., 2017b; Li et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019;
Peng et al., 2018]. [Bruna et al., 2014] ﬁrst proposes a convo-
lution operator for graph data by deﬁning a function in spec-
tral domain. It ﬁrst calculates the eigenvalues and eigenvec-
tors of graph’s Laplacian matrix and then applies a function to
the eigenvalues. For each layer, the features of node will be a
different combination of weighted eigenvectors. [Defferrard
et al., 2016] deﬁnes polynomial ﬁlters on the eigenvalues of
the Laplacian matrix to reduce the computational complexity
by using the Chebyshev expansion. [Kipf and Welling, 2016]
further simpliﬁes the convolution operator by using only ﬁrst-
order neighbors. The adjacent matrix A is ﬁrst added self-
connections and normalized by the degree matrix D. Then,
graph convolution operation can be applied by just simple
matrix multiplication: H′ = D−1
2 AD−1
2 HΘ. Under this
framework, the convolution operator is deﬁned by parameter
Θ which is not related to the graph structure. Instead of using
the full neighbors, GraphSAGE[Hamilton et al., 2017] uses a
ﬁxed-size set of neighbors for aggregation. This mechanism
makes the memory used and running time to be more pre-
dictable. [Abu-El-Haija et al., 2018] proposes a multi GCN
framework by using random walk. They generate multiple
adjacent matrices through random walk and feed them to the
GCN model.
Graph Attention Networks.
Instead of using ﬁxed aggre-
gation weights, [Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018] brings attention
mechanism into graph convolutional network and proposes
GAT model based on that. One of the beneﬁts of attention is
the ability to deal with input with variant sizes and make the
model focus on parts which are most related to current tasks.
In GAT model, the weight for aggregation is no longer equal
or ﬁxed. Each edge in the adjacent matrix will be assigned
with an attention coefﬁcient that represents how much one
node affects the other one. The network is expected to learn
to pay more attention to the important neighbors. [Zhang et
al., 2018] proposes a gated attention aggregation mechanism
which is based on GAT. They argue that not every attention
head in GAT model is equally important for the feature em-
bedding process.
They propose a model that can learn to
assign different weights to different attention head. [Liu et

al., 2018] proposes an adaptive graph convolutional network
by combining attention mechanism with LSTM model. They
suggest using LSTM model can help to ﬁlter the information
aggregated from neighbors of variant hops.
Difference to Existing Methods.
Unlike all the methods
described above, the proposed SPAGAN model explicitly
conducts path-based high-order attention that explores the
more global graph topology, within in one layer, to update
the network parameters and features of the center nodes.
3
Preliminary
Before introducing our proposed method, we give a brief re-
view of the ﬁrst-order attention mechanism.
Given
a
graph
convolutional
network,
let
h
=
{ ⃗h1, ⃗h2, ⃗h3, ..., ⃗
hN} denotes a set of features of N nodes,
where ⃗hi ∈ℜF with F being the feature dimension. Also, let
A denotes the connection relationship, where Aij ∈{0, 1}
denotes whether there is an edge going from node i to node
j. Typically, a linear transformation operation, W ∈ℜF ′×F ,
is ﬁrst applied to the input features individually to transform
them into a new space of F ′ dimension. We write
(l) ⃗h′j = lW (k)
(l−1)⃗hj,
(1)
where lW (k) is deﬁned for each layer l and each attention
head k, (l−1)⃗hj is the feature of node j in (l−1)-th layer, and
(l) ⃗h′j is the projected feature for node j. Note that, layer zero
represents the original feature of input.
A shared attention function is then applied to those pairs of
connected nodes to obtain the attention coefﬁcients:
lα(k)
ij =
exp(σ⟨⃗a, (l) ⃗h′i∥(l) ⃗h′j⟩)
P
j∈Ni
exp(σ⟨⃗a, (l) ⃗h′i∥(l) ⃗h′j⟩)
,
(2)
where lα(k)
ij
represents the attention coefﬁcient from node j
to node i, ⟨·, ·⟩represents dot product of two vectors, Ni rep-
resents a set of 1-hop neighbors of node i, and σ can be any
non-linear operation. Intuitively, the shared attention func-
tion controls how much the feature of one node affects that of
the other node. By sharing the same vector ⃗a for all pairs, the
number of parameters as well as the risk of over-ﬁtting can be
reduced.
A forward process that updates the node features based on
the obtained attentions, is then carried out:
l⃗hi = σ′


ΞK
k=1 {
X
j∈Ni
lα(k)
ij (l−1) ⃗h′j}


,
(3)
where K is the number of attention head, Ξ denotes the opera-
tion that can be concatenation, max pooling, or mean pooling.
For example, [Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018] uses concatenation for
the middle layers and mean pooling for the last layer.
The above forward process is totally differentiable and can
be seen as one graph convolutional layer. Note that the above
operation only considers one-hop neighborhoods within one
layer. Although stacking multiple such layers can make far-
ther nodes be accessible, it often leads to worse performance
and in many cases convergence issues.
Figure 3: Aggregating feature for a center node using shortest path
attention. For each center node d, shortest paths starting from it can
be represented as a set of vectors with different sizes. These vectors
will be mapped to the same dimension by the function φ. ∗denotes
the attention operator deﬁned in Eq. 8, which will take d as a query
to conduct a hierarchical path aggregation.
4
Proposed Method
In this section, we will give more details of the Shortest Path
Graph Attention Network (SPAGAN). The core idea of SPA-
GAN is to utilize shortest-path-based attention, which allows
us to robustly and effectively explore the more global graph
topology, to update the attention functions and the node fea-
tures within one layer. The overall structure of SPAGAN is
shown in Fig. 2 and can be optimized in an iterative manner.
The network takes node features h and the shortest paths P to
minimize the loss function and thus to update coefﬁcients and
features, based on which the shortest paths are re-computed,
and the process iterates.
4.1
Shortest Path Attention
We will discuss here how to aggregate the information of
shortest paths to the center node, which we call shortest path
attention. Different from graph attention network that only
focuses on pairwise node attention deﬁned by the adjacent
matrix, the proposed SPAGAN approach focuses on path-to-
node attention. SPAGAN contains three steps, shortest path
generation, path sampling, and hierarchical path aggregation,
for which we give details as follows.
Shortest Path Generation
In the initial phase, the network takes the node features h and
the shortest paths P generated using the same edge weights
as input, to minimize the loss of a speciﬁc task, like cross
entropy loss for classiﬁcation. The attention function, once
trained, generates meaningful edge weights based on the
learned attention coefﬁcients. Shortest paths are then com-
puted using Dijkstra’s algorithm [Dijkstra, 1959], where the
weights of edges are reversed ﬁrst and then transformed to
positive values using the approach of [Suurballe, 1974]. Note
that the paths here do not include the start node.
To get a robust representation of the weight of an edge, we
use the ﬁnal layer attention coefﬁcients and average those of
all attentions:
Wij = 1
K
K
X
k=1
¯lα(k)
ij ,
(4)
where ¯l denotes the last layer of network, K denotes the num-
ber of attention heads for that layer, α(k)
ij denotes the attention
coefﬁcient from node j to node i in k-th head, and Wij cor-
responds to the weight of the edge from node i to node j.

Let pc
ij denotes the obtained shortest path from node i to
node j with length c, and let P denote the set of all such
paths. Since a path with length c will allow the center node to
access nodes up to c-hop, we can therefore control the size of
receptive ﬁeld for a single layer by deﬁning the max value of
c. We will give analysis about c in the experimental section.
Also, we add the center nodes themselves to P.
Path Sampling
For shortest paths of the same length, those with smaller costs
are heuristically more correlated with the center node, and
vice versa. To highlight the contributions of the more cor-
related paths and meanwhile reduce the computational load,
for a ﬁxed length c, we sample the top k paths with the lowest
costs. We denote the set of all the sampled paths of length c
centerd node i as ℵc
i. We write
ℵc
i = topk(Pc), k = g
degi ∗r,
(5)
where Pc is the subset of P that contains all shortest paths of
length c, and k is determined by the degree of the center node,
because we want to make the embedded features from paths
of different lengths comparable. g
degi represents the degree
of node i, and r is a hyper-parameter that controls the ratio
of the degree of the center node over the number of sampled
paths. We will also give analysis about this hyper-parameter
in the experimental section.
Hierarchical Path Aggregation
Path aggregation is the core of our model. We expect the
shortest paths of different lengths to encode richer topological
information as compared to the ﬁrst-order neighbors do. To
this end, we propose a hierarchical path aggregation mecha-
nism that focuses on the paths of same length in the ﬁrst level
(Eq. 6) and on different ones in the second level (Eq. 9).
The hierarchical path aggregation mechanism is shown in
Fig. 3. In the ﬁrst level, given a center node i and its short-
est path set ℵi, we aggregate features respect to each c. For
the sake of simplicity, we omit l that represents layer in the
following discussion. We write
ℓc
i = ΞK
k=1
 X
pc
ij∈ℵc
i
α(k)
ij φ(pc
ij)
	
,
(6)
where ℵc
i is a set of shortest paths starting from node i with
length of c, ℓc
i is the aggregated feature for node i respect
to ℵc
i, K is the number of path attention heads that is the
same for all c, Ξ can be concatenation, max pooling or mean
pooling operation. In our implementation, we use Ξ as a con-
catenation operation for all middle layers and mean pooling
operation for the ﬁnal layer. φ maps paths with variant sizes
to ﬁxed ones. In our implementation, mean pooling, an order-
invariant operator, is used for φ that computes the average of
all nodes’ features in a path. α(k)
ij is the attention coefﬁcient
between node i and path pc
ij, and is taken to be
α(k)
ij = AT

⃗h′i, φ(pc
ij)|aα

,
(7)
where aα is the parameter that deﬁnes the attention function
AT , and ⃗h′i donates the feature of node i after the linear
transformation. Note that when we set c to 2, the generated
attention coefﬁcients will be equal to the node attention that
can be used to update edges’ weights.
The attention function AT in Eq. 7 is taken to be
AT (a, b|θ) =
exp(σ⟨θ, a∥b⟩)
P
b∈ℵa
exp(σ⟨θ, a∥b⟩),
(8)
where θ is its parameter, ℵa denotes a set deﬁned on a, ||
represents concatenation. In the case of Eq. 7 or ﬁrst level
aggregation, ℵa denotes ℵc
i, while in the case of Eq. 10 to be
discussed below or second level aggregation, ℵa denotes a set
of all ℓi. The output of this function estimates the attention
between a and b.
In the second level, we focus on aggregating features of
paths with different lengths and applying the attention mech-
anism to obtain the embedded features for the center node:
⃗hi = σ

C
X
c=2
βcℓc
i
	
,
(9)
where ℓc
i is the aggregated feature for node i from paths of
length c. C is the maximum-allowable path length and σ can
be any no-linear function. βc is the attention coefﬁcient for
ℓc
i and can be obtained from the same attention mechanism
with respect to the center node i using an attention function
deﬁned by aβ:
βc = AT

⃗h′i, ℓc
i|aβ

.
(10)
Iterative Optimization
The whole network then will be trained in an iterative man-
ner that involves shortest paths P and all other parameters of
the network. In the beginning, the network is trained based
on h and P, where P is generated using equal edge weights.
When the network converges, P will be regenerated accord-
ing to the attention coefﬁcients in the ﬁnal layer for the next
iteration. In practice, we ﬁnd two iterations is sufﬁcient to get
a good performance, which we will give more discussions in
the experimental section.
4.2
Discussion
Here, we will discuss some properties of SPAGAN.
Generalized GAT.
SPAGAN can be seen as a generalized
GAT, as it degenerates to GAT when we set the max value of
c to 2 and the sample ratio r to 1.0.
Order Invariance.
Order invariance refers to property that,
the embedded feature for a node is independent of the order
of its neighbors. It is thus a crucial property since we expect
the feature for each node to depend only on the structure of
the graph but not the order of the nodes. All our operations
are based on pair-wise attention, which is order invariant.
Node Dependency.
Node dependency refers to that for
each node, the aggregation process is dependent on its local
structure, so that every node will have its unique aggrega-
tion pattern. In SPAGAN, shortest paths starting from center
node are expected to explore more global graph structure than
ﬁrst-order mechanisms, which makes the feature aggregation
process more node dependent.

Relation
to
Random
Walk.
The
random
walk
ap-
proach [Kashima et al., 2003] assumes that each node can
transmit to its neighbors in equal probability that can be rep-
resent as the product of adjacent matrices. A k step random
walk leads to a matrix of Ak. It suffers from tottering caused
by walking through the same edge or node thus may get stuck
at a local structure. Shortest path, by nature, can alleviate
such tottering problem [Borgwardt and Kriegel, 2005].
5
Experimental Setup
In this section, we give the details of the datasets used for val-
idation, the experimental setup, and the compared methods.
5.1
Experimental Datasets
We use three widely used semi-supervised graph datasets,
Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed summarized in Tab. 1. Follow-
ing the work of [Kipf and Welling, 2016; Veliˇckovi´c et al.,
2018], for each dataset, we only use 20 nodes per class for
training, 500 nodes for validating and 1000 nodes for testing.
We allow all the algorithms to access the whole graph that
includes the node features and edges. As done in [Kipf and
Welling, 2016], during training, only part of the nodes are
provided with ground truth labels; at test time, algorithm will
be evaluated by their performance on the test nodes.
5.2
Experimental Setup
We implement SPAGAN under Pytorch framework [Paszke et
al., 2017] and train it with Adam optimizer. We follow a sim-
ilar learning rate and L2 regularization as GAT [Veliˇckovi´c
et al., 2018]: For the Cora dataset, we set the learning rate
to 0.005 and the weight of L2 regularization to 0.0005; for
the Pubmed dataset, we set the learning rate to 0.01 and the
weight of L2 regularization to 0.001. For the Citeseer dataset,
however, we found that the original setting of parameters un-
der the Pytorch framework yields to worse performances as
compared to those reported in the GAT paper. Therefore, we
set the learning rate to 0.0085 and the weight of L2 regular-
ization to 0.002 to match the original GAT performance. For
all datasets, we set a tolerance window and stop the training
process if there is no lower validation loss within it. We use
two graph convolutional layers for all datasets with different
attention heads. For the ﬁrst layer, 8 attention heads for each
c is used. Each attention head will compute 8 features. Then,
an ELU [Clevert et al., 2015] function is applied. In the sec-
ond layer, we use 8 attention heads for the Pumbed dataset
and 1 attention head for the other two datasets. The outputs
of second layer will be used for classiﬁcation which have the
same dimension as the class number. Dropout is applied to
the input of each layer and also to the attention coefﬁcients
for each node, with a keep probability of 0.4.
For all datasets, we set the r to 1.0 which means the number
of sampled paths is the same as the degree of each node. The
max value of c is set to be three for the ﬁrst layer and two for
the last layer for all datasets. The steps of iteration is set to
two. For all the datasets, we use early stopping based on the
cross-entropy loss on validation set. We run the model under
the same data split for 10 times and report the mean accuracy
as well as standard deviation. Experiments on the sensitivities
of these three hyper-parameters will be provided.
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
#Nodes
2,708
3,327
19,717
#Edges
5,429
4,732
44,338
#Features
1,433
3,703
500
#Classes
7
6
3
Table 1: Summary of the datasets used in our experiments. For each
dataset, we use only 20 nodes per class for training, 500 nodes for
validation, and 1000 nodes for testing.
Method
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
MLP
55.1%
46.5%
71.4%
DeepWalk
67.2%
43.2%
65.3%
Chebyshev
81.2%
69.8%
74.4%
GeniePath
-
-
78.5%
GCN
81.5%
70.3%
79.0%
MoNet
81.7±0.5%
-
78.8±0.3%
GAT
83.0±0.7%
72.5±0.7%
79.0±0.3%
GAT3
81.2±0.6%
68.8±0.7%
78.5±0.4%
SPAGAN
83.6±0.5%
73.0±0.4%
79.6±0.4%
Table 2: Summary of results in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy.
GAT3 denotes the three-layer GAT model with skip connections
(GAT model fails to converge when we simply stack three layers
without skip connections).
5.3
Comparison Methods
We compare our method with several state-of-the-art base-
lines, including MLP, DeepWalk [Perozzi et al., 2014],
Chebyshev [Defferrard et al., 2016], GeniePath [Liu et al.,
2018], GCN, MoNet [Monti et al., 2017a] and GAT. MLP
only uses the node features. DeepWalk is a random walk
base method. Chebyshev is a spectral method. GeniePath
uses LSTM model to aggregate features from different layers
on a GAT model. GCN can be seen as a special case of GAT
model where αij is the same for each pair of nodes. MoNet
is a ﬁrst-order spatial method, which uses Gaussian kernel
to learn the weight for each neighbors. GAT is a ﬁrst-order
attention framework which can be seen as a special case of
SPAGAN when we set the max length of paths to 2 and the
sampling ratio to 1.0. We will see the usefulness of path at-
tention when compare to the naive ﬁrst-order attention model.
We also compare SPAGAN with GAT model with the same
size of receptive ﬁeld by increasing the number of layers by
one. We add skip connections for each layer before ELU ac-
tivation in three layers GAT model to make it converge.
6
Experimental Result
As we focus on node classiﬁcation, we use classiﬁcation ac-
curacy to evaluate all methods. The results of our compara-
tive experiments are summarized in Tab. 2, where we observe
SPAGAN consistently achieves the best performance on all
three datasets. This implies that SPAGAN, by exploring high-
order neighbors and graph structure within one layer, indeed
leads to more discriminant node features.
In addition, we provide a visualization on the learned em-
bedded features as well as the shortest paths. The features

(a) Results with different sampling ratios.
r
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Acc
83.4±0.3%
83.6±0.5%
83.4±0.6%
83.3±0.5%
(b) Results with different steps of iterations.
Iter
1
2
3
4
5
Acc
83.0±0.7%
83.6±0.5%
83.6±0.6%
83.6±0.6%
83.5±0.6%
(c) Results with different lengths of paths.
C
2
3
4
5
Acc
83.0±0.7%
83.6±0.5%
83.5±0.7%
83.1±0.4%
Table 3: Sensitivity analysis of hyper-parameters. All these results
are obtained on the Cora dataset.
obtained from the hidden layers of a trained model on the
Cora dataset are projected using t-SNE algorithm [Maaten
and Hinton, 2008]. As shown in Fig. 4, we randomly sam-
ple 10 nodes and visualize four paths per node. Nodes with
black surroundings indicate the starts of paths. For the cor-
rectly classiﬁed nodes, the paths are colored with cyan, oth-
erwise the paths are colored with red. As can be observed,
the shortest paths of most correctly classiﬁed nodes tend to
reside within the same cluster. Another interesting observa-
tion is that, for nodes that lie in the wrong cluster, shortest
paths can still lead them back to the right cluster and further
produce the correct classiﬁcation results. For example, in the
zoomed region, the node surrounded by the red dotted circle
lies in blue cluster. However, since it is connected to shortest
paths leading back to the green cluster, our network eventu-
ally predicts the correct label, green, to this node.
6.1
Sensitivity Analysis
There are three hyper-parameters in our model: the sampling
rate of path r, the maximum depth of path C, and the number
of iteration Iter. We change each of them to analyze the sen-
sitive of our model respect to them. The results are shown in
Tab. 3. All these results are obtained from the Cora dataset.
For the sampling ratio, we ﬁx Iter to be 2 and C to 3 (for
sampling ratio 0.5, we adopt a max operator over the number
of sampled paths and one, to ensure that at least one path is
selected); the best performance is obtained in 1.0, meaning
that we use the same number of paths as the degree of each
node. Then we ﬁx the sampling ratio to 1.0 and change the
number of iterations. Results show that two iterations is sufﬁ-
cient for a good performance. We also change the max depth
of paths from 2 to 5. The best performance is obtained at 3.
6.2
Ablation Study
We conduct ablation study to validate the proposed hierar-
chical path attention mechanism described by Eq. 10. We
compare the results between full SPAGAN model that has
learnable attention coefﬁcients for paths of different lengths,
and SPAGAN model without it, which we call SPAGAN Fix.
The results are shown in Tab. 4, where the full model of SPA-
GAN improvement over. We can thus conclude that hierar-
chical attention mechanism indeed plays an important role in
the feature aggregation process.
Method
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
GAT
83.0±0.7%
72.5±0.7%
79.0±0.3%
SPAGAN Fix
83.2±0.4%
72.4±0.4%
79.2±0.4%
SPAGAN
83.6±0.5%
73.0±0.4%
79.6±0.4%
Table 4: Classiﬁcation accuracy of SPAGAN with and without the
hierarchical path aggregation.
SPAGAN Fix refers to the model
where we average the features coming from paths with different
lengths (i.e., removing β from Eq. 9).
Figure 4: Visualization of features obtained from hidden layer of a
trained SPAGAN model on the Cora dataset and paths starting from
10 random nodes (with black background). Color of nodes repre-
sents their labels. Paths starting from correctly classiﬁed nodes are
colored with cyan, otherwise with red.
6.3
Computing Complexity
Many real-world graphs are sparse. For example, the average
degree of the Cora dataset is only 2. A sparse graph can be
represented by values and indexes in O(E) space complexity
where E is the number of edges in the graph. The computed
path matrix P is cutoff by C and further reduced by sampling.
In our experiments, the space complexity of path attention
layer is one or two times larger than that of the ﬁrst-order one,
which is very friendly for GPU memory. Take Cora dataset
as an example, GAT model takes about 600M GPU memory
while our SPAGAN model only increases it by about 200M.
As for the running time, the shortest path algorithm we
adopted, Dijkstra, runs at a time complexity of O(V ElogV )
where V is the number of nodes in a graph. The path attention
mechanism is implemented using sparse operator [Fey et al.,
2018] according to indices and values of P, which allows us
to make full use of the GPU computing ability. The running
time of one epoch with path attention on Pubmed dataset is
0.1s on a Nvidia 1080Ti GPU.
7
Conclusion
We propose in this paper an effective and the ﬁrst dedicated
graph attention network, termed Shortest Path Graph Atten-
tion Network (SPAGAN), that allows us to explore high-order
path-based attentions within one layer. This is achieved by
computing the shortest paths of different lengths between a
center node and its distant neighbors, then carrying path-to-
node attention for updating the node features and attention
coefﬁcients, and iterates. We test SPAGAN on several bench-
marks, and demonstrate that it yields results superior to the
state of the art on the downstream node-classiﬁcation task.
