Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
LEARNING TO REPEAT:
FINE GRAINED ACTION REPETITION FOR
DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Sahil Sharma, Aravind S. Lakshminarayanan, Balaraman Ravindran
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Chennai, 600036, India

ABSTRACT
Reinforcement Learning algorithms can learn complex behavioral patterns for se-
quential decision making tasks wherein an agent interacts with an environment
and acquires feedback in the form of rewards sampled from it. Traditionally, such
algorithms make decisions, i.e., select actions to execute, at every single time step
of the agent-environment interactions. In this paper, we propose a novel frame-
work, Fine Grained Action Repetition (FiGAR), which enables the agent to decide
the action as well as the time scale of repeating it. FiGAR can be used for im-
proving any Deep Reinforcement Learning algorithm which maintains an explicit
policy estimate by enabling temporal abstractions in the action space. We em-
pirically demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our framework by showing performance im-
provements on top of three policy search algorithms in different domains: Asyn-
chronous Advantage Actor Critic in the Atari 2600 domain, Trust Region Policy
Optimization in Mujoco domain and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients in the
TORCS car racing domain.
1
INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) is used to solve goal-directed sequential decision making problems
wherein explicit supervision in the form of correct decisions is not provided to the agent, but only
evaluative feedback in the form of the rewards sampled from the environment. RL algorithms model
goal-directed sequential decision making problems as Markov Decision Processes (MDP) [Sutton &
Barto (1998)]. However, for problems with an exponential or continuous state space, tabular RL al-
gorithms that maintain value or policy estimates for every state become infeasible. Therefore, there
is a need to be able to generalize decision making to unseen states. Recent advances in representa-
tion learning through deep neural networks provide an efﬁcient mechanism for such generalization
[LeCun et al. (2015)]. Such a combination of representation learning through deep neural networks
with reinforcement learning objectives has shown promising results in many sequential decision
making domains such as the Atari 2600 domain [Bellemare et al. (2013); Mnih et al. (2015); Schaul
et al. (2015); Mnih et al. (2016)], Mujoco simulated physics tasks domain [Todorov et al. (2012);
Lillicrap et al. (2015)], the Robosoccer domain [Hausknecht et al. (2016)] and the TORCS domain
[Wymann et al. (2000); Mnih et al. (2016)]. Often, MDP settings consist of an agent interacting
with the environment at discrete time steps. A common feature shared by all the Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning (DRL) algorithms above is that they repeatedly execute a chosen action for a ﬁxed
number of time steps k. If at represents the action taken at time step t, then for the said algorithms,
a1 = a2 = · · · = ak, ak+1 = ak+2 = · · · = a2k and in general aik+1 = aik+2 = · · · = a(i+1)k,
i ≥0. Action repetition allows these algorithms to compute the action once every k time steps and
hence operate at higher speeds, thus achieving real-time performance. This also offers other advan-
tages such as smooth action policies. More importantly, as shown in Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016)
and Durugkar et al. (2016), macro-actions constituting the same action repeated k times could be
interpreted as introducing temporal abstractions in the induced policies thereby enabling transitions
between temporally distant advantageous states.
1
arXiv:1702.06054v2  [cs.LG]  21 Sep 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
(a) Freeway
(b) Sea Quest
Figure 1: FiGAR induces temporal abstractions in learnt policies. The arrows indicate the action
executed between the frames and the numbers depict the number of time steps for which the action
was repeated. The thunder bolt corresponds to the ﬁring action. An arrow alongside a thunderbolt
corresponds to the action (arrow+ﬁre). In the ﬁgure (a), the agent learns to execute down operation
(which is equivalent to a no-op in this particular state, in this game) until a traveling car passes by
and then executes temporally elongated actions to complete the task, skillfully avoiding the red car
in the 7th frame. In ﬁgure (b) the agent catches a glimpse of a pink opponent towards bottom right
in the 2nd frame and executes temporally elongated actions to intercept and kill it (in the 6th frame).
The time scale for action repetition has largely been static in DRL algorithms until now [Mnih et al.
(2015; 2016); Schaul et al. (2015)]. Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016) are the ﬁrst to explore dynamic
time scales for action repetition in the DRL setting and show that it leads to signiﬁcant improvement
in performance on a few Atari 2600 games. However, they choose only two time scales and the
experiments are limited to a few representative games. Moreover the method is limited to tasks with
a discrete action space.
We propose FiGAR, a framework that enables any DRL algorithm regardless of whether its action
space is continuous or discrete, to learn temporal abstractions in the form of temporally extended
macro-actions. FiGAR uses a structured and factored representation of the policy whereby the pol-
icy for choosing the action is decoupled from that for the action repetition selection. Note that
deciding actions and the action repetitions independently enables us to ﬁnd temporal abstractions
without blowing up the action space, unlike Vezhnevets et al. (2016) and Lakshminarayanan et al.
(2016). The contribution of this work is twofold. First, we propose a generic extension to DRL algo-
rithms by coming up with a factored policy representation for temporal abstractions (see ﬁgure 1 for
sequences of macro actions learnt in 2 Atari 2600 games). Second, we empirically demonstrate Fi-
GAR’s efﬁciency in improving policy gradient DRL algorithms with improvements in performance
over several domains: 31 Atari 2600 games with Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic [Mnih et al.
(2016)], 5 tasks in MuJoCo Simulated physics tasks domain with Trust Region Policy Optimiza-
tion [Schulman et al. (2015)] and the TORCS domain with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients
[Lillicrap et al. (2015)].
2
RELATED WORK
Our framework is centered on a very general idea of only deciding when necessary. There have
been similar ideas outside the RL domains. For instance, Gu et al. (2016) and Satija & Pineau
(2016) explore Real Time Neural Machine Translation where the action at every time step is to
decide whether to output a new token in the target language or not based on current context.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Transition Point Dynamic Programming (TPDP) [Buckland & Lawrence (1994)] algorithm is a mod-
iﬁcation to the tabular dynamic programming paradigm that can reduce the learning time and mem-
ory required for control of continuous stochastic dynamic systems. This is done by determining
a set of transition points in the underlying MDP. The policy changes only at these transition point
states. The algorithm learns an optimal set of transition point states by using a variant of Q-Learning
to evaluate whether or not to add/delete a particular state from the set of transition points. FiGAR
learns the transition points in the underlying MDP on the ﬂy with generalization across the state
space unlike TPDP which is tabular and infeasible for large problems.
The Dynamic Frameskip Deep Q-network [Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016)] proposes to use multi-
ple time scales of action repetition by augmenting the Deep Q Network (DQN) [Mnih et al. (2015)]
with separate streams of the same primitive actions corresponding to each time scale. This way, the
time scale of action repetition is dynamically learned. Although this framework leads to a signiﬁcant
improvement in the performance on a few Atari 2600 games, it suffers from not being able to support
multiple time scales due to potential explosion of the action space and is restricted to discrete action
spaces. Durugkar et al. (2016) also explore learning macro-actions composed using the same action
repeated for different time scales. However, their framework is limited to discrete action spaces and
performance improvements are not signiﬁcant.
Learning temporally extended actions and abstractions have been of interest in RL for a long time.
Vezhnevets et al. (2016) propose Strategic Attentive Writer (STRAW) for learning macro-actions
and building dynamic action-plans directly from reinforcement learning signals. Instead of out-
putting a single action after each observation, STRAW maintains a multi-step action plan. The
agent periodically updates the plan based on observations and commits to the plan between the re-
planning steps. Although the STRAW framework represents a more general temporal abstraction
than FiGAR, FiGAR should be seen as a framework that can compliment STRAW whereby the
decision to repeat could now be hierarchical at plan and base action levels.
FiGAR is a framework that has a structured policy representation where the time scale of execution
could be thought as parameterizing the chosen action. The only other work that explores param-
eterized policies in DRL is Hausknecht & Stone (2016) where discrete actions are parameterized
by continuous values. In our case, discrete/continuous actions are parameterized by discrete values.
The state spaces in Atari are also more sophisticated than the kind explored in Hausknecht et al.
(2016).
FiGAR is also very naturally connected to the Semi-MDPs (SMDPs) framework. SMDPs are MDPs
with durative actions. The assumption in SMDPs is that actions take some holding time to com-
plete [Duff (1995); Mahadevan et al. (1997); Dietterich (2000)]. Typically, they are modeled with
two distributions, one corresponding to the next state transition and the other corresponding to the
holding time which denotes the number of time steps between the current action from the policy
until the next action from the policy. The rewards over the entire holding time of an action is the
credit assigned for picking the action. In our framework, we naturally have durative actions due to
the policy structure where the decision consists of both the choice of the action and the time scale of
its execution. Therefore, we convert the original MDP to an SMDP trivially. In fact, we give more
structure to the SMDP because we are clear that we repeat the chosen action during the holding
time, while what happens during the holding time is not speciﬁed in the SMDP framework. One
can think of the part of the policy that outputs the probability distribution over the time scales as a
holding time distribution. Therefore, our framework naturally ﬁts into the SMDP deﬁnition with the
action repetition rate characterizing the holding time. We also sum up the rewards over the holding
time with an an appropriate discounting factor as in an SMDP framework.
3
BACKGROUND
3.1
ASYNCHRONOUS ADVANTAGE ACTOR CRITIC
Actor critic algorithms execute policy gradient updates by maintaining parametric estimates for the
policy πθa(a|s) and the value function Vθc(s) [Sutton & Barto (1998)]. The value function estimates
are used to reduce the variance in the policy gradient updates.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C) [Mnih et al. (2016)] learns policies based on an asyn-
chronous n-step returns. The k learner threads execute k copies of the policy asynchronously and
the parameter updates are sent to a central parameter server at regular intervals. This ensures that
temporal correlations are broken between subsequent updates since the different threads possibly
explore different parts of the state space in parallel. The objective function for policy improvement
in A3C is:
L(θa) = log πθa(at|st) (Gt −V (st))
where Gt is an estimate for the return at time step t. The A3C algorithm uses n-step returns for
estimating Gt which is a biased estimate for Q(st, at). Hence one can think of Gt −V (st) as an
estimate for A(st, at) which represents the advantage of taking action at in state st. The value
function Vθc(st) is updated by using n-step TD error as: L(θc) =

ˆV (st) −Vθc(st)
2
where ˆV (st)
is an estimate of the n-step return from the current state. In A3C j-step returns are used where j ≤n
and n is a ﬁxed hyper-parameter. For simplicity assume that t ≤n. Then the deﬁnition for ˆV (st) is:
ˆV (st) =
n−1
X
j=t
γt−jrj + γn−tV (sn)
The policy and value functions are parameterized by Deep Neural Networks.
3.2
TRUST REGION POLICY OPTIMIZATION
TRPO [Schulman et al. (2015)] is a policy optimization algorithm. Constrained optimization of a
surrogate loss function is proposed, with theoretical guarantees for monotonic policy improvement.
The TRPO surrogate loss function L for potential next policies (˜π) is:
Lθold(˜θ) = η(π) +
X
s
ρπ(s)
X
a
˜π(a|s)Aπ(s, a)
where θold are the parameters of policy π and ˜θ are parameters of ˜π. This surrogate loss function is
optimized subject to the constraint:
Dmax
KL (π, ˜π) ≤δ
which ensures that the policy improvement can be done in non-trivial step sizes and at the same time
the new policy does not deviate much from the current policy due to the KL-divergence constraint.
3.3
DEEP DETERMINISTIC POLICY GRADIENTS
According to the Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG) Theorem [Lever (2014)], the gradient of the
performance objective (J) of the deterministic policy (µ) in continuous action spaces with respect
to the policy parameters (θ) is given by:
∇θJ(µθ) =
Z
S
ρµ(s)∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)ds
= Es∼ρµ[∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)]
(1)
for an appropriately deﬁned performance objective J. The DPG model built according to this theo-
rem consists of an actor which outputs an action vector in the continuous action space and a critic
model Q(s, a) which evaluates the action chosen at a state. The DDPG algorithm [Lillicrap et al.
(2015)] extends the DPG algorithm by introducing non-linear neural network based function ap-
proximators for the actor and critic.
4
FIGAR: FINE GRAINED ACTION REPETITION
FiGAR provides a DRL algorithm with the ability to model temporal abstractions by augmenting it
with the ability to predict the number of time steps for which an action chosen for execution is to be
repeated. This prediction is conditioned on the current state in the environment.
The FiGAR framework can be used to extend any DRL algorithm (say Z) which maintains an
explicit policy. Let Z′ denote the extension of Z under FiGAR. Z′ has two independent decoupled
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Algorithm 1 Create FiGAR −Z
1: function MAKEFIGAR(DRLAlgorithm Z, ActionRepetitionSet W)
2:
st ←state at time t
3:
at ←action taken in st at time t
4:
πa ←action policy of Z
5:
fθa(st) ←action network for realizing action policy πa
6:
L(πa, st, at) ←A’s objective function for improving πa
7:
πx ←construct action repetition policy for FiGAR-Z.
8:
fθx(st) ←repetition network with output of size |W| for action repetition policy πx.
9:
L(πx, st, at) ←L evaluated at πx
10:
T(st, at) ←L(πx, st, at) ∗L(πa, st, at)
// Total Loss
11:
return T, fθa, fθx
policy components. The policy πθa for choosing actions and the policy πθx for choosing action
repetitions. Algorithm 1 describes the generic framework for deriving DRL algorithm Z′ from
algorithm Z. Let W stand for the set of all action repetitions that Z′ would be able to perform. In
tradition DRL algorithms, W = {c}, where c is a constant. This implies that the action repetition
is static and ﬁxed. In FiGAR, The set of action repetitions from which Z′ can choose is W =
{w1, w2, · · · , w|W |}. The central idea behind FiGAR is that the objective function used to update
the parameters θaof πθa maintained by Z will be used to update the parameters θx of the action
repetition policy πθx of Z′ as well (illustrated by the sharing of L in Algorithm 1). In the ﬁrst sub-
section, we desribe how Z′ operates. In the next two sub-sections, we describe the instantiations of
FiGAR extensions for 3 policy gradient DRL algorithms: A3C, TRPO and DDPG.
4.1
HOW FIGAR OPERATES
The following procedure describes how FiGAR variant Z′ navigates the MDP that it is solving:
1. In the very ﬁrst state s0 seen by Z′, it predicts a tuple (a0, x0) of action to execute and number
of time steps for which to execute it. a0 is decided based on πθa(s0) whereas x0 is decided based
on πθx(s0). Each such tuple is known as an action decision.
2. We denote by sj the state of the agent after j such action decisions have been made. Similarly
xj and aj denote the action repetition and the action chosen after j such action decisions. Note
that xj ∈{w1, w2, · · · , w|W |}, the set of all allowed action repetitions.
3. From time step 0 until x0 , Z′ executes a0.
4. At time step x0, Z′ again decides, based on current state s1 and policy components
(πθa(s1), πθx(s1)), the tuple of action to execute and the number of times for which to execute
it, (a1, x1).
5. It can seen that in general if Z′ executes action ak for xk successive time steps, the next action is
decided at time step t =
kP
i=0
xi on the basis of (πθa(sk+1), πθx(sk+1)), where sk+1 is the state
seen at time step t.
4.2
FIGAR-A3C
A3C uses fθa(sj) and fθc(sj) which represent the policy π(a|sj) and the value function V (sj)
respectively. π(a|sj) is a vector of size equal to the action space of the underlying MDP while
V (sj) is a scalar. FiGAR extends the A3C algorithm as follows:
1. With sj deﬁned as in the previous sub-section, in addition to fθa(sj) and fθc(sj) , FiGAR-
A3C deﬁnes a neural network fθx(sj). This neural network outputs a |W|-dimensional vector
representing the probability distribution over the elements of the set W. The sampled time scale
from this multinomial distribution decides how long the action decided with fθa(sj) is repeated.
The actor is now composed of both fθa(sj) (action network) and fθx(sj) (repetition network).
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
2. The objective function for the actor is modiﬁed to be:
L(θa, θx) = (log fθa(a|sj) + log fθx(x|sj)) A(sj, a, x)
where A(sj, a, x) represents the advantage of executing action a for x time steps at state sj. This
implies that for FiGAR-A3C the combination operator ∗deﬁned in Algorithm 1 is in fact scalar
addition.
3. The objective function for the critic is the same except that estimated value function used in the
target for the critic is changed as:
ˆV (sj) =
n−1
X
k=j
γyk−jrk + γyn−jV (sn)
where we deﬁne y0 = 0, yk = yk−1 + xk, k ≥1 and action ak was repeated xk times when
state sk was encountered. Note that the return used in target is based on n decision steps, steps
at which a potential change in actions executed takes place. It is not based on n time steps.
Note that point 2 above implies that the action space has been extended by |W| and has a dimension
of |A| + |W|. It is only because of this factored representation of the FiGAR policy that the number
of parameters do not blow up. If one were to extend the action space in a naive way by coupling
the actions and the action repetitions, one would end up suffering the kind of action-space blow-
up as seen in [Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016); Vezhnevets et al. (2016)] wherein for being able to
control with respect to |W| different action repetition levels (or |W|-length policy plans in the case
of STRAW) , one would need to model |A| × |W| actions or action-values which would blow up the
ﬁnal layer size |W| times.
4.3
FIGAR-TRPO
Although fθa(sj) in A3C is generic enough to output continuous or discrete actions, we consider
A3C only for discrete action spaces. Preserving the notation from the previous subsection, we
describe FiGAR-TRPO where we consider the case of the output generated by the network fθa(sj)
to be A dimensional with each dimension being independent and describing a continuous valued
action. The stochastic policy is hence modeled as a multi-variate Gaussian with diagonal co-variance
matrix. The parameters of the mean as well as the co-variance matrix are together represented by θa
and the concatenated mean-covariance vector is represented by the function fθa(sj). FiGAR-TRPO
is constructed as follows:
1. In TRPO,the objective function Lθold(˜θ) is constructed based on trajectories drawn according to
the current policy. Hence, for FiGAR-TRPO the objective function is modiﬁed to be:
Lθa,old,θx,old( ˜θa) ×

Lθa,old,θx,old( ˜θx)
βar
where θx are the parameters of sub-network fθx which computes the action repetition distribu-
tion. This implies that for FiGAR-TRPO the combination operator ∗deﬁned in Algorithm 1 is
in some sense the scalar multiplication. βar controls the relative learning rate of the core-policy
parameters and the action repetition parameters.
2. The constraint in TRPO corresponding to the KL divergence between old and new policies is
modiﬁed to be:
Dmax
KL (πa, ˜πa) + βKLDmax
KL (πx, ˜πx) ≤δ
where πa denotes the Gaussian distribution for the action to be executed and πx denotes the
multinomial softmax-based action repetition probability distribution. βKL controls the relative
divergence of πx and πa from the new corresponding policies. See Appendix C for an explana-
tion of the loss function used.
4.4
FIGAR-DDPG
In this subsection, we present an extension of DDPG under the FiGAR framework. DDPG consists
of fθa(sj) which denotes a deterministic policy µ(s) and is a vector of size equal to the action space
of the underlying MDP; and fθc(sj, aj) which denotes the critic network whose output is a single
number, the estimated state-action value function Q(sj, aj). FiGAR framework extends the DDPG
algorithm as follows:
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
1. fθx is introduced, similar to FiGAR-A3C. This implies that the complete policy for FiGAR-
DDPG (πθa, πθx) is computed by the tuple of neural networks: (fθa, fθx) . Similar to DDPG
[Lillicrap et al. (2015)], FiGAR-DDPG has no loss function for the actor. The actor receives
gradients from the critic. This is because the actors proposed policy is directly fed to the critic and
the critic provides the actor with gradients which the proposed policy follows for improvement.
In FiGAR-DDPG the total policy π is a concatenation of vectors πa and πx. Hence the gradients
for the total policy are also simply the concatenation of the gradients for the policies πa and πx.
2. To ensure sufﬁcient exploration, the exploration policy for action repetition is an ϵ-greedy version
of the behavioral action repetition policy. The action part of the policy, (fθa(sj)), continues to
use temporally correlated noise for exploration, generated by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (see
Lillicrap et al. (2015) for details).
3. The critic is modeled by the equation
f(sj, aj, xj) = fθc(sj, fθa(sj), fθx(sj))
As stated above, fθx is learnt by back-propagating the gradients produced by the critic with
respect to fθx, in exactly the same way that fθa is learnt.
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
The experiments are designed to understand the answers to the following questions:
1. For different DRL algorithms, can FiGAR extensions learn to use the dynamic action repetition?
2. How does FiGAR impact the performance of the different algorithms on various tasks?
3. Is FiGAR able to learn control on several different kinds of Action Repetition sets W?
Figure 2: Percentage Improvement of FiGAR-A3C over A3C for Atari 2600
In the next three sub-sections, we experiment with the simplest possible action repetition set
W = {1, 2, · · · , |W|}. In the fourth sub-section, we understand the effects that changing the action
repetition set W has on the policies learnt.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
5.1
FIGAR-A3C ON ATARI 2600
This set of experiments was performed with FiGAR-A3C on the Atari 2600 domain. The hyper-
parameters were tuned on a subset of games (Beamrider, Breakout, Pong, Seaquest and Space In-
vaders) and kept constant across all games.
W is perhaps the most important hyper-parameter and depicts our conﬁdence in the ability of a DRL
agent to predict the future. Such a choice has to depend on the domain in which the DRL agent is
operating. We only wanted to demonstrate the ability of FiGAR to learn temporal abstractions and
hence instead of tuning for an optimal |W|, it was chosen to be 30, arbitrarily. The speciﬁc set of
time scales we choose is 1, 2, 3, · · · , 30. FiGAR-A3C as well as A3C were trained for 100 million
decision steps. They were evaluated in terms of the ﬁnal policy learnt. Treating the score obtained by
the A3C algorithm as baseline (b), we calculated the percentage improvement (i) offered by FiGAR-
A3C (f) as: i =
f−b
b . Figure 2 plots this metric versus the game names. The improvement for
Enduro and Atlantis is staggering and more than 900× and 35× respectively. Figure 2’s y-axis has
been clipped at 1000% to make it more presentable. Appendix A contains the experimental details,
the raw scores obtained by both the methods. Appendix B contains experiments on validating our
setup.
Figure 3: Evaluation of Action Repetition Control for Atari 2600. See Appendix B (Table 7) for an
expanded version of ﬁgure.
To answer the ﬁrst question we posed, experiments were conducted to record the percentage of
times that a particular action repetition was chosen. Figure 3 presents the action repetition distri-
bution across a selection of games, chosen arbitrarily. The values have been rounded to 2 decimal
places and hence do not sum to 1 in each game. Each game was played for 10 episodes using the
same policy used to calculate average scores in Figure 2.
The two tables together show that FiGAR-A3C generally prefers lower action repetition but does
come up with temporal abstractions in policy space (specially in games like Pong and Crazy
Climber). Some such abstractions have been demonstrated in Figure 1. Such temporal abstrac-
tions do not always help general gameplay (Demon Attack). However, as can be seen from Figure
2, FiGAR-A3C outperforms A3C in 26 out of 33 games.
One could potentially think of FiGAR as a deep exploration framework by using the learnt policy
πθa for predicting actions at every time step and completely discarding the action-repetition policy
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
πθx, at evaluation time. Appendix F contains an empirical argument against such a usage of FiGAR
and demonstrates that the temporal abstractions encoded by πθx are indeed important for game play
performance.
5.2
FIGAR-TRPO ON MUJOCO TASKS
In this sub-section we demonstrate that FiGAR-TRPO can learn to solve the Mujoco simulated
physics tasks reasonably successfully. Similar to FiGAR-A3C, |W| is chosen to be 30 arbitrarily.
Table 1: Evaluation of FiGAR on Mujoco
Domain
FiGAR-TRPO
TRPO
Ant
947.06 (28.35)
-161.93 (1.00)
Hopper
3038.63 (1.00)
3397.58 (1.00)
Inverted Pendulum
1000.00 (1.00)
971.66 (1.00)
Inverted Double Pendulum
8712.46 (1.01)
8327.75 (1.00)
Swimmer
337.48 (10.51)
364.55 (1.00)
The full policy (fθa, fθx) is trained jointly. The policies learnt after each TRPO optimization step
(details in Appendix C) are compared to current best known policy to arrive at the overall best
policy. The results in this sub-section are for this best policy. Table 1 compares the performance
of TRPO and FiGAR-TRPO. The number in the brackets is the average action repetition chosen.
As can be seen from the table, FiGAR learns either policies which are much faster to execute albeit
at cost of slight loss in optimality or it learns policies similar to non-repetition case, performance
being competitive with the baseline algorithm. This best policy was then evaluated on 100 episodes
to arrive at average scores which are contained in Table 1. TRPO is a difﬁcult baseline on the
MuJoCo tasks domain. On the whole, FiGAR outperforms TRPO in 3 out of 5 domains, although
the gains are marginal in most tasks. Appendix C contains experimental details. A video showing
FiGAR-TRPO’s learned behavior policies can be found at http://youtu.be/JiaO2tBtH-k.
5.3
FIGAR-DDPG ON TORCS
FiGAR-DDPG was trained and tested on the TORCS domain. |W| was chosen to be 15 arbitrarily.
FIGAR-DDPG manages to complete the race task ﬂawlessly and manages to ﬁnish 20 laps of the
circuit, after which the simulator stops. The total reward obtained by FiGAR-DDPG was 557929.68
as against 59519.70 obtained by DDPG. We also observed that FiGAR-DDPG learnt policies which
were smoother than those learnt by DDPG. A video showing the learned driving behavior of the
FiGAR-DDPG agent can be found at https://youtu.be/dX8J-sF-WX4. See Appendix D
for experimental and architectural details.
5.4
EFFECT OF ACTION REPETITION SET ON FIGAR
This sub-section answers the third question raised at the beginning of this section in afﬁrmative. We
demonstrate that there is nothing sacrosanct about the set of action repetitions W = {1, 2, · · · , 30}
on which FiGAR-A3C performed well, and that the good performance carries over to other action
repetition sets.
To demonstrate the generality of FiGAR with respect to W, we chose a wide variety of action
repetition sets W, trained and evaluated FiGAR-A3C variants which learn to repeat with respect to
their respective Action Repetition sets. Table 3 describes the various FiGAR-variants considered for
these experiments in terms of their action repetition set W.
Note that the hyper-parameters of the various variants of FiGAR-A3C were not tuned but rather the
same ones obtained by tuning for FiGAR-30 were used. Table 2 contains a comparison of the raw
scores obtained by the various FiGAR-A3C variants in comparison to the A3C baseline. It is clear
that FiGAR is able to learn over any action repetition set W and the performance does not fall by
a lot even when hyper-parameters tuned for FiGAR-30 are used for other variants. Appendix E
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 2: Comparison of FiGAR-A3C variants to the A3C baseline for 3 games: Sea Quest, Space
Invaders and Asterix. See Appendix E (Figure 7) for a bar graph visualization of this table.
Variant
Seaquest
Space Invaders
Asterix
FiGAR-50
22904.50
1929.50
7730.00
FiGAR-30-50
17103.60
1828.90
11090.00
FiGAR-P
20005.40
2047.40
10937.00
FiGAR-30
18076.90
2251.95
11949.00
FiGAR-20-30
14683.00
2310.70
8182.00
FiGAR-20
19148.50
1929.50
7730.00
Baseline
2769.40
1268.75
2364.00
Table 3: Description of FiGAR-A3C variants in terms of action repetition set W.
Name
Description in terms of W
FiGAR-20
W = {1, 2, · · · , 19, 20}
FiGAR-30
W = {1, 2, · · · , 29, 30}
FiGAR-50
W = {1, 2, · · · , 49, 50}
FiGAR-30-50
W = {30 numbers drawn randomly from W = {1, 2, · · · , 50} w/o replacement}
FiGAR-20-30
W = {20 numbers drawn randomly from W = {1, 2, · · · , 30} w/o replacement}
FiGAR-P
W = {p | p < 50, p ∈P (Set of all Primes)}
contains additional graphs showing the evolution of average game scores against number of training
steps as well as a bar graph visualization of Table 2.
6
CONCLUSION, SHORTCOMINGS AND FUTURE WORK
We propose a light-weight framework (FiGAR) for improving current Deep Reinforcement Learning
algorithms for policy optimization whereby temporal abstractions are learned in the policy space.
The framework is generic and applicable to DRL algorithms concerned with policy gradients for
continuous as well as discrete action spaces such as A3C, TRPO and DDPG. FiGAR maintains a
structured policy wherein the action probability distribution is augmented with a probability dis-
tribution for choosing the time scale of repeating the chosen action. Our results demonstrate that
FiGAR can be used to signiﬁcantly improve the current policy gradient and Actor-Critic algorithms
thereby learning better control policies across several domains by discovering optimal sequences of
temporally elongated macro-actions.
Atari, TORCS and MuJoCo represent environments which are largely deterministic with a minimal
degree of stochasticity in environment dynamics. In such highly deterministic environments we
would expect FiGAR agents to build a latent model of the environment dynamics and hence be
able to execute large action repetitions without dying. This is exactly what we see in a highly
deterministic environment like the game Freeway. Figure 1 (a) demonstrates that the chicken is able
to judge the speed of the approaching cars appropriately and cross the road in a manner which takes
it to the goal without colliding with the cars and at the same time avoiding them narrowly.
Having said that, certainly the ability to stop an action repetition (or a macro-action) in general
would be very important, especially in stochastic environments. In our setup, we do not consider the
ability to stop executing a macro-action that the agent has committed to. However, this is a necessary
skill in the event of unexpected changes in the environment while executing a chosen macro-action.
Thus, stop and start actions for stopping and committing to macro-actions can be added to the basic
dynamic time scale setup for more robust policies. We believe the modiﬁcation could work for more
general stochastic worlds like Minecraft and leave it for future work.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
