1
6G: The Next Frontier
Emilio Calvanese Strinati, Member, IEEE, Sergio Barbarossa, Fellow, IEEE,
Jos´e Luis Gonzalez-Jimenez, Member, IEEE, Dimitri Kt´enas, Member, IEEE,
Nicolas Cassiau, Member, IEEE, Luc Maret, Member, IEEE,
C´edric Dehos, Member, IEEE
Abstract
5G networks represent a breakthrough in the design of communication networks, for their ability
to provide a single platform enabling a variety of different services, from enhanced mobile broadband
communications to virtual reality, automated driving, Internet-of-Things, etc. Nevertheless, looking at
the increasing requests for new services and predicting the development of new technologies within a
decade from now, it is already possible to envision the need to move beyond 5G and design a new
architecture incorporating new technologies to satisfy new needs at both individual and societal level. The
goal of this paper is to motivate the need to move to a sixth generation (6G) of mobile communication
networks, starting from a gap analysis of 5G, and predicting a new synthesis of near-future services,
like holographic communications, high precision manufacturing, a pervasive introduction of artiﬁcial
intelligence and the incorporation of new technologies, like sub-THz or Visible Light Communications
(VLC), in a truly 3-dimensional (3D) coverage framework, incorporating terrestrial and aerial radio
access points to bring cloud functionalities where and when needed on demand.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 1926, the visionary Nikola Tesla stated: “When wireless is perfectly applied, the whole
Earth will be converted into a huge brain ...”. In 2030, pushed by fundamental needs at the
individual as well as societal level, and based on the expected advancements of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT), Tesla’s prophecy may come to reality and 6G will play a
signiﬁcant role in this advancement by providing an ICT infrastructure that will enable the end
Emilio Calvanese Strinati, Jos´e Luis Gonzalez-Jimenez, Dimitri Kt´enas, Nicolas Cassiau, Luc Maret and C´edric Dehos are
with CEA-LETI; Sergio Barbarossa is with the Department of Information Engineering, Electronics, and Telecommunications,

arXiv:1901.03239v2  [cs.NI]  16 May 2019

2
users to perceive themselves as surrounded by a “huge artiﬁcial brain” providing virtual zero
latency services, unlimited storage, and immense cognition capabilities.
5G networks already represent a signiﬁcant leap forward in the realization of this grand vision.
With respect to previous generations, rather than just improving the communications capabilities,
5G provides a communication infrastructure enabling a variety of services, or verticals, from En-
hanced Mobile Broadband communication to Industry 4.0, automated driving, massive machine
type communications, etc. In 2018, intensive successful testing, proof-of-concepts and trials [1]
have supported the launch in 2019 of the ﬁfth generation (5G) services, which will fundamentally
transform current industries, create new industries, and impact societies and revolutionize the
way people connect with everything and everything connects to people and things. The services
enabled by 5G networks are characterized by very diverse sets of key performance indicators
(KPI’s), so that the design of a single platform enabling all of them in an efﬁcient manner is a very
challenging task. The approach taken by 5G to address this challenge builds on the exploitation
of softwarization and virtualization of network functionalities. In parallel, the accommodation
of stringent requirements in terms of data rate and latency, has required the introduction of
millimeter-wave (mmW) communications, the exploitation of massive multiple-input/multiple-
output (MIMO) links, and the (ultra) dense deployment of radio access points.
With its distinguishing connotation of being an enabler of very different services, 5G represents
a major breakthrough with respect to previous generations. Given this context, the fundamental
question we wish to address is: Given the enormous potentials of 5G networks and their
foreseeable evolution, is there a real motivation for thinking of 6G networks ? If yes, what
should there be in 6G that is not in 5G or in its long term evolution? The “6G or not 6G”
debate has indeed already started. Academic, industrial and research communities are working
on the deﬁnition and identiﬁcation of relevant key enabling technologies that might deﬁne the
so called ’beyond 5G’ (B5G) or sixth generation (6G) [2], [3], [4].
In our vision a tentative 6G roadmap is reported in Fig. 1. In this paper, we point out what
we think will be the key distinguishing factors of 6G, starting, in Section II, with new services
that motivate a shift towards 6G networks, and then identifying the major enablers of these new
services. Section III focuses on a comprehensive vision of 6G, where a pervasive introduction
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and a holistic management of C4 resources are shown to represent
a paradigm shift with respect to 5G. Section IV is then devoted to sub-THz and visible light
communications. Finally, Section V draws some conclusions and highlights further developments.

3
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 
2028 2029 2030 2031 
SIG 
Collaborative 
Research 
Rel-17    
•  WI low spectrum  
     enhancement 
•  WI for high spectrum  
5G Evolution (Beyond 5G) 
Rel-16  
Vision/KPI/Scope/Timeline 
Study 
Specifications 
5G Evaluation 
Vision 
Requirements 
Evaluation 
Product 
PoC 
Beyond 5G: 
ICT 20, etc.. 
6G testbeds 
HW, SW functions demos 
FP 9: Horizon Europe 
6G Key technology 
components 
Full 6G PoC, 
6G services 
Fig. 1: Proposed 6G Roadmap.
II. A NEW COMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENABLE NEW SERVICES
Typically, a new generation arises at the conﬂuence of two major paths: a technological path
that brings to maturity new groundbreaking technologies and a societal path that motivates the
introduction of new services that cannot be efﬁciently offered by the current technologies. We
start presenting new services and then we highlight some of their major enablers.
A. New Services
We envision the following new services that cannot be efﬁciently provided by the current
development of 5G networks:
Holographic communications: In ten years from now, the current ways of remote interaction
between human beings will become obsolete, as new forms of interaction will arise leading to a
true immersion into a distant environment. Five dimensions (5D) communications and services,
integrating all human sense information (sight, hearing, touch, smell and taste) are expected to
arise, together with holographic communications, thus providing a truly immersive experience
[3]. Holographic communications, employing multiple view cameras, will demand data rates in
the order of Tbps [4], which are not supported by 5G.

4
High-precision manufacturing: The key objective in Industry 4.0 is to reduce the need for hu-
man intervention in industrial processes by using automatic control systems and communication
technologies. In numerical terms, when applied to high-precision manufacturing, this translates
to very high reliability - up to the order of 10−9 - and extremely low latency, in the order of
0.1 to 1 millisecond (ms) round trip time [5]. Furthermore, industrial control networks require
real-time data transfer and strong determinism, which translates into a very low delay jitter, in
the order of 1 µsec [5].
Sustainable development and smart environments: ICT technologies, incorporating wireless
communications, cloud computing, and the Internet of Things (IoT), are expected to play a
key role to drive global sustainability and improve quality of life. ICT can strongly con-
tribute to improve health care, enable the development of smart cities, including the design
of intelligent transportation and energy distribution systems. Achieving some of these goals
requires a pervasive sensing and a distributed decision and actuation system. 6G will provide
a signiﬁcant contribution by relying on 3D communication platforms that can bring distributed
edge cloud functionalities, e.g. distributed decision mechanisms, on demand, when and where
needed. In some cases, like autonomous driving, reliable safety mechanisms are essential to
prevent accidents. This will require very demanding levels of communication reliability (i.e.,
above 99.9999) and low end-to-end latency (below 1 ms). Moreover, inter-communication among
cars will be a key action to reduce risks of accidents. This will require high data rates links
between vehicles and between vehicles and road side units.
A sustainable development of course pays close attention to energy consumption. Hence, 6G
will have to develop truly effective energy-efﬁcient communication strategies. The vision is to
achieve, wherever possible, battery-free communications, targeting communication efﬁciency in
the order of 1 pJ/bit [6].
The KPI’s associated to the previous services are summarized in Table I, to highlight the
necessary improvement with respect to 5G KPI’s. Some like delay jitter and energy/bit do not
really represent a focus of 5G and then they are not-speciﬁed (NS) in 5G, whereas they represent
KPI’s in 6G.
B. Enablers
Fulﬁlling the challenging requirements of the new services, 6G will build on a set of techno-
logical enablers. We envision the following major thrusts:

5
KPI
5G
6G
Trafﬁc Capacity
10 Mbps/m2
∼1-10 Gbps/m3
Data rate DL
20 Gbps
1 Tbps
Data rate UL
10 Gbps
1 Tbps
Uniform user experience
50 Mbps 2D everywhere
10 Gbps 3D everywhere
Latency (radio interface)
1 msec
0.1 msec
Jitter
NS
1 µsec
Reliability (frame error rate)
10−5
10−9
Energy/bit
NS
1 pJ/bit
Localization precision
10 cm on 2D
1 cm on 3D
TABLE I: Comparison of 5G and 6G KPI’s; NS= Not Speciﬁed.
A new architecture: The need to support nearly deterministic services, as in high-precision
manufacturing, guaranteeing very tight physical constraints, like latency or energy consumption,
requires a new Internet architecture that combines different resources, such as communication
and computation resources, within a single framework. The architecture will include: a new
data plane, able to adapt, dynamically, to different operating modes and to enable holographic
communications; a new control plane, enabling for example the synchronization of concurrent
streams for holographic communications, and preferred path routing protocols to establish nearly
deterministic (i.e., with very low jitter) links, to enable high precision manufacturing; a new
management plane, incorporating self-conﬁguration and self-optimization capabilities, leveraging
on the strong support of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI).
A pervasive introduction of artiﬁcial intelligence at the edge of the network: Distributed
AI algorithms, possibly running under sever delay constraints, are expected to play a key role
in various aspects: self-optimization of network resource allocation, possibly adopting proactive
strategies based on network learning and prediction; development of smart mobile applications,
running either directly on the mobile devices or remotely through computation ofﬂoading mech-
anisms, that learn from user behavior and act as a context-aware virtual intelligent assistant;
development of semantic inference algorithms and semantic communication strategies to incor-
porate knowledge representation in communication strategies. This will be particularly useful for
an effective deployment of holographic communications. The role of AI in 6G will be further
expanded in Section III;

6
3D coverage:
The design of a 3D communication infrastructure incorporating terrestrial and
aerial radio access points and mobile edge hosts makes possible to bring cloud functionalities
on demand, where and when needed. As opposed to the common approach relying on a ﬁxed
infrastructure, this strategy is much more economically efﬁcient when the requests are highly
varying across space and time, as it happens in case of sporadic events gathering lots of people
or in remote areas, in case of disasters. The idea is to manage a plethora of aerial platforms,
including Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), High Altitude Platform Station (HAPS) ﬂying at
around 20 Km of altitude, and constellations of very low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites, ﬂying
at altitudes in order of a few hundred Kilometers, in order to bring cloud functionalities under
controllable delay constraints.
New physical layer incorporating sub-THz and VLC: The need to support very high data
rates, up to Tbps, to enable for example holographic communications, requires the exploitation
of sub-THz bands and visible light communications. This aspect will be further explored in
Section IV. Energy-efﬁcient communication strategies are also expected to become more and more
important, especially in view of a pervasive deployment of the Internet-of-Things, with myriads
of tiny sensors. Energy harvesting mechanisms and advanced wireless charging technologies
and their fundamental limits are presented in [13], with a focus on promising distributed laser
charging techniques showing that wireless charging might approximately deliver 2W of power
up to a distance of about 10 meters. An even more drastic approach will rely on the exploitation
of ambient backscattering, which enables tiny devices to operate with no battery, by redirecting
ambient radio frequency (RF) signals (for example using on/off encoding) without requiring
active RF transmission [14].
Distributed security mechanisms:
The vision delineated so far foresees a huge exchange
of data to enable a pervasive use of AI techniques. Clearly, this poses some major challenges
in terms of security, privacy, and trust, which need to be properly addressed by 6G networks.
Innovative cryptographic techniques should be used to get an effective merge of AI and privacy.
For example, a mobile user wishing to run a remote machine learning algorithm on its own data,
could use homomorphic encryption [15]. In this way, rather than sending the raw data, it could
send encrypted data, let the remote machine learning algorithm run on the encrypted data, and
still be able to recover the desired output. Existing schemes are not practical yet due to high
computation complexity, but we might expect that, in a decade or so from now, the complexity
issue could be alleviated. Decentralized authentication is another key issue, especially for the IoT

7
scenario. Distributed Ledger Technologies, exploiting blockchain-like mechanisms, are expected
to play a key role for distributed authentication [11].
III. PERVASIVE AI AND HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT OF C4 RESOURCES
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and more speciﬁcally machine learning (ML), is already permeating
many applications running on today smartphones. It is not difﬁcult to predict an ever increasing
usage of learning mechanisms at both network and mobile terminal level. ML cam enable
proactive network resource allocation and thus improve performance, especially in delay-sensitive
applications. The exploitation of machine learning algorithms at the edge of the network has
been recently suggested in [7]. We believe AI will play a key role in 6G in at least the following
aspects.
Semantic communications: Shannon’s classical information theory (CIT) represents the basic
foundations of all modern communications. Yet, Shannon deliberately considered semantic as-
pects as irrelevant. However, now that communications have reached all the limits predicted
by Shannon’s theory, a true leap forward can come from incorporating semantic aspects in
communications [8]. Let us consider as a motivating example a holographic communication,
where a speaker gives a speech in a remote place by sending a set of multi-camera video data
enabling the reconstruction of her hologram. This requires the transmission of a huge amount of
video data. Suppose now that part of this data gets lost, maybe because of blockage events due
to the sudden appearance of an obstacle in the millimeter wave, or even worse sub-THz, link.
Conventional systems will need to retransmit the lost packets. Conversely, assume that transmitter
and receiver share some common knowledge about the speaker. This shared knowledge enables
the receiver to reconstruct the hologram, even in the presence of several missing packets. In
other words, content information (semantic) can be recovered through semantic inference, if
transmitter and receiver share some common knowledge. Similar examples can be made about
voice. Recovering the word “cat”, when the word “car” was transmitted, looks like a small
mistake at syntactic level, but it represents a big mistake at semantic level. Conversely, recovering
“automobile” instead of “car” is a big mistake at syntactic level, but it is not really a big mistake
at semantic level. In summary, semantic communication can greatly improve communication
efﬁciency by assigning different priorities to different data, based on meaning, and exploiting
any form of shared knowledge to enable semantic inference.
Machine learning and deep neural networks: ML will play a key role at the network

8
level by enabling self-organization strategies, including self-learning, self-conﬁguration, self-
healing. At the terminal level, ML will lead to the deployment of mobile applications that
provide a virtual intelligent assistance and learn from the user’s behavior. Furthermore, deep
neural networks (DNN), with their ability of being a universal function approximator, will
make possible to parameterize many network functions with a limited set of parameters (the
DNN’s coefﬁcients, at different layers, after proper training). This universal function encoder
will facilitate the deployment of network functionalities throughout the network by using a
general purpose architecture, whose parameters can be periodically updated by running training
algorithms ofﬂine.
Holistic management of C4 resources: A key feature of 6G networks is that its architecture
should be designed to handle communication, computation, caching and control (C4) resources as
parts of a single system, whose efﬁcient management requires a joint optimization. A motivating
AP 
actuator 
AP 
MEC host 
mobile  
inspector 
gateway 
gateway 
MEC host 
mobile  
inspector 
MEC host 
Fig. 2: C4 scenario incorporating 3D coverage.

9
example is represented, for instance, by the autonomous control of an industrial process in
an automated factory sketched in ﬁgure 2. In this scenario, mobile robots take videos of the
industrial process and send the data to the edge cloud, where learning algorithms run to detect
anomalies and take decisions that are sent back to an actuator aimed to implement the proper
countermeasures. The edge cloud may be present in a ﬁxed infrastructure, or it may be made
available through aerial platforms. A key performance indicator in this scenario is the end-to-end
(E2E) delay, which includes: communication time, i.e the overall time spent to share data among
the various actors (robot, cloud, data-base, actuator, etc.); computation time (the time necessary
to run the decision algorithm). To approach a nearly deterministic control, it is necessary to bring
resources, i.e. access points, cloud resources and contents, as close as possible to the end user.
This strategy is promoted by the deployment of mobile edge computing (MEC), which is already
an important component of 5G. However, in 5G communication and computation resources are
handled separately. Conversely, we believe that the inevitable limitation of resources that can
be available at the edge of the network calls for a holistic management of all C4 resources. In
this new scenario, the assignment of users to access points, dynamic caching and migration of
virtual machines will all need to be orchestrated jointly to guarantee the E2E requirements and
an efﬁcient use of resources. The need for a joint C3 (computation, communication and caching)
optimization was advocated in [10], where control was still referring to computation ofﬂoading.
However the true challenge will be how to enable an intelligent control with stringent E2E delay
guarantees, as required in, e.g., autonomous driving, autonomous factory, etc.
IV. COMMUNICATING THROUGH SUB-TERAHERTZ AND VISIBLE LIGHT LINKS
The never ending quest for higher data rates, more spectrum and higher network densiﬁcation
sets the target for the future decade of wireless services to provide at least the challenging Tbps
aggregated bit rate in small regions. This would represent about two orders of magnitude bit rate
increase with respect to 5G [2]. To tackle this challenging task, 6G will have to exploit different
enabling technologies. The possible strategies to increase the volume data rate (bits/sec/m3) are:
increase bandwidth, by using sub-THz and visible light spectrum; increase spectral efﬁciency,
using advanced MIMO technologies; combine multi-RAT and 3D multi-link connectivity at a
scale going well beyond 5G; perform a (ultra) dense deployment of radio access points in a 3D
domain, exploiting aerial platforms.

10
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) and other agencies are currently
considering the bands beyond 90 GHz to provide high-data rate wireless services for short (5 to
20 meters) and medium distance (50 to 200 meters) ﬁxed links. However, beyond 5G and 6G
current research is already focusing on how to efﬁciently exploit the sub-THz (90- 450 GHz)
and visible light bands as solutions to provide optical-ﬁber like performance from 100 Gbps up
to a few Tbps.
A. The sub-TeraHertz Opportunity for 6G
Sub-THz communications are envisioned for beyond 5G communications at both device access
and network backhauling and frounthauling. For example, we expect that, for device access
communications with (ultra) dense deployments of access points within 10 meters of line of sight
communication range, one Tbps is achievable in principle by a single link with 250 GHz of carrier
frequency (assuming 20% fractional bandwidth (Bw), 40 dBi antenna gain at both transmitter and
receiver and, and a noise ﬁgure of 20 dB) but it requires very high spectral efﬁcient modulation
(and coding) schemes. While in future, the evolution of transceiver and antennas technologies will
provide solutions for achieving such challenging performance, the associated energy consumption
still remains a severe limitation for the applicability of such technologies for battery-powered
terminals. In a ﬁrst generation of sub-THz communications, most likely, simple modulations
schemes with low spectral efﬁciency will be used to communicate at very short distances by
using large amounts of BW with very simple transceiver architectures, therefore avoiding power-
hungry complex digital signal processing and coding. Then, a technological breakthrough will
be needed otherwise the peak data rate will be limited by the available supply power.
The ﬁrst exploitation of sub-THz communications for fronthauling and backhauling links will
require, even with ultra densiﬁcation of 5G and 6G networks, to cover at least between tens
to hundreds of meters. Nevertheless, for these challenging distances, at such high frequencies,
the single link peak capacity falls well below 1 Tbps. After all, the Graal of the Tbps can be
reached also at such communication ranges allowing more complex and less power constrained
communications, engineering antenna array with higher gains and investing in more hardware
complexity for combining multiple parallel links (of the order of 100s of Gbps) using diversity
(polarization, frequency, spatial, ...). Achieving several hundred Gbps over a single wireless
links is a today research and prototype reality. Figure 3 shows recent realizations of multi-Gbps
wireless transceivers implemented using different integrated circuit (IC) technologies. The points

11
on the ﬁgure include labels displaying the data-rate, the technology, the modulation scheme and
the antenna gain (if available). The trade-off between carrier frequency and range is clearly shown
in the ﬁgure. The larger carrier frequency solutions use a large amount of RF bandwidth in a
single RF channel and simple modulations schemes such as Amplitude-Shift Keying (ASK)/
Binary Phase SK (BPSK) which allows for digital-less demodulation. Such transceivers have
been demonstrated for carrier frequencies up to 300 GHz and achieve communication in the
range of 1 m up to 1 km using high gain antennas, as shown on Figure 3 [12]. On the other
Fig. 3: Sub-THz Hardware IC Tecnologies.
hand, CMOS based transceivers are limited to lower frequencies and bandwidths. They use
higher order modulations such as Quadrature PSK (QPSK), 16QAM or even 64QAM. This
second type of transceivers have demonstrated high data-rates at lower carrier frequencies,
comparable to those of much larger bandwidth III-V transceivers, as shown on ﬁgure 3. Recent
photonic-based modulation transceivers have also been included in the ﬁgure, and correspond
to the highest carrier frequencies, but their degree of integration if currently very low. Today’s

12
advanced digital baseband systems data-rate processing capabilities are somehow limited to a
few tens of Gbps, and are also power consumption bonded. There is indeed a trade-off to
explore between complexity/power consumption of transceiver and antennas and the exploitation
of diversity techniques (i.e. number of single links) to reach the (aggregated) Tbps target. For
instance, a reasonable trade-off needs to be done between single link BW and the overall number
of channels required to cover the full RF band to provide the desired throughput. With the
advances of materials and technology such trade-off might be relaxed opening cost effective
Tbps communications in 6G networks.
B. The Visible Light Communications Opportunity for 6G
In order to provide optical-ﬁber like performance, one possible complementary technology
for future 6G networks is to exploit the visible spectrum with visible light communication
(VLC) techniques for short range (up to few meters) links, which compared to classically
adopted RF bands offers ultra-high bandwidth (THz), zero electromagnetic interference, free
unlicensed abundant spectrum, very high frequency reuse [9]. Today, currently available VLC
indoor technology is clamped from several tenths of Mb/s to 100 Mb/s in the range of about 5
meters. Such limitation - due to commercial over the shelf (COTS) light ﬁxtures and absence
of beamforming - is forecast to disappear with the introduction of upcoming new light sources
based on microLED. Such innovative components will soon offer 1+GHz bandwidth and near
10Gb/s have been achieved in lab on a single diode LED. In our vision, VLC has a huge potential
of improvement in the next decade, catching up the current performance gap between VLC and
5G technologies that already proved the Gbps experience [1] and reaching the Tbps with VLC
technologies when 6G services will be launched. In our vison, VLC will be able to provide
short range indoor connectivity reaching the Tbps with full operational available demonstrators
maturity by 2027 (see ﬁgure 4). The ﬁrst milestone will be in 2019, by the launch of 5G services,
when full 1 Gbps indoors short range capability will be demonstrated with thousands of LED
active sources for lighting functionality. Then, a new challenge will appear at short term in order
to pilot such huge matrices and preserve the high bandwidth. To this end, it will be required the
hybridization of microLED matrices and CMOS driver arrays into a single chip. Then, in order to
reach by 2024 the today claimed highest 5G link capacity (20 Gbps), it will be required a more
complex device with the parallelization of several aforementioned chips and the introduction of
a dedicated imaging optical system leading to a spatial separation of users, also known as optical

13
beamforming, with a signiﬁcant increase of cellular throughput. Eventually, by 2026 when both
microLED technologies and spatial multiplexing techniques will be mature and cost effective,
white light based on different wavelengths will unlock throughput thanks to wavelength division
multiplexing leading to potentially 100+ Gb/s for ultra-high data rate VLC access points. In
2027, adding on top of the above mentioned technologies massive parallelization of microLED
arrays, the target Tbps aggregated throughput will be available.
2020
•
Multiusers
2024
2026
2022
•
µLed 60µm 210 pixels
•
Digital OFDM
•
ASIC design
•
5 bps/Hz
100 Mbps
1 Gbps
20 Gbps
100 Gbps
Spatial Mux
Wavelength Mux
Digital to Light
•
µLed 30µm 16×210 pixels
•
16× Spatial Division
•
ASIC fab
•
10 bps/Hz
•
µLed 30µm 4×16×210 pix
•
RGB multiplexing
•
ASIC demo
•
15 bps/Hz+
Massive
parallelization
•
µLed 30µm 210 pix
1 Tbps
•
Sensor array 210 pix
•
One to one projection
0101010
2027
Fig. 4: Visible Light Communication Roadmap from Mbps to Tbps.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we highlighted some of the new services and their technological enablers
that should represent the core of next generation (6G) networks. At the physical layer, we
believe that the level of maturity reachable in a decade from now by sub-THz and visible
light communication can make these technologies a powerful enabler. A more massive use of
multi-RAT and multi-link techniques will be needed, to tackle the challenges arising in the
propagation in these higher frequency bands and providing high reliability links. At a higher
level, we think that new architectures will need to be designed to really bring delay-sensitive
AI applications to the end user, pushing for a major integration and distributed optimization of

14
communication, computation, caching and control resources. We mentioned possible ways to
go beyond Shannon’s classical information theory by incorporating semantic aspects. Finally,
looking at another law that has been able to predict the miniaturization capabilities of integrated
circuits (IC) for a long time, i.e. Moore’s law, we predict that at some point, Moore’s law will
inevitably break, but this will not end the increase of computational capabilities of electronic
devices, as most sophisticated device interactions between IC’s, at different scales, will more
than complement the limitations of the single IC.
