1 
 
 
A Review of Methodologies for Natural-
Language-Facilitated Human-Robot Cooperation 
Rui Liu, Xiaoli Zhang* 
Abstract- Natural-language-facilitated human-robot 
cooperation (NLC) refers to using natural language 
(NL) to facilitate interactive information sharing and 
task executions with a common goal constraint 
between robots and humans. Recently, NLC research 
has received increasing attention. Typical NLC 
scenarios include robotic daily assistance, robotic 
health 
caregiving, 
intelligent 
manufacturing, 
autonomous navigation, and robot social accompany. 
However, a thorough review, that can reveal latest 
methodologies to use NL to facilitate human-robot 
cooperation, 
is 
missing. 
In 
this 
review, 
a 
comprehensive summary about methodologies for 
NLC is presented. NLC research includes three main 
research focuses: NL instruction understanding, NL-
based execution plan generation, and knowledge-
world mapping. In-depth analyses on theoretical 
methods, applications, and model advantages and 
disadvantages are made. Based on our paper review 
and perspective, potential research directions of NLC 
are summarized. 
Index 
Terms- 
natural 
language, 
human-robot 
cooperation, NL instruction understanding, NL-
based execution plan generation, knowledge-world 
mapping 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
Attracted by the naturalness of natural language 
(NL) communications among humans, intelligent robots 
start to understand NL to develop intuitive human-robot 
cooperation in various task execution applications [1][2]. 
Natural-language-facilitated human-robot cooperation 
(NLC) has received increasing attention in human-
involved intelligent robotics research over the recent 
decade. By using NL, human intelligence at high-level 
task planning and robot physical capability—such as 
force [3], precision [4], and speed [2]—at low-level task 
executions are combined to perform intuitive cooperation 
[5][6]. 
Due to the advantages of naturalness, information 
richness and standardized linguistic structures, NLC has 
been widely explored in areas, including daily assistance 
[5], medical caregiving [6][7], manufacturing [8], indoor 
or outdoor navigation [9], and social accompany [10]. 
Typical areas using NLC systems are shown in Fig. 1. 
 
Fig. 1. Promising areas using natural-language-based human-robot 
cooperation. (a) is daily robotic assistance using NL [11]. A robot 
categorized daily objects with human NL instructions. (b) is 
autonomous manufacturing using NL [12]. An industrial robot 
welded parts with human’s oral requests. (c) is robotic navigation 
using NL [13]. A quadcopter navigated in indoor environments with 
human’s oral guidance. (d) is social accompany [14]. A pet dog is 
playing balls with a human with socialized verbal communications. 
 
B. Motivation and systematic overview 
Advancements of NLP support an accurate 
understanding of the task in NLC. Advancement of a 
robot’s 
physical 
capability 
support 
increasingly 
improved task execution in NLC. With supporting 
technique from both NLP and robot execution, NLC has 
been developed from low-cognition-level symbol 
matching control, such as using “yes/no” to control 
robotic arms, to high-cognition-level task understanding, 
such as identifying a plan from the description “go 
straight and turn left at the second cross.” 
NLC research is regularly published in international 
journals, such as IJRR [15], TRO [16], AI [17] and KBS 
[18], and international conferences such as ICRA [19], 
IROS [20] and AAAI [21]. By using keywords ‘NLP, 
human, robot, cooperation, speech, dialog, natural 
language’, about 1200 papers were retrieved from 
Google Scholar [22], then with a focus of NL-facilitated 
human-robot cooperation, about 420 papers were finally 
kept. The publication trend is shown in Fig. 2, where the 
increasing significance of NLC is reflected by steadily 
increasing publication numbers. 
Compared with existing review papers about human-
robot cooperation using communication manners such as 
gesture and pose [23][24], action and motion [25], and 
tactile [26], a review paper about NLC, which is human-
robot cooperation using NL communication manner, is 
lacking. Given the huge potentials and increasingly 
received attention, it is necessary to make a summary of 
state-of-the-art NLC methodologies in wide-range 
_______________________________________ 
      Rui Liu and Xiaoli Zhang are with the Intelligent Robotics and 
Systems Lab (IRSL), Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401 
USA. 

*Corresponding author. 
cs.RO arXiv:1701.08756 

2 
 
 
domains, revealing current research progress and 
signposting future NLC research. The organization of 
this paper is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Fig. 2. The annual amount of NLC-related publications since the 
year 2000 according to our paper review. In the past 15 years, the 
number of NLC publications are steadily increasing and reaching a 
history-high level in current time, revealing that NLC research is 
encouraged by other researches such as robotics and NLP.  
 
Fig.3. Organization of this review paper. This review systematically 
summarized methodologies for using NL to facilitate human-robot 
cooperation. Three main researches are introduced as NL 
instruction understanding, NL-based execution plan generation, and 
knowledge-world mapping. In each research, typical models, 
application scenarios, model comparison and open problems are 
summarized. 
 
II. FRAMEWORK OF NLC REALIZATION 
Realization of NLC is challenging due to the 
following aspects. First, human NL is abstract and 
ambiguous. It is hard to understand humans accurately 
during 
task 
assignments, 
impeding 
natural 
communications between a robot and a human. Second, 
NL-instructed plans are implicit. It is difficult to reason 
appropriate execution plans from human NL instructions 
for effective human-robot cooperation. Third, NL-
instructed knowledge is information-incomplete and 
real-world inconsistent. It is difficult to map sufficient 
theoretical knowledge into the real-world for supporting 
successful NLC. To solve these problems for effective 
and natural NLC, mainly three types of researches have 
been done. First, to accurate understand assignments 
during NLC, NL instruction understanding research has 
been done to build semantic models for extracting 
cooperation-related 
knowledge 
from 
human 
NL 
instructions. Second, to reason a robot’s execution plans 
from human NL instructions, NL-based execution plan 
generation research has been done to create various 
reasoning mechanisms for identifying human requests 
and formulize robot execution strategies. Third, to map 
NL-instructed theoretical knowledge to real-world 
situations for practical cooperation, knowledge-world 
mapping research has been done to recommend the 
missing 
knowledge 
and 
correct 
the 
real-world 
inconsistent knowledge for realizing NLC in various 
real-world environment. 
III. NL INSTRUCTION UNDERSTANDING 
NL instruction understanding enables a robot to 
receive human-assigned tasks, identify human-preferred 
execution procedures, and understand the surrounding 
environment from abstract and ambiguous human NL 
instructions during NLC. By improving the robot’s 
understanding towards the human, the accuracy and 
naturalness during NLC are improved. To intuitively 
understand human NL expressions with an environment 
awareness, two types of semantic analysis models were 
developed: literal models and interpreted models. For 
both literal models and interpreted models, cooperation 
related information is explicitly or implicitly extracted 
indicated by humans. The difference between them, 
however, is the information source. The literal models 
only extract information from human NL instructions; 
while the interpreted models will also extract information 
from human’s surrounding environment. With literal 
models, the robot understands tasks merely by following 
human NL instructions; while with interpreted models, 
robots understand tasks by critically thinking about 
cooperation-related practical environment conditions, 
becoming situation aware. 
A. Models 
From the model construction perspective, to analyze 
meanings of human NL instructions in NLC, literal 
models mainly use literal linguistic features, such as 
words, Part-of-Speech (PoS) tags, word dependencies, 
word references and sentence syntax structures, shown in 
Fig. 4; interpreted models mainly use interpreted 
linguistic features, such as temporal and spatial relations, 
object categories, object physical properties, object 
functional roles, action usages, and task execution 
methods, shown in Fig. 5. Literal linguistic features were 
directly extracted from human NL instructions, while 
interpreted linguistic features were indirectly inferred 
from commonsense based on NL expressions. 
(i). Literal models 
With regards to involvement manners of literal 
linguistic features, literal models are categorized into the 

3 
 
 
following types. (1) Grammar model. Literal linguistic 
feature patterns such as “action+destination” are 
manually defined. (2) Association model. Literal 
linguistic features are mutually associated with 
commonsense knowledge. 
 
 
Fig.4. Typical literal models for NL instruction understanding. (a) 
[27], and (b) [29] are grammar models. In (a), the robotic arm’s 
motion was controlled by predefined vowels in human speech. In 
(b), object manipulation methods are defined as linguistic structures 
such as “find(cup), grasp(milkbox), …”. (c) [34] and (d) [33] are 
association models. NL expression such as “OpenLeft” was 
interpreted as specific parameter “open left hand for 1 DOF” for 
robotic arms. 
 
To 
initially 
identify 
key 
cooperation-related 
information, such as goal, tool usage, and action 
sequences, from human NL instructions, grammar 
patterns are defined to build grammar models. Grammar 
patterns refer to keyword combinations, PoS tag 
combinations and keyword-PoS tag combinations 
[30][31]. By using these grammar models, robot 
behaviors will be triggered by the grammars mentioned 
in human NL instructions. Some grammar patterns 
explored execution logics. For example, verbs and nouns 
were combined to describe a type of actions such as 
V(go) + NN(Hallway) and V(grasp) + NN(cup) 
[32][35][36]. Some grammar patterns explored temporal 
relations, such as the if-then relation “if door open, then 
turn right” and the step1-step2 relation “go -- grasp” 
[37][38]. Some grammar patterns explored spatial 
relations, such as the IN relation “cup IN room” and the 
CloseTo relation “cup CloseTo plate” [9][39]. The 
rationale of the grammar model is that sentences with a 
similar meaning have similar syntax structures. 
Similarity of NL meanings was calculated by evaluating 
the syntax structure similarity. 
To understand abstract and implicit NL execution 
commands during cooperation, association models were 
developed by associating different literal linguistic 
features together to extract new semantic meanings. 
Essentially, the association model exploited existed 
knowledge by creating high-level abstract knowledge 
from low-level detailed knowledge. One typical 
association model is a probabilistic association model. 
Informative literal linguistic features in NL instructions 
were correlated with other informative keywords by 
using probability likelihoods computed from human 
communications. Typical works are as follows. (1). 
Learning from previous human execution experiences. 
Cooperation-needed actions are inferred based on 
mentioned tasks, locations, and their probabilistic 
associations [40]. (2) Learning from daily commonsense. 
Quantitative dynamic spatial relations such as “away 
from, between, …” have been associated with its 
corresponding 
NL 
expressions 
based 
on 
their 
probabilistic relations [41]; general terms such as 
‘beverage’ are specified to ‘juice’ according to 
cooperation types and task-object probabilistic relations 
[42]. With this probabilistic association model, the 
uncertainty 
in 
NL 
expressions 
was 
modeled, 
disambiguating NL instructions and improving a robot’s 
adaptation towards different human users with various 
NL expressions. Another typical association model is an 
empirical association model. High-level abstract literal 
linguistic features, such as ambiguous words and 
uncertain NL phrases, are empirically specified by low-
level detailed literal features such as action usage, sensor 
values, and tool usages. The rationale is that general 
knowledge could be recommended for disambiguating 
ambiguous NL instructions in specific situations. 
Compared with probabilistic association models, which 
use 
objective 
probabilistic 
calculation, 
empirical 
association models use subjective empirical association. 
Typical usages include the following types. (1). By 
defining sensor value ranges as ambiguous NL 
descriptions, such as “slowly, frequently, heavy”, 
ambiguous execution-related NL expressions were 
quantitatively interpreted, making ambiguous NL 
expressions 
sensor-perceivable 
[38][43]. 
(2). 
By 
integrating key aspects, such as execution preconditions, 
action sequences, human preferences, tool usages, and 
location information, into abstract NL expressions—such 
as ‘drill a hole’—human instructed high-level plans were 
specified into detailed robot-executable plans—such as 
‘clean 
the 
surface,’ 
or 
‘install 
a 
screw’ 
[4][9][31][36][44]. (3). By using discrete fuzzy 
statuses—such as ‘close, far, cold, warm’—to divide 
continuous sensor data ranges, unlimited objective sensor 
values were ‘translated’ into limited subjective human 
feelings, such as “close to the robot, day is hot”, 

4 
 
 
supporting 
a 
human-centered 
task 
understanding 
[33][45]. (4). By combining human factors, such as 
‘human’s visual scope’, with linguistic features, such as 
a keyword “wrench” in human NL instructions, empirical 
association 
model 
became 
environmental-context-
sensitive, making a robot to understand a human NL 
instructions such as “ deliver him a wrench” from the 
human perspective “human desired wrench is actually the 
human-visible wrench” [29][46][47]. The advantage of 
using association models in NLC is that the robot 
cognition level is improved by means of mutual 
knowledge compensation. With this association model, a 
robot can explore unfamiliar environments by exploiting 
its existing knowledge. 
(ii). Interpreted models 
 
 
Fig.5. An typical interpreted model for NL instruction 
understanding [48]. Robot memory, real-world states and human 
NL instructions were integrated to instruct a robotic with plan 
executions. 
 
Human requests are usually situated, which means 
human NL expressions are with default environmental 
preconditions, such as ‘cup is dirty, a driller is missing, 
robot is far from a human’. Human NL instructions are 
closely correlated with situation-related information, 
such as human tactile indication (tactile modality), 
human hand/body pose (vision modality and motion 
dynamics modality), and environmental conditions 
(environment sensor modality). 
To accurately understand human NL instructions, 
interpreted 
models 
are 
developed 
to 
integrate 
information from multi-modalities, instead of merely 
from NL modality. The rationale of interpreted models is 
that a human is considered to be dependent with their 
surrounding environment and better understanding of 
human needs to be environmentally context aware. With 
multi-modality models, information from different 
modalities related to human, robot, and their surrounding 
environment 
was 
aligned 
to 
establish 
semantic 
corrections [53][54]. Using NL instructions and human-
related features to understand human NL instructions, 
typical features beyond linguistic features considered in 
single-modality models also include follows: (1) 
individual identity detected by RFID sensors [50]; (2). 
touch events detected by tactile sensors [51]; (3). facial 
expressions (joy, sad) [55], and hand poses detected by 
computer vision systems [56]; (4). human head 
orientations detected by motion tracking systems [57]. 
Supported by rich information from multi-modality 
information, typical problems tackled for NLC include 
complex-instruction understanding [52], human-like 
cooperation [57], human social behavior understanding, 
and mimicking [45]. For multi-modality models using 
environment and robot-related features to understand 
human NL instructions in NLC, typical features also 
include the following: (1). spatial object-robot relations 
indicated by human hand directions [52]; (2). temporal 
robot-speech-and-head-orientation 
dependencies 
measured by computer vision systems [57]; (3). object 
visual cues detected by cameras [58][59]; (4). robot 
sensorimotor behaviors monitored by both motion 
systems and computer vision systems [48]. Supported by 
rich information from these features, typical problems 
tackled in NLC include real-time communication, 
context-sensitive cooperation (sensor-speech alignment), 
machine-executable task plan generation, and implicit 
human request interpretation. Typical algorithms used 
for constructing multi-modality models include hidden 
Markov model (HMM) for modeling hidden probabilistic 
relations among interpreted linguistic features [58][60], 
Bayesian Network for modeling probabilistic transitions 
among task-execution steps [61][62], and first-order 
logic for modeling semantic constraints among 
interpreted linguistic features [49][63]. These algorithms 
integrate 
different 
modalities 
with 
appropriate 
contribution distributions and extract contributive feature 
patterns among modalities. Multi-modality models have 
three potential advantages in understanding human NL 
instructions. 
(1) 
By 
exploring 
multi-modality-
information sources, rich information can be extracted 
for an accurate NL instruction understanding. (2) 
Information in one modality can be compensated by 
information learned from other modalities for better NL 
disambiguation. (3) Consistency of multi-modality 
information enables mutual confirmations among 
knowledge from multiple modalities. A reliable NL 
command understanding could be conducted. Supported 
by these advantages, multi-modality models have the 
potential to understand complex plans and various users, 
and to perform practical NL instruction understanding in 
real-world NLC situations. 
B. Model comparison 
Literal models, which use basic linguistic features 

5 
 
 
directly from human NL instructions, are shallow 
literature-level understanding. While interpreted models, 
which use multi-modality features interpreted from 
human NL instructions, is a comprehensive connotation-
level understanding. Each of them has unique 
advantages, therefore suitable for different application 
scenarios. For literal models, they are good at scenarios 
with simple procedures and clear work assignments, such 
as robot arm control and robot pose control. For 
interpreted models, they are good at scenarios with 
involvements of daily commonsense, human cognitive 
logics, rich domain information, such as object physical 
property assisted object searching, intuitive machine-
executable plan generation, as well as vision-verbal-
motion-supported object delivery. From literal models to 
interpreted models, robots have been more closely 
integrated with humans both physically and mentally. 
This integration enables a robot to accurately understand 
both human requests and practical environments, 
improving the effectiveness and naturalness of NLC. 
C. Open problems 
Although robots using grammar models have an 
initial capability of understanding human NL instructions 
during cooperation, the drawback is that feature 
correlations needed for understanding have been 
exhaustively listed. It is difficult to summarize all the 
likely-encountered grammar rules. Compared with 
grammar models, association models give more 
cooperation-related knowledge to a robot by exploiting 
associations among literal features. Even though the 
association model could interpret abstract linguistic 
features into detailed execution plan, it still suffers from 
incorrect association problems. These open problems are 
decreasing NL instruction understanding accuracy and 
further decreasing robot adaptability. 
Although interpreted models are capable of 
comprehensively understanding human NL instructions 
by considering practical environment conditions, it is 
difficult to combine different types of modalities such as 
motion, speech, and visual cues with an appropriate 
manner to reveal practical contribution distributions for 
different modalities. Second, it is difficult to extract 
contributive features for describing both distinctive and 
common aspects of one modality in understanding NL 
instructions. Third, the overfitting problem still exists 
when using multi-modality information to understand NL 
instructions. NL instruction understanding based on 
different modalities could be mutually conflicting, 
thereby preventing the practical implementation of multi-
modality models. Model details are shown in Table I. 
IV. NL-BASED EXECUTION PLAN GENERATION 
With task knowledge extracted in NL instruction 
understanding, it is critical to use the task knowledge to 
plan robot executions in NLC. Models for NL-based 
execution plan generation (‘generation model’ for short) 
are developed for formulizing robot execution plans, 
theoretically supporting robots to cooperate with humans 
in appropriate manners. In these models, previously-
learned piecemeal knowledge are organized with 
different algorithm structures. Different algorithms 
enable the models with different cooperation manners 
under various human-robot cooperation scenarios. For 
example, dynamic models supported by HMM enable 
real-time NL understanding and execution, while static 
models supported by Naïve Bayesian enable spatial 
human-robot relation exploration. During a plan 
generation, correlations among NLC-related knowledge, 
such as execution steps, step transitions, and actions, 
tools, or locations—as well as their temporal, spatial, and 
logic relations are defined. Regarding reasoning 
mechanisms, generation models have three main types: 
probabilistic models, logic models, and cognitive 
models. 
A. Models 
To enable robots with cooperation associative 
capability, in which a likely plan is inferred, and 
TABLE. I. SUMMARY OF NL INSTRUCTION UNDERSTANDING METHODS 
 
Literal models 
Interpreted models 
 
Grammar 
Association 
Knowledge format 
linguistic structures 
meaningful concepts 
semantic correlations 
Algorithms 
first-order logic 
ontology tree 
typical classification algorithms (NB, SVM), 
first-order logic 
User adaptability 
low 
low 
high 
Tackled problems 
initially understand logic 
relations, temporal and spatial 
relations in execution processes 
specify abstract executions into 
machine-executable executions 
 
complex task instruction understanding, 
human-like human-robot cooperation, context-
sensitive cooperation 
Advantages 
performance is good and 
steady in trained situations 
model human cognitive process, 
scaling up robot knowledge 
rich cooperation-related information is 
involved. information is more reliable.  
Disadvantages 
exhaustive listing of NL 
instructions, time-consuming 
and labor-intensive 
lacking standards for concept 
interpretation and interpretation 
evaluation 
difficult to combine different-modality 
features, difficult to extract important NL 
features 
Typical references 
[30][31][37][38][39]  
[40][41][43][44][45] 
[58][60][61][62][63]  

6 
 
 
appropriate tools and actions are recommended, 
probabilistic 
models 
were 
developed 
based 
on 
probabilistic dependencies, shown in Fig. 6. To enable 
robots with logical reasoning capability, in which internal 
logics among execution procedures are followed, logic 
models were developed based on ontology and first-order 
logics, shown in Fig. 7. To enable robots with cognitive 
thinking capability, in which plans are intuitively made 
and adjusted, cognitive models were developed based on 
weighted logics, shown in Fig. 8. 
(i). Probabilistic model 
 
 
Fig. 6. Typical probabilistic models. (a) [64] is a HMM model, in 
which NLC task’s potential execution sequences are modeled by 
hidden Markov statuses. (b) [65] is a naïve Bayesian model, in 
which observations “object size, object shape” and their conditional 
correlations such as “size-big, shape-ball, …” are combined to form 
joint-probability correlations such as “object-size-shape, ….”. 
 
To enable a robot with cooperation planning based 
on various observations, joint-probabilistic BN methods 
are developed. By using a single joint probability p(x, y), 
a robot could use the probabilistic association p between 
a human NL instruction y, such as “move”, and one 
execution parameter x, such as object “ball”, to plan 
simple cooperation such as object placement ‘move ball’ 
[65]. Typical joint-probability associations in NLC 
include activity-object associations, such as “drink-cup” 
[29], activity-environment associations such as “drink - 
hot day” [66], and action-sensor associations [67]. 
During the generation of cooperation strategies, a single 
joint-probabilistic BN association is used as independent 
evidence to describe one semantic aspect of a task. For 
using 
multiple 
joint-probabilistic 
associations 
∏𝑝(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖)
𝑖
, interpreted linguistic features of NLC task 
are collected from various NL descriptions and sensor 
data, describing relatively complex plans. Typical 
methods using multiple joint-probability associations 
include Viterbi algorithm [67], Naïve Bayesian (NB) 
algorithm [66] and Markov Random Field (MRF) [68]. 
With these algorithms, the most complete plan described 
in human NL instructions are selected as a human-desired 
plan. With multi-joint-probabilistic BN models, tackled 
problems are as follows. (1). Modeling plans by 
extracting linguistic features, such as NL instruction 
patterns [68][69]; enriching cooperation details by 
aligning multiple types of sensor data, such as speech 
meaning, task execution statuses, and robot or human 
motion status [36]; making flexible plans by specifying 
verbally-described tasks with appropriate execution 
details, such as execution actions and effects [70][71]; 
intuitively cooperating with a human by integrating 
current NL descriptions with previous execution 
experiences [72]; accurate tool searching by associating 
theoretical knowledge, such as tool identities with 
practical real-world evidences, such as tools’ colors and 
placement locations [73]. One common characteristic of 
probabilistic models, such as naïve Bayesian (NB, is that 
dependencies among task features are simplified to be 
fully or partially independent [66]. In practical situations, 
when a set of observations are made, evidences, such as 
speech, object, context, and action involved in 
cooperation, are usually not mutually-independent [74]. 
As for task plan representation, this simplification brings 
both negative effects, such as undermining the plan 
representation accuracy, and positive effects, such as 
preventing overfitting problems in plan-representation 
process. 
The 
common 
problem 
of 
multi-joint-
probabilistic BN models is that temporal associations are 
ignored, limiting the implementations of real-time NLC. 
To enable a temporal knowledge association for real-
time cooperation planning, Dynamic Bayesian Network 
(DBN) 
was 
developed. 
With 
DBN, 
temporal 
dependencies p(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1) propagated among NLC-related 
requests 𝑥𝑡 and object usages 𝑥𝑡−1 [75]. Given that the 
final format of DBN is the joint probabilistic form p(y, 
𝑥𝑡, 𝑥𝑡−1, ..), DBN is still a joint-probabilistic model. A 
widely-used DBN algorithm in NLC is hidden Markov 
mode (HMM) algorithm [76], which uses a Markov chain 
assumption to explore the hidden influence of previous 
task-related features on the current NLC status. The 
rationale of HMM in NLC is that human-desired 
executions, such as going to a position, grasping a tool, 
and lifting a robot hand, are decided by the previous 
cooperation (𝑥𝑡−1), such as action sequence, and current 

7 
 
 
cooperation 𝑥𝑡. These statuses include environmental 
conditions, task execution progress, and human NL 
instructions, as well as working statuses for the human 
and robot. HMM uses both observation probabilities 
(absolute probability p(x)) and transitions abilities 
(conditional 
probability 
p(Y/X)) 
for 
modeling 
associations P(x, y) among NLC-related knowledge 
[76][64]. With HMM models, tackled problems mainly 
include real-time task assignments [77], dynamic human-
centered cooperation adjustment [64][78], accurate tool 
delivering by simultaneously fusing multi-view data such 
as NL instruction, shoulder coordinates, shoulders-
elbows’ 3D angle data, and hand poses [76][79]. Limited 
by Markov assumptions, HMM is only capable of 
modeling shallow-level hidden correlations among NLC-
related knowledge. Moreover, given that hidden statuses 
need to be explored for HMM modeling, a large amount 
of 
training 
data 
is 
needed, 
limiting 
HMM 
implementations in unstructured scenarios with limited 
training data availability. 
(ii). Logic model 
 
 
Fig.7. Typical logic models. In (a) [12], NLC tasks such as “finding 
a cup” is decomposed into different first-order logic constraints such 
as “cupAction + graspingPose → detectCup success”. In (b) [35], 
hard logic relations such as “move=(grasp, place), …” is defined to 
control robots’ motion in NLC. 
 
To support a robot with rational logical reasoning of 
cooperation strategies, rather than merely conducting 
exhausting probabilistic inferences from various NL-
indicated evidences, logic models were developed. Logic 
models teach robots using unviolated logic formulas to 
describe complex execution procedures which includes 
multiple actions and statuses. Unviolated logics usually 
are first-order logic formulas, such as “in possible worlds 
a 
kitchen 
is 
a 
region 
(∀w∀x(kitchen(w,x) 
→ 
region(w,x)))” [80]. The rationale of logic models in 
NLC is that an NLC task is decomposed into sequential 
logic formulas by satisfying which specific NLC task 
could be accomplished. In a logic model, logics are 
equally important without contribution differences 
towards execution success. Logic relations, including 
tool usages, action sequences, and locations, are defined 
in the structure. Typical tackled problems include 
follows. (1). Autonomous robot navigation by using logic 
navigation sequences, such as going to a location 
“hallway” then going to a new location “rest room” 
[61][63]. (2). Environment uncertainty modeling by 
summarizing potential executions, such as “ground 
atoms (boolean random variables) eats(Dominik, 
Cereals), uses(Dominik, Bowl), eats(Michael, Cereals) 
and uses(Michael, Bowl)” [81]. (3). Robot action control 
by defining action-usage logics such as “move (grasp 
piece(location, grip), place piece(location, ungrip))” 
[61][82][83][84]. (4). Autonomous failure analysis by 
looking up first-order logic representations to detect the 
missing knowledge, such as “tool brush, action: sweep” 
[4][84]. (5). NL-based robot programming by using the 
grammar language, such as point(object, arm-side), 
lookat(object), and rotate(rot-dir, arm-side) [49]. The 
drawback of logic models in modeling NLC tasks is that 
logic relations defined in the model are hard constraints. 
If one logic formula was violated in practical execution 
processes, the whole logic structure would be 
inapplicable and the task execution would fail. This 
drawback limits models’ implementation scopes and 
reduces a robot’s environment adaptability. Moreover, 
hard constraints were defined indifferently, ignoring the 
relative importance of executions. The execution 
flexibility is undermined due to critical executions not 
being focused and trivial executions not being ignored 
when the NLC plan modifications are necessary. 
(iii). Cognitive model 
 
 
Fig.8. Typical cognitive models. In (a) [87], human motion in NL 
instructions have been defined as fuzzy statuses “very low happy, 
very high happy, …” with different degree, reflecting human 
subjective attitudes in cooperation. In (b) [28], human’s cognitive 
process in decision making is simulated by execution logics with 
different influence weights, based on which important logics with 
larger weights could be emphasized and trivial logics with smaller 
weights could be ignored. With this soft logic manner, the flexible 
cooperation between a human and a robot could be conducted. 
 
Neural science research [85] and psychology 
research [86] proved that a cognitive human planning is 
not a sensorimotor transforming, instead a goal-based 
cognitive thinking. This reasoning is reflected on that 
cognitive thinking of cooperation is not relying on 
specific objects and specific executions, instead it is 
merely relying on goal realization. Based on this theory, 

8 
 
 
another generation model category is summarized as a 
cognitive model. Human-like robot cognitive planning in 
NLC is reflected in flexibly changing execution plans 
(different procedures), adjusting execution orders (same 
procedures, different orders), removing some less-
important execution steps (same procedures, less steps), 
and adding more critical executions procedures (similar 
procedures, similar orders). 
To develop human-like robot cognitive planning for 
robust NLC, cognitive models are developed by using 
soft logic, which is defined by both logic formulas and 
their weighted importance. A typical cognitive model is 
Markov logic network (MLN) model. MLN represents 
NLC task in a way such as “0.3Drill(𝑚𝑒𝑠1) ^ 
0.3TransitionFeasible(𝑚𝑒𝑠1,𝑚𝑒𝑠2) ^ 0.3Clean(𝑚𝑒𝑠2) ⇒ 
0.9Task(𝑚𝑒𝑠1,𝑚𝑒𝑠2)” [4], imitating the human cognition 
process in task planning. In this model, single execution 
steps and step transitions were defined by logic formulas, 
which could be grounded into different logic formulas by 
substituting real-world conditions. With this cognitive 
model, a flexible execution plan can be generated by 
omitting non-contributing and weak-contributing logic 
formulas, and involving strong-contributing logic 
formulas. Different from hard constraints in logic 
models, constraints (logic formula) in MLN are soft. 
These soft constraints mean when human NL instructions 
are partially obeyed by a robot, the task could still be 
successfully executed. Typical tackled problems include 
using MLN to generate a flexible machine-executable 
plan from human NL instructions for autonomous 
industrial task execution [28], NL-based cooperation in 
uncertain environments by using MLN to meet 
constraints from both robots’ knowledge availability 
(human-NL-instructed knowledge) and real-world’s 
knowledge requirements (practical situation conditions) 
[81][88]. The advantage of using cognitive models in 
NLC is that soft logic is relatively like a human’s 
cognitive process reflected in human NL instructions 
during cooperation. It helps a robot with intuitive 
cooperation in unfamiliar situations by modifying, or 
replacing, and executing plan details, such as tool or 
action usages, improving robots’ cognition levels and 
enhancing its environment adaptability. The major 
drawback is that MLN is still different from human 
cognitive processes to consider logic conditions at a deep 
level to enable plan modification, new plan making, and 
failure analysis. Logic parameters for analyzing real-
world conditions are still insufficient to imitate logic 
relations in the human mind, thereby limiting robots’ 
performances in adapting to users and environments. 
B. Model comparison 
Usually the probabilistic model is conducted in an 
end-to-end manner, which directly reasons cooperation 
strategies 
from 
observations, 
ignoring 
internal 
correlations among execution procedures. A logic model 
uses a step-by-step manner, with which ontology 
correlations and temporal or spatial correlations among 
execution procedures are explored, enabling process 
reasoning for intuitive planning. The cognitive model 
also uses a step-by-step model. Including logic 
correlations, the cognitive model also explores relative 
influences of execution procedures, enabling a flexibly 
plan adjustment. For the probabilistic model, it is good 
for scenarios with rich evidence and single objective 
goal, such as tool delivery and navigation path selection. 
For the logic model, it is good for scenarios with either 
poor evidence or multiple objective goals, such as 
assembly planning and cup grasping planning. For the 
cognitive model, it is good for rich or poor evidence and 
multiple subjective goals, such as human emotion guided 
social interaction, and human preference based object 
assembly. 
C. Open problems 
Probabilistic models lack explorations of indirect 
human cognitive processes in NLC, limiting naturalness 
of robotic executions. Logic models is inflexible and 
incapable of simulating a human’s intuitive planning in 
real-world environments. The cognitive model is close to 
a human’s cognitive process in simulating flexible 
decision-making processes. However, cognitive models 
are still suffering from two types of shortcomings. One 
shortcoming is that cognitive process simulation is still 
not a cognitive process because the fundamental theory 
of cognitive process modeling is lacking insufficient 
support for a human-like task execution [81]. The second 
problem is the difficulties of cognitive model learning. 
Different individuals have different cognitive processes, 
thus making it difficult to learn a general reasoning 
model. Model details are shown in Table II. 
V. KNOWLEDGE-WORLD MAPPING 
With understanding of NL language and execution 
plans, it is critical for a robot to use this knowledge in 
practical 
cooperation 
scenarios. 
Knowledge-world 
mapping methods are developed to enable intuitive 
human-robot cooperation in real-world situations. The 
general process of knowledge-world mapping is shown 
in Fig. 12. Considering the different implementation 
problems, knowledge-world mapping methods include 
two main types: theoretical knowledge grounding and 
knowledge gap filling. Theoretical knowledge grounding 
methods accurately mapped learned knowledge items, 
such as objects, spatial/temporal logic relations, into 
corresponding objects and relations in real-world 
scenarios. Gap filling methods detect and recommend 

9 
 
 
both the missing knowledge, which is needed in real-
world situations, but has not been covered by theoretical 
execution plans, as well as real-world- inconsistent 
knowledge, which is provided by a human, but could not 
find corresponding things in practical real-world 
scenarios. 
A. Models 
(i). Theoretical knowledge grounding 
To accurately map theoretical knowledge to 
practical things, knowledge grounding methods are 
developed. In these methods, a knowledge item is defined 
by properties, such as visual properties “object color and 
shape” captured by RGB cameras, motion properties 
“action speed” captured by motion tracking systems and 
execution properties “tool usage and location” captured 
by RFID. Different from the direct symbol mapping 
method, which has an element-mapping manner, the 
general property mapping method has a structural 
mapping manner. The rationale of these methods is that 
a knowledge item can be successfully grounded into the 
real world by mapping its properties. The properties were 
collected by using methods such as ‘semantic similarity 
measurement’ [90], which can establish correlations 
between an object and their corresponding properties. 
One typical mapping method by using general property 
mapping is semantic map [91][92]. Theoretical indoor 
entities such as rooms and objects are identified by 
meaningful real-world properties, such as location, color, 
point cloud, spatial relation “parallel”, neighbor entities, 
constructing a semantic map with both objective 
locations and semantic interpretations ‘wall, ceiling, 
wall, floor’. For detecting visual properties in the real 
world, RGBD cameras are usually used. For spatial 
relations, it is detected by laser sensors, and motion 
tracking systems. By identifying these properties in the 
real-world, an indoor entity is identified, enabling an 
accurate robotic navigation in real-world NLC. Other 
typical mapping method also include: object searching by 
using NL instructions (detected by microphones) as well 
as visual properties such as object color, size and shape 
(detected by motion tracking systems and cameras) [93]; 
executing NL-instructed motion plan such as “pick up the 
tire pallet” by focusing on realizing actions “drive, insert, 
raise, drive, set” [94]; identifying human-desired 
cooperation places such as “lounge, lab, conference 
room” by checking spatial-semantic distributions of 
landmarks such as “hallway, gym, …” [95]. With 
mapping methods, knowledge could be mapped into real 
world in a flexible manner, in which only parts of 
properties need to be mapped for grounding a theoretical 
item into a real-world thing. This manner could improve 
a robot’s adaptability towards users and environments. 
The limitation is that these mapping methods still use 
predefinitions to give a robot knowledge, reducing the 
intuitiveness of human-robot cooperation. 
(ii). Knowledge gap filling 
A theoretical execution plan defines an ideal real-
world situation. Given unpredicted aspects in a practical 
situation, even if all defined knowledge has been 
accurately mapped into the real-world, it is still 
challenging to ensure the success of NLC by providing 
all knowledge needed in a practical situation. Especially 
TABLE. II. METHOD SUMMARY OF NL-BASED EXECUTION PLAN GENERATION 
 
Probabilistic Model 
Logic Model 
Cognitive Model 
 
joint-probabilistic BN 
Dynamic Bayesian Network 
Knowledge 
format 
joint probabilistic 
correlations 
conditional probabilistic 
correlations  
logic formulas 
logic formulas, their 
weighted influences 
Algorithms 
joint BN, NB, MRF 
conditional BN, Viterbi 
Algorithm, HMM 
First-order Logic, 
Ontology Tree 
MLN, Fuzzy Logic 
User adaptability 
moderate 
moderate 
low 
high 
Tackled 
problems 
modeling meaning 
distributions on NL 
instructions, aligning 
multi-view sensor data, 
action and tool 
recommendation 
meaning disambiguation, 
entity-sensor data mapping, 
human-attended object 
identification, real-time 
uncertainty assessment  
autonomous robot 
navigation, environment 
uncertainty modeling, 
autonomous execution 
failure diagnosis, NL-
based robot programming 
support a flexible 
machine-executable plan 
implementation, task 
execution in unknown 
environments 
Advantages 
good at representing a 
complete plan 
good at distinguishing plans 
strong logic correlations 
among execution steps 
flexible task plan, human 
cognitive process 
imitating, strong 
environment/user 
adaptability 
Disadvantages 
weak capability in 
modeling the mutual 
distinctiveness among 
tasks. 
weak capability in 
representing a complete task; 
rely on large amount of 
training data 
inflexible task execution, 
weak environment 
adaptation 
parameters are difficult to 
learn, the current soft 
logic is still far from a 
human cognitive process 
Typical
