arXiv:2001.07754v4  [cs.AI]  15 Jun 2020
A Journey into Ontology Approximation: From Non-Horn to Horn
Anneke Haga1 , Carsten Lutz1 , Johannes Marti2 and Frank Wolter3
1Universit¨at Bremen, Germany
2Universiteit van Amsterdam, Netherlands
3University of Liverpool, UK

Abstract
We study complete approximations of an ontology
formulated in a non-Horn description logic (DL)
such as ALC in a Horn DL such as EL. We pro-
vide concrete approximation schemes that are nec-
essarily inﬁnite and observe that in the ELU-to-EL
case ﬁnite approximations tend to exist in practice
and are guaranteed to exist when the source ontol-
ogy is acyclic. In contrast, neither of these are the
case for ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥and for ALC-to-EL⊥ap-
proximations. We also deﬁne a notion of approxi-
mation tailored towards ontology-mediated query-
ing, connect it to subsumption-based approxima-
tions, and identify a case where ﬁnite approxima-
tions are guaranteed to exist.
1
Introduction
Despite prominent standardization efforts such as OWL, a
large variety of description logics (DLs) continues to be
used as ontology languages.
In fact, ontology designers
choose a DL suitable for their purposes based on many
factors including expressive power, computational proper-
ties, and tool support [Baader et al., 2017].
Since ontol-
ogy engineering frequently involves (partial) reuse of ex-
isting ontologies, this raises the problem of converting an
ontology written in some source DL LS into a desired
target DL LT .
A particularly important case is ontol-
ogy approximation where LT is a fragment of LS, stud-
ied for example in [Pan and Thomas, 2007; Ren et al., 2010;
Botoeva et al., 2010; Carral et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2015;
B¨otcher et al., 2019].
In practice, ontology approximation is often done in an ad
hoc way by dropping all statements from the source ontology
OS that are not expressible in LT , or at least the inexpressible
parts of such statements. It is well-known that this results in
incomplete approximations, that is, there will be knowledge
in OS that could be expressed in LT , but is not contained
in the resulting approximated ontology. The degree and na-
ture of the resulting incompleteness is typically neither under-
stood nor analyzed. One reason for this unsatisfactory situa-
tion might be the fact that it is by no means easy to construct
complete approximations and, even worse, ﬁnite complete ap-
proximations are not guaranteed to exist. This was studied in
depth in [B¨otcher et al., 2019] where ontologies formulated
in expressive Horn DLs such as Horn-SHIF and ELI are
approximated in tractable Horn DLs such as EL. For exam-
ple, it is shown there that ﬁnite complete ELI-to-EL approxi-
mations do not exist even in extremely simple cases including
those occurring in practice. The authors then lay out a new re-
search program for ontology approximation that consists in
mapping out the structure of complete (inﬁnite) ontology ap-
proximations as a tool for guiding informed decisions when
constructing incomplete (ﬁnite) approximations in practice,
and also to enable a better understanding of the degree and
nature of incompleteness.
In this paper, we consider LS-to-LT ontology approxima-
tion where LS is a non-Horn DL such as ALC and LT is a
tractable Horn DL such as EL. Arguably, these are extremely
natural cases of ontology approximation given that Horn vs.
non-Horn is nowadays the most important classiﬁcation cri-
terion for DLs [Baader et al., 2017]. Non-Horn DLs include
expressive features such as negation and disjunction and re-
quire ‘reasoning by cases’ which is computationally costly,
but also have considerably higher expressive power than Horn
DLs. Horn DLs, in contrast, enjoy favourable properties such
as the existence of universal models and of ‘consequence-
based’ reasoning algorithms that avoid reasoning by cases
[Cucala et al., 2019]. Despite being natural, however, non-
Horn-to-Horn approximation turns out to be a challenging en-
deavour.
We start with the fundamental case of ELU-to-EL approxi-
mation. Given an ELU ontology OS, we aim to ﬁnd a (poten-
tially inﬁnite) EL ontology OT such that for all EL concepts
C, D in the signature of OS, OS |= C ⊑D iff OT |= C ⊑D.
Example 1. Consider the ELU ontology
OS = {
Job ⊑MainJob ⊔SideJob
∃job.SideJob ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime) }.
Then the following is an EL approximation of OS:
OT = {
∃job.SideJob ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime)
∃job.Job ⊑∃job.MainJob
∃job.(Job ⊓PartTime) ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime) }.
The last two lines of OT illustrate that EL consequences of
ELU ontologies can be rather non-obvious.

We ﬁrst prove that ﬁnite approximations need not exist in
the ELU-to-EL case and that depth bounded approximations
may be non-elementary in size. Our main result is then a
concrete approximation scheme that makes explicit the struc-
ture of complete inﬁnite approximations and aims to keep as
much structure of the source ontology as possible. An inter-
esting and, given the results in [B¨otcher et al., 2019], surpris-
ing feature of our scheme is that it can be expected to often
deliver ﬁnite approximations in practical cases. We perform a
case study based on the Manchester ontology corpus that con-
ﬁrm this expectation. We also show that if OS is an acyclic
ELU ontology, then a ﬁnite EL approximation always exists
(though it need not be acyclic). The ﬁnite approximations
that we obtain are too large to be directly used in practice.
Nevertheless, we view our results as positive and believe that
in practice approximations of reasonable size often exist, as
in Example 1. A ‘push button technology’ for constructing
them, however, is outside of the scope of this paper.
We then proceed to the cases of ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥and ALC-
to-EL⊥approximations which turn out to be closely re-
lated to each other. They also turn out to be signiﬁcantly
different from the ELU-to-EL case in that ﬁnite approx-
imations do not exist in extremely simple (and practical)
cases, much like in the Horn approximation cases studied in
[B¨otcher et al., 2019]. Also, ﬁnite approximations of acyclic
ontologies are no longer guaranteed to exist. While this is not
good news, it is remarkable that the addition of the ⊥sym-
bol has such a dramatic effect. We again provide an (inﬁnite)
approximation scheme.
Finally, we propose a notion of approximation that is tai-
lored towards applications in ontology-mediated querying
[Calvanese et al., 2009] and show that it is intimately related
to the subsumption-based approximations that we had stud-
ied before. Remarkably, if we concentrate on atomic queries
(AQs), then we obtain ﬁnite approximations even in the ALC-
to-EL⊥case.
Compared to the related work presented in
[Kaminski et al., 2016], we do not require the preservation
of all query answers, but only of a maximal subset thereof,
and our method is applicable to all ontologies formulated
in the source DL chosen rather than to a syntactically re-
stricted class. We also observe an interesting application to
the rewritability of ontology-mediated queries.
All proofs are deferred to the appendix.
2
Preliminaries
Let NC and NR be disjoint and countably inﬁnite sets of con-
cept names and role names. In the description logic ALC,
concepts C, D are built according to the syntax rule
C, D ::= ⊤| ⊥| A | ¬C | C ⊓D | C ⊔D | ∃r.C | ∀r.C
where A ranges over NC and r over NR. The depth of a con-
cept is the nesting depth of the constructors ∃r and ∀r in it.
For example, the concept ∃r.B ⊓∃r.∃s.A is of depth 2. We
introduce other DLs as fragments of ALC. An ELU ⊥con-
cept is an ALC concept that does not contain negations ¬C
and value restrictions ∀r.C. An EL⊥concept is an ELU ⊥
concept that does not contain disjunctions C ⊔D. ELU con-
cepts and EL concepts are deﬁned likewise, but additionally
forbid the use of the bottom concept ⊥.
For any of these DLs L, an L ontology is a set of concept
inclusions (CIs) C ⊑D where C and D are L concepts.
While ontologies used in practice have to be ﬁnite, we
frequently consider also inﬁnite ontologies.
W.l.o.g., we
assume that all occurrences of ⊥in ELU ⊥ontologies are in
CIs of the form C ⊑⊥, where C does not contain ⊥. An
acyclic ontology O is a set of concept inclusions A ⊑C
and concept equivalences A ≡C where A is a concept
name (that is, it is not a compound concept), the left-hand
sides are unique, and O does not contain a deﬁnitiorial cycle
A0 ⊲⊳1 C0, . . . , An ⊲⊳n Cn, ⊲⊳i∈{⊑, ≡}, where Ci contains
Ai+1 mod n+1 for all i ≤n. An equivalence A ≡C can be
viewed as two CIs A ⊑C and C ⊑A and thus every acyclic
ontology is an ontology in the original sense.
A signature Σ is a set of concept and role names, uniformly
referred to as symbols. We use sig(X) to denote the set of
symbols used in any syntactic object X such as a concept or
an ontology. If sig(X) ⊆Σ, we also say that X is over Σ.
The size of a (ﬁnite) syntactic object X, denoted ||X||, is the
number of symbols needed to write it, with every occurrence
of a concept and role name contributing one.
The semantics of concepts and ontologies is deﬁned
in terms of interpretations I
=
(∆I, ·I) as usual,
see [Baader et al., 2017]. An interpretation I satisﬁes a CI
C ⊑D if CI ⊆DI, an equivalence A ≡C if AI = CI,
and it is a model of an ontology O if it satisﬁes all CIs
in O. Concept C is subsumed by concept D w.r.t. ontology
O, written O |= C ⊑D, if every model I of O satisﬁes
the CI C ⊑D; we then also say that the CI is a conse-
quence of O. Subsumption can be decided in polynomial
time in EL⊥and is EXPTIME-complete between ELU and
ALC [Baader et al., 2017]. We now give our main deﬁnition
of approximation. With concept of depth bounded by ω, we
mean concepts of unrestricted depth.
Deﬁnition 1. Let OS be an ALC ontology, sig(OS) = Σ,
LT any of the DLs introduced above, and ℓ∈N ∪{ω}. A
(potentially inﬁnite) LT ontology OT is an ℓ-bounded LT ap-
proximation of OS if
OS |= C ⊑D iff OT |= C ⊑D
for all LT concepts C, D over Σ of depth bounded by ℓ. OT
is non-projective if sig(OT ) ⊆Σ and projective otherwise.
We refer to ω-bounded LT approximations as LT approxima-
tions.
We refer to the “if” direction of the biimplication in Deﬁ-
nition 1 as soundness of the approximation and to the “only
if” direction as completeness. Inﬁnite approximations always
exist: take as OT the set of all L CIs C ⊑D with C, D over
Σ and OS |= C ⊑D. In the same way, ﬁnite (non-projective)
depth-bounded approximations always exist. With LS-to-LT
approximation, LS a DL and LT a fragment of LS, we mean
the task to approximate an LS ontology in LT , possibly using
an inﬁnite ontology.
3
ELU-to-EL Approximation
We consider ELU-to-EL approximation as the simplest case
of approximating non-Horn ontologies in a Horn DL.

C
⊑
XC
XD1 ⊓C
⊑
XD2
if OS |= D1 ⊓C ⊑D2
XD1 ⊓XD2
⊑
XD3
if OS |= D1 ⊓D2 ⊑D3
∃r.XD1
⊑
XD2
if OS |= ∃r.D1 ⊑D2
XD1
⊑
∃r.XD2
if OS |= D1 ⊑∃r.D2
XD1
⊑
C
if OS |= D1 ⊑C
Figure 1: Candidate EL approximation OT .
Fundamentals.
We start with observing that projective ap-
proximations are more powerful than non-projective ones.
Proposition 1. The ELU ontology
OS = {
A
⊑
B1 ⊔B2,
∃r.Bi
⊑
Bi,
for i ∈{1, 2}
Bi ⊓A′
⊑
M
for i ∈{1, 2} }.
has a ﬁnite projective EL approximation, but every non-
projective EL approximation is inﬁnite.
In fact, a ﬁnite projective EL approximation OT of the on-
tology OS from Proposition 1 is obtained from OS by replac-
ing the CI in the ﬁrst line with
A ⊑XB1⊔B2, ∃r.XB1⊔B2 ⊑XB1⊔B2, XB1⊔B2 ⊓A′ ⊑M.
The intuitive reason for why OS has no ﬁnite non-projective
EL approximation is that OS |= A′ ⊓∃rn.A ⊑M for all n ≥
0. Proposition 1 indicates that projective approximations are
preferable. Since they also seem perfectly acceptable from an
application viewpoint, we concentrate on the projective case
and from now on mean projective approximations whenever
we speak of approximations.
To illustrate the challenges of ELU-to-EL approximation,
it is instructive to consider a candidate approximation scheme
that might be suggested by Proposition 1. We use sub(OS)
to denote the set of all subconcepts of (concepts in) the ontol-
ogy OS and sub−(OS) to denote the restriction of sub(OS)
to concept names and existential restrictions ∃r.C. We use
Con(OS) to denote the set of all non-empty conjunctions of
concepts from sub−(OS) without repetitions and Dis(OS)
to mean the set of all disjunctions of concepts from Con(OS)
without repetitions. Now, a (ﬁnite projective) candidate EL
approximation scheme is given in Figure 1 where C ranges
over sub(OS) and D1, D2, D3 range over Dis(OS). It in-
deed yields an approximation when applied to the ontology
OS in Proposition 1. There are, however, two major prob-
lems. First, the syntactic structure of OS is lost completely,
which is undesirable in practice where ontologies are the re-
sult of a careful modeling effort. We could include all EL
concept inclusions from OS in the approximation, but this
would be purely cosmetic since all such CIs are already im-
plied. Second, the approximation is incomplete in general.
In fact, ﬁnite approximations need not exist also in the pro-
jective case while the approximation scheme in Figure 1 is
always ﬁnite.
Proposition 2. The ELU ontology
OS = {
A
⊑
B1 ⊔B2,
∃r.B2
⊑
∃r.(B1 ⊓L),
L
⊑
∃s.L
}
C
⊑
DNF(E)↑
if C ⊑E ∈OS
XD ⊓D↑
1
⊑
D↑
2
if OS |= D ⊓D1 ⊑D2
∃r.XD
⊑
D↑
1
if OS |= ∃r.D ⊑D1
F ↑
⊑
∃r.G
if OS |= F ⊑∃r.G
where in the last line
• F is an EL concept over sig(OS) decorated with dis-
junctions from Dis(OS) at leaves and
• G is an OS-generatable EL concept over sig(OS)
such that depth(F) ≤depth(G) < ℓ.
Figure 2: ℓ-bounded EL approximation Oℓ
T .
has no ﬁnite EL approximation.
The intuitive reason for why OS has no ﬁnite EL approxi-
mation is that OS |= ∃r.(A ⊓∃sn.⊤) ⊑∃r.(B1 ⊓∃sn.⊤) for
all n ≥0.
The ontology in Proposition 2 can be varied to show that
even bounded depth approximations can get very large. The
function tower : N × N →N is deﬁned as tower(0, n) := n
and tower(k + 1, n) := 2tower(k,n).
Proposition 3. Let On
S be obtained from the ontology OS in
Proposition 2 by replacing the bottommost CI with
L ⊑A1 ⊓ˆA1 ⊓· · · ⊓An ⊓ˆAn ⊓∃r1.L ⊓∃r2.L
Then for all n, ℓ≥1 and any ℓ-bounded EL approximation
OT of On
S, ||OT || ≥tower(ℓ, n).
A Complete Approximation.
We present a more careful
approximation scheme that aims to preserve the structure of
OS, is complete, and yields a ﬁnite approximation in many
practical cases.
Let OS be an ELU ontology to be ap-
proximated. As a preliminary, we assume that for all CIs
C ⊑D ∈OS, C is an EL concept. If this is not the case,
then we can rewrite OS by exhaustively replacing every dis-
junction C ⊔D that occurs (possibly as a subconcept) on the
left-hand side of a concept inclusion in OS with a fresh con-
cept name XC⊔D and adding the inclusions C ⊑XC⊔D and
D ⊑XC⊔D. It is not hard to see that the resulting ontology
O′
S is of size polynomial in ||OS|| and a conservative exten-
sion of OS in the sense that OS |= C ⊑D iff O′
S |= C ⊑D
for all ELU concepts C, D over sig(OS). Consequently, ev-
ery EL approximation of O′
S is also a projective EL approxi-
mation of OS and we can work with O′
S in place of OS.
Let ℓ∈N ∪{ω}. The proposed EL approximation Oℓ
T of
OS is given in Figure 2 where D1, D2 range over Dis(OS)
and D ranges over Dis−(OS), the set of all disjunctions in
Dis(OS) that have at least two disjuncts. We still have to
deﬁne the notation and terminology used in the ﬁgure. For
an ELU concept C such that all disjunctions in C are from
Dis(OS), we use C↑to denote the EL concept obtained from
C by replacing every outermost D ∈Dis−(OS) with a fresh
concept name XD. Set DNF(C) = C if C is a concept name
or of the form ∃r.D, DNF(C1 ⊓C2) = DNF(C1) ⊓DNF(C2),
and deﬁne DNF(C1 ⊔C2) to be the ELU-concept obtained by
converting C1⊔C2 into disjunctive normal form (DNF), treat-
ing existential restrictions ∃r.D as atomic concepts, that is,

the argument D is not modiﬁed. Note that while ||DNF(C)||
may be exponential in ||C||, we have ||DNF(C)↑|| ≤||C||.
By decorating an EL concept C with disjunctions from
Dis(OS) at leaves, we mean to replace subconcepts ∃r.E
of C with E of depth 0 by ∃r.(E ⊓D), D ∈Dis(OS). As
a special case, we can replace C with C ⊓D, D ∈Dis(OS),
if C is of depth 0.
Deﬁnition 2. An EL concept C is OS-generatable if there is
an ∃r.D ∈sub(OS) that occurs on the right-hand side of a
CI in OS and satisﬁes OS |= D ⊑C.
Let us explain the proposed approximation. The ﬁrst three
lines of Figure 2 can be viewed as a more careful version of
the ﬁrst four lines of Figure 1. In the ﬁrst line, we preserve
the structure of OS as long as it lies outside the scope of a dis-
junction operator, thanks to the careful deﬁnition of DNF(C).
This is not cosmetic as in the candidate approximation in Fig-
ure 1: since we introduce the concept names XD only when
a disjunction is ‘derived’ (ﬁrst line) and only for disjunctions
D ∈Dis−(OS), Oℓ
T is no longer guaranteed to be an ap-
proximation when the ﬁrst line in Figure 2 is dropped. The
last line of the approximation addresses the effect illustrated
by Proposition 2. It is strong enough so that a counterpart of
the second last line in Figure 1 is not needed. An example
application of our approximation scheme is given in arxive
version: put the example right here.
An interesting aspect of our approximation is that it turns
out to be ﬁnite in many practical cases. In fact, it is easy to
see that Oℓ
T is ﬁnite for all ℓ< ω and that Oω
T is ﬁnite if
and only if there are only ﬁnitely many EL concepts that are
OS-generatable, up to logical equivalence; we then say that
OS is ﬁnitely generating. Since ontologies from practice tend
to have a simple structure, one might expect that they often
enjoy this property. Below, we report about a case study that
conﬁrms this expectation.
How does the approximation scheme in Figure 2 relate to
the examples given above? For the ontologies OS in Exam-
ple 1 and in Proposition 1, our approximation Oω
T contains all
CIs in the approximation OT given in place. Of course, Oω
T
also contains a lot of additional CIs that, however, do not re-
sult in any new consequences C ⊑D with C, D EL concepts
over sig(OS). It seems very difﬁcult to identify up front
those CIs that are really needed. We can remove them after
constructing Oω
T by repeatedly deciding conservative exten-
sions [Lutz and Wolter, 2010], but this is not practical given
the size of Oω
T . Nevertheless, both ontologies OS are ﬁnitely
generating and thus in both cases Oω
T is ﬁnite. In Example 1,
the OS-generatable concepts are ⊤, MainJob, PartTime,
and MainJob ⊓PartTime (up to logical equivalence) while
there are no OS-generatable concepts for Proposition 1. For
Proposition 2, there are inﬁnitely many OS-generatable con-
cepts such as ∃sn.⊤for all n ≥0.
Examples.
To
illustrate
the
proposed
approximation
scheme, we pick up some of the previous examples again.
Recall that the ELU ontology OS from Example 1 has a ﬁ-
nite EL approximation OT , given in place, and repeated here
for the reader’s convenience:
OS = {
Job ⊑MainJob ⊔SideJob
∃job.SideJob ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime) }
OT = { ∃job.SideJob ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime)
∃job.Job ⊑∃job.MainJob
∃job.(Job ⊓PartTime) ⊑∃job.(MainJob ⊓PartTime) }.
The ﬁrst CI in OT is directly taken over from OS, via the ﬁrst
line of the approximation scheme in Figure 2. The second
and third CI in OT are instances of the fourth line in Figure 2
since, as already noted, MainJob and MainJob ⊓PartTime
are both OS-generatable.
Of course, the approximation scheme in Figure 2 intro-
duces many additional CIs that, however, are not needed in
this particular case for the approximation to be complete. Let
us still consider a few of them. The ﬁrst line creates
Job ⊑XMainJob⊔SideJob.
Note that we do not need the DNF conversion from the ﬁrst
line of Figure 2 here since MainJob ⊔SideJob is already
in DNF. In fact, we only need this conversion if the right-
hand side of a CI in OS contains a disjunction nested inside
a conjunction nested inside a disjunction, which should be
rare in practice. Then, for example, Line 2 of Figure 2 yields
uninteresting CIs such as
XMainJob⊔SideJob ⊑MainJob ⊔SideJob
which clearly do not add new knowledge. Line 3 of Figure 2
also does not yield any interesting CIs
∃job.XMainJob⊔SideJob ⊑D↑
as every disjunction D
∈
Dis(OS) with OS
|=
∃job.MainJob ⊔SideJob ⊑D is tautological. Additional
concept names XD are also introduced, e.g. via Line 2 and
the CI
XMainJob⊔SideJob ⊓Job ⊑X(MainJob⊓Job)⊔(SideJob⊓Job),
triggering new applications of the second and third line in
turn, but no new knowledge in sig(OS) is ever derived.
To see non-redundant applications of Lines 2 and 3 of Fig-
ure 2, reconsider the ontology OS given in Proposition 1 and
its approximation given below that proposition, here again re-
peated for convenience:
OS = {
A
⊑
B1 ⊔B2,
∃r.Bi
⊑
Bi,
for i ∈{1, 2}
Bi ⊓A′
⊑
M
for i ∈{1, 2} }.
and OT is obtained from OS by replacing the CI in the ﬁrst
line with
A ⊑XB1⊔B2, ∃r.XB1⊔B2 ⊑XB1⊔B2, XB1⊔B2 ⊓A′ ⊑M.
The ﬁrst additional CI is an instance of Line 1 of Figure 2,
the second CI is an instance of Line 3, and the third CI is
an instance of Line 2. As already mentioned, there are no
OS-generatable concepts since OS does not have existential
restrictions on the right-hand side of CIs, and thus Line 4 of
Figure 2 cannot be applied. If applied naively, Line 2 and 3
yield many additional CIs and introduce many additional con-
cepts XD, but as in Example 1, they do not derive any new
knowledge in sig(OS).

Case Study.
We have considered the seven non-trivial ELU
ontologies that are part of the Manchester OWL corpus.1 The
size of the ontologies ranges from 113 to 813 concept inclu-
sions and equalities. All ontologies use disjunction on the
right-hand side of CIs (thus in a non-trivial way) and none
of them is acyclic. We have been able to prove that all these
ontologies are ﬁnitely generating and thus the approximation
Oω
T is ﬁnite. Our proof relies on the following observation.
Lemma 1. OS is not ﬁnitely generating iff for every n ≥0,
there is an ∃r.D ∈sub(OS) that occurs on the right-hand
side of a CI and a sequence r1, . . . , rn of role names from
OS such that OS |= D ⊑∃r1. · · · .∃rn.⊤.
In our implementation, we use role inclusions to avoid
going through all of the exponentially many sequences
r1, . . . , rn. Lemma 1 can also be used to show the follow-
ing.
Theorem 1. It is decidable whether a given ELU-ontology
OS is ﬁnitely generating.
By what was said above, this implies that it is decidable
whether the approximation Oω
T from Figure 2 is ﬁnite.
Soundness and Completeness.
We now establish sound-
ness and completeness of the proposed approximation, the
main result in this section.
Theorem 2. For every ℓ∈N ∪{ω}, Oℓ
T is an ℓ-bounded EL
approximation of OS.
While soundness is easy to show, completeness is remark-
ably subtle to prove. It is stated by the following lemma
which shows that our approximation Oℓ
T is actually stronger
than required in that it preserves all EL subsumptions C ⊑D
with D of depth bounded by ℓand C of unrestricted depth.
Lemma 2. Let ℓ∈N ∪{ω}. Then OS |= C0 ⊑D0 implies
Oℓ
T |= C0 ⊑D0 for all EL concepts C0, D0 over sig(OS)
such that the role depth of D0 is bounded by ℓ.
The proof of Lemma 2 is the most substantial one in this
paper. It uses a chase procedure for ELU ontologies that is
speciﬁcally tailored towards proving completeness in that it is
deterministic rather than disjunctive and mimics the concept
inclusions in Figure 2. Showing that this chase is complete is
far from trivial.
Fewer Symbols.
The number of fresh concept names XD
in Oℓ
T is double exponential in ||OS|| since the number of
disjunctions in Dis−(O) is.
However, Oℓ
T can be rewrit-
ten into an ontology b
Oℓ
T that uses only single exponentially
many fresh concept names and is still an ℓ-bounded approxi-
mation of OS. The idea is to transition from disjunctive nor-
mal form to conjunctive normal form, that is, to replace each
concept name XD, D ∈Dis−(O), with a conjunction of con-
cept names YD′ where D′ is a disjunction of concepts from
sub−(O), rather than conjunctions thereof. Details are in the
appendix.
Theorem 3. For every ℓ∈N ∪{ω}, bOℓ
T is an ℓ-bounded EL
approximation of OS.
1http://owl.cs.manchester.ac.uk/publications/supporting-
material/owlcorpus/
Acyclic Ontologies.
Using Lemma 1, one can show that
Oω
T is ﬁnite whenever OS is an acyclic ELU ontology. In
fact, the length n of role sequences with the properties stated
in the lemma is bounded by ||OS|| if OS is acyclic.
Theorem 4. Every acyclic ELU ontology has a ﬁnite EL ap-
proximation.
There is, however, more that we can say about acyclic on-
tologies. We ﬁrst observe that there are acyclic ELU ontolo-
gies that have ﬁnite EL approximations, but no EL approxi-
mation that is an acyclic ontology.
Example 2. Consider the acyclic ELU ontology
OS = {A ≡(B1 ⊓B2) ⊔(B1 ⊓B3)}.
Then OT = {B1 ⊓B2 ⊑A, B1 ⊓B3 ⊑A, A ⊑B1} is an
EL approximation of OS, but OS has no EL approximation
that is an acyclic ontology, ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
Further, our approximations Oℓ
T can be simpliﬁed for
acyclic ELU ontologies OS. Let eOℓ
T be deﬁned like Oℓ
T in
Figure 2, except that in the last line, F ranges only over con-
cept names (not decorated with disjunctions) rather than over
compound concepts, a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation.
Theorem 5. Let ℓ∈N ∪{ω} and let OS be an acyclic ELU
ontology. Then eOℓ
T is an ℓ-bounded EL approximation of OS.
Based on this observation, constructing ﬁnite EL approxi-
mations of acyclic ELU ontologies does not seem infeasible
in practice.
4
ALC-to-EL⊥Approximation
We consider ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥and ALC-to-EL⊥approximation
which turn out to be closely related to each other and signiﬁ-
cantly different from ELU-to-EL approximation.
It immediately follows from the results in Section 3 that
ﬁnite approximations are guaranteed to exist neither in the
ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥nor in the ALC-to-EL⊥case. However, while
we have argued that ﬁnite ELU-to-EL approximations can
be expected to exist in many practical cases, this does not
appear to be true for ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥and ALC-to-EL⊥. The
following example illustrates the problem.
Example 3. Consider the ELU⊥ontology
OS = {
A1 ⊑M ⊔N1,
A2 ⊑M ⊔N2,
∃r.N1 ⊓∃r.N2 ⊑⊥
}.
There are no OS-generatable EL concepts. Yet, there is no
ﬁnite EL⊥approximation of OS. Informally, this is because
OS |= ∃r.(A1⊓∃rn.⊤)⊓∃r.(A2⊓∃rn.⊤) ⊑∃r.(M⊓∃rn.⊤)
for all n ≥1.2
While the above example is for ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥, there is an
additional effect in ALC-to-EL⊥that already occurs for very
simple ontologies OS.
2A formal proof is analogous to that of Proposition 2.

C
⊑
DNF(E)↑
if C ⊑E ∈OS
XD ⊓D↑
1
⊑
D↑
2
if OS |= D ⊓D1 ⊑D2
∃r.XD
⊑
D↑
1
if OS |= ∃r.D ⊑D1
F ↑
⊑
∃r.G
if OS |= F ⊑∃r.G
where in the last line F is an EL concept over sig(OS)
decorated with disjunctions from Dis(OS) at leaves and G
is an EL concept over sig(OS) such that
1. F has no top-level conjunct ∃r.F ′ s.t. OS |= F ′ ⊑G;
2. depth(F) ≤depth(G) < ℓ.
Figure 3: ℓ-bounded EL⊥approximation Oℓ
T .
Example 4. The ALC ontology OS
=
{A
⊑
∀r.B}
has no ﬁnite EL⊥approximation.
This is shown in
[B¨otcher et al., 2019] for the equivalent ELI
ontology
{∃r−.A ⊑B}.
Informally, this is because OS |= A ⊓
∃rn+1.⊤⊑∃r.(B ⊓∃rn.⊤) for all n ≥1.
Note that the ontology OS in Example 4 is acyclic and thus
in contrast to the ELU-to-EL case, ﬁnite EL⊥approxima-
tions of acyclic ALC ontologies need not exist. In a sense,
Example 3 shows the same negative result for the ELU ⊥-
to-EL⊥case. While the ontology used there is not strictly
acyclic, acyclic ontologies do not make much sense in the
case of ELU ⊥and additionally admitting CIs C1 ⊓C2 ⊑⊥
as used in Example 3 seems to be the most modest extension
possible that incorporates ⊥in a meaningful way.
Despite these additional challenges, we can extend the ap-
proximation given in Section 3 to ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥and to ALC-
to-EL⊥when we are willing to drop OS-generatability and,
as a consequence, accept the fact that approximations are inﬁ-
nite unless they are depth bounded. Note that the latter is also
the case in L-to-EL approximation where L is an expressive
Horn DL such as ELI [B¨otcher et al., 2019].
We ﬁrst reduce ALC-to-EL⊥approximations to ELU ⊥-to-
EL⊥approximations. Let OS be an ALC ontology. We can
transform OS into an ELU⊥ontology as follows:
1. replace each subconcept ∀r.C with ¬∃r.¬C;
2. select a concept ¬C such that C contains no negation, re-
place all occurrences of ¬C with the fresh concept name
A¬C, and add the CIs ⊤⊑C ⊔A¬C and C ⊓A¬C ⊑⊥;
repeat until no longer possible.
The resulting ontology O′
S is of size polynomial in ||OS||
and a conservative extension of OS in the sense that OS |=
C ⊑D iff O′
S |= C ⊑D for all ALC concepts C, D over
sig(OS). Consequently, every EL⊥approximation of O′
S is
also a (projective) EL⊥approximation of OS.
It thus sufﬁces to consider ELU ⊥-to-EL⊥approximations.
Thus let OS be an ELU ⊥ontology. For each ℓ∈N ∪{ω},
the EL⊥approximation Oℓ
T of OS is given in Figure 2
where again D ranges over Dis−(OS) and D1, D2 range over
Dis(OS); both Dis(OS) and Dis−(OS) are deﬁned exactly
as for ELU ontologies and in DNF(C) we drop all disjuncts
that contain ⊥as a conjunct, possibly resulting in the empty
disjunction (which represents ⊥). Point 1 can be viewed as
an optimization that sometimes helps to avoid the expensive
last line. There, a top-level conjunct means a concept Fi if F
takes the form F1 ⊓· · ·⊓Fn, n ≥1. In the appendix we point
out another non-trivial such optimization.
Theorem 6. Oℓ
T is an ℓ-bounded EL⊥approximation of OS.
The proof of Theorems 2 and 6 also establishes another
result that will turn out to be interesting in the context of
ontology-mediated queries in Section 5. We use O−
T to de-
note the restriction of Oω
T to the (instantiations) of the ﬁrst
three lines in Figure 3 (equivalently: Figure 2). Clearly, O−
T
is always ﬁnite.
Theorem 7. Let C0, D0 be EL⊥concepts with D0
∈
sub(OS). Then OS |= C0 ⊑D0 iff O−
T |= C0 ⊑D0.
5
Approximations and Query Evaluation
The notion of approximations given in Section 2 is tailored to-
wards preserving subsumptions. In ontology-mediated query-
ing, in contrast, the main aim of approximation is to preserve
as many query answers as possible. We propose a suitable
notion of approximation and show that the results obtained
in the previous sections have interesting applications also in
ontology-mediated querying.
Let NI be a countably inﬁnite set of individual names dis-
joint from NC and NR. An ABox is a ﬁnite set of concept
assertions A(a) and role assertions r(a, b) where A ∈NC,
r ∈NR, and a, b ∈NI. We use Ind(A) to denote the set of
individual names in the ABox A. An interpretation I satis-
ﬁes a concept assertion A(a) if a ∈AI and a role assertion
r(a, b) if (a, b) ∈rI. It is a model of an ABox if it satisﬁes all
assertions in it. A Σ-ABox is an ABox A with sig(A) = Σ.
An ontology-mediated query (OMQ) is a triple Q
=
(O, Σ, q) with O an ontology, Σ ⊆sig(O) ∪sig(q) an
ABox signature, and q an actual query. While conjunctive
queries (CQs) and unions of CQs are a popular choice for for-
mulating q and our central Deﬁnition 3 below makes sense
also for these richer query languages, for simplicity we con-
centrate on atomic queries (AQs) A(x) where A is a concept
name and on EL queries (ELQs) C(x) where C an EL con-
cept. We also mention ALC queries (ALCQs) C(x) where
C is an ALC concept. Note that all such queries are unary.
We use ELQ(Σ) to denote the language of all ELQs that use
only symbols from signature Σ. Let (L, Q) denote the OMQ
language that contains all OMQs Q in which O is formulated
in DL L and q in query language Q, such as in (EL, AQ).
Let Q = (O, Σ, C(x)) be an OMQ and A a Σ-ABox. Then
a ∈Ind(A) is an answer to Q on A, written A |= Q(a), if
a ∈CI for all models I of O and A. For OMQs Q1 and
Q2, Qi = (Oi, Σ, qi), we say that Q1 is contained in Q2 and
write Q1 ⊆Q2 if for every Σ-ABox A and a ∈Ind(A), A |=
Q1(a) implies A |= Q2(a). We say that Q1 is equivalent to
Q2 and write Q1 ≡Q2 if Q1 ⊆Q2 and Q2 ⊆Q1.
A natural deﬁnition of ontology approximation in the con-
text of OMQs is as follows.
Deﬁnition 3. Let OS be an ALC ontology, LT one of the DLs
from Section 2, and Q a query language. An LT ontology OT
is an LT approximation of OS w.r.t Q if for all queries q ∈Q
and all signatures Σ with Σ ∩sig(OT ) ⊆sig(OS),
1. (OS, Σ, q) ⊇(OT , Σ, q) and

2. (OS, Σ, q) ⊇Q implies (OT , Σ, q) ⊇Q for all OMQs
Q = (O′
T , Σ, q) with O′
T ∈LT .
OT might use fresh symbols and thus approximations are
projective. Informally, Point 1 is a soundness condition and
Point 2 formalizes ‘to preserve as many query answers as pos-
sible’. It is not guaranteed that the OMQs (OS, Σ, q) and
(OT , Σ, q) are equivalent for all relevant queries q and signa-
tures Σ, and the following example shows that this is in fact
impossible to achieve.
Example 5. Let OS be the ELU ontology
OS = {⊤⊑B1 ⊔B2} ∪{Bi ⊓∃r.Bi ⊑A | i ∈{1, 2}}
Then an EL approximation of OS w.r.t. ELQ is
OT = {B1 ⊓B2 ⊓∃r.⊤⊑A, ∃r.(B1 ⊓B2) ⊑A}
∪{Bi ⊓∃r.Bi ⊑A | i ∈{1, 2}}.
However, there is no OMQ in (EL, ELQ) that is equivalent to
(OS, {r}, A(x)) since it would have to return a as an answer
on the ABox {r(a, a)}, but not on the ABox {r(a, b), r(b, a)}.
No OMQ from (EL, ELQ) has this property.
It turns out that the approximations from Sections 3 and 4
are also useful in the context of Deﬁnition 3 when we choose
ELQ or AQ as the query language. In particular, it follows
from Theorem 7 that every ALC ontology OS has a ﬁnite
EL⊥approximation w.r.t. AQ.
Theorem 8. Let OS be an ALC ontology, sig(OS) = Σ.
Then
1. the ontology Oω
T from Section 4 is an EL⊥approxima-
tion of OS w.r.t. ELQ(Σ);
2. the ontology O−
T from Section 4 is a (ﬁnite) EL⊥approx-
imation of OS w.r.t. AQ;
3. if OS falls within ELU, then the ontology Oω
T from Sec-
tion 3 is an EL approximation of OS w.r.t. ELQ(Σ).
Point 2 also implies that O−
T is an EL approximation of OS
w.r.t. AQ whenever OS is an ELU ontology. We close with
an interesting application of Theorem 8.
The topic of rewriting an OMQ into a simpler query
language has received a lot of interest in the literature,
see for example [Calvanese et al., 2007; Gottlob et al., 2014;
Kaminski et al., 2016; Feier et al., 2019].
An OMQ Q is
(L, Q)-rewritable if there is an OMQ Q′ in the OMQ lan-
guage (L, Q) such that Q ≡Q′.
By virtue of Theorem 8, we can decide whether an
OMQ Q = (O, Σ, A(x)) from (ALC, AQ) is (EL⊥, AQ)-
rewritable. It can be seen that this is the case if and only if
Q is equivalent to an OMQ Q′ ∈(EL⊥, AQ) of the form
(O′, Σ, A(x)). By Condition 2 of Deﬁnition 3, it thus sufﬁces
to construct the ﬁnite EL⊥approximation O−
T of O w.r.t.
AQ from Theorem 8 and check whether Q ≡(O−
T , Σ, A(x)),
which is decidable [Bienvenu et al., 2014].
This result ex-
tends to (ALC, ALCQ) since every OMQ from this language
is equivalent to one from (ALC, AQ).
Via the results in
[Feier et al., 2018], this can be lifted further to a certain class
of conjunctive queries.
Theorem 9. Given an OMQ Q ∈(ALC, ALCQ), it is decid-
able whether Q is (EL⊥, AQ)-rewritable.
6
Conclusion
We have investigated the structure and ﬁniteness of ontology
approximations when transitioning from non-Horn DLs to
Horn DLs. We believe that our results shed signiﬁcant light
on the situation. It remains, however, an important and chal-
lenging topic for future work to push our techniques further
towards practical applicability. Also, there are many other rel-
evant cases of approximation. As a ﬁrst step, one might think
about extending the DLs considered in this paper with role in-
clusions. It might further be interesting to study the problem
to decide whether a given (ﬁnite) candidate is an approxima-
tion of a given ontology. We expect this to be quite non-trivial.
A related result in [Lutz et al., 2012] states that it is between
EXPTIME and 2EXPTIME to decide whether a given ELU on-
tology OS of a restricted syntactic form has a ﬁnite complete
EL approximation. Without the restriction, even decidability
is open.
