AI and the Sense of Self
Srinath Srinivasa
Jayati Deshmukh

International Institute of Information Technology
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
ABSTRACT
After several winters, AI is center-stage once again, with current ad-
vances enabling a vast array of AI applications. This renewed wave
of AI has brought back to the fore several questions from the past,
about philosophical foundations of intelligence and commonsense–
predominantly motivated by ethical concerns of AI decision-making.
In this paper, we address some of the arguments that led to research
interest in intelligent agents, and argue for their relevance even in
today’s context. Specifically we focus on the cognitive sense of “self”
and its role in autonomous decision-making leading to responsible
behaviour. The authors hope to make a case for greater research
interest in building richer computational models of AI agents with
a sense of self.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Philosophical/theoretical foun-
dations of artificial intelligence.
KEYWORDS
machine ethics, autonomous agents, reinforcement learning, sense
of self
1
INTRODUCTION
“Artificial Intelligence” or AI, a term coined by Minsky and Mc-
Carthy in 19561, has evolved into a veritable global vision and
dream, evoking interest from not just researchers, but also practi-
tioners, artists, writers, policy makers, and the general public. Like
most fields of study, AI has gone through several waves interspersed
by periods of relative insignificance– the so called “AI winters.”
Each wave of AI resurgence has been characterized by specific
forms of conceptual advancements– like formal logic, artificial neu-
ral networks, intelligent agents, subsumption architecture, etc. The
current resurgence in interest in AI is perhaps unique in that re-
gard, since arguably, the primary catalyst for this new wave comes
from advances in hardware, especially Graphical Processing Units
(GPUs), re-purposed for massive parallel processing of Artificial
Neural Networks. This wave is hence driven more by AI applica-
tions and deployments, rather than by conceptual breakthroughs.
Although in the last decade, there have been several new advances
in deep-learning architectures, autonomous agents and robotic in-
teraction models, arguably, none of them constitute a paradigmatic
departure from earlier models.
This also implies that much of the open questions and challenges
posed by AI from earlier times, have remained unanswered. Of
1History of Artificial Intelligence
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_artificial_intelligence
significance is the issue of machine ethics, which was once primarily
a philosophical debate, but which has now become center-stage
with large-scale deployment of AI in different application contexts.
Machine ethics refers to a family of disparate concerns. With
data-heavy applications like recommendation and personalization
systems, biases in the data or in the algorithmic design assump-
tions, can pose several ethical concerns [15, 20, 35]. Similarly, AI
agents acting autonomously in order to achieve some objective,
may create several kinds of collateral damage with serious ethical
implications [14, 33].
For a large part, ethical considerations for machines have been
specified using normative constructs, and modeled as either a con-
straint satisfaction problem or a constrained optimization problem.
Different paradigms are used to model underlying ethical guidelines.
These include [33]: deontics (specification of what one ought to
do), consequentialism (reasoning based on expected consequences),
modeling of an innate sense virtues in agents, and particularism
(context-specific ethical reasoning). In addition, emerging areas
like Artificial Moral Agents (AMA), Reflective Equilibrium (RE),
and Value Sensitive Design (VSD) have addressed formal model-
ing of ethical frameworks as a fundamental design principle of AI
systems [7, 9–12, 18, 36, 37].
However, this paper argues that our understanding of machine
ethics is far from complete, and that there is a need to reopen some
of the philosophical debates from the 1980s and 1990s about the
nature of intelligence, and address them in today’s context. There
are fundamental issues with the way “intelligence” is defined and
modeled in present day AI systems, that create a barrier for AI to
reason about ethics seamlessly. Ethics and intelligence are often
assumed to be orthogonal, if not conflicting dimensions.
Most questions pertaining to modeling ethics, require some form
of generalized understanding of ethical principles, necessitating an
element of “commonsense” reasoning [27]– leading to yet another
long-standing open issue, that is typically relegated to “strong” AI
or Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
Many such considerations led to the emergence of the field of
Intelligent Agents (IA), addressing issues like agency, autonomy,
self-interest, and so on. Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) extended on
this concept, to model interacting autonomous agents and their
emergent properties. The field of multi-agent systems have had to
contend with issues of ethics and responsibility, when self-interest
from disparate agents interfere with one another. This lead to the
development of several forms of multi-agent negotiation protocols
and fairness constructs [21, 26, 34].
While IA and MAS elicited a lot of research interest in the early
2000s, the interest soon waned. This paper tries to bring back some
of the key philosophical arguments that lead to research interest
arXiv:2201.05576v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2022

in computational modeling of agency, with the hope that some
of them may provide promising paths of inquiry for some of the
pressing concerns of AI deployments today.
In particular, the authors propose to extend on some of the
arguments around agency, and propose that an “elastic sense of
self” is a key ingredient that can address disparate issues concerning
self-interest, ethics and responsible behaviour.
2
MACHINES AND SOCIETIES
Scientific and engineering models today are predominantly grounded
in Newtonian hermeneutics, where reality is considered to be built
from impersonal, inanimate matter, and causal relationships be-
tween them. This form of thinking replaced earlier models of human
inquiry, that were overtly anthropomorphic. Hence for instance, we
no longer consider an earthquake today as an expression of “anger”
of some God, but as a causal chain of tectonic events leading to the
catastrophe.
Newtonian hermeneutics has enabled us to build rich causal
models of physical phenomena, paving the way for machines and
robots that are as versatile as natural beings, if not more, as regards
their mechanical abilities. However, when such machinery needs
to inter-operate in an ecosystem of sentient beings like humans
and animals, they pose great challenges, since there is no place for
anthropomorphic constructs like free-will, conscience, trust, desire,
anger, etc. as part of Newtonian hermeneutics. This makes a lot of
social constructs and communication paradigms inaccessible and
inapplicable to machines. For instance, “shaming” or expressing
disapproval, disgust and anger against a reprehensible act can act
as a deterrent to a human; but machines hitherto don’t respond
to such expressive rhetoric. While we can appeal to the conscience
of a human wrong-doer to make them correct their actions, no
such mechanisms exist for interacting with AI that is about to do
something irresponsible.
To some extent, present day AI can be made to respond to
rhetoric, by modeling them as reinforcement signals from the envi-
ronment. Indeed, in a number of AI deployments, ethical issues are
enforced by means of constraints and/or reinforcements over an
underlying adaptive logic [1, 24].
But this only opens up deeper questions about how to bring
about ethical and responsible behaviour in the absence of relevant
reinforcements and constraints. A sense of ethics in humans are not
always responses to external reinforcements. Appeal to conscience
of a person, is not the same as deterrence by inducing the fear of
penalty. Indeed, the system of external reinforcements in the form
of laws and social norms, are themselves an emergent characteristic
of complex interactions around ethics, among humans. There is
evidence that a sense of ethics and responsible behaviour is an
innate element of human nature [5, 16].
This leads us to ask whether there are some paradigmatic dif-
ferences between natural beings and artificial automation. Could
it be that the idea of machine ethics is itself an ill-posed problem?
Could it be that machines today, lack essential design elements that
are present in natural beings, and that which endow them with
anthropomorphic abilities including their sense of ethics?
When we compare automation in nature, and that of human
engineering, we can immediately see a number of contrasts between
an artificial machine (like a car), and a natural being (like a tiger)–
even in their mechanics.
Firstly, we can see that nature does not have wheels, and hardly if
ever, bases its mechanics on rotary motion. There are hardly any
examples of motors, pumps and turbines in nature that are based
on rotary motion. In contrast, the wheel is such a fundamental
element of human engineering, that “don’t reinvent the wheel” is
an oft-repeated cliché. But, nature has not “invented” the wheel at
all!
Natural pumps, like the heart in animals, use contraction and
expansion as a means for pumping. Conventional mechanical en-
gineering would call that an inefficient design, since continuous
contraction and expansion leads to material fatigue and wear-and-
tear. However, the heart beats continuously throughout the lifetime
of the natural being (60-100 years for average humans), without ever
taking a break– a feat that is very hard if not impossible to achieve
with more “efficient” motors built from conventional engineering!
Clearly, paradigmatic differences between natural and artificial
engineering can lead to fundamental differences in engineering
wisdom. What is clearly an unwise design in one paradigm, is the
design of choice in the other. Could this paradigmatic difference
hold the key for us to understand anthropomorphic constructs that
are an integral part of natural beings, but not of artificial machines?
The paradigmatic difference between artificial and natural au-
tomation can be summarized as the difference between a “machine”
and a “society.”
Unlike machines, which are built from components custom-made
for their functionality, natural beings are modeled as a large “society”
of autonomous entities called cells. Cells are generic components,
which in their nascent stages (called stem cells), can be moulded into
several different kinds of functional agents, like muscles, nerves,
cartilage, bone matter, tissue, etc.
The master-plan directing role distribution among the cells is
encoded in an organism’s genotype, or its genetic material. But
unlike the “blueprint” of machines, a genotype does not rigidly
encode the phenotype (the resultant organism). The structure and
function of the phenotype is a combination of both genetically
encoded plan, and adjustments to its environment (nature and
nurture).
The logic that drives moulding of stem cells into specific forms of
functional roles is based on the economic demand from the “society”
that makes up the organism. Hence, a physically active organism
creates a larger demand for muscle cells to develop, much like
growth in a particular sector (like say, biotechnology) of a human
society, creates a demand for more professionals to be trained in
this area.
Machine-oriented and society-oriented designs lead to some
sharp differences in engineering wisdom, as noted earlier. Society-
oriented design needs to work with building blocks that are au-
tonomous, and act independently in their individual interest. For
the system of cells to work together as an organism, the system
needs to be such that acting in cooperation with other cells is far
more rationally lucrative than acting independently.
2

Cooperation does not mean that the collective will always over-
rides individual autonomy. The autonomous nature of individ-
ual components makes organisms immensely adaptive and self-
sustaining. Organisms have intelligent responses encoded through-
out their being. This pervasive intelligence of societies result in
resilience and self-healing properties like responding to routine
issues like a scratch or a skin prick, in a subconscious manner–
without sometimes the brain (representing the collective society)
even being aware of it.
But by far, a characteristic feature of natural beings that has been
largely ignored by engineers, is the sense of “self” that pervades
across all cells of the organism. Cells have a sharp notion of “cit-
izenship” to the being that make them act with vigilance against
“foreign” cells that infect the organism. Even though each agent in
the being is acting autonomously, there is also a sense of “oneness”
or “belongingness” to the being, that pervades across all the agents.
When the organism strives to survive, it is the pervasive sense
of self that is sought to be maintained and preserved and not for
instance, any particular cell. It is also the pervasive sense of self, that
is sought to be protected against attacks in the form of infections,
by the immune system.
The sense of self is also “elastic” in the sense that the being
may sometimes identify with other external entities or concepts,
by attaching a part of its sense of self, to that object. Identifying
with an external entity means that, the being contributes some part
of its biological and cognitive processes towards preserving and
furthering the interests of the object of identity.
Hence, parents identifying with their children, or patriots iden-
tifying with their country, or activists identifying with a cause,
proactively invest their efforts and mind towards the interests of
their object of identity. This elastic sense of self may also underlie
the mirror neuron system (MNS) that is thought to be the neuro-
logical basis for empathy [25, 29].
We argue that modeling this elastic sense of self, holds the key
for several issues pertaining to responsible AI, and hope to elicit
more research interest in this area.
3
COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF AGENCY
Computational modeling of agency and autonomy began to elicit
increasing research interest starting from the late 1980s. A survey
of different computational models of agency may be found in [32].
Early models of agency focused on the proactive nature of au-
tonomous agents, implemented as software objects with an inde-
pendent thread of execution. Later on, logics based on intentionality
and norms, tempered by an agent’s beliefs and knowledge, were
developed for modeling autonomy [13, 28]. A third paradigm of
agency were adaptive models powered by reinforcement learning
and extensive games [22, 31].
While the above approaches resulted in rich, proactive and adap-
tive behaviour, questions still remained about what is meant by
autonomy itself. Perhaps the closest we have come to answering
this question is to model autonomy using the theory of rational
choice [4, 26]. Rational choice is represented by two elements, self-
interest, and utility maximization.
Foundations of rational choice and economic games come from
the work of von Neumann and Morgenstern [23], that is also now
called the “classical” model of rational choice. This theory is based
on representing self-interest in the form of preference functions be-
tween pairs of choices. Ordinal preference relations between pairs
of choices, are converted to numerical payoffs based on equating
expected payoffs of a conflicting set of choices. For instance, sup-
pose an agent prefers 𝐴over 𝐵over 𝐶(represented as 𝐴> 𝐵> 𝐶).
Suppose now that the agent is presented a choice, where Choice
I returns 𝐵with 100% certainty, and Choice II returns either 𝐴or
𝐶with a probability of 𝑝and (1 −𝑝) respectively. The value of 𝑝
at which the agent becomes indifferent between choices I and II
provides us a mechanism for assigning numerical payoff values to
𝐴, 𝐵and 𝐶. The classical theory is also developed further, with a set
of axiomatic basis like methodological individualism, transitivity
of preferences, independence of choices, etc.
While classical rational choice theory is widely used in differ-
ent application areas, including modeling human behaviour and
micro-economic models, it has also received criticism from various
quarters about how well it can model human sense of agency. In his
critique called “Rational Fools” [30], Sen argues that our autonomy
comes from our “sense of self” and it is too simplistic to reduce
our sense of self to a preference matrix between pairs of choices.
Specifically, Sen argues that humans display an innate sense of
trust and empathy towards others, and assume a basic level of trust
to exist even among self-interested strangers. If humans were to
be strict rational maximizers, then according to Sen, the following
kinds of interactions would be more commonplace [30]:
"Where is the railway station?" he asks me. "There," I
say, pointing at the post office, "and would you please
post this letter for me on the way?" "Yes," he says,
determined to open the envelope and check whether
it contains something valuable.
This critique of the classical model lead to the development of
the theory of rational empathy and welfare economics.
Similarly, Kahnemann and Tversky in their work called “prospect
theory” [19], critique the classical model for its linear model of
utility from expected payoffs.
Figure 1 contrasts the model of derived utility between the classi-
cal model and prospect theory. Utility is also called “intrinsic payoff”
and refers to the value associated by the agent to an external payoff
received.
Prospect theory identifies at least two characteristics of human
valuation to external payoffs– saturation, and risk aversion. Satu-
ration refers to diminishing valuation of returns with increasing
returns. The first million earned may be valued very highly, by a
business, but by the time the business earns 50 million, it is largely
business as usual.
Similarly, humans value negative and positive payoffs differently.
Humans are known to be “risk averse” and value prospects of
negative returns much more negatively, than positive returns of
the same worth. Hence an investment that provides a guaranteed
return of 𝑥is valued higher than another investment that returns
either 0 or 2𝑥with equal probability.
Both saturation and risk-aversion can also be tagged back to our
“sense of self”. Risk aversion comes from our pursuit of homeostasis–
preserving our sense of self, making us more often to choose smaller
but guaranteed returns, over higher but riskier returns. Similarly,
3

Figure 1: Contrasting derived utility between classical
model and prospect theory
saturation can be explained by our mind’s eternal quest for novelty
or epistemic surprise [6], where unexpected rewards are valued
more than expected returns.
4
AN ELASTIC SENSE OF IDENTITY
It is reasonably clear that the human sense of autonomy is much
more than rational choice, as described by the classical model. Cri-
tiques of the classical model introduce several facets of our sense
of self, including: rational empathy, trust, homeostasis, foraging or
epistemic novelty, risk aversion, etc.
While we may be far from a comprehensive computational model
of self, in this work, we focus on a specific characteristic of our sense
of self that may hold the key for the innate sense of responsibility
and ethics in humans. We call this the elastic sense of self, extending
over a set of external objects called the identity set.
Our sense of self, is not limited to the boundaries of our physical
being, and often extends to include other objects and concepts from
our environment. This forms the basis for social identity [17] that
builds a sense of belongingness and loyalty towards something
other than, or beyond one’s physical being.
We model this formally as follows. Given an agent 𝑎, the sense
of self of 𝑎is described as:
𝑆(𝑎) = (𝐼,𝑑𝑎,𝛾𝑎)
(1)
Here 𝐼is the set of identity objects, where 𝑎∈𝐼. The agent
itself belongs to its set of identity objects. The set may contain
any number of other entities including other agents, collections
of agents, or even abstract concepts. The term 𝑑𝑎: {𝑎} × 𝐼→ℜ+
represents the “semantic distance” between 𝑎and some object in
its identity set, with 𝑑𝑎(𝑎) = 0. The term 𝛾𝑎∈[0, 1] represents
an attenuation parameter, indicating how fast does the sense of
identity attenuate with distance. The agent identifies with object at
distance 𝑑with an attenuation of 𝛾𝑑𝑎.
The “sense of self” of the agent describes how its internal valu-
ation or utility, is computed based on external rewards or payoffs
that may be received by elements of its identity set. For any element
𝑜∈𝐼, let the term 𝑜𝑖refer to the payoff obtained by object 𝑜in
game (system) state 𝑖.
Given this, the utility derived by agent 𝑎is computed as follows:
𝑢𝑖(𝑎)
=
1
𝑍
∑︁
∀𝑜∈𝐼
𝛾𝑑𝑎(𝑜)
𝑎
𝑜𝑖
(2)
𝑍
=
∑︁
∀𝑜∈𝐼
𝛾𝑑𝑎(𝑜)
𝑎
(3)
The above can be understood as a “unit” of self being attached
in different proportions to the objects in the identity set, based on
their semantic distance and attenuation rate. Since the distance
from an agent to itself is zero, this has the least attenuation.
Player A
C
D
Player B
C
6, 6
0, 10
D
10, 0
1, 1
Table 1: Prisoner’s Dilemma
To illustrate the impact of an elastic sense of identity, consider
the game of Prisoners’ Dilemma as shown in Table 1.
The Prisoners’ Dilemma (PD) represents a situation where play-
ers have to choose to cooperate (C) or defect (D) on the other. When
both players cooperate, there are rewarded with a payoff (6 in the
example). However, as long as one of the players chooses to coop-
erate, the other player has a temptation to defect, and end up with
a much higher payoff (10 in the example). Hence, a player choosing
to cooperate, runs the risk of getting exploited by the other player.
And when both players choose to defect on the other, they end up
in a state of “anarchy” with a much lesser payoff (1 in the example),
than had they both chosen to cooperate.
When played as a one-shot transaction, there is no rational
incentive for a player to choose to cooperate. Regardless of whether
a player is known to choose cooperate or defect, it makes rational
sense for the other player to choose 𝐷over 𝐶. The state 𝐷𝐷is also
the Nash equilibrium, representing the mutual best response by
both players, given the choice of the other. The choice 𝐷strictly
dominates over choice 𝐶, since regardless of what the other player
chooses, a player is better off choosing 𝐷over 𝐶.
The only way players in a PD game find a rational incentive to
cooperate, is when the game is played in an iterated manner, with
evolutionary adjustments allowing players to change strategies
over time [2].
However, with an elastic sense of identity, we can create a ra-
tional incentive for the players to cooperate, even in a one-shot
transaction. Instead of working on strategies and payoffs, here we
change the players’ sense of self, to include the other player, to
different extents.
Without loss of generality, consider player𝐴, and let the payoff in
game state 𝑖be denoted as 𝑎𝑖. With an elastic identity that includes
the other player in one’s identity set at a distance of 1, the derived
utility of player 𝐴in game state 𝑖is given by (from Eqn 2):
𝑢𝑖(𝐴) =
1
1 + 𝛾[𝑎𝑖+ 𝛾𝑏𝑖]
(4)
4

Figure 2: Change in expected utility with increased elasticity
of sense of self
The expected utility of a choice (either 𝐶or 𝐷) is computed by
the utility accrued at all possible game states on making this choice,
along with the probability of this game state. Since we make no
further assumptions, all game states are considered equally probable.
Hence, the expected utility for choosing a given choice is computed
as follows:
𝐸𝐴(𝐶) = 0.5 · 𝑢𝐶𝐶(𝐴) + 0.5 · 𝑢𝐶𝐷(𝐴)
(5)
𝐸𝐴(𝐷) = 0.5 · 𝑢𝐷𝐶(𝐴) + 0.5 · 𝑢𝐷𝐷(𝐴)
(6)
Figure 2 plots the expected utility from choosing 𝐶or 𝐷over
varying values of 𝛾or the elasticity in one’s sense of self. When
𝛾= 0, this becomes the usual PD game, where the expected utility
from choosing 𝐷is much higher than the expected utility from
choosing 𝐶. However, as 𝛾increases, with player 𝐴identifying
more and more with player 𝐵, the expected utility of choosing 𝐶
overtakes that of choosing 𝐷, when 𝛾= 1
3. At this value of 𝛾the
sense of self is split between one’s own interest and the other’s
interest, in a ratio of 3
4 : 1
4.
When 𝛾= 1 the sense of self is evenly split between a player and
the other. In this state, the PD game effectively “flips over” with
𝐶and 𝐷swapping places with respect to expected utility. In this
state, it makes as much rational sense to choose to cooperate, as
it made rational sense in the conventional PD to choose to exploit
the other. This seems to give credence to the folk wisdom that a
relationship between two persons is at its natural ideal when each
member feels as much for the other, as for themselves. In such a
state, cooperation is more appealing than selfish gains.
An elastic sense of self can be contrasted with other forms of
pro-social constructs that have inspired the design of fairness in
artificial agents. We look at a few of these constructs here.
Pareto Optimality. One of the commonly used constructs for
fairness is Pareto optimality [3, 8]. A game state is said to be Pareto
optimal, if it does not contain any “Pareto improvement” where an
agent can improve one’s payoffs by changing its choice, such that
it does not result in a reduced payoff for any other agent.
In the PD example, while game state𝐶𝐶is not a Nash equilibrium,
it is Pareto optimal, since no player can switch to the other choice
Figure 3: Pareto boundary and fairness
to get a better payoff, without hurting the other. In this sense,
“consideration for the other” or “aversion to inequity in incremental
payoffs” as an ethical principle, can lead to cooperation.
However, Pareto optimality can also just as well result in grossly
unfair configurations. Figure 3 shows a two player game with sev-
eral states. The set of states in the “Pareto boundary” connected by
the line, represent Pareto optimal states. In these states, no player
can change its choice to get a better payoff for itself, without hurt-
ing the other. As we can see, the shaded state, where Player 𝑦has a
negative payoff, is also on the Pareto boundary!
Pareto optimality, used by itself as a measure of responsible
behaviour, can also admit oppressive constructs as “fair” configura-
tions.
Altruism. Altruism or “selfless” behaviour where an agent “sac-
rifices” one’s own good for the welfare of the other, or for the
collective, is sometimes celebrated as the epitome of pro-social
responsibility.
However, as we can see from the PD game, while an altruist
would be attracted by the state 𝐶𝐶, the game state 𝐶𝐷would also
be attractive for an altruist agent, since this gives the best possible
payoff for the other player.
Not being concerned about one’s own welfare, doesn’t neces-
sarily lead to responsible behaviour. Consider a surgeon or pilot
sacrificing their sleep or rest time to maximally serve their patients
or passengers. They would be putting them at risk rather than serv-
ing them.
An elastic sense of self on the other hand, does not put one’s own
self in conflict with the interests of others, nor does it invalidate
one’s own individuality for collective interests.
5
CONCLUSIONS
The objective of this paper is to address the question of machine
ethics in a philosophical manner using foundations of human cogni-
tion, and propose a new line of thinking for modeling responsibility
in AI agents. An elastic sense of self, as proposed in this paper, may
be a foundational element for modeling several forms of anthropo-
morphic constructs in AI, including machine ethics.
5

For future work, we plan to take up realistic agent-based appli-
cations involving reinforcement learning, and introduce an elastic
sense of self into the learning agents. Preliminary work in this
regard has yielded promising results, with agents pursuing self-
interest while being mindful of collateral damage.
Elastic identity also opens up several new questions and oppor-
tunities for research. Some of these questions include the following:
underlying model for deciding the elements of one’s identity set,
semantic distance to each element of one’s identity set, and the
attenuation parameter. There are also questions about how and
when is the attenuation parameter set, and whether it changes over
time and with fruitful or adverse experiences.
At a systemic level, there are also open questions about the
evolutionary stability of a system of agents with elastic identity.
Can a system of empathetic agents be successfully “invaded” by
a small group of non-empathetic agents who don’t identify with
others? Or does there exist a strategy for deciding the optimal
level of one’s empathy or extent of one’s identity set, that makes it
evolutionarily stable?
