The Power of Training: How Different Neural
Network Setups Influence the Energy Demand
Daniel Geißler1, Bo Zhou1,2, Mengxi Liu1, Sungho Suh1, and Paul Lukowicz1,2
1 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Kaiserslautern,
Germany
2 University of Kaiserslautern-Landau (RPTU), Kaiserslautern, Germany
Abstract. This work offers a heuristic evaluation of the effects of vari-
ations in machine learning training regimes and learning paradigms on
the energy consumption of computing, especially HPC hardware with a
life-cycle aware perspective. While increasing data availability and inno-
vation in high-performance hardware fuels the training of sophisticated
models, it also fosters the fading perception of energy consumption and
carbon emission. Therefore, the goal of this work is to raise awareness
about the energy impact of general training parameters and processes,
from learning rate over batch size to knowledge transfer. Multiple setups
with different hyperparameter configurations are evaluated on three dif-
ferent hardware systems. Among many results, we have found out that
even with the same model and hardware to reach the same accuracy, im-
properly set training hyperparameters consume up to 5 times the energy
of the optimal setup. We also extensively examined the energy-saving
benefits of learning paradigms including recycling knowledge through
pretraining and sharing knowledge through multitask training.
Keywords: Energy Demand · Hyperparameter · HPC Monitoring
1
Introduction
With the wake of artificial intelligence (AI), the high-performance computing
(HPC) demand related to machine learning has been drastically elevated, to-
gether with the energy consumption in the sector as a whole. While there have
been many works optimizing the energy footprint of machine learning from the
software model architecture and hardware accelerator aspects, there has been lit-
tle effort in examining the differences in training regimes and learning paradigms,
especially considering the lifecycle of machine learning models. The connection
between the complexity of a task being solved by a deep neural network (DNN)
and the accompanying energy requirement from powerful hardware to train and
deploy such models is a well-known issue of machine learning algorithms. Im-
proving availability and access to more data, which forms the basis for training
complex models, supports the trend towards enhanced hardware power and en-
ergy consumption further. Next to the increase in computational demands, there
is a growing awareness of a less visible but increasingly significant aspect: the
carbon footprint for training machine learning models. [11,17]
arXiv:2401.01851v4  [cs.LG]  5 Oct 2024

2
D. Geißler et al.
Multiple projects like carbontracker [1] or eco2AI [4] apply to this problem
statement, aiming to track the energy consumption and the related carbon foot-
print for training a model by linking into the hardware power utilization logging
during the model training. Although these tools can monitor energy consump-
tion, they are unable to compare the efficiency of the training process as well as
suggesting recommendations for improvements.
In this work, we aim to create awareness about the significance of general ad-
justments in the training process and their major effects on energy consumption.
Moreover, a goal of this work is to strive for a general analysis that can be applied
to other projects as well. Additionally, we examine the effects of advanced learn-
ing paradigms to project our baseline findings from standard training regimes
into state-of-the-art practices by comparing their energy consumption on our
test setups.
Even though the innovation in terms of efficiency and sustainability of ma-
chine learning algorithms lags behind the quantitative growth of hardware re-
sources, small improvements in the low percentage range already help to reduce
the carbon footprint if such methods are scaled properly within the landscape
of machine learning applications. [17]
In short summary, we make the following contributions:
1. We examine the energy consumption of often overlooked nuance during DNN
training, specifically among training setup hyperparameters and learning
paradigms with longer lifecycle considerations. A major factor differentiating
our method is that we use the prediction accuracy as a performance target,
resulting in total energy per development cycle, additionally to the pure
energy per epoch metrics like most related works.
2. Our findings show, with the same DNN model, HPC hardware, and accuracy-
regulated tasks, improperly configured batch size and learning rate could
cause 5 times the energy consumption of the optimal configurations.
3. By re-using part of a DNN (the feature encoder) in different downstream
classification tasks, the practice will bring a break-even point compared to
training a new model in total for every downstream task. And this break-even
point is associated with the training hyperparameter setups in Contribution
No. 2.
4. By sharing parts of a DNN during the same training cycle of multiple tasks
(multi-task training), the energy consumption per cycle is significantly less
than the total of training for different tasks in isolation.
The paper is structured as follows: section 2 reviews the relevant state-of-the-
art works to track energy consumption and optimize the hyperparameter space;
section 3 introduces the methodology of conducted experiments from classic
training regime to advanced learning paradigms followed by the corresponding
results for the classic training in section 4, the pretraining scenario in section 5
and multitask scenario in section 6. After additional comparison of the HPC
results to high-performance consumer hardware in section 7, we conclude with
a discussion on limitations and future work in section 8.

The Power of Training
3
2
Related Works
Due to lacking practicability and the complexity of tasks, precise energy con-
sumption tracking is still not commonly applied in the field of AI and Machine
Learning [9]. However, the rising demand for energy must be counteracted to
minimize the environmental footprint and economic expenses, for instance when
hosting large server and HPC farms, in order to operate sustainably in the future
[16]. In the past focus lay on inference optimization for edge devices, microcon-
trollers, and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), since the energy demands
of training machine learning models have received less attention due to smaller
implications [6]. Nevertheless, with the rise of Large Language Models (LLM)
and other complex architectures, the computational demands for training such
models have a significantly larger share of the lifecycle energy requirement [19].
This in turn requires a precise consideration of possible adjustment screws to
counteract these trends, whereas this work focuses on the exploration and tun-
ing of hyperparameters [10]. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first
to investigate the selection of popular hyperparameter spaces with a hardware-
based focus on quantifying the energy demand instead of purely aiming towards
optimal model performance.
2.1
Energy Tracking
Energy tracking software tools are usually designed to capture as much power
information about the system as possible by building an additional layer between
the system’s hardware configuration and the user’s model training process. Gen-
erally speaking, the power consumption of the Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)
is the largest part of the training process as it performs the core work with the
parallel processing of mathematical tasks. Following that, usually, the Central
Processing Unit (CPU) is the second largest consumer of power.
There is a growing list of software available with most of them utilizing
the same approach to gather the power consumption data from the hardware
manufacturers’ utility logging. The energy consumption is then calculated from
the current power consumption and the polling time interval set in the software.
Works like Carbontracker [1], eco2Ai [4] and Green Algorithms [13] utilize this
approach to gather data from CPU, GPU, and even the memory if supported.
Nevertheless, there is still a lack of tracking the full systems’ energy consumption.
High-performance setups may consume more power than present tools can track,
for instance, if the cooling, which can account for a non-negligible proportion,
is not taken into account. Therefore, software like Carbontracker [1] multiplies
its results with an efficiency constant of 1.55 to incorporate untracked secondary
power needs and efficiency losses.
With an extended focus on user experience, projects like Cloud Carbon [7]
or CodeCarbon [5] extend the gathered knowledge and present it in analytic-
based dashboards. Based on the calculated energy consumption and the user’s
location, the average local energy mix from fossil and renewable energy sources
is utilized to estimate the carbon emissions in kilograms or even tons [12]. On

4
D. Geißler et al.
top of that, since the carbon emissions are difficult to visualize or imagine, the
conversion into kilometers driven by car, flights with a plane, or the number of
phones charged is a standard practice to make the user aware of the generated
carbon emissions amount.
2.2
Hyperparameter Selection
Selecting the right hyperparameters is a common problem in thoroughly training
the machine learning model to properly solve the targeted task. It is still a
standard practice to explore the hyperparameter space manually by launching
multiple training runs and wasting energy on training insufficient models [21].
Many techniques evolved over time to solve this issue, starting from classical
methods like grid search or random search, towards more advanced techniques
like evolutionary, Bayesian, pruning or reinforcement-learning based optimiza-
tion strategies [3]. In many cases, there is no clear identification of the best-
performing strategy possible because the efficiency of the algorithm depends
on the respective machine learning problem to solve and the user’s preferences.
Nevertheless, there is a trend of different hyperparameter optimization categories
being fused to elevate the performance compared to the traditional algorithms
[2].
All strategies together share a downside: They purely focus on maximizing
the model performance without incorporating the energy consumption [8]. This
oversight leads to an enhanced waste of energy and usually leads to training and
discarding models that do not meet the required performance [24]. Therefore,
there is a need to investigate the correlation between hyperparameter selection
and energy demand in order to develop strategies that may strive for the best
performance while maintaining moderate energy demands.
3
Methodology
3.1
Experiment Setup
In order to provide a meaningful correlation between the training setup of a
model and its power consumption, we chose two application scenarios that de-
termine the structure of this work: computer vision and sensor-based activity
recognition. We used two commonly used benchmark datasets from two disci-
plines: for a computer vision task we used the CelebA dataset [14] and for the
sensor-based activity recognition, we utilized the PAMAP2 dataset [18] as a
basis.
To reduce hardware-specific implications from our results and cross-compare
them in a meaningful way, we run each experiment two times on three different
hardware configurations on a SLURM-based HPC cluster [23]. Due to the job-
based nature of the HPC, the experiments run in clean, isolated Linux environ-
ments running on CUDA 12.3. We settled three different Nvidia GPUs, namely
the H100-HBM3 with 80GB, the A100-SXM4 with 80GB, and the GeForce RTX
3090.

The Power of Training
5
The already introduced Carbontracker [1] is utilized to track the GPU power
and energy consumption of the desired GPUs. Due to Carbontracker’s restric-
tion on tracking CPU power consumption for Intel CPUs only and a lack of
an adequate framework to track the power consumption of AMD CPUs, this
work solely focuses on GPU power consumption. The tracker is modified to ad-
ditionally store the corresponding timestamp and the current epoch to properly
link the gathered data with the model’s training process. The efficiency con-
stant multiplication was disabled throughout our tests to achieve the raw GPU
measurements.
To further classify the HPC results on common prosumer hardware, the same
experimental scenarios were carried out again on a workstation equipped with
an Nvidia RTX 6000 Ada with 48GB VRAM and a 16-inch Apple Macbook Pro
with M1 Max chip (32-core GPU and 64GB unified memory). The findings for
those hardware are separately discussed in Section 7.
Since each hardware setup has deviating power capabilities and the power is
not representative in terms of energy consumption, we decided to calculate the
epoch-wise energy consumption as the baseline following the equation:
∀k ∈[0, T]
Ek =
Pn
i=0 power(k, n)
n
∗time(k)
3600
(1)
Throughout all experiments and the varying hardware setups, we kept the
same model and training script versions. Moreover, the changed parameters
across training runs were induced as external arguments. For training, we used
early stopping techniques based on validation loss for the encoder and the vali-
dation accuracy for the classifier as a standard metric.
3.2
Training Regime
Our test procedure can be separated into two tasks which we applied to the
two application scenarios, the training regime and the learning paradigm. A
common problem when training a model is the proper initialization of hyper-
parameters that fit the task or problem. The two most prominent ones are the
batch size and the learning rate [10]. To determine the influence of hyperpa-
rameters, we created an encoder plus classifier architecture for the CelebA to
classify the attributes and identities. The encoder is ResNet18 from the TIMM
python package with pre-trained ImageNet weights and the classifier is based
on classic convolution with a size of 20520 parameters. For the PAMAP2, we
build a similar convolutional classifier architecture inspired by [20] with a size of
141293 parameters to classify the activities. For the training regime, we trained
the models with variations in batch size and learning rate, resulting in a total of
16 different setups as shown in Table 1. We kept the hyperparameters constant
for each training run without any further decay or adaption. All experiments
were conducted with threshold early stopping as a regularization in order to still
maintain proper model performance. We set the threshold to an accuracy of 0.8
from which the regularization was started. It was set based on experience since

6
D. Geißler et al.
such classifiers trained on CelebA and PAMAP2 usually range slightly above
this performance. This strategy ensures that all setups can exceed the thresh-
old and further eliminates potential outliers due to early termination with poor
accuracy.
Table 1. Training Regime Hyperparameter Setup List
Setup Batch Size Learning Rate
1
64
0.1
2
64
0.01
3
64
0.001
4
64
0.0001
5
256
0.1
6
256
0.01
7
256
0.001
8
256
0.0001
9
1024
0.1
10
1024
0.01
11
1024
0.001
12
1024
0.0001
13
4096
0.1
14
4096
0.01
15
4096
0.001
16
4096
0.0001
3.3
Learning Paradigm
On top of the training regime tests, we extended the experiments to explore
the energy consumption of different learning paradigms focusing on knowledge
sharing and reusing. In principle, these learning paradigms can potentially re-
duce the energy cost compared to the baseline of training a randomly initialized,
black-box model for each dataset or task. Instead, the research community fo-
cuses on the generalization abilities or accuracy improvements of these learning
paradigms; the actual energy consumption has not yet been evaluated.
With the PAMAP2 dataset, we evaluate the pretraining learning paradigm,
shown in Figure 1. We train an autoencoder and use its encoder as a pre-trained
part to train a classifier on its latent features and compare it to the training
of the encoder and classifier architecture sequentially. This practice is typically
used to first force the feature encoder to learn information that can be used to
reconstruct the input, thus the features are unique to different characteristics of
the input data. This could reduce the likelihood of over-fitting on the ground
truth labels of the training data and thus provide a better-generalized model.
We also inspect the differences between freezing and unfreezing the pre-trained
encoder weights during the usage for generating the latent features.

The Power of Training
7
Fig. 1. Pretraining an autoencoder and utilizing the encoder in frozen and unfrozen
mode to generate latent features for the training of a classifier.
With the CelebA dataset, we can evaluate multi-task learning [22], since the
datasets have different aspects of ground truth for the same input (identity and
facial attributes). Opposed to training a complete black-box-like neural network
for each task, multi-task learning shares the feature encoder with multiple down-
stream tasks (e.g. different classifiers). The procedure is visualized in Figure 2
a and b for the single training setup and the multitask setup in c by connecting
the two classifiers via the weight coefficient α within the loss function.
Fig. 2. Comparing the single training setup with the multitask setup (combined loss
function).
4
Training Regime Results
For testing the training regime on the two application scenarios, the standard
versions of their tasks are utilized by excluding the advanced setups so far. For
PAMAP2, this is the training of an encoder and a classifier in one run without

8
D. Geißler et al.
(a) CelebA on H100
(b) CelebA on A100
(c) CelebA on RTX 3090
(d) PAMAP2 on H100
(e) PAMAP2 on A100
(f) PAMAP2 on RTX 3090
Fig. 3. Energy per epoch (mWh) across the different application scenarios with varying
Batch Size and Learning Rate.
pretraining, whereas, for the CelebA scenario, a single classifier is trained to
predict the identities only. Each scenario is trained with 16 different hyperpa-
rameter combinations and run two times on the three different HPC hardware
setups.
The average energy that was demanded during the training is shown in Fig-
ure 3, calculated through the introduced equation Equation (1). For this equa-
tion, k states the number of epochs in range 0 to T and n represents the number
of power measurements within an epoch from which we calculate the average. As
a general rule, the level of energy used can be linked to the efficiency and utiliza-
tion of the GPU. Within each matrix, lower values mean less energy consumed
for training one epoch, which results in improved GPU efficiency.
For each matrix shown in table Figure 3, the batch size choice has the most
impact on the energy consumption. Since the batch size determines the level
of operations that can be executed in parallel, effects in the energy per epoch
mainly originate from the utilization and the efficiency window in which the
GPU is operated. There needs to be a balance between the dataset size and the
GPU capabilities in order to operate it efficiently. Cross-comparing the matrices
across the two application scenarios highlights the importance of proper hyper-
parameter utilization. Due to the large size of the CelebA image dataset with
each data point representing a 78×218 pixel-sized image, the smallest batch size
can be considered the best selection to operate the GPU efficiently. On the other
hand, the tremendously smaller size of the PAMAP2 results in in-efficient uti-

The Power of Training
9
(a) CelebA on Nvidia H100
(b) PAMAP2 on Nvidia H100
(c) CelebA on Nvidia A100
(d) PAMAP2 on Nvidia A100
(e) CelebA on Nvidia RTX 3090
(f) PAMAP2 on Nvidia RTX 3090
Fig. 4. Average consumption across all epochs for each application scenario and test
setup.
lization of the GPU for small batch sizes. Therefore, larger batch sizes run more
efficiently for the PAMAP2 scenario since less energy is wasted for GPU idling.
Compared to the batch size, the choice of learning rate does not have a
recognizable influence in this analysis. Apart from small deviations, which may
occur due to the software-based measurement procedure, we cannot derive a
trend for the energy per epoch across the four learning rate selections. The
reason for that is the independence of the training duration, namely the number
of epochs until the model converges and stops the training process. As mentioned
before, the early stopping was set to start after reaching the threshold accuracy
of 0.8 with patience of 40 epochs. Influences through the learning rate change
can therefore be seen in figure Figure 4. Across the 16 setups, grouped into
the 4x4 setup alignment through the dashed lines as introduced in Table 1, the
total energy consumption for the full training is visualized. We can derive a

10
D. Geißler et al.
slight trend of learning rate settings towards 0.01 and 0.001, due to the issue
of learning rate 0.1 being set too large to converge properly whereas a learning
rate of 0.0001 increases the number of epochs needed until convergence. Further,
the total consumption is still ruled by the batch size choice, especially in the
PAMAP2 scenario with greater deviations in energy per epoch.
Overall, the range between the worst and best-performing setup is wide,
with the best case usually consuming less than 20% of the worst-case setup. As
a guideline to achieve this much of an improvement, the energy per epoch and
necessary number of epochs both need to be minimized. Comparing our two
application scenarios, especially when checking the CelebA results in Figure 4,
there can not be derived a general rule for thoroughly choosing the best hyper-
parameters. These findings therefore provide a motivation for further research
to explore more dynamic and thorough hyperparameter selection approaches.
5
Pretraining Learning Paradigm Results
For the pretraining scenario of PAMAP2, the autoencoder’s energy consumption
for training the encoder was tracked first. On top of that, the consumption
for training a classifier based on the latent features was tracked as well. As a
comparison, we trained the encoder and classifier architecture together without
pretraining. In total, we trained each model again for all 16 setups.
To compare the results, we generated equation 2 to calculate the breakeven
point on how many times the pre-trained encoder model needs to be recycled in
order to compensate the pretraining energy overhead compared to training the
full architecture every time.
EEnc + x ∗EClass = x ∗EEnc+Class
x =
EEnc
(EEnc+Class −EClass)
with x = number of cycles till compensation
(2)
The results are shown in Figure 5 for the three desired hardware setups. In
this case, the results are solely based on the frozen encoder, so the optimization
process does not consider the encoder anymore. The consumption for the pre-
training run is shown in solid lines whereas the basic training without encoder
pretraining is a dashed line. The crossing of two lines of the same color indicates
the break-even point, which means with how many complete downstream-task
training cycles, the investment in the pretraining starts to yield better energy
savings in the longer perspective. The dashed pre-trained lines commonly start
at a higher energy level since the starting point represents the pretraining en-
ergy investment, whereas the slope of each line represents the addition of the
recycling cycle’s training energy over time. The ideal situation is that the break-
even point appears as early as possible. From the 16 setups of hyperparameter
configurations utilized, we extracted the best, worst, and average scenarios.

The Power of Training
11
(a) PAMAP2 on Nvidia H100
(b) PAMAP2 on Nvidia A100
(c) PAMAP2 on Nvidia RTX 3090
Fig. 5. Break-even points, highlighting the amount of cycles until the pretraining en-
ergy investment is compensated.
As we can see across the three hardware setups, the blue lines show a sce-
nario where the pretraining already outperforms the standard training after two
to three recycling steps. On the other hand, for the worst case, visualized with
orange, it takes between 30 to 40 cycles until the spent pretraining energy is
compensated. As we can derive from equation 2, the compensation depends on
the increased energy consumption of the encoder pretraining and the ratio be-
tween training the classifier alone or with the encoder together. On average,
the energy is compensated after seven to 13 recycling steps of the pre-trained
encoder. Interestingly, in Figure 5c, the worst-case scenario with almost 40 re-
cycling steps still consumes less total energy than the average recycling. The
reason for that is the focus on cycles instead of energy in this graphic, leading
to the approval that even though you can recycle the energy with fewer cycles,
the total consumption has to be taken into account as well in order to maintain
the life-cycle efficiency.

12
D. Geißler et al.
Additionally, we investigated the average energy consumption between freez-
ing and unfreezing the encoder’s layer weights after its pretraining run. [15]
Since the optimizer does not update the weights during the backpropagation to
fine-tune the encoder, there is less energy needed to train the full model. As
shown in Table 2, average energy saving between 23% to 45% can be achieved
across all 16 setup combinations. Since proper pretraining already ensures the
required encoders’ behavior, the freezing of weights can be a helpful action to
reduce energy consumption, and further energy investment for fine-tuning can
be saved.
Table 2. Average Energy consumption (Wh) for utilizing the pre-trained encoder in
frozen or unfrozen mode.
Hardware
Encoder
H100
A100
RTX3090
Frozen
3.89 Wh
4.24 Wh
4.97 Wh
Unfrozen
6.01 Wh
5.55 Wh
9.13 Wh
Savings
35.2%
23.6%
45.5%
6
Multitask Learning Paradigm Results
For the multitask scenario trained on CelebA, we utilize the ResNet18 archi-
tecture pre-trained on ImageNet as the encoder. Due to ImageNets size and
required training time, we decided to recycle an already existing, pre-trained
model. As a side note, the best option to save energy in machine learning is the
usage of already existing, pre-trained models from external, shared sources to
compensate their energy investment further.
For our experiment, the nature of the CelebA dataset with multiple properties
labeled per image, we focus on training a multitask classifier and measuring
the energy consumption including the pre-trained encoder. More specifically, we
train a classifier to classify 40 facial attributes and the 40 most represented
person identities of a CelebA image.
The experiment was conducted through the same procedure as the previous
pretraining scenario, training the three models (attribute, identity, and both
together) with the 16 different setups. We calculated the average energy per
epoch across the three scenarios as shown in Table 3. Since the average energy
per epoch is almost identical across training attributes, identity, or both, with
different operating levels across the three hardware configurations, we further
calculated the average length of the training in number of epochs. As we can
see, for this experiment the number of epochs rules the overall energy consump-
tion whereas the efficiency from energy per epoch is negligible. Since the loss
functions are connected during the training in the multitask scenario, the classi-
fiers of attribute and identity are able to cross-regulate each other, which results

The Power of Training
13
in a quicker convergence. Instead of recycling already present knowledge as for
the pretraining, this experiment benefits from the active exchange of information
through the loss function. The result manifests our previous findings for mini-
mizing either one or at best both, the energy per epoch and the overall number
of epochs, to properly decrease the energy consumption for the training.
Table 3. Average Energy per Epoch (mWh) / Average number of Epochs
Hardware
Type
H100
A100
RTX3090
Attribute
47.93 mWh / 358
46.82 mWh / 380
81.41 mWh / 382
Identity
47.26 mWh / 170
45.79 mWh / 163
81.42 mWh / 159
Both
48.34 mWh / 85
45.48 mWh / 86
81.19 mWh / 84
7
Correlation with High-End Consumer Hardware
We transferred our experiment to high-end consumer hardware to compare our
findings independently of the utilized HPC cluster. Therefore we ran our experi-
ment scenarios for the CelebA and the PAMAP2 dataset again on a workstation
powered by an Nvidia RTX 6000 Ada with 48GB VRAM. Further, to test the
independence of CUDA-based systems, we set up a 16-inch Apple Macbook Pro
with M1 Max chip with 32-core GPU and 64GB unified memory as a second
device. The Nvidia GPU workstation runs on CUDA 12.3 and the Apple device
runs on metal performance shader (MPS) for neural network training accelera-
tion. We implemented a custom tracker based on the powermetrics tool of Mac
OS to generate the same energy monitoring and data structure as collecting data
through Carbontracker.
For the training regime, we could reproduce the influences of batch size and
the learning rate influence on the energy per epoch efficiency metric. However,
the findings were somewhat less distinctive and showed higher variations. We
attribute this to the missing isolation of the jobs, which are now running on
commercial operating systems. Additionally, for the powermetrics-based track-
ing, it remains unclear how precise the measurements can be compared to the
carbontracker measurements. Even though the local hardware operated on differ-
ent power levels, running the two learning paradigm tests confirmed our findings
that pretraining and multitask learning can be utilized to improve life-cycle-
oriented efficiency. For pretraining, the average breakeven points are calculated
for 9 cycles on the CUDA setup and 12 cycles on MPS. Finally, for the multitask
learning, the information sharing through the loss function by training attribute
and identity at the same time could reduce the energy consumption by around
40%.

14
D. Geißler et al.
8
Conclusion
In conclusion, we investigated the energy consumption of two popular ML sce-
narios on three different HPC and 2 pro-consumer workstation configurations
with variations in batch size and learning rates. For the 16 selected setups, we
first evaluated their influence on the efficiency through energy per epoch and fur-
ther, the total energy per training cycle until the early stopping monitor criteria
were met. Our findings showcased up to 80% decrease in energy consumption
if hyperparameters are set properly. For the learning paradigm tests, the cal-
culated break-even point is an indicator if energy investment for pretraining is
beneficial. Proper selection of hyperparameters may help to compensate for the
energy overhead already after a few recycling steps. A long recycling process
can be necessary if too much energy is invested into the pretraining or if the
savings are too weak for each recycling step. Lastly, for the multitask training,
we not only showed that training two classifiers in one training process is less
energy-consuming, we additionally showed that fewer epochs are necessary in
total due to the mutual training support of the classifiers.
As a limitation, we observed that hyperparameters influence the pretraining
and downstream task cycles differently, this is mostly determined by the number
of epochs needed to reach the accuracy target. Therefore, it is not possible to
derive best practice recommendations without trying them out. Moreover, even
the dataset influences the energy consumption depending on its size and the
chosen number of samples for pretraining and thorough training. Nevertheless,
as the goal of training DNNs is to have a model that reaches good performance,
optimizing for power consumption alone is not enough. Future research in this
direction should balance the model prediction performance and the energy effi-
ciency based on the baseline findings from our work.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and in-
novation program (HORIZON-CL4-2021-HUMAN-01) through the ”SustainML”
project (grant agreement No 101070408).
