Proceedings of the 2009 INFORMS Simulation Society Research Workshop
L.H. Lee, M.E. Kuhl, J.W. Fowler, and S. Robinson, eds.
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate output accuracy for a Discrete
Event Simulation (DES) model and Agent Based Simula-
tion (ABS) model. The purpose of this investigation is to
find out which of these simulation techniques is the best
one for modelling human reactive behaviour in the retail
sector. In order to study the output accuracy in both mod-
els, we have carried out a validation experiment in which
we compared the results from our simulation models to the
performance of a real system. Our experiment was carried
out using a large UK department store as a case study. We
had to determine an efficient implementation of manage-
ment policy in the store’s fitting room using DES and
ABS. Overall, we have found that both simulation models
were a good representation of the real system when model-
ling human reactive behaviour.
1
INTRODUCTION
Simulation has become a preferred tool in Operation Re-
search (OR) for modelling complex systems. Studies in
human behaviour modelling have received increased focus
and attention from simulation research in the UK (Robin-
son 2004). The research in human behaviour modelling has
been applied to various application areas such as manufac-
turing, health care, military and many more. As found in
the literature, researchers choose either Discrete Event
Simulation (DES) or Agent Based Simulation (ABS) as
tools to investigate human behaviour problems. The choice
of which simulation technique to be used relies on the in-
dividual judgment of the simulation model characteristics
and their experience with the model. The representation of
human behaviour contains complexity and variability;
therefore when investigating such systems it is very impor-
tant to choose a suitable modelling and simulation tech-
nique.
In this research, we aim to provide an empirical study
in order to find out which simulation modelling technique
is a good representation of a real system in our validation
experiment. In the validation experiment we have com-
pared the results from traditional DES and ABS models to
the performance of the real system. The main difference
between traditional DES and ABS is that in the first one
the modelling focuses on the process flow, while in the
ABS the modelling focus is on the individual entities in the
system and their interactions.
Human reactive behaviour means “how a certain indi-
vidual responds to a certain request. For example, sales
staff provides help when needed. In this work, we investi-
gate the output accuracy of DES and ABS models when
modelling human reactive behaviour in a department store.
Statistical tests were used to compare the models.
The content of the report is as follows: a background
section which gives a taxonomy of simulation techniques
and a discussion of previous related work. Background in
Section 2 explores the theory and characteristics of three
major OR simulation methods, i.e. DES, ABS and System
Dynamics (SD). In Section 3, we define our case study and
the model design. Validation experimentation is presented
in Section 4, where we also compare our simulation mod-
els’ output against the real world output by using quantita-
tive methods. In addition results from the experiment are
also discussed. Finally in Section 5 we draw our conclu-
sions and summarize the current progress of our research.
2
BACKGROUND
There are several tools and techniques that can be used
to model a system. Modelling is a process of abstracting a
real world problem into modelling tools. Over the last three
decades, simulation has become a frequently used model-
ling tool in OR (Kelton 2007).
A simulation can be defined as a process of executing
a model over time. Its ability to model complex systems
has made simulation the preferred user choice when com-
pared to mathematical models. Simulation can be classified
INVESTIGATING OUTPUT ACCURACY FOR A DISCRETE EVENT SIMULATION MODEL
AND AN AGENT BASED SIMULATION MODEL
Mazlina Abdul Majid
School of Computer Science
Nottingham University
Nottingham, NG8 1BB, U.K.
Uwe Aickelin
School of Computer Science
Nottingham University
Nottingham, NG8 1BB, U.K.
Peer-Olaf Siebers
School of Computer Science
Nottingham University
Nottingham, NG8 1BB, U.K.

Majid, Aickelin and Siebers
into three types; Discrete Event Simulation (DES), System
Dynamics (SD) and Agent Based Simulation (ABS).
DES models represent a system based on a series of
chronological sequencing of events where each event
changes state in discrete time. Meanwhile, SD models rep-
resent real world phenomenon using stock and flow dia-
grams, causal loop diagrams (to represent a number of in-
teracting feedback loops) and differential equations. In
contrast to the DES and SD models, ABS models comprise
of a number of autonomous, responsive and interactive
agents that will interact with each other in order to achieve
their objectives. We can summarise the three simulation
techniques as follows: the DES and ABS models are suit-
able to work with discrete event. They both model changes
in discrete time from one event to another. On the other
hand, SD models are suitable for modelling a system with
continuous state changes.
We have found literature performing comparisons be-
tween the DES and ABS models together with SD models
in terms of model characteristics; however, none of them
are currently focusing on modelling human behaviour. One
of the relevant papers comparing simulation technique with
regards to model characteristics is (Wakeland et al. 2005),
where they have compared SD and ABS in field of Bio-
medical. The authors found that the understanding of the
aggregate behaviour in SD models and state changes in in-
dividual entities in ABS models is relevant in the study.
SD and DES comparisons in the field of Fisheries were de-
scribed by (Morecroft and Robinson 2006). They found
that SD and DES are different approaches but both are
suitable for modelling systems over time. Existing com-
parisons between DES and ABS were described by
(Becker et al. 2006) in the field of transportation where
they found that DES is less flexible than ABS, i.e. it is dif-
ficult to model different behaviours of shippers in DES. In
addition to the existing comparison between DES and
ABS, (Yu et al. 2007) performed a quantitative comparison
on the DES and ABS models outputs in the field of trans-
portation. We found just one work that describes the three
techniques discussed in this study. (Owen et al 2008) tried
to establishing a framework for comparing the different
modelling techniques.
We have also found a disparity in the quantity of work
comparing SD and ABS or SD and DES contrasted to the
amount of work comparing DES and ABS. Specifically,
this disparity can be outstanded when referring to model-
ling human behavioural and where the focus is output ac-
curacy. Therefore, in this research we choose to study the
differences between DES and ABS in this regard.
To study the differences in both models, we choose to
focus on management practices in retail with regards to
worker behaviour. Research in retail previously focused on
consumer behaviour (i.e. Schenk et al. 2007). However,
research in management practices has started to evolve as
described by (Siebers et al. 2007, 2008). As discussed in
the existing comparison of simulation techniques above, a
lot of work has been done to compare simulation tech-
niques in transportation and supply chain management.
These studies have focused on modelling characteristics.
On the other hand, we have decided to compare the accu-
racy of output in the DES and ABS models on manage-
ment practices, as it is currently a developing area of study
in the retail domain.
3
CASE STUDY FIELDWORK
In order to achieve our aim, we have used a case study ap-
proach. The research has focused on the operation of the
main fitting room in the womenswear department of one of
the top ten retailers in the UK (see Figure 1). We wanted to
identify the potential impact for fitting room performance
when having different numbers of sales staff permanently
present.
We have investigated the staff behaviour on human re-
active behaviour, which relates to staff responding to the
customer when being available and requested. From the
case study exploration, we have produced a flow chart dia-
gram for DES conceptual models (see Figure 2) as in DES
we focus on process flow. Our ABS conceptual models
(see Figure 3 for an example) are state chart diagrams for
the different types of people we had to represent (in our
case customers and staff) as in ABS we focus on the indi-
vidual ‘actors’ and their interactions.
In the fitting room operation, the staff reactive behav-
iours can be seen in three jobs. Job 1 is about counting the
number of garments and giving the green card, job 2 is
about providing help and lastly job 3 is about receiving the
green card and unwanted garments from the customers.
The case study data has been transformed into the simula-
tion inputs for the experimentation.
4
EXPERIMENTATION
Two similar simulation models of DES and ABS were de-
veloped using multi-paradigm software known as Any-
logictm. A conventional M/M/1 queuing system is con-
structed in both techniques. The model consists of an
arrival process (customers), three single queues (customer
entry queue, customer return queue, customer help queue)
and resource (sales staff). The run length for both simula-
tion models is one day from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm and was
replicated to 100 runs. Both simulation models used the
same inputs. The simulation model we developed has one
member of staff that does all three jobs mentioned above,
with a workload of 45% for job 1 (counting garments on
entry), a workload of 10% for job 2 (providing help) and a
workload of 45% for job 3 (counting garments on exit).
Along with developing the simulation models for DES and
ABS, the verification and validation process is performed
simultaneously with the models. In the next sub-section,

Proceedings of the 2009 INFORMS Simulation Society Research Workshop
L.H. Lee, M.E. Kuhl, J.W. Fowler, and S. Robinson, eds.
Figure 1: An illustration of the main fitting room operation
we describe how we have performed our validation ex-
periment.
4.1 Validation Experiment
We have used black box validation to compare the simula-
tion outputs from DES and ABS with the real system out-
put using quantitative method. By using statistical methods
for this comparison, we are able to find out which simula-
tion model is a good representation of a real system. We
compared output data observed in the department store to
the distribution of the predicted output generated by each
model. By assuming the alternative hypothesis is the oppo-
site of null hypothesis in all tests, thus in the paper we will
only state the null hypothesis. The main hypothesis for the
validation test was constructed as following:
Ho = DES model is a good representation of a real system
Ho = ABS model is a good representation of a real system
We have used mean waiting time from the three
queues as our performance measurement in the experiment.
This was the only performance data we were able to collect
from the real system. Two tests have been setup in answer-
ing the hypothesis. These tests are described in the follow-
ing sub-section.
4.1.1 Test
1:
Comparing
Medians
Using
a
Non
Parametric Test
In Normal distributed data, the observed mean, median and
mode will have similar values because they are identical in the
population. Since waiting time data are not normally distrib-
uted, we have chosen to compare medians as a more robust
measure of central tendency rather than means and have cho-
sen a Non Parametric statistical test known as Mann-Whitney
to avoid assuming Normality. We have constructed the fol-
lowing hypothesis for the test:
Figure 2: Flow chart for DES model
Figure 3: State chart for ABS model (customer)

Majid, Aickelin and Siebers
Ho = DES models are not significantly different with real
system in mean customer waiting time
Ho = ABS models are not significantly different with real sys-
tem in mean customer waiting time
In performing the Mann-Whitney test, we have used
the open source statistical software, R. The median of wait-
ing time from DES and ABS models and real system were
used for the comparison purpose. We have chosen 0.05 as
the level of significance. If the probability of seeing data as
or more different than expected under the model is smaller
than 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis. If it is not then we
fail to reject the null hypothesis. Put some simply we can
conclude that the data we observed are consistent with the
model’s predictions (without assuming that the model must
itself therefore be correct). In the statistic test for DES
model against real system, p-value is 0.3269.Since the p-
value is not less than the chosen sigma value of 0.05; there
is insufficient evidence to reject our hypothesis. The statis-
tic test for ABS model against real system showed similar
results when it had a p-value of 0.2958, and it was larger
than the chosen level of 0.05.Therefore, we fail to reject
our hypothesis for both simulation models. We find the
distribution of median waiting times is consistent with both
models. Next we look at the variability of waiting time to
see if the one we get from our simulation models matches
the variability we can observe in the real system.
4.1.2 Test 2: Measuring Variability
In finding out which DES and ABS models are having
more variation against real system we have plotted a fre-
quency distribution of customer waiting time for a single
day (represents one replication) from both simulation mod-
els and real system (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Waiting time outputs for one day in real system,
DES and ABS models.
Next, we calculate the variance (a measure of disper-
sion) of customer waiting times. This allows us to compare
the variability of the simulation outputs data against real
system on a statistical basis by study the spread of fre-
quency distribution of customer waiting time from both
simulation models and real system. To execute the test, we
have produced the following hypothesis:
Ho = DES model shows similar variability compare to the
real system
Ho = ABS model shows similar variability compare to the
real system
The spread of frequency distribution for DES and
ABS models (as shown in Figure 4) seem slightly different
and to look into their differences, we have compared the
variances of the outputs. The variance shows how close the
simulation outputs i.e. waiting time, in the distribution are
to the middle of the distribution.
Table 1: Waiting time outputs for DES, ABS and real sys-
tem in one day with standard deviation and variance.
Models
Mean waiting
time
(minutes)
Standard
deviation
Variance
Real system
1.68
1.73
3.01
DES
1.69
1.59
1.96
ABS
1.61
1.70
2.89
By looking at the result in Table 1 above, the variance
between DES model and the real system is significantly
different with 35% difference and ABS model is similar
with real system with 4% difference. The reason for the
differences in variance for both simulation models may be
due to the different operation structure in DES and ABS mod-
els. The entities in DES model are having a strong order and
they are depending to each other to change their state. Mean-
while agents in ABS model are in decentralised order and they
change their state independently. For this test we fail to reject
our hypothesis for ABS model where the model has produced
similar variability with the real system. However, we have to
reject the hypothesis for DES model where the model has
shown dissimilarity in variability when compared to the real
system.
4.1.3 Validation Experiment Conclusion
In conclusion we find on statistically significant differ-
ences between the DES and ABS models when compared
to the real system in Test 1. However in Test 2 we found
DES model produced different variability then the real sys-
tem and ABS produced the similar variability with the real
system. Therefore based on Test 2 result, we suggest that
the ABS model is more suitable in representing the behav-
iour of the real system where the operation involving hu-
man is the main focus of the system. Nevertheless based on
the validation experiment both simulation models are good
in representing the real system and ABS shows better rep-
resentation of the real system when passed the Test 2.
Waiting Time Outputs from
Real System, DES and ABS in One Day
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Custimer Waiting Time
Frequency
REAL
DES
ABS

Majid, Aickelin and Siebers
5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the validation experiments between DES and ABS mod-
els, we are able to demonstrate which simulation models is
a good representation of real system when modelling hu-
man reactive behaviour. To achieve that, we compared the
output accuracy of the simulation outputs with the real sys-
tem in mean customer waiting time. Statistical methods to
analyse the outputs have helped us to identify the statistical
significance of the similarity and difference of the simula-
tion models to one another. The testing suggested that even
though both DES and ABS models produce similar outputs
in Test 1, when we compared their medians to the real sys-
tem, they showed different variation in their model outputs
in Test 2. ABS models reflect the real system behaviour
much better than DES model in terms of their predicted
variability in waiting times. The system that we modelled
in DES and ABS is a typical queuing system with no extra
features of complex human behaviour. Moreover, based
on the validation results we have concluded that both DES
and ABS models are a good representation of the real sys-
tem that contains human reactive behaviour. Investigating
the outputs’ behaviour using different sample data and dif-
ferent scenarios will be carried out as part of our future
work. We also want to evolve our experiment by modelling
human proactive behaviour in ABS only and look into the
benefit of modelling such behaviour in a queuing system
for the OR simulation study.
