IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
2135
Deep-Learning Inversion of Seismic Data
Shucai Li, Bin Liu
, Yuxiao Ren
, Yangkang Chen , Senlin Yang,
Yunhai Wang
, Member, IEEE, and Peng Jiang
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—We propose a new method to tackle the mapping
challenge from time-series data to spatial image in the ﬁeld
of seismic exploration, i.e., reconstructing the velocity model
directly from seismic data by deep neural networks (DNNs). The
conventional way of addressing this ill-posed inversion problem
is through iterative algorithms, which suffer from poor nonlinear
mapping and strong nonuniqueness. Other attempts may either
import human intervention errors or underuse seismic data. The
challenge for DNNs mainly lies in the weak spatial correspon-
dence, the uncertain reﬂection–reception relationship between
seismic data and velocity model, as well as the time-varying
property of seismic data. To tackle these challenges, we propose
end-to-end seismic inversion networks (SeisInvNets) with novel
components to make the best use of all seismic data. Speciﬁcally,
we start with every seismic trace and enhance it with its neighbor-
hood information, its observation setup, and the global context
of its corresponding seismic proﬁle. From the enhanced seismic
traces, the spatially aligned feature maps can be learned and
further concatenated to reconstruct a velocity model. In general,
we let every seismic trace contribute to the reconstruction of
the whole velocity model by ﬁnding spatial correspondence.
The proposed SeisInvNet consistently produces improvements
over the baselines and achieves promising performance on our
synthesized and proposed SeisInv data set according to various
evaluation metrics. The inversion results are more consistent
with the target from the aspects of velocity values, subsurface
structures, and geological interfaces. Moreover, the mechanism
and the generalization of the proposed method are discussed and
veriﬁed. Nevertheless, the generalization of deep-learning-based
inversion methods on real data is still challenging and considering
physics may be one potential solution.
Index
Terms—Deep
neural
networks
(DNNs),
seismic
inversion.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
EISMIC exploration is often used to map the structure
of subsurface formations based on the propagation of
Manuscript received March 26, 2019; revised July 29, 2019 and October 30,
2019; accepted November 4, 2019. Date of publication December 11,
2019; date of current version February 26, 2020. This work was sup-
ported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 51739007, Grant 61702301, and Grant 51809155, in part by the
Royal Academy of Engineering under the U.K.–China Industry Academia
Partnership Program Scheme (U.K.-CIAPP\314), in part by the Key Research
and Development Plan of Shandong Province under Grant 2016ZDJS02A01,
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University.
(Corresponding author: Shucai Li.)
S. Li, B. Liu, Y. Ren, S. Yang, and P. Jiang are with the School of
Qilu Transportation, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China, and also
with the Geotechnical and Structural Engineering Research Center, Shandong

163.com;

gmail.com).
Y. Chen is with the School of Earth Sciences, Zhejiang University,

Y. Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong

This
article
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, provided by the authors.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this article are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGRS.2019.2953473
Fig. 1.
Illustration of seismic exploration, which maps seismic velocity
model (spatial image) to time-series seismic data. Seismic data are composed
of seismic proﬁles indicated by a red border. Each seismic proﬁle corresponds
to seismic data recorded by all receivers from a seismic source. The white
dashed line on the seismic proﬁle indicates a seismic trace recorded by a
single receiver.
seismic wave on the Earth. It can estimate the physical
properties of the Earth’s subsurface mainly from reﬂected or
refracted seismic wave. Since seismic exploration is capable
of detecting target features from a large to small scale, it plays
an important role in the delineation of near-surface geology
for engineering purposes, hydrocarbon exploration, as well as
the Earth’s crustal structure investigation. Usually, artiﬁcial
sources of energy are required and a series of receivers are
placed on the surface to record seismic waves (as shown
in Fig. 1). One major outcome of processing the recorded data
is the reconstruction of the subsurface velocity model, namely
seismic velocity inversion, which has a substantial impact on
the accuracy of locating and imaging target bodies. Recently,
in addition to stochastic inversion strategies [1]–[3], by using
full-waveform information of seismic data, full-waveform
inversion (FWI) is now one of the most appealing methods
to reconstruct the velocity model with high accuracy and
resolution [4]–[7].
FWI was ﬁrst proposed in the early 1980s. It reconstructs
the velocity model by iteratively minimizing the difference
between seismic data and synthetic data in a least-squares
sense [8]–[12]. Conventional FWI uses gradient-based solvers
to update the model parameters, and the gradient is normally
calculated through backward waveﬁeld propagation of data
residuals based on adjoint-state methods [13]–[15]. However,
seismic velocity estimation from observed signals is a highly
nonlinear process, so that the conventional iterative algorithm
usually requires a good starting model to avoid local mini-
mum. Moreover, FWI also faces severe nonuniqueness because
of inadequate observation or observation data contaminated
with noise. Faced with these nonlinearity and nonunique-
ness issues in conventional FWI, geophysicists have proposed
many improvements, such as the multiscale strategy [16]–[19],
processing of seismic data in other domains [20]–[22],
and so on.
0196-2892 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2136
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
Fig. 2.
Task deﬁnition. DNN-based seismic inversion is a method to learn
the function F that maps seismic data to its corresponding velocity model.
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated
remarkable ability to approximate nonlinear mapping function
between various data domains [23], such as images and
label maps [24], [25], images and text [26], [27], and dif-
ferent types of images [28], [29], especially for inverse
problems, such as model/image reconstruction [30], [31],
image super-resolution [32]–[34], real-world photosynthesis
[35], [36], and so on. These state-of-the-art development
brings new perspectives for seismic inversion and velocity
model reconstruction. DNN-based seismic inversion is to learn
the mapping function F from seismic data to velocity model,
as illustrated in Fig. 2. So far, some work has already made
progress on this task. Moseley et al. [37] achieved 1-D
velocity model inversion by WaveNet [38] after depth-to-time
conversion of the velocity proﬁle. Araya-Polo et al. [39] used
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to reconstruct velocity
model from a semblance cube calculated from raw data.
These two approaches may introduce biases because of the
human intervention in seismic data processing. Other than data
processing, Wu et al. [40] proposed InversionNet to build the
mapping from raw seismic data to the corresponding velocity
model directly by Autoencoder architecture, which decodes the
velocity model from an encoded embedding vector. Since data
are extremely condensed in the embedding vector, the decoded
velocity model may lose details.
Inspired by recent progress and to avoid potential problems
of the work mentioned above, we further analyze the char-
acteristics of the DNN-based seismic inversion task. In gen-
eral, the characteristics mainly consist of three aspects. First,
the spatial correspondence between raw time-series signals
(seismic data) and seismic images (velocity model) is weak,
especially for reﬂected seismic signals. As illustrated in Fig. 3,
the position for which there exists a reﬂected wave on the
seismic proﬁle, the corresponding position on the velocity
model may not contain any interface and vice versa. This
weak spatial correspondence issue was also mentioned in [41].
Second, considering the complexity of subsurface structure in
various velocity models, for reﬂected seismic signals received
by one receiver from one source (i.e., seismic trace), the cor-
responding interfaces which cause the reﬂections in velocity
model are uncertain. In this article, we use the term uncertain
reﬂection–reception relationship to refer to this characteris-
tic. Third, in raw seismic data, the recorded seismic wave
gradually weakens as time goes by. That is, seismic data are
of time-varying property, which makes seismic pattern hard
to capture with ﬁxed kernel. All these characteristics pose a
great challenge for DNNs, especially for CNNs with spatial
correspondence and weight-sharing properties.
Fig. 3.
Velocity model and its corresponding seismic proﬁles. (Left) Velocity
model with one downward and upward interface. (Middle) Proﬁle of seismic
data based on one shot in location 25. (Right) Proﬁle of seismic data based
on one shot in location 75. The red and purple curves on the seismic
proﬁles indicate signals from the downward and upward parts of the interface,
respectively. Note that the squares with jet color indicate patches that all lie
on the same relative positions. The patch on the left seismic proﬁle contains
reﬂected signals from both upward and downward parts of interface, whereas
the patch on the right seismic proﬁle contains only signals from the upward
part. However, the patch on the velocity model does not have any information
about the interface. That is, either spatial correspondence between the velocity
model and the seismic proﬁles or between different seismic proﬁles is not
aligned.
To address these unique and intrinsic characteristics, in this
article, we propose an end-to-end DNN with novel components
called the seismic inversion network (SeisInvNet). The idea
is that we ﬁrst learn a feature map spatially aligned to
the velocity model from each seismic trace and after build-
ing the spatial correspondence, the velocity model could
be reconstructed from the learned feature maps effortlessly.
Speciﬁcally, considering the uncertain reﬂection–reception
relationship, we enforce each seismic trace to learn a feature
map with information corresponding to the whole velocity
model regardless of actual relationship between each seismic
trace and velocity model. Then, from all the feature maps,
we reconstruct the velocity model by CNNs. Thus, after
training, the information in each feature map will spatially
align to the velocity model. Since each seismic trace has its
own sensitivity region, the feature map from different seismic
traces will provide knowledge to reconstruct different parts of
a velocity model. We learn spatially aligned feature maps by
fully connected layers, which can handle the uncertainty and
time-varying properties of seismic data. In this way, we solve
the challenge of uncertain reﬂection–reception relationship,
build the spatial correspondence, and meanwhile get rid of
the time-varying problem.
Moreover, in seismic exploration, a seismic trace is often
observed along with its neighborhood traces to identify the
local structure, and all seismic traces are combined together
to deduce the global context. Thus, before learning the feature
map, we enhance each seismic trace with some auxiliary
knowledge from several neighborhood traces and the whole
proﬁle. Furthermore, all the mentioned operations could be
trained end to end. In general, we make the best use of all
seismic data and let every seismic trace contribute to the
reconstruction of the whole velocity model by ﬁnding spatial
correspondence.
We carry out experiments on a self-proposed SeisInv data
set. From comprehensive comparisons, our SeisInvNet has
demonstrated superior performance against all the baseline
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2137
models consistently. Our inversion results are more consistent
with the ground truth from the aspects of velocity values,
subsurface structures, and geological interfaces. Furthermore,
we study the mechanism of SeisInvNet by visualization and
statistical analysis.
Major contributions reside in the following aspects.
1) We make an in-depth analysis on the problem of
DNN-based seismic inversion.
2) We design SeisInvNet with novel and efﬁcient compo-
nents to take full advantage of all the seismic data.
3) We demonstrate superior performance against all the
baseline models on the proposed SeisInv data set.
4) We provide comprehensive mechanism studies.
II. RELATED WORKS
Several works have tried seismic inversion problems by
DNNs in various ways, which can be concluded as follows.
A. Data Preprocessing-Based Seismic Inversion
To make raw seismic data and the corresponding velocity
model spatially aligned, data preprocessing is always an option
to consider, though at the risk of introducing human assump-
tions. Moseley et al. [37] made a single-receiver recorded
signal spatially aligned to the model by the standard 1-D time-
to-depth conversion before performing 1-D velocity model
inversion by WaveNet [38]. Araya-Polo et al. [39] transferred
raw seismic data into a velocity-related feature cube by
the normal moveout correction of common midpoint gather
data [42] before applying CNNs.
B. Encoder–Decoder Network-Based Seismic Inversion
When images have speciﬁc ﬁxed structures or patterns,
they can be reconstructed without providing low-level infor-
mation, such as spatial correspondence. In this case, even
discarding spatial information and compressing original data
to a 1-D embedding vector, we can still get desired output
without losing much information. This process can be achieved
by the encoder–decoder networks (Autoencoder for short).
An Autoencoder has two components: one is the encoder
which compresses input to the embedding vector and the other
is the decoder which reconstructs the output from the embed-
ding vector. This kind of Autoencoder has been widely utilized
for tasks on the aligned face data set, such as face genera-
tion [43], [44]. According to their experiments, the embedding
vector contains high-level information, such as expression,
gender, and age. It also ﬁts the human behaviors that we
can draw the portrait only given some high-level seman-
tic descriptions. However, when it comes to more complex
images, low-level information will have critical importance.
For example, medical image semantic segmentation methods,
such as U-Net [31], [45], concatenate low-level features on
the output of deep layers by shortcuts to compensate details
of the results, but they only work on data where input and
output are spatially aligned.
For seismic inversion problem where input and output are
not spatially aligned, encoder–decoder networks can still be
applied to extract the embedding vector. This way was adopted
by Wu et al. [40] to propose InversionNet, which works well
on the velocity model with relatively ﬁxed patterns (horizontal
interfaces and dipping faults) according to their article and can
successfully handle complex structures after introducing CRF
as postprocessing in [46]. However, when velocity models
contain a large number of small structures, the embedding
vector may fail to preserve all the details. As Fig. 7 demon-
strates, Autoencoder inverted results sometimes lose details in
our implementation.
C. Other Related Work
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) neural networks with fully
connected layers are the most direct way to construct a map-
ping between data of weak spatial correspondence. The output
of each fully connected layer will depend on all the input
values, and thus, information carried by seismic data could be
best captured. However, in this way, the computation and space
complexity is proportional to the square of data dimension.
Dahlke et al. [41] developed a probabilistic model to indicate
the existence of faults in the 2-D velocity model using MLPs,
while Araya-Polo et al. [47] extended this method to the 3-D
case. To reduce computational complexity, they have to ﬁrst
convert the model to the low-dimensional pixel or voxel grid,
so that the faults could only be coarsely identiﬁed. In addition
to reﬂected seismic waves, transmitted waves can also be
used to reconstruct velocity models. For example, based on
the prestack multishot seismic traces of transmitted wave,
Wang et al. [48] achieved satisfactory inversion results using
fully convolutional networks.
III. METHODOLOGY AND IMPLEMENTATION
A. Methodology
In order to better deﬁne the problem, let us ﬁrst introduce
some notation. We have N velocity models V i, i ∈N and the
corresponding N seismic data Di, i ∈N. Each velocity model
V i is of size [H, W], whereas each seismic data Di is of size
[S, T, R]. Here, H and W denote the height and width of the
velocity model, whereas S, R, and T denote the number of
seismic sources, receivers, and time steps, respectively. Each
seismic data Di can be treated as S × R single seismic trace
Di
s,r of dimension T, while all the single seismic traces from
the same source form the seismic proﬁle Di
s,: of dimension
[T, R]. Visual illustration of these notation is shown in Fig. 1.
In this article, we intend to learn the mapping F from
seismic data Di to velocity model V i directly, namely seismic
inversion, by DNNs with parameters θ
F(Di, θ) →V i.
(1)
In general, for an image-to-image mapping, CNNs are pre-
ferred. However, in our case, directly using CNNs may not
be the optimal choice. There are two unique characteristics of
the mapping between seismic data and velocity model.
1) Weak spatial correspondence. The interface in velocity
model and the corresponding pattern in seismic data
have weak spatial correspondence.
2) Uncertain reﬂection–reception relationship between seis-
mic data and velocity model.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2138
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
For a seismic trace, the corresponding interfaces that cause
the reﬂected signals are uncertain in different velocity models.
These characteristics will be problematic for the spatial cor-
respondence property of CNNs. In addition, there is another
potential problem that seismic waves weaken gradually as
time goes by, which may pose another challenge for the
weight-sharing property of CNNs. As stated in Section II, one
possible way of using CNNs regardless of the spatial corre-
spondence and weight sharing issue is by encoder–decoder
networks, which condense seismic data into a 1-D embedding
vector and abandon its spatial information. As demonstrated
in Fig. 7, this way sometimes leads to inaccurate inversion of
velocity models.
Instead, in this article, we intend to take full advantage
of seismic data without much loss of information by DNNs.
Consequently, we have the following methodology. In general,
we ﬁrst learn that the feature map f i
s,r contains information
spatially aligned to the velocity model V i from each seismic
trace Di
s,r, and then we regress the velocity model V i from
all the spatially aligned feature maps [ f i
s,r : s ∈S,r ∈R].
In practice, considering the uncertain relationship between
seismic traces and interfaces in velocity model, regardless
of actual relationship, we choose to let each seismic trace
learn the feature map corresponding to the whole velocity
model. After training, the information in each feature map
will spatially align to the velocity model. As each seismic
trace has its own sensitivity region, the feature map from
different seismic traces will provide knowledge to reconstruct
different parts of the velocity model. However, this mapping
is ambiguous since different seismic observation setup and
subsurface geology conditions may result in the same seismic
trace records, i.e., Di
ˆs,ˆr = Di
¯s,¯r, ˆs ̸= ¯s, and ˆr ̸= ¯r. To reduce
the uncertainty and enrich the knowledge, for each seismic
trace data Di
s,r recorded by a single receiver r and single
shot s, we enhance the trace data by encoding its neighbor-
hood information N(Di
s,:)r, its observation setup S(Di
s,r), and
global context of its sth proﬁle G(Di
s,:), where we replace Di
s,r
with an embedding vector Ei
s,r, which gives
Ei
s,r =
!
N
"
Di
s,:
#
r, S
"
Di
s,r
#
, G
"
Di
s,:
#$
.
(2)
Compared with Di
s,r, Ei
s,r provides much more rich knowledge
to
generate
spatially
aligned
and
unambiguous
feature
map
f i
s,r. Intuitively speaking, neighborhood information
would help networks become aware of the pattern of local
seismic data, such as the existence and direction of reﬂected
wave; observation setup would make information more
distinguishable and less ambiguous by telling how each
seismic trace data are recorded; and global context would
supplement global information, such as velocity distribution
and the number of interfaces.
Given this information, it is feasible to generate spatially
aligned feature f i
s,r from Ei
s,r that
F1
"
Ei
s,r, θ1
#
= f i
s,r
(3)
where F1 and θ1 are the feature generating functions and its
parameters. Collecting all the feature maps, we have Fi =
[ f i
s,r : s ∈S,r ∈R] with dimension [S × R, h, w].
Finally, we could regress velocity model V i from Fi with
commonly used CNNs, since we have built the spatial corre-
spondence between Fi and V i that
F2(Fi, θ2) = V i
(4)
where F2 and θ2 are the velocity model regressing function
and its parameters.
In a nutshell, in our method, we build the mapping F by
F : Di N ,S,G
−→Ei
F1
−→Fi
F2
−→V i.
(5)
In the following, we will describe how to implement
N, G, F1, F2 by DNNs.
B. Implementation
Fig. 4 illustrates our proposed SeisInvNet which has four
components.
1) Embedding Encoder: The embedding encoder generates
embedding vectors that contain neighborhood information,
observation setup, and global context.
We
extract
neighborhood
information
by
a
shallow
CNN (N) on the seismic proﬁle Di
s,:. The output of N
has the same dimension as the input, but each value in
N(Di
s,:) shares information across its neighborhood in Di
s,:.
Consequently, the column N(Di
s,:)r (of dimension T) contains
the neighborhood information of seismic trace Di
s,r. As for
observation setup, S transforms the position of the receiver r
and source s to the one-hot vector. Since s ∈[1, S] and r ∈
[1, R], the observation setup S(Di
s,r) is a vector of dimension
S + R. Global context is a vector of dimension C extracted
from seismic proﬁle Di
s,: by an encoder G. The encoder G
is also implemented by CNNs, which constantly compresses
data by convolution operation until the spatial dimension
vanished.
Finally, as (2), we collect N(Di
s,:)r, S(Di
s,r), and G(Di
s,:)
to form an embedding vector Ei
s,r of dimension T +S+ R+C,
which replaces the original T-dimensional seismic trace Di
s,r.
Sometimes, we will refer Ei
s,r as enhanced seismic trace. It is
worth to note that all CNNs based on N and G are weight
sharing over all the applied data.
2) Spatially Aligned Feature Generator: Given the S × R
embedding vectors Ei, our generator ﬁrst further condense
them to vectors of size h × w using MLPs (F1) with
several fully connected layers (including activation and norm
operations), then reshape each vector to a feature map f i
s,r of
size [h, w]. To be speciﬁc, instead of using raw seismic data
(of size [S, R, T ]) as a 3-D input, we treat each enhanced
trace (of size [T + S + R + C]) as the actual input and let the
parameters of the generator ﬁxed and shared on all [S × R]
of them. Thus, the mapping from each embedding vector to
the feature map becomes acceptable for the generator with
fully connected layers.
We design the generator to output feature map with the
same dimension ratio as the velocity model. From these
feature maps, the velocity model will be reconstructed directly.
Thus, after training, every part of the feature map will impart
knowledge to reconstruct the corresponding part of the velocity
model, so feature map is spatially aligned to the velocity
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2139
Fig. 4.
Visualization of SeisInvNet framework. Given the seismic data (▼to ▼indicate data by different sources, while ▲to ▲indicate data recorded
by different receivers. To save space, data are not visualized in its original scale.) (a) Embedding encoder replaces each original seismic trace Dis,r by an
embedding vector Eis,r which comprises neighborhood information N (Dis,:)r (indicated by
and one of the correspondences is indicated by the yellow
region.), observation setup S(Dis,r) (indicated by squares, such as ■and ■), and global context G(Dis,:) of the corresponding seismic proﬁle (indicated by
rectangles, such as
,
, and
). (b) Spatially aligned feature generator transforms each embedding vector to a feature map whose information is spatially
aligned to the velocity model. (c) Velocity model decoder collects all the feature maps from which knowledge is decoded to regress the velocity model. (d) We
optimize parameters of an encoder, a generator, and a decoder by minimizing L2 and maximizing MSSIM metrics to make output more closed to the ground
truth. Check Section III-B for details.
model. In addition, because each embedding vector has its own
sensitivity region, a feature map f i
s,r learned from a different
embedding vector would contribute to a different part of the
velocity model. We show feature maps in Section IV-F to
verify the above statements.
3) Velocity Model Decoder: A velocity model decoder
collects all S × R feature maps Fi from which knowl-
edge is decoded to regress the velocity model V i (of size
[1, H, W]) by CNNs (F2) with several convolutional layers
(including activation and norm operations). During training,
the velocity model decoder randomly throws away several
feature maps (dropout) to help the decoder reconstruct the
velocity model from all the possible information, other than
only depended on certain feature maps. The dropout operation
improves robustness and generalization ability of the velocity
model decoder.
4) Loss Function: How the reconstructed velocity models
appear mainly depends on how the loss function is designed.
For image regression and reconstruction problems, L1 or L2
norm is the most commonly used metric to deﬁne the loss
function. However, these metrics treat each position of the
image individually, which makes it difﬁcult for networks to
capture local structures and details, such as edges and corners.
In the experiments of Wang et al. [49], with the same L2 score,
processed images show dramatic difference, which means
L2 is inconsistent with human perception.
Local structures and details are important factors to be
taken into consideration while reconstructing seismic velocity
models [50]–[52]. To measure these factors, the structural
similarity index (SSIM) proposed by Wang et al. [49] is the
most commonly used metric which computes the statistical
difference between two corresponding windows, that is. pre-
dict and target. SSIM is deﬁned as
SSIM(x, y) =
(2µxµy + c1)(2σxy + c2)
"
µ2x + µ2y + c1
#"
σ 2x + σ 2y + c2
#
(6)
where x and y are the two corresponding windows, while
c1 and c2 are the variables to stabilize the division. SSIM
score ranges from 0 to 1, and it reaches its maximum when
information in two windows are the same.
Accordingly, apart from minimizing norm metric, in this
article, we will simultaneously maximize SSIM metric.
Speciﬁcally, we apply squared L2 norm and multiscale
structural similarity (MSSIM) [53] to compute the loss Li
for each data pair
Li( ¯V i, V i) =
H×W
%
k=0
" ¯V i
k −V i
k
#2
−
%
r∈R
H×W
%
k=0
λrSSIM
" ¯V i
x(k,r), V i
y(k,r)
#
(7)
where ¯V i and V i are the inversion result and ground truth,
respectively, for the ith data pair, and x(k,r) and y(k,r) are
the two corresponding windows centered in k of size r.
We carry out SSIM on total R different scales, and for each
scale r, we have a weight λr to control its importance. For
the gradient derivation of SSIM, please refer to [54].
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Data Set Preparation
In this section, we give a detailed description of how the
data set is prepared. Our data set has 12 000 different velocity
models and the corresponding synthetic seismic data pairs.
Since this data set is mainly for inversion problems, we name
our data set SeisInv data set. Consequently, synthetic seismic
data are the input, whereas the velocity model is the ground
truth.
In this article, velocity models are designed to have horizon-
tally layered structures with several small ups and downs ran-
domly distributed along the interfaces. In general, the velocity
models in our data set can be divided into four subsets,
namely types I–IV, respectively, according to the number of
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2140
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
Fig. 5.
Overall statistics on the training data set. (a) Velocity distribution with respect to the depth. Red stars: mean of velocities distributed in depth on
the vertical axis. Blue intervals: the corresponding standard deviation. (b) Histogram of values in velocity models. Blue bars: the number of grids with a
velocity value in the corresponding velocity interval. (c) Interface distribution on velocity models. The number of interfaces in each grid is visualized with
the right-side colormap.
subsurface interfaces. In each category, 3000 different models
are ﬁrst designed by generating the geology interfaces and
then ﬁlling the layers between two adjacent interfaces with a
constant velocity value randomly selected from [1500, 4000].
According to the statistics of actual subsurface geological
conditions, the deeper stratum tends to have a larger seismic
velocity. Consequently, we let the velocity value monoton-
ically increase with stratum and the velocity difference is
over 300 m/s for the adjacent geological layers. The overall
statistics, including mean, variance, and histogram of values
are demonstrated in Fig. 5(a) and (b). In this article, we design
velocity models to have up to four interfaces, i.e., two to ﬁve
layers with different velocity values. In order to obtain a more
recognizable pattern on observation data, the interfaces are
kept away from the top ten grids and mainly distributed in the
middle, as shown in Fig. 5(c).
Seismic data are generated through numerical simulation
of seismic wave propagation on velocity models. In seismic
exploration, a series of seismic sources and receivers are set
on the ground surface to excite and record seismic wave,
respectively. Usually, the recorded signal will contain various
types of waves, such as reﬂected waves, and diffracted waves.
Normally, the primary reﬂected wave is the main signal used
to extract information regarding subsurface structures. In the
numerical generation of seismic data in this article, the velocity
model is of grid size 100 × 100 with uniform spacing of 10 m
on both directions, and 20 seismic sources are set on the
surface uniformly with ﬁve-grid interval, while 100 receivers
are set on every grid of the surface. Typically, acoustic wave
equation [see (8)] is considered as the governing physics
controlling the seismic waveﬁeld changes in time
∂2 p
∂t2 −v2
&∂2 p
∂x2 + ∂2 p
∂y2
'
= 0
(8)
where p denotes the pressure, i.e., the acoustic waveﬁeld,
v denotes wave velocity of the media, x and y are the spatial
coordinates, and t is the time. Based on the pseudospectral
method [55]–[57], seismic wave propagation in an arbitrary
velocity model can be simulated accurately. The waveﬁeld at
every receiver point and every time step is saved as seismic
data (two ﬁgures on the right-hand side in Fig. 3).
Note that, the ﬁrst recorded wave, which has the biggest
amplitude, is called the direct wave (as shown in Fig. 3).
It represents waves that travel directly from seismic sources
to the receivers, so it does not contain any information about
subsurface structures. Below the direct wave there lie the
primary reﬂected waves, which are indicated bys red and
brown lines in Fig. 3. They have much smaller amplitude
since part of the wave energy will go through the interface
and continue to travel in the next medium. Even in the same
medium, as time goes by, the amplitude of seismic record
will gradually decrease due to dispersion and dissipation.
This waveﬁeld attenuation nature will pose a great challenge,
especially for the CNNs that share uniform weights over the
whole spatial dimensions.
B. Experimental Settings
We randomly divide our SeisInv data set into three sets:
10 000 for training, 1000 for validation, and 1000 for test.
To reduce the computation complexity and for the convenience
of comparing with other methods, we only utilize the data of
the front 1000 time steps and sample the data recorded by
32 receivers from the total 100 receivers uniformly. That is,
the input data are from the same seismic acquisition setup.
For each time step, the time sampling rate is 1 ms, and a
study of how different time steps affect the ﬁnal inversion
results is carried out in Section IV-D3. Consequently, Di is
of size [20, 1000, 32] and V i is of size [100, 100]. We apply
MSSIM with ﬁve different scales from window size of 11 at
the beginning, and the weight for each scale is set up identical
with [53]. To optimize our SeisInvNet and baseline model,
we use Adam optimizer [58] with batch size 12 and set initial
learning rate as 5e-5 following the “poly” learning rate policy.
During training, we carry out 200 epochs in total and set the
dropout rate to 0.2 in our velocity model decoder. The longest
path in our SeisInvNet has 24 layers (each layer is a combi-
nation of convolution or fully connected operation, activation
operation, and norm operation.). Our SeisInvNet has about
10M parameters and could be trained end to end without any
preprocessing and postprocessing. Following the convention,
we save the parameters that perform best on the validation set
and carry out experiments on validation and test sets.
C. Baseline Models
To verify the effectiveness of our SeisInvNet, we use fully
convolutional networks as our baseline model. To be speciﬁc,
we design the baseline model based on encoder–decoder
networks as the ones used in [40] and implement it by
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2141
Fig. 6.
Randomly selected examples from the test set. Each row from top to bottom exhibits examples from the velocity types I ∼IV, respectively.
our own code, since no ofﬁcial code is available yet. The
baseline model has 21 layers, which are slightly fewer than our
SeisInvNet. However, the amount of parameters in the baseline
model is about 40M in our implementation that is three times
larger than SeisInvNet because of frequently using convolution
with large channels. To be fair, our SeisInvNet and baseline
model are designed with the same basic network blocks
and trained with the same hyperparameters and optimizer
mentioned in Section IV-B. Please refer to the Supplementary
Material for the detailed architecture of the SeisInvNet and
baseline model.
During comparison, we tested several variants of the
SeisInvNet and baseline model by modifying loss function
conﬁguration. For each pair comparison of the SeisInvNet
and baseline model, all the setups are identical. For example,
in Table I, instead of comparing the SeisInvNet and baseline
model with loss deﬁned in (7), we also make comparisons
with only L1 loss and L2 loss. It is worth to note that
InversionNet [40] is a speciﬁc form of the baseline model
with L1 loss, initial learning rate as 5e-4, and learning rate
policy of decreasing ten times after every 15 training epochs.
In our implementation, InversionNet may not converge to its
optimal because of this dramatic learning rate decreasing. All
the variants are trained, validated, and tested on the machine
of a single NVIDIA TITAN Xp with similar average inference
time of 0.013 ± 0.002s.
For convenience, we use a series of Greek letter to denote
each variant of SeisInvNet and baseline model that (α) for
InversionNet, (β) for baseline with L1 loss, (γ ) for SeisInvNet
with L1 loss, (δ) for baseline with L2 loss, (ϵ) for SeisInvNet
with L2 loss, (ζ) for baseline with L2 and MSSIM loss, and
(η) for SeisInvNet with L2 and MSSIM loss.
D. Qualitative Comparison
In this section, we will show some examples to visually
demonstrate the inversion effects of our SeisInvNet variants,
the baseline models, as well as the conventional FWI. In gen-
eral, both DNN methods can successfully invert the velocity
model, while SeisInvNet (η) presents more accurate value and
detailed interface structures than the baseline model.
1) Comparison With the Baseline Models: From each type
of velocity model in the test set, we randomly select several
examples for comparison in Fig. 6. Apparently, among all the
SeisInvNet variants and the baseline models, our SeisInvNet
(η) can provide the best performance in most cases.
We further select several examples to visually com-
pare SeisInvNet (η) and baseline (ζ) more comprehensively
in Fig. 7. The misﬁt degree of geological interface and velocity
value are two major factors considered in this evaluation.
As we can see, all four examples inverted by both SeisInvNet
(η) and baseline (ζ) present relatively uniform and accurate
velocity distribution within every subsurface layer. Overall,
observation indicates that the velocity model reconstructed by
SeisInvNet (η) is closer to the ground truth from the aspects of
velocity value, subsurface structure, and geological interface.
To further analyze the inversion effects, we take a closer look
at the interfaces and compare the inversion results at the pixel
level. Generally speaking, baseline (ζ) tends to present blurred
interfaces, while SeisInvNet (η) generates a more accurate
description of the interfaces, especially when the interfaces
have some small undulations. Taking the example on the
third row as an example, our SeisInvNet (η) successfully
reconstructs the small undulation (marked by red circle) on
the second interface, while baseline (ζ) totally missed this
structure and presented a ﬂat interface. In addition, the results
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2142
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
Fig. 7.
Inversion results of our SeisInvNet (the second column) and baselines (the third column), as well as ground truth (the ﬁrst column) from the validation
and test sets. Vertical velocity proﬁle at the black line is shown in the rightmost column for comparing the inverted velocity values. Each row from top to
bottom exhibits examples from the velocity types I ∼IV, respectively. The red ellipses on the third row circled a small undulation in the velocity model and
the corresponding inversion results and the red rectangles on the third and fourth rows denote anomalous velocity areas. The comparison in this ﬁgure indicates
that our SeisInvNet (η) delivers a better performance than the baseline model (ζ) does.
of baseline (ζ) in the third and fourth rows have a poor
inversion effect with anomalous velocity area and blurry
interface (indicated by the red region), respectively, while the
results of SeisInvNet (η) are more matched with the ground
truth. A possible reason is that the baseline (ζ) removes the
spatial dimension, while our SeisInvNet (η) preserves spatial
information, as discussed in Section IV-F.
From the velocity proﬁles at the vertical central axis shown
in Fig. 7, we could ﬁnd that our SeisInvNet (η) is better at the
velocity recovery than the baseline model. In shallow layers,
the reconstructed velocity model by SeisInvNet (η) seems
identical with the ground truth, while baseline (ζ) occasionally
produces errors. As for the deeper layers, both methods show
some discrepancy regarding the ground truth, while the error
by SeisInvNet (η) is obviously smaller. This pattern is in line
with the common sense of geophysical exploration that the
deeper the subsurface structure is, the harder it is to estimate.
Moreover, the velocity jump in the outputs of SeisInvNet (η)
seems more “vertical” than that in baseline (ζ), which means
interfaces predicted by SeisInvNet (η) are sharper.
2) Comparison With the Conventional FWI: To demonstrate
the advancement of our SeisInvNet over conventional methods,
we further show several visual comparisons between the
results of the FWI and SeisInvNet (η) in Fig. 8. The FWI
results are calculated via a basic time-domain ﬁnite-difference
code with a common conjugate gradient solver. As mentioned
above, a good FWI result depends on a relatively good initial
model while the deep learning way does not require this
prerequisite. However, in most of the practical cases, the prior
velocity distribution is hard to obtain and is usually blur
and far from the ground truth. Thus, in this experiment,
we use greatly smoothed velocity as initial models for FWI
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2143
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON TEST AND VALID SETS BY THE FIVE METRICS. FOR EACH SET AND METRIC,
THE TOP THREE RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN RED, BLUE, AND GREEN, RESPECTIVELY. THE ↑INDICATES THE LARGER
VALUE ACHIEVED, THE BETTER PERFORMANCE IS, WHILE ↓INDICATES THE SMALLER, THE BETTER
Fig. 8.
Comparison between conventional FWI results with smooth velocity
as initial model and the outcome of the SeisInvNet (η) (see the ground truth
in Fig. 7).
and the observation setup is the same as the one described
in Section IV-B. From the inversion results shown in Fig. 8,
we can see that our SeisInvNet(η) has a better performance
than the conventional FWI, especially in terms of the interface
and the velocity distribution.
3) Difﬁculty in the Recovery of the Last Layer: The above
visual comparisons show some difﬁculties in the recovery
of the last layer. One possible reason is that the recording
time is not long enough that the reﬂective information from
the deeper parts of the model are not enough for velocity
recovery. To verify this, we reprepare the data by extending the
recording time to 1500 time steps and retrain our SeisInvNet
from scratch. According to the evaluation results on the test
set, the overall average L2 loss decreases from 0.001226 to
0.001039, while the overall average MSSIM increases from
0.9861 to 0.9879, which shows small improvement and little
visual quality promotion (see examples provided in Fig. 9).
Therefore, we only use 1000 times steps in other experiments
to reduce the number of parameters in networks and accelerate
the speed of training and inference. Considering the above
Fig. 9.
SeisInvNet (η) outcomes with different recording times. (a) and (b)
correspond to the type III and IV model in Fig. 7.
analysis, another possible reason would be that although most
of the deep reﬂection waves are recorded, they are not strong
enough to contribute in the velocity model recovery. How to
extract the relatively weak signals from the deeper layers and
how to better recover the deeper parts would be an essential
topic worth exploring further in the future.
E. Quantitative Comparison
In this section, we quantitatively evaluate and compare
the overall inversion effects of our SeisInvNet variants and
baseline models via a series of metrics.
1) Metrics: Metrics we used are listed as follows.
a) Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Square Error
(MSE): We quantify the misﬁt error of both inversion results
based on the prevalently used MAE and MSE.
b) SSIM and MSSIM: We measure how well the local
structures are ﬁt by SSIM [49] and MSSIM [53].
c) Soft Fβ: As stated previously, the quality of geological
interfaces is one major factor considered when evaluating
the inversion results. Geological interfaces appear as edges
between two adjacent layers. Thus, we can ﬁrst detect edges
in the reconstructed velocity model and ground truth and
then use the evaluation method for edge detection to measure
their alignment. Namely, we measure the quality of geological
interfaces by evaluating the accuracy of edges after applying
the same edge detection method. And, we treat edges of ¯V as
predicted edges and edges of corresponding V as ground-truth
edges.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2144
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
Algorithm 1 Soft Fβ
Require:
(a) Reconstructed velocity model ¯V ,
(b) Ground-truth velocity model V,
(c) Binarized edge detection method E.
Steps:
1: Compute binarized edges for both ¯V and V that ¯e = E( ¯V)
and e = E(V ),
2: Smooth ¯e by Gaussian kernel ω that ˆe= ω ∗¯e, and ∗
represents convolution ﬁlter,
3: Soft Precision = |ˆe ⊙e|/|¯e|, ⊙is a Hadamard product,
4: Soft Recall = |ˆe ⊙e|/|e|, ⊙is a Hadamard product.
Soft Fβ:
Substitute Precision and Recall with Soft Precision and
Soft Recall in Eq. 9, we get Soft Fβ.
Fβ also called F-measure is a metric to measure the
accuracy of classiﬁcation, which is deﬁned as
Fβ = (1 + β2) ·
Precision · Recall
β2 · Precision + Recall
(9)
and can also be used to measure the accuracy of edges, and it
ranges from 0 to 1 with the rule of the larger the better that 1
for complete alignment and 0 reversely. However, this metric
is too rigid that no matter how much predicted edges deviated
from ground-truth edges, resulting in a total misalignment.
This problem also exists in other metrics, such as MAE and
cross entropy.
Consequently, we modify Fβ to a soft metric for edge detec-
tion that the more spatial closed the prediction to the target,
more larger the Fβ will be (see deﬁnition in Algorithm 1). It is
worth noting that since Soft Fβ no longer follows its original
formulation, the value range will change. In our experiments,
the value range may exceed 1 but still follows the original
rule. We set ω to 7 and β to 1 in the following experiments.
2) Results and Ablation Study: The comparison results of
all seven variants of SeisInvNet and baseline model by total
ﬁve metrics on both validation (valid) and test sets are listed
in Table I. Obviously, for each pair of SeisInvNet and baseline
with the same loss function conﬁguration, our SeisInvNet
shows consistent superiority according to all the metrics.
On the whole, our SeisInvNet (η) with L2 and MSSIM loss
achieved the best performance, since MAE and MSE, SSIM
and MMSIM, and Soft Fβ measure the ﬁt of velocity value,
subsurface structure, and geological interface, respectively.
Thus results of our SeisInvNet (η) should have overall the
best quality on these aspects (see Figs. 6 and 7 and the
Supplementary Material for visual results).
In addition, we show the loss curve of baseline ζ and
SeisInvNet (η) in Fig. 10. As can be seen, both methods
converged quickly without overﬁtting on both training and
validation sets, but our SeisInvNet (η) converged more rapidly
and more stably, which means SeisInvNet (η) could cope with
this task without too much burden and may well apply to
other more complex data. It is worthwhile to mention again
that our SeisInvNet achieves this promising performance with
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS OF SEISINVNET (η) WITH AND WITHOUT
GLOBAL CONTEXT, ON THE TEST SET, BY THE FIVE METRICS.
FOR EACH METRIC, THE BETTER RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED
IN BOLD FONTS. THE ↑INDICATES THE LARGER VALUE
ACHIEVED, THE BETTER PERFORMANCE IS, WHILE ↓
INDICATES THE SMALLER, THE BETTER
Fig. 10.
Loss curves for baseline (ζ) and SeisInvNet (η) on (Left) training
set and (Right) validation set.
Fig. 11.
SeisInvNet (η) outcomes with/without the global context. (a) and (b)
correspond to the type III and IV model in Fig. 7.
just one-quarter of the parameters used in the baseline model,
which further proves our network’s efﬁciency.
Next, we would like to demonstrate is the effectiveness of
the global context vector we added in the enhanced seismic
trace. To check this, we retrain SeisInvNet (η) without the
global context and show the statistic evaluation in Table II
and visual examples in Fig. 11. From the experiments, without
the global context, the performance degenerates signiﬁcantly.
This means that the global context contains some information
that local seismic trace does not have and could beneﬁt the
reconstruction of the velocity model. Since the global context
is extracted from the whole seismic proﬁle, we guess it
contains information such as velocity distribution and number
of interfaces. However, what kind of information the global
context actually has is hard to verify, and explanation of
features in deep learning is still an open question.
Finally, in Fig. 12, we demonstrate how the hyperparameters
applied affect the ﬁnal results. The main hyperparameters used
for our Adam optimizer [58] are the learning rate and batch
size. From the loss curves in Fig. 12, our SeisInvNet (η)
demonstrates certain robustness to these parameters.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2145
Fig. 12. Loss curves for SeisInvNet (η) with different hyperparameter settings
on (left) training set and (right) validation set.
Fig. 13.
Feature map visualization. We visualize feature maps that follow
the approach described in Section IV-F, and each feature map is ampliﬁed
for better illustration. Feature maps show clear sensitivity regions (the
yellow areas). (a) 1–8 receivers. (b) 9–16 receivers. (c) 17–24 receivers.
(d) 25–32 receivers.
F. Mechanism Study
As stated in the previous sections, the beneﬁt of extracting
spatially aligned feature map from enhanced seismic traces
lies in taking full advantage of knowledge inherent in each
seismic trace. Typically, each enhanced seismic trace will have
different sensitivity regions on the velocity model, so a feature
map from a different enhanced seismic trace would reﬂect
knowledge focus on the different parts of the velocity model.
For simplicity, we also call the focused part in a feature map
the sensitivity region. In Fig. 13, we illustrate how spatially
aligned features Fi of SeisInvNet (η) look like. Since Di
is of size [20, 1000, 32], we will have 640 recorded seismic
traces and thus generate 640 feature maps. To save space,
we show only the 32 feature maps for the 11th seismic source
(the middle seismic source). Moreover, to visualize from an
overall perspective, for each feature map, we compute its
average over all the 1000 validation data, then group and
further average every eight feature maps to better explore the
pattern.
It can be easily seen from Fig. 13 that the feature map
from recorded data by left receivers (#1–8) has high activation
on the left-hand side, which means that it can provide more
information to reconstruct left part of the velocity model.
Similarly, feature maps by middle-left receivers (#9–16),
middle-right receivers (#17–24), and right receivers (#25–32)
own information to reconstruct middle-left, middle-right, and
right part of the velocity model, respectively. However, there
is little response to the bottom part of the velocity model in
both feature maps, which means it is hard to infer information
from seismic data to reconstruct bottom part and implies that
the sensitivity region of feature maps cannot cover the whole
velocity model.
Yet, most results of our SeisInvNet (η) look as good as
Fig. 7, so we suspect that our inversion results for the bottom
part of the velocity model may depend more on the context
and the statistics information of data set that SeisInvNet
had captured and memorized. The utilization of context and
statistics is the primary advantage of DNN-based methods,
but in the task of geophysical inversion, inversion for the
bottom part in the velocity model by DNNs maybe still
unstable and has bigger error due to the lack of direct knowl-
edge. Basically, inversion of the bottom part is an inherent
difﬁculty in the seismic inversion due to seismic inversion
mechanism.
We study and verify this potential problem via Fig. 14,
which illustrates the velocity difference and variance in dif-
ferent layers of the velocity model in the validation set, for
the seven methods described in Section IV-C. The velocity
difference is deﬁned as the mean estimated velocity minus the
mean true velocity within the area in each layer of the true
velocity model. The velocity variance measures the variance
of estimated velocity within the area in each layer of the true
velocity model. From the velocity difference in Fig. 14, we can
conclude that all the seven methods tend to generate higher
velocity values for shallow layers and lower velocity values for
deeper layers. As for velocity variance, the bars corresponding
to the top and bottom layers have lower height than the bars
corresponding to the middle layers, which indicates a stable
and uniform velocity distribution within the top and bottom
layers. In general, variants of SeisInvNet present results with
smaller velocity difference and variance within each layer,
so that they could give more accurate, stable, and uniform
seismic inversion results. Similar observation can also be made
in the test set.
G. Network Generalization
Learning-based methods always have the problem of gen-
eralization. Directly applying the trained networks from one
data set to another new data set usually will not lead to
satisfying results. However, the trained networks often have
gained some general knowledge and could be applied to
another data set well after ﬁne tuning or other operations.
Generally, fewer the efforts made for these operations, much
stronger the generalization ability of the trained networks is.
In the following, we further carry out two experiments to
demonstrate the generalization ability of our SeisInvNet (η).
These two experiments will conﬁrm that our SeisInvNet (η)
has the potential of dealing with more complex models and
noisy data. Moreover, it may provide a novel perspective for
the data processing of incomplete seismic data that are often
encountered in ﬁeld cases. More visual results can be found
in the Supplementary Material.
1) Domain Adaptation: In this experiment, we intend to
adapt our SeisInvNet (η) to another data domain with two
kinds of data that have never been seen before (noisy data of
models with fault and noisy data of models with more layers).
In this data set [SeisInv (new)], we have 2000 data-model
pairs for each kind, which is only one-ﬁfth of our previous
SeisInv (old) data set. The average SNR for all the noisy
data equals −0.0716 dB (we use Gaussian noise with zero-
mean). To make domain adaptation from SeisInv (old) to
SeisInv (new), we ﬁne-tune SeisInvNet (η) by retraining
it on SeisInv (new) for another 40 epochs (only one-ﬁfth
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2146
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
Fig. 14.
Velocity difference (a)–(d) and velocity variance (e)–(h). From left to right, we show the results for the velocity model of four types I–IV, respectively.
In each subﬁgure, we have seven groups of bars for seven methods (α) to (η), respectively. For each group, bars from left to right correspond to the layers
from top to bottom.
Fig. 15.
Inversion results before and after ﬁne-tuning. The top two rows are
examples from SeisInv (new), whereas the last one is from SeisInv (old). The
corresponding data are in the last column, where the ﬁrst two are the noisy
data with SNR equals −0.0108 and −0.0603 dB, respectively.
of initial training). The results are shown in Fig. 15. The
ﬁrst two rows illustrate how the results on noisy data of
models with fault and models with more layers get promoted
after ﬁne-tuning, respectively. The third row is the result of
retrained networks on the previously used model as shown
in Fig. 7, from which most of the knowledge obtained from
the initial training process had not been disregarded after ﬁne-
tuning, though there is a slight degradation in the last layer.
Furthermore, we show the statistical evaluation in Table III
in which the performance of SeisInvNet (η) before and after
ﬁne-tuning, on the new and old data sets, by the ﬁve metrics
is demonstrated. Clearly, after ﬁne-tuning, the performance
of SeisInvNet (η) on SeisInv (new) is promoted signiﬁcantly,
while its degradation on SeisInv (old) is relatively small. This
minor degradation problem could be further alleviated by joint
training on the two data sets; however, here, we focus on
domain adaptation.
From Table III, we can conclude that our SeisInvNet (η)
could apply to other data domain well after ﬁne-tuning with
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS OF SEISINVNET (η) BEFORE AND AFTER
FINE TUNING, ON THE NEW AND OLD DATA SETS, BY THE FIVE
METRICS. FOR EACH SET AND METRIC, THE BETTER RESULTS
ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD FONTS. THE ↑INDICATES THE
LARGER VALUE ACHIEVED, THE BETTER PERFORMANCE
IS, WHILE ↓INDICATES THE SMALLER, THE BETTER
much fewer training data and training epochs. Also, most of
the knowledge SeisInvNet (η) learned from original SeisInv
data set could still be preserved. These examples suggest that
the trained SeisInvNet (η) has promising generalization ability
and could apply to another data set with fewer efforts.
2) Observation Setup: In addition to the data domain,
another generalization problem worth discussing is trained
network’s applicability on different observation setups. Actu-
ally, by the logic of reconstructing model from each enhanced
seismic trace, our SeisInvNet is relative ﬂexible to the observa-
tion setup. Especially, in our training stage, we had randomly
dropped out 20% feature maps from which we decoded the
velocity model (see Fig. 4). So, typically, our SeisInvNet could
still work well without some seismic traces. To verify this
claim, in the following, we carry out another experiment by
randomly dropping out some receivers.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SHANDONG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on June 26,2020 at 07:20:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: DEEP-LEARNING INVERSION OF SEISMIC DATA
2147
Fig. 16.
Inversion results on different observation setups. Different num-
bers of receivers are randomly selected from the original 32 receivers.
(a) 32 receivers. (b) 26 receivers. (c) 22 receivers. (d) 16 receivers.
As shown in Fig. 16, our SeisInvNet (η) could still present
acceptable results when six seismic traces missed. However,
the interfaces start to become blurred and misaligned after
dropping out ten seismic traces. When half of the seismic
traces are discarded, our SeisInvNet (η) could still perceive
interface location and velocity distribution but with low accu-
racy. The results are acceptable and predictable, since we had
only let networks to recover the model when 20% feature maps
are missing.
In a word, the overall analysis proves a certain generaliza-
tion ability of our SeisInvNet on the more complex data set
and different observation setups. However, the generalization
of deep-learning-based inversion methods on real data is still
a challenging job and considering the physics may be one
potential solution that we intend to study in our further works.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we investigated the problem of deep-learning-
based seismic inversion. We found that most of the existing
approaches could not take full advantage of seismic data and
may introduce biases. In light of these drawbacks, we analyze
the intrinsic characteristics of this task and propose an end-
to-end DNNs called SeisInvNet. Our SeisInvNet generates
spatially aligned features from every enhanced seismic trace,
which enforce every seismic trace to contribute to the recon-
struction of the whole velocity model. In our experiments,
these spatially aligned features actually show spatial corre-
spondence to the velocity model, thus paving the way for
subsequent components to regress velocity value by CNNs
directly.
We apply L2 and MSSIM loss together to guide the
SeisInvNet reconstruct velocity model considering individual
position and local structures together so as to generate results
closer to the target. We propose to do evaluation from the
aspects of the velocity value, subsurface structure, and geolog-
ical interface and consequently choose ﬁve relevant metrics.
Among these metrics, the proposed Soft Fβ is a relaxed
version of F-measure that can better measure the alignment
of interfaces. To train, validate, and test our SeisInvNet,
we synthesize and collect SeisInv data set with 12 000 pairs
of seismic data and velocity model.
Our experiments show that our SeisInvNet demonstrates
superior performance against all the baseline models on
SeisInv data set by ﬁve metrics as well as visual comparison,
consistently. With fewer parameters, our SeisInvNet achieves
lower loss and converges more quickly and stably. In the
mechanism study, we further provide the evidence to verify
our statements. Finally, the study of network generalization
proves certain application prospects of our SeisInvNet on more
complex data, which may be encountered in ﬁeld cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the editor and referees for their construc-
tive suggestions.
