Video Intelligence as a component of a Global Security system 
Dominique Patrick VERDEJO1 , Eunika MERCIER-LAURENT2 
1 Personal Interactor, Montpellier and INHESJ, Paris, France, 
, 
2 University Reims Champagne Ardenne, France 
 

Abstract. This paper describes the evolution of our research from video analyt-
ics to a global security system with focus on the video surveillance component. 
Indeed video surveillance has evolved from a commodity security tool up to the 
most efficient way of tracking perpetrators when terrorism hits our modern ur-
ban centers. As number of cameras soars, one could expect the system to lever-
age the huge amount of data carried through the video streams to provide fast 
access to video evidences, actionable intelligence for monitoring real-time 
events and enabling predictive capacities to assist operators in their surveillance 
tasks. This research explores a hybrid platform for video intelligence capture, 
automated data extraction, supervised Machine Learning for intelligently assist-
ed urban video surveillance; Extension to other components of a global security 
system are discussed. 
Applying Knowledge Management principles in this research helps with 
deep problem understanding and facilitates the implementation of efficient in-
formation and experience sharing decision support systems providing assistance 
to people on the field as well as in operations centers. The originality of this 
work is also the creation of “common” human-machine and machine to ma-
chine language and a security ontology.  
Keywords: global security,  artificial intelligence, video, surveillance, ontolo-
gy, intelligence, annotation, natural language processing, predictive analytics, 
situational awareness, big data, knowledge management, eco-systems, risk 
management, machine learning 
 
1 
Introduction 
Global digitalization has provided an extraordinary progress in communication and 
services with their downside, the rise of threats in the ever growing cyber domain. 
Increased terrorists’ attacks and the rise of extremism require better management of 
all available resources in aim to detect planned actions and prevent disasters [30].  

2 
The complexity of security imposes considering all components and their interactions 
for better understanding of causes. The third hype of Artificial Intelligence has intro-
duced powerful techniques for processing big data, used mainly in marketing at the 
beginning. Deep learning demonstrated great capacity in data processing; however the 
complex challenges at stake require combining both data and knowledge processing 
in hybrid systems. Knowledge Management approach helps deep understanding of 
security problem and impacts, organizing and optimizing all sources, such as video 
records, exchanges in social networks, data collected from IoT, sensors and others in 
aim to set an adequate architecture of decision support system for all participants. 
Various AI techniques allows, among others, verifying consistency of gathered in-
formation and detect fake news for instance. AI also support the whole knowledge 
flow generated by all involved actors. 
 
Global security deals with security of persons, of buildings, but also cybersecurity 
of IT systems by early detection of threats and weak signals in the cyberspace. This 
paper gives an overview of all components and focus on enhancing the human-
machine effectiveness of surveillance activities, taking video surveillance as primary 
application field. 
Besides traffic and cleanliness control, the role of cameras in urban areas and pub-
lic transportation systems is mostly to deter crime, theft and vandalism. This is 
achieved through two distinct activities, one being real-time and the second, post-
event. In real-time, the operators in urban control centers apply techniques to follow 
individuals of interest or to monitor specific areas or persons to protect from attacks. 
Those activities are often carried out in close collaboration with police staff. 
Investigation of video records a posteriori consists in analyzing them to locate the 
meaningful footages that can be used as evidences in a court or intelligence to track 
perpetrators. These post-event video investigations are often long and fastidious, but 
prove more and more efficient to identify the perpetrators and lead to their arrest as 
image quality and resolution steadily improve. In both contexts, the tremendous in-
crease of the number of cameras represents a major challenge for the overall efficien-
cy of the system. It has been demonstrated that a human operator can monitor 16 
cameras over a period of 20 minutes [3]. Whichever activity, real-time or post-event, 
requires attention of the operator on a number of video feeds. This highlights the need 
for computer based operator assistance.  
 
This problem was already studied in our previous research - Vortex decision sup-
port system for video analysis [34]. The current research aims at improving the previ-
ous system by applying Knowledge Management principles and integrating a feed-
back from the previous work.  
 
To predict possible threat scenarios, this research focuses, among others, on Ma-
chine Learning models to process specific pattern matching in spatiotemporal event 
sequences. However the prediction based on past data is insufficient to predict the 
future disasters. The permanent metamorphosis of threats prevents from constructing 
a sufficiently representative and properly documented data set for system training. 

3 
Surveillance activities using video, social media and cyber defense data have one 
common point: they all capture and manipulate highly varied, complex and unpredict-
able events and behaviors, for which risk assessment requires mostly human common 
sense and contextual knowledge. Connection with the other sources of information 
and knowledge, such as the law enforcement files in the case of terrorism is necessary 
for overall understanding.  
 
While related research focuses on media analysis, like video analysis, providing 
added forensic evidence research capabilities, we have chosen to emphasize on the 
analysis of metadata generated by such algorithms. These metadata can be efficiently 
used to establish correlations with other media analysis results like social networks or 
events generated by cyber security monitoring systems. 
 
The applied bottom-up Knowledge Management approach combined with 
knowledge modelling allows easy extension to the others system components of glob-
al security, i.e. social networks analysis and cybersecurity, especially in the era of 
ubiquitous IoT and drones equipped with facial recognition capabilities. 
 
After the general introduction and pointing out the challenge, this paper describes 
our research method, followed by the state of the art in the fields covered. The expla-
nation on the role of Knowledge Management in this research is provided before we 
focus on the first system component of this research -hybrid decision support system 
for real-time video analysis. Conclusions and some perspectives of future work and 
applications are given at the end. 
2 
Research method 
Considering our experience acquired during the initial work on Vortex project we 
decided to consider the video analysis as a part of a Global Security system. Current-
ly, the proposed research method applies Knowledge Management and complex prob-
lem solving [35] to global security.  It consists in understanding the challenge of a 
global security system and aims at i) proposing a modular architecture for a hybrid 
system, ii) prototype and test separate modules conceived by combining holistic and 
system approaches. Each component plays its own role and interacts with the others 
for more accurate result. Incremental approach allows building the whole system step 
by step. At each stage, the adequate AI techniques are selected and tested and results 
discussed. 
The role of Knowledge Management consists in  
 Problem analysis with a given context. What data/information/knowledge do we 
need to successfully manage security and prevent disasters provoked by ill-
intentioned people? What sources of data/information/knowledge are available? 
 Initiating and managing a human-machine self-reinforcing synergy 
 Defining the overall architecture of the decision support (not making) system, con-
sidering all involved actors’ contributions and needs. 

4 
 Building generic and reusable knowledge models (static, dynamic or hybrid, ex. 
multi-agents systems). 
 Defining a strategy for future extensions (Building blocs) 
 Integrating a feedback on all stages. 
 
Related to video analysis, we propose to transpose the general scene analysis prob-
lem into a natural language description exercise. This approach allows human opera-
tors to share understanding of the scene/situation with the machine. This common 
language, scene description capability, creates a gate between human and machine 
providing two major benefits: i) situational awareness knowledge can be immediately 
shared between operators without visual support and ii) the human operators can en-
rich the description provided by the machine with additional common sense or con-
textual knowledge.  
This natural language processing approach will use ontologies as a model for text 
generation and a semantic navigation tool. This provides guidelines to keep con-
sistency, manage ambiguities and act as a communication protocol dedicated to a 
specific media analysis.  
 
The machine learns text generation through supervised machine learning (labeling) 
approach and builds risk scenarios using reinforced learning. The scenarios of maxi-
mum risk likelihood will be proposed to the operators for facing the most urgent chal-
lenge in modern control centers: monitoring exponentially growing numbers of sen-
sors inputs.  
This module will be considered using modularity, genericity and reusability ap-
proach for future extensions. 
3 
State of the art 
Research in video analysis is not new. French programs PRIAM and RIAM initiated 
by the French Ministry of Industry gave some promising results in applying AI tech-
niques for video analysis on the flow. For example, the architecture of MediaWorks 
combined neural networks, multi-agent systems and natural language processing for 
relevant finding on the flow of person or object to illustrate TV news [4]. These pro-
jects did not address security issues as the subject was not as critical at this time. 
 
Since 2000, many researches have been made in semantic video indexing [4] and 
European Research has been funded to create tools to annotate and retrieve video [5]. 
It is commonly agreed today that we need an abstract layer of representation, a lan-
guage, to describe and retrieve video. Ontologies have been proposed as an adapted 
tool to capture observations but also to shift domains as surveillance can be operated 
on media from many different natures depending on the activity [6][7][8] (satellite, 
urban, cyber, social networks, etc.) 
 

5 
The “Smart City” trend combining technological progress, cameras price drop down 
and raise of delinquency, has prompted cities to install surveillance systems. However 
they did not have a resource for systematic analysis of the recorded content. The raise 
of terrorist’s attacks amplified a demand for efficient video surveillance systems.  
 
The effectiveness of such systems depends on intelligence in exploring the available 
data sources of information and knowledge.  
The analysis after the disaster pointed out the need for preventive actions.  
Opening of public data and Big Data from multiple sources are available but using 
only analytics on the past data is insufficient for prevention of future disasters. We did 
not find in available literature the efficient decision support system to face this chal-
lenge. Some separate modules, such as video analytics, social networks mining, 
OSINT (Open Source Intelligence) and IoT data exploring are only described. 
 
3.1 
evolution of video surveillance 
Learning from human generated annotations, the machine has shown a capacity to 
generalize, identifying objects and generating text sentences describing image and 
scenes. In 2017, this effort is extended to video with the DAVIS [14] challenge on 
video object segmentation. The downside of this approach, is that human contribution 
is highly necessary to generate meaningful datasets. Initiatives to deploy crowd-
annotations platform have been recently undertaken to improve and speed-up the 
ground truth collection from users on the Web [15], fostering the need for creation of 
machine learning datasets.  
It is notable that image segmentation, object recognition, video labeling creates a leap 
frog in surveillance applications and human interface. But, as every camera turns into 
a talkative witness, we lack the ability to correlate the different sources and enable 
global risk analysis. This is particularly important for behaviour analysis and anomaly 
detection in scene understanding, including gesture and intentions analysis. 
 
3.2 
Evolution and revolution of video analytics 
Over the past 15 years, numerous tests and benchmarks were undertaken to assess 
feasibility of using algorithms to perform recognition of specific situations to ease the 
task of video operators. It is expected that automating video monitoring can lead to a 
less heavy mental workload for operators as their attention can be focused only on 
identified problems. In fact, false alarms tend to overcrowd the video monitoring 
environment and have rendered those technologies quite useless in most operational 
cases, specifically in large urban surveillance contexts. 
 
Traditional video analytics, based on bitmap analysis can be useful to identify line 
crossing or counter-flow. They can count individuals and detect crowds and aban-
doned luggage. But they fail providing insights on more complex situations like 

6 
fights, tagging, thefts and carjacking where more context and common sense is re-
quired [10]. Highly focused European FP7 2010-2013 research project, VANAHEIM 
][9] has been developed in the context of two metro stations and revealed the difficul-
ty to use inputs from video analytics modules to automate the displays on video walls. 
Nevertheless this project has been pivotal in demonstrating the huge potential of un-
supervised video analysis and the detection of abnormality into long recordings. 
 
Since 2010, a revolution has begun in video analytics. Thanks to Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks, Deep Learning techniques, object recognition, image segmentation and 
labeling has shown impressively efficient, up to the point where the machine, using a 
software built on top of GoogLeNet has demonstrated in 2015 an ability to identify 
objects in still images that is almost identical to humans[12]. This was made possible 
thanks to the availability of a very large image dataset called Imagenet [10](over 1,4 
million images from over 1000 classes) manually annotated and a challenge that took 
place annually between 2010 and 2015, the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition 
Challenge (ILSVRC).  In 2015, the Chinese company BAIDU also claimed actual 
superiority of machine image recognition compared to human on the same image 
dataset [11]. 
3.3 
Evolution of Cyber Security and Cyber Defense 
Information systems security has evolved since 2000 taking into account the global 
interconnection of machines. System protection has evolved from basic anti-virus and 
firewalls up to a range of monitoring activities dedicated to detect and identify intru-
sions and potentially harmful activities on the networks and servers. Recently, com-
panies have marketed AI based systems to achieve specific surveillance analysis, 
based on the logs produced by applications and systems. Interestingly, those new 
approaches, gathered around the SIEM components (Security Incident Event Man-
agement) tend to procure a behavioral analysis rather than a simple event categoriza-
tion. 
 
It is worth mentioning the similarities between video and cyber analytics which 
both converge toward behavioral analysis for detecting the weak signals in the mas-
sive data sets. 
Cyber Security for instance, uses dedicated event description and exchange named 
STIX [32] to communicate cyber threat intelligence.  
3.4 
Evolution of Social Network Analysis 
In complex situations such as terrorism and cybercrime analysis of video is not suf-
ficient. Social networks and especially ephemeral ones are used to spread information 
and to recruit new terrorists by systematic brainwashing.  [14] describes detection of 
influential users using linguistic approach. [15] uses graphs and networks (Social 
Networks Analysis -SNA) to detect leaders in the “dark networks”. 

7 
Social Network Analysis is now widely used as a fully operational intelligence 
source, introducing the SOCMINT [27] neologism standing for Social Media Intelli-
gence.  
3.5 
Knowledge Management for global security 
Security management requires deep understanding of a given problem in its context 
and follows the rules of KM lifecycle: acquisition, modeling, navigation and use. The 
adequate AI techniques will support the whole process.  
Global Security is composed of a set of domains security systems, each having its 
own objectives and controls. As threat awareness requires surveillance, each domain 
uses specific surveillance processes and vocabulary.  
 
Knowledge Management helps organizing and optimizing the available sources of 
data/information and knowledge and creating progressively a common language for 
all involved actors to facilitate exchanges between them [33]. Three main approaches 
can be used: top-down, bottom-up and combination of both.  In the case of global 
security a well-defined and dynamic strategy is mandatory to efficiently face the 
treats. Dynamic strategy allows flexibility for quick adaptation to evolving situation. 
Conceptual knowledge modelling as for ex ontologies allow reusing knowledge for 
related applications.  
The existing literature provides description of all facets of security, useful for build-
ing such a system [25]. In this work, Rogers analyses the legacy of the Cold War's 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; the impact of human activity on the 
global ecosystem; the growth of hyper capitalism and resulting poverty and insecuri-
ty; the competition for energy resources and strategic minerals; biological warfare. 
This context leads to delinquency. Similar conclusion was stated at the end of collo-
quium organized by French Ministry of Defense on the influence of Climate change 
on the rise of crime [35].  
Chen [27] describes Terrorism informatics as methodologies and integrate process 
of gathering and processing all related information. 
 
We also found works applying KM principles to water and food security and to 
multiple risks management. 
 
In our case Knowledge Management applied to global security system will connect 
components shown in Figure 1. 
 
On our knowledge, there is no integrated approach of Knowledge Manage-
ment to global security; this and the need for a systemic approach is leitmotiv for our 
research. 
 

8 
 
Fig. 1. Main interrelated components of global security system 
 
Our proposal is then to consider the feedback from previous approach in the 
light of such global security system.  
4 
Feedback form the previous research 
The research on video analysis, under the name of VORTEX project, has been initiat-
ed in 2010 in France after a large number of interviews with system architects, securi-
ty managers and police officers. The aim was to spot the flaws of contemporary met-
ropolitan video surveillance systems and propose an optimization of human activities 
in video surveillance operations. A synthetic article about public-private partnerships 
in new video surveillance services, for the French National Institute of Security and 
Justice (INHESJ), was written subsequently. 
Findings described in this initial stage of the research where the following: As video 
surveillance moves through its digital transformation from analog cables, monitors 
and tapes to a complete computer based environment, there is  a quantum leap in both 
numbers of video sensors and geographic scale of systems deployed. Large French 
urban areas like Paris, Lyon, Marseille and Nice have set up or are in the process of 
setting up systems with more than one thousand cameras, without mentioning the 
thousands of cameras already scattered along the public transportation lines and inside 
the vehicles [1]. While the need for police activity monitoring surges, these numbers 
are also increased by the new body worn cameras on police officers. Information 

9 
Technology provides solutions to record and visualize all these cameras, but it does 
not meet the day to day exploitation needs made more complex by the multitude of 
video sensors. In a word, the capacity to have an eye everywhere does not spare the 
people watching. A global rethinking of the balance between people in front line, 
people in operations centers as well as citizens must be undertaken. We introduce the 
need for a rethinking and rationalization of the human role in image interpretation, 
based on the finding that we can deploy much more than we can actually monitor. It is 
made necessary to define how a human operator can collect and preserve intelligence 
[2] from video sources, with the aid of the machine, assuming the large number of 
video feeds creates a rich potential information source. This in turns requires new 
training procedures and new tools to be created to cope with system scale and carry 
out this strategic task.  
Subsequent research emphasized the importance of a contextual use of video, in 
complement of other data sources. 
Wise decision making require considering all available sources on a given topic as 
well as the knowledge about the current context. Recent attacks, notably on energy 
critical infrastructures [29] show that infrastructure security may be endangered by 
cyber-attacks. This is leading to the creation of a hybrid domain for security called 
Cyber Physical Security (CPS) [31] with social networks as platforms of choice for 
preparing operational details in such cases. 
In this context, Vortex project objectives are to keep the human operator at the 
heart of the system and decision process. This requires the development of computer 
aided monitoring automation, providing advices and recommendations as to what 
should be watched first in the continuous flow of contextual real-time and recorded 
events. 
   
5 
Research focus – hybrid system for video analysis 
Those breakthroughs in image and video analysis and labeling are the cornerstones of 
VORTEX concept. But as we witness the need for developing supervised machine 
learning processes that can lead to development of video intelligence expert modules, 
we also realize that in the ever changing very complex metropolitan environment, the 
patterns of normality and abnormality and their relationship to the images captured by 
the cameras are difficult to express. The role of the human operator in the heart of the 
semantic system is mandatory to reconcile volumes of data captured by computerized 
video sensors with contextual situation awareness. Reinforcement learning [31] is a 
machine learning technique sitting at the crossing of supervised and unsupervised 
learning. It implies defining a decision function that allows the machine to modify its 
state and also to define rewards and penalty functions that are used to provide the 
machine with an assessment of the result of its decisions. Using a very large number 
of try and fail the machine infers an optimized solution by maximizing its reward. 
 

10 
We therefore propose an approach based on two distinct annotation processes. One 
being conducted through the most modern labeling algorithms running on state of the 
art, dedicated hardware platforms, or inference platforms, the second being performed 
by the operators. We introduce a third knowledge based situational awareness module 
or recommendation module that uses insights produced from the analysis of combined 
human and machine generated annotations and communicates back its recommenda-
tions to the operator. This system is able of maintaining long term memory of what is 
a “normal” or “abnormal” situation and in addition has the essential capability to take 
into account human generated alerts and comments to adapt to new situations as they 
happen. 
Replaced in the context of video surveillance, the human operator appears even 
more important to machine learning as he not only recognizes objects and people but 
assesses the level of risk of a particular situation and correlates scenes monitored by 
different cameras. 
 
Fig. 2. Human Centric Design for man-machine interoperability 
From the picture in fig. 2. it is made clear that the System is fed with annotations 
coming primarily from human operators’ interactions witnessing events happening on 
their surveillance screens (traffic incidents, aggressions and thefts, vandalism, tags, 
terrorist attacks, smuggling…). This human input is key to providing a common sense 
context to information that is provided automatically by labeling modules either em-
bedded directly in the cameras or located centrally in the cloud System. 
The supervised learning is then operated by human rating of situations on a severi-
ty scale, enabling the System to learn and anticipate situations contexts leading to 
potential risky situations. 

11 
The RETEX1 describes that anticipation data which is deduced by the system 
while streams of new data flows continuously from both operators and cameras. The-
se streams can also be completed by auxiliary data streams incoming from contextual 
communication systems and metadata concerning the sensors. The RETEX provides a 
predictive capacity based on the supervised learning achieved continuously by the 
interaction of operators and System. An important part of the System analytics is 
dedicated to transform the RETEX, primarily made of textual content, into actual 
operational data that can be actioned by operators. In the context of video surveil-
lance, this is achieved by highlighting those cameras that are most important to watch. 
5.1 
Situational awareness increased with video surveillance 
The RETEX illustrates how the predictive capabilities of the System can be turned 
into prescriptive surveillance actions. Still, state of the art video surveillance man-
agement system provide poor interfaces to enable operators to capture their annota-
tions on the fly and store them in a workable format.  
It is thus one of the key objectives of this research to study the conditions of an ef-
ficient real-time annotation to enable the operators to achieve the necessary super-
vised learning and initialize the RETEX loop. Information captured by operators are 
essential to a sound indexing of video and participate to the overall indexing required 
by both forensic investigations and day to day exploitation. 
6 
Originality of this work 
VORTEX is proposing a genuine approach to the man machine cooperation by lever-
aging the recent breakthroughs in Machine Learning technologies that allows pro-
cessing video from traditional stationary cameras as well as mobile or handheld de-
vices [16]. Based on the essential finding that the video media needs to be translated 
to be workable, we propose to organize a data model for streaming information gen-
erated by video analytics labeling algorithms. We propose to define the annotation 
interfaces necessary to capture operators’ annotation in real-time in such a way as it 
can be used as input for a supervised learning input. Eventually, we propose a predic-
tive analytics System capable of issuing recommendations to the human operators and 
interacting with them in a feedback loop (RETEX) of reinforcement learning.  
It is important to note that annotations as well as any other indexing data may be 
stored and preserved much beyond the limits of video retention periods, as advised for 
instance by the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS). This means that real-
time automated labeling data are key to provide large datasets of surveillance contexts 
without the burden of keeping the video they originated from. VORTEX is an attempt 
to rationalize the capture of human feedback in surveillance and crisis context. Putting 
face to face these data with large volume of sensors data enable the System to corre-
                                                          
1 RETEX is “Retour d’Experience” in French in the text (feedback from experi-
ence) 

12 
late and generalize on a rich dataset and leads to the emergence of predictive alerts 
and prescriptive surveillance actions that increase considerably the situational aware-
ness in operations centers. 
 
We are confronted with several difficulties, notably in scene description and mod-
eling. But we are confident that we can circumvent those difficulties by using ma-
chine learning techniques rather than going through a scene data modeling exercise. 
7 
Conclusion 
The described system is the first “Kblock2” of Decision support system for global 
security. The modular architecture will allow integration of other components such as 
conversations in social networks and data from IoT.  Following the trend of predictive 
policing, we introduce a system that will help gathering intelligence from existing and 
future video surveillance systems and using it to anticipate terrorism and decrease 
safety risk in metropolitan areas. 
Based on supervised Machine Learning and RETEX interaction loop, human oper-
ators will contribute to building System cognitive computing capacities and will be 
augmented in return by its prescriptive analytics. 
Universality of this approach consists in the following: it does not depend on video 
surveillance technology infrastructure but complements it with new video analytics 
labeling systems, new annotation and communication tools and new predictive capa-
bilities. 
The security ontology definition is the basis of the underlying knowledge man-
agement required to provide a consistent framework that will serve as an interopera-
bility guide to extend the approach to different countries and open intelligence coop-
eration between agencies, both nationally and internationally, representing a potential 
benefit for global organizations like EUROPOL. Moreover, the genericity of the 
model for risk management can be extended from video surveillance to cybersecurity 
to SOCMINT and to all surveillance activities. 
Adopting an ontology and developing automated labeling capacities provides the 
ground for generating a continuous stream of data flowing from the many and highly 
diversified sources of information available, both video sensors and human inputs. 
Among human inputs we can cite metropolitan security control centers operators, but 
also social networks OSINT (Open Source Intelligence) or even SOCMINT (Social 
Media Intelligence) which play an ever increasing role in situational awareness. A 
mixt fusion approach based on cognitive computing, could then benefit large scale 
proven systems like IBM Watson [17] to extract early signals and anticipate risks 
from the very large textual information generated in such context. 
                                                          
2 Knowledge block 

13 
8 
Perspective and  future work  
VORTEX framework has been conceived for aiding urban video surveillance opera-
tions, but similar initiatives have been undertaken in the field of aerial image analytics 
[18] and the knowledge based information fusion proposed for the System has been 
under scrutiny in numerous other papers [19]. The range of sensors providing field 
data is not limited to stationary cameras. Ground vehicle cameras, aerial drone camer-
as, body-worn cameras, microphones and general presence detection sensors output 
information streams that can be injected in the RETEX interaction loop. 
The real-time annotation tool may be utilized by operators supervising media dif-
ferent from urban surveillance cameras, i.e. thermal cameras, radars, LIDARs as well 
as front-line operators located directly in the zone of interest and providing direct 
field intelligence to the System. 
Different application field also requiring human surveillance, like cyber security, 
may be using VORTEX framework by adapting the vocabulary of annotations. This is 
made possible by using domain dependent Ontologies, as mentioned in previous pro-
jects. 
 
9
