Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale
Cross-Document Coreference
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst MA 01003

Abstract. Cross-document coreference, the problem of resolving entity men-
tions across multi-document collections, is crucial to automated knowledge base
construction and data mining tasks. However, the scarcity of large labeled data
sets has hindered supervised machine learning research for this task. In this paper
we develop and demonstrate an approach based on “distantly-labeling” a data set
from which we can train a discriminative cross-document coreference model. In
particular we build a dataset of more than a million people mentions extracted
from 3.5 years of New York Times articles, leverage Wikipedia for distant label-
ing with a generative model (and measure the reliability of such labeling); then
we train and evaluate a conditional random ﬁeld coreference model that has fac-
tors on cross-document entities as well as mention-pairs. This coreference model
obtains high accuracy in resolving mentions and entities that are not present in
the training data, indicating applicability to non-Wikipedia data. Given the large
amount of data, our work is also an exercise demonstrating the scalability of our
approach.
Keywords: information extraction, coreference, weak supervision, structured pre-
diction
1
Introduction
Given a collection of mentions of people or other entities extracted from a body of text,
coreference or entity resolution consists of partitioning (or clustering) the mentions such
that all mentions within a partition refer to the same underlying entity. Coreference is
vital for many down-stream semantic analysis and knowledge discovery tasks [6]. Yet
despite being extensively studied, considerable challenges remain. In particular, while
signiﬁcant progress has been made in within-document coreference [22,4,9,15] (resolv-
ing mentions from inside a single document), the larger problem of cross-document
coreference (resolving mentions from across a collection of many documents) has re-
ceived signiﬁcantly less attention. We hypothesize two reasons for this discrepancy.
First, there is a scarcity of substantial datasets labeled for cross-document coreference.
Second, both the data and the hypothesis space are as a consequence larger and more
difﬁcult to manage.
One approach to coping with the lack of training data is to employ unsupervised
methods, where weights, thresholds, or priors are set by hand. Some existing methods
arXiv:1005.4298v1  [cs.AI]  24 May 2010

2
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
combine a clustering procedure with thresholded distance function over entities [1,14].
More recently, generative and non-parametric Bayesian clustering techniques have been
proposed as a way to circumvent the need for labeled data [15]. Unfortunately, these
unsupervised methods tend to perform considerably worse than supervised methods,
making labeled data essential for achieving state-of-the art performance [4].
Of course another alternative is to manually label a corpus. However, this presents
more difﬁculties for cross-document coreference than for within-document coreference.
For cross-document coreference, the number of mentions and entities is typically large,
and thus the space of partitions immense—making the labeling process cumbersome,
with high uncertainty about the true number of entities. Faced with these difﬁculties
cross-document labelers often use tools that allow them to query and label pairs of
mentions at a time; however, this process scales poorly, has high cognitive load, and
results in transitivity violations that must be resolved in a subsequent step. Furthermore,
information from the immediate context of the mention is often not sufﬁcient to resolve
them, requiring additional search or investigation.
We present an alternative approach that supports supervised learning, while avoid-
ing the need for human labeling effort. In addition to the unlabeled corpus of men-
tions, we leverage readily-available supplementary data—data which does not directly
provide the required labels, but which is distantly related to those labels needed for
the coreference task at hand. We process the original data together with this distantly-
labeled data [31] to automatically label the original relevant corpus. This is a type of
indirect supervision by alignment [3]. In this paper we develop and demonstrate distant-
labeling for coreference of over a million mentions from 3.5 years of New York Times
newspaper articles by using Wikipedia as distantly-labeled data. We present a genera-
tive probabilistic model that performs the alignment with 92% accuracy.
We also present a sophisticated conditional random ﬁeld model of coreference that
includes factors over entities, as well as traditional mention-mention pairs. The model is
trained on the distantly-labeled data, and evaluated on unseen mentions and entities. We
address the challenge of scaling up this model to our massive data set by using a fam-
ily of Metropolis-Hastings proposal distributions that use canopies [20] to efﬁciently
explore the hypothesis space. Our experiments show that both learning and inference
can be performed in less than 10 hours on a single CPU, even though the coreference
hypothesis space is exponential in the millions of cross-document mentions present in
the corpus.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes and motivates the
problem of cross-document coreference. In Section 3 we describe and evaluate our
proposed approach for generating training data using Wikipedia. The cross-document
coreference model trained on this data is described in Section 4. In Section 5 we explore
related work. We conclude and lay out a number of ideas for future work in Section 6.
2
Problem Deﬁnition
The problem of cross-document coreference is to identify the sets of mention strings
that refer to the same underlying entity, where the number of entities is not known. The
source of the mentions may be a single document, in which case the task is within-

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
3
Filmmaker
Rapper
BEIJING, Feb. 21— Kevin Smith, who played the god of war in the "Xena"...
... The Physiological Basis of Politics,” by Kevin B. Smith, Douglas Oxley, Matthew Hibbing...
The filmmaker Kevin Smith returns to the role of Silent Bob...
Like Back in 2008, the Lions drafted Kevin Smith, even though Smith was badly...
Firefighter Kevin Smith spent almost 20 years preparing for Sept. 11. When he...
...shorthanded backfield in the wake of Kevin Smith's knee injury, and the addition of Haynesworth...
...were coming,'' said Dallas cornerback Kevin Smith. ''We just didn't know when...
...during the late 60's and early 70's, Kevin Smith worked with several local...
...the term hip-hop is attributed to Lovebug Starski. What does it actually mean...
Nothing could be more irrelevant to Kevin Smith's audacious ''Dogma'' than ticking off...
Cornerback
Fireﬁghter
Actor
Running back
Author
Fig. 1. Example of a set of ambiguous mention strings from news articles and their true entities.
document coreference. The number of mentions (and underlying entities) in each doc-
ument is usually in the hundreds. The difﬁculty of the task arises from large hypothesis
space (exponential in the number of mentions) and from challenges in resolving nomi-
nal and pronominal mentions to the correct named mentions. Usually, named mentions
are not ambiguous in within-document coreference.
The problem we study in this paper is that of cross-document coreference, where the
source of mentions is a large collection of documents. The same sources of ambiguity as
within-doc coreference exist in this scenario also. Furthermore, the number of mentions
and entities are typically much larger, and for some corpora it can be in the millions,
making the hypothesis space of all possible clustering exponentially larger than that of
within-doc. Additionally, often there exists ambiguity even in the named entities since
the same string can refer to multiple entities in different document, and multiple distinct
strings may refer to the same entity in different documents.
We show an example of some ambiguities in Fig 1. The most common problem in
cross-document coreference is resolving people that have the exact same name. The
example above contains an example of such entities that are in the same general cate-
gory (football), making the problem more difﬁcult. Another common ambiguity is that
of alternate names, where the same entity is referred to variations on the same name
(such as “Richard/Dick”). The ﬁgure also shows an example of renaming ambiguity
(“Lovebug Starski” may be mentioned as “Kevin Smith”), which is an extreme case of
alternate names. Rare singleton entities (like the ﬁreﬁghter), who may appear only once
in the whole corpus, are also often difﬁcult to isolate. Our approach aims to address all
these various challenges.
3
Distant-Labels for Coreference
Wikipedia1 pages contain historical and biographical descriptions of a large number of
entities, which we use as the external source of “distant labels”. These pages are used
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/

4
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
to identify the entities that mention strings from a different corpus refer to, resulting in
a clustering over these mentions.
Our approach to distant-labeling for coreference consists of three steps. Given the
set of mention strings, the ﬁrst step performs preliminary within-document coreference
to resolve entities for mentions that appear in the same document. Second, a set of
candidate entities for each mention string is identiﬁed from Wikipedia using the redirect
and disambiguation pages. This set of candidates is reduced using a relevance scoring
function based on a generative model over the article and Wikipedia pages. The steps
are described in detail below in the context of person-name disambiguation in newswire
articles, however the method can be applied to other forms of cross-doc coreference.
3.1
Within-Document Coreference
To reduce the number of mentions available for cross-document, within-document coref-
erence is usually applied as a preprocessing step to resolve the entities within the docu-
ment [1,6,29]. The task of resolving proper nouns within a document is usually straight-
forward; however, incorporating pronouns and nominal nouns (like “he”, “she”, “the
president”, etc.) make within-doc coreference considerably more challenging.
Since our method of within-doc coreference is applied only to mention strings that
are proper nouns, it is similar to that used in [6,27]. A distance function is deﬁned be-
tween a pair of mention sets (clusters) that uses hand-tuned weights over features that
look at various string matches (such as whether the ﬁrst name/last name is same) and
gender matches (a mention contains “Mr.” and the other contains “Mrs.”). We apply
standard greedy agglomerative clustering using this distance function, and use a low
threshold to obtain high precision. Although this may result in multiple within-doc en-
tities that refer to the same entity, we rely on the cross-doc disambiguation to resolve
these. For the rest of the paper we refer to the within-doc coreference entities as men-
tions, and the strings as as sub-mentions. For each mention, the longest sub-mention is
selected as its canonical string representation.
This within-doc coreference system is simple and domain-speciﬁc. The rest of the
approach does not rely on a particular choice of within-doc coreference and instead
a machine-learned coreference model that also considers pronouns can be used, such
as [9]. However, since it is not directly relevant for cross-document coreference, for the
purposes of illustration in this paper we used the domain-speciﬁc approach.
3.2
Identifying Candidate Entities
For each canonical mention string, a set of potential Wikipedia entities that the mention
may refer to need to be identiﬁed. To discover these candidates, we utilize the redirect
and disambiguation pages available in Wikipedia.
Redirect pages are used to forward the user to the page with the correct title, given
that the user query is either a common misspelling (“Barak Obama”), an alternate
spelling (“Dick Nixon”), or refers to multiple entities of which one is prominent (“Obama”).
Redirect pages also exist for less common but difﬁcult to disambiguate cases of re-
names (Sean Combs/Puff Daddy), typographical issues (Pointcare/Pointcar´e), spacing
and casing (vangogh/Vincent van Gogh), etc. Note that the destination of a redirect link

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
5
is not always a content page, it may be another redirect page. These redirections offer
a reliable signal for identifying a candidate entity for a mention, since many different
variations of the entity are represented.
Although the redirect pages provide alternate mentions for a single entity, often the
same string can refer to multiple entities, for example, “Hillary” may refer to Hillary
Clinton or to Edmund Hillary. To incorporate this information, Wikipedia includes dis-
ambiguation pages that list, for a given string, all the entities on Wikipedia that the
string may refer to. These pages can range from 2 or 3 entities (“William Clinton”) to
more than 50 entities (“John Smith”). We use these disambiguation pages to expand the
set of candidate entities for a given string.
The set of candidate Wikipedia pages for a given mention m is computed as follows.
We start by initializing a set S = {m}. Within a loop, we go through every element of
s ∈S, and do the following:
1. if there is a redirect page s →s′, we remove s and insert s′ into S.
2. if there is a disambiguation page for s containing S′ as the set of possible pages,
we remove s and update S ←S ∪S′.
3. if s is a content page in Wikipedia, do nothing
4. if s is not present in Wikipedia, remove it from S.
The above process is repeated until S stops changing, resulting in a ﬁnal set of Wikipedia
page candidates for m. This algorithm is analogous to taking a transitive closure of a
graph where the mentions and content pages are the nodes, and the redirect and disam-
biguation pages represent the edges.
Note that this approach may result in many candidates that are trivially inapplicable
to the mention string; however, the objective is to obtain a super-set of candidates.
Furthermore, we may discover only one candidate for a mention on Wikipedia, but it
may be the incorrect one (i.e. the mention’s correct entity does not exist on Wikipedia).
The next section describes how this set of candidates is pruned to a single (or no) match.
3.3
Selection Using Multinomials
Once the candidates for each mention are identiﬁed, the method selects which candidate
the mention refers to, or whether it refers to none of the Wikipedia entities. To make this
decision, we use the contents of the Wikipedia page of the candidate and the news article
that the mention belongs to. A score is calculated between the article and the Wikipedia
page, and the candidate with the highest score is picked (or none of the candidates are
picked if this score is below a threshold). It is possible to use an alternative approach
that only considers the local contexts around the sub-mentions instead of the complete
article text, however we are interested in thematic match between the candidate page
and the mention, and the local contexts are a noisy signal of this match.
The task of identifying the best candidate for a mention is represented as a retrieval
problem. In information retrieval, documents are ranked for a given query according to
the probability that the query is generated from the document. The document is repre-
sented as a unigram language model (multinomial over the words) and the probability of
generating the query is the product of the probabilities of generating individual tokens

6
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
of the query. Smoothing is often introduced as a back-off distribution so that tokens
that do not appear in the document have a small positive probability of being gener-
ated [25,32].
Since the candidates refer to a single Wikipedia entity, and an article may refer to
multiple entities, we rank the candidate pages (queries) according to the probability that
they were generated from the news article (document). Tokens are weighted according
to the standard inverse-document frequency2 so that the rare tokens contribute more
to the generation probability. To account for the back-off distribution, we use uniform
multinomial for the global language model (P(t|Mg) = α), and use linear interpolation
(Jelinek-Mercer smoothing) using λ ([17]).
The model is described below, where c is the candidate page, a is the article, Ma
is the language model for article a, Mg is the global language model, nt,i is the count
of word t in page/article i, and idfD(t) is the inverse document frequency for word t in
corpus D.
P(c|a) ∝
Y
t∈c
P(t|a)
P(t|a) = (λP(t|Ma) + (1 −λ)P(t|Mg))wt
c
=
 λwt
a + (1 −λ)α
wt
c
where wt
c =
nt,c × idfC(t)
X
t∈c
nt,c × idfC(t)
,
and wt
a =
nt,a × idfA(t)
X
t∈a
nt,a × idfA(t)
.
We rank the candidates according to P(c|a) based on the article that contains the
mention. To account for the case where the mention does not refer to any of the can-
didates, a threshold β is used on the probability. Therefore we apply our candidate
selection method even when mentions have a single candidate.
3.4
Evaluation
To evaluate the quality of the labels, we apply our method to the New York Times cor-
pus [30] which contains 20 years of New York Times articles. Our approach is applied
to a subset (Jan 1, 2004–June 19, 2007) that consists of 308k articles. The Stanford
NER tagger [12] is used to extract person-name string from these articles, resulting in
5 million sub-mentions. High-precision within-doc coreference identiﬁes 2.5 million
mentions that are used in cross-document disambiguation. We use a recent snapshot of
Wikipedia3 consisting of 6.2 million pages, out of which 2.5 million are redirects and
121k are disambiguation pages.
2 Since the distribution of the words in Wikipedia and our corpus may differ considerably, we
compute separate idfs.
3 enwiki-20080103-pages-articles.xml

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
7
Table 1. Distribution of Entity Sizes
Entity Size Number of Entities
1
50,654
2-9
55,868
10-99
17,976
100-999
1,338
1000-9999
31
Table 2. Accuracy of the Labels
Subset of Mentions Correct Decisions / Total Mentions Accuracy
Single Candidate
872 / 888
98.2
Multiple Candidates
153 / 219
69.9
Overall
1025 / 1107
92.6
Out of the 2.5 million mentions, our method of candidate set selection does not ﬁnd
any candidates for ∼1.4 million mentions, due to occurrence of rare entities, absence
of sufﬁcient context and string variations that are not captured by the redirect pages.
Since we rely on Wikipedia for our distant-labels, these mentions cannot be resolved
and are hence ignored.
Since we want as little smoothing as possible, we set α = 10−4 and λ = 1 −α.
This results in higher weights to rare word matches (and less weight to common word
matches). The threshold for rejecting candidates β is set to e−18. Running our method
of entity selection on ∼1.1 million mentions (172k unique strings) results in matches
to 125k entities (Wikipedia pages). We show the distribution of the resulting entity sizes
in Table 1.
The creation of the dataset took a total of 23 hours, out of which 15 hours were
for the NER tagging. Since there is no computation on pairs of mentions, our approach
is linear in the size of the document corpus, and will scale to larger data, for e.g. all
20 years of the New York Times corpus. Furthermore, each decision is made inde-
pendently, leading to parallelization across machines that can considerably reduce the
running time.
We evaluate the accuracy of the resulting data set by manually examining the Wikipedia
page selection decision made for individual mentions. 1, 107 total mentions are sampled
randomly from the training data and their entity selection is labeled as correct or incor-
rect. The accuracy reported in Table 2 includes subsets of the labeled mentions that
have only a single candidate (decision on whether to pick it or not) and ones that have
multiple candidates.
The overall accuracy of 92.6% for creating training data for coreference containing
more than a million mentions without any manual intervention makes our approach use-
ful for real-world applications. Since resolving disambiguation is a difﬁcult task even
by humans (some mentions had more than 50 candidates), we are impressed that our
language model based method achieves an accuracy of 69.9% for mentions with mul-

8
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
tiple candidates. Furthermore, much of the dataset does not contain these disambigua-
tions, resulting in the redirect link resolving a number of correct entities, achieving an
accuracy of 98.2% when there are no disambiguations.
3.5
Dataset Ambiguity
In this section we give some examples of cross-document coreference decisions that are
difﬁcult to achieve without our distant-labeling approach.
– Renaming: Consider the changing aliases of celebrities, for example mentions
“Sean Combs” and “Puff Daddy”. Since the contexts around these mentions vary
signiﬁcantly due to temporal differences, unsupervised methods that rely on the
mention string or the contexts may not merge these mentions. Furthermore, these
mentions are problematic for human labelers who lack the domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge required to disambiguate them. However, Wikipedia provides a redirect link,
“Sean Combs→Puff Daddy”. Similarly, for the example in Fig 1, “Lovebug Starski”
appears on the disambiguation page for “Kevin Smith”.
– Alternate Names: There are many examples of cases where the same ﬁrst name
is often referred to by alternate strings, such as “Richard/Dick”, “Chuck/Charles”,
“Dan/Daniel”, “Robert/Bob/Bobby”, etc. Many approaches use a pre-built gazetteers
for such renames, however they require domain expertise to build, may be incom-
plete, and may not always be applicable (for e.g. “Edward” is sometimes “Ted”,
as in Kennedy, but this is uncommon). Wikipedia redirect and disambiguation links
provide alternatives only if the entity is sometimes referred to by the alternate name.
– Same Names: This is a major concern for cross-document coreference wherein
same mention strings refer to different entities, e.g. “John Smith”. Unsupervised
techniques that rely on contexts can create more/less entities than truth. This prob-
lem is magniﬁed when the different entities belong to similar ﬁelds (“Michael
Moore”, ﬁlmmaker, and “Michael D. Moore”, ﬁlm actor and director). From Wikipedia
we know which entities to disambiguate between, and our relevance model uses the
article text to select a candidate, resulting in an accuracy of 69.9%.
– Singletons: Many mention strings in news articles often refer to entities that do
not appear in the corpus again (local opinion pieces, death notices, one-off criminal
stories, etc.). Pruning these involves considerable labor, as not all articles in a cer-
tain category only refer to singleton entities. Frequency based analysis is also not
enough, since many of these mentions share the same string with mentions from
other articles. Our approach eliminates these from Wikipedia candidates based on
the threshold on the article-page scoring function. However, as a side effect, this
method does not resolve isolated references to prominent entities, e.g. reference to
“George Bush” in a sports article.
We investigate the level of ambiguity in our generated dataset by analyzing precision
and recall scores of pairwise coreference decisions for some simple baseline procedures
evaluated using our generated labeled data as ground truth (see Table 3). Precision, in
context of clustering, refers to the ratio of the number of pairs of mention that were cor-
rectly predicted to be coreferent (true positives) to the total pairs of mentions that were

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
9
Table 3. Ambiguity Analysis using Pairwise Decisions
Pairwise Metric (%) Unique Name Last Name
Precision
97.29
35.49
Recall
81.49
98.85
F1 score
88.69
52.14
predicted to be coreferent (true positives + false positives). Precision thus encourages
smaller clusters that are of high quality. Recall, on the other hand, refers to the number
of true positives to the number of pairs of mentions that are coreferent as per the truth
(true positives + false negatives), and encourages bigger clusters that are super-sets of
true clusters. Precision and recall scores of some simple baseline clustering techniques
(by treating our generated data as truth) gives us insight into the ambiguity in our data.
First we cluster the mentions according to their unique canonical strings, that is,
each cluster contains mentions whose canonical names are string-identical. There are
two important observations here. First, the precision is below 100% revealing that
unique name clustering is merging names that refer to different entities, that is, demon-
strating “same names” ambiguity. Second, the recall is considerably lower indicating
that entities are being referred to by multiple strings, demonstrating “renaming” and
“alternate names” ambiguity.
Next, we relax the notion of canonical name clustering to a last name clustering,
where mentions are in the same cluster if their last names are string-identical. If there
were no “rename” ambiguity, then we would expect perfect recall (100%) for the last
name clustering. However, this is not the case, implying that there is a substantial
amount of “rename” ambiguity in our dataset (although considerably less than the “al-
ternate name” ambiguity).
This pairwise analysis, along with the manual evaluation in Table 2, can be used
to estimate the quality and frequency of the various types of disambiguations in the
dataset, and therefore its utility as a cross-document coreference corpus.
4
Cross-Document Coreference
Now that we have described our distantly labeled coreference corpus, we demonstrate
its utility for training a sophisticated discriminative model of coreference. Since this
conditional random ﬁeld based model only consists of features based on the raw text
surrounding the mentions, and does not use any supervision from Wikipedia, it can
be applied to any source of text. In particular we reveal that the model is capable of
generalizing to a held-out evaluation set that contains mentions and entities that are not
encountered during training.
4.1
Model
We adapt the state-of-the-art within document coreference model of [9] to our prob-
lem setting. In particular, we use a conditional random ﬁeld with features deﬁned over

10
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
m1
m3
m2
e1
e2
 
  
 
 
!+
!-
!-
!
!
Fig. 2. The Factor graph for coreference with two entities and three mentions. The shaded areas
represent the clustering.
mention-pairs and cross-document entities. There are two types of hidden variables:
mentions (denoted mi) and entities (denoted ei). The mention variable has a domain
that ranges over possible entities, and the entity is a set-valued variable whose domain
ranges over all possible subsets of mentions. Further, there are variables that encap-
sulate all the observed properties of mentions, which are implicitly part of the hidden
mention variable. These properties include the mention text, the canonical representa-
tion for the mention, and the bags of words extracted from context windows as well
as the sub-mention texts. These factors model the dependencies between mention pairs
in the same cluster (ψ+ modeling attraction), and mention pairs in different clusters
(ψ−modeling repulsion). Additionally, we have a factor over each entity variable (ψ)
that can examine the cohesiveness of a coreference cluster. Figure 2 shows our model
instantiated with three mentions over a two-entity hypothesis.
Let M be the set of hidden mention variables, E be the set of hidden entity vari-
ables, X be the set of observed mention properties, and Y = M ∪E be the set of
all hidden variables. Further let the notation mi.e denote the entity that mi references,
let P + = {⟨mi, mj⟩∈M2
i<j|mi.e = mj.e} and similarly P −= {⟨mi, mj⟩∈
M2
i<j|mi.e ̸= mj.e}. Then, the probability distribution over the coreference hypothe-
sis space (clusterings) is given as:
π(y|x) ∝
Y
e∈E
ψ(e) ×
Y
P +
ψ+(mi, mj)
(1)
×
Y
P −
ψ−(mi, mj)
where ψ±(mi, mj) = exp
 θ± · φ(mi, mj)
 is a log-linear combination of parameters θ
and the feature function φ. Note that while the underlying feature-functions for these
two types of factors are equivalent (φ), the parameters between them are not tied, allow-
ing separate sets of weights to be learned. Our model is implemented as an imperatively-
deﬁned factor graph using the FACTORIE probabilistic programming library [21].

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
11
4.2
Features
Since we want to apply the model to arbitrary sources of mentions, we rely only on
the text, stored as observed properties of the mentions (X). As described above, these
properties include the mention text, the canonical representation for the mention, and
the bags of words extracted from context windows as well as the sub-mention texts.
Given a mention pair ⟨mi, mj⟩we deﬁne the following binary pairwise features
φ(mi, mj):
– canonical match true iff mi’s canonical representation is lower-case string identi-
cal to mj’s. Similarly, we include a canonical mismatch feature.
– last name match true iff mi’s canonical last name is lower-case string identical to
mj’s Similarly, we include a last name mismatch feature.
– cosine distance features for each type of bag-of-words, the cosine distance is mea-
sured and quantized into ten bins.
For an entity e, we implement the following binary features
– cluster size features: thresholded cluster sizes (== 1, > 1, > 2, > 4)
4.3
Inference
In this section we describe a method for scaling inference to large datasets. In particular,
we use a local search method based on the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm with
a canopy-based proposer. We brieﬂy describe MH and canopies, then present our jump
function.
MH is a Markov-chain Monte Carlo method that stochastically performs local changes
by probabilistically accepting jumps from a proposal distribution Q conditioned on the
current state y producing a new conﬁguration y′. The proposed conﬁguration y′ is ac-
cepted with probability α = π(y′|x)/π(y|x) × q(y|y′)/q(y′|y), where π is the distribu-
tion encoded by the model (see Eq 1), and q is the probability of proposing the jump to
y′. Since we are performing maximum a posteriori (MAP) with no latent variables, we
can safely ignore the ratio containing q [21].
In order to avoid inefﬁciencies arising from unnecessary exploration, we inject the
following domain-speciﬁc knowledge into the proposal distribution. First, the proposal
distribution is designed so that inference explores only the space of valid conﬁgurations
(settings to the hidden variables that result in an invalid clustering are not considered).
Second, we use the idea of canopies to propose jumps that are more likely to be accepted
by the model, and that lead to high-scoring conﬁgurations.
A canopy is a relaxation of a clustering where mentions can refer to more that one
entity (in other words the transitivity assumption is not enforced and mentions can be
in more than one cluster) [20]. Formally, we deﬁne a canopy C as a set of mention sets.
Typically, canopies are constructed so that mentions occurring in the same set are highly
likely to be coreference, for example, they can be constructed such that all mentions in
the same set are within a certain cosine threshold of each other.
Let Γ = {Ci} be a set of canopies. Also, let the notation t ∼ρ T mean to draw an
element t from a set T with probability distribution ρ : T →[0, 1] s.t. P
t∈T ρ(s) = 1.
The class of proposal distributions based on canopies is deﬁned as follows:

12
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
1: Input: current conﬁguration y
2: Output: proposed conﬁguration y′
3: C ∼ρ Γ
//pick a random canopy
4: S ∼ρ C
//pick a set of mentions from canopy
5: //pick a new entity for mention
ma ∼ρ S
mb ∼ρ S
ma.e ←mb.e
// move ma to mb’s entity
6: return y′
In practice we take ρ to be uniform in distribution.In our implementation we use the
last name and canonical name clusterings from Section 3.4 as the set of canopies Γ. We
further enrich the above proposal distribution to create new entities and explore random
conﬁgurations. Speciﬁcally, with 20% probability, we pick a random mention and move
it to a random entity (this entity may be an empty one), and with 80% probability we
run the canopy proposer.
Note that for each step, the jump function moves a single mention from one entity to
another; each jump changes the settings of only three hidden variables. Therefore, even
with factors over entire entities, evaluating the MH acceptance score requires computing
as many factors as the number of total mentions in the two entities.
4.4
Learning
Parameter estimation is performed with SampleRank [34], an extremely efﬁcient stochas-
tic gradient-ascent based method that solves a ranking-objective function. SampleRank
employs the same proposal distribution as used during inference and learns a model
whose probabilities correspond with a user-speciﬁed ranking function over coreference
conﬁgurations. In particular, we learn a model that ranks conﬁgurations according to
pairwise accuracy.
4.5
Experiments
We present preliminary experiments demonstrating that the within document corefer-
ence model can be scaled to perform inference on a large dataset. In particular, we
use our distantly-labeled NYT data consisting of over a million mentions, as described
in Section 3.4. This is evenly divided into training and testing sets, each contains
∼550, 000 mentions and ∼90, 000 entities.
We perform ten iterations of SampleRank on the training set, where an iteration
consists of 100, 000 Metropolis-Hastings steps; each iteration takes on average only
19.6 minutes and training takes under ﬁve hours total. We perform inference using ﬁve
million Metropolis-Hastings steps on the held out test data. Inference takes 9.5 hours
and achieves a Pairwise F1 score of 89.83%. This high score is encouraging for a model
that is trained on our distantly-labeled data. Note that since most of the entities that
are present in the training data are absent from the evaluation, our model is resolving
mentions to unseen entities. This provides evidence that our model may generalize to
entities that are not present in Wikipedia, however we could not evaluate this since our
evaluation data only consists of entities that appear in Wikipedia.

Distantly Labeling Data for Large Scale Cross-Document Coreference
13
5
Related Work
Even though the cross-document coreference problem is challenging and lacks large
labeled datasets, its ubiquitous role as a key component to many knowledge discovery
tasks has inspired several efforts.
There are a number of unsupervised approaches to the problem, many of which rely
on a scoring function for pairs of contexts that is used for clustering. One of the ﬁrst
approaches to cross-document coreference [1] uses a pre-trained within-document step,
followed by an idf based scoring function for pairs of contexts for clustering. Ravin et
al. [29] extend this work to be more scalable by comparing pairs of context only if the
mentions are deemed ambiguous enough using a heuristic. Others have explored multi-
ple methods of context similarity, and concluded that agglomerative clustering provides
effective means of performing inference [14]. Pedersen et al. [24] and Purandare & Ped-
ersen [28] integrate second-order co-occurrence of words into the similarity function. A
number of other approaches include various forms of hand-tuned weights, dictionaries,
and heuristics to deﬁne similarity for name disambiguation for clustering [6,2,27].
Since the unsupervised techniques make strong assumptions about the data and/or
contain domain speciﬁc heuristics, techniques that rely on minimal supervision have
been proposed. Mann & Yarowsky [18] extract biographical facts from the Web, such
as birthdate, which are used as features for clustering. Niu et al. [23] incorporate in-
formation extraction into the context similarity model, and construct small annotated
datasets to learn some of the parameters. There has been little work in completely su-
pervised cross-document coreference. The only work of which we are aware is Finin et
al. [11]. They incorporate features from Wikitology to train a pairwise classiﬁer. Simi-
larly, Mayﬁeld et al. [19] use additional features that are information extraction based.
Both these systems are trained on a small subset of the ACE 2008 data.
A number of techniques above also create datasets for evaluation. Bagga & Bald-
win [1] generate a small, highly-ambiguous “john smith” dataset. Gooi & Allan [14]
create the ambiguous “Person-X dataset” that replaces names of different entities to be
the same Person-X. Although challenging and helpful for academic evaluation, these
artiﬁcial datasets offer little realism. Niu et al.[23] generate approximate data sets for
partial supervision, however the datasets are too small and noisy to be useful for train-
ing. A number of tools have been proposed to help annotators and the resulting datasets
have been released. Bentivogli et al. [5] introduces a small dataset containing high am-
biguity (209 names over 709 entities), but the data set is not big enough for large-scale
models. Day et al.[10] also introduce a tool and a corpus, however the corpus offers
little ambiguity.
Various aspects of Wikipedia have been used as supervision and features for a num-
ber of information extraction tasks. Features based on Wikipedia, including categorical
and structure, have been used to train supervised models of within-document [26] and
cross-document [11,19] coreference. Similar to our generative model, wikipedia has
been used to score similarity between documents [13,16,33]. By making a “one person
per document” assumption, Han & Zhao [16] treat document clustering as an approach
to unsupervised coreference. Strube & Ponzetto [33] uses the semantic relatedness of
articles as a feature for a supervised coreference model.

14
Sameer Singh, Michael Wick, and Andrew McCallum
Our work is most similar to Bunescu & Pasca [7] and Cucerzan [8] which also use
Wikipedia to disambiguate entities in an unsupervised manner. Bunescu & Pasca [7] use
content and categorical information to create features for a scoring model that can dis-
ambiguate mentions that appear in wikipedia articles. This scoring model is trained on
the existing links in Wikipedia. It unclear whether this method can generalize to men-
tions from other sources such as newswire. Cucerzan [8] disambiguates mentions in ar-
bitrary data sources, and is evaluated on news articles. The vector representation of each
document is created using features from wikipedia, and the dot product is used to denote
document similarity. This disambiguation approach was applied to a small dataset. Ad-
ditionally, none of these approaches train a cross-document coreference model that can
run on a large number of mentions and resolve entities that do not appear in Wikipedia,
restricting their utility.
6
Conclusions
Motivated by the difﬁculty of labeling data for large-scale cross-document coreference,
we propose a distantly-labeling approach to automatically produce large datasets using
Wikipedia. We applied the method to the New York Times corpus, and the noise and
ambiguity in the generated dataset were analyzed. To enable cross-document corefer-
ence on this large dataset, a canopy-based sampling approach for training and inference
was introduced. The model that we trained on this data has multiple uses in downstream
applications, such as search, reputation analysis, trend analysis, etc. Furthermore, the
predictions of the model can be used to suggest additional disambiguations and redi-
rects for Wikipedia.
There are a number of avenues for future work. We intend to release the dataset so
that the community of cross-document coreference can beneﬁt from a large labeled cor-
pus. Even though the current level of noise is acceptable, our method can be improved
to create less noisy datasets, using more complicated models than the current. More
ambiguity can be artiﬁcially introduced into the dataset; although this is not realistic,
the resulting dataset may be more useful for evaluation of cross-document coreference
methods.
