arXiv:2101.00300v3  [cs.LG]  25 Oct 2021
When Is Generalizable Reinforcement Learning
Tractable?
Dhruv Malik
Yuanzhi Li
Pradeep Ravikumar
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
October 27, 2021
Abstract
Agents trained by reinforcement learning (RL) often fail to generalize beyond the environ-
ment they were trained in, even when presented with new scenarios that seem similar to the
training environment. We study the query complexity required to train RL agents that gener-
alize to multiple environments. Intuitively, tractable generalization is only possible when the
environments are similar or close in some sense. To capture this, we introduce Weak Proximity,
a natural structural condition that requires the environments to have highly similar transition
and reward functions and share a policy providing optimal value. Despite such shared structure,
we prove that tractable generalization is impossible in the worst case. This holds even when each
individual environment can be eﬃciently solved to obtain an optimal linear policy, and when
the agent possesses a generative model. Our lower bound applies to the more complex task of
representation learning for the purpose of eﬃcient generalization to multiple environments. On
the positive side, we introduce Strong Proximity, a strengthened condition which we prove is
suﬃcient for eﬃcient generalization.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is the dominant paradigm for sequential decision making in machine
learning, and has achieved success in a variety of domains such as competitive gaming [M+15, S+17]
and robotic control [GHLL17, HPZ+18]. Despite this success, many issues prevent RL from being
regularly used in the real world. For example, one typically trains and tests RL agents in the same
environment. In such cases, an agent can memorize behavior that achieves high reward, without
acquiring the true behavior that the system designer desires. This has raised concerns about RL
agents overﬁtting to a single environment, instead of learning meaningful skills [FMB18].
Indeed, a long line of work has noted the brittleness of RL agents: slight changes in the envi-
ronment, such as those incurred by modeling or simulator design errors, or slight perturbations of
the agent’s trajectory, can lead to catastrophic declines in performance [RLTK17, ZBP18, HIB+18].
Furthermore, although RL agents can solve diﬃcult tasks, they struggle to transfer the skills they
learned in one task to perform well in a diﬀerent but similar task [RZF+19, YQH+19]. Yet, in
the real world, it is reasonable to expect that RL agents will see scenarios that are at least mildly
diﬀerent from the speciﬁc scenarios they trained for.
Hence, a desirable property of RL agents is that of generalization, broadly deﬁned as the ability
to discern the correct notion of behavior and perform well in semantically similar environments.
We focus on two popular generalization settings. The Average Performance setting assumes there
1

is an underlying distribution over the environments that an agent might encounter. The agent’s
goal is to perform well on average across this distribution [PGK+18, NPH+18, CKH+19]. The
Meta Reinforcement Learning setting is closely related [FAL17, CNL+19, RZF+19]. Here an agent
ﬁrst learns from a suite of training environments sampled from a distribution. Then at test time
the agent must leverage this experience to adapt to a new environment sampled from the same
distribution, via only a few queries in the new environment.
Of course, in full generality, both notions of generalization are impossible to achieve eﬃciently.
This is especially true in the RL function approximation setting, where the cardinality of the state
space is potentially inﬁnite, and so we desire query complexity that scales (polynomially) with the
dimensionality of the state space [DLWZ19, RD19, DKWY20, LSW20, WAJ+21]. Hence, key to
both lines of inquiry is the premise that the environments are structurally similar. For example, a
robot may face the diﬀering tasks of screwing a bottle cap and turning a doorknob, but both tasks
involve turning the wrist [RZF+19]. The hope is that if the environments are suﬃciently similar,
then RL can exploit this structure to eﬃciently discover policies that generalize.
Yet, it remains unclear what kind of structure is necessary, and what it means for diﬀerent
environments to be close or similar. Motivated by this, we ask the following question:
What are the structural conditions on the environments that permit eﬃcient
generalization?
This question underlies the analysis of our paper. We focus on environments that share state-action
spaces, since even this basic case is not well understood in the literature. Indeed, even in this simpli-
ﬁed setting, eﬃcient generalization can be highly non-trivial. We make the following contributions.
Our Contributions. We introduce Weak Proximity, a natural structural condition that is moti-
vated by classical RL results, and requires the environments to have highly similar transition and
reward functions and share optimal trajectories. We prove a statistical lower bound demonstrating
that tractable generalization is impossible, despite this shared structure. This lower bound holds
even when each individual environment can be eﬃciently solved to obtain a linear policy providing
optimal value, and when the agent possesses a generative model. Consequentially, we show that
a classical metric for measuring the relative closeness of MDPs is not the right metric for mod-
ern RL generalization settings. Our lower bound implies that learning a state representation for
the purpose of eﬃciently generalizing to multiple environments, is worst case sample ineﬃcient —
even when such a representation exists, the environments are ostensibly similar, and any single
environment can be eﬃciently solved.
To provide a suﬃcient condition for eﬃcient generalization, we introduce Strong Proximity. This
structural condition strengthens Weak Proximity by additionally constraining the environments to
share an optimal policy. We provide an algorithm which exploits Strong Proximity to provably and
eﬃciently generalize, when the environments share deterministic transitions.
Organization. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss prior
work that has tackled the generalization problem in RL. In Section 3, we formally present our
settings of interest and state the problem that is our object of study. In Section 4, we present our
theoretical results. We conclude and discuss avenues for future work in Section 5. All proofs are
presented in Appendices A, B, C and D.
2

2
Related Work
Simulation Lemma. Many prior works deﬁne notions of statistical distance between Markov deci-
sion processes (MDPs), and measure the relative value of policies when deployed in diﬀerent MDPs
that are close under such metrics. The Simulation Lemma, which uses total variation distance
between transitions and the absolute diﬀerence of rewards as this metric, is a well known formal-
ization of this and has been very useful in classical prior work [KK99, KS02, BT03, KKL03, AN05].
These works do not directly tackle generalization, but their analyses construct an approximate
MDP that models the true MDP under the aforementioned metric. Solving this approximate MDP
then corresponds to solving the true MDP. It is natural to ask whether this metric is useful for
measuring the similarity of MDPs in modern RL generalization settings. We show this metric is
not appropriate for the settings we study.
Transfer & Multitask Learning. There are varying formalisms of both settings, so we do not
directly study them. However, they are broadly relevant, and we expect our theory to be useful
for future studies of these settings. The works [LG10, BL13, Jia18, WZXS19] all study metrics for
measuring variation between MDPs that are diﬀerent from the metrics we study. A metric similar
to the one used in the Simulation Lemma has also been studied [FYY19], and we show that this is
inappropriate for our settings.
Average Performance & Meta RL Settings. We directly study these two settings, which have
seen much empirical work [PGK+18, CKH+19, CHHS20, RZF+19, YQH+19]. On the theoretical
side, [BMPS20, SJT+20] study an Average Performance setting where the agent receives a noisy
observation in lieu of the actual state. We focus on the simpler setting where the agent knows its
state. Recent works [FMO20, WCYW20] analyze the MAML algorithm [FAL17] in the context
of Meta RL. In the worst case, their complexity bounds scale exponentially with the horizon, and
they do not discuss structure which permits tractable Meta RL.
Representation Learning. A large body of work has focused on extracting a representation
useful for a single MDP [FPP04, Cas20, LBC21, ZMC+21]. Some works extend this to multiple
MDPs [CP10, AMCB21, SPM20], but they are about learning shared representations for MDPs
that appear similar (but not from a sample eﬃciency perspective), while we formalize what it
means for MDPs to be similar (in a sample eﬃcient sense). Indeed, these works study the general
case when the environments have distinct state spaces, but our lower bounds show generalization
is non-trivial even when each MDP shares the same state space.
3
Problem Formulation
Notation & Preliminaries.
Before describing our settings of interest, we establish notation
and brieﬂy review preliminaries. We always use M to denote a Markov decision process (MDP).
Recall that an undiscounted ﬁnite horizon MDP is speciﬁed by a set of states S, a set of actions A,
a transition function T which maps from state-action pairs to distributions over states, a reward
function R which maps state-action pairs to nonnegative real numbers, and a ﬁnite planning horizon
H. We assume that the state-action pairs are featurized, so that S ×A ⊂Rd, and that ∥(s, a)∥2 = 1
for all (s, a) ∈S × A. Any MDP we consider is undiscounted and has a ﬁnite action space, but
3

could have an uncountable state space. If we need to refer to the transition or reward function of
a speciﬁc MDP M, then we shall denote this via T M or RM. We will denote a distribution over
MDPs as D. We also assume that S can be partitioned into H diﬀerent levels. This means that for
each s ∈S there exists a unique h ∈{0, 1 . . . H −1} such that it takes h timesteps to arrive at s
from s0. We say that such a state s lies on level h, and denote Sh to be the set of states on level h.
This assumption is without loss of generality, since we can always make the ﬁnal coordinate of each
state-action pair encode the number of timesteps that elapsed to reach the state. A “deterministic
MDP” is one with deterministic transitions. For any MDP, we assume a single initial state s0,
which strengthens our lower bounds.
A policy maps each state to a corresponding distribution over actions, and shall typically be
denoted by π.
The total expected reward accumulated by policy π when initialized at state s
in MDP M is given by E
hPH−1
h=level(s) RM(sh, ah) | π
i
and will be denoted by V s
M(π). Here the
expectation is over the trajectory {(sh, ah)}H−1
h=level(s) given that the ﬁrst state in the trajectory is s.
So V s
M(π) is the value of the policy π in MDP M with respect to (w.r.t) initial state s. Analogously,
if a policy is parameterized by θ = {θh}H−1
h=0 , then we denote it as π(θ), and the notation V s
M(π)
is then replaced by V s
M(θ). We assume that the cumulative reward collected by any trajectory
from any initial state s in any MDP M is always bounded by 1. Hence the value of any policy in
any MDP lies in the interval [0, 1]. TV(P, Q) denotes the total variation (TV) distance between
probability distributions P and Q. Throughout, we use standard big O notation.
3.1
Problem Settings
Average Performance Setting. There is a ﬁxed distribution D over a family of MDPs. One
can sample MDPs from D. The algorithm can query states in the sampled MDPs, to learn some
common structure. The goal is to solve
max
π
EM∼D

V s0
M (π)

.
(1)
Meta Reinforcement Learning Setting. There is a ﬁxed distribution D over a family of MDPs.
At training time, one can sample MDPs from D. The algorithm can query states in the sampled
MDPs, to learn some common structure between all the MDPs. Then at test time, an MDP Mtest
is sampled from the same distribution D. The goal of the algorithm is to learn a subroutine, which
with non-trivial probability over the selection of Mtest, can solve
max
π
V s0
Mtest(π),
(2)
signiﬁcantly more eﬃciently than trying to solve Mtest without having seen any training MDPs.
In both settings, “sampling an MDP” means drawing an MDP i.i.d from D, so that the agent can
then interact with it by performing trajectories in it. Note that in Eqs. (1) & (2), in full generality
the initial state s0 is random and depends on M, Mtest. We focus on the case when the MDPs
supporting D share a state-action space, and hence share the same single initial s0 since we assume
a single initial state for any MDP. While such assumptions are already strong, they only strengthen
our lower bounds. Furthermore, it is necessary to understand this simpler setting, before looking
at more complex scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, such a study has not appeared in prior
work.
4

To solve the problems described by Eqs. (1) & (2), we need to deﬁne an appropriate query
model for the algorithm. We consider two query models, the ﬁrst of which is strictly stronger than
the second.
Strong Query Model (SQM). Sampling an MDP from D incurs no cost.
The agent has a
generative model of any sampled MDP M. To interact with M, the agent inputs a state-action
pair (s, a) of M into the model, and receives RM(s, a) and a state sampled from T M(s, a). This
incurs a query cost of one. The goal is to solve Eqs. (1) & (2) with total query cost that is at most
polynomial in |A|, H, d.
Weak Query Model (WQM). Sampling an MDP from D incurs a query cost of qD ≥1. Within
a sampled MDP M, the agent operates in the standard episodic RL setup. Concretely, during each
episode the agent interacts with the MDP by starting from s0, taking an action and observing the
next state and reward, and repeating. Each action taken during an episode incurs a query cost
of one. The goal is to solve Eqs. (1) & (2) with total query cost that is at most polynomial in
qD, |A|, H, d.
Note that under both SQM and WQM, we desire query cost that is polynomial in the dimension
d of the state-action space, as opposed to the cardinality of the state space.
This is standard
for our function approximation setting [DLWZ19, RD19, DKWY20, LSW20, WAJ+21], since the
cardinality of the state space could be inﬁnite.
Also, we separate SQM and WQM because it
is well known that diﬀerent query models can lead to various subtleties in analysis and sample
complexity guarantees [DLWZ19, RD19, DKWY20, LSW20, WAJ+21]. The generative model that
deﬁnes SQM assumes that we can simulate any state of our choice without performing a trajec-
tory, which is unrealistic in practice, and is one of the strongest oracle models considered in prior
literature [KMN99, AMK12, SWW+18, DKWY20, LSW20, AKY20]. We shall present our lower
bounds under SQM, which makes these results stronger, but shall present our upper bound under
the natural and standard WQM. More generally, we emphasize that proving a lower bound under
stronger assumptions makes the lower bound stronger. By contrast, proving an upper bound under
weaker assumptions means that upper bound applies more generally.
Without any conditions on D, the Average Performance & Meta RL settings can be intractable,
even under SQM. This will occur if the MDPs supporting D do not share structure. This will also
occur if any individual MDP cannot be solved eﬃciently. Nevertheless, in practice one often deals
with MDPs which share meaningful structure [CKH+19, RZF+19]. For instance, the transition
distributions of the MDPs may be close in a suitable metric. Similarly, the reward functions of the
MDPs might be close in an appropriate norm, or each MDP may share a set of optimal trajectories.
And in practice, individual MDPs can usually be optimized eﬃciently [PGK+18, YQH+19]. In such
cases, it is reasonable to expect tractable generalization. We are interested in formalizing conditions
that permit eﬃcient generalization. We will particularly focus on conditions which capture shared
structure of the MDPs and the tractability of individual MDPs. We now formally state the problem
we consider throughout our paper.
Which conditions on D allow us to solve the Average Performance & Meta RL settings eﬃciently?
As mentioned above, there are two types of requirements. The ﬁrst requirement should ensure
that the MDPs are meaningfully similar. We formalize such conditions in Section 3.2. The second
5

requirement should ensure that any individual MDP is eﬃciently solvable, else there is no hope to
eﬃciently ﬁnd policies that generalize for many MDPs. We formalize such properties in Section 3.3.
3.2
Strong & Weak Proximity
We now identify conditions that capture when the MDPs supporting D share meaningful structure.
Since MDPs are deﬁned in terms of rewards and transitions, it is very natural to impose conditions
directly on the rewards and transitions. To this end, we state the following condition.
Condition 1 (Similar Rewards & Transitions) The distribution D satisﬁes this condition with
parameters ξr, ξtr ≥0 when:
(a) Each MDP supporting D shares the same state-action space S × A.
(b) For all Mi, Mj supporting D and all (s, a) ∈S × A we have |RMi(s, a) −RMj(s, a)| ≤ξr.
(c) For all Mi, Mj supporting D and all (s, a) ∈S × A we have TV(T Mi(s, a), T Mj(s, a)) ≤ξtr.
The parameters ξr, ξtr naturally quantify the similarity of diﬀerent MDPs. Conditions of this form
are canonical and have yielded fruitful research in classical RL literature [KK99, KS02, BT03,
KKL03, AN05], in the guise of the Simulation Lemma (see Section 2). To concretize this condition
with an example, consider a suite of simulated robotic goal reaching tasks [YQH+19], where the
physics simulator is the same in each task, so the transitions are ﬁxed and ξtr = 0, but the goal
location changes from task to task, implying that ξr > 0. We now establish our Weak Proximity
condition, which strictly strengthens Condition 1.
Condition 2 (Weak Proximity) The distribution D satisﬁes Weak Proximity with parameters
ξr, ξtr, α ≥0 when:
(a) D satisﬁes Condition 1 with parameters ξr, ξtr ≥0.
(b) There exists a deterministic policy π⋆which for any MDP M satisﬁes
V s0
M (π⋆) ≥max
π′ V s0
M (π′) −α.
Weak Proximity strengthens Condition 1 by additionally requiring (via part (b)) that there exists
some policy π⋆which provides α-suboptimal value for each MDP supporting D. Intuitively, this
condition implicitly constrains the MDPs to be similar, since there is a single policy which provides
(nearly) optimal value, irrespective of the MDP it is deployed in. Furthermore, recall from Eqs. (1)
& (2) that the objectives of the Average Performance & Meta RL settings are deﬁned in terms of
value w.r.t the initial state s0. So it is natural to assume, as we do in part (b), that there is one
policy which provides good value w.r.t s0 for all MDPs. From an algorithmic perspective, this is
helpful, because it ensures that we can restrict our search to those policies which perform well for
many MDPs supporting D.
Although Condition 1 is natural and well motivated by classical RL literature, it (and Weak
Proximity) may seem strong. This is because it requires that each MDP supporting D shares the
same state space, which may not hold in practice. We stress that we will prove a lower bound under
6

Weak Proximity, showing that eﬃcient generalization is impossible even in the simpler regime of a
shared state space.
We now present Strong Proximity, a condition which strictly strengthens Weak Proximity. We
will later show that unlike its Weak counterpart, Strong Proximity indeed permits eﬃcient gener-
alization.
Condition 3 (Strong Proximity) The distribution D satisﬁes Strong Proximity with parameters
ξr, ξtr, α ≥0 when:
(a) D satisﬁes Condition 1 with parameters ξr, ξtr ≥0.
(b) There exists a deterministic policy π⋆which is a near optimal policy for each MDP. Concretely,
the policy π⋆satisﬁes
V s
M(π⋆) ≥max
π′ V s
M(π′) −α,
for each state s and each MDP M.
Let us compare Weak with Strong Proximity. Part (a) remains identical. But Weak Proximity
(b) only requires a shared policy which provides α-suboptimal value with respect to s0. This is in
contrast to the shared policy in part (b) of Strong Proximity, which provides α-suboptimal value
for any state.
3.3
Tractability of Individual Optimization
As discussed previously, in order to eﬃciently solve Eqs. (1) & (2), we require the property that
each individual MDP supporting D can be eﬃciently solved. It is natural to expect such a property
to hold in practice. For instance, in the context of our earlier example of simulated robotic goal
reaching tasks [YQH+19], any individual task can be eﬃciently solved via policy gradient methods.
We now state two such properties, the ﬁrst of which is strictly stronger than the second. Since
these properties require a notion of query cost, we state both of them with reference to a generic
query model QM, and when we later present our results we will instantiate QM to be either SQM
or WQM. To avoid complicating notation in these statements, we assume in this subsection (as is
our focus throughout the paper) that all MDPs supporting D are deﬁned on the same state-action
space S × A ⊂Rd. Recall that a linear policy π is parameterized by θ = {θh}H−1
h=0 , where θh ∈Rd
and ∥θh∥2 = 1 for all 0 ≤h ≤H −1, such that π(s) ∈argmaxa∈A(s, a)T θh for any s ∈Sh. Here xT y
denotes the Euclidean inner product of x, y ∈Rd. We use π⋆
M to denote an arbitrary deterministic
optimal policy of MDP M.
Property 1 (Strong Individual Optimization (SIO)) Let the query model be QM. The dis-
tribution D satisﬁes SIO with parameters k > 0 and 0 ≤β < 1/4 when:
(a) Any MDP M supporting D admits an optimal linear policy. Concretely, given any M, there
exists θ⋆= {θ⋆
h}H−1
h=0 such that for every state s ∈Sh we have
π⋆
M(s) ∈argmax
a∈A
(s, a)T θ⋆
h.
7

(b) There exists a ﬁxed and known algorithm, such that given any MDP M and any state s, this
algorithm uses at most O(| A |Hk) query cost (under QM) on M to identify (almost surely) a
linear policy π(θ) parameterized by θ = {θh}H−1
h=0 which satisﬁes
max
π′ V s
M(π′) ≥V s
M(θ) ≥max
π′ V s
M(π′) −β.
This algorithm then outputs π(θ) as well as V s
M(θ).
Let us discuss this property. Part (a) requires that for any MDP supporting D, there exists an
optimal linear policy. Part (b) requires that the user has knowledge of an algorithm, which can
eﬃciently ﬁnd a linear policy providing β-suboptimal value from any input state s in any MDP M.
The exponent k describes the (polynomially sized) complexity of this algorithm.
SIO is a fairly strong property, since it says that a linear policy is suﬃcient to optimize any
individual MDP, whereas in practice one typically requires nonlinear neural network policies. SIO
also heavily constrains each individual MDP supporting D to be eﬃciently solvable from any initial
state. We stress that we will prove our lower bounds under SIO, which makes our result stronger.
Meanwhile, we prove our upper bounds under the following property, which is signiﬁcantly weaker
than SIO.
Property 2 (Weak Individual Optimization (WIO)) Let the query model be QM. The dis-
tribution D satisﬁes WIO with parameter 0 ≤β < 1/4 when the following holds. There exists an
oracle bV , which takes as input a state s and MDP M, and outputs bV s
M satisfying
max
π′ V s
M(π′) ≥bV s
M ≥max
π′ V s
M(π′) −β,
via query cost (under QM) on M that is polynomial in | A |, H, d.
WIO postulates the existence of an oracle bV , which can eﬃciently approximate the optimal value
that is achievable from an input state and MDP. To see that WIO is strictly weaker than SIO,
simply note we can implement bV by running the algorithm described in part (b) of SIO. Note that
in certain states, a user may use domain knowledge to implement bV without solving an entire RL
problem. Also note that WIO does not place (arguably unrealistic) linearity restrictions on the
MDPs supporting D. Finally, note that although the algorithm in SIO (b) returns both a policy
and a scalar value, the oracle in WIO only returns a scalar value.
4
Main Results
We shall present our results in two subsections.
In Section 4.1, we prove lower bounds which
demonstrate that even under Weak Proximity, SQM and SIO, tractable generalization is worst case
impossible. In Section 4.2, we prove that eﬃcient generalization is possible under Strong Proximity,
WQM and WIO, when the MDPs supporting D share a deterministic transition function.
4.1
Lower Bounds
Before stating our own results, we ﬁrst state the following classical result which is known as the
Simulation Lemma [KK99, KS02, BT03, KKL03, AN05]. Recall that ξr, ξtr are parameters used to
satisfy Condition 1.
8

Lemma 1 Consider any D satisfying Condition 1 with ξr, ξtr ≥0.
For any policy π and any
M1, M2 supporting D, we have that |V s0
M1(π) −V s0
M2(π)| ≤ξr H + ξtr H.
This result is almost identical to the one given by [KKL03], although there are some (minor)
diﬀerences in assumptions so we provide a proof in Appendix D. This lemma shows that when D
satisﬁes Condition 1 and ξr, ξtr are each o( 1
H ), then eﬃcient generalization is trivial, at least in
problems where H is large and we want to optimize to within o(1) tolerance. Concretely, take any
M supporting D and use a standard RL method to ﬁnd π which satisﬁes V s0
M (π) ≈maxπ′ V s0
M (π′).
Then Lemma 1 ensures V s0
M′(π) ≳maxπ′ V s0
M′(π′) −o(1) for any other MDP M′ supporting D. This
implies EM∼D

V s0
M (π)

≳maxπ′ EM∼D

V s0
M (π′)

−o(1) and V s0
Mtest(π) ≳maxπ′ V s0
Mtest(π′) −o(1).
Since Weak Proximity implies Condition 1, Lemma 1 and all the above statements remain
true when D satisﬁes Weak Proximity. Naturally then, in our settings it is only interesting to
consider problems when at least one of either ξr or ξtr is Ω( 1
H ). Our next result is a lower bound
which shows that when ξr = Θ( 1
H ) and ξtr = 0, then Weak Proximity is not suﬃcient to eﬃciently
generalize in the Average Performance Setting. For the statement of this result, recall that ξr, ξtr, α
are parameters used to satisfy Weak Proximity, while β, k are parameters used to satisfy SIO.
Theorem 1 Let the query model be SQM. For any k ≥3, there exists D satisfying Weak Prox-
imity with ξr = Θ( 1
H ), ξtr = 0 & α = 0 and SIO with β = 0 & k, such that the MDPs sup-
porting D are deterministic and the following holds. Any (possibly randomized) algorithm requires
Ω
 min

| A |H, 2d	
total query cost to ﬁnd (with probability at least 1/2 over the randomness of the
algorithm) a policy π satisfying
EM∼D

V s0
M (π)

≥
max
linear policy π′ EM∼D

V s0
M (π′)

−1/4.
We defer the proof to Appendix A.1. Let us discuss this theorem, which is stated for the Average
Performance Setting, when the MDPs supporting D all share a deterministic transition function.
Recall that SQM is the stronger query model we consider, which strengthens this lower bound,
and trivially implies a lower bound for when WQM is the query model. Also recall that SIO is
the stronger individual optimization property that we consider, and it ensures that the user can
eﬃciently ﬁnd a linear policy providing optimal value w.r.t any initial state for any individual MDP,
since β = 0. Moreover, Weak Proximity (b) ensures that each MDP supporting D shares a policy
that provides optimal value (w.r.t s0), since α = 0. And Weak Proximity (a) explicitly requires
that the reward functions are (non-trivially) close, in the sense deﬁned by Condition 1, because
ξr = Θ( 1
H ). Despite this signiﬁcant structure, the theorem demonstrates that one can still require
an exponential query cost to ﬁnd a policy that is nearly as good as the best linear policy (which
is of course easier than ﬁnding the best generic policy). Note that this lower bound holds with
α = β = ξtr = 0, and so implies a lower bound for when any of α, β, ξtr are strictly positive. As we
discuss at the end of Section 4.1, Theorem 1 (and its forthcoming corollaries) immediately applies
to the task of learning a feature mapping which maps similar states to the same vector, for the
purpose of eﬃciently solving Average Performance and Meta RL settings.
We note that in the construction used to prove the lower bound of Theorem 1, the algorithm we
provide to satisfy the SIO property is extremely simple and natural. It is simply a greedy version
of Monte Carlo Tree Search, which is extremely popular in practice [KS06, S+17].
Let us provide some intuition for our proof of Theorem 1. In the |A|-ary tree hard instance used
in our proof, there are Ω(| A |H) possible trajectories. The fact that ξr = Θ( 1
H ) allows us enough
9

degrees of freedom to hide the policy that generalizes across D, so that identifying it requires
querying each of the Ω(| A |H) trajectories. We leverage recent techniques [DKWY20, WDYS20]
to construct a suitable featurization of the state-action space, that is expressive enough to allow
for eﬃciently ﬁnding an optimal linear policy for any single MDP, but does not leak any further
information. Notably, our constructed featurization satisﬁes that d is a polynomial function of H.
A similar result holds for the Meta RL setting. Recall that by SIO (b), the user has access to an
algorithm which can solve any Mtest at test time in O(| A |Hk) queries, even if it does no training.
So it only makes sense to train, if one can use this training to solve Mtest in o(| A |Hk) queries. The
following corollary to Theorem 1 demonstrates that this may require exponential query cost during
training time. Its proof is presented in Appendix A.2.
Corollary 1 Let the query model be SQM. For any k ≥3, there exists D satisfying Weak Proximity
with ξr = Θ( 1
H ), ξtr = 0 & α = 0 and SIO with β = 0 & k, such that the MDPs supporting D are
deterministic and the following holds. If a (possibly randomized) algorithm at test time can identify
π satisfying
V s0
Mtest(π) ≥
max
linear policy π′ V s0
Mtest(π′) −1/4
in o(| A |Hk) queries, with probability at least 1/2 over the selection of Mtest (and the randomness
of the algorithm), then this algorithm must have required Ω
 min

| A |H, 2d	
total query cost at
training time.
So far we presented results for when the MDPs supporting D share deterministic transitions but
have (slightly) varying rewards. For the remainder of Section 4.1, we present analogous results for
when the MDPs share a reward function but have (slightly) varying transitions, again under both
SIO and SQM. Recall from our discussion of Lemma 1 that when ξr = 0, it is only interesting to
consider problems when ξtr is Ω( 1
H ). Unfortunately, the following corollary of Theorem 1 shows
that eﬃciently solving the Average Performance Setting is impossible in this regime.
Corollary 2 Let the query model be SQM. For any k ≥3, there exists D satisfying Weak Proximity
with ξr = 0, ξtr = Θ( 1
H ) & α = 0 and SIO with β = 0 & k, such that the following holds.
Any (possibly randomized) algorithm requires Ω
 min

| A |H, 2d	
total query cost to ﬁnd (with
probability at least 1/2 over the randomness of the algorithm) a policy π satisfying
EM∼D

V s0
M (π)

≥
max
linear policy π′ EM∼D

V s0
M (π′)

−1/4.
We defer the proof to Appendix A.3. Recall the discussion of Theorem 1, and note that the same
discussion applies here, after swapping ξtr with ξr. An analogous result holds for the Meta RL
setting. As we discussed before presenting Corollary 1, it only makes sense to train, if one can use
this training in order to solve Mtest in o(| A |Hk) queries. The following result shows that this is
impossible without exponential query cost at training time. Its proof is presented in Appendix A.4.
Corollary 3 Let the query model be SQM. For any k ≥3, there exists D satisfying Weak Proximity
with ξr = 0, ξtr = Θ( 1
H ) & α = 0 and SIO with β = 0 & k, such that the following holds. If a
(possibly randomized) algorithm at test time can identify π satisfying
V s0
Mtest(π) ≥
max
linear policy π′ V s0
Mtest(π′) −1/4
10

in o(| A |Hk) queries, with probability at least 1/2 over the selection of Mtest (and the randomness
of the algorithm), then this algorithm must have required Ω
 min

| A |H, 2d	
total query cost at
training time.
In conjunction with Lemma 1, the results of Theorem 1 and Corollaries 1, 2 & 3 suggest that the
classical (and natural) way of measuring variation in MDPs using Condition 1 is inappropriate
for the modern Average Performance & Meta RL settings. When both ξr and ξtr are o( 1
H ), then
these settings are trivially solvable. But when either ξr or ξtr is Θ( 1
H ) then these settings become
exponentially hard, even with the additional Weak Proximity condition as well as SIO & SQM.
Theorem 1 and Corollaries 1, 2 & 3 all hold in the setting where each MDP supporting D shares
a state-action space. So these lower bounds immediately apply to more complex settings where the
MDPs are deﬁned on disjoint state-action spaces, and where learning an appropriate representation
is necessary. Indeed, it is popular in practice to learn a feature mapping which maps similar states
to the same vector. Our results show that if such a mapping enables eﬃcient solution of the Average
Performance & Meta RL settings, then learning the mapping itself is worst case ineﬃcient.
4.2
Upper Bound
We now show that Strong Proximity permits eﬃcient generalization when the MDPs supporting D
share deterministic transitions. While this setting is restricted, we study it because our Theorem 1
shows that even this setting can be worst case ineﬃcient under strong assumptions. Furthermore,
past literature on even traditional RL with a single MDP has often focused on the deterministic
setting [WVR13, DLMW20]. Notably, to prove our upper bound we only require the weaker WQM
and weaker WIO. Our method is deﬁned in Algorithm 1.
It exploits Strong Proximity, which
requires the existence of a policy which provides optimal value for each MDP from any given initial
state, even though the objectives in Eqs. (1) & (2) are deﬁned only in terms of value w.r.t s0.
Algorithm 1 GenRL
1: Inputs: horizon length H, distribution D, sample size n, oracle bV as deﬁned in WIO
2: Initialize π as an arbitrary function from {0, 1 . . . H −1} to A
3: for t ∈{0, 1 . . . H −1} do
4:
for i ∈{1, 2 . . . n} do
5:
Sample Mi ∼D
6:
for a ∈A do
7:
Begin a new episode in Mi at s0
8:
if t > 0 then
9:
Execute action sequence {π(t′)}0≤t′<t to arrive at st
10:
end if
11:
Take action a to arrive at s′ = TMi(st, a) and receive RMi(st, a)
12:
Query bV to obtain bV s′
Mi and store Qi,a = RMi(st, a) + bV s′
Mi
13:
end for
14:
end for
15:
Store at ∈argmaxa′∈A{ 1
n
Pn
i=1 Qi,a′} and deﬁne π(t) = at
16: end for
17: return π
11

Let us describe Algorithm 1. It represents policy π as a vector which stores one action for each
timestep in {0, 1 . . . H −1}. It initializes arbitrary π and incrementally updates it at each timestep
t. At the beginning of any timestep t > 0, π has been constructed to play the action π(t′) = at′
at each timestep t′ < t. The algorithm then executes {π(t′)}0≤t′<t to arrive at st. Crucially, due
to the assumption of a shared state-action space and shared deterministic transitions, the state st
is fully determined by π and does not depend on the particular Mi. Exploiting WIO, the method
queries bV to estimate the value in Mi of each child state of st. Averaging this estimated value
over {Mi}n
i=1 yields an estimate of the expected value (over the randomness in D) of each action
at st. Finally, the algorithm picks the action at with the highest estimated value, and updates π to
play at at timestep t. This algorithm operates in the standard RL framework and falls under the
purview of WQM.
The following result provides a performance guarantee for Algorithm 1. Recall that α, ξtr, ξr
are parameters used to satisfy Strong Proximity and β is a parameter used to satisfy WIO.
Theorem 2 Let the query model be WQM. Consider any D satisfying WIO with β ≥0 and Strong
Proximity with ξtr = 0 and any α, ξr ≥0, such that the MDPs supporting D are deterministic. Fix
ǫ, δ > 0, and let π be the output of Algorithm 1 when run with n = H2
ǫ2 log

2H| A |
δ

samples. Then
with probability at least 1 −δ, we are guaranteed that
EM∼D

V s0
M (π)

≥max
π′ EM∼D

V s0
M (π′)

−ǫ −3 α H −3 β H.
Hence the total query cost under WQM required to achieve this guarantee is polynomial in qD, |A|, H, d.
We defer the proof to Appendix B. A few comments are in order. First, note that Theorem 2
directly provides a guarantee for the Average Performance setting. It also provides a guarantee for
the Meta RL setting, since the π found by Algorithm 1 will on average perform well for Mtest, and
the user can use π to warm start any ﬁnetuning or adaptation at test time. Second, the speciﬁed
value of n depends only on quantities that are either known a priori or chosen by the user. This
makes Algorithm 1 parameter free — the user does not need to know the values of α, β, ξr, ξtr to
run this method.
Third, note Theorem 2 holds under WIO. By contrast, Weak Proximity was insuﬃcient for
eﬃcient generalization even when paired with SIO. This suggests that a condition that is both
necessary and suﬃcient for eﬃcient generalization lies somewhere between Weak and Strong Prox-
imity — assuming, of course, that we do not assume an individual optimization property that is
even stronger than SIO. Indeed, SIO is already quite strong, since SIO says that a linear policy is
suﬃcient to optimize any individual MDP, but in practice one typically employs nonlinear neural
network policies.
Finally, observe that ξr does not appear in the error bound. So ξr can be arbitrarily large, and
Theorem 2 requires no explicit conditions on the reward functions of the MDPs supporting D, as
in the sense of Condition 1. Instead, the implicit reward structure induced by the shared nearly
optimal policy required by Strong Proximity is suﬃcient. Comparing this observation with the
result of Theorem 1 suggests that the classical explicit constraints on rewards and transitions is not
appropriate for modern RL generalization settings. Instead, implicit constraints of the sort aﬀorded
by Strong Proximity oﬀer a more ﬁne grained characterization of when eﬃcient generalization is
possible.
12

Recall from Theorem 1 that a lower bound holds for Weak Proximity and SIO even with
α = β = 0. However, Strong Proximity and WIO provide enough structure that the error bound of
Theorem 2 can tolerate α, β ≥0. But these α, β terms in the error bound of Theorem 2 scale linearly
with H. It is natural to question whether this scaling is due to a suboptimality of Algorithm 1 or
looseness in our analysis. We provide a partial answer to this question in Appendix C, where we
prove that the dependency on β given in the result of Theorem 2 is tight to within a logarithmic
factor in H.
5
Discussion
In this paper, we studied the design of RL agents that generalize. We proved that eﬃcient general-
ization is worst case impossible, even under structural conditions like Weak Proximity and strong
assumptions on the query model and tractability of individual MDPs. This result extends to the
task of learning representations for the purpose of eﬃcient generalization. On the positive side, we
provided Strong Proximity, which permits eﬃcient generalization, even under mild assumptions on
the query model and individual tractability. Our analysis highlights that classical metrics for mea-
suring similarity of MDPs are inappropriate for modern RL. It also suggests that a condition which
is both necessary and suﬃcient for eﬃcient generalization lies between Weak & Strong Proximity
— unless we make (arguably unreasonable) assumptions on the tractability of individual MDPs.
The primary limitation of our work is that our upper bound has limited applicability. It holds
only when the MDPs share a state-action space, and when the MDPs are deterministic, which is
very restrictive in practice. Our rationale for working in this restricted setting was due to our
lower bounds, which show that even this toy setting can be worst case ineﬃcient, and because it is
necessary to understand the toy setting before looking at more complex scenarios. Nevertheless, our
upper bound is several steps removed from the practice of RL. It is best interpreted as a preliminary
suﬃcient condition for when eﬃcient generalization is possible, albeit in a toy setting, and is far
from conclusive on this matter.
Note that our upper bound might apply if we are a priori given a feature mapping which maps
similar states of diﬀerent MDPs to the same state space. For example, in self driving, learning to
drive in diﬀerent countries might be diﬃcult because the images of traﬃc signs are diﬀerent. But if
a known feature map extracts the underlying meaning of these signs, then our upper bound could
conceivably apply. Of course, such a known feature map is rarely available a priori, and is usually
learned from data. The key direction for future work, is how to learn such a feature mapping
eﬃciently, while ensuring that it is still useful for generalization.
