Experiments in Veriﬁcation of Linear Model Predictive
Control: Automatic Generation and Formal Veriﬁcation
of an Interior Point Method Algorithm∗
Guillaume Davy12, Eric Feron3, Pierre-Loic Garoche1, and Didier Henrion2
1 Onera - The French Aerospace Lab, Toulouse, FRANCE
2 CNRS LAAS, Toulouse, FRANCE
3 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta GA, USA
Abstract
Classical control of cyber-physical systems used to rely on basic linear controllers.
These controllers provided a safe and robust behavior but lack the ability to perform
more complex controls such as aggressive maneuvering or performing fuel-eﬃcient controls.
Another approach called optimal control is capable of computing such diﬃcult trajectories
but lacks the ability to adapt to dynamic changes in the environment.
In both cases,
the control was designed oﬄine, relying on more or less complex algorithms to ﬁnd the
appropriate parameters. More recent kinds of approaches such as Linear Model-Predictive
Control (MPC) rely on the online use of convex optimization to compute the best control at
each sample time. In these settings optimization algorithms are specialized for the speciﬁc
control problem and embed on the device.
This paper proposes to revisit the code generation of an interior point method (IPM)
algorithm, an eﬃcient family of convex optimization, focusing on the proof of its imple-
mentation at code level. Our approach relies on the code specialization phase to produce
additional annotations formalizing the intented speciﬁcation of the algorithm. Deductive
methods are then used to prove automatically the validity of these assertions. Since the
algorithm is complex, additional lemmas are also produced, allowing the complete proof
to be checked by SMT solvers only.
This work is the ﬁrst to address the eﬀective formal proof of an IPM algorithm. The
approach could also be generalized more systematically to code generation frameworks,
producing proof certiﬁcate along the code, for numerical intensive software.
1
Model Predictive Control and Veriﬁcation Challenges
When one wants to control the behavior of a physical device, one could rely on the use of
a feedback controller, executed on a computer, to perform the necessary adjustements to the
device to maintain its state or reach a given target.
Classical means of this control theory
amount to express the device behavior as a linear ordinary diﬀerencial equation (ODE) and
deﬁne the feedback controller as a linear system; eg.
a PID controller.
The design phase
searches for proper gains, ie. parametrization, of the controller to achieve the desired behavior.
While this approach has been used for years with great success, eg. in aircraft control, some
more challenging behaviors or complex devices need more sophisticated controllers. Assuming
that the device behavior is known, one can predict its future states. A ﬁrst approach, Optimal
Control with indirect-method, search for optimal solutions solving a complex mathematical
problem, the Pontryagin Maximal Principle. This is typical used to compute rocket or satellite
trajectories. However this approach, while theoretically optimal, requires complex computation
∗This work was partially supported by ANR FEANICSES project.
arXiv:1801.03833v2  [cs.LO]  28 Sep 2018

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
and cannot yet be performed online, in real-time. A second approach, Linear Model Predictive
Control or direct method, amounts to solve online a convex optimization problem describing
the current state, the target and the problem constraints, ie. limits on the thrust. A pregnant
example of such trajectory computation is the landing of SpaceX orbital rockets [1].
The use of a convex encoding of the problem guarantees the absence of saddle points (local
minimums) and could be resolved eﬃciently with polynomial-time algorithms. Convex opti-
mization covers a large set of convex-conic problems, from linear programming (LP: linear
constraints, linear cost) to quadratic programming (QP: linear contraints, quadratic cost) or
semi-deﬁnite programming (SDP: linear constraints over matrices, linear cost). While the fa-
mous Simplex algorithm can eﬃciently address LP ones, the Interior Point Method (IPM) is
the state-of-the art one when it comes to more advanced cones (eg. QP, SDP).
Linear Model Predictive control can then be expressed as a bounded model-checking problem
with an additional cost to ﬁnd the best solution, using convex optimization:
Deﬁnition 1 (Example: LP encoding of MPC). Let U ⊆Ru and X ⊆Rs be constrained convex
set for inputs and states of the controller. Let (uk ∈U)0≤k<N be an N-bounded sequence of
control inputs for a linear system xk+1 = Axk + Buk with xk ∈X a vector of state variables,
A ∈Rs×s and B ∈Rs×u. Let X0 the initial state and XN the target one. The objective is to
compute an optimal trajectory, for example minimizing the required inputs ΣN
i=1|ui| to reach the
target point XN. Let us deﬁne the following LP problem:
min ΣN
i=1|ui| s.t.









X0 = x0, XN = xn,
x1 = A · x0 + B · u0,
...
xN = A · xN−1 + B · uN−1.
(1)
Let us remark that Eq. (1) relies on a linear and discrete description (through matrices
A and B) of the original device behavior, typically a non linear ODE. This LP problem has
(N −2) × s + N × u variables since x0, xN, A and B are known. Without loss of generality, one
can express Eq. (1) over fresh deﬁnitions of A ∈Rm×n, b ∈Rm and c ∈Rn as the following
LP:
min c⊺· x
s.t. A · x ≤b
(2)
with m constraints, and where x ∈Rn denotes here a larger state. Equality constraints x = e
are deﬁned as x ≤e ∧−x ≤−e.
This computation is embedded on the device, and, depending on the starting point X0,
computes the sequence of N inputs to reach the ﬁnal point XN. Since most of the parameters
are known a priori the usual approach is to instanciate an optimization algorithm to the speciﬁc
problem rather than embed on the device a generic solver. For example SpaceX rockets rely
on CVX [2] to produce custom code, compatible with embedded devices (eg.
no dynamic
allocation, reduced number of computations).
While classical linear control only amounts to the computation of a linear update, these
MPC approaches rely on more involved online computation: the convex optimization has to
return a sound solution in ﬁnite time.
The objective of this paper is to address the veriﬁcation of these IPM implementations to
ensure the good behavior of MPC-based ccontrollers. A possible approach could have been to
specify the algorithm in a proof assistant and extract a correct-by-construction code. Unfortu-
nately code extraction from these proof assistants generates source code that hardly resembles
classical critical embedded source code. We rather chose to synthesize the ﬁnal code while
2

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
producing automatically code contracts and additional annotations and lemmas to support the
automatic validation of the code. Our contributions are then following:
1. We revisit the custom code generation, instanciating an IPM algorithm to the provided
problem, producing both the code, its formal speciﬁcation [3, 4] and proof artifacts.
2. We then rely on Frama-C [5] to prove the validity of generated Hoare triples using deduc-
tive methods [6].
3. Our proof process is automatic: instead of proving a generic version of the algorithm,
which would require strong assumptions on the problem parameters, we perform an au-
tomatic instance-speciﬁc proof, achieving a complete validation without any user input:
all proofs are performed, at code level, using SMT-solvers only.
4. The approach has been evaluated on a set of generated instances of various sizes, evalu-
ating the scalability of the proof process. The generated code can then be embedded in
actual devices.
The considered setting is a primal IPM solving a LP problem. In the presented work, we
focus only on the algorithmic part while dealing with the actual implementation, therefore
numerical issues such as ﬂoating point computation are here neglected.
This work is the ﬁrst approach addressing the formal veriﬁcation of an IPM convex algo-
rithm, as used in MPC-based controllers.
This paper is structured as follow. We introduce the reader to convex optimization and IPM
in Sec. 2 and we describe the code and speciﬁcation generation in Sec. 3. Sec. 4 focuses on the
proof process supporting the automatic proof of generated code speciﬁcation. Sec. 5 provides
a feedback on our approach evaluation. Related works are then presented in Sec. 6.
2
Convex Optimization with the Interior Point Method
Let us outline the key deﬁnition and principles behind the primal IPM we analyze. As mentioned
above, these notions easily extend to more sophisticated cones. We chose a primal algorithm
for its simplicity compared to primal/dual algorithms and we followed Nesterov’s proof [7].
Deﬁnition 2 (LP solution). Let us consider the problem of Eq. (2) and assume that an optimal
point x∗exists and is unique. We have then the following deﬁnitions:
Ef ={x ∈Rn | Ax < b}
(feasible set of P)
(3)
f(x) =⟨c, x⟩= C⊺· x
(cost function)
(4)
x∗= arg min
x∈Ef f
(optimal point)
(5)
In order to ensure the existence of an optimal value, we assume the set Ef to be bounded.
Barrier function and analytic center.
One can describe the interior of the feasible set
using a penalty function F : Ef →R. Figure 1 depicts such a logarithmic barrier function
encoding a set of linear constraints, it diverges when x approaches the border of Ef.
By
construction, it admits a unique minimum, called the analytic center, in the interior of the
feasible set.
3

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
Figure 1: Barrier function.
Central path
A minimum of a function is obtain by
analyzing the zeros of its gradients; for convex function
this minimum is unique. In case of a cost function with
constraints, IPM represents these constraints within
the cost function using the function ˜f(x, t). The vari-
able t balances the impact of the barrier: when t = 0,
˜f(x, t) is independent from the objective while when
t →+∞, the cost gains more weight.
Deﬁnition 3 (Adjusted cost ˜f.). Let ˜f be a linear combina-
tion of the previous objective function f and the barrier func-
tion F.
˜f(x, t) = t × f(x) + F(x) with t ∈R
(6)
Deﬁnition 4 (Central path: from analytic center to optimal
solution.). The values of x minimizing ˜f when t varies from
0 to +∞characterize a path, the central path (cf. Fig. 2).
x∗: R+
→Ef
t
7→arg min
x∈Ef
˜f(x, t)
(7)
Note that x∗(0) is the analytic center while
lim
t→+∞x∗(t) = x∗.
Figure 2: Central path.
IPM algorithm: a sequence of Newton steps following the central path.
IPM algo-
rithm performs a sequence of iterations, updating a point X that follows the central path and
eventually reaches the optimal point. At the beginning of each loop iteration, there exists a
real t such that X = x∗(t). Then t is increased by dt > 0 and x∗(t + dt) is the new point X.
This translation dX is performed by a Newton step.
Computing dX using Newton step.
We recall that the Newton’s method computes an
approximation of a root of a function G : Rk →Rl. It is a ﬁrst order method, ie. it relies on
the gradient of the function and, from a point in the domain of the neighborhood of a root,
performs a sequence of iterations, called Newton steps. A Newton step transforms a point Yn
into Yn+1 as follows:
Yn+1 −Yn = −
 G′(Yn)
−1G(Yn)
(8)
We apply the Newton step to the gradient of ˜f, computing its root which coincides with the
minimum of ˜f. We obtain:
dX = −
 F ′′(X)
−1((t + dt)c + F ′(X))
(9)
Computing dt: preserving the Approximate Centering Condition (ACC).
The con-
vergence of the Newton method is guaranteed only in the neighborhood to the function root.
This neighborhood is called the region of quadratic convergence; this region evolves on each
4

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
iteration since t varies. To guarantee that the iterate X remains in the region after each iter-
ation, we require the barrier function to be self-concordant. Without providing the complete
deﬁnition of self-condordance, let us focus on the implied properties: assuming that F is a
self-concordant, then F ′′, its Hessian, is non-degenerate([7, Th4.1.3]) and we can deﬁne a local
norm.
Deﬁnition 5 (Local-norm).
∥y∥∗
x =
q
yT × F ′′(x)−1 × y
(10)
This local-norm allows one to deﬁne the Approximate Centering Condition (ACC), the
crucial property which guarantees that X remains in the region of quadratic convergence:
Deﬁnition 6 (ACC). Let x ∈Ef and t ∈R+, ACC(x, t, β) is a predicate deﬁned by
∥˜f ′(x)∥∗
x = ∥tc + F ′(x)∥∗
x ≤β
(11)
In the following, as advised in [7], we choose a speciﬁc value for β, as deﬁned in (12).
β < 3 −
√
5
2
(12)
The only step remaining is the computation of the largest dt such that X remains in the
region of quadratic convergence around x∗(t + dt), with γ a constant:
dt =
γ
∥c∥∗x
(13)
Theorem 1 (ACC preserved). This choice maintains the ACC at each iteration([7, Th4.2.8]).
When ACC(X, t, β) and γ ≤
√β
1+√β −β then ACC(X + dX, t + dt, β).
Summary of IPM
Thanks to an appropriate barrier function to describe the feasible set,
IPM algorithm starts from the point X = x∗(0), the analytic center, and t = 0. Then its
updates both variables using Eqs. (9) and (13), until the required precision is reached.
Remark 1 (Choice of a barrier function.). For this work, we use the classic self-concordant
barrier for linear programs:
F(x) =
m
X
i=0
−log(bi −Ai × x)
(14)
with A1, Am the columns of A.
Remark 2 (Computation of the analytic center.). x∗
F is required to initiate the algorithm. In
case of oﬄine use the value could be precomputed and validated. However in case of online use,
its computation itself has to be proved. Fortunately this can be done by a similar algorithm with
comparable proofs. In addition, in MPC-based controllers, the set of constraints can be fed with
previously computed values, guaranteeing the existence of a non-empty interior and provding a
feasible point to compute this new analytic center.
5

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
3
Generating Code and Formal Speciﬁcation
Typical uses of MPC do not rely on a generic solver implementing an IPM algorithm with
a large set of parameters but rather instanciate the algorithm to the provided instance. As
mentioned in the introduction, a large subset of the problem is known beforehand and therefore
lots of computation can be hard-coded. As an example, the computation of the local norm
relies mainly on the computation of the Hessian of the barrier function and can be, in some
cases, precomputed.
The code generation is therefore very similar from one instance to the other. The main
changes lie in the sizes of the various arrays representing the problem and the points along the
central path.
Figure 3: Autocoding toolchain: automatic gen-
eration of both C code and annotations.
Figure 3 sketches our fully automatic pro-
cess which, when provided with a convex
problem with some unknown values, gener-
ates the code, the associated annotation and
prove it automatically. We are not going to
present all the process in this paper but con-
centrate on how to write the embedded code,
annotate it and automatize its proof. Early
stages of the process reformulate the given
instance in a canoncial form. Regarding the
code generation, our approach is really simi-
lar to the CVXGEN or CVXOPT tools.
3.1
Code structure: Newton steps in a For-Loop
The generated code follows strictly the algorithm presented in the previous section for each
iteration steps. However, usual implementations perform the iterations in a while-loop until
a condition tk > tstop(ϵ) is satisﬁed, where tk represents the position on the central path at
iteration k.
In order to guarantee termination, we rely on the convergence proof and complexity analysis
of [7, Th 4.2.9] and compute, a priori, the required number of iterations klast(ϵ) to reach
a given optimality ϵ. The termination proof relies on the characterization of a a geometric
progression Lower(k) such that each increment dt is suﬃcient to achieve some progress towards
termination: at k-th iteration, we have
tk ≥Lower(k)
(15)
In terms of practical impact the code becomes a for loop with a provided number of iterations
while the Lower progression only appears in the formal speciﬁcation part and is used for proof
purposes.
3.2
Domain-speciﬁc axiomatics
We rely on the tool Frama-C [5] to perform the proofs at code level and on ACSL [8], its
annotation language, to formally express the speciﬁcation. While extensible, ACSL does not
provide high level constructs regarding linear algebra or optimzation related properties. We ﬁrst
deﬁned new ACSL axiomatics: speciﬁc sets of types, operators and axioms to express these.
Similar approaches were already proposed [9] for matrices but were too speciﬁc to ellipsoid
6

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
axiomatic matrix
{
type LMat;
// Getters
logic integer getM(LMat A);
logic integer getN(LMat A);
logic real mat_get(LMat A, integer i, integer j);
// Constructors
logic LMat MatVar(double* ar, integer m, integer n) reads
ar[0..(m*n)];
logic LMat MatCst_1_1(real x0);
logic LMat MatCst_2_3(real x0, real x1, real x2, real x3,
real x4, real x5);
// Operators
logic LMat mat_add(LMat A, LMat B);
logic LMat mat_mult(LMat A, LMat B);
logic LMat transpose(LMat A);
logic LMat inv(LMat A);
...
// Example of axioms
axiom getM_add: \forall LMat A, B; getM(mat_add(A, B))
==getM(A);
axiom mat_eq_def:
\forall LMat A, B;
(getM(A)==getM(B))==> (getN(A)==getN(B))==>
(\forall integer i, j; 0<=i<getM(A) ==> 0<=j<getN(A) ==>
mat_get(A,i,j)==(mat_get(B,i,j))==>
A == B;
...
}
axiomatic Optim
{
logic LMat hess(LMat A, LMat b, LMat X);
logic LMat grad(LMat A, LMat b, LMat X);
logic real sol(LMat A, LMat b, LMat c);
logic real sol(LMat A, LMat b, LMat c);
axiom sol_min: \forall LMat A, b, c;
\forall LMat y; mat_gt(mat_mult(A, y), b) ==>
dot(c, y) >= sol(A, b, c);
axiom sol_greater: \forall LMat A, b, c;
\forall Real y;
(\forall LMat x; mat_gt(mat_mult(A, x), b) ==> dot(c, x)
>= y) ==>
sol(A, b, c) >= y;
logic real norm(LMat A, LMat b, LMat x, LMat X) =
\sqrt(mat_get(mat_mult(transpose(x), mat_mult(inv(hess(A,
b, X)), x)), (0), (0)));
logic boolean acc(LMat A, LMat b, LMat c, real t, LMat X,
real beta) =
((norm(A, b, mat_add(grad(A, b, X), mat_scal(c, t)), X))
<=(beta));
...
}
Figure 4: ACSL Axiomatics: Matrix and Optim
problems. We give here an overview of the deﬁnitions of both the Matrix and Optim ACSL
axiomatics, both presented in Fig. 4. Note that these deﬁnition are not instance-speciﬁc and
are shared among all uses of our framework.
Axiomatic are deﬁned as algebraic speciﬁcations. Logical opererators manipulating the local
types can either be deﬁned as functions or as uninterpreted functions ﬁtted with axioms.
Matrix axiomatic.
The new ACSL type LMat, ie. Logic Matrix, is introduced and ﬁtted
with getters and constructors. Constructors such as MatVar allow to bind fresh LMat value. This
one reads a C array while others create constant values. Operators such as matrix addition or
inverse are deﬁned axiomatically: the operator is deﬁned and ﬁtted with axioms.
Optimization axiomatic.
Besides generic matrix operators, we also need some operators
speciﬁc to our algorithm. The Newton step deﬁned in Eq. (9) as well as the local norm of
Eq. (10) are both based on the gradient and the Hessian of the barrier function (Eq. (14))
encoding the feasible set.
These functions are parametrized by the matrix A, the vector b
and the local point X. However Hessian and gradient are hard to deﬁne without real analysis
which is well beyond the scope of this article. Therefore we decided to directly axiomatize some
theorems relying on their deﬁnition like [7, Th4.1.14].
Another important notion is the optimal solution x∗of the convex problem. We can char-
acterize axiomatically the equations (3) – (5) of Deﬁnition 2 using the uninterpreted function
sol:
∀y ∈Ef, cT y ≥sol
∀y ∈R, ∀x ∈Ef, cT x ≥y =⇒sol ≥y
(16)
Last we deﬁned some operators representing deﬁnitions 5, 6 and Lower(15).
7

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion

void set_dX()
{
dX[0] = -cholesky[0];
dX[1] = -cholesky[1];
}
Simple case of dx %= -cholesky encapsulated in a function for dx and cholesky of size 2 × 1.
The ﬁrst ensures statement speciﬁes, using our own encoding of matrices in ACSL, that, after
the execution of the function body, the relationship dX = −1 ∗cholesky holds where both dX
and cholesky are interpreted as matrices. The second annotation assigns is used for the alias
analysis and expresses that the only modiﬁed values are dX[0], dX[1]. This property is also
automatically generated and has to be proved by the solver. It is of great help to support the
proof of relationships between arrays. Note that all variables are global here.
Figure 5: Example of ACSL-speciﬁed matrix operation.
3.3
Functions and contracts
Multiple functions to support proof and local contrats.
Proving large functions is
usually hard with SMT-based reasoning since the generated goals are too complex to be dis-
charged automatically. A more eﬃcient approach is to associate small pieces of code with local
contracts; these intermediate annotations acting as cut-rules in the proof processes.
Let A = B[C] be a piece of code containing C. Replacing C by a call to f() { C } requires
either to inline the call or to write a new contract {P} f() {Q}, characterizing two smaller
goals instead of a larger one. Speciﬁcally in the proof of a B[f()], C has been replaced by P
and Q which is simpler than an automatically computed weakest precondition.
Therefore instead of having one large function, our code is structured into several functions.
As an example, each basic matrix operation is performed in a dedicated function. The associated
contract provides a high level interpretation of the function behavior expressed over matrices
abstract datatypes. This modular encoding supports the generation of simpler goals for the
SMT solver, while keeping the code structure clearer.
Fig. 5 illustrates a very simple generated code and contract while Fig. 6 presents the hier-
archy of function calls.
Speciﬁcation of pathfollowing.
A sound algorithm must produce a point in the feasible
set such that its cost is ϵ-close to sol. This represents the functional speciﬁcation that we expect
from the code and is asserted by two post-conditions. In addition, two preconditions state that
X is feasible and close enough to the analytic center.

*/
void pathfollowing() {
...

for (int l = 0; l < NBR;l++) { ... }
...
}
Figure 7: Pathfollowing ACSL contract and
loop annotations.
Thanks to our two new theories Matrix
and Optim, writing and reading this contract
is straightforward and can be checked by any-
one familiar with linear programming. Our
contribution focuses on the expression on in-
termediate annotations, spread over the code,
to support the overall proof of speciﬁcations.
A loop needs to be annotated by an in-
variant to have its Weakest precondition com-
puted. We need three invariants for our path-
following algorithm.
The ﬁrst one guaran-
tees the feasibility of X while the second one
8

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
• compute ﬁll X with the the analytic
center and call pathfollowing.
• pathfollowing contains the main loop which
udpate dX and dt.
• compute_pre computes Hessian and gradiant of
F which are required for dt and dX.
• udpate_dX and udpate_dt call the associated subfunction and
update the corresponding value.
• compute_dt performs (13), it requires to call Cholesky to compute
the local norm of c.
• compute_dX performs (9), Cholesky is used to inverse the Hessian matrix.
Figure 6: Call tree of the implementation (colored boxes are matrix computation)
states the conservation of the ACC (cf. Def. 6) The third invariant assert that t is increasing
enough on each iteration, more speciﬁcally that it is greater than a geometric progression(15).
Proving the initialization is straightforward, thanks to the main preconditions. We wrote
one ACSL lemma for each invariant. Whenever it is possible we try to follow [7], for example
by translating [7, Th4.1.5] and Theorem 1. The last two loop invariants are combined to prove
the second post-condition of pathfollowing thanks to Theorem 2. NBR is computed from klast.
Theorem 2. [7, Th4.2.7] Let t ≥0, and X such that ACC(X, t, β) then
cT X −cT X∗< 1
t × (1 + (β + 1)β
1 −β
)
(17)
Fig. 7 presents the speciﬁcation in ACSL: the main function contract and the loop invariants.

acc(A, b, c, t, MatVar(X, N, 1), BETA + GAMMA);

void update_t();
Figure 8: update_t ACSL contract
Loop body.
Each iteration of the IPM re-
lies on three function calls: update_pre com-
puting some common values, update_t and
update_x (cf Fig. 6). Theorem 1 is then split
into several properties and the corresponding
post-conditions. For example, the contract of
update_t is described in Fig. 8.
The ﬁrst post-condition is an intermediary results stating that:
ACC(X, t + dt, β + γ)
(18)
This result is used as precondition for update_x. The second ensures corresponds to the
product of t by the common ratio of the geometric progression Lower, cf. Eq. (15) which will
9

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
be used to prove the second invariant of the loop. The ﬁrst precondition is a post-condition
from update_pre and the second one is the ﬁrst loop invariant.
4
Automatic Veriﬁcation: Proof Reﬁnement through Lemma
Deﬁnitions and Local Contracts.
Our framework produces both the code and its annotations, as well as a set of axioms related
to our newly deﬁned axiomatics (cf. Fig. 4). However most of the contracts cannot be proved
automatically by an SMT solver. After a ﬁrst phase in which we tried to perform these proofs
with Coq, we searched for more generic means to automatize the proof.
4.1
Reﬁning the proofs.
We performed the following steps in order to identify the appropriate set of additional assertions,
local contracts or lemma to be introduce:
• we took a fully deﬁned custom code for a linear problem and study means to prove its
validity: a feasible, optimal solution, while guarantying the convergence of the algorithm.
• these proofs were then manually generalized through the introduction of numerous in-
termediate lemmas as annotations in the code. These additional annotations enable the
automatic proof of the algorithm using an oﬀ-the-shelf SMT solver Alt-Ergo [10].
• the custom code generation was extended to produce both the actual code and these
annotations and function contracts, enabling both the generation of the embedded code
and its proof of functional soundness.
Another approach is to reﬁne the code into smaller components, as presented in Fig. 6. The
encoding hides low-level operations to the rest of the code, leading to two kinds of goals:
• Low level operation (memory and basic matrix operation).
• High level operation (mathematics on matrices).
4.2
Simplifying the code: addressing memory-related issues.
One of the diﬃculties when analyzing C code are memory related issues. Two diﬀerent pointers
can alias and reference the same part of the stack. A ﬁne and complex modeling of the memory
in the predicate encoding, such as separation logic[11] could address these issues.
Another
more pragmatic approach amounts to substitute all local variables and function arguments
with global static variables. Two static arrays cannot overlap since their memory is allocated
at compile time.
Since we are targeting embedded system, static variables will also permit to compute and
reduce memory footprints. However there are two major drawbacks: the code is less readable
and variables are accessible from any function. These two points usually lead the programmer
to mistakes but could be accepted in case of code generation. In order to support this we also
tagged all variables with the function they belong to by preﬁxing each variable with its function
name.
10

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
assert getM(MatVar(dX,2,1)) == 2;
assert getN(MatVar(dX,2,1)) == 1;
assert getM(MatVar(cholesky,2,1)) == 2;
assert getN(MatVar(cholesky,2,1)) == 1;
assert mat_get(MatVar(dX,2,1),0,0) == mat_get(\old(mat_scal(MatVar(cholesky,2,1),-1.0)),0,0);
assert mat_get(MatVar(dX, 2, 1),1,0) == mat_get(\old(mat_scal(MatVar(cholesky,2,1),-1.0)),1,0);
Figure 9: Assertion appended to the function of Figure 5
4.3
Low-level goals: Proving Matrix operations.
As explained in previous Section, the matrix computation are encapsulated into smaller func-
tions. Their contract states the equality between the resulting matrix and the operation com-
puted.
The extensionality axiom (mat_eq_def) is required to prove this kind of contract.
Extensionality means that if two objects have the same external properties then they are equal.
This axiom belong to the matrix axiomatic but is too general to be used therefore lemmas
speciﬁc to the matrices size are added for each matrix aﬀectation. This lemma can be proven
with the previous axioms and therefore does not introduce more assumption.
The proof remains diﬃcult or hardly automatic for SMT solvers therefore we append addi-
tional assertions, as sketched in Figure 9, at the end of function stating all the hypothesis of
the extensionality lemma. Proving these post-conditions is straightforward and smaller goals
need now to be proven.
Further split of functions into smaller functions is performed when functions become larger.
As an example, for operations on matrices of size m2, there is m2 lines of C code manipulating
arrays and logic. To avoid large goals involving array accesses for SMT solvers when m be-
comes greater than 10, each operation is encapsulated as a separate function annotated by the
operation on a single element:
mat_get(MatVar(dX,2,1),0,0) == mat_get(\old(mat_scal(MatVar(cholesky,2,1),-1.0)),0,0);
These generated goals are small enough for SMT. The post-condition of the matrix operation
remains large but the array accesses are abstracted away by all the function call and therefore
becomes provable by SMT solvers.
4.4
High-level goals: IPM speciﬁc properties.
Proving sophisticated lemmas with non trivial proof is hardly feasible for an SMT solver. To
support them, we introduced many intermediate lemmas.
At each proof step (variable ex-
pansion, commutation, factorization, lemma instantiation, ...) a new lemma is automatically
introduced. With this method, SMT solvers manage to handle each small step which eventually
lead to the proof of the initial lemma.
For example, the post-condition (18) of update_t is not provable by Alt-Ergo. In order
to prove it, we introduce the lemma (update_t_ensures1) where P1 is ACC(X, t, β), the
precondition, and P2 is dt =
γ
∥c∥∗x the performed update.
∀x, t, dt; P1 ⇒P2 ⇒ACC(X, t + dt, β + γ)
(update_t_ensures1)
Proving the post-condition with SMT solvers is straightforward given the previous lemma
but again proving the lemma itself is beyond their capabilities. However with the additional
lemma (update_t_ensures1_l0) the proof becomes obvious to the SMT solver. Indeed the
11

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
Figure 10: Proof tree for (18) (In green, proven goal, in white, axioms)
lemma is just the expansion of the ACC deﬁnition.
∀x, t, dt; P1 ⇒P2 ⇒∥F ′(X) + c(t + dt)∥∗
x ≤β + γ
(update_t_ensures1_l0)
Step by step, we introduce new lemmas to prove the previous ones: e.g. to prove the goal
(update_t_ensures1_l0) we introduce the following three lemmas:
∀x, t, dt; P2 ⇒∥c × dt∥∗
x = γ
(update_t_ensures1_l3)
∀x, t, dt; P1 ⇒∥F ′(X) + c × t∥∗
x ≤β
(update_t_ensures1_l2)
∀x, t, dt; P1 ⇒P2 ⇒∥F ′(X) + c(t + dt)∥∗
x ≤∥F ′(X) + c × t)∥∗
x + ∥c × dt∥∗
x
(update_t_ensures1_l1)
Each lemma depends on other lemmas, and so do contracts, all this logic results shapes a
proof tree. The one for the ﬁrst ensures of update_t is presented in Fig. 10.
These small steps are usually bigger than the application of a tactic in a proof assistant. SMT
solvers are also more resilient to a change in the source code. For these two reasons we decided
not to write proofs directly within a proof assistant but to use SMT solvers. Moreover, all these
intermediate lemmas are eventually automatically generated by the autocoding framework.
5
Experimentations
We implemented the presented approach: considering a provided LP problem, a source ﬁle
is generated as well as a considerable amount of function contracts and additional lemmas –
all expressed in ACSL [8], the annotation language of the Frama-C veriﬁcation platform. The
function contracts specify the functional requirements of this custom-code and instance-speciﬁc
solver: it computes a feasible and optimal solution in a predictable – and known – number of
iterations.
Now, this speciﬁc code has to be validated before being used on the embedded device. We
rely on Frama-C to perform the formal veriﬁcation process. Each generated annotation becomes
a proof objective and is submitted to an SMT solver, Alt-Ergo [10], for veriﬁcation. Thanks to
our introduction of all these intermediate lemmas, each local lemma is proved as well as the
global function contracts.
12

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
Note that the generated code is a direct implementation of the chosen primal IPM for LP.
The main concern here is the proof. We present here our experimentations. First, we address
issues with respect to the provers (Frama-C and Alt-Ergo) and how we tuned the code and
proof generation to ease the proofs. Second, we present the results in terms of goals proved or
not-yet-proved and the time required to perform the proofs.
5.1
Limitation of the approach: Asserted lemmas.
The veriﬁcation is performed thanks to two sets of axioms we developed, supporting (1) the
deﬁnition of matrices in ACSL or (2) properties of operators in linear programming. While the
ﬁrst set describing matrices commutation or norm positivity could be proved, it is an additional
work outside of the scope of our contribution. The second set is more challenging to prove and
corresponds to the axiomatization of some theorems from [7]. Their deﬁnition as axioms was
carefully addressed and the number of such axioms minimized.
We deliberately choose to ignore:
• the proof of soundness of the Cholesky resolution;
• the validation of the gradient or Hessian computations;
• some vector and matrix related properties: eg.
matrix multiplication associativity or
norm positivity (scalar product);
• more involved optimization related theorems used within the proof of optimality, and
developed in [12].
All these axioms are potential ﬂaws for the veriﬁcation. One solution could be to translate
them within a Theorem prover such as Coq [13] and proving them instead of assuming them.
Translating matrices to a theorem prover would also have the advantage to check the matrix
axiomatic we wrote. This could be done by providing a bijection between the translation of our
matrices and matrices deﬁned in Coq libraries like SSReﬂect [14].
Last, the analytic center has to be provided, at least within the β-neighborhood, which is
performed automatically through a dedicated algorithm in our experiments. While its existence
cannot be guaranted in theory, its computation in MPC context can be eased (cf. Remark 2).
5.2
Results: Scalability of proof process
While the custom-code itself ought to be executed on an embedded system with limited compu-
tation power, the veriﬁcation of its soundness can be performed on a regular desktop computer.
While all contracts and lemmas were proved, except the set of axioms we assumed (cf.
previous Section), the time and therefore the scalability of the proof process largely depend on
the problem size.
We provide here some ﬁgures regarding the total time required to perform the proofs. The
veriﬁcation has been performed on 2.6GHz computer running Linux with 4GB of RAM. Alt-
Ergo does not parallelize computations.
Total computation time.
The total proof time directly depends on the size of the input
problem. This is expected since a n×m problem will manipulate arrays of that size and express
properties over that many variables.
We used our framework on a large set of LP problems of various sizes. The boundedness
constraint of the feasible set (cf. Sec. 2) has been artiﬁcially enforced by adding a hypercube
13

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
constraint. Therefore problems over n variables have at least 2 × n constraints. In practice, we
generated about 100 random instances for each pair (n, m) ∈[2, 4] × [3 × n, 5 × n[ and perform
the proofs with both a 1 second and 10 seconds timeouts, for each goal.
An interesting outcome is the relative independence of the proof time with respect to the
actual numerical values of the constraints. Since we recorded the computation time for each
instance of a (n, m) pair, we compare the experimental results. As an example, for problems
of size (3, 9), the total computation time ranges in [124s, 127s]. Note that sparse constraints
will generate more optimized code, minimizing the number of computations, but are likely to
generate harder problem for the solvers.
The number of generated goals is impressive: for a problem of size (n, m), we generate
automatically 129 + 18 × n + 3 × m + 9 × n2 goals. We can see that both the number of proofs
is linear in m but quadratic in n. Let us now have a closer look at the proof costs depending
on the category of proof.
Scalability of proofs.
In order to precisely keep track of the proof time of each function,
we stored them in separate ﬁles and recorded the associated proof time. Figure 11 presents
such results. Files and their proof time have been packaged by clusters depending on their
ability to scale, as identiﬁed by timeouts. For example one can identify the following clusters:
lemma denoting the set of ACSL lemmas, atomic denoting local atomic manipulations of matrix
elements, matrix denoting matrix level operation and atom to mat denoting an intermediary
results between the last two. We isolate one of the ﬁle from the last cluster : atom to mat*
since it was longer to prove than the others. Other categories correspond to individual ﬁles im-
plementing higher level functions of the IPM: update_dt, update_dx, compute_dt, compute_dx
and compute.
As expected, some properties are diﬃcult to prove automatically. These scalability issues
mainly occur in compute_dt, compute_dx and the set_ and set_in clusters. However, the
associated proofs are not mathematically challenging and the main limitation seems to be caused
by the Frama-C encoding of goals as SMT proof objectives. The future versions of Frama-C
may have better memory model, identifying unmodiﬁed variables in predicates, leading to better
proof times of our generated instances.
An annotated code, automatically generated by our framework, is accessible at https://
github.com/davyg/proved_primal, annotations can be found in the header build_primalTest/
code/primalTest.h which itself includes primalTest_contracts.h the ﬁle containing all the
function contracts.
6
Related work
Related works include ﬁrst activities related to the validation of numerical intensive control
algorithms. This article is an extension of Wang et al [15] which was presenting annotations for
a convex optimization algorithm, namely IMP, but the process was both manual and theoretical:
the code annotated within Matlab and without machine checked proofs. An other work from the
same authors [9] presented a similar method than ours but limited to simple control algorithms,
linear controllers. The required theories in ACSL were both diﬀerent and less general than the
ones we are proposing here.
Concerning soundness of convex optimization, Cimini and Bemporad [16] presents a ter-
mination proof for a quadratic program but without any concerns for the proof of the imple-
mentation itself. A similar criticism applies to Tøndel, Johansen and Bemporad [17] where
another possible approach to online linear programming is proposed, moreover it is unclear
14

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
Each cluster is described by its average time and the timeout(red lines) setting of the SMT
solver i.e. an upper bound on the maximum time for each goal. As an example, the analyzed
instance of size 5 × 33 produces 195 goals, all proved. It requires less than one second for the
goals of categories lemma, atomic, update_t, update_x and compute; less than 10 seconds for
the category matrix and 50s for the category atom to mat. Both compute_dt and compute_dx
are proved with a timeout of 150s. The isolated ﬁle atom to mat* requires a higher timeout of
500s to achieve all proofs. Note that the average proof time of goals in cluster compute_dt is
about 40s so only a subset (2 out of 6) of the goals require 150s to be proved.
Figure 11: Proof-Time required per proof or ﬁle category.
how this could scale and how to extend it to other convex programs. Roux et al [18, 19] also
presented a way to certify convex optimization algorithm, namely SDP and its sum-of-Squares
(SOS) extension, but the certiﬁcation is done a posteriori which is incompatible with online
optimization.
A last set of works, e.g. the work of Boldo et al [20], concerns the formal proof of complex
numerical algorithms, relying only on theorem provers. Although code can be extracted from
the proof, the code is usually not directly suitable for embedded system: it is too slow and
requires diﬀerent compilation steps which should also be proven to have the same guarantee
than our proposed method.
7
Conclusion and future works
This article focuses on the proof a Interior Point Method (IPM) convex optimization algorithm
as used in state-of-the-art linear Model Predictive Control (MPC). The current setting is the
simplest one: a primal IPM for Linear Programming problems.
In these MPC approaches convex optimzation engines are autocoded from an instance spec-
iﬁcation and embed on the cyber-physical system. Our approach relies on the autocoding frem-
work to generate, along the code, the speciﬁcation and the required proof artifacrs. Once both
the code and these elements are generated, the proof is achieved automatically by Frama-C,
using deductive methods (weakest precondition) and SMT solvers (Alt-Ergo).
15

Veriﬁcation of an IPM for linear MPC
Davy, Feron, Garoche, Henrion
This is the ﬁrst proof, at code level, of an IPM algorithm. Still the proposed approach is
a proof-of-concept and has some identiﬁed limitations. First, we worked with real variables to
concentrate on runtime errors, termination and functional speciﬁcation and left ﬂoating points
errors for a future work. Then, some mathematical lemmas were asserted since our goal was to
focus on the algorithm itself rather than proving that a norm ought to be positive. The set of
asserted lemmas is still limited and reasonable. Last the setting is simple: a primal algorithm for
LP. The proposed approach is a ﬁrst step and can naturally be extended to more sophisticated
Interior Point Methods (IPM): considering primal-dual algorithms, or quadratic constraints.
The limitation is to restrict to IPM algorithms that guaranty the computation of a feasible
solution. For example this does not include homogenized versions [21, §11, Bibliography] of
IPM that do not compute iterates within the feasible set.
Another outcome is the general approach to deal with the proof of complex numerical algo-
rithms which are autocoded from an instance description. Code generation is now widespread
for embedded devices, especially in control, and could be ﬁtted with formal speciﬁcation and
proof artifacts, to automatize the proof at code level. This would require further developments
to axiomatize the associated mathematical theories.
