Bayesian Parameter Estimation for Latent Markov Random
Fields and Social Networks
Richard G. Everitt∗
15th May 2018
Nuﬃeld Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford,
John Radcliﬀe Hospital,
Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
Tel.: +447815763118

∗Richard G. Everitt is a Postdoctoral Scientist at the University of Oxford, 1 South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3TG, UK

1
arXiv:1203.3725v1  [stat.CO]  14 Mar 2012

Abstract
Undirected graphical models are widely used in statistics, physics and machine vision.
However
Bayesian parameter estimation for undirected models is extremely challenging, since evaluation of the
posterior typically involves the calculation of an intractable normalising constant.
This problem has
received much attention, but very little of this has focussed on the important practical case where the data
consists of noisy or incomplete observations of the underlying hidden structure. This paper speciﬁcally
addresses this problem, comparing two alternative methodologies. In the ﬁrst of these approaches particle
Markov chain Monte Carlo (Andrieu et al., 2010) is used to eﬃciently explore the parameter space,
combined with the exchange algorithm (Murray et al., 2006) for avoiding the calculation of the intractable
normalising constant (a proof showing that this combination targets the correct distribution in found in
a supplementary appendix online). This approach is compared with approximate Bayesian computation
(Pritchard et al., 1999).
Applications to estimating the parameters of Ising models and exponential
random graphs from noisy data are presented. Each algorithm used in the paper targets an approximation
to the true posterior due to the use of MCMC to simulate from the latent graphical model, in lieu of
being able to do this exactly in general. The supplementary appendix also describes the nature of the
resulting approximation.
Keywords: approximate Bayesian computation, particle Markov chain Monte Carlo, intractable norm-
alising constants, exponential random graphs, graphical models.
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Motivation
The subject of this paper is Bayesian inference in models for large numbers of dependant objects, e.g. pixels
in an image, people in a social network, or pages on the world wide web. We focus on Markov random ﬁelds
(MRFs), also known as undirected graphical models (UGMs), which are the models most commonly used
for this type of data. Much of the literature (e.g. Murray et al. (2006); Møller et al. (2006)) is devoted to
estimating the parameters of these models in the case where the MRF is completely observed, but for real
data this is often not the case: in practice observations of the MRF can be noisy or incomplete. As a result,
estimation of the parameters of the model presents a signiﬁcant computational challenge, particularly when
using Bayesian estimation in order to account for the missing data in a principled manner.
Let y ∈Y represent noisy or incomplete observations of the hidden variables x ∈X. Our aim is to
estimate the parameters θ ∈Θ of a model for this data.
Using the Bayesian approach, we describe a
joint distribution p(θ, x, y) = p(θ)f(x, y|θ) over θ, x and y and wish to estimate θ through the posterior
distribution:
p(θ|y) ∝
ˆ
x
p(θ)f(x, y|θ)dx.
(1)
Our focus is on Monte Carlo methods for simulating from p(θ|y), and we present two quite general
methodologies for achieving this. We apply these methods to two well known types of data: a noisy image
(similar to Besag (1986)); and an indirectly observed social network (similar to Caimo and Friel (2011)).
Parameter estimation in problems such as these is often addressed using maximum likelihood (as in
Heckerman (1996)), rather than a fully Bayesian approach (aside from the recent work in Møller et al. (2004);
Murray et al. (2006); Friel et al. (2009); Koskinen et al. (2010)). In this paper we compare the computational
approach taken in these recent papers, which we show is not always appropriate, to alternative computational
methods.
2

In some cases we are also interested in the posterior distribution over the hidden variables x (in the
applications described above, this is the case if we wish to infer a denoised Ising model or social network)
but this is not our primary focus. A part of the methodology we describe is the use of sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC) samplers for simulating from the posterior of x, which can be signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than
using MCMC on these models.
In the remainder of this section we describe MRFs in more detail in section 1.2, and basic methods of
inference in these model in section 1.3. Section 1.3 also describes the challenges faced in using these basic
inference methods, and this motivates the rest of the paper.
1.2
Models
1.2.1
Markov Random Fields
Throughout the paper, we take p(θ) to have some simple form that can be both evaluated pointwise and
simulated from using standard techniques. The primary purpose of this paper is to discuss computational
methods for inference rather than choosing the most appropriate models, therefore we choose a proper prior
simply to ensure that the posterior always exists.
We assume that the likelihood f(x, y|θ) factorises as an MRF, i.e. the joint distribution is completely
deﬁned by potential functions over groups of variables known as cliques (Besag, 1974):
f(x, y|θ) =
1
Z(θ)
M
Y
j=1
Φj(x, y ∈Cj|θ)
(2)
where Φ1:M are potentials on cliques C1:M, and the normalising constant
Z(θ) =
ˆ
x,y
M
Y
j=1
Φj(x, y ∈Cj|θ)dxdy
(3)
is usually an intractable integral. The methods described in this paper also apply to directed graphical
models, which is easier to deal with since the factors of the joint distribution in a directed model are simply
conditional distributions that can be normalised independently (Heckerman, 1996), and hence the intractable
normalising constant is not present.
1.2.2
Ising Models
The Ising model is a particular MRF that deﬁnes a distribution over a random vector x of binary variables
each of which can take the value −1 or 1. The distribution is deﬁned by the pairwise interactions between
variables as f(x|θx) = exp
h
θx
P
(i,j)∈N xixj
i
/Z(θx), where N is a set that deﬁnes pairs of nodes that are
“neighbours” and, for our purposes, θx > 0. This distribution follows through choosing cliques containing
only two nodes, with the potential function Φ(xi, xj|θx) = exp(θxxixj) for each clique. In this paper we
concentrate on the case where N is chosen so that the variables are arranged in a two-dimensional grid.
The study of these models often centres around the phase change that the model exhibits when θx passes
a critical value: a small θx gives a small preference for neighbouring nodes to be the same and results in
a high probability that localised groups of variables take on the same value. When θx increases above the
critical value the joint distribution has the vast majority of its probability mass on the cases where almost
every variable takes on the same value.
3

The Ising model and its generalisation, the Potts model (where the variables can take on more than two
states), are frequently used in analysing spatially structured data, especially images. In these applications
it is usually the case that the random vector x is observed indirectly through observations y. To model the
noisy image data used later in the paper, we assume that each x variable has a corresponding y variable
representing a noisy observation of the x variable. We then take the joint over the x and y variables to be:
f(x, y|θ) = f(x|θx)g(y|x, θy) =
1
Z(θx) exp

θx
X
(i,j)∈N
xixj


1
Z(θy) exp
"
θy
T
X
k=1
xkyk
#
,
(4)
where T is the number of pixels in the image, Z(θy) = (exp(θy) + exp(−θy))T is the normalising constant
for all of the potentials on the (xk, yk) pairs.
1.2.3
Exponential Random Graphs
This section considers the most popular model for social networks: the exponential random graph model
(ERGM) or p∗model (Wasserman and Pattison, 1996). These models are also used in physics and biology
and aim to model data consisting of nodes and edges, which in the social network context represent actors
and relationships between these actors. There has been relatively little work on using Bayesian inference
for inferring the parameters of ERGMs aside from recent papers by Koskinen et al. (2010); Caimo and Friel
(2011).
For an ERGM, the random vector x is deﬁned over the space of all graphs on a set of nodes, with each
variable in x representing the presence or absence of a particular edge (xk takes value 1 when edge k is
present and 0 when edge k is absent). An ERGM for a graph (which consists of a set of edges over the set
of nodes) is then given by:
f(x|θx) =
1
Z(θx) exp(θT
x S(x))
(5)
where S(x) is a vector of statistics of the graph (e.g. the number of edges, triangles, etc) and θT
x denotes the
transpose of the parameter vector θx. The normalising constant is intractable due to the extremely large
number of possible graphs. ERGMs are simply MRFs deﬁned on the edge space of networks (Frank and
Strauss, 1986), with statistics of the network corresponding to particular cliques in the MRF.
We consider the case where the y variables represent noisy observations about the existence of each edge
in the network. Analogous to equation (4) we use the model
f(x, y|θ) = f(x|θx)g(y|x, θy) =
1
Z(θx) exp(θT
x S(x))
1
Z(θy) exp
"
θy
T
X
k=1
(2xk −1)(2yk −1)
#
.
(6)
We note that the algorithms described in this paper are also applicable to the alternative missing data
scenarios described in Koskinen et al. (2010). In fact, the only speciﬁc detail that is required to use the
methods in this paper is the factorisation of x as an MRF: the space in which θ and y lie aﬀects only minor
implementation details.
4

1.3
Inference
1.3.1
Posterior Inference
Recall that the posterior distribution of interest is p(θ|y). We now consider standard Monte Carlo meth-
ods for sampling from this distribution, under MRF models such as those described in the previous section.
Throughout the algorithmic sections of this paper we consider the general case where both the observed vari-
ables y and unobserved variables x are jointly distributed according to an MRF, with distribution f(x, y|θ).
The high dimensionality of x leads to the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) for performing the
integration in equation (1). Speciﬁcally, MCMC is used to simulate from p(θ, x|y), projecting the obtained
points into the marginal space in order to obtain a sample from p(θ|y). In these circumstances, since it is
unclear as to how to propose an eﬃcient move in the joint space of θ and x, the standard approach is to use
an MCMC algorithm that updates θ and x separately through moves on their full conditional distributions
(see Murray and Ghahramani (2004); Friel et al. (2009); Koskinen et al. (2010), for example). We shall refer
to this method as the “data augmentation” (DA) approach.
Superﬁcially the DA approach may seem to be extremely simple, but for the models described here there
are three major diﬃculties with using this method:
1. Sampling from p(θ|x, y) is diﬃcult, since this requires the evaluation of the intractable normalising
constant in equation (3).
2. Sampling from p(x|θ, y) can be diﬃcult, since this is usually a distribution with a complicated
structure on a high-dimensional space.
3. Using a data augmentation approach may be ineﬃcient, since x and θ are often highly depen-
dent a posteriori.
These diﬃculties largely dictate the structure of the remainder of the paper. In section 2 we devise a novel
MCMC algorithm for sampling from p(θ|y) that is designed to minimise the eﬀect of each of these problems,
combining the exchange algorithm of Murray et al. (2006) with marginal particle Markov chain Monte Carlo
(PMCMC) (Andrieu et al., 2010). In section 3 explore an alternative approach to sampling from p(θ|y), using
approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) (Pritchard et al., 1999) to largely circumvent the diﬃculties listed
above. However, this approach introduces complications of its own. Section 4 applies both approaches to
data, with a comparison to the standard DA approach.
Throughout the paper we make use of a single site Gibbs sampler on p(x|θ, y), and for this reason we
devote some space in the remainder of this section to describing this algorithm.
1.3.2
Gibbs Samplers for MRFs
The simplest approach to sampling from p(x|θ, y) for a MRF model using MCMC is to use single component
Metropolis, where the variables are updated one at a time. Variable k is updated using a Metropolis-Hastings
step targeting the full conditional p(xk|x̸=k, θ, y) ∝Q
Cj∋xk Φj(x, y ∈Cj|θ), where the product is over the
potentials of all cliques that contain variable k. When there are strong dependencies between the variables
this results in an ineﬃcient MCMC algorithm. A partial solution might be to update highly correlated
variables in blocks: Andrieu et al. (2010) note that to create an eﬃcient algorithm the size of the blocks of
variables must be limited, since it becomes more increasingly diﬃcult to design good proposals for a block as
the size of the block grows. The ineﬃciency of Gibbs samplers for Ising models is well known (e.g. Higdon
5

(1998)) and a similar observation is made in the literature on ERGMs (Snijders, 2002). Similar approaches,
with the same drawbacks, are commonly used for sampling from p(x|θ), which is encountered both in the
exchange and ABC algorithms later in the paper. The ineﬃciency of these approaches motivates the use of
SMC samplers, where we observe a signiﬁcant improvement over the Gibbs sampler.
2
EXCHANGE MARGINAL PMCMC
This section describes the design of an MCMC algorithm for simulating from p(θ|y) that addresses the
problems listed in section 1.3.1. We begin in section 2.1 by describing methods for sampling from p(θ|x, y)
that avoid the evaluation of the intractable term Z(θ) in equation (3). Our favoured approach is the exchange
algorithm of Murray et al. (2006): an algorithm that requires exact simulation from f(x, y|θ) which is not
generally possible in the models we consider. We study the eﬀect of replacing exact simulation with the use
of MCMC.
The remainder of the section focuses on the use of marginal PMCMC to sample eﬃciently in cases where
θ and x are highly dependant a posteriori. In section 2.2 we introduce PMCMC and describe how to apply
it to MRFs, using the exchange algorithm to avoid the intractable normalising constant. The key component
of a PMCMC algorithm is an eﬃcient SMC sampler for simulating from p(x|θ, y) and we describe candidate
approaches in section 2.3.
2.1
Intractable Normalising Constant
Consider the use of a Metropolis-Hastings (MH) update on the full conditional p(θ|x, y) ∝p(θ)f(x, y|θ). Let
γ(x, y|θ) = QM
j=1 Φj(x, y ∈Cj|θ) so that f(x, y|θ) =
1
Z(θ)γ(x, y|θ). Using a proposal q(θ∗|θ), we obtain the
acceptance probability:
1 ∧p(θ∗)γ(x, y|θ∗)q(θ|θ∗)
p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)
Z(θ)
Z(θ∗),
(7)
which cannot be calculated due to the presence of Z(.), leading such models to be known as doubly intractable
(Murray et al., 2006). A similar problem is encountered when using maximum likelihood, or any other method
that need to evaluate the likelihood.
There are several diﬀerent classes of approaches for avoiding this:
pseudo-likelihood (Besag, 1975); variational approximations (Murray and Ghahramani, 2004); Monte Carlo
approximations (Geyer and Thompson, 1992; Green and Richardson, 2002; Atchadé et al., 2008); auxiliary
variable approaches (Møller et al., 2006; Murray et al., 2006); and ABC (Grelaud et al., 2009). Each of the
methods results in targeting an approximation to p(θ|x, y), unless exact simulation from f(x, y|θ) is available.
We focus on auxiliary variable methods and ABC due to their ease of implementation and because we ﬁnd
that using an MCMC algorithm in place of exact simulation from f(x|θ) has little practical eﬀect on the
examples we consider.
2.1.1
The Single Auxiliary Variable Method
The ﬁrst MCMC method that targets the true posterior in the presence of the intractable normalising
constant was the single auxiliary variable method (SAVM), which originated in Møller et al. (2004) and
Møller et al. (2006). Here we present an alternative justiﬁcation of SAVM to that in the original paper
(given in Andrieu et al. (2010)), based on the principle that it is possible to design an MCMC algorithm for
simulating from some target π(θ) when only unbiased positive estimates bπ(θ) of an unnormalised version of
6

π are available. Speciﬁcally, a standard Metropolis-Hastings algorithm that targets bπ, with proposal q(θ∗|θ)
and acceptance probability
1 ∧bπ(θ∗)
bπ(θ)
q(θ|θ∗)
q(θ∗|θ),
(8)
has a stationary distribution of π(θ). Recall now the MH algorithm targeting p(θ|x, y) with acceptance
probability given in equation (7): equation (8) implies that a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm targeting an
unbiased estimate bp(θ|x, y) := p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)d
1/Z(θ) of p(θ|x, y), where d
1/Z(θ) is an unbiased estimate of
1/Z(θ), will have a stationary distribution of p(θ|x, y).
SAVM targets a joint distribution π(θ, u|x, y) ∝qu(u|θ, x, y)p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)/Z(θ), of which p(θ|x, y) is a
marginal, constructed through the introduction of an auxiliary variable u, where qu(.|θ, x, y) is an arbitrary
distribution and u = (ux, uy) ∈X × Y . This target is then simulated using a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
on the (θ, u) space, with proposal θ∗∼q(.|θ) and u∗∼f(.|θ∗) (the simulation of u∗being performed using
exact sampling). The acceptance probability for this move is given by:
1 ∧p(θ∗)γ(x, y|θ∗)q(θ|θ∗)qu(u∗|θ∗, x, y)γ(u|θ)
p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)qu(u|θ, x, y)γ(u∗|θ∗) .
(9)
Comparing equations (7) and (9) we see that essentially SAVM is using single point importance sampling
(IS) estimates of d
1/Z(θ) and d
1/Z(θ∗), where d
1/Z(θ) = qu(u|θ, x, y)/γ(u|θ) and d
1/Z(θ∗) = qu(u∗|θ∗, x, y)/γ(u∗|θ∗).
Linking this to the argument based on equation (8) gives us an alternative justiﬁcation of the algorithm which
suggests the following generalisation: any algorithm that ﬁnds an unbiased estimate of d
1/Z(θ) may be used
in place of IS. For example, an SMC sampler with π1 = f(.|θ) and πT = qu(u|θ, x, y) will provide such an
estimate whose eﬃciency is less dependent on the choice of qu than is the IS estimate. Note that SMC
samplers play an important role later in the paper, and we refer the reader unfamiliar with the method to
Del Moral et al. (2006) for further details.
2.1.2
The Exchange Algorithm
In Murray et al. (2006), the exchange algorithm is initially motivated by the observation that in SAVM
the ratio Z(θ)/Z(θ∗) is estimated indirectly, using the ratio of d
1/Z(θ∗) and d
1/Z(θ). Murray et al. (2006)
suggests that estimating Z(θ)/Z(θ∗) directly may lead to an improved algorithm. The resulting algorithm is
actually most clearly formulated (for our purposes) in an alternative fashion. Consider the target distribution
π(θ, θ∗, u|x, y) = f(x, y|θ)p(θ)q(θ∗|θ)f(u|θ∗)/p(x, y) of which π(θ|x, y) is a marginal, where u = (ux, uy) ∈
X × Y. At iteration i, the exchange algorithm iterates the following two operations (given input (θ(i −
1), θ∗(i −1), u(i −1)) = (θ, θ∗, u) from the previous iteration), giving an MCMC algorithm that targets
π(θ, θ∗, u|x, y):
1. Draw θ∗∼q(.|θ(i −1)) and u ∼f(.|θ∗).
2. Let (θ(i), θ∗(i), u(i)) = (θ∗, θ(i −1), u) with probability:
1 ∧p(θ∗)γ(x, y|θ∗)q(θ|θ∗)γ(u|θ)
p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)γ(u|θ∗)
Z(θ)Z(θ∗)
Z(θ∗)Z(θ) = 1 ∧p(θ∗)γ(x, y|θ∗)q(θ|θ∗)γ(u|θ)
p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)γ(u|θ∗) ,
(10)
otherwise set (θ(i), θ∗(i), u(i)) = (θ(i −1), θ∗(i −1), u).
7

This deterministic move simply proposes a swap of θ and θ∗, hence the name “exchange algorithm”. The
proof that this is the appropriate acceptance probability for this move is given in Tierney (1998), where
it is established that the acceptance probability for a deterministic move θ →T(θ) on a target π is 1 ∧
π(T(θ))/π(θ). If we now compare equation (7) with equation (11) we see that γ(u|θ)/γ(u|θ∗) can be thought
of as an IS estimate of Z(θ)/Z(θ∗), so that the exchange method can be interpreted as using an estimate
of the acceptance probability. However, we note that in this case we only have proof that this estimate in
particular results in an algorithm that targets the correct distribution - alternative estimates that give a
better estimate of this ratio may not be appropriate (although the similar approach of Koskinen (2008) is
also shown to have the correct target). The exchange method exhibits superior performance to SAVM in
Murray et al. (2006), and it is also easier to implement - in SAVM there are more algorithmic choices to
make and these can severely aﬀect the performance of the algorithm. For these reasons we focus on the
exchange algorithm for the remainder of the paper, although we note that if the free choices in SAVM are
well made (as in Møller et al. (2004)), it may outperform the exchange method.
Although the exchange algorithm targets the true posterior, it is less eﬃcient than a standard MH algo-
rithm would be if the true target were available. This ineﬃciency is accentuated if the proposed u ∼f(.|θ∗)
has only a small probability of being generated under θ. Murray et al. (2006) describes an extended ex-
change method to improve this ineﬃciency whilst maintaining the exactness of the algorithm, using annealed
IS (Neal, 2001) as a substitute for the importance estimate γ(u|θ)/γ(u|θ∗). In the applications described in
section 4 we found the use of this extended method to be essential in obtaining a reasonable performance
for the methods described in the paper. The central idea of the extended method is to move the proposed
u ∼f(.|θ∗) through a sequence of transitions so that it has a larger probability of being generated under θ (a
similar idea may be used to improve SAVM in a similar way). This is done by introducing a sequence of K tar-
get distributions fk(.|θ, θ∗) ∝γk(.|θ, θ∗) = γ(.|θ∗)βkγ(.|θ)1−βk where, for example, βk = (K −k + 1)/(K + 1)
so that the sequence of targets provides a “route” from f(.|θ∗) to f(.|θ). The extended exchange algorithm
moves the initial point u ∼f(.|θ∗) via a sequence of transitions Rk(u′|u, θ, θ∗) that satisfy detailed balance
with fk(u′|θ, θ∗), and changes the acceptance probability accordingly:
1. Draw θ∗∼q(.|θ(i −1)) and u0 ∼f(.|θ∗).
2. Apply the sequence of transitions: u1 ∼R1(u1|u0, θ, θ∗), u2 ∼R2(u2|u1, θ, θ∗), ... , uK ∼RK(uK|uK−1, θ, θ∗).
3. Let (θ(i), θ∗(i), u(i)) = (θ∗, θ(i −1), uK) with probability:
1 ∧p(θ∗)γ(x, y|θ∗)q(θ|θ∗)
p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)
K
Y
k=0
γk+1(uk|θ, θ∗)
γk(uk|θ, θ∗) ,
(11)
otherwise set (θ(i), θ∗(i), u(i)) = (θ(i −1), θ∗(i −1), uK).
For our applications we have the factorisation f(x, y|θ) = f(x|θ)g(y|x, θ), where f(x|θ) = γ(x|θ)/Z(θ)
has an intractable normalising constant and g(y|x, θ) is normalised. In this situation the exchange algorithm
is simpliﬁed slightly since uy does not need to be simulated.
2.1.3
The Exchange Algorithm Without Exact Simulation
In step 1 of the exchange algorithm, on sampling u, exact simulation from the likelihood is required. However,
aside from a few special cases (one of which is the Ising model, which can be sampled exactly using “coupling
8

from the past” (Propp and Wilson, 1996)) this is not generally possible for MRFs. Caimo and Friel (2011)
choose to approximate the exact simulation by sampling u from f(.|θ∗) using an MCMC run that is “long
enough” to get a point that can be treated as if it were simulated exactly from f(.|θ∗). We refer to this
approach as the approximate exchange algorithm, and use M to denote the number of iterations of the
MCMC algorithm used to simulate approximately from the likelihood. Caimo and Friel (2011) suggest that
500 iterations is a long enough run for models similar to those studied in this paper, a conclusion supported
by own study which suggests that as few as 50 or 100 iterations are usually suﬃcient. In appendix B in
the supplemental materials we give theoretical justiﬁcation for the validity of this approach, proving that
(using a similar method to a proof in Andrieu and Roberts (2009)) when the MCMC kernel for the exact
exchange algorithm is uniformly ergodic, the invariant distribution (when it exists) of the corresponding
approximate exchange algorithm becomes closer to the “true” target (that of the exact exchange algorithm)
with increasing M. We also characterise the rate of convergence of the approximate kernel. The same proof
justiﬁes the use of an MCMC kernel as a substitute for simulating exactly from the likelihood within SAVM.
2.2
Marginal PMCMC
2.2.1
The Pseudo-Marginal Approach
Our primary concern in this section is problem 3 in section 1.3.1: that the data augmentation approach to
obtaining a sample from p(θ|y) is ineﬃcient when θ and x are highly dependant a posteriori. The phase
change in Ising models means that this dependence is particularly clear in these models, but other MRFs
(including ERGMs (Snijders, 2002)) also have this property. Beaumont (2003) and Andrieu and Roberts
(2009) describe an alternative approach to sampling from p(θ|y) that is designed to avoid the problems
caused by this dependence: approximating the “ideal” algorithm that uses an MH update by replacing p(θ|y)
with unbiased estimates of the form ep(θ|y) to p(θ|y). The argument described in section 2.1.1 tells us that
such updates actually provide us with points from the desired target p(θ|y). Such an approach is referred to
as a pseudo-marginal approach. The eﬃciency of the MCMC chain based on these updates depends on the
variance of the estimator ep(θ|y).
The simplest useful estimator ep(θ|y) is an IS approximation epN(θ|y) =
1
N
PN
k=1 p(θ, x(k)|y)/q(x(k)|θ),
where x(k) ∼q(.|θ). However, for the applications about which we are interested, where x is high-dimensional,
it is diﬃcult to deﬁne a proposal distribution q that results in an estimator with a small variance. The optimal
proposal is p(x|θ, y) (see (Geyer, 2011), for example): which we cannot sample from directly. The remainder
of this section is devoted to using SMC samplers for this task. The framework of PMCMC in Andrieu et al.
(2010) then tells us, via the pseudo-marginal approach, how to use SMC samplers to more eﬃciently obtain
samples from p(θ|y). In section 2.2.2 we describe the marginal PMCMC framework, then in section 2.2.3 we
describe the use of marginal PMCMC on MRFs.
2.2.2
Marginal PMCMC
As in Andrieu et al. (2010), in this section we make the assumption (relaxed in the following section)
that the normalising constant Z of f(x, y|θ) is independent of θ so that the joint posterior is given by:
p(θ, x|y) = p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)/Zp(y). We describe the marginal PMCMC algorithm brieﬂy here - for a thorough
description see Andrieu et al. (2010). The algorithm is an MCMC sampler that targets p(θ, x|y), operating
on the factorisation p(θ|y)p(x|θ, y). The intuition behind the approach is in devising a move on the joint
(θ, x) space: in terms of moving around the θ space it would be most eﬃcient if the proposal could take
9

the form q(θ∗|θ)p(x∗|θ∗, y), so that x∗is “perfectly adapted” to the proposed θ∗. The approach is to devise
an algorithm that approximates this idealised situation, using an SMC sampler as a statistically eﬃcient
method for simulating from an approximation bp(x∗|θ∗, y) to p(x∗|θ∗, y). The point from bp(x∗|θ∗, y) is then
used as a proposed point in a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm that targets p(x∗|θ∗, y). Andrieu et al. (2010)
derive the acceptance probability that should be used by explicitly writing down the target and proposal
distributions involved. The resulting algorithm in the case we describe here proceeds as follows.
At iteration i, beginning with the point (θ(i −1), x(i −1)) and the estimate bφ(i −1) outputted from
iteration i −1:
1. Simulate θ∗∼q(.|θ(i −1)), where q is some proposal distribution.
2. Run an SMC sampler on the x space, with the ﬁnal (unnormalised) distribution as πT (x) = γ(x, y|θ∗).
This gives a particle approximation bp(x|θ∗, y) to p(x|θ∗, y) and an estimate bφ(θ∗, y) of its normalising
constant, φ(θ∗, y) = Zp(y|θ∗).
3. Sample a single point x∗from bp(.|θ∗, y).
4. Set (θ(i), x(i), bφ(i)) = (θ∗, x∗, bφ(θ∗, y)) with probability
1 ∧p(θ∗)bφ(θ∗, y)
p(θ)bφ(i −1)
q(θ(i −1)|θ∗)
q(θ∗|θ(i −1)),
(12)
otherwise set (θ(i), x(i), bφ(i)) = (θ(i −1), x(i −1), bφ(i −1)).
Here note the interpretation of the algorithm as a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm targeting an unbiased
approximation to p(θ|y) ∝p(θ)φ(θ, y) = p(θ)Z
´
x f(x, y|θ)dx.
2.2.3
Exchange Marginal PMCMC Algorithm
Now consider the application of marginal PMCMC to cases when the normalising constant of f(x|θ) is a
function of θ, and cannot be evaluated. In this case the joint posterior is p(θ, x|y) = p(θ)γ(x, y|θ)/Z(θ)p(y)
and direct application of the marginal PMCMC algorithm results in the presence of the intractable term
Z(θ)/Z(θ∗) in the acceptance ratio. The combination of marginal PMCMC with the exchange algorithm res-
ults in the disappearance of this ratio. Let us introduce the target π(θ, θ∗, u|y) = p(θ)p(y|θ)q(θ∗|θ)γ(u|θ∗)/Z(θ∗)p(y),
where u = (ux, uy), as in section 2.1.1. We then use the exchange algorithm as follows.
1. Draw θ∗∼q(.|θ(i −1)) and u ∼f(.|θ∗).
2. Run an SMC sampler on the x space, with the ﬁnal (unnormalised) distribution as πT (x) = γ(x, y|θ∗)
in order to obtain the particle approximation bp(x|θ∗, y) and an estimate bφ(θ∗, y) of its normalising
constant, φ(θ∗, y) = Z(θ∗)p(y|θ∗).
3. Sample a single point x∗from bp(.|θ∗, y).
4. Let (θ(i), θ∗(i), x(i), bφ(i), u(i)) = (θ∗, θ(i −1), x∗, bφ(θ∗, y), u) with probability:
1 ∧p(θ∗)bφ(θ∗, y)q(θ|θ∗)γ(u|θ)
p(θ)bφ(i −1)q(θ∗|θ)γ(u|θ∗)
Z(θ)Z(θ∗)
Z(θ∗)Z(θ) = 1 ∧p(θ∗)bφ(θ∗, y)q(θ|θ∗)γ(u|θ)
p(θ)bφ(i −1)q(θ∗|θ)γ(u|θ∗)
,
(13)
otherwise set (θ(i), θ∗(i), x(i), bφ(i), u(i)) = (θ(i −1), θ∗(i −1), x(i −1), bφ(i −1), u).
10

The acceptance probability in equation (13) is again derived using a proof similar to those in Andrieu et al.
(2010), in conjunction with the result on deterministic transformations, from Tierney (1998), used previously.
This proof can be found in appendix A in the supplemental materials. An extension using the extended
exchange algorithm described in section 2.1.2 is trivial. The results in Andrieu et al. (2010) also tell us that
the (θ, x) points that are generated are from the joint posterior p(θ, x|y), and that the unused SMC points
generated from bp(.|θ∗, y) can be recycled in Monte Carlo estimates based on the x space.
Our framework is now in place: the EMPMCMC algorithm addresses each of the issues raised in section
1.3.1. The eﬃciency of the algorithm is heavily dependant on the design of the SMC sampler on the x space,
and we examine this issue in the following section.
2.3
SMC Samplers for MRFs
The use of SMC samplers for simulating from hidden Markov models is well understood, but there have
been few attempts to use them on more general graphical models. The exception is the work of Hamze
and de Freitas (2005), which they describe in application to discrete or Gaussian models with a pairwise
factorisation. It is their methods, hot coupling and tempering, that form the basis of our approach. The
most fundamental choice in the design of such an algorithm is the choice of targets π1:N to use, where the
ﬁrst target is easy to simulate from, the ﬁnal target is the desired distribution and the targets between these
two provide a “route” from the ﬁrst target to the last. It is this choice, rather than matters such as designing
the forward and backward kernels that we focus on here.
Hot coupling proceeds by setting π1 in the SMC sampler to be a spanning tree of the true graph (which
can be easily sampled, and whose normalising constant may be exactly calculated using Carter and Kohn
(1994)) and then to add edges to the graph, one at a time (randomly chosen), until the true graph is
reached at πN (this scheme could be generalised to non-pairwise MRFs by forming larger cliques as the
SMC sampler progresses). Tempering consists of choosing the sequence πn = f(x, y|θ)1/tn, where (tn)N
n=1
is a decreasing sequence of “temperatures” with tN = 1. For an Ising model this sequence of distributions
has a simple interpretation, since we obtain f(x, y|θx, θy)1/tn ∝f(x, y|θx/tn, θy/tn). Hamze and de Freitas
(2005) suggest that hot coupling is often more eﬀective: our own empirical results support this, as long as
data generated from the initial tree is a good approximation to data generated from the ﬁnal target. This
is diﬃcult to quantify in advance in general: the case of the Ising model illustrates this, where the use of
a square lattice exhibits the phase change described previously. Our empirical investigation was based on
results obtained in our two applications in section 4. In the Ising model in the ﬁrst application, we observed
that data generated from an initial tree had similar characteristics to that that from the full grid (although
this may not hold as strongly for larger grids). In the social network application that follows, we did not
ﬁnd that there was a smooth transition between the initial tree and the ﬁnal MRF. A possible cause is that
in this case the latent MRF has the circular structure exhibited in Frank and Strauss (1986), and that the
addition of edges that complete this circle change the character of the data drawn from the graph. For this
reason, the tempering method was preferred in this latter application. The tempering method is likely to
perform more reliably across a range of applications (it is also regularly used in non-MRF applications of
SMC samplers), but for some MRFs hot coupling can be a useful tool.
11

3
APPROXIMATE BAYESIAN COMPUTATION
3.1
Introduction
Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) is a method designed, by Pritchard et al. (1999), to perform
Bayesian inference in cases where a likelihood l(y|θ) cannot be evaluated because it is unavailable or compu-
tationally intractable. The basic idea is to approximate the likelihood by ˆlϵ(y|θ) =
´
y′ l(y′|θ)πϵ(y′|y)dy where
πϵ(y′|y) is a probability density on the same space as y, and centred on y with a concentration determined by
ϵ. If ϵ = 0, then ˆlϵ(y|θ) is equal to the true likelihood l(y|θ). This approximate likelihood can be evaluated
by a Monte Carlo approximation elϵ(y|θ) = 1
R
PR
r=1 πϵ(y′(r)|y) where y′(r) ∼l(.|θ) and R > 0. This likelihood
gives more weight to values of θ that are more likely to generate data similar to y.
In practice, due to the possible high dimension of the data, a summary statistic S(y) is usually used
in place of the data, giving a further approximation (if the statistic is not suﬃcient) to the true likelihood
using:
ˆlϵ,S(y|θ) := ˆlϵ(S(y)|θ) :=
ˆ
y′ l(S(y′)|θ)πϵ(S(y′)|S(y))dy′.
(14)
MCMC (Marjoram et al., 2003) and SMC samplers (Sisson et al., 2007; Del Moral et al., 2011; Robert
et al., 2011) have been introduced to enable eﬃcient exploration of the θ space when using an ABC ap-
proximation to the likelihood. In section 4 we apply an ABC-SMC sampler to the problem of parameter
estimation in MRFs. The main advantage of this approach is that it avoids the diﬃculties listed in section
1.3.1.
For some of the models we consider we can take ϵ = 0, and low-dimensional suﬃcient statistics sometimes
exist: in these cases it can be possible to devise an ABC algorithm that targets the correct posterior
distribution p(θ|y). However this is not the case in general. For higher dimensional suﬃcient statistics it
can require more computational eﬀort to obtain a useful sample when ϵ = 0. In some cases using ϵ = 0 is
impracticable, and suﬃcient statistics are not available, and in these cases it is only possible to obtain a
sample from an approximation to the true posterior with ABC. Usually the use of ABC methods involves a
trade oﬀbetween the degree of approximation to the true posterior and the computational eﬀort required
to obtain the sample. Thus tuning ABC can be diﬃcult and it is not easy to quantify the eﬀect of the
approximation to the true posterior that is used. The intricacies of using ABC are discussed further in the
review of Marin et al. (2011).
3.2
Application to MRFs
ABC has previously been applied to inferring the parameters of MRFs (Grelaud et al., 2009) - here we instead
consider noisy or incomplete data. It is particularly simple to apply ABC to the models that we focus on in
this paper, since both Ising models and ERGMs are deﬁned in terms of statistics of the data. However, as
is the case when using the exchange algorithm on these problems, it is not possible to exactly simulate from
l(.|θ) and we consider the eﬀect of using for example, MCMC (as in Grelaud et al. (2009)) as a substitute.
The proof in appendix B in the supplemental materials describes the eﬀect of using an MCMC run of length
M for simulating from l(.|θ) within an ABC-MCMC algorithm (as in Marjoram et al. (2003)). The result is
analogous to that obtained for the exchange algorithm and SAVM: the invariant distribution (when it exists)
of this method becomes closer to the “true” target (the invariant distribution of the standard ABC-MCMC
algorithm) with increasing M.
12

In our models f(x, y|θ) factorises as f(x, y|θ) = f(x|θ)g(y|x, θ). For a given θ the simulation y′ from the
likelihood l(.|θ) is performed through ﬁrst simulating x′ from f(.|θ), then by simulating y′ from g(.|x′, θ). In
this situation we note that x′ is always proposed from its prior f(x|θ), as opposed to the posterior p(x|θ, y),
therefore when the eﬀect of the data dominates that of the prior the exploration of the x space is not likely
to be as eﬃcient as that used as in the PMCMC approach described in the previous section.
4
APPLICATIONS
4.1
Methods
In this section we apply each of the methods described in the paper to two diﬀerent data sets. The conﬁgur-
ation of the algorithms that we use has some commonality between each case, thus we begin by describing
these common aspects of the algorithms before describing the speciﬁcs of their application in the relevant sec-
tions. Our implementation is in Matlab, and makes use of the UGM package (available from Mark Schmidt’s
website at http://www.di.ens.fr/~mschmidt/Software/UGM.html).
4.1.1
Approximate Bayesian Computation
The choices made in constructing the approximate likelihood in our ABC algorithms are always the same,
up to the choice of summary statistics: we use the uniform kernel πϵ(S(y′)|S(y)) ∝1∥S(y′)−S(y)∥<ϵ as the
data comparison function, where ∥.∥is the Euclidean norm.
Our choice of the uniform kernel allows us to use the adaptive ABC-SMC sampler of Del Moral et al.
(2011) to generate weighted points from the posterior. This method adaptively chooses a sequence of targets
in the SMC sampler, where the n’th target is the ABC posterior using the likelihood in equation (14) with
tolerance ϵn. The sequence (ϵn) is chosen by, for each n, taking the smallest tolerance that ensures that a
particular percentage of the particles is given non-zero weight. We always use 10000 particles, initialise the
ABC-SMC with ϵ1 = 20 and terminate it when ϵn is reduced to zero, and resample at every iteration (which
is likely to be the most eﬃcient option when using this ABC algorithm, since otherwise particles with zero
weight are carried from one iteration of the sampler to the next) using stratiﬁed resampling. This method
uses an ABC-MCMC move as the forward kernel within the SMC sampler, and we choose a MH move with
a random walk proposal.
4.1.2
DA and PMCMC
In our implementation of DA, the update of θ uses an MH step whose proposal q is a random walk with
variance sI, where s is some problem speciﬁc scaling and I is the identity matrix of the appropriate dimension.
To update x we use L sweeps of the single site Gibbs sampler.
Our conﬁguration of the marginal PMCMC algorithm is chosen to facilitate easy comparison with the
DA approach above. The forward kernel in the SMC sampler is always chosen to be the single site Gibbs
sampler, and stratiﬁed resampling was performed when the eﬀective sample size (ESS) dropped below 0.5
multiplied by the number of particles. To ensure that the computational eﬀort of a PMCMC iteration is
comparable to a sweep of the DA algorithm, we take the number of particles P = ⌊L/T⌋, where T is the
number of targets used in the SMC sampler within the PMCMC. In every case, our ﬁgures show 4500 points
generated by the algorithm, after a burn in of 500 iterations.
13

4.1.3
Simulation From the Likelihood and Exchange Algorithm
The extended exchange algorithm (section 2.1.3) is used when updating θ in both the DA and PMCMC
algorithms; B bridging targets are used. Both this use of the exchange algorithm and the ABC approach
require simulation from the likelihood f(x|θ). In all cases we use 1000 sweeps of the single site Gibbs sampler
described in section 1.3.2. Note that the proof in appendix B in the supplemental materials indicates that
there is no restriction on choice of the initial point x0 of this Gibbs sampler. We simply chose x0 = y (which
we are free to do since in this case x and y inhabit the same space). This choice, where the same initial value
is used at each iteration, could potentially be improved by choosing the initial value based on the previous
run of the Gibbs sampler, however this has little practical eﬀect in our applications. Changing the initial
value for each run of the Gibbs sampler necessitates an alteration to the proof in the appendix, and this
alteration is described in the appendix.
We note that all the methods contain the single site Gibbs sampler (either for simulating from the
likelihood, or for updating x), which we know to be ineﬃcient. More eﬃcient MCMC moves could be used
in its place, for example the Swendsen-Wang algorithm for Ising models (Higdon, 1998) or, for the ERGM
example in the next section, the “tie no tie” sampler used in Caimo and Friel (2011). This would improve
the eﬃciency of all of these algorithms, and for real applications we would advocate such an approach. Here
we have chosen not to investigate these potential eﬃciency gains, concentrating instead on the impact of
avoiding the use of the DA algorithm.
4.1.4
Reporting of Results
The diﬀerence in performance of the algorithms in both applications is large and can be observed through
visualising the samples that are generated.
Estimates of posterior means and variances do not provide
any useful information above plots of the samples, and measures of the eﬃciency of the MCMC such as
autocorrelation times are not informative since some of the chains we wish to compare are not close to
stationarity. Thus we chose to only represent the output of the samplers through plots of the samples they
produce (in the ABC-SMC algorithm the positions of the equally weighted particles after resampling are
shown).
4.2
Ising Model
In this section we apply the methods described in the paper to inference of the parameters of an Ising model.
We use noisy observations of a hidden 10 × 10 pixel two-dimensional grid, simulated from the model in
equation (4) with parameters θx = 0.1 and θy = 0.1. This data is shown in ﬁgure 1a. Our prior over both θx
and θy is uniform on the interval [0, 3], and our model for the data is given by equation (4). Our goal is to
simulate from the posterior p(θx, θy|y), and in this section we compare ABC, DA and PMCMC algorithms.
Our ABC algorithm used two summary statistics of the data: S1(y) = P
(i,j)∈N yiyj (the number of
equivalently valued neighbours) and S2(y) = P
i yi (the magnetisation).
In the adaptive ABC-SMC al-
gorithm, we choose that 70% of the particles were given non-zero weight at each iteration. Points from
p(θx, θy|y) using this method, which was terminated at n = 12, are shown in ﬁgure 1b: the posterior mass
is distributed around the areas where θx is small and/or θy is small. It is clear that this posterior will pose
a signiﬁcant challenge to DA: in order to explore the posterior fully it is necessary to sample both large and
small values of θx, and moving from one side of the critical value of θx to the other is diﬃcult due to the
dependence between x and θx. Points from p(θx, θy|y) using DA, in which we chose s = 1 and L = 105,
14

are shown in ﬁgure 1c. The posterior dependency between θx and x, and the ineﬃciency of the updates on
p(x|θ, y) (even when using 105 sweeps of the Gibbs sampler at every iteration), inhibit the sampler from
moving below the critical value of θx.
In this implementation of the marginal PMCMC algorithm, we use hot coupling for the SMC sampler
updates, adding a single edge at each target (this results in a total of 82 targets, giving approximately 1200
particles). The simlated points are shown in ﬁgure 1d: the sampler has explored the whole posterior, with no
evidence of diﬃculty in passing the critical value of θx. Figure 1e shows the trace plot of S1(x) for both the
DA and the PMCMC methods, illustrating that the PMCMC approach enables exploration of the x space,
whereas DA only explores graphs that correspond to a large value of θx. In both the DA and PMCMC
extended exchange algorithms, we use B = 100 intermediate targets in the annealed IS: fewer intermediate
targets can result in poor estimation of the ratio of normalising constants, and therefore ineﬃciency in both
algorithms. If the original exchange algorithm is used (B = 1), the results from the PMCMC method do not
look dissimilar to those produced by the DA method: when there is a proposed change in θx that crosses the
critical value, the move is rejected since the proposed u ∼f(.|θ∗) has a small probability of being generated
under θ.
The dominating factor in the computational cost of each algorithm is in the Gibbs sampler for the
simulation from the x space (with the target of either p(x|θ) or p(x|θ, y)). For each iteration of the DA or
PMCMC algorithm 105 sweeps of the Gibbs sampler are performed at each iteration of the MCMC (along
with an additional 103 for the exchange algorithm), so the total cost of our run is approximately 5 × 108
sweeps. For each target of the ABC-SMC 107 sweeps are performed, so the total computational cost is
1.2 × 108 sweeps.
4.3
Social Network Data
We consider the application of our methods to the Florentine family business graph studied in Caimo and
Friel (2011), shown in ﬁgure 2a. We begin by assuming the network x is directly observed and use exactly
the model for the data as that used in Caimo and Friel (2011): using an ERGM (equation (5)) with
S1(x) = P
i<j xij (the number of edges) and S2(x) = P
i<j<k xikxjk (the number of 2-stars) , and prior on
θx = (θ1, θ2) as θx ∼N(0, 30I2).
We begin by examining ABC as a direct alternative to the MCMC approach in Caimo and Friel (2011)
(the DA and PMCMC approaches are not applicable here since there is no latent space). We use the statistics
S1 and S2 as our summary of the data, and since these statistics are suﬃcient, when ϵ = 0 the ABC posterior
is equivalent to the true posterior. In this implementation the scale of the target changes dramatically across
the iterations (since the posterior is signiﬁcantly tighter than the prior), thus we adaptively choose the
proposal variance in the MH move, so that at iteration n, the variance is 2bΣn−1 where bΣn−1 is the sample
variance of the particles at iteration n −1 (as in Robert et al. (2011)). We choose that 50% of the particles
were given non-zero weight at each iteration. The ABC-SMC terminated at n = 16, and weighted points
drawn from p(θ1, θ2|y) using this method are shown in ﬁgure 2b. These points are in good agreement with
the shape of the posterior shown in Caimo and Friel (2011). We note that the “population” nature of the
SMC algorithm acts as a substitute for the population MCMC method employed in that paper.
Now consider the case where it is assumed that the observed graph, now denoted by y, is a noisy
observation of some underlying graph x. Speciﬁcally, we use the model in equation (6), which account for
noisy observations of the edges of the underlying graph. We use a generalisation of the model described
above, deﬁned on the extended parameter θ = (θ1, θ2, θy) with the same priors on θ1 and θ2, and with a
15

Figure 1: Results for Bayesian parameter estimation in a hidden Ising model.
(a) Observed data.
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
(b) Points from the posterior produced
by the ABC-SMC algorithm.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
ex
ey
(c) Points simulated from the posterior
using the DA exchange algorithm.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
ex
ey
(d) Points simulated from the posterior
using the exchange marginal PMCMC
algorithm.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
ex
ey
(e) Trace plot of the statistic S1(x), the number of identical neighbours in the hidden
ﬁeld x, for the DA (black) and the PMCMC (grey) algorithms.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
iteration
S1(x)
prior of θy ∼U[0, 100] on the additional parameter θy. Note that the data itself does not suggest that this
model is particularly suitable: it is chosen simply to highlight the computational problems that can result in
the presence of a latent ERGM. We use the same ABC-SMC algorithm as above, using the same summary
statistics (which are now not suﬃcient). The ABC-SMC again terminated at n = 16, and weighted points
simulated from p(θ1, θ2|y) using this method are shown in ﬁgure 2c. One of the limitations of ABC is evident
here: since the statistics are not suﬃcient, it is diﬃcult to assess how accurate the approximation to the
true posterior is, even though we have ϵ = 0. We applied the DA algorithm and PMCMC algorithms to
the same model that assumes the data is noisy (including the parameter θy). In the DA algorithm we chose
s = 10 and L = 104 and points generated from p(θ1, θ2|y) are shown in ﬁgure 2d. The posterior sample
produced by this sampler was highly dependant on the initial point. In this particular example, when the
initial value of x is the complete graph (where all edges are present), the chain gets stuck in this state, which
is highly correlated a posteriori with a small value of θy. Again, the ineﬃciency of the updates on x and the
dependency between x and θ is seen to lead to the poor performance of the DA approach.
In addition to comparing the PMCMC approach to DA, we also compare the original IS based pseudo-
marginal approach to the more general PMCMC approach in order to observe the beneﬁt of using an SMC
sampler in sampling the x space. Speciﬁcally, we compare IS with 104 importance points drawn using a
uniform distribution independently on each edge, with the SMC sampler with tempering using 1000 targets
and 10 particles. Figures 2e and 2f respectively illustrate the PMCMC results using these two schemes. The
performance of the IS based technique is poor since the importance proposal is poor and does not provide
16

an accurate estimate of the normalising constant Z(θ)p(y|θ). The performance of the tempering SMC based
EMPMCMC is signiﬁcantly better than both the IS and DA approaches, with convergence to the region
shown in ﬁgure 2f regardless how the MCMC is initialised. This lack of dependence on initial conditions,
and the free exploration of the x and θy space that is allowed by the method, provide some evidence that
this method has found the true posterior.
In the DA and PMCMC extended exchange algorithms, we use 1000 intermediate targets in the extended
exchange algorithm: again we ﬁnd that fewer intermediate targets results in poor estimation of the ratio of
normalising constants and thus ineﬃcient MCMC algorithms.
Again, the dominating factor in the computational cost of each algorithm is in the Gibbs sampler for the
simulation from the x space. In this case, for each iteration of the DA or PMCMC algorithm 104 sweeps
of the Gibbs sampler are performed at each iteration of the MCMC (along with an additional 103 for the
exchange algorithm), so the total cost of our run is approximately 5 × 107 sweeps. For each target of the
ABC-SMC 107 sweeps are performed, so the total computational cost is 1.6 × 108 sweeps. The method of
Caimo and Friel (2011) is relatively cheap compared to ABC-SMC, with the only simulation from the x
space being carried out as part of the exchange algorithm (which costs 103 sweeps).
Figure 2: Results for Bayesian parameter estimation in a hidden ERGM.
(a) Observed data.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
(b)
Points
from
the
posterior
(with
no observation error) produced by the
ABC-SMC algorithm.
ï3.5
ï3
ï2.5
ï2
ï1.5
ï1
ï0.2
ï0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
e1
e2
(c) Points from the posterior produced
by the ABC-SMC algorithm.
ï4.5
ï4
ï3.5
ï3
ï2.5
ï2
ï1.5
ï1
ï0.3
ï0.2
ï0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
e1
e2
(d) Points simulated from the posterior
using the DA exchange algorithm.
ï10
ï9
ï8
ï7
ï6
ï5
ï4
ï3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
e1
e2
(e) Importance sampling based pseudo-
marginal approach, with the exchange
algorithm.
1
2
3
4
5
6
ï0.8
ï0.7
ï0.6
ï0.5
ï0.4
ï0.3
ï0.2
ï0.1
e1
e2
(f) Points simulated from the posterior
using the exchange marginal PMCMC
algorithm containing an SMC sampler.
ï4
ï3
ï2
ï1
0
ï0.5
0
0.5
e1
e2
17

5
DISCUSSION
Bayesian parameter estimation for latent MRFs can face computational diﬃculties using standard meth-
odology since the DA approach can be extremely ineﬃcient. We have described two methods, ABC and
PMCMC that can oﬀer an alternative in situations where DA is not suitable.
ABC is currently particularly popular for addressing missing data problems, and we apply it for the ﬁrst
time to inference in ERGMs as a method for avoiding the intractable normalising constant. We also provide
a theoretical justiﬁcation for the use of MCMC for inexact simulation from the likelihood, as is required in
many MRF models, within ABC-MCMC. However, we observe the usual limitations of ABC in cases where
suﬃcient statistics are not available: namely that an approximation that is diﬃcult to quantify is introduced.
Marginal PMCMC oﬀers an eﬀective means of bypassing the potential ineﬃciency of DA and our results
indicate that this method is a promising approach to parameter estimation in these models.
We note
the large computational cost of these methods, especially when sampling from a high dimensional latent
space. As such, routine use of the method will usually only be possible when accompanied by an eﬃcient
implementation, possibly on parallel computing architectures such as graphics cards or cloud computing
resources. Given the increase in popularity of this hardware, the PMCMC methodology oﬀers a promising
avenue for use on more realistic applications in the near future. The key aspect of PMCMC is the use of
an SMC sampler for sampling from the x space. Although we have focussed on parameter estimation, our
results (and those of Hamze and de Freitas (2005)) indicate that SMC samplers have an important role to
play in simulating from MRFs, both when the parameters are known and unknown. These methods have not
been used before in the ERGM literature, and address some of the known problems with MCMC described
in Snijders (2002).
We follow previous work in using the exchange algorithm to account for the intractable normalising
constant, and give theoretical justiﬁcation for the use of approximate exchange algorithms where MCMC as
a substitute for exact simulation from the likelihood. In application, we ﬁnd the use of the extended version
of the exchange algorithm described in Murray et al. (2006) to be essential to ensure the MCMC can move
freely in the problems we consider.
