IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022
1
SABLAS: Learning Safe Control for Black-box
Dynamical Systems
Zengyi Qin1, Dawei Sun2, and Chuchu Fan1
Abstract—Control certiﬁcates based on barrier functions have
been a powerful tool to generate probably safe control policies for
dynamical systems. However, existing methods based on barrier
certiﬁcates are normally for white-box systems with differentiable
dynamics, which makes them inapplicable to many practical
applications where the system is a black-box and cannot be
accurately modeled. On the other side, model-free reinforcement
learning (RL) methods for black-box systems suffer from lack
of safety guarantees and low sampling efﬁciency. In this paper,
we propose a novel method that can learn safe control policies
and barrier certiﬁcates for black-box dynamical systems, without
requiring for an accurate system model. Our method re-designs
the loss function to back-propagate gradient to the control policy
even when the black-box dynamical system is non-differentiable,
and we show that the safety certiﬁcates hold on the black-box
system. Empirical results in simulation show that our method
can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the learned policies
by achieving nearly 100% safety and goal reaching rates using
much fewer training samples, compared to state-of-the-art black-
box safe control methods. Our learned agents can also generalize
to unseen scenarios while keeping the original performance. The
source code can be found at https://github.com/Zengyi-Qin/bcbf.
Index Terms—Robot Safety; Robust/Adaptive Control.
I. INTRODUCTION
G
UARANTEEING safety is an open challenge in de-
signing control policies for many autonomous robotic
systems, ranging from consumer electronics to self-driving
cars and aircrafts. In recent years, the development of machine
learning (ML) has created unprecedented opportunities to
control modern autonomous systems with growing complexity.
However, ML also poses great challenges for developing high-
assurance autonomous systems that are provably dependable.
While many learning-based approaches [1], [2], [3], [4] have
been proposed to train controllers to accomplish complex
tasks with improved empirical performance, the lack of safety
certiﬁcates for the learning-enabled components has been a
fundamental hurdle that blocks the massive deployment of the
learned solutions.
For decades, mathematical control certiﬁcates has been used
as proofs that the desired properties of the system are satisﬁed
Manuscript received: September 9, 2021; Revised December 11, 2021;
Accepted January 5, 2022.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Clement Gosselin
upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This work
was supported by the Defense Science and Technology Agency in Singapore,
but this article solely reﬂects the opinions and conclusions of its authors and
not DSTA Singapore or the Singapore Government.
1Zengyi Qin and Chuchu Fan are with Massachusetts Institute of Technol-

2Dawei Sun is with University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Cham-

Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI): see top of this page.
(a) CityEnv
(b) ValleyEnv
(c) Comparison with existing methods
Fig. 1. (a) and (b) are two task environments we consider. In both CityEnv
and ValleyEnv, the controller should control the ego vehicle to avoid collision
with NPC vehicles. There are 1024 NPC drones in the city and 32 NPC ships
in the valley. Each vehicle is assigned a random initial and goal location. (c)
shows the average result for the two tasks, where the errorbars represent two
times the standard deviation. SABLAS exhibits signiﬁcant improvement in
relative safety rate and task completion rate.
in closed-loop with certain control policies. For example,
Control Lyapunov Function [5], [6] and Control Contraction
Metrics [7], [8], [9], [10] ensure the existence of a controller
under which the system converges to an equilibrium or a
desired trajectory. Control Barrier Function [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17] ensures the existence of a controller
that keeps the system inside a safe invariant set. Classical
control synthesis methods based on Sum-of-Squares [18],
[12], [19], [20] and linear programs [21], [22] usually only
work for systems with low-dimensional state space and simple
dynamics. This is because they choose polynomials as the
candidate certiﬁcate functions, where low-order polynomials
may not be a valid certiﬁcate for complex dynamical systems
and high-order polynomials will increase the number of de-
cision variables exponentially in those optimization problems.
Recent data-driven methods [17], [23], [9], [24] have shown
signiﬁcant progress in overcoming the limitations of the tra-
ditional synthesis methods. They can jointly learn the control
certiﬁcates and policies as neural networks (NN). However,
arXiv:2201.01918v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2022

2
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022
data-driven methods that can generate control certiﬁcates still
require an explicit (or white-box) differentiable model of
the system dynamics, as the derivatives of the dynamics are
required in the learning process. Finally, many works study
the use of control certiﬁcates such as CBF to provide safety
guarantees during and after training the policies [16], [25],
but they more or less requires an accurate model of the system
dynamics or a reasonable modeling of the system uncertainties
to build the certiﬁcates.
Many dynamical systems in the real-world are black-box
and lack accurate models. The most popular model-free ap-
proach to handle such black-box systems is safe reinforce-
ment learning (RL). Safe RL methods enforce safety and
performance by maximizing the expectation of the cumulative
reward and constraining the expectation of the cost to be less
or equal to a given threshold. The biggest disadvantage of
safe RL methods is the lack of systematic or theoretically
grounded way of designing cost function and reward functions,
which heavily rely on empirical trials and errors. The lack
of explainable safety guarantees and low sampling efﬁciency
also make safe RL methods difﬁcult to exhibit satisfactory
performance.
Instead of stressing about the trade-off between the strong
guarantees from control certiﬁcates and the practicability of
model-free methods, in this work, we propose SABLAS to
achieve both. SABLAS is a general-purpose approach to learn-
ing safe control for black-box dynamical systems. SABLAS
enjoys the guarantees provided by the safety certiﬁcate from
CBF theory without requiring for an accurate model for the
dynamics. Instead, SABLAS only needs a nominal dynamics
function that can be obtained through regressions over sim-
ulation data. There is no need to model the error between
the nominal dynamics and the real dynamics since SABLAS
essentially re-design the loss function in a novel way to back-
propagate gradient to the controller even when the black-box
dynamical system is non-differentiable. The resulting CBF
(and the corresponding safety certiﬁcate) holds directly on the
original black-box system if the training process converges.
The proposed algorithm is easy-to-implement and follows
almost the same procedure of learning CBF for white-box
systems with minimal modiﬁcation. SABLAS fundamentally
solves the problem that control certiﬁcates cannot be learned
directly on black-box systems, and opens up the next chapter
use of CBF theory on synthesizing safe controllers for black-
box dynamical systems.
Experimental results demonstrates the superior advantages
of SABLAS over leading learning-based safe control methods
for black-box systems including CPO [26], PPO-Safe [3]
and TRPO-Safe [27], [28]. We evaluate SABLAS on two
challenging tasks in simulation: drone control in a city and
ship control in a valley (as shown in Fig. 1). The dynamics
of the drone and ship are assumed unknown. In both tasks,
the controlled agent should avoid collision with uncontrolled
agents and other obstacles, and reach its goal before the testing
episode ends. We also examine the generalization capability
of SABLAS on testing scenarios that are not seen in training.
Fig. 1 shows that SABLAS can reach a near 1.0 relative
safety rate and task completion rate while using only 1/10
of the training data compared to existing safe RL methods,
demonstrating a signiﬁcant improvement. We also study the
effect of model error (between the nominal model and actual
dynamics) on the performance of the learned policy. It is
shown that SABLAS is tolerant to large model errors while
keeping a high safety rate. A detailed description of the results
is presented in the experiment section. Video results can be
found at supplementary materials.
To summarize the strength of SABLAS: 1) SABLAS can
jointly ﬁnd a safety certiﬁcate (i.e. CBF) and the corresponding
control policy on black-box dynamics; 2) Unlike RL-based
methods that need tedious trial-and-error on designing the
rewards, SABLAS provides a systematic way of learning
certiﬁed control policy, without parameters (other than the
standard hyper-parameters in NN training) that need ﬁne-
tuning. 3) Empirical results that SABLAS can achieve a nearly
perfect performance in terms of guaranteeing safety and goal-
reaching, using much less samples than state-of-the-art safe
RL methods.
II. RELATED WORK
There is a rich literature on controlling black-box systems
and safe RL. Due to the space limit, we only discuss a few
directly related and commonly used techniques on black-box
system control. We will also skip the literature review for the
large body of works on model-based safe control and trajectory
planning as the research problems we are solving are very
different.
A. Controller Synthesis for Black-box Systems
Proportional–integral–derivative (PID) controller is widely
used in controlling black-box systems. The advantage of PID
controller is that it does not rely on a model of the system and
only requires the measurement of the state. A drawback of
PID controller is that it does not guarantee safety or stability,
and the system may overshoot or oscillate about the control
setpoint. If the underlying black-box system is linear time-
invariant, existing work [29] has presented a polynomial-time
control algorithm without relying on any knowledge of the
environment. For non-linear black-box systems, the dynamics
model can be approximated using system identiﬁcation and
controlled using model-based approaches [30], and PID can
be used to handle the error part. The concept of practical
relative degree [31] is also proposed to enhance the control
performance on systems with heavy uncertainties. Recent
advance in reinforcement learning [4], [3], [27], [32] also gives
us insight into treating the system as a pure black-box and
estimating the gradient for the black-box functions in order
to optimize the control variables. However, in safety-critical
systems, these black-box control methods still lack formal
safety guarantee or certiﬁcate.
Simulation-guided controller synthesis methods can also
generate control certiﬁcates for black-box systems, and some-
times those certiﬁcates can indicate how policies should be
constructed [21], [20], [22]. However, most of these techniques
use polynomial templates for the certiﬁcates, which limits their
use on high-dimensional and complex systems. Another line

QIN et al.: SABLAS: LEARNING SAFE CONTROL FOR BLACK-BOX DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
3
of work studies the use of [33], [34] data-driven reachability
analysis, jointly with receding-horizon control to constructed
optimal control policies. These methods rely on side informa-
tion about the black-box systems (e.g. lipschitz constants of
the dynamics, monotonicity of the states, decoupling in the
states’ dynamics) to do the reachability, which is not needed
in our method.
B. Safe Reinforcement Learning
Safe RL [26], [28], [2], [35], [36] extends RL by adding
constraints on the expectation of certain cost functions, which
encode safety requirements or resource limits. CPO [26]
derived a policy improvement step that increases the reward
while satisfying the safety constraint. DCRL [2] imposes con-
straint on state density functions rather than cost value func-
tions, and shows that density constraint has better expressive-
ness over cost value function-based constraints. RCPO [28]
weights the cost using Lagrangian multipliers and add it to
the reward. FISAR [36] uses a meta-optimizer to achieve
forward invariance in the safe set. A disadvantage of safe
RL is that it does not provide safety guarantee, or their
safety guarantee cannot be realized in practice. The problem
of sampling efﬁciency and sparsity of cost also increase the
difﬁculty to synthesize safe controller through RL.
C. Safety Certiﬁcate and Control Barrier Functions
Mathematical certiﬁcates can serve as proofs that the desired
property of the system is satisﬁed under the corresponding
planning [37], [38] and control components. Such certiﬁcate
is able to guide the controller synthesis for dynamical systems
in order to ensure safety. For example, Control Lyapunov
Function [5], [6], [24] ensures the existence of a controller
so that the system converges to desired behavior. Control
Barrier Function [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [39]
ensures the existence of a controller that keep the system
inside a safe invariant set. However, the existing controller
synthesis with safety certiﬁcate heavily relies on a white-
box model of the system dynamics. For black-box systems
or system with large model uncertainty, these methods are not
applicable. While recent work [40] proposes to learn the model
uncertainty effect on the CBF conditions, it still assumes that
a handcrafted CBF is given, which is not always available for
complex non-linear dynamical systems. Our approach repre-
sents a substantial improvement over the existing CBF-based
safe controller synthesis strategy. The proposed SABLAS
framework simultaneously enjoys the safety certiﬁcate from
the CBF theory and the effectiveness on black-box dynamical
systems.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Safety of Black-box Dynamical Systems
Deﬁnition 1 (Black-box Dynamical System). A black-box
dynamical system is represented by tuple ⟨S, U, f⟩, where
S ∈Rn is the state space and U ∈Rm is the control input
space. f : S × U 7→S is the system dynamics ˙s = f(s, u),
which is unknown due to the black-box assumption.
Let S0, Sg, Ss and Sd denote the set of initial states,
goal states, safe states and dangerous states respectively. The
problem we aim to solve is formalized in Deﬁnition 2.
Deﬁnition 2 (Safe Control of Black-box Systems). Given a
black-box dynamical system modeled as in Deﬁnition 1, the
safe control problem aims to ﬁnd a controller π : S 7→U such
that under control input u = π(s) and the unknown dynamics
˙s = f(s, u), the following is satisﬁed:
∃t > 0, s(t) ∈Sg
s.t. ∀t > 0, s(t) ̸∈Sd and s(0) ∈S0
(1)
The above deﬁnition requires that starting from the initial
set S0, the system should never enter the dangerous set Sd
under controller π.
B. Control Barrier Function as Safety Certiﬁcate
A common approach for guaranteeing safety of dynamical
systems is via control barrier functions (CBF) [11], which
ensures that the state always stay in the safe invariant set.
A control barrier function h : S 7→R satisﬁes:
h(s) ≥0,
∀s ∈S0
h(s) < 0,
∀s ∈Sd
˙h + α(h) = ∂h
∂s f(s, u) + α(h) ≥0,
∀s ∈Sp
(2)
where Sp = {s | h(s) ≥0}, u = π(s) and α(·) is a class-
K function that is strictly increasing and α(0) = 0. It is
proven [11] that if there exists a CBF h for a given controller
π, the system controlled by π starting from s(0) ∈S0 will
never enter the dangerous set Sd. Besides the formal safety
proof in [11], there is an informal but straightforward way to
understand the safety guarantee. Whenever h(s) decreases to
0, we have ˙h + α(h) = ˙h ≥0, which means h(s) no longer
decreases and h(s) < 0 will not occur. Thus s will not enter
the dangerous set Sd where h(s) < 0.
C. Co-learning Controller and CBF for White-box Systems
For white-box dynamical systems where f(s, u) is known,
we can jointly synthesize the controller π and it safety
certiﬁcate h that satisfy CBF conditions (2) via a learning-
based approach. We model π and h as neural networks with
parameters Θ and Ω. Given a dataset D of the state samples
in S, the CBF conditions (2) can be translated into empirical
loss functions:
L0(Ω) =
1
|S0 ∩D|
X
s∈S0∩D
max(0, −h(s; Ω))
Ld(Ω) =
1
|Sd ∩D|
X
s∈Sd∩D
max(0, h(s; Ω))
Lp(Ω, Θ) =
1
|Sp ∩D|
X
s∈Sp∩D
max

0, −∂h
∂s f(s, π(s; Θ)) −α(h(s, Ω))

.
(3)
Each of the loss functions in (3) corresponds to a CBF
condition in (2). In addition to safety, we also consider goal-
reaching by penalize the difference between the safe controller

4
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022
π and the goal-reaching nominal controller πnom in (4). The
synthesis of πnom is well-studied and is not the contribution
of our work.
Lg(Θ) =
1
|Sp ∩D|
X
s∈Sp∩D
||π(s; Θ) −πnom(s)||2
2.
(4)
The total loss function is L0(Ω)+Ld(Ω)+Lp(Ω, Θ)+λLg(Θ),
where λ is a constant that balances the goal-reaching and
safety objective. The total loss function is minimized via
stochastic gradient descent to ﬁnd the parameters Ωand
Θ. The dataset D is not ﬁxed during training and will be
periodically updated with new samples by running the current
controller. When the loss L0 + Ld + Lp converges to 0, the
resulting controller π(s; Θ) and CBF h(s; Ω) will satisfy (2) on
unseen testing samples with a generalization bound as proven
in [17]. Therefore, a safe controller and the corresponding CBF
is found for the white-box system.
However, for black-box dynamical systems where f(s, u)
is unknown, the co-learning method for safe controller and
CBF described above is no longer applicable. In Section IV,
we propose an important and easy-to-implement modiﬁcation
to (3) such that we can leverage similar co-learning framework
to jointly synthesize the safe controller and its corresponding
CBF as safety certiﬁcate.
IV. LEARNING CBF ON BLACK-BOX SYSTEMS
In this section, we ﬁrst elaborate on why it is difﬁcult to
learn the safe controller and its CBF for black-box dynamical
systems. Then we will propose an important and easy-to-
implement re-formulation of the optimization objective, which
makes learning safe controller in black-box systems as easy
as in white-box systems.
A. Challenges in Black-box Dynamical Systems
Among the three loss functions L0, Ld and Lp in (3), Lp
is the only one that can propagate gradient to the controller
parameter Θ. The main challenge of training safe controller
with its CBF for black-box dynamical systems is that the
gradient can no longer be back-propagated to Θ when f is
unknown. Therefore, a safe controller cannot be trained by
minimizing the loss functions in (3).
Given state samples s(t) and s(t + ∆t) from the black-box
system where ∆t is a sufﬁciently small time interval, we can
approximate ˙h and compute Lp as:
˙h1(s) = h(s(t + ∆t)) −h(s(t))
∆t
Lp1 =
1
|Sp ∩D|
X
s∈Sp∩D
max

0, −˙h1(s) −α(h(s))

.
(5)
Lp1 does give the value of Lp, but its backward gradient ﬂow
to the controller is cut off by the black-box system that is non-
differentiable. (5) can only be used to train CBF h but not the
safe controller π. Even worse, the h obtained by minimizing
(5) does not guarantee that a corresponding safe controller π
exists. If we have an differential expression of dynamics f
and replace h(s(t + ∆t)) with h(s(t) + f(s(t), π(s(t)))∆t),
the gradient ﬂow can successfully reach π(s) and update the
Black-box system
Nominal model 𝑓𝑛𝑜𝑚
Controller 𝜋
Control input 𝑢
𝑠(𝑡+ ∆𝑡)
𝑠𝑡+ 𝑓𝑛𝑜𝑚(𝑠, 𝑢)∆𝑡
ҧ𝑠(𝑡+ ∆𝑡)
𝑠(𝑡)
ሶℎ3
ℒ𝑝3
Forward pass
Back-propagation
Fig. 2. Computational graph of Lp3. The blue lines show how the gradient
from Lp3 is back-propagated to the controller π despite that the black-box
system itself is non-differentiable.
controller parameter. However, this is not immediately possible
because f is unknown by the black-box assumption.
A possible way to back-propagate gradient to π is to use a
differentiable nominal model fnom. There are many methods
to obtain fnom, such as ﬁtting a neural network using sampled
data from the real black-box system. We do not require fnom
to perfectly match the real dynamics f, because there will
always exist an error between them. With fnom, we can
approximate Lp as:
˙h2(s) = h(s + fnom(s, π(s))∆t) −h(s)
∆t
Lp2 =
1
|Sp ∩D|
X
s∈Sp∩D
max

0, −˙h2(s) −α(h(s))

,
(6)
which is differentiable w.r.t. π(s) because both h and fnom
are differentiable. The gradient of Lp2 can be back-propagated
to the controller to update its parameters. However, whatever
way we get fnom, there still exists an error between the
real dynamics f and fnom, which means ˙h2 is not a good
approximation of ˙h and Lp2 is not the true value of Lp. Using
Lp2, it is not guaranteed that the third CBF condition in (2)
will be satisﬁed.
B. Learning Safe Control for Black-box Dynamics
We present a novel re-formulation of Lp that makes learning
safe controller with CBF for black-box dynamical systems
as easy as in white-box systems. The proposed formula-
tion possesses two features: it enables the gradient to back-
propagate to the controller in training, and offers an error-free
approximation of ˙h.
Given state samples s(t) and s(t+∆t) from the trajectories
of the real black-box dynamical system, where ∆t is a
sufﬁciently small time interval, we deﬁne snom(t + ∆t) as
:
snom(t + ∆t) = s(t) + fnom(s(t), π(s(t)))∆t,
then construct ¯s(t + ∆t) as:
¯s(t + ∆t) = snom(t + ∆t) + g(s(t + ∆t) −snom(t + ∆t)),
where g(s) = s is an identity function but without gra-
dient. We need to pretend that g(s) is a constant and in
back-propagation, the gradient on g(s) cannot propagate to
its argument s. In PyTorch [41], there is an off-the-shelf
implementation of g(s) as g(s) = s.detach(), which cuts

QIN et al.: SABLAS: LEARNING SAFE CONTROL FOR BLACK-BOX DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
5
off the gradient from g to s in back-propagation. Then we
approximate Lp using:
˙h3(s) = h(¯s(t + ∆t)) −h(s(t))
∆t
Lp3 =
1
|Sp ∩D|
X
s∈Sp∩D
max

0, −˙h3(s) −α(h(s))

.
(7)
Theorem 1. ∇ΘLp3 exists and lim∆t→0 Lp3 = Lp. Namely,
Lp3 is differentiable w.r.t. the controller parameter Θ, and Lp3
is an error-free approximation of Lp as ∆t →0.
Proof. Since fnom is differentiable, snom and ¯s(t + ∆t) are
differentiable w.r.t. π, ˙h3 and Lp3 are also differentiable w.r.t.
π and its parameter Θ. Thus, ∇ΘLp3 exists. Furthermore,
since ¯s(t+∆t) = s(t+∆t), ˙h3 is an error-free approximation
of the real ˙h when ∆t →0. Thus Lp3 is also an error-free
approximation of Lp when ∆t →0.
Note that Theorem 1 reveals the reason why the pro-
posed SABLAS method can jointly learn the CBF and the
safe controller for black-box dynamical system. First, since
∇ΘLp3 exists, the gradient from Lp3 can be back-propagated
to the controller parameters to learn a safe controller. On
the contrary, ˙h1 is not differentiable w.r.t. π so Lp1 cannot
be used to train the controller. Second, since Lp3 is a good
approximation of Lp, minimizing Lp3 contributes to the mini-
mization of Lp and the satisfaction of the third CBF condition
in (2). On the contrary, ˙h2 is an inaccurate approximation
of ˙h as we elaborated in Section IV-A. The construction of
Lp3 incorporates the advantages of Lp1 and Lp2, and avoids
the disadvantages of Lp1 and Lp2 at the same time. The
computational graph of Lp3 is illustrated in Fig. 2, which
shows the forward pass and the backward gradient propagation
from Lp3 to controller π.
Remark 1. One may argue that the gradient received by
π via minimizing Lp3 is not exactly the gradient it should
receive if we had a perfect differentiable model of the black-
box system. Despite this, minimizing Lp3 directly contributes
to the satisfaction of the third CBF condition in (2). A safe
controller and its CBF can be found to keep the system within
safe set.
Remark 2. Although the current formulation of Lp3 leads
to promising performance in simulation as we will show in
experiments, Lp3 requires further consideration in hardware
experiments. Directly using the future state s(t + ∆t) to
calculate the time derivative of h or s is not always de-
sirable because noise will possibly dominate the numerical
differentiation. When the noise dominates the time derivative
of s or h, the training will have convergence issues. But a
moderate noise is actually beneﬁcial to training, because our
optimization objective makes the CBF conditions hold even
under noise disturbance, which increases the robustness of the
trained CBF and controller. On physical robots where noise
dominates the numerical differentiation, one can incoperate
ﬁltering techniques to mitigate the noise.
Combining with the loss functions L0, Ld and Lg in (3) and
(4), the total loss function can be formulated as:
L(Ω, Θ) = L0(Ω) + Ld(Ω) + Lp3(Ω, Θ) + λLg(Θ),
(8)
Algorithm 1 Learning Safe Controller with CBF for Black-
box Dynamical Systems
1: Input: The set of initial condition S0, the set of dan-
gerous state Sd, controller π and CBF h with randomly
initialized parameters Θ and Ω, nominal dynamics fnom,
loss function L(Ω, Θ), the number of episodes K in data
collection, the number of training iterations N.
2: for i = 1, 2, · · · , N do
3:
Initialize state samples dataset D ←∅
4:
for j = 1, 2, · · · , K do
5:
s(0) ←SAMPLE(S0)
6:
Dj ←RUN(π(·; Θ), s(0)), D ←D ∪Dj
7:
end for
8:
Ω, Θ ←UPDATE(Ω, Θ, D, L)
9: end for
10: return CBF parameter Ωand controller parameter Θ
where λ is a constant balancing the safety and goal-reaching
objective. L is minimized via stochastic gradient descent.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the learning process of the safe
controller and the corresponding safety certiﬁcate (CBF) for
black-box dynamical systems. The RUN function runs the
black-box system using the controller π under initial condition
s(0), and returns the trajectory data. The UPDATE function
updates parameters Ω, Θ by minimizing L(Ω, Θ) using the
state samples in D via gradient descent.
V. EXPERIMENT
The primary objective of our experiment is to examine the
effectiveness of the proposed method in terms of safety and
goal-reaching when controlling black-box dynamical systems.
We will conduct comprehensive experiments on two simula-
tion environments illustrated in Fig.1 (a) and (b), and compare
with state-of-the-art learning-based control methods for black-
box systems.
A. Task Environment Description
a) Drone control in a city (CityEnv): In our ﬁrst case
study, we consider the package delivery task in a city using
drones, as is illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). There is one controlled
drone and 1024 non-player character (NPC) drones that are not
controlled by our controller. In each simulation episode, each
drone is assigned a sequence of randomly selected goals to
visit. The aim of our controller is to make sure the controlled
drone reach its goals while avoiding collision with NPC drones
at any time. A reference trajectory sref(t), t ∈[0, T] will be
given, which sequentially connects the goals and avoid colli-
sion with buildings. The reference trajectory can be generated
by any off-the-shelf single-agent path planning algorithm. We
use FACTEST [42] in our implementation, and other options
such as RRT [43] are also suitable. The reference path planner
does not need to consider the dynamic obstacles, such as the
moving NPCs in our experiment. A nominal controller πnorm
will also be given, which outputs control commands that
drive the drone to follow the reference trajectory. However,
πnorm is purely for goal-reaching and does not consider safety.

6
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022
Fig. 3.
Quantitative results of relative safety rate, task completion rate and tracking error. The center points are mean and error bars represent standard
deviations. Results are collected over 50 random runs on each method. The ﬁrst row is for drone control in CityEnv and the second row is for ship control
in ValleyEnv. Our method reaches a high task completion rate and relative rate at the same time, while keeping a low tracking error.
The CityEnv has two modes: with static NPCs and moving
NPCs. If the NPCs are static, they will constantly stay at
their initial locations. If the NPCs are moving, they will
follow pre-planned trajectories to sequentially visit their goals.
The drone model is with state space [x, y, z, vx, vy, vz, θx, θy],
where θx and θy are row and pitch angles. The control inputs
are the angular acceleration of θx, θy and the vertical thrust.
The underlying model dynamics is from [17] and assumed
unknown to the controller and CBF in our experiment.
b) Ship control in a valley (ValleyEnv): In our second
case study, we consider task of controlling a ship in valley
illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). There are one controlled ship and
32 NPC ships. The number of NPCs in ValleyEnv is less
than CityEnv because ships are large in size and inertia, and
hard to maneuver in dense trafﬁc. Also, different from the
3D CityEnv, ValleyEnv is in 2D, which means the agents
have fewer degrees of freedom to avoid collision. The initial
location and goal location of each ship is randomly initialized
at the beginning of each episode. The aim of our controller is
to ensure the controlled ship reach its goal and avoid collision
with NPC ships. Similar to CityEnv, a reference trajectory and
nominal controller will be provided. There are also two modes
in ValleyEnv, including the static and moving NPC mode, as is
in CityEnv. The ship model is with state space [x, y, θ, u, v, ω],
where θ is the heading angle, u, v are speed in the ship body
coordinates, and ω is the angular velocity of the heading angle.
The ship model is from Sec. 4.2 of [44] and is unknown to
the controller and CBF.
B. Evaluation Criteria
Three evaluation criteria are considered. Relative safety
rate measures the improvement of safety comparing to a nomi-
nal controller that only targets at goal-reaching but not safety.
To formally deﬁne the relative safety rate, we ﬁrst consider
the absolute safety rate α as α =
1
T
R T
0 I(s(t) ̸∈Sd) dt,
which measures the proportion of time that the system stays
outside the dangerous set. Given two control policies π1 and
π2 with absolute safety rate α1 and α2, the relative safety
rate of π1 w.r.t. π2 is deﬁned as β12 = α1−α2
1−α2
∈(−∞, 1].
If β12
= 0, then control policy π1 does not have any
improvement over π2 in terms of safety. If β12 = 1, then
π1 completely guarantees safety of the system in t ∈[0, T].
In our experiment, π1 is the controller to be evaluated, and
π2 is the nominal controller πnorm that only accounts for
goal-reaching without considering safety. Task completion
rate is deﬁned as the success rate of reaching the goal state
before timeout. Tracking error is the average deviation of the
system’s state trajectory comparing to a pre-planned reference
trajectory sref(t), t ∈[0, T] as γ = 1
T
R T
0 ||s(t)−sref(t)||2
2 dt.
Note that we do not assume sref always stay outside the
dangerous set.
C. Baseline Approaches
In terms of safe control for black-box systems, the most
recent state-of-the-art approaches are safe reinforcement learn-
ing (safe RL) algorithms. We choose three safe RL algorithms
for comparison: CPO [26] is a general-purpose policy opti-
mization algorithm for black-box systems that maximizes the
expected reward while satisfying the safety constraints. PPO-
Safe is a combination of PPO [3] and RCPO [28]. It uses PPO
to maximize the expected cumulative reward while leveraging
the Lagrangian multiplier update rule in RCPO to enforce the
safety constraint. TRPO-Safe is a combination of TRPO [27]
and RCPO [28]. The expected reward is maximized via TRPO
and the safety constraints are imposed using the Lagrangian
multiplier in RCPO.
D. Implementation and Training
Both the controller π and CBF h are multi-layer perceptrons
(MLP) with architecture adopted from Sec. 4.2 of [17]. π and
h not only take the state of the controlled agent as input, but
also the states of 8 nearest NPCs that the controlled agent can
observe. In Algorithm 1, we choose K = 1, N = 2000. The
total number of state samples collected during training is 106.
In UPDATE of the algorithm, we use the Adam [45] optimizer
with learning rate 10−4 and batch size 1024. The gradient

QIN et al.: SABLAS: LEARNING SAFE CONTROL FOR BLACK-BOX DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
7
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.
(a) Comparison of sampling efﬁciency. With only 1/10 samples,
SABLAS achieves a nearly perfect relative safety rate. (b) Inﬂuence of
model error on safety performance. SABLAS-Lp2 uses Eqn. 6 instead of the
proposed Eqn. 7 as loss function. SABLAS is tolerant to large error between
nominal and real models while keeping a high safety rate.
descent runs for 100 iterations in UPDATE. The nominal model
dynamics are ﬁtted from trajectory data in simulation. We used
104 state samples to ﬁt a linear approximation of the drone
dynamics, and 105 samples to ﬁt a non-linear 3-layer MLP as
the ship dynamics.
In training the safe RL methods, the reward in every step is
the negative distance between the system’s current state and
the goal state, and the cost is 1 if the system is within the
dangerous set Sd and 0 otherwise. The threshold for expected
cost is set to 0, which means we wish the system never enter
the dangerous set (never reach a state with a positive cost).
During training, the agent runs the system for 107 timesteps
in total and performs 2000 policy updates. In each policy
update, 100 iterations of gradient descent are performed. The
implementation of the safe RL methods is based on [46].
All the methods are trained with static NPCs and tested
on both static and moving NPCs. We believe this can make
the testing more challenging and examine the generalization
capability of the tested methods in different scenarios. All the
agents are assigned random initial and goal locations in every
simulation episode, which prevents the learned controller from
overﬁtting a single conﬁguration.
E. Experimental Results
a) Safety and goal-reaching performance: Results are
shown in Fig. 3. Among the compared methods, our method
is the only one that can reach a high task completion rate
and relative safety rate at the same time. For other methods
such as TRPO-Safe, when the controlled drone or ship is
about to hit the NPCs, the learned controller tend to brake
and decelerate. Thus, the agent is less likely to reach its goal
when a simulation episode ends. The task completion rate and
safety rate are opposite to each other for CPO, PPO-Safe and
TRPO-Safe. On the contrary, the controller obtained by our
method can maneuver smoothly among NPCs without severe
deceleration. This enables the controlled agent to reach the
goal location on time. Our method can also keep a relatively
low tracking error, which means the difference between actual
trajectories and reference trajectories is small.
b) Generalization capability to unseen scenarios: As is
stated in Sec. V-D, the NPCs are static in training and can
be either static or moving in testing. Fig. 3 also demonstrates
that our method has promising generalization capability across
different training and testing scenarios.
c) Sampling efﬁciency: In Fig. 4 (a), we show the safety
performance under different sizes of the training set. The
results are averaged over the drone and ship control tasks.
SABLAS only needs around 1/10 of the samples required
by the compared methods to achieve a nearly perfect relative
safety rate. Note that SABLAS requires an extra 104 to 105
samples to ﬁt the nominal dynamics, but this does not change
the fact that the total number of samples needed by SABLAS
is much fewer than the baselines.
d) Effect of model error: We investigate the inﬂuence of
the model error || ˙s −˙snom|| between the real dynamics and
the nominal dynamics on the safety performance. We change
the modeling error of the drone model and test the learning
controller on CityEnv with static NPCs. We also perform an
ablation study where we use Lp2 in Eqn. 6 instead of Lp3 in
Eqn. 7 as loss function. The red curve in Fig. 4 (b) show that
SABLAS is tolerant to large model errors while exhibiting a
promising safety rate. In our previous experiments, the model
error e = E[|| ˙s −˙snom||]/E[|| ˙s||] is always less than 0.2. We
did not encounter any difﬁculty ﬁtting a nominal model with
empirical error e ≤0.2. The orange curve in Fig. 4 (b) shows
that if we use Lp2 in Eqn. 6, the trained controller will have a
worse performance in terms of safety rate. This is because Lp2
only uses the nominal dynamics to calculate the loss, without
leveraging the real black-box dynamics.
F. Discussion on Limitation
The main limitation of the proposed approach is that it
cannot guarantee the satisfaction of the CBF conditions in
(2) in the entire state space. Even if we minimize L0, Ld
and Lp3 to 0 during training, the CBF conditions may still
be occasionally violated during testing. After all, the training
samples are ﬁnite and cannot cover the continuous state space.
If the testing distribution and training distribution are the
same, one can leverage the Rademacher complexity to give
an error bound that the CBF conditions are violated, as is in
Appendix B of [17]. But if the testing distribution is different
from training, it is still unclear to derive the generalization
error of the CBF conditions. To train CBF and controller that
provably satisfy the CBF conditions, one can also use veriﬁ-
cation tools to ﬁnd the counterexamples in the state space that
violates the CBF conditions and add those counterexamples
to the training set [24], [23]. The process is ﬁnished when
no more counterexample can be found. However, the time
complexity of the veriﬁcation makes it not applicable for large
and expressive neural networks. Also, the error between the
nominal and real dynamics will have a negative impact on the
safety performance. These limitations are left for future work.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
We presented SABLAS, a general-purpose safe controller
learning approach for black-box systems, which is supported
by the theoretical guarantees from control barrier function
theory, and at the same time is strengthened using a novel
learning structure so it can directly learn the policies and bar-
rier certiﬁcates for black-box dynamical systems. Simulation
results show that SABLAS indeed provides a systematic way

8
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022
of learning safe control policies with a great improvement over
safe RL methods. For future works, we plan to study SABLAS
on multi-agent systems, especially with adversarial players.
