1 
 
Mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in diffusion - type financial 
systems in highly volatile global capital markets with nonlinearities 
 
Dimitri O. Ledenyov and Viktor O. Ledenyov 
 
Abstract – The M&A transactions represent a wide range of unique business optimization 
opportunities in the corporate transformation deals, which are usually characterized by the high 
level of total risk. The M&A transactions can be successfully implemented by taking to an 
account the size of investments, purchase price, direction of transaction, type of transaction, and 
using the modern comparable transactions analysis and the business valuation techniques in the 
diffusion – type financial systems in the finances. We developed the MicroM&A software 
program with the embedded optimized near-real-time artificial intelligence algorithm to create 
the winning virtuous M&A strategies, using the financial performance characteristics of the 
involved firms, and to estimate the probability of the M&A transaction completion success. We 
believe that the fluctuating dependence of M&A transactions number over the certain time 
period is quasi-periodic. We think that there are many factors, which can generate the quasi 
periodic oscillations of the M&A transactions number in the time domain, for example: the stock 
market bubble effects. We performed the research of the nonlinearities in the M&A transactions 
number quasi-periodic oscillations in Matlab, including the ideal, linear, quadratic, and 
exponential dependences. We discovered that the average of a sum of random numbers in the 
M&A transactions time series represents a time series with the quasi periodic systematic 
oscillations, which can be finely approximated by the polynomial numbers. We think that, in the 
course of the M&A transaction implementation, the ability by the companies to absorb the newly 
acquired knowledge and to create the new innovative knowledge bases, is a key pre-determinant 
of the M&A deal completion success as in Switzerland. We would like to state that the winning 
virtuous mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in the diffusion - type financial systems 
in the highly volatile global capital markets with the nonlinearities can only be selected through 
the decision making process on the various available M&A choices, applying the econophysical 
econometrical analysis with the use of the inductive, deductive and abductive logics. 
JEL: G11, G14, G21, G25, G28, G30, G34, L12, L13, L22, L96, L60, M14 F23, F40 . 
PACS numbers: 89.65.Gh, 89.65.-s, 89.75.Fb . 
Keywords: mergers and acquisitions transactions, comparable transactions analysis, business 
valuation methodologies, econophysics, econometrics, nonlinearities, global capital markets.

2 
 
Introduction 
 
The globalization results in a strong necessity to originate and implement the new 
corporate strategies towards the businesses re-structurizations through the various types of the 
Mergers and Acquisitions transactions in order to optimize the organizational structures, 
management capabilities, financial indicators, aiming to establish the fully optimized profitable 
corporations at the various business operation scales and scopes within the different product and 
services line in the various markets. Thus, let us begin the discussion on the topic of our research 
interest by exploring all the possible impacts by the globalization on the M&A transaction 
strategies selection, reviewing the research opinions by various authors in the M&A literature 
and trying to understand the main ideas behind the M&A transactions. 
Lall (2002) writes: “International mergers and acquisitions (M&As), particularly those 
with giant transnational companies (TNCs) spending vast sums of money to take over firms in 
other countries, are one of the most visible aspects of globalization. Such M&As are now the 
most important form of Foreign Direct Investments (FDI), far outstripping investment in new 
facilities (‘greenfield’ investments) in terms of value (see various issues of UNCTAD World 
Investment Report).” 
Sakai (2002) explains: “Global industrial restructuring in the current era is characterized 
by an increase in cross-border strategic alliances, mergers and acquisitions (M&As) and other 
types of business networking.” 
Hussinger (2005) states: “Due to increasing globalization of markets, it is often 
hypothesized that firms engage in merger and acquisition (M&A) activities in order to secure 
their international competitiveness. While the former merger waves in the 1960s and 1980s 
were characterized by diversification endeavors, M&A activities in the 1990s are said to be 
driven by firm strategies that aimed at strengthening competitiveness and market power within 
their field of core competencies. M&As provide firms the possibility to grow, lower sector or 
technological competition, and to benefit from economies of scale and scope, which has been 
important for increasing or maintaining market power in opened, international markets.” 
Neto, Brandão, Cerqueira (2008) note: “When a company decides to invest abroad, it 
can do it in two different ways: i) through the establishment of a greenfield investment in new 
asset in a foreign country, ii) or through an investment by acquiring a pre-existent foreign firm or 
merging with a foreign firm. Therefore, the two main components of Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) are greenfield investments and mergers and acquisitions (M&A).” 

3 
 
King, Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008) comment: “The value of worldwide merger and 
acquisition (M&A) activity set a new record in 2006 with $3.79 trillion worth of transactions—a 
38% increase over 2005 (Berman (2007a)). The dominant rationale used to explain acquisition 
activity is that acquiring firms seek higher performance (Bergh (1997), Hoskisson and Hitt 
(1990), Sirower (1997)).” 
Hussinger (2012) emphasizes: “In times of increasing technological competition the 
access to technological knowledge is one of the major objectives for mergers and acquisitions 
(M&As) (Chakrabarti et al. (1994); Capron et al. (1998); Puranam et al. (2003); Graebner 
(2004)).” 
In other words, in the diffusion - type financial system, the M&A transactions represent 
a wide range of unique business optimization opportunities and techniques in the corporate 
transformation deals, which are mainly aimed to facilitate the value creation process within 
the corporation, increase the operating efficiency of corporation and raise the competitiveness 
of corporation in the selected markets, however it makes sense to note that the M&A 
transactions are usually characterized by the high total risk factors. 
Let us review the extensive list of literature on the M&A transactions in the diffusion-type 
financial system, which has been created by the world renowned scientists in the USA and 
Canada, Eastern and Western Europe, Asia and Australia regions over the recent decades. 
The North American academicians are commonly regarded as the pioneers in the 
research on the M&A transactions in the World. We would like to make a chronological 
literature review on the M&A transactions in the chronological order. Among the early research 
works on the M&A transactions, it is necessary to highlight the research on the merger 
movements in the American industry in 1895 – 1956 in Nelson (1959). The forces generating and 
limiting concentration under the Schumpeterian competition in Schumpeter (1934) have been 
investigated in Nelson, Winter (1978). The theory of the growth of the firm has been researched 
in Penrose (1959). The mergers and the market for the corporate control have been studied in 
Manne (1965). The financial motivation for the conglomerate mergers has been analyzed in 
Levy, Sarnat (1970), Lewellen (1971). The efficiency performance of conglomerate firms has 
been researched in Weston, Mansinghka (1971). Some issues on the corporate bankruptcy and 
the conglomerate merger have been uncovered in Higgins, Schall (1975). The cycle of highly 
innovative research articles by Jensen and his co-authors can be definitely considered as a 
significant contribution to the theory on the M&A transactions, namely the new theory of the 
firm has been proposed in Jensen, Meckling (1976) and the market for the corporate control has 
been described in Jensen, Ruback (1983). The agency costs of the free cash flow, corporate 

4 
 
finance and takeovers have been researched in Jensen (1986). The takeover controversy has been 
analyzed in Jensen (1987). The causes and consequences of takeovers have been fully explained 
in Jensen (1988). The performance pay and top-management incentives have been placed at the 
center of research in Jensen, Murphy (1990). The problems on the corporate control and the 
politics of finance have been considered in Jensen (1991). The modern industrial revolution has 
been selected as a main topic of research in Jensen (1993). The mergers, including their motives, 
effects and policies, have been also researched in Steiner (1976). The corporate mergers and the 
co-insurance of corporate debt have been studied in Kim, McConnell (1977). The diversification 
through acquisition has been described in Salter, Weinhold (1979). The takeover bids, the free 
rider problem, and the theory of the corporation have been considered in Grossman, Hart (1980). 
The determinants and effects of mergers have been discovered in Mueller (1980). The problems 
of the mergers and the market share have been researched in Mueller (1984). Some issues on the 
corporation growth, diversification and mergers have been studied in Mueller (1987). The 
mergers, their causes, effects and policies have been investigated in Mueller (1989). The risk 
reduction as a managerial motive for the conglomerate mergers has been discussed in Amihud, 
Baruch (1981). The impact of merger bids on the participating firms' security holders has been 
extensively considered in Asquith, Kim (1982). The merger bids, uncertainty, and stock-holder 
returns have been described in Asquith (1983). The gains to the bidding firms from the mergers 
have been calculated in Asquith, Bruner, Mullins (1983). The strategies of Japanese investors in 
the United States have been defined in Hennart, Park (1993). The investment choices between 
the mergers/acquisitions and the joint ventures by the Japanese investors in the United States 
have been discussed in Hennart, Reddy (1997). The mergers, debt capacity, and the valuation of 
corporate loans have been estimated in Stapleton (1982). The horizontal mergers and 
stockholder wealth have been considered to certain degree in Eckbo (1983). The bidding 
strategies and takeover premiums have been reviewed in Eckbo (2009). An empirical test of the 
redistribution effect in the pure exchange mergers has been conducted in Eger (1983). The 
valuable research contributions in the M&A transactions science by Lubatkin resulted in a better 
understanding of a number of complex issues during the M&A transactions implementation in 
various organizations. The mergers and the performance of the acquiring firm have been 
investigated in Lubatkin (1983). The merger strategies and stockholder value have been 
researched in Lubatkin (1987). The study towards the reconciliation of market performance 
measures to the strategic management research has been done in Lubatkin, Shrieves (1986). The 
merger strategies and shareholder value in the case of large mergers during the 1980s in the 
conditions of relaxed antitrust enforcement rules have been studied in Lubatkin, Srinivasan, 

5 
 
Merchant (1997). The top management turnover in related M&As has been investigated in 
Lubatkin, Schweiger, Weber (1998). The ecological investigation of firm effects in the horizontal 
mergers has been conducted in Lubatkin, Schulze, Mainkar, Cotterill (2001). The wealth effect 
of merger activity and the objective functions of merging firms have been considered in details in 
Malatesta (1983). The possible losses from the horizontal merger, including the effects of an 
exogenous change in the industry structure on the Cournot-Nash equilibrium, have been studied 
in Salant, Switzer, Reynolds (1983). The abnormal returns to the acquired firms by the type of 
acquisition and the method of payment have been researched in Wansley, Lane, Yang (1983). 
The important problem on how to achieve the integration on the human side of the merger has 
been discussed in Blake, Monton (1984). The organizational performance measurement in the 
absence of objective measures in the case of the privately held firm and conglomerate business 
unit has been investigated in Dess, Robinson (1984). The relationship between the aggregate 
merger activity and the stock market has been established in Geroski (1984). The categorical 
bank acquisitions have been considered in Lobue (1984). The multiple cultures integration issues 
in the acquisitions during the corporate transitions processes have been discussed in Sales, 
Mirvis (1984). The role of market structure in the merger behavior has been highlighted in 
Stewart, Harris, Carleton (1984). The anatomy of a merger, including the multicultural 
differences problems, has been studied in Buono, Bowditch, Lewis (1985). The conjectures on 
the cognitive simplification in the acquisition and divestment decision making processes have 
been suggested in Duhaime (1985). The certain characteristic of takeover targets have been 
researched in Hasbrouch (1985). An exploratory study of strategic acquisition factors, relating 
to the organization performance, has been completed in Kusewitt (1985). A model of stock price 
reactions with an application to the corporate acquisitions has been developed in Malatesta, 
Thompson (1985). The oligopoly and the incentive for the horizontal merger have been 
considered in Perry, Porter (1985). The determinants of tender offer premiums have been 
described in Walkling, Edmister (1985). Chatterjee wrote a cycle of research articles on the 
M&A transactions, namely the impacts of acquisitions on the merging and rival firms have been 
investigated in Chatterjee (1986). The corporate mergers stock holder diversification and the 
changes in the systematic risk have been analyzed in Chatterjee, Lubatkin (1990). The gains in 
the vertical acquisitions and the market power have been researched in Chatterjee (1991). The 
sources of value in the takeovers, synergy or restructuring, including the implications for the 
target and bidder firms, have been investigated in Chatterjee (1992). The cultural differences 
and the shareholder value in the related mergers have been considered in Chatterjee, Lubatkin, 
Schweiger, Weber (1992). The corporate mergers and the security returns have been studied in 

6 
 
Dennis, McConnell (1986). Some issues in the corporate acquisitions have been researched in 
Jemison, Sitkin (1986a, b). The mergers that last in the frames of a predictable pattern have been 
researched in Montgomery, Wilson (1986). A methodological and empirical analysis toward the 
prediction of takeover targets has been made in Palepu (1986). The merger and the bankruptcy 
alternative have been discussed in Pastena, Ruland (1986). The hubris hypothesis of corporate 
takeovers has been uncovered in Roll (1986). The interesting cycle of research works has been 
written by Shleifer and co-authors. The large shareholders and corporate control topics have been 
discussed in Shleifer, Vishny (1986). The breach of trust in the hostile takeovers has been 
selected as a main research topic in Shleifer, Summers (1988). The takeover wave of the 1980s 
has been found to exist in Shleiper, Vishny (1990). The takeovers in the 1960s and the 1980s 
have been researched in Shleifer, Vishny (1991). The inefficient markets have been researched in 
Shleifer (2001). The stock market driven acquisitions have been considered in Shleifer, Vishny 
(2003). The post-merger integration has been explored in Shrivastava (1986). The effects of the 
interstate bank mergers on the shareholder wealth have been considered in De, Duplichan 
(1987). A theory for the choice of exchange medium in the mergers and acquisitions has been 
created in Hansen (1987). A contingent framework for the acquisition integration process has 
been proposed in Haspeslagh, Farquhar (1987). The target abnormal returns, associated with 
the acquisition announcements have been researched in Huang, Walkling (1987). The returns to 
the acquirers and the competition in the acquisition market in the case of banking industry have 
been considered in James, Wier (1987). The banking acquisitions, including the acquirer and 
target shareholder returns, have been investigated in Neely (1987). The life after the takeover 
has been described in Ravenscraft, Scherer (1987a). The mergers, selloffs, and economy 
efficiency have been analyzed in Ravenscraft, Scherer (1987b). The acquisition of divested 
assets and the shareholder wealth have been researched in Sicherman, Pettway (1987). The 
corporate acquisition strategies and the economic performance have been studied in Singh, 
Montgomery (1987). The corporate takeover bids, methods of payment, and bidding firms’ stock 
returns have been investigated in Travlos (1987). The executive compensation, method of 
payment and abnormal returns to the bidding firms at the takeover announcements have been 
analyzed in Travlos, Waegelein (1992). The interstate bank mergers have been researched in 
Trifts, Scanlon (1987). The overpaying in the corporate takeovers has been discussed in Varaiya, 
Ferris (1987). Some aspects of the mergers and acquisitions have been discussed in Auerbach 
(1988). The causes and consequences of corporate takeovers have been explained in Auerbach 
(1989). The returns to the bidding firms in the mergers and acquisitions have been estimated in 
Barney (1988). The firm resources and sustained competitive advantage have been analyzed in 

7 
 
Barney (1991). The synergistic gain from the corporate acquisitions, including its division 
between the stockholders of target and the acquiring firms, have been researched in Bradley, 
Desai, Kim (1988). The impact of foreign acquisition on the labour has been studied in Brown, 
Medoff (1988). The effect of takeover activity on the corporate research and development has 
been considered in Hall (1988). The impact by the corporate restructuring on the industrial 
research and development has been described in Hall (1990). The mergers and the R&D have 
been revisited in Hall (1999). The characteristics of the hostile and friendly takeovers have been 
summarized in Morck, Shleifer, Vishny (1988). The supposition that the unwise managerial 
objectives can drive the bad acquisitions has been analyzed in Morck, Shleifer, Vishny (1990). 
The hostile takeovers in the 1980s have been reviewed in Bhagat, Shleifer, Vishny (1990). The 
acculturation in the mergers and acquisition has been researched in Nahavandi, Malekzadeh 
(1988). The impact by the merger-related regulations on the shareholders of bidding firms has 
been evaluated in Schipper, Thompson (1983). The strategic business fits in the corporate 
acquisition have been studied in Shelton (1988). The top management turnover following the 
mergers and acquisitions has been investigated in Walsh (1988). The merger and acquisition 
negotiations and their impact upon the target company top management turnover have been 
extensively studied in Walsh (1989). The failed bank acquisitions and the successful bidders’ 
returns have been studied in Bertin, Ghazanfari, Torabzadeh (1989). The preemptive bidding 
and the role of the medium of exchange in the acquisitions have been researched in Fishman 
(1989). The determinants of the tender offer and the post-acquisition financial performance have 
been investigated in Fowler, Schmidt (1989). A time-series analysis of the mergers and 
acquisitions in the US economy has been completed in Golbe, White (1989). The returns to the 
bidders and targets in the acquisition process in the banking industry have been evaluated in 
Hannan, Wolken (1989). The tax attributes as the main determinants of shareholder gains in the 
corporate acquisitions have been investigated in Hayn (1989). The cartels, collusion and 
horizontal merger have been considered in Jacquemin, Slade (1989). The New Hampshire bank 
mergers have been reviewed in Kaen, Tehranian (1989). The profitability of mergers has been 
studied in Ravenscraft, Scherer (1989). The market valuation effects of bank acquisitions have 
been researched in Wall, Gup (1989). The hostile bank takeover offers have been analyzed in 
Baradwaj, Fraser, Furtado (1990). The bidder returns in the interstate and intrastate bank 
acquisitions have been forecasted in Baradwaj, Dubofsky, Fraser (1992). The airline mergers 
airport dominance and the market power have been discussed in Borenstein (1990). The cycle of 
research papers by Data and co-authors attracted the considerable attention from the side of 
scientists. The relationships between the type of acquisition, the autonomy given to the acquired 

8 
 
firm, and the acquisition success have been empirically analyzed in Datta, Grant (1990). The 
organizational fit and the acquisition performance effects during the post-acquisition integration 
have been considered in Datta (1991). The executive compensation and the corporate 
acquisition decisions have been studied in Datta, Iskander-Datta, Raman (1992). The corporate 
partial acquisitions, total firm valuation and the effect of financing method have been researched 
in Datta, Iskandar-Datta (1995). The executive compensation and the corporate acquisition 
decisions have been researched in Datta, Iskandar-Datta, Raman (2001). The horizontal mergers 
have been analyzed in Farrell, Shapiro (1990). The mergers and acquisitions in the US banking 
industry have been researched in Hawawini, Swary (1990). The corporate performance after the 
mergers has been researched in Healy, Palepu, Ruback (1990). The changing pattern of 
acquisition behavior in the takeovers and the consequences for the acquisition processes have 
been discussed in Hunt (1990). The horizontal mergers have been analyzed in Farrell, Shapiro 
(1990). Hit wrote a number of valuable research articles on the M&A transactions, for example, 
the mergers and acquisitions and the managerial commitment to the innovation have been 
considered in Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland (1990). The effects of the acquisition on the R&D inputs 
and outputs have been considered in Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland, Harrison (1991). The market for 
the corporate control and firm innovation has been studied in Hitt, Hoskisson, Johnson, Moesel 
(1996). The attributes of the successful and unsuccessful acquisitions of US firms have been 
listed in Hitt, Harrison, Ireland, Best (1998). The mergers and acquisitions as a value generation 
opportunity for the stakeholders have been considered in Hitt, Harrison, Ireland (2001). The 
limits of monopolization through the acquisition have been considered in Kamien, Zang (1990). 
The competitively cost advantageous mergers and the monopolization have been studied in 
Kamien, Zang (1991). The monopolization by the sequential acquisition has been researched in 
Kamien, Zang (1993). The sensitivity of the acquiring firms’ returns to the alternative model 
specification and disaggregation have been discussed in Lahey, Conn (1990). The corporate 
acquisitions by listed firms have been summarized in Loderer, Martin (1990). The question: Do 
union wealth concessions explain takeover premiums?, has been answered in Rosett (1990). The 
sources of value creation in the acquisitions have been empirically investigated in Seth (1990). 
The value creation and destruction in the cross-border acquisitions have been discussed in Seth, 
Song, Pettit (2002). The differential effects of the mergers on the corporate security values have 
been described in Shastri (1990). Some thoughts on the corporate ownership structure and 
performance have been presented in Smith (1990). The common stock returns in the corporate 
takeover bids with the evidence from interstate bank mergers have been estimated in Cornett, De 
(1991). The postmerger share-price performance of acquiring firms has been evaluated in 

9 
 
Franks, Harris, Titman (1991). The value creation through the corporate renewal during the 
acquisition has been described in Haspeslagh, Jemison (1991). The role of acquisitions in the 
foreign direct investment with the evidence from the US stock market has been explained in 
Harris, Ravenscraft (1991). The synergies and post-acquisition performance of corporation have 
been considered in Harrison, Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland (1991). The acquisition activity and equity 
issues have been discussed in Mann, Sicherman (1991). A longitudinal field experiment through 
the communication with the employees, following a merger, has been conducted in Schweiger, 
Denisi (1991). The Tobin’s Q and the gain from the takeovers have been discussed in Servaes 
(1991). The synergy, agency, and the determinants of premia paid in the mergers have been 
uncovered in Slusky, Caves (1991). The merger analysis, industrial organization theory, and 
merger guidelines have been presented in Willig (1991). The post-merger performance of 
acquiring firms has been evaluated in Agrawal, Jaffe, Mandelker (1992), Agrawal, Jaffe (2000, 
2002). The effect of a set of comparable firms on the accuracy of the price-earnings valuation 
method has been described in Alford (1992). It is noteworthy to mention that the cycle of 
research articles by Berger and co-authors added to the better understanding of the M&A 
transactions techniques in the banking industry. The megamergers in the banking and the use of 
cost efficiency as an antitrust defense have been discussed in Berger, Humphrey (1992). The 
differences in the efficiencies of financial institutions have been described in Berger, Mester 
(1997). The effect of bank mergers and acquisitions on the small business lending has been 
discussed in Berger, Saunders, Scalise, Udell (1997, 1998). The efficiency effects on the bank 
mergers and acquisition, using the 1990s data, have been discussed in Berger (1998). The 
globalization of financial institutions, evaluating the cross-border banking performance, has been 
studied in Berger, DeYoung, Hesna, Udell (1999). The consolidation of the financial services 
industry, including its causes, consequences, and implications for the future, has been researched 
in Berger, Demsetz, Strahan (1999). A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining the 
estimates of new venture performance has been made in Brush, Vanderwerf (1992). The 
predicted change in the operational synergy and post-acquisition performance of acquired 
businesses has been discussed in Brush (1996). The limits of monopolization through the 
acquisition have been set in Gaudet, Salant (1992). The external technology acquisition in the 
large multi-technology corporations has been explained in Grandstrand, Bohlin, Oskarsson, 
Sjoberg (1992). The question: Does corporate performance improve after the mergers?, has been 
answered in Healey, Palepu, Ruback (1992). The mergers and profitability problems have been 
studied in Ingham, Kran, Lovestam (1992). The post-acquisition performance of acquiring firms 
has been revealed in Loderer, Martin (1992). The agreement between the top management teams 

10 
 
and the expectations for the post acquisition performance have been studied in Shanley, Correa 
(1992). The question: Are there cost savings from the bank mergers?, has been answered in 
Srnivasan (1992). The federal merger guidelines have been formulated in United States 
Department of Justice (1992). The effects of executive departures on the performance of the 
acquired firms have been researched in Cannella, Hambrick (1993). The mergers, leveraged 
buyouts, and performance in food retailing industry have been studied in Cotterill (1993). An 
antitrust economic analysis of stop & shop’s proposed acquisition of the big V shop retail 
supermarket chain has been investigated in Cotterill (2002). The determinants of corporate 
restructuring, including the relative importance of corporate governance, takeover threat, and 
free cash flow, have been discussed in Gibbs (1993). A framework for understanding departures 
of acquired executives has been proposed in Hambrick, Cannella (1993). The mergers and 
market power issues with particular focus on the airline industry have been described in Kim, 
Singal (1993). The bank mergers with an accent on the integration and profitability have been 
highlighted in Linder, Crane (1993). The efficiency effects of horizontal bank mergers have 
been described in Rhoades (1993). A summary of merger performance studies in banking in 
1980 - 1993, and an assessment of the “operating performance” and “event study” 
methodologies have been presented in Rhoades (1994a, b). The takeovers performance 
improvement in the banking industry have been researched in Schrantz (1993). The impacts of 
managerial ownership on the acquisition attempts and target shareholder wealth have been 
discussed in Song, Walking (1993). The performance of acquisitions of distressed firms has been 
evaluated in Bruton, Oviatt, White (1994). Some issues in the process to acquire the 
technological firms have been discussed in Chakrabarti, Hauschildt, Suverkup (1994). The 
mergers as a means of restructuring distressed firms have been empirical investigated in Clark, 
Ofek (1994). The overall gains from the large bank mergers have been computed in Houston, 
Ryngaert (1994). The bank mergers from the perspective of insiders and outsiders have been 
considered in Houston, James, Ryngaert (2001). The innovation through the acquisition 
corporate development model has been suggested in Hudson (1994). An agency theory 
perspective on the role of representatives in the brokering mergers has been created in Kesner, 
Shapiro, Sharma (1994). The long-term valuation effects of bank acquisitions have been 
observed in Madura, Wiant (1994). The shareholder benefits from the corporate international 
diversification on the base of evidence from US international acquisitions have been researched 
in Markides, Ittner (1994). The determinants of acquisition integration level and their impacts on 
the decision-making perspective have been studied in Pablo (1994). The combined effects of the 
fee cash flow and financial slack on the bidder and target stock returns have been estimated in 

11 
 
Smith, Kim (1994). The effects of mergers in the differentiated products industries have been 
measured in Werden, Froeb (1994). The attacker’s advantage in the acquisition process, 
including the technological paradigms, organizational dynamics, and value network problems,  
have been reviewed in Christensen, Rosenbloom (1995). A microanalysis of both the tax reform 
and the foreign acquisitions has been completed in Collins, Kemsley, Shackelford (1995). An 
exploratory empirical study on the successful integration of R&D functions after the acquisition 
has been conducted in Gerpott (1995). The incorporating dynamic efficiency concern in the 
merger in the innovation markets has been researched in Gilbert, Sunshine (1995). The 
intellectual property guidelines have been created in Gilbert, Tom (2001). The competition and 
innovation have been researched in Gilbert (2006). The valuation of cash flow forecasts has been 
considered in Kaplan, Ruback (1995). The effects of the trade liberalization on the cost-reducing 
horizontal mergers have been researched in Long, Vousden (1995). The cross-border 
acquisitions have been investigated in Sudarsanam (1995). The wealth effects in the US bank 
takeovers have been considered in Zhang (1995). The predicted change in the operational 
synergy and the post-acquisition performance in the acquired businesses have been discussed in 
Brush (1996). The interest-rate exposure and bank mergers have been studied in Esty, 
Narasimhan, Tufano (1996). The hostile takeovers and the correction of managerial failure have 
been considered in Franks, Mayer (1996). The M&A transactions strategies have been privately 
discussed in Brighton in the UK in Gerstein (1996). The impact of industry shocks on the 
takeover and the restructuring activity have been analyzed in Mitchell, Mulherin (1996). The 
performance changes and the shareholder wealth creation, associated with the mergers of 
publicly traded banking institutions have been selected to discuss in Pilloff (1996). The markup 
pricing in the mergers and acquisitions has been chosen as a research theme in Schwert (1996). 
The hostility in the takeovers has been described in Schwert (2000). The value of diversification 
during the conglomerate merger wave has been estimated in Servaes (1996). The mergers with 
the differentiated products have been described in Shapiro (1996). Some issues on the 
organizational learning through the acquisitions have been considered in Vermeulen, Barkema 
(1996). The corporate cultural fit and performance in the mergers and acquisitions topics have 
been discussed in Weber (1996). The effects of megamergers on the efficiency and prices with 
the evidence from a bank profit function have been presented in Akhavein, Berger, Humphrey 
(1997). The asset redeployment, acquisitions and corporate strategy in declining industries have 
been researched in Anand, Singh (1997). An integrative model for the prediction of divestiture of 
the unrelated acquisitions has been proposed in Bergh (1997). The interesting cycle of research 
articles on the M&A transactions has been written by Capron. The outcomes of international 

12 
 
telecommunications acquisitions, including the analysis of the four cases with the implications 
for the acquisitions theory, have been discussed in Capron, Mitchell (1997). The bilateral 
resource redeployment and the capabilities improvement, following the horizontal acquisitions, 
have been considered in Capron, Mitchell (1998). The resource re-deployment, following the 
horizontal acquisitions in Europe and North America in 1988 – 1992, have been researched in 
Capron, Dussauge, Mitchell (1998). The long-term performance of horizontal acquisitions with 
the multiple empirical evidences of the US and European firms, has been estimated in Capron 
(1999a, b). The re-deployment of brands, sales forces, and general marketing management 
expertise, following the horizontal acquisitions, from a resource-based perspective have been 
researched in Capron, Hulland (1999). The cases, when the acquirers earn the abnormal returns, 
have been analyzed in Capron, Pistre (2002). The changes in the value-relevance of earnings 
and book values over the past forty years have been analyzed in Collins, Maydew, Weiss (1997). 
The leadership style and the post-merger satisfaction have been discussed in Covin, Kolenko, 
Sightler, Tudor (1997). The mergers related problems, including the leadership, performance and 
corporate health, have been thoughtfully discussed in Fubini, Price, Zollo (1997). The one of 
possible explanations of the premium paid for the large acquisitions has been proposed in 
Hayward, Hambrick (1997). The problem: When do firms learn from their acquisition 
experience?, has been accurately considered, using the evidences from 1990 – 1995, in Hayward 
(2002). The international mergers and the welfare under the decentralized competition policy 
have been studied in Head, Ries (1997). The "wallet game" and its applications in the auctions 
with the almost common values have been discussed in Klemperer (1997). A critical determinant 
of the acquisition performance and the CEO rewards have been presented in Kroll, Wright, 
Toombs, Leavell (1997). An analysis of the effects of the foreign acquisitions vs the domestic 
acquisitions of the US targets, including the problem of post-acquisition turnover among the US 
top management teams, has been done in Krug, Hegarty (1997). A study of the top managers in 
the multinationals, including the prediction on the problem: Who does stay and leave after an 
acquisition, has been made in Krug, Hegarty (2001). The question: Do the long term 
shareholders benefit from the corporate acquisitions?, has been answered in Loughran, Vijh 
(1997). The theory and evidence on the corporate acquisitions has been presented in Megginson, 
Morgan, Nail (1997). The modeling of takeover likelihood has been completed in Powell (1997). 
The performance impact of strategic similarity in the horizontal mergers in the US banking 
industry have been fully explained in Ramaswamy (1997). The telecommunications mergers and 
acquisitions in the USA have been studied in Rosenberg (1997). The cycle of research works on 
the M&A transactions by Siegel and his co-authors has been written with the particular research 

13 
 
focus on the various M&A effects assessments. The human resource management implications in 
the process of the adoption of advanced manufacturing technologies have been described in 
Siegel, Waldman, Youngdahl (1997). The skill-biased technological change has been researched, 
using the evidence from a firm-level survey, in Siegel (1999). The problems of the ownership 
change, productivity, and human capital have been considered, applying the new evidences from 
the matched employer-employee data in Swedish manufacturing, in Siegel, Simons, Lindstrom 
(2005). The assessment of the effects of the mergers and acquisitions on the firm’s performance, 
plant productivity, and workers has been conducted by matching the employer - employee data 
in Siegel, Simons (2006). The assessment of the effects of the mergers and acquisitions on the 
women and minority employees with the application of the new evidences from the matched 
employer-employee data has been presented in Marsh, Siegel, Simons (2007). The evaluation of 
the effects of the mergers and acquisitions on the employees has been completed, using the 
evidence from the matched employer-employee data, in Siegel, Simons (2008). The assessment 
of the effects of the mergers and acquisitions on the firm’s performance, plant productivity, and 
workers, using the new evidences from the matched employer-employee data, has been realized 
in Siegel, Simons (2010). The problems, concerning the companies, which lose the acquisition 
games, because of the synergy trap, have been researched in Sirower (1997). The question: Did 
the mergers improve the X-efficiency and scale efficiency of US banks in the 1980s?, has been 
answered in Stavros (1997). The small business lending by the banks, involved in the mergers, 
has been investigated in Walraven (1997). A learning perspective on the international expansion 
through the start-up or acquisitions has been presented in Barkema, Vermeulen (1998). The 
consolidation in the US banking industry by means of the banks mergers and acquisitions, 
including the possible implications for the efficiency and risk, has been studied in Boyd, Graham 
(1998). The toeholds and takeovers have been researched in Bulow, Huang, Klemperer (1998, 
1999). The takeovers of privately held targets, methods of payments, and bidder returns have 
been investigated in Chang (1998). An interesting hypothesis that the bank mergers reduce the 
availability of credit to small businesses has been tested in Cole, Walraven (1998). It was found 
that the bank takeover activity is associated with the greater rather than reduced availability of 
credit to the small businesses in Cole, Walraven (1998). In the next research article, Cole, 
Fatemi, Vu (2006) greatly contributed to the M&A science: “1) by investigating whether a 
takeover attempt signals the investors about the quality of firm management as well as the 
quality of the specific firm investment under the consideration; 2) by examining how the merger 
bids and terminations affect the relative values of bidders, attempting, diversifying and focusing 
on the takeovers; 3) by using data from the 1991 - 2000 period to re-examine the important topic 

14 
 
of who wins and who loses, when the mergers are terminated. The M&A transactions have been 
researched in Jones T (2009), where it was found that an every M&A transaction is different and 
it requires a special attention to the details and a contingency plan for the unknown variables. 
The mergers in the open economies have been studied in Falvey (1998). The undervaluation 
hypothesis in the cross-border mergers and acquisitions has been researched in Gonzalez, 
Vasconcellos, Kish (1998). The role of managerial incentives in the bank acquisitions during the 
consolidation of the financial services industry has been discussed in Hadlock, Houston, 
Ryngaert (1998). The emerging patterns in the global telecommunications alliances and mergers 
have been discovered in Jamison (1998). A case survey of synergy realization, including the 
strategic, organizational, and human resource perspectives on the mergers and acquisitions, has 
been described in Larsson, Finkelstein (1999). A co-competence and motivational approach to 
the synergy realization toward the merger and acquisition success has been researched in 
Larsson, Brousseau, Driver, Sweet (2004). The first-mover (dis)advantages in the M&A process 
have been studied in Lieberman, Montgomery (1998). The wealth creation versus the wealth 
redistribution in the pure stock-for-stock mergers have been compared in Maquieria, Megginson, 
Nail (1998). The national cultural distance and the cross-border acquisition performance have 
been investigated in Morosini, Shane, Singh (1998). The value effects of the bank mergers and 
acquisitions in the banking industry have been determined in Piloff, Santomero (1998). The 
difficult complicated question: Do the substantial horizontal mergers generate the significant 
price effects?, has been answered, using the evidence from the banking industry, in Prager, 
Hannan (1998). The post-acquisition performance of acquiring firms has been measured in Rau, 
Vermaelen (1998). An overview of case studies of the nine mergers with the particular focus on 
the efficiency effects of bank mergers has been presented in Rhoades (1998). The economic role 
of mergers in the USA has been investigated in Andrade, Stafford (1999). The new perspectives 
on the mergers have been provided in Andrade, Mitchell, Stafford (2001). An economic role of 
mergers has been revealed in Andrade, Stafford (2004). Some topics on the knowledge transfer 
in the international acquisitions have been presented in Bresman, Birkinshaw, Nobel (1999). The 
use of R2 technique in the accounting research in application to the measurements of changes in 
the value relevance over the last four decades has been reviewed in Brown, Lo, Lys (1999). An 
empirical investigation on the method of comparables and the tax court valuations of the private 
firms has been conducted in Beatty, Riffe, Thompson (1999). The knowledge transfer in the 
international acquisitions has been described in Bresman, Birkinshaw, Nobel (1999). The 
possible ways to capture the real value in the high-tech acquisitions have been described in 
Chadhuri, Tabrizi (1999). An empirical assessment of the residual income valuation model has 

15 
 
been done in Dechow, Hutton, Sloan (1999). The straightforward research question: Are you 
paying too much for that acquisition?, has been discussed in Eccles, Lanes, Wilson (1999). A 
behavioral learning perspective on the influence of organizational acquisition experience on the 
acquisition performance has been proposed in Haleblian, Finkelstein (1999). The certain issues 
on the corporate cash reserves and acquisitions have been analyzed in Harford (1999). The 
driving origins of the merger waves have been found in Harford (2005). The trade-offs between 
the buyers and the sellers in the merger and acquisitions have been described in Rappaport, 
Sirower (1999). The problems of the leverage and corporate performance, applying the 
evidences from the unsuccessful takeovers, have been researched in Safieddine, Titman (1999). 
The effects of banking mergers on the loan contracts has been investigated in Sapienza (1999). 
The topics the consolidation of banking industry and the universal banking have been considered 
in Saunders (1999). The valuation effects of bank mergers have been considered in Becher 
(2000). The first international merger wave (and the fifth and last US wave) have been placed in 
the center of research interest in Black (2000). The R&D intensity and acquisitions in the high 
technology industries, considering the evidence from the US electronic and electrical equipment 
industries, have been researched in Blonigen, Taylor (2000). The institutional, cultural and 
transaction cost influences on the decision to make the acquisition or establish the greenfield 
start-up have been considered in Brouthers K D, Brouthers L E (2000). A CEO roundtable 
discussion on the successful mergers has been conducted in Carey (2000). The valuation 
accuracies of the price – earnings and price-book benchmark valuation methods have been 
discussed in Cheng, McNamara (2000). The industrial restructuring through the mergers and 
acquisitions in the case of Argentina in the 1990s has been described in Chudnovsky (2000). An 
empirical investigation on the equity undervaluation and the decisions, related to the repurchase 
tender offers, has been conducted in DMello, Shroff (2000). The advances in the mergers and 
acquisitions between the professional service firms, which explored the undirected process of the 
integration, have been researched in Empson (2000). The influence of the corporate acquisitions 
on the behavior of key inventors has been researched in Ernst, Vitt (2000). The cross-border 
acquisitions of US technology assets have been described in Inkpen, Sundaram, Rockwood 
(2000). The incentives for the banking megamergers have been discussed in Kane (2000). The 
cross-border mergers and acquisitions with the particular focus on their role in the industrial 
globalization have been discussed in Kang, Johansson (2000). The role of international strategic 
alliances in the industrial globalization has been described in Kang, Sakai (2000). The 
comparison of the acquisitions and the divestitures has been done in Mulherin, Boone (2000). 
The role of retaining human capital in the acquisitions of high-tech firms has been discussed in 

16 
 
Ranft, Lord (2000). A review on the influence of cultural compatibility within the cross-border 
acquisitions has been discussed in Schoenberg (2000). The hostility in the takeovers has been 
uncovered in Schwert (2000). An empirical examination of motives for the foreign acquisitions 
of US firms has been completed in Seth, Song, Pettit (2000). The characteristics of merging firms 
have been described in Sorensen (2000). The corporate takeovers, strategic objectives, and 
acquiring-firm shareholder wealth have been reviewed in Walker (2000). The determinants of 
US bank failures and acquisitions have been provided in Wheelock, Wilson (2000). The cross 
border mergers and acquisitions analysis has been presented in World Investment Report (2000). 
A longitudinal study on the technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of 
acquiring firms has been conducted in Ahuja, Katila (2001). The probability of failure, survival 
and acquisition of firms in the financial distress has been discussed in Astebro, Winter (2001). 
The executive retention and acquisition outcomes have been considered in Bergh (2001). The 
CEO compensation and bank mergers have been reviewed in Bliss, Rosen (2001). The cross-
border bank mergers have been analyzed in Buch, Delong (2001). The asymmetric information, 
bargaining, and international mergers have been studied in Das, Sengupta (2001). The mergers 
and acquisitions through an intellectual capital perspective have been considered in Gupta, Ross 
(2001). The merger policies and trade liberalization have been researched in Horn, Levinsohn 
(2001). The merger and technological change in 1885 - 1998 have been selected as a subject of 
research in Jovanovic, Rousseau (2001). The Q-theory of mergers has been proposed in 
Jovanovic, Rousseau (2002a). The proposition on the mergers as a reallocation has been placed 
at the center of discussion in Jovanovic, Rousseau (2002b). The question: Are the cash 
acquisitions associated with the better post-combination operating performance than the stock 
acquisitions?, has been answered in Linn, Switzer (2001). Considering the market for the 
corporate assets, the following two questions have been raised: 1) Who engages in the mergers 
and asset sales; and 2) Are there the efficiency gains?, in Maksimovic, Phillips (2001). The role 
of managerial incentives in the corporate acquisitions in the 1990s has been discussed in North 
(2001). The evidence on the mergers and acquisitions has been presented in Paulter (2001). The 
business valuation discounts and premiums have been estimated in Pratt (2001). The learning 
through the acquisitions process has been described in Vermeulen, Barkema (2001). The 
absolute and relative resources as the determinants of international acquisitions have been 
investigated in Anand, Delios (2002). The effects of the partners’ heterogeneity of experience on 
the corporate acquisitions have been researched in Beckman, Haunschild (2002). The main 
problems on the sales force optimization after the merger have been researched in Bekier, 
Shelton (2002). A valuation-based approach to the selection of comparable firms has been 

17 
 
explored in Bhojraj, Lee (2002). The corporate governance in the case of the cross-border 
mergers has been researched in Bris, Cabolis (2002). The problem: What do the returns to the 
acquiring firms tell us?, has been researched, using the evidence from the firms that make many 
acquisitions in Fuller, Netter, Stegemoller (2002). The mergers, acquisitions and corporate 
restructurings have been researched in Gaughan (2002). The effect of the mergers and 
acquisitions on the technological performance of companies in a high-tech environment has been 
researched in Hagedoorn, Duysters (2002). The comparison of international strategies such as 
the acquisitions strategy versus the greenfield investments strategy has been conducted in 
Harzing (2002). The question: When do the firms learn from their acquisition experience?, has 
been answered, using the evidences from 1990 – 1995 in Hayward (2002). The operating 
performance and the method of payments in the takeovers have been discussed in Heron, Lie 
(2002). A beginner’s guide on the implications of cross-border mergers and acquisitions by 
TNCs in developing countries: has been published in Lall (2002). A grounded model of 
acquisition implementation has been proposed in Ranft, Lord (2002). The implications for the 
small firms of global industrial restructuring have been studied in Sakai (2002). The predictions 
of the successful takeovers and the risk arbitrage have been investigated in Branch, Taewon 
(2003). The bidding wars over the R&D intensive firms to obtain the corporate control have been 
documented in Coff (2003). The market valuations in the new economy have been investigated in 
Core, Guay, Van Buskirk (2003). The cross-border mergers and acquisitions wave of the late 
1990s has been registered in Evenett (2003). The question: What can go wrong and how to 
prevent it in the process of the mergers?, has been at the focus of research in Gaughan (2003). 
An international comparison of the effects of mergers has been completed in Gugler, Mueller, 
Yurtoglu, Zulehner (2003). The effect of mergers on the company employment in the USA and 
Europe has been researched in Gugler, Yurtoglu (2004). Officer with his co-authors wrote a 
cycle of research articles on the M&A transactions. For instance, the termination fees in the 
mergers and acquisitions have been determined in Officer (2003). The collars and renegotiation 
in the mergers and acquisitions have been researched in Officer (2004). The market pricing of 
implicit options in the merger collars has been described in Officer (2006). The research on the 
acquisition discounts for the unlisted targets with the determination of the price of corporate 
liquidity has been completed in Officer (2007). King conducted an advanced research program 
on the M&A transactions at the Wright Peterson Air Force Base in Ohio in the USA. For 
example, the investigation on the integration of acquired firms in the high-technology industries 
has been completed in King, Driessnack (2003). Some issues on the complementary resources 
and the exploitation of technological innovations have been considered in King, Covin, Hegarty 

18 
 
(2003). The meta-analyses of post-acquisition performance in King, Dalton, Daily, Covin 
(2004). The bondholder wealth effects in the mergers and acquisitions have been characterized, 
using the new evidence from the 1980s and 1990s in Billett, Tao-Hsien, King, Mauer (2004). 
The performance implications of firm resource interactions in the acquisition of R&D-intensive 
firms have been analyzed in King, Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008). The integration trade-offs in the 
technology-grafting acquisitions have been identified in Puranam, Singh, Zollo (2003). The 
mergers trends have also been researched in Schonfeld, Malik (2003). An explorative study on 
the relationship between the acquisitions, divestitures and innovations has been conducted in Van 
Beers, Sadowski (2003). The mergers and acquisitions in the telecommunications industry have 
been studied in Warf (2003). The applied mergers and acquisitions have been researched in 
Bruner (2004). The mandatory bids, squeeze-out, sell-out and the dynamics of tender offer 
process have been researched in Burkart, Panunzi (2004). The secrets of successful mergers have 
been revealed in Camara, Renjen (2004). An empirical investigation of early mover advantages 
in acquisitions has been completed in Carow, Heron, Saxton (2004). The sources of gains in the 
horizontal mergers, have been identified, using the evidences from the customers, supplier, and 
rival firms, in Feea, Thomas (2004). The CEOs compensations and incentives, have been 
researched, using the evidences from the M&A bonuses, in Grinstein (2004). The personal 
benefits, obtained by CEOs, whose firms are acquired, have been researched in Hartzell, Ofek, 
Yermack (2004). The merger profitability and the trade policy have been evaluated in Huck, 
Konrad (2004). The bank mergers have been researched in Humphrey, Vale (2004). The 
progress in the mergers and acquisitions has been documented in Javidan, Pablo, Singh, Hitt, 
Jemison (2004). The merger policy and its impact on the innovation has been researched in Katz, 
Shelanski (2004). The nature of discipline by the corporate takeovers has been investigated in 
Kini, Kracaw, Mian (2004). The price pressure around the mergers has been researched in 
Mitchell, Pulvino, Stafford (2004). The firm size and the gains from the acquisitions have been 
estimated in Moeller, Schlingemann, Stultz (2004). A comparison between the cross-border 
acquisitions and the domestic acquisitions has been conducted in Moeller, Schlingemann (2005). 
The interesting problem: How do the diversity of opinion and the information asymmetry affect 
the acquirer returns?, has been researched in Moeller, Schlingemann, Stulz (2007). A survey by 
the CFOs on the merger motives and target valuation in Mukherjee, Kiymaz, Baker (2004). The 
gains in the bank mergers with the evidences from the bond markets have been researched in 
Penas, Unal (2004). The merger programs and compensation have been studied in Rosen 
(2004). The cross-country determinants of the mergers and acquisitions have been found in 
Rossi, Volpin (2004). Some research topics on the resources allocation in the acquisitions have 

19 
 
been explored in Saxton, Dollinger (2004). A review of research and recommendations on the 
theoretical foundations of the cross-border mergers and acquisitions has been conducted in 
Shimizu, Hitt, Vaidyanath, Pisano (2004). The post-acquisition strategies and the integration 
capability in the US bank mergers in Zollo, Singh (2004). The M&A performance has been 
considered in Zollo, Meier (2008). The important issues on the corporate business valuation for 
the mergers and acquisitions have been studied in Aluko, Amidu (2005). The valuation for the 
mergers, buyout, and restructuring has been completed in Arzac (2005). The generation of the 
merger waves by the cross-border mergers and acquisitions has been considered in Brakman, 
Garretsen, Van Marrewijk (2005). The bank consolidation through the merger of Fleet and 
BankBoston has been studied in Calomiris, Pornrojnangkool (2005). An empirical analysis of 
the possible impacts of the M&As on the R&D process in the companies has been conducted in 
Cassiman, Colombo, Garrone, Veugelers (2005). The influence of the mergers and acquisitions 
on the ability of companies to innovate has been researched in Cassiman, Colombo (2006). A 
conceptual framework on the M&A and innovation has been created in Cassiman, Ueda (2006). 
The consolidation in the wireless phone industry in the USA has been described in Fox (2005). A 
theory of preemptive mergers has been proposed in Fridolfsson, Stennek (2005). An exploratory 
analysis of reverse takeovers has been completed in Gleason, Rosenthal, Wiggins (2005). The 
assessment of the international mergers and acquisitions as a mode of foreign direct investment 
has been conducted in Globerman, Shapiro (2005). Some topics on the measurement and 
management of the companies values have been researched in Goedhart, Koller, Wessels (2005). 
A new theory of mergers and merger waves has been formulated in Gorton, Khal, Rosen (2005). 
The multinationals and the global capitalism from the nineteenth century to the twenty-first 
century have been accurately described in Jones (2005). The post-merger performance of bank-
holding companies in 1987-1998 has been discussed in Knapp, Gart, Becher (2005). The 
problem of emotions management in the mergers and acquisitions has been discussed in 
Kusstatscher, Cooper (2005). The various impacts of shareholder control on the merger payoffs 
have been explained in Moeller (2005). The effect of the food industry mergers and acquisitions 
on the employment and wages has been determined in Ollinger, Nguyen, Blayney, Chambers, 
Nelson (2005). A review of recent research on the banking consolidation and the small business 
lending in the USA has been done in Ou (2005). The effect of mergers and acquisitions on the 
small business lending by the large banks has been revealed in PM KeyPoint LLC (2005). The 
impact of the acquisitions on the innovations has been analyzed in Prabhu, Chandy, Ellis (2005). 
The need for a hybrid approach in the organizational integration of the acquired biotechnology 
companies into the pharmaceutical companies has been evidently presented in Schweizer (2005). 

20 
 
The industry structure and the horizontal takeovers through the prism of an analysis of the 
wealth effects on the rivals, suppliers, and corporate customers have been researched in Shahrur 
(2005). The cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the conditions of various international 
economics have been considered in Brakman, Garretsen, Van Marrewijk (2006). A review and 
the detailed research agenda, which answers the question: What have we acquired and what 
should we acquire in the divestiture research?, has been outlined in Brauer (2006). The problem: 
How have borrowers fared in the banking megamergers?, has been investigated in Carow, Kane, 
Narayanan (2006). The mergers and acquisitions with their effect on the innovative performance 
of companies in the high-tech industries have been discussed in Clodt, Hagedoorn, Van 
Kranenburg (2006). The questions: Does the investors misevaluation drive the takeover market?, 
has been considered in Dong, Hirschleifer, Richardson, Teoh (2006). The cross-border merger 
waves have been detected in Fumagalli, Vasconcelos (2006). The R&D investment level and the 
business environment as the predictors of the firm’s acquisition have been at the center of 
consideration in Heeley, King, Covin (2006). The outsourcing of the R&D through the 
acquisitions in the pharmaceutical industry has been discussed in Higgins, Rodriguez (2006). 
The national mergers versus the international mergers in the conditions of unionized oligopoly 
has been raised in Lommerud, Straume, Sorgard (2006). The problem on the disruption of 
inventors in the acquired companies, namely the acquisition integration and the productivity 
losses in the technical core, has been formulated in Paruchuri, Nerkar, Hambrick (2006). The 
management of the coordination-autonomy dilemma in the technology acquisitions, when 
building the organization with the particular focus on the innovation, has been researched in 
Puranam, Singh, Zollo (2006). The international mergers have been considered with the 
particular attention on the incentives and welfare in Qiu, Zhou (2006). The international linkages 
between the trade and the merger policies have been established in Saggi, Yildiz (2006). The 
comparable transactions analysis and data manipulation during the M&A processes tools have 
been developed in Schnoor (2006a, b). The literature review on M&A and R&D with the 
particular stress on the innovation impacts has been done in Veugelers (2006). The foreign 
currency exposure and hedging processes by means of the foreign acquisitions have been studied 
in Bartram, Burns, Helwege (2007). The mergers in the multidimensional competition have been 
deeply analyzed in Davidson, Ferrett (2007). The information spillovers in the execution and 
valuation of the commercial banks M&As, using the principles of learning by observing, have 
been researched in DeLong, DeYoung (2007). The multi-sided platform businesses have been 
studied by creating an empirical framework with an application to the Google’s purchase of the 
DoubleClick in Evans, Noel (2007). The mergers and acquisitions in conditions of the 

21 
 
globalization have been researched in Hutson (2007). The trends and determinants of the 
mergers and acquisitions in the developing countries in 1990s have been reviewed in Kamaly 
(2007). The impact of the acquisition on the innovation performance by the inventors as well as 
the productivity of company at the semiconductor companies have been researched in Kapoor, 
Lim (2007a, b). The accounting for the distress in the bank mergers has been analyzed in 
Koetter, Bos, Heid, Kolari, Kool, Porath (2007). The acquisition premiums, subsequent 
workforce reductions and post-acquisition performance have been investigated in Krishnan, Hitt, 
Park (2007). The customer information sharing in the result of the completed M&A deal has 
been researched in Kim, Choi (2007). The corporate governance and the acquirer returns have 
been considered in Masulis, Wang, Xie (2007). The cross-border mergers as the instruments of 
comparative advantage have been studied in Neary (2007). The cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions vs greenfield foreign direct investment have been investigated in Nocke, Yeaple 
(2007). A new evidence from the corporate takeover market has been presented in Boone, 
Mulherin (2008). The mergers, corporate control and governance issues, going from the 
principles of corporate finance, have been described in Brealy (2008a, b). The trade 
liberalization and industrial restructuring through the mergers and acquisitions have been 
discussed in Breinlich (2008). The mergers, acquisitions, and other restructuring activities have 
been studied in DePamphilis (2008). The market valuations of start-up ventures around the 
technology bubble have been investigated in Gavious, Schwartz (2008). The post-merger 
restructuring and the boundaries of the firm have been researched in Maksimovic, Phillips, 
Prabhala (2008). The globalization and profitability of the cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions have been considered in Norbäck, Persson (2008a). The cross-border mergers & 
acquisitions policy in service markets has been studied in Norbäck, Persson (2008b). The 
efficiency and tax revenues issues at the cross-border mergers & acquisitions have been 
researched in Norbäck, Persson, Vlachos (2009). The strategic merger waves have been 
researched in Toxvaerd (2008). The financial distress and the firm’s exit, including the 
determinants of involuntary exits, voluntary liquidations and restructuring exits, have been 
researched in Balcaen, Buyze, Ooghe (2009). A review of literature on the mergers and 
acquisitions of financial institutions after 2000 has been created in DeYoung, Evanoff, Molyneux 
(2009). The problem on the added value during the firm valuation by the financial experts has 
been considered in Elnathan, Gavious, Hauser (2009). The mergers and acquisitions review has 
been published in Jones K (2009). The mergers and innovation in the big pharma have been 
researched in Ornaghi (2009). The question: Do the mergers improve the information?, using the 
research evidences from the loan market, has been clarified in Panetta, Schivardi, Shum (2009). 

22 
 
The notes on the post-merger integration have been compiled in Patel, Bourgeois (2009). The 
basics of the mergers & acquisitions have been described in Wong (2009). The stock market 
bubble effects on the mergers and acquisitions have been researched in Aharon, Gavious, Yosef 
(2010). The acquisitions as a response to the deregulation, going from the evidences in the cable 
television industry in Canada, have been researched in Byrne (2010). The bidders’ strategic 
timing of acquisition announcements and the effects of payment method on the target returns and 
competing bids have been researched in Chen, Chou, Lee (2011). The anticipation, acquisitions, 
and bidder returns topics have been considered in details in Jie, Song, Walkling (2011). A large 
sample study of the mergers and acquisitions from 1992 to 2009, including the implications of 
data screens on the merger and acquisition analysis, has been conducted in Netter, Stegemoller, 
Wintoki (2011). The practical aspects, regarding the stages of mergers through the company 
acquisition have been discussed in Rus (2012). The possible reasons: Why do some targets 
accept the very low and even negative takeover premiums?, have been identified in Weitzel, 
Kling (2012). 
The Asian and Australian M&A subject experts have been worked hard to make the 
advanced research on the M&A transactions in Asia during the recent years. The cross border 
M&As in the crisis-affected Asia have been analyzed in UNCTAD (2000). An analysis of 
mergers in the private corporate sector in India has been done in Beena (2000). The impact of 
market cycle on the performance of the Singapore acquirers has been investigated in Pangarkar 
(2004). A comparative perspective toward the understanding of the merger-wave in the Indian 
corporate sector has been suggested in Beena (2004). An exploratory analysis on the mergers 
and acquisitions in the Indian pharmaceutical industry in Beena (2006a). The mergers and 
acquisitions in the Indian pharmaceutical industry, including their nature, structure and 
performance, have been researched in Beena (2006b). The overseas mergers and acquisitions by 
the Indian enterprises, including their patterns and motivations, have been researched in 
Pradhan, Abraham (2005). The most complicated problem: Which is the best 
internationalization strategy for the Indian pharmaceutical enterprises: The overseas acquisition 
versus the green-field foreign investment?, has been researched in Pradhan, Alakshendra (2006). 
The growth of Indian multinationals in the World economy, including some implications for their 
development, has been considered in Pradhan (2007a). The modern trends and patterns of 
overseas acquisitions by the Indian multinationals have been discovered in Pradhan (2007b). 
The causes and consequences of cross-border acquisitions in a transition economy, using the 
1998 - 2006 deal data for targeted Chinese and Indian firms and foreign acquirers, have been 
examined in Nagano, Yuan (2007), confirming the fact that that a recent increase in the cross-

23 
 
border acquisition contributed to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in P.R. China and 
India. The bank consolidation and the soft information acquisition in the small business lending 
in Japan has been researched in Ogura, Uchida (2007). The mergers and acquisitions in Japan, 
Germany, France, the UK and USA have been explained in Jackson, Miyajima (2007). The M&A 
management from the strategic intent to the integration, including the consideration on the IOC’s 
acquisition of the IBP in India, has been analyzed in Venkiteswaran (2008). The international 
venturing emerging paradigms consideration in the frames of a study of the Indian IT industry 
has been performed in Varma (2008). The effect of the mergers and acquisitions on the market 
concentration and interest spread in Pakistan has been researched in Mehwish, Kayani, Javid 
(2012). 
The European M&A transactions trends have been analyzed by the European scientists 
in their various research articles. The economics and politics of European merger control have 
been selected as the main research topics in Neven, Nuttall, Seabright (1993). The evolutionary 
characteristics of acquisitions in France in 1959 – 1992 have been identified in Derhy (1995). 
The effect of the mergers and acquisitions on the efficiency and profitability of EC credit 
institutions has been evaluated in Vennet (1996). The wealth creation and the bid resistance in 
the UK takeover bids have been researched in Holl, Kyriazis (1997). The research problem such 
as: Can the mergers foster the efficiency?, in the conditions, when the introduced regulation 
fosters the mergers in the Italian researched case, has been analyzed in Resti (1998). The 
European lessons on the consolidation in the banking industry have been provided in Boot 
(1999). The study on the economics of bank mergers in the European Union has been completed 
in Dermine (1999). The problem: Why do banks merge in the conditions of financial crisis?, has 
been clearly answered and further researched with the particular interest in the full spectrum of 
possible implications for the banking industry and the policy regulation in Italy in Focarelli, 
Fabio, Salleo (1999), Focarelli, Panetta, Salleo (2002), Focarelli, Panetta, Salleo (2003). The 
mergers and shareholder wealth in the European banking has been evaluated in Cybo-Ottone, 
Murgia (2000). The privatization and foreign direct investment in Central and Eastern Europe 
have been researched in Hunya, Kalotay (2000). The toeholds, bid-jumps and expected pay-offs 
in the takeovers have been considered in Betton, Eckbo (2000). The corporate takeovers have 
been considered in Betton, Eckbo, Thorburn (2008). The merger negotiations and the toehold 
puzzle have been studied in Betton, Eckbo, Thorburn (2009). The efficiency gains from the 
mergers in the European economy have been evaluated in Roeller, Stenneck, Verboven (2001). 
The banking culture in Italian financial system has been discussed in Carretta (2001). The 
banking culture in the Italian financial system has been further analyzed in Carretta, Farina, 

24 
 
Schwizer (2005a). The “culture of compliance” between the banks and the supervisory 
authorities in the Italian financial system, including the management of the reputation, investor 
relation, corporate governance and leadership, has been discussed in Carretta, Farina, Schwizer 
(2005b). The change management in the process of post merger integration of banks in the 
Italian financial system has been described in Carretta (2007). The M&As and post merger 
integrations in the Italian banking industry have been considered in Carretta, Farina, Schwizer 
(2008). The market access strategies in the EU banking sector have been investigated in 
Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002). The cycle of research articles by Conyon and his co-
authors greatly contributed to the M&A transactions understanding in the UK. The impact of the 
mergers and acquisitions on the company employment in the United Kingdom has been 
investigated in Conyon, Girma, Thompson, Wright (2002a). The question: Do the hostile 
mergers destroy jobs?, has been discussed in Conyon, Girma, Thompson, Wright (2002b). The 
productivity and wage effects of foreign acquisitions in the United Kingdom have been 
investigated in Conyon, Girma, Thompson, Wright (2002c). The question: Do the wages rise or 
fall after the merger?, has been answered in Conyon, Girma, Thompson, Wright (2004). The 
effect of foreign acquisitions on the total factor productivity in the manufacturing industry in the 
UK in 1987 – 1992 has been outlined in Harris, Robinson (2002). An analysis of the mergers 
and acquisitions in the Turkish banking sector has been conducted in Mumcu, Zenginobuz 
(2002). The mergers and acquisition in Germany have been studied in Schmid, Wahrenburg 
(2002). An economic perspective on the corporate governance in Germany has been presented 
in Schmidt (2003). The people, culture and politics impacts on the cross-border mergers have 
been characterized by the Danish scientists in Soderberg, Vaara (2003). A qualitative review on 
the impact by the cultural differences on the merger and acquisition performance has been 
reported in Denmark in Stahl, Voigt (2003). The UK evidences on the glamour acquirers, method 
of payment and post-acquisition performance have been presented in Sudarsanam, Mahate 
(2003). The effect of mergers and acquisitions on the bank efficiency in Greece has been 
analyzed in Athanasoglou, Brissimis (2004). The M&A success in the European bank mergers 
and acquisitions has been determined in Beitel, Schiereck, Wahrenburg (2004). The economic 
integration and the profitability of cross-border mergers and acquisitions have been investigated 
in Bjorvatn (2004). The domestic plants’ employment and survival prospects after the foreign 
acquisition have been discussed in Girma, Görg (2004). The shareholder wealth effects of the 
European domestic and cross-border takeover bids have been described in Goergen, Renneboog 
(2004). The corporate governance convergence, has been investigated, applying the evidences 
from the takeover regulation reforms in Europe in Goergen, Martynova, Renneboog (2005). The 

25 
 
triggers, performance and motives of the takeover waves have been described in Martynova, 
Renneboog (2005). The mergers and acquisitions in Europe have been accurately characterized 
in Martynova, Renneboog (2006). The Finish perspective on the acquiring and acquired 
companies has been proposed in Lehto, Lehtoranta (2004). The employment effects of mergers 
have been analyzed in Lehto, Böckerman (2006). An event study of M&As in the European 
banking industry with the particular interest in the diversification problem versus the 
specialization problem has been completed in Lepetit, Patry, Rous (2004). The economics of the 
proposed European takeover directive has been studied in McCahery, Renneboog, Ritter, Haller 
(2004). The macroeconomic determinants of the cross-border mergers and acquisitions have 
been studied, using the European and Asian evidences, in Aminian, Campart (2005). The 
question: Did the concentration on the core competencies drive the merger and acquisition 
activities in the 1990s?, has been researched, using the empirical evidences in Germany, in 
Hussinger (2005). The absorptive capacity and the post-acquisition inventor productivity after 
the M&A deals in Germany have been investigated in Hussinger (2010, 2012). The modelling of 
the European mergers, including the theory, competition and case studies, has been performed in 
Röller (2005). The impact on the UK acquirers of the domestic cross-border public and private 
acquisitions has been investigated in Conn, Cosh, Guest, Hughes (2005). The case of cross-
border M&A activity has been researched in Di Giovanni (2005). The choice of payment method 
in European mergers and acquisitions has been considered in Faccio, Masulis (2005). Some 
problems on the development of the country multinationals have been found to exist in France in 
Aykut, Goldstein (2006). The determinants of the mergers and bankruptcies in Switzerland in 
1995 - 2000 have been found in Buehler, Kaiser, Jaeger (2006). The M&A performance in the 
European financial industry has been selected as a subject of main research interest in Campa, 
Hernando (2006). The corporate governance and the agency costs of the debt and outside equity 
have been researched in Szilagyi (2007). The corporate finance in Norway, including the capital 
structure and hybrid capital, has been studied in Mjøs (2007). The taxation of the foreign profits 
in the cases of the international mergers and acquisitions, considering the source versus the 
residence based taxation, has been evidently described in Becker, Fuest (2007a, b). The change 
management during the post merger integration in the case of the Unicredit group in Italy has 
been researched in Farina (2007). The mergers & acquisitions and the innovation performance 
in the telecommunications equipment industry in Germany have been discussed in Gantumur, 
Stephan (2007). The macroeconomic determinants of the cross border mergers and acquisitions 
and greenfield investments have been defined in Neto, Brandão, Cerqueira (2008a). The impact 
of FDI, cross border mergers and acquisitions and greenfield investments on economic growth 

26 
 
has been evaluated in Neto, Brandão, Cerqueira (2008b). The mergers, acquisitions and 
technological regimes, going from the European experience over the period of 2002 – 2005, 
have been presented in Damiani, Pompei (2008). The acquisitions, divestitures and innovation 
performance in the Netherlands have been extensively researched in Van Beers, Dekker (2009). 
The two central problems in the M&A transactions completion process: 1) the reasons why 
acquisitions and divestitures occur, and 2) the impact of acquisitions and divestitures on firms’ 
innovation performance, have been considered in details in Van Beers, Dekker (2009). The 
business problem: Do financial conglomerates create or destroy value?, going from the EU 
evidences, has been discussed in Van Lelyveld, Knot (2009). The stock price reaction to the 
M&A announcements at the London Stock Exchange has been thoughtfully researched in Spyrou, 
Siougle (2010). The new logic of the merger and acquisition pricing, using the accumulated 
knowledge base in Germany, has been explained in Lenz (2010). The impact by the European 
bank mergers on the bidder default risk has been estimated in Vallascas, Hegendorff (2011). The 
cross-border mergers and market segmentation have been described in Chaudhuri (2011). The 
dynamics of M&A transactions during the recent crisis in the European banking sector has been 
investigated in Beltratti, Paladino (2011). The merger and acquisition performance of European 
banks has been researched in Asimakopoulos, Athanasoglou (2011). The bank mergers and 
acquisitions and the lending relationships in Norway have been considered in Hetland, Mjøs 
(2011). The competition protection and the Philip Kotler's strategic recommendations, including 
some issues on the M&A transactions in Poland, have been researched in Fornalczyk (2012). 
The overview of the mergers & acquisitions in Switzerland in 2012 and outlook for the mergers 
& acquisitions in 2013 have been presented in Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, 
Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013). The global trends in the international mergers and 
acquisitions in the financial sector and theirs features in Ukraine have been explored in Shumska, 
Stepanenko-Lypovyk (2013). The next big luxury M&A targets in 2014 have been analyzed in 
Friedman (2013). 
We would like to explain that, in this research article, the authors prefer to limit our 
research considerations by an assumption that the selection of the mergers and acquisitions 
transactions strategies takes place in the diffusion-type financial systems in the imperfect highly 
volatile global capital markets with the nonlinearities. Since the time, when the first financial 
systems were established to govern the money markets in Bagehot (1873, 1897), Fisher (1892), 
the diffusion theory has been frequently applied to accurately characterize the diffusion - type 
financial systems in the finances. The multiple evidences of the fact that the diffusion processes 
have the considerable influences on the various econophysical and econometrical parameters of 

27 
 
the diffusion-type financial systems have been described in Bachelier (1900), Volterra (1906), 
Slutsky (1910, 1912, 1913, 1914, 1915, 1922a, b, 1923a, b c, 1925a, b, 1926, 1927a, b, 1929, 
1935, 1937a, b, 1942), Osborne (1959), Alexander (1961), Shiryaev (1961, 1963, 1964, 1965, 
1967, 1978, 1998a, b, 2002, 2008a, b, 2010), Grigelionis, Shiryaev (1966), Graversen, Peskir, 
Shiryaev (2001), Kallsen, Shiryaev (2001, 2002), Jacod, Shiryaev (2003), Peskir, Shiryaev 
(2006), Feinberg, Shiryaev (2006), du Toit, Peskir, Shiryaev (2007), Eberlein, Papapantoleon, 
Shiryaev (2008, 2009), Shiryaev, Zryumov (2009), Shiryaev, Novikov (2009), Gapeev, Shiryaev 
(2010), Karatzas, Shiryaev, Shkolnikov (2011), Shiryaev, Zhitlukhin (2012), Zhitlukhin, Shiryaev 
(2012), Feinberg, Mandava, Shiryaev (2013), Akerlof, Stiglitz (1966), Rothschild, Stiglitz (1976), 
Stiglitz, Weiss (1981), Richiardi, Gallegati, Greenwald, Stiglitz (2007), Jaffee, Russell (1976), 
Leland, Pyle (1977), Bernanke (1979, 2002, 2004, 2007, 2009a, b, c, d, e, 2010a, b, 2012a, b, 
2013a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h), Bernanke, Blinder (1992), Bernanke, Gertler (1995), Bernanke, 
Reinhart (2004), Bernanke, Reinhart, Sack (2004), Bernanke, Blanchard, Summers, Weber 
(2013), Shiller, Pound (1989), Conley, Hansen, Luttmer, Scheinkman (1997), Stock, Watson 
(2002), Xiaohong Chen, Hansen, Carrasco (2009), Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O (2013f, g, h, i). 
Finally, we would like to say that this short condensed research article on the selection 
and implementation of the mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in the diffusion - type 
financial systems in the highly volatile global capital markets with the nonlinearities, has the 
three main research goals: 
1. 
to present the extensive review on the current state of research on the mergers and 
acquisitions transactions strategies selection and implementation in the diffusion - 
type financial systems in the highly volatile global capital markets with the 
nonlinearities; 
2. 
to report the innovative research proposals and cutting-edge research results on 
the mergers and acquisitions transactions implementation strategies in the 
diffusion - type financial systems in the highly volatile global capital markets with 
the nonlinearities; 
3. 
to enhance our general understanding on the nature of the nonlinearities in the 
finances in Ledenyov V O, Ledenyov D O (2012a, b), Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V 
O (2012c, d), Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O (2013a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i). 
As always we would like to comment that this innovative research article explores the 
subject of our research interest, using the extended knowledge base on the nonlinearities in the 
microwave superconductivity in Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O (2012e). 

28 
 
Mergers and Acquisitions transactions: Review on business valuation 
methodologies and comparable transactions analysis techniques 
 
We would like to continue this research article by writing a clear definition of the Merger 
and Acquisition (M&A) transaction in Wikipedia (2013): “Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) is 
an aspect of corporate strategy, corporate finance and management dealing with the buying, 
selling, dividing and combining of different companies and similar entities that can help an 
enterprise grow rapidly in its sector or location of origin, or a new field or new location, 
without creating a subsidiary, other child entity or using a joint venture.”  
Let us provide a few more possible definitions of the M&A transaction given by other 
researchers. 
Jones K (2009) defines the M&A transaction as: “Mergers and acquisitions refers to the 
corporate strategy, finance, and management that deals with the buying, selling, and combining 
of companies; mergers and acquisitions can finance or help a growing company in a given 
industry expand rapidly without the necessity of creating another business entity Wikipedia 
(2009). The ultimate goal of a merger is to create value. Value can only be created when the 
value of Company A + Company B is greater than the value of Company A and Company B 
separately.” 
Fornalczyk (2012) writes: “Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) offer an alternative to 
strategic alliances in order to strengthen market position. Mergers result in higher concentration 
of assets in the hands of a single company, the outcome of acquisitions is the creation and 
expansion of capital groups. Competition law treats a capital group as one economic entity 
because subsidiaries are coordinated by the dominant company within the group.” 
Brakman, Garretsen, Van Marrewijk (2005) explain the general motivation behind the 
M&A deals: Following Neary (2004a) various motives for M&As can be distinguished in 
general. In the Industrial Organization (IO) literature two basic motives stand out: an efficiency 
motive and a strategic motive. Efficiency gains arise because takeovers increase synergy between 
firms that increase economies of scale or scope. Furthermore, from a strategic perspective, 
M&As might change the market structure and as such have an impact on firm profits, which 
might even be reduced to zero (this is the so-called ‘merger paradox’, Salant et al. (1983)).” 
It makes sense to add that the M&A main purposes and business transformation goals 
may include in Wikipedia (2013): 

29 
 
1. 
Economy of scale: the optimization of combined company by removing duplicate 
departments or operations, lowering the costs of the company relative to the same 
revenue stream, thus increasing profit margins.  
2. 
Economy of scope: the optimization of combined company by increasing or 
decreasing the scope of marketing and distribution of different types of products. 
3. 
Increase of revenue or market share: the combined company increase its market 
power (by capturing increased market share) to set prices. 
4. 
Cross-selling: the combined company will increase the customer base. 
5. 
Synergy: the combined company will have the opportunities of managerial 
specialization, increased order size and associated bulk-buying discounts. 
6. 
Taxation: the combined profitable company can buy the loss making companies to 
reduce its tax liability.  
7. 
Geographical or other diversification: the combined company will smooth the 
earnings results of a company, which over the long term smoothens the stock 
price of a company, giving conservative investors more confidence in investing in 
the company. 
8. 
Resource transfer: the combined company resources can create value through 
either overcoming information asymmetry or by combining scarce resources. 
9. 
Vertical integration: Vertical integration occurs when an upstream and 
downstream firm merge (or one acquires the other). There are several reasons for 
this to occur. One reason is to internalize an externality problem. A common 
example of such an externality is double marginalization. Double marginalization 
occurs when both the upstream and downstream firms have monopoly power and 
each firm reduces output from the competitive level to the monopoly level, 
creating two deadweight losses. Following a merger, the vertically integrated firm 
can collect one deadweight loss by setting the downstream firm's output to the 
competitive level. This increases profits and consumer surplus. A merger that 
creates a vertically integrated firm can be profitable. 
10. 
Hiring: the combined company will use the acquisitions as an alternative to the 
normal hiring process 
11. 
Absorption: the combined company will absorb the similar businesses under 
single management. 
12. 
Diversification: the combined company may expect to hedge against a downturn 
in an individual industry. 

30 
 
13. 
Manager's compensation: the senior management team at the combined company 
may expect to increase their executive compensation, based on the total amount of 
profit of the company, instead of the profit per share, which would give the team a 
perverse incentive to buy companies to increase the total profit while decreasing 
the profit per share (which hurts the owners of the company, the shareholders). 
There are the three M&A transactions main categories as explained in Jones T (2009): 
“Typically, there are three categories of mergers: 
1. Horizontal, 
2.  Vertical, and 
3. Conglomerate/Diversification. 
Additional subcategories include product‐extension merger, purchase merger, consolidation 
merger, accretive merger, and dilutive merger.” 
Jones T (2009) provides the following definitions for the three main M&A transactions 
categories: 
1. 
“A horizontal merger is a merger of two companies in the same line of business. 
2. 
Vertical mergers involve companies that cater to different stages of production. 
The buyer expands back toward the source of raw materials or forward in the 
direction of the customer. 
3. 
A conglomerate or diversification merger is the union of two companies that are 
not competitors, not in the same industry, and not a part of the same supply chain. 
A conglomerate merger is the acquisition of a company in a totally separate line 
of business. Typically, the acquired company is operated as a separate business 
unit or a wholly owned subsidiary of the parent company.” 
In the time of initiation of the M&A transaction, the special attention has to be focused on 
the Due Diligence process by which the M&A buyers inspect a target company. There are the 
two Due Diligence possibilities in M&A transaction: 
1. 
Friendly Bid, when the acquisition is supported by the management of the target 
business. Frequently, the material adverse change provisions (MAC) are used to 
renegotiate the price of the transaction in this case. 
2. 
Hostile Bid, when the acquisition is opposed by the management of the target 
business. 
The Business Valuation in the M&A deal includes the following types of valuation in 
Wikipedia (2013): 
1. 
The asset valuation, 

31 
 
2. 
The historical earnings valuation, 
3. 
The future maintainable earnings valuation, 
4. 
The relative valuation (comparable company & comparable transactions), 
5. 
The discounted cash flow (DCF) valuation. 
 
Let us review the modern comparable transactions analysis and valuation 
methodologies in the next few pages, considering the Concept of Valuation, which is 
increasingly important during the M&A transaction process origination and completion in           
Schnoor (2006), Arzac (2005), Goedhart, Koller, Wessels (2005), Lie E, Lie H J (2002), Liu, 
Nissim, Thomas (2002): 
1. 
Public Equity Offerings: How much is a company or division worth in the public 
markets? 
2. 
Debt Offerings: What is the underlying value of the business or assets against which 
debt is being issued? 
3. 
Mergers and Acquisitions: How much is the target company worth? What is the value 
of potential synergies? 
4. 
Divestitures: How much can a company or division be sold for? 
5. 
Public Defense: Is the company undervalued or overvalued in the event of a hostile 
bid? 
6. 
Fairness of opinions: Is the price offered for a company or division fair from a 
financial point of view? 
7. 
Research: Should the firm’s clients buy, hold or sell positions in a particular security? 
The Valuation Methodologies include in Schnoor (2006): 
1. 
Publicly Traded Company Analysis Methodology: 
a) 
Public market valuation, 
b) 
Value is based on market trading multiples of comparable companies, 
c) 
Can be regarded as a market’s shortcut to a Discounted Cash Flow (DCF), 
d) 
This methodology does not usually reflect an M&A control premium. 
2. 
Comparable Transactions Analysis Methodology: 
a) 
Focused on change of control situations, 
b) 
Value is based on multiples paid for the comparable companies in sale 
transactions, 
c) 
This methodology includes a control premium. 
3. 
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis Methodology: 

32 
 
a) 
Represents the intrinsic value of a business, 
b) 
Requires a detailed financial forecast (usually five to ten years), 
c) 
Usually the most detailed and intensive methodology to prepare. 
4. 
Leveraged Buyout Analysis Methodology: 
a) 
Variation on a Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) analysis with different 
assumptions, 
b) 
Represents the value to a financial / LBO buyer, 
c) 
Value is based on the Free Cash Flows, Debt Repayment and Return on 
Investment (ROI). 
5. 
Other Methodologies: 
a) 
Liquidation Analysis, 
b) 
Break up Analysis, 
c) 
Greenfield / “Cost to Build” Analysis. 
The two most common Measures of Company Value are in Schnoor (2006)  
1. 
Equity Value 
a) 
Represents the value attributed to the common shareholders of the business 
b) 
It is the value remaining after all debt and preferred stock obligations have 
been satisfied, 
c) 
Often called Market Capitalization, 
d) 
Market Capitalization = Diluted Shares O/S x Current Share Price. 
2. 
Enterprise Value 
a) 
Sometimes referred to as “Firm Value,” 
b) 
Represents the market value of all capital invested in a business, 
c) 
Theoretically, debt and preferred securities should be valued at market, but 
this is often impractical, 
d) 
Enterprise Value = Market Capitalization + Net Debt + Preferred Equity 
+ Minority Interest – Long Term Investments, 
e) 
Net Debt = Short Term Debt + Long Term Debt + Capitalized Leases – 
(Cash + Cash Equivalents). 
 
The following diagram illustrates the Minority Interest and Investments situations in 
Company A and its three subsidiaries in Schnoor (2006): 
 
 

33 
 
 
Subsidiary X 
Subsidiary Y 
Subsidiary Z 
Ownership Percentage 
100% 
30% 
75% 
Accounting method 
Consolidation 
Equity Method 
Consolidation 
Does Subsidiary appear 
as 
a 
Long 
Term 
Investment 
on 
the 
Balance Sheet? 
No 
Yes 
No 
Does ownership create 
Minority 
Interest 
on 
Balance Sheet? 
No 
No 
Yes 
Amount 
of 
Minority 
Interest 
0% 
0% 
25% 
Percent of EBITDA in 
Company A’s EBITDA 
100% 
0% 
100% 
Value of Subsidiary in 
Company 
A’s 
Market 
Value 
100% 
30% 
75% 
Are the previous two 
rows consistent? 
Yes 
No 
No 
Possible adjustments to 
reconcile 
Not Required 
Add 30% of Sub. 
Y’s EBITDA to Co. 
A’s EBITDA or 
reduce Co. A’s 
Market Value by the 
value of Sub Y 
Subtract 25% of Sub. Z’s 
EBITDA from Co. A’s 
EBITDA or increase Co. 
A’s market Value by the 
value of sub. Z that is not 
owned 
Decision Making criteria 
Does Co. A 
have control 
over the 
subsidiary? 
Does Co. A have 
control over the 
respective 
subsidiary? 
Does Co. A have control 
over the respective 
subsidiary? 
Typical Convention to 
resolve 
None Required 
No, so reduce Co. 
A’s Market Value by 
the value of Sub. Y 
Yes, increase Co. A’s 
Market Value by the value 
of Sub. Z that is not owned 
Tab. 1. Minority Interest and Investments Situations in Company A and its Three 
Subsidiaries (after Schnoor (2006)). 

34 
 
The Equity Value and Enterprise Value can be represented as in Schnoor (2006): 
1. Market Basis: Enterprise Value = Net Debt + Equity Value, 
2. Book Basis: Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders Equity. 
The Equity Value Multiples in Schnoor (2006): 
1. Certain ratios or values apply to equity holders only – Net Income, Cash Flow, 
and Book Value, 
2. Since these values are after debt, multiples applied to these values are based 
only on the value of the equity, 
3. Some relevant equity value multiples are: 
a) Price /Earnings (P/E), 
b) Price / Book Value, 
c) Price / Cash Flow. 
The Enterprise Value Multiples in Schnoor (2006): 
1. Certain ratios or values apply to all capital providers (including debt and equity) 
– Revenues, EBITDA, EBIT, 
2. These values are before the cost of debt, so the relevant multiples should be 
based on Enterprise Value, 
3. Some relevant Enterprise value multiples are: 
a) Enterprise Value / Sales, 
b) Enterprise Value / EBITDA. 
It is imperative to understand the differences between Equity Value and Enterprise 
Value and their respective multiples. The main difference between their use in various multiples 
resolves around the treatment of debt. A multiple with debt in the numerator must contain a 
value that is before interest in the denominator in Schnoor (2006). 
Equity Value or Enterprise Value 
Ratio Denominator 
Has Interest been subtracted? 
Numerator 
Book Value 
Yes 
Equity Value 
Net Income 
Yes 
Equity Value 
Cash Flow 
Yes 
Equity Value 
Revenue 
No 
Enterprise Value 
EBITDA 
No 
Enterprise Value 
EBIT 
No 
Enterprise Value 
Tab. 2. Equity value or enterprise value (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 

35 
 
The Publicly Traded Comparable Company Analysis overview in Schnoor (2006): 
1. The analysis of publicly traded comparable companies usually consists of a 
comparison of several companies operating and trading statistics, 
2. The exact ratios and values will vary from industry to industry, 
3. There is no perfect, consistent template that can be used for any company, 
4. Depending on the particular situation, multiples can be calculated in different ways: 
a) Valuation, 
b) Credit Analysis / Liquidity, 
c) Restructuring, 
5. Each company has to be analyzed carefully to find adjustments and subtleties, 
6. In addition, every senior banker may have preferences for specific ratios or 
calculations. 
 
The Pros and Cons of Comparables are summarized in the table in Schnoor (2006): 
PROS 
CONS 
Provides a benchmark to value a 
company by referring to other similar 
public companies 
Does not account for “control premiums” nor 
potential synergies realized in an acquisition 
Calculates valuation multiples based on 
current market conditions 
May not reflect fundamental value in thinly traded, 
small capitalization or poorly followed stocks 
Takes into account industry trends and 
growth prospects 
For many companies, there are few, if any, good 
comparable companies 
Provides insight into key valuation 
multiples for an industry 
Does not explain market inefficiencies 
Serves as a reliable value indicator for a 
minority investment 
 
 
Tab. 3. Pros and cons of comparables (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The key to choosing appropriate comparables or compiling useful trading comparables 
is to first identify companies that are considered comparable, based on the following criteria’s in 
Schnoor (2006):  
1. Operational Criteria’s: 
a) Industry, 

36 
 
b) Products, 
c) Distribution Channels, 
d) Customers, 
e) Seasonality, 
f) Cyclicality, 
g) Geographic Location. 
2. Financial Criteria’s: 
a) Size, 
b) Leverage, 
c) Profit Margins, 
d) Growth Prospects, 
e) Shareholder Base, 
f) Risk Profile. 
The Sources for Identifying Comparable Companies include in Schnoor (2006): 
1. SIC Code Screens, 
2. Equity Research, 
3. 1—K/Annual Report, 
4. Proxy Statement, 
5. Other Bankers, 
6. Client. 
The Time Period in a comparable analysis depends on the company, industry, and 
practices of different groups. Forecast multiples are generally more important than historical 
multiples, because investors pay for future earnings. However, historical data is usually more 
complete, and is often relied upon as well in Schnoor (2006): 
1. LFY-1: Latest fiscal year minus one 
2. LFY: Latest fiscal year 
3. LTM: Last twelve months 
4. LFY+1: Forecast for the next fiscal year 
5. LFY+2: Forecast for the year after next 
The Time Period Adjustments: LTM Income Statement and Cash Flow Statement values 
are calculated as follows in Schnoor (2006):  
LTM = Fiscal Year Ended 12/31/2005 – Q1 Ended 3/31/2005 + Q1 Ended 3/31/2006 
In future periods, if the companies don’t all have the same year end, forecasts should be 
calendarized to make them comparable: 

37 
 
1. If Company A has a September 30 year end, and all its peers have a December 
31 year end, Company A’s forecast should be calendarized 
2. Earnings per Share estimates for Company A are as follows: 
a) Fiscal 2006: $1.59 
b) Fiscal 2007: $1.86 
3. Calendar 2006 EPS = (3/4 *1.59 + ¼ * 1.86) = $1.66 
 
The Income Statement Items include (see the below Table) in Schnoor (2006): 
Income Statement and Cash Flow Items 
Item 
Comments 
Revenues 
1. 
Should only include revenue from the sale of the company’s goods and 
services 
2. 
Exclude interest and other income 
3. 
If a company reports Gross and Net Revenue, use Net Revenue 
EBITDA 
1. 
The most common performance measure among investment bankers 
2. 
Serves as a pre-tax proxy for cash flow generated from operations 
3. 
EBITDA and EBIT multiples attempt to normalize for differences in 
companies capital structures 
4. 
The comparable analysis model calculates EBITDA by adding EBIT 
and D&A 
Depreciation 
and 
Amortization 
1. 
Includes depreciation for PP&E, goodwill amortization, and items such 
as depletion for mining companies 
2. 
Do not include amortization of debt issuance costs as these figures are 
typically included in interest expense  
EBIT 
1. 
Must exclude special charges, non-recurring items and discontinued 
operations 
Earnings per 
Share 
1. 
Usually looked at after preferred dividends and extraordinary items 
2. 
Needs to be adjusted after-tax for any non-recurring items 
3. 
Used for the calculation of Price/Earnings multiples 
Cash Flow 
1. 
Net Income + Deferred Taxes + D&A + Other non-cash items 
2. 
Measure of cash generated by a company after leverage and taxes, but 
generally before working capital items 
3. 
A closer approximation of cash generated by a company’s operations 
Tab. 4. Income statement and cash flow items (after Schnoor (2006)). 

38 
 
The Balance Sheet Items include (see the below Table) in Schnoor (2006): 
 
Balance Sheet Items 
Balance Sheet 
Items 
Comments 
Cash 
and 
Marketable 
Securities 
1. 
Includes cash & cash equivalents 
2. 
Check for any long-term investments in marketable securities 
Short-Term 
Debt 
1. 
Includes notes payable, commercial paper, lines of credit, bank 
overdrafts, current portion of long-term debt and capital leases 
Long-Term Debt 1. 
Includes long-term debt and capitalized lease obligations 
Minority 
Interest 
1. 
Includes minority interest as it appears on balance sheet without 
adjustments 
2. 
Represents the portion of earnings that are attributable to 
shareholders owning less than 50% of a subsidiary 
Preferred Shares 1. 
Includes Preferred Stock on the company’s balance sheet that has 
debt-like characteristics 
Convertible 
Securities 
1. 
If the security is in the money, treat as equity; 
2. 
It the security is out of money, treat as debt 
Common Equity 
1. 
Includes common stock, paid-in capital and retained earnings 
2. 
Do not confuse with shareholders’ equity, which generally includes 
preferred stock – confirm your group’s definition of these categories 
Shareholders’ 
Equity 
1. 
Includes the Common Equity described above, plus the book value 
of preferred stock that is considered equity 
 
Tab. 5. Balance sheet items (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The Shares Outstanding Values used in Comparable Company Analysis. The following 
are the Shares Outstanding Values that are required in the comparable company analysis model 
in Schnoor (2006): 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
Shares Outstanding Definitions 
Shares Outstanding 
Category 
Comments 
Basic 
Shares 
Outstanding 
as 
of 
Comp date 
1. 
Represents the total number of shares issued and 
outstanding as of the comp date 
2. 
Start with the Basic Shares Outstanding as of the latest 
balance sheet date and check press releases to see if any shares have 
been issued or redeemed since the last balance sheet date 
3. 
Used to calculate the company’s market capitalization 
Fully Diluted Shares 
Outstanding as of the 
Comp Date 
1. 
This number is calculated in the comp model 
2. 
The basic shares outstanding is added together with the total 
number of in-the-money options to arrive at this value  
LTM 
Weighted 
Average Fully Diluted 
Shares Outstanding 
1. 
This number is typically found in the notes to the financial 
statements 
2. 
Used to calculate Earnings per Share and Cash Flow per 
Share 
 
Tab. 6. Shares outstanding definitions (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The Performance Ratios include the following profitability ratios, which are often used 
when analyzing a company in Schnoor (2006): 
 
Profitability Ratios 
Profitability Ratio 
Definition 
Return on Equity 
ROE = Net Income / Common Equity 
Gross Margin 
Gross Margin = Gross Profit / Net Sales 
EBITDA Margin 
EBITDA Margin = EBITDA / NET Sales 
EBIT Margin 
EBIT Margin = EBIT / Net Sales 
Net Income Margin 
NI Margin = Net Income / Net Sales 
 
Tab. 7. Profitability ratios (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
 

40 
 
The Valuation Ratios include the following ratios, which are often used when analyzing 
a company in Schnoor (2006): 
Valuation Ratios 
Valuation Ratio 
Definition 
Price / Earnings (P/E) 
P/E = Current Share Price / Fully Diluted EPS 
Price / Cash Flow 
P/CF = Current Share Price / (F/D) Operating CFPS 
Price / Book Value 
P/BV = Current Share Price / Book Value per Share 
Enterprise Value / Revenue 
EV/Rev = Enterprise Value / Revenue 
Enterprise Value / EBITDA 
EV / EBITDA = Enterprise Value / EBITDA 
Enterprise Value / EBIT 
EV/EBIT = Enterprise Value / EBIT 
 
Tab. 8. Valuation ratios (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The Credit Ratios include the ratios, which are often used to assess a company’s debt 
capacity, and may also provide insight into a company’s trading performance in Schnoor (2006): 
 
Credit Ratios 
Credit Ratios 
Definition 
Net Debt / Total Cap (Book) 
Debt / Cap (Book) = Net Debt / Capitalization (Book) 
Net Debt / Total Cap (Market) 
Debt / Cap (Market) = Net Debt / Capitalization (Market) 
EBITDA / Interest 
EBITDA / Interest = EBITDA / Interest Expense 
(EBITDA – CAPEX) / Interest 
(EBITDA – CAPEX) / Interest = (EBITDA – CAPEX) / 
Interest 
Total Debt / EBITDA 
Debt / EBITDA = Total Debt / EBITDA 
 
Tab. 9. Credit ratios (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
Adjusting for the Operating Leases: When calculating Credit Ratios, you may need to 
capitalize a company’s operating leases to make the company comparable with its peers in 
Schnoor (2006): 
1. An Operating Lease is a lease for which the lessee acquires the property for 
only small portion of its useful life. 
2. A Capital Lease is a lease that meets one or more of the following criteria, and 
as such is classified as a purchase: 

41 
 
a) The lease term is greater than 75% of the property’s estimated economic life 
b) The lease contains an option to purchase the property for less than fair 
market value 
c) Ownership of the property is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease 
term 
d) The present value of the lease payments exceeds 90% of the fair market 
value of the property 
3. An Operating Lease would be capitalized as follows: 
a) The operating lease expense (which can be found in the notes to the 
financial statements) would usually be multiplied by a ratio of 6.0x – 8.0x 
b) This capitalized value would get added to the company’s debt 
c) The operating lease expense would then be subtracted from the company’s 
costs to arrive at a higher EBITDA 
d) This adjustment is not normally done, when calculating trading multiples 
 
Adjusting for the Securitizations: It may also be necessary to adjust for any securitized 
assets in Schnoor (2006): 
1. If a company has securitized some assets, you may need to add these assets back 
to the balance sheet 
a) This value can be found in the notes to the financial statements 
b) Add the assets back to the appropriate working capital item 
c) Subtract the corresponding amount from the cash line (or add the 
corresponding amount to the company’s debt) 
2. These adjustments are made for comparison purposes so that you are comparing 
companies on an apples-to-apples basis. 
 
The Important Reminders, when preparing Comparable Company Analysis in 
Schnoor (2006): 
1. Eliminate non-recurring items that are recorded before NI: 
a) Restructuring Charges / one-time write offs 
b) Gains or losses on the sale of assets 
c) Read all footnotes and MD&A carefully to find these items 
2. Tax-effect all adjustments: 
a) Check MD&A and footnotes for actual tax impact, if available 

42 
 
b) If not available, use the company’s marginal tax rate 
3. D&A may be buried in COGS or SG&A, so look at the Cash Flow Statement 
4. Make sure to understand the company’s pension liability 
5. Double check all calculations = perform reality checks 
6. Use most current financials to check historical data 
7. Include Marketable Securities in Cash 
8. Subtract Long-Term Investments when calculating Enterprise Value 
9. Calendarize earnings estimates 
 
The Analytical Trouble Shooting: Read all disclosures carefully and be prepared to 
adjust for the following types of occurrences in Schnoor (2006): 
1. Stock splits, Dividends and Repurchases 
2. Non-calendar year ends (EPS estimates) 
3. Cash (Long-term investments) 
4. Recent acquisitions and divestitures – pro forma numbers 
5. Changes in earnings estimates 
6. Differences in accounting treatment 
7. Non-recurring items 
8. Recent debt or equity offerings 
9. Temporary sector reactions 
10. Take-over activity among competitors 
11. Conversion of convertible securities since the last reporting period 
12. Differences in international accounting treatment. 
 
Let us review the comparable transactions analysis by considering the Comparable 
Transactions Analysis in Schnoor (2006): 
1. The Comparable Transactions Analysis provides some information on the transactions, 
which are completed in the same industry as the company being valued 
2. The Comparable Transaction Multiples provide insight into: 
a) Premiums, which are paid by the acquirers to gain a control over the target 
companies, and 
b) Potential for synergies. 
3. The Comparable Transaction Multiples preparation, may require the consideration of 
the following data: 

43 
 
1. The industry of the company being valued, in order to properly screen 
transactions, 
2. The time frame of specific transactions – typically you want transactions that 
have been consummated in the past few years, 
3. The status of past transactions: 
a)  Successfully completed transaction, 
b) Pending transaction, 
c) Terminated transaction, 
d) Consideration: Cash vs. Stock exchange, 
e) Hostile vs. Friendly bids. 
 
The attention has to be paid to the following Transaction Issues in Schnoor (2006): 
1. Two types of transaction multiples are usually calculated: 
a) Financial Multiples (Enterprise Value / LTM EBITDA) 
b) Industry Specific Multiples (Enterprise value / annual Production) 
2. Comparable transaction analysis provides insight into the M&A activity in a 
specific industry 
a) Activity relative to the overall market 
b) Who is buying, and what are they buying? 
c) What kinds of premiums are buyers paying? 
3. Provides an understanding of the events surrounding specific transactions: 
a) Hotly contested transactions 
b) Privately- negotiated friendly deals 
c) Major transactions that impact an entire industry 
d) Timing of transactions relative to specific business cycles 
 
The Sourcing Precedent Transactions: The following sources can be used to identify 
appropriate comparable transactions in Schnoor (2006): 
1. M&A Databases – SDC, Internal databases 
2. Previous analysis prepared by specific industry groups 
3. Industry periodicals and news articles 
4. Acquisitions footnotes in the annual reports of public companies 
5. Tender offer documents 
6. Equity research analysts 

44 
 
7. Senior investment bankers 
8. Client 
 
The Use of Comparable Transaction Multiples (Comparables) to Derive Value in 
Schnoor (2006):  
1. The first stage is to calculate the relevant multiples for each comparable company 
2. Then, to determine which multiples or range of multiples justify a reasonable 
benchmark for valuing the specific target 
3. Analyze the results to decide which companies are most comparable: 
a) Exclude outlying multiples 
b) Test for reasonableness and use common sense 
4. Look at mean and median multiples, mean excluding high and low multiples, and 
multiples of specific companies that may be most relevant 
5. Use judgement to determine, which ratios are most relevant given the company and 
the nature of its industry 
 
The following table contains Comparable Trading Multiples for sample companies, 
which will be used to value a target company in Schnoor (2006): 
 
Comparable Trading Multiples 
 
Price 
07/10/06 
Mkt. 
Cap. 
(US$MM) 
EV 
(US$M
M) 
Debt/ 
Total 
Cap. 
EV/ 
EBITD
A 
2005 
EV/ 
EBITDA 
LTM 
 
EV/ 
EBITDA 
2006E 
 
P/BV 
LTM 
Company 
1 
$14.05 
$2,679 
$4,467 
40% 
11.2x 
11.1x 
10.9x 
0.9x 
Company 
2 
$11.05 
$2,024 
$3,218 
37% 
16.7x 
12.0x 
9.5x 
1.3x 
Company 
3 
$9.40 
$706 
$1,301 
46% 
8.0x 
6.0x 
4.8x 
0.7x 
Company 
4 
$33.50 
$1,887 
$3,840 
51% 
11.8x 
9.0x 
6.7x 
1.6x 
Company 
5 
$42.50 
$4,062 
$7,394 
45% 
11.5x 
11.5x 
8.0x 
1.3x 

45 
 
Company 
6 
57.63 
$11,467 
$20,018 
43% 
9.7x 
9.7x 
5.5x 
2.5x 
Average 
 
 
 
44% 
11.5 
9.9x 
7.6x 
1.4x 
Average 
Excluding 
Hi & Low 
 
 
 
43% 
11.0x 
10.3x 
7.4x 
1.3x 
 
Tab. 10. Comparable trading multiples (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The following table contains Comparable Transaction Multiples for sample transactions 
which will be used to value a target company in Schnoor (2006): 
 
Comparable Transaction Multiples 
Date 
Acquirer 
Target 
EV Paid 
(US$MM) 
Target’s 
Capacity 
(000units) 
LTM 
EBITDA 
(US$MM) 
EV 
per 
Unit 
(US$/unit) 
EV 
per 
EBITDA 
2005 
Company 
A 
Company 
B 
$995 
885 
$80 
$1,124 
12.4x 
2004 
Company 
C 
Company 
D 
$594 
440 
$52 
$1,350 
11.4x 
2003 
Company 
E 
Company 
F 
$882 
875 
$91 
$1,008 
9.7x 
2002 
Company 
G 
Company 
H 
$3,875 
2,463 
$291 
$1,573 
13.3x 
2002 
Company I 
Company J 
$450 
250 
$31 
$1,800 
14.5x 
 
Median 
 
 
 
 
$1,350 
12.4x 
 
Mean 
 
 
 
 
$1,371 
12.3x 
 
Mean 
Excluding 
Hi & Low 
 
 
 
 
$1,349 
12.4x 
 
Tab. 11. Comparable transaction multiples (after Schnoor (2006)). 

46 
 
The following table uses the Comparable Trading Multiples and Comparable 
Transaction Multiples from the previous pages to value a sample target company in Schnoor 
(2006): 
Summary Value Table 
Methodology 
Target Company’s 
Values 
Multiple 
Range 
Value 
(US$ Millions) 
Trading Multiples 
LTM EBITDA 
2006E EBITDA 
 
$88 (US$/MM) 
$102 (US$/MM) 
 
9.5x – 10.5x 
7.0x – 8.0xx 
 
9.5x88=836  – 924 
7.0x102=714  – 816 
Summary 
Enterprise 
Values 
 
 
(836+714)/2=$775 -$870 
Transaction Multiples 
LTM EBITDA 
Annual Capacity 
 
$88 (US$/MM) 
600 (000 units) 
 
12.0x – 12.5x 
$1,300-$1,400 
 
12x88=1,056 – 1,100 
1,300x600=780 – 840 
Summary 
Enterprise 
Values 
 
 
 
$918 - $970 
Summary 
Enterprise 
Value Range 
Less: Net Debt 
Equity Value 
SharesOutstanding(MM) 
 
 
 
$847 - $920 
$250 
847-250=$597 - $670 
55.7 
Equity Value perShare 
 
 
597/55.7=$10.70 -$12.00 
 
Tab. 12. Summary value table (after Schnoor (2006)). 
 
The Important Considerations have to be taken to the account during the above 
calculations see the Summary Value Table in Schnoor (2006): 
1. 
Multiply the Operating Results of the company to be valued by relevant 
comparable company Multiples: 
a) Use a few time periods – i.e. LTM, forecast years 
b) Select relevant multiple ranges for each period 
2. 
Convert derived Equity Values to Enterprise Values by adding the 
target’s ne debt 

47 
 
a) Net Income / EPS multiples 
b) Book Value Multiples 
3. 
Convert derived Enterprise Values to Equity Values by subtracting the 
target’s net debt 
a) Sales Multiples 
b) EBITDA Multiples 
4. 
A range of values, Value Range, is usually calculated based on high, mean 
and low summary multiples. 
Finally, let us summarize some important definitions of used terms: 
1. 
Consolidated income statement: revenues (include product sales, contract 
research, royalty and interest income); Earnings Before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and 
Amortization (EBITDA), depreciation and amortization, EBIT, earnings per share, cash flow 
from operating, investing, financing activities; 
2. 
Consolidated balance sheet: total assets, total liabilities, total equity, net assets, 
cash and marketable securities, short term debt, long term debt, minority interest, preferred 
shares, convertible securities, common equity, shareholder equity; 
3. 
Consolidated statement of recognized income and expense: currency translation 
on foreign currency net investments, amounts charged to hedging reserve, actuarial gains/losses 
on pension schemes, current tax on items taken directly to equity, deferred tax on items taken 
directly to equity, net income recognized directly in equity, profit, total recognized income and 
expense; 
4. 
Reconciliation of underlying earnings per share: profit, preference dividends, 
net financing credit, market value movements on derivatives, amortization of assets; 
5. 
Performance ratios: return on equity, profit margin (it represents after-tax income 
as percentage of revenues), gross margin, EBITDA margin, EBIT margin, net income margin; 
6. 
Valuation ratios: price / earnings, price cash / flow, price / book value, enterprise 
value / revenue, enterprise value / EBITDA, enterprise value / EBIT; 
7. 
Credit ratios: net debt / total capitalization (book), net debt / total capitalization 
(market), EBITDA / interest, EBITDA – CAPEX / Interest, total debt / EBITDA; 
8. 
Other ratios: consumer financial obligations ratio measures all consumer credits, 
including credit cards, auto loans, durable goods payment plans (published by Federal Reserve); 
mortgage financial obligations ratio measures mortgage debt as a share of personal disposable 
income. 

48 
 
Let us summarize all the information on the business valuation methodologies, which can 
be used during the M&A transaction strategy implementation. 
First of all, let us point out that to the fact that we derived the following formula to 
describe the successful merger 
 
 
 
where V0
C is the value of the combined firm in the period 0, V0
A is the value of the firm A in the 
period 0, V0
B is the value of the firm B in the period 0, P0
B is the acquisition price for the firm B. 
The formula for the calculation of the combined firm value with the multiple business 
processes in the given time moment is in Lenz (2010) 
 
 
 
where V0
C is the value of the combined firm in the period 0, NCFn
t is the net cash flow of the 
business process n in the period t, r is the discount rate (Weighted Average Cost of Capital), n is 
the number of business processes, t is the period of time. 
(
)
0
1
1
,
1
n
N
T
t
C
t
n
t
NCF
V
r
=
=
=
+
∑∑
(
)
0
0
0
0,
C
A
B
B
V
V
V
P
≥
+
−

49 
 
 
Fig. 1 shows the corporate system C scheme in Lenz (2010)  
 
Fig. 1. Corporate system scheme (after Lenz (2010)). 
 
 
Fig. 2 depicts the business evaluation methodology of the corporate system C in Lenz (2010). 
 
Fig. 2. Evaluation of corporate system C (after Lenz (2010)). 

50 
 
Mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in diffusion - type financial 
systems in highly volatile global capital markets with nonlinearities 
 
Let us discuss the current state of research on the M&A transactions. The extended 
knowledge base on the M&A transactions has been created as a result of completion of research 
programs by many world renowned scientists. 
Damiani, Pompei (2008) write: “A first group of studies, focusing on international 
comparisons, has explored the role of corporate governance systems, investor protection laws and 
other countries’ regulatory institutions as the main determinants of takeovers around the world (see, 
for instance, Rossi and Volpin (2004)). The underlying claim of these studies is that, in better-
regulated systems, it is easier and less expensive to raise capital and to finance corporate 
acquisitions.” 
Damiani, Pompei (2008) continue to explain: “A second group of contributions 
(Andrade et. (2001), Mitchell and Mulherin (1996); Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001, 2002)) has 
attributed a central role to variations in industry composition, documenting that, in each country, 
mergers occur in waves and within each wave clustering by industry is observed. In this field 
of research, industry level shocks (due to technological and regulatory changes) play a central 
role in explaining takeovers and their evolution in time.” 
Figs. 3 - 5 illustrate the M&A transactions activities in Damiani, Pompei (2008). 
 
Fig. 3. Classifications of M&A data (after Damiani, Pompei (2008)). 

51 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. M&A activity in eight European countries: Incidence of takeovers by 2 digit sectors (% 
incidence of deals on the total number of firms for each sector) (after Damiani, Pompei (2008). 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Top markets for corporate control in eight European countries: Frequency of M&A by 
four digit sectors in 2002-2005 (after Damiani, Pompei (2008). 

52 
 
Damiani, Pompei (2008) derive the formula to evaluate both: 1) the volume of M&A 
activity and 2) the determinants of various patterns, observed by the countries and by the sectors 
 
 
 
where i = 1,…8 Countries; j = 1, …39 Four digit sectors; m = 1,…5 Institutional variables (I);n = 
1,2 Sectoral variables (S); l = 1,2 Technological variables (TEC);z = 1,2 Technological Regimes 
dummy variables (TR). Tab. 13 shows the estimates of takeover frequencies in Damiani, Pompei 
(2008). 
  
Tab. 13. Estimates of takeover frequencies: the role institutional, sectoral and technological 
factors (after Damiani, Pompei (2008). 
(
)
5
2
2
2
0
1
.
2
3
4
1
1
1
1
&
,
ij
m
i m
n
ijn
l
ijl
z
ijz
z
ij
m
n
l
z
M
A
I
S
TEC
TEC TR
=
=
=
=
= β +
β
+
β
+
β
+
β
+ ε
∑
∑
∑
∑

53 
 
Let us provide the definitions of various types of the M&A transactions Tab. 14 in Lehto, 
Böckerman (2006). 
 
 
Tab. 14. Definitions of various types of M&A transactions (after Lehto, Böckerman (2006)). 
 
Let us illustrate the change dynamics of M&A transactions in Finland as shown in Fig. 6 
in Lehto, Böckerman (2006). 
 
 
Fig. 6. The number of different types of M&As in Finland over the period 1989-2003. Two 
types of domestic M&As are added together (after Lehto, Böckerman (2006)). 

54 
 
Let us show a sectoral division of the different types of M&A transactions in Finland in 
Fig. 7 in Lehto, Böckerman (2006). 
 
 
Fig. 7. The sectoral division of different types of M&As in Finland. The figures are 
reported as sums over the period 1989-2003 and two types of domestic M&As are added 
together (after Lehto, Böckerman (2006)). 

55 
 
Tab. 15 demonstrates the main types of the European M&As in the banking industry in 
Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002), and Tab. 16 shows the motives and risks with the four 
types of the Mergers & Acquisitions (M&As) in Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002). 
 
Tab. 15. European M&As types (after Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002)). 
 
Tab. 16. M&As motives and risks (after Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002)). 

56 
 
Tab. 17 shows the BNP Paribas strategies in Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002). 
 
Tab. 17. BNP Paribas business strategies (after Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002)). 
 
Fig. 8 demonstrates the M&A activity in European banking sector (1990-2004) in 
Asimakopoulos, Athanasoglou (2011)) 
 
Fig. 8. M&A activity in European banking sector (1990-2004) (after Asimakopoulos, 
Athanasoglou (2011)). 

57 
 
Let us discuss the M&A performance shortly. Beltratti, Paladino (2011) write: 
“Acquisitions in the banking sector may be driven by a multiplicity of factors among which are: 
(i) exploiting economies of scale associated with centralizing functions like IT, cash management 
personnel, (ii) exerting market power and imposing better pricing conditions on customers, (iii) 
pursuing geographical diversification that brings benefits in terms of risk reduction, (iv) taking 
advantage from implicit subsidies connected with a too-big-to-fail (TBTF)1 status, (v) managers 
maximizing their own utility function rather than the shareholders utility function.” 
Focarelli, Panetta, Salleo (2003) state: “In summary, acquisitions appear to be aimed at 
increasing the value of the passive bank by improving the quality of its loan portfolio, while 
mergers apparently reflect a strategy of increasing the reach of the active bank’s services.” 
Fig. 9 shows the M&A transaction success factors in Jones (2009). 
 
Fig. 9. M&A transaction success factors (after Jones (2009)). 

58 
 
Tab. 18 displays the categorization of studies of the acquisition performance by the 
performance metrics in Zollo, Meier (2008). 
 
 

59 
 
 
Tab. 18. Categorization of studies of acquisition performance by performance metric (after 
Zollo, Meier (2008)). 
 
Zollo, Meier (2008) explain: “Results of factor and structural equations analysis reveal 
that:  (a) M&A performance is a multifaceted construct; there is no one overarching factor 
capturing all the different ways used to proxy it, 
(b) there is a path linking integration process performance to long-term firm performance 
(both accounting and financial returns) via customer retention and overall synergy realization, 
and 
(c) short-term window event studies are not linked to any of the other performance 
metrics.” 
Zollo, Meier (2008) propose to differentiate the performance measurements at the three 
possible levels: 
“1. The task level. The integration process, with its different components related to 
multiple tasks necessary to reach the desired level of integration between the two organizations 
(e.g., alignment of control systems, conversion of the IT systems, transferring sales practices, 

60 
 
etc.). Each of these tasks generates its own performance, which can be aggregated in a more 
general notion of integration process performance, that is, the degree to which the targeted level 
of integration between the two organizations has been achieved across all of its task dimensions 
in a satisfactory manner. 
2. The transaction level. The performance of the entire acquisition encompasses all the 
phases of the acquisition process and focuses on the actual value creation eventually generated 
by the acquisition. The transaction performance construct can thus be defined as the amount of 
value, in cost efficiencies and revenue growth, generated by the complete transaction process, 
from the completion of the negotiation to the execution of the business plan. Note that this notion 
of performance centers around the realization of the value creation objectives, as they have been 
envisioned at the time of the transaction. 
3. The firm level. The performance of the combined entity, over and above the value 
generated by the transaction itself, can be defined as the variation in firm performance that 
occurred during the period of relevance for the execution of the business plan connected to the 
acquisition. Needless to say, this construct is the broadest of the three, and includes the effects of 
the acquisition on the performance of other business processes simultaneously ongoing within 
the firm during the period in consideration.” 
King, Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008) explain: “Strategic management literature in general 
(Daily (1994), Daily et al. (2002)) and acquisition research specifically (Javidan et al. (2004)) do 
not provide a consensus for measuring firm performance. Generally, M&A research focuses on 
financial performance using either accounting or stock market measures. We elected to avoid 
using accounting measures of performance because they tend to have a historical focus 
(Chakravarthy (1986)) and, in the case of return on assets, can be biased by the method of 
accounting for an acquisition (Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987), Sirower (1997)). This left a 
choice between short or long-term stock market measures of performance.” King, Slotegraaf, 
Kesner (2008) continue the discussion: “Therefore, we selected a long-term stock measure. 
Jensen’s alpha (Jensen (1968)), a variation of the two-parameter market model previously used 
(Farjoun (1998); Hoskisson et al. (1993, 1994)), was our primary performance measure. An 
advantage of Jensen’s alpha is that it compares the return of an acquiring firm with a benchmark 
from a common starting point.” 
 
 
 
where Rit is the monthly rate of return of firm i during month t, 
(
)
,
it
i
i
mt
it
R
R
= α +β
+ ε

61 
 
αi is the Jensen’s alpha for firm i, 
βi is the firm i’s stock price variance relative to the variance of market benchmark (m), 
Rmt is the monthly rate of return of the market benchmark (m) during month t, 
εit is the random error term. 
King, Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008) conclude: ‘Positive values of Jensen’s alpha indicate 
that an acquiring firm outperformed the market benchmark or S&P 500. Comparing a firm’s 
stock performance with a benchmark portfolio offers several benefits, including: 
(1) comparing an acquirer with a benchmark of multiple firms that eliminates matching 
firms to calculate abnormal returns, and 
(2) calculating the average abnormal return of investing in a firm against a benchmark 
over the same time period. This eliminates a preannouncement estimation period needed for the 
capital asset pricing model to estimate a firm’s normal return. 
However, long-term stock market measures of firm performance are also subject to 
criticism because of the potential for confounding events (Williams and Siegel (1997)).” 
The abnormal return for firm j on day t is defined as in King, Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008): 
 
 
 
where Rjt is the rate of return on the common stock of the jth firm on the time window t, 
Rmt is the rate of return of a market index on the time period t, 
αi is the Jensen’s alpha for firm j, 
βi is the parameter that measures the sensitivity of Rjt to the market index. 
Van Beers, Dekker (2009) make interesting comments to think about: “The main findings 
of this study are as follows. 
First, innovating firms are significantly more involved in acquisition activities than non-
innovating firms, which suggests that acquisitions are a strategy to gain access to new 
technologies or knowledge. 
Second, lack of knowledge as a barrier to innovate increases the chance of acquiring 
assets of other firms although not significantly. Lack of finance as a barrier to innovate increases 
significantly the chance of divesting assets. 
Third, acquisitions motivated by knowledge barriers in the innovation process affect the 
probability of positive innovative sales positively while acquisitions motivated by other reasons 
than innovation barriers affect this probability negatively. No effect of knowledge barriers 
induced acquisitions on the level of the innovative sales could be found.” 
(
),
jt
jt
j
j
mt
AR
R
R
=
−α +β

62 
 
Tab. 19 shows the plant and firm level studies of the effects of the mergers and 
acquisitions on the employment and wages in Siegel, Simons (2008). 
 
 
 
Tab. 19. Plant and firm level studies of the effects of mergers and acquisitions on employment 
and wages (after Siegel, Simons (2008)). 

63 
 
The M&A transactions strategies and related financial issues in the diffusion – type 
financial systems in the global capital markets have been extensively researched in Nelson 
(1959), Nelson, Winter (1978), Penrose (1959), Marris (1964), Manne (1965), Thompson 
(1967), Levy, Sarnat (1970), Lewellen (1971), Weston, Mansinghka (1971), Fama, Miller (1972), 
Fama (1980), Kirzner (1973), Higgins, Schall (1975), Jensen, Meckling (1976), Jensen, Ruback 
(1983), Jensen (1986, 1987, 1991, 1993), Jensen, Murphy (1990), Steiner (1976), Kim, 
McConnell (1977), Lucas (1978), Salter, Weinhold (1979), Bradley (1980), Grossman, Hart 
(1980), Mueller (1980, 1984, 1987, 1989), Scherer (1980), Amihud, Baruch (1981), Asquith, Kim 
(1982), Asquith (1983), Asquith, Bruner, Mullins (1983), Hennart (1982, 1988), Hennart, Park 
(1993), Hennart, Reddy (1997), Stapleton (1982), Eckbo (1983, 2009), Eger (1983), Lubatkin 
(1983, 1987), Lubatkin, Shrieves (1986), Lubatkin, Srinivasan, Merchant (1997), Lubatkin, 
Schweiger, Weber (1998), Lubatkin, Schulze, Mainkar, Cotterill (2001), Malatesta (1983), 
Salant, Switzer, Reynolds (1983), Wansley, Lane, Yang (1983), Blake, Monton (1984), Dess, 
Robinson (1984), Geroski (1984), Lobue (1984), Sales, Mirvis (1984), Stewart, Harris, Carleton 
(1984), Buono, Bowditch, Lewis (1985), Duhaime (1985), Hasbrouch (1985), Kusewitt (1985), 
Malatesta, Thompson (1985), Perry, Porter (1985), Walkling, Edmister (1985), Chatterjee 
(1986, 1991, 1992), Chatterjee, Lubatkin (1990), Chatterjee, Lubatkin, Schweiger, Weber 
(1992), Dennis, McConnell (1986), Jemison, Sitkin (1986a, b), Montgomery, Wilson (1986), 
Palepu (1986), Pastena, Ruland (1986), Roll (1986), Shleifer, Vishny (1986, 1990, 1991, 2001, 
2003), Shleifer, Summers (1988), Shrivastava (1986), De, Duplichan (1987), Hansen (1987), 
Haspeslagh, Farquhar (1987), Huang, Walkling (1987), James, Wier (1987), Neely (1987), 
Ravenscraft, Scherer (1987a, b), Sicherman, Pettway (1987), Singh, Montgomery (1987), 
Travlos (1987), Travlos, Waegelein (1992), Trifts, Scanlon (1987), Varaiya, Ferris (1987), 
Auerbach (1988, 1989), Barney (1988, 1991), Bradley, Desai, Kim (1988), Brown, Medoff 
(1988), Hall (1988, 1990, 1999), Morck, Shleifer, Vishny (1988, 1990), Nahavandi, Malekzadeh 
(1988), Schipper, Thompson (1983), Shelton (1988), Walsh (1988, 1989), Bertin, Ghazanfari, 
Torabzadeh (1989), Bulow, Rogoff (1989), Cantwell (1989), Dubofsky, Fraser (1989), Fishman 
(1989), Fowler, Schmidt (1989), Golbe, White (1989), Hannan, Wolken (1989), Hayn (1989), 
Jacquemin, Slade (1989), Kaen, Tehranian (1989), Ravenscraft, Scherer (1989), Wall, Gup 
(1989), Baradwaj, Fraser, Furtado (1990), Baradwaj, Dubofsky, Fraser (1992), Bhagat, 
Shleifer, Vishny (1990), Borenstein (1990), Datta, Grant (1990), Datta (1991), Datta, Iskander-
Datta, Raman(1992), Datta, Iskandar-Datta (1995), Datta, Iskandar-Datta, Raman (2001), 
Farrell, Shapiro (1990), Hawawini, Swary (1990), Healy, Palepu, Ruback (1990), Hunt (1990), 
Farrell, Shapiro (1990), Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland (1990), Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland, Harrison 

64 
 
(1991), Hitt, Hoskisson, Johnson, Moesel (1996), Hitt, Harrison, Ireland, Best (1998), Hitt, 
Harrison, Ireland (2001), Holmes, Schmitz (1990), Kamien, Zang (1990 1991, 1993), Lahey, 
Conn (1990), Loderer, Martin (1990), Rosett (1990), Seth (1990), Seth, Song, Pettit (2002), 
Shastri (1990), Smith (1990), Cornett, De (1991), Franks, Harris, Titman (1991), Haspeslagh, 
Jemison (1991), Harris, Ravenscraft (1991), Harrison, Hitt, Hoskisson, Ireland (1991), Mann, 
Sicherman (1991), Schweiger, Denisi (1991), Servaes (1991), Slusky, Caves (1991), Willig 
(1991), Agrawal, Jaffe, Mandelker (1992), Agrawal, Jaffe (2000, 2002), Alford (1992), Berger, 
Humphrey (1992), Berger, Mester (1997), Berger, Saunders, Scalise, Udell (1997, 1998), Berger 
(1998), Berger, DeYoung, Hesna, Udell (1999), Berger, Demsetz, Strahan (1999), Brush, 
Vanderwerf (1992), Brush (1996), Gaudet, Salant (1992), Grandstrand, Bohlin, Oskarsson, 
Sjoberg (1992), Healey, Palepu, Ruback (1992), Ingham, Kran, Lovestam (1992), Loderer, 
Martin (1992), Shanley, Correa (1992), Srnivasan (1992), United States Department of Justice 
(1992), Cannella, Hambrick (1993), Hambrick, Cannella (1993), Cotterill (1993, 2002), Gibbs 
(1993), Kim, Singal (1993), Linder, Crane (1993), Neven, Nuttall, Seabright (1993), Rhoades 
(1993), Rhoades (1994), Schrantz (1993), Song, Walking (1993), Bruton, Oviatt, White (1994), 
Chakrabarti, Hauschildt, Suverkup (1994), Clark, Ofek (1994), Houston, Ryngaert (1994), 
Houston, James, Ryngaert (2001), Hudson (1994), Kesner, Shapiro, Sharma (1994), Madura, 
Wiant (1994), Markides, Ittner (1994), Pablo (1994), Rhoades (1994), Smith, Kim (1994), 
Werden, Froeb (1994), Christensen, Rosenbloom (1995), Collins, Kemsley, Shackelford (1995), 
Collins, Kemsley, Shackelford (1995), Derhy (1995), Gerpott (1995), Gilbert, Sunshine (1995), 
Gilbert, Tom (2001), Gilbert (2006), Kaplan, Ruback (1995), Long, Vousden (1995), 
Sudarsanam (1995), Zhang (1995), Brush (1996), Esty, Narasimhan, Tufano (1996), Franks, 
Mayer (1996), Freixas, Rochet (1996), Gerstein (1996), Mitchell, Mulherin (1996), Pilloff 
(1996), Schwert  (1996, 2000), Servaes (1996), Shapiro (1996), Vennet (1996), Vermeulen, 
Barkema (1996), Weber (1996), Akhavein, Berger, Humphrey (1997), Anand, Singh (1997), 
Bergh (1997), Capron, Mitchell (1997, 1998), Capron, Dussauge, Mitchell (1998), Capron 
(1999a, b), Capron, Hulland (1999), Capron, Pistre (2002), Collins, Maydew, Weiss (1997), 
Covin, Kolenko, Sightler, Tudor (1997), Fubini, Price, Zollo (1997), Hayward, Hambrick 
(1997), Hayward (2002), Head, Ries (1997), Holl, Kyriazis (1997), Klemperer (1997), Kroll, 
Wright, Toombs, Leavell (1997), Krug, Hegarty (1997, 2001), Loughran, Vijh (1997), 
Megginson, Morgan, Nail (1997), Powell (1997), Ramaswamy (1997), Rosenberg (1997), Siegel, 
Waldman, Youngdahl (1997), Siegel (1999), Siegel, Simons, Lindstrom (2005), Sirower (1997), 
Stavros (1997), Walraven (1997), Barkema, Vermeulen (1998), Boyd, Graham (1998), Bulow, 
Huang, Klemperer (1998, 1999), Chang (1998), Cole, Walraven (1998), Falvey (1998), 

65 
 
Gonzalez, Vasconcellos, Kish (1998), Hadlock, Houston, Ryngaert (1998), Jamison (1998), 
Larsson, Finkelstein (1999), Larsson, Brousseau, Driver, Sweet (2004), Lieberman, Montgomery 
(1998), Maquieria, Megginson, Nail (1998), Morosini, Shane, Singh (1998), Piloff, Santomero 
(1998), Prager, Hannan (1998), Rau, Vermaelen (1998), Resti (1998), Rhoades (1998), Andrade, 
Stafford (1999, 2004), Andrade, Mitchell, Stafford (2001), Boot (1999), Bresman, Birkinshaw, 
Nobel (1999), Brown, Lo, Lys (1999), Beatty, Riffe, Thompson (1999), Bresman, Birkinshaw, 
Nobel (1999), Chadhuri, Tabrizi (1999), Dechow, Hutton, Sloan (1999), Dermine (1999), Eccles, 
Lanes, Wilson (1999), Focarelli, Fabio, Salleo (1999), Focarelli, Panetta, Salleo (2002, 2003), 
Haleblian, Finkelstein (1999), Harford (1999, 2005), Rappaport, Sirower (1999), Safieddine, 
Titman (1999), Sapienza (1999), Saunders (1999), Allen, Gale (2000), Becher (2000), Beena 
(2000, 2004, 2006a, b), Betton, Eckbo (2000), Betton, Eckbo, Thorburn (2008, 2009), Black 
(2000), Blonigen, Taylor (2000), Brouthers K D, Brouthers L E (2000), Carey (2000), Cheng, 
McNamara (2000), Chudnovsky (2000), Cybo-Ottone, Murgia (2000), DMello, Shroff (2000), 
Empson (2000), Ernst, Vitt (2000), Hunya, Kalotay (2000), Inkpen, Sundaram, Rockwood 
(2000), Kane (2000), Kang, Johansson (2000), Kang, Sakai (2000), Mulherin, Boone (2000), 
Ranft, Lord (2000), Schoenberg (2000), Schwert (2000), Seth, Song, Pettit (2000), Sorensen 
(2000), UNCTAD (2000), Walker (2000), Wheelock, Wilson (2000), World Investment Report 
(2000), Ahuja, Katila (2001), Astebro, Winter (2001), Bergh (2001), Bliss, Rosen (2001), Buch, 
Delong (2001), Carretta (2001, 2007), Carretta, Farina, Schwizer (2005a, b, 2008), Das, 
Sengupta (2001), Gupta, Ross (2001), Horn, Levinsohn (2001), Jovanovic, Rousseau (2001, 
2002a, b), Linn, Switzer (2001), Maksimovic, Phillips (2001), North (2001), Paulter (2001), 
Pratt (2001), Roeller, Stenneck, Verboven (2001), Vermeulen, Barkema (2001), Anand, Delios 
(2002), Beckman, Haunschild (2002), Beckmann, Eppendorfer, Neimke (2002), Bekier, Shelton 
(2002), Bhojraj, Lee (2002), Bris, Cabolis (2002), Conyon, Girma, Thompson, Wright (2002a, b, 
c, 2004), Fuller, Netter, Stegemoller (2002), Gaughan (2002), Hagedoorn, Duysters (2002), 
Harris, Robinson (2002), Harzing (2002), Hayward (2002), Heron, Lie (2002), Lall (2002), Lie 
E, Lie H J (2002), Liu, Nissim, Thomas (2002), Mumcu, Zenginobuz (2002), Ranft, Lord (2002), 
Sakai (2002), Schmid, Wahrenburg (2002), Benjamin (2003), Branch, Taewon (2003), Coff 
(2003), Core, Guay, Van Buskirk (2003), Evenett (2003), Gaughan (2003), Gugler, Mueller, 
Yurtoglu, Zulehner (2003), Gugler, Yurtoglu (2004), Officer (2003, 2004, 2006, 2007), King, 
Driessnack (2003), King, Covin, Hegarty (2003), King, Dalton, Daily, Covin (2004), King, 
Slotegraaf, Kesner (2008), Puranam, Singh, Zollo (2003), Schonfeld, Malik (2003), Schmidt 
(2003), Soderberg, Vaara (2003), Stahl, Voigt (2003), Sudarsanam, Mahate (2003), Van Beers, 
Sadowski (2003), Warf (2003), Athanasoglou, Brissimis (2004), Beitel, Schiereck, Wahrenburg 

66 
 
(2004), Billett, Tao-Hsien, King D, Mauer (2004), Bjorvatn (2004), Bruner (2004), Burkart, 
Panunzi (2004), Camara, Renjen (2004), Carow, Heron, Saxton (2004), Feea, Thomas (2004), 
Girma, Görg (2004), Goergen, Renneboog (2004), Goergen, Martynova, Renneboog (2005), 
Grinstein (2004), Hartzell, Ofek, Yermack (2004), Huck, Konrad (2004), Humphrey, Vale 
(2004), Javidan, Pablo, Singh, Hitt, Jemison (2004), Katz, Shelanski (2004), Kini, Kracaw, Mian 
(2004), Lehto, Lehtoranta (2004), Lehto, Böckerman (2006), Lepetit, Patry, Rous (2004), 
McCahery, Renneboog, Ritter, Haller (2004), Mitchell, Pulvino, Stafford (2004), Moeller, 
Schlingemann, Stultz (2004), Moeller, Schlingemann (2005), Moeller, Schlingemann, Stulz 
(2007), Mukherjee, Kiymaz, Baker (2004), Pangarkar (2004), Penas, Unal (2004), Rosen (2004), 
Rossi, Volpin (2004), Saxton, Dollinger (2004), Shimizu, Hitt, Vaidyanath, Pisano (2004), Zollo, 
Singh (2004), Zollo, Meier (2008), Aluko, Amidu (2005), Aminian, Campart (2005), Arzac 
(2005), Brakman, Garretsen, Van Marrewijk (2005), Calomiris, Pornrojnangkool (2005), 
Cassiman, Colombo, Garrone, Veugelers (2005), Cassiman, Colombo (2006), Cassiman, Ueda 
(2006), Conn, Cosh, Guest, Hughes (2005), Di Giovanni (2005), Faccio, Masulis (2005), Fox 
(2005), Fridolfsson, Stennek (20050, Gleason, Rosenthal, Wiggins (2005), Globerman, Shapiro 
(2005), Goedhart, Koller, Wessels (2005), Gorton, Khal, Rosen (2005), Hand (2005), Hussinger 
(2005, 2010, 2012), Jones G (2005), Knapp, Gart, Becher (2005), Kusstatscher, Cooper (2005), 
Martynova, Renneboog (2005), Martynova, Renneboog (2006), Moeller T (2005), Ollinger, 
Nguyen, Blayney, Chambers, Nelson (2005), Ou (2005), PM KeyPoint LLC (2005), Prabhu, 
Chandy, Ellis (2005), Pradhan, Abraham (2005), Pradhan, Alakshendra (2006), Pradhan 
(2007a, b), Röller (2005), Schweizer (2005), Shahrur (2005), Aykut, Goldstein (2006), Brakman, 
Garretsen, Van Marrewijk (2006), Brauer (2006), Buehler, Kaiser, Jaeger (2006), Campa, 
Hernando (2006), Carow, Kane, Narayanan (2006), Clodt, Hagedoorn, Van Kranenburg (2006), 
Dong, Hirschleifer, Richardson, Teoh (2006), Fumagalli, Vasconcelos (2006), Heeley, King, 
Covin (2006), Higgins, Rodriguez (2006), Lommerud, Straume, Sorgard (2006), Paruchuri, 
Nerkar, Hambrick (2006), Puranam, Singh, Zollo (2006), Qiu, Wen Zhou (2006), Saggi, Yildiz 
(2006), Schnoor (2006a, b), Siegel, Simons (2006, 2008, 2010), Marsh, Siegel, Simons (2007), 
Veugelers (2006), Bartram, Burns, Helwege (2007), Becker, Fuest (2007a, b), Davidson, Ferrett 
(2007), DeLong, DeYoung (2007), Evans, Noel (2007), Farina (2007), Gantumur, Stephan 
(2007), Hutson (2007), Jackson, Miyajima (2007), Kamaly (2007), Kapoor, Lim (2007a, b), 
Koetter, Bos, Heid, Kolari, Kool, Porath (2007), Krishnan, Hitt, Park (2007), Kim, Choi (2007), 
Masulis, Wang, Xie (2007), Mjøs (2007), Hetland, Mjøs (2011), Nagano, Yuan (2007), Neary 
(2007), Nocke, Yeaple (2007), Ogura, Uchida (2007), Szilagyi (2007), Boone, Mulherin (2008), 
Brealy (2008a, b), Breinlich (2008), Damiani, Pompei (2008), DePamphilis (2008), Gavious, 

67 
 
Schwartz (2008), Maksimovic, Phillips, Prabhala (2008), Neto, Brandão, Cerqueira (2008a, b), 
Norbäck, Persson (2008a, b), Norbäck, Persson, Vlachos (2009), Toxvaerd (2008), Varma 
(2008), Venkiteswaran (2008), Balcaen, Buyze, Ooghe (2009), DeYoung, Evanoff, Molyneux 
(2009), Elnathan, Gavious, Hauser (2009), Jones K (2009), Ornaghi (2009), Panetta, Schivardi, 
Shum (2009), Patel, Bourgeois (2009), Van Beers, Dekker (2009), Van Lelyveld, Knot (2009), 
Wong (2009), Aharon, Gavious, Yosef (2010), Byrne (2010), Lenz (2010), Spyrou, Siougle 
(2010), Asimakopoulos, Athanasoglou (2011), Beltratti, Paladino (2011), Brealey, Myers, Allen 
(2011), Chaudhuri (2011), Chen, Chou, Lee (2011), Jie, Song, Walkling (2011), Netter, 
Stegemoller, Wintoki (2011), Vallascas, Hegendorff (2011), Binder (2012), Fornalczyk (2012), 
Mehwish, Kayani, Javid (2012), Rus (2012), Weitzel, Kling (2012), Friedman (2013), Mukherjee, 
Chowdhury (2013), Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet 
(2013), Shumska, Stepanenko-Lypovyk (2013), UNCTAD (2013), Wikipedia (2013). 
 
Analysis of mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in diffusion - 
type financial system in Switzerland 
 
We analyzed the M&A transactions in Switzerland in such industries segments as the 
chemicals; 
commodities; 
consumer 
markets; 
financial 
services; 
industrial 
markets; 
pharmaceuticals & life sciences; power & utilities; private equity; technology, media & 
telecommunications over the last few decades, using the data in Tabs. 13 – 30 in Pfister, Kerler, 
Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013) and some other data sources. 
We would like to make the following research comments: 
1. 
We think that the globalization has a strong influence on the M&A deals completion in 
Switzerland. This research observation is in a good agreement with the data, which has been 
early documented in Lenz (2010): “Globalization and economies of scale effects fuel corporate 
merger activities in nearly every sector. Nevertheless empirical studies have shown that most 
mergers and acquisitions fail to be successful and destroy shareholders wealth. If the firm’s 
management has a clear picture of the relationship between the take-over premium and the 
requested return of synergy in the future, some irrational decisions can be avoided.” A total 
number of forthcoming M&A transactions and their cumulative value in Switzerland, namely the 
M&A transactions, which would be initiated by the growing businesses from the emerging 
economies, could increase exponentially in coming years as a direct result of globalization. 
2. 
We believe that the fluctuating dependence of the M&A transactions number over the 
certain time period is quasi-periodic and cyclic. This research observation is in full agreement 

68 
 
with the research results in Chaudhuri (2011): “Over the decades, due to globalization, merger 
waves have taken on an increasingly international dimension. The volume of cross-border 
mergers has grown over time such that, in 2000, the ratio of the value of global cross-border 
mergers to the value of global foreign direct investment (FDI) was about 80% (UNCTAD 
(2000)). There is considerable evidence that cross-border mergers tend to occur in waves (see, 
for example, Gaughan (2002), Gugler et al (2003) and UNCTAD.s World Investment Report 
(2004)).” The oscillating nature of the M&A transactions number was also reported in Derhy 
(1995): “The re-structurizations which occurred in several western countries analyzed over a 
long period of time, reveal the existence of mergers and acquisitions (M&A) waves.” Moreover, 
the time fluctuation of M&A transactions number was reported in Brakman, Garretsen, Van 
Marrewijk (2005) write: “Analyzing M&As in a General Oligopolistic Equilibrium (GOLE) 
model incorporating strategic interaction between firms in a general equilibrium setting, we 
argue that: M&As follow revealed comparative advantage as measured by the Balassa index, and 
M&As come in waves.” The evidences on the oscillating wave nature of the M&A transactions 
were presented in Gorton, Khal, Rosen (2005), Martynova, Renneboog (2005), Toxvaerd (2008). 
3. 
We think that there are many factors, which can generate the quasi periodic 
oscillations of the M&A transactions number in the time domain, for example: the stock 
market bubble effects. Aharon, Gavious, Yosef (2010) analyzed the stock market bubble effects 
on the mergers and acquisitions (M&A) transactions, considering the changes in the pricing of 
M&A transactions throughout the four sub-periods. Aharon, Gavious, Yosef (2010) used the 
univariate analysis as well as the multivariate analysis, taking to the account the fact that the 
differences in the valuation multiples can derive not only from the industrial affiliation, time 
period or market trend, but also from the target firm’s profitability, risk and growth. Aharon, 
Gavious, Yosef (2010): “We document a considerable increase in the prevalence of M&A 
transactions during the bubble for all sectors, followed by a reduction to pre-bubble levels at the 
bursting of the bubble, and further reduction in sub-sequent post-burst in years, despite recovery 
in the capital markets during that time.” Applying the integrative creative collateral design 
thinking principles to analyze the M&A transactions behaviour trends, we propose that the 
econophysics techniques can be used to accurately characterize the M&A transactions number 
quasi-periodic oscillations in various industrial sectors over the selected time period. In our 
research approach, the M&A transactions number quasi-periodic oscillations depend on the 
following factors 1) the changes of companies valuations over the time; 2) the changes of 
companies stock market shares prices over the time; 3) the changes of companies knowledge 
absorption capacities in the process of integration over the time; and 4) the changes of the 

69 
 
particular industry sector performance index over the time. We performed the research of the 
nonlinearities in the M&A transactions number quasi-periodic oscillations in Matlab, 
including the following dependences: 1) the ideal dependence of the M&A transactions 
number quasi-periodic oscillations over the time, 2) the linear dependence of the M&A 
transactions number quasi-periodic oscillations over the time, 3) the quadratic dependence of 
the M&A transactions number quasi-periodic oscillations over the time, 2) the exponential 
dependence of the M&A transactions number quasi-periodic oscillations over the time in 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O (2013j). 
4. 
Researching the M&A transactions in Europe, North America and Asia – Australia 
regions over the long time period of observation, we discovered the Ledenyov effect: the 
average of a sum of random numbers in the M&A transactions time series represents a time 
series with the quasi periodic systematic oscillations, which can be finely approximated by the 
polynomial numbers. We think that the Ledenyov effect in the case of the M&A transactions 
quasi periodic cycles can be considered as similar to the Slutsky-Yule effect in Slutsky (1927a), 
Yule (1927) in the cases of the business cycles and the solar activity cycles. 
5. 
The absorption theory has been created and applied to understand the nature of 
absorption processes by the different chemical compounds in the various physical – chemical 
systems in the physics and chemistry at the research institutions and top league universities in the 
XX – XXI centuries, for example, in the nuclear physics in Ledenyov O P, Neklyudov (2013), 
Neklyudov, Dovbnya, Dikiy, Ledenyov O P, Lyashko (2013), Neklyudov, Ledenyov O P, 
Fedorova, Poltinin (2013a, b), Neklyudov, Fedorova, Poltinin, Ledenyov O P (2013), Ledenyov 
O P, Neklyudov, Poltinin, Fedorova (2012a, b), Neklyudov, Ledenyov O P, Fedorova, Poltinin 
(2012). In the econophysics, the absorption process plays an important role in Cohen, Levinthal 
(1990). Therefore, it is a subject of intensive research in Cohen, Levinthal (1990). For instance, 
the absorptive capacity in the M&A deals in Germany have been investigated in Hussinger 
(2010, 2012). We think that, in the course of the M&A transaction implementation, the ability 
by the companies to absorb the newly acquired knowledge and to create the new innovative 
knowledge base, is a key pre-determinant of the M&A deal completion success. In our 
opinion, the integrative collateral creative design thinking has a direct impact on the 
company’s knowledge absorption properties toward the new innovative knowledge base 
formation in the highly competitive global markets. 
6. 
The strategy selection problems have been extensively researched in Porter (1987, 1996, 
2008), Besanko, Shanley, Dranove (2007), Gavetti, Rivkin (2007), Teece, Winter (2007). We 
would like to state that the winning virtuous mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies 

70 
 
in diffusion - type financial systems in highly volatile global capital markets with 
nonlinearities can only be selected through the decision making process on the M&A choices, 
applying the econophysical econometrical analysis in Amemiya (1985), Greene (2008) with the 
use of the inductive, deductive and abductive logics in Martin (1998-1999, 2005-2006). 
 
List of M&A transactions in Switzerland in 2012 
 
 
 
Tab. 20. List of M&A transactions in chemicals in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

71 
 
 
 
Tab. 21. List of M&A transactions in commodities in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

72 
 
 
 
Tab. 22. List of M&A transactions in commodities in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

73 
 
 
 
Tab. 23. List of M&A transactions in commodities in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

74 
 
 
 
Tab. 24. List of M&A transactions in commodities in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

75 
 
 
 
Tab. 25. List of M&A transactions in consumer markets in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

76 
 
 
 
Tab. 26. List of M&A transactions in consumer markets in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

77 
 
 
 
Tab. 27. List of M&A transactions in financial services in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

78 
 
 
 
Tab. 28. List of M&A transactions in industrial markets in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

79 
 
 
 
Tab. 29: List of M&A transactions in industrial markets in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

80 
 
 
 
Tab. 30. List of M&A transactions in industrial markets in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 
 
 
Tab. 31. List of M&A transactions in pharmaceuticals and life sciences in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 

81 
 
 
 
Tab. 32: List of M&A transactions in power utilities in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

82 
 
 
 
Tab. 33. List of M&A transactions in technology, media and telecommunications in Switzerland 
in 2012 (after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

83 
 
 
 
Tab. 34. List of M&A transactions in technology, media and telecommunications in Switzerland 
in 2012 (after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

84 
 
 
 
Tab. 35. List of M&A transactions in other industries in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

85 
 
 
 
Tab. 36. List of M&A transactions in other industries in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 

86 
 
 
 
Tab. 37: List of M&A transactions in other industries in Switzerland in 2012 
(after Pfister, Kerler, Valk, Prien, Peyer, Kuhn, Hintermann, Ljaskowsky, Arnet (2013)). 
 
 

87 
 
Conclusion 
 
The M&A transactions represent a wide range of unique business optimization 
opportunities in the corporate transformation deals, which are usually characterized by the high 
level of total risk. The M&A transactions can be successfully implemented by taking to an 
account the size of investments, purchase price, direction of transaction, type of transaction, and 
using the modern comparable transactions analysis and the business valuation techniques in the 
diffusion – type financial systems in the finances. 
We think that there are many factors, which can generate the quasi periodic oscillations 
of the M&A transactions number in the time domain, for example: the stock market bubble 
effects. We performed the research of the nonlinearities in the M&A transactions number quasi-
periodic oscillations in Matlab, including the ideal, linear, quadratic, and exponential 
dependences. 
We discovered that the average of a sum of random numbers in the M&A transactions 
time series represents a time series with the quasi periodic systematic oscillations, which can be 
finely approximated by the polynomial numbers. 
We think that, in the course of the M&A transaction implementation, the ability by the 
companies to absorb the newly acquired knowledge and to create the new innovative knowledge 
bases, is a key pre-determinant of the M&A deal completion success. In our opinion, the 
integrative collateral creative design thinking has a direct impact on the new innovative 
knowledge bases formation by companies in the highly competitive global markets. 
We analyzed the M&A transactions in Switzerland in 2012 in various industrial 
segments. We think that the globalization has a strong influence on the successful M&A deals 
completion in Switzerland. We believe that the fluctuating dependence of M&A transactions 
number over the certain time period is quasi-periodic. 
We would like to state that the winning virtuous mergers and acquisitions transactions 
strategies in the diffusion - type financial systems in the highly volatile global capital markets 
with the nonlinearities can only be selected through the decision making process on the various 
available M&A choices, applying the econophysical econometrical analysis with the use of the 
inductive, deductive and abductive logics. 
We developed the MicroM&A software program with the embedded optimized near-real-
time artificial intelligence algorithm to create the winning virtuous M&A strategies, using the 
financial performance characteristics of the involved firms, and to estimate the probability of the 
M&A transaction completion success. 

88 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
This research article is a result of our scientific collaborations with a number of leading 
academicians with the specializations in the economics, finances, mathematics, and physics from 
many leading universities in the Western Europe, North America, Asia and Australia over the 
last 25 years. The initial research ideas on the M&A transactions strategies have been outlined in 
the form of short notes by the first author many years ago, then as it frequently happens, the 
original research ideas have been intelligently re-worked for a few times and finally forgotten 
somewhere on the first author’s research desk at the James Cook University in Townsville in 
Australia. Several decisive attempts have been recently undertaken to make a certain kind of 
order from the chaotic mess of numerous research papers, reports and books on the first author’s 
research desk at JCU in Townsville in Australia. As a result, the once forgotten research article 
on the M&A transactions strategies has been re-written and significantly updated with the new 
research materials added. Of course, the main line of thinking on the M&A transactions 
strategies in the diffusion - type financial systems in the highly volatile global capital markets 
with the nonlinearities is pretty much the same as it was originally chosen by the authors, 
however the text of research article has been extensively complemented by the new research 
findings with the insightful analysis on the M&A transactions strategies included. The final 
variant of research article has been edited at the JCU in Townsville in Queensland in Australia. 
The first author’s knowledge on the origins of the nonlinearities in the complex systems 
in the electrical, electronic, and computer engineering as well as the financial engineering has 
been strongly influenced by the intensive scientific collaboration with Prof. Janina E. Mazierska, 
Personal Chair, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, James Cook University, 
Townsville, Australia and former IEEE Director and IEEE Fellow. Prof. Janina E. Mazierska 
helped the first author to develop both the logical mathematical analysis skills and the abstract 
scientific thinking ability to tackle the complex scientific problems on the nonlinearities in the 
microwave superconductivity as well as on the nonlinearities in the finances, applying the 
interdisciplinary scientific knowledge together with the advanced computer modeling skills 
during the innovative research projects at James Cook University in Townsville, Australia in 
2000 – 2014 after the graduation from V. N. Karazyn Kharkov National University in Kharkov, 
Ukraine in 1994 – 1999. 
The second author would like to appreciate a long hours discussion on the M&A 
transactions by the multinationals in the conditions of globalization in the 19th to the 21st 

89 
 
centuries with Prof. Geoffrey Jones, Harvard University, which had place at the University of 
Toronto in Canada in 2006. 
In addition, the second author would like to thank the Presidents of the Empire Club of 
Canada, Economic Club of Toronto, Canadian Club and the Prof. Roger L. Martin, former Dean 
of the Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto for their valuable help in the 
organization of many hundreds of business meetings with the senior executives from the 
Canadian and American multinational corporations, insurance companies, international banks, 
investment funds and universities, which have been conducted with the aim to discuss the 
modern M&A transactions strategies selection and implementation techniques together with the 
industry specific trends in North America over the last decades. The obtained valuable 
information has been collected, researched, analyzed and partly used in preparation of this 
research article. The second author takes this opportunity to thank all the researchers and 
business partners, who were involved in the intensive research on the M&A transactions, which 
has been conducted for more than 20 years since the time of the graduation from V. N. Karazyn 
Kharkov National University in Kharkov, Ukraine in 1988 – 1993. 
We think that our initial research findings highlight both: 1) the complexity of considered 
research problems, and 2) the novelty of obtained research results. Therefore, our next research 
phase will certainly improve our evolving understanding on the mergers and acquisitions 
transactions selection and implementation strategies in the diffusion - type financial systems in 
the highly volatile global capital markets with the nonlinearities, aiming to continue to 
accumulate the necessary critical mass of knowledge on the modern M&A transactions theories 
and practices. Of course, there are many possible avenues to explore the research on the M&A 
transaction strategies and we would like to conclude this innovative article by making the 
following optimistic statement in UNCTAD (2000): “M&As became an important source of 
finance at the time of the crisis, thereby contributing to the speedy recovery of the economies. 
True, under normal circumstances it is possible for an acquirer to raise capital in the local 
financial markets without bringing in new capital from outside. But in the crisis- hit countries 
which experience a credit crunch and depressed domestic financial markets, cross-border M&As 
necessarily entail fresh capital inflows from the outside.” 
The second author had a wonderful opportunity to discuss the M&A transactions 
completion in New York in the USA and related research topics with Charles K. Whitehead, 
Professor of Business Law, Cornell University Law School, New York, USA during the six 
informative invited lectures on the M&A corporate deals, dynamics of the boards of directors, 
and legal aspects of corporate governance in New York in the USA, which have been delivered at 

90 
 
V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University in the City of Kharkiv in the State of Ukraine in 
December, 2014. The second author expresses his personal thanks to Charles K. Whitehead for 
the presentation of the business cases studies with a particular accent on the poison pills 
technique application in the M&A business deals in the USA. The comprehensive discussions on 
the M&A business deals strategies are also acknowledged. 
Finally, it may be interesting to note that the authors faced the following situations 
frequently: Looking at the Vacheron Constantin Patrimony Traditionnelle World Time Swiss 
mechanical watch, we understand that it is time to board for the next international business flight 
to attend the business meetings, conferences and symposiums to deliver our invited presentations; 
hence, we would like to make a note that the work on the complete version of our research paper 
is still in progress. 
 

 
References: 
Finances Science, Economics Science, Econometrics Science, Econophysics Science: 
1. Bagehot W 1873, 1897 Lombard Street: A description of the money market               
Charles Scribner's Sons New York USA. 
2. Fisher I 1892 Mathematical investigations in the theory of value and prices Transactions of 
the Connecticut Academy 9 pp 1 – 124. 
3. Bachelier L 1900 Theorie de la speculation Annales de l’Ecole Normale Superieure Paris 
France vol 17 pp 21-86. 
4. Ricci U Curve crescenti di ofelimita elementare e di domanda Giornale degli Economisti 
Series 2, 29 pp 112 – 138. 
5. Volterra V 1906 L’economia matematica ed il nuovo manual del prof. Pareto Giornale degli 
Economisti Series 2, 32 pp 296 – 301. 
6. Slutsky E E 1910 Theory of marginal utility M Sc Thesis Vernadsky National Library Kiev 
Ukraine. 
7. Slutsky Е Е 1912 Theory of correlation and elements of study about distribution curves Kiev 
Commerce Institute Bulletin 16 pp 1 – 208 Kiev Ukraine. 
8. Slutsky Е Е 1913 On the criterion of goodness of fit of the regression lines and the best 
method of fitting them to the data Journal Royal Statistics Society vol 77 part I pp 78 – 84. 

91 
 
9. Slutsky Е Е 1914 Sir William Petty: Short overview of his economic visions with attachment 
of his several important research works Kiev Commerce Institute Bulletin 18 pp 5 – 48 Kiev 
Ukraine. 
10. Slutsky Е Е 1915 Sulla teoria sel bilancio del consumatore Giornale degli economisti e ri 
vista di statistica 51 no 1 pp 1 – 26 Italy. 
11. Slutsky Е Е 1922a Statistics and mathematics. Review of Kaufman Statistics Bulletin 3 – 4        
pp 104 – 120. 
12. Slutsky E E 1922b To the question of logical foundations of probability calculation Statistics 
Bulletin 9 - 12 pp 13 – 21. 
13. Slutsky E E 1923a On the some patterns of correlation connection and the systematic error of 
correlation coefficient Statistics Bulletin 1 – 3 pp 31 – 50. 
14. Slutsky E E 1923b On a new coefficient of mean density of population Statistics Bulletin 4 – 
6 pp 5 – 19. 
15. Slutsky E E 1923c On calculation of state revenue from emission of paper money Local 
Economy 2 pp 39 – 62 Kiev Ukraine. 
16. Slutsky E E 1925a On the law of large numbers Statistics Bulletin 7 – 9 pp 1 – 55. 
17. Slutsky E E 1925b Ueber stochastische Asymptoten und Grenzwerte Metron Padova Italy    
vol 5 no 3 pp 3 – 89. 
18. Slutzhi E E 1926 Ein Beitrag zur Formal-praxeologischen Grundlegung der Oekonomik Ann 
de la classe des sci soc-econ Akad Oukrainienne des Sciences Kiev Ukraine vol 4 pp 3 – 12. 
19. Slutsky E E 1927a The summation of random causes as sources of cyclic processes Problems 
of Conjuncture (Voprosy Kon’yunktury) vol 3 issue 1 pp 34 – 64 Moscow Russian 
Federation. 
20. Slutzhi Е Е 1927b Zur Kritik des Bohm-Bawerkschen Wertbegriffs und seiner Lehre von der 
Messbarkeit des Wertes Schmollers Jb 51 (4) pp 37 – 52. 
21. Slutsky E E 1929 Sur l’erreur quadratique mogenne du coefficient de correlation dans le cas 
des suites des epreuves non independantes Comptes rendus 189 pp 612 – 614. 
22. Slutsky E E 1935 To the extrapolation problem in connection with forecast problem 
Geophysics Journal 5 (3) pp 263 – 277. 
23. Slutsky E E 1937a Quelche propositione relative alla teoria delle funzioni aleatorie Giornale 
dell Istituto Italiano degli Attuari 8 no 2 pp 3 – 19. 
24. Slutsky E E 1937b The summation of random causes as the source of cyclical processes 
Econometrica 5 pp 105 – 146. 

92 
 
25. Slutsky E E 1942, 1999 Autobiography of December 3, 1942 Economics School 5               
pp 18 – 21. 
26. Slutsky E E 1960 Selected research works (Izbrannye trudy) Academy of Sciences of USSR 
Moscow Russian Federation. 
27. Kolmogorov A N 1948 Slutsky. The obituary Uspekhi Matematicheskih Nauk vol 3 issue 4 
Moscow Russian Federation 
28. Smirnov N V 1948 E E Slutsky Izvestia Akademii Nauk SSSR vol 12 pp 417 – 420. 
29. Allen R G D 1936 Professor Slutsky theory of consumers choice Review of Economic Studies 
1 pp 110 – 121. 
30. Allen R G D 1950 The work of Eugen Slutsky Econometrica vol 18 pp 209 – 216. 
31. Afriat S N 1972 A case of vanishing Slutsky matrix Journal of Economic Theory 5               
pp 208 – 223. 
32. Diewert W E 1977 Generalized Slutsky conditions for aggregate consumer demand functions 
Journal of Economic Theory 15 pp 353 - 362. 
33. Könus A A 1978 Slutsky in Kruskal W H, Tanur J M (editors) International Stat Enc vol 2               
pp 1000 – 1001 New York – London USA – UK. 
34. Chipman J S, Lenfant J-S 2002 Slutsky's 1915 article: How it came to be found and 
interpreted History of Political Economy vol 34 no 3 pp 553 – 597. 
35. Barnett V 2006 Chancing an interpretation: Slutsky’s random cycles revisited European 
Journal History of Economic Thought 13 (3) pp 411 – 432 ISSN 0967-2567 print/ISSN 
1469-5936 online DOI: 10.1080/09672560600875596 http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals . 
36. Sheynin O 2010 Evgeny Slutsky: Collected statistical papers pp 1 – 265               
ISBN 3-938417-82-X Berlin Germany. 
37. Yule G 1927 On a method of investigating periodicities in disturbed series, with special 
reference to Wolfer's sunspot numbers Phil. 
38. Schumpeter J S 1934 The theory of economic development Harvard University Press 
Cambridge Massachusetts USA. 
39. Osborne M F M 1959 Brownian motion in the stock market Operations Research 7              
pp 145 – 173. 
40. Alexander S S 1961 Price movements in speculative markets: Trends or random walks 
Industrial Management Review 2 pp 7 – 26. 
41. Shiryaev A N 1961 The problem of the most rapid detection of a disturbance in a stationary 
process Soviet Mathematical Doklady 2 pp 795 – 799. 

93 
 
42. Shiryaev A N 1963 On optimal methods in quickest detection problems Theory of 
Probability and its Applications 8 (1) pp 22 – 46. 
43. Shiryaev A N 1964 On Markov sufficient statistics in non-additive Bayes problems of 
sequential analysis Theory of Probability and its Applications 9 (4) pp 670 – 686. 
44. Shiryaev A N 1965 Some exact formulas in a ’disorder’ problem Theory of Probability and 
its Applications 10 pp 348 – 354. 
45. Grigelionis B I, Shiryaev A N 1966 On Stefan’s problem and optimal stopping rules for 
Markov processes Theory of Probability and its Applications 11 pp 541 – 558. 
46. Shiryaev A N 1967 Two problems of sequential analysis Cybernetics 3 pp 63 - 69. 
47. Shiryaev A N 1978 Optimal stopping rules Springer Berlin Germany. 
48. Shiryaev A N 1998a Foundations of stochastic financial mathematics vol 1 Fazis Scientific 
and 
Publishing 
House 
Moscow 
Russian 
Federation 
ISBN 
5-7036-0044-8               
pp 1 – 492. 
49. Shiryaev A N 1998b Foundations of stochastic financial mathematics vol 2 Fazis Scientific 
and 
Publishing 
House 
Moscow 
Russian 
Federation 
ISBN 
5-7036-0044-8               
pp 493 – 1017. 
50. Graversen S E, Peskir G, Shiryaev A N 2001 Stopping Brownian motion without anticipation 
as close as possible to its ultimate maximum Theory of Probability and its Applications 45 pp 
125 – 136 MR1810977 http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1810977 . 
51. Kallsen J, Shiryaev A N 2001 Time change representation of stochastic integrals Theory of 
Probability 
and 
its 
Applications 
46 
pp 
579 
- 
585 
MR1978671 
http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1978671 . 
52. Kallsen J, Shiryaev A N 2002 The cumulant process and Esscher’s change of measure 
Finance 
Stoch 
6 
pp 
397 
– 
428 
MR1932378 
http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-
getitem?mr=1932378 . 
53. Shiryaev A N 2002 Quickest detection problems in the technical analysis of the financial 
data Proceedings Mathematical Finance Bachelier Congress Paris France (2000) Springer 
Germany pp 487 - 521 MR1960576 http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1960576 . 
54. Jacod J, Shiryaev A N 2003 Limit theorems for stochastic processes 2nd edition Grundlehren 
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences] 288 
Springer Berlin Germany MR1943877 http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=1943877  
55. Peskir G, Shiryaev A N 2006 Optimal stopping and free-boundary problems Lectures in 
Mathematics 
ETH 
Zürich 
Birkhäuser 
Switzerland 
MR2256030 
http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=2256030 . 

94 
 
56. Feinberg E A, Shiryaev A N 2006 Quickest detection of drift change for Brownian motion in 
generalized 
Bayesian 
and 
mini-max 
settings 
Statistics 
& 
Decisions 
24 
(4)               
pp 445 – 470. 
57. du Toit J, Peskir G, Shiryaev A N 2007 Predicting the last zero of Brownian motion with 
drift Cornell University NY USA pp 1- 17 http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.3415v1 . 
58. Shiryaev A N 2008a Generalized Bayesian nonlinear quickest detection problems: on 
Markov family of sucient statistics Mathematical Control Theory and Finance Proceedings 
of the Workshop of April 10–14 2007 Lisbon Portugal Sarychev A et al editors Springer 
Berlin Germany pp 377 - 386. 
59. Shiryaev A N 2008b Optimal stopping rules 3rd edition Springer Germany. 
60. Eberlein E, Papapantoleon A, Shiryaev A N 2008 On the duality principle in option pricing: 
Semimartingale setting Finance Stoch 12 pp 265 – 292 http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-
getitem?mr=2390191 . 
61. Shiryaev A N, Novikov A A 2009 On a stochastic version of the trading rule "Buy and Hold" 
Statistics & Decisions 26 (4) pp 289 – 302. 
62. Eberlein E, Papapantoleon A, Shiryaev A N 2009 Esscher transform and the duality principle 
for multidimensional semimartingales The Annals of Applied Probability vol 19 no 5 pp 1944 
- 1971 http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/09-AAP600 http://arxiv.org/abs/0809.0301v5 . 
63. Shiryaev A N, Zryumov P Y 2009 On the linear and nonlinear generalized Bayesian disorder 
problem (discrete time case) optimality and risk – modern trends in mathematical finance 
The Kabanov Festschrift Delbaen F et al editors Springer Berlin Germany               
pp 227 – 235. 
64. Gapeev P V, Shiryaev A N 2010 Bayesian quickest detection problems for some diffusion 
processes Cornell University NY USA pp 1 - 25 http://arxiv.org/abs/1010.3430v2 . 
65. Karatzas I, Shiryaev A N, Shkolnikov M 2011 The one-sided Tanaka equation with drift 
Cornell University NY USA http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.4069v1 . 
66. Shiryaev A N, Zhitlukhin M V 2012 Optimal stopping problems for a Brownian motion with 
a 
disorder 
on 
a 
finite 
interval 
Cornell 
University 
NY 
USA 
pp 
1 
- 
10 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1212.3709v1 . 
67. Zhitlukhin M V, Shiryaev A N 2012 Bayesian disorder detection problems on filtered 
probability spaces Theory of Probability and Its Applications 57 (3) pp 453 – 470. 
68. Feinberg E A, Mandava M, Shiryaev A N 2013 On solutions of Kolmogorov’s equations for 
nonhomogeneous jump Markov processes Cornell University NY USA pp 1 – 15 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.6998v3 . 

95 
 
69. Akerlof G, Stiglitz J E 1966 Investment, income and wages Econometrica 34 (5) p 118. 
70. Stiglitz J E 1969 Theory of innovation: Discussion American Economic Review 59 (2)           
pp 46 – 49. 
71. Rothschild M, Stiglitz J 1976 Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the 
economics of imperfect information Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 pp 629 – 649. 
72. Stiglitz J, Weiss A 1981 Credit rationing in markets with incomplete information American 
Economic Review 71 pp 393 – 409. 
73. Stiglitz J E 1988 Randomization with asymmetric information RAND Journal of Economics 
19 (3) pp 344 – 362. 
74. Greenwald B, Stiglitz J E 1990 Asymmetric information and the new theory of the firm: 
Financial constraints and risk behavior American Economic Review 80 (2) pp 160 – 165. 
75. J E Stiglitz 2001, 2002 Joseph E Stiglitz - Biographical The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in 
Economic 
Sciences 
in 
Memory 
of 
Alfred 
Nobel 
2001 
p 
1 
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2001/stiglitz-bio.html . 
76. Richiardi M, Gallegati M, Greenwald B, Stiglitz J 2007 The asymmetric effect of diffusion 
processes: Risk sharing and contagion Global Economy Journal vol 8 issue 3 pp 1 – 10  
ISSN (Online) 1524-5861 DOI: 10.2202/1524-5861.1365 . 
77. Stiglitz J E 2013 Five years in limbo Columbia University 3022 Broadway NY USA 
http://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/chazen/globalinsights/node/218/Five%20Years%20in%20Li
mbo# . 
78. Jaffee D, Russell T 1976 Imperfect information, uncertainty and credit rationing Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 90 pp 651 – 666. 
79. Leland H E, Pyle D H 1977 Information asymmetries, financial structure, and financial 
intermediation The Journal of Finance 32 pp 371 – 387. 
80. Bernanke B S 1979 Long-term commitments, dynamic optimization, and the business cycle 
Ph. D. Thesis Department of Economics Massachusetts Institute of Technology USA. 
81. Bernanke B S, Blinder A S 1992 The federal funds rate and the channels of monetary 
transmission American Economic Review 82 (4) pp 901 – 921. 
82. Bernanke B S, Gertler M 1995 Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary policy 
transmission Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4) pp 27 – 48. 
83. Bernanke B S 2002 Deflation: “Making sure it doesn’t happen here.” Speech before the 
National Economists Club Washington DC http://www.federalreserve.gov. 
84. Bernanke B S 2004 The great moderation www.federalreserve.gov.  

96 
 
85. Bernanke B S, Reinhart V R 2004 Conducting monetary policy at very low short-term 
interest rates The American Economic Review vol 94 no 2 pp 85 – 90. 
86. Bernanke B S, Reinhart V R, Sack B P 2004 Monetary policy alternatives at the zero bound: 
an empirical assessment Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Issue 2 pp 1–78. 
87. Bernanke B S 2007 The financial accelerator and the credit channel Speech at The Credit 
Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century Conference Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta Georgia USA. 
88. Bernanke B S 2009a The crisis and the policy response Federal Reserve USA. 
89. Bernanke B S 2009b On the outlook for the economy and policy Bank for International 
Settlements Basel Switzerland http://www.bis.org/review/r091119a.pdf . 
90. Bernanke B S 2009c The Federal Reserve's balance sheet – an update Bank for International 
Settlements Basel Switzerland http://www.bis.org/review/r091013a.pdf . 
91. Bernanke B S 2009d Regulatory reform Bank for International Settlements Basel 
Switzerland http://www.bis.org/review/r091006a.pdf . 
92. Bernanke B S 2009e Policy responses to the financial crisis Public Lecture on 13.01.2009 
London 
School 
of 
Economics 
and 
Political 
Science 
London 
UK. 
http://richmedia.lse.ac.uk/publicLecturesAndEvents/20090113_1300_policyResponsesToThe
FinancialCrisis.mp3 . 
93. Bernanke B S 2010a Monetary policy and the housing bubble Annual Meeting of the 
American Economic Association Atlanta Georgia USA. 
94. Bernanke B S 2010b Causes of the recent financial and economic crisis testimony before the 
Financial 
Crisis 
Inquiry 
Commission 
Washington 
USA 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100902a.htm . 
95. Bernanke B S 2012a Some reflections on the crisis and the policy response Rethinking 
Finance: Perspectives on the Crisis conference sponsored by the Russell Sage Foundation 
and 
The 
Century 
Foundation 
New 
York 
USA 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120413a.htm . 
96. Bernanke B S 2012b Monetary policy since the onset of the crisis The Changing Policy 
Landscape symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole 
Wyoming USA www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120831a.htm . 
97. Bernanke B S 2013a Financial and economic education 13th Annual Redefining Investment 
Strategy Education (RISE) Forum Dayton Ohio USA. 
98. Bernanke B S 2013b Stress testing banks: What have we learned? Maintaining Financial 
Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 

97 
 
Atlanta 
Stone 
Mountain 
Ga 
USA 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20130408a.htm . 
99. Bernanke B S 2013c Monitoring the financial system 49th Annual Conference on Bank 
Structure and Competition sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Chicago 
Illinois USA pp 1 – 16. 
100. 
Bernanke B S 2013d A century of U.S. central banking: Goals, frameworks, 
accountability The first 100 years of the Federal Reserve: The policy record, lessons learned, 
and prospects for the future conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic 
Research Cambridge Massachusetts USA. 
101. 
Bernanke 2013e Teaching and learning about the Federal Reserve A Teacher Town Hall 
Meeting: 100 Years of the Federal Reserve Washington DC USA pp 1 – 5. 
102. 
Bernanke 2013f The crisis as a classic financial panic Fourteenth Jacques Polak Annual 
Research Conference Washington DC USA pp 1 - 9. 
103. 
Bernanke B S 2013g Remarks by Ben S Bernanke Ceremony Commemorating the 
Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act Washington DC USA. 
104. 
Bernanke B S 2013h Concluding Remarks by Ben S Bernanke Ceremony 
Commemorating the Centennial of the Federal Reserve Act Washington DC USA. 
105. 
Bernanke B S, Blanchard O, Summers L H, Weber A A 2013 What should economists 
and policymakers learn from the financial crisis? Public Lecture on 25.03.2013 London 
School of Economics and Political Science London UK 
http://media.rawvoice.com/lse_publiclecturesandevents/richmedia.lse.ac.uk/publiclecturesan
devents/20130325_1715_whatShouldEconomistsAndPolicymakersLearn.mp4 ; 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20130325a.htm. 
106. 
Shiller R J, Pound J 1989 Survey evidence on the diffusion of interest and information 
among investors Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12 pp 47 – 66. 
107. 
Conley T G, Hansen L P, Luttmer E G J, Scheinkman J A 1997 Short-term interest rates 
as subordinated diffusions The Review of Financial Studies vol 10 no 3 pp 525 – 577 
http://rfs.oxfordjournals.org/ . 
108. 
Fischer S 1999 On the need for an international lender of last resort Journal of Economic 
Perspectives vol 13 Fall pp 85 – 104. 
109. 
Stock J H, Watson M W 2002 Macroeconomic forecasting using diffusion indexes 
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20 no 2 pp 147 – 162. 
110. 
Xiaohong Chen, Hansen L P, Carrasco M 2009 Nonlinearities and temporal dependence 
CIRANO ISSN 1198-8177 pp 1 – 33. 

98 
 
Firm Theory Science, Business Administration Science: 
111. 
Babbage Ch 1832 On the economy of machinery and manufacturers Charles Knight 13 
Pall Mall East London UK. 
112. 
Ueda 1904 Shogyo Dai Jiten (The dictionary of commerce) Japan. 
113. 
Ueda 1937 Keieikeizaigaku Saran (The science of business administration, Allgemeine 
Betriebswirtschaftslehre) Japan. 
114. 
Marshall A 1923 Money, credit, and commerce Prometheus Books Amherst New York 
USA ISBN 13: 9781591020363. 
115. 
Berle A, Means G 1932a The modern corporation and private property The Commerce 
Clearing House New York USA. 
116. 
Berle A A, Means G 1932b The modern corporation MacMillan New York USA. 
117. 
Ohlin B 1933 Interregional and international trade Harvard University Press Cambridge 
Massachusetts USA. 
118. 
Coase R H 1937 The nature of the firm Economica vol 4 (16) pp 386 – 405 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x year=1937. 
119. 
Barnard C I 1938 The functions of the executive Harvard University Press Cambridge 
MA USA pp 241 – 244. 
120. 
Barnard C I 1948 Organization and management: Selected papers Harvard University 
Press Cambridge MA USA. 
121. 
Barnard C I 1949 The entrepreneur and formal organization Change and the 
Entrepreneur. Harvard University Press Cambridge MA USA. 
122. 
Barnard C I 1958 Elementary conditions of business morale California Management 
Review vol 1 no 1. 
123. 
Solow R M August 1957 Technical changes and the aggregate production function 
Review of Economics and Statistics 39 pp 214 – 231. 
124. 
Modigliani F, Miller M June 1958 The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the theory 
of investment American Economic Review pp 261 – 297. 
125. 
Baumol W 1959 Business behaviour, value and growth. 
126. 
Baumol W 1962 The theory of expansion of the firm American Economic Review. 
127. 
Penrose E T 1959 The theory of the growth of the firm Oxford University Press Oxford 
UK, John Wiley and Sons Inc New York USA. 
128. 
Marris R May 1963 A model of the managerial enterprise Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 77 pp 185 – 209. 

99 
 
129. 
Telser L 1963 Cutthroat competition and the long purse Journal of Law and Economics 9    
pp 259 – 277. 
130. 
Williamson O E 1964 The economics of discretionary behavior: Managerial objectives in 
a theory of the firm Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs NJ USA. 
131. 
Williamson O E 1975 Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications Free 
Press New York USA. 
132. 
Williamson O E 1988 Corporate finance and corporate governance Journal of Finance 43    
pp 567 – 591. 
133. 
Cyert R, March J G 1963, 1992 A behavioral theory of the firm Wiley-Blackwell 2nd 
edition ISBN 0-631-17451-6. 
134. 
Fogel R 1964 Railroads and American economic growth: Essays in econometric history 
Johns Hopkins Press Baltimore USA. 
135. 
Manne H G 1965 Mergers and the market for corporate control Journal of Political 
Economy 73-74 pp 110 – 120. 
136. 
Stigler G 1968 The organization of industry Richard Irwin Inc Homewood USA. 
137. 
Mano O 1968-1969 On the science of business administration in Japan Hokudai 
Economic Papers vol 1 pp 77 – 93 Hokkaido University Japan. 
138. 
Mano O 1970-1971 The development of the science of business administration in Japan 
since 1955 Hokudai Economic Papers vol 2 pp 30 – 42 Hokkaido University Japan. 
139. 
Mano O 1972-1973 An approach to the organization economy - The development of 
Barnard's theory Hokudai Economic Papers vol 3 Hokkaido University Japan. 
140. 
Mano O 1975-1976 Social responsibility of the firm-one development of Barnard's theory 
Hokudai Economic Papers vol 5 Hokkaido University Japan. 
141. 
Mano O 1978 Soshiki Keizai no Kaimei (Organization economy - A study of the 
management theory of C. L. Barnard) Bunshindo Tokyo Japan. 
142. 
Mano O 1980-1981 Barnard's theory of education for executives Hokudai Economic 
Papers vol 10 Hokkaido University Japan. 
143. 
Mano O 1987 Barnard no Keiei Riron (Management Theory of C. I. Barnard) Bunshindo 
Tokyo Japan. 
144. 
Mano O 1994 The Differences between Barnard's and Simon's Concept of Organization 
Equilibrium-Simon's Misunderstanding about Barnard's Intention Economic Journal of 
Hokkaido University vol 23 Hokkaido University Japan. 
145. 
Mano O 1995 On the Significance of Lateral Organization In C. I. Barnard's Theory 
Economic Journal of Hokkaido University vol 24 pp 1 – 13 Hokkaido University Japan. 

100 
 
146. 
Black F, Scholes M 1973 The pricing of options and corporate liabilities Journal of 
Political Economy vol 81 pp 637 – 654. 
147. 
Black F, Cox J C 1976 Valuing corporate securities: Some effects of bond indenture 
provisions Journal of Finance vol 31 pp 351 – 367. 
148. 
Merton R C 1973 Theory of rational option pricing Bell Journal of Economics and 
Management Science vol 4 pp 141 – 183. 
149. 
Merton R C 1974 On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates 
Journal of Finance vol 29 pp 449 – 470. 
150. 
Lee, Jung Hwan 1975 An essay on the theory of the firm 
 vol 2 pp 133 – 153. 
151. 
Jensen M C, Meckling W H 1976 Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs 
and ownership structure Journal of Financial Economics 3 pp 305 – 360. 
152. 
Jensen M C, Ruback R S 1983 The market for corporate control: The scientific evidence 
Journal of Financial Economics 11 pp 5 – 50. 
153. 
Jensen M C 1986 Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers 
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings of the 98th Annual Meeting of the 
American Economic Association76 (2) pp 323 – 329. 
154. 
Jensen M C September-October 1989 The eclipse of the public corporation Harvard 
Business Review 67 (5) pp 61 – 74 
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=146149 . 
155. 
Jensen M C, Murphy K J 1990 Performance pay and top management incentives Journal 
of Political Economy 98 (2) pp 225 – 264. 
156. 
Jensen M C 1993 The modern industrial revolution: Exit and the failure of internal 
control systems Journal of Finance 48 (3) pp 831 – 880. 
157. 
Jensen M C 2007 The economic case for private equity Unpublished Harvard NOM 
Research Paper no 07-02. 
158. 
Fama E 1980 Agency problems and the theory of the firm Journal of Political Economy 
88 pp 288 – 307. 
159. 
Fama E, Jensen M 1983 Separation of ownership and control Journal of Law and 
Economics 26 pp 301 – 325. 
160. 
Fama E, Jensen M 1985 Organizational forms and investment decisions Journal of 
Financial Economics vol 14 pp 101 – 119. 
161. 
Demsetz H 1983 The structure of ownership and the theory of the firm Journal of Law 
and Economics vol 26 pp 375 – 390. 

101 
 
162. 
Demsetz H 1997 Theories of the firm: Their contrasts and implications Chung-Hua 
Series of Lectures no 25 The Institute of Economics Academia Sinica Nankang Taipei 
Taiwan Republic of China. 
163. 
Wernerfelt B 1984 A resource-based view of the firm Strategic Management Journal 5        
pp 171 – 180. 
164. 
Wernerfelt B 1995 The resource-based view of the firm: Ten years after Strategic 
Management Journal 16 pp 171 – 174. 
165. 
Lode Li 1986 A stochastic theory of the firm Working Paper no 1844-86 Sloan School of 
Management MIT USA. 
166. 
Perrow C 1986 Complex organizations Random House New York USA. 
167. 
Hart O, Moore J 1990 Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm Journal of Political 
Economy vol 98 no 6 pp 1119 – 1158. 
168. 
Hart O 2011 Thinking about the firm: A review of Daniel Spulber’s the theory of the firm 
Journal of Economic Literature 49 (1) pp 101 – 113 
http:www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/jel.49.1.101 . 
169. 
Sterman 2000 Business dynamics McGraw Hill USA. 
170. 
Williamson O E 2002 The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice to 
Contract Journal of Economic Perspectives vol 16(3) pp 171-195. 
171. 
Gompers P A, Metrick A, Ishii J L 2003 Corporate governance and equity prices 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 pp 107 – 156. 
172. 
Kantarelis D 2007 Theories of the firm Inderscience Genève Switzerland               
ISBN 0-907776-34-5, ISBN: 0-907776-35-3. 
173. 
Jacobides M G 2008 Competitive environments and redefining firm and industry 
boundaries Public Lecture London School of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
174. 
Jacobides M G 2008 Can firms shape their environments to gain an architectural 
advantage? Public Lecture London School of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
175. 
Spulber D F 2009 The theory of the firm: Microeconomics with endogenous 
entrepreneurs, firms, markets, and organizations Cambridge University Press UK 
http://www.cambridge.org/9780521736602 . 
176. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013b On the theory of firm in nonlinear dynamic 
financial 
and 
economic 
systems 
Cornell 
University 
NY 
USA 
www.arxiv.org 
1206.4426v2.pdf pp 1 – 27. 
Merger and Acquisition Science, Business Administration Science: 

102 
 
177. 
Nelson R L 1959 Merger movements in American industry 1895 – 1956 Princeton NJ 
Princeton University Press USA. 
178. 
Nelson R L, Winter S 1978 Forces generating and limiting concentration under 
Schumpeterian competition Bell Journal Economics 9 pp 524 – 548. 
179. 
Penrose 1959 The theory of the growth of the firm Blackwell London UK. 
180. 
Marris R 1964 The economic theory of managerial capitalism Macmillan London UK. 
181. 
Manne H G 1965 Mergers and the market for corporate control Journal of Political 
Economy 73 pp 110 – 120. 
182. 
Thompson J D 1967 Organizations in action McGraw Hill New York USA. 
183. 
Levy H, Sarnat M 1970 Diversification, portfolio analysis and the uneasy case for 
conglomerate mergers Journal of Finance 25 pp 795 – 802. 
184. 
Lewellen W G 1971 A pure financial rationale for the conglomerate merger Journal of 
Finance 26 pp 521 – 537. 
185. 
Weston F, Mansinghka S 1971 Tests of the efficiency performance of conglomerate firms 
The Journal of Finance 42 pp 943 – 963. 
186. 
Fama E F, Miller M H 1972 The theory of finance Holt, Rinehart and Winston NY USA. 
187. 
Fama E F 1980 Agency problems and the theory of the firm Journal of Political Economy 
88 pp 288 – 307. 
188. 
Fama E, Hansen L P, Shiller R 2013 Lectures: 2013 Nobel prize in economic sciences 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WzxZGvrpFu4 , www.nobelprize.org . 
189. 
Kirzner I 1973 Competition and entrepreneurship University of Chicago Press USA. 
190. 
Higgins R C, Schall L D 1975 Corporate bankruptcy and conglomerate merger Journal of 
Finance 30 pp 93 – 111. 
191. 
Jensen M C, Meckling W H 1976 Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs 
and ownership structure Journal of Financial Economics 3 pp 305 – 360. 
192. 
Jensen M C, Ruback R S 1983 The market for corporate control Journal of Financial 
Economics 11 (1– 4) pp 5 – 50. 
193. 
Jensen M C 1986 Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers               
The American Economic Review 76 pp 323 – 329. 
194. 
Jensen M C 1987 The takeover controversy: Analysis and evidence Oxford University 
Press Oxford UK. 
195. 
Jensen M C 1988 Takeovers; Their causes and consequences Journal of Economic 
Perspective 2 (1) pp 21 – 48. 

103 
 
196. 
Jensen M C, Murphy K J 1990 Performance pay and top-management incentives Journal 
of Political Economy 98 pp 225 – 264. 
197. 
Jensen M C 1991 Corporate control and the politics of finance Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance 4 (2) pp 13 – 34. 
198. 
Jensen M C 1993 The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal 
control systems Journal of Finance vol 48 pp 831 – 880. 
199. 
Steiner P O 1976 Mergers: Motives, effects and policies University of Michigan Press 
USA. 
200. 
Kim E H, McConnell J J 1977 Corporate mergers and the co-insurance of corporate debt 
Journal of Finance 32 pp 349 – 365. 
201. 
Lucas R E 1978 On the size distribution of business firm Bell Journal of Economics 9 (2) 
pp 508 – 523. 
202. 
Salter M, Weinhold W 1979 Diversification through acquisition The Free Press New 
York USA. 
203. 
Bradley M 1980 Inter firm tender offers and the market for corporate control The Journal 
of Business 53 (4) pp 345 – 376. 
204. 
Grossman S J, Hart O D 1980 Takeover bids, the free rider problem, and the theory of the 
corporation Bell Journal of Economics vol 11 pp 42 – 64. 
205. 
Mueller D 1980 The determinants and effects of mergers: An international comparison 
Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Hain Cambridge Massachusetts USA. 
206. 
Mueller D 1984 Mergers and market share Review of Economics and Statistics vol 67          
pp 259 – 267. 
207. 
Mueller D 1987 The corporation: Growth, diversification and mergers University of 
Maryland USA. 
208. 
Mueller D C 1989 Mergers, causes, effects and policies International Journal of 
Industrial Organization vol 7. 
209. 
Scherer R M 1980 Industrial market structure and economic performance 2nd edition 
Houghton Mifflin Company USA. 
210. 
Amihud Y, Baruch L 1981 Risk reduction as managerial motive for conglomerate 
mergers Bell Journal of Economics 12 (2) pp 823 – 837. 
211. 
Asquith P, Kim E H 1982 The impact of merger bids on the participating firms' security 
holders Journal of Finance 37 pp 1209 – 1228. 
212. 
Asquith P 1983 Merger bids, uncertainty, and stock-holder returns Journal of Financial 
Economics 11 pp 81 – 114. 

104 
 
213. 
Asquith P, Bruner R F, Mullins D W Jr 1983 The gains to bidding firms from mergers 
Journal of Financial Economics 11 (1) pp 121– 139. 
214. 
Hennart J-F 1982 A theory of multinational enterprise University of Michigan Press Ann 
Arbor MI USA. 
215. 
Hennart J-F 1988 A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures Strategic 
Management Journal 9 (4) pp 361 – 374. 
216. 
Hennart J-F, Park Y-R 1993 Greenfield versus acquisition: The strategy of Japanese 
investors in the United States Management Science 39 (9) pp 1054 – 1069. 
217. 
Hennart J-F, Reddy S 1997 The choice between mergers/acquisitions and joint ventures: 
The case of Japanese investors in the United States Strategic Management Journal 18 pp 1 – 
12 CCC 0143–2095/97/010001–12. 
218. 
Stapleton R 1982 Mergers, debt capacity, and the valuation of corporate loans in Keenan 
M, White L J (editors) Mergers and acquisitions Chapter 2 DC Heath Lexington MA USA. 
219. 
Eckbo B E 1983 Horizontal mergers, collusion, and stockholder wealth Journal of 
Financial Economics 11 (1 – 4) pp 241 – 273. 
220. 
Eckbo B E 2009 Bidding strategies and takeover premiums: A review Journal of 
Corporate Finance 15 (1) pp 149 – 178. 
221. 
Eger C E 1983 An empirical test of the redistribution effect in pure exchange mergers 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 18 pp 547 – 572. 
222. 
Lubatkin M 1983 Mergers and the performance of the acquiring firm The Academy of 
Management Review 8 (2) pp 218 – 225. 
223. 
Lubatkin M 1987 Merger strategies and stockholder value Strategic Management Journal 
8 (1) pp 39 – 53. 
224. 
Lubatkin M, Shrieves R 1986 Towards reconciliation of market performance measures to 
strategic management research Academy Management Review 11 pp 497 – 512. 
225. 
Lubatkin M, Srinivasan N, Merchant H 1997 Merger strategies and shareholder value 
during times of relaxed antitrust enforcement: The case of large mergers during the 1980s 
Journal of Management 23 pp 59 – 81. 
226. 
Lubatkin M, Schweiger D, Weber Y 1998 Top management turnover in related M&As: 
An additional test of the theory of relative standing Journal of Management vol 25 no 1              
pp 39 – 52. 
227. 
Lubatkin M, Schulze W, Mainkar A, Cotterill R 2001 Ecological investigation of firm 
effects in horizontal mergers Strategic Management Journal 22 pp 335 – 357. 

105 
 
228. 
Malatesta P H 1983 The wealth effect of merger activity and the objective functions of 
merging firms Journal of Financial Economics 11 pp 155 – 181. 
229. 
Salant S W, Switzer S, Reynolds R J 1983 Losses from horizontal merger: The effects of 
an exogenous change in industry structure on Cournot-Nash equilibrium The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 108 pp 185 – 199. 
230. 
Wansley J, Lane W, Yang H 1983 Abnormal returns to acquired firms by type of 
acquisition and method of payment Financial Management 12 pp 16 – 22. 
231. 
Blake R R, Monton J S 1984 How to achieve integration on the human side of the merger 
Organizational Dynamics 13 (3) pp 41 – 56. 
232. 
Dess G G, Robinson R B 1984 Measuring organizational performance in the absence of 
objective measures: The case of the privately held firm and conglomerate business unit 
Strategic Management Journal 5 (3) pp 265 – 273. 
233. 
Geroski P 1984 On the relationship between aggregate merger activity and the stock 
market European Economic Review 25 pp 223 – 233. 
234. 
Lobue M 1984 Categorical bank acquisitions Journal of Bank Research 14 pp 274 – 282. 
235. 
Sales A, Mirvis P A 1984 When cultures collide: Issues in acquisitions in Kimberly J R, 
Quinn R E (editors) New futures: The challenge of managing corporate transitions Dow 
Jones-Irwin Homewood IL USA pp 107 – 133. 
236. 
Stewart J, Harris R, Carleton W 1984 The role of market structure in merger behavior 
Journal Industrial Economics 32 pp 293 – 312. 
237. 
Buono A F, Bowditch J L, Lewis J W 1985 When cultures collide: The anatomy of a 
merger Human Relations 38 pp 477 – 500. 
238. 
Duhaime I M 1985 Conjectures on cognitive simplification in acquisition and divestment 
decision making Academy of Management Review 10 pp 287 – 295. 
239. 
Hasbrouch J 1985 The characteristic of takeover targets. Q and other measures Journal of 
Banking and Finance 9 (3) pp 351 – 362. 
240. 
Kusewitt J B 1985 An exploratory study of strategic acquisition factors relating to 
performance Strategic Management Journal 6 pp 151 – 169. 
241. 
Malatesta P H, Thompson R 1985 Partially anticipated events: A model of stock price 
reactions with an application to corporate acquisitions Journal of Financial Economics 14   
pp 237 – 250. 
242. 
Perry M K, Porter R H 1985 Oligopoly and the incentive for horizontal merger The 
American Economic Review 75 pp 219 – 227. 

106 
 
243. 
Walkling R A, Edmister R O 1985 Determinants of tender offer premiums Financial 
Analysts Journal 41 (1) pp 27 – 37. 
244. 
Chatterjee S 1986 Types of synergy and economic value: The impact of acquisitions on 
merging and rival firms Strategic Management Journal 7 (2) pp 119 – 139. 
245. 
Chatterjee S, Lubatkin M 1990 Corporate mergers stock holder diversification and 
changes in systematic risk Strategic Management Journal 11 (4) pp 255 – 268. 
246. 
Chatterjee S 1991 Gains in vertical acquisitions and market power: Theory and evidence 
Academy of Management Journal 34 (2) pp 436 – 448. 
247. 
Chatterjee S 1992 Sources of value in takeovers, synergy or restructuring: Implications 
for target and bidder firms Strategic Management Journal 13 pp 267 – 286. 
248. 
Chatterjee S, Lubatkin M, Schweiger O, Weber Y 1992 Cultural differences and 
shareholder value in related mergers: Linking equity and human capital Strategic 
Management Journal vol 13 no 5 pp 319 – 334. 
249. 
Dennis D K, McConnell J J 1986 Corporate mergers and security returns Journal of 
Financial Economics 16 pp 143 – 187. 
250. 
Jemison D B, Sitkin S B 1986a Acquisitions: The process can be a problem Harvard 
Business Review March-April pp 107 – 116. 
251. 
Jemison D B, Sitkin S B 1986b Corporate acquisitions: A process perspective Academy 
of Management Review vol 11 no 1 pp 145 – 163. 
252. 
Montgomery C A, Wilson V A 1986 Mergers that last: A predictable pattern Strategic 
Management Journal 7 (1) pp 91 – 96. 
253. 
Palepu K G 1986 Predicting takeover targets: A methodological and empirical analysis 
Journal of Accounting and Economics 8 (1) pp 3 – 35. 
254. 
Pastena V, Ruland W 1986 The merger/bankruptcy alternative Accounting Review 61 (2)     
pp 288 – 301. 
255. 
Roll R 1986 The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers Journal of Business 59               
pp 197 – 216. 
256. 
Shleifer A, Vishny R W 1986 Large shareholders and corporate control Journal of 
Political Economy 95 pp 461 – 488. 
257. 
Shleifer A, Summers L 1988 Breach of trust in hostile takeovers in Auerbach A (editor) 
Corporate takeovers: Causes and consequences University of Chicago Press Chicago USA 
pp 33 – 59. 
258. 
Shleiper A, Vishny R W 1990 The takeover wave of the 1980s Science vol 249. 

107 
 
259. 
Shleifer A, Vishny R W 1991 Takeovers in the' 60s and the '80s: Evidence and 
implications Strategic Management Journal vol 12 pp 51 – 59. 
260. 
Shleifer A 2001 Inefficient markets Oxford University Press New York USA. 
261. 
Shleifer A, Vishny R W 2003 Stock market driven acquisitions Journal of Financial 
Economics 70 (3) pp 295 – 311. 
262. 
Shrivastava P 1986 Post-merger integration Journal of Business Strategy vol 7 no 1              
pp 65 – 76. 
263. 
De S, Duplichan D 1987 Effects of interstate bank mergers on shareholder wealth: 
Theory and evidence Geld Banken und Versicherungen pp 751 – 773. 
264. 
Hansen R G 1987 A theory for the choice of exchange medium in mergers and 
acquisitions Journal of Business 60 pp 75 – 95. 
265. 
Haspeslagh P C, Farquhar A B 1987 The acquisition integration process: A contingent 
Framework The 7th Annual International Conference of the Strategic Management Society 
Boston USA. 
266. 
Huang Y-S, Walkling R A 1987 Target abnormal returns associated with acquisition 
announcements: Payment, acquisition form, and managerial resistance Journal of Financial 
Economics 19 (2) pp 329 – 349. 
267. 
James Ch M, Wier P 1987 Returns to acquirers and competition in the acquisition market: 
The case of banking The Journal of Political Economy 95 pp 355 – 370. 
268. 
Neely W P 1987 Banking acquisitions: Acquirer and target shareholder returns Financial 
Management 16 pp 66 – 74. 
269. 
Ravenscraft D J, Scherer F M 1987a Life after takeover Journal of Industrial Economics 
36 (2) pp 147 – 156. 
270. 
Ravenscraft D J, Scherer R M 1987b Mergers, selloffs, and economy efficiency 
Brookings Institution Washington DC USA. 
271. 
Sicherman N, Pettway R 1987 Acquisition of divested assets and shareholder wealth 
Journal of Finance 42 pp 1261 – 1273. 
272. 
Singh H, Montgomery C A 1987 Corporate acquisition strategies and economic 
performance. Strategic Management Journal 8 (4) pp 377 – 386. 
273. 
Travlos N G 1987 Corporate takeover bids, methods of payment, and bidding firms’ 
stock returns Journal of Finance 42 pp 943 – 963. 
274. 
Travlos N G, Waegelein J F 1992 Executive compensation, method of payment and 
abnormal returns to bidding firms at takeover announcements Managerial & Decision 
Economics 13 (6) pp 493 – 501. 

108 
 
275. 
Trifts J W, Scanlon K P 1987 Interstate bank mergers: The early evidence Journal of 
Financial Research 10 pp 305 – 311. 
276. 
Varaiya N, Ferris K 1987 Overpaying in corporate takeovers: The winner’s curse 
Financial Analysts Journal 43 pp 64 – 73. 
277. 
Auerbach A J 1988 Mergers & acquisitions National Bureau of Economie Research 
France. 
278. 
Auerbach A J 1989 Corporate takeovers: Causes & consequences National Bureau of 
Economie Research University of Chicago Press Chicago USA. 
279. 
Barney J 1988 Returns to bidding firms in mergers and acquisitions: Reconsidering the 
relatedness hypothesis Strategic Management Journal 9 pp 71 – 78. 
280. 
Barney J 1991 Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage Journal of 
Management 17 pp 99 – 120. 
281. 
Bradley M, Desai A, Kim E H 1988 Synergistic gain from corporate acquisitions and 
their division between the stockholders of target and acquiring firms Journal of Financial 
Economics 21 (1) pp 61 – 98. 
282. 
Brown C, Medoff J L 1988 The impact of foreign acquisition on labour in Auerbach A 
(editor) Corporate takeovers: Causes and consequences University of Chicago Press Chicago 
USA pp 9 – 31. 
283. 
Hall B H 1988 The effect of takeover activity on corporate research and development in 
Auerbach A (editor) The economic effects of takeover activity University of Chicago Press 
Chicago USA. 
284. 
Hall B H 1990 The impact of corporate restructuring on industrial research and 
development Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3 pp 85 – 135. 
285. 
Hall B H 1999 Mergers and R&D revisited Quasi - Experimental Methods Symposium 
Econometrics Laboratory UC Berkeley San Francisco USA. 
286. 
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny R W 1988 Characteristics of hostile and friendly takeovers 
in Auerbach A J (editor) Corporate takeovers: Causes and consequences University of 
Chicago Press NBER Chicago IL USA. 
287. 
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny R W 1990 Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions? 
Journal of Finance 45 pp 31 – 48. 
288. 
Nahavandi A, Malekzadeh A 1988 Acculturation in mergers and acquisition Academy of 
Management Review vol 13 (1) pp 79 – 90. 
289. 
Schipper K, Thompson R 1983 The impact of merger-related regulations on the 
shareholders of bidding firms Journal of Accounting Research 21 (1) pp 184 – 221. 

109 
 
290. 
Shelton L M 1988 Strategic business fits and corporate acquisition: Empirical evidence 
Strategic Management Journal 9 (3) pp 279 – 287. 
291. 
Walsh J P 1988 Top management turnover following mergers and acquisitions Strategic 
Management Journal 9 (2) pp 173 – 183. 
292. 
Walsh J P 1989 Doing a deal: Merger and acquisition negotiations and their impact upon 
target company top management turnover Strategic Management Journal 10 (4)               
pp 307 – 322. 
293. 
Bertin W J, Ghazanfari F, Torabzadeh K M 1989 Failed bank acquisitions and successful 
bidders’ returns Financial Management 18 pp 93 – 100. 
294. 
Bulow J, Rogoff K 1989 Sovereign debt: Is to forgive to forget? American Economic 
Review 79 pp 43 – 50. 
295. 
Cantwell J 1989 Technological innovation and multinational corporations Basil Blackwell 
Oxford UK. 
296. 
Dubofsky D A, Fraser D R 1989 Regulatory change and the market for bank control in        
Gup B E (editor) Bank mergers: Current issues and perspectives Kluwer Boston USA               
pp 121 – 139. 
297. 
Fishman M J 1989 Preemptive bidding and the role of the medium of exchange in 
acquisitions Journal of Finance 44 pp 41 – 57. 
298. 
Fowler K L, Schmidt D R 1989 Determinants of tender offer post-acquisition financial 
performance Strategic Management Journal 10 (4) pp 339 – 350. 
299. 
Golbe D L, White L J 1989 A time-series analysis of mergers and acquisitions in the US 
Economy in Auerbach A J (editor) Corporate takeovers: Causes & conséquences National 
Bureau of Economie Research France. 
300. 
Hannan T H, Wolken J D 1989 Returns to bidders and targets in the acquisition process: 
Evidence from the banking industry Journal of Financial Services Research 3 pp 5 – 16. 
301. 
Hayn C 1989 Tax attributes as determinants of shareholder gains in corporate 
acquisitions Journal of Financial Economics 23 (1) pp 121 – 153. 
302. 
Jacquemin A, Slade M E 1989 Cartels, collusion and horizontal merger in Handbook of 
industrial organization Schmalensee R, Willing R (editors) North-Holland Publishing 
Company Amsterdam The Netherlands. 
303. 
Kaen F R, Tehranian H 1989 New Hampshire bank mergers: The returns to acquiring 
bank shareholders in Gup B E (editor) Bank mergers: Current issues and perspectives Kluwer 
Boston USA pp 141 – 155. 

110 
 
304. 
Ravenscraft, Scherer F M 1989 The profitability of mergers International Journal of 
Industrial Organisation vol 7 no 1 pp 101 – 116. 
305. 
Wall L D, Gup B E 1989 Market valuation effects of bank acquisitions in Gup B E 
(editor) Bank mergers: Current issues and perspectives Kluwer Boston USA 37 pp 107 – 120. 
306. 
Baradwaj B G, Fraser D R, Furtado E P H 1990 Hostile bank takeover offers: Analysis 
and implications Journal of Banking and Finance vol 14 pp 1229 – 1242. 
307. 
Baradwaj B G, Dubofsky D A, Fraser D R 1992 Bidder returns in interstate and intrastate 
bank acquisitions Journal of Financial Services Research 5 pp 261 – 273. 
308. 
Bhagat S, Shleifer A, Vishny R W 1990 Hostile takeovers in the 1980s: The return of 
corporate specialization Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics pp 1 – 72. 
309. 
Borenstein S 1990 Airline mergers airport dominance and market power The American 
Economic Review 80 no 2 102nd Annual meeting of the American Economic Association 
Meeting May 1990 pp 400 – 404. 
310. 
Datta D K, Grant J H 1990 Relationships between type of acquisition, the autonomy 
given to the acquired firm, and acquisition success: An empirical analysis Journal of 
Management 16 (1) pp 29 – 44. 
311. 
Datta D K 1991 Organizational fit and acquisition performance: Effects of post-
acquisition integration Strategic Management Journal 12 (4) pp 281 – 297. 
312. 
Datta S, Iskander-Datta M E, Raman K (1992) Executive compensation and corporate 
acquisition decisions Journal of Finance 56 (6) pp 2299 – 2336. 
313. 
Datta S, Iskandar-Datta M E 1995 Corporate partial acquisitions, total firm valuation and 
the effect of financing method Journal of Banking & Finance 19 pp 97 – 115. 
314. 
Datta S, Iskandar-Datta M, Raman K 2001 Executive compensation and corporate 
acquisition decisions The Journal of Finance 56 (6) pp 2299 – 2336. 
315. 
Farrell J, Shapiro C 1990 Horizontal mergers: An equilibrium analysis The American 
Economic Review 80 pp 107 – 126. 
316. 
Hawawini G A, Swary I 1990 Mergers and acquisitions in the U.S. banking industry: 
Evidence from the capital markets North Holland New York USA. 
317. 
Healy P M, Palepu K, Ruback R S 1990 Does corporate performance improve after 
mergers? Journal of Financial Economics 31 (2) pp 135 – 176. 
318. 
Hunt J W 1990 Changing pattern of acquisition behavior in takeovers and the 
consequences for acquisition processes Strategic Management Journal 11 (1) pp 69 – 77. 
319. 
Farrell J, Shapiro C 1990 Horizontal mergers: An equilibrium analysis The American 
Economic Review 80 pp 107 – 126. 

111 
 
320. 
Hitt M A, Hoskisson R, Ireland R 1990 Mergers and acquisitions and managerial 
commitment to innovation in M-form firms Strategic Management Journal 11 pp 29 – 47. 
321. 
Hitt M A, Hoskisson R E, Ireland R D, Harrison J S 1991 Effects of acquisition on R&D 
inputs and outputs Academy of Management Journal 34 (3) pp 693 – 706. 
322. 
Hitt M A, Hoskisson R, Johnson R, Moesel D 1996 The market for corporate control and 
firm innovation Academy of Management Journal 39 (8) pp 1084 – 1119. 
323. 
Hitt M, Harrison J, Ireland R D, Best A 1998 Attributes of successful and unsuccessful 
acquisition of US firms British Journal of Management 9 pp 91 – 114. 
324. 
Hitt M A, Harrison J, Ireland R 2001 Mergers and acquisitions: A guide to creating value 
for stakeholders Oxford University Press Oxford UK. 
325. 
Holmes Th J, Schmitz J A Jr 1990 A theory of entrepreneurship and its application to the 
study of business transfer Journal of Political Economy vol 98 no 2 pp 265 – 294. 
326. 
Kamien M I, Zang I 1990 The limits of monopolization through acquisition The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 pp 465 – 499. 
327. 
Kamien M I, Zang I 1991 Competitively cost advantageous mergers and monopolization 
Games and Economic Behaviour 3 pp 323 – 338. 
328. 
Kamien M I, Zang I 1993 Monopolization by sequential acquisition Journal of Law and 
Economic Organization 9 pp 205 – 229. 
329. 
Lahey K E, Conn R L 1990 Sensitivity of acquiring firms’ returns to alternative model 
specification and disaggregation Journal of Business and Accounting 17 pp 421 – 439. 
330. 
Loderer C, Martin K 1990 Corporate acquisitions by listed firms: The experience of a 
comprehensive sample Financial Management 19 pp 17 – 33. 
331. 
Rosett J G 1990 Do union wealth concessions explain takeover premiums? The evidence 
on contract wages Journal of Financial Economics 27 pp 263 – 282. 
332. 
Seth A 1990 Sources of value creation in acquisitions: An empirical investigation 
Strategic Management Journal 11 (6) pp 431 – 446. 
333. 
Seth A, Song K P, Pettit A R 2002 Value creation and destruction in cross-border 
acquisitions Strategic Management Journal 23 pp 921 – 940. 
334. 
Shastri K 1990 The differential effects of mergers on corporate security values Research 
in Finance 8 pp 179 – 201. 
335. 
Smith A 1990 Corporate ownership structure and performance Journal of Financial 
Economics 27 pp 143 – 169. 
336. 
Cornett M M, De S 1991 Common stock returns in corporate takeover bids: Evidence 
from interstate bank mergers Journal of Banking and Finance 15 pp 273 – 295. 

112 
 
337. 
Franks J, Harris R, Titman S 1991 The postmerger share-price performance of acquiring 
firms Journal of Financial Economics 29 pp 81 – 96. 
338. 
Haspeslagh P, Jemison D 1991 Managing acquisitions: Creating value through corporate 
renewal Free Press New York USA. 
339. 
Harris R S, Ravenscraft D 1991 The role of acquisitions in foreign direct investment: 
Evidence from the US stock market Journal of Finance 46 (3) pp 825 – 844. 
340. 
Harrison J S, Hitt M A, Hoskisson R E, Ireland R D 1991 Synergies and post-acquisition 
performance: Differences versus similarities in resource allocations Journal of Management 
17 (1) pp 173 – 190. 
341. 
Mann S, Sicherman N 1991 The agency costs of free cash flow: Acquisition activity and 
equity issues Journal of Business 13 pp 213 – 227. 
342. 
Schweiger D M, Denisi A S 1991 Communication with employees following a merger: A 
longitudinal field experiment Academy of Management Journal 34 (1) pp 110 – 135. 
343. 
Servaes H 1991 Tobin’s Q and the gain from takeovers Journal of Finance 46 (1)               
pp 409 – 419. 
344. 
Slusky A R, Caves R E 1991 Synergy, agency, and the determinants of premia paid in 
mergers. Journal of Industrial Economics 39 (3) pp 277 – 296. 
345. 
Willig R 1991 Merger analysis, industrial organization theory, and merger guidelines 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 281 pp 292 – 293. 
346. 
Agrawal A, Jaffe J F, Mandelker G N 1992 The post-merger performance of acquiring 
firms: A re-examination of an anomaly Journal of Finance 47 (4) pp 1605 – 1621. 
347. 
Agrawal A, Jaffe J F 2000 The post-merger performance puzzle in Cooper C, Gregory A, 
(editors) Advances in mergers and acquisitions Elsevier Science New York USA pp 7 – 42. 
348. 
Agrawal A, Jaffe J F 2002 The post-merger performance puzzle in Cooper C, Gregory A 
(editors) Advances in mergers and acquisitions vol 1 Elsevier Science NY USA pp 7 – 41. 
349. 
Alford A W 1992 The effect of the set of comparable firms on the accuracy of the price-
earnings valuation method Journal of Accounting Research 30 pp 94 – 108. 
350. 
Berger A N, Humphrey D B 1992 Megamergers in banking and the use of cost efficiency 
as an antitrust defense Antitrust Bulletin 37 pp 541 – 600. 
351. 
Berger A N, Mester L 1997 Inside the black box: What explains the differences in the 
efficiencies of financial institutions? Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 97 – 1 USA. 
352. 
Berger A N, Saunders A, Scalise J M, Udell G F 1997 The effect of bank mergers and 
acquisitions on small business lending mimeo Federal Reserve Board USA. 

113 
 
353. 
Berger A N, Saunders A, Scalise J M, Udell G F 1998 The effects of bank mergers and 
acquisitions on small business lending Journal of Financial Economics 50 pp 187 – 229. 
354. 
Berger A N 1998 The efficiency effects on bank mergers and acquisition: A preliminary 
look at the 1990s data in Amihud Y, Miller G (editors) Bank mergers and acquisitions 
Kluwer Academic Publishers Boston USA. 
355. 
Berger A N, DeYoung R, Hesna G, Udell G F 1999 Globalization of financial 
institutions: Evidence from cross-border banking performance Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago Working Paper 99 – 25 Chicago USA. 
356. 
Berger A N, Demsetz R S, Strahan P E 1999 The consolidation of the financial services 
industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future Journal of Banking and 
Finance 23 pp 135 – 190. 
357. 
Brush C, Vanderwerf P 1992 A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining 
estimates of new venture performance Journal of Business Venturing 7 (2) pp 157 – 170. 
358. 
Brush T H 1996 Predicted change in operational synergy and post-acquisition 
performance of acquired businesses Strategic Management Journal 17 (1) p 124. 
359. 
Gaudet G, Salant St 1992 The limits of monopolization through acquisition: Further 
results Cahiers de recherche du Département des sciences Economiques UQAM 9203 
Département des sciences économiques Université du Québec à Montréal Canada. 
360. 
Grandstrand O, Bohlin E, Oskarsson C, Sjoberg N 1992 External technology acquisition 
in large multi-technology corporations R&D Management 22 pp 111 – 133. 
361. 
Healey P M, Palepu K U, Ruback R S 1992 Does corporate performance improve after 
mergers? Journal of Financial Economics 31 (2) pp 135 – 175. 
362. 
Ingham H, Kran I, Lovestam A 1992 Mergers and profitability: A managerial success 
story Journal Management Studies 29 (2) pp 195 – 208. 
363. 
Loderer C, Martin K 1992 Post-acquisition performance of acquiring firms Financial 
Management 21 (3) pp 69 – 80. 
364. 
Shanley M T, Correa M E 1992 Agreement between top management teams and 
expectations for post acquisition performance Strategic Management Journal 13 (4)             
pp 245 – 266. 
365. 
Srnivasan A 1992 Are there cost savings from bank mergers? Economic Review Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta 77 March-April pp 17 – 28. 
366. 
United States Department of Justice 1992 Federal merger guidelines United States 
Department of Justice Washington DC USA. 

114 
 
367. 
Cannella A A, Hambrick D C 1993 Effects of executive departures on the performance of 
acquired firms Strategic Management Journal 14 pp 137 – 152. 
368. 
Cotterill R W 1993 Food retailing: mergers, leveraged buyouts, and performance in 
Industry Studies Duetsch L L (editor) Englewood Cliffs NJ Prentice Hall USA. 
369. 
Cotterill R W 2002 An antitrust economic analysis of stop & shop’s proposed acquisition 
of the big V shop rite supermarket chain Research Report no 63 Food Marketing Policy 
Center Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics University of Connecticut USA 
http://www.are.uconn.edu/FMKTC.html . 
370. 
Gibbs P A 1993 Determinants of corporate restructuring: The relative importance of 
corporate governance, takeover threat, and free cash flow Strategic Management Journal 14 
pp 51 – 68. 
371. 
Hambrick D C, Cannella A A Jr 1993 Relative standing: A framework for understanding 
departures of acquired executives Academy of Management Journal 36 (4) pp 733 – 762. 
372. 
Kim E H, Singal V 1993 Mergers and market power: Evidence from the airline industry 
The American Economic Review 83 (3) pp 549 – 569. 
373. 
Linder J C, Crane D B 1993 Bank mergers: Integration and profitability Journal of 
Financial Services Research 7 pp 35 - 55. 
374. 
Neven D, Nuttall R, Seabright P 1993 Merger in daylight: The economics and politics of 
European merger control Centre for Economic Policy Research London UK. 
375. 
Rhoades S A 1993 Efficiency effects of horizontal bank mergers Journal of Banking and 
Finance 17 pp 411 – 422. 
376. 
Rhoades S A 1994a A summary of merger performance studies in banking, 1980-93, and 
an assessment of the “operating performance” and “event study” methodologies Federal 
Reserve Board Staff Study 167 USA. 
377. 
Rhoades S A 1994b A summary of merger performance studies in banking, 1980-93and 
an assessment of the ‘operating performance’ and ‘event study’ methodologies The Federal 
Reserve Bulletin 80 (7) pp 588 – 590. 
378. 
Schrantz M S 1993 Takeovers improve performance: Evidence from the banking industry 
Journal of Political Economy 101 pp 299 – 326. 
379. 
Song M, Walking R 1993 The impact of managerial ownership on acquisition attempts 
and target shareholder wealth Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28               
pp 439 – 457. 
380. 
Bruton G D, Oviatt B M, White M A 1994 Performance of acquisitions of distressed 
firms Academy of Management Journal 37 pp 972 – 989. 

115 
 
381. 
Chakrabarti A, Hauschildt J, Suverkup C 1994 Does it pay to acquire technological firms 
R&D Management 24 (1) pp 47 – 56. 
382. 
Clark K, Ofek E 1994 Mergers as a means of restructuring distressed firms: An empirical 
investigation Journal of Financial & Quantitative Analysis 29 (4) pp 541 – 569. 
383. 
Houston J F, Ryngaert M D 1994 The overall gains from large bank mergers Journal of 
Banking and Finance 18 pp 1155 – 1176. 
384. 
Houston J, James C, Ryngaert M 2001 Where do merger gains come from? Bank mergers 
from the perspective of insiders and outsiders Journal of Financial Economics 60               
pp 285 – 331. 
385. 
Hudson B 1994 Innovation through acquisition Cornell HRA Quarterly 34 pp 82 – 87. 
386. 
Kesner I F, Shapiro D, Sharma A 1994 Brokering mergers: An agency theory perspective 
on the role of representatives The Academy of Management Journal 37 (3) pp 703 – 721. 
387. 
Madura J, Wiant K J 1994 Long-term valuation effects of bank acquisitions Journal of 
Banking and Finance 18 (6) pp 1135 – 1154. 
388. 
Markides C C, Ittner C D 1994 Shareholder benefits from corporate international 
diversification: Evidence from US international acquisitions Journal of International 
Business Studies 25 (2) pp 343 – 366. 
389. 
Pablo A 1994 Determinants of acquisition integration level: A decision-making 
perspective The Academy of Management Journal 37 (4) pp 803 – 836. 
390. 
Smith R, Kim J H 1994 The combined effects of fee cash flow and financial slack on 
bidder and target stock returns Journal of Business 67 pp 281 – 310. 
391. 
Werden G J, Froeb L M 1994 The effects of mergers in differentiated products industries: 
Logit demand and merger policy Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 194               
pp 407 – 426. 
392. 
Christensen C, Rosenbloom R 1995 Explaining the attacker’s advantage: Technological 
paradigms, organizational dynamics, and the value network Research Policy 24               
pp 233 – 257. 
393. 
Collins J, Kemsley D, Shackelford D 1995 Tax reform and foreign acquisitions: A 
microanalysis National Tax Journal 48 (1) pp 1 – 21. 
394. 
Derhy A 1995 Les fusions et acquisitions en France de 1959 à 1992: Evolution et 
caractéristiques Revue d'économie industrielle vol 73 3e trimestre pp 19 – 44 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3406/rei.1995.1583 , 
http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/rei_0154-
3229_1995_num_73_1_1583 . 

116 
 
395. 
Gerpott T J 1995 Successful integration of R&D functions after acquisition: An 
exploratory empirical study R&D Management 25 pp 161 – 178. 
396. 
Gilbert R J, Sunshine S C 1995 Incorporating dynamic efficiency concerns in merger 
analysis: The use of innovation markets Antitrust Law Journal 63 pp 569 – 601. 
397. 
Gilbert J R, Tom W K 2001 Is innovation king at the antitrust agencies?: The intellectual 
property guidelines five years later Antitrust Law Journal 69 pp 43 – 86. 
398. 
Gilbert R J 2006 Competition and innovation Journal of Industrial Organization 
Education 1 pp 1 – 23. 
399. 
Kaplan S N, Ruback R S 1995 The valuation of cash flow forecasts: An empirical 
analysis. The Journal of Finance 50 pp 1059 – 1093. 
400. 
Long N V, Vousden N 1995 The effects of trade liberalization on cost-reducing 
horizontal mergers Review of International Economics 3 pp 141 – 155. 
401. 
Sudarsanam P S 1995 Cross-border acquisitions in The essence of mergers and 
acquisitions Prentice Hall Essence of Management Series Prentice Hall New York USA. 
402. 
Zhang H 1995 Wealth effects of U.S. bank takeovers Applied Financial Economics 55         
pp 329 – 336. 
403. 
Brush T H 1996 Predicted change in operational synergy and post-acquisition 
performance of acquired businesses Strategic Management Journal 17 (1) pp 1 – 24. 
404. 
Esty B, Narasimhan B, Tufano P 1996 Interest-rate exposure and bank mergers Working 
paper Department of Finance Pennsylvania University USA. 
405. 
Franks J, Mayer C 1996 Hostile takeovers and the correction of managerial failure 
Journal of Financial Economics vol 40 no 1 pp 163 – 181. 
406. 
Freixas X, Rochet J C 1996 Microeconomics of banking MIT Press Cambridge 
Massachusetts USA. 
407. 
Gerstein F S 1996 Private communications on M&A transactions strategies Brighton UK. 
408. 
Mitchell M L, Mulherin J H 1996 The impact of industry shocks on takeover and 
restructuring activity Journal of Financial Economics 41 (2) pp 193 – 229. 
409. 
Pilloff S J 1996 Performance changes and shareholder wealth creation associated with 
mergers of publicly traded banking institutions Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28    
pp 294 – 310. 
410. 
Schwert G W 1996 Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions Journal of Financial 
Economics 41 (2) pp 153 – 162. 
411. 
Schwert G W 2000 Hostility in takeovers: In the eye of the beholder Journal of Finance 
55 pp 2599 – 2640. 

117 
 
412. 
Servaes H 1996 The value of diversification during the conglomerate merger wave The 
Journal of Finance 51 pp 1201 – 1225. 
413. 
Shapiro C 1996 Mergers with differentiated products Antitrust 10 pp 23 - 30. 
414. 
Vennet R V 1996 The effect of mergers and acquisitions on the efficiency and 
profitability of EC credit institutions Journal of Banking and Finance 20 (9) pp 1531 – 1558. 
415. 
Vermeulen F, Barkema H 1996 Learning through acquisitions Academy of Management 
Journal 44 (3) pp 457 – 476. 
416. 
Weber Y 1996 Corporate cultural fit and performance in mergers and acquisitions Human 
Relations 49 (9) pp 1181 – 1203. 
417. 
Akhavein J D, Berger A N, Humphrey D B 1997 The effects of megamergers on 
efficiency and prices: Evidence from a bank profit function Review of Industrial 
Organization 12 pp 95 – 139. 
418. 
Anand J, Singh H 1997 Asset redeployment, acquisitions and corporate strategy in 
declining industries Strategic Management Journal 18 pp 99 – 118. 
419. 
Bergh D 1997 Predicting divestiture of unrelated acquisitions: An integrative model of ex 
ante conditions Strategic Management Journal 18 pp 715 – 731. 
420. 
Capron L, Mitchell W 1997 Outcomes of international telecommunications acquisitions: 
Analysis of four cases with implications for acquisitions theory European Management 
Journal 15 (3) pp 237 – 251. 
421. 
Capron L, Mitchell W 1998 Bilateral resource redeployment and capabilities 
improvement following horizontal acquisitions Industrial Corporate Change 7 pp 453 – 484. 
422. 
Capron L, Dussauge P, Mitchell W 1998 Resource redeployment following horizontal 
acquisitions in Europe and North America, 1988 – 1992 Strategic Management Journal 19 
pp 631 – 661. 
423. 
Capron L 1999a The long-term performance of horizontal acquisitions Strategic 
Management Journal 20 pp 987 – 1018. 
424. 
Capron L 1999b The long-term performance of horizontal acquisitions: Empirical 
evidence of US and European firms INSEAD Switzerland. 
425. 
Capron L, Hulland J 1999 Redeployment of brands, sales forces, and general marketing 
management expertise following horizontal acquisitions: A resource-based view Journal of 
Marketing 63 pp 41 – 54. 
426. 
Capron L, Pistre N 2002 When do acquirers earn abnormal returns? Strategic 
Management Journal 23 pp 781 – 794. 

118 
 
427. 
Collins D W, Maydew E L, Weiss I S 1997 Changes in the value-relevance of earnings 
and book values over the past forty years Journal of Accounting and Economics 24               
pp 39 – 67. 
428. 
Covin T J, Kolenko T A, Sightler K W, Tudor R K 1997 Leadership style and post-
merger satisfaction Journal of Management Development 16 (1) pp 22 – 33. 
429. 
Fubini D, Price C, Zollo M 1997 Mergers: Leadership, performance and corporate health 
Palgrave Publishers London UK. 
430. 
Hayward M L A, Hambrick D C 1997 Explaining the premium paid for large 
acquisitions: Evidence of CEO hubris Administrative Science Quarterly 42 (1) pp 103 – 127. 
431. 
Hayward M L A 2002 When do firms learn from their acquisition experience? Evidence 
from 1990–1995 Strategic Management Journal 23 (1) pp 21 – 39. 
432. 
Head K, Ries J 1997 International mergers and welfare under decentralized competition 
policy Canadian Journal of Economics 30 pp 1104 – 1123. 
433. 
Holl P, Kyriazis D 1997 Wealth creation and bid resistance in UK takeover bids Strategic 
Management Journal 18 pp 483 – 498. 
434. 
Klemperer P 1997 Auctions with almost common values: The "wallet game" and its 
applications 
European 
Economic 
Review 
42 
(3-5) 
pp 
757 
– 
769 
www.nuff.ox.ac.uk/economics/people/klemperer.htm . 
435. 
Kroll M, Wright P, Toombs L, Leavell H 1997 Form of control: A critical determinant of 
acquisition performance and CEO rewards Strategic Management Journal 18 (2) pp 85 – 96. 
436. 
Krug J A, Hegarty W H 1997 Post-acquisition turnover among US top management 
teams: An analysis of the effects of foreign vs domestic acquisitions of US targets Strategic 
Management Journal vol 18 no 8 pp 667 – 675. 
437. 
Krug J A, Hegarty W H 2001 Predicting who stays and leaves after an acquisition: A 
study of top managers in multinationals Strategic Management Journal 22 (2) pp 185 – 196. 
438. 
Loughran T, Vijh A M 1997 Do long term shareholders benefit from corporate 
acquisitions? Journal of Finance 52 (5) pp 1759 – 1790. 
439. 
Megginson W, Morgan A, Nail L 1997 Corporate focus and corporate acquisitions: 
Theory and evidence Working Paper University of Georgia USA. 
440. 
Powell R G 1997 Modeling takeover likelihood Journal of Business Finance & 
Accounting 24 (7/8) pp 1009 – 1030. 
441. 
Ramaswamy K 1997 The performance impact of strategic similarity in horizontal 
mergers: Evidence from the US banking industry Academy of Management Journal 40 (3)   
pp 697 – 715. 

119 
 
442. 
Rosenberg E 1997 Telecommunications mergers and acquisitions: Key policy issues and 
options for state regulators The National Regulatory Research Institute USA. 
443. 
Siegel D S, Waldman D A, Youngdahl W E 1997 The adoption of advanced 
manufacturing technologies: Human resource management implications IEEE Transactions 
on Engineering Management vol 44 no 3 pp 288 – 298. 
444. 
Siegel D S 1999 Skill-biased technological change: Evidence from a firm-level survey 
Upjohn W E Institute Press Upjohn W E Inst. for Empl. Research Kalamazoo MI USA. 
445. 
Siegel D S, Simons K L, Lindstrom Th 2005 Ownership change, productivity, and human 
capital: New evidence from matched employer-employee data in Swedish manufacturing 
NBER/CRIW Conference on “Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data” 
Bethesda MD USA April 8 – 9 2005. 
446. 
Siegel D S, Simons K L 2006 Assessing the effects of mergers and acquisitions on firm 
performance, plant productivity, and workers: New evidence from matched employer-
employee data Working Papers in Economics Number 0601 Department of Economics 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute NY USA http://www.rpi.edu/dept/economics/ . 
447. 
Siegel D S, Simons K L 2008 Evaluating the effects of mergers and acquisitions on 
employees: Evidence from matched employer-employee data Working Papers in Economics 
Number 0804 Department of Economics, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute NY USA 
http://www.rpi.edu/dept/economics/ . 
448. 
Siegel D, Simons K L 2010 Assessing the effects of mergers and acquisitions on firm 
performance, plant productivity, and workers: New evidence from matched employer-
employee data Strategic Management Journal 31 pp 903 – 916. 
449. 
Marsh J, Siegel D S, Simons K 2007 Assessing the effects of mergers and acquisitions on 
women and minority employees: New evidence from matched employer-employee data 
International Journal of the Economics of Business 14 pp 161 – 179. 
450. 
Sirower M L 1997 The synergy trap: How companies lose the acquisition game Free 
Press New York USA. 
451. 
Stavros P 1997 Do mergers improve the X-efficiency and scale efficiency of US vanks? 
Evidence from the 1980s Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29 (3) pp 326 – 337. 
452. 
Walraven N 1997 Small business lending by banks involved in mergers Finance and 
Discussion Series 97-25 Federal Reserve Board Washington DC USA. 
453. 
Barkema H G, Vermeulen F 1998 International expansion through start-up or 
acquisitions: A learning perspective Academic Management Journal 41 pp 7 – 26. 

120 
 
454. 
Boyd J H, Graham S L 1998 Consolidation in US banking: Implications for efficiency 
and risk in Amihud Y, Miller G (editors) Bank mergers and acquisitions Kluwer Academic 
Publishers Boston USA. 
455. 
Bulow J, Huang M, Klemperer P 1998, 1999 Toeholds and takeovers Journal of Political 
Economy 107 (3) pp 427 – 454. 
456. 
Chang S 1998 Takeovers of privately held targets, methods of payments, and bidder 
returns Journal of Finance 53 pp 773 – 784. 
457. 
Cole R, Walraven N 1998 Banking consolidation and the availability of credit to small 
businesses MPRA Paper no 4716 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 25 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/4716/ . 
458. 
Falvey R 1998 Mergers in open economies The World Economy 21 pp 1061 – 1076. 
459. 
Gonzalez P, Vasconcellos G M, Kish R J 1998 Cross-border mergers and acquisitions: 
The undervaluation hypothesis The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 38 (1)       
pp 25 – 45. 
460. 
Hadlock Ch J, Houston J F, Ryngaert M D 1998 The role of managerial incentives in 
bank acquisitions The consolidation of the financial services industry Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York NY USA. 
461. 
Jamison M A 1998 Emerging patterns in global telecommunications alliances and 
mergers Industrial and Corporate Change 7 (4) pp 695 – 713. 
462. 
Larsson R, Finkelstein S 1999 Integrating strategic, organizational, and human resource 
perspectives on mergers and acquisitions: A case survey of synergy realization Organization 
Science 10 pp 1 – 26. 
463. 
Larsson R, Brousseau K, Driver M, Sweet P 2004 The secrets of merger and acquisition 
success: A co-competence and motivational approach to synergy realization in Pablo A, 
Javidan M (editors) Mergers and acquisitions: Creating integrative knowledge Blackwell 
Publishing Malden MA USA pp 3 – 19. 
464. 
Lieberman M, Montgomery D 1998 First-mover (dis)advantages: Retrospective and link 
with the resource-based view Strategic Management Journal 19 pp 1111 – 1125. 
465. 
Maquieria C, Megginson W, Nail J 1998 Wealth creation versus wealth redistribution in 
pure stock-for-stock mergers Journal of Financial Economics 48 pp 3 – 33. 
466. 
Morosini P, Shane S, Singh H 1998 National cultural distance and cross-border 
acquisition performance Journal of International Business Studies 29 (1) pp 137 – 158. 
467. 
Piloff S J, Santomero A M 1998 The value effects of bank mergers and acquisitions in 
Amihud Y, Miller G (editors) Bank Mergers & Acquisitions Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

121 
 
468. 
Prager R A, Hannan H T 1998 Do substantial horizontal mergers generate significant 
price effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry Journal of Industrial Economics 46         
pp 433 – 452. 
469. 
Rau P R, Vermaelen T 1998 Glamour, value and the post-acquisition performance of 
acquiring firms Journal of Financial Economics 49 (2) pp 223 - 253. 
470. 
Resti A 1998 Regulation can foster mergers, can mergers foster efficiency? The Italian 
case. Journal of Economics and Business 50 (2) pp 157 – 169. 
471. 
Rhoades S 1998 The efficiency effects of bank mergers: An overview of case studies of 
nine mergers Journal of Banking and Finance 22 pp 273 – 291. 
472. 
Andrade G, Stafford E 1999 Investigating the economic role of mergers Harvard 
University Working Paper Harvard University Cambridge USA. 
473. 
Andrade G, Mitchell M, Stafford E 2001 New evidence and perspectives on mergers 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (2) pp 103 – 120. 
474. 
Andrade G, Stafford E 2004 Investigating the economic role of mergers Journal of 
Corporate Finance vol 10 (1) pp 1 – 36. 
475. 
Boot A W A 1999 European lessons on consolidation in banking Journal of Banking and 
Finance 23 pp 609 – 613. 
476. 
Bresman H, Birkinshaw J, Nobel R 1999 Knowledge transfer in international acquisitions 
Journal of International Business Studies 30 (3) pp 439 – 462. 
477. 
Brown S, Lo K, Lys T 1999 Use of R2 in accounting research: Measuring changes in 
value relevance over the last four decades Journal of Accounting and Economics 28              
pp 83 – 115. 
478. 
Beatty R P, Riffe S M, Thompson R 1999 The method of comparables and tax court 
valuations of private firms: An empirical investigation Accounting Horizons 13               
pp 177 – 199. 
479. 
Bresman H, Birkinshaw J, Nobel R 1999 Knowledge transfer in international acquisitions 
Journal of International Business Studies 30 (3) pp 439 – 462. 
480. 
Chadhuri S, Tabrizi B 1999 Capturing the real value in high-tech acquisitions Harvard 
Business Review 77 (5) p 123. 
481. 
Dechow P M, Hutton A P, Sloan R G 1999 An empirical assessment of the residual 
income valuation model Journal of Accounting and Economics 26 pp 1 – 34. 
482. 
Dermine J 1999 The economics of bank mergers in the European Union: A review of the 
public policy issues INSEAD Working Paper no 99/35/FIN INSEAD Switzerland. 

122 
 
483. 
Eccles R G, Lanes K L, Wilson T C 1999 Are you paying too much for that acquisition? 
Harvard Business Review July-August pp 136 – 146. 
484. 
Focarelli D, Fabio P, Salleo C 1999 Why do banks merge? Some empirical evidence 
from Italy in Global financial crises – Implications for banking and regulation Proceedings of 
the 35th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Regulation Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago Chicago USA. 
485. 
Focarelli D, Panetta F, Salleo C 2002 Why do banks merge? Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking 34 (4) pp 1047 – 1066. 
486. 
Focarelli D, Panetta F, Salleo C 2003 Why do banks merge? Banca d’Italia Rome Italy 
CEIS Tor Vergata - Research Paper Series vol 2003 no 3 pp 1 – 33. 
487. 
Haleblian J, Finkelstein S 1999 The influence of organizational acquisition experience on 
acquisition performance: A behavioral learning perspective Administrative Science Quarterly 
44 (1) pp 29 – 56. 
488. 
Harford J 1999 Corporate cash reserves and acquisitions The Journal of Finance 54 no 6 
pp 1969 – 1997. 
489. 
Harford J 2005 What drives merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77 (3)             
pp 529 – 560. 
490. 
Rappaport A, Sirower M L 1999 November-December Stock or cash? The trade-offs for 
buyers and sellers in merger and acquisitions Harvard Business Review pp 147 – 158. 
491. 
Safieddine A, Titman S 1999 Leverage and corporate performance: Evidence from 
unsuccessful takeovers The Journal of Finance 54 pp 547 – 580. 
492. 
Sapienza P 1999 The effects of banking mergers on loan contracts Working Paper 
Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management USA. 
493. 
Saunders A 1999 Consolidation and universal banking Journal of Banking and Finance 
23 pp 693 – 695. 
494. 
Allen F, Gale D 2000 Comparing financial systems MIT Press Cambridge USA. 
495. 
Becher D A 2000 The valuation effects of bank mergers Journal of Corporate Finance 6     
pp 189 – 214. 
496. 
Beena S 2000 An analysis of mergers in the private corporate sector in India Working 
Paper no 301 CDS. 
497. 
Beena S 2004 Towards understanding the merger-wave in the Indian corporate sector: A 
comparative perspective Working Paper no 355 CDS. 
498. 
Beena S 2006a Mergers and acquisitions in the Indian pharmaceutical industry: An 
exploratory analysis PhD Dissertation Jawaharlal Nehru University New Delhi India. 

123 
 
499. 
Beena S 2006b Mergers and acquisitions in the Indian pharmaceutical industry: Nature, 
structure and performance Centre for Development Studies (JNU) Kerala India MPRA Paper 
no 8144 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 - 21 http://mpra.ub.uni-
muenchen.de/8144/ . 
500. 
Betton S, Eckbo B 2000 Toeholds, bid-jumps and expected pay-offs in takeovers Review 
of Financial Studies 13 pp 841 – 882. 
501. 
Betton S, Eckbo B, Thorburn K 2008 Corporate takeovers in Eckbo B E (editor) 
Handbook of corporate finance: Empirical corporate finance vol 2 Handbook of Finance 
Series Elsevier/North-Holland Amsterdam The Netherlands chapter 15 pp 291 –  430. 
502. 
Betton S, Eckbo B E, Thorburn K S 2009 Merger negotiations and the toehold puzzle 
Journal of Financial Economics 91 (2) pp 158 – 178. 
503. 
Black B 2000 The first international merger wave (and the fifth and last US wave) 
University of Miami Law Review 54. 
504. 
Blonigen B A, Taylor C T 2000 R&D intensity and acquisitions in high technology 
industries: Evidence from the US electronic and electrical equipment industries The Journal 
of Industrial Economics 48 pp 47 – 70. 
505. 
Brouthers K D, Brouthers L E 2000 Acquisition or greenfield start-up? Institutional, 
cultural and transaction cost influences Strategic Management Journal 21 pp 89 – 97. 
506. 
Carey D 2000 May‐June Lessons from master acquirers: A CEO roundtable on making 
mergers succeed Harvard Business Review Harvard University USA. 
507. 
Cheng C S A, McNamara R 2000 The valuation accuracy of the price – earnings and 
price-book benchmark valuation methods Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 15       
pp 349 – 370. 
508. 
Chudnovsky D 2000 Industrial restructuring through mergers and acquisitions: The case 
of Argentina in the 1990s Transnational Corporations 9 pp 33 – 58. 
509. 
Cybo-Ottone A, Murgia M 2000 Mergers and shareholder wealth in European banking 
Journal of Banking and Finance 24 pp 831 – 859. 
510. 
DMello R, Shroff P 2000 Equity undervaluation and decisions related to repurchase 
tender offers: An empirical investigation Journal of Finance 55 pp 2399 – 2424. 
511. 
Empson L 2000 Mergers between professional service firms: Exploring an undirected 
process of integration in Cooper C, Gregory A (editors) Advances in mergers and 
acquisitions Elsevier Science New York USA pp 205 – 238. 
512. 
Ernst H, Vitt J 2000 The influence of corporate acquisitions on the behavior of key 
inventors R&D Management 30 (2) pp 105 – 119. 

124 
 
513. 
Hunya G, Kalotay K 2000 Privatization and foreign direct investment in Central and 
Eastern Europe UNCTAD. 
514. 
Inkpen C, Sundaram A, Rockwood K 2000 Cross-border acquisitions of US technology 
assets California Management Review 42 (3) pp 50 – 71. 
515. 
Kane E 2000 Incentives for banking megamergers: What motives might regulators infer 
from event-study evidence? Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32 pp 671 – 701. 
516. 
Kang N H, Johansson S 2000 Cross-border mergers and acquisitions: Their role in 
industrial globalization OCDE Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry STI 
Working 
Paper 
2000/1 
OECD 
Paris 
France 
http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2000doc.nsf/LinkTo/DSTI-DOC(2000)1. 
517. 
Kang N, Sakai K 2000 International strategic alliances: Their role in industrial 
globalization OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers 2000/05 OECD 
Publishing http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/613723204010 . 
518. 
Mulherin J H, Boone A L 2000 Comparing acquisitions and divestitures Journal of 
Corporate Finance 6 pp 117 – 139. 
519. 
Ranft A L, Lord M D 2000 Acquiring new knowledge: The role of retaining human 
capital in acquisitions of high-tech firms Journal of High Technology Management Research 
11 (2) pp 295 – 319. 
520. 
Schoenberg R 2000 The influence of cultural compatibility within cross-border 
acquisitions: A review in Cooper C, Gregory A (editors) Advances in Mergers and 
Acquisitions 1 pp 43 – 60 JAI Press Amsterdam The Netherlands. 
521. 
Schwert G W 2000 Hostility in takeovers: In the eyes of the beholder? Journal of 
Finance 55 pp 2599 – 2640. 
522. 
Seth A, Song K P, Pettit R 2000 Synergy materialism or hubris? An empirical 
examination of motives for foreign acquisitions of US firms Journal of International 
Business Studies 31 (3) pp 387 – 405. 
523. 
Sorensen D 2000 Characteristics of merging firms Journal of Economics and Business 52 
pp 423 – 433. 
524. 
UNCTAD 2000 Cross border M&As in crisis-affected Asia: Implications for developing 
host economies UNCTAD Geneva Switzerland. 
525. 
Walker M 2000 Corporate takeovers, strategic objectives, and acquiring-firm shareholder 
wealth Financial Management 29 pp 53 – 66. 
526. 
Wheelock D C, Wilson P W 2000 Why do banks disappear? The determinants of US 
bank failures and acquisitions Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (1) pp 127 – 138. 

125 
 
527. 
World Investment Report 2000 Cross border mergers and acquisitions and development 
UNCTAD New York, USA and Geneva, Switzerland. 
528. 
Ahuja G, Katila R 2001 Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of 
acquiring firms: A longitudinal study Strategic Management Journal 22 (3) pp 197 – 227. 
529. 
Astebro T, Winter J K 2001 More than a dummy: The probability of failure, survival and 
acquisition of firms in financial distress Working Paper Joseph L. Rotman School of 
Management University of Toronto Canada. 
530. 
Bergh D D 2001 Executive retention and acquisition outcomes: A test of opposing views 
on the influence of organizational tenure Journal of Management 27 pp 603 – 622. 
531. 
Bliss R, Rosen R J 2001 CEO compensation and bank mergers Journal of Financial 
Economics 61 (1) pp 107 – 138. 
532. 
Buch C, Delong G L 2001 Cross-border bank mergers: What lures the rare animal         
Kiel Working Paper no 1070 Kiel Germany. 
533. 
Carretta A 2001 Il governo del cambiamento culturale in banca. Modelli di analisi, 
strumenti operativi, valori individuali Bancaria Editrice Roma Italy. 
534. 
Carretta A, Farina V, Schwizer P 2005a Banche, cultura dei fidi e capital sociale: Si può 
finanziare la fiducia? in Bracchi G, Masciandaro D (editors) X Rapporto sul Sistema 
Finanziario Italiano Le banche italiane e la finanza per lo sviluppo: Territori, imprese e 
famiglie Edibank-Bancaria Editrice Milano Italy. 
535. 
Carretta A, Farina V, Schwizer P 2005b Banking regulation towards advisory: The 
“culture compliance” of banks and supervisory authorities European Academy of 
Management (EURAM) 5th Annual Conference: A stakeholder perspective on financial 
markets; Managing reputation, investor relation, corporate governance and leadership TUM 
Business School Munich Germany. 
536. 
Carretta A 2007 Creazione di valore nel governo dei processi di fusione eacquisizione nel 
sistema finanziario in Carretta A, Schwizer P (editors) Change managemente post merger 
integration Un’analisi della creazione di valore nel governo dei processi difusione e 
acquisizione nel sistema finanziario Newfin Università Bocconi Milano Italy. 
537. 
Carretta A, Farina V, Schwizer P 2008 M&A and post merger integration in banking 
industry: The missing link of corporate culture XVI International Tor Vergata Conference on 
Banking and Finance Rome Italy 5-7 December 2007 University of Rome "Tor Vergata" 
University of Parma Italy MPRA Paper no 8300 Munich University Munich Germany          
pp 1 – 20 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/8300/ . 

126 
 
538. 
Das S P, Sengupta S 2001 Asymmetric information, bargaining, and international 
mergers Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 10 pp 565 – 590. 
539. 
Gupta O, Ross G 2001 Mergers and acquisitions through an intellectual capital 
perspective Journal of Intellectual Capital vol 2 no 3 pp 297 – 309. 
540. 
Horn H, Levinsohn J 2001 Merger policies and trade liberalization The Economic Journal 
111 pp 244 – 276. 
541. 
Jovanovic B, Rousseau P 2001 Merger and technological change: 1885 - 1998 Working 
Paper no 01-W16 Vanderbilt University USA. 
542. 
Jovanovic B, Rousseau P 2002a The Q-theory of mergers American Economic Review 
vol 92 pp 198 – 204. 
543. 
Jovanovic B, Rousseau P 2002b Mergers as reallocation NBER Working Paper #9279 
USA. 
544. 
Linn S C, Switzer J A 2001 Are cash acquisitions associated with better post-combination 
operating performance than stock acquisitions? Journal of Banking and Finance 25 (6)         
pp 1113 – 1138. 
545. 
Maksimovic V, Phillips G 2001 The market for corporate assets: Who engages in 
mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains? Journal of Finance 56 (6)               
pp 2019 – 2065. 
546. 
North D S 2001 The role of managerial incentives in corporate acquisitions: The 1990s 
evidence Journal of Corporate Finance 7 (2) pp 125 – 149. 
547. 
Paulter P A 2001 Evidence on mergers and acquisitions Federal Trade Commission 
Bureau of Economics Working Paper no 243 Washington DC USA. 
548. 
Pratt S P 2001 Business valuation discounts and premiums John Wiley & Sons Inc       
New York USA. 
549. 
Roeller L-H, Stenneck J, Verboven F 2001 Efficiency gains from mergers European 
Economy no 5 European Communities Belgium. 
550. 
Vermeulen F, Barkema H 2001 Learning through acquisitions Academy Management 
Journal 44 pp 457 – 476. 
551. 
Anand J, Delios A 2002 Absolute and relative resources as determinants of international 
acquisitions Strategic Management Journal 23 pp 119 – 134. 
552. 
Beckman C M, Haunschild P R 2002 Network learning: The effects of partners’ 
heterogeneity of experience on corporate acquisitions Administrative Science Quarterly 47 
(1) pp 92 – 124. 

127 
 
553. 
Beckmann R, Eppendorfer C, Neimke M 2002 Market access strategies in the EU 
banking sector - Obstacles and benefits towards an integrated European retail market Ruhr-
Universität Bochum Germany MPRA Paper no 5273 Munich University Munich Germany 
pp 1 – 30 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/5273/ . 
554. 
Bekier M, Shelton M J 2002 Keeping your sales force after the merger McKinsey 
Quarterly 4 pp 106 – 115. 
555. 
Bhojraj S, Lee C M C 2002 Who is my peer? A valuation-based approach to the selection 
of comparable firms Journal of Accounting Research 40 pp 407 – 439. 
556. 
Bris A, Cabolis Ch 2002 Corporate governance convergence by contract: Evidence from 
cross-border mergers Yale International Center for Finance Working Paper 02-32 Yale 
University USA. 
557. 
Conyon M J, Girma S, Thompson S, Wright P W 2002a The impact of mergers and 
acquisitions on company employment in the United Kingdom European Economic Review 
46 pp 31 – 49. 
558. 
Conyon M J, Girma S, Thompson S, Wright P W 2002b Do hostile mergers destroy jobs? 
Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization 45 pp 427 – 440. 
559. 
Conyon M J, Girma S, Thompson S, Wright P W 2002c The productivity and wage 
effects of foreign acquisitions in the United Kingdom The Journal of Industrial Economics 
50 pp 85 – 102. 
560. 
Conyon M, Girma S, Thompson S, Wright P W 2004 Do wages rise or fall after merger? 
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics vol 66 no 5 pp 847 – 862. 
561. 
Fuller K, Netter J, Stegemoller M 2002 What do returns to acquiring firms tell us? 
Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions The Journal of Finance 57 no 4               
pp 1763 – 1793. 
562. 
Gaughan P A 2002 Mergers, acquisitions and corporate restructurings 3rd edition John 
Wiley and Sons Inc New York USA. 
563. 
Hagedoorn J, Duysters G 2002 The effect of mergers and acquisitions on the 
technological performance of companies in a high-tech environment Technology Analysis 
and Strategic Management 14 (1) pp 67 – 85. 
564. 
Harris R, Robinson C 2002 The effect of foreign acquisitions on total factor productivity: 
Plant level evidence from UK manufacturing, 1987 – 1992 The Review of Economics and 
Statistics 84 (3) pp 562 – 568. 
565. 
Harzing A 2002 Acquisitions versus greenfield investments: International strategy and 
management of entry modes Strategic Management Journal 23 (3) pp 211 – 227. 

128 
 
566. 
Hayward M L A 2002 When do firms learn from their acquisition experience? Evidence 
from 1990–1995 Strategic Management Journal 23 pp 21 – 39. 
567. 
Heron R, Lie E 2002 Operating performance and the method of payments in takeovers 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37 (1) pp 137 – 156. 
568. 
Lall S 2002 Implications of cross-border mergers and acquisitions by TNCs in 
developing countries: A beginner’s guide Queen Elisabeth House Working Paper Series WP 
88 University of Oxford UK pp 1 – 12. 
569. 
Lie E, Lie H J 2002 Multiples used to estimate corporate value Financial Analyst Journal 
58 pp 44 – 54. 
570. 
Liu J, Nissim D, Thomas J 2002 Equity valuation using multiples Journal of Accounting 
Research 40 pp 135 – 172. 
571. 
Mumcu A, Zenginobuz U 2002 An analysis of mergers and acquisitions in the Turkish 
banking sector MPRA Paper no 191 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 44 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/191/ . 
572. 
Ranft A, Lord M 2002 Acquiring new technologies and capabilities: A grounded model 
of acquisition implementation Organization Science 13 pp 420 – 441. 
573. 
Sakai K 2002 Global industrial restructuring: Implications for small firms OECD 
Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers 2002/04 OECD Publishing 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/067747507888 . 
574. 
Schmid F A, Wahrenburg M 2002 Mergers and acquisition in Germany The Federal 
Reserve Bank of St Louis Working Paper Series USA. 
575. 
Benjamin D J 2003 Does 401(k) eligibility increase saving? Evidence from propensity 
score sub-classification Journal of Public Economics 87 pp 1259 – 1290. 
576. 
Branch B, Taewon Y 2003 Predicting successful takeovers and risk arbitrage Quarterly 
Journal of Business and Economics Winter/Spring pp 3 – 18. 
577. 
Coff R 2003 Bidding wars over R&D intensive firms: Knowledge, opportunism and the 
market for corporate control Academy Management Journal 46 pp 74 – 85. 
578. 
Core J E, Guay W R, Van Buskirk A 2003 Market valuations in the new economy: An 
investigation of what has changed Journal of Accounting and Economics 34 pp 43 – 67. 
579. 
Evenett S J 2003 The cross-border mergers and acquisitions wave of the late 1990s 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no 9655 Cambridge MA USA. 
580. 
Gaughan P A 2003 Mergers - What can go wrong and how to prevent it 1st edition Wiley 
Finance New Jersey USA. 

129 
 
581. 
Gugler K, Mueller D C, Yurtoglu B, Zulehner C 2003 The effects of mergers: An 
international comparison International Journal of Industrial Organisation 21 (5)               
pp 625 – 653. 
582. 
Gugler K, Yurtoglu B B 2004 The effect of mergers on company employment in the USA 
and Europe International Journal of Industrial Organization 22 pp 481 – 502. 
583. 
Officer M S 2003 Termination fees in mergers and acquisitions Journal of Financial 
Economics 69 pp 431 – 467. 
584. 
Officer M S 2004 Collars and renegotiation in mergers and acquisitions The Journal of 
Finance 59 (6) pp 2719 - 2743. 
585. 
Officer M S 2006 The market pricing of implicit options in merger collars The Journal of 
Business 79 (1) pp 115 – 136. 
586. 
Officer M S 2007 The price of corporate liquidity: Acquisition discounts for unlisted 
targets Journal of Financial Economics 83 pp 571 – 598. 
587. 
King D, Driessnack J 2003 Investigating the integration of acquired firms in high-
technology industries: Implications for industrial policy Acquisition Review Quarterly 10 
(Summer) pp 260 – 283. 
588. 
King D, Covin J, Hegarty W 2003 Complementary resources and the exploitation of 
technological innovations Journal Management 29 pp 589 – 606. 
589. 
King D, Dalton D, Daily C, Covin J 2004 Meta-analyses of post-acquisition performance: 
Indications of unidentified moderators Strategic Management Journal 25 pp 187 – 200. 
590. 
King D R, Slotegraaf R J, Kesner I 2008 Performance implications of firm resource 
interactions in the acquisition of R&D-intensive firms Organization Science vol 19 no 2       
pp 327 – 340 ISSN 1047-7039 . 
591. 
Puranam P, Singh H, Zollo M 2003 A bird in the hand or two in the bush? Integration 
trade-offs in technology-grafting acquisitions European Management Journal 21 (2)            
pp 179 – 184. 
592. 
Schonfeld E, Malik O 2003 Gulp! Mergers are back with a vengeance Business 2.0 4 (7) 
pp 88 – 95. 
593. 
Schmidt R H 2003 Corporate governance in Germany: An economic perspective Center 
of Financial Studies (CFS) Working Paper no 36 and Oxford Scholarship Online 
Monographs pp 386 – 425. 
594. 
Soderberg A-M, Vaara E (editors) 2003 Merging across borders: People, culture and 
politics Copenhagen Business School Press Copenhagen Denmark. 

130 
 
595. 
Stahl G K, Voigt A 2003 Impact of cultural differences on merger and acquisition 
performance: A qualitative review European International Business Academy 29th Annual 
Conference Copenhagen Denmark. 
596. 
Sudarsanam S, Mahate A A 2003 Glamour acquirers, method of payment and post-
acquisition performance: The UK evidence Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 30 
pp 299 – 341. 
597. 
Van Beers C, Sadowski B M 2003 On the relationship between acquisitions, divestitures 
and innovations: An explorative study Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 3 (1/2)   
pp 131 – 143. 
598. 
Warf B 2003 Mergers and acquisitions in the telecommunications industry Growth and 
Change 34 (3) pp 321 – 344. 
599. 
Athanasoglou P P, Brissimis S N 2004 The effect of mergers acquisitions on bank 
efficiency in Greece Bank of Greece Economic Bulletin 22 pp 7 – 32. 
600. 
Beitel P, Schiereck D, Wahrenburg M 2004 Explaining the M&A success in European 
bank mergers and acquisitions European Financial Management Journal 10 pp 109 – 134. 
601. 
Billett M T, Tao-Hsien, King D, Mauer D C 2004 Bondholder wealth effects in mergers 
and acquisitions: New evidence from the 1980s and 1990s Journal of Finance 59               
pp 107 – 135. 
602. 
Bjorvatn K 2004 Economic integration and the profitability of cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions European Economic Review 48 (6) pp 1211 – 1226. 
603. 
Bruner R F 2004 Applied mergers and acquisitions Wiley & Sons Inc New York USA. 
604. 
Burkart M, Panunzi F 2004 Mandatory bids, squeeze-out, sell-out and the dynamics of 
the tender offer process in Ferrarini G, Hopt K J, Winter J, Wymeersch E (editors) 
Reforming company and takeover law in Europe Oxford University Press Oxford UK               
pp 737 – 765. 
605. 
Camara C, Renjen P 2004 The secrets of successful mergers: Dispatches from the front 
lines The Journal of Business Strategy Management vol 25 no 3 pp 10 – 14. 
606. 
Carow K, Heron R, Saxton T 2004 Do early birds get the returns? An empirical 
investigation of early mover advantages in acquisitions Strategic Management Journal 25  
pp 563 – 577. 
607. 
Feea C E, Thomas S 2004 Sources of gains in horizontal mergers: Evidence from 
customers, supplier, and rival firms Journal of Financial Economics 74 (3) pp 423 – 460. 
608. 
Girma S, Görg H 2004 Blessing or curse? Domestic plants’ employment and survival 
prospects after foreign acquisition Applied Economics Quarterly 50 pp 89 – 110. 

131 
 
609. 
Goergen M, Renneboog L 2004 Shareholder wealth effects of European domestic and 
cross-border takeover bids European Financial Management vol 10 pp 9 – 45. 
610. 
Goergen M, Martynova M, Renneboog L 2005 Corporate governance convergence: 
Evidence from takeover regulation reforms in Europe Oxford Review of Economic Policy  
vol 21 pp 243 – 268. 
611. 
Martynova M, Renneboog L 2005 Takeover waves: Triggers, performance and motives 
ECGI Finance Working Paper 97/2005. 
612. 
Martynova M, Renneboog L 2006 Mergers and acquisitions in Europe in Renneboog L 
Advances in corporate finance and asset pricing Elsevier Amsterdam The Netherlands          
pp 15 – 76. 
613. 
Grinstein H P 2004 CEO compensation and incentives: Evidence from M&A bonuses 
Journal of Financial Economics 73 (2) pp 119 – 143. 
614. 
Hartzell J, Ofek E, Yermack D 2004 What's in it for me? Personal benefits obtained by 
CEOs whose firms are acquired Review of Financial Studies 17 pp 37 - 61. 
615. 
Huck S, Konrad K A 2004 Merger profitability and trade policy Scandinavian Journal of 
Economics 106 (1) pp 107 – 122. 
616. 
Humphrey D, Vale B 2004 Scale economies, bank mergers, and electronic payments: A 
spline function approach Journal of Banking and Finance 28 pp 1671 – 1696. 
617. 
Javidan M, Pablo A, Singh H, Hitt M, Jemison D 2004 Where we’ve been and where 
we’re going in Pablo A, Javidan M (editors) Mergers and acquisitions: Creating integrative 
knowledge Blackwell Publishing Malden MA USA pp 245 – 261. 
618. 
Katz M L, Shelanski H A 2004 Merger policy and innovation: Must enforcement change 
to account for technological change NBER Working Paper 10710 Cambridge MA USA. 
619. 
Kini O, Kracaw W, Mian S 2004 The nature of discipline by corporate takeovers The 
Journal of Finance vol 59 pp 1511 – 1552. 
620. 
Lehto E, Lehtoranta O 2004 Becoming an acquirer and becoming acquired Technological 
Change and Social Change 71 pp 635 – 650. 
621. 
Lehto E, Böckerman P 2006 Enemy of labour? Analyzing the employment effects of 
mergers and acquisitions Labour Institute for Economic Research Helsinki Finland MPRA 
Paper no 1812 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 34 http://mpra.ub.uni-
muenchen.de/1812/ . 
622. 
Lepetit L, Patry S, Rous P 2004 Diversification versus specialization: An event study of 
M&As in the European banking industry Applied Financial Economics 14 pp 663 – 669. 

132 
 
623. 
McCahery J, Renneboog L, Ritter P, Haller S 2004 The economics of the proposed 
European takeover directive in Ferrarini G, Hopt K J, Winter J, Wymeersch E (editors) 
Reforming company and takeover law in Europe Oxford Oxford University Press UK          
pp 575 – 646. 
624. 
Mitchell M, Pulvino T, Stafford E 2004 Price pressure around mergers Journal of 
Finance 59 pp 31 – 63. 
625. 
Moeller S B, Schlingemann F P, Stultz R 2004 Firm size and the gains from acquisitions 
Journal of Financial Economics 73 pp 201 – 228. 
626. 
Moeller S B, Schlingemann F P 2005 Global diversification and bidder gains: A 
comparison between cross-border and domestic acquisitions Journal of Banking & Finance 
29 pp 533 – 564. 
627. 
Moeller S B, Schlingemann F B, Stulz R M 2007 How do diversity of opinion and 
information asymmetry affect acquirer returns? Review of Financial Studies 20               
pp 2047 – 2078. 
628. 
Mukherjee T K, Kiymaz H, Baker H K 2004 Merger motives and target valuation: A 
survey of evidence from CFOs Journal of Applied Finance 14 pp 7 – 24. 
629. 
Pangarkar N 2004 The impact of market cycle on the performance of Singapore acquirers 
Strategic Management Journal 25 (12) pp 1209 – 1216. 
630. 
Penas M, Unal H 2004 Gains in bank mergers: Evidence from the bond markets Journal 
of Financial Economics 74 pp 149 – 179. 
631. 
Rosen R J 2004 Betcha can’t acquire just one: Merger programs and compensation 
Working Paper 2004-22 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago USA pp 1 – 40. 
632. 
Rossi S, Volpin P 2004 Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions Journal 
of Financial Economics vol 74 pp 277 – 304. 
633. 
Saxton T, Dollinger M 2004 Target reputation and appropriability: Picking and deploying 
resources in acquisitions Journal Management 30 pp 123 – 147. 
634. 
Shimizu K, Hitt M, Vaidyanath D, Pisano V 2004 Theoretical foundations of cross-
border mergers and acquisitions: A review of current research and recommendations for the 
future Journal of International Management 10 pp 307 – 353. 
635. 
Zollo M, Singh H 2004 Deliberate learning in corporate acquisitions: Post-acquisition 
strategies and integration capability in US bank mergers Strategic Management Journal 25 
pp 1233 – 1256. 
636. 
Zollo M, Meier D 2008 What is M&A performance? Academy of Management 
Perspectives pp 55 – 77. 

133 
 
637. 
Aluko B T, Amidu A-R 2005 Corporate business valuation for mergers and acquisitions 
International Journal of Strategic Property Management vol 9 pp 173 – 189. 
638. 
Aminian N, Campart S 2005 Macroeconomic determinants of cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions – European and Asian evidence Int Conf at the University of Le Havre 2005. 
639. 
Arzac E R 2005 Valuation for mergers, buyout, and restructuring John Wiley & Sons Inc 
New York USA. 
640. 
Brakman S, Garretsen H, Van Marrewijk Ch 2005 Cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions: on revealed comparative advantage and merger waves CESIFO Working Paper 
no 1602 University of Groningen Utrecht University Erasmus University Rotterdam The 
Netherlands pp 1 - 33 http://www.cesifo-group.de/ . 
641. 
Calomiris C, Pornrojnangkool T 2005 Monopoly-creating bank consolidation? The 
merger of Fleet and BankBoston NBER Working Paper Series 11351 USA. 
642. 
Cassiman B, Colombo M, Garrone P, Veugelers R 2005 The impact of M&A on the 
R&D process. An empirical analysis of the role of technological and market relatedness 
Research Policy 34 (2) pp 195 – 220. 
643. 
Cassiman B, Colombo M G (editors) 2006 Mergers and acquisitions. The innovation 
impact Edward Elgar Cheltenham UK. 
644. 
Cassiman B, Ueda M 2006 M&A and innovation: A conceptual framework in Cassiman 
B, Colombo M G (editors) Mergers and acquisitions. The innovation impact Edward Elgar 
Cheltenham UK pp 63 – 76. 
645. 
Conn C, Cosh A, Guest P, Hughes A 2005 The impact on UK acquirers of domestic 
cross-border public and private acquisitions Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 32 
pp 815 – 870. 
646. 
Di Giovanni J 2005 What drives capital flows? The case of cross-border M&A activity 
and financial deepening Journal of International Economics 65 pp 127 – 149. 
647. 
Faccio M, Masulis R W 2005 The choice of payment method in European mergers and 
acquisitions Journal of Finance 60 pp 1345 – 1388. 
648. 
Fox J T 2005 Consolidation in the wireless phone industry Working Paper #05-13 The 
Networks, Electronic Commerce, and Telecommunications University of Chicago USA        
pp 1 - 25 http://www.NETinst.org . 
649. 
Fridolfsson S-O, Stennek J 2005 Why mergers reduce profits and raise share prices – A 
theory of preemptive mergers Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (5)              
pp 1083 – 1104. 

134 
 
650. 
Gleason K C, Rosenthal L, Wiggins R A I 2005 Backing into being public: An 
exploratory analysis of reverse takeovers Journal of Corporate Finance 12 (1) pp 54 – 79. 
651. 
Globerman S, Shapiro D 2005 Assessing international mergers and acquisitions as a 
mode of foreign direct investment in Governance, multinationals and growth 2005 - New 
horizons in international business Eden L, Dobson W (editors) Cheltenham and Northampton 
UK pp 68 – 99. 
652. 
Goedhart M, Koller T, Wessels D 2005 Valuation, measuring and managing the value of 
companies John Wiley & Sons Inc Hoboken New Jersey USA. 
653. 
Gorton G, Khal M, Rosen L 2005 Eat or be eaten: A theory of mergers and merger waves 
NBER Working Paper no 11364 USA. 
654. 
Hand J R M 2005 The value relevance of financial statements in the venture capital 
market The Accounting Review 80 pp 613 – 648. 
655. 
Hussinger K 2005 Did concentration on core competencies drive merger and acquisition 
activities in the 1990s? Empirical evidence for Germany Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 
Belgium Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW) Mannheim Germany ZEW 
Discussion Papers no 05-41 Leibniz Information Centre for Economics Germany pp 1 – 14 
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/24132 , ftp://ftp.zew.de/pub/zew-docs/dp/dp0541.pdf . 
656. 
Hussinger K 2010 Absorptive capacity and post-acquisition inventor productivity 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Belgium Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW) 
Mannheim Germany ZEW Discussion Papers no 10-066 Leibniz Information Centre for 
Economics Germany pp 1 - 32 http://hdl.handle.net/10419/41435 ftp://ftp.zew.de/pub/zew-
docs/dp/dp10066.pdf. 
657. 
Hussinger K 2012 Absorptive capacity and post-acquisition inventor productivity Journal 
Technology Transfer 37 pp 490 – 507 DOI 10.1007/s10961-010-9199-y . 
658. 
Jones G 2005 Multinationals and global capitalism from the nineteenth to the twenty-first 
century Oxford University Press Oxford UK. 
659. 
Knapp M, Gart A, Becher D 2005 Post-merger performance of bank-holding companies, 
1987-1998 Financial Review 40 pp 549 – 574. 
660. 
Kusstatscher V, Cooper C L 2005 Managing emotions in mergers and acquisitions           
E Elgar Publ Cheltenham UK; Nordhampton MA USA pp 1 – 213. 
661. 
Ollinger M, Nguyen S V, Blayney D P, Chambers B, Nelson K 2005 Effect of food 
industry mergers and acquisitions on employment and wages United States Department of 
Agriculture Economic Research Report no 13. 

135 
 
662. 
Ou C 2005 Banking consolidation and small business lending: A review of recent 
research Working Paper Office of Economic Research US Small Business Administration 
Washington DC USA pp 1 - 15 http://www.sba.gov/advo/ . 
663. 
PM KeyPoint LLC 2005 The effect of mergers and acquisitions on small business lending 
by large banks Contract no SBAHQ-02-Q-0024 US Small Business Administration Office of 
Advocacy US Small Business Administration Washington DC USA. 
664. 
Moeller T 2005 Let's make a deal! How shareholder control impacts merger payoffs 
Journal of Financial Economics 76 pp 167 – 190. 
665. 
Prabhu J C, Chandy R K, Ellis M E 2005 The impact of acquisitions on innovations: 
Poison pill, placebo or tonic? Journal of Marketing 69 pp 114 – 130. 
666. 
Pradhan J P, Abraham V 2005 Overseas mergers and acquisitions by Indian enterprises: 
Patterns and motivations Indian Journal of Economics vol LXXXV pp 365 – 386. 
667. 
Pradhan J P, Alakshendra A 2006 Overseas acquisition versus green-field foreign 
investment: Which internationalization strategy is better for Indian pharmaceutical 
enterprises? ISID Working Paper no WP2006/07. 
668. 
Pradhan J P 2007a Growth of Indian multinationals in the World economy: Implications 
for development ISID Working Paper no 2007/04 Institute for Studies in Industrial 
Development New Delhi India. 
669. 
Pradhan J P 2007b Trends and patterns of overseas acquisitions by Indian multinationals 
Institute for Studies in Industrial Development New Delhi India MPRA Paper no 12404 
Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 - 43 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/12404/ . 
670. 
Röller L-H 2005 Economic analysis and competition policy enforcement in Europe. 
Modelling European mergers: Theory, competition and case studies Edward Elgar 
Cheltenham UK and Northampton MA USA. 
671. 
Schweizer L 2005 Organizational integration of acquired biotechnology companies into 
pharmaceutical companies: The need for a hybrid approach Academy Management Journal 
48 pp 1051 – 1074. 
672. 
Shahrur H 2005 Industry structure and horizontal takeovers: Analysis of wealth effects on 
rivals, suppliers, and corporate customers Journal of Financial Economics 76 (1) pp 61 – 98. 
673. 
Aykut D, Goldstein A 2006 Developing country multinationals: South-south investment 
comes of age Working Paper no 257 OECD Development Centre Paris France               
pp 1 – 42. 

136 
 
674. 
Brakman S, Garretsen H, Van Marrewijk Ch 2006 Cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions: The facts as a guide for international economics CESifo Working Paper no 1823 
Munich Germany. 
675. 
Brauer M 2006 What have we acquired and what should we acquire in divestiture 
research? A review and research agenda Journal of Management 32 (6) pp 751 – 785. 
676. 
Buehler S, Kaiser C, Jaeger F 2006 Merge or fail? The determinants of mergers and 
bankruptcies in Switzerland, 1995-2000 Economics Letters 90 (1) pp 88 – 95. 
677. 
Campa J M, Hernando I 2006 M&A performance in the European financial industry 
Journal of Banking and Finance 30 pp 3367 – 3392. 
678. 
Carow K, Kane E, Narayanan R 2006 How have borrowers fared in banking 
megamergers? Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 pp 821 – 836. 
679. 
Clodt M, Hagedoorn J, Van Kranenburg H 2006 Mergers and acquisitions: Their effect 
on the innovative performance of companies in high-tech industries Research Policy vol 35 
pp 642 – 654. 
680. 
Dong M, Hirschleifer D, Richardson S, Teoh S H 2006 Does investor misevaluation drive 
the takeover market? Journal of Finance 61 (2) pp 725 – 762. 
681. 
Fumagalli E, Vasconcelos H 2006 Cross-border merger waves CEPR Discussion Papers 
5601. 
682. 
Heeley M, King D, Covin J 2006 R&D investment level and environment as predictors of 
firm acquisition Journal Management Studies 43 pp 1513 – 1536. 
683. 
Higgins M, Rodriguez D 2006 The outsourcing of R&D through acquisitions in the 
pharmaceutical industry Journal Financial Economics 80 pp 351 – 383. 
684. 
Lommerud K E, Straume O R, Sorgard L 2006 National versus international mergers in 
unionized oligopoly RAND Journal of Economics 37 (1) pp 212 – 233. 
685. 
Paruchuri S, Nerkar A, Hambrick D C 2006 Acquisition integration and productivity 
losses in the technical core: Disruption of inventors in acquired companies Organization 
Science 17 (5) pp 545 – 562. 
686. 
Puranam P, Singh H, Zollo M 2006 Organizing for innovation: Managing the 
coordination-autonomy dilemma in technology acquisitions Academy of Management 
Journal 49 (2) pp 263 – 280. 
687. 
Qiu L D, Wen Zhou 2006 International mergers: Incentives and welfare Journal of 
International Economics 68 pp 38 – 58. 
688. 
Saggi K, Yildiz H M 2006 On the international linkages between trade and merger 
policies Review of International Economics 14 pp 212 – 225. 

137 
 
689. 
Schnoor I 2006a Comparable analysis and data manipulation tools The Marquee Group 
Toronto Canada pp 1 – 66. 
690. 
Schnoor I 2006b Private communications on valuation of companies in time of M&A 
transactions Rotman School of Management University of Toronto Canada. 
691. 
Veugelers R 2006 Literature review on M&A and R&D in Cassiman B, Colombo M G 
(editors) Merger and acquisitions—the innovation impact Edward Elgar Cheltenham UK    
pp 37 – 62. 
692. 
Bartram S M, Burns N, Helwege J 2007 Foreign currency exposure and hedging: 
Evidence from foreign acquisitions Lancaster University Management School University of 
Texas at San Antonio Penn State University MPRA Paper no 13061 Munich University 
Munich Germany pp 1 – 33 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/13061/ . 
693. 
Becker J, Fuest C 2007a Taxing foreign profits with international mergers and 
acquisitions Working Paper 07/19 Oxford University Centre for Business Taxation Said 
Business School Oxford University Oxford UK. 
694. 
Becker J, Fuest C 2007b Tax competition and international mergers and acquisitions: 
Source versus residence based taxation University of Cologne Working Paper Cologne 
Germany. 
695. 
Davidson C, Ferrett B 2007 Mergers in multidimensional competition Economica 74        
pp 695 – 712. 
696. 
DeLong G, DeYoung R 2007 Learning by observing: Information spillovers in the 
execution and valuation of commercial bank M&As Journal of Finance 62 (1) pp 181 – 216. 
697. 
Evans D S, Noel M D 2007 Defining markets that involve multi-sided platform 
businesses: An empirical framework with an application to Google’s purchase of 
DoubleClick Working Paper 07-18 AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies USA 
www.regulation2point0.org . 
698. 
Farina V 2007 L’analisi della cultura aziendale attraverso il linguaggio: Un’applicazione 
all’interno del gruppo Unicredit in Carretta A, Schwizer P (editors) Change management e 
post merger integration. Un’analisi della creazione di valore nel governo dei processi di 
fusione e acquisizione nel sistema finanziario Newfin Università Bocconi Milano Italy. 
699. 
Gantumur T, Stephan A 2007 Mergers & acquisitions and innovation performance in the 
telecommunications equipment industry Discussion Paper 728 German Institute for 
Economic Research Berlin Germany ISSN print edition 1433-0210 ISSN electronic edition 
1619-4535 pp 1 – 39 http://www.diw.de . 

138 
 
700. 
Hutson E 2007 Mergers and acquisitions in Robertson R, Scholte J A (editors) 
Encyclopedia of globalization Routledge pp 1 – 7 http://hdl.handle.net/10197/1981 . 
701. 
Jackson G, Miyajima H 2007 Varieties of capitalism, varieties of markets: Mergers and 
acquisitions in Japan, Germany, France, the UK and USA RIETI Discussion Paper            
Series 07-E-054. 
702. 
Kamaly A 2007 Trends and determinants of mergers and acquisitions in developing 
countries in 1990s International Research Journal of Finance and Economics 8 pp 16 – 30. 
703. 
Kapoor R, Lim K 2007a The impact of acquisition on the innovation performance of 
inventors at semiconductor companies Academy of Management Journal 50 (5)               
pp 1133 – 1155. 
704. 
Kapoor R, Lim K 2007b The impact of acquisitions on the productivity of inventors at 
semiconductor firms: A synthesis of knowledge-based and incentive-based perspectives 
Academy of Management Journal 50 (5) pp 1133 – 1155. 
705. 
Koetter M, Bos J W B, Heid F, Kolari J W, Kool C J M, Porath D 2007 Accounting for 
distress in bank mergers Journal of Banking and Finance 31 pp 3200 – 3217. 
706. 
Krishnan H A, Hitt M A, Park D 2007 Acquisition premiums, subsequent workforce 
reductions and post-acquisition performance Journal of Management Studies 44 (5)              
pp 709 – 732. 
707. 
Kim B, Choi J P 2007 Customer information sharing: Strategic incentives and new 
implications Working Paper #07-27 NET Institute Michigan State University pp 1 – 31 
http://www.netinst.org/Choi_Kim_07-27.pdf . 
708. 
Masulis R W, Wang C, Xie F 2007 Corporate governance and acquirer returns The 
Journal of Finance 62 (4) pp 1851 – 1889. 
709. 
Mjøs A 2007 Corporate finance: Capital structure and hybrid capital Ph D dissertation 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration Bergen Norway. 
710. 
Hetland O R, Mjøs A A 2011 Using bank mergers and acquisitions to understand lending 
relationships Discussion Paper FOR 13 2011 Norwegian School of Economics and Business 
Administration Bergen Norway ISSN: 1500-4066 pp 1 – 42. 
711. 
Nagano M, Yuan Y 2007 Cross-border acquisitions in a transition economy: Recent 
experiences of China and India Nagoya City University MPRA Paper no 24676 Munich 
University Munich Germany pp 1 – 28 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/24676/ . 
712. 
Neary P 2007 Cross-border mergers as instruments of comparative advantage Review of 
Economic Studies 74 pp 1229 – 1257. 

139 
 
713. 
Nocke V, Yeaple St 2007 Cross-border mergers and acquisitions vs greenfield foreign 
direct investment: The role of firm heterogeneity Journal of International Economics 72       
pp 336 – 365. 
714. 
Ogura Y, Uchida H 2007 Bank consolidation and soft information acquisition in small 
business lending RIETI Discussion Paper Series 07-E-037 The Research Institute of 
Economy, Trade and Industry Japan pp 1 – 40 http://www.rieti.go.jp/en/ . 
715. 
Szilagyi P 2007 Corporate governance and the agency costs of debt and outside equity 
Department of Finance and CentER Graduate School of Tilburg University The Netherlands 
pp 1 – 176. 
716. 
Boone A L, Mulherin J H 2008 Do auctions induce a winner's curse? New evidence from 
the corporate takeover market Journal of Financial Economics 89 (1) pp 1 – 19. 
717. 
Brealy R A 2008a Mergers in Brealy R A Principles of corporate finance McGraw Hill 
NY USA pp 1 – 883. 
718. 
Brealy R A 2008b Mergers, corporate control and governance in Brealy R A Principles of 
corporate finance McGraw Hill NY USA pp 885 – 886. 
719. 
Breinlich H 2008 Trade liberalization and industrial restructuring through mergers and 
acquisitions Journal of International Economics 76 pp 254 - 266. 
720. 
Damiani M, Pompei F 2008 Mergers, acquisitions and technological regimes: The 
European experience over the period 2002 – 2005 Department of Economics, Finance and 
Statistics University of Perugia MPRA Paper no 8226 Munich University Munich Germany 
pp 1 – 51 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/8226/ . 
721. 
DePamphilis D M 2008 Mergers, acquisitions, and other restructuring activities 4th 
edition Elsevier Academic Press Burlington MA USA. 
722. 
Gavious I, Schwartz D 2008 Market valuations of start-up ventures around the 
technology bubble Working Paper Ben-Gurion University Israel. 
723. 
Maksimovic V, Phillips G, Prabhala N R 2008 Post-merger restructuring and the 
boundaries of the firm NBER Working Paper Series Working Paper 14291 NBER USA. 
724. 
Neto P, Brandão A, Cerqueira A 2008a The macroeconomic determinants of cross border 
mergers and acquisitions and greenfield investments FEP Working Paper no 281 Faculdade 
de Economia Universidade do Porto Portugal pp 1 – 42. 
725. 
Neto P, Brandão A, Cerqueira A 2008b The impact of FDI, cross border mergers and 
acquisitions and greenfield investments on economic growth FEP Working Paper no 291 
Faculdade de Economia Universidade do Porto Portugal pp 1 – 32. 

140 
 
726. 
Norbäck P-J, Persson L 2008a Globalization and profitability of cross-border mergers 
and acquisitions Economic Theory 35 (2) pp 241 – 266. 
727. 
Norbäck P-J, Persson L 2008b Cross-border mergers & acquisitions policy in service 
markets Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 8 (3) pp 269 – 293. 
728. 
Norbäck P-J, Persson L, Vlachos J 2009 Cross-border acquisitions and taxes: Efficiency 
and tax revenues Canadian Journal of Economics 42 (4) pp 1473 – 1500. 
729. 
Toxvaerd F 2008 Strategic merger waves: A theory of musical chairs Journal of 
Economic Theory 140 pp 1 – 26. 
730. 
Varma S 2008 International venturing emerging paradigms - a study of the Indian IT 
industry Sri Aurobindo College Delhi University India MPRA Paper no 14028 Munich 
University Munich Germany pp 1 – 20 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/14028/ . 
731. 
Venkiteswaran N 2008 Managing M&A-from strategic intent to integration: IOC’s 
acquisition of IBP and after Working Paper no 2008-12-09 Indian Institute of Management 
India pp 1 – 37. 
732. 
Balcaen S, Buyze J, Ooghe H 2009 Financial distress and firm exit: determinants of 
involuntary exits, voluntary liquidations and restructuring exits Working Paper 
D/2009/7012/50 Department of Accountancy and Corporate Finance Faculty of Economics 
and Business Administration Ghent University Belgium pp 1 – 44. 
733. 
DeYoung R, Evanoff D D, Molyneux Ph 2009 Mergers and acquisitions of financial 
institutions: A review of the post - 2000 literature Journal of Financial Services Research 36 
pp 87 – 110. 
734. 
Elnathan D, Gavious I, Hauser S 2009 On the added value of firm valuation by financial 
experts International Journal of Business and Management 4 (3) pp 70 – 85. 
735. 
Jones K 2009 Mergers & acquisitions: A snapshot of a SPECIAL pre and post M&A 
process International School of Management Paris France MPRA Paper no 18500 Munich 
University Munich Germany pp 1 – 19 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/18500/ . 
736. 
Ornaghi C 2009 Mergers and innovation in big pharma International Journal of 
Industrial Organization 27 pp 70 – 79. 
737. 
Panetta F, Schivardi F, Shum M 2009 Do mergers improve information? Evidence from 
the loan market Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (4) pp 673 – 709. 
738. 
Patel L, Bourgeois L J 2009 Note on post-merger integration Darden Business Publishing 
pp 4 – 5. 
739. 
Van Beers C, Dekker R 2009 Acquisitions, divestitures and innovation performance in 
the Netherlands Economics and Management of Innovation Discussion Paper Series #2009-

141 
 
02 Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management Delft University of Technology The 
Netherlands MPRA Paper no 13464 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 39 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/13464/ . 
740. 
Van Lelyveld I, Knot K 2009 Do financial conglomerates create or destroy value? 
Evidence for the EU Journal of Banking and Finance 33 pp 2312 – 2321. 
741. 
Wong K M 2009 Mergers & acquisitions: The basics ISM NY DBA Summer 3 pp 6 – 8   
St John’s University NY USA. 
742. 
Aharon D Y, Gavious I, Yosef R 2010 Stock market bubble effects on mergers and 
acquisitions The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance pp 1 – 15 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.qref.2010.05.002. 
743. 
Byrne D 2010 Acquisitions as a response to deregulation: Evidence from the cable 
television industry Queen’s Economics Department Working Paper no 1242 Department of 
Economics Queen’s University Ottawa Canada pp 1 – 42. 
744. 
Lenz R 2010 The logic of merger and acquisition pricing University of Applied Sciences 
Bielefeld Germany MPRA Paper no 26627 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 17 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/26627/ . 
745. 
Spyrou S, Siougle G 2010 Stock price reaction to M&A announcements: Evidence from 
the London Stock Exchange Journal of Money, Investment and Banking 16 pp 29 – 45. 
746. 
Asimakopoulos I, Athanasoglou P P 2011 Revisiting the merger and acquisition 
performance of European banks MPRA Paper no 31994 Munich University Munich 
Germany pp 1 – 40 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/31994/ . 
747. 
Beltratti A, Paladino G 2011 Is M&A different during a crisis? Evidence from the 
European banking sector Bocconi University Milano Italy Intesa Sanpaolo Italy MPRA 
Paper no 35065 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 35 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/35065/ . 
748. 
Brealey R A, Myers S C, Allen F 2011 Principles of corporate finance 10th edition 
McGraw-Hill New York NY USA. 
749. 
Chaudhuri A R 2011 Cross-border mergers and market segmentation Tilec Discussion 
Paper no 2011-047 Tilburg University The Netherlands ISSN 1572-4042 pp 1 - 33 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1095672 . 
750. 
Chen Sh-S, Chou R K, Lee Y-Ch 2011 Bidders’ strategic timing of acquisition 
announcements and the effects of payment method on target returns and competing bids 
Journal of Banking and Finance 35 pp 2341 – 2354. 

142 
 
751. 
Jie C, Song M H, Walkling R A 2011 Anticipation, acquisitions, and bidder returns: 
Industry shocks and the transfer of information across rivals Review of Financial Studies 24 
pp 2242 – 2285. 
752. 
Netter J, Stegemoller M, Wintoki M B 2011 Implications of data screens on merger and 
acquisition analysis: A large sample study of mergers and acquisitions from 1992 to 2009 
Review of Financial Studies 24 pp 2200 – 2243. 
753. 
Vallascas F, Hegendorff J 2011 The impact of European bank mergers on bidder default 
risk Journal of Banking and Finance 35 pp 902 – 915. 
754. 
Binder P 2012 Private communications on the mergers and acquisitions transactions. 
755. 
Fornalczyk A 2012 Competition protection and Philip Kotler's strategic recommendations 
Center for Antitrust and Regulatory Studies Faculty of Management University of Warsaw 
Poland MPRA Paper no 38520 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 14 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/38520/ . 
756. 
Mehwish A K, Kayani F, Javid A Y 2012 Effect of mergers and acquisitions on market 
concentration and interest spread MPRA Paper no 37311 Munich University Munich 
Germany pp 1 – 9 http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/37311/ . 
757. 
Rus I 2012 Practical aspects regarding stages of mergers through company acquisition 
Academica Science Journal no 1 (1) ISSN 2285 - 8067 pp 1 – 10. 
758. 
Weitzel U, Kling G 2012 Sold below value? Why some targets accept very low and even 
negative takeover premiums Radboud University Nijmegen University of Southampton 
MPRA Paper no 43002 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 65 http://mpra.ub.uni-
muenchen.de/43002/ . 
759. 
Friedman V 2013 The next big luxury M&A targets in 2014 Financial Times London 
UK. 
760. 
Mukherjee A, Chowdhury P R 2013 Innovation and social desirability Economics 
Bulletin vol 33 no 1 pp 348 – 360. 
761. 
Pfister S, Kerler P, Valk T, Prien U, Peyer S, Kuhn S, Hintermann Ch, Ljaskowsky P, 
Arnet Ph 2013 M&A Yearbook – 2013 Edition: KPMG’s overview of mergers & acquisitions 
in Switzerland in 2012 and outlook for 2013 no E-KP049-G2 KPMG AG Badenerstrasse 172 
8004 Zurich Switzerland pp 1 – 60. 
762. 
Shumska S, Stepanenko-Lypovyk B 2013 International mergers and acquisitions in 
financial sector: Global trends and theirs features in Ukraine Institute for Economics and 
Forecasting National Academy of Science of Ukraine Galyts’ky Economic Bulletin no 5 (38) 

143 
 
pp 173 – 185 MPRA Paper no 48426 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 14 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/48426/ . 
763. 
UNCTAD 2013 UNCTAD M&A database http://unctad.org . 
764. 
Wikipedia 2013 Mergers and Acquisitions http://wikipedia.org . 
Information Absorption and Asymmetry in Economics, Finances, Business Administration 
Sciences: 
765. 
Akerlof G A 1970 The market for lemons: Qualitative uncertainty and the market 
mechanism Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3) pp 488 – 500. 
766. 
Akerlof G A August 29 2014 Writing the "The Market for 'Lemons'": A Personal 
Interpretive Essay Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2014. Web. 29 Aug 2014. 
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2001/akerlof-
article.html?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=facebook_page . 
767. 
Leland H, Pyle D 1977 Informational asymmetries, financial structure and financial 
intermediation Journal of Finance 32 pp 371 – 387. 
768. 
Cohen W M, Levinthal D A 1989 Innovation and learning: The two faces of R&D 
Economic Journal 99 pp 569 – 596. 
769. 
Cohen W M, Levinthal D A 1990 Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning 
and innovation Administrative Science Quarterly 35 pp 128 – 152. 
770. 
Nonaka I 1994 A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation Organization 
Science 5 (1) pp 14 – 37. 
771. 
Kumar R, Nti K O 1998 Differential learning and interaction in alliance dynamics: A 
process and outcome discrepancy model Organization Science 9 pp 356 – 367. 
772. 
Lane R J, Lubatkin M 1998 Relative absorptive capacity and inter-organizational learning 
Strategic Management Journal 19 pp 461 – 477. 
773. 
Farina V 2008 Network embeddedness, specialization choices and performance in 
investment banking industry University of Rome Tor Vergata Italy MPRA Paper no 11701 
Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 26  
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/11701/ . 
774. 
Ledenyov V O, Ledenyov D O 2012a Shaping the international financial system in 
century of globalization Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1206.2022.pdf             
pp 1 – 20. 
775. 
Ledenyov V O, Ledenyov D O 2012b Designing the new architecture of international 
financial system in era of great changes by globalization Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1206.2778.pdf pp 1 – 18. 

144 
 
776. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2012a On the new central bank strategy toward monetary 
and financial instabilities management in finances: econophysical analysis of nonlinear 
dynamical financial systems Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1211.1897.pdf           
pp 1 – 8. 
777. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2012b On the risk management with application of 
econophysics analysis in central banks and financial institutions Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1211.4108.pdf pp 1 – 10. 
778. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013a On the optimal allocation of assets in investment 
portfolio with application of modern portfolio management and nonlinear dynamic chaos 
theories in investment, commercial and central banks Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1301.4881.pdf pp 1 – 34. 
779. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013b On the theory of firm in nonlinear dynamic 
financial 
and 
economic 
systems 
Cornell 
University 
NY 
USA 
www.arxiv.org 
1206.4426v2.pdf pp 1 – 27. 
780. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013c On the accurate characterization of business cycles 
in nonlinear dynamic financial and economic systems Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1304.4807.pdf pp 1 – 26. 
781. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013d To the problem of turbulence in quantitative easing 
transmission channels and transactions network channels at quantitative easing policy 
implementation by central banks Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1305.5656.pdf 
pp 1 – 40. 
782. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013e To the problem of evaluation of market risk of 
global equity index portfolio in global capital markets MPRA Paper no 47708 Munich 
University Munich Germany pp 1 – 25 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/47708/ . 
783. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013f Some thoughts on accurate characterization of 
stock market indexes trends in conditions of nonlinear capital flows during electronic trading 
at stock exchanges in global capital markets MPRA Paper no 49964 Munich University 
Munich Germany pp 1 – 52  
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/49964/ . 
784. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013g On the Stratonovich - Kalman - Bucy filtering 
algorithm application for accurate characterization of financial time series with use of state-
space model by central banks MPRA Paper no 50235 Munich University Munich Germany 
pp 1 – 52  

145 
 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/50235/ . 
785. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013h Tracking and replication of hedge fund optimal 
investment portfolio strategies in global capital markets in presence of nonlinearities      
MPRA Paper no 51176 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 92 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/51176/ . 
786. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013i Venture capital optimal investment portfolio 
strategies selection in diffusion - type financial systems in global capital markets with 
nonlinearities MPRA Paper no 51903 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 81 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/51903/ . 
787. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014a Mergers and acquisitions transactions strategies in 
diffusion - type financial systems in highly volatile global capital markets with nonlinearities 
MPRA Paper no 53906 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 142  
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/53906/ . 
788. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014b Strategies on initial public offering of company 
equity at stock exchanges in imperfect highly volatile global capital markets with induced 
nonlinearities MPRA Paper no 53780 Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 139 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/53780/ . 
789. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014c MicroFX foreign currencies ultra high frequencies 
trading software platform with embedded optimized Stratonovich – Kalman - Bucy filtering 
algorithm, particle filtering algorithm, macroeconomic analysis algorithm, market 
microstructure analysis algorithm, order flow analysis algorithm, comparative analysis 
algorithm, and artificial intelligence algorithm for near-real-time decision making / instant 
switching on / between optimal trading strategies ECE James Cook University Townsville 
Australia, Kharkov Ukraine. 
790. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014d MicroLBO software program with the embedded 
optimized near-real-time artificial intelligence algorithm to create winning virtuous strategies 
toward leveraged buyout transactions implementation and to compute direct/reverse leverage 
buyout transaction default probability number for selected public/private companies during 
private equity investment in conditions of resonant absorption of discrete information in 
diffusion - type financial system with induced nonlinearities ECE James Cook University 
Townsville Australia, Kharkov Ukraine. 
791. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014e On the winning virtuous strategies for ultra high 
frequency electronic trading in foreign currencies exchange markets MPRA Paper no 59770 
Munich University Munich Germany pp 1 – 173  

146 
 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/59770/ . 
792. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014f On the fundamentals of winning virtuous strategies 
creation toward leveraged buyout transactions implementation during private equity 
investment in conditions of resonant absorption of discrete information in diffusion - type 
financial system with induced nonlinearities MPRA Paper no 60450 Munich University 
Munich Germany pp 1 – 161 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/60450/ . 
793. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2015 MicroID software program with the embedded 
optimized near-real-time artificial intelligence algorithm to create the winning virtuous 
business strategies and to predict the director’s election / appointment in the boards of 
directors in the firms, taking to the consideration both the director’s technical characteristics 
and the interconnecting interlocking director’s network parameters in conditions of the 
resonant absorption of discrete information in diffusion - type financial economic system 
with induced nonlinearities ECE James Cook University Townsville Australia, Kharkov 
Ukraine. 
794. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2013j MicroM&A software program with the embedded 
optimized near-real-time artificial intelligence algorithm to create the winning virtuous M&A 
strategies and to estimate the probability of the M&A transaction completion success ECE 
James Cook University Townsville Australia, Kharkov Ukraine. 
Absorption Phenomena in Physics; Chemistry; Electrical, Electronics and Computer 
Engineering Sciences: 
795. 
Neklyudov I M, Dovbnya A N, Dikiy N P, Ledenyov O P, Lyashko Yu V 2014 Research 
on resonant structure of absorbed chemical elements distribution in air filters at nuclear 
power plants by gamma activation analysis method Proceedings of the XII High Energy 
Physics, Nuclear Physics, Particles Accelerators Conference National Academy of Sciences 
in Ukraine (NASU), National Scientific Centre Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology 
(NSC KIPT) Kharkov Ukraine March 17 – 21, 2014 p 63. 
796. 
Ledenyov O P, Neklyudov I M 2013 Distribution of small dispersive coal dust particles 
and absorbed radioactive chemical elements in conditions of forced acoustic resonance in 
iodine air filter at nuclear power plant Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 
1306.3324.pdf pp 1 – 8. 
797. 
Neklyudov I M, Dovbnya A N, Dikiy N P , Ledenyov O P, Lyashko Yu V 2013 Features 
of adsorbed radioactive chemical elements and their isotopes distribution in iodine air filters 

147 
 
AU-1500 at nuclear power plants Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1307.2914.pdf 
pp 1 – 9. 
798. 
Neklyudov I M, Ledenyov O P, Fedorova L I, Poltinin P Ya 2013a Generation of 
concentration density maxima of small dispersive coal dust particles in horizontal iodine air 
filter at air-dust aerosol blow Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1306.2853.pdf      
pp 1 – 7. 
799. 
Neklyudov I M, Ledenyov O P, Fedorova L I, Poltinin P Ya 2013b Influence by small 
dispersive coal dust particles of different fractional consistence on characteristics of iodine 
air filter at nuclear power plant Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1302.4223.pdf        
pp 1 – 6. 
800. 
Neklyudov I M, Fedorova L I, Poltinin P Ya, Ledenyov O P 2013 Features of coal dust 
dynamics at action of differently oriented forces in granular filtering medium Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1301.5806.pdf pp 1 – 8. 
801. 
Ledenyov O P, Neklyudov I M, Poltinin P Ya, Fedorova L I 2012a Physical features of 
accumulation and distribution processes of small disperse coal dust precipitations and 
absorbed radioactive chemical elements in iodine air filter at nuclear power plant Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1209.3151.pdf pp 1 – 6. 
802. 
Ledenyov O P, Neklyudov I M, Poltinin P Ya, Fedorova L I 2012b Physical features of 
small disperse coal dust fraction transportation and structurization processes in iodine air 
filters of absorption type in ventilation systems at nuclear power plants Cornell University 
NY USA www.arxiv.org 1208.5198.pdf pp 1 – 9. 
803. 
Neklyudov I M, Ledenyov O P, Fedorova L I, Poltinin P Ya 2012 On the structurization 
of coal dust precipitations and their influence on aerodynamic resistance by granulated 
mediums in air filters at nuclear power plants Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 
1207.0456.pdf pp 1 – 7. 
804. 
Ledenyov O P 2012a On the structure of quantum intermediate state in type I 
superconductors Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1204.5976v1.pdf pp 1 – 5. 
805. 
Ledenyov V O, Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov O P, Tikhonovsky M A 2012 Influence by 
proximity effect on ultrasound attenuation in Cu-Nb composite system at low temperatures 
Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1204.3837v1.pdf pp 1 – 6. 
806. 
Ledenyov O P 2012b Geometric resonance in intermediate state of type I 
superconductors Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1207.3712.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
807. 
Ledenyov O P 2012c Oscillatory tilt effect in a metal in a weak magnetic field Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1208.0724.pdf pp 1 – 3. 

148 
 
808. 
Ledenyov O P, Fursa V P 2012 On the parameters of intermediate state structure in high 
pure type I superconductors at external magnetic field Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1208.0723.pdf pp 1 – 5. 
809. 
Shepelev A G, Ledenyov O P, Filimonov G D 2012a New effects in absorption of 
ultrasound in intermediate state of high pure type I superconductor Cornell University NY 
USA www.arxiv.org 1210.1325.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
810. 
Shepelev A G, Ledenyov O P, Filimonov G D 2012b Anomalous attenuation of 
longitudinal ultrasound in intermediate state of high pure type I superconductor Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1210.1655.pdf pp 1 – 3. 
811. 
Shepelev A G, Ledenyov O P, Filimonov G D 2012c Experimental research of 
longitudinal ultrasound absorption in intermediate state of high pure type I superconductor 
Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1211.0114.pdf pp 1 – 8. 
812. 
Shepelev A G, Ledenyov O P, Filimonov G D 2012d Effect of anomalously high 
oscillations of velocity of longitudinal ultrasound in high pure type I superconductor at weak 
external magnetic field Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1211.0394.pdf pp 1 – 3. 
813. 
Shepelev A G, Ledenyov O P, Filimonov G D 2012e Influence by trajectorial electron 
transport on anomalous ultrasound attenuation in high pure Gallium single crystal Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1211.0789.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
814. 
Abramenkov A D, Fogel’ Ya M, Slyozov V V, Tanatarov L V, Ledenyov O P 2012 
Research on diffusion of Mo substrate atoms into Ti and Cr thin films by secondary ion-ion 
emission method Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1209.4750.pdf pp 1 – 3. 
815. 
Ledenyov D O, Mazierska J E, Allen G, Jacob M V 2012 Lumped element modeling of 
nonlinear properties of high temperature superconductors in a dielectric resonator Cornell 
University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1207.5362.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
816. 
Leong K T, Mazierska J E, Jacob M V, Ledenyov D O, Batt S 2012 Comparing unloaded 
Q-factor of a high-Q dielectric resonator measured using the transmission mode and 
reflection mode methods involving S-parameter circle fitting Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1207.5622.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
817. 
Mazierska J E, Ledenyov D O, Jacob M V, Krupka J 2012 Precise microwave 
characterization of MgO substrates for HTS circuits with superconducting post dielectric 
resonator Cornell University NY USA 1207.5906.pdf pp 1 – 6. 
818. 
Jacob M V, Mazierska J E, Ledenyov D O, Krupka J 2012 Microwave characterization of 
CaF2 at cryogenic temperatures using a dielectric resonator technique Journal of the 

149 
 
European Ceramic Society 23 pp 2617 – 2622 2003 Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1209.0110.pdf pp 1 – 6. 
819. 
Mazierska J E, Krupka J, Jacob M V, Ledenyov D O 2012 Complex permittivity 
measurements at variable temperatures of low loss dielectric substrates employing split post 
and single post dielectric resonators 2004 IEEE MTT-S Digest Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1209.0111.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
820. 
Jacob M V, Mazierska J E, Leong K T, Ledenyov D O, Krupka J 2012 Surface resistance 
measurements of HTS thin films using SLAO dielectric resonator Cornell University NY 
USA www.arxiv.org 1209.4519.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
821. 
Jacob M V, Mazierska J E, Krupka J, Ledenyov D O, Takeuchi S 2012 Microwave 
properties of Yttrium Vanadate at cryogenic temperatures Cornell University NY USA 
www.arxiv.org 1209.5255.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
822. 
Mazierska J E, Jacob M V, Ledenyov D O, Krupka J 2012 Loss tangent measurements of 
dielectric substrates from 15 K to 300 K with two resonators: Investigation into accuracy 
issues Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1210.2230.pdf pp 1 – 4. 
823. 
Ledenyov V O, Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov O P 2012 Features of oxygen and its vacancies 
diffusion in YBa2Cu3O7–δ thin films near to magnetic quantum lines Cornell University NY 
USA www.arxiv.org 1206.5635v1.pdf pp 1 – 7. 
824. 
Ledenyov D O 2013 Nonlinear surface resistance of YBa2Cu3O7-δ superconducting thin 
films on MgO substrates in dielectric resonator at ultra high frequencies Cornell University 
NY USA www.arxiv.org 1303.1276.pdf pp 1 – 10. 
825. 
Ledenyov D O, Ledenyov V O 2014 Nonlinearities in microwave superconductivity 6th 
edition Cornell University NY USA www.arxiv.org 1206.4426v6.pdf pp 1 – 919. 
826. 
Mazierska J E, Leong K T, Ledenyov D O, Rains A, Zuchowski N, Krupka J 2014 
Microwave measurements of surface resistance and complex conductivity of NdBaCuO films 
Advances in Science and Technology vol 95 pp 162 – 168 Trans Tech Publications 
Switzerland doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AST.95.162 
http://www.ttp.net/ . 
Business Strategy Science, Strategic Governance Science, Management Science: 
827. 
Chandler A D Jr 1962, 1998 Strategy and structure: Chapters in the history of the 
American industrial enterprise Beard Books USA ISBN-10: 158798198X ISBN-13: 978-
1587981982 pp 1 – 480. 
828. 
Chandler A D Jr 1977, 1993 The visible hand: The managerial revolution in American 
business Belknap Press ISBN-10 0674940520 ISBN-13 978-0674940529 pp 1 – 624. 

150 
 
829. 
Chandler A D Jr, Daems H 1980 Managerial hierarchies: Comparative perspectives on 
the rise of the modern industrial enterprise Harvard University Press ISBN 9780674547414 . 
830. 
Chandler A D Jr 1994 Scale and scope: The dynamics of industrial capitalism Belknap 
Press USA ISBN-10: 0674789954 ISBN-13: 978-0674789951 pp 1 – 780. 
831. 
Chandler A D Jr 2001 Inventing the electronic century: The epic story of the consumer 
electronics and computer industries Free Press USA ISBN-10: 0743215672 ISBN-13: 978-
0743215671 pp 1 – 336. 
832. 
Chandler A D Jr 2005 Shaping the industrial century: The remarkable story of chemical 
and pharmaceutical industries Harvard University Press Cambridge Massachusetts USA 
ISBN 0-674-01720-X pp 1 – 366. 
833. 
Andrews K R 1971a The concept of corporate strategy Richard D Irwin Homewood 
USA. 
834. 
Andrews K R 1971b New horizons in corporate strategy McKinsey Quarterly vol 7 no 3 
pp 34 – 43. 
835. 
Andrews K R 1980 Directors’ responsibility for corporate strategy Harvard Business 
Review vol 58 no 6 pp 30 – 42. 
836. 
Andrews K R 1981a Corporate strategy as a vital function of the board Harvard Business 
Review vol 59 no 6 pp 174 – 180. 
837. 
Andrews K R 1981b Replaying the board’s role in formulating strategy Harvard Business 
Review vol 59 no 3 pp 18 – 23. 
838. 
Andrews K R 1984 Corporate strategy: The essential intangibles McKinsey Quarterly    
no 4 pp 43 – 49. 
839. 
Rumelt R P 1974 Strategy, structure and economic performance Harvard Business 
School Press Boston MA USA. 
840. 
Rumelt R P 1982 Diversification strategy and profitability Strategic Management Journal 
3 pp 359 – 369. 
841. 
Porter M E March-April 1979 How competitive forces shape strategy Harvard Business 
Review 57 (2) pp 137 – 145. 
842. 
Porter M E 1980, 1998 Competitive strategy: Techniques for analyzing industries and 
competitors Free Press New York USA. 
843. 
Porter M E, Harrigan K R 1981 A framework for looking at endgame strategies in 
Strategic management and business policy Glueck B (editor) McGraw-Hill USA. 
844. 
Porter M E 1982a Cases in competitive strategy Free Press New York USA. 

151 
 
845. 
Porter M E 1982b Industrial organization and the evolution of concepts for strategic 
planning: The new learning in Corporate strategy: The integration of corporation planning 
models and economics Taylor T H (editor) North-Holland Publishing Company Amsterdam 
The Netherlands. 
846. 
Porter M E, Salter M S March 1982, June 1986 Note on diversification as a strategy 
Harvard Business School Background Note Harvard University pp 382 – 129. 
847. 
Porter M E 1983 Analyzing competitors: Predicting competitor behavior and formulating 
offensive and defensive strategy in Policy, strategy, and implementation Leontiades M 
(editor) Random House USA. 
848. 
Porter M E 1985 Defensive strategy Strategy 7 (1). 
849. 
Porter M E, Millar V July 1985 How information gives you competitive advantage 
Harvard Business Review 
http://hbr.org/1985/07/how-information-gives-you-competitive-advantage/ar/1 . 
850. 
Porter M E May 1987a The state of strategic thinking Economist London UK. 
851. 
Porter M E 1987b From competitive advantage to corporate strategy Harvard Business 
Review pp 43 – 59. 
852. 
Porter M E April 1991 America's green strategy Scientific American 264 (4). 
853. 
Porter M E 1991 Toward a dynamic theory of strategy Strategic Management Journal 12 
pp 95 – 117. 
854. 
Montgomery C A, Porter M E (editors) 1991 Strategy: Seeking and securing competitive 
advantage Harvard Business School Press Boston Massachusetts USA. 
855. 
Porter M E 1994a Global strategy: Winning in the World-wide marketplace in The 
portable MBA in strategy Fahey L, Randall R M (editors) John Willey & Sons NY USA. 
856. 
Porter M E 1994b Competitive strategy revisited: A view from the 1990s in The 
relevance of a decade: Essays to mark the first ten years of the Harvard Business School 
Press Duffy P B (editor) Harvard Business School Press Boston Massachusetts USA. 
857. 
Porter M E, Van der Linde C 1995 Toward a new conception of the environment-
competitiveness relationship Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4) pp 97 – 118. 
858. 
Porter M E 1996a What is strategy? Harvard Business Review 74 (6) pp 61 – 78. 
859. 
Porter M E December 1996b Tradeoffs, activity systems, and the theory of competitive 
strategy Unpublished Work Harvard University USA. 
860. 
Porter M E March February 1997 New strategies for inner-city economic development 
Economic Development Quarterly 11 (1). 

152 
 
861. 
Schwab K, Conrnelius P, Porter M E 1999 The global competitiveness report Oxford 
University Press New York USA. 
862. 
Porter M E, Rivkin J W January 2000, March 2001 Competition & strategy: Course 
structure TN Harvard Business School Teaching Note Harvard University pp 700 – 091. 
863. 
Porter M E March 2001a Strategy and the Internet Harvard Business Review 79 (3) 
http://hbr.org/2001/03/strategy-and-the-internet/ar/1 . 
864. 
Porter M E 2001b The technological dimension of competitive strategy in Research on 
technological innovation, management and policy vol 7 Burgelman R A, Chesbrough H 
(editors) JAI Press Greenwich CT USA. 
865. 
Porter M E, Kramer M R 2002 The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy 
Harvard Business Review 80 (12) pp 56 – 68. 
866. 
Porter M E, Sakakibara M 2004 Competition in Japan Journal of Economic Perspectives 
Winter Issue. 
867. 
Anand B N, Bradley S P, Ghemawat P, Khanna T, Montgomery C A, Porter M E, Rivkin 
J W, Rukstad M G, Wells J R, Yoffie D B June 2005, September 2008 Strategy: Building 
and sustaining competitive advantage Harvard Business School Class Lecture Harvard 
University USA pp 705 – 509. 
868. 
Porter M E, Kramer M R December 2006 Strategy and society: The link between 
competitive advantage and corporate social responsibility Harvard Business Review 84 (12). 
869. 
Porter M E January 2008 The five competitive forces that shape strategy Special Issue on 
HBS Centennial Harvard Business Review 86 (1)  
http://hbr.org/2008/01/the-five-competitive-forces-that-shape-strategy/ar/1 . 
870. 
Porter M December 2013 Fundamental purpose Value Investor Insight pp 8 – 20 
www.valueinvestorinsight.com . 
871. 
Porter M E, Heppelmann J E November 2014 How smart, connected products are 
transforming 
competition 
Harvard 
Business 
Review 
November 
USA 
http://hbr.org/2014/11/how-smart-connected-products-are-transforming-competition/ar/1 . 
872. 
Schendel D E, Hofer Ch W 1979 Strategic management. A new view of business policy 
and planning Little Brown Boston USA p 9. 
873. 
Yelle L E 1979 The learning curve: Historical review and comprehensive survey 
Decision Sciences 10 (2) pp 302 – 328. 
874. 
Dess G G, Davis P S 1984 Porter's (1980) generic strategies as determinants of strategic 
group membership and organizational performance Academy of Management Journal 27 (3)     
pp 467 – 488. 

153 
 
875. 
Schwenk C R 1984 Cognitive simplification processes in strategic decision making 
Strategic Management Journal 5 pp 111 – 128. 
876. 
Hambrick D C 1985 Turnaround strategies in Handbook of strategic management Guth 
W D (editor) Warren, Gorham and Lamont New York USA pp 10 – 1 to 10 – 32. 
877. 
Palepu K G 1985 Diversification strategy, profit performance and the entropy measure 
Strategic Management Journal 6 pp 239 – 255. 
878. 
Barney J B 1986 Strategic factor markets: Expectations, luck, and business strategy 
Management Science 32 (10) pp 1231 – 1241. 
879. 
Barney J B 1991 Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage Journal of 
Management 17 (1) pp 99 – 120. 
880. 
Huff A S, Reger R K 1987 A review of strategic process research Journal of 
Management vol 13 no 2 p 211. 
881. 
Hill C W L, Snell S A 1988 External control, corporate strategy, and firm performance in 
research intensive industries Strategic Management Journal 9 pp 577 – 590. 
882. 
Baysinger B D, Hoskisson R E 1989 Diversification strategy and R&D intensity in large 
multiproduct firms Academy of Management Journal 32 pp 310 – 332. 
883. 
Rue L W, Holland P G 1989 Strategic management: Concepts and experiences 2nd edition 
McGraw-Hill Singapore; Sage Beverly Hills California USA. 
884. 
Cohen W M, Levinthal D A 1990 Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning 
and innovation Administrative Science Quarterly 35 pp 128 – 152. 
885. 
Ansoff I H 1991 Critique of Henry Mintzberg’s “The design school: Reconsidering the 
basic premises of strategic management” Strategic Management Journal vol 12 no 6             
pp 449 – 461 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smj.4250120605/abstract . 
886. 
Goold M 1991 Strategic control in the decentralized firm Sloan Management Review 32 
(2) pp 69 – 81. 
887. 
Goold M, Luchs K 1993 Why diversify? Four decades of managed thinking Academy of 
Management Executive 7 (3) pp 7 – 25. 
888. 
Goold M et al. 1994 Corporate level strategy: Creating value in the multi-business 
company John Willey & Sons Inc New York USA. 
889. 
Goold M, Campbell A September, October 1998 Desperately seeking synergy Harvard 
Business Review pp 131 – 143. 
890. 
Alexander M, Goold M, Collis D J, Campbell A, Lieberthal K, Montgomery C A, Palepu 
K, Prahalad C K, Stalk G, Khanna T, Hart S L, Shulman L F, Evans Ph 1992, 1995, 1996, 

154 
 
1997, 1998, 1999 Harvard Business Review on corporate strategy Harvard University Press 
Cambridge Massachusetts USA ISBN 1-57851-699-4. 
891. 
Yip G 1992 Total global strategy: Managing for worldwide competitive advantage 
Prentice Hall NY USA. 
892. 
Yip G 1998 Asian advantage: Key strategies for winning in the Asia-Pacific region 
Addison Wesley/Perseus Books USA. 
893. 
Yip G 2000 Strategies for Central and Eastern Europe Macmillan Business USA. 
894. 
Yip G 2007 Managing global customers Oxford University Press Oxford UK. 
895. 
Campbell A et al 1995 Corporate strategy: The quest for parenting advantage Harvard 
Business Review 73 (2) pp 120 – 132. 
896. 
Johnson G, Scholes K 1997 Exploring corporate strategy Prentice- Hall London UK. 
897. 
Johnson G, Scholes K, Whittington R 1998 Exploring corporate strategy Simon & 
Shuster UK ISBN 0-2736-8734-4. 
898. 
Johnson G, Scholes K, Whittington R 2002, 2003 Exploring corporate strategy 7th edition 
Prentice Hall Pearson Education Limited UK ISBN 0-2736-8734-4. 
899. 
McKiernan P 1997 Strategy past, strategy futures Long range planning vol 30 no 5 p 792. 
900. 
Child J, Faulkner D 1998 Strategies of cooperation: Managing alliances, networks and 
joint ventures Oxford University Press Oxford UK. 
901. 
Hill C, Jones G 1998 Strategic management 1st edition Houghton Mifflin Co Boston 
USA. 
902. 
Hill C, Jones G 2004 Cases in strategic management 1st edition Houghton Mifflin Co 
Boston USA. 
903. 
Martin R L (1998-1999, 2005-2006) Private communications on the theory of strategy 
Rotman School of Management University of Toronto Canada. 
904. 
Moldoveanu M, Martin R L 2001 Agency theory and the design of efficient governance 
mechanisms Joint Committee on Corporate Governance Meeting Rotman School of 
Management University of Toronto Ontario Canada pp 1 – 57. 
905. 
Martin R L 2004 Strategic choice structuring: A set of good choices positions a firm for 
competitive advantage Rotman School of Management University of Toronto Canada            
pp 1 – 14  
www.rotman.utoronto.ca strategicChoiceStructuring.pdf . 
906. 
Martin R L 2007 Becoming an integrative thinker Rotman Magazine Rotman School of 
Management University of Toronto Ontario Canada pp 4 – 9. 

155 
 
907. 
Martin R L 2007 Designing the thinker Rotman Magazine Rotman School of 
Management University of Toronto Ontario Canada pp 4 – 8. 
908. 
Martin R L 2008 The opposable mind Harvard Business Press Cambridge Massachusetts 
USA. 
909. 
Martin R L 2009 The design of business Harvard Business School Press ISBN 
1422177807 pp 1 – 256. 
910. 
Lafley A G, Martin R L 2013 Playing to win: How strategy really works Harvard 
Business Review Press ISBN-10: 142218739X ISBN-13: 978-1422187395 pp 1 – 272. 
911. 
Shiryaev A N 1999 Essentials of stochastic finance: Facts, models, theory Advanced 
Series on Statistical Science & Applied Probability vol 3 World Scientific Publishing Co Pte 
Ltd Kruzhilin N (translator) ISBN 981-02-3605-0 Singapore pp 383 – 395, 633 – 646. 
912. 
Laffont J-J, Tirole J 1999 Competition in telecommunications MIT Press USA. 
913. 
Grant R 2001 Corporate strategy: Managing scope and strategy content in Handbook of 
strategy and management Pettigrew A, Thomas H, Whittington R (editors) Sage Newbury 
Park California USA pp 72 – 98. 
914. 
Welch J 2001 Straight from the gut Business Plus ISBN-10: 0446528382 pp 1 – 496. 
915. 
Welch J 2001 Winning Warner Business Books USA. 
916. 
Choo C, Bontis N 2002 The strategic management of intellectual capital and 
organizational knowledge 1st edition Oxford University Press Oxford UK. 
917. 
Drejer A 2002 Strategic management and core competencies 1st edition Quorum Books 
Westport Connecticut USA. 
918. 
Sadler P 2003 Strategic management 1st edition Kogan Page Sterling VA USA. 
919. 
Gavetti G, Levinthal D A 2004 The strategy field from the perspective of management 
science: Divergent strands and possible integration Management Science vol 50 no 10          
pp 1309–1318 ISSN 0025-1909 EISSN 1526-5501. 
920. 
Gavetti G, Rivkin J W 2007 On the origin of strategy: Action and cognition over time 
Organization Science vol 18 no 3 pp 420 – 439 ISSN 1047-7039 EISSN 1526-5455. 
921. 
Roney C 2004 Strategic management methodology 1st edition Praeger Westport 
Connecticut USA. 
922. 
Ireland R, Hoskisson R, Hitt M 2006 Understanding business strategy 1st edition 
Thomson Higher Education Mason OH USA. 
923. 
Besanko D, Shanley M, Dranove D 2007 Economics of strategy John Wiley &Sons Inc 
USA. 

156 
 
924. 
Hitt M, Ireland R, Hoskisson R 2007 Management of strategy 1st edition Thomson/South-
Western Australia. 
925. 
Kirkbride P S 2007 Developing a leadership and talent architecture MBS Leader-casts 
Melbourne Business School Melbourne Australia. 
926. 
Murphy T, Galunic Ch 2007 Leading in the age of talent wars INSEAD Leader-casts 
INSEAD France. 
927. 
Sekhar G 2007 Management information systems 1st edition Excel Books New Delhi 
India. 
928. 
Sull D 2007a Simple rules: Strategy as simple rules Part II Public Lecture London School 
of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
929. 
Sull D 2007b Closing the gap between strategy and execution: Strategy and its 
discontents Public Lecture London School of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
930. 
Sull D 2007c Closing the gap between strategy and execution: Making hard choices 
Public Lecture London School of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
931. 
Sull D 2007d Closing the gap between strategy and execution: The strategy loop in action 
Public Lecture London School of Economics and Political Science London UK. 
932. 
Sull D 2008 An iterative approach to the strategy Public Lecture London School of 
Economics and Political Science London UK. 
933. 
Teece D J, Winter S 2007 Dynamic capabilities: Understanding strategic change in 
organizations Blackwell Oxford UK. 
934. 
Samuels R 2008 Japan's grand strategy Public Lecture on 13.10.2008 London School of 
Economics and Political Science London UK 
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/LSEPublicLecturesAndEvents/events/2008/20080819t1316
z001.htm 
http://richmedia.lse.ac.uk/publicLecturesAndEvents/20081013_1830_japansGrandStrategy.m
p3 
935. 
Chamberlain G P 2010 Understanding strategy Create Space Charleston SC USA. 
Disruptive Innovation Science, Strategic Governance Science, Management Science: 
936. 
Schumpeter J A 1911; 1939, 1961 Theorie der wirtschaftlichen entwicklung; The theory 
of economic development: An inquiry into profits, capital, credit, interest and the business 
cycle Redvers Opie (translator) OUP New York USA. 
937. 
Schumpeter J A 1939 Business cycle McGraw-Hill New York USA. 
938. 
Schumpeter J A 1947 The creative response in economic history Journal of Economic 
History vol 7 pp 149 – 159. 

157 
 
939. 
Solow R H August 1957 Technical change and the aggregate production function Review 
of Economics and Statistics 39 pp 214 – 231. 
940. 
Christensen C M June 16, 1977 Fatal attraction: The dangers of too much technology 
Computerworld Leadership Series pp 3 – 11. 
941. 
Christensen C M Fall 1992a Exploring the limits of the technology S-curve, Part 1: 
Component Technologies Production and Operations Management 1 pp 334 – 357. 
942. 
Christensen C M Fall 1992b Exploring the limits of the technology S-curve, Part 2: 
Architectural technologies Production and Operations Management 1 pp 358 – 366. 
943. 
Bower J L, Christensen C M January February 1995 Disruptive technologies: Catching 
the wave Harvard Business Review 73 no 1 pp 43 – 53. 
944. 
Bower J L, Christensen C M 1997 Disruptive technologies: Catching the wave in Seeing 
differently: Insights on innovation Brown J S (editor) Harvard Business School Press Boston 
MA USA. 
945. 
Christensen C M 1997 The innovator's dilemma: When new technologies cause great 
firms to fail Harvard Business School Press Boston MA USA. 
946. 
Christensen C M, Armstrong E G Spring 1998 Disruptive technologies: A credible threat 
to leading programs in continuing medical education? Journal of Continuing Education in 
the Health Professions 69 no 80 pp 69 – 80. 
947. 
Christensen C M 1998 The evolution of innovation in Technology management 
handbook Dorf R (editor) CRC Press Boca Raton FL USA. 
948. 
Christensen C M December 1998 Disruptive technologies: Catching the wave TN 
Harvard Business School Teaching Note 699 - 125. 
949. 
Christensen C M, Cape E G December 1998 Disruptive technology a heartbeat away: 
Ecton, Inc Harvard Business School Case 699 - 018. 
950. 
Christensen C M April 1999a Value networks and the impetus to change: Managing 
innovation: Overview teaching note for module 1 Harvard Business School Teaching Note 
699 - 163. 
951. 
Christensen C M April 1999b Finding new markets for new and disruptive technologies: 
Managing innovation, overview teaching note for module 2 Harvard Business School 
Teaching Note 699 - 164. 
952. 
Christensen C M April 1999c Teradyne: The Aurora project & Teradyne: Corporate 
management of disruptive change, TN Harvard Business School Teaching Note 399 - 087. 
953. 
Christensen C M, Dann J June 1999 Processes of strategy definition and implementation, 
The Harvard Business School Background Note 399 - 179. 

158 
 
954. 
Bower J L, Christensen C M 1999 Disruptive technologies: Catching the wave Ch 29 in 
The entrepreneurial venture 2nd edition Sahlman W A, Stevenson H H, Roberts M J, Bhide A 
V pp 506 – 520 Harvard Business School Press Boston MA USA. 
955. 
Christensen C M 1999a Innovation and the general manager Irwin McGraw-Hill 
Homewood IL USA. 
956. 
Christensen C M 1999b Impact of disruptive technologies in telecommunications in 
Bringing PC economies to the telecommunications industry PulsePoint Communications. 
957. 
Christensen C M, Tedlow R S January February 2000 Patterns of disruption in retailing 
Harvard Business Review 78 no 1 pp 42 – 45. 
958. 
Christensen C M, Donovan T March 2000 Disruptive technology a heartbeat away: 
Ecton, Inc TN Harvard Business School Teaching Note 600 - 129. 
959. 
Christensen C M, Overdorf M March April 2000 Meeting the challenge of disruptive 
change Harvard Business Review 78 no 2 pp 66 – 76. 
960. 
Christensen C M, Bohmer R M J, Kenagy J September October 2000 Will disruptive 
innovations cure health care? Harvard Business Review 78 no 5 pp 102 – 117. 
961. 
Christensen C M, Craig Th, Hart S March April 2001 The great disruption Foreign 
Affairs 80 no 2. 
962. 
Christensen C M Summer 2001 Assessing your organization's innovation capabilities 
Leader to Leader no 21 pp 27 – 37. 
963. 
Christensen C M, Milunovich S March 2002 Technology strategy: The theory and 
application of the Christensen model Merrill Lynch Report Series. 
964. 
Bass M J, Christensen C M April 2002 The future of the microprocessor business IEEE 
Spectrum 39 no 4. 
965. 
Anthony S D, Roth E A, Christensen C M April 2002 The policymaker's dilemma: The 
impact of government intervention on innovation in the telecommunications industry 
Harvard Business School Working Paper no 02 - 075. 
966. 
Kenagy J, Christensen C M May 2002 Disruptive innovation: A new diagnosis for health 
care's 'Financial flu' Healthcare Financial Management pp 62 – 66. 
967. 
Christensen C M, Johnson M W, Rigby D K Spring 2002 Foundations for growth: How 
to identify and build disruptive new businesses MIT Sloan Management Review 43 no 3. 
968. 
Kenagy J W, Christensen C M 2002 Disruptive innovation - New diagnosis and treatment 
for the systemic maladies of healthcare World Markets Series Business Briefing Global 
Healthcare 2002 pp 14 – 17. 
969. 
Christensen C M June 2002 The rules of innovation Technology Review. 

159 
 
970. 
Hart S L, Christensen C M Fall 2002 The great leap: Driving innovation from the base of 
the global pyramid MIT Sloan Management Review 44 no 1 pp 51 – 56. 
971. 
Christensen C M, Verlinden M, Westerman G November 2002 Disruption, disintegration, 
and the dissipation of differentiability Industrial and Corporate Change 11 no 5               
pp 955 – 993. 
972. 
Christensen C M 2003 The opportunity and threat of disruptive technologies Harvard 
Business School Publishing Class Lecture HBSP Product Number 1482C Boston MA USA. 
973. 
Shah Ch D, Brennan T A, Christensen C M April 2003 Interventional radiology: 
Disrupting invasive medicine. 
974. 
Christensen C M March April 2003 Beyond the innovator's dilemma Strategy & 
Innovation 1 no 1. 
975. 
Christensen C M, Raynor M E 2003 The innovator's solution: Creating and sustaining 
successful growth Harvard Business School Press Boston MA USA. 
976. 
Burgelman R A, Christensen C M, Wheelwright S C 2003 Strategic management of 
technology and innovation 4th edition McGraw-Hill Irwin USA. 
977. 
Christensen C M, Anthony S D January February 2004 Cheaper, faster, easier: Disruption 
in the service sector Strategy & Innovation 2 no 1. 
978. 
Christensen C M, Anthony S D, Roth E A 2004 Seeing what's next: Using the theories of 
innovation to predict industry change Harvard Business School Press Boston MA USA. 
979. 
Christensen C M January 2006 The ongoing process of building a theory of disruption 
Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 pp 39 – 55. 
980. 
Christensen C M, Baumann H, Ruggles R, Sadtler Th M December 2006 Disruptive 
innovation for social change Harvard Business Review 84 no 12. 
981. 
Christensen C M, Horn M B, Johnson C W 2008 Disrupting class: How disruptive 
innovation will change the way the World learns McGraw-Hill USA. 
982. 
Christensen C M, Grossman J H, Hwang J 2009 The innovator's prescription: A 
disruptive solution for health care McGraw-Hill USA. 
983. 
Dyer J H, Gregersen H B, Christensen C M December 2009 The innovator's DNA 
Harvard Business Review 87 no 12. 
984. 
Christensen C M, Donovan T May 2010 Disruptive IPOs? WR Hambrecht & Co Harvard 
Business School Case 610-065. 
985. 
Dyer J H, Gregersen H B, Christensen C M 2011 The innovator's DNA: Mastering the 
five skills of disruptive innovators Harvard Business Press Boston MA USA. 

160 
 
986. 
Christensen C M, Talukdar Sh, Alton R, Horn M B Spring 2011 Picking green tech's 
winners and losers Stanford Social Innovation Review USA. 
987. 
Christensen C M, Wang D, van Bever D October 2013 Consulting on the cusp of 
disruption Harvard Business Review 91 no 10 pp 106 – 114. 
988. 
Bhattacharya S, Ritter J R 1983 Innovation and communication: Signaling with partial 
disclosure Review of Economic Studies 50 pp 331 – 346. 
989. 
Scherer F M 1984 Innovation and growth: Schumpeterian perspectives MIT Press 
Cambridge MA USA.
