1
Fusion of Federated Learning and
Industrial Internet of Things: A Survey
Parimala M, Swarna Priya R M, Quoc-Viet Pham, Kapal Dev,
Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, and Thien Huynh-The
Abstract—Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) lays a new
paradigm for the concept of Industry 4.0 and paves an insight
for new industrial era. Nowadays smart machines and smart
factories use machine learning/deep learning based models for
incurring intelligence. However, storing and communicating the
data to the cloud and end device leads to issues in preserving
privacy. In order to address this issue, federated learning (FL)
technology is implemented in IIoT by the researchers nowa-
days to provide safe, accurate, robust and unbiased models.
Integrating FL in IIoT ensures that no local sensitive data is
exchanged, as the distribution of learning models over the edge
devices has become more common with FL. Therefore, only the
encrypted notiﬁcations and parameters are communicated to the
central server. In this paper, we provide a thorough overview
on integrating FL with IIoT in terms of privacy, resource
and data management. The survey starts by articulating IIoT
characteristics and fundamentals of distributive and FL. The
motivation behind integrating IIoT and FL for achieving data
privacy preservation and on-device learning are summarized.
Then we discuss the potential of using machine learning, deep
learning and blockchain techniques for FL in secure IIoT.
Further we analyze and summarize the ways to handle the
heterogeneous and huge data. Comprehensive background on
data and resource management are then presented, followed
by applications of IIoT with FL in healthcare and automobile
industry. Finally, we shed light on challenges, some possible
solutions and potential directions for future research.
Index Terms—Data Storage, IIoT, Federated Learning, Data
Privacy, Data sharing, Resource Management.
I. INTRODUCTION
With an unprecedented increase in the number of Internet of
things (IoT) devices and emerging applications, a large amount
of trafﬁc is created every day. Such an increase poses a great
burden on the Internet network and also demands signiﬁcant
investments for the infrastructure upgrade. However, thanks to
the development of big data analytics and artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) techniques such as deep learning (DL) and machine
learning (ML), the data collected can be effectively exploited
for many purposes. From the communications perspective,
Parimala M, Swarna Priya R. M, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta
and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu are with the School of Information Tech-
nology and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore 632014,

Quoc-Viet Pham is with the Research Institute of Computer, Information
and Communication, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of

Kapal Dev with CONNECT Centre, Trinity College Dublin, D02 PN40,

Thien Huynh-The is with the ICT Convergence Research Center, Kumoh
National Institute of Technology, Gyeongsangbuk-do 39177, Republic of

TABLE I
ACRONYMS
IoT
Internet of things
IIoT
Industrial Internet of Things
DL
Deep Learning
ML
Machine Learning
FL
Federated Learning
DP
Differential Privacy
FML
Federated Machine Learning
FDL
Federated Deep Learning
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
DRL
Deep Reinforcement Learning
DML
Distributed Machine Learning
FTM
Federated Tensor Mining
IoE
Internet of Everything
RFID
Radio-frequency data
SDN
Software Deﬁned Network
BF
Bloom Filter
FFBF
Fuzzy Folded BF
IDMS
Industrial Data Management System
SOA
Service Oriented Architecture
IWNs
Industrial Wireless Networks
CCPSA
Cyber Physical System Architecture
CPS
Cyber Physical Systems
MTs
Mobile Terminals
MPC
Multi-party Computation
PEFL
Privacy Enhanced Federated Learning
PSO
Particle Swarm Optimization
BS
Base station
MBS
Macro Base Station
SBS
Small Cell Base Station
IFL
Industrial Federated Learning
DTWN
Digital Twin Wireless Networks
DFRL
Deep Federated Reinforcement Learning
DFQL
Deep Federated Q-Learning
MAQL
Multi-Agent Deep Q-learning
UAVs
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
GFC
Ground Fusion Centre
LSTM
Long-Short Term Memory
FIL
Federated Imitation Learning
the last few years has witnessed the emergence of AI ap-
plications in various ﬁelds. For example, ML is employed
to investigate an efﬁcient antenna selection in multi-antenna
wireless systems [1], DL is used to handle the computation
ofﬂoading problem in IoT systems with edge computing [2],
and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is used to optimize
resource allocation problems at the network edge such as
trafﬁc classiﬁcation, edge caching, network security, and data
ofﬂoading [3]. However, the conventional AI models typically
require central processing of data collected from all the users
in the network, that is, users should upload their own data
to a central server for training the learning model. However,
a critical concern with the central learning is data privacy,
i.e., some users want to keep track of their local data and
arXiv:2101.00798v1  [cs.NI]  4 Jan 2021

2
do not want to transmit their local data to the central server.
Training the learning model centrally requires a central cloud
with immensely powerful computing capabilities and storage
capacities. Meanwhile, recent advances in computing hardware
and the proliferation of smart devices in our daily lives have
shown that each IoT device can be equipped with reasonable
computing and storage levels, which is closely comparable to
a desktop computer ten years ago [4]. Therefore, the standard
ML model is not readily applicable to large-scale IoT networks
and cannot exploit the availability of distributed computing.
This calls for a new learning model that leaves the training
data distributed across individual IoT devices instead of being
centralized.
Motivated by this issue, Google invented the concept of fed-
erated learning (FL) for on-device learning and data privacy
preservation [5]. Using the FL approach, each IoT device can
train its model based on locally collected data. Local data from
IoT devices does not need to be transmitted to the centralized
cloud. The centralized cloud only needs to collect the updated
local training model from individual users. Thanks to its
characteristics, FL has been adopted in many applications, for
example, FL for improving Google keyboard suggestions [6],
FL for healthcare [7], FL for smart city sensing [8], and FL
for medicine [9]. To pictorially illustrate the concept of FL, an
overview of FL in IoT systems is shown in Fig. 1. In general,
each IoT device has its own dataset and the aggregation server
can be either located at the network edge or a virtual cloud
in the remote cloud computing system [10]. Each FL model
has its own pros and cons, depending on various factors. For
example, FL with the server at the network edge is suitable
for applications requiring low latency, location awareness, and
network contextual information [4] while cloud-based FL is
suitable for applications with massive IoT devices over mul-
tiple regions and requirements of powerful computing/storage
capabilities.
Although FL has found many beneﬁts in enabling privacy-
preserving learning solutions for IoT systems, it also poses sig-
niﬁcant challenges such as resource management, robustness,
security, and incentive mechanisms. These challenges would
be more signiﬁcant and difﬁcult to handle in industrial IoT
(IIoT), in which much higher levels of security, safety, and
reliability are demanded. To enable FL in IIoT applications, a
number of research works have been dedicated over the last
few years. For example, Liu et al. [12] investigated a solution
for IIoT data sharing applications using blockchain and FL and
showed that the proposed scheme can enhance security and
performance utility without requiring a central server for train-
ing. Similar to [12], Zhang et al. [13] employed blockchain
and FL to detect device failure in IIoT environments and to
secure raw data of IIoT devices. More recently, Liu et al. [14]
developed a communication-efﬁcient FL approach to detect
device failures in IIoT through the use of FL and the long-short
term memory (LSTM) model. The advantage of this work is
that data privacy is preserved via FL and at the same time time-
series data in IIoT can be efﬁciently handled via the LSTM
learning model. In spite of the fast development of FL and the
rapid emergence of many IIoT applications, there is a lack of
a comprehensive survey that provides an overview of FL, IIoT,
and applications of FL to IIoT areas. Motivated by this fact, in
this work we will be focusing on providing the fundamentals
of FL, IIoT, and reviewing state-of-the-art research works on
FL for IIoT applications.
A. State-of-the-Arts and Contributions
Although there have been a number of surveys focusing on
FL and IIoT, these two topics are usually studied separately.
With regards to IIoT, the most well-known survey is presented
in [15] with an introduction to IIoT, enabling technologies,
major applications, and research outlooks. Similar surveys
of IIoT on enabling technologies and applications can be
found in [16], [17], in which the term ”Industry 4.0” is used
instead. The roles of big data analytics in IIoT and a thorough
classiﬁcation, including data sources, big data tools, big data
techniques, requirements, applications, and analytics types, are
presented in [18]. More recently, a survey on IIoT security and
the application of edge/fog computing is presented in [19].
With regards to FL, several surveys have been conducted
over the last few years such as [20]–[26]. The two surveys
in [20], [21] present an introduction to FL along with general
applications and challenges. Lim et al. [22] ﬁrstly provided
fundamental features and unique characteristics of FL, and
then reviewed three major aspects of FL at mobile edge
networks, which are communication costs, resource allocation
optimization, and privacy and security. In [23], [24], security
and privacy issues in FL systems are reviewed. In particular,
Mothukuri et al. [23] tried to address four major questions,
including the source of vulnerabilities, the kinds of security
threats/attacks, comparison with security and privacy issues
in conventional and distributed ML methods, and the defen-
sive techniques. A survey on enabling technologies, network
protocols, and promising applications of FL can be found
in [25]. A short survey on personalized models in FL is
presented in [26], which concluded that personalized models
would enhance the learning performance of individual users
in comparison with the global model and local models. We
can also ﬁnd interesting topics about FL in recent magazine
articles. For example, the integration of FL into 6G wireless
systems is discussed in [27], FL for intelligent fog/edge cloud
radio access networks is introduced in [28], a framework
of reliable FL is proposed in [29], FL-based intelligent IoT
over controllable communication channels via reconﬁgurable
intelligent surfaces was studied in [30], and incentive resource
allocation mechanisms using game-theoretic approaches are
investigated in [31]. A recent survey on the integration of
FL and IoT is provided [32]. This survey also provides a
classiﬁcation of FL-IoT studies, which are cloud server design,
miner classiﬁcation, edge collaboration, federated optimization
schemes, incentive design, security and privacy, and global
update strategies.
Different from existing works, in this work, we set to
provide a survey on the use of FL for IIoT applications. To
the best of our knowledge, this work is the very ﬁrst attempt
on the integration of FL and IIoT. The primary contributions
offered by our work can be summarized as follows.

3
...
Radio 
tower
Server
Local 
updates
Participants
Model 
aggregation
Global 
model
Selected 
participants
Model 
aggregation
Cloud
Global 
model
Fig. 1. An overview of FL in IoT systems, adapted from [11].
• We present the fundamentals of distributed learning, FL,
IIoT architecture and characteristics as well as motiva-
tions of integrating FL with IIoT.
• We review the state-of-the-arts on FL-IIoT, including FL
for enhancing security and privacy in IIoT, data man-
agement and resource management in IIoT, and promis-
ing application areas such as autonomous industry and
healthcare industry.
• We discuss a number of challenges associated with
current studies on FL-IIoT, and further highlight open
research issues that should be efﬁciently addressed to
fully realize FL-IIoT solutions.
B. Paper Organization
The remaining parts of this paper are organized as follows.
In Section II, we present fundamentals of IIoT and FL as
well as motivations of FL-IIoT integration. In Section III, we
review the use of FL to provide secure solutions in IIoT. Next,
Section IV presents data management and resource allocation
in IIoT and discusses the use of FL. Applications of FL
for important sectors in IIoT, including autonomous industry,
smart healthcare industry, and IIoT security, are reviewed in
Section V. Challenges and future directions in the use of FL
for IIoT are discussed in Section VI, and ﬁnally we conclude
the paper in Section VII. For clarity, the list of frequently used
acronyms is summarized in Table I.
II. INDUSTRIAL IOT AND FEDERATED LEARNING
A. Fundamentals of Distributed Learning
The rapid increase in digitization through several advances
in information technology applications such as IoT, smart
cities, industry 4.0, etc. has led to tremendous growth in the
digital data [33]. Traditional ML approaches where the ML
algorithms are trained using the data stored in a personal
computer or at a centralized locations may not work on real-
time applications in this era of big data due to the limitations
in scalability and time complexity. If the training data is too
large, the ML algorithms may not be trained properly due to
the memory and computational constraints. To address this
issue, distributed ML (DML) has been introduced. In DML,
the ML algorithms can be trained on the subsets of the data
which are distributed across several nodes [34], [35].
Distribution of the training data in DML can be performed
by following two approaches. The ﬁrst approach is horizontal
fragmentation, where the instances or rows in the dataset are
divided into several fragments and each fragment is stored
in a node in the distributed network. The second approach
is vertical fragmentation, where a subset of attributes are
distributed across several nodes in the distributed network.
The ML algorithms can then be executed in parallel in each
of the node in the distributed network, which reduces the
training time of the ML algorithms signiﬁcantly, thus making

4
the ML algorithms scalable and addressing the limitation of
memory requirements for training the ML algorithms. Some
applications generating large amount of data in real-time
where DML is extensively used are healthcare applications,
IoT, smart city based applications, communications, etc. [36]–
[40]. DML also plays a huge role in big data analytics [41],
[42].
Even though DML has enormous potential in several ap-
plications, it has its own limitations. Some of the limitations
of the DML are privacy, security, platform dependency, lack
of standard measures to evaluate the DML algorithms [43].
The following subsection introduces the concept of FL, how
it addresses the issue of privacy and security in conventional
ML and DML.
B. Fundamentals of Federated Learning
FL is a speciﬁc category of DML where the ML models are
trained on the data located at the decentralized devices such
as mobile phones and other smart devices [20]. The devices
participating in the FL need not exchange their data samples,
that ensures the privacy and security [21]. The underlying
principle in FL is that the ML models are trained on local data,
then the parameters of the ML models are exchanged between
the local nodes (devices) at regular intervals that enables the
creation of a global ML model. The training data remains
on the individual devices. The global ML model resides at a
server. Once all the devices send their models to the server,
a combined model is created by averaging the parameters of
the individual models. In this way, the individual devices learn
collaboratively from a shared model. Some of the advantages
of FL over traditional ML models are that FL ensures data
privacy, reduced latency, reduced power consumption [44].
Not only the FL ensures privacy of sensitive information of
users, but also FL can deliver personalized ML models to the
users with enhanced user experience [29].
The basic difference between FL and DML is that the DML
concentrates mainly on parallelization of the computing power
whereas FL concentrates on training the datasets that are
generated locally on devices such as mobile phones. The DML
assumes that the datasets are distributed identically (in size)
across several nodes in the architecture. Whereas, in FL, the
size of the datasets at different nodes may be heterogeneous
[45]. Also, the nodes in the DML are typically data centers that
can communicate with latest communication technologies and
they have access to powerful computational resources. On the
other hand, the nodes in the FL are typically devices that may
be battery-dependant and also work on communication media
like Wi-Fi and cellular networks that makes them unreliable
and drop out frequently from the network.
C. Characteristics of IIoT
IIoT is collection of people, sensors, machines, and comput-
ers that enable intelligent industrial operations with the help
of ML and analytics [46]. IIoT enables intelligent devices and
networked sensors to collect the data from the manufacturing
plants and make use of predictions through AI and automate
the decision making [47], [48]. IIoT offers a revival of in-
dustries that have been lately struggling due to several factors
including shortage of skills from personnel. IIoT offers several
beneﬁts because of their minimal or nil dependency on human
intervention. IIoT systems can make intelligent decisions by
automatically learning from the data generated through the
sensors. IIoT leads to smart machines that can achieve high-
est levels of accuracy that was not possible earlier because
of human intervention. This disruptive technology has huge
potential to transform the way the products are manufactured
and delivered, make factories smart and efﬁcient, protect front
line workers by providing better security in difﬁcult conditions,
reduce human errors, increase efﬁciency, thus, in turn, save
huge amount of money [49], [50].
Many sectors and applications such as manufacturing, trans-
portation system, oil and gas, healthcare, agriculture, smart
cities, energy are beneﬁted by IIoT. One of the main beneﬁts
of IIoT is its ability to increase efﬁciency in operations
through prediction. For instance, the sensors in a machine can
automatically pinpoint speciﬁcally where the trouble is when
it goes down and place a service request automatically. The
sensors can predict the likelihood of a breakdown of machines
before it happens by automatically sensing the sounds of a
machine, temperature, vibrations, and other factors by using
data analytics and ML. Hence, predictive maintenance reduces
the idle time of a machine and also reduces the damages
caused by faulty machines by ﬁxing the issues before they are
escalated [51]. Another important advantage of IIoT is location
tracking of equipment and tools. In many industries, the
workers spend signiﬁcant amount of time searching for tools,
ﬁnished goods in an inventory. IIoT sensors saves lot of time
by providing location services, thereby making it impossible
to lose equipment, goods [52]. Until recently, manufacturing
companies used to spend huge capital on purchasing and
maintenance of equipment. But with the advent and advance-
ments in IIoT, the industries can lease the equipment from the
vendors. The owners can remotely monitor these equipment
through the sensors, thereby delivering upgrades, repairs, and
maintenance remotely. This will save both time and capital
for industries [53]. To summarize, the main beneﬁts of IIoT
are 1) reduced waste, 2) reduced maintenance costs, 3) energy
savings, 4) workforce productivity gains, 5) improved service,
and 6) revolutionary products and services.
D. Motivations of Integrating Federated Learning with IIoT
The exponential growth in the IIoT applications is being
hindered by several issues such as security, privacy, commu-
nication cost, etc. Integration of FL with IIoT has the potential
to solve many of issues discussed above. The main motivations
behind integrating FL with IIoT applications are summarized
as follows:
• Security and Data Privacy Preservation: In order to
get valuable insights and patterns from the data gener-
ated by IoT devices in IIoT applications, ML and DL
algorithms are used. To understand the complex patterns
from the data generated, these algorithms are trained
regularly by large datasets collected from different in-
dustries/locations. But moving these datasets to a central

5
location for training the algorithms exposes the sensitive
data to potential hackers, and intruders [54]. The datasets
need not be transferred to a central location for training
the algorithms when FL is used. Hence it secures the
sensitive data from potential attackers. This also preserves
the privacy of sensitive data.
• Reduced Communication Cost: The sensors in IIoT
applications generate large volumes of data. This data is
stored in the edge devices for analytics and then moved to
the centralized locations such as the cloud. Transferring
huge volumes of data incurs signiﬁcant communication
cost. With FL, the entire data need not be transferred
to the cloud. Instead, only the summarized results after
application of the the ML/DL models is transferred to
the cloud. This reduces the communication cost for
transferring the data to the cloud.
• Improved Performance of the Network: A ML/DL
model is implemented on the data generated from IIoT
applications is stored in an edge device and only the sum-
mary of the results is transferred to the central location
when FL is used. Hence, the trafﬁc in the network is
reduced considerably. With reduced network trafﬁc, the
overall performance of the network can be signiﬁcantly
improved.
• Scalability: Integration of FL with IIoT enables the
DL algorithms to scale their learning as they need not
be trained on large volumes of data generated locally.
The central algorithm is trained only on summarized
results from the individual edge devices. This facilitates
a signiﬁcant scalability of the central learning algorithms
and train from the data generated at several edge/local
devices.
III. FEDERATED LEARNING FOR SECURITY IN IIOT
FL protects user data by training the model without trans-
ferring the data from client to the main server. The scope of
security mechanism can be further enhanced while sharing the
model updates and integrating the data generated from similar
devices from various industries. In this section, we discuss
about providing different security mechanisms by integrating
FL with ML and DL models in IIoT framework. FL with
blockchain in IIoT is also presented in this section.
A. Federated Machine Learning for Secure IIoT
The amount of data generated from a single industry will not
be suitable for applying ML techniques [55]. Generally, many
industries would have similar IoT surveillance systems [15]
and so the data generated can be federated from all the devices
that could lead to increase in the accuracy of ML algorithms.
However, the key concern is the data security [56] provided
during leveraging of data. Federated ML (FML) has gained
a lot of attention because the way it handles the privacy by
decentralizing the data generated at the end user device and
aggregation of ML models at a centralized server. The two
types of attacks in IIoT namely eavesdroppers and hackers
were discussed in [57].
1) Eavesdroppers: Attack happens when the data is trans-
ferred through communication channels. In this case, it
may happen between IoT node and IoT sink, then from
IoT sink to centralized server communication channels.
2) Hackers: Attack that happens in the centralized server. A
stalker resides in the server and is capable of obtaining
actual locations of a user.
As discussed in [57], initially the data is generated from
IoT devices from every smart industry sent to the IoT sink.
The sink is a repository for collecting the data from different
IoT nodes in the industry through wired and wireless com-
munications and it also encrypts the data which is sent to the
centralized server. Then the server collects the information
from multiple IoT sinks and federates the data. Finally, the
smart industry decrypts the knowledge into an understandable
format. In this case, both eavesdroppers and hackers attacks
are not possible, as encrypted data is present in both the cases.
The main intention of FL is to collectively learn the global
model without sacriﬁcing the privacy of data. But sharing
model updates to the server during training process may
lead to an issue of leaking sensitive data like user personal
information. In order to preserve privacy in ML models,
number of methods are employed in FL.
• Differential Privacy (DP): DP deﬁnes the amount of
information about the data that can be available for
third party analysis [58]. Information under DP can be
categorized as general information which has the infor-
mation about the entire population and the other type
is private information that has the personal private data.
Some of the properties of DP framework to provide sensi-
tive personal information and privacy protection includes
quantiﬁcation of privacy loss, composition, group privacy
and closure under post-processing.
• Homomorphic Encryption: Computation and analysis is
done based on encryption technique so that the attacker
ﬁnds very hard to ﬁnd the original information [59].
• Secure Multiparty Computation: It is a model where
multiple parties collaboratively compute without leaking
any information to the third parties [39].
To summarize, [58] DP does not guarantee complete data
security because if the algorithm wrongly classiﬁes a private
information as general information, then the algorithm fails to
protect the data. In spite of all these drawbacks, DP has proved
to be more efﬁcient privacy preserving approach compared to
the traditional centralized method.
B. Federated Deep Learning in IIoT
Recently, integration of DL models with IoT and edge
devices have become more popular which provide real time
analytics with limited resources [60]. So, federated DL (FDL)
enables Industry 4.0 companies to integrate DL in IoT de-
vices and provides secure framework using FL as shown in
Fig. 2. DL is computationally expensive which requires costly
resources and framework. So decentralising DL models is
a multi-dimensional issue which requires new technologies
framework to integrate DL with edge computing and IIoT. The
main goal of FDL is to provide IIoT with advanced capabilities

6
Optimize
Compression
Deploy
Server Side
Original DL 
Model Public
Training of DL 
Model Private
Edge Computing
Local 
Storage
Differentially Private SGD
Factory Machine Smart
Sensor
IoT
Device
Updates
Trained Model
Industry Side
Cloud
Fig. 2. Federated DL in IIoT.
using optimized DL which would transform the Industry 4.0
factories into smart factories. Some of the parameters that are
required to build the FDL model in IIoT are discussed below.
1) FDL Model: A FDL model can be implemented on both
client and server side. In client side, private networks are
deﬁned which have the DL model tuned and optimized
from the general model present in the cloud. Optimized
and tuned models are then deployed on the client side,
where the model is trained with locally generated data
from the end device. Finally the end device contains
highly quantized and compressed FDL model. On the
server side, model present in cloud is continuously
updated by integrating differentially gradients from each
private network. Each local DL network takes its turn to
continuously upload and download the currently updated
gradients to the cloud model. So, distributed selective
stochastic gradient descent approach is presented in [61]
which can be applied in cloud model to frequently
update local private model. The ﬁrst decentralised model
named “Model Chain” uses blockchain technology [62],
[63] to enable privacy preserving in the data transfer.
In addition to that, asynchronous stochastic gradient
descent can also be used when a single model can be
trained in parallel among all the devices, aggregated and
processed.
2) FDL Communication and Networking: The main ad-
vantage of using FDL is to run DL models in IoT devices
and to involve model in decision making process. This
kind of decentralizing DL process enhance robustness,
operational efﬁciency and reliability of IoT devices.
FDL provides two types of communication, namely,
intra-communication channel and inter-communication
channel. Former transmits the data among all the tiers
in the framework. FDL communicates between the IoT
and cloud tier where the optimized model in the cloud
is deployed to the end device. However, the security and
privacy must be maintained in the FDL during communi-
cation. In inter communication channel, the components
in each layer communicates with each other in three
different ways such as cloud, edge and end device. The
main aim of FDL is to minimize intra-communication
TABLE II
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FDL AND FML.
Features
FDL
FML
Communication
Communication between
cloud and IoT is possible
Communication between
cloud and IoT is not pos-
sible
Privacy
Privacy is less than FML
Privacy is more
Data storage
Private
DL
model
is
maintained in cloud
No data resides in cloud
Updates
Gradient DL models up-
dates
are
sent
to
the
cloud
Statistical
updates
are
sent to the cloud
Devices
connected
with Cloud
IoT devices are directly
connected with cloud
Edge devices act as a
buffer between IoT and
Cloud
Model access
Model access is private
Model access is public
Data control
Data control is central-
ized
Data control is decentral-
ized
Optimization
Optimization is required
It is not required
and maximize inter-communication which would signif-
icantly reduce the cost of communication.
3) FDL privacy and security: Lim et al. [22] discussed
about various security threats while FDL shares DL
models from cloud to end devices. Anyway, FDL builds
DL models that do not expose information about the
data to the cloud. Security issue on the server side
includes sharing of DL models on the cloud that leads
to conﬁdentiality and security risk. Security issue on
the client side is done by encrypting the data during
the training process before sending it to the cloud
server. Some mechanisms namely DP and homomorphic
encryption technique controls the amount of data to be
shared on the cloud.
4) FDL Optimization: As the end devices have limited
memory and computational requirements, DL models
must be optimized so that they can be deployed on
IoT or end devices efﬁciently. In terms hardware op-
timization, GPU offers low power computation that
decreases computation time. FPGA and Google’s Tensor
Processing Unit [64] are other DL devices that boosts
the processing of DL network. In terms of memory
optimization, algorithms like shared memory allocation
algorithm can be used for DL models. Dynamic schedul-
ing [65] is one of the key process used for optimizing
the performance on the cloud server.
To summarize, the difference between the above two sec-
tions FML and FDL is presented in Table II. Recently,
researchers in [66]–[69] proposed DL models in FL for IIoT
networks in various application such as automobile and mobile
network, trafﬁc network and in image processing applications.
C. Blockchain in IIoT using FL
Generally, FL uses a central server to aggregate all the up-
dates of ML and DL models and communicates the aggregated
updates to the global model. Security breach can happen when
the updates are transferred to the server or when the global
model is sent to the clients. So to overcome this security
issue, the blockchain concept can be applied to store the

7
model updates in immutable form. Yin et al. in [70] presented
a secured model that uses blockchain as a decentralized
framework to replace the traditional central servers. Also, it
stores the historical information as tamper resistant data. Lu et
al. [12] investigated some security issues in node, block and
framework which are designed using blockchain in FL.
• Node security: In terms of node security, blockchain
ensures the node permission control using alliance chain
and data security part is implemented using the chain
of nodes. Each node is created when the parameters are
updated or model is modiﬁed. Each validated update
is stored in the form of chain which is untampered or
immutable. Committee consensus mechanism can also
be used to validate the node to verify whether they are
malicious or not. Committee allows the good node to
send the updates and change the global model for efﬁcient
training. If it is a malicious node updates, then the FL
will ignore the updates which would affect in designing
of global model.
• Block security: It is a vital process in blockchain to
implement the consensus for each block. Executing and
broadcasting the consensus is highly time consuming
task, so it is inevitable to reduce the consensus cost.
• Model Security: The data is secured in FL as there is no
transfer or exchange of information between the client
and the server. But the global model constructed in the
centralised server can be hacked by the unauthorized per-
son. Model trained in the central server is more exposed
to attack compared to model stored in local server. So
the model build and trained should be preserved at both
the ends.
The workﬂow of FL with blockchain is shown in Fig. 3. IIoT
devices are designed in such a way that they train the model
with local data. After training, they send the local updates to
the edge node where all the local updates are consolidated.
Edge nodes in turn send aggregated local updates to the fog
node where the updates from all the edge node are aggregated.
Then, the updates are converted into a block, which is veriﬁed
based on the smart contract. The validated block is joined
with onchain which is tamper-proof and secured. Finally, all
the local updates are received by the centralised server to train
the global model. Then the updates of the global model is sent
to all the edge node to update on all the end devices connected
to the edge node.
The framework must be scalable for real world applications
that can adapt to different kind of scenarios. In recent works
[71]–[73], researchers have applied blockchain in image pro-
cessing and vehicular networks using FL in IIoT framework.
The works in [74]–[76] designed a FL based blockchain
framework for health industry, railway network and defence
organization. Generally, privacy preserving mechanism in FL
using IIoT will be applied on end to edge device communi-
cation and from edge to collaborative model. Even in worst
case also only the model updates can be tampered between
end devices to collaborative engine. Recent studies of FL in
ML, DL and blockchain in IIoT are summarized in Table III.
Edge Computing
Edge 1
Edge 2
Edge 3
Sensors
Machine Tools
Smart Instruments
Collaborative Model
Fog Computing
Blockchain Model
ON Chain
OFF Chain
Validate
Vallidate
Server/Global Model
Cloud
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block N
Request
Response
Fig. 3. Blockchain in IIoT using FL.
IV. DATA MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Internet of everything (IoE) is a form of the network, in-
cluding physical, digital and virtual objects [80]. These entire
groups of objects are networked together to serve the users’
requirements. The requirements are served by communicating
with each other and these are performed over the Internet. The
data generated by virtual objects as well as physical objects
are heterogeneous and huge in volume such as logs in their
SCADA systems [81], data from various business-oriented
applications [82], radio-frequency data (RFID) [46], data from
wearable devices [83], data from sensors [84], real-time web
data [85], media data and location data [46]. So the available
traditional data management techniques fail to handle such
heterogeneous and huge data. There are a variety of distinct
solutions, such as architecture-based solutions, middle-ware
based solutions and indexing solutions. Though traditional ML
had ruled the various intelligent smart industrial applications,
most of the IIoT applications are not widely deployed in real-
time. The reason for the gap in real-time implementation is
due to sensitivity of the data and hesitation of the industry
in sharing their sensitive information over the Internet and
also due to resource constraints in handling the communication
cost, throughput and latency. FL can be utilized to overcome
these challenges as the technique is speciﬁcally designed to
maintain data privacy by avoiding global sharing of data. This
section investigates the contributions of researchers in the ﬁeld
of FL for data management and resource management.

8
TABLE III
OVERVIEW OF RECENT STUDIES ON FL WITH SECURE IIOT.
Ref
Framework
Algorithm
Application
Techniques
Contribution Inference
Limitations challenges
[57]
FMLin IIoT
FTM
Smart
factories
that
belong
to
same
vertical
industry
FTM with homomorphic en-
cryption which leverages the
linear transformation
◦Every factory has to share its ciphertext
data
◦Mines the same knowledge from different
factories
◦Defend the attacks from distributed and
centralized hackers
◦Challenge to maintain balance
between ML and data security
◦FTM needs the centralised
server to operate the federated
mining
[58]
Primalchain
NLP and speech
recognitiono
DP
◦Uses FML to generate global representa-
tion of distributed knowledge in IIoT envi-
ronment
◦Blends DP, FML and blockchain
◦Large scale ML latency is more
◦Efﬁciency can be improved
[77]
Tensor
Ridge
Regression
Image processing
Parallel factor decomposition
◦Projections of input tensor to more than
one directions
◦Multilinear mapping from tensorial input
space to continuous output space
◦
High
dimensional
datasets
leads to overtraining, high com-
putational complexity and large
memory requirement
[78]
STA
Computer vision
and
pattern
recognition
Tensor Alignment Technique
Unsupervised tensor feature extraction
Enhances the robustness in the alignment
step
◦Works good for high dimensional space
Sparse projection learning meth-
ods are not investigates for tensor
recognition
Not efﬁcient for high dimensional
space
[79]
CPSS
Wireless IoT
◦Privacy preserving high or-
der singular value
◦Decomposition based crite-
rion
◦Model allows users to utilize the storage
and computing resources of cloud and fog
without leaking any sensitive information
As it uses encrypted data, cost is
very high
[66]
FDL in IIoT
DeepPAR
DeepDPA
Smart factories
◦Proxy re-encryption
◦Group dynamic key manage-
ment
◦Protects each participants input privacy
while preserving dynamic update
◦Guarantees secrecy in group participants
Still security mechanism at edge
device can be improved
[67]
Double
Deep
Q-
network
Mobile networks
Decentralised cooperate edge
caching
Markov decision process
◦Federated reinforcement learning deep
framework enables fast training and decou-
ple the learning process from cloud
◦Reduces performance loss and average
delay
◦Decentralaized loss can be
maximized
[68]
FedGRU
Trafﬁc network
◦parameter aggregation
◦Federated averaging algo-
rithm
◦Joint announcement protocol
◦Random subsampling for participating or-
ganization is used to reduce the communi-
cation overhead
◦Captures the spatiotemporal correlation of
trafﬁc ﬂow data
Spatial temporal dependency can
be better captured by applying
graph convolutional network
[69]
ASTW-
FedAVG
Image Processing
◦Asynchronous strategy
◦Weighted aggregation
◦To reduce the communication between the
client and server
◦Asynchronous strategy is used to aggre-
gate and update the parameters
◦Previously trained local models are aggre-
gated to enhance the performance
◦Only server are involved in
evolving the local model
◦Communication cost can be re-
duced
[70]
Federated
collab-
oration
framework
Wearable
sensor
data
Private and public data center
blockchain
◦Framework for collaborating multiparty
computation is designed
◦Blockchain is used to overcome security
issues
Large scale multiparty secure col-
laboration of IoT data is chal-
lenging
[71]
Federated
Blockchain
BlockFL
Wireless
Communication
Network
◦On device ML
◦Smart Consensus mechanism
◦Veriﬁed local updates are generated as
block and added to blockchain
◦Each device generate global model from
the updated new block
Proof-of-work can be hacked by
the malicious miners
[72]
FL-Block
Image processing
◦Decentralized privacy
◦Poisoning attack
◦Allow local updates to exchange with
global blockchain model
◦As the central authority is replaced by
blockchain, privacy is achieved more
Tradeoff between privacy protec-
tion and efﬁciency should be opt-
mized
[73]
BFL
Vehicular
network
◦Renewal reward approach
◦VML
◦Provide efﬁcient communication of au-
tonomous vehicles
◦It forms representative groups from the
overall vehicles
Choice of block updates will
limit the increase in overall delay
[74]
CrowdSFL
Health Industry
Crowd sourcing encryption al-
gorithm
◦Data privacy is controlled by smart con-
tracts
◦The updates submitted by the local device
cannot be leaked as it enables the decen-
tralised blockchain platform
◦Reward distribution mechanism
is not deﬁned
◦Model can be optimized
[75]
SVM
and
Deep
network
Railway network
SVM based on mixed kernel
function and multi class model
◦Distributed asynchronous collaborative
ML is designed without involving the cen-
tral server
◦Smart contract involves all participant and
generates new block
Accuracy and efﬁciency of the
prediction can still be maximized
[76]
IoBT
Social
Security
through
defence
organization
◦Multilayered model
◦Defence led combat
◦Distributed computing defence framework
for sustainable society
◦Optimize the data trained in local nodes
Participation of local node in
training process can be rewarded
based on their contribution
A. Data Storage in IIoT
The world has now stepped into the era of IoE. IoT is a
subset of IoE and IIoT is a subset of IoT. As we move further
into this era, the data produced and gathered goes beyond
tetra-bytes of data. This data is structured, semi-structured
and, in some cases, unstructured. This huge volume of data
produced by the IIoT environment is of great value and can
be used to extract knowledge about the manufacturing unit
or maintenance unit or any unit in an industrial environment
so that any kind of abnormality can be prevented in the

9
near future. But storing such huge data and processing them
to extract knowledge and reacting at the right time is the
biggest challenge now. The technologies, namely fog com-
puting, cloud computing, and edge computing have given the
researchers an opportunity to solve the issues with respect to
data storage [86].
In [87], Fu et al. proposed a framework for processing the
IIoT data. Almost all the data life cycle phases are integrated,
starting from pre-processing to the retrieval of the requested
data stored or archived using fog and cloud computing. The
framework was designed to have entities, namely edge server,
proxy server, and cloud server for taking care of data storage
and processing. The time-sensitive data generated by the IIoT
data sources is received by the edge servers where the data is
processed at a fundamental level. If the data in the edge server
is needed for future usage, then those are transmitted to the
proxy server where the quality of the data is improvised by
pre-processing, transforming into structured data so that they
can be stored in the cloud server as historical data for further
predictive analysis.
Borylo et al. [88] proposed and presented a scheme named
dynamic resource provision by combining the cloud and edge
computing schemes for the purpose of energy-awareness. In
this scheme, the major limitation was that the amount of en-
ergy consumed was high. In order to overcome this limitation,
Kaur et al. [89] designed an architecture consisting of three
different layers, namely cloud layer, edge layer and software-
deﬁned network (SDN) layer. The SDN layer plays a major
role in handling network congestion and hence minimizes
energy consumption.
In [90], Singh et al. proposed a data storage method using
bloom ﬁlter (BF) and fuzzy logic, namely Fuzzy Folded
BF (FFBF). Two different BFs are compressed into a single
BF by using fuzzy operations. The major advantage of this
compression was that in a single BF, a large volume of data
elements was stored. The rate at which the data decayed was
reduced so that the data streamed were residing for a longer
time. The computational cost was reduced due to the usage of
the double hashing technique.
An integrated framework, namely IoT based Industrial Data
Management System (IDMS), for an IIoT environment was
proposed by Saqlain et al. [91] for handling and managing
the huge industrial real-time data acquired from a smart
manufacturing unit. This framework tried to monitor this
huge real-time data online and hence make wise decisions.
For the purpose of handling emergency events, traditional
communication protocols were used. The middle-ware, which
was designed in the IDMS, provided a Service Oriented
Architecture (SOA). The raw data was transformed into a
structured format by the framework so that it can be archived
in the cloud server where useful information and knowledge
can be extracted.
In [92], Anton et al. presented a model that can smartly
collect, aggregate, and analyze the data collected from het-
erogeneous sources. The model consists of three levels. The
base level, that is the ﬁrst level, is responsible for collecting
singular packets which are correlated along with various logs
and the collected packets are analyzed here. The second level
is responsible for aggregating all the packets that ﬂow in
the network and the information is extracted based on the
application. This level is more application-speciﬁc. The third
level which is the highest level in the aggregation model,
aggregates all the raw data and meta-information related to
each application into a connected graph which gives an overall
picture of the ﬂow of packets in the network.
An IIoT based intelligent control and management system
was designed by Du et al. in [93] for the purpose of the
motorcycle endurance test. The architecture designed in this
system is made of four layers, namely the executive layer for
the sake of data acquisition, the cognitive layer which takes
care of the business logic, the network layer which acts as
the communication layer and ﬁnally, the control layer. The
system provides an interface for establishing a relationship
between the protocols and the other external parameters. The
design enables easy management, up-gradation, extension and
compatibility.
Wan et al. [94] analyzed the general architecture of IIoT
that includes the physical layer comprising of the devices,
industrial wireless networks (IWNs) dealing with protocols,
industrial cloud for storage and smart terminals for better
interaction. As a result of this analysis, this work proposed
a software-deﬁned based IIoT architecture consisting of three
layers named physical infrastructure dealing with the imple-
mentation as well as production, control layer taking care
of the interaction between physical and application layer and
ﬁnally, the application layer for innovative applications. They
also assessed the performance of this architecture using a test-
bed. The results showed an improvement in the utilization of
the equipment and also reduced the consumption of energy.
Shu et al. [95] proposed a novel architecture termed as cloud
integrated cyber physical system architecture (CCPSA) which
comprises of three domains: one domain which focuses on
the network and their communications, other-oriented towards
the cloud platform dealing with the control and computational
aspects and the ﬁnal domain is a data-centric CPS. This
work also focused on providing solutions for challenges like
resource management, scheduling aspects of resources. Liu et
al. [96] proposed a methodology for acquiring and collecting
data in an efﬁcient manner so that no data is missed due
to the limited energy in the smart terminals using Ethereum
blockchain and DRL. The DRL increases the amount of data
collected at a time by the mobile terminals (MTs) and the
blockchain enables higher security.
To summarize, most of the available data acquisition and
data storage techniques as well as frameworks focus on
speciﬁc issues, but acquiring and storing such huge hetero-
geneous industrial data is a challenging task. Also the data
collected from various factories distributed at different ﬂoors
and locations can be of different formats and volume [97].
Now, most of the industries are shifting towards digitization
for achieving their goals. Few challenges that can be listed
out are data dynamicity, data visualization, storing industrial
data. To meet these challenges a well-versed data management
framework has to be devised that can efﬁciently handle the
huge data.

10
B. Federated Learning for Data Management
The IIoT era has enabled the heavy ﬂow of data packets over
the Internet, which has increased the trafﬁc. Moreover, recent
advancements have made it easier for the industrial giants to
gather huge volumes of data from devices located in different
geographical locations. Though huge data is collected, most of
the industrial applications lose their value in the market as the
users are not satisﬁed. The applications need to process the
huge data for making any decision by transferring them to a
centralized server or location, which requires high bandwidth,
but they fail because of a huge delay in the transportation
of data from heterogeneous devices. To overcome this, few
heterogeneous architectural based solutions were provided
like usage of edge computing, fog computing, etc. But these
solutions still have challenges like security, privacy, etc. The
major issue with these kinds of architecture-based solutions
is that most of the decisions are made locally, neglecting
the global data, model and knowledge. This issue could be
solved by the usage of a technology proposed by Google
named FL [25]. This section discusses the various approaches
coined by various researchers for handling the inﬂuence of
local knowledge over the decisions.
Wang et al. [98] proposed a framework named ”In-Edge
AI” which imparted intelligence to the mobile edge network
using DRL and FL. This framework is designed to reduce the
volume of data that needs to be transferred to the central server
and to provide a better data management scheme to adapt the
heterogeneity. Another set of researchers integrated FL with
imitation learning (IL) and proposed a framework for improv-
ing the performance and the learning capability of a robot [99].
The framework was designed for cloud based robotic systems
which gathered sensor data from heterogeneous resources. Yin
et al. [70] proposed a framework based on FL for providing a
secured collaboration of data. The framework was named as
FDC and enabled data collaboration among multiple parties
distributed across different geographical locations.
Lu et al. [12] designed a methodology by integrating the
blockchain and FL for enhancing the computational efﬁciency
and to secure the sharing of data among the distributed clients
as well as the server. This work provided an IIoT test bed for
analyzing the performance of their framework. FL is used for
solving the data sharing problem in typical IIoT environment.
The presence of a centralized server gave rise to so many data
leakage problems. Most of the clients hesitated to share their
private raw data over the network to a centralized location.
Hence, a methodology using FL was designed in which the
model or the structure of the data was shared to all clients in
the IIoT Network instead of leaking or revealing the raw data.
Zhu et al. [100] proposed a methodology to optimize their
neural network model with the usage of evolutionary algo-
rithms. This work used multi-objective functions for reducing
the computational cost. FL is used for the purpose of solving
the scalability issues in the DL models and also to increase
the learning efﬁciency and performance of the global model
using the data distributed across the clients.
A methodology called two-phase multi-party computation
(MPC) was proposed by Renuga et al. which is an aggregation
model using FL concept [101]. The model provided privacy
to huge sensitive data gathered from various companies. This
followed a two phase methodology where initially a small
committee was elected and later MPC based aggregation
service was provided via the elected committee. The model
was integrated along with a smart manufacturing IoT envi-
ronment and the results showed high accuracy with reduced
communication cost and computation time.
FL is now integrated with DL models to provide intelligence
to industrial applications. A scheme by name Efﬁcient and
Privacy Enhanced FL (PEFL) is proposed in [102]. This
scheme is best suited for industrial sectors dealing with sen-
sitive data like healthcare, auto-pilot, auto-driving, industrial
robots, etc. where decision making cannot be compromised
due to hesitation in sharing data. The major advantage of this
scheme is that the performance is not reduced even if there is
a collision due to multiple entries.
A cross domain sharing based scheduling scheme [103] was
proposed for providing edge services with higher intelligence.
The scheme integrated the block-chain and edge intelligence
mechanisms to provide an intelligent IIoT framework. The
results showed an improvement in service cost of the edge
devices and their efﬁciency in terms of service. The proposed
scheme is suitable for IIoT networks beyond 5G. This work
also designed a transaction approval scheme for reaching the
edge resources which are distributed all over.
An optimization technique using particle swarm optimiza-
tion (PSO) and FL is proposed in [104] focusing on the
hyper-parameter tuning for the DL models that are available
locally in the smart city applications. PSO is used for setting
the hyper-parameters in case of the DL model LSTM. The
results showed a reduction in number of rounds required for
identifying the parameters by 2% to 4%.
To summarize, there are various methods and building
blocks that can be used for customizing the traditional ML
and FL algorithms to suit the IIoT applications. Though
there are too many architectures available for FL, there is no
speciﬁc architecture that seems to be centered around speciﬁc
industrial sector. The algorithms and methodologies discussed
in the section can work for any type of industry once modiﬁed
a bit keeping in mind various aspects such as efﬁciency, device
set up, end users, end servers, structure, autonomy. etc.
C. Federated Learning for Resource Management
The recent industrial revolution uses a wide variety of
technologies like collaborative robotics, cloud and edge com-
puting, cognitive computing, CPS, ML, etc. [105] These
collaborative technologies have led to high level of industrial
innovations and applications. Integration of Industrial appli-
cations with IoT and ML leads to various advantages like
optimized production costs, increased productivity, reduction
of error, improvising the automation process, higher quality,
and so on. Hence ML plays a major role in any smart industrial
application. But, the traditional ML aspects could not be used
in real-time Industry 4.0 applications as data cannot be shared
for training in a centralized ML server [22] as there is a risk
of data leakage [106]. Hence most of the IIoT uses FL which

11
is an efﬁcient resource management technique for learning,
adding new data and updating the aggregation server with
the model updates. This section discusses about the various
contribution of researchers in the ﬁeld of FL for optimizing
and managing resources over real-time processing in Industry
4.0 applications.
In [107], Chen et al. analysed the performance of FL with
the help of packet error rate over wireless networks. A closed-
form expression was derived for calculating the convergence
rate of FL. This was utilized for computing the optimal trans-
mission power for allocating a resource block and selecting
a user. This work also minimized the loss function for the
above said resource allocation and user selection. This work
was analyzed using a single base station (BS) scenario, and
thus the blooming researchers can concentrate on analysing
the performance of FL for multiple BS scenarios. In [108],
Abad et al. proposed hierarchical FL for optimizing the usage
and allocation of resource in wireless applications. This work
constructed a heterogeneous cellular network which consisted
a macro base station (MBS) and few small cell base stations
(SBS). In the SBS, sub-global model is trained using the
traditional FL concept for speciﬁc iterations and this process
is carried out in all SBS. The trained sub-global models in all
SBS are then transferred to the MBS for aggregation of the
global model. The global model updates are ﬁnally transferred
to the SBS from where the updated parameters of the global
model are broadcasted to the end devices. This technique is
well suited for reusing the wireless resources. Though this
seems an attractive technique, the scheme follows a centralized
MBS which might crash due to physical damage or attack
and hence there is a chance of losing the updated global
parameters.
Huang et al. [109] proposed a novel approach named Deep-
Q for the purpose of enabling resource allocation and task
ofﬂoading for networks in edge computing. This work focused
on ofﬂoading multiple tasks at the same time to the edge
servers. The proposed technique helped in minimizing the cost
due to delay, computation and energy consumption. In [110],
Khan et al. proposed a novel dispersed FL to be employed in
smart industries. This work focused on optimizing the resource
in cognitive IoT based smart industrial applications. This work
proposed a model which used distributed and hierarchical FL
for offering optimized resource communication and robust-
ness. This work also formulated an integer linear programming
problem for minimizing the overall cost of FL. Numerical
results were provided to compare the proposed approach
with two techniques namely random resource allocation and
random association.
Hiessl et al. [111] tried to adapt the available traditional
FL for industrial environments and named it as Industrial
FL (IFL). This work introduced the various requirements and
designs required for IFL. IFL trains and evaluates the ML
models. This work also discussed the needs for IFL and
also provided a collection of structured workﬂows for the
requirements in the architecture of IFL. To get adapted to
the diverse operating conditions of the industrial environment,
the FL clients are not allowed to exchange the ML model
parameters with the FL participants in the IFL architecture.
A discussion on future such as usage of FL open source
frameworks, asynchronous and decentralized FL, and negative
knowledge transfer were also provided.
In [112], Lu et al. introduced the usage of blockchain
based FL in the digital twin wireless networks (DTWN). The
methodology helps in improving the reliability, security and
data privacy by which the learning accuracy is balanced using
the bandwidth allocation process. The designed DTWN model
uses the digital twins concept for mitigating the unreliable
communication among the edge servers and users. The limited
resources available in the network are allocated using the
optimization problem that is formulated between the BS and
the digital twins. The major advantage of the scheme is good
learning convergence and latency.
Messaoud et al. [113] focused on developing a FL based
methodology to support the resource allocation strategy in
multi-industrial IoT. This work proposed a novel deep fed-
erated reinforcement learning (DFRL) scheme for providing
dynamic resource allocation and network management for the
IIoT networks. The scheme provided IIoT slice based resource
allocation with the help of a novel proposal Deep Federated
Q-Learning (DFQL). This work also proposed two other ap-
proached namely Multi-Agent deep Q-learning (MAQL) that
dynamically slices the transmission power and spreading factor
for maximizing the QoS requirements namely throughput and
delay. The DFL is also utilized for learning the multi agent
model to enable decision making on the IIoT virtual network
slices.
Edge intelligence plays a signiﬁcant role in IIoT since it
provides smart services via cloud with low latency rate and
lesser cost. Since IIoT is a heterogeneous network with diverse
resources, there is a need to integrate all these together to
improve the computing capability. Zhang et al. [103] proposed
a scheme for cross-domain sharing of resources by using
an edge scheduling scheme based on DFL. This scheme is
designed based on a credit-differentiated edge transaction ap-
proval mechanism which enhances the ﬂexibility and security
in the service provided by the edge with a minimal cost.
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) play a promising role
in IIoT applications, but the characteristic of UAVs is that
they have a limited payload and lesser ﬂight time [115].
These UAVs have to be empowered with complex as well
as high level of tasks so that they can be utilized in smart
IIoT applications. In [114], Zhang et al. investigated the
UAVs to perform image classiﬁcation tasks and proposed FL
based multi-UAV systems in the exploration domain. The
image classiﬁcation task is completed using the distributed
FL. Multiple UAVs in the application area are coordinated
with the use of ground fusion centre (GFC). Results show
that the accuracy of image classiﬁcation by UAV is high and
communication cost is reduced relatively. The global model is
updated at the GFC using the weighted Zero Forcing transmit
precoding at every UAV.
To summarize, resource optimization deals with optimizing
the communication as well as computation resources required
for enabling the FL systems to locally compute, communicate
and update the global parameters. When these are optimized,
the learning cost of FL model is signiﬁcantly reduced. Apart

12
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF RECENT RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS ON FL IN IIOT FOR DATA STORAGE-DATA MANAGEMENT-RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.
Ref.
Methodology
Research Focus
Techniques Used
Contributions
Proof of Concept
[87]–[89]
Data Storage
◦Secure data storage
◦Dynamic data gathering
◦Reducing congestion
◦Reducing energy consump-
tion
◦Middleware based solution
◦SDN
◦Interplay of fog and cloud
computing
◦latencyAware policy
◦Retrieval feature tree is designed
◦Reduction in storage space
◦Carbon footprint of data centre is reduced
◦Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm is
proposed
◦Gas density in factory
◦Customer services and main-
tenance
[90], [91]
◦Effective data storage
◦Acquiring huge data
◦Provide intelligent manage-
ment
◦SOA based solution
◦Distributed database server
◦Data aggregation model
◦FFBF service architecture is proposed
◦An IDMS framework is proposed
◦Manufacturing sector
◦Healthcare
◦Wearable devices
[92]
◦Collection of data from var-
ious sources
◦Aggregation of data
◦Analysis of data
◦Event Centric Model
◦A data aggregation model is proposed
◦Correlation model is proposed
◦Maintenance Sector
◦Interconnected Production
Lines
[94]–[96]
◦To handle device failure
◦To provide interface for ex-
change of information and data
◦Architecture based solution
◦SDN
◦CPS
◦DRL
◦Blockchain based DRL is proposed
◦CCPSA is proposed
◦Equipment utilization rate is increased
◦Complex industrial applica-
tions
◦Automated guided vehicles
◦Industrial robots
[98]
Data
Management
◦To reduce the amount of data
uploaded
◦To provide intelligence to
mobile edge nodes
◦DRL for optimization
◦FL for providing intelligence
◦An “In-Edge AI” framework for improv-
ing deployment
◦Deep Q-Learning for improving compu-
tation in edges
Xender’s traces
[99]
◦To provide knowledge fusion
mechanism
◦To provide a model for trans-
fer learning
FL along with imitation learn-
ing
◦Federated IL (FIL) is proposed
◦A transfer learning approach using FIL is
proposed
Self-driving cars
[70]
◦To provide higher security
while multiple parties try to
collaborate
DL
and
FL
along
with
blockchain
◦A data collaboration framework is pro-
posed using FDL
◦A blockchain based secure mechanism for
computation is proposed
◦A private blockchain based
on Libra protocol
◦Raw data collected from
wearable device
[12]
◦To share data across multiple
parties without any leakage
FL and blockchain
◦Differential private FL is proposed
◦Reuters data set
◦20 newsgroups data
[100]
◦To optimize the structure of
the model
◦To minimize the computa-
tional cost
◦
To
minimize
the
global
model test errors
FL and multi-objective evolu-
tionary algorithm
◦Federated averaging algorithm is proposed
◦A modiﬁed version of SET algorithm is
proposed
Independent IID and non-IID
data set
[101]
To provide better privacy in
shared models
FL and MPC
◦Two-phase MPC enabled FL is proposed
◦Committee election algorithm is proposed
◦Manufacturing unit
◦Fault detection in electrical
machines
[102]
To prevent exploitation of pri-
vate data in sensitive applica-
tions
FL
along
with
Augmented
Learning
◦Privacy enhanced FL is proposed for
Industrial AI
◦Aggregation decryption is utilized
◦Model aggregation algorithm is proposed
◦MNIST data set
◦Healthcare and autopilot
[103]
◦To provide intelligence to the
edge network
◦To prevent malicious attacks
Ubiquitous
communication,
blockchain along with DRL
◦Credit Differentiated transaction approval
scheme is proposed
◦DRL for optimized resource scheduling
Five BS each having comput-
ing server and caching server
[104]
To optimize hyper-parameters
in ML model
PSO along with FL
◦PSO based parameter setting framework
is proposed
◦The number of hidden layers and neurons
are optimized
Smart city trafﬁc with City
Pulse EU FP7 data set
[107], [108]
Resource
Management
◦To optimize transmission
power
◦To reuse wireless resources
Hierarchical FL
◦Closed form expression for computing
convergence rate
◦Optimal transmission power
◦Minimized loss function
◦Single BS scenario
◦Heterogeneous cellular net-
work consisting of MBS and
SBS
[109]
To enable task ofﬂoading in
edges
DL based FL
◦Minimize cost due to delay, computation
and energy consumption
Heterogeneous
networks
in
edge computing
[110]
To optimize resource in cogni-
tive IoT
Dispersed FL
Integer linear programming to minimize
overall cost
Smart industry
[111]
◦To evaluate ML model
◦To provide structured work-
ﬂows
IFL
◦Model for adapting to diverse operating
conditions
◦Proposed IFL
◦Synchronous framework
◦Centralized FL
[112]
To mitigate unreliable commu-
nication
Blockchain based FL
Learning accuracy is balanced
DTWN
[113]
To provide dynamic resource
allocation
DFRL
MAQL for dynamic slicing is proposed
Multi-industrial IoT
[114]
To perform image classiﬁca-
tion in exploration domain
Distributed FL
◦GFC is deployed
◦Communication cost is reduced
◦Weighted zero forcing transmit precoding
UAVs
from these the energy consumed by the end devices and
local learning rate are dependent on the capability of FL
systems’ CPU. Various research contributions discussed in the
section gives solutions for reducing the computation cost and
improvises the resource allocation process.
It is expected that IIoT would transform the way human
beings live, work or play. The future of IIoT varies from basic
automation to factory automation, high level of connectivity to
wearable devices and smart applications. IIoT is ready to set
our lives with large number of sensible things around us which
would be networked with each other to avoid any accidents or
abnormalities. In the near future, there will be a variety of ap-
plications which would be a part of our daily activities. There
will be huge volume of data acquired by networks, upload and
download of data via communication channel would be high.
To handle these data, various solutions are proposed by recent

13
Federated 
Learning 
Data Storage
SOA
Architecture 
Based 
Enhanced Equipment 
Utilization
Dynamic Resource 
Provisioning 
Acquiring Huge 
Data
Prevents Dos and 
DDoS Attacks 
Intelligent 
Management 
Failure rate reduced 
by 50%
Minimize 
Computational Time
Middleware 
Based
Congestion 
Reduction
Enhance Remote 
Data Control 
Dynamic Data 
Gathering
Efficient Data 
Retrieval 
Data 
Management 
Deep 
Learning 
Based
Reduce 
uploaded data
Dynamic Resource 
Allocation
Improving 
Computation in 
Edges
Blockchain 
Based
Improves Reliability
Prevent Malicious 
Attacks
Better Privacy in 
Shared Memory
Prevention of Data 
Leakages 
Evolutionary 
Algorithm
Optimize Hyper-
Parameter
Optimize 
Structural Model
Resource 
Management
Hierarchical 
FL
Minimized Loss 
Function
Cross Domain 
Sharing
Minimize 
Convergence Rate
Optimal Transmission 
Power
Fig. 4. Illustrative Usage of FL in IIoT for data/resource management.
researchers with respect to data storage, data management and
resource management and is summarised in the Table IV. The
usage of FL for data/resource management and data storage
in IIoT is illustrated in Fig. 4.
V. APPLICATIONS
IoT has been playing signiﬁcant role in our day to day mod-
ern life with applications almost in every vertical such as smart
automobile industry, smart healthcare, defence, smart cities,
smart grid etc [116]. It provides high end smart services and
products which can transform traditional technology into an
fully automated technology. Typically, millions of smart sen-
sors are producing bundles of data that needs to be managed
speciﬁcally privacy as per new GDPR rules. As a consequence,
task-speciﬁc ML models need to be developed that can provide
smart services and products with no compromise on privacy.
A. Federated Learning enabled IoT in Automotive Industry
FL is a ML approach that trains an algorithm in a decen-
tralized manner such that models are updated with the help of
local data without sharing this data over cloud servers keeping
the privacy of the data intact [117]. FL along with IoT has
become the game-changer for almost the last two decades in
every modern ﬁeld such as smart automobile industry, smart
healthcare, defence, smart cities, smart grid etc [116]. These
collaborative techniques along with IoT have transformed
the way every individual interacts with his surroundings by
providing smart services which convert traditional technology
into a fully automated technology [118]. Considering auto-
mobile industry, the consumer end has been beneﬁting the
most as modern vehicular systems have been transformed into
an automated device which enables all the smart vehicles
to be interconnected and also occupants in these vehicles to
become connected to each other. Vehicles that are connected
to IoT provides constant and simultaneous access to informa-
tion to chauffeur and occupants while moving. However, the
number of vehicles connected to each other over IoT keeps
on increasing [119] which thrives for smart car emerging
technologies with new requirements such as secure, robust
and roadside infrastructures etc, which transforms the original
concept of vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) [120], [121],
[122] into a new concept called the FL enabled Internet of
Vehicles (IoV) [123]. Manufacturing of such smart vehicles
in automotive industry must be capable of employing IIoT
along with ML techniques paving the way for smart industry
experience enabling efﬁcient and sustainable production [124].
Computers, people, and machines coming together to execute
industrial operations by capitalizing advanced data driven
algorithms for groundbreaking business results is termed as
IIoT. IIoT provides a way to better understand and gain insight
into operations and assets of the company with the help of
data associated with the various machine sensors, middleware,
software, and back-end cloud compute and memory systems.
Therefore, it provides a way to transform business operations
and processes by using advanced analytics to query large data
sets by using the results obtained as feedback. These gains
results in optimized efﬁciency of productions, and thereby
increasing proﬁts. This connectivity allows for data collection,
exchange, and analysis, potentially facilitating improvements
in productivity and efﬁciency. IIoT applications usually require
relatively small throughput per node, and capacity is not a

14
major issue. Instead, a large number of devices need to be
connected to the Internet at low cost, which have limited
hardware capabilities and have small batteries thus requires
an energy efﬁcient, cost effective, reliability, and privacy
solutions. The IIoT will eventually have a greater impact
on economy as it will innovate infrastructures to such larger
extents that it will revolutionize the traditional industry. With
a strong focus on M2M communication, big data, and ML, the
IIoT enables industries and enterprises to have better efﬁciency
and reliability in their operations. As big and high volumes of
data is involved in IIoT devices, it is impossible to collect data
over cloud centralized server [10]. As high number of devices
and machines are connected, classical cloud-based learning
approaches are impractical and inadequate. But with FML
enabled IIoT, privacy of the data is taken into consideration
which further enhances the performance of IIoT devices and
also accelerates the learning processes of the data which
technique you are talking or building the base.
There are a number of techniques available to access and
train data. One such approach is to access user data which
is scattered and collecting it from cloud for modeling and
then transfer this trained model to client devices for providing
automation of speciﬁc tasks. But the cost associated with this
type of approach is huge and also latency will be increased
which is not desirable [125]. It also involves some data privacy
issues as sensitive data is shared on cloud which can be
leaked. The IIoT devices are also becoming the main targets of
malicious attacks leading to disastrous consequences. These at-
tacks misleads the global models to predict undesirable outputs
[126]. Various counter methods have been proposed such as
ensemble diversity [127], Purifying Variational AutoEncoder
(PuVAE) [128] and other training methods such as adversarial
training, but none of them proved to be satisfactory as they
focus only on a particular type of attacks. Alternative to these
methods is to train the IIoT data locally in isolation to other
devices but with this approach, resources required will be very
high. On the other hand, with limited computation ability and
local memory and insufﬁcient data samples can result in fur-
ther degrading the model. So to solve the issue of availability
of IIoT device data in isolation and maintaining privacy of
this data, a more advanced ML approach is developed which
is termed as Federated ML [20]. The concept of FL was ﬁrst
introduced by google in 2016 [129] which aimed to access
user data distributed across various IIoT devices and build ML
models exploiting this data without its leakage [130]. Privacy
is one of the basic attributes of FL which requires security
models and analysis to provide meaningful privacy guarantees
[131]. FL enabled smart automobile industry has various
automation systems, IIoT devices for storing corresponding
data, control systems and various operating machines which
are connected to each other through the internet. FML models
are deployed to edge devices which updates the model based
on demands and also check for any anomalies in production
[132].
An FL based IIoT model is depicted in Fig.
5 and steps
followed are mentioned below.
1) Selection of client nodes: In a smart industry, various
clients are automation systems and operating machines
having its own processor and is connected to other
machines having M2M communication, the IIoT subsys-
tems collecting data from data generating machines for
learning tasks and training of models [133]. These client
edge nodes are selected by central cloud server that is
involved in model training. This big data associated with
other smart industries of some other company can also
be considered while training the global model. Based on
client selection, an initial central model is developed by
evaluating local raw data of edge clients.
2) Model distribution: This initial model is then distributed
to clients for the purpose of updating and training this
model based on clients local raw data.
3) Uploading locally trained models: These initial models
are no longer initial as they are trained by the clients
using their local raw data. The updated model is then
uploaded to centralized server for federated averaging.
4) Aggregation: Having all the updated models by local
clients, central task executioner averages all these mod-
els to develop a new version of Global model which
is better in terms of efﬁciency and accuracy than the
initial global model. For averaging FedAvg [133] is the
best algorithm to solve this averaging problem yielding
a well trained Global model.
5) Model Testing and update: This aggregated global model
is then tested by central task executioner with the data
that belongs to other clients that have not participated in
this training. Analyzing the testing results, some param-
eters are tuned to repeat the training process if needed,
else the model is updated accordingly and distributed to
all the clients.
The above process is repeated until a global model is
achieved which solves the purpose with considerable accuracy
[134]. Based on this, Bonawitz et al. [130] recommend that all
local updates are aggregated securely and globally by using
their weighted average. In this way, efﬁciency in production
can be achieved with low cost.
In smart automobile factory, automated machines and con-
trol systems drives the raw material used for production by
communicating with each other cooperatively. Smart manufac-
turing enables factory managers to automatically collect and
analyze data to make more informed decisions and optimize
production in reduced costs. All the decisions depends upon
harnessing of data and based on FL models, data will decide
what to do and when to do a particular task.
1) Requirements: Following are the requirements for FL
enabled IIoT in automotive industry for continuous monitoring
and adaptation of system.
• Data management: First and foremost requirement is
the management and harnessing of big data. To support
collaboration of all the FL clients (FLCs), it is required
to publish metadata describing the organization and its
corresponding edge IIoT device. Based on this data, FLCs
can provide information and data for collaborating with
other selected FLCs. As private raw data is not shared
in FL, it enables privacy taking into consideration the
privacy policies of industry partners. Industrial FLCs

15
Automatic Machine 
Data Generation
M2M
M2M
IIoT devices storing 
data and training models
Aggregation of models 
and continuous 
updations 
Industry partner 
Aggregation
1
2
5
Uploading
4
Downloading
3
Federated global model
IIoT 1
IIoT 2
Fig. 5. A FL-enabled smart automobile industry manufacturing smart cars. FL models are being trained by edge IIoT devices which trains data generated by
automatic machines and the data fetched from industry partners. These models are regularly updated and sent to global cloud for aggregation and generating
a new global model which is reliable and efﬁcient.
target to improve ML models using IIoT device data by
updating them regularly with its local data.
• M2M communications: These are required in automated
machines so that they can send and receive data from
other machines and can work collaboratively resulting in
smart manufacturing of vehicles. Machines communicate
with each other through various protocols in production
and manufacturing of smart vehicles. In case of M2M
communications, efﬁcient routing protocols are required
in dense and mobile environment [135], [136]. The
driving force behind the FL-based IIoT is that smart
machines with M2M communications works better than
humans with greater accuracies by consistently capturing
and communicating data with each other.
• Quality of Information (QoI): Quality of information
means the information set that is received by global
model through aggregations and updations by local mod-
els with their local data sets. As FLCs trains and evaluates
the models based on its local data set, aggregated global
models have a diverse set of data with certain quality of
information. Furthermore, as different clients are operat-
ing in the industry with less or almost no human inter-
ventions [137], different approaches to collect data can
inﬂuence QoI of generated data sets in edge IIoTs such
as free-of-error datasets, relevancy QoI, etc [138]. Storing
QoI indicators along with existing industry metadata of
participating organizations can further enhance the ability
to build and update appropriate FL models.
• Scheduling Algorithms: These algorithms are required for
computations and task ofﬂoading as FL plans can cause
heavy loads on edge IIoT devices as training requires
large amount of data sets and this problem was identiﬁed
in [139] and the need for scheduling algorithms. These
algorithms take care of any repetitions being done on
older data sets if any new data is to be processed and
model should be trained on the basis of new data. The
scheduling device will give priority to this new data set
and avoid any congestion.
2) Advantages: The FL enabled IIoT is proved beneﬁcial
in industry in the following ways:
• A FL approach which is dynamic and decentralized ap-
proach, can be efﬁcient in terms of design and allocation
of resources by collaborative and simultaneous learning
with constant access of information from automated ma-
chines and control systems releasing its data to IIoT edge
devices.
• FL enabled IoT is said to take care of privacy of the
data which the client has to constantly share with the
task executioner for generating and updating global model
thus mitigating the privacy issues by not providing access
to the raw training data. Privacy-protection techniques
can be applied to FL such as personalization techniques
[26], FL enabled semi-supervised learning algorithms
[140], threat models [24], mobile edge networks [22].
By using large amount of data for devices with privacy
protection methods, FL can enable some impossible new
applications for traditional learning methods.
• FL approach enables smart manufacturing to take actions
on the basis of global model and local model which
results in reduced delay as compared to traditional tech-
niques. The FL can be incorporated with other techniques
such as Blockchain and edge computing to promote

16
various real-time systems for the IoT in Industries.
3) Applications: FL enabled IoV is an autonomous system
which updates and trains global model in isolation, thus
maintaining the privacy of the user data. Existing IoT vehicular
systems are based on centralization of data in which each
vehicle uploads its data to a central cloud which puts a
limit on amount on data being shared as there is a risk
of data leakage. But, FL mitigates this issue and intelligent
autonomous vehicular system could be developed which works
on collaboration among vehicles. Thus it has many applica-
tions such as intelligent trafﬁc signal control, precise nav-
igation systems, collaborative autonomous driving, collision
avoidance systems, vehicle platooning and many more.
Vehicle platooning system is very important application of
ML based IoT systems. For building smart cities, autonomous
vehicle platooning will play an important role in maintaining
the road safety and mitigates the problem of trafﬁc conges-
tion. FL enabled IoT along with vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
communication will collect information from environment and
trains global model without any risk of data leakage, thus
maintaining the speed requirements and the V2V distance and
provide stability to vehicle’s control system. Modern Vehicles
are equipped with multiple sensors, and accessing data of
multiple vehicles along with FL, improved platooning systems
can be achieved [141]. GPS, speed of vehicle, V2V distance
data can be accessed for predicting road safety, enabling a
better positioning systems and intelligent road systems [142].
The camera of the vehicle and data associated with it can be
accessed for surveillance, any accidents etc. However, due to
large data size and privacy concerns, it is challenging to upload
the data on central cloud server. Therefore, FL could be a
possible way to conduct distributed perception by processing
the data at the end vehicles and then integrating the results to
make the ﬁnal decision.
B. Smart Health Care Industry
Healthcare industry is another area that we expect to beneﬁt
from the rising ML technique of FL. As the population is
growing at alarming rate, there can be seen an alarming
pressure on hospital staff and quality of service being delivered
to patients by staff and medical practitioners. Thus, new
efﬁcient and reliable solutions are required from science and
technology [143], [144].Because of fourth industrial revolu-
tion, innovation has been achieved in manufacturing process
with increased efﬁciency in the supply chain [103]. In the
medical ﬁeld, smart Industry with IIoT and ML techniques
has played vital role providing wide range of applications in
creating customised implants, tools and medical equipment.
Smart healthcare industry improves the healthcare infrastruc-
tures and biomedical systems keeping in view the safety of
patients, their vitals and real time monitoring. Such automated
systems manufactured by smart medical industry make smart
decisions through real-time communication and cooperation
with humans, machines, sensors, and so forth. [145]. Medi-
cal Industry 4.0 manufactures smart devices which provides
quality care to patients while addressing the issue of shortage
of medical staff and beds especially in populated hospitals.
IIoT has been widely identiﬁed as a potential solution to
alleviate the pressures on healthcare systems [146] by assisting
manufacturing and supply chain of medical devices. Remote-
healthcare systems can monitor patients at home without any
need of them visiting inﬁrmary or hospitals. In essence, it
can improve access to medical resources, while reducing the
pressure on the medical system, and it can allow people to
better control their health. Health systems have improved a lot
from the earlier times, thus increasing average life expectancy
of the individuals. As a result, there is increased population
of elderly people living with chronic diseases, heart diseases,
diabetes etc, thus placing huge demands of healthcare services.
In order to address this issue, FL enabled IIoT systems are
developed which can learn patients medical data such as day-
to-day health, disease symptoms, medical reports and vitals
and this data is shared with medical practitioners to subscribe
them appropriate medication at their residence itself. There are
a lot of IIoT based healthcare systems that focus on particular
diseases and in-general monitoring of patients health. A system
for generating rehabilitation plan based on patients symptoms
has been developed [147] in which the individual’s condition is
compared with the symptoms of past patients from a database
and studied their ailments and provided optimal treatments.
IIoT provides anytime, anywhere and anything can be con-
nected with each other with focus on M2M communication
[116]. IIoT and IFL enable ML models on local raw data,
stored in edge devices, to be updated to global model without
actually sharing the local data which provides security to
manufacturing process and IIoT improves productivity [61].
In this scheme, cloud server receives different parameters
from local updated models trained on IIoT decentralized [148]
edge devices and aggregates these local models to develop a
global model [133], whose parameters are again sent to edge
devices for training based on raw data. This process is repeated
until the global model achieves a well deﬁned condition and
accuracy. But to successfully caters the challenges faced in
industry, FML approach needs to be adapted.
Thus FL along with IIoT is employed which keeps all
the sensitive data of automated systems and smart operating
machines private in local edge devices. The machines are
digitally represented as assets [111] that are responsible for
generation of data that is trained and evaluated by edge
devices.
The FL enabled smart healthcare industry model is depicted
in Fig. 6 and following steps are followed:
1) Data Selection: Central cloud server needs an initial set
of data to develop an initial global model. This data
set includes the data that is generated by assets which
depicts automated machines. This data is accessed by
edge devices which trains models based on ML. ML
models depicts any anomalies present in the manufac-
turing process of the smart medical devices. Due to some
potential differences in asset data, model updates may
lead to negative knowledge transfer, thereby reducing
model performance [149].
2) Model distribution and updation: This initial model
prepared by cloud is distributed to IIoT edge devices
which can update and train this model based on their

17
Automatic Machine 
Data Generation
M2M
Model training by local 
raw data
FL cohorts ensures optimal 
collaboration with respect 
to model performance
1
2
5
Model 
M1
Aggregation of global 
model
Model 
M2
Model 
M3
Cloud Server
3
4
IIoT, Edge 
devices
FL cohort 1,2,3
Robots
Assets
Production Machines 
M2M
Fig. 6. An FL-Enabled IoT healthcare system.
own local data. Due to the existence of well-trained
robots, the ML model are constantly updated and the
information is shared with other federated robots. These
updates are integrated asynchronously into the global
model to ultimately enhance the navigation skills of
all robots involved. In this way IFL can continuously
updates and reevaluate data similarity which is key
requirement to ensure high model quality.
3) Aggregation: Algorithms such as FedAvg [133] is used
to solve this averaging problem yielding a well trained
Global model. It is decentralization approach that work
with non independent identical distribution (non-IID)
data which requires sharing of the same model by all
the clients.
4) Federated Learning Cohorts: FL cohorts enables clients
or assets share their updates to those belonging to subset
of FL clients, who have submitted FL tasks that belongs
to the same FL cohort. These updates are required to
improvise accuracy of their local models. In medical
device manufacturing industries, some assets requires
similar conditions for their accurate working e.g., au-
tomated production machines placed into environment
with similar temperature, noise and other features con-
sidered in the model prediction. Thus the IFL system
needs to build FL cohorts.
5) Scheduling: A service scheduling machine and a virtual
manager (VM) is also required at the middle of IoT
subsystems and cloud. VM is responsible for collecting
and storing sensor data of virtual sensors from automatic
machines and robots. Service scheduling machine is
responsible for resource management and scheduling of
several tasks with high inter-arrival rates and highly vari-
ant run-times of IIoT subsystems with low parallelism,
thus improving energy efﬁciency.
The above steps are repeated for developing an accurate global
model for developing medical devices in healthcare industry.
As individuals data is not shared on the cloud making FL as
a trustable way to train the models.
VI. CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
The IIoT based systems are generally heterogeneous and the
structure is also too complex in nature. Though these systems
are advantageous, there are so many technical challenges in
implementing and deploying these types of applications in real
time. When these challenges are met by providing solutions,
these systems will surely rule the world in near future.
A. Effective Data Management
The IIoT systems are highly heterogeneous in nature and
the data gathered using the data acquisition mechanisms or
sensors and actuators are huge in volume and also at times
unstructured. Also in IIoT systems, the data gathered are
usually streams of data at high velocity. Currently these huge
streams of data are stored in heterogeneous devices, gateways,
edge servers, fog servers or cloud servers. The huge data
gathered is raw and needs to be processed before taking any
decisions in real-time [150]. After processing, the processed
data needs to be transmitted to the required destination in an
efﬁcient manner. The data once archived needs to be retrieved
when requirement arises and hence the data has to be available

18
at the right time for further analysis. While the data is archived,
then arises the challenge for safe storage. Though IIoT is the
buzz term in the recent days, most of the industries are still
in a dilemma to implement these systems in real-time due to
the above mentioned challenges.
Solution: To cope up with these challenges, an efﬁcient data
management model [151] has to be designed and utilized. The
data model designed has to enable better storage mechanisms
while archiving as well as sharing the sensitive data. It should
also provide an efﬁcient management scheme for handling the
huge volume of data like processing, analyzing, retrieving the
data at a higher speed,etc.
B. Heterogeneity and Interoperability
IIoT systems are typically comprised of heterogeneous
multiple vendor systems [152] such as machines, robots, IoT
devices, wearable sensors, actuators, networks which are either
wired or wireless, 5G based cellular networks, broadband
networks, storage servers which may be cloud servers or
edge servers. Integrating these multiple technologies to build
a whole system is a challenging issue.
Solution: The researchers need to concentrate more on
developing resource sharing techniques [153], synchronizing
techniques, data sharing techniques and similar factors among
the heterogeneous environment to improve the interoperability
[154] and collaboration.
C. Server side attack
Preserving privacy of data and model is major issue in
decentralized framework. Security mechanism must be applied
on Edge to end device communication and from edge to
collaborative model. Even in worst case, the model updates
can be tampered between end devices to collaborative engine.
In FL, the update from end devices are sent to the cloud for
training the global model. However there is a high chance of
stealing the updates from cloud by the malicious user which
results in increase of inconsistency and noise data in the model.
Solution: Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) is one of
the best to overcome privacy threat challenge in the cloud. All
operation can be encrypted using FHE except the activation
functions. Even for activation function, higher degree polyno-
mials or modiﬁed Chebyshev polynomial can be applied and
then can be encrypted using FHE. Recently Phong et al. [155]
designed a model that balances the trade-off between data
privacy and accuracy. It also ensures no information is leaked
from the cloud server. The gradient updates are encrypted and
is directly provided to neural networks where homomorphic
function enables the computation among the other gradient
updates.
D. Optimization
As the end devices have limited memory and computational
requirements, DL models must be optimized so that they can
be trained and deployed on IIoT or end devices efﬁciently.
In terms of hardware optimization and model optimization
would decreases computation time and energy consumption.
To summarize. Optimizing the DL and ML models is an
essential part to execute the models at the edge devices which
remains a challenging task for the researchers even now. The
end device have only limited power and resource to train the
local model as they are shared by the other devices. Practically,
it is difﬁcult to provide a static connection for all end devices.
So, we have to reduce the computational complexity and
communication overhead in FL. Therefore, there should be a
tradeoff between power consumption and resource allocation
to train the model [130].
Solution: The main solution for the above challenge is to
use MPC in FL by using secure aggregation protocol. So the
best possible approach would be to use the FHE based MPC
that can be implemented with limited rounds. Generally FHE
provides the conﬁdentiality and privacy of the updates but
threshold FHE can reduce the communication overhead.
E. Inference Attack
Inference attack is an attack where the hacker can infer
sensitive information by the results of authorized query. In-
formation can be inferred directly from the model or industry
from the frequent queries. Generally the updates are sent to the
server by the local node which indirectly has the features of
the models. Some of the privacy information or identiﬁcation
of the user can also be inferred from the model updates. In-
ference attacks can be inferring class representatives, inferring
membership, inferring properties and inferring training inputs
and labels.There are two types of inference attack namely
identiﬁcation attack where the users personal information is
leaked and another type of attack is matching attack which
compares the two model updates [156].
Solution: The best way is to utilize differential policy by
adding noise to the information such that the unauthorized
user cannot distinguish the original information from noise.
Therefore there should be a balance between the privacy
of data and accuracy of the model. This can be done by
choosing the parameter to balance the above two parameters.
Orekondy [157] stated that domain speciﬁc data augmentation
can provide effective results with minimal impact.
F. Client side Attack
In general, privacy security mechanisms are computationally
expensive techniques that results delay in response. Security
issue on server side and client side remains a challenging task
even the data communication is restricted. Some mechanisms
namely DP and homomorphic encryption technique controls
the amount of data to be shared on the cloud. Model poisoning
is one of the dangerous attack which introduces backdoor func-
tionality [158] from the client side and poison the client model.
Some of the popular backdoor attack model are label ﬂipping
attack [159] and Sybil attacks [160]. Based on the occurrence
of their scenario, the complexity of the attack differs. One
of the client device is compromised and the local model is
trained using the backdoor data with their new techniques and
submits the resulting model. Finally this poisoned client model
is aggregated with other client model and replace the global
model with the backdoor model. Another way of poisoning

19
the model is the adversary can inject bad data into the models
training data.
Solution: To prevent backdoor attack combined anomaly
detection algorithm, participant level DP and Byzantine-
tolerant gradient descent can be used. [130] discussed about
the secure aggregation as the updates from each end device
are not visible to the aggregator. There is no one single
solution to overcome the model poisoning. So it is difﬁcult to
design a best solution for various type poisoning techniques.
Furthermore, various solution can be integrated into an auto-
matic predictable model which is an open question to proceed
research in future directions. Another recommended approach
is participant level DP. More speciﬁcally, FedAvg one of the
DP algorithm trains deep models on user partitioned data and
another feature is providing required level of privacy for each
participant.
G. Data Leakage
The data generated by the smart devices are conﬁdential,
resulting in more security and privacy practices. Data leakage
is one of the major barriers to data sharing in the distributed
channel. Researchers are more focused on data leakage as
sensitive data breaches can lead to increased risk factors
like ﬁnancial loss, online vandalism, future security costs.
Providing secure, smart data transmission in a distributed
environment is a major concern.
Solution: Integrating FL and blockchain into IIoT can
adequately improve data stabilization and data quality. Lu
et al. [12] proposed a blockchain-based FL model that en-
ables data privacy in IIoT applications. The research aims to
enhance trust management while transferring sensitive data
from source to destination, to provide a secure blockchain-
based data-sharing architecture in a distributed environment.
The researchers pay special focus by establishing a blockchain
environment to resist data leaks and inhibit full access control
of it’s owner. During this process, FL models are incorporated
to conceptualize data models that often share data models
in the communication network. However, smart mechanisms
for enhancing the data utility and expanding the amount of
resources for effective data sharing in a distributed setup
should be incorporated.
H. Data Privacy
Data privacy is the primary concern in IIoT, as most of
the data will be sensitive and conﬁdential, so it is essential to
keep these data secure. Data protection techniques are used to
identify unauthorized users and malicious attacks to overcome
these challenges. Data privacy is one of the key issue when
FL is used to train static streams and data streams. In general,
privacy can be classiﬁed as global and local privacy. The model
updates generated in each iteration on all the devices are not
available to untrusted third parties other than the centralized
server, whereas in local privacy, the updates are private to the
server.
Solution: In recent work [58], a PriModChain framework
is proposed for the implementation of trust and data privacy
in IIoT. The proposed model implemented data privacy with
a view to enhance the security and safety of the IIoT. The
Smart Contract helps in providing transparency within the
IIoT framework whenever a communication link is formulated
between the distributed bodies and the central authorities.
An interplanetary ﬁle system is used to achieve optimum
latency, immutability, efﬁcient data archiving and secure in-
formation sharing between the P2P network. Furthermore,
the framework does not achieve optimum latency and thus
curtails its use in the IIoT system. Additionally, to improve
resource optimization and data privacy for smart industries,
the work in [110] unveils a dispersed federated approach for
resource optimization and reliability. During this process, the
proposed model aims to minimize FL costs, while optimization
is achieved by a decomposing and relaxation-based algorithm.
Later [110] indicated the convergence of sub-problems and
remedied them using a stochastic optimization technique.
I. Communication Overhead
Training in FL is a recursive process that involves intensive
sharing of parameters among clients and servers. Conse-
quently, to adopt FL to resource-constrained IIoT contexts,
minimizing communication overhead is a key issue requiring
in-depth investigation. However, some work has been under-
taken to mitigate the use of resources in FL by lowering the
load distribution factor between source and destination.
Solution: The work in [161] presented gradient-descent FL
that involves local updates and global convergence measures.
In order to accomplish the desired exchange between local
update and global accumulation, a control algorithm is intro-
duced to signiﬁcantly reduce the loss function in the context of
budgetary resource concerns. Meanwhile, researchers in [162]
exemplify ineffective client training with fairly low resources.
Besides, the lack of global accumulations could reduce model
performance and convergence. The allocation of resources,
data training and data authentication must be considered in
order to improve the communication cost in FL.
J. Data Sharing in Horizontal Federated Learning
Industrial awareness is commonly observed using DL and
data mining techniques related to IoT data. However some
data is not easy to acquire one factory’s information, as there
are still few samples. If different alliance factories are able
to gather their information together a lot more information
could be extracted. In addition, security of information is a key
issue for these factories. Traditional matrix-based techniques
can ensure information security within a factory, but will not
facilitate information sharing between factories, and therefore,
due to lack of correlation, mining efﬁciency is weak.
Solution: To achieve these objectives, a new Federated
Tensor Mining (FTM) approach is introduced in [57] to fed-
erate multisource data for tensor-based mining while ensuring
security. The key contribution of FTM is that every factory
only needs to share its ciphertext data for security issue,
and these ciphertexts are adequate for tensor-based knowledge
mining due to its homomorphic attribution. Real-data-driven
simulations demonstrate that FTM not only mines the same
knowledge compared with the plaintext mining, but also is

20
enabled to defend the attacks from distributed eavesdroppers
and centralized hackers.
K. Anomaly Detection
Effective anomaly detection techniques based on sensing
big data become extremely important to ensure stability for
industrial applications. Since the failure of edge devices (i.e.
anomalies) has a serious impact on the production process
in IIoT, the relevant and reliable detection of anomalies is
becoming extremely important. In addition, the data collected
by the edge device contains tremendous private information,
which is challenging as user privacy has become a serious
concern.
Solution: To address this issue, Liu et al. [14] developed
a communication-efﬁcient FL-based deep anomaly detection
model for IIoT data sensing. During this process, a FL
model was ﬁrst introduced to allow decentralised edge devices
to train an anomaly detection model, which could enhance
its classiﬁcation accuracy. In the second step, an Attention
Mechanism-based Convolutional Neural Network-Long Short
Term Memory (AMCNN-LSTM) approach is formulated for
accurate detection of anomalies. The AMCNN-LSTM method
uses attention mechanism-based CNN units to identify relevant
ﬁne-grained features, to prevent memory loss and gradient
dispersion risks. In addition, the proposed model retains the
merits of the LSTM unit in anticipating time series informa-
tion. In the third step, a gradient compression technique to
improve communication process is proposed.
In order to solve these problems, an innovative FL-based
deep anomaly monitoring system is proposed for smart edge
devices. Liu et al. [163] proposed a CNN-LSTM FL-based
framework for detecting anomalies in IIoT applications. To
improve the data transmission efﬁcacy of the presented frame-
work, a gradient compression technique based on top-k selec-
tion has been used to minimise network overhead.
L. Data Integrity
Blockchain technology is used in IIoT-based FL to provide
data integrity in order to obtain adequate customer informa-
tion and training computing capabilities. Blockchain-based FL
systems face some of the challenges in the design phase to
address the barriers of data heterogeneity in IIoT during earlier
fault detection. However, existing security mechanisms do not
focus on designing the effective framework and blockchain’s
reliability issue.
Solution: In [13], a new FL-based blockchain architecture
is proposed to detect failures in IIoT applications. During this
process, each client server continuously builds a Merkle tree
where each leaf node signiﬁes the client data and saves the
root tree to the blockchain. An on-chain system is designed to
measure each client’s impact, based on the size of client data
used in local model training.
M. Data and Model Attack
Even though data sharing is minimal in FL, still there can be
several attacks in the framework at different levels. In general
attacks can happen at any stage starting from the basic node
level to the server level. They are as follows:
1) Data Attack- Attack in local data at the end device
2) Model Attack- Attack that happens in local trained
model and global model in centralised server
Data based attack: Changing the data or labels used in
the training data falls under this category of the attack. Data
attack can be a clean label and dirty label attack. When the
unauthorized person cannot change the label of data as this
would lead to misclassiﬁcation of data is known as clean label
attack. In contrast in dirty label attack, the intruders attempt
to include some number of samples which would mislead the
ML process.
Model based attack: Changing the model updates com-
municated would cause the decrease in model efﬁciency.
Hacking the model trained in local node results in leaking user
identiﬁcation data globally. Aggregated global model present
in the centralized server is also prone to attack. Sometimes
the model are targeted for misclassiﬁcation by changing the
training process. Even though DNN-based approaches have
become more popular in IIoT applications, they are currently
experiencing some disadvantages, such as massive numbers
of adversarial attacks. How to build DNNs that are immune
to different types of attacks are becoming a major bottleneck
when deploying IIoT safety applications.
Solution: In order to provide solutions to these kinds of
problems, Song et al. [164] developed federated defensive
system for cloud-based IIoT architectures. The revised FL
model and the implemented adversarial learning loss function,
the proposed strategy can metabolise DNNs to successfully
handle existing adversarial threats while guaranteeing privacy
protection among various IIoT devices. The obtained results
were compared with two popular benchmarks, and the results
reveal that the improved method can not only increase overall
protection against various existing adversarial attacks, but can
also accurately detect the improper behaviour of DNN induced
by new attacks.
VII. CONCLUSION
The new paradigm of integrating FL on IIoT data was
surveyed and several approaches and techniques associated
with it are introduced. In speciﬁc, we highlighted the char-
acteristics and beneﬁts of IIoT in terms of FL and distributive
learning. The motivation behind the integration of IIoT with
FL is also discussed. Subsequently, several privacy preserving
ML/DL and blockchain models employed in FL and IIoT are
presented. Then, survey on algorithms to handle heterogenous
data is summarized. Contribution of researchers in the ﬁeld of
FL with data and resource management followed by several
challenges and solutions are discussed. Reviewing automobile
and healthcare applications on IIoT with FL would provide
the researchers to understand the principal components of
IIoT smart devices. We also identiﬁed various challenges,
solutions and future research direction in path of FL for IIoT.
In summary, the advantages of extending edge intelligence
to intelligent edge is to reduce the communication cost,
computing power and energy consumption. Also, this paper

21
would enhance the readers to consolidate and combine the
information with respect to IIoT, FL and privacy preserving
mechanism, data management and storage mechanisms under
a common new paradigm of Industry 4.0.
In future, researchers should focus on developing algorithms
and methodologies to impose privacy constraints across edge
device and data level. The privacy preserving model for FL
should be designed to learn multiple geographically distributed
training data sets without exploiting the sensitive information
of the user. The existing architecture violates the usage of
short packets for low latency communication. Therefore new
generation of wireless systems such as 6G cellular networks
can be integrated with FL enabled IIoT networks to provide
more importance for privacy preservation.
