Mining the online infosphere: A survey
Sayantan Adak1, Souvic Chakraborty1, Paramtia Das1, Mithun Das1, Abhisek
Dash1, Rima Hazra2, Binny Mathew1, Punyajoy Saha1, Soumya Sarkar1, and
Animesh Mukherjee1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal, India – 721302
2Advanced Technology Development Center, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, West Bengal, India – 721302∗
Abstract
The evolution of AI-based system and applications had pervaded everyday life to make decisions that have
momentous impact on individuals and society. With the staggering growth of online data, often termed as the
Online Infosphere it has become paramount to monitor the infosphere to ensure social good as the AI-based
decisions are severely dependant on it. The goal of this survey is to provide a comprehensive review of some
of the most important research areas related to infosphere, focusing on the technical challenges and potential
solutions. The survey also outlines some of the important future directions. We begin by discussions focused
on the collaborative systems that have emerged within the infosphere with a special thrust on Wikipedia. In
the follow up we demonstrate how the infosphere has been instrumental in the growth of scientiﬁc citations and
collaborations thus fuelling interdisciplinary research. Finally, we illustrate the issues related to the governance of
the infosphere such as the tackling of the (a) rising hateful and abusive behaviour and (b) bias and discrimination
in diﬀerent online platforms and news reporting.
1
Introduction
Online infosphere1 is the term corresponding to the Internet becoming a virtual parallel world
formed from billions of networks of artiﬁcial life at diﬀerent scales ranging from tiny pieces of
software to massive AI tools running a factory or driving a car. The motivations for this are
diverse, seeking to both help mankind and harm it.
In this article, we shall attempt to portray some of the areas that are increasingly gaining
importance in research related to the evolution of this infosphere. In particular, we would begin
with infosphere as a collaborative platform, Wikipedia being the prime point of discussion. As a
next step we would discuss how the infosphere has inﬂuenced the evolution of scientiﬁc citations
and collaborations. Finally, we shall outline the emerging research interest in the governance of
this infosphere to eradicate discrimination, bias, abuse and hate.
∗The ﬁrst nine authors have been arranged based on family names and have equal contributions.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infosphere
1
arXiv:2101.00454v1  [cs.DL]  2 Jan 2021

1.1
Infosphere as a collaborative platform
The infosphere hosts numerous collaborative platforms including question answering sites, folk-
sonomies, microblogging sites and above all encyclopedias. In this survey we shall focus on
Wikipedia which is one of the largest online collaborative encyclopedia. We shall primarily dis-
cuss two of the most important aspects of Wikipedia – (a) the quality of an article and its
indicators and (b) the collaboration dynamics of Wikipedia editors who constitute the backbone
of this massive initiative. Under the ﬁrst topic we shall identify the diﬀerent features of an
article like its language, structure and stability as well as their quality [150, 53, 120]. We shall
further summarise attempts that have been made to automatically predict the quality of an
article [52, 91]. Within the second topic we shall brieﬂy describe various issues related to the
community of editors including anomalies, vandalism and edit wars[71, 135]. Finally, we shall
talk about ways to enabling retention of editors on the platform [54, 104, 132].
1.2
Infosphere shaping scientiﬁc citations and collaborations
Citations play a crucial role in shaping the evolution of a scientiﬁc discipline. With an exponential
growth of research publications in various disciplines it has become very important for researchers
and scientists to grasp diﬀerent concepts within a short period of time. We would explore how
the infosphere has inﬂuenced the growth and interaction of diﬀerent scientiﬁc disciplines over
the period of last few years by investigating several diﬀerent aspects of citation networks. Our
survey includes – (a) a detailed account of how the basic sciences and the computer sciences have
interacted with each other over the years resulting in an interdisciplinary research landscape [58,
103],(b) the temporal dynamics of citations [129], (c) ways for assessment of article quality, and
ﬁnally (d) a brief account of anomalous citation ﬂows.
1.3
Governance of the infosphere
The stupendous growth of the infosphere has resulted in the emergence of various online commu-
nities that have massively started infusing bias, discrimination, hatred and abuse often resulting
in violence in the oﬄine world. In this segment, we shall primarily focus our discussion on the
following topics – (a) analysis, spread, detection and mitigation of online hate speech and (b)
biases that manifest across news media and in traditional recommendation systems. Within the
ﬁrst topic we shall motivate the need to tackle online hate speech by citing some of the adverse
consequences of the same. In particular, we shall see how unmoderated hate speech spreads in a
social network [93, 94], what are the challenges to automatically detect online hate speech [49, 2]
and the possible techniques to combat this problem [95, 96]. Within the second topic we shall
discuss two important forms of biases. The ﬁrst one corresponds to political biases that manifest
due to the massive production of unveriﬁed (and in many cases false) news generated in the
form of news/blog/tweets etc. We shall also discuss the diﬃculties faced by modern machine
learning techniques in preventing the infusion of such biases. The second one narrates the idea of
formation of ﬁlter bubbles [107] in traditional recommendation systems followed by a discussion
on the need to systematically audit such systems [28, 27].
2
Wikipedia as a collaborative platform
Wikipedia models a hypertext collaborative platform along with an open and free knowledge
base catering a large variety of information ranging from history, arts, culture, politics to science,
technology and many more ﬁelds. Being one of the most widely viewed sites (within top ten)
in the world since 2007, it spans over 208 languages with a copious amount of articles in each
edition. For example, the English-language Wikipedia, the largest in volume, contains more than
2

6 million articles as of February, 2020. Owing to the collaborative nature and an open-access
policy announced by Wikipedia as “anyone can edit”, a number of challenges have cropped up in
maintaining the veracity-quality balance of the content. Although Wikipedia has enforced several
rules and strict administrative policies to protect the encyclopedia from malicious activities, a
lack of authoritative vigilance prohibits its trustworthiness in academics. In contrast, Wikipedia’s
structured, complete and detailed evolution history receives increasing attention of the research
community in discovering automated solution (e.g. bots, software, API etc.) to meet the goal
of quality management.
2.1
Quality
The elementary purpose of Wikipedia is free, unbiased, accurate information curation. To achieve
this objective Wikimedia foundation which is the governing body of the platform, has developed
labyrinth of guidelines which editors are expected to follow so that highest encyclopedic standards
are maintained. These guidelines also enhance accessibility of the Wikipedia articles to a broad
community of netizens. We enumerate these guidelines into three categories as discussed below.
2.1.1
Article language
Expressions describing a subject should be neutral. Promotion bearing words such as renowned,
visionary, iconic, virtuoso etc. should not be used. Subject importance should be demonstrated
using facts and attribution2 Prose should have active voice. Jargon needs to be elaborated or
substantiated with reference. Any eﬀort to propagate myth or contentious content should be
curtailed. An example for this is addition of preﬁx pseudo or suﬃx -gate which encourages the
reader to assume that the subject is factitious or scandalous respectively. Euphemisms (e.g.,
passed away, collateral damage and cliches (e.g.,
lion’s share, tip of the iceberg) disallows
presentation of prose directly and hence is restricted. Any unnecessary emphasis in the form of
italics, quotations etc. is discouraged. For a complete list of details of content guidelines for the
English Wikipedia we refer the reader to the Wikipeida manual of style3.
2.1.2
Article structure
These guidelines include proper formatting of the Wikipedia article in terms of section headings,
infobox, article name, section organisation etc. The lead section should not be of arbitrary length.
The following sections should not be exorbitant in size and bigger sections should be broken into
coherent smaller sections. Another requirement is proper positioning of the images with captions
and references. In order to alleviate manual labor in improving article structure there have been
some automated approaches leveraging advances in machine learning techniques [63].
2.1.3
Article stability
These guidelines denote stability of the article, i.e., the respective article should not be subject
of frequent edit wars.
There should not be abusive language exchange among editors and
discussions toward improving article quality should organically reach consensus. This is the most
diﬃcult objective in collaborative content creation and generally the onus lies in the hands of
senior level editors and moderators for smooth conﬂict arbitration.
2.1.4
Peer review framework
Although Wikipedia has grown signiﬁcantly in terms of volume and veracity over the last decade,
the quality of articles is not uniform [138]. The quality of Wikipedia articles is monitored through
a rating system where each article is assigned one of several class indicators. Some of the major
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Words_to_watch
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style
3

article categories are FA, GA, B, C, Start and Stub. Most complete and dependable content is
annotated by an FA (aka featured article) tag while the lowest quality content is annotated with
a Stub tag. The intention behind this elaborate scheme is to notify editors regarding current
state of the article and extent of eﬀort needed for escalating to encyclopedic standards4. The
editors are expected to rigorously follow the aforementioned guidelines. As has been evident
from the guidelines, they are circuitous and often require experience for implementation. Such
strict policy adherence have also been sometimes a barrier for onboarding of new editors on
Wikipedia which has led to the decline of newcomers over the past decade [132, 55]. Since it
is nontrivial to discern qualifying diﬀerences between articles manually, it has given rise to the
emergence of automated techniques using machine learning models.
2.1.5
Computational methods for quality prediction
Automatic article assessment is one of the key research agendas of the Wikimedia foundation5.
One of the preliminary approaches [56] seeking to solve this problem extracted structural features
such as presence of infobox, references, level 2 headings etc. as indicators of the article qual-
ity. [26] proposed the ﬁrst application of deep neural networks into quality assessment task where
they employed distributional representation of documents [80] without using manual features.
The authors in [123] introduce a hybrid approach, where textual content of the Wikipedia arti-
cles are encoded using a BILSTM model. The hidden representation captured by the sequence
model is further augmented with handcrafted features and the concatenated feature vector is
used for ﬁnal classiﬁcation.
[151] is an edit history based approach where every version of an
article is represented by 17 dimensional handcrafted features. Hence, an article with k versions
will be represented by k × 17 matrix. This k length sequence is passed through a stacked LSTM
for ﬁnal representation used in classiﬁcation.
[124] proposed a multimodal information fusion
approach where embeddings obtained from both article text as well as html rendering of the ar-
ticle webpage is used for ﬁnal classiﬁcation. [52] proposed the ﬁrst approach which incorporates
information from three modes for quality assessment, i.e., article text, article image and article
talk page. [52] obtains 8% improvement over [125] approach and achieves the SOTA result.
A complementary direction of exploration has been put forward by [84, 31] where correlation
between article quality and structural properties of co-editor network and editor-article network
has been exploited. An orthogonal direction of research looks into edit level quality prediction
which is a ﬁne-grained approach toward article content management [120].
2.2
Collaboration among editors
The workhorse behind the success story of Wikipedia is the large pool of its voluntary editors;
an encouragement toward global collaboration inﬂuences people to contribute on almost all
wikipages. These group of people maintain Wikipedia pages behind the scenes which includes
creating new pages, adding facts and graphics, citing references, keeping the wording and format-
ting appropriate etc. to lead the articles to the highest level of quality. The achievement of any
open collaborative project is hinged on the continued and active participation of its collaborators,
and hence, Wikipedia needs to manage its voluntarily contributing editor community carefully.
In the days of extreme socio-cultural polarization, algorithmically crafted ﬁlter bubbles and fake
information represented as facts, editors are highly motivated to contribute to the largest non-
biased knowledge sharing platform although their works are not ﬁnancially compensated most
of the times [88]. In these lines there have been several works [145, 104], which attempt to
understand the dynamics of interaction behaviours of the community in sustaining the health of
4wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProjectWikipedia/Assessment
5www.mediawiki.org/wiki/ORES
4

Wikipedia.
2.2.1
Anomaly
While investigating the editing behaviours of editors in general context, researchers have found
out a taxonomy of semantic intentions behind the edits, and conﬂicts and controversy are
inherent components of the classiﬁcation. Wikipedia owes its success for several reasons and
openness is one of those pillars.
Sometimes, the very openness misguides editors to violate
Wikipedia’s strict guidelines of the neutral-point of view (NPOV), and their disruptive edits
cause various kinds of anomalies. We describe the two dominant disputes, produced by the
damaging edits as follows.
Vandalism: With the freedom of editing anything by anyone, Wikipedia has to struggle in
stopping the malicious practice of contaminating articles by bad faith edits intentionally. The
popular pages like famous celebrities, controversial topics etc.
become the frequent targets
of vandalism where vandals try to mislead the readers by addition, deletion or modiﬁcation,
which can be termed as hoax. Wikipedia has enforced several strict policies such as blocking
and banning Vandals (registered / unregistered editors), patrolling recent changes by adding
watch-lists, protecting articles (ex, semi-protected pages) from new editors, random IP addresses
etc. In addition to the administrative decisions, bots 6 are employed to detect and revert the
vandalism automatically and ﬁnally warn the editors without human intervention. Researchers
have proposed various automated ways [131, 71], i.e., the state-of-the-art techniques based on
machine learning [75, 133] and deep neural methods [92, 135] in preventing Wikipedia from
vandalism.
Edit war: Apart from the intended malpractice of vandalism, editors often engage themselves
in disagreement which further inﬂuence them to override each other’s contribution instead of
dispute resolution. Any such actions violating the three-revert rule7 is coined as edit warring in
Wikipedia and it promotes a toxic environment in the community. Ultimately in the long-term,
the integrity of the encyclopedia will be aﬀected signiﬁcantly by the damaging eﬀects of edit
wars [117]. Although Wikipedia encourages editors to be bold, in contrast a constant refusal to
get the point is also not entertained.
2.2.2
Retention of editors
Historically, Wikipedia managed the numbers of its volunteers quite successfully; however, ex-
perts [54] note that it is at the danger of sharp decline of its active editors due to the lack
of the socialization eﬀort. Editors may choose to leave the platform for personal reasons as
well as for their disagreement/conﬂict with their fellow editors. The damage is happening in
both ways - when new editors fail to inherit the rules and policies they easily become upset
and leave eventually. Experienced editors, on the other hand, can get discouraged because of
the continuous upgradation of policies to retain newcomers, or even for the nuisances by the
newbies. Two way eﬀort are being taken to combat with this problem – researchers are coming
up with various approaches (see [101, 102, 147] and the refereces therein) while Wikipedia itself
is running several wikiprojects8,9 to proactively retain its contributors.
Future directions: Due to the enormous volume of data publicly available from various multi-
lingual wikiprojects, several interesting future directions can be explored. One of the directions is
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:ClueBot_NG
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Edit_warring
8https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Editor_Retention
9https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Expert_retention
5

combating repeat abusers who add malicious content annonymously after being blocked through
sockpuppetry [90] or collusion. A large volume of eﬀort has been invested in understanding editor
behaviour; however, similar large scale exploration need to be done on understanding readers. A
promising start in this direction includes the following [65, 115]. However, further work needs
to explore the interplay between editors and readers and how these two stakeholders can forge
a partnership in mutually beneﬁcial fashion. We refer to the mediawiki research index 10 for a
comprehensive take on this emerging research scope.
3
Recent trends in citation dynamics
Research on citation network have always remained essential in solving various problems such
as predicting emerging topics, early citation prediction, modelling evolving citation networks.
Citation network is a directed graph where nodes could be authors/papers/journals and edges
are the citation ﬂows (weighted/unweighted) from one node to another node. Using citation
networks, one can predict which ﬁeld/topic could be the ‘most attractive ones to work on’ in the
immediate future years. The research dynamics in various ﬁelds over the years can be analyzed
with the help of the underlying citation network. Various studies uncover the chances of the
manifestation of certain new ﬁelds/sub-ﬁelds by investigating the citation ﬂows from papers of
one ﬁeld to the papers of another ﬁeld over the time. In recent years, citation count prediction
task plays an important role in fund allocations and rewards. Researchers are also interested in
building models for automatic citation recommendation while drafting an article. Apart from
these, some anomalous practices in exchanging citations have been exposed in the late ’90s.
Now, such malpractices are becoming more common among the researchers/journals (mostly
low ranked). In the rest of this section, we shall discuss each of the above issues in details.
3.1
Interdisciplinary research in terms of citation interactions
Various research questions such as “which ﬁeld will collaborate with which ﬁeld in future?”,
“Which ﬁeld will receive more citations from recently published papers?”, etc., can be addressed
with the help of the underlying citation networks among the articles. Nowadays, research is
performed by combining the ideas from multiple disciplines. In [58] the authors have analyzed
the interdisciplinarity among the two basic science ﬁelds – Mathematics and Physics and one
fast growing ﬁeld – Computer Science. Further they observe how the citation from papers of
one discipline ﬂows to the papers of another discipline over the years. They observe that in
initial years huge amount of citation ﬂows from Physics to Mathematics and vice versa. Over
the years, Computer Science started gaining citation from Mathematics. In the recent years,
both the basic science ﬁelds tend to massively cite papers from Computer Science. They observe
how popularity of some topics decreases over the time. They found that the Computer Science
papers mostly cites the quantum physics sub-ﬁeld for long time span. In late ’90s, Physics mostly
cites information theory papers of Computer Science but in recent times it mostly cites papers
from machine learning and social & information networks domain.
Further, interdisciplinarity has been studied in diﬀerent ﬁelds including biology [103], mathe-
matics [103], cognitive science [9, 76], social science [109], humanities [109]. Various studies
[7, 121, 9] have attempted to propose novel metrics to measure the degree of interdisciplinarity
based on researchers’ scientiﬁc impact, collaborator’s knowledge, publication history, etc. In
addition, metric for measuring interdisciplinarity of an article has been proposed [9] where au-
thors’ research area, publications in diﬀerent domains have been used to deﬁne the metric. A
10https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Research:Index
6

study [126] has been carried out to analyze the interdisciplinarity nature of highly cited articles
from Thomson Reuters’ databases published in between 1900-2012 years.
3.2
Analyzing and modelling the citation dynamics
Several studies have been carried out in the past to model the temporal dynamics of citation
networks. In order to model the temporal dynamics of citation networks, researchers traditionally
used preferential attachment [1] and copying based [74] models.
In [137], the authors investigated the citation behavior of older papers in various ﬁelds. They
concluded that older articles receive more citations over the years. It is observed that in 2013,
36% of citations ﬂowed toward the at least ten years old papers. However, a re-investigation of
this study showed that the observations are only partly true since the authors did not take into
account the accelerating volume of publications over time. In order to tackle the tug-of-war be-
tween obsolescence and entrenchment, recently, in [129], the authors proposed a complex model
based on the idea of relay-linking where the older article relays a citation to a recently published
article. This model has very less number of parameters and ﬁts with the real data much better
than the traditional models. Yet another novel citation growth model called RefOrCite [106]
have been proposed recently where the authors allow copying from the references (out-edges)
and citations (in-edges) of an article (as opposed to only references in the traditional setup). It
is observed that RefOrCite model ﬁts well with real compared to the previous models.
Citation count prediction
Predicting future impact of scientiﬁc articles is important for making decision in fund allocation
(by funding agencies), recruitment etc. There are various works [82, 143, 149, 83] that have
been carried out in the past to automatically estimate the citation count of scientiﬁc articles. In
this article, we shall mainly focus on the recent literature. In 2015, the authors in [82] proposed
Trend-based Citation Count Prediction (T-CCP) model where the model ﬁrst would ﬁrst learn
the type of the citation trends of the articles and then predict the citation count for that trend.
All the articles were categorized into ﬁve citation trend categories based on the “burst” time
(“burst time” is the time when the paper gets maximum citations) – early burst, middle burst,
late burst, multi bursts, and no bursts. Two types of features have been used – (a) publication
related features like author centric features (i.e., h-index, number of papers published, citation
count, number of collaborators), publication venue (average citation count, impact factor etc.)
and (b) reinforcement features which are the graph based features (i.e., PageRank, HITS etc.)
calculated from weighted citation network among authors.
In their model, they mainly use
SVR and SVM (LibLinear) for citation count prediction and classiﬁcation task respectively. In
paper [128], the authors found that the knowledge gathered from citation context within the
article could help to predict future citation count. Number of occurrences of the citations for a
paper within the article and the average number of words in citation context, have been derived
from citation context knowledge. Further they categorized the articles into six citation proﬁles
(PeakInit, PeakMul, PeakLate, MonDec, MonIncr, Oth) and found that the above two citation
context based features are able to nicely distinguish these six categories. In [127], the authors
observed that the long term citation of an article depends on the citations it receives in the early
years (within one or two years from its publication date). The authors who cite an article in its
early years are called early citer. Early citers based on whether they are inﬂuential or not aﬀect
the long term citation count of the article. In most cases, inﬂuential authors negatively aﬀect
the long term citation of an article. In [143], the authors have proposed a novel point process
method to predict the citations of individual articles. In their approach they tried to capture two
7

properties – the “rich gets richer” eﬀect and the recency eﬀect. The authors in [149] used four
factors – intrinsic quality (citation count) of a paper, aging eﬀect, Mathew eﬀect and recency
eﬀect to derive a model called long term individual level citation count prediction (LT-CCP). In
this model they mainly use RNN with LSTM units. It is observed that LT-CPP model achieves
better performance than existing models. Authors in [83] proposed a neural model for predicting
citation count with the help of peer review text. They mainly learn two deep features – (a) the
abstract-review match mechanism (in order to learn the abstract aware review representation)
and (b) the cross review match from peer review text.
3.3
Citation recommendation
Often new researchers face diﬃculties in ﬁnding appropriate published research papers while
exploring the domain literature and citing published papers.
Citation recommendation is a
technique that recommends appropriate published articles for the given text/sentence.
The
sentences present around the reference (placeholder) are called context sentences.
Citation
recommendation task can be divided into two parts – (i) local citation recommendation, and
(ii) global citation recommendation. In case of local citation recommendation, only the context
sentences are used.
In case of global citation recommendation, the whole article is used as
input and the system outputs a list of published papers as output. In cite [10] the authors
proposed a model for the global citation recommendation task where they embedded the textual
information (i.e., the title and the abstract) of the candidate citations in a vector space and
considered the nearest neighbors as the candidate citations for the target document. Further,
re-ranking of the candidate citations was done.
They used DBLP (50K articles having an
average citation of 5 per article) and PubMed (45K articles with average citation of 17 per
article) datasets and also introduced a new dataset OpenCorpus (7 million articles) in the paper.
They showed that their model achieved state-of-the-art performance without using metadata
(authors, publication venues, keyphrases). In paper [64], the authors proposed a deep learning
model (consists of context encoder and citation encoder) and used a dataset [59] for context
aware citation recommendation. Pre-trained BERT [34] model has been used in order to learn
the embedding of the context sentences. GCN has been employed to learn the citation graph
embedding from the paper-paper citation graph.
They mainly revised two existing datasets
– AAN and FullTextPeerRead (revised version of PeerRead). They showed that their model
performed three times better than the SOTA approaches (CACR etc.). The authors in [110]
proposed a novel method – ConvCN – based on the citation knowledge graph embedding.
3.4
Detection of anomalous citation ﬂows
Various anomalous citation patterns have been found to emerge over the years. Various ways of
maliciously increasing one’s citation are through self-citations, citation stacking among journals,
and citation cartel. Nowadays, authors are more concerned about their position in academia,
publication pressure etc. and this leads to most of them adopting unfair means to increase their
citation. Citation cartel is one of the anomalous citation patterns which was ﬁrst reported in
late ’90s11. Citation cartel is formed by a group of authors/editors/journals where they cite
each other heavily for mutual beneﬁt. The relationship in citation cartel could be author-author,
editor-author, journal-journal etc. There are a few cases found where the journal’s impact factor
increases rapidly due to this anomalous behavior. Cell Transplantation12 is a medical journal
whose impact factor rapidly increased between 2006 and 2010 (3.48 to 6.20). After investigation
carried out by JCR publisher, it was found that one review article published in this journal
11https://science.sciencemag.org/content/286/5437/53
12https://www.cognizantcommunication.com/journal-titles/cell-transplantation
8

Medical Science Monitor13 cited almost 91% papers published in Cell Transplantation from the
time bucket 2008–2009. It was found that the impact factor of the journal Cell Transplantation
was calculated based on this time bucket14. Surprisingly, the authors (three out of four) are
from the editorial board of this journal. In cite [40] the authors tried to detect citation cartels.
They deﬁned a citation cartel as a group of authors citing each other excessively than they do
with other authors’ works in the same domain. They observed that there could be multiple
reasons like academic pressure, “publish or perish” concept in academia, fear of losing job,
scientiﬁc competition etc. behind establishing such citation cartels. It was observed that such
unfair means are mostly adopted by low ranked researchers [41]. In their work, they prepared
a multilayer graph where they include paper-paper citation network (directed graph), authors’
collaboration network and authors’ citation networks (weighted directed graph). Finally, citation
cartel has been captured from the authors’ citation network. Cartels have been discovered by
using Resource Description Framework (RDF) and RDF query language and some threshold has
been declared to identify the existence of citation cartel among authors. The authors in [72]
proposed a novel algorithm – Citation Donors and REcipients (CIDRE) to detect the citation
cartel among the journals that cite each other disproportionately to increase the impact factor
of the journal. CIDRE algorithm ﬁrst distinguishes between the normal and malicious citation
exchange with the help of few parameters. These parameters are similarity in research areas,
citation inﬂow and outﬂow. A weighted citation network among 48K journals was constructed
from the dataset collected from MAG15. With the help of the algorithm, more than half of
the malicious journals were detected (those were actually suspended by Thomson Reuters) in
the same year. In addition, CIDRE algorithm detected few malicious journal groups in 2019
whose journals received 30% of its in-ﬂow citation from the journals in the same group. Such
anomalous citations help to grow the impact factor of the journals over the years. In [62], the
authors studied how malicious journals are increasing in the Indian research community and
avoiding proper rules and regulations. The analysis has been carried out on Indian publishing
group OMICS (considered as predatory by the research community). Surprisingly they observed
that such malicious journals share very similar characteristics with various reputed journals.
Future directions: In order to gather more citations, malpractices among the journals are
rapidly increasing. More research is required to build a mechanism which can automatically
predict those (predatory) journals (depending on the topics of the journal). In case of citation
recommendation, there is a need for improving the recommendation system such that the system
is able to recommend papers that are conceptually similar or exhibit conﬂicting claims [42]. Also,
prioritizing the citation recommendation would be another help to maintain the page limit given
by many conferences [42].
4
Governance
As noted in the introduction, this section is laid out into two major parts. The former part
centers around the spread, automatic detection and containment of hate speech. The latter part
deals with bias in media outlets and online recommendation platforms.
13http://www.medscimonit.com/
14https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2012/04/10/emergence-of-a-citation-cartel/
15https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/microsoft-academic-graph/
9

4.1
Hate speech
4.1.1
Spread
The Internet is one of the greatest innovations of mankind which has brought together people
from every race, religion, and nationality. Social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook
have connected billions of people16 and allowed them to share their ideas and opinions instantly.
That being said, there are several ill consequences as well such as online harassment, trolling,
cyber-bullying, and hate speech.
The rise of hate speech: Hate speech has recently received a lot of research attention with
several works that focus on detecting hate speech in online social media [29, 33, 4, 119, 73].
Even though several government and social media sites are trying to curb all forms of hate
speech, it is still plaguing our society. With hate crimes increasing in several states17, there is an
urgent need to have a better understanding of how the users spread hateful posts in online social
media. Companies like Facebook have been accused of instigating anti-Muslim mob violence in
Sri Lanka that left three people dead18 and a United Nations report blamed them for playing
a leading role in the possible genocide of the Rohingya community in Myanmar by spreading
hate speech19. In response to the UN report, Facebook later banned several accounts belonging
to Myanmar military oﬃcials20 for spreading hate speech. In the recent Pittsburgh synagogue

Gab?? and posted his ﬁnal message before the shooting22. Inspection of his Gab account shows
months of anti-semitic and racist posts that were endorsed by a lot of users on Gab.
Understanding the spread of hate speech: We perform the ﬁrst study which looks into the
diﬀusion dynamics of the posts by hateful users in Gab [93]. We choose Gab for all our analysis.
This choice is primarily motivated by the nature of Gab, which allows users to post content that
may be hateful in nature without any fear of repercussion. This provides an unique opportunity
to study how the hateful content would spread in the online medium, if there were no restrictions.
To this end, we crawl the Gab platform and acquire 21M posts by 341K users over a period
of 20 months (October, 2016 to June, 2018). Our analysis reveals that the posts by hateful
users tend to spread faster, farther, and wider as compared to normal users. We ﬁnd that the
hate users in our dataset (which constitute 0.67% of the total number of users) are very densely
connected and are responsible for 26.80% of posts generated in Gab.
We also study the temporal eﬀect of hate speech on the users and the platform as well [94]. To
understand the temporal characteristics, we needed data from consecutive time points in Gab.
As a ﬁrst step, using a heuristic [98], we generate successive graphs which capture the diﬀerent
time snapshots of Gab at one month intervals. Then, using the DeGroot model [32], we assign
a hate intensity score to every user in the temporal snapshot and categorize them based on their
degrees of hate. We then perform several linguistic and network studies on these users across
the diﬀerent time snapshots. We ﬁnd that the amount of hate speech in Gab is consistently
16https://techcrunch.com/2018/07/25/facebook-2-5-billion-people
17http://www.aaiusa.org/unprecedented_increase_expected_in_upcoming_fbi_hate_crime_report
18https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/mar/14/facebook-accused-by-sri-lanka-of-failing-
to-control-hate-speech
19https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/myanmar-facebook-hate
20https://www.reuters.com/article/us-myanmar-facebook/facebook-bans-myanmar-army-chief-
others-in-unprecedented-move-idUSKCN1LC0R7
21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pittsburgh_synagogue_shooting
22https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/pittsburgh-synagogue-shooter-gab-
robert-bowers-final-posts-online-comments-a8605721.html
10

increasing. This is true for the new users joining as well. We further ﬁnd that the recently
joining new users take much less time to turn hateful as compared to those that joined at earlier
time periods. In addition, the fraction of users becoming hateful is increasing as well. Also, we
ﬁnd that the language used by the community as a whole is becoming more correlated with that
of the hateful users as compared to the non-hateful ones. The hateful users also seem to be
playing a pivotal role from the network point of view.
4.1.2
Detection
Due to the massive scale of online social media, methods that automatically detect hate speech
are required. In this section, we explore a few of the methods that try to automatically de-
tect hate speech. Some of the approaches utilize Keyword-based techniques, machine learning
models, etc. Perceiving the right features for a classiﬁcation problem can be one of the chal-
lenging tasks when using machine learning. Though surface-level features, such as bag of words,
uni-grams, larger n-grams, etc. [18, 136] have been used for this problem, since hate speech de-
tection is usually applied on small pieces of text, one may face a data sparsity problem. Lately,
neural network based distributed word/paragraph representations, also referred to as word em-
beddings/paragraph embeddings [36] have been proposed. Using large (unlabelled) text corpus,
for each word or for a paragraph a vector representation is induced [81] that can eventually be
used as classiﬁcation features, replacing binary features indicating the presence or frequency of
particular words.
Hate speech detection is a task that cannot always be solved by using only lexicon based features/
word embedding. For instance, ‘6 Million Wasn’t Enough‘ may not be regarded as some form of
hate speech when observed in isolation. However, when the context is given that the utterance
is directed toward Jewish people who were killed in the holocaust by white supremacists and
Neo Nazis23, one could infer that this is a hate speech against Jews. The above example shows
us whether a message is hateful or not can be highly dependent on world knowledge. In [46],
the authors annotated context dependant hate speech and showed that incorporating context
information improved the overall performance of the model.
Apart from world knowledge, meta-information (i.e., background information about the user of
a post, number of posts by a user, geographical origin) can be used as a feature to improve
the hate speech detection task. Since the data commonly comes from the online social media
platform, variety of meta-information about the post can be collected while crawling the data. A
user who is known to post mostly hateful content, may do so in the future. Existing research [93]
has found that, high number of hateful messages are generated from less number of users. It has
been also observed that men are more likely to spread hate speech than women [139]. Also, the
number of profane words in the post history of user has been used as a feature for hate speech
classiﬁcation task [24].
Nowadays the number of posts which consists of images, audios, and video content are getting
shared more in Social media platforms. In [49], the authors have explored the textual and visual
information of images for the hate speech detection task.
Most of the methods that have been explored earlier were supervised and heavily dependant
on the annotated data. Oﬀ-the-shelf classiﬁers such as logistic regression, support vector ma-
chines have been extensively used. Recently, deep neural models are being extensively used for
the classiﬁcation task. In [2], the authors explored several models such as CNN-GRU, BERT,
23https://www.vice.com/en/article/y3z9aj/a-national-guard-twitch-streamer-said-6-million-
wasnt-enough-on-stream
11

mBERT for the classiﬁcation task in 9 languages and observed that with increasing training
data, the classiﬁer performance increased. Another key observation they made was that the
relative performance seemed to vary depending on the language and the model. While better
models for hate speech detection are continually being developed, little study has been done to
understand the bias and interpretability aspect of hate speech. In [97], the authors release a
benchmark dataset which could be used to study this. In their work, they show that the models
that perform very well in classiﬁcation do not score high on explainability metrics.
4.1.3
Counter speech
After detection of hate speech, we need proper mitigation strategies to stop it from becoming
viral. The current methods largely depend on blocking or suspending the users, deleting the
tweets etc. This is performed mostly by moderators which is a tedious task for them given the
information rate. Many companies like Facebook have started to automate this process but both
these methods have the risk of violating free speech. This work [69] identiﬁes various pitfalls with
respect to trust, fairness and bias of these algorithms. A more promising direction could be to
counter with speech which are popularly known as counter speech. Speciﬁcally, counter speech
is a direct non-hostile response/comment that counters the hateful or harmful speech [116]. The
idea that ‘more speech’ is a remedy for dangerous speech has been familiar in liberal democratic
thought at least since the U.S. Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis declared it in 1927. There
are several initiatives with the aim of using counter speech to tackle hate speech. For example,
UNESCO released a study [44] titled ‘Countering Online Hate Speech’, to help countries deal
with this problem.
The frameworks for mitigating hate speech using counter speech involves two school of thoughts.
One of them will be to develop fully automatic counter speech generation system, which can
output contextually relevant counter speech given a hate speech. Since generating contextual
replies to a text is still a nascent area in natural language processing, generating counter speech
is expected to be further diﬃcult for AI systems due to the variety of socio-political variables
present in them. Hence, a more practical approach could be to ﬁnd a task force of moderators
who can suitably edit system generated counter speech for large scale use.
One of the earliest computational studies attempted to identify hate and counter users on Twitter
and further observe how they interact in online social media [95]. The authors created a small
dataset of hate-counter reply pairs and observed how diﬀerent communities responded diﬀerently
to the hate speech targeting them. The paper further tried to build a machine learning model to
classify a user as hate or counter. A followup study [96] on YouTube comments was conducted
further to understand how diﬀerent communities attempted to respond to hate speech. Taking
the YouTube videos that contain hateful content toward three target communities: Jews, African-
American (Blacks) and LGBT, the authors collected user comments to create a dataset which
contained counter speech. The dataset is rich since it not only has the counter/non-counter
binary classes but also a detailed ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation of the counter class as described
in [142] with a slight modiﬁcation to the ‘Tone’ Category. The authors observed that the LGBT
community usually responded to hate speech via “humour” whereas the Jew community used
messages with a “positive tone”. The work further adds a classiﬁcation model which can identify
a text as counter speech and its type. The authors in [111] generated a large scale dataset having
hate and their counter replies. They further used this dataset for counter speech generation using
seq2seq models and variational autoencoders. One of the limitations of this paper was that the
counter speech data annotated through crowd-sourcing were very generic in nature. Hence, a
later work [21] took help from experts from and NGO to curate a dataset of counter speech
12

toward Islamophobic statements from the social media. While this dataset provides diverse and
to the point reply to hate speech, it largely depends on the experts availability. These challenges
were compiled in [134], where the authors showed how data collection and counter speech
generation is dependant on the assistance from the experts. The former paper also highlighted
the weakness of the generation models with around 10% of the automatic responses being proper
response to the given hate speech. This reinstates the fact that current generation systems are
not capable of understanding the hidden nuances required to generate proper counter speech.
Another important question that lurks around in the research community is the “eﬀect of counter
speech”. While in the case of banning or suspension the eﬀect, i.e., removal of tweet/user is
visible, the eﬀect of counter speech is rather subjective in nature. In a recent work [47], the
authors used a classiﬁer to identify 100,000 hate-counter speech pairs and found reduction of
hate speech due to the organised counter speech. While whether this solely was caused by the
counter speech or some other reason is still an open question to the research community.
Overall the counter speech research shows promise but has several unanswered questions about
its data collection, execution and eﬀect.
Nevertheless, ﬁghting hate speech in this way has
some beneﬁts: it is faster, more ﬂexible and responsive, capable of dealing with extremism from
anywhere and in any language and it does not form a barrier against the principle of free and
open public space for debate. We hope gradually by using counter speech, it will be slowly
possible to move toward an online world where diﬀerences could exist but not divisions.
Future directions:
Increased polarization seems to be spreading hate speech more. Most of
the current models have been developed for English language. There is a need for larger and
better hate speech datasets for other languages as well. Using transfer learning for improving
the task is another direction. Zero or few shot learning would allow models to be able to build
models for low resource languages. Finally, an orthogonal but very interesting direction is to
understand the complexity of the annotation task itself. Due to the subjective nature of the
task, the perception of hate speech is diﬀerent for people belonging to diﬀerent demographics.
Another important direction is to integrate the detection and counter systems to build an end-
to-end framework for eﬀective hate speech detection and countering mechamism, as shown in
ﬁgure 1.
Counter speech
generation
       AUTOMATIC   
    GENERATION
       USER
        BASED
Feeds 
from social media
Counter 
speech
Filtered 
hate speech
Mitigation Framework
Explanation
Detection 
system
Knowledge
graph
Detection Framework
User 
metadata
Figure 1: An overview of the hate speech framework.
4.2
Bias and fairness
As outlined in the introduction, in this section we shall talk about two types of important biases
(out of many more that dwells in the online world) – bias in news reporting and bias in online
13

recommendation systems.
4.2.1
Media bias
As we hit 53.6% Internet penetration worldwide, compounded by an exponential growth in
the number of social media users in the developing countries fuelled by cheap data-rates and
smartphone-based-accessibility24, the news media continues to play a signiﬁcant role in shaping
political discourse and inﬂuencing national priorities. Of late, while on one hand, it has become
easier to produce news without adequate references, on the other hand, most newsreaders share
news without any veriﬁcation25 [43]. In many instances, even the mainstream media houses
have been accused of copying and distributing news from other media houses with little or no
veriﬁcation 26. While being informed about news from sources other than direct correspondents
is a common practice, distribution of that news without veriﬁcation indeed is a worrying trend.
In many cases, this has led to fake news propagation by the most reputed media moguls. So,
quantifying media bias and deﬁning the abstract idea of bias in this context is an important area
of research.
Genesis: In Manufacturing Consent [60], 1988, Edward Herman & Noam Chomsky saw news
media as the propagandist which will ﬁnd ways to propagate the “ﬁltered” message of the rich
and powerful to the ordinary masses. Sooner or later in any system, they hypothesize that the
news medium will get concentrated in the hands of a few people of power and money and will get
manipulated either by ownership or by ﬁltering out news not beneﬁcial for the people in power.
Following this model, researchers have hypothesized diﬀerent kinds of biases like there have been
numerous studies examining bias in media especially in the US and the European context. While
the term “bias” still remains abstract, some studies have put eﬀorts to make a distinction between
the computational sense of bias and the journalistic sense of the same making it more scientiﬁcally
deﬁnable and quantiﬁable. Journalistic and linguistic studies mostly discuss selection/coverage
bias, conﬁrmation/statement bias [78, 86, 105, 118] and psychological/cognitive biases [15,
112]. Recently, a lot of work is being done where the researchers are interested to formulate a
computational basis for investigating bias. Some works are focused on speciﬁc kinds of bias, such
as gender [11, 89, 152], and race [20]. Politics, in particular, is a widely studied and discussed
topic. Researchers seek to ﬁnd ideological political bias of users in social networks [22, 66, 141],
news media [5, 12, 77, 79, 113] and user comments [114, 148].
D’Alessio and Allen [25]
list three kinds of media bias to be the most widely studied: Coverage/visibility bias [37],
gatekeeping bias/selectivity [61] or selection bias [51] (sometimes referred to as agenda bias [37])
and statement bias/tonality bias/presentation bias [37, 51].
Document level bias in reporting: A news article may choose to cover some aspects of one
news and ﬁlter other aspects to bias the sentiments of the readers toward/against a speciﬁc
political party or interest group. Researchers have annotated such sentiment leanings of news
articles at the article level [70, 12] or the sentence level [85] building document sentiment
prediction models based on the annotated data. Following previous researches on sentiment
prediction of documents [70, 19, 16], dominated by BERT [35] based methods, Longformer [8]
is shown to be the best choice in the prediction of document level bias.
Media bias is topic & demographics dependent: While machine learning models can achieve
24https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/internet/internet-users-in-india-to-reach-627-
million-in-2019-report/articleshow/68288868.cms?from=mdr
25https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2016/06/16/six-in-10-of-you-will-
share-this-link-without-reading-it-according-to-a-new-and-depressing-study/
26http://archiwum.thenews.pl/1/10/Artykul/280476
14

high accuracy in the task of bias detection, the models are not immune to dataset variations.
Inferring media bias is shown to be highly subjective and dependent on the political beliefs of
the annotators [45]. Also, the demographic shift plays a key role. The authors in [23] showed
that simple language variations in the data due to change in point of view (a cross-country
dataset) can have a devastating eﬀect on the media bias classiﬁer. In [45], the authors showed
that the common belief [70] that the bias of the source media house is the bias of any news
article originated from it, does not hold well. Also, media houses tend to show diﬀerent political
bias both by magnitude and polarity for diﬀerent topics (e.g., ABC News and CNN show heavy
liberal bias on Gun issues but exhibit conservative bias on immigration issues) [23].
Source level bias: Predicting the topical/political bias of individual news outlets is as critical
to media proﬁling as determining factuality. With the advent of user-generated content and
exponential rise of digital media, scaling the process of determining media-bias and factuality of
reporting of the media houses has become more and more important as everybody who shares
an article or screenshot of the same of any source is a news provider now. While measuring the
factuality or bias of each news media is a hard task and requires world-knowledge, the prediction
of aggregate factuality or bias of a news media house is relatively straight-forward. Political bias
and factuality of reporting have a linguistic aspect (what was written) along with a social context
(who read it). So, the authors in [6] crawled relevant data from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube
& Wikipedia and studied the impact of diﬀerent metadata extracted from these sources while
classifying the media sources. The evaluation results showed that what was written matters
most, and that putting all information sources together yields huge improvements over the
current state-of-the-art. On the other hand, in [113], the authors studied the demographics of
the US population interested in a media source with a speciﬁc political inclination, using the
Facebook AdSense tool, to understand the leanings of the audience of the news media houses
and reports high accuracy by doing just that. Along with political bias, they were also able
to identify the demographic biases in the consumer population of any media house in a zero-
shot setting (i.e., using no training data). A demo of their application can be found here27.
TIMME [144] supervises a special form of GCNs to identify the political bias of each Twitter
user on annotated data and is able to identify the geographic distribution of Twitter users with
particular bias which correlates well with the voting pattern of American citizens. They were
able to use the same algorithm to identify the bias of each news media house by gathering their
Twitter data.
Future directions: News media is widely cited as the fourth pillar of democracy. While the
health of a democratic institution depends heavily on fair coverage of the institution by the
media houses, studies on how computational media bias is related to the health of democracies
are lacking. Again, most of the studies in media bias are concentrated on two-party systems
and is done on American and European demographics for the English language media while
other democracies also face the same problem deserving similar attention. Further research is
needed to understand the challenges faced in a multi-party system for other languages in diﬀerent
demographics. Also, event space in media changes very rapidly. So, research in an online learning
setup is needed to further enhance the media bias prediction accuracy over time.
4.2.2
Fairness in recommendation
The digital platform is full of choices. To help users make intelligent choices, diﬀerent information
ﬁltering systems are deployed in online platforms. Recommendation systems (RSs) are one such
27https://twitter-app.mpi-sws.org/media-bias-monitor/
15

omnipresent module. From consumers’ perspective, RSs help in ﬁnding useful contents; while
from platforms’ and producers’ perspectives RSs bring revenue and proﬁt [50, 122]. Given the
multi-stakeholder setup and importance of RSs in the livelihood of many of the stakeholders,
recommendation fairness is of utmost importance.
Filter bubble and evolution of fairness in RSs: Traditionally, RSs like other information
ﬁltering systems are keyed to relevance [87, 130].
However, over dependency on relevance
has led to diﬀerential services to diﬀerent users or diﬀerent user groups.
To describe these
eﬀects succinctly, Eli Pariser coined a term ‘ﬁlter bubble’ [107].
The ﬁlter bubble problem
is a concern that personalization technologies, including RSs, narrow and bias the topics of
information provided to people while they do not notice these facts.
To account for these
eﬀects, the ﬁeld of fairness in recommendation ﬁrst evolved as ‘Information Neutrality in RSs’.
Focusing on customer fairness (information neutrality toward customers) Kamishima et.
al.
[67, 68] tried to solve the unfairness issue in RSs by adding a regularization term that enforces
demographic parity 28. Such objectives penalized the diﬀerences among the average predicted
ratings of user groups (based on sensitive attributes, e.g., gender).
However, demographic
parity is only appropriate when preferences are unrelated to the sensitive features.
In tasks
such as recommendation, user preferences are indeed inﬂuenced by sensitive features such as
gender, race, and age [17, 30].
Taking a leaf out of the progresses in fairness literature in
supervised machine learning [57, 99], Yao et. al. [146] put forward fairness notions to bridge the
gap. They formulated diﬀerent customer fairness metric by taking a leaf out of the evolution
of fairness in supervised learning [57] and showed their eﬀectiveness in improving customer
fairness in recommendation [146].
Following their footsteps a number of works focused on
‘group fairness’ in personalized recommendations [153, 38] where ﬁrst they quantiﬁed biases due
to recommendation algorithms toward socially salient groups and proposed methodologies to
mitigate such biases. However, a major drawback of many of these works was their negligence
toward one of the major stakeholder in RSs, i.e., the producer of items/services. This led to a
second school of thought when Burke et. al. [13, 14] ﬁrst advocated for fairness toward both
customers and providers in a recommendation framework. Considering RSs as a two-sided aﬀair
many nuanced algorithms came into existence considering fairness toward both customers and
producers and thus taking a giant step toward a fair marketplace [100, 108, 48].
Auditing RSs: While the fairness community seems to have covered diﬀerent forms of bi-
ases, there is a lack of understanding of the existing online recommendation systems and biases
thereof. Understanding of these systems are especially important today due to the emergence
of diﬀerent private label products (and in-house products) in e-commerce (and OTT) plat-
forms [140, 39, 3]. A private label product is often produced and sold under the retailer’s brand
name, providing enough monetary incentive to the platforms to be discriminative against several
other products (or producers) on the platform. Note that no third party (3P) regulator can
quantify such biases because of the lack of access to the exact underlying algorithms and the
exact user-item interaction details. To enable such 3P audits, in one of our works, we presented
a novel network-based technique that enabled us to extract important parameters for auditing
RSs by considering them as black-boxes [28]. With detailed analysis on three diﬀerent existing
online RSs, we ﬁrst proposed ways to quantify their induced diversity and extent of information
segregation [28]. The usefulness of such a framework is manifold: (a) it sheds light on how
recommendations are formed between items based on diﬀerent item-centric properties, (b) it
can be used as a tool for quantifying and auditing for diﬀerent consumer-focused metrics e.g.,
28Upar = |Eg[y] −E¬g[y]| can be an instantiation of such demographic parity based regularizers [146].
16

Figure 2: The ﬁgure shows the genesis of notions of fairness in recommendation frameworks. In
early 2010, it started with the notion of ‘neutrality in recommendation and by the end of the
decade it has evolved into multi-sided fairness toward building a fair marketplace.
relevance, diversity, information-segregation etc., (c) it can be used to quantify diﬀerent biases
toward the associated producers of diﬀerent items/services, and (d) ﬁnally, it also can be used
as a tool for mitigating the existing biases by re-wiring few of the recommendation edges. In an-
other follow-up work, we analyzed the sponsored recommendation on e-commerce marketplaces
and showed how they are utilized as a trojan-horse to improve sales of products having special
relationship with the marketplace (e.g., private label products) [27]. Given that sponsored rec-
ommendations potentially have delayed impact on their organic counterparts (by aﬀecting the
sales and visibility of products), such studies open up a completely new avenue of research.
Future directions: While the fairness community seems to have covered diﬀerent forms of
biases in recommendation frameworks, it has overlooked the special relationships that may exist
between the digital marketplace and a subset of stakeholders, and the biases thereof. Hence,
studies of unfairness discovery and mitigation considering the special relationships of platforms
remain an under-explored avenue of research till date. The introduction of sponsored search and
recommendations complicates the scenario even further. Policies that allow sponsored results to
deviate from organic results; while adhering to fairness of marketplace can be another interesting
broad direction for further research.
5
Conclusion
In this survey we have presented a critical rundown on the evolution of the online infosphere by
depicting some of the research areas that are becoming very crucial at current times. We started
our discussion with a view of the infosphere as a collaborative platform, with a dedicated focus
on Wikipedia. Wikipedia, the freely available and one of the largest knowledge base, containing
a wide variety of information has been a primary focus of an extensive research so far. In this
survey we have presented a detailed account of the works on article quality monitoring, editor
behaviour and their retention and malicious activities like vandalism.
In the next section we have detailed the growth of the citations and collaborations within and
across various scientiﬁc disciplines that have their roots in the infosphere.
In fact, this has
17

resulted in the birth of many new interdisciplinary landscapes. We also discussed how machine
learning algorithms can be used to predict future citations as well as for recommending citations.
Finally we touched upon various issues related to anomalous citation ﬂows and their behaviour.
Finally, we summarised the research drives for patrolling the infosphere to suppress the rising
volume of harmful content. The discussion started with analyzing the concept of hate speech
and its growth over the past few years through the online social media platforms and the adverse
impact, thereby, on both the online and the real world. We have shown the massive eﬀorts
the research community have put forward in detection and mitigation of such hateful behaviour.
However, a lot of issues still remain as open problems and need immediate attention. We observed
dense connectivity in the hateful users network by crawling Gab platform and analyzing their data
and found that a signiﬁcant amount of posts are generated by these hateful users in social media
platforms. Additionally, we studied the temporal eﬀect of hate speech on the users by using the
Gab data and found the increasing rate of hateful users in the social network. After skimming
through the recent literature we have pointed out that by incorporating knowledge based context
information for a given post improves the overall performance of hatespeech detection rather
than by analyzing only the textual information.
Apart from that we have observed that by
adding the user information of a given post can be further analyzed to improve the hatespeech
detection task. The last segment of the discussion dealt with the bias and discrimination that are
becoming pervasive across diﬀerent online environments like recommendation and news media
platforms.
To conclude, the above mentioned research aspects related to the online infosphere have at-
tracted a lot of attention across the board including scientiﬁc communities, industry stakeholders
and policy-makers. This paper discusses the technical challenges and possible solutions in a direc-
tion that utilizes the immense power of AI for solving real world problems but also considers the
societal implications of these solutions. As a ﬁnal note, we could see that the problems related
to the anomalies in scientiﬁc collaborations and citations, hate speech detection and mitigation
in social media and the bias and unfairness in news media and recommendation systems have a
lot of open ends thus enabling exciting opportunities for future research.
