One-Shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
Danilo J. Rezende*

Shakir Mohamed*

Ivo Danihelka

Karol Gregor

Daan Wierstra

Google DeepMind, London
Abstract
Humans have an impressive ability to reason
about new concepts and experiences from just a
single example. In particular, humans have an
ability for one-shot generalization: an ability to
encounter a new concept, understand its struc-
ture, and then be able to generate compelling
alternative variations of the concept.
We de-
velop machine learning systems with this im-
portant capacity by developing new deep gen-
erative models, models that combine the repre-
sentational power of deep learning with the in-
ferential power of Bayesian reasoning. We de-
velop a class of sequential generative models that
are built on the principles of feedback and atten-
tion. These two characteristics lead to genera-
tive models that are among the state-of-the art
in density estimation and image generation. We
demonstrate the one-shot generalization ability
of our models using three tasks: unconditional
sampling, generating new exemplars of a given
concept, and generating new exemplars of a fam-
ily of concepts. In all cases our models are able
to generate compelling and diverse samples—
having seen new examples just once—providing
an important class of general-purpose models for
one-shot machine learning.
1. Introduction
Figure 1. Given the ﬁrst
row, our model gener-
ates new exemplars.
Consider the images in the red
box in ﬁgure 1.
We see each
of these new concepts just once,
understand their structure, and
are then able to imagine and
generate compelling alternative
variations of each concept, sim-
ilar to those drawn in the rows
beneath the red box. This is an
*Equal contributions. Proceedings of the 33 rd International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR:
W&CP volume 48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).
ability that humans have for one-shot generalization: an
ability to generalize to new concepts given just one or a few
examples. In this paper, we develop new models that pos-
sess this capacity for one-shot generalization—models that
allow for one-shot reasoning from the data streams we are
likely to encounter in practice, that use only limited forms
of domain-speciﬁc knowledge, and that can be applied to
diverse sets of problems.
There are two notable approaches that incorporate one-shot
generalization.
Salakhutdinov et al. (2013) developed a
probabilistic model that combines a deep Boltzmann ma-
chine with a hierarchical Dirichlet process to learn hierar-
chies of concept categories as well as provide a powerful
generative model. Recently, Lake et al. (2015) presented
a compelling demonstration of the ability of probabilistic
models to perform one-shot generalization, using Bayesian
program learning, which is able to learn a hierarchical,
non-parametric generative model of handwritten charac-
ters. Their approach incorporates speciﬁc knowledge of
how strokes are formed and the ways in which they are
combined to produce characters of different types, exploit-
ing similar strategies used by humans. Lake et al. (2015)
see the capacity for one-shot generalization demonstrated
by Bayesian programming learning ‘as a challenge for neu-
ral models’. By combining the representational power of
deep neural networks embedded within hierarchical latent
variable models, with the inferential power of approximate
Bayesian reasoning, we show that this is a challenge that
can be overcome. The resulting deep generative models are
general-purpose image models that are accurate and scal-
able, among the state-of-the-art, and possess the important
capacity for one-shot generalization.
Deep generative models are a rich class of models for den-
sity estimation that specify a generative process for ob-
served data using a hierarchy of latent variables. Models
that are directed graphical models have risen in popular-
ity and include discrete latent variable models such as sig-
moid belief networks and deep auto-regressive networks
(Saul et al., 1996; Gregor et al., 2014), or continuous la-
tent variable models such as non-linear Gaussian belief net-
works and deep latent Gaussian models (Rezende et al.,
arXiv:1603.05106v2  [stat.ML]  25 May 2016

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014). These models use deep
networks in the speciﬁcation of their conditional proba-
bility distributions to allow rich non-linear structure to be
learned. Such models have been shown to have a num-
ber of desirable properties: inference of the latent vari-
ables allows us to provide a causal explanation for the
data that can be used to explore its underlying factors of
variation and for exploratory analysis; analogical reason-
ing between two related concepts, e.g., styles and identi-
ties of images, is naturally possible; any missing data can
be imputed by treating them as additional latent variables,
capturing the the full range of correlation between miss-
ing entries under any missingness pattern; these models
embody minimum description length principles and can
be used for compression; these models can be used to
learn environment-simulators enabling a wide range of ap-
proaches for simulation-based planning.
Two principles are central to our approach: feedback and
attention. These principles allow the models we develop to
reﬂect the principles of analysis-by-synthesis, in which the
analysis of observed information is continually integrated
with constructed interpretations of it (Yuille & Kersten,
2006; Erdogan et al., 2015; Nair et al., 2008). Analysis
is realized by attentional mechanisms that allow us to se-
lectively process and route information from the observed
data into the model. Interpretations of the data are then ob-
tained by sets of latent variables that are inferred sequen-
tially to evaluate the probability of the data. The aim of
such a construction is to introduce internal feedback into
the model that allows for a ‘thinking time’ during which
information can be extracted from each data point more
effectively, leading to improved inference, generation and
generalization. We shall refer to such models as sequen-
tial generative models. Models such as DRAW (Gregor
et al., 2015), composited variational auto-encoders (Huang
& Murphy, 2015) and AIR (Eslami et al., 2016) are exist-
ing models in this class, and we will develop a general class
of sequential generative models that incorporates these and
other latent variable models and variational auto-encoders.
Our contributions are:
• We develop sequential generative models that provide a
generalization of existing approaches, allowing for se-
quential generation and inference, multi-modal posterior
approximations, and a rich new class of deep generative
models.
• We demonstrate the clear improvement that the combi-
nation of attentional mechanisms in more powerful mod-
els and inference has in advancing the state-of-the-art in
deep generative models.
• Importantly, we show that our generative models have
the ability to perform one-shot generalization. We ex-
plore three generalization tasks and show that our mod-
els can imagine and generate compelling alternative vari-
ations of images after having seen them just once.
2. Varieties of Attention
Attending to parts of a scene, ignoring others, analyzing
the parts that we focus on, and sequentially building up
an interpretation and understanding of a scene: these are
natural parts of human cognition. This is so successful a
strategy for reasoning that it is now also an important part
of many machine learning systems. This repeated process
of attention and interpretation, analysis and synthesis, is an
important component of the generative models we develop.
In its most general form, any mechanism that allows us to
selectively route information from one part of our model
to another can be regarded as an attentional mechanism.
Attention allows for a wide range of invariances to be
incorporated, with few additional parameters and low
computational cost. Attention has been most widely used
for classiﬁcation tasks, having been shown to improve both
scalability and generalization (Larochelle & Hinton, 2010;
Chikkerur et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2015; Jaderberg et al.,
2015; Mnih et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2015). The attention
used in discriminative tasks is a ‘reading’ attention that
transforms an image into a representation in a canonical
coordinate space (that is typically lower dimensional), with
the parameters controlling the attention learned by gradient
descent. Attention in unsupervised learning is much more
recent (Tang et al., 2014; Gregor et al., 2015). In latent
variable models, we have two processes—inference and
generation—that can both use attention, though in slightly
different ways.
The generative process makes use of
a writing or generative attention, which implements a
selective updating of the output variables, e.g., updating
only a small part of the generated image. The inference
process makes use of reading attention, like that used in
classiﬁcation. Although conceptually different, both these
forms of attention can be implemented with the same
computational tools. We focus on image modelling and
make use of spatial attention. Two other types of attention,
randomized and error-based, are discussed in appendix B.
Spatially-transformed attention.
Rather than select-
ing a patch of an image (taking glimpses) as other methods
do, a more powerful approach is to use a mechanism that
provides invariance to shape and size of objects in the
images (general afﬁne transformations). Tang et al. (2014)
take such an approach and use 2D similarity transforms
to provide basic afﬁne invariance.
Spatial transformers
(Jaderberg et al., 2015) are a more general method for
providing such invariance, and is our preferred attentional
mechanism.
Spatial transformers (ST) process an input
image x using parameters λ to generate an output:
ST(x, λ) = [κh(λ) ⊗κw(λ)] ∗x,
where κh and κw are 1-dimensional kernels, ⊗indicates
the tensor outer-product of the two kernels and ∗indicates
a convolution. Huang & Murphy (2015) develop occlusion-

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
aware generative models that make use of spatial trans-
formers in this way. When used for reading attention, spa-
tial transformers allow the model to observe the input im-
age in a canonical form, providing the desired invariance.
When used for writing attention, it allows the generative
model to independently handle position, scale and rotation
of parts of the generated image, as well as their content.
An direct extension is to use multiple attention windows
simultaneously (see appendix).
3. Iterative and Attentive Generative Models
3.1. Latent Variable Models and Variational Inference
Generative models with latent variables describe the proba-
bilistic process by which an observed data point can be gen-
erated. The simplest formulations such as PCA and factor
analysis use Gaussian latent variables z that are combined
linearly to generate Gaussian distributed data points x. In
more complex models, the probabilistic description con-
sists of a hierarchy of L layers of latent variables, where
each layer depends on the layer above in a non-linear way
(Rezende et al., 2014). For deep generative models, we
specify this non-linear dependency using deep neural net-
works. To compute the marginal probability of the data, we
must integrate over any unobserved variables:
p(x) =
Z
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz
(1)
In deep latent Gaussian models, the prior distribution
p(z) is a Gaussian distribution and the likelihood function
pθ(x|z) is any distribution that is appropriate for the ob-
served data, such as a Gaussian, Bernoulli, categorical or
other distribution, and that is dependent in a non-linear way
on the latent variables. For most models, the marginal like-
lihood (1) is intractable and we must instead approximate
it. One popular approximation technique is based on vari-
ational inference (Jordan et al., 1999), which transforms
the difﬁcult integration into an optimization problem that
is typically more scalable and easier to solve. Using vari-
ational inference we can approximate the marginal likeli-
hood by a lower bound, which is the objective function we
use for optimization:
F = Eq(z|x)[log pθ(x|z)] −KL[qφ(z|x)∥p(z)]
(2)
The objective function (2) is the negative free energy,
which allows us to trade-off the reconstruction ability of the
model (ﬁrst term) against the complexity of the posterior
distribution (second term). Variational inference approxi-
mates the true posterior distribution by a known family of
approximating posteriors qφ(z|x) with variational param-
eters φ. Learning now involves optimization of the varia-
tional parameters φ and model parameters θ.
Instead of optimization by the variational EM algorithm,
we take an amortized inference approach and represent the
distribution q(z|x) as a recognition or inference model,
which we also parameterize using a deep neural network.
Inference models amortize the cost of posterior inference
and makes it more efﬁcient by allowing for generalization
across the inference computations using a set of global vari-
ational parameters φ. In this framework, we can think of
the generative model as a decoder of the latent variables,
and the inference model as its inverse, an encoder of the ob-
served data into the latent description. As a result, this spe-
ciﬁc combination of deep latent variable model (typically
latent Gaussian) with variational inference that is imple-
mented using an inference model is referred to as a varia-
tional auto-encoder (VAE). VAEs allow for a single compu-
tational graph to be constructed and straightforward gradi-
ent computations: when the latent variables are continuous,
gradient estimators based on pathwise derivative estimators
are used (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Burda et al., 20) and when they are discrete, score func-
tion estimators are used (Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Ranganath
et al., 2014; Mansimov et al., 2016).
3.2. Sequential Generative Models
The generative models as we have described them thus
far can be characterized as single-step models, since they
are models of i.i.d data that evaluate their likelihood func-
tions by transforming the latent variables using a non-
linear, feed-forward transformation. A sequential genera-
tive model is a natural extension of the latent variable mod-
els used in VAEs. Instead of generating the K latent vari-
ables of the model in one step, these models sequentially
generate T groups of k latent variables (K = kT), i.e. us-
ing T computational steps to allow later groups of latent
variables to depend on previously generated latent variables
in a non-linear way.
3.2.1. GENERATIVE MODEL
In their most general form, sequential generative models
describe the observed data over T time steps using a set of
latent variables zt at each step. The generative model is
shown in the stochastic computational graph of ﬁgure 2(a),
and described by:
Latent variables
zt ∼
N(zt|0, I) t = 1, . . . , T (3)
Context
vt =
fv(ht−1, x′; θv)
(4)
Hidden state
ht =
fh(ht−1, zt, vt; θh)
(5)
Hidden Canvas
ct =
fc(ct−1, ht; θc)
(6)
Observation
x ∼
p(x|fo(cT ; θo))
(7)
Each step generates an independent set of K-dimensional
latent variables zt (equation (3)).
If we wish to condi-
tion the model on an external context or piece of side-
information x′, then a deterministic function fv (equation
(4)) is used to read the context-images using an attentional
mechanism. A deterministic transition function fh intro-
duces the sequential dependency between each of the la-
tent variables, incorporating the context if it exists (equa-
tion (5)). This allows any transition mechanism to be used

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
x
ct−1
zt−1
ht−1
A
…
…
fw
fc
A
fw
fo
hT
cT
Generative model
zT
A
ht−1
x
zt
fr
Inference model
(a) Unconditional generative model.
x
A
fw
fo
hT
cT
x’
hT −1
A
Generative model
zT
A
ht−1
x
fr
x’
A
zt
Inference model
(b) One-step of the conditional generative model.
Figure 2. Stochastic computational graph showing conditional probabilities and computational steps for sequential generative models.
A represents an attentional mechanism that uses function fw for writings and function fr for reading.
and our transition is speciﬁed as a long short-term mem-
ory network (LSTM, Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997).
We explicitly represent the creation of a set of hidden vari-
ables ct that is a hidden canvas of the model (equation (6)).
The canvas function fc allows for many different trans-
formations, and it is here where generative (writing) at-
tention is used; we describe a number of choices for this
function in section 3.2.3. The generated image (7) is sam-
pled using an observation function fo(c; θo) that maps the
last hidden canvas cT to the parameters of the observation
model. The set of all parameters of the generative model is
θ = {θh, θc, θo}.
3.2.2. FREE ENERGY OBJECTIVE
Given the probabilistic model (3)-(7) we can obtain an ob-
jective function for inference and parameter learning using
variational inference. By applying the variational principle,
we obtain the free energy objective:
log p(x) = log
R
p(x|z1:T )p(z1:T )dz1:T ≥F
F = Eq(z1:T )[log pθ(x|z1:T )]
−PT
t=1 KL[qφ(zt|z<tx)∥p(zt)],
(8)
where z<t indicates the collection of all latent variables
from step 1 to t −1. We can now optimize this objec-
tive function for the variational parameters φ and the model
parameters θ, by stochastic gradient descent using a mini-
batch of data. As with other VAEs, we use a single sample
of the latent variables generated from qφ(z|x) when com-
puting the Monte Carlo gradient. To complete our speciﬁ-
cation, we now specify the hidden-canvas functions fc and
the approximate posterior distribution qφ(zt).
3.2.3. HIDDEN CANVAS FUNCTIONS
The canvas transition function fc(ct−1, ht; θc) (6) updates
the hidden canvas by ﬁrst non-linearly transforming the
current hidden state of the LSTM ht (using a function fw)
and fuses the result with the existing canvas ct−1. In this
work we use hidden canvases that have the same size as
the original images, though they could be either larger or
smaller in size and can have any number of channels (four
in this paper). We consider two ways with which to update
the hidden canvas:
Additive Canvas. As the name implies, an additive canvas
updates the canvas by simply adding a transformation of the
hidden state fw(ht; θc) to the previous canvas state ct−1.
This is a simple, yet effective (see results) update rule:
fc(ct−1, ht; θc) = ct−1 + fw(ht; θc),
(9)
Gated Recurrent Canvas. The canvas function can be up-
dated using a convolutional gated recurrent unit (CGRU)
architecture (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015), which provides a
non-linear and recursive updating mechanism for the can-
vas and are simpliﬁed versions of convolutional LSTMs
(further details of the CGRU are given in appendix B). The
canvas update is:
fc(ct−1, ht; θc) = CGRU(ct−1 + fw(ht; θc))
(10)
In both cases, the function fw(ht; θw) is a writing or gen-
erative attention function, that we implement as a spatial
transformer; inputs to the spatial transformer are its afﬁne
parameters and a 10 × 10 image to be transformed, both of
which are provided by the LSTM output.
The ﬁnal phase of the generative process transforms the
hidden canvas at the last time step cT into the parameters of
the likelihood function using the output function fo(c; θo).
Since we use a hidden canvas that is the same size as the
original images but that have a different number of ﬁlters,
we implement the output function as a 1 × 1 convolution.
When the hidden canvas has a different size, a convolu-
tional network is used instead.
3.2.4. DEPENDENT POSTERIOR INFERENCE
We use a structured posterior approximation that has an
auto-regressive form, i.e. q(zt|z<t, x). We implement this
distribution as an inference network parameterized by a
deep network. The speciﬁc form we use is:
Sprite
rt = fr(x, ht−1; φr)
(11)
Sample zt ∼N(zt|µ(st,ht−1;φµ),σ(rt,ht−1; φσ)) (12)

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
At every step of computation, we form a low-dimensional
representation rt of the input image using a non-linear
transformation fr of the input image and the hidden state
of the model.This function is reading or recognition atten-
tion using a spatial transformer, whose afﬁne parameters
are given by the LSTM output. The result of reading is a
sprite rt that is then combined with the previous state ht−1
through a further non-linear function to produce the mean
µt and variance σt of a K-dimensional diagonal Gaussian
distribution. We denote all the parameters of the inference
model by φ = {φr, φµ, φσ}. Although the conditional dis-
tributions q(zt|z<t) are Gaussian, the joint posterior pos-
terior p(z1:T ) = Q
t p(zt|z<t) is non-Gaussian and multi-
modal due to the non-linearities used, enabling more accu-
rate inference.
3.2.5. MODEL PROPERTIES AND COMPLEXITY
The above sequential generative model and inference is a
generalization of existing models such as DRAW (Gregor
et al., 2015) , composited VAEs (Huang & Murphy, 2015)
and AIR (Eslami et al., 2016). This generalization has a
number of differences and important properties. One of the
largest deviations is the introduction of the hidden canvas
into the generative model that provides an important rich-
ness to the model, since it allows a pre-image to be con-
structed in a hidden space before a ﬁnal corrective trans-
formation, using the function fo, is used. The generative
process has an important property that allows the model be
sampled without feeding-back the results of the canvas ct
to the hidden state ht—such a connection is not needed
and provides more efﬁciency by reducing the number of
model parameters. The inference network in our frame-
work is also similarly simpliﬁed. We do not use a sepa-
rate recurrent function within the inference network (like
DRAW), but instead share parameters of the LSTM from
the prior—the removal of this additional recursive function
has no effect on performance.
Another important difference between our framework and
existing frameworks is the type of attention that is used.
Gregor et al. (2015) use a generative attention based on
Gaussian convolutions parameterized by a location and
scale, and Tang et al. (2014) use 2D similarity transforma-
tions. We use a much more powerful and general attention
mechanism based on spatial transformers (Jaderberg et al.,
2015; Huang & Murphy, 2015).
The overall complexity of the algorithm described matches
the typical complexity of widely-used methods in deep
learning. For images of size I × I, the spatial transformer
has a complexity that is linear in the number of pixels
of the attention window. For a J × J attention window,
with J ≤I, the spatial transformer has a complexity of
O(NTJ2), for T sequential steps and N data points. All
other components have the standard quadratic complexity
in the layer size, hence for L layers with average size D,
this gives a complexity of O(NLD2).
4. Image Generation and Analysis
We ﬁrst show that our models are state-of-the-art, obtain-
ing highly competitive likelihoods, and are able to generate
high-quality samples across a wide range of data sets with
different characteristics.
For all our experiments, our data consists of binary images
and we use use a Bernoulli likelihood to model the proba-
bility of the pixels. In all models we use 400 LSTM hidden
units. We use 12 × 12 kernels for the spatial transformer,
whether used for recognition or generative attention. The
latent variable zt are 4-dimensional Gaussian distributions
and we use a number of steps that vary from 20-80. The
hidden canvas has dimensions that are the size of the im-
ages with four channels. We present the main results here
and any additional results in Appendix A. All the mod-
els were trained for approximatively 800K iterations with
mini-batches of size 24. The reported likelihood bounds
for the training set are computed by averaging the last 1K
iterations during training. The reported likelihood bounds
for the test set were computed by averaging the bound for
24, 000 random samples (sampled with replacement) and
the error bars are the standard-deviations of the mean.
4.1. MNIST and Multi-MNIST
We highlight the behaviour of the models using two data
sets based on the MNIST benchmark.
The ﬁrst experi-
ment uses the binarized MNIST data set of Salakhutdinov
& Murray (2008), that consists of 28 × 28 binary images
with 50,000 training and 10,000 test images. Table 1 com-
pares the log-likelihoods on this binarized MNIST data set
using existing models, as well as the models developed in
this paper (with variances of our estimates in parentheses).
The sequential generative model that uses the spatially-
transformed attention with the CGRU hidden canvas pro-
vides the best performance among existing work on this
data set. We show samples from the model in ﬁgure 3.
We form a multi-MNIST data set of 64 × 64 images that
consists of two MNIST digits placed at random locations in
the image (having adapted the cluttered MNIST generator
from Mnih et al. (2014) to procedurally generate the data).
We compare the performance in table 2 and show samples
from this model in ﬁgure 3. This data set is much harder
than MNIST to learn, with much slower convergence. The
additive canvas with spatially-transformed attention pro-
vides a reliable way to learn from this data.
Importance of each step
These results also indicate that longer sequences can lead
to better performance. Every step taken by the model adds
a term to the objective function (2) corresponding to the
KL-divergence between the prior distribution and the con-

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
Table 1. Test set negative log-likelihood on MNIST.
Model
Test NLL
From Gregor et al. (2015) and Burda et al. (20)
DBM 2hl
≈84.62
DBN 2hl
≈84.55
NADE
88.33
DLGM-VAE
≈86.60
VAE + HVI/Norm Flow
≈85.10
DARN
≈84.13
DRAW (64 steps, no attention)
≤87.40
DRAW (64 steps, Gaussian attention)
≤80.97
IWAE (2 layers; 50 particles )
≈82.90
Sequential generative models
Attention
Canvas
Steps
Train
Test NLL
Spatial tr.
CGRU
80
78.5
≤80.5(0.3)
Spatial tr.
Additive
80
80.1
≤81.6(0.4)
Spatial tr.
CGRU
30
80.1
≤81.5(0.4)
Spatial tr.
Additive
30
79.1
≤82.6(0.5)
Fully conn.
CGRU
80
80.0
≤98.7(0.8)
Figure 3. Generated samples for MNIST. For a video of the gen-
eration process, see https://youtu.be/ptLdYd8FXRA
tribution to the approximate posterior distribution at that
step.
Figure 4 shows the KL-divergence for each itera-
tion for two models on MNIST up to 20 steps. The KL-
divergence decays towards the end of the sequence, indi-
cating that the latent variables zt have diminishing contri-
bution to the model as the number of steps grow. Unlike
VAEs where we often ﬁnd that there are many dimensions
which contribute little to the likelihood bound, the sequen-
tial property allows us to more efﬁciently allocate and de-
cide on the number of latent variables to use and means of
deciding when to terminate the sequential computation.
4.2. Omniglot
Unlike MNIST, which has a small number of classes with
many images of each class and a large amount of data, the
omniglot data set (Lake et al., 2015) consists of 105 × 105
binary images across 1628 classes with just 20 images per
class. This data set allows us to demonstrate that attentional
mechanisms and better generative models allow us to per-
form well even in regimes with larger images and limited
amounts of data.
There are two versions of the omniglot data that have been
previously used for the evaluation of generative models.
One data set used by Burda et al. (20) consists of 28 × 28
images, but is different to that of Lake et al. (2015). We
compare the available methods on the dataset from Burda
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
1
2
3
4
5
10
15
20
Steps
KLD (nats)
G
G
ST+CGRU
ST+Additive
Figure 4. Per-step KL contri-
bution on MNIST.
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
30x20
40x10
45x5
Data split
Bound (nats)
train
test
Figure 5. Gap between train
and test bound on omniglot.
Table 2. Train and test NLL bounds on 64 × 64 Multi-MNIST.
Att
CT
Steps
Train
Test
Multi-ST
Additive
80
177.2
176.9(0.5)
Spatial tr.
Additive
80
183.0
182.0(0.6)
Spatial tr.
CGRU
80
196.0
194.9(0.5)
Fully conn.
CGRU
80
272.0
270.3(0.8)
et al. (20) in table 3 and ﬁnd that the sequential models
perform better than all competing approaches, further es-
tablishing the effectiveness of these models. Our second
evaluation uses the dataset of Lake et al. (2015), which we
downsampled to 52 × 52 using a 2 × 2 max-pooling. We
compare different sequential models in table 4 and again
ﬁnd that spatially-transformed attention is a powerful gen-
eral purpose attention and that the additive hidden canvas
performs best.
4.3. Multi-PIE
The Multi-PIE dataset (Gross et al., 2010) consists of
48 × 48 RGB face images from various viewpoints. We
have converted the images to grayscale and trained our
model on a subset comprising of all 15-viewpoints but only
3 out of the 19 illumination conditions. Our simpliﬁcation
results in 93, 130 training samples and 10, 000 test sam-
ples. Samples from this model are shown in ﬁgure 7 and
are highly compelling, showing faces in different orienta-
tions, different genders and are representative of the data.
The model was trained using the logit-normal likelihood as
in Rezende & Mohamed (2015).
5. One-Shot Generalization
Lake et al. (2015) introduce three tasks to evaluate one-shot
generalization, testing weaker to stronger forms of gener-
alization. The three tasks are: (1) unconditional (free) gen-
eration, (2) generation of novel variations of a given ex-
emplar, and (3) generation of representative samples from
a novel alphabet. Lake et al. (2015) conduct human eval-
uations as part of their assessment, which is important in
contrasting the performance of models against the cogni-
tive ability of humans; we do not conduct human bench-
marks in this paper (human evaluation will form part of our
follow-up work). Our focus is on the machine learning of
one-shot generalization and the computational challenges
associated with this task.

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
Figure 6. Generated samples for multi-MNIST. For a video
of the generation process, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
HkDxmnIfWIM
Table 3. NLL on the 28 × 28 omniglot data.
Model
Test NLL
From Burda et al. (20)
VAE (2 layer, 5 samples)
106.31
IWAE (2 layer, 50 samples)
103.38
RBM (500 hidden)
100.46
Seq Gen Model (20 steps, ST, additive)
≤96.5
Seq Gen Model (80 steps, ST, additive)
≤95.5
1. Unconditional Generation.
This is the same generation task reported for the data sets
in the previous section. Figure 8 shows samples that reﬂect
the characteristics of the omniglot data, showing a variety
of styles including rounded patterns, line segments, thick
and thin strokes that are representative of the data set. The
likelihoods reported in tables 3 and 4 quantitatively estab-
lish this model as among the state-of-the-art.
2. Novel variations of a given exemplar.
This task corresponds to ﬁgure 5 in Lake et al. (2015)). At
test time, the model is presented with a character of a type
it has never seen before (was not part of its training set),
and asked to generate novel variations of this character.
To do this, we use a conditional generative model (ﬁgure
2(b), equation (4)). The context x′ is the image that we
wish the model to generate new exemplars of. To expose
the boundaries of our approach, we test this under weak
and strong one-shot generalization tests:
a) We use a data set whose training data consists of all
available alphabets, but for which three character types
from each alphabet have been removed to form the test
set (3000 characters). This is a weak one-shot general-
ization test where, although the model has never seen
the test set characters, it has seen related characters
from the same alphabet and is expected to transfer that
knowledge to this generation task.
b) We use exactly the data split used by Lake et al. (2015),
which consists of 30 alphabets as the training set and
the remaining 20 alphabets as the test set. This is a
strong one-shot generalization test, since the model has
seen neither the test character nor any alphabets from
its family. This is a hard test for our model, since this
split provides limited training data, making overﬁtting
easier, and generalization harder.
c) We use two alternative training-test split of the data, a
Table 4. Train and test NLL bounds on 52 × 52 omniglot
Att
CT
Steps
Train
Test
Multi-ST
CGRU
80
120.6
134.1(0.5)
Spatial tr.
Additive
40
128.7
136.1(0.4)
Spatial tr.
Additive
80
134.6
141.5(0.5)
Spatial tr.
CGRU
80
141.6
144.5(0.4)
Fully conn.
CGRU
80
170.0
351.5(1.2)
Figure 7. Generated samples for Multi-PIE using the model with
Spatial Transformer + additive canvas (32 steps). For a video of
the generation process including the boundaries of the writing at-
tention grid, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6S6Tx_OtvnA
40-10 and 45-5 split. We can examine the spectrum of
difﬁculty of the previous one-shot generalization task
by considering these alternative splits.
We show the model’s performance on the weak generaliza-
tion test in ﬁgure 9, where the ﬁrst row shows the exemplar
image, and the subsequent rows show the variations of that
image generated by the model. We show generations for
the strong generalization test in ﬁgure 10. Our model also
generates visually similar and reasonable variations of the
image in this case. Unlike the model of Lake et al. (2015),
which uses human stroke information and a model struc-
tured around the way in which humans draw images, our
model is applicable to any image data, with the only do-
main speciﬁc information that is used being that the data
is spatially arranged (which is exploited by the convolution
and attention). This test also exposes the difﬁculty that the
model has in coping with small amounts of data. We com-
pare the difference between train and test log-likelihoods
for the various data splits in ﬁgure 5. We see that there is
a small gap between the training and test likelihoods in the
regime where we have more data (45-5 split) indicating no
overﬁtting. There is a large gap for the other splits, hence
a greater tendency for overﬁtting in the low data regime.
An interesting observation is that even for the cases where
there is a large gap between train and test likelihood bounds
(ﬁgure 5), the examples generated by the model (ﬁgure 10,
left and middle) still generalize to unseen character classes.
Data-efﬁciency is an important challenge for the large para-
metric models that we use and one we hope to address in
future.

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
Figure 8. Unconditional samples for 52 × 52 omniglot (task 1).
For a video of the generation process, see https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=HQEI2xfTgm4
Figure 9. Generating new examplars of a given character for the
weak generalization test (task 2a). The ﬁrst row shows the test
images and the next 10 are one-shot samples from the model.
3. Representative samples from a novel alphabet.
This task corresponds to ﬁgure 7 in Lake et al. (2015), and
conditions the model on anywhere between 1 to 10 samples
of a novel alphabet and asks the model to generate new
characters consistent with this novel alphabet. We show
here the hardest form of this test, using only 1 context im-
age. This test is highly subjective, but the model genera-
tions in ﬁgure 11 show that it is able to pick up common
features and use them in the generations.
We have emphasized the usefulness of deep generative
models as scalable, general-purpose tools for probabilistic
reasoning that have the important property of one-shot gen-
eralization. But, these models do have limitations. We have
already pointed to the need for reasonable amounts of data.
Another important consideration is that, while our models
can perform one-shot generalization, they do not perform
one-shot learning. One-shot learning requires that a model
is updated after the presentation of each new input, e.g.,
like the non-parametric models used by Lake et al. (2015)
or Salakhutdinov et al. (2013). Parametric models such as
ours require a gradient update of the parameters, which we
do not do. Instead, our model performs a type of one-shot
inference that during test time can perform inferential tasks
on new data points, such as missing data completion, new
exemplar generation, or analogical sampling, but does not
learn from these points. This distinction between one-shot
learning and inference is important and affects how such
models can be used. We aim to extend our approach to the
online and one-shot learning setting in future.
30-20
40-10
45-5
Figure 10. Generating new examplars of a given character for the
strong generalization test (task 2b,c), with models trained with
different amounts of data. Left: Samples from model trained on
30-20 train-test split; Middle: 40-10 split; Right: 45-5 split (right)
Figure 11. Generating new exemplars from a novel alphabet (task
3). The ﬁrst row shows the test images, and the next 10 rows are
one-shot samples generated by the model.
6. Conclusion
We have developed a new class of general-purpose mod-
els that have the ability to perform one-shot generalization,
emulating an important characteristic of human cognition.
Sequential generative models are natural extensions of vari-
ational auto-encoders and provide state-of-the-art models
for deep density estimation and image generation.
The
models specify a sequential process over groups of latent
variables that allows it to compute the probability of data
points over a number of steps, using the principles of feed-
back and attention. The use of spatial attention mechanisms
substantially improves the ability of the model to general-
ize. The spatial transformer is a highly ﬂexible attention
mechanism for both reading and writing, and is now our
default mechanism for attention in generative models. We
highlighted the one-shot generalization ability of the model
over a range of tasks that showed that the model is able to
generate compelling and diverse samples, having seen new
examples just once. However there are limitations of this
approach, e.g., still needing a reasonable amount of data to
avoid overﬁtting, which we hope to address in future work.

One-shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models
