arXiv:1103.4515v1  [cs.LO]  23 Mar 2011
Real Islamic Logic
Jan Aldert Bergstra
University of Amsterdam1
(November 26, 2024)
Abstract
Four options for assigning a meaning to Islamic Logic are surveyed including a
new proposal for an option named Real Islamic Logic (RIL). That approach to
Islamic Logic should serve modern Islamic objectives in a way comparable to the
functionality of Islamic Finance.
The prospective role of RIL is analyzed from several perspectives: (i) parallel
distributed systems design, (ii) reception by a community structured audience, (iii)
informal logic and applied non-classical logics, and (iv) (in)tractability and artiﬁcial
intelligence.
1
Introduction
Islamic Logic is often used as a label for Arabic logic which ﬂourished between 900 and
1500. Indeed a rich literature on logic and philosophy has been produced which merits
descriptions like Arabic Logic, Arabic School of Logic, and perhaps less plausible Islamic
Logic. Many scholarly works have been written about that period and aspect of Arabic
culture as well including the reception of Aristotelian logic.
Using Islamic Logic primarily as a pointer to a part of the history of logic is in marked
contrast with the common usage of the phrase “Islamic Finance”, nowadays mainly per-
ceived as an indication for a modern and thriving phenomenon which must not be under-
stood through its centuries old historic roots but instead should preferably be understood
as a form of Jihad.2
Consequential to the reception of Aristotelian logic, the logic of syllogisms has been
criticized by Islamic scholars. The ample existence of this criticism may lead one to believe
that Islam has been and perhaps still is rather pessimistic about logic.3 That far reaching
1Informatics Institute, Section Theory of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, University of Ams-

I acknowledge several discussions with M.P. Lindo (University of Amsterdam), who in particular drew
my attention to [29] which provides a picture of Islamic Finance from an anthropological perspective.
2I will assume that a manifestation of Jihad consists exclusively of non-violent actions by default.
Manifestations of violent Jihad will play no role in the paper. A proper understanding of Islamic Finance
a as a part of political Islam cannot be obtained without some awareness of the history of Islam from say
1920 onwards.
3The judgement that early and later Islamic scholars considered logic forbidden (haram) has been put
forward to great eﬀect by Goldhizer in [21]. Recent work by Khaled El-Rouayheb [17] and Spevack [35]
indicates that at no time the opponents of logic had a signiﬁcant majority.
1

conclusion, however, becomes less defensible if one imagines that these critical scholars
simply saw no plausible way for Greek logicians to arrive at the universally quantiﬁed
assertions from which they went onwards with reasoning by means of instantiation as
incorporated in various syllogisms (see Ruth Mas [30]). Universally quantiﬁed assertions
cannot be “sensed” and for that reason they can be constructions of the individual mind
only, thus lacking the required “objectivity” so it was argued. That a modern scientiﬁc
process may generate universally quantiﬁed assertions which are considered objectively
valid was unknown in the days when syllogistic logic came under attack of Arabic schol-
ars.
Their criticism need not be construed as an outcome of religious contemplation.
Fortunately (for Islamic scholars) the revealed sources, which were unaccessible to an-
cient Greek scholars, codiﬁed after having been made available through prophecy, could
produce fully reliable universally quantiﬁed assertions. This observation, perhaps more
adequately understood as a design decision about the basis of logical reasoning, then pro-
vided a clever way to solve a pressing problem in the philosophy of science, but nowadays
it represents an outdated view. A modern perspective on science, with its method for gen-
erating universally quantiﬁed statements acceptable for entire communities rather than
for single individuals only, implies that formalized logic can be accepted more easily, and
implies that the mechanics of reasoning need not be made exclusively dependent on the
existence of revealed sources. Summing up these arguments I see no reason to believe that
Islam is nowadays intrinsically hostile towards methodical reasoning on the basis of large
collections of assumptions, neither do I believe that Islam is committed to the viewpoint
that only assertions obtained directly or indirectly from revealed sources can be both uni-
versal and valid. In addition there is no compelling reason why a systematic investigation
of reasoning processes (that is logic as a branch of mathematics, science and philosophy)
should be considered incompatible with Islam. Nevertheless the contemporary tolerance
of Islam towards logic seems not to have given rise to any speciﬁc developments that may
foster the usability of logic for Islam.
Most developments of applied logic remain within a limited set of domains: computing
(very signiﬁcant), mathematics (limited), physics (very limited), economics (marginal
but growing alongside the explosion of electronic trade), law (still marginal but steadily
growing), linguistics (large but perhaps on the way back), psychology (marginal and
perhaps even declining), and philosophy (marginal and stable).
Now there is no technical reason why applications of logic to religion and in particular
to some speciﬁc religion cannot be developed. Of course a logician may be unwilling to
work towards progress in that direction, but however distant religion may be considered
from science that distance by itself cannot rule out a potential for applications of logic in
that direction.4 This paper analyses a perspective for an application of logic within Islam
from a position outside Islam.5
4Applications of logic to a system of law can be imagined irrespective of the moral quality attributed
to that system, though one’s willingness to perform research towards that end may very well depend on
the perceived moral quality of the particular system of law at hand.
5I see no compelling argument against this objective stemming from implicit or even explicit intrinsic
ethical problems which might be attributed to Islam from an external position. Proving decisively that
such objections do not exist is quite another matter of course.
2

1.1
Logic applied to a speciﬁc religion
If one accepts that logic may be applied to or within a religion in spite of the fact that
logic is a constituent of science and philosophy whereas religion is not, there are still many
ways in which this kind of application can be conceived. I will refrain from an attempt
to survey these options and focus on one particular view only which likely to be speciﬁc
for Islam.
Working towards a deﬁnite and applicable form of Islamic Logic may be conceived
of as an instance of Islamization of modernity, with conventional formal logic considered
modern. Islamization of modernity also underlies Islamic Finance. Through Islamization
of the logic of legal argument, and successive application of that logic for structuring legal
reasoning, legal arguments may become more transparent and more convincing, thereby
promoting underlying values of Islam in a novel fashion. In this way Islamic Logic may
be considered a potential manifestation of Jihad.6
1.2
Usage of language
In this text I will avoid Arabic terms as much as possible based on the hypothesis that
the fundamental content of Islam is international and language independent. Unavoidably
translations are used, for instance instead of Shari’ah I will use Islamic Legal Process, and
instead of Allah I will write God.7
1.3
The problematic status of speculative thought
Writing this paper has proven diﬃcult for various reasons. First of all there is no way
that I can take into account or even become aware of the enormous literature which has
been accumulated regarding the topics that will be covered. Now specialization is a major
tool for ﬁghting the enemy of amateurism in research, and reliable claims of novelty are
usually based on equally reliable accounts of relevant prior art. But I feel the need to
arrive at a comprehensive picture and the objective to achieve some form of completeness
when writing this paper has taken priority over scholarly precision concerning the search
for backwards pointers to prior art.
Moreover there is a speculative aspect about any development aiming at relating a
classical part of science and philosophy (in this case logic) with any form of religion. If one
intends to argue that such connections may provide an advantage the story may become
even more speculative. Most work on Islamic Finance and Islamic Logic that I have seen
avoids speculation by making use of a descriptive style: historical work describes what
people did in the past and how we may ﬁnd out about that, anthropological work looks at
6Perhaps Jihad may be translated as “the progressive movement from within Islam”, where “progres-
sive” still may have many mutually highly incompatible meanings.
7This convention is for instance followed by Makdisi in [28] but is is unusual in writings on Islamic
Finance. Writing Allah instead of God in an English text may be misunderstood as a suggestion that
these are diﬀerent entities after all, thereby potentially contradicting the principled monotheism of Islam.
I will not make use of a translation of the term Islam. Instead an attempt is made in this paper to provide
a working deﬁnition of Islam. The translation “submission (to God’s will)” as given by Wikipedia can
be used for the purposes of this paper, however.
3

how small communities deal with some body of methods and concepts, sociological work
considers the development of communities at large and economic work takes measurable
streams of goods, products and services into account. I try to write about a modernization
of Islamic logic with the additional constraint that, although being an outsider, I need to
understand and trust the full story including a rationale of Islam and the role that logic
may play in that context.
1.4
About the external position
Being an outsider to Islam, and writing from that position, must not primarily be valued
as providing a tool for arriving at an objective perspective and for avoiding speculative
thoughts.8 Rather taking the external position reﬂects a fact of the matter which I must
in addition take into account without knowing in advance to what extent it simpliﬁes
or complicates the task at hand. Working from inside Islam and working from outside
Islam provides an author with diﬀerent interfaces of operational options.
An author
cannot freely choose and change his position in this respect, as if taking an inside Islamic
perspective (from an outsider’s initial position) were conceivable as merely a tailor made
and methodologically legitimate anthropological style of work, which can be dispensed
with after the planned research activity has been completed, thereby returning to the
initial outsider position.
An undeniable obligation for an outsider is to be suﬃciently critical. Have I overlooked
intrinsic problems of Islam (seen from an outsider’s perspective) that should have been
mentioned in this paper? Am I participating in not seeing what needs to be seen? Of
course I don’t think so myself. I will return to this diﬃcult issue in the concluding section
of the paper. The computer scientist C.A.R. Hoare wrote:
inside every large program is a small program struggling to get out.
This remarkable observation is meaningful (and useful) even if the large program contains
many design and programming errors. Transposing Hoare’s observation from the science
of computer programming to the study of religions I obtain:
inside a complex religion is a clear core struggling to get out and to become
visible and comprehensible from an outsider’s position.
This holds true to a considerable extent in spite of mistakes enacted in the name of that
religion. Thus the outsider’s position to a religion may be compared with the informed
programmer’s view on a large program written by an unknown software engineering team:
ﬁnd the core which is struggling to get out, and don’t be distracted from that task by
the discovery of programming errors because the existence of programming errors is a
statistical fact which cannot undermine the validity of Hoare’s observation.
8An informative reference concerning the issue of taking an external position, while crossing borders
every now and then can be found in a book review by Victor Kal [26]. Another way to make use of an
external position is found in [13], where extensive suggestions are made how theorists of Islamic Finance
can make better use of existing “western” economic theory. The authors phrase these suggestions as an
advice to “Islamic Scholars” and do not specify to what extent this advice might be taken up in their
own work for instance.
4

1.5
Novelty remains to be seen
No claim of novelty of any assertion put forward in this paper can be reliably based on
the author’s grasp of the body of published and grey literature relevant for that particular
assertion. Even in very conﬁned areas of mathematical logic and the theory of computing
it has proven strikingly diﬃcult to ﬁnd out what has been done by other authors before.9
To the best of my knowledge the proposed description of Real Islamic Logic is new in
objective, in form, and in content. The stratiﬁed description of Islam seems to be new.
The focus on autonomous parallel legal processing as a key strength worth of preservation
and enhancement of the Islamic Legal Process may be new. The excursion in the ﬁnal
section towards an additional (new) argument for assuming the existence of God may also
consititute an original contribution.
2
Four conceptions of Islamic Logic
Islamic logic can be understood in four diﬀerent ways at least, the historic conception
and the holistic conception being the only views that we found in the existing literature.
These four understandings of Islamic Logic will be labeled as follows: (i) historic, (ii)
holistic, (iii) Real (Islamic Logic), and (iv) Crescent-Star Logic.10
2.1
Historic topic
The dominant understanding of Islamic Logic is that this refers to a period in the devel-
opment of logic. Pinpointing that period is rather arbitrary, but 900-1600 is a reasonable
guess. It might alternatively, and according to some authors more appropriately, be called
Arabic Logic. The term may be compared to: “Roman Architecture”, “French Litera-
ture”, “Greek Philosophy”, or “Welsh Poetry”. The historic understanding of Islamic
Logic is so widespread that it may be considered the standard meaning of the phrase.
Here are some pointers to the rich literature on the subject: [1], [33], and [36]. Islamic
Logic is less formal than present day manifestations of logic. We ﬁnd that what Islamic
Logic as accumulated some 1000 years ago is comparable to what today is called informal
logic rather than formal logic or to philosophical logic.
It should be noticed that Islamic Finance seems to have no historic connotation,
whereas for instance Islamic Architecture does. Islamic Architecture may be decomposed
into historic and modern. Modern Islamic Logic currently seems to be a vacuous concept
at present.
9Our recent work on proposition algebra and short-circuit logic (see [10] and further work cited in that
paper) has been a remarkable experience concerning the diﬃculty of surveying prior art. Working with 3
to 4 persons quite systematically it still took us almost two years to spot an essential (but nowhere cited)
45 years old paper by Tony Hoare. And of course that ﬁnding alone comes nowhere near completing the
prior art discovery job that needs to be done just for that particular and quite specialized topic.
10Crescent-Star Logic may be considered an abbreviation of Crescent-Star Islamic Logic, which is a topic
that may be technically treated without any mention of Islam but for which the origin and motivation
can only be found by taking Real Islamic Logic into account.
5

2.2
Holistic conception
Islamic logic is sometimes understood as the way muslims are supposed to think. Such
applications of the term are always implicit, never based on a scholarly analysis and may
be considered a misuse of the term logic. This form of (mis)use is rather widespread. For
instance “Capitalist Logic” may be called into action as a rationale for the dictate that
minimal wages must be paid and so on. The phrase “Economic Logic” is often used with
a similar holistic interpretation. Its use is almost never convincing and nearly always one
might ask: which economic logic is meant in particular. There is no useful connection
between the holistic use of logic and logic as a theme in philosophy, mathematics or
science.
2.3
A manifestation of Jihad: Real Islamic Logic (RIL)
Novel as far as I know, but nevertheless potentially attractive, is to consider Islamic
Logic as a longstanding “project” for the advancement of Islam: Real Islamic Logic. Real
Islamic Logic embodies the Islamization of Logic (as a part of modernity) just as Islamic
Finance embodies the Islamization of ﬁnance. The adjective real is added in order to
avoid confusion with the three other conceptions of Islamic Logic. It is conceivable that
after due time the “real” can be left out and Islamic Logic has undergone a change of its
default meaning.
Below a proposal will be made concerning the table of contents and the repertoire of
objectives of Real Islamic Logic. The proposal may be read as a proposed political view
on how to advance Islam by way of the Islamization of Logic. In this conception of Islamic
Logic the similarity with Islamic Finance is taken to a rather extreme conclusion and all,
often implicit, political objectives that underly Islamic Finance are considered candidates
for being taken into account when developing a speciﬁcation in detail for the design and
development of Real Islamic Logic. If it ever gets oﬀthe ground the project of developing
a Real Islamic Logic may take centuries rather than decades.
(Real) Islamic Logic can be conceptualized by a non-Islamic author, but it cannot be
performed to its full potential without being part of the Umma. For the (non-Islamic)
author of this paper this limitation implies is that he can carry out conceptual work
towards the establishment of the Islamization of logic interpretation of Islamic Logic
(that is RIL), but he must stop at its doorstep once it has been designed.11
It is not so easy to ﬁnd a name for an activist and contemporary interpretation of
Islamic Logic.
I am suggesting to use Real Islamic Logic, thus recognizing and leav-
ing untouched, the currently predominant historic interpretation of the phrase “Islamic
Logic”.12
11Reasons for a reluctant approach in bringing RIL into practice are twofold. (i) It is implausible that
a non-muslim performs actions that may be classiﬁed as Jihad, and, (ii) such actions can be strongly
criticized by non-muslims because of perceived ethical problems. I will expand on this matter in section
6.4.1.
12Retrospectively that leads to Real Islamic Finance as a name for Islamic Finance useful for those
who would prefer Islamic Finance to have a historic connotation just like Islamic Logic. However, there
are reasons not to identify Real Islamic Finance with the current meaning of Islamic Finance and to keep
room for a forthcoming speciﬁcation of Real Islamic Finance which expressively does away with some of
6

Stopping at the doorstep of Real Islamic Logic may be considered frustrating for a
non-muslim intrigued by the subject.
This can be solved by recasting the subject in
non-Islamic terms. Facilitating that step motivates the fourth and ﬁnal understanding of
Islamic logic.
2.4
Cresent-star Logic
Islamic Finance can serve as a role model for the development of Real Islamic Logic. In
both cases the projection to a non-religious version of the topic can be performed in a
similar fashion. In [5] I have suggested Crescent-star Finance as a reference to Islamic
Finance explicitly stripped from its Islamization of ﬁnance perspective.
Crescent-star
Logic casts Real Islamic Logic as a neutral topic in logic stripped from the Islamization
of modernity ideology and stripped from the Islamic tradition.13 Crescent-star Logic does
away with the conventional historic perspective of the scholarly interpretation and does
away with the Jihadic perspective of the Islamization of modernity.14 Crescent-star logic
then represents the pure logic of Real Islamic Logic as formulated above.
Due to its
neutral form Crescent-star Logic should be accessible and legitimate for logicians who
oppose the very concept of Islamization of Logic, assuming that the mere perspective of
pure logic in an ideologically biased praxis presents no unsurmountable obstacle.
Progress in Crescent-star Logic may help to improve the usage of logic for the applica-
tion in Islamic courts. Crescent-star Logic uses and integrates several logical themes which
must come together forming a complex of reasoning methods of uncommon complexity:
• paraconsistent logic (local inconsistencies cannot be excluded, not even in the case
of a single court),
• deontic logic (most judgements/assertions are about permissions and prohibitions),
• belief revision (courts may withdraw earlier assertions representing court beliefs that
have become superseded),
• modal logic (in some cases diﬀerent courts may best be seen as logically existing in
diﬀerent worlds).
3
A community oriented description of Islam
Who belongs to Islam, and what themes and activities can be called Islamic?
These
questions are supposed to have some kind of an answer as soon as one starts writing
about Islamic Finance or about Islamic Logic. The simplest option is to assume that
the historic imports that might have been needed for getting Islamic Finance moving but which may in
the mean time have become a drawback. More speciﬁcally Real Islamic Finance might be conceived as
being more ﬂexible towards interests being paid and received than Islamic Finance claims it must be on
theological grounds.
13Real Islamic Logic is supposed to have been detached from the Arabic tradition already so that step
need not be performed when making the move towards Crescent-star Logic.
14It is not meant that Islamization of modernity is the only or even a major position of Jihad towards
modernity. It merely constitutes an option that can be considered relevant in the case of logic.
7

Islam is a well-known notion provided with useful deﬁnitions elsewhere so that the matter
need not be discussed in further detail. That assumption seems to underly much writing
in these areas but I doubt its validity. Below I will provide a description of the extension
of Islam which yields a reasonably explicit criterion allowing to assess to what extent an
approach to ﬁnance may be called Islamic and to what extent a contemporary approach
to logic deserves being labeled (Real) Islamic.15
It is assumed that at any moment of time Islam consists of a collection It of persons
with 720 ≤t. This set It needs to be identiﬁed for various t. A sequence of 8 sets of
persons It
0, It
1, It
2, It
3, It
4, It
5, It
6 and It
7 will be deﬁned, each less inclusive. These sets change
in time, for instance because the deceased must be deleted from each set in which they
have been included at the time of their death. New persons can enter for the ﬁrst time
at all stages except stage 6 and 7. Only death removes persons from the set I0. Members
can move up and down through the various levels this hierarchy so to speak.
By means of this sequence a reasonably precise deﬁnition of who belongs to Islam at
time t can be provided. This nested series of sets can also be used to determine when
an activity can be called Islamic. Thus at any instant of time t the sets have a speciﬁc
extension It
n with 0 ≤n ≤7 each consisting of persons living at time t, with It
n ⊆It
n+1
for 0 ≤n < 7.
At any time Islam will mean one of the sets It
n, however with It
5 constituting the default
extension of Islam. If another extension is meant that must be mentioned explicitly.
Why is this relevant? For instance, even after having read extensively about Islamic
Finance one may still wonder: what justiﬁes the label Islamic for these ﬁnancial activi-
ties?16 Can someone, at least in principle, deﬁne his or her own system of Islamic Finance
(or of Islamic Logic) as a theoretical project in a Northern European University carried
out by non-muslims, or is such a state of aﬀairs impossible by deﬁnition?
None of these questions can be given a reliable answer if no extension of Islam and of
points of view “held by Islam” is known, and the objective of this section is to make some
progress on that matter. Unfortunately but not uncharacteristically we will make use of
sources that are not full in agreement with one-another. Except for the design of the sets
It
0−7, and except for issues concerning Islamic Finance, the knowledge of Islam used in
this section has been taken mainly from the following sources Armstrong [3], Donner [14],
and Esposito [18].
Donner’s book, proposes an intriguing and attractive picture of the prophet Muham-
mad and his contemporaries, organized as a community of believers, until the creation of
Islam some 80 years after the death of the prophet. He departs from the conventional
picture as sketched by Armstrong. Esposito forcefully argues against North American
prejudice. He bases his arguments on several international survey studies, conducted by
Gallup, about the opinions held by members of Islam regarding a range of issues. In
terms of the sequence It
0−7 that will be deﬁned in more detail below, I guess that Esposito
describes the result of interviews of members of the stage I5 in that listing. Supporters
of the 9-11 attacks have been included in the reported polls, but there is no quantitative
15This description has been derived from the sociology of computer science which nowadays is entirely
community based so it seems.
16And similarly one may wonder with what justiﬁcation some activities are ascribed to “Islamic ex-
tremism” (assuming that it is known “who did it, and why”).
8

information provided in [18] about the coverage of the distribution of questionnaires over
the diﬀerent streams within Islam that Esposito intends to distinguish.
3.1
Extension independent aspects of Islam
As stated above our objective is to shed light on the following: who belongs to Islam
(the extension of Islam), what are Islamic points of view, what qualiﬁes an approach or
method as Islamic. We begin with an “axiom”.
AXIOM 1: What Islam has to say about a topic T is entirely and exclusively determined
by the points of view of those persons who currently are to be considered as belonging to
Islam.
This axiom has several implications which are rather independent of time and for that
reason from the actual extension of the membership of Islam:
• Islam’s view concerning T, if it exists at all, can change over time.
• Islam’s view on T cannot be discovered exclusively by reading old sources.
• During the life of the prophet Muhammad Islam did not yet exist, the Qur’an for
that reason, assuming that it coincides with Muhammad’s spoken words, is not an
immediate source for “Islamic viewpoints”.
• In most cases (that is for most T) some kind of “voting”, either explicit or implicit
will be required to arrive at an Islamic viewpoint about topic T.
• Islam is entirely man made, even if its sources may have been be revealed.
• Conﬁrmation of the revealed status at time t of the original sources is part of
becoming a member of the set It
0
• The construction of Islam is an ongoing process with revealed sources and their
continuous interpretation playing a very important role.
• The elevation around the year 720 of Muhammad’s oral tradition, after its written
compilation (perhaps around the year 650), to the status of the primary revealed
source of Islam has been an extremely successful conscious design decision that went
into the construction of Islam. Further successful design decisions were to come.
• Design decisions about Islam are exclusively taken by members of Islam. Such design
decisions are just points of view about certain topics turned into assertions that must
be conﬁrmed by new members of stages 5 and 6. In terms of the hierarchy of sets
such a decision can adapt the bundle of points of view adhered to by mainstream
communities and for that reason incorporation of a decision may reduce the number
of mainstream communities (thus moving their members back from level 6 to level
5.)
9

• Who belongs to Islam, is exclusively decided by members of Islam, and this cannot
be undone retrospectively, that is who belongs to Islam at time t will always belong
to Islam at time t′ > t though perhaps at a diﬀerent level of the stratiﬁcation.
3.2
A stratiﬁed membership description
In order to gain insight in the extension of Islam at an arbitrary moment in time an axiom
is used that allows for a layered decomposition of its membership.
AXIOM 2.
Islam provides unity in diversity.
For membership of Islam distinguish 7
levels can be distinguished, which are incrementally more demanding.
ABBREVIATION: V is used as an abbreviation of the following vow: “God is the only
god and Muhammad is his most prominent and most recent prophet”.
Retrospective subjective members. It
0 consists of those (living) people who have at some
time r ≤t expressed V (with or without the presence of witnesses).
According to some It
0 coincides exactly with members of Islam at time t. What can
be held against this viewpoint is that persons may be insuﬃciently aware of the
consequences when making the vow V.
Members of It
0 may be members of other religions as well (usually only after revoking
vow V ).17
Subjective members. It
1 consists of the members of It
0 who have not revoked their vow V
since asserting it.
It
1 is disjoint with Judaism, all Christian religions, and with most religions from
India, Japan, China. It
1 is a well-known separator in topological terms and it can be
used as a deﬁnition of Islam if atheistic (who do not accept the concept of god) and
zerotheistic (who acknowledge the concept of god but are in addition of the opinion
that currently no god exists) persons are not taken into account.
Conscious subjective members. It
2 consists of the members of It
1 who are at time t willing
to renew the vow V.
Active members. It
3 consists of the members of It
2 who (at time t) perform conventional
religious tasks (regular prayer, regular gifts to the poor, making a journey to Mecca),
Community members.
It
4 consists of members of It
3 who perform their conventional
religious tasks in the context of and in accordance with a community of persons all
members of It
3, Thus It
3 is the union of a collection of communities each made up
from members of It
3.
17There is some confusion that Islam would not tolerate persons revoking V .
Revocation is often
discouraged but it cannot be prevented. Diﬀerent communities within Islam may have diﬀerent viewpoints
concerning the legality of revocation and concerning its consequences.
10

No attempt is made to decompose communities into subcommunities. Doing so may
be important for various purposes. It leads to a partially ordered reﬁnement of the
proposed stratiﬁcation.
Traditional community members. It
5 consists of the members of those communities that
constitute It
4 of which the members are (collectively) aware of:
• a package of viewpoints collectively considered a consequence of Islam (though
in fact often only in their speciﬁc community),
• a line of descent in terms of communities from the initial phase of Islam,
• a line of descent in terms of packages of viewpoints (the community lineage
consists of a sequence of communities and intervals of their existence; it must be
equipped with a package of viewpoints held during each of these phases). This
theological lineage must have signiﬁcant explanatory value for the community’s
current positions.
Mainstream traditional community members. It
6 comprises (the union of) a collection of
communities who have decided that they are among the mainstream communities
accounted for in stage 5, while other communities have been left out. The diﬀerent
communities at this level may share:
• some beliefs (neutral assertions),
• some elements of orthopraxy,
• some objectives concerning the preferrered development towards a next stage
of the community’s existence.
For a reliable demarcation of It
6 as a subset of It
5 it is necessary that the entire geneal-
ogy of branching communities composing It
5 is assessed with a degree of centrality
within Islam. This is a matter of sociology and group structure and group intercon-
nection analysis rather than a matter of deciding about the centrality of viewpoints.
Anyhow, It
6 singles out the mainstream communities from the marginal, excentric
and extremist communities.18
Mainstream based forward movers. It
7 consists of selected members of various communi-
ties existing at level It
6, who actively perform Jihad and in various ways are quite
visible at least within the membership of It
5 and perhaps also outside It
5 and even
outside It
0. Here Jihad may take various forms, for instance:
• spreading the word,
• living a life with visible piety, which may be convincing for others.
• developing innovative activities that allow groups of persons to perform their
life compatible with a package of viewpoints held by their community as men-
tioned in the speciﬁcation of It
5.
18The step from stage 5 to stage 6 is potentially subjective and risks being unacceptably sensitive to
one’s opinions independently of being outside or inside Islam. Nevertheless social network analysis and
the recognition of scale free networks carry some promise of rendering the selection of the mainstream
communities from stage 5 objective.
11

3.3
Qualiﬁcation of views and activities
Having dealt with the classiﬁcation of individuals and groups the classiﬁcation of activi-
ties and viewpoints can be put on a reasonably ﬁrm footing.19
DEFINITION 1. An assertion belongs to the points of view of Islam if some commu-
nity as mentioned in the deﬁnition of It
5 adheres to the assertion.20
DEFINITION 2.
An assertion belongs to the points of view of mainstream Islam if
some community as mentioned in the deﬁnition of It
6 adheres to the assertion.
DEFINITION 3. An assertion belongs to the shared points of view of Islam if a large
majority (over 75%) of communities as mentioned in the deﬁnition of It
5 adheres to the
assertion.
DEFINITION 4. An assertion belongs to the shared points of view of mainstream Is-
lam if a large majority (over 75%) of communities as mentioned in the deﬁnition of It
6
adheres to the assertion.
DEFINITION 5. A theory, methodology or system can be called Islamic if it is endorsed
by at least one community included in It
5. It is a mainstream Islamic theory, method or
system, if it is endorsed by one of the communities constituting It
6. It is shared (or shared
mainstream) if it is endorsed by a signiﬁcant (over 75%) of communities of It
5, respectively
of It
6.
Here are some examples of the use of these deﬁnitions.
• That a woman should not be driving a car is a point of view of mainstream Islam.
• That a woman is allowed to drive a car is a point of view of mainstream Islam.
• That drinking alcohol must be avoided is a shared point of view of Islam.
• That non-Islamic (or rather outside I2) western civilians can be aggressively attacked
is a non-shared, non-mainstream point of view of Islam.
• That the poor should be supported is a shared point of view of Islam.
• That interests on loans should neither be paid nor collected is a non-shared point of
view of mainstream Islam. The support for this point of view is growing, however,
and it may well become a shared point of view of mainstream Islam in the next 100
years.
19The number of stage that is taken into account in the stratiﬁcation of Islam determines a level of
resolution that can be achieved for the classiﬁcation of activities and viewpoints.
20Anthropological work by Bill Maurer [29] indicates that muslim communities are willing to grant the
label Islamic to activities which are in conformance with the requirements that these communities deem
necessary even if that conformance is not intentional. So in some cases our deﬁnition will not provide a
justiﬁcation of what takes place. Perhaps deﬁnition 1 can be extended to include those activities that
are considered Islamic by a stage 5 (or higher) community.
12

Some further consequences of the stratiﬁed deﬁnition of Islam can be mentioned:
• from outside It
2, on cannot design a system of Islamic ﬁnance, by deﬁnition, unless
appropriate endorsment is obtained. (This is the impact of deﬁnition 5.)
• The set of points of view of Islam is inconsistent, mainly because viewpoints that
stem from more than one community are taken into account.
• In fact even the family of shared points of view of mainstream Islam is not protected
against logical inconsistency. But that is a matter related to the fact that majority
voting processes can lead outside logical validity, which is generally a fact of social
choice theory unspeciﬁc for Islam.
• Given this layered architecture of Islam it is not even diﬃcult to design (by way
of a thought experiment) a package of LinkedIn groups which allow to capture all
of Islam as well as the dynamics of its constituting communities as dedicated (an
perhaps preferably closed) LinkedIn groups. That requires 1.500.000.000 persons to
be covered by LinkedIn, which is rapidly becoming technologically feasible. Leaving
aside legal and political objections before long large movements like Islam can be
entirely covered by social media, at least in principle.
• Islam has held inconsistent views since its earliest days.
Both Christianity and
Islam may be in part understood in terms of their coming to grips with an event of
political assassination of a major ﬁgure (Jesus, and Uthman respectively). A major
distinction between these religions arises, however, from that fact that Islam has
kept both sides of this deep moral dilemma21 within its ranks (an even within the
mainstream communities composing stage It
6), whereas all of Christianity has taken
side for the victim of the assassination so to speak.
• The logic used by Islam, if any, is a paraconsistent propositional logic. Many forms
of paraconsistent logic have been developed since 1900 and ill require an extensive
study to ﬁnd out which version ﬁts best.22The Roman Catholic Church on the other
hand has made an attempt to live up to a consistent logic. For the union of Christian
churches and their collective points of view ﬁnding a paraconsistent logic is also the
best one can hope for, while for particular churches the search for full consistency
has been important. That has led to fragmentation and diversity in Christianity
to which Islam seems to be less prone due to its principled compatibility with local
inconsistencies, that is by its ability to settle for mere pragmatic paraconsistency.
Paraconsistent logics are not mainstream in the west. This is remarkable, because
removing local inconsistencies is as diﬃcult as anywhere else. I believe that “west-
ern” scientiﬁc paradigms tend to develop into completions of consistent subsets of
originally paraconsistent theories, this process leading to a fragmentation not unlike
the religious fragmentation just mentioned.
21This dilemma arose before the establishment of Islam thus creating the split between the Shia and
Sunni movements.
22From the extensive literature on paraconsistent logics I mention Avron [4], Priest [32], and the
relevance logics of Anderson and Belnap [2] which may be considered paraconsistent logics as well.
13

Now we all know that if a mother asserts that her child C needs to sleep at 8 PM
while its father insists that it may stay awake until 9 PM both may successfully
and consistently agree that it must wake up next morning at 7.30 AM, expecting
that the latter goal will be aimed at unconfused by the parental disagreement about
the preferred timing of C’s going to bed. Making sense of this situation requires a
paraconsistent logic of parental behavior, however.
• Finally the classiﬁcation mechanism can be applied to the main theme of this paper.
– Doing applied research on a particular system of Islamic Finance constitutes
an Islamic activity and it requires being a member of stage 5 or beyond at
least.
– Making proposals for systems of Islamic Finance is not necessarily an Islamic
task (that is it can be done by individuals who are not stage-0 members.)
– Labeling a proposed ﬁnancial system as a system of Islamic Finance can only
be done by a group of members of stage 5 together representing at least one of
its communities.
– Doing applied work within Real Islamic Logic is a task only accessible for
members of stage 5 or beyond.
– Drafting proposals for real Islamic Logic is accessible to non-members of stage
0. (It is not always an Islamic activity.)
Besides questioning to what extent it is reasonable to label activities in ﬁnance and
logic as Islamic, one may consider this matter from the other extreme position: which
processes, tasks and entities can be called Islamic, and more generally can be labeled
with a religious identity. I will dwell on that matter brieﬂy below merely coming to the
conclusion that matters are far from clear.
3.4
Some reﬂection on the use of a religious adjective
I will now confront the question whether or not a seemingly neutral theme like ﬁnance or
logic might be provided with the adjective “Islamic” or with any other religious adjective.
By way of example I will consider the adjective “Roman catholic” (in the remainder of
this section abbreviated to catholic) instead of the adjective Islamic. Consider the catholic
priest John active in a rural area, who administers a parish P, who owns a horse H and
who regularly serves the mass in ”his” church C. In addition he is in charge of school S.
It seems rather absurd to label horse H Roman catholic merely because it is owned by a
catholic priest. An object or structure X being catholic must say something signiﬁcant
about X itself, merely a reference to an owner is deﬁnitely not suﬃcient.
3.4.1
Religious labeling of material objects, books, theories and thoughts
So what about the school.
If the horse cannot be catholic can the bricks and glass
constituting the school be catholic? It seems more plausible to assume that the term
“school” must be disambiguated, because it refers both to an organization, which might
14

be labeled catholic, and to a physical building which is used by this organization, the
building being less amenable to a religious adjective. For the church building the same
remark may apply: as a building it is hardly amenable to an application of the adjective
catholic, whereas the community making use of the church is plausibly labeled catholic.
But where is this reductionist strategy leading to. The organization running the school
and the community constituting the parish (and making use of the church) can be labeled
catholic merely because the members of these groups are considered catholic. But that is
obviously insuﬃcient, because if these organizations/communities are to be perceived as
catholic, besides a constraint on their membership this also imposes the requirement of
having acquired an adequate accreditation by the local catholic bishop, acting on behalf
of the catholic pope. This brings us reasonably close to the deﬁnition of a catholic school
(or parish).
One may then consider a book with catholic religious hymns used in church C. Is
this book with hymns catholic, and if not is the collection of hymns itself catholic, or is
it merely a neutral tool for an activity performed by a catholic community. Similarly a
book may contain the catechism of the catholic church, which is not to say that the book
itself is catholic.
Finally one may face the question to what extent a body of ideas can be considered
catholic. This leads to the speciﬁc question whether or not the catholic faith (as a col-
lection of ideas) is itself catholic. If not then X being catholic is not even a precondition
for “catholic X” to make sense. If so, then that faith constitutes a body of ideas which is
rightfully labeled catholic. Alternatively one might also hold that “catholic faith” rather
than referring to something catholic speciﬁes someone’s state of mind which then might
be considered catholic. That state of mind is not amenable to episcopal accreditation,
however, neither is any other property a person inherits from his or her state of mind.
Summarizing these considerations I conclude that the question “when can an X be
called Islamic” is quite diﬃcult to answer but this diﬃculty is not speciﬁc for Islam, but
rather independent from Islam.
Further for a speciﬁc theme or these T the question
“can T be called Islamic” can be analyzed in sociological terms by making use of the
layered stratiﬁcation of its extension. Application of these matters is not at all obvious,
however. The question “is the Qur’an an Islamic text” indicates some of the complications
involved. The answer to this question may be negative if one thinks of Qur’an primarily
in the time of its writing but it may be positive when it is analyzed in terms of its much
later reception. So it appears that the latter question is insuﬃciently speciﬁc to allow for
a deﬁnite answer.
3.4.2
An instrumental view on the label Islamic
The simplest way to appreciate Real Islamic Logic and Islamic Finance is to assume that
logic and ﬁnance get colored in religious terms because of the intended application. An
instrument used for Jihad may be labeled an Islamic instrument, even if it might be used
alternatively for the opposite purpose just as well.
This convention being somewhat unsatisfactory I suggest that an instrument might
be labeled Islamic (mainstream Islamic) if the following three (four) criteria are met:
• it is used for Jihad, using a very liberal and preferably non-violent interpretation of
15

that term, and,
• it is speciﬁc (or has been designed speciﬁcally) for that particular use, and,
• if the previous observations are conﬁrmed by an uncontested group of leading ﬁgures
in a stage 5 (or higher) community.
• (If the conﬁrmation is provided by a stage 6 (or 7) community it is a mainstream
Islamic instrument.)
Given this convention about using Islamic as a label, some further remarks can be made
considering the plausibility of religious labeling in various circumstances, now rendered
speciﬁcally for Islam:
• A recent copy of the Qur’an is a (mainstream) Islamic book (instrument for dis-
tributing information, whereas its content has been transformed from non-Islamic
to Islamic around the year 720.
• At second inspection the decisive argument that horse H above can’t be labeled
Roman catholic lies in the fact that H is in no way speciﬁc for the catholic faith,
although the way he is used may be dedicated towards strengthening that particular
religion. This same argument generalizes to all animals.
• A person is Islamic if he or she is a member of Islam. This is a matter of degree in
accordance with the stratiﬁcation.
• No animal and no natural location can be Islamic. Except for persons only artifacts
(including their abstract designs) can plausibly be labeled Islamic.
• Islamic Finance is a plausible term because the particular form of ﬁnance is supposed
to satisfy the four criteria mentioned above. In fact it may be labeled a mainstream
Islamic activity.
• If the design of Real Islamic Finance is suﬃciently speciﬁc and its intended appli-
cation is suﬃciently compatible with some form of Jihad that will validate the use
of the phrase given the mentioned criteria.
• the introduction of RIL in this paper does not qualify as an Islamic activity.
4
Comparing Real Islamic Logic and Islamic Finance
Before working out a speciﬁc proposal for Real Islamic Logic in some detail, that notion
which is transpiring in an abstract or distant form already, will be compared to Islamic
Finance which has been used since around the year 1930 onwards.
This comparison
is supposed to be helpful for developing an understanding of what RIL can be given a
perspective on Islamic Finance.
After that comparison the companion notions Crescent-star Finance and Crescent-star
Logic will be brieﬂy compared.
16

4.1
Comparing IF and RIL in some detail
It has been argued that whether or not the label Roman catholic can be assigned to
some concept is a diﬃcult matter and that diﬃculty is similar for the adjective Islamic.
Nevertheless some convention has been formulated and that convention underlies the
understanding of the adjective Islamic in the sequel of this paper. I will now make an
attempt to highlight in detail some important merits and demerits of the phrase Islamic
Finance while contrasting it with Real Islamic Logic.
1. As I have noticed already above Islamic Finance seems not to be used in existing
literature with the historic bias which is dominantly assumed for Islamic Logic.
2. I brieﬂy consider Islamic Astronomy. That has a historic connotation by default.
One might seek for a modern version of it “Modern Islamic Astronomy” or even a
Jihadic form “ Real Islamic Astronomy” (or a movement with similar objectives).
None of these exist because Modern Islamic Astronomy is simply Astronomy.
3. There is no contemporary Islamic Astronomy for the simple reason that conventional
astronomy is entirely acceptable from an Islamic perspective. Real Islamic Logic
may be considered meaningless in the same way as contemporary Islamic Astronomy
is. Likewise some hold Islamic Finance to be a self-contradictory notion. However,
these arguments are ﬂawed because although Islam suggests no alternative ways
for pursuing astronomy, Islamic Finance deﬁnitely involves a rather speciﬁc set
of ﬁnancial conventions and the logic for Islamic Finance may be designed quite
speciﬁcally as a customized toolbox for applications in an Islamic context. A similar
argument can be put forward concerning RIL.
4. The logic involved in Real Islamic Logic can be pursued both in a philosophical style
and in a more formalist style. At least for philosophical logic the potential to work
in an Islamization oriented mode cannot be ruled out as easily as for instance for
physics and mathematics.
5. Islamic Finance is a successful intellectual construction that could have originated
outside Islam in theory (not what actually happened, it was a mainstream Islamic
development). Pursuing Islamic Finance is by deﬁnition a matter for muslims only.
6. A signiﬁcant result of Islamic Finance is the appearance of Arabic terms and con-
cepts in the ﬁnancial world. A similar development is not to be expected from the
pursuit of Real Islamic Logic.23About this phenomenon the following can be said:
23It is remarkable that explanations of Islamic ﬁnance so often make use of Arabic terminology thereby
implicitly suggesting that separating Islamic Finance from promoting the usage of Arabic is either im-
possible or undesirable.
Of course it may be disputed that a religion can be separated from the languages in which it has
originated. Is it a modern feature of western Christianity that its core body of texts has been entirely
translated into a number of diﬀerent languages or is it a feature of Christianity that such a translation
is an option at all? Or will it be concluded in the future that a Christian faith after all could not be
successfully internationalized without becoming essentially weakened?
17

• The appearance of Arabic jargon in the ﬁnancial world cannot simply be un-
derstood as a consequence of Islamization, in the same way as the appearance
of English in many areas of activity is not a symptom of Christianization. It
merely indicates the importance of Arab speaking authors and ﬁnancial workers
in the pursuit of Islamic Finance.24
• Islam has Arabic language as a major carrier of its cultural sources in very
much the same way (though signiﬁcantly more pronounced) as Christianity
has (medieval) Latin as a source. I am assuming that conceptually Islam can
and must be separated from Arabic.25
• Not only language and religion must be separated but to some extent history
and language need separation as well. For instance Shari’ah may be replaced by
“Islamic Legal Process” and that replacement immediately removes potential
misunderstandings. For instance one may think that extremely harsh punish-
ments are characteristic for Shari’ah ignoring the fact that the local history
of some well-known traditions of the Islamic Legal Process have developed in
nomadic societies where imprisonment was not considered a practical option
and punishment of an instantaneous form was more easily applicable. In dif-
ferent conditions, however, the Islamic Legal Process leads to diﬀerent ways of
dealing with undesirable behavior.
• It is quite diﬃcult to translate classical Arabic terms into English. For instance
gharrar (accepting an excessive downside risk) is forbidden in Islamic Finance
but explanations of this limitation invariably involve digressions into the mean-
ing of the term gharrar. The concept of Islamic Finance should not be allowed
the degree of freedom to proclaim that gharrar is forbidden whatever it means
so to say, thus leaving those who don’t master Arabic uninformed about which
behavioral limitation is imposed by means of this proclamation.26
7. Currently Real Islamic Logic may be considered to be about as plausible or implau-
sible as Islamic Economics with the diﬀerence that the phrase Islamic Economics
is widely used. In spite of being often mentioned Islamic Economics has not really
come oﬀthe ground except for its specialized ﬁnancial branch.
24In any case I will defend the position that Islamic Finance is a manifestation of the Islamic Progressive
Political Process (an aspect of Jihad) which can and must be entirely detached from the Arabic language
and its promotion. Stated more concretely: the constraint that riba must be prohibited in a written
explanation of Islamic Finance must always be complemented with a binding (for the author) explanation
of the meaning of riba.
For instance who translates riba as illegally obtained ﬁnancial income gets for free that “riba is forbid-
den”. Getting from there to the observation that interest is forbidden though, is quite another matter.
The relevance of this requirement on the usage of Arabic terms is immediately clear if one understands
that morality of behavior is at stake. If, according to an author, a morally valid life cannot be led by
persons unable to read Arabic texts that position should be made clear in advance, and deﬁnitely not be
suggested as a corollary of a incomplete or even defective explanation of Islamic Finance.
25If that assumption proves wrong the RIL ambition is either ﬂawed or can only be produced by an
author in command of Arabic.
26See [16] for a survey concerning the meaning of gharrar.
18

8. Islamic Finance acquires signiﬁcant visibility and proﬁle from a single assumption
namely the prohibition of interests. Opinions about the foundations of this pro-
hibition vary from a fully religious grounding (promising no economic advantages
compliant with Islamic social objectives) to a fully economic grounding (expecting
that this prohibition will contribute signiﬁcantly to the reduction of phenomena of
individual hardship27 and of structural crisis). At a closer inspection Islamic Fi-
nance is based on a combination of restrictions amongst which interest prohibition
is only the most well-known ingredient. These other restrictions are:
• Avoidance of excessive downside risks.
• Non-reliance on excessive upside chances (gamble).
• Sold items must exist at the time of transaction (but payment may be deferred).
• All parties involved in a sales transaction must have comparable and complete
information about what is being sold.
• Parties involved in a ﬁnancial transaction may not be forced into participation.
9. Real Islamic Logic has no counterpart to the dogma of interest prohibition. That
is no single element carries signiﬁcantly more visibility than other elements. If any
counterpart to the above concise speciﬁcation of Islamic Finance must be found it
consists of a cluster of elements for which the following listing may be a candidate:
• Inconsistencies abound, and paraconsistency is the best one may aim for. In
particular:
– Revealed sources are a fundamental source of the body universally quan-
tiﬁed assertions from which reasoning must take place.
– The totality of revealed sources is not claimed to be consistent. (Many
inconsistent subsets may exist.) Informed scholars must resolve contradic-
tions when needed.
– Original eye-witness accounts produce evidence, and so do indirect tes-
timonies. These may have higher priority than the original source facts
these accounts are commenting upon. This also holds if the source facts
are understood in a metaphoric fashion. Proximity in time to the causes of
creation of the original sources (for instance measured by means of count-
ing number of intermediate witnesses) increases conﬁdence.
– Science (including logic and mathematics) may produce valid assertions
which may be inconsistent with revealed sources. Scientiﬁc fact wins out
against revealed fact, moving the latter into a metaphoric status, which is
then in need of explanation by interpreting scholars.
– A improved level of knowledge of science may lead to modiﬁed assertions
to which a higher degree of conﬁdence is assigned. Ordinary resolution of
inconsistencies amongst scientiﬁc results.
27I refer to [27] for a clear and contemporary explanation of the problems to which a ﬁnancial system
based on interest payment may lead.
19

• Distributed and autonomous human judgement performed by groups of in-
formed scholars plays and will play a major role in legal decision making which
may overrule at any time all formalized deduction from acquired database of
accepted legal assertions. As a consequence:
– Islamic legal reasoning cannot become outdated, it is essentially a contem-
porary phenomenon, and,
– the Islamic Legal Process proceeds concurrently at diﬀerent locations and
diﬀerent courts may judge quite diﬀerently about similar cases at the same
time,28 and,
– logic is supposed to be supportive of this mechanism and must not in
any way be construed as an “objective” replacement of conscious group
decision making by informed scholars.
• Resolution of contradictions makes use of geographically based priorities, with
local Islamic courts having more impact than distant ones,29 recent court judge-
ments have more relevance than older ones of the same court.30
• Altogether Real Islamic Logic deals with (at least) eight priority mechanisms
at the same time:
– priority of science over revelation,
– priority of improved science over previous scientiﬁc ﬁndings,
– priority of conﬁrmed interpretation (if sources are understood metaphori-
cally) over revelation,
– priority of direct witness reports over indirect ones,
– priority of propositions put forward by highly regarded scholars over propo-
sitions produced by less highly regarded ones,
– priority of propositions put forward by directly involved (concerning the
issue at hand) individual scholars over judgements made by individual
scholars from a more distant position,
– priority of recent court judgements over older judgements of the same
court,
– priority of nearby (physically or community wise) court judgements over
more distant ones.
As it stands human decision making is essential to balance the relative weights
that must be assigned to these diﬀerent priorities.31
28This potential inconsistency of simultaneous judgements on comparable cases is a price that must be
paid if the Islamic Legal Process is supposed to deliver contemporary judgements at all times.
29The topology impacting on this geographic form of priority reasoning is in terms of “logical” distance
between communities rather than physical (metric) distance between locations of courts.
30This higher priority of more recent judgements must not be confused with the fact that older assertions
(assumptions) may win out against younger ones in case these assumptions have not come about from
explicit court activity. If description of fact is at stake, proximity in time is counted as an advantage.
31Instead of considering logics that make use of priorities one may look at multiple criterion decision
making as a related non-religious phenomenon.
20

The simultaneous presence of a number of priority mechanisms renders Real
Islamic Logic astonishingly complex but it constitutes no reason not to analyze
its working in detail, on the contrary, it suggest that much work can be done.
4.2
Comparing Crescent-star Finance and Crescent-star Logic
Crescent-star Logic stands for Real Islamic Finance stripped from its political and religious
objectives. Similarly Crescent-star Finance is Islamic Finance stripped from its religious,
political and ideological objectives. Both themes can be contemplated and advanced by
non-muslims. There is a diﬀerence, however, because for a non-muslim Islamic Finance
represents a reasonable comprehensible deviation from conventional ﬁnance and the eﬀect
of adherence to that deviation can be investigated in an impartial way both in theory by
way of making use of thought experiments and in practice by means of observation of real
or of artiﬁcial (that is experimental) economic processes.
Work on Crescent-star Finance may, at least in principle, reveal weak points concerning
Islamic Finance that need to be taken into account by muslims pursuing Islamic Finance
in its full meaning. It may also lead to the discovery of new ﬁnancial products which
Islamic scholars are likely to consider morally adequate (halal).
At this early stage Crescent-star Logic is a hypothetical matter altogether because
the inclusion and exclusion of formal techniques as well as philosophical methods for Real
Islamic Logic needs to be worked out from an application perspective. Nevertheless a stage
can be imagined where Crescent-star Logic can be abstracted from real Islamic Logic in
way comparable to the way logic programming has been obtained from programming in
PROLOG.
5
Objectives of Real Islamic Logic
From its introduction Islam has conceived of itself as modern. Judgements produced by
Islamic courts are modern in the sense that these are recent decisions taking all jurispru-
dence into account as well as all classical Islamic sources.
Real Islamic Logic can be
imagined as supportive of preservation of this form of modernity.
The need for and role of real Islamic Logic will now be analyzed in more detail. First
of all it is claimed that Islamic Finance by itself produces a signiﬁcant incentive to deﬁne
and investigate systems for Real Islamic Logic.
5.1
Islamic Finance requires Real Islamic Logic
Islamic Finance involves a very frequent use of Islamic courts for decision making about
individual cases of economic behavior. But economic decision are made so frequently that
the vast majority of such decisions must be taken without making use of the informed
advice of an Islamic Court. Real Islamic Logic must support the reasoning taking place
outside Islamic Courts. For a system of Islamic Finance it seems very useful if that form
of reasoning can be understood in a scholarly fashion just like the logic of other forms of
reasoning not primarily depending on human deliberation.
21

It is not easy to grasp why a strict adherence to the well-advertised tenets of Islamic
Finance will lead to a better society. In fact all of these tenets, which can be formulated
in terms of restrictions, are hard to understand in three diﬀerent ways:
• what the restriction means in technical terms,32 and,
• how the restriction has come about by means of a chain of reasoning starting from
original sources, and,
• is there an expectation or intention that and observing the restriction will have
positive moral or social consequences and if so, ﬁnally,
• why compliance with the restriction might lead to a better world in moral terms.
The combined complexity and interaction of Islamic Finance renders it extremely complex
with the eﬀect that recourse to groups of Islamic scholars is regularly needed.
Their
judgement may be asked not only for the evaluation of generic schemes and ﬁnancial
products but also for the assessment of individual plans for economic transactions. This
may be exactly what is good about Islamic Finance on the long run.
If one believes that preservation of the impact of Islamic courts is an important ob-
jective, then the development of a systematic approach to Real Islamic Logic is justiﬁed
because it adds to the feasibility (improved partitioning of tasks between individual agents
and courts) and to the cost reduction (reduction of court workload) of a well-organized
system of Islamic Finance. That in turn may motivate research activities about Real
Islamic Logic from the long term perspective of Islamic Finance.
5.2
The role of Real Islamic Logic in more detail
The role of Real Islamic Logic is to support methods for avoiding recourse to an Islamic
court for each and every issue. Non court mediated and Real islamic Logic based decision
making from distributed court output is needed to make the system suﬃciently productive
when scaling up. This productivity again is needed to safeguard the pivotal positions of
Islamic courts which must not be overloaded with futile requests (that is requests amenable
to semi-automatic resolution from the geographically distributed class of current local
court outputs.)
Evidently Real Islamic Logic features a high degree of concurrency. Many agents are
reasoning at the same time, and in fact diﬀerent agents will be reasoning about one-
another which renders the logic epistemic.
It is an essential part of the system that many Islamic Courts are producing their
judgements (that is LP’s) in a concurrent fashion. Though not democratic in a sense
of elected representations the wide spread distribution of legal decision making and its
commitment to reconsidering classical dilemma’s must be considered a virtue.
Dealing with inconsistencies as well as dealing with novel moral dilemma’s is the core
of Islamic Court tasks. The Islamic legal system stands on utterly inconsistent feet and for
32Probably the clearest restriction that underlies Islamic Finance is prohibition of interests. In, [9] it
has been pointed out that even that concept is conceptually far from obvious.
22

that reason enforces a systematic dependency on human decision making. This should be
considered an advantage over a system which resolves the majority of its moral dilemma’s
through applications of artiﬁcial intelligence and automated reasoning.
5.3
Islamic Court Legal Proposition Processing
Islamic Court Legal Proposition Processing (ICLPP) will be used as a descriptor of the
main activity of islamic courts.
The term reasoning is avoided because that suggests
regularities and methods to which ICLPP is not in any way committed.
ICLPP and
Real Islamic Logic are complementary mechanisms where ICLPP is by nature an entirely
human group activity. It is not suggested that a formal logic behind ICLPP must be
sought. Perhaps ICLPP is best understood as multiple criterion decision making, a process
which is amenable to empirical analysis but not amenable to theory based prediction by
means of formalized logic.33
Each court maintains a collection of previously issued (or imported) and not yet with-
drawn LP’s ready for application in new circumstances. A court maintains a history of
new LP’s as well as of withdrawals together with written accounts of the motivation for
such steps. The current LP set is likely to be paraconsistent but not consistent (that
is properly paraconsistent). When formulating judgements concerning new cases a court
may put forward new LP’s that may or may not contradict its current set of publicly an-
nounced LP’s. As a consequence older LP’s may be withdrawn from the court’s current
LP set. An LP in the current LP set of court C may be considered a court C belief.
A court performs belief revision in a context of paraconsistent logic. Reasons for LP
withdrawal or for the introduction of LP’s that render the LP base (more) inconsistent
so include:
• Changing viewpoints regarding the same topic (for instance because of novel insights
in the eﬀects of certain regulations, or due to the emergence of new scientiﬁc ﬁndings,
or due to the, very rare, discovery of new source texts),
• Entirely new dilemma’s emerging from (changing) daily practice which require new
LP’s as well as revision (withdrawal) of old LP’s,
• Eﬀorts to improve the consistence of the current LP base (with the intent to enhance
non-court decision making on the its basis).
• Paraconsistency appears because the full collection of valid (that is not yet with-
drawn) LP’s is likely not to be consistent at any time. Belief revision for paracon-
sistent theories cannot be based on the known framework tailored to classical logic,
and this limitation implies (or at least suggests) that human decision making (by
an IC) is essential. As it stands no rules for the production of LP’s by courts are
given. Each IC therefore provides what we will call paraconsistent belief generation
and revision, with these characteristics:
– This particular form of belief revision attempts to attach higher value to older
LP’s.
33Neural network modeling may prove a more eﬀective technique for predicting ICLPP outcomes.
23

– It makes use of an axiomatic basis emerging from old sources. These old sources
produce closed as well as universally quantiﬁed LP’s.
– Courts may produce new universally quantiﬁed LP’s. The collection of axioms
thus formed is highly inconsistent. This inherited inconsistency, which is not
amenable to a full resolution of conﬂicts, implies that very often a court will be
needed to resolve a moral dilemma by means of human cognitive and emotional
activity. All assertions held in Islam are essentially recent in the sense that
only if an Islamic court explicitly conﬁrms a judgement it must be held true.
– Belief revision (which involves LP withdrawal) is needed to allow unambiguous
inference in relevant cases.
– Inference in part consists of paraconsistent belief generation and revision, with
deductive inference playing a minor role. More prominent inference methods
are induction and reasoning by way of ﬁnding analogues and drawing corre-
sponding conclusions.
Courts can be called into action by individuals who conclude that Real Islamic Logic is
inconclusive in a particular case, and courts may be called into action by local authorities
who question the validity of Real Islamic Logic based reasoning as applied by individual
muslims or by groups of muslims.
5.4
Technical objectives and methods of Real Islamic Logic (RIL)
RIL must provide methods of reasoning that support the rule-based and semi-automatic
part of the non-court based Islamic legal process.
1. RIL supports reasoning based multiple criterion decision making.
2. RIL is based on a pragmatic view of “informal logic”. Informal logic stands between
philosophical logic and formal logic. It deals with the strength of arguments used in
a non-formalized but yet rigorous practice. For instance in [20] the use of emotional
aspects in rigorous argument is analyzed. Emotional aspects probably cannot be
avoided in the intended practice of RIL. A survey of informal logic is given in [25],
see also [22].
A convincing specimen of informal logic is found in [37] where a
classiﬁcation of analogies is provided from a deductivist standpoint.
There is no such thing as informal logic, instead there are diﬀerent approaches to it.
In spite of that lack of clarity it seems unavoidable to place some form of informal
logic in between practice and any application of formal logic. Opinions diﬀer on the
question to what extent an approach to informal logic by itself must be based on
a particular selection of philosophies of science, language, and law. It is likely that
diﬀerent brands of RIL may be based on diﬀerent approaches to informal logic each
serving as an embedding mechanism for more formalized approaches to logic.
3. RIL supports autonomous decision making on the basis of concurrent streams of
current LP information from customizable collections of diﬀerent courts.34
34Mark Burgess in [12] and in several other papers about his theory of promises, emphasizes autonomy
24

A plurality of autonomously operating Islamic courts each produces in parallel an
ever growing stream of LP’s (legal propositions or). At each instant of time the
overall legal position is determined by the family of theories reached that moment
by each court.35One may think of the order of 5.000 to 10.000 courts each serving
up to 150.000 persons, with new courts being installed on a regular basis wold wide.
The concurrent processing aspect of this distributed decision making process is vital.
Its modeling requires formalization just as the modeling of its reasoning mechanisms
requires the use of formalized logic. As an example of a concurrency model that may
work in this case I mention thread algebra [7] and the distributed and hierarchical
versions of thread algebra which have been developed on the basis of the concurrency
model in [7].
4. RIL supports separation of concerns:
• Well-developed and widely understood methods are needed to allow individual
persons to infer LP’s regarding moral dilemma’s without the support of an
Islamic court. This is necessary due to the number of persons that may put
forward such dilemma’s and the limited number of courts.
• RIL must support real time decision making in cases where recourse to a court
is self-defeating.36
• RIL supports individuals and groups with making a judgement concerning
whether or not a court should not be involved, and if so in which phase of the
process.
• RIL allows for methodical reasoning (rule based and almost or entirely au-
tomatic). Real Islamic Logic for that reason primarily provides an inference
method for paraconsistent theories.
• RIL must support adequate documentation of all proceedings.
5. RIL allows for application speciﬁc or thematic versions. Diﬀerent chapters of human
activity may call for diﬀerent dedicated instantiations of RIL (application speciﬁc
RILs or ASRILs), allowing for the use of specialized terminology. One may think of
an ASRIL for: ﬁnance, sustainability, food industry, policing, military, trade, art,
politics and so on.
6. RIL involves:
• deduction in paraconsistent theories,37
as a vital ingredient for computer systems design, mainly because it is scalable in principle. It is hard to
imagine that autonomy will less important for the design of human powered organizations.
35Here paraconsistency, both for single court LP streams, and for their combination is the best one
may expect because diﬀerent courts may develop quite diﬀerent views even when starting from the same
base theories derived from old sources.
36That may bring Short-circuit Logic [10] into play which deals with propositional statements that
allow their atomic components to change value during evaluation.
37For a recent survey on paraconsistent logics written by Kees Middelburg in connection with our joint
work on Islamic Finance I refer to [31].
25

• epistemic reasoning capabilities for supporting agents with reasoning about
knowledge of themselves and of other agents,
• logic of public announcements because all LP’s produced by courts as well as
all withdrawals are public,
• deontic logic because most LP’s are about obligation of prohibition of various
actions or conditions,
• priority logics because mutually inconsistent collections of LP’s may be struc-
tured by means of priorities.
7. RIL makes use of a heterogeneous system of priorities where:
• LP’s issued by nearby courts count stronger than LP’s issued by distant ones
(relative to a person seeking advice),
• recent LP’s by the same court have higher priority than older ones,
• real time safety critical decisions are most likely to be taken by means of RIL,
• RIL must indicate when a court must be called for advice.
8. RIL allows for:
• A ﬂexible language to denote activities, plans, action histories and states of
the world. Decision support concerning the question whether or not a plan is
permissible (and whether or not that can be asserted without the help of a
court) is the primary task of RIL.
• Integrated planning procedures that support permissible plan generation from
stated goals.
• Evaluation methods helpful to determine to what extent a past history of
activities performed by one or more agents will be considered morally adequate
when handed over for judgement to a speciﬁc court.
• Heuristics for determining in which cases to refer the evaluation of past actions
to an Islamic court, and
• support for selecting a competent court when needed.
5.5
Feasibility of RIL and RIL oriented research
The list of requirements for RIL is so extensive that designing an adequate and eﬀective
RIL from scratch in a single and brief project is inconceivable. Nevertheless, such work
need not be considered unrewarding only because of its ambitious appearance.
Empirical work can provide a case base that allows for case studies with diﬀerent
reasoning methods. Theoretical work needs to show how the mentioned logical techniques
can be brought together in a uniﬁed framework. Practical work in AI style may lead to
prototypes of reasoning based decision support systems that make an RIL based reasoning
engine available to a pioneering community.
26

As long as theoretical work aims at grouping together diﬀerent techniques which sup-
posedly must be brought together in a mature system of RIL, that work may be counted
as work on Crescent-star Logic if one intends to avoid the complexities of the adjective
Islamic and if one simultaneously wants to attribute the particular grouping of techniques
to an intended application in RIL.38
An empirical criterion of the success of a design of RIL and supporting software is that
Islamic courts promote its distribution and usage because they feel their own activities
being strengthened by usage made of RIL by their client base.39
6
Business ethics risk analysis for RIL development
Who works towards RIL with the application perspective of a RIL enhanced ICLPP in
mind faces a number of questions about morality or rather business ethics pertaining to
that particular line of work. I intend to shed light on these matters in this section of the
paper. First I will restate the orientation of the work on RIL for which its business ethics
is to be scrutinized.
6.1
Restating the orientation towards a RIL supported ICLPP
A picture has been drawn of the mechanics of a scaled up Islamic Legal Process that makes
use of Islamic Legal Reasoning performed within Islamic courts and of Real Islamic Logic
applied outside courts with the main purpose to ease the burden of decision making for
the courts.
In the absence of a well-understood Real Islamic Logic one may postulate the existence
of a Natural Islamic Logic, which represents the ethical decision making practiced by
muslims in circumstances they consider suﬃciently simple or suﬃciently conclusive for
them not to seek for advice of a court.
The project to develop a Real Islamic Logic
looks for more than the mere psychology of Natural Islamic Logic. The project requires
a systematic approach to disentangle the reasoning process currently performed by way
of Natural Islamic Logic as to improve the entire system at least from the point of view
of acknowledged Islamic objectives.
The essential quality of the entire Islamic Legal Process is the permanent involvement
of Islamic courts in many aspects of decision making, in a way that seems to resist
automation. This quality has become more important with the progress of computing
technology.
I have not made an attempt to put forward arguments that a well-designed system of
Real Islamic Logic, when put in place at a grand scale, will indeed bring some particular
family of relevant objectives closer to their realization. But is seems clear that a more
systematic approach to that part of the legal process may foster the role of Islamic courts
38Needless to say that combined techniques may have applications outside RIL just as well and that
such applications may motivate research without any incentive to make reference to either RIL or to
Crescent-star Logic.
39This criterion is indirect in the sense that it is not explicitly dependent on any long term objectives
of Islam as a movement.
27

and for that reason it may be considered plausible that this will promote goals that
motivate these courts.
The assumption that fostering the role of Islamic courts will bring about progress
towards intrinsic Islamic objectives underlies the motivation given for RIL and its appli-
cation perspective. As an assumption, its validity cannot be conﬁrmed by mere theoretical
work and this assumption for that reason takes the form of an unproven axiom. Devel-
oping RIL by means of the design of a systematic approach to Natural Islamic Logic has
been outlined and a survey of the techniques from formal logic that might come into play
has been given. Of course the real work for developing a comprehensible and eﬀective
Real Islamic Logic has yet to begin and a even proof of concept is missing at this stage
of development. A sharp condemnation of the plan to develop RIL cannot be based on
known adverse consequences of its application.
6.2
Working on the basis of randomized source documents
At this point of our development of RIL and its rationale a remarkable and speculative
hypothesis can be formulated. The hypothesis being that:
the entire Islamic Legal Process inherits its powerful functionality ﬁrst and
for all from the fact that the heritage of the original sources, after years of
evolution and codiﬁcation of the outcomes of that evolution, still defeats an
automated logical analysis to such an extent that:
i) the legal process is best put in the hands of a large number of concurrently
operating autonomous groups of informed persons (the courts), cooperating
with a number of highly skilled and informed individuals (excellent Islamic
scholars), and,
ii) the members of these courts as well as the informed individuals who play
a role constitute a meritocracy, rather than that they have been selected by
means of majority voting,
iii) properties i) and ii) are the distinctive characteristics of the Islamic Legal
Process in comparison with competing mechanisms.
If this hypothesis is actually valid it may also be maintained as a plausible assumption
concerning an alternative world in which the original sources have been laid down in an
almost random way. A weaker and for that reason more plausible assessment is that after
many years of autonomous evolution the Islamic Legal Process has become quite stable
against (hypothetical) small modiﬁcations of the original sources. This stability against
hypothetical perturbations of the source documents mainly derives from the distributed
and autonomous nature of the Islamic legal process. If that process were ﬁrmly centralized
each single line in the original source texts would have more impact on current decision
making.
When the decision was made to found Islam around the year 720 on the basis of
the collected original sources then available, the deciding actors rightly foresaw (perhaps
unconsciously) that the combined complexity of these sources would defeat any attempted
simpliﬁcation and would keep readers and scholars busy for centuries to come, even in
times of legal process automation.
28

6.2.1
Centralization: a risk provoked by Islamic Finance?
If one accepts that the distributed nature, with many autonomous courts working con-
currently throughout the world, is a major strength of the Islamic legal process then the
widespread call for unity in the world of Islamic Finance is seriously misguided. This
may indicate a systemic risk for Islamic Finance as well as for Real Islamic Logic. Com-
petition on the ﬁnancial market may force Islamic Finance into structures of centralized
control that are incompatible with the distributed and autonomous nature of the Islamic
legal process. Losing that competition, however, is problematic too because it limits the
inﬂuence for which Islamic Finance has been originally set up. If one takes this risk of
derailment into centralized structures seriously that gives way to another chapter of Tarek
El Diwani’s criticism that Islamic Finance imports western ﬁnancial habits far too quickly
and without due consideration of the risks thereof and of the longer term objectives of
Islam (see the survey of Tarek El Diwany’s positions of [15] in [6]).
6.2.2
Genetic programming needed?
The rather mechanical picture of a thread vector of threads, each representing the behavior
of a single court,40 operating together as a multithreaded system (in the terminology of
[7]) scheduled by way of strategic interleaving, fails to explain why the points of view
of diﬀerent courts do not diverge in time to an extent that similarities become rare. A
remedy that may promote some convergence is as follows: at regular intervals a court
imports randomly chosen LP’s held by other courts. The probability of doing so is higher
if the other court is more mainstream. To allow for this mechanism rather than merely
having level 6 containing the mainstream communities of level 5 of the stratiﬁcation,
a degree of centrality must be imposed on level 5 communities (with the level 6 and
mainstream communities being the ones for which the degree of centrality exceeds some
threshold) and the more central a community is considered the more likely is an export of
LP’s maintained by one of its courts to an other court. This randomized export of LP’s
introduces a mechanism that may be compared to the working of genetic programming.
6.3
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT)
Working towards RIL with its intended application in mind poses a researcher in a position
where a wide range of moral issues needs to be dealt with. Even to develop a survey of
these issues is so complicated that it cannot be satisfactorily done in this paper. But
an attempt must be made. I will focus on the development of an RIL supported ICLPP
as a process about which the moral consequences of signiﬁcant participation are to be
assessed.
For this process a SWOT analysis will be made from three viewpoints, the
results are rendered in a SWOT diagram which highlights key elements for each of the
four categories of SWOT.
A SWOT analysis for a subject S will provide insight in the Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities and Threats relevant to S More precisely a SWOT analysis is carried out
with respect to three ingredients:
40Implementing an instance of the ICLPP (see 5.3).
29

subject: some entity, concept, or mechanism of which the SWOT is made,
context: the context of a particular environment
perspective: a viewpoint, or perspective from which the SWOT is formulated.
For instance a SWOT can be made with subject: Financial Industry in London, context:
European competition in the ﬁnancial industry, perspective: economic development of
the London area. An alternative perspective may be: the UK tax payer. An alternative
context may be: protection of oﬃce buildings against various risks in the UK.
Two diﬀerent context/perspective pairs for the same subject (development of a RIL
based ICLPP) will be considered, and then a third SWOT analysis is made with the
legal process of a constitution based liberal democracy as a subject in the context of its
competition with an RIL based ICLPP and from the perspective of a supporter of the
liberal democratic political structures. Together this leads to three SWOT diagrams.
1. RIL based ICLPP (entity) in the competition with the current ICLPP which it
eventually seeks to replace context), seen from inside Islam in its current form
(perspective).
2. An RIL based ICLPP (entity) in the context of Islam (having embraced RIL and
its applications perspective) competing with other non-Islamic ideologies (context),
seen from inside a hypothetical stage of Islam having adapted to its modiﬁed process
(perspective).
3. An RIL based ICLPP seen as an outpost of Islam (entity) in the context of a world
with a number of constitution based liberal democracies for which RIL based ICLPP
may be a competing process (context) seen from a classical democratic perspective
outside Islam.
A SWOT can be made from outside Islam and from inside for instance and the results
that are obtained may diﬀer vastly. Moral risks can only be formulated from a certain
perspective. The three SWOT diagrams are meant to deal with three kinds of objections
each rendered as weaknesses or threats within an appropriate SWOT diagram.
1. Objections to development of RIL from a contemporary Islamic perspective, not
particularly keen on legal process innovation.
2. Objections to the application perspective of RIL in terms of legal process innovation,
given the need to compete with other systems outside Islam.
3. Objections to RIL development raised by those who consider ICLPP to constitute
a risk for the maintenance of other (non-Islamic) legal processes for which the legal
or ethical basis is considered superior, or at least of an independent value in need
of preservation (seen from some perspective outside Islam).
30

6.3.1
A SWOT from a simulated internal perspective
This SWOT analysis highlights the ways in which a participant to the development of
RIL may be criticized by participants of the current ICLPP. Options for such criticism
are listed as treats in this SWOT analysis. The perspective is in fact a (hypothetical)
inside conventional ICLPP perspective which is formulated from outside Islam.41
Strengths. (i) potential new development for ICLPP, which may be in need of innovation.
Weaknesses. These take the form the RIL may not be developed (or used after develop-
ment) to the satisfaction of its users and their local courts. Indeed RIL development
is risky: it may be inconclusive, there may be scaling problems, results may be un-
convincing or even counterproductive.
Opportunities. (i) Constituting a new area for applied logic, thus attracting signiﬁcant
external interest, (ii) attracting the attention of a young generation of muslims.
Threats. (i) being considered innovation for its own sake, unable to keep focussed on true
and classical legal foundations of Islam, (ii) logic becoming considered too distant
from ordinary life42 (iii) scholars constituting courts are unwilling to take notice
of logical methods and for that reason unwilling to take new colleagues on board
who intend to make use of such methods.43 (iv) opponents of RIL may successfully
claim that introduction and usage RIL will lead to uniformity which then leads to
centralization, a development that they want to prevent at all costs.
6.3.2
A SWOT diagram from an friendly external perspective
This SWOT analysis concerns the evaluation of RIL supported ICLPP (which serves as the
motivation for RIL designs and development), from a (hypothetical) Islamic perspective.
This perspective is formulated under the assumption that RIL supported ICLPP (or at
least a development in that direction) has obtained ample support in mainstream Islam.44
Strengths. (i) autonomy, (ii) real time decision making enabled about all daily matters
on moral grounds, (iii) grounded in a long history, (iv) adaptation to local circum-
stances of a community, (v) law is not seen as an artiﬁcial fence which citizens
may always try to approach (or even try to cross), rather law permanently guides
everyone at in appropriate directions.
Weaknesses.
(i) lacking cohesion (correspondence) between diﬀerent courts, (ii) low
authority by defective grounding of court decisions. (ICLPP may be too weak a
process to produce grounds for decisions that are widely accepted), (iii) inability
to develop adequate customizations (local adaptations) of the ICLPP, again with
41Because the author is its designer, this SWOT cannot be considered a “conservative Islamic SWOT”,
though approximating just that was intended.
42This is what happened with much of formal methods in computing.
43A corresponding handicap has proven almost insurmountable in software engineering.
44Of course many diﬀerent “inside perspectives” can be thought of. This one has been designed by the
author and for that reason does not really qualify as an inside perspective.
31

lacking authority as a consequence. (iii) Unclarity about its own ambitions: should
this process be installed everywhere on the long run, or only in some countries with
other countries following other governance principles? Should the process be made
subordinate to other legal systems if those are (locally) dominant because a majority
of a population has voted that way? If that is done, can it still retain its strength?
Opportunities. (i) Real Islamic Finance may be developed on the basis of Islamic Finance
and Real Islamic logic: less important restrictions may subsequently be abandoned
and the courts may be much more involved in ethical decision making about partic-
ular ﬁnancial strategies and activities, (ii) customization of ICLPP to various local
circumstances may be improved, (iii) RIL may be developed and used to facilitate
a more eﬃcient and for that reason also more frequent use of courts.
Threats. (i) centralization may become dominant with all advantages gone, (ii) central-
ization may creep into the system because of the modern ICT technologies, (iii)
the system is outperformed by a competing system, in particular constitution based
liberal democracies which do not tolerate signiﬁcant local variations in legal decision
making.
6.3.3
A SWOT diagram from a cautious external perspective
The third SWOT analysis works from an external position, in particular from the position
of the legal process of a constitution based liberal democracy, and it grasps the reﬂection
on its own position assuming the emergence of an RIL supported ICLPP as depicted
above, which is considered an emerging competitor.
Strengths. (i) Centralized law making produces better rules with wider acceptance, easily
defended against the outcome of local autonomous ICLPP’s. (ii) Consistency of law
throughout a wide area allows persons to be very mobile.
Weaknesses. (i) Citizens take a defensive attitude against the law (even if it has been con-
structed in part in their own name) more often than not viewing it as an unwanted
limitation of their possible behavior and endlessly trying to stretch its boundaries.
(ii) Moral arguments have lost prominent status, though some issues can only be
solved by means of such arguments. (iii) Minorities may feel poorly represented by
the dominant legal system.
Opportunities. (i) Inside area A, the legal platform may allow for a reduced ICLPP
(reduced because not permitted to overrule some constitutional principles), thus
making area A more attractive to Islamic citizens and allowing A to make optimal
use of their talents and skills. (iii) if ICLPP structures are more eﬀective in ﬁghting
crime and other results of lacking social cohesion, such advantages can be made use
of, (iv) the same holds for other pressing social problems such as taking care of the
elderly.
Threats. (i) If clear rules are lacking the emergence of an ICLPP infrastructure in area A
may endanger the authority (and eﬀectiveness) of the existing legal structure, with-
out replacing it to the satisfaction of a voting majority, (ii) if the right to set up an
32

ICLPP infrastructure, (on top of A’s existing legal system), may conﬂicts between
both legal processes may arise and the power structures of A may come under pres-
sure from allies of ICLPP outside A. Such pressures may be conventional political
once, but also involve wars and acts of terrorism. (iii) When ICLPP comes into
prominence, court autonomy may imply severe restrictions on individual mobility
to areas supervised by other courts.
6.4
Integrating the SWOT diagrams
These SWOT’s are hardly consistent. From an an external position (the current author’s
position) the external SWOT takes priority over both internal ones. A worker on RIL
assumes that for risk analysis and for selection of strategy and tactics taking the second
SWOT into account may take priority over taking the ﬁrst o into account.
That imposition of priorities does not imply a substantial weakening of the arguments
which have been put forward in favor of RIL and its potential use.
It only indicates
operational boundary conditions. Together these SWOT analysis results provide some
insight the pro’s and con’s of participating in RIL development for a non-muslim.
I
conclude that participation in RIL development is defensible for an outsider to Islam who
is strongly supportive of a constitution based liberal democracy.
The outsider’s position brings with it some moral dilemma’s which have not been
uncovered by means of the above SWOT analysis exercises. This requires some further
comments.
6.4.1
Moral issues concerning the outsider’s position
Given the non-Islamic, that is outsider, position to which I committed myself, claiming
a preference for the outcomes of the third SWOT analysis over the second and of the
second one over the ﬁrst will not resolve all possible ethical questions concerning the work
on this paper. I would hope to be able to write in such a way that the work becomes
acceptable for readers from a very wide ideological and religious spectrum. Aiming at
that, however, implies that potential worries of some potential readers must be dealt with
which are absent if not foreign to other potential readers. Taking the worries of some
seriously can alienate others.
The outsider’s position is complicated by worries coming from two sides so to speak.
Those who consider Islam a dangerous enemy of democracy, liberalism, and, of free expres-
sion of opinion, may regard the plan to develop logic in order to become more functional
for Islam a dangerous activity (and its agent may be considered naive at best). For peo-
ple from Islam this perspective is so unattractive that they may not be willing to read
a paper which pays any attention to it. Still I have to ask for some attention because
my outsider’s position implies that such voices, often coming from so-called conservative
politicians, cannot be overheard. Now what can I say? The moral issues cannot be deﬁni-
tively dealt with in isolation. Ethical questions about research and development must be
considered in a larger context, taking corresponding problems in other ﬁelds into account.
I will make use of two ﬁelds of research and development as a tool for comparison: (i)
applied logic in general and (ii) the development that has led to the implementations if
33

Islamic Finance.
I notice that many applications of logic in computing have been ready made for ap-
plication in the military sector. Such applications can be developed by one’s enemy too,
because publication is open to anyone who pays the relatively low cost of disclosure in-
cluding an enemy. Thus even if one agrees that Islam is an “enemy” and that RIL can
be applied in Islam, that state of aﬀairs does not imply any moral problem for an RIL
worker, the potential support for an enemy holds in both cases, and we know that right
wing ideologists hardly ever suggest not to perform applied science and technology be-
cause that may empower the military and industrial capabilities of their enemies more
than those of their allies.
6.4.2
Comparison with defense system oriented research considered ﬂawed
In spite of this comparison with applied logic, an ethical problem certainly emerges be-
cause RIL might be considered to be so speciﬁc for its Islamic background that working
on RIL can only be useful for applications aiming towards a particular form of Jihad.
Thus application asymmetry can lead to a moral problem. Against this objection, which
portrays supporting work on RIL as less defensible than “ordinary applied logic focusing
on military applications” the following can be said.
• In the initial stages RIL’s development is not conclusive from an application point
of view. Until that is the case there is no true speciﬁcity of RIL oriented work for
applications in the context of ICLPP (an intended speciﬁcity alone implies no moral
problem with regard to asymmetric applicability).
• If RIL is successfully developed its methods and techniques may have other appli-
cations besides the intended one (thus widely accessible publication is mandatory if
an asymmetry based critique is to be avoided).
• If RIL matures and is applied in the Islamic Legal process in the intended way that
state of aﬀairs may lead by way of computational evolution to centralized, or rather
uniformized, control of the legal reasoning used outside courts, because monitoring
information is likely to end up in public data bases, thus allowing legal meta-studies
to be made.45
• The situation may be compared with the development of Islamic Finance. Islamic
windows46 of banks managed from UK and USA have played an important role
in getting the set of Islamic products deﬁned and in their subsequent commercial-
ization. This matter seems not to have drawn much critical attention from ﬁerce
45In medicine world-wide data bases with individual health information have opened new possibilities
for evidence based treatments, sometimes at cost of local cultures of the medical profession.
46I will assume that a non-Islamic bank can perform Islamic activities through its Islamic Window (IW)
provided key personnel of that IW is Islamic and these staﬀmembers perceive their activities performed
for IW as being compatible with their view of Islam.
Absent that condition an Islamic Window may fail to qualify as Islamic following the deﬁnition of
that notion that has been put forward in section 3. This is not inconsistent as the naming is done by
a non-Islamic organization not committed to a high level of scrutiny concerning this part of its naming
and branding strategy
34

opponents of Islam. That lack of criticism is quite understandable: a few highly
internationally operating western banks recognized a market opportunity and they
took advantage of it successfully. These western banks have been so successful in
that activity that it may be valued as a signiﬁcant achievement that native banks
from Islamic countries (that is, countries where a large part of the population is mus-
lim) ﬁnally have been able to acquire a leading role in matters of Islamic Finance.
Sustainability of these leading roles has yet to be shown.
• As an economic phenomenon the evolution towards prominence of native banks in
providing the products of Islamic Finance (in Islamic countries) may be compared
to the prominence which Japan has acquired in the car industry between, say, 1970
and 2010. There is no need to view the acquisition of the prominent role of native
banks as a manifestation of Jihad because ordinary market competition can be used
as an alternative and more attractive explanation of that development. Jihad was
involved earlier when the preconditions of these developments were set.
These arguments together make me believe that an outsider should not (or rather may ask
not to) be sharply criticized (by other outsiders, perhaps including anti-Islam theorists)
for doing work in such a way that he or she directly contributes to a development of RIL,
including its intended application.
7
God’s existence as an AI motivated hypothesis
Making the scholarly topic of logic dependent on the unprovable and, from a certain
perspective unscientiﬁc, assertion of the existence of God47 seems to be a step backward,
a denial of the deﬁnitive achievements of many centuries of rational thought. This problem
of course disappears if God’s existence can be shown after all. Through past centuries
many candidate proofs have been invented and equally many refutations were designed
leaving the perspective of ﬁnding such proofs rather bleak. The concept of Real Islamic
Logic may shed some additional light on this matter, however, and some of its implications
for the “god hypothesis” are discussed below.
As a disclaimer I must start with asserting is that I don’t want to imply in any way that
a belief in the existence of God not based on some form of proof is somehow problematic
or, more speciﬁc for this paper, that such a belief leads to a point of departure from which
development and application of Real Islamic Logic is less plausible after all.
This section is meant for those readers who are so sceptic about the existence of God
that this attitude virtually removes their curiosity for the topic of this paper.
First of all a proof of the existence of God may be compared to a proof of the existence
of an ideal object in mathematics: the assumption of his existence can strengthen human
thought.
The assumption of God’s existence may provide intellectual and emotional
47I am assuming that a if a god exists he is unique. Further by convention, if a god exists, God denotes
that unique entity. If no god exists God is undeﬁned (nonexistent). Now speaking of the existence of
God makes sense because it may be true but it need not be true. Writing “God” can be done without
already implying his existence. The situation may be compared with division by zero. In that admittedly
much simpler case “existence of 1/0” is a property which is usually considered wrong but nevertheless it
is true in some structures, for instance in meadows [11].
35

empowerment.48 The comparison of God with a physical or cosmological phenomenon
which must be indirectly observed by means of clever experiments and perhaps though
the eyes of extremely complex cosmological mathematics may be considered less attractive.
7.1
Making the existence of a god explicit
I will assume that God is deﬁned to be an eternal entity equipped with a will and able
and willing to reﬂect upon human existence through its entire historical development.
In some way God may also inﬂuence human existence, and adequately following his will
reinforces that phenomenon, a thesis upheld even in the absence of any empirical data
about it.
The use of the assumption of the existence of God lies in the possibility to strive to
conduct one’s life in such a way that this complies with God’s will, together with the
assumption that doing so is fruitful on the long run. A substantial religion incorporates
a long standing cultural heritage providing its members the tools necessary and suﬃcient
to follow God’s will as best as possible according to the communal conceptions available
during his or her life.
7.1.1
Irrationality of an existence assumption denied
At this stage one might immediately reply: there is no ground for the hypothesis of God’s
existence whatsoever, and the existence assumption is irrational and counterintuitive.49
Without some “objective” conﬁrmation the assumption of God’s existence goes against
modern scientiﬁc thought. In reply to this it might be stated that looking in the sky one
may not get any clue about the hypothesis of a big bang and the corresponding beginning
of physical time either, although such phenomena are nowadays considered ingredients of
plausible explanations of the universe’s history. God’s existence, or rather the irrationality
behind that assumption, may be a singularity of logic or a singularity for rational thought
comparable to the big bang being a singularity of space and time. This argument, if
one attributes any value to it at all, responds to the alleged irrationality of assuming the
existence of God. But whereas the big bang hypothesis constitutes (nowadays) a part of
a simpliﬁed picture of the universe given the need to account for a wealth of experimental
data, God’s hypothetical existence cannot be rationalized in the same way due to a lack
of compelling and relevant data.
At this stage the parallel with scientiﬁc hypothesis formation may just fail. The virtue
of the assumption of God’s existence, viewed as a hypothesis in need of conﬁrmation, need
not be found in its power to simplify the resulting picture of the world and its ongoing
development, but may be found instead in its power to render this picture intrinsically
48Needless to say assuming the existence of a god may also lead to the opposite eﬀect. Without an
appropriate context the presence or even dominance of that assumption in a community has unpredictable
consequences.
49A famous remark by Lapace, in reply to a question posed by Napoleon reads “Sire, je n’avais pas
besoin de cette hypot`ese-l`a” (Sire, I had no need for that particular hypothesis.) I will argue that a
need (or at least a reasonably convincing use) for this assumption, admittedly absent for the ambitions
of Laplace and for developing most of Science, may have reappeared in recent times, with the growth of
technology, which asks for other mental schemes than “classical” scientiﬁc explanation.
36

more complex (and for that reason more computationally intractable) than any ordinary
science based model would do.
Some thousands of years ago religion probably made the story of life much more
complex than a naive and “natural” explanation of the observed facts did at that time.
This very complexity made religion almost inaccessible to non-intellectuals (none of them
priests) and for that reason it helped to turn religion into a method for obtaining and
keeping worldly power. Indeed if some 4000 years ago a king or queen plans to build a
magniﬁcent pyramid, it may be very helpful, if not necessary, to invent a religion assuming
that his or her subordinates are not already committed to any religion. And perhaps not
just any religion will do, its design may need to reﬂect the power structures it is supposed
to enforce.
7.1.2
Deductive, inductive, conductive, abductive, and productive arguments
That existence of God can be deduced from simpler assumptions in a non-circular fashion
has become unlikely after centuries of unsuccessful attempts. Informal logic (see [22])
recognizes more forms of argument, however. An inductive existence argument arises if
it can be understood as a generalization from a number of existence assertions which, at
least initially, are attributed a higher degree of conﬁdence. This line or argument seems
inapplicable in the case at hand. A conductive argument accumulates a heterogeneous
(thereby disabling induction) collection of arguments (each individually non-conclusive)
which together are considered suﬃciently convincing. Conductive arguments have been
put forward by many authors.
A diﬃculty with conductive argumentation for God’s
existence is that if more arguments are needed the individual arguments seems to lose
impact and the net gain is limited. Abductive arguments have been dealt with above;
such arguments rest upon a positive appraisal of the explanatory value of a hypothesis
(in this case the hypothesis of God’s existence) which is thereafter considered validated.
Having discharged deductive, inductive, conductive, and abductive arguments for the
existence of God as being less promising, the methodology of informal logic seems to
leave one empty-handed on the matter. The argument that is put forward below may
be classiﬁed as productive: it produces a context which is advantageous in terms of its
social productivity.
As such its productivity may be compared, in principle (and for
the sake of this argument), to the existence axioms in axiomatic set theory for which
the main argument in their favor is the extremely rich and magically attractive world of
mathematics that unfolds upon their assumption.
7.2
Virtues of the existence assumption
Assuming the existence and uniqueness of a god, together justifying the identiﬁer “God”,
combined with adherence to a substantial religion, such as for instance Islam, an individ-
ual gets committed to the task of permanently ﬁnding out about God’s will in a changing
world on the basis of a long and complex oral and written tradition. The Islamic Legal
Process is a geographically distributed mechanism for carrying out this task by way of a
tradition based group process.
37

HYPOTHESIS 1.
The virtue of the Islamic Legal Process (now essentially conceived
as a highly distributed process without centralized control) may be understood as follows:
it is more resistant against being automated than any other human process that one may
imagine.50 In other words it poses a maximal challenge for text oriented artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and making in addition the assumption of God’s existence ensures that something
fundamentally non-mechanical is at stake (or better: is assumed to be at stake), thereby
rendering also the intention of complete (and threatening) mechanization futile.51
HYPOTHESIS 2. The virtue mentioned in hypothesis 1 is so signiﬁcant that assum-
ing god’s existence is justiﬁed for that reason.52
Although the progress of artiﬁcial intelligence has not met original expectations it is
a steady process and its endpoint has by no means been reached. In forthcoming years
many of today’s human tasks will be turned into computer based activities. 1300 years
after its initiation Islam may represent mankind’s best opportunity for the deﬁnition of
a competence (following God’s will and ﬁnding out what that means) which will defeat
attempts of automation on a sustained basis. Automation of cognitive human activity
which makes human interventions redundant is an undeniable threat if only a distant one,
besides being a great opportunity just as well. It is against this emerging threat that a
substantial religion may choose to maintain the hypothesis of the existence of God as an
intellectual weapon which may be hard to replace.
Hypothesis 2 is meaningless if hypothesis 1 is unwarranted.
Progress in artiﬁcial
intelligence is so fast that the possibility that a single Islamic Court is automated in
such a way that an external observer has diﬃculties in detecting that fact and in seeing
the diﬀerence with the majority of “natural” Islamic Courts (that is it passes a kind of
customized Turing test) must be taken into account even in a near future. The highly
distributed and autonomous form of the Islamic Legal Process, until now successfully
resisting an evolution towards centralized control, together with its long term stability
contributes to the credibility of hypothesis 2.
Hypothesis 1 speaks of a maximal challenge for AI and that cannot be formally true:
automation of the entire human cultural development for an extended period of time
poses a greater challenge. So implicit in this notion of a challenge is the requirement that
a functionality of a limited scope is envisaged.
7.3
Weaknesses of this “proof”
Arguing for the existence of a god along the lines of hypothesis 1 and hypothesis 2 has an
interesting weakness: it is implausible that this god is unique because it is unique only
given the start made by its initial source documents, in combination with the sustained
50Above 8 levels of priorities of reasoning have been distinguished as being of relevance to RIL. A
formal and predictable analysis of the combined eﬀect of these 8 priority mechanisms is unlikely soon to
emerge.
51Art and Science also represent areas where automatic robots (or softbots) won’t easily replace men.
52Remarkably hypothesis 2 is in full contradiction with the idea of apocalyptic AI as surveyed in [19].
I must admit that apocalyptic AI strikes me as quite unattractive in spite of its possible futurological
merits.
38

eﬀort to take all source documents into account and to avoid deﬁnitive splits in the
community. The fundamental diﬃculty of keeping the collection of communities in I5 in
some way coherent reﬂects the diﬃculty of the underlying task: to follow God’s will. If
one were to accept an existence proof of a god along these lines of thought this existence
is only unique relative to the bundle of original sources, and the prophet gains prominence
with respect to the god whose message he has been transmitting.
So why might it be useful to turn things upside down and to consider god a reality and
his prophet a messenger about that reality? This counterintuitive mechanism enforces
that the Islamic community is kept coherent. As a simplifying assumption it helps to
understand why sustained coherence is a plausible objective. But “united we stand” may
now be understood as a tool for preventing on a sustained basis that intellectual and
emotional power is transferred into the chips of computers. However, within less than
a century this idea may be proven wrong, given the progression of artiﬁcial intelligence
technology. That turn of events opens the door to a “victory” of apocalyptic AI (see [19]).
8
Concluding remarks
A project for developing Real Islamic Logic (RIL) has been outlined. A risk analysis has
been sketched concerning an outsider’s participation to the initial phases of the develop-
ment of RIL, and these risks have been assessed as being acceptable for the author at
least.
As a speculation the intractability of RIL as a reasoning system has been portrayed
as an advantage which should be preserved and might be exploited. That very advantage
allows a further speculative thought concerning the relevance of the assumption of God’s
existence for strengthening the intended applications of RIL.
The original sources of Islam, together with a long tradition of derived works deﬁne a
control code (see [8, 24]) for a reasoning engine which is intractable (in computing terms).
Probably, with the help of modern computer science an even more intractable control code
(that is a control code leading to a less tractable reasoning system) can be designed. But
for the time being there is no need for that because, in spite of its age, Islam’s complexity
is suﬃciently high to prevent automation of its reasoning process in the near future.
