Towards Intelligent Robotic Process Automation for BPMers
Simone Agostinelli, Andrea Marrella, Massimo Mecella
Sapienza Universit`a di Roma

Abstract
Robotic Process Automation (RPA) is a fast-emerging au-
tomation technology that sits between the ﬁelds of Business
Process Management (BPM) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI),
and allows organizations to automate high volume routines.
RPA tools are able to capture the execution of such routines
previously performed by a human users on the interface of a
computer system, and then emulate their enactment in place
of the user by means of a software robot. Nowadays, in the
BPM domain, only simple, predictable business processes in-
volving routine work can be automated by RPA tools in situ-
ations where there is no room for interpretation, while more
sophisticated work is still left to human experts. In this paper,
starting from an in-depth experimentation of the RPA tools
available on the market, we provide a classiﬁcation frame-
work to categorize them on the basis of some key dimensions.
Then, based on this analysis, we derive four research chal-
lenges and discuss prospective approaches necessary to inject
intelligence into current RPA technology, in order to achieve
more widespread adoption of RPA in the BPM domain.
Introduction
The recent developments in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) force
us to continuously revisit the debate on what should be
automated and what should be done by humans. One of
these developments is Robotic Process Automation (RPA), a
fast-emerging automation approach that use software robots
(or simply SW robots) to mimic and replicate the exe-
cution of highly repetitive tasks performed by humans in
their application’s user interface (UI). SW robots are mainly
used for automating ofﬁce tasks in operations like account-
ing, billing and customer service. Typical tasks are: ex-
tract semi-structured data from documents, read and write
from/to databases, copy and paste data across cells of a

make calculations, etc. (Willcocks, Lacity, and Craig 2015;
Willcocks 2016).
Despite the capabilities of SW robots, the RPA technol-
ogy is still considered to be in its infancy (van der Aalst,
Bichler, and Heinzl 2018), even if similar solutions have
been around for a long time. For instance, since the mid-
nineties, closely related to SW robots, chatbots have been
used for years to accept voice-based or keyboard inputs
and guide customers to ﬁnd relevant information in web-
based applications (Hill, Ford, and Farreras 2015). Similarly,
in the same years, there has been some interest in the ﬁ-
nancial industry around a preliminary form of RPA, called
Straight Through Processing (STP) (van der Aalst and van
Hee 2004). The objective of STP was to speed up ﬁnancial
transactions allowing to automate several repetitive back-
ofﬁce functions, thus reducing the manual process for em-
ployees to enter the same information repeatedly during the
processing of a transaction. Differently from STP and chat-
bots, RPA can be seen as an evolution of traditional screen
scraping solutions (Bisbal et al. 1999), which sought to vi-
sualize screen display data from legacy applications (having
no means for automated interfacing) in order to display such
data using modern UIs. The strength of RPA is that it does
not replace existing applications or manipulate their code,
but rather works with them similarly to a human user.
In recent years, there has been an increased interest
around RPA in the Business Process Management (BPM)
domain (Kirchmer 2017). BPM is an active area of research
based on the observation that each product and/or service
that an organization offers is the outcome of a number of
performed activities. Business processes (BPs) are the key
instrument for organizing such activities and improving the
understanding of their interrelationships. Nowadays, BPs are
enacted in many complex industrial (e.g., manufacturing, lo-
gistics, retail) and non-industrial (e.g., emergency manage-
ment, healthcare, smart environments) domains through a
dedicated generation of information systems, called Process
Management Systems (PMSs) (Reichert and Weber 2012).
However, while conducting a BPM project is often consid-
ered too expensive because its “top-down” approach that
forces to develop the PMS from scratch (and system inte-
gration is expensive), the promise of RPA is to rely on an
approach where, instead of redesigning existing information
systems (that remain unchanged), humans are replaced by
SW robots in the execution of those BPs involving routine
work. This allows knowledge workers to have more time for
value added tasks. In the research literature, a number of
case studies have shown that RPA technology can concretely
lead to improvements in efﬁciency for BPs involving routine
work in large companies, such as O2 and Vodafone (Lacity,
Willcocks, and Craig 2015; Aguirre and Rodriguez 2017;
Geyer-Klingeberg et al. 2018).
Despite this growing attention around RPA, when con-
sidering the state-of-the-art technology, it becomes appar-
ent that the current generation of RPA tools is driven by
predeﬁned rules and manual conﬁgurations made by ex-
pert users rather than by AI (Lohr 2018). According to
(van der Aalst, Bichler, and Heinzl 2018), to achieve a more
widespread adoption in the BPM domain, RPA needs to be-
come “smarter”. In a nutshell, with the use of AI techniques,
more complex and less deﬁned BPs could be fully supported
by the RPA technology. For example, by observing human
problem resolving unexpected system behavior (e.g., in case
arXiv:2001.00804v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2020

of system errors, changing forms, etc.), RPA tools can adapt
and learn how to handle non-standard cases. After all, the
Gartner Hype Cycle for AI published in 20181 places RPA
as one of the technologies at the peak of the hype cycle,
meaning that there are nowadays deep expectations on what
RPA will be able to deliver to the AI community.
Starting from the above discussion, in this paper we ﬁrst
identify and test ten RPA tools available on the market and
categorize them by means of a classiﬁcation framework. The
results of the classiﬁcation allow us to derive four research
challenges and identify prospective approaches required to
evolve RPA towards AI in the context of BPM.
Background
The state-of-the-art in RPA is plenty of recent works that
are focused on optimizing speciﬁc BPM aspects of a RPA
project. The work of Bosco et al. (Bosco et al. 2019) fo-
cuses on the automated identiﬁcation of candidate routines
to robotize. The work of Gao et al. (Gao et al. 2019) pro-
poses a self-learning approach to automatically detect high-
level RPA-rules, from captured historical low-level user be-
havior. The work of Jimenez-Ramirez and Reijers (Jimenez-
Ramirez et al. 2019) proposes a method for the early stages
of a RPA project. The work of Leno (Leno et al. 2019)
presents a method to record the performed user actions in
Excel and Chrome Web browser in a log, in order to en-
able process mining for RPA. Finally, the works (Lacity,
Willcocks, and Craig 2015; Aguirre and Rodriguez 2017;
Geyer-Klingeberg et al. 2018) discuss the enactment of three
different RPA case studies in large companies.
Excluding the works (Bosco et al. 2019) and (Gao et al.
2019), the majority of the above contributions focus on re-
ﬁning some existing features of a RPA project, while none of
them is targeted to identify and tackle the concrete research
challenges of RPA to enable its adoption in BPM on a large
scale. To ﬁll this gap, the ﬁrst step of this contribution is to
identify and test the real RPA tools available on the market
categorizing them by means of a classiﬁcation framework.
Most of the actual deployments of RPA are industry-
speciﬁc, e.g., for ﬁnancial and business services (Tornbohm
2017). According to (AI-Multiple 2019), nowadays, the
market of RPA solutions includes more than 50 vendors de-
veloping tools having different prices and features. Among
them, we identiﬁed 10 vendors that offer to freely try their
RPA tools, i.e., without the need to pay any license. The RPA
tools in question are:
• Automation Anywhere2
• AssistEdge3
• G1ANT4
• Kryon5
1https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3883863-hype-cycle-
for-artiﬁcial-intelligence-2018
2https://www.automationanywhere.com/
3https://www.edgeverve.com/assistedge/
4https://g1ant.com/
5https://www.kryonsystems.com/
• Rapise6
• TagUI7
• UiPath8
• VisualCron9
• WinAutomation10
• WorkFusion11
We analyzed each of the above tools leveraging a ded-
icated case study based on a Purchase-to-Pay process ob-
tained from a SAP ERP system (the same one used in
(Geyer-Klingeberg et al. 2018)), which includes many stan-
dardized and highly repetitive transactions with potential
for automation. The data of the case study covers around
400.000 purchase orders created over one year, and can be
accessed after registration on the Celonis Academic Cloud
(SE 2019).
After selecting the target process to automate, we em-
ployed the selected tools to design and train various SW
robots, by recording the manual steps of the process. This
has allowed us to identify a list of common tasks that must
be performed to conduct a RPA project:
1. Determine which process steps (also called routines) are
good candidates to be automated.
2. Model the selected routines in the form of ﬂowchart di-
agrams, which involve the speciﬁcation of the actions,
routing constructs (e.g., parallel and alternative branches),
data ﬂow, etc. that deﬁne the behavior of a SW robot.
3. Record the mouse/key events that happen on the UI of
the user’s computer system. This information is associ-
ated with the actions of a routine, enabling it to emulate
the recorded human activities by means of a SW robot.
4. Develop each modeled routine by generating the software
code required to concretely enact the associated SW robot
on a target computer system.
5. Deploy the SW robots in their environment to perform
their actions. According to (Jimenez-Ramirez et al. 2019),
it should be noted that RPA is often characterized by the
lacking of a testing environment; only the production en-
vironment is available.
6. Monitor the performance of SW robots to detect bottle-
necks and exceptions.
7. Maintain the routines, which takes into account each SW
robot’s performance and error cases. The outcomes of this
phase enable a new analysis and design cycle to enhance
the SW robots (Jimenez-Ramirez et al. 2019).
Classiﬁcation Framework
We tested the selected RPA tools with our case study per-
forming the tasks to conduct a RPA project. This has allowed
6https://www.inﬂectra.com/Rapise/
7https://github.com/kelaberetiv/TagUI
8https://www.uipath.com/
9https://www.visualcron.com/
10https://www.winautomation.com/
11https://www.workfusion.com/

Table 1: Results of the application of the classiﬁcation framework
Tool
SW Arch.
Coding
Recording
Self Learning
Autom.
Routine comp.
Log
Cl.-Server
St.-alone
Strong
Low
GUI
Web
Desktop
Others
Intra-rout.
Inter-rout.
type
Manual
Autom.
quality
Aut. Anyw.
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆⋆⋆
AssistEdge
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆
G1ANT
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆
Kryion
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆⋆
Rapise
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆
TagUI
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆
UiPath
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆⋆
VisualCron
✓
✓
Attended
✓
⋆⋆⋆
WinAutom.
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆⋆
WorkFusion
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Hybrid
✓
⋆⋆
us to realize a classiﬁcation framework for RPA tools, which
consists of the following key dimensions:
• Software (SW) Architecture: The speciﬁc SW architec-
ture adopted by the tool: either Stand-alone or Client-
Server.
• Coding features: The behavior of SW robots can be clas-
siﬁed as:
– Strong coding: based on the realization of explicit
programming scripts, often with the support of a
command-line interface (CLI), which instructs the SW
robots about the routines to emulate;
– Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs): user friendly envi-
ronments providing drag & drop facilities to build the
ﬂowchart of the routines to emulate;
– Low-code tools: GUIs that – in addition to drag & drop
facilities – provide low-coding functionalities to semi-
automatically create software code.
• Recording facilities: The actions performed by a human
within the software tool can be recorded with:
– Web recording: detection of user actions performed on
a web browser;
– Desktop recording: detection of user actions performed
on a desktop UI;
– Others: some RPA tools do not support neither web
nor desktop recording. Nonetheless, they offer record-
ing tools that work on speciﬁc applications only, such
as Excel, Acrobat, SAP and Citrix. Some RPA tools
provide also traditional screen-scraping recording.
• Self Learning: The ability of the RPA tool to automati-
cally understand which user actions belong to which rou-
tines (Intra-routine learning), and which routines are good
candidates for the automation (Inter-routine learning).
• Automation type: SW robots can either interact with
users and/or act independently. This leads to three differ-
ent categories of automation:
– Attended: the SW robots constantly require interaction
with the users;
– Unattended: the SW robots act like batch processes,
i.e., manual intervention is not desired. This is ideal for
optimizing back-ofﬁce work;
– Hybrid: Combination of the two above categories.
• Routine composition: The ability of the RPA tool to or-
chestrate, at run-time, through manual support or in an
automated way different (single) routines associated with
different SW robots, when large workﬂows need to be em-
ulated.
• Log quality: The quality of the logs recorded by the
RPA tool (called RPA logs). Since routines consist of col-
lections of activities to be enacted according to certain
routing constraints, logs produced by RPA tools resemble
event logs in process mining. To this end, we measure the
quality of such logs using the classiﬁcation provided in
the Process Mining Manifesto (van der Aalst et al. 2012),
where ﬁve maturity levels are deﬁned, ranging from logs
of excellent (⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆) to poor quality (⋆).
Table 1 shows the results of the application of our classiﬁ-
cation framework to the selected RPA tools. The following
aspects become apparent: the majority of the tools provide
(i) a Client-Server SW architecture, (ii) GUIs with drag &
drop facilities and low-code functionalities, (iii) both web
and desktop recording, (iv) a hybrid automation type, (v)
manual-based features to achieve routine composition, (vi)
logs of poor quality. Interestingly, differently from the other
tools, G1ANT and TagUI offer strong-coding functionalities
with a basic CLI to support the programming of SW robots.
Finally, there is no tool that provides self learning or auto-
mated routine composition features.
Research Challenges and Approaches
On the basis of the results discussed in the previous sec-
tion, we have derived four research challenges (and potential
approaches to tackle them) necessary to inject intelligence
into the current RPA technology towards a better support
to BPM. The four identiﬁed challenges, which will be ex-
plained in the rest of the section, are: (i) Intra-routine Self
Learning, (ii) Inter-routine Self Learning, (iii) Automated
generation of ﬂowcharts, and (iv) Automated routine com-
position.
1. Intra-routine Self Learning (Segmentation).
Description: Logs recorded by RPA tools are character-
ized by long sequences of actions and/or events that re-
ﬂect a number of routine executions. A log can record
information about several routines, whose actions and
events are mixed in some order that reﬂects the particular
order of their execution by the user (Bosco et al. 2019). In

addition, the same routine can be spread across multiple
logs, making the automated identiﬁcation of routines far
from being trivial.
Objective: Identify the routines to be (potentially) emu-
lated through software robots by looking at the RPA logs
that keep track of the user actions taking place during a
run of the system. This issue is known as “segmentation”.
Approaches: One possible approach to tackle this chal-
lenge is to rely on log analysis solutions in the Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) ﬁeld (Dumais et al. 2014;
Dev and Liu 2017; Marrella and Catarci 2018), which fo-
cus on identifying frequent user tasks inside logs consist-
ing of actions at different granularity. Alternately, local
process mining approaches (Tax et al. 2016) or sequential
pattern mining (Dong 2009) can be employed to identify
sequential patterns of non-consecutive actions that tend
to be repeated multiple times across multiple logs (Bosco
et al. 2019). An interesting recent approach is the one of
Gao et al. (Gao et al. 2019), where the authors present a
learning-based approach that allows for completely auto-
mated RPA-rule deduction, on the basis of captured his-
torical low-level user behavior. However, to date, no avail-
able solution exists that allows for automatically: (i) un-
derstanding which user actions have to be considered in-
side the log (separating noise from actions that contribute
to routines); (ii) interpreting their semantics on the ba-
sis of their granularity and (iii) identifying which routines
they belong to. Solving the above challenges would al-
low us to cluster all user actions associated with a routine
in a well bounded execution trace. Consequently, all such
execution traces would be organized into a routine-based
log.
2. Inter-routine Self Learning (Automated identiﬁcation
of candidate routines to robotize).
Description: While existing RPA tools allow one to auto-
mate a wide range of routines, they do not allow one to
determine in an automated way which routines are good
candidates for automation in the ﬁrst place.
Objective: Given a list of routine-based logs, identify au-
tomatically which routines are good candidates for being
automated by RPA tools.
Approaches: To date, current RPA tools provide very lim-
ited support to this challenge, which is often performed
by means of interviews, walkthroughs, direct observation
of workers, and analysis of documentation that may be of
poor quality and difﬁcult to understand. This manual ap-
proach allows analysts to identify the most obvious rou-
tines, while it is not suitable to detect those routines that
are not executed on a daily basis or that are performed
across multiple business units in different ways. The work
of Jimenez-Ramirez and Reijers (Jimenez-Ramirez et al.
2019) proposes to mitigate this issue through a method to
improve the early stages of the RPA lifecycle using pro-
cess mining techniques (van der Aalst 2016). On the other
hand, a potential concrete solution to tackle this challenge
is proposed by Bosco et al. (Bosco et al. 2019), where the
authors present a method to analyze routine-based logs
in order to discover routines that are fully deterministic.
To this end, the method combines a technique for com-
pressing a set of routines into an acyclic automaton, with
techniques for rule mining and for discovering data trans-
formations.
3. Automated generation of ﬂowcharts.
Description: In RPA tools, there is a lacking of testing en-
vironments. As a consequence, SW robots are developed
through a trial-and-error approach consisting of three
steps that are repeated until success (Leno et al. 2018):
(i) First, a human designer produces a ﬂowchart diagram
that includes the actions to be performed by the SW robot
on a target system; (ii) Second, SW robots are typically
deployed in production environments, where they inter-
act with information systems, with a high risk of errors
due to inaccurate modeling of ﬂowcharts; (iii) Third, if
SW robots are not able to reproduce the behavior of the
users for a speciﬁc routine, then the designer adjusts the
ﬂowchart diagrams to ﬁx the identiﬁed gap. While this
approach is effective to execute simple rule-based logic
in situations where there is no room for interpretation, it
becomes time-consuming and error-prone in the presence
of routines that are less predictable or require some level
of human judgement. Indeed, the designer should have a
global vision of all possible unfoldings of the routines to
deﬁne the appropriate behaviors of the SW robot, which
becomes complicated when the number of unfoldings in-
creases. In cases where the rule set does not contain a suit-
able response for a speciﬁc situation, robots allow for es-
calation to a human supervisor.
Objective: Once the routines to be automated and the user
actions that constitute them (i.e., the routine-based logs)
have been identiﬁed, the target is to automatically gener-
ate the ﬂowchart diagrams describing the behaviors of the
SW robots required to successfully execute the routines.
Approaches: A possible solution to this challenge can be
to resort on discovery algorithms from the process min-
ing ﬁeld (van der Aalst 2016) and to automatically ex-
tract ﬂowcharts in the form of Petri nets/BPMN models
from routine-based logs. Thus, it is necessary to investi-
gate from the literature on process discovery (Augusto et
al. 2019) which algorithms suit better to extract the base
structure of ﬂowchart diagrams from a routine-based log.
Since such discovered ﬂowcharts will reﬂect real routine
executions, they may contain/miss (un-)necessary user ac-
tions with respect to the SW robot’s expected behavior.
To mitigate this issue, it is possible to leverage another
process mining technique, named trace alignment (Adri-
ansyah, Sidorova, and van Dongen 2011), which would
allow us to properly clean the discovered ﬂowchart dia-
grams, by ﬁltering out the unwanted behaviors found in
the previous discovery stage.
4. Automated routines composition.
Description: In modern contexts, human operators usually
enact not just single tasks but complex workﬂows, con-
sisting of many interrelated routines. However, the cur-
rent RPA technology allows for developing SW robots for
executing single, independent routines. Only manual sup-
port is provided to orchestrate multiple routines, i.e., the

Figure 1: Overview of the pipeline of potential approaches required to tackle the research challenges
Routine-based
logs
RPA
logs
Action 1
Action 2
Action 1
Action 3
Action 2
Action 1
Action 2
Automated 
generation of
ﬂowchart diagrams
Process 
Mining
Automated routines 
composition
Automated 
Planning
Flowchart diagrams
Intra-routine & 
Inter-routine 
Self Learning
HCI
Process Mining
Machine Learning
RPA Workflow
management of more complex workﬂows is completely
delegated to human supervisors.
Objective: Automated generation of RPA workﬂows con-
sisting of many interrelated routines.
Approaches: To synthesize complex workﬂows through
an intelligent orchestration of the robots’ routines, auto-
mated planning techniques in AI can be employed (Ghal-
lab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). The application of plan-
ning for tackling the composition issue has been already
proved to be successful in real world domains (Marrella
2019). The idea is to consider the robots’ routines as black
boxes, i.e., as planning actions with speciﬁc precondi-
tions and effects, and to delegate to a planning system the
generation of a proper strategy to automatically compose
them in a larger workﬂow that coordinates their orches-
tration.
Figure 1 shows a graphical overview of the pipeline of
potential approaches required to tackle the four identiﬁed re-
search challenges to achieve the aforementioned objectives.
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
RPA recently gained a lot of attention in the BPM domain
(van der Aalst, Bichler, and Heinzl 2018). Since RPA oper-
ates at the UI level, rather than at the system level, it allows
one to apply automation without any changes in the underly-
ing information system. Thus, the entry barrier of adopting
RPA in BPs that are already in place is lower compared to
conventional BPM (Gao et al. 2019). However, the current
generation of RPA tools is driven by predeﬁned rules and
manual conﬁgurations made by expert users rather than by
AI (Lohr 2018), preventing a widespread adoption of these
tools in the BPM domain.
In this paper, we have tackled this issue starting from an
in-depth experimentation of the RPA tools available in the
market. Then we have provided a classiﬁcation framework
to categorize them on the basis of some key dimensions and
we have derived four research challenges and discussed po-
tential approaches necessary to inject intelligence into the
current RPA technology, from a BPM perspective.
It is worth to notice that, according to Table 1, the logs
produced by the tested RPA tools have a poor quality (ac-
tions may be missing or not recorded properly), since they
are mainly used for debugging purposes. Increasing the
quality of RPA logs is a fundamental prerequisite to properly
tackle the proposed research, which leverages a log analysis
to discover, identify, model and compose routines in an au-
tomated way. To this end, RPA tools should aim at logs at
the highest possible quality level.
To mitigate this issue, we are currently developing an ac-
tion logger to be attached to the existing RPA tools, in order
to enable the creation of routines-based logs of an acceptable
quality. Apart from the need to increase the quality of RPA
logs, as a future work, this research aims at also improv-
ing the auditability (RPA logs are auditable), upgradability
(ﬂowchart diagrams describing SW robots’ behavior will be
always updated to the current state of the system execution)
and the resiliency (SW robots will be always upgraded to
deal with new behaviors, making them very robust to any
contextual change that may arise during a routine execution)
of SW robots. Furthermore, scalability must be improved as
well. Human capacity is difﬁcult to scale in situations where
demand ﬂuctuates, instead SW robots operate at whatever
speed is demanded by the work volume.
To conclude, we note that our study has a threat to valid-
ity, since we analyzed only a sample of the RPA tools avail-
able on the market. As a consequence, our ﬁndings can not
be generalized beyond the scope of the tested RPA tools.
Nonetheless, we consider this work as an important ﬁrst
step towards the realization of intelligent solutions for RPA.
Moreover, we also envision that this research will provide
long-term beneﬁts on the companies workforce, e.g., by im-
proving the customer service in the front ofﬁce while at the
same time reducing the back ofﬁce tasks.
