arXiv:2101.00589v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2021
diﬀ-SAT - A Software for Sampling and Probabilistic
Reasoning for SAT and Answer Set Programming
Matthias Nickles
School of Computer Science
National University of Ireland, Galway

Abstract
This paper describes diﬀ-SAT, an Answer Set and SAT solver which com-
bines regular solving with the capability to use probabilistic clauses, facts and
rules, and to sample an optimal world-view (multiset of satisfying Boolean
variable assignments or answer sets) subject to user-provided probabilistic
constraints. The sampling process minimizes a user-deﬁned diﬀerentiable ob-
jective function using a gradient descent based optimization method called
Diﬀerentiable Satisﬁability Solving (∂SAT) respectively Diﬀerentiable An-
swer Set Programming (∂ASP). Use cases are i.a. probabilistic logic pro-
gramming (in form of Probabilistic Answer Set Programming), Probabilistic
Boolean Satisﬁability solving (PSAT), and distribution-aware sampling of
model multisets (answer sets or Boolean interpretations).
Keywords:
Boolean Satisﬁability, Answer Set Programming, Probabilistic
Satisﬁability, Probabilistic Programming, Gradient Descent
1. Introduction
Modern solvers for the Boolean Satisﬁability Problem (SAT) are power-
ful, versatile and fast tools for logical inference. SAT solvers underlie a large
number of other optimization and reasoning approaches as well as industry
applications, for example many constraint programming and Satisﬁability
Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers, bounded model checking, package man-
agers, hardware and software veriﬁcation tools, crypto-analysis, and plan-
ning and scheduling approaches [13, 8, 9]. Answer Set Programming (ASP)
[5] is a form of logic programming (with syntax similar to Prolog and Data-
log) which is closely related to SAT solving and oriented primarily towards

NP-hard search and combinatorial problems.
Regular SAT and Answer Set solvers do not have the capability to han-
dle or reason about probabilistic knowledge, or to sample multisets of models
governed by speciﬁc probability distributions. diﬀ-SAT (formerly named del-
SAT) is an open source SAT and ASP solver which has those capabilities.
diﬀ-SAT is programmed in Scala and runs on any contemporary standard
Java VM. Its solver core incorporates modern SAT solving techniques such as
CDCL (Conﬂict-Driven Clause Learning)-style solving, Glucose-style restart
policy [1], adaptive branching heuristics, rephasing, and parallel portfolio
solving in multi-core environments.
Symbolic knowledge can be provided in various formats, including Boolean
formulas in CNF and logic programs in Answer Set Programming (ASP) in-
termediate format (obtained from an ASP grounder). Soft constraints can be
provided by attaching probabilities to clauses, facts or rules, or by specify-
ing diﬀerentiable objective functions directly as mathematical expressions.
In contrast to most existing logic programming approaches, probabilistic
databases and approaches based on a reduction to Weighed Model Counting
[3], diﬀ-SAT does not require any independence assumptions about proba-
bilistic variables. Compared to Markov Logic Networks [12] (the arguably
most popular probabilistic logic), diﬀ-SAT allows for probabilistic logic pro-
gramming and has thus the ability to deal with inductive deﬁnitions and
to use probabilities directly as weights despite being able to model complex
interdependencies.
diﬀ-SAT’s output is a multiset of models (if the given problem has a solution)
corresponding to a probability distribution over possible worlds, allowing for
probabilistic inference in the usual way.
On the technical level, diﬀ-SAT achieves its functionality by ﬁnding op-
timal distributions of entire multi-sets of satisfying models (related to the
concept of “worldviews” in epistemic logic programming [6]). An incremen-
tal sampling process minimizes a user-deﬁned objective function (loss func-
tion) over symbol statistics in model multisets using a gradient descent-based
branching literal selection approach called Diﬀerentiable Satisﬁability Solving
respectively Diﬀerentiable Answer Set Programming [10, 11] (∂SAT, ∂ASP).
Probabilistic annotations of logical items like clauses or rules can be au-
tomatically translated into such diﬀerentiable functions. Multi-models opti-
mization could be stylized as a form of model optimization where the optimal
model is a meta-model which comprises multiple models, but diﬀ-SAT avoids
2

this stylization as it would require clunky techniques like model reiﬁcation.
Remark: Multi-models optimization should not be confused with other op-
timization types involving multiple models, such as the concurrent discovery
of several optimal models.
In contrast to existing approaches to ASP- or SAT-based optimization
such as MaxWalkSAT for Weighted MaxSAT solving [7], the diﬀerentiable
objective function evaluates and optimizes statistics over an entire multiset of
models instead of ﬁnding an optimal single model which is optimal wrt. the
sum of the weights of satisﬁed soft constraints (soft clauses). Compared to
other SAT sampling approaches, in particular [2], diﬀ-SAT samples multiple
models using a form of gradient descent until a given minimization threshold
of the objective function has been reached. Clauses can be attached proba-
bilities directly instead of non-normalized weights. Note that diﬀ-SAT is not
a Stochastic Local Search (SLS) solver but a complete solver (i.e., a solver
which returns UNSAT if the input formula is not satisﬁable) with probabilis-
tic optimization features.
A more detailed description of diﬀ-SAT’s algorithm and comparison with
further related approaches can be found in [11, 10].
2. Functionality and Input
Notwithstanding being based on a single, relatively simple technical prin-
ciple (∂SAT / ∂ASP), diﬀ-SAT goes beyond regular SAT/ASP solving by
providing a wide range of additional use cases (besides plain SAT and ASP
solving), including probabilistic SAT (PSAT), Probabilistic Answer Set Pro-
gramming (PrASP), and distribution-dependent model sampling where a
family of target distributions can be speciﬁed by diﬀerentiable objective func-
tions of the form described in the previous section.
diﬀ-SAT is open source. The source code, recent releases and documentation
can be found at https://github.com/MatthiasNickles/diff-SAT.
Features include:
- Parallel portfolio ASP and SAT solving based on Conﬂict-Driven No-
good Learning (CDNL), a variant of CDCL)
- Runs on the JVM (Java 1.8 or higher)
- Model sampling as randomized, gradient-steered search for optimal
multisets of models (answer sets respectively Boolean assignments)
3

- Objective functions are arbitrary diﬀerentiable functions over atom
frequencies in models, allowing for, e.g., probabilistic atoms (clauses,
rules) and probabilistic inference, i.e., computation of the probabilities
of logical query formulas.
- A range of alternative input formats, including for Probabilistic SAT
and Probabilistic Answer Set Programming. See below for the complete
list of supported formats.
- User API for working with probabilistic and non-probabilistic clause
and rule sets
- Direct support for basic non-ground ASP rules (unrestricted non-ground
answer set programs can also be used, but that requires a preceding
grounding step using a grounder such as Gringo or Clingo [4], as usual
with Answer Set solvers)
Input is accepted in various standard as well as non-standard forms
(where no commonly accepted format exists yet, in particular in the area
of probabilistic input):
- DIMACS CNF (for regular SAT solving)
- Probabilistic DIMACS CNF (PCNF) where each clause can optionally
be annotated with a probability to turn it into a soft clause
- Enhanced DIMACS CNF with a list of parameter atoms and objective
function terms appended to the DIMACS part
- ASP Intermediate Format (ASPIF), optionally extended with parame-
ter atoms and objective function terms deﬁned using special predicates
- Enhanced ASPIF format with a list of parameter atoms and objective
function terms appended to the ASPIF part
- Probabilistic ASP Intermediate Format (PASPIF) which enhances AS-
PIF standard format with optional rule probabilities
diﬀ-SAT’s output for satisﬁable problems is a multiset of models (possible
worlds) where the normalized count of a model represents its probability.
The probabilities of individual clauses, facts or rules can be obtained using a
simple subsequent ﬁltering and counting step as in most other probabilistic
logic programming approaches, but diﬀ-SAT can optionally perform this step
itself for user-speciﬁed query clauses, facts and rules.
4

Code metadata
Nr.
Code metadata description
C1
Current code version
0.5.2
C2
Link to code/repository used for this
code version
https://github.com/
MatthiasNickles/diff-SAT
C4
Code License
MIT
C5
Code versioning system used
git
C6
Software code languages, tools, and
services used
Scala, Java, JVM
C7
Compilation requirements, operat-
ing environments & dependencies
JDK 1.8+ (e.g., OpenJDK), SBT or
Maven
C8
If available link to developer docu-
mentation/manual
https://github.com/
MatthiasNickles/diff-SAT
C9

(see author contact details)
Table 1: Code metadata
