T-LESS: An RGB-D Dataset for 6D Pose Estimation of Texture-less Objects
Tom´aˇs Hodaˇn1, Pavel Haluza1, ˇStˇep´an Obdrˇz´alek1, Jiˇr´ı Matas1, Manolis Lourakis2, Xenophon Zabulis2
1Center for Machine Perception, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
2Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas, Heraklion, Greece
Abstract
We introduce T-LESS, a new public dataset for estimat-
ing the 6D pose, i.e. translation and rotation, of texture-less
rigid objects. The dataset features thirty industry-relevant
objects with no signiﬁcant texture and no discriminative
color or reﬂectance properties. The objects exhibit sym-
metries and mutual similarities in shape and/or size. Com-
pared to other datasets, a unique property is that some of
the objects are parts of others. The dataset includes training
and test images that were captured with three synchronized
sensors, speciﬁcally a structured-light and a time-of-ﬂight
RGB-D sensor and a high-resolution RGB camera. There
are approximately 39K training and 10K test images from
each sensor. Additionally, two types of 3D models are pro-
vided for each object, i.e. a manually created CAD model
and a semi-automatically reconstructed one. Training im-
ages depict individual objects against a black background.
Test images originate from twenty test scenes having vary-
ing complexity, which increases from simple scenes with
several isolated objects to very challenging ones with mul-
tiple instances of several objects and with a high amount of
clutter and occlusion. The images were captured from a sys-
tematically sampled view sphere around the object/scene,
and are annotated with accurate ground truth 6D poses of
all modeled objects. Initial evaluation results indicate that
the state of the art in 6D object pose estimation has ample
room for improvement, especially in difﬁcult cases with sig-
niﬁcant occlusion. The T-LESS dataset is available online
at cmp.felk.cvut.cz/t-less.
1. Introduction
Texture-less rigid objects are common in human environ-
ments and the need to learn, detect and accurately localize
them from images arises in a variety of applications. The
pose of a rigid object has six degrees of freedom, i.e. three
in translation and three in rotation, and its full knowledge
is often required. In robotics, for example, the 6D object
pose facilitates spatial reasoning and allows an end-effector
to act upon an object. In an augmented reality scenario, ob-
Figure 1. Examples of T-LESS test images (left) overlaid
with colored 3D object models at the ground truth 6D poses
(right). Instances of the same object have the same color.
The goal is to ﬁnd instances of the modeled objects and
estimate their 6D poses.
ject pose can be used to enhance one’s perception of reality
by augmenting objects with extra information such as hints
for assembly guidance.
The visual appearance of a texture-less object is domi-
nated by its global shape, color, reﬂectance properties, and
the conﬁguration of light sources. The lack of texture im-
plies that the object cannot be reliably recognized with tra-
ditional techniques relying on photometric local patch de-
tectors and descriptors [9, 31]. Instead, recent approaches
that can deal with texture-less objects have focused on lo-
cal 3D feature description [33, 51, 19], and semi-global or
arXiv:1701.05498v1  [cs.CV]  19 Jan 2017

global description relying primarily on intensity edges and
depth cues [20, 24, 54, 5, 14, 21, 27]. Therefore, RGB-
D data consisting of aligned color and depth images, ob-
tained with widely available Kinect-like sensors, have come
to play an important role.
In this paper, we introduce a new public dataset for 6D
pose estimation of texture-less rigid objects. An overview
of the included objects and test scenes is provided in Fig. 2.
The dataset features thirty commodity electrical parts which
have no signiﬁcant texture, discriminative color or distinc-
tive reﬂectance properties, and often bear similarities in
shape and/or size. Furthermore, a unique characteristic of
the objects is that some of them are parts of others. For ex-
ample, objects 7 and 8 are built up from object 6, object 9
is made of three copies of object 10 stacked next to each
other, whilst the center part of objects 17 and 18 is nearly
identical to object 13. Objects exhibiting similar properties
are common in industrial environments.
The dataset includes training and test images captured
with a triplet of sensors, i.e. a structured light RGB-D sen-
sor Primesense Carmine 1.09, a time-of-ﬂight RGB-D sen-
sor Microsoft Kinect v2, and an RGB camera Canon IXUS
950 IS. The sensors were time-synchronized and had sim-
ilar perspectives. All images were obtained with an auto-
matic procedure that systematically sampled images from a
view sphere, resulting in ~39K training and ~10K test im-
ages from each sensor. The training images depict objects
in isolation with a black background, while the test images
originate from twenty table-top scenes with arbitrarily ar-
ranged objects. Complexity of the test scenes varies from
those with several isolated objects and a clean background
to very challenging ones with multiple instances of several
objects and with a high amount of occlusion and clutter. Ad-
ditionally, the dataset contains two types of 3D mesh mod-
els for each object; one manually created in CAD software
and one semi-automatically reconstructed from the training
RGB-D images. All occurrences of the modeled objects
in the training and test images are annotated with accurate
ground truth 6D poses; see Fig. 1 for their qualitative and
Sec. 4.1 for their quantitative evaluation.
The dataset is intended for evaluating various ﬂavors of
the 6D object pose estimation problem [23] and other re-
lated problems, such as 2D object detection [50, 22] and
object segmentation [49, 17]. Since images from three sen-
sors are available, one may also study the importance of dif-
ferent input modalities for a given problem. Another option
is to use the training images for evaluating 3D object recon-
struction methods [44], where the provided CAD models
can serve as the ground truth.
Our objectives in designing T-LESS were to provide a
dataset of a substantial but manageable size, with a rigorous
and complete ground truth annotation that is accurate to the
level of sensor resolution, and with a signiﬁcant variability
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure 2.
T-LESS includes training images and 3D mod-
els of 30 objects (top) and test images of 20 scenes (bot-
tom) – shown overlaid with colored 3D object models at
the ground truth poses. The images were captured from a
systematically sampled view sphere around an object/scene
and are annotated with accurate ground truth 6D poses of
all modeled objects.
in complexity, so that it would provide different levels of
difﬁculty and be reasonably future-proof, i.e. solvable, but
not solved by the current state-of-the-art methods. The difﬁ-
culty of the dataset for 6D object pose estimation is demon-
strated by the relatively low performance of the method by
Hodaˇn et al. [24]. This method otherwise achieves a perfor-
mance close to the state of the art on the well-established
dataset of Hinterstoisser et al. [20].

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Sec. 2 reviews related datasets, Sec. 3 describes technical
details of the acquisition and post-processing of the T-LESS
dataset, Sec. 4 assesses the accuracy of the ground truth
poses and provides initial evaluation results, and Sec. 5 con-
cludes the paper.
2. Related Datasets
First we review datasets for estimating the 6D pose of
speciﬁc rigid objects, grouped by the type of provided im-
ages, then we mention a few datasets designed for simi-
lar problems. If not stated otherwise, these datasets supply
ground truth annotations in the form of 6D object poses.
2.1. RGB-D Datasets
Only a few public RGB-D datasets, from over one
hundred reported by Firman in [15], enable the evalua-
tion of 6D object pose estimation methods. Most of the
datasets reviewed in this section were captured with Mi-
crosoft Kinect v1 or Primesense Carmine 1.09, which rep-
resent the ﬁrst generation of consumer-grade RGB-D sen-
sors operating on the structured-light principle. The dataset
introduced in [17] was captured with Microsoft Kinect v2,
which is based on the time-of-ﬂight principle.
For texture-less objects, the dataset of Hinterstoisser et
al. [20] has become a standard benchmark used in most of
the recent work, e.g. [38, 4, 47, 24, 54]. It contains 15
texture-less objects represented by a color 3D mesh model.
Each object is associated with a test sequence consisting of
~1200 RGB-D images, each of which includes exactly one
instance of the object. The test sequences feature signiﬁcant
2D and 3D clutter, but only mild occlusion, and since the
objects have discriminative color, shape and/or size, their
recognition is relatively easy. In the 6D localization prob-
lem (where information about the number and identity of
objects present in the images is provided beforehand [23]),
state-of-the-art methods achieve recognition rates that ex-
ceed 95% for most of the objects. Brachmann et al. [4] pro-
vided additional ground truth poses for all modeled objects
in one of the test sequences from [20]. This extended anno-
tation introduces challenging test cases with various levels
of occlusion and allows the evaluation of multiple object lo-
calization, with each object appearing in a single instance.
Tejani et al. [47] presented a dataset with 2 texture-less
and 4 textured objects. For each object, a color 3D mesh
model is provided together with a test sequence of over 700
RGB-D images. The images show several object instances
with no to moderate occlusion, and with 2D and 3D clut-
ter. Doumanoglou et al. [14] provide a dataset with 183 test
images of 2 textured objects from [47] that appear in mul-
tiple instances in a challenging bin-picking scenario with
heavy occlusion. Furthermore, they provide color 3D mesh
models of another 6 textured objects and 170 test images
depicting the objects placed on a kitchen table.
The Challenge and Willow datasets [58], which were
collected for the 2011 ICRA Solutions in Perception Chal-
lenge, share a set of 35 textured household objects. Train-
ing data for each object is given in the form of 37 RGB-D
training images that show the object from different views,
plus a color point cloud obtained by merging the training
images. The Challenge and Willow datasets respectively
contain 176 and 353 test RGB-D images of several objects
in single instances placed on top of a turntable. The Willow
dataset also features distractor objects and object occlusion.
Similar is the TUW dataset [1] that presents 17 textured and
texture-less objects appearing in 224 test RGB-D images.
Instead of a turntable setup, images were obtained by mov-
ing a robot around a static cluttered environment with some
objects appearing in multiple instances.
The Rutgers dataset [37] is focused on perception for
robotic manipulation during pick-and-place tasks and com-
prises of images from a cluttered warehouse environment.
It includes color 3D mesh models for 24 mostly textured
objects from the Amazon Picking Challenge 2015 [11], that
were captured in more than 10K test RGB-D images with
various amounts of occlusion.
Aldoma et al. [2] provide 3D mesh models without color
information of 35 household objects that are both textured
and texture-less and are often symmetric and mutually sim-
ilar in shape and size. There are 50 test RGB-D images of
table-top scenes with multiple objects in single instances,
with no clutter and various levels of occlusion.
The BigBIRD dataset [42] includes images of 125
mostly textured objects that were captured in isolation on
a turntable with multiple calibrated RGB-D and DSLR sen-
sors. For each object, the dataset provides 600 RGB-D point
clouds, 600 high-resolution RGB images, and a color 3D
mesh model reconstructed from the point clouds. Since Big-
BIRD was acquired under very controlled conditions, it is
not concerned with occlusions, clutter, lighting changes or
varying object-sensor distance. Georgakis et al. [17] pro-
vide 6735 test RGB-D images from kitchen scenes includ-
ing a subset of the BigBIRD objects. Ground truth for ob-
jects in the test images is provided only in the form of 2D
bounding boxes and 3D point labeling.
Lai et al. [29] created an extensive dataset with 300 com-
mon household objects captured on a turntable from three
elevations. It contains 250K segmented RGB-D images and
22 annotated video sequences with a few hundred RGB-D
frames in each. Ground truth is provided only in the form of
approximate rotation angles for training images and in the
form of 3D point labeling for test images.
Schlette et al. [40] synthesized RGB-D images from sim-
ulated object manipulation scenarios involving 4 texture-
less objects from the Cranﬁeld assembly benchmark [10].

Several small datasets that were used for evaluation of the
SHOT descriptor are provided by Salti et al. [39]. These
datasets include synthetic data as well as data acquired with
a spacetime-stereo method and an RGB-D sensor.
2.2. Depth-only and RGB-only Datasets
The depth-only dataset of Mian et al. [34] includes 3D
mesh models of 5 objects and 50 test depth images acquired
with an industrial range scanner. The test scenes contain
only the modeled objects that occlude each other. A sim-
ilar dataset is provided by Taati et al. [46]. The Desk3D
dataset [3] comprises of 3D mesh models for 6 objects
which are captured in over 850 test depth images with oc-
clusion, clutter and similarly looking distractor objects. The
dataset was obtained with an RGB-D sensor, however only
the depth images are publicly available.
The IKEA dataset by Lim et al. [30] provides RGB im-
ages with objects being aligned with their exactly matched
3D models. Crivellaro et al. [12] supply 3D CAD mod-
els and annotated RGB sequences with 3 highly occluded
and texture-less objects. Mu˜noz et al. [36] provide RGB
sequences of 6 texture-less objects that are each imaged
in isolation against a clean background and without occlu-
sion. Further to the above, there exist RGB datasets such as
[13, 50, 38, 25], for which the ground truth is provided only
in the form of 2D bounding boxes.
2.3. Datasets for Similar Problems
The RGB-D dataset of Michel et al. [35] is focused on
articulated objects, where the goal is to estimate the 6D
pose of each object part, subject to the constraints intro-
duced by their joints. There are also datasets for categorical
pose estimation. For example, the 3DNet [55] and the UoB-
HOOC [53] contain generic 3D models and RGB-D images
annotated with 6D object poses. The UBC VRS [32], the
RMRC (a subset of NYU Depth v2 [41] with annotations
derived from [18]), the B3DO [26], and the SUN RGB-
D [43] provide no 3D models and ground truth only in the
form of bounding boxes. The PASCAL3D+ [57] and the
ObjectNet3D [56] provide generic 3D models and ground
truth 6D poses, but only RGB images.
3. The T-LESS Dataset
Compared to the reviewed datasets, T-LESS is unique in
its combination of the following characteristics. It contains
1) a larger number of industry-relevant objects, 2) training
images captured under controlled conditions, 3) test images
with large viewpoint changes, objects in multiple instances,
affected by clutter and occlusion; including test cases that
are challenging even for the state-of-the-art methods, 4) im-
ages captured with a synchronized and calibrated triplet of
sensors, 5) accurate ground truth 6D poses for all modeled
objects, and 6) two types of 3D models for each object.
~
3
~
1
~
2
Figure 3. Acquisition setup: 1) turntable with marker ﬁeld,
2) screen ensuring a black background for training images,
removed when capturing test images, 3) triplet of sensors
attached to a jig with adjustable tilt.
Figure 4.
Sample training (top) and test (bottom) im-
ages. Left: RGB-D images from Primesense Carmine 1.09.
Middle: RGB-D images from Microsoft Kinect v2. Right:
High-resolution RGB images from Canon IXUS 950 IS. For
the RGB-D images, bottom-left halves show the RGB com-
ponents whereas the top-right show the depth components.
The rest of the section describes the process of dataset
preparation, which includes image acquisition, camera cal-
ibration, depth correction, 3D object model generation and
the ground truth pose annotation.
3.1. Acquisition Setup
The training and test images were captured with the aid
of the setup shown in Fig. 3. It consists of a turntable, where
the imaged objects were placed, and a jig with adjustable
tilt, to which the sensors were attached. A marker ﬁeld used
for camera pose estimation was afﬁxed to the turntable. The
ﬁeld was extended vertically to the sides of the turntable to

facilitate pose estimation at lower elevations. To capture
training images, the objects were placed in the middle of
the turntable and in the front of a black screen, which en-
sured a uniform background at all elevations. To introduce
a non-uniform background in the test images, a sheet of ply-
wood with markers at its edges was placed on the top of the
turntable. In some scenes, the objects were placed on the
top of other objects (e.g. books) to give them different ele-
vations and thus invalidate a ground plane assumption that
might be made by an evaluated method. The depth of ob-
ject surfaces in the training and test images is in the range
0.53 −0.92 m, which is within the sensing ranges of the
used RGB-D sensors that are 0.35 −1.4 m for Carmine and
0.5 −4.5 m for Kinect.
3.2. Calibration of Sensors
Intrinsic and distortion parameters of the sensors were
estimated with the standard checkerboard-based procedure
using OpenCV [6].
The root mean square re-projection
error calculated at corners of the calibration checkerboard
squares is 0.51 px for Carmine, 0.35 px for Kinect, and
0.43 px for Canon. For the RGB-D sensors, the calibration
was performed with the RGB images. The depth images
were aligned to the RGB images using the factory depth-
to-color registration available through manufacturer’s SDKs
(OpenNI 2.2 and Kinect for Windows SDK 2.0). The color
and aligned depth images, which are included in the dataset,
are already processed to remove radial distortion. The in-
trinsic parameters can be found at the dataset website.
All sensors were synchronized and extrinsically cali-
brated with respect to the turntable, making it possible to
register any pair of images. Synchronization was essential
since the images were taken while the turntable was spin-
ning.
The extrinsic calibration was achieved using ﬁdu-
cial BCH-code markers from ARToolKitPlus [52]. Speciﬁ-
cally, the detection of particular markers in an image com-
bined with the knowledge of their physical location on the
turntable provided a set of 2D-3D correspondences. These
were used to estimate the camera pose in the turntable co-
ordinate system by robustly solving the PnP problem and
then reﬁning the estimated 6D pose by non-linearly min-
imizing the cumulative re-projection error with the posest
library from [31]. The root mean square re-projection er-
ror, which was calculated at marker corners in all test im-
ages, is 1.27 px for Carmine, 1.37 px for Kinect, and 1.50 px
for Canon. This measure combines errors in sensor calibra-
tion, marker ﬁeld detection and sensor pose estimation and
is therefore larger than the aforementioned error in sensor
intrinsic calibration.
3.3. Training and Test Images
A common strategy for dealing with poorly textured ob-
jects is to adopt a template-based approach trained on object
images that are acquired with a dense sampling of view-
points, e.g. [13, 20, 38, 24]. To support such approaches,
T-LESS offers training images of every object in isolation
from a full view sphere. These images were obtained with
a systematic acquisition procedure which uniformly sam-
pled elevation from 85◦to −85◦with a 10◦step and the
complete azimuth range with a 5◦step. Views from the up-
per and lower hemispheres were captured separately, turn-
ing the object upside down in between. In total, there are
18 × 72 = 1296 training images per object from each sen-
sor. Exceptions are objects 19 and 20, for which only views
from the upper hemisphere were captured, speciﬁcally 648
images from elevation 85◦to 5◦. These objects are hori-
zontally symmetric at the pose in which they were placed
on the turntable, thus the views from the upper hemisphere
are sufﬁcient to capture their appearance. Test scenes were
captured from a view hemisphere with a 10◦step in eleva-
tion (ranging from 75◦to 15◦) and a 5◦step in azimuth. A
total of 7 × 72 = 504 test images were captured per scene
by each sensor.
To remove irrelevant parts of the scene in the images pe-
riphery, the provided images are cropped versions of the
captured ones.
Resolution of the provided images is as
follows: 400 × 400 px for training RGB-D images from
Carmine and Kinect, 1900 × 1900 px for training RGB im-
ages from Canon, 720×540 px for test RGB-D images from
Carmine and Kinect and 2560 × 1920 px for test RGB im-
ages from Canon. Sample images are shown in Fig. 4.
Parts of the marker ﬁeld were visible in some of the
training images, especially at lower elevations. These were
masked to ensure a black background everywhere around
the objects. To achieve this, we identiﬁed an object mask
in an image by back-projecting its CAD model and gradu-
ally darkened the image moving from the mask perimeter
towards the image border.
3.4. Depth Correction
Similarly to [16, 45], we observed that the depths mea-
sured by the RGB-D sensors exhibit a systematic error. To
remove it, we collected depth measurements d at projec-
tions of the marker corners and computed their expected
depth values de from the known marker coordinates. The
measurements were collected from the depth range 0.53 –
0.92 m in which the objects appear in the training and test
images. We found the following linear correction models
by least squares ﬁtting: dc = 1.0247·d−5.19 for Carmine,
and dc = 1.0266 · d −26.88 for Kinect (depth measured
in mm). In [45], only scaling is used for the depth correc-
tion. According to Foix et al. [16], a 3-degree polynomial
function sufﬁces to correct depth in the 1 – 2 m range. In
our case, a narrower range is used and we found a simple
linear polynomial to adequately account for the error: the
correction reduced the mean absolute difference from the

expected depth de from 12.4 mm to 2.8 mm for Carmine
and from 7.0 mm to 3.6 mm for Kinect. The estimated cor-
rection was applied to all depth images, requiring no further
action from the dataset user.
3.5. 3D Object Models
For each object, a manually created CAD model and
a semi-automatically reconstructed model are available
(Fig. 5).
Both models are provided in the form of 3D
meshes with surface normals at model vertices.
Surface
color is included only for the reconstructed models. The
normals were calculated using MeshLab [7] as the angle-
weighted sum of face normals incident to a vertex [48].
The reconstructed models were created using fastfusion,
a volumetric 3D mapping system by Steinbr¨ucker et al. [44].
The input to fastfusion were the RGB-D training images
from Carmine and the associated camera poses estimated
using the ﬁducial markers (see Sec. 3.2). For each object,
two partial models were ﬁrst reconstructed, one for the up-
per and another for the lower view hemisphere. The partial
models were then aligned using the iterative closest point
(ICP) algorithm applied to their vertices. This was followed
by manual reﬁnement that ensured correct registration of
surface details that are visible only in color. The result-
ing alignment was applied to the camera poses to trans-
form them into a common reference frame, and the up-
dated poses were used to reconstruct the full object model
from all images. These models contained some minor arti-
facts, e.g. small spikes, which were removed manually. It
is noted that some of the objects contain small shiny metal
parts whose depth is not reliably captured by the current
depth sensors; in general, any glossy or translucent surface
is problematic. Hence, some of these parts, such as the plug
poles, were not reconstructed.
The reconstructed models were aligned to the CAD mod-
els using the ICP algorithm and the alignment was fur-
ther reﬁned manually. Models of both types are therefore
deﬁned in the same coordinate system and the provided
ground truth poses are valid for both of them. The origin
of the model coordinate system coincides with the center of
the bounding box of the CAD model.
The geometrical similarity of the two model types was
assessed by calculating the average distance from vertices
of the reconstructed models to the closest surface points
of the corresponding CAD models. The average distance
over all object models was found to be 1.01 mm, which is
very low compared to the size of objects that ranges from
58.13 mm for object 13 to 217.16 mm for object 8. Dis-
tances in the opposite direction, i.e. from the CAD models
to the reconstructed models, are not informative since some
CAD models contain inner parts that are not represented in
the reconstructed models. The Metro software by Cignoni
et al. [8] was used to measure the model differences.
Figure 5. Examples of 3D object models. Top: Manually
created CAD models. Bottom: Semi-automatically recon-
structed models which include also surface color. Surface
normals at model vertices are included in both model types.
3.6. Ground Truth Poses
To obtain ground truth 6D object poses for images of a
test scene, a dense 3D model of the scene was ﬁrst recon-
structed with the system of Steinbr¨ucker et al. [44]. This
was accomplished using all 504 RGB-D images of the scene
along with the sensor poses estimated using the turntable
markers.
The CAD object models were then manually
aligned to the scene model. To increase accuracy, the object
models were rendered into several selected high-resolution
scene images from Canon, misalignments were identiﬁed
and the poses were manually reﬁned accordingly. This pro-
cess was repeated until a satisfactory alignment of the ren-
derings with the scene images was achieved. The ﬁnal poses
were distributed to all test images with the aid of the known
camera-to-turntable coordinate transformations. The trans-
formed poses are provided as the ground truth poses with
each test image.
4. Design Validation and Experiments
This section presents an accuracy assessment of the
ground truth poses and examines the difﬁculty of T-LESS
with a recent 6D localization method.
4.1. Accuracy of the Ground Truth Poses
Aiming to evaluate the accuracy of the ground truth
poses, we compared the captured depth images, after the
correction described in Sec. 3.4, with depth images obtained
by graphically rendering the 3D object models at the ground
truth poses. At each pixel with a valid depth value in both
images, we calculated the difference δ = dc −dr, where
dc is the captured and dr is the rendered depth. Table 1
presents statistics of these differences, aggregated over all

training and test depth images. Differences exceeding 5 cm
and amounting to around 2.5 % of the measurements were
considered to be outliers and were pruned before calculat-
ing the statistics. The outlying differences may be caused
by erroneous depth measurements, or by occlusion induced
by distractor objects in the case of test images.
The rendered depths align well with the depths captured
by Carmine, as indicated by the mean difference µδ being
close to zero. In the case of Kinect, we observed that the
RGB and depth images are slightly misregistered, which is
the cause of the positive bias in µδ. The average absolute
difference µ|δ| is less than 5 mm for Carmine and 9 mm for
Kinect, which is near the accuracy of the sensors [28] and is
relatively small compared to the size of objects. The error
statistics are slightly favorable for the reconstructed mod-
els (as opposed to the CAD models), as they were obtained
from the captured depth images and therefore exhibit simi-
lar characteristics and artifacts. For example, the plug poles
are invisible to the RGB-D sensors and are missing in the
reconstructed models, but are present in the CAD models.
4.2. 6D Localization
The recent template-based method of Hodaˇn et al. [24]
was evaluated on the 6D localization problem. The input is
comprised of a test image together with the identities of ob-
ject instances that are present in the image, and the goal is to
estimate the 6D poses of these instances [23]. The method
was evaluated on all test RGB-D images from the Carmine
sensor. The parameters were set as described in [24], the
templates were generated from the training images from
Carmine, and the CAD models were employed in the pose
reﬁnement stage as detailed in [59]. Pose estimates were
evaluated as in [20], using the average distance error for
objects with indistinguishable views. This error measures
the misalignment between the surface of model M at the
ground truth pose ( ¯R,¯t) and at the estimated pose ( ˆR,ˆt),
and is deﬁned as:
e = avg
x1∈M
min
x2∈M

  ¯Rx1 + ¯t

−
  ˆRx2 + ˆt


2 .
Pose estimate ( ˆR,ˆt) is considered correct if e ≤k · d,
where k = 0.1 and d is the largest distance between any pair
of model vertices, i.e. the object diameter. Only the ground
truth poses at which at least 10% of the object surface is
visible were considered for the evaluation. The visibility
was estimated as in [23].
The performance is measured by recall, i.e. the percent-
age of the ground truth poses for which a correct pose was
estimated. Fig. 6 presents achieved recall per object (top)
and recall per scene (middle). The objects with the lowest
recall are those that are similar to other objects. For exam-
ple, object 1 is often confused with object 2, as are objects
20, 21 and 22. Likewise, test scenes containing similar ob-
jects are harder, with the hardest one being scene 20 that
Sensor, model type
µδ
σδ
µ|δ|
med|δ|
Carmine, CAD
-0.60
8.12
4.53
2.57
Carmine, reconst.
-0.79
7.72
4.28
2.46
Kinect, CAD
4.46
11.76
8.76
5.67
Kinect, reconst.
4.08
11.36
8.40
5.45
Table 1. Statistics of differences between the depth of ob-
ject models at the ground truth poses and the captured depth
(in mm). µδ and σδ is the mean and the standard deviation
of the differences, µ|δ| and med|δ| is the mean and the me-
dian of the absolute differences.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Object ID
0
20
40
60
80
100
Recall [%]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Scene ID
0
20
40
60
80
100
Recall [%]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Visible part of object surface [%]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Recall [%]
Figure 6. Performance of the method by Hodaˇn et al. [24]
on the 6D localization problem. Shown are the recall per
object (top), recall per scene (middle), and recall w.r.t. the
percentage of the visible object surface (bottom).
contains many similar objects and severe occlusions. Bot-
tom of Fig. 6 plots the recall, accumulated over all objects,
as a function of the fraction of their image projection that
is unoccluded. The recall increases proportionally with this
fraction, illustrating that occlusion is one of the main chal-
lenges in T-LESS.
The achieved mean recall over all objects is 67.2%,
which suggests a signiﬁcant margin for improvement. We
note that the same method achieved a mean recall of 95.4%
on the dataset of Hinterstoisser et al. [20], which is close
to the state of the art: [20] reports 96.6% and [5] reports
99.0% on this dataset. The latter is not directly compara-
ble since it was calculated only over 13 out of 15 objects
included in the dataset.

5. Conclusion
This paper has presented T-LESS, a new dataset for eval-
uating 6D pose estimation of texture-less objects that can
facilitate systematic comparison of pertinent methods. The
dataset features industry-relevant objects and is character-
ized by a large number of training and test images, accu-
rate 6D ground truth poses, multiple sensing modalities, test
scenes with multiple object instances and with increasing
difﬁculty due to occlusion and clutter. Initial evaluation re-
sults using the dataset indicate that the state of the art in 6D
object pose estimation has ample room for improvement.
The T-LESS dataset is available online at:
cmp.felk.cvut.cz/t-less
