Learning to Ignore:
Fair and Task Independent Representations
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
ZHAW School of Engineering,
Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract. Training fair machine learning models, aiming for their in-
terpretability and solving the problem of domain shift has gained a lot
of interest in the last years. There is a vast amount of work address-
ing these topics, mostly in separation. In this work we show that they
can be seen as a common framework of learning invariant representa-
tions. The representations should allow to predict the target while at the
same time being invariant to sensitive attributes which split the dataset
into subgroups. Our approach is based on the simple observation that it
is impossible for any learning algorithm to diﬀerentiate samples if they
have the same feature representation. This is formulated as an additional
loss (regularizer) enforcing a common feature representation across sub-
groups. We apply it to learn fair models and interpret the inﬂuence of the
sensitive attribute. Furthermore it can be used for domain adaptation,
transferring knowledge and learning eﬀectively from very few examples.
In all applications it is essential not only to learn to predict the target,
but also to learn what to ignore.
1
Introduction
In June 2020 MIT withdrew Tiny Images1 a popular vision dataset as researchers
found that it is socially biased. Biases in training data are a major issue for
machine learning algorithms [20]. Especially, as they are increasingly used to
make critical decisions. First, it is important to ensure that those systems are fair
and do not discriminate certain groups. Secondly, interpretability of the decisions
- ”why” the system comes to that conclusion or how important a certain factor
for decision making is - are desirable for better understanding. Thirdly, these
trained models should generalize well. For many real world situations the data
seen during training is diﬀerent then the data which the models are applied
to in production. Domain adaptation tries to transfer knowledge from a source
domain (training set) to a particular target domain. In order to cope with these
challenges many diﬀerent approaches have been proposed over the last decade.
Fairness and domain adaptation seem to be very diﬀerent topics, but the goal
for both is actually learning invariant feature representations. In this paper we
propose a yet simple approach for learning fair representation. A deep learning
1 https://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/TinyImages/, 2020/07/10.
arXiv:2101.04047v2  [cs.LG]  21 Jan 2021

2
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
Fig. 1: Given a set of examples split into groups based on the sensitive attribute
z, our learnt representation should allow to predict the target variable y, but at
the same time not be able to predict the sensitive attribute z. In the example
the digits should be predicted, however the origin (MNIST/inverted MNIST) is
irrelevant and should be ignored.
model is forced to ignore certain information that would allow to draw conclu-
sions about sensitive attributes (fair classiﬁer) or certain areas (domain indepen-
dent classiﬁer). As seen in Fig. 1 the target variable should be still predictable,
but at the same time it should not be distinguishable from which subgroup the
examples were taken. The main insight is that similar feature representations
for diﬀerent groups or datasets do not allow us to diﬀerentiate between them
anymore. To accomplish this, we introduce an aﬃnity loss which is additionally
used during the training of a model. Once a fair representation is established,
the sensitive attribute can be added back and its impact measured. This paves
the way for interpretability or causal reasoning. Furthermore, by reducing the
distance between diﬀerent domains in latent space a more general representation
of the dataset is learned which helps to better generalize across domains.
Related Work. In order to make machine learning models ”fair”, works aim at
modifying the feature representations of the data [30], the class label annota-
tions [25] or the data itself [22]. Learning this latent representation includes an
additional cross entropy classiﬁcation loss [3], a decomposition loss [22], an ad-
ditional hidden layer for adversarial optimization [1], distribution matching [21],
using Variational Autoencoders [13], or by learning the representation as an ad-
versarial minimax game [27]. The goal is not only to improve fairness but also
to interpret how fairness is enforced. Such methods build on special network ar-
chitectures [5,12] or a combination of diﬀerent machine learning algorithms [9].
For the domain adaptation task approaches make use of re-weighting the source
samples to better match the target domain [11,19], learning shared weights [28]
or a common subspace [6], modifying the network architecture [15,16], or using
Generative Adversarial Networks [13,7]. Interestingly, if causal aspects are taken
into account, predictions can be improved [4,24]. In the same line, recent work
aims for analysing those areas in a common way [13,23,14].

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
3
Fig. 2: Example architecture of a
neural network with one ore more
hidden layers h (indicated with
the dotted lines). The last hidden
layer (r1, ..., rn), is reﬀed as repre-
sentation and used for calculated
our proposed aﬃnity loss.
Contribution. Our main aim is not to beat any particular method for fairness or
domain adaption, it is rather to highlight the commonalities. From a technical
side, the most related work probably is the one by Ganin et al. [6] based on
Zemel et al. [30]. However instead of adding a new gradient reversal layer, we
simply reduce an additional aﬃnity loss during training. Hence, our method can
be easily applied to any existing network architecture including classiﬁcation,
regression tasks or auto-encoders2. Experiments demonstrate that a pretrained
network with ﬁxed weights can be simply debiased by adding a fair representa-
tion layer. While many approaches struggle with unbalanced datasets both in
terms of the target and the sensitive attribute [3], our approach is not very neg-
atively impacted. We are able to improve fairness, interpretability and domain
adaptation within one very simple approach.
2
Learning Invariant Representation
Problem formulation. Let X be the entire data set. Each x ∈X is an example
represented by m attributes and y ∈Y its corresponding target variable. Fur-
thermore, let z be the sensitive attribute. We aim to learn a classiﬁer fy : x →y
to predict the target variable from the attributes, but at the same time being
unable to predict the sensitive attribute fz : x →z.
In order to achieve this we build a (low dim.) representation g(x) which allows
for predicting the target y but not the sensitive attribute z. Our aim is to make
the representation as similar as possible with respect to the sensitive attribute.
Hence, being invariant features. Many modern deep learning architectures can
be seen as having such a representation layer, having the advantage that any
pre-trained model can be used and later ﬁne-tuned.
In the setting of training a neural network, typically a loss ltarget (e.g., cross
entropy) is minimized in order to predict the target. We propose to add another
loss term laffinity which serves as regularizer. See a visualization in Fig. 2. The
neural network is then trained on the combined loss
ltotal = ltarget + λ · laffinity.
(1)
2 In this paper we focus on the classiﬁcation tasks with one categorical sensitive vari-
able.

4
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
If the weight λ of the aﬃnity loss is set to zero, the model is trained normally
without the new loss. If λ is very large the neural network optimizes on the
aﬃnity loss, ignoring the target loss. The fairness of a model increases with λ
but might result in lower accuracy.
In the following we derive laffinity. The sensitive attribute splits the dataset
in one or more subgroups. For simplicity we focus on two subgroups in the
following. Considering the two sets X1, X2 split by the sensitive attribute z. To
be unable to distinguish between these two sets the following must hold
∀x1 ∈X1 ∃x2 ∈X2 : g(x1) = g(x2).
(2)
In other words, for each sample there must be at least another sample with a
diﬀerent sensitive attribute having the same representation. Technically the loss
is minimizing the closest distance of them.
The learnt representation should still allow to predict the target y. Trivial
representations are avoided by the combination of the loss term (see above). How-
ever, our experiments show that it is beneﬁcial to add a more strict constraint
so that the two examples x1 and x2 are from the same class, i.e., y1 = y2. This
avoids mixing up classes and yields signiﬁcantly better performance. Averaging
over all examples and all classes gives
laffinity =
1
|Y ||X1|
X
y∈Y
X
x1∈(X1|y1=y)
min
x2∈(X2|y2=y) d(g(x1), g(x2)),
(3)
where d(·, ·) is an arbitrary distance function.
Implementation Details. In order to implement Eq. (3) we use a nearest neighbor
with the L1 norm. To speed the training up we do not use the whole dataset,
but only calculate the aﬃnity loss on the mini-batches.
2.1
Experiments
We show the basic behavior of our method on an illustrative experiment based on
the well known MNIST dataset of handwritten digits3. Additionally we created
the MNIST-I, which contains all original MNIST images, but inverted. Together
it forms our dataset where the sensitive attribute indicates if the digit originates
from the MNIST-I or the original MNIST. As target we still want to predict
which number is depicted.
We train a simple neural network with two 128- and a single 20-width ReLU
hidden layer as representation layer. For training, a batch size of 128 samples is
used and the weight of the proposed aﬃnity loss is set to λ = 0.01.
Embedding. In order to analyze our learnt representation, we perform a t-
Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) on the representation layer.
It models the higher-dim. data by a low-dim. point such that similar objects lay
closer together and dissimilar ones further away.
3 http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 2020/07/10.

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
5
baseline
our approach
target
(digits)
sensitive
attribute
(MNIST/
MNIST-I)
Fig. 3: 2-dim. t-SNE plot
showing the learnt fea-
ture representations col-
ored based on digit (top
row) and on the sen-
sitive attribute (bottom
row). By using our ap-
proach, the representa-
tion shows distinguish-
able digit clusters but the
dataset origin cannot be
traced. Best viewed in
colour!
Fig. 3 depicts the comparison of two models, trained without (baseline) and
with the aﬃnity loss. The baseline model learns two clusters for each digit (one
normal and one inverted) and the groups can easily be separated by the sensi-
tive attribute (MNIST/MNIST-I). In contrast, adding the proposed aﬃnity loss
into the training process shows that the two groups are highly overlapping, i.e.,
not being distinguishable anymore, creating a fair (more in Sec. 3) and more
general (only one cluster per digit) feature representation. The digits can still
be predicted very accurately as their clusters are kept very distinct from each
other. The eﬀect of generality is also used for domain adaptation in Sec. 4.
Predictions After training, we ﬁx all hidden layers and do a normal retrain of
the output layer. The output layer is not only trained to predict the digits but
also if the sample comes from the original MNIST or inverted MNIST-I dataset.
The model trained with our approach should struggle in learning the origin of
the sample (inverted/not inverted). In fact, our fair model predicts the target
class with 93% accuracy (4% higher than the baseline), whereas the sensitive
attribution is hardly predictable anymore (around 57% accuracy). The baseline
model can easily predict (nearly 100%) the sensitive attribute.
Hyperparameter. If the weight λ of the aﬃnity loss is set to zero, we train the
model only based on the target loss not focusing on making the model fair (see
Tab. 1a, trained 5 times and averaged). For λ equals 0.01 we get the fairest
model, as the numbers are predicted well (even better than the baseline model
does) and the origin dataset of the input samples can hardly be predicted. For
a λ of 0.1 the model gets as fair as possible by not learning anything at all. If
the representation layer is chosen too small (smaller than 5 nodes) the model
does not perform well in predicting the digits accurately (see Tab. 1b). If the
number of nodes is getting too large (more than 50 in this example) the model
gets unfair again suﬀering from the curse of dimensionality.

6
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
Table 1: Inﬂuence of Hyper-parameters on fairness and accuracy.
(a) Tuning λ balances accuracy vs. fairness.
λ
0
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
accuracy
0.89
0.9
0.93
0.93
0.1
digits
± 0.02
± 0.02
± 0.01
± 0.01
± 0.005
accuracy
0.995
0.99
0.89
0.57
0.5
sensitive
± 0.005
± 0.005
± 0.02
± 0.03
± 0.005
(b) Too small representations (obviously) do not allow for good classiﬁcation results.
A too large embedding space suﬀers from the curse of dimensionality.
layer size
1
5
10
20
50
100
accuracy
0.1
0.78
0.93
0.93
0.95
0.96
digits
± 0.05
± 0.03
± 0.01
± 0.01
± 0.03
± 0.04
accuracy
0.5
0.54
0.57
0.57
0.74
0.85
sensitive
± 0.05
± 0.02
± 0.02
± 0.03
± 0.04
± 0.05
3
Fairness and Interpretability
Simply removing the sensitive attributes from a dataset is insuﬃcient for elim-
inating their biases as there almost always exists an indirect inﬂuence of the
sensitive information [17]. Our approach learns a feature representation of the
data preserving general information but enforcing not to learn sensitive charac-
teristic information.
After the fair training of the model we are able to interpret the classiﬁcation
and investigate in the inﬂuence of the sensitive attribute on the classiﬁcation
task [18]. We do so by reattaching the sensitive attribute z to the fair model
again, see Fig. 4. For better interpretability the fair feature representation is is
linearly combined, forming r. The reattachment of z and its interpretation is
possible as r is trained to be independent of z (see also [2])
ˆy = f(wrr + wzz + b), with z ⊥⊥r
(4)
where wr and wz are the learnt weights of the neural network, b the bias term and
z the sensitive attribute and f(·) the transfer function (e.g., linear or sigmoid).
The weights wr and wz of r and z, respectively, indicate how large the inﬂuence
of the sensitive attribute on the classiﬁcation is [18]. In the following experiments
a model trained without the aﬃnity loss using the same architecture as the fair
one is reﬀed as baseline.
3.1
Fairness Measures
There are a lot of diﬀerent fairness measures used for classiﬁcation [26,3,8,29].
Two commonly used ones are summarized in the following. Let ˆy be the output
of the classiﬁer, y the true label and z the sensitive attribute.

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
7
Fig. 4: A simple linear unit is
added to the fair model represen-
tation. Furthermore the sensitive
attribute z is reattached. As the
both units are uncorrelated, we
use the weights as interpretation
for the importance of the sensi-
tive attribute for the ﬁnal classi-
ﬁcation.
Equality of Opportunity/ Equality Gap. The most common measure is the so-
called equality of opportunity. It is reached if the groups z1 and z2 deﬁned by the
sensitive characteristic have equal true positive rates (TPR), i.e., TPRz=z1 =
TPRz=z1. The equality gap is then calculated as
P(ˆy = 1|z = z1, y = 1) −P(ˆy = 1|z = z2, y = 1) = |TPRz=z1 −TPRz=z2|. (5)
Parity Gap. The parity gap is calculated as independence between prediction ˆy
and sensitive attribute z for positive predictions, i.e.
|P(ˆy = 1|Z = z1) −P(ˆy = 1|Z = z2)|
(6)
For binary case of the sensitive attribute, in medical settings, it is the same as
the average treatment eﬀect (ATE) [2].
It is important to note that it is diﬃcult to minimize all fairness metrics at
the same time. The appropriate metric depends on the application, but most
often the equality of opportunity is targeted. Be aware, that there are some
trivial models which yield good results (very small gaps) such as models with
very low TPR. For some tasks, the compromise may not even be possible, such as
predicting whether someone can give birth. There is a clear causal relationship to
the gender; thus, if this information (including implicit information) is removed,
it becomes impossible for any classiﬁer to make a correct prediction.
3.2
Experiment: Adult Dataset
The popular Adult income dataset4 from the UCI is used for further experiments
and the results are compared with other papers. The task is to predict whether or
not an individual is earning more than $50K per year. The samples are annotated
with 14 diﬀerent attributes from gender and educational level to number of work
hours per week. The gender attribute is used as binary sensitive attribute for the
aﬃnity loss during training. The dataset is split into 26’049 samples for training,
6,512 samples for validating and 16,281 for testing.
4 https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/adult, 2020/07/10.

8
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
Table 2: Our approach compared with a baseline and diﬀerent other approaches
concerning accuracy and fairness on the Adult dataset.
approach
accuracy
parity gap
equ. gap
equ. gap (TNR)
baseline
0.85
0.18
0.088
0.072
ours
0.82
0.065
0.02
0.015
Quadrianto’18 [21]
0.81
-
0.04
-
Adel’19 [1]
0.89
0.13
-
-
Zemel’13 [30]
0.82
-
-
-
Quadrianto’17 [22]
0.84
-
0.017
-
Beutel’17 [3]
0.82
0.12
0.07
0.04
Louizos’17 [13]
0.82
-
0.05
-
Xie’17 [27]
0.84
-
-
-
We train our model with a batch size of 512 samples using a network with
one hidden layer of 128 and another one with 20 nodes on whose feature rep-
resentation the aﬃnity loss is calculated. We compare our model with several
state-of-the-art approaches as well as against the baseline. Results are summa-
rized in Tab. 2. Our approach achieves a similar fairness level compared to other
approaches. Consistently, our feature representation promoted fairness criteria
with only a small penalty in accuracy even though the dataset is heavily skewed.
Fair Representation. We train two baseline models once inputting all the features
including the sensitive attribute and once removing this attribute. We assume
that simply removing the sensitive attribute does not help to omit the gender
bias [17]. The performances are compared with our fair model and if the sensitive
attribute is added back, see Fig. 4. For each model we retrain the last layer
(hidden layers are ﬁxed) to predict once the gender of the input samples and
once the income. Results are summarized in Tab. 3. The accuracies of the baseline
models lay very close together, which shows that information about the gender
attribute is indeed still hidden in the input data. Our model is not able to classify
the genders correctly just labeling almost all samples as male. The performance
of our model with reattached gender attribute is similar to the baseline models.
This shows that the sensitive attribute helps the model to perform better.
The histograms of the fair one-dim. representation (see Fig. 4) for the male
and female samples in Fig. 5 show a very similar distribution. Hence, this sup-
ports the assumption that our model contains a fair representation of the data.
Interpretablity of the sensitive attribute. The inﬂuence of the gender attribute on
the classiﬁcation of the input samples concerning the income is evaluated. The
weight of the fair one-dim. feature representation r and the weight of the input
of the sensitive attribute z are compared (see Fig. 4). We consider the samples
where the income is larger than $50K. The weight for z lays around 4, whereas
the weight for r is approximately 1, thus much smaller. This shows that the
input of the sensitive attribute has indeed a large inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation
as it holds highly valuable information.

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
9
Table 3: Accuracy and fairness measures predicting income and gender attribute
(z) on the Adult dataset with diﬀerent training approaches.
baseline
our approach
with z
without z
z reattached
accuracy income
0.85
0.85
0.81
0.83
parity gap
0.16
0.17
0.05
0.15
equality gap
0.069
0.074
0.0075
0.1
accuracy female
0.46
0.25
0.027
1.0
accuracy male
0.84
0.86
0.98
1.0
(a) baseline
(b) our approach
Fig. 5: Histogram of the outputs of r (see Fig. 4) for male and female samples.
Without enforcing any fair training the learnt distributions carry a lot of in-
formation about the sensitive attribute (a) in contrast to our approach with
overlapping distributions (b), not allowing to trace back the sensitive attribute.
3.3
Experiment: CelebA
The CelebA image dataset5 is signiﬁcantly more complex than the MNIST or
Adult dataset. This record contains a total of 202,599 images of celebrities, each
with 40 attributes. 162,770 images are used for training, 19,867 for validating and
the rest for testing. The annotated attributes reﬂect appearance of the celebrities
as well as the emotional state (e.g. smiling), gender, attractiveness and age. The
gender attribute is used as a binary sensitive characteristic and attractiveness
as a target label for the classiﬁcation of the images.
As model we use a ﬁxed VGG19 net trained on imagenet (to speed up the
training process and reduce complexity) and an additional hidden layer with 124
nodes. Tab. 4 compares results with diﬀerent weights λ and shows that we can
in fact debias the pretrained VGG net. The CelebA dataset is heavily skewed;
around ∼77% of the images showing women are labeled as attractive, compared
to ∼23% of men. If λ is strong enough, the inﬂuence of the skew on the fairness
disappears. The downside is the decrease of accuracy to only ∼55% as the
TNRs for female and male are getting low. Please note, the comparison with
Quadrianto [22] is not too accurate as our baseline already has a lower accuracy.
5 http://mmlab˜.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/projects/CelebA.html, 2020/07/10.

10
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
Table 4: Fairness of diﬀerent models on the CelebA dataset. A lower weight of
λ keeps the accuracy higher, but improves fairness only to a limited amount. A
higher weight decreases the accuracy signiﬁcantly but makes the model fair.
baseline
our approach
Quadrianto’18[22]
λ = 0.05
λ = 0.07
λ = 0.1
fair
baseline
accuracy
0.73
0.64
0.62
0.55
0.8
0.8
parity gap
0.47
0.23
0.22
0.0038
-
-
equality gap
0.31
0.25
0.23
0.018
0.19
0.34
Table 5: Accuracies and fairness measures predicting gender attribute z and
income on the CelebA dataset with diﬀerent training approaches.
baseline
our approach
with z
without z
z reattached
accuracy
0.73
0.74
0.62
0.7
parity gap
0.47
0.49
0.22
0.63
equality gap
0.31
0.32
0.23
0.59
accuracy female
0.86
0.84
0.88
1.0
accuracy male
0.83
0.85
0.25
1.0
(a) baseline
(b) our approach
Fig. 6: Histogram of the outputs of r for male and female samples for CelebA.
Fair representation & Intepretability. The histograms of the the fair one-dim.
representation (see Fig. 4) for the male and female samples in Fig. 6 show a very
similar distribution, supporting the assumption that our model contains a fair
representation of the data. The inﬂuence of the gender attribute on the classiﬁ-
cation, see Tab. 5, is checked with the same approach as described in Sec. 3.2.
The similar accuracies of the baseline models show that information about the
gender attribute is indeed still hidden in the input data. The reattached sensitive
attribute helps the fair model to perform better in classifying faces as attractive.
This can also be seen in the weight of the sensitive attribute z with around 1.5,
compared to the one of the fair one-dim. feature representation r with around
0.7.

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
11
Fig. 7: Accuracy of MNIST with dif-
ferent number of training samples from
the target domain (MNIST-R). Our ap-
proach (orange) clearly outperforms the
simple baseline, especially when only
few data from the target domain is pro-
vided.
4
Domain Adaptation
Data used for training a model might not be the same as during test time. This is
a big problem for robust real world applications. The sensitive attribute relates
now to the diﬀerent domains or environments [4]. As seen in Sec. 2.1 we enforce
to learn a more general feature representation and to ignore domain speciﬁc
attributes. This is leveraged to learn representations which are generic across
(related) domains and hence would generalize better.
From MNIST to MNIST-R. Additionally to the MNIST dataset we created the
MNIST-R dataset containing all original MNIST images rotated by 30 degrees.
We train a simple neural net with two 128- and one 20-width ReLU representa-
tions. MNIST is used as source while the performance is measured on MNIST-R
(target). Inspired by Heinze-Deml et al. [10] few samples of the target set are used
to improve the performance. We compare the results in Tab. 6 with a baseline
model trained on the same amount of samples (20 per class) of the target dataset
using data augmentation. Our approach can keep up with data augmentation,
respectively even performs better if the imbalance in the amount of samples
used during training becomes larger. It can better leverage the structure in the
source data and map it to the target domain than simple data augmentation
which relies on predeﬁned transformations.
From SVHN to MNIST. The Street-View House Number (SVHN) dataset6,
contains house numbers from Google Street View. The challenge of the SVHN
dataset is the structured clutter in the background of images. A Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) with two double-Convolutional layers containing 32 and
64 nodes, respectively, is used. A 20-dim. feature representation on top of this
architecture is applied to calculate the aﬃnity loss. Results and comparison
to Ganin et al. [6] are shown in Tab. 7. The aﬃnity loss does indeed improve
the performance on the target dataset with only a little amount of samples. The
performance of our model trained on the SVHN dataset with 10 MNIST samples
reaches an accuracy of around 75% and can be compared with Ganin et al. [6]. In
comparison, the baseline model achieves only an accuracy of 3% (see Fig. 7) on
6 http://ufldl.stanford.edu/housenumbers/, 2020/07/10.

12
Linda H. Boedi and Helmut Grabner
Table 6: Domain adaptation on MNIST (source) and MNIST-R (target). Dis-
played are the accuracies on the MNIST-R dataset after training (training
dataset indicated in the header).
# source
samples
only source
dataset
+ 200 target samples
and data aug.
our approach (+ 200
target samples)
1,000
0.52
0.76
0.78
10,000
0.67
0.76
0.82
Table 7: Performance of models trained with the aﬃnity loss on SVHN (source)
and MNIST (target). For training a small amount of labeled target samples is
used. Ganin et al. [6] uses only unlabeled target samples for training.
accuracy SVHN
(source domain)
accuracy MNIST
(target domain)
only SVHN
0.91
0.11
baseline
+ 100 MNIST samples
0.91
0.11
+ 200 MNIST samples
0.91
0.13
our
approach
+ 10 MNIST samples
0.91
0.75
+ 100 MNIST samples
0.91
0.80
+ 200 MNIST samples
0.92
0.85
Ganin et al. [6]
-
0.74
the same data. If there are only a few MNIST samples available, the neural net
trained with SVHN and our aﬃnity loss outperforms the baseline model trained
solely on the same amount of MNIST samples.
5
Discussion and Conclusions
We proposed a new approach for learning invariant feature representation. The
main idea is to bring the feature representation of diﬀerent distributions closer
together by introducing an additional loss. We applied this strategy to three
diﬀerent areas: fairness, interpretability and domain adaptation. Our proposed
method can be used for diﬀerent model architectures as well as for readjusting
the feature representation of existing, already trained models. Experiments show
that the equality gap can be signiﬁcantly reduced while the accuracy is still kept
at an acceptable level. The results are comparable with state-of-the-art methods
for each task. We demonstrate how to understand how a sensitive attribute
inﬂuences the classiﬁcation of an input sample. A challenge in our approach
is to eﬃciently ﬁnd the nearest neighbors in the embedding space. We rely on
eﬀective, approximated methods here. Not much thematized in this paper is that
our approach allows using multiple source and target datasets. Thus a model can
be trained to be fair regarding multiple attributes. A further extension might be
using real-valued attributes as sensitive attributes.

Learning to Ignore: Fair and Task Independent Representations
13
