Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 32 (2008) 757–791
Submitted 01/08; published 08/08
Compositional Belief Update
James Delgrande

Yi Jin

School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6
Francis Jeﬀry Pelletier

Departments of Philosophy and Linguistics
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6
Abstract
In this paper we explore a class of belief update operators, in which the deﬁnition of the
operator is compositional with respect to the sentence to be added. The goal is to provide an
update operator that is intuitive, in that its deﬁnition is based on a recursive decomposition
of the update sentence’s structure, and that may be reasonably implemented. In addressing
update, we ﬁrst provide a deﬁnition phrased in terms of the models of a knowledge base.
While this operator satisﬁes a core group of the benchmark Katsuno-Mendelzon update
postulates, not all of the postulates are satisﬁed. Other Katsuno-Mendelzon postulates can
be obtained by suitably restricting the syntactic form of the sentence for update, as we show.
In restricting the syntactic form of the sentence for update, we also obtain a hierarchy of
update operators with Winslett’s standard semantics as the most basic interesting approach
captured. We subsequently give an algorithm which captures this approach; in the general
case the algorithm is exponential, but with some not-unreasonable assumptions we obtain
an algorithm that is linear in the size of the knowledge base. Hence the resulting approach
has much better complexity characteristics than other operators in some situations. We
also explore other compositional belief change operators: erasure is developed as a dual
operator to update; we show that a forget operator is deﬁnable in terms of update; and
we give a deﬁnition of the compositional revision operator. We obtain that compositional
revision, under the most natural deﬁnition, yields the Satoh revision operator.
1. Introduction
A knowledge base is typically not a static entity, but rather evolves over time. New infor-
mation may be added, and old or out-of-date information may be removed. A fundamental
issue concerns how such change should be managed. A major body of research addresses this
question via the speciﬁcation of rationality postulates, or standards that a change operator
should satisfy. These postulates describe belief change at the knowledge level, independent
of how beliefs are represented and manipulated. There are various rationales for motivat-
ing a change in an evolving knowledge base, and these diﬀering rationales have been seen
as calling for diﬀerences in the background knowledge-level postulates. For example, one
may think that some alteration in the world has occurred, with the result that we should
update the knowledge base’s representation of the world in some appropriate way. Or, we
may think that our previous sources of information were fallible or incomplete and that we
now have better, more accurate information about the world. So, in this case we should
revise our beliefs. Another motivation might be to merge already-existing stores of beliefs,
c⃝2008 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
without giving any a priori preference to one or the other of the belief sets, but aiming to
achieve a balanced resolution of conﬂicts. Such a merging might be used to combine the
belief states of diﬀerent agents, so as to come up with a joint course of action based on
some sort of “all things considered” assimilation of the knowledge and preferences of the
agents that are involved. And we can also imagine a linguistic reform, so that a concept (or
rather, the associated word) was no longer to be used. In such a case one might say that
the users forgot about this concept/word.
These diﬀerences in motivation have led to speciﬁc diﬀerences in the sorts of postulates
that are associated with the diﬀerent motivations.
Initially, in the AGM approach (Al-
chourr´on, G¨ardenfors, & Makinson, 1985; G¨ardenfors, 1988), standards for belief revision
and contraction functions were given, wherein it was assumed that a knowledge base is
receiving information concerning a static1 domain, and that it is the increased amount or
accuracy of information that is responsible for the changes in the knowledge base. Subse-
quently, Katsuno and Mendelzon (1992) explored a distinct notion of belief change, with
functions for belief update and erasure, wherein an agent changes its beliefs in response to
what it perceives as changes in the environment. The concept of forget goes back to George
Boole (1854), but was reintroduced in the work of Lin and Reiter (1994) and Lin (2001) as
a way to characterize how an agent may bring its knowledge base up-to-date, by forgetting
about facts that are no longer relevant and in such a way as to not aﬀect any possible
future actions. This approach is syntactic in nature: it deals with the issue of removing
facts by removing the ability to describe the facts.2 Finally, the notion of knowledge base
merging was introduced as a generalization of the long-standing problem of information
sharing between databases, where diﬀerent databases might contain conﬂicting information
(see Bright, Hurson, & Pakzad, 1992, for a survey). With the work of Revesz (1993), there
came an interest in constructing a “merged” knowledge base that best represents the in-
formation in a set of other knowledge bases. One use for this was thought to be a way of
determining a course of action that best represents the “desires” and “goals” of a divergent
set of knowledge bases, thereby forming a group-level, all-things-considered knowledge base.
The formal properties of merging have been discussed in previous works (e.g., see Lin &
Mendelzon, 1998; Konieczny & Pino P´erez, 1998; Everaere, Konieczny, & Marquis, 2007).
The distinctions between the formal properties of the diﬀerent types of change were
brought out in each of the papers after the initial AGM publications; for instance, Katsuno
and Mendelzon (1992) compared update with revision; Konieczny and Pino P´erez (1998)
compared merging with revision; Nayak et al. (2006) compared forgetting with update.
Some of the postulates suggested by the initial authors of these diﬀerent conceptions of
belief change have been challenged by other writers. And since our own approach towards
update conﬂicts with some of Katsuno and Mendelzon’s postulates, we wish to show that
1. Note that “static” does not imply “with no mention of time”. For example, one could have information
in a knowledge base about the state of the world at diﬀerent points in time, and revise information at
these points in time. Thus, belief revision is also applicable to the situation where an agent investigates
a past event and tries to reason about what was the real state of the world when this event took place.
Further considerations on how revision and update are interrelated are in the work of Lang (2006).
2. Nayak, Chen, and Lin (2006) described this diﬀerence thus: “While belief erasure purports to answer the
question ‘What should I believe if I can no longer support the belief that the cook killed Cock Robin?’,
forgetting purports to answer the question ‘What should I believe if Killing was a concept not aﬀorded
in my language?’.”
758

Compositional Belief Update
this is not, by itself, a reason to reject our theory — every theory has met with objurgation
concerning its foundational postulates.
Although our focus in this paper is with update — and hence with the postulates given
by Katsuno and Mendelzon (1992) and the objections related to these postulates — we
believe that considerations similar to the ones we bring forward in this arena would hold
with respect to the other sorts of belief change postulates.
That is, we think that the
rationale we have for imposing a compositionality constraint on belief update should be
brought to bear on the cases of belief revision, belief merging, and forgetting.
The knowledge level speciﬁcations of these types of belief change allow for diﬀerent ways
to implement any of them. Various researchers have proposed speciﬁc change operators for
belief revision (Borgida, 1985; Dalal, 1988; Satoh, 1988), belief update (Forbus, 1989; We-
ber, 1986; Winslett, 1988), belief merging (Subrahmanian, 1994; Konieczny, 2000; Everaere,
Konieczny, & Marquis, 2005), and forgetting (Lang, Liberatore, & Marquis, 2003; Nayak
et al., 2006). These approaches are formulated in terms of the distance between models
of the knowledge base and models of a sentence for revision or update. In general there
has been less work dealing with systems that may be readily implementable (but see, e.g.,
Williams, 1996; Delgrande & Schaub, 2003).
In this paper we develop a speciﬁc update operator where the operator is intended to be
compositional, in that an update ψ ⋄µ can be expressed recursively in terms of the syntactic
structure of µ. Thus, if a knowledge base is to be updated by a disjunction µ = a ∨b,
the idea is that this update will be a function of the update by a in a certain combination
with the update by b. The update of the knowledge base by a conjunction µ = a ∧b will
also be a function (a diﬀerent one) of the update by a in combination with the update by
b. The goal is to arrive at an operator whose results are intuitive, in that its deﬁnition
is based on a recursive decomposition of a formula; hence the (generally abstract) notion
of update will be anchored in part in a more familiar computational setting. Second, the
hope is that these operators will be eﬃciently implementable, at least in some cases, by
exploiting restrictions to the syntactic form of the formula. The focus here is on the form of
the formula for update; presumably the approach described may be combined with one in
which the knowledge base is itself divided into relevant and irrelevant parts for an update
(Parikh, 1999).
These goals are generally realised. First, the operators have reasonable properties: many
of the Katsuno and Mendelzon benchmark properties are satisﬁed, including those deemed
essential by Herzig and Riﬁ(1999). While we don’t obtain full irrelevance of syntax, we
do obtain weaker results in this regard; as well we show how irrelevance of syntax can be
obtained by restricting the syntactic form of the sentence for update.
The approach is
also related to other approaches in the literature, and hence serves to establish some links
between approaches. In fact, the family of compositional update operators obtained by
imposing various syntactic restrictions can be regarded as constituting a family of operators
of which Winslett’s standard semantics makes up the most basic nontrivial approach. As
well, the general approach to update presented here can capture the forget operator (Lin &
Reiter, 1994; Lang et al., 2003; Nayak et al., 2006), and so in a certain sense can be regarded
as generalizing forget. We also deﬁne a revision operator using the obvious deﬁnition for
such an operator; it proves to be the case that this operator corresponds with the revision
operator in the work of Satoh (1988).
759

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
The approach leads to a straightforward algorithm for implementing these operators.
This algorithm is eﬃcient, compared to the model-based deﬁnition of this and other distance-
based operators. For a knowledge base in disjunctive normal form, the size of the knowledge
base contributes only a linear factor to the overall complexity. As well, further eﬃciency is
obtained when the size of the input sentence is bounded by a constant.
The next section reviews belief revision, update, forgetting, and merging, and describes
two speciﬁc approaches to update.
The section following describes our approach, after
which, in the next section, we give a discussion and analysis. The last section contains
concluding remarks; proofs of theorems are given in an Appendix.
2. Background
As described, our goal is to introduce a compositional method of carrying out belief change.
But since part of our overall goal also is to examine the place of a compositional belief change
operation in all the various arenas where this can take place, we start by outlining some of
the details for each of these diﬀerent conceptions that motivate belief change, along with
some motivational considerations and some areas where the diﬀerent types of belief change
part ways. These operators were introduced implicitly, by means of a set of postulates that
any legitimate such operator was required to obey. However, in all these areas there has
been some dispute concerning the correctness of the various postulates, and we mention
some of these as we proceed, since our own approach in the case of update does not obey all
the standard postulates for update. We start with the historically earlier case of revision
before moving to our central concern of update. These are followed by short expositions
concerning forgetting and merging.
2.1 Formal Preliminaries
We consider a propositional language L, over a ﬁnite set of atoms, that is, propositional
letters, P = {⊤, a, b, c, . . . }, and truth-functional connectives ¬, ∧, and ∨. Where conve-
nient, ⊃and ≡are also used, and are considered as being introduced by deﬁnition. We
use ↔for logical equivalence; that is, α ↔β is an abbreviation for ⊢(α ≡β). Lits is the
set of literals P ∪{¬l | l ∈P}. In particular, ¬⊤is also denoted as ⊥. A set of literals
Γ is consistent just if ⊥̸∈Γ and for no atom p ∈P do we have p, ¬p ∈Γ. For a literal
l, we use l to denote ¬l if l ∈P, or l′ ∈P if ¬l′ = l. Similarly, for a set of literals Γ, we
use Γ to denote the set {l | l ∈Γ}. The expression atom(µ) denotes the set of atoms in
formula µ. An interpretation ω of L is a maximal consistent set of literals, i.e., ⊤∈ω and
for every other p ∈P precisely one of p ∈ω, ¬p ∈ω holds. A model of a sentence µ is an
interpretation that makes µ true, according to the usual deﬁnition of truth. Mod(µ) de-
notes the set of models of sentence µ. We also make use of the notation ModL(µ) to denote
the set of models of sentence µ over the language of µ (that is to say, over the language
atom(µ).) For interpretation ω we write ω |= µ to mean µ is true in ω. For interpretation
ω and set of literals Γ, we deﬁne ω ↓Γ = ω \ (Γ ∪Γ). That is, ω ↓Γ is the set of literals
in ω but containing neither l nor l for each l ∈Γ. For example, if ω = {a, ¬b, ¬c} then
ω ↓{b, ¬c} = {a}.
We denote the negation-normal form (in which negation applies to atoms only) of a
sentence µ by nnf (µ). Similarly, we denote the conjunctive normal form and the disjunctive
760

Compositional Belief Update
normal form of µ by cnf (µ) and dnf (µ) respectively.3 For a set of sentences Γ (which will
always be ﬁnite), we use W Γ to denote the disjunction and V Γ the conjunction of the
sentences in Γ. Proofs will often be based on the structure of a formula, speciﬁcally on
the depth of a formula; for formula µ, the depth of µ, depth(µ) is the maximum nesting of
connectives in µ. Hence depth(¬a ∨(b ∧¬c)) = 3.
Later we make use of the notion of the prime implicants of a sentence. A consistent set
of literals Γ is a prime implicant of µ iﬀ: Γ ⊢µ and for any Γ′ ⊂Γ we have Γ′ ̸⊢µ.4 In the
limiting case where ⊢µ, we take the (sole) prime implicant of µ to be {⊤}.
2.2 Belief Revision and Contraction
In the seminal approach of AGM (Alchourr´on et al., 1985), postulates are proposed to
constrain belief revision. In this approach, a knowledge base K is assumed to be a belief
set, a set of sentences closed under logical consequence. The revision of a belief set by a
formula, K ∗φ, is a new belief set in which the formula φ is believed. The interesting case is
that in which ¬φ is initially believed, and so to attain a consistent belief set (assuming that
φ is satisﬁable), some beliefs have to be dropped. Exactly which beliefs must be dropped
is not stipulated in the AGM approach; however, constraints in the form of postulates
that govern what are seen as legitimate revision operators are given. In contrast, in their
development of belief update Katsuno and Mendelzon (1992) represented the knowledge
base by a formula in some language L. Hence, in this paper we also express things in terms
of postulates phrased in terms of formulas, rather than belief sets.
The following R-postulates comprise Katsuno and Mendelzon’s reformulation of the
AGM revision postulates, where ∗is a function from L × L to L.
(R1) ψ ∗µ ⊢µ.
(R2) If ψ ∧µ is satisﬁable, then ψ ∗µ ↔ψ ∧µ.
(R3) If µ is satisﬁable then ψ ∗µ is also satisﬁable.
(R4) If ψ1 ↔ψ2 and µ1 ↔µ2 then ψ1 ∗µ1 ↔ψ2 ∗µ2.
(R5) (ψ ∗µ) ∧φ ⊢ψ ∗(µ ∧φ).
(R6) If (ψ ∗µ) ∧φ is satisﬁable then ψ ∗(µ ∧φ) ⊢(ψ ∗µ) ∧φ.
A dual operation, called contraction is also deﬁned, in which a formula is deleted from
the knowledge base. This operation can be seen as governed by the C-postulates, again
using a Katsuno and Mendelzon formulation in terms of a function from L × L to L.
3. Of course for formula µ, there are many diﬀerent but logically equivalent ways to express cnf (µ) and
dnf (µ). We assume a ﬁxed procedure for converting to cnf (or dnf), by converting to negation normal
form, and then distributing disjunctions over conjunctions (or vice versa for dnf), hence justifying the use
of the term the conjunctive (disjunctive) normal form of a formula, rather than a (disjunctive) normal
form.
4. The notion of prime implicant should not be confused with the dual notion of a prime implicate. A
prime implicate of a formula µ is a clause, or disjunction of literals, ρ, such that µ ⊢ρ but for any proper
subclause ρ′ of ρ, we have µ ̸⊢ρ′.
761

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
(C1) ψ ⊢ψ −µ.
(C2) If ψ ̸⊢µ then ψ −µ ↔ψ.
(C3) If ̸⊢µ then ψ −µ ̸⊢µ.
(C4) If ψ1 ↔ψ2 and µ1 ↔µ2 then ψ1 −µ1 ↔ψ2 −µ2.
(C5) (ψ −µ) ∧µ ⊢ψ.
Revision and contraction are related in the AGM approach by what have come to be
known as the Levi and Harper identities. They may be expressed as follows (using formulas
rather than belief sets):
ψ ∗µ
↔
(ψ −¬µ) ∧µ
(1)
ψ −µ
↔
ψ ∨(ψ ∗¬µ).
(2)
The ﬁrst case asserts that revising ψ by µ corresponds to the contraction of ψ by ¬µ con-
joined with µ. The second asserts that contracting µ from ψ corresponds to the disjunction
of ψ with the result of ψ updated by ¬µ.
Although this makes a nice picture, there have been various objections to some of the
presuppositions of the AGM model (e.g., the representation of belief states by theories, that
is, by inﬁnite sets of formulas) and to some of the postulates that are said to govern the
operations of revision and contraction (especially (C5), the postulate of “recovery”). Issues
involved with (C5) have been discussed by Fuhrmann, 1991; Tennant, 1997; Hansson &
Rott, 1998; Rott & Pagnucco, 1999, and others.
2.3 Belief Update and Erasure
The account of revision and contraction described in the preceding subsection is usually seen
as applying most straightforwardly to the case where one has a store of information about
“an unchanging, static world” but where new information about that world is received by
the agent, thereby forcing a change in the representation of this “unchanging, static world.”
But a diﬀerent picture was put forward by Katsuno and Mendelzon (1992), where there was
a “changing, dynamic world”. In such a conception, the new information that is gathered
by the agent reﬂects the idea that the world is diﬀerent than it was when the knowledge
base was previously constructed.
The sorts of changes to the knowledge base that are
required by this type of new information are seen as diﬀerent from the sorts envisaged
when it is thought that changes to the knowledge base are only going to make its contents
successively more accurate. Although this simplistic distinction is not all there is to the
diﬀerences between the two pictures (as we mentioned in Footnote 1), it has led to a large
body of work that does point to a diﬀerent conception. Distinct operations that change
knowledge bases have been proposed: update, which makes changes to the knowledge base
given information concerning a change in the state of the world, and erasure, for removing
out-of-date information.
A formula is said to be complete just if it implies the truth or falsity of every other
formula. In the approach of (Katsuno & Mendelzon, 1992), update is a function ⋄from
L × L to L satisfying the following U-postulates.
762

Compositional Belief Update
(U1) ψ ⋄µ ⊢µ.
(U2) If ψ ⊢µ then (ψ ⋄µ) ↔ψ.
(U3) If µ and ψ are satisﬁable then so is ψ ⋄µ.
(U4) If ψ1 ↔ψ2 and µ1 ↔µ2 then (ψ1 ⋄µ1) ↔(ψ2 ⋄µ2).
(U5) (ψ ⋄µ) ∧φ ⊢ψ ⋄(µ ∧φ).
(U6) If ψ ⋄µ1 ⊢µ2 and ψ ⋄µ2 ⊢µ1 then (ψ ⋄µ1) ↔(ψ ⋄µ2).
(U7) If ψ is complete then (ψ ⋄µ1) ∧(ψ ⋄µ2) ⊢ψ ⋄(µ1 ∨µ2).
(U8) (ψ1 ∨ψ2) ⋄µ ↔(ψ1 ⋄µ) ∨(ψ2 ⋄µ)
These postulates are not, however, uncontentious. Herzig and Riﬁ(1999) discussed the
plausibility of the postulates given; they assert that U2, U5, and U6 are undesirable,
while U7 is unimportant. This leaves (according to the authors) U1, U3, U4, and U8 as
being desirable.
Erasure is also deﬁned, in a manner analogous to the way we described how contraction
was related to belief revision. In both cases, some speciﬁed formula is not believed in the
result. The erasure of µ from ψ is denoted ψ
µ, and the formula µ is not believed in the
resulting state. As with all our other operations, there is a set of postulates characterizing
erasure (given in Katsuno & Mendelzon, 1992). Update and erasure are also interdeﬁnable
by means of identities, analogous to the Levi and Harper identities, which related revision
and contraction:
ψ ⋄µ
↔
(ψ
¬µ) ∧µ
(3)
ψ
µ
↔
ψ ∨(ψ ⋄¬µ).
(4)
The ﬁrst case asserts that update by µ corresponds to erasing ¬µ along with the conjunction
with µ. The second asserts that erasing µ from ψ corresponds to disjoining ψ with the result
of ψ updated by ¬µ.
There have been various speciﬁc update (and revision) operators proposed based on the
distance between interpretations. We focus on two update operators, both due to Winslett.
The ﬁrst, the Possible Models Approach (PMA) of (Winslett, 1988) is a well-known exam-
ple of an update operator satisfying the Katsuno and Mendelzon update postulates. The
second, the standard semantics of (Winslett, 1990) is a weak (in fact, arguably the weakest
reasonable) approach to update. We denote these operators by ⋄pma and ⋄ss respectively.
For ψ ⋄pma µ, we have that, for each interpretation w of ψ, ⋄pma selects from the inter-
pretations of µ those that are “closest” to w. The update is determined by the set of these
closest interpretations. The notion of “closeness” between two interpretations w1 and w2 is
the Hamming distance, given as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 diﬀ(w1, w2) = The set of all propositional letters on which w1 and w2 diﬀer.
763

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
Interpretation w1 is not less close to w than w2, w1 ≤w w2, just if diﬀ(w, w1) ⊆diﬀ(w, w2).
It follows that ≤w is a partial order on interpretations. The ≤w-minimal set with respect
to µ is designated Min(Mod(µ), w). ¿From this we can specify the PMA update operator:
Mod(ψ ⋄pma µ) =
[
w∈Mod(ψ)
Min(Mod(µ), w).
The update operator ψ ⋄ss µ is deﬁned so that for each model of ψ, those models of µ
that retain the truth values of atoms not in µ are chosen. That is:
Mod(ψ ⋄ss µ) =
[
w1∈Mod(ψ)
{w2 ∈Mod(µ) | diﬀ(w1, w2) ⊆atom(µ)}
The operator ψ ⋄ss µ is the weakest “reasonable” update operator in the following sense
(Winslett, 1990): First, for an update ψ ⋄ss µ, µ is true in every model of ψ ⋄ss µ. Second,
every model of ψ over the language excluding atoms in µ is a model of ψ ⋄ss µ (again over
this restricted language). Moreover, ψ ⋄ss µ consists of the maximal set of interpretations
that satisﬁes the preceding two properties. Hence in the update of ψ by µ, the truth values
of atoms in ψ but not in µ are unaﬀected by the update.
Example 1 (Katsuno & Mendelzon, 1992) Let L = {b, m} be the language of dis-
course. Let ψ = (b∧¬m)∨(¬b∧m), and µ = b. The interpretations of ψ are w1 = (¬b, m),
w2 = (b, ¬m); and the interpretations of µ are:
w′
1 = (b, m), w′
2 = (b, ¬m).
Thus
diﬀ(w1, w′
1) = {b} and diﬀ(w1, w′
2) = {b, m}, hence w′
1 ≤w1 w′
2 and w′
2 ̸≤w1 w′
1, so
Min(Mod(µ), w1) = {w′
1}. Similarly, Min(Mod(µ), w2) = {w′
2}. Hence, (ψ ⋄pma µ) ↔b.
The same result obtains for ⋄ss.
For concreteness, take b to mean “the book is on the ﬂoor”, and m to mean “the magazine
is on the ﬂoor”. So ψ means that either the book or the magazine is on the ﬂoor, but not
both. A robot is ordered to put the book on the ﬂoor. Intuitively, at the end of this action
the book will be on the ﬂoor, and the location of the magazine will be unknown. Both
operators give this result.
Example 2 Let ψ = (¬b ∧¬m) and µ = (b ∨m). Then (ψ ⋄pma µ) ↔(b ≡¬m), whereas
(ψ ⋄ss µ) ↔(b ∨m).
Here, neither the book nor the magazine is on the ﬂoor. The robot is ordered to put at
least one of them on the ﬂoor. According to the ⋄pma operator, exactly one will be on the
ﬂoor after this action, while according to the ⋄ss operator, at least one will be on the ﬂoor.
2.4 Forget
While our focus is on a speciﬁc approach to update and erasure, we also relate our approach
to that of the forget operator. The notion of forgetting goes back to George Boole (1854),
though it has received more recent attention in Artiﬁcial Intelligence by, e.g., Lin & Reiter,
1994; Lin, 2001; Lang et al., 2003; Nayak et al., 2006. In a propositional context, to forget
an atom, or set of atoms, is to remove all information concerning the atom or set of atoms.
764

Compositional Belief Update
It has been suggested (in Nayak et al., 2006) that forgetting corresponds to the removal of
literals or atoms from the language of discourse in the case of propositional forgetting (i.e.,
0-place predicate forgetting). In the more general case, it is seen as removing a predicate or
relation from the language, and hence removing any further consequences that might have
been due to this predicate’s presence.
Let ψ[p/q] denote the formula ψ where all occurrences of atom p are replaced by q.
Then the usual deﬁnition for forgetting (again, going back to Boole) atom p in ψ is given
by ψ[p/⊤] ∨ψ[p/⊥]. In order to forget a set of atoms Γ, one takes the disjunction of the
substitution of all 2|Γ| combinations of ⊤, ⊥for elements of Γ.
We have the following deﬁnitions. For single atoms we basically follow Nayak et al.
(2006); for sets of atoms we use the deﬁnition from (Lin & Reiter, 1994). To begin, the
p-dual of an interpretation ω is the interpretation like ω but where the truth value assigned
to p is changed to its negation. A set of interpretations is closed under p-duals just if, for
any interpretation ω in the set, the p-dual of ω is also in the set.
Deﬁnition 2 Given a set of interpretations Ωand atom p, the operator U(Ω, p) yields the
least set of interpretations containing Ωand closed under p-duals.
Given this, we can deﬁne forget for an atom and set of atoms, where the latter is deﬁned
recursively in terms of the former:
Deﬁnition 3 Basis Case: Let ψ be a formula and p an atom. Then forget of p with respect
to ψ is given by:
Mod(ψ ⊙p)
=
]
(Mod(ψ), p)
=
Mod(ψ[p/⊤] ∨ψ[p/⊥]).
Inductive Case: Let ψ be a formula and Γ = {p1, . . . , pn} a set of atoms. Then forget
of Γ with respect to ψ is given by:
ψ ⊙Γ = (ψ ⊙(Γ \ {pn})) ⊙pn.
For example, a ∧(b ∨c) ⊙a ↔¬a ∧(b ∨c) ⊙a ↔b ∨c. (Given a knowledge base that has
stored that Alberta is in Canada and also that either Vancouver is in British Columbia or
Charlottetown is in Ontario, forgetting that Alberta is in Canada would yield that either
Vancouver is in British Columbia or Charlottetown is in Ontario. This would be the same
result if the initial knowledge base had that Alberta was not in Canada, but that either
Vancouver is in British Columbia or Charlottetown is in Ontario.) For another example,
(a ∨b) ⊙a ↔⊤. This last example illustrates that forget is distinct from erasure, since a
property of erasure is that if ψ does not imply µ then (ψ
µ) ↔ψ (Katsuno & Mendelzon,
1992).
2.5 Belief Merging
Merging diﬀers formally from the preceding three pictures of how knowledge bases are
changed. The preceding operators had a knowledge base and a sentence that may need to
occasion a change in the knowledge base. If one rephrases this in terms of agents, these
765

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
other types of change postulate an agent, with a store of beliefs, who is now faced with a
new belief that needs to be accommodated. In the case of merging, however, we start with
many belief sets that need all to be dealt with in some way that yields “the best, overall”
single belief state. In terms of agents, again, we have here a number of agents, each with
a belief set, and we are trying to construct that belief set which best represents the total
beliefs of the community of agents. So, rather than being a function that maps a belief set
and a sentence onto a belief set, it is instead a function that maps a number of belief sets
into a single one. Following our earlier practice of representing belief sets by a single formula
(in the manner of Katsuno & Mendelzon, 1992), we can see that the earlier rationales for
belief change envision it as a function L × L →L, whereas merging envisions a function
L × L × . . . × L →L. Note that the general case allows for some of the knowledge bases on
this list to be identical to one another, thus the list is actually a multi-set (bag).
The goal in merging, then, is to construct, from a ﬁnite list of knowledge bases E,
some appropriate, single “merged” knowledge base. Despite this formal diﬀerence from the
earlier three types of belief change, we nevertheless include a discussion here because of the
conceptual similarities that hold between merging and any of the other versions of belief
change. Indeed, it seems plausible to suggest that merging might be deﬁnable in terms of
the others, or maybe that it is some sort of generalization of the others. In these cases, our
considerations about compositionality of belief change operators may be relevant.
Deﬁnition 4 A knowledge set is a multi-set (bag) of knowledge bases.
Deﬁnition 5 If E is a knowledge set, then V E is the conjunction of the formulas repre-
senting all the knowledge bases that are in E.
Konieczny and Pino P´erez (1998, 2002) proposed the following M-principles to govern all
merging operators. A merge function △is a function from a knowledge set E to a knowledge
base △(E) satisfying the following postulates, where ⊔is multiset union.5
(M1) △(E) is consistent
(M2) If V E is consistent then △(E) = V E.
(M3) If E1 and E2 are knowledge sets such that E1 ↔E2, then △(E1) ↔△(E2)
(M4) If K1 and K2 are knowledge bases that are not mutually consistent, then △(K1 ⊔
K2) ̸⊢K1
(M5) △(E1) ∧△(E2) ⊢△(E1 ⊔E2)
(M6) If △(E1) ∧△(E2) is consistent, then △(E1 ⊔E2) ⊢△(E1) ∧△(E2)
Some of these merging postulates have been contested: For example, Meyer (2000) argued
that M4 and M6 should be rejected. (He argues this on the grounds that there are many
plausible merging operations that do not obey these postulates).
5. For simplicity, we list the postulates of (Konieczny & Pino P´erez, 1998), which do not include integrity
constraints.
766

Compositional Belief Update
A natural method for determining whether a formula φ should be in the merged knowl-
edge base is to determine whether it appears in the majority of the members of the knowl-
edge set that is being merged (“the merged knowledge base should allow the opinion of the
majority to prevail”). Liberatore and Schaerf (1998) introduced the method of arbitration,
whereby the goal is to adopt as many diﬀerent opinions as possible from the members of the
knowledge set (“try to take as many diﬀering opinions as possible into account”). Konieczny
and Pino P´erez (1998) proved that there is no arbitration operator (at least, not of the sort
that they characterize) that obeys M1 – M6.6
The interplay between various merging
operations and the ability of an agent to hide, lie, or otherwise camouﬂage its preferences
from other agents as they try to construct a merged knowledge base has been surveyed in
Everaere et al. (2007).
3. The Approach
This section discusses our approach.
Following intuitions and motivation of the formal
approach, we introduce compositional update and, subsequently, erasure. We also consider
the notion of compositional belief revision, but conclude that, at least with respect to our
speciﬁc approach, there is no separate, distinct, notion of compositional revision. Analysis
of properties of these operators is covered in the next section.
3.1 Intuitions
Our goal is to deﬁne update operators in a compositional fashion so that, for updating by
formula µ, update is deﬁned in terms of the syntactic components of µ. The general idea
behind update is that for ψ ⋄µ, each model of ψ is replaced by the “closest” model(s) in µ
(Katsuno & Mendelzon, 1992). In our approach, the notion of “close” for each model of ψ is
determined in part by the syntactic structure of µ. That is, µ is recursively decomposed; the
resulting (base case) literals are used to determine models of the update by sets of literals;
and the results are combined depending on the connective(s) in µ.
Consider how this may be carried out. We are given a knowledge base ψ and a sentence
µ, and we wish to determine a new knowledge base where µ is believed. For a base case,
µ = l is a literal, and we wish to update the knowledge base ψ by literal l. If ψ implies l
then we need do nothing. If ψ does not imply l, then we wish to arrive at a knowledge base
in which l is believed. That is, we want to change the knowledge base only enough so that
it entails l. Clearly, we can do this by replacing each model ω of ψ by the interpretation
ω′ = (ω ↓{l}) ∪{l}.7 Thus, we would have that every resulting interpretation entails l.
Consider next updating a knowledge base ψ by a conjunction of literals µ = l1 ∧l2. A
knowledge base in which l1∧l2 is believed will, obviously, be one in which every model of the
knowledge base entails both l1 and l2. We carry this out by replacing each interpretation
ω ∈Mod(ψ) with an interpretation ω′ = (ω ↓{l1, l2}) ∪{l1, l2}. There is a limiting case
that needs to be taken care of, where l1 is l2. In this situation, there is no interpretation in
which l1, l2 are true, and in this case ω′ does not exist, reﬂecting an attempt to update by
an inconsistent formula.
6. This forms a part of the rationale for Meyer (2000, 2001) to deny M4 and M6.
7. To be clear, if ω |= l then ω′ = ω; and if ω ̸|= l then ω′ is like ω but with l replacing its complement.
767

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
To update a knowledge base ψ by a disjunction of literals µ = l1 ∨l2, we want to
modify models of ψ so that at least one of l1 or l2 is true. Consider ω ∈Mod(ψ) such that
ω ̸|= l1 ∨l2. Then ω1 = (ω ↓{l1}) ∪{l1} is an interpretation that involves the least change
to ω in which l1 is true, while ω2 = (ω ↓{l2}) ∪{l2} does the same for l2. Arguably then ω
should be replaced by ω1 and ω2.
Last, we generalize the above considerations to deal with arbitrary formulas.
So to
update by a disjunction of formulas, we recursively determine the update given by the
individual disjuncts and return the union of the resulting sets of interpretations.
3.2 A Compositional Update Operator
Based on the preceding intuitions, we deﬁne an update operator ⋄c. We begin with some
preliminary deﬁnitions. In the following, UL is a function from an interpretation ω and
ﬁnite set of formulas Γ to a set of interpretations. Informally, ω is a model of the knowledge
base and Γ is a set of formulas resulting from the partial decomposition of a formula for
update. The value of UL is the set of interpretations closest to ω, according to Γ. To ease
notation, in the case of a single formula we sometimes write UL(ω, µ) for UL(ω, {µ}).
Deﬁnition 6 For interpretation ω and ﬁnite Γ ⊆L, deﬁne UL(ω, Γ) as follows:
1. If Γ ⊆Lits then
UL(ω, Γ) =
 {(ω ↓Γ) ∪Γ}
if Γ ̸⊢⊥
∅
otherwise
2. If Γ = {α ∧β} ∪Γ′ then UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {α, β} ∪Γ′)
3. If Γ = {α ∨β} ∪Γ′ then UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {α} ∪Γ′) ∪UL(ω, {β} ∪Γ′)
4. If Γ = {¬(α ∨β)} ∪Γ′ then UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {¬α, ¬β} ∪Γ′)
5. If Γ = {¬(α ∧β)} ∪Γ′ then UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {¬α} ∪Γ′) ∪UL(ω, {¬β} ∪Γ′)
6. If Γ = {¬¬α} ∪Γ′ then UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {α} ∪Γ′)
It is worth noting that the recursion steps of the above deﬁnition resemble closely the
procedure which we use to convert a formula to its disjunctive normal form. Before deﬁning
update in terms of this operator, we ﬁrst investigate some of its properties.
Foremost,
we need to show that UL is well-deﬁned. That is, in specifying UL(ω, Γ), the deﬁnition
is phrased in terms of some member of Γ; it needs to be shown that the order in which
elements are “selected” in the recursion does not aﬀect the result.
Theorem 1 UL is well-deﬁned.
The next two results reﬂect the inﬂuence of the structure of a formula on the recursive
decomposition in the deﬁnition of UL.
Theorem 2 UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, nnf (V Γ)).
Theorem 3 UL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, dnf (V Γ)).
768

Compositional Belief Update
Note that a similar result does not extend to conjunctive normal form. A counterexample
is given by the following:
UL(ω, {a ∨(b ∧c)})
=
UL(ω, {a}) ∪UL(ω, {b, c})
̸=
UL(ω, {a}) ∪UL(ω, {a, c}) ∪UL(ω, {b, a}) ∪UL(ω, {b, c})
=
UL(ω, {a, a ∨c}) ∪UL(ω, {b, a ∨c})
=
UL(ω, {(a ∨b), (a ∨c)})
=
UL(ω, {(a ∨b) ∧(a ∨c)}).
We consider next a couple of fundamental properties of UL:
Theorem 4 For every µ ∈Γ and w′ ∈UL(ω, Γ) we have w′ |= µ.
Theorem 5 UL(ω, Γ) = ∅iﬀΓ ⊢⊥.
We next deﬁne our update operator directly in terms of UL.
Deﬁnition 7
Mod(ψ ⋄c µ) = {ω′ | ω′ ∈UL(ω, {µ}), ω ∈Mod(ψ)}.
Recall Example 1 in which µ = b and ψ = (b ∧¬m) ∨(¬b ∧m). We have that Mod(ψ ⋄c
µ) = {ω′ | ω′ ∈UL(ω, {µ}), ω ∈Mod(ψ)} = {(ω ↓{b}) ∪{b} | ω ∈Mod(ψ)}. Thus,
Mod(ψ ⋄c µ) = {{b, ¬m}, {b, m}}, and so (ψ ⋄c µ) ↔b. This is the same result as we obtain
with both Winslett’s approaches.8
For Example 2, where ψ = ¬b ∧¬m and µ = (b ∨m), we obtain Mod(ψ ⋄c µ) =
{{b, ¬m}, {¬b, m}}. In this case, our update operator behaves the same as ⋄pma, but dif-
ferently from ⋄ss.
We can similarly deﬁne an erasure operator via UL. To erase µ from ψ, and in analogy
to the Harper Identity, one can update by ¬µ and add the result to ψ. Thus:
Deﬁnition 8
Mod(ψ
cµ) = Mod(ψ) ∪{ω′ | ω′ ∈UL(ω, {¬µ}), ω ∈Mod(ψ)}.
We get the results:
Theorem 6
ψ ⋄c µ
↔
(ψ
c¬µ) ∧µ
ψ
cµ
↔
ψ ∨(ψ ⋄c ¬µ).
8. We note however that these approaches diﬀer. Speciﬁcally, the PMA update operator satisﬁes all of the
KM postulates, whereas our operator does not; see Section 4 for details.
769

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
3.3 Erasure
In Deﬁnition 8 we deﬁned a dual to update, called erasure, directly in terms of UL. We
can equally well deﬁne a function analogous to UL, call it EL, to directly deﬁne an erasure
operator from ﬁrst principles. We do this now, toward such a deﬁnition of erasure. Brieﬂy,
our motivation is: if we want to erase µ as a consequence of ψ, then semantically we want
to add interpretations to the models of ψ. If µ corresponds to a single literal, then for
each model of ψ we would want to add an interpretation in which l was replaced by ¯l. If µ
corresponds to a conjunction, then µ can be erased by erasing either of the conjuncts; if µ
corresponds to a disjunction, then to erase µ both disjuncts must be erased. By continuing
in this fashion we obtain the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 9 For interpretation ω and ﬁnite Γ ⊆L, deﬁne EL(ω, Γ) as follows:
1. If Γ ⊆Lits then
EL(ω, Γ) =
 {(ω ↓Γ) ∪Γ}
if W Γ ̸⊢⊤
∅
otherwise
2. If Γ = {α ∧β} ∪Γ′ then EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, {α} ∪Γ′) ∪EL(ω, {β} ∪Γ′)
3. If Γ = {α ∨β} ∪Γ′ then EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, {α, β} ∪Γ′)
4. If Γ = {¬(α ∨β)} ∪Γ′ then EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, {¬α} ∪Γ′) ∪EL(ω, {¬β} ∪Γ′)
5. If Γ = {¬(α ∧β)} ∪Γ′ then EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, {¬α, ¬β} ∪Γ′)
6. If Γ = {¬¬α} ∪Γ′ then EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, {α} ∪Γ′)
The following results are analogous to Theorems 2 and 3; note the occurrence of cnf in
Theorem 8, in contrast to dnf in Theorem 3.
Theorem 7 EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, nnf (V Γ)).
Theorem 8 EL(ω, Γ) = EL(ω, cnf (V Γ)).
We can now directly deﬁne an erasure operator
′
c in terms of EL:
Deﬁnition 10 Mod(ψ
′
c µ) = Mod(ψ) ∪{ω′ | ω′ ∈EL(ω, {µ}), ω ∈Mod(ψ)}
Unsurprisingly, this notion of erasure and that given in Deﬁnition 8 are equivalent. We
show this by ﬁrst establishing the following result:
Lemma 1 For interpretation ω and Γ ⊆L, we have EL(ω, Γ) = UL(ω, {¬ V Γ})
¿From this, it follows that our notions of erasure as given via the Harper Identity, and by
direct deﬁnition via Deﬁnition 9 coincide:
Theorem 9 ψ
cµ ↔ψ
′
c µ.
Hence we just use the symbol
c for erasure. As a corollary, Theorem 9 also establishes the
well-deﬁnedness of
′
c .9
9. That is, since UL is well-deﬁned (Theorem 1), so is
c (Deﬁnition 8) and hence so is
′
c by the above
equivalence.
770

Compositional Belief Update
3.4 Revision
In this section we consider extending the compositional approach to belief revision. To
begin, it might be pointed out that there is nothing about the underlying motivation that
makes ⋄c an update operator, and this point suggests that ⋄c might also be regarded as a
revision operator, albeit with weak properties. However, regardless of intuitions, the recur-
sive decomposition implicit in Deﬁnition 6 yields an operator with update-like properties,
in that for sentence for update µ, one eﬀectively deals with the models of the disjuncts in
dnf (µ). For revision, in contrast, the intuition is that one deals with models of µ that are
(in some sense) closest to those of the knowledge base ψ. Hence, the operator ⋄c is not
really appropriate as a revision operator.
This suggests a possibly-feasible approach to deﬁning compositional revision: To deﬁne
a revision ψ∗µ, one ﬁrst uses the operator ⋄c to ﬁnd a candidate set of models of µ, and then
employs some distance function to determine the subset of these models that are closest to
models of ψ as a whole. That is, for formulas ψ, µ, an update of ψ by µ is deﬁned (in one
fashion or another) with respect to all the models of ψ. For revision in contrast, a deﬁnition
of the revision of ψ by µ makes reference to only a subset of the models of ψ, those that are
closest (in some sense) to the models of µ. In this sense then, update is a logically weaker
operator than revision. Thus a revision operator can be deﬁned with respect to ψ and µ by
ﬁrst applying some (compositional) update operator to get a candidate set of models of µ.
This set can then be “ﬁltered”, by removing those models that are not of minimal distance
to the closest models of ψ. So depending on the notion of distance employed, one might
expect to obtain diﬀerent revision operators for a given compositional update operator.
There are two common notions of distance that are used for model-based belief change,
one based on set containment and the other on cardinality. In the ﬁrst case, for formulas
α, β, deﬁne
∆min(α, β)
=
min⊆({M1∆M2 | M1 ∈Mod(α), M2 ∈Mod(β)}),
where for sets A and B, A∆B is the symmetric diﬀerence of A and B. Satoh’s (1988)
revision operator ψ ∗S µ is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 11
Mod(ψ ∗S µ) = {w′ ∈Mod(µ) | ∃w ∈Mod(ψ), w∆w′ ∈∆min(ψ, µ)}.
For example, let ψ = a∧b∧c and let µ = ¬a∨(¬b∧¬c). Then ψ∗Sµ = (¬a∧b∧c)∨(a∧¬b∧¬c).
We can deﬁne a corresponding compositional revision operator as follows:
Deﬁnition 12
Mod(ψ ∗µ) = {w′ | w′ ∈UL(w, {µ}), where w ∈Mod(ψ), w∆w′ ∈∆min(ψ, µ)}.
However, it turns out that this revision operator in fact coincides the Satoh revision oper-
ator:
Theorem 10 ψ ∗µ ↔ψ ∗S µ.
771

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
It follows as a straightforward corollary that if we use a distance metric based on the num-
ber of diﬀering propositional symbols between two interpretations, we obtain the revision
operator of (Dalal, 1988).10
So in the obvious approaches to compositional revision, we
do not obtain new revision operators; which is to say, the recursive decomposition in the
deﬁnition of UL does not serve to select among models of µ in any interesting sense with
respect to revision.
However, these considerations do lead to one interesting result, and that is they point
the way to algorithms that may more eﬃciently compute the Satoh or Dalal revision: To
compute the Satoh revision for example, one can use Deﬁnition 6 to determine a relevant
subset of models of µ, and then use ∆min(ψ, µ) to determine the closest subset of these
models to the set of models of ψ. As we discuss in Section 5, this initial ﬁltering of models
of µ may be done eﬃciently in certain syntactically-restricted cases.
4. Analysis of Compositional Update and Erasure
To start, we consider which of the Katsuno-Mendelzon update postulates our operator
satisﬁes. We do not consider the set of corresponding compositional erasure postulates,
since the results are analogous to those of the update postulates, and so are of limited
additional interest. After considering the update postulates, we further explore the update
and erasure operators, including properties resulting from the restriction of the syntactic
form of the formula for update, and a comparison to related approaches.
Theorem 11 ⋄c satisﬁes U1, U3, U5, U7, U8.
For a counterexample to U2, consider the ﬁrst example given above, illustrating the
approaches of Winslett, where for ψ ⋄c µ we have ψ = (b ∧¬m) ∨(¬b ∧m) and µ = b ∨m.
In our approach, for the update (as given in Deﬁnition 7) the ﬁrst disjunct of µ viz., b,
yields interpretations {b, ¬m} and {b, m} and the update by the second disjunct, m, gives
interpretations {b, m} and {¬b, m}. Hence ψ⋄c(b∨m) is characterized by the interpretations
{b, m}, {b, ¬m}, and {¬b, m} and so we get ψ ⋄c (b ∨m) ↔(b ∨m). U2 would dictate
that the result be ψ; however, the above example suggests that U2 is problematic in the
context of update. To borrow an example from other works (Herzig & Riﬁ, 1999; Brewka
& Herzberg, 1993), suppose an agent believes p (that a certain coin shows heads). Now
the world changes because of a toss of this coin (where the agent does not see the result).
Letting ¬p be that the coin shows tails, we note that the agent should believe (p ∨¬p). Yet
note that p ⊢(p∨¬p); so U2 would stipulate that p⋄(p∨¬p) should be p, contrary to what
we want. The operator ⋄c, on the other hand, includes an additional model. This appears
to make sense, because by updating by b ∨m we are really telling the knowledge base that
the world has changed so that one of b ∧m or b ∧¬m or ¬b ∧m is true. Thus, in this case
the update operator behaves like the Gricean belief change operator of Delgrande, Nayak,
and Pagnucco (2005), where the goal is to incorporate all and only the new information.
10. That is, for ﬁxed formulas, any model of the Dalal revision is a model of the Satoh revision. Rephrasing
Deﬁnitions 11 and 12 for cardinality-based distance gives a result analogous to Theorem 10 for Dalal
revision. We omit the details.
772

Compositional Belief Update
We note that we can modify our ⋄c operator in a simple fashion to satisfy U2 as follows:11
ψ ⋄′
c µ =
 ψ
if ψ ⊢µ
ψ ⋄c µ
otherwise
But for our purposes, although U2 is indeed now satisﬁed, this modiﬁcation sheds no light
on our original goal of investigating ramiﬁcations of developing a compositional update
operator, and so we do not further pursue this modiﬁcation.
We next consider a counterexample for U4. Although ((¬a ∧b) ∨b) ↔b, nonetheless
Mod(a⋄c((¬a∧b)∨b)) = {{¬a, b}, {a, b}} while Mod(a⋄cb) = {{a, b}}. So U4 is not satisﬁed
since in our compositional approach parts of a sentence may provide implicit results not
explicit in the sentence. Consider (¬a∨b)∧(¬b∨c) to further illustrate this point. Updating
by this sentence is eﬀected by updating by the individual components, viz., (¬a ∨b) and
(¬b ∨c). However, implicit in these parts is the fact that (¬a ∨c) is also true, and the
addition of this (implied) sentence would aﬀect the result of the update. We consider this
behaviour further below.
A counterexample for U6 is given by the following. Let
ψ
=
a ∨b
µ1
=
(a ∨¬a)
µ2
=
⊤
We have that
Mod((a ∨b) ⋄c (a ∨¬a))
=
Mod(⊤)
But we also have:
Mod((a ∨b) ⋄c ⊤)
=
Mod(a ∨b)
So we have a case where ψ ⋄c µ1 ⊢µ2 and also ψ ⋄c µ2 ⊢µ1. Thus the antecedent conditions
of U6 are satisﬁed, but not ψ ⋄c µ1 ↔ψ ⋄c µ2.
While ⋄c does not satisfy U4 (substitution of logical equivalents) in general, it does
satisfy some weaker conditions. First, our update obviously satisﬁes substitution of logical
equivalents in the ﬁrst argument of ⋄c. As well, in light of Theorems 2 and 3, if µ1 and
µ2 share the same negation normal form or disjunctive normal form, then they may be
substituted one for the other as a formula for update.
We summarize these results as
follows:
Observation 1
1. If ψ1 ↔ψ2 then (ψ1 ⋄c µ) ↔(ψ2 ⋄c µ).
2. If nnf (µ1) = nnf (µ2) then (ψ ⋄c µ1) ↔(ψ ⋄c µ2).
3. If dnf (µ1) = dnf (µ2) then (ψ ⋄c µ1) ↔(ψ ⋄c µ2).
11. Borgida (1985) employed a similar deﬁnition with respect to a revision operator.
773

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
Despite failing to satisfy some postulates (which, it can be noted, overlap with the
postulates that Herzig & Riﬁ, 1999, think are undesirable), ⋄c does exhibit a nice property,
reﬂecting the compositional nature of our operator, but which operators appearing in the
literature and satisfying the Katsuno and Mendelzon postulates fail to satisfy. The following
version of the disjunction property holds.
Theorem 12 ψ ⋄c (µ1 ∨µ2) ↔(ψ ⋄c µ1) ∨(ψ ⋄c µ2)
Corollary 1 (ψ ⋄c µ1) ∧(ψ ⋄c µ2) implies ψ ⋄c (µ1 ∨µ2).
The corollary can be observed to be a strengthening of U7.
Our update operator satisﬁes those postulates deemed desirable by Herzig and Riﬁ
(1999), with the exception of U4.
As discussed above, U4 is not satisﬁed due to the
interaction of parts of a sentence. It would seem that if we could “compile out” the implicit
information in a sentence then we would obtain the full substitution of equivalents, as
expressed in U4.
So, one way to satisfy U4 is to redeﬁne ⋄c so that we ﬁrst get this
information implicit in the interaction of the compositionally distinct parts of the update
sentence. We do this by deﬁning operators that consider the set of prime implicants of a
sentence. We call this modiﬁed operator ⋄pi
c . Let PI(µ) be the set of prime implicants of µ.
Deﬁnition 13
ψ ⋄pi
c µ = ψ ⋄c
W PI(µ)
Theorem 13 ⋄pi
c satisﬁes U4
Although ⋄pi
c satisﬁes U4, we now lose U7. A counter-example for U7 is given by
ψ
=
a ∧b ∧c ∧d
µ1
=
(a ∧d) ∨(¬c ∧d)
µ2
=
(¬a ∧d) ∨(¬c ∧d).
We have that
Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c µ1)
=
{{a, b, c, d}, {a, b, ¬c, d}}
and
Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c µ2)
=
{{¬a, b, c, d}, {a, b, ¬c, d}}
Hence Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c µ1) ∩Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c µ2) = {{a, b, ¬c, d}}. On the other hand
Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c (µ1 ∨µ2))
=
Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c ((a ∧d) ∨(¬c ∧d) ∨(¬a ∧d) ∨(¬c ∧d)))
=
Mod(ψ ⋄pi
c d)
=
{{a, b, c, d}}.
Conversion to prime implicants in eﬀect removes irrelevant or redundant syntactic infor-
mation, as illustrated in the preceding example where µ1 ∨µ2 was in fact equivalent to the
atom d. We can further pursue this line of inquiry by considering, for a formula for update
µ, a syntactic representation of the proposition expressed by µ over the language of µ. For a
given formula µ, recall that ModL(µ) is the set of models of µ, over the language of µ. The
formula WV ModL(µ) then would be this formula expressed in disjunctive normal form; for
example ModL((a ∨b) ∧c) would be expressed as (a ∧b ∧c) ∨(a ∧¬b ∧c) ∨(¬a ∧b ∧c).
We deﬁne an update operator as follows:
774

Compositional Belief Update
Deﬁnition 14 Mod(ψ ⋄ss
c µ) = Mod(ψ ⋄c (WV ModL(µ))).
We obtain that this update operator is in fact the same as that of Winslett’s standard
semantics:
Theorem 14 ψ ⋄ss
c µ ↔ψ ⋄ss µ.
We can pursue this direction one step further, and deﬁne an update operator where the
update formula µ is characterized by its models expressed in dnf. That is we can deﬁne:
Mod(ψ ⋄triv
c
µ) = Mod(ψ ⋄c (WVMod(µ))).
This is the same as Deﬁnition 14, except over models of µ, rather than models of µ in the
language of µ. However it is easily shown that this is not an interesting operator, since it
removes all old information and we have:
Observation 2 (ψ ⋄triv
c
µ) ↔µ.
We next proceed in a slightly diﬀerent direction and compare our update operator with
the forget operator. Recall that forgetting a set of atoms from a formula ψ basically removes
all information having to do with this set of atoms; in a sense forgetting is analogous to
decreasing the language by this set of atoms.
To begin with, it can be noted that our update operator can have contraction-like
properties similar to forget. For example, (a∧b)⋄c(a∨¬a) is readily shown to be equivalent
to b. So again, in a sense, this update can be read as updating by precisely a ∨¬a, which
in this case would indicate tautologous information concerning a.
In fact, we have the
following result (recall that we use ⊙to denote forget):
Theorem 15 Let ψ ∈L and let Γ ⊆P. Then
ψ ⊙Γ = ψ ⋄c

^
p∈Γ
(p ∨¬p).


Hence forgetting a set of atoms is a special case of our update operator. (Given The-
orem 6, forget is of course also expressible via erasure in an analogous fashion.) Last, we
establish a result between the forget operator and Winslett’s standard semantics. While in
hindsight obvious, this result does not appear to have been previously noted.
Theorem 16 For formula ψ and Γ ⊆P, let µ = V
l∈Γ(l ∨¬l). Then
ψ ⊙Γ = ψ ⋄ss
c µ.
In summary, it can be observed from the above discussion that we have obtained a
hierarchy of operators, based on the extent to which information in µ is made explicit.
For the most basic case, we have ψ ⋄triv
c
µ, where the update formula µ is a syntactic
representation of all models of the language; a trivial update operator results. The most
basic interesting operator is given by ψ ⋄ss
c µ, which is the same as Winslett’s standard
semantics, followed by ψ ⋄pi
c µ and ψ ⋄c µ. As well, by introducing tautologies, we also
capture the notion of forgetting of atoms.
We have already noted that our update operator ⋄c is distinct from the Winslett PMA
approach. To the best of our knowledge it is also distinct from all other speciﬁc approaches
appearing in the literature, including those surveyed in (Herzig & Riﬁ, 1999).
775

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
5. Algorithms and Complexity
In this section we present a syntactic characterization as well as an algorithm for computing
compositional update. We also analyze the complexity of this algorithm under a variety of
assumptions. Speciﬁcally, we analyze the complexity of the algorithm when applied to any
propositional sentences in general, to any sentences in disjunctive normal form, and to any
sentences whose sizes are bounded by some speciﬁed constant.
We start with some background notions.
Recall that ψ[p/q] denotes the formula ψ
where all occurrences of atom p are replaced by q. We write ∃p.ψ to denote the formula
ψ[p/⊤] ∨ψ[p/⊥]. If P = {p1, · · · , pn} is a set of atoms then ∃P.ψ, called an eliminant of
P in ψ, stands for ∃p1.(· · · ∃(pn.ψ)) (Brown, 1990). Intuitively, an eliminant of P in ψ can
be viewed as a formula representing the same knowledge of ψ that is not concerned with
atoms in P. We have eliminated information about members of P by replacing them by
their two possible values, ⊤and ⊥, thus leaving only the other information in ψ.
It has been shown that Winslett’s standard semantics can be syntactically captured
based on the notion of eliminant (Doherty,  Lukaszewicz, & Madali´nska-Bugaj, 1998). Let
P = atom(µ), then
ψ ⋄ss µ ↔(∃P.ψ) ∧µ
(5)
5.1 Syntactic Characterization and Algorithms
We are now ready to provide a syntactical characterization of compositional update. The
idea is quite similar to that of (Doherty et al., 1998). However, our approach ﬁrst converts
the update formula to disjunctive normal form, then deals with each disjunct.
Update(ψ, µ) =
_
{(∃P.ψ) ∧t | t ∈dnf (µ), P = atom(t)}
The following results establish the correspondence between the semantical deﬁnition and
syntactic characterizations of compositional update.
Lemma 2 Suppose t is a term (a conjunction of literals) and P = atom(t). Then
Mod((∃P.ψ) ∧t) = {w′ | w′ ∈UL(w, t), w ∈Mod(ψ)}
Theorem 17
Mod(ψ ⋄c µ) = Mod(Update(ψ, µ)).
Corollary 2
ψ ⋄c µ ↔Update(ψ, µ)
All we need to compute compositional update, therefore, is the ability to compute
eliminants. As proposed by Brown (1990), an eliminant ∃P.ψ can be constructed as follows.
1. Convert ψ to dnf t1 ∨· · · ∨tn (each ti is a conjunction of literals)
2. Replace each ti by ti ↓P.
Now we are ready to provide the algorithms for compositional update. We will assume
that dnf (µ) refers to the disjunctive normal form of µ represented in clause form, in which
a formula is represented by sets of sets of literals. In this case, the members of dnf (µ)
are implicitly disjoined, while a set of literals making up a member of dnf (µ) is implicitly
conjoined.
In the following algorithms, let ψ, µ ∈L and P be a set of atoms:
776

Compositional Belief Update
Algorithm Eliminant(P, ψ)
1.
ψ′ ←⊥
2.
for each term t ∈dnf (ψ)
3.
t′ ←⊤
4.
for each literal l ∈t
5.
if l /∈P and l /∈P
6.
t′ ←t′ ∧l
7.
ψ′ ←ψ′ ∨t′
8.
return ψ′
Algorithm Update(ψ, µ)
1.
ψ′ ←⊥
2.
for each term t ∈dnf (µ)
3.
P = atom(t)
4.
ψ′ ←ψ′ ∨(Eliminant(P, ψ) ∧t)
5.
return ψ′
Let’s consider again Example 1 in which µ = b and ψ = (b ∧¬m) ∨(¬b ∧m). We
have that Update(ψ, µ) = ⊥∨(Eliminant({b}, ψ) ∧b). Since Eliminant({b}, ψ) = ⊥∨
(⊤∧¬m) ∨(⊤∧m), which is equivalent to ⊤, we obtain that Update(ψ, µ) ↔b. Thus,
Update(ψ, µ) ↔ψ ⋄c µ, as we have already shown that ψ ⋄c µ ↔b.
For Example 2, where ψ = ¬b ∧¬m and µ = (b ∨m), we obtain Update(ψ, µ) =
(b ∧¬m) ∨(¬b ∧m). Again, this result is same as what we obtain with ⋄c.
5.2 Complexity
In the sequel, we analyze the space complexity of the update algorithm; that is, we are
interested in how large the updated knowledge base could be. Unfortunately, when applied
to arbitrary formulas, the algorithm Update may cause exponential space blowup, as the
disjunctive normal form of a formula could be exponentially large.
Theorem 18 The space complexity of Update(ψ, µ) is O(2(|ψ|+|µ|)) for ψ, µ ∈L;
However, we are able to show that such exponential space blowup is inevitable for any
algorithm of compositional update. To this end, we need to introduce so-called advice-taking
Turing machine (TM) and non-uniform complexity class, see (Johnson, 1990).
An advice-taking TM is a TM with an advice oracle, which can be considered as a
function a from positive integers to strings. On input x, the machine loads string a(|x|)
and then continues as usual based on two inputs x and a(|x|). Note that the oracle string
a(|x|) only depends on the size of the input x.
We call an advice oracle a polynomial
iﬀ|a(n)| < p(n) for some ﬁxed polynomial p and all positive integers n. If X is a usual
complexity class deﬁned in terms of resource-bounded machines (e.g., P or NP) then X/poly
is the class of the problem that can be decided on machines with the same resource bound
augmented by polynomial advice oracles. Any class X/poly is also known as the non-uniform
X; in particular, P/poly appears to be much more powerful than P. However, it has been
shown very unlikely that NP ⊆P/poly, otherwise the polynomial hierarchy would collapse
777

Delgrande, Jin, & Pelletier
at Σp
2 (Karp & Lipton, 1980). This result is used to show that it is unlikely that there exists
an algorithm for compositional update with a polynomial space bound.
Theorem 19 Assume there exist a polynomial p and an algorithm Update of compositional
update such that Update(ψ, µ) ↔ψ ⋄c µ and |Update(ψ, µ)| ≤p(|ψ| + |µ|), for any belief
base ψ and formula µ. Then NP ⊆P/poly.
We can pursue the above result one step further, and show that algorithms for any sen-
sible update operators will cause exponential blowup. Formally, we say an update operator
⋄is sensible iﬀfor any consistent set of literals Γ:
Mod(ψ ⋄
^
Γ) = {ω′ | ω′ ∈(w ↓Γ) ∪Γ, ω ∈Mod(ψ)}
Arguably, the above condition is very intuitive and natural (cf. discussions in Section 3).
In fact, almost all update operators in the literature are sensible.
Theorem 20 If there exists a polynomially space bounded algorithm for any sensible update
operator, then NP ⊆P/poly.
We remark that the above result also proves Winslett’s conjecture stating that there does
not exist a polynomially space bounded algorithm for her standard semantics (see Winslett,
1990).
The algorithm becomes tractably better when applied to formulas in disjunctive normal
form, and to update formulas whose sizes are bounded.
Theorem 21 The space complexity of Update(ψ, µ) is:
1. O(|ψ| × |µ|) for ψ, µ in dnf; and
2. O(|ψ|) for ψ in dnf and |µ| < k for some constant k.
Arguably, in practice, the update formula µ (representing the changes of the world) will be
relatively small. Therefore, it is relatively easy to convert µ to dnf, and it is also reasonable
to assume the size of µ is bounded. As we usually do not restrict the size of the belief
base ψ, converting ψ to dnf could be computationally much more expensive. Fortunately,
we only need to compile (oﬀ-line) the original belief base once into dnf, and the output of
Update algorithm is automatically the dnf of the updated belief base. This will considerably
facilitate the further update of the belief base.
6. Conclusion
We have presented belief change operators for updating a knowledge base where the deﬁni-
tion of these operators is compositional with respect to the sentence to be added. The intent
is to provide operators with transparent deﬁnitions, based on the structure of the formula
for belief change. As a result we lose some of the standard postulates for update, although
we do satisfy a core group of the standard postulate set. We achieve full irrelevance of
syntax if the sentence for update is replaced by the disjunction of its prime implicants.
778

Compositional Belief Update
The approach is interesting because ﬁrst, it is founded on diﬀering intuitions than other
operators, in that it is based on a decomposition of the formula rather than on the models
of the formula, and second, it allows a straightforward and (under reasonable assumptions)
eﬃcient implementation. While distinct from previous update operators that have appeared
in the literature, we can capture Winslett’s standard semantics approach to update in a
restriction of our approach. In fact, the update operator, under diﬀerent syntactic restric-
tions, may be regarded as constituting a family of update operators of which Winslett’s
standard semantics is the weakest interesting approach. When we turn from update to revi-
sion, we discover there is no new, interesting compositional revision operator; nevertheless,
our results indicate that by ﬁrst computing the compositional update, one can implement
the Satoh or Dalal revision operator more eﬃciently, because we consider only a subset
of the models of the formula of revision, and in certain cases this will have a signiﬁcant
speedup over a naive algorithm.
An open question concerns combining this approach with one that is designed to exploit
the structure of the knowledge base (such as discussed in Parikh, 1999 and characterized
in terms of PMA updates in Peppas, Chopra, & Foo, 2004). A second, technical question
that is not fully explored concerns the behaviour of ⋄c as an erasure operator. For example,
let ψ = (a ∨b) ∧(¬a ∨¬b). Then, we get that ψ ⋄c (a ∨b) ↔a ∨b. So, in updating the
knowledge base with a formula already implied by the knowledge base, we have actually
removed information. This, as discussed earlier, is quite reasonable if one considers that
an update (in contrast to a revision) by a ∨b asserts that the world has changed so that
one of {a, b}, {¬a, b}, {a, ¬b} is now true. Finally, it would be of interest to apply the
compositional approach to the merging of knowledge bases.
