arXiv:1003.4781v1  [cs.LG]  25 Mar 2010
Arxiv.org manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Large Margin Boltzmann Machines and Large Margin Sigmoid Belief
Networks
Xu Miao · Rajesh P.N. Rao
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Current statistical models for structured predic-
tion make simplifying assumptions about the underlying out-
put graph structure, such as assuming a low-order Markov
chain, because exact inference becomes intractable as the
tree-width of the underlying graph increases. Approximate
inference algorithms, on the other hand, force one to trade
off representational power with computational efﬁciency. In
this paper, we propose two new types of probabilistic graph-
ical models, large margin Boltzmann machines (LMBMs)
and large margin sigmoid belief networks (LMSBNs), for
structured prediction. LMSBNs in particular allow a very
fast inference algorithm for arbitrary graph structures that
runs in polynomial time with a high probability. This prob-
ability is data-distribution dependent and is maximized in
learning. The new approach overcomes the representation-
efﬁciency trade-off in previous models and allows fast struc-
tured prediction with complicated graph structures. We present
results from applying a fully connected model to multi-label
scene classiﬁcation and demonstrate that the proposed ap-
proach can yield signiﬁcant performance gains over current
state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords Structured Prediction · Probabilistic Graphical
Models · Exact and Approximate Inference
Xu Miao
Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle WA,98125 USA
Tel.: +1-206-685-2035
Fax: +1-206-543-2969

Rajesh P.N. Rao
Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle WA,98125 USA
1 Introduction
Structured prediction is an important machine learning prob-
lem that occurs in many different ﬁelds, e.g., natural lan-
guage processing, protein structure prediction and semantic
image annotation. The goal is to learn a function that maps
an input vector X to an output Y, where Y is a vector rep-
resenting all the labels whose components take on the value
+1 or −1 (presence or absence of the corresponding label).
The traditional approach to such multi-label classiﬁcation
problems is to train a set of binary classiﬁers independently.
Structured prediction on the other hand also considers the
relationships among the output variables Y. For example, in
the image annotation problem, an entire image or parts of
an image are annotated with labels representing an object, a
scene or an event involving multiple objects (Carneiro et al,
2007). These labels are usually dependent on each other,
e.g., buildings and beaches occur under the sky, a truck is a
type of automotive, and sunsets are more likely to co-occur
with beaches, sky, and trees (Figure 1). Such relations cap-
ture the semantics among the labels and play an important
role in human cognition. A major advantage of structured
prediction is that the structured representation of the output
can be much more compact than an unstructured classiﬁer,
resulting in smaller sample complexity and greater general-
ization (Bengio et al, 2007).
Extending traditional classiﬁcation techniques to struc-
tured prediction is difﬁcult because of the potentially com-
plicated inter-dependencies that may exist among the out-
put variables. If the problem is modeled as a probabilis-
tic graphical model, it is well-known that exact inference
over a general graph is NP-hard. Therefore, practical ap-
proaches make simplifying assumptions about the depen-
dencies among the output variables in order to simplify the
graph structure and maintain tractability. Examples include
maximum entropy Markov models (MEMMs) (Mccallum et al,

2
Fig. 1 Semantic Image Annotation. (A). During training, we train a function mapping an image to the label semantics. (B). During prediction, we
annotate each image a set of labels.
2000), conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) (Lafferty et al, 2001;
Quattoni et al, 2004), max-margin Markov networks (M3Ns)
(Taskar et al, 2004) and structured support vector machines
(SSVMs) (Tsochantaridis et al, 2004). These approaches typ-
ically restrict the tree-width1 of the graph so that the Viterbi
algorithm or the junction tree algorithm can still be efﬁcient.
On the other hand, there has been much research on
fast approximate inference for complicated graphs based on,
e.g., Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), variational infer-
ence, or combinations of these methods. In general, MCMC
is slow, particularly for graphs with strongly coupled vari-
ables. Good heuristics have been developed to speed up MCMC,
but they are highly dependent on graph structure and associ-
ated parameters (Doucet et al, 2000). Variational inference
is another popular approach where a complicated distribu-
tion over Y is approximated with a simpler distribution so
as to trade accuracy for speed. For example, if the variables
are assumed to be independent, one obtains the mean ﬁeld
algorithm. A Bethe energy formulation yields the loopy be-
lief propagation (LBP) algorithm (Yedidia et al, 2005). If
a combination of trees is considered, one obtains the tree-
1 In this paper, the tree-width of a directed acyclic graph refers to
the tree-width of the corresponding undirected graph obtained through
moralization.
reweighted sum-product algorithm (Wainwright et al, 2005a).
One can also relax the higher-order marginal constraints to
obtain a linear programming algorithm (Wainwright et al,
2005b). The lesser the dependency constraints, the less accu-
rate these inference algorithms become, and the faster their
speed. However, the sacriﬁced accuracy in inference could
be detrimental to learning. For example, mean ﬁeld can pro-
duce highly biased estimates, and loopy belief propagation
might even cause the learning algorithm to diverge
(Kulesza and Pereira, 2007).
Long-range dependencies and complicated graphs are
necessary to accurately and precisely represent semantic knowl-
edge. Unfortunately, the approaches discussed above all op-
erate under the assumption that one cannot avoid the trade-
off between the representational power and computational
efﬁciency.
In this paper, we propose large margin sigmoid belief
networks (LMSBNs) and large margin Boltzmann machines
(LMBMs), two new models for structured prediction. We
provide a theoretical analysis tool to derive the generaliza-
tion bounds for both of them. Most importantly, LMSBNs
allow fast inference for arbitrarily complicated graph struc-
tures. Inference is based on a branch-and-bound (BB) tech-
nique that does not depend on the dependency structure of

3
the graph and exhibits the interesting property that the bet-
ter the ﬁt of the model to the data, the faster the inference
procedure.
Section 2 describes both LMSBNs and LMBMs. We present
learning algorithms for both and the fast BB inference al-
gorithm for LMSBNs. LMBMs, being undirected, rely on
traditional inference algorithms.
Section 4 applies both LMSBNs and LMBMs to the se-
mantic image annotation problem using a fully-connected
graph structure. We empirically study the performance of
the BB inference algorithm and illustrate its efﬁciency and
effectiveness. We present results from experiments on a bench-
mark dataset which demonstrate that LMSBNs outperform
current state-of-the-art methods for image annotation based
on kernels and threshold-tuning.
2 Large Margin Sigmoid Belief Networks and Large
Margin Boltzmann Machines
The sigmoid belief network (SBN) (Neal, 1992) and Boltz-
mann machine (BM) (Hinton and Sejnowski, 1983) are a
special type of Bayesian network and a special type of Markov
random ﬁeld respectively, and are deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 A Boltzmann machine is an undirected graph
G = (V,E), where V is the set of random variables with size
K = |V|, E is the set of undirected edges. The joint likelihood
is deﬁned as:
Pr(V|w) = e
1
2 ∑i zi/∑
V
e
1
2 ∑i zi
(1)
zi =
∑
j:(Vi,Vj)∈E
wijvivj + wivi
where Z is the normalization constant.
Deﬁnition 2 A sigmoid belief network is a directed acyclic
graph G = (V,E), where V is the set of random variables
with size K = |V|, E is the set of directed edges. (Vj,Vi) rep-
resents an edge from Vj to Vi. For each node Vi, its parents
are in the set pa(Vi) = {Vj|(Vj,Vi) ∈E}. The joint likelihood
is deﬁned as:
Pr(V|w) =
K
∏
i=1
Pr(Vi|pa(Vi),w)
(2)
Pr(Vi|pa(Vi),w) =
1
1 + e−zi
zi =
∑
j:Vj∈pa(Vi)
wijvivj + wivi
In BMs, the edges are undirected, so the feature vivj ap-
pears in both zi and zj. In SBNs, the edges are directed, so
the feature vivj appears in either zi or zj, but not both. One
can generalize the function zi to utilize high order features
over a set of variables. In probabilistic graphical models,
this set is referred to as a clique. In SBNs or BMs, the fea-
tures are deﬁned as a product of all variables in the clique.
For example, C1 = {V1,V2,V3} is a 3rd order clique, f1 =
v1v2v3. The edges are 2nd order cliques, e.g., C2 = {V1,V2},
f2 = v1v2. The ﬁrst order cliques are the variable themselves,
e.g., C3 = {V1}, f3 = v1. When the variables take values
{−1,1}, the feature function is also known as the parity
function or the XOR function. Therefore, a SBN or BM
softly encodes a Boolean function via an AND-of-XOR ex-
pansion2, which provides a ﬂexible way to encode human
expert knowledge into the model. Without ambiguity, we
simplify the representation of zi to be zi = ∑j wij f j, where
the summation is taken over all cliques that include variable
Vi. For SBNs, We require that all the variables in each clique
Cj other than Vi must be parents of Vi. This requirement in-
sures that the underlying graph is acyclic, and each Cj is
used in one zi.
In the structured prediction setting, the problem involves
an input vector X, and the joint probability over all Y is con-
ditioned on X, i.e., Pr(Y|X,w). Note that zi is deﬁned for
each Yi although the cliques include both X and Y.
When there is only one output variable, i.e. K = 1, the
conditional likelihoods of both SBNs and BMs become the
same, i.e., Pr(Y = y|x;w) =
1
1+e−z , where z = y∑j wjφj(x).
The features are f j(x,y) = yφj(x). This is the well known
logistic regression (LR) with a loss function L(y,x,w) =
log(1 + e−z). In fact, a SBN can be considered as a product
of LRs according to a topological order over the graph. The
overall loss function is then L(y,x,w) = ∑i log(1 + e−zi). A
BM needs normalization over all Y, the loss function usu-
ally can not be factorized locally that puts some challenge
on learning.
To facilitate the derivation of a fast inference algorithm
for LMSBNs and a fast learning algorithm for LMBMs, we
use a hinge loss, [1 −z]+ = max(0,1 −z) to approximate
the log-loss log(1 + e−z). We call the resulting SBN a large
margin sigmoid belief network (LMSBN) and the resulting
BM a large margin Boltzmann machine (LMBM). The ap-
proximations are presented in Remark 3. The approximation
of LMBM is similar to pseudo likelihood approximation of
a Markov random ﬁeld. The only difference is the extra reg-
ularization. In the latter section, we will show that this reg-
ularizer is crucial for LMBMs to generalize well. Note that
for LMSBNs, each feature f j only appears in one zi, but for
LMBMs, each feature f j appears in all zi where Yi ∈Cj.
2 This is different from the ring-sum expansion which is an XOR-
of-AND expansion.

4
Remark 3
LSBN(y,x,w) ≤LLMSBN(y,x,w)+ Kb
LBM(y,x,w) ≤LLMBM(y,x,w)+ Kb + g(x)∥w∥
LLMSBN(y,x,w) = LLMBM(y,x,w) =∑
i
[1 −zi]+
(3)
zi = ∑
j:Yi∈Cj
wj f j
b = log(e+ e−1)
Proof From Figure 2, it is easy to verify that log(1+e−z) ≤
[1 −z]+ + b, which leads to the ﬁrst upper bound for SBN.
For BM, because the features involves multiple variables
Yi appear in all corresponding zi, which makes the upper
bounding much harder. Here we prove the second upper bound
as follows:
LBM(y,x,w)
= −1
2 ∑
i
zi + log∑
Y
e
1
2 ∑i zi
= −1
2 ∑
i
zi + log ∑
Y\Y1
e
1
2 ∑i̸=1 zi
∑
Y1={−y1,y1}
e
1
2 z1
≤−1
2 ∑
i̸=1
zi + log ∑
Y\Y1
e
1
2 ∑i̸=1 zie[1−z1]++b
≤−1
2 ∑
i̸=1
zi + log
∑
Y\{Y1,Y2}
e
1
2 ∑i̸={1,2} zi
∑
Y2={−y2,y2}
e
1
2 z2e[1−z1]++b
≤−1
2 ∑
i̸={1,2}
zi + log
∑
Y\{Y1,Y2}
e
1
2 ∑i̸={1,2} zi
e[1−z2]++[1−z1]++2b+g1(x)∑j:Y1,Y2∈Cj w2
j
≤∑
i
[1 −zi]+ + Kb + g(x) ∑
j:Cj∈C ′
w2
j
(4)
since the hinge loss for Y1 also contains Y2, when the par-
tition function marginalizes Y2, we have to relax the sum-
mation with a term proportional to the norm of the weights
whose corresponding cliques include both Y1 and Y2. This
relaxation is represented by g1(x)∑j:Y1,Y2∈Cj w2
j, where g1 is
a constant determined by x. After the whole partition func-
tion being relaxed, the upper bound contains a regularizer on
all the weights whose corresponding cliques include at least
two output Y. The set of all these cliques is C ′.
⊓⊔
Output values are predicted by minimizing the loss func-
tion, as shown in Equation 5 below. With an ℓ2 norm regular-
ization on the weights w, the training problem for LMSBNs
is deﬁned as in Equation 6 below. Note that, for LMBMs,
there is an extra ℓ2 regularization on the weights among the
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
 
Log Loss
Hinge Loss
Hinge Bound
0−1 Loss
Fig. 2 Losses and upper bound
output Y, but no regularization on the weights for individual
Y or between X and Y.
ˆy = argmin
y L(y,x,w)
(5)
ˆw = argmin
w
1
N
N
∑
l=1
L(yl,xl,w)+ R(w)
(6)
LMDBNs : R(w) ≡λ ∥w∥2
2
LMBMs : R(w) ≡λ ∥w∥2
2 + λη0∥wC ′∥2
2
2.1 Generalization Bound
One major concern of structured prediction, as well as all
classiﬁcation problems, is generalization performance. Gen-
eralization performancefor structured prediction has not been
as well studied as for binary and multi-class classiﬁcation
(Taskar et al, 2004; Tsochantaridis et al, 2004; Daum´e III et al,
2009). Both Taskar et al and Tsochantaridis et al employed
the maximum-margin approach that builds on binary sup-
port vector machines (SVMs). Generalization performance
can be addressed by an upper bound on the prediction er-
rors. However, the derivation of the bound is speciﬁcally
restricted to the loss function they use, and hard to apply
to other loss functions. Daum´e III et al consider a sequen-
tial decision approach that solves the structured prediction
problem by making decisions one at a time. These sequen-
tial decisions are made multiple times, and the output is ob-
tained by averaging all results. The generalization bound is
analyzed in terms of all these binary classiﬁcation losses.
One major drawback of this approach is that the averaged
losses for the averaged classiﬁers need a large number of it-
erations to converge. Even if it converges, the bound is still
loose compared to the bound we presented. We will discuss
this further in Section 3.
In this section, we provide a general analysis tool for
both single variable classiﬁcation and structured prediction
that allows arbitrary loss functions and holds tight. We ﬁrst
need the following threshold theorem:

5
Theorem 4 Assuming X,Y ∼D,if
∀y ̸= ˆy, ∃T > 0, s.t.
L(x,y,w) > T, then
Pr(ˆy ̸= y|w) ≤1
T ED[L(x,y,w)]
(7)
Proof
Pr(ˆy ̸= y|w) = ED[1(ˆy ̸= y)]
≤ED[H (L(x,y,w)−T)]
≤1
T ED[L(x,y,w)]
The function 1(z) is the indicator function that is 1 when z is
true and 0 for false. H (z) is the Heaviside function that is
1 for z ≥0 and 0 otherwise. The last inequality comes from
the fact that H (z−T) ≤z
T .
This threshold theorem allows one to discuss the pre-
diction error bounds for any number of outputs with any
loss function. For example, for logistic regression (LR), L =
log(1 + e−z) > log2 whenever a mistake is made, so the
threshold T for LR is log2. In Adaboost (Zhang, 2001), L =
e−z > 1 whenever it makes a mistake, so T = 1. For SSVMs,
L = [1−maxy′̸=y(z(y,x,w)−z(y′,x,w))]+ > 1 when it makes
a mistake, so T is again 1. Then the prediction errors for all
these classiﬁers are upper bounded by the expected loss di-
vided by the threshold T.
According to this theorem, the goal of all classiﬁcation
tasks is to ﬁnd the hypothesis that predict with an expected
loss as low as possible. On the other hand, for LMSBNs,
there is a fast inference algorithm whose performance di-
rectly dependents on this quantity. The smaller the expected
loss, the faster the inference. For both of the above reasons,
the log-loss and exponential-loss are unfavorable because
they are usually larger than zero even if the model ﬁts the
data well. Therefore, we choose the hinge loss as the loss
function for both LMSBNs and LMBMs.
The threshold for LMBMs is given in Remark 5, and
the threshold for LMSBNs is given in Remark 6. For a tight
bound, the threshold should be large enough, so for LMBMs,
we need to constrain the weights among the output variables.
In other words, if the coupling between outputs is stronger
than the coupling between an output and an input, then the
possibility of overﬁtting increases. This also explains why
the approximate loss of LMBMs contains regularizations for
the coupling weights among the output variables. However,
for LMSBNs, the threshold is always 1. Generally speaking,
LMSBNs can be expected to generalize better than LMBMs.
Remark 5 For LMBMs, T = mini[γ −g(x)∑j:Cj∈C ′ w2
j]+,
for some g.
Proof For any yi ̸= ˆyi, we have [1−zi]+ = [1−A0−A1]+,[1−
ˆzi]+ = [1 −A0 −A2]+ where A0 = ∑j:f j= ˆf j wj f j,
A1 = ∑j:f j̸= ˆf j wj f j,
A2 = ∑j:f j̸= ˆf j wj ˆfi. Since all y takes {−1,+1}, so A2 = −A1,
and [1 −ˆzi]+ = [1 −A0 + A1]+.
If A1 < 0, we have L > [1 −zi]+ > [1 −A0]+. Otherwise,
L > ˆL > [1 −ˆzi]+ > [1 −A0]+. So L > [1 −∑j:f j= ˆf j wj f j]+.
We can further loosen it to L > mini[1−g(x)∑j:Cj∈C ′ w2
j]+.
⊓⊔
Remark 6 For LMSBNs, T = 1
Proof Pick the ﬁrst Yi in the topological order that does not
equal the optimal value, i.e. yi ̸= ˆyi and ∀yj ≺yi,yj = ˆyj.
Let Li = [1 −zi]+ and ˆLi = [1 −ˆzi]+. Since Y takes values
{−1,1} and only yi ̸= ˆyi in zi, it is easy to verify that zi =
−ˆzi. So, we have Li = [1+ ˆzi]+. If ˆzi > 0, we have L ≥Li ≥1.
Otherwise, L ≥ˆL ≥ˆLi ≥1.
⊓⊔
We assume all data are drawn from the same unknown
distribution D. Since D is unknown, one can only minimize
the empirical risk rather than the expected risk. A fast con-
vergence rate of the empirical objective to the expected one
was proved in (Shalev-Shwartz et al, 2008) for the single
output variable case. We can extend it to the general struc-
tured output case by providing a structured Rademacher com-
plexity bound, as shown in Lemma 7.
Lemma 7 Let F = {x,y 7→L(x,y,w)},
Fi = {x,y 7→∑j:Yi∈Cj wj f j}, φ(z) = [1 −z]+. We have
E

sup
h∈F
 Eh −ˆENh

≤∑
i
RN(φ ◦Fi)
Proof
E

sup
h∈F
 Eh −ˆENh

≤E
"
sup
h∈F
1
N ∑
l
 h(x′
l,y′
l)−h(xl,yl)

#
≤E
"
∑
i
sup
h′
i∈φ◦Fi
1
N ∑
l
 h′
i(x′
l,y′
l)−h′
i(xl,yl)

#
= ∑
i
RN(φ ◦Fi)
Here RN is the Rademacher complexity (Bartlett and Mendelson,
2003) of sample size N. See (Bartlett and Mendelson, 2003)
for details on the notation.
⊓⊔
Together with Lemma 7 and Corollary 4 in (Shalev-Shwartz et al,
2008), we can now derive a generalization bound as in The-
orem 8.
Theorem 8 Let L (w) = ED[L(x,y,w)], wo = arginfw L (w).
Assuming ∑j f 2
j < B2, for any δ > 0, with probability 1 −δ

6
over the sample size N, if λ = c B√
d/δ
∥wo∥2
√
N , where c is a con-
stant, we have
Pr(ˆy ̸= y| ˆw) ≤1
T L ( ˆw)
L ( ˆw) ≤L (wo)+ O
 
B∥wo∥2
r
log(d/δ)
N
!
The basic idea of the structured Rademacher complexity
is to bound the whole functional space by a combination of
the Rademacher complexity of each subspaces. For LMBMs,
a f j will be shared by all zi where Yi ∈Cj. So the subspaces
overlap with each other, and the overall Rademacher com-
plexity counts the features multiple times while B counts
only once. Therefore the generalization bound is loosened
by
√
d, where d is the maximum clique size. The more com-
plicated the graph, the larger the d. For LMSBNs, each fea-
ture only appears in one subspace, so d is always 1. Hence
the bound for LMSBNs is tighter than for LMBMs.
Furthermore, the bound given above is better than the
PAC-Bayes bound of SSVMs and is not affected by the in-
ference algorithm. For SSVMs, when there is no cheap ex-
act inference algorithm available, the PAC-Bayes bound be-
comes worse due to the extra degrees of freedom introduced
by relaxations (Kulesza and Pereira, 2007), leading to po-
tentially poorer generalization performance.
2.2 Learning Algorithm
For LMSBNs, the learning problem deﬁned in Equation 6
can be decomposed into K independent optimization prob-
lems3. Each of them can be solved efﬁciently by any of
the modern fast solvers such as the dual coordinate descent
algorithm (Hsieh et al, 2008) (DCD), the primal stochastic
gradient descent algorithm (PEGASOS) (Shalev-Shwartz et al,
2007; Bottou and Bousquet, 2008) or the exponentiated gra-
dient descent algorithm (Collins et al, 2008). For LMBMs,
the weights are shared in multiple zi, one has to optimize
the whole objective simultaneously. Similar to (Hsieh et al,
2008), we give a dual coordinate descent based optimization
algorithms for LMBMs.
Consider the following primal optimization problem:
min
w,ξ
1
2 ∑
j
ηjw2
j + 1
λN ∑
il
ξil
subject to
∑
j:Yi∈Cj
wj f jl ≥1 −ξil
ξil ≥0
where ηj = 1 if wj is not extra regularized; otherwise, ηj =
1+η0. The index l represents each training data. Let αil and
3 λ should be the same, otherwise Theorem 8 does not hold.
βil be Lagrange multipliers. Then, we have the Lagrangian:
L(w,ξ,α,β) = 1
2 ∑
j
ηjw2
j + 1
λN ∑
il
ξil −∑
il
βilξil −
∑
il
αil( ∑
j:Yi∈Cj
wj f jl −1 + ξil)
We optimize L with respect to w and ξ:
∂L
∂wj
= ηjwj −∑
l ∑
i:Yi∈Cj
αil f jl = 0
∂L
∂ξil
=
1
λN −αil −βil = 0
Substituting for w and ξ, we have the dual objective:
Lα = 1
2 ∑
j,l,l′ ∑
i:Yi∈Cj ∑
i′:Yi′∈Cj
αilαi′l′Qjll′ −∑
il
αil
where Qjll′ =
f jl f jl′
η2
j
. The dual coordinate descent algorithm
picks αil one at a time and optimizes the dual Lagrangian
with respect to this variable. The resulting algorithm is de-
scribed in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The dual coordinate descent algorithm for
large margin Boltzmann machines
Input:

f jl
	
,

Q jll
	
,λ,N
Output: w
1: α ←0,w ←0
2: while α is not optimal do
3:
for all αil do
4:
αo ←αil
5:
G = ∑j:Yi∈Cj w j f jl −1
6:
PG =



min(G,0)
αo = 0,
max(G,0)
αo =
1
λN ,
G
0 < αo <
1
λN
7:
if |PG| ̸= 0 then
8:
αil ←min(max(αo −
G
∑j:Yi∈Cj Qjll ,0), 1
λN )
9:
w j ←w j +(αil −αo) f jl,∀j : Yi ∈Cj
10: return w
2.3 Inference Algorithm
In this section, we propose a simple and efﬁcient inference
algorithm (Algorithm 2) to solve the prediction problem in
Equation 5 for LMSBNs. According to the topological order
of the graph, we branch on each Yi, and compute zi with x
and all of its parents yj. We ﬁrst try the value of yi that makes
zi > 0, i.e., the left branch in the algorithm, then the right
branch with the opposite value of yi. During this search, we
keep an upper bound initialized to a parameter S ≥1. When-
ever the current objective is higher than the upper bound, we
backtrack to the previous variable. The search terminates be-
fore KS states of Y have been visited. The following theo-
rem shows that with a high probability, the above algorithm
computes the optimal values in polynomial time:

7
Algorithm 2 The Branch and Bound Algorithm for Infer-
ence
Input: x,w, S ≥1
Output: ˆy,UB
1: UB = S, i = 0, U = 0;
2: while i >= 0 do
3:
if i = K then
4:
if UK < UB then
5:
UB = UK, ˆy = y;
6:
i = i−1;
7:
else
8:
if Left branch has not been tried then
9:
yi = argmaxyi zi, Ui+1 = Ui +[1−zi]+;
10:
else if Right branch has not been tried then
11:
yi = −yi,Ui+1 = Ui +[1+zi]+;
12:
if Ui+1 ≥UB or both branches have been tried then
13:
i = i−1;
14:
else
15:
i = i+1;
Theorem 9 For any S ≥1, the BB algorithm reaches the
optimal values before O(KS) states are visited with a prob-
ability at least 1 −1
SL (w).
Proof During the search, if we branch on the right, the hinge
loss [1 + zi]+ is greater than 1. So, for a given x, if the true
objective L < S, the optimal objective ˆL < L < S as well, and
the optimal path contains at most S right branches. Since the
BB algorithm always searches the left branch ﬁrst, the opti-
mal path will be reached before ∑S−1
i=0
 i
K

≤O(KS) states
have been searched. According to the Markov inequality,
Pr(L < S) = 1 −Pr(L > S) ≥1 −1
SL (w).
The BB algorithm adjusts the search tree according to
the model weights. Through training, optimal paths are con-
densed to the low energy side, i.e., the left side of the search
tree with a high probability. This probability is directly re-
lated to the expected loss with respect to the given data dis-
tribution. We therefore label the BB algorithm a data-dependent
inference algorithm. Most popular inference algorithms for
exact or approximate inference depend on graph complex-
ity: the more complicated the graph, the slower the infer-
ence. This trade-off diminishes the applicability of these al-
gorithms and presents researchers with the difﬁcult problem
of selecting a (possibly sub-optimal) graph structure that
balances the accuracy and the efﬁciency. The BB algorithm
for LMSBNs circumvents this trade-off and allows arbitrary
complicated graphs without sacriﬁcing computational efﬁ-
ciency. In fact, if a particular complicated graph yields a
smaller expected loss, the BB algorithm in turn runs even
faster.
It is well-known that for NP-hard problems, there may
be many instances that can be solved efﬁciently. The area
of speedup learning focuses on learning good heuristics to
speedup problem solvers. The approach presented here can
be regarded as a novel method for speedup learning (Tadepalli and Natarajan,
1996) and demonstrates that the experience gained during
training can speedup a problem solver signiﬁcantly.
The BB algorithm is speciﬁcally designed for LMSBNs,
a directed graphical model. For undirected models, the BB
algorithm does not guarantee a polynomial time complex-
ity with a high probability. Indeed, we observe an expo-
nential time complexity when it is applied to LMBMs. For
the undirected models including SSVMs and LMBMs, we
implement a convex relaxation-based linear programming
(LP) (Wainwright et al, 2005b). Note that although LMBMs
don’t have a fast inference algorithm, unlike SSVMs, the
learning is not affected by the inference algorithm. In the ex-
periments section, we will show that LMBMs outperforms
SSVMs.
The BB algorithm differs from other search-based de-
coding algorithms, e.g., beam search and best ﬁrst search
(Abdou and Scordilis, 2004), in several aspects. First, those
search algorithms typically prune the supports of maximum
cliques that can grow exponentially. On one hand, the prun-
ing can lead to misclassiﬁcation quickly if backtracking is
not implemented. On the other hand, the number of remain-
ing states might still be large so that the inference is still
slow. Furthermore, even if a backtracking procedure is im-
plemented, unlike the BB algorithm for LMSBNs, there are
still no guaranteed heuristics that can prune the states efﬁ-
ciently and correctly.
To demonstrate the efﬁciency and the data dependency
property, we run the algorithms on the test data of RCV1-
V2 (a text categorization dataset) with a trained model and
a random untrained model. The running times are collected
by varying the number of output variables. The CPU time is
measured on a 2.8Ghz Pentium4 desktop computer.
The upper graph in Figure 3 demonstrates that the BB
algorithm performs several orders of magnitude faster than
LP4. In this experiment, S is set to a very large value such
that the solution from BB is guaranteed to be the optimal
solution. The running time of LP with respect to the num-
ber of output variables does not vary from a trained model
to a random untrained model, but the running time of BB
changes signiﬁcantly. For the random untrained model, the
BB algorithm demonstrates an exponential time complexity
with respect to the number of output variables. However, af-
ter training, the running time of the BB algorithm scales up
much more slowly.
This observation underscores the data distribution de-
pendent property of BB, i.e., the better the model ﬁts the
data, the faster BB performs. We illustrate this property fur-
ther by a second experiment. In this experiment, the prob-
ability of the BB algorithm reaching the optimal values is
4 The speed measurement of LP is comparable to Finley et al.
(Finley and Joachims, 2008). According to their experiments, graph
cuts and loopy belief propagation can perform 10-100 times faster, but
are still much slower than BB.

8
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
Time(s)
Number of labels
Inference speed comparison
 
 
BB for a random model
BB for a trained model
LP for a random model
LP for a trained model
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Probability of optimality
Cutoff S
 
 
N=10
N=100
N=1000
N=3000
Random
Fig. 3 Upper graph. Running time comparisons of LP and BB algo-
rithms on the test dataset of RCV1-V2. The dashed lines are 1 standard
deviation above the mean. The time axis is log-scaled. Lower graph.
Accuracy and data distribution dependency. The more the training data,
the more accurate and faster the prediction. The corresponding esti-
mated theoretical lower bounds are plotted in blue.
plotted by varying the cutoff threshold S. According to The-
orem 9, S reﬂects the running time overhead for the BB al-
gorithm. We compare this curve for several models, namely,
a random model and models trained with 10, 100, 1000, and
3000 training instances respectively. The lower graph in Fig-
ure 3 shows a signiﬁcant improvement for the trained mod-
els over the random untrained model. Moreover, with more
and more training instances, more and more test instances
can be predicted exactly and quickly. In the same ﬁgure, we
also plot the corresponding theoretical lower bounds esti-
mated from the testing dataset (blue lines). The lower graph
of Figure 3 veriﬁes Theorem 9 empirically.
Due to the fast and accurate inference algorithm for LMS-
BNs, we can start with the most complicated graph struc-
ture, i.e., a fully connected model. The linear form of zi can
be generalized to high order features. Moreover, the kernel
trick can be applied to augment the modeling power. The
only thing one needs to concern is to minimize the expected
loss as much as possible because the small expected loss
guarantees not only a high prediction accuracy but also a
fast inference.
3 Related Models
Most maximum margin estimated structured prediction mod-
els, e.g., SSVMs (Tsochantaridis et al, 2004), maximum mar-
gin Markov networks (M3Ns) (Taskar et al, 2004), Maxi-
mum margin Bayesian networks (M2BNs) (Guo et al, 2005)
and conditional graphical models (CGMs) (Perez-Cruz et al,
2007) adopt a min-max formulation as shown below:
min
w
1
2 ∥w∥2 + 1
λN ∑
l
[∆(yl,y)−m(xl,yl;w)]+(8)
m(xl,yl;w) = max
y̸=yl
Ψ(xl,yl;w)−Ψ(xl,y;w)
where Ψ is the compatibility function derived from a prob-
abilistic model, and m is the margin function.
The embedded maximization operation potentially in-
duces an exponential number of constraints. This exponen-
tial number of constraints makes optimization intractable.
In M2BNs, the local normalization constraints makes the
problem even harder. SSVMs utilize a cutting plane algo-
rithm (Joachims et al, 2009) to select only a small set of con-
straints. M3Ns directly treat the dual variables as the decom-
posable pseudo-marginals. When the undirected graph is of
low tree-width, both SSVMs and M3Ns are computationally
efﬁcient and generalize well. However, for high tree-width,
approximate inference has to be used and both the compu-
tational complexity and the sample complexity increase sig-
niﬁcantly (Kulesza and Pereira, 2007; Finley and Joachims,
2008).
CGMs decompose the single hinge loss into a summa-
tion of several hinge losses, each corresponding to one fea-
ture function, such that the exponential number of combina-
tions is greatly reduced. The decomposition from one hinge
loss to multiple hinge loss is similar to LMBMs and LMS-
BNs. However, CGMs decompose to each feature function.
For real problems, not every feature function could be com-
patible to the data, which leads to a large and trivial upper
bound. Therefore, the performance can not be guaranteed.
The large margin estimation by the threshold theorem
4 generalizes the maximum margin estimation approach. As
long as the loss function satisﬁes the threshold theorem, there
is a margin function implicitly deﬁned such that minimiz-
ing the expected loss maximizes the margins. The traditional
log-loss based models, e.g., CRFs and MEMMs, can be dis-
cussed under the large margin estimation framework, but
the thresholds are possibly small so that the upper bounds
become trivial. This suggests that large margin estimated
models could generalize better than maximum likelihood es-
timated models.
For problems like semantic annotation, a low-treewidth
graph usually is insufﬁcient to represent the knowledge about
the relationships among the labels. The example in Figure 1
illustrates the motivation for a high-treewidth graph. All of
the models discussed above lack a fast and accurate infer-

9
ence algorithm for high-treewidth graphs, and are subject to
the trade-off between the treewidth and computational efﬁ-
ciency.
To speed up inference for a high-treewidth graphical mod-
els, one can use mixture models to represent probabilities.
For example, MoP-MEMMs (Rosenberg et al, 2007) extend
MEMMs to address long-range dependencies and represent
the conditional probability by a mixture model. Wainwright et al
uses a mixture of trees to approximate a Markov random
ﬁelds. Both demonstrate performance gains but one still has
to improve inference speed by restricting the number of mix-
tures.
Another line of research for high-treewidth graphical mod-
els uses arithmetic circuits (AC) (Darwiche, 2000) to repre-
sent the Bayesian networks. The AC inference is linear in the
circuit size. As long as the circuit size is low, the inference
is fast. But learning the optimal AC is an NP-hard problem.
Similarly, one has to improve inference speed by penalizing
the circuit size (Lowd and Domingos, 2008).
The search based structured prediction (SEARN) (Daum´e III et al,
2009) takes a different approach than probabilistic graphi-
cal models to handle the high tree-width graphs. It solves
the structured prediction by making decisions sequentially.
The later classiﬁer can take all the earlier decisions as in-
puts, which is similar to LMSBNs. In fact, the inference can
be considered as the initial decision of the BB algorithm.
The expected errors caused by this naive inference could
be very high. SEARN implements an averaging approach
to reduce the expected errors. It trains a set of sequential
classiﬁers for each iteration and outputs the prediction by
averaging the decisions made over all iterations. The ear-
lier decisions will be fed into later classiﬁers, so the later
classiﬁers possibly make fewer mistakes. By averaging over
iterations, the expected loss are reduced thereafter. Roughly
speaking, the prediction errors will be bounded by this av-
eraged expected loss5 multiplied by logK6. Compared to
the bounds of LMBMs and LMSBNs, where the prediction
errors are bounded by the minimum expected loss divided
by the threshold T, the generalization bound of SEARN is
rather loose. Furthermore, according to (Daum´e III et al, 2009),
one needs a large number of iterations to reach that bound
which slows down the inference. Therefore, one still has to
limit the number of iterations for a faster inference, which
might sacriﬁce the prediction accuracy.
Unlike all the above approaches, LMSBNs possess a very
interesting property that one does not have any constraints
on the modeling power. The smaller the expected loss, the
faster the inference. Usually, one obtains a smaller expected
loss by using a more complicated graph. This property leads
5 The expectation is over the unknown data distribution, while the
averaging is over the iterations.
6 Suppose that the initial policy can make perfect predictions.
to a novel approach for structured prediction with high tree-
width graphs.
4 Experiments
The performance of LMSBNs was tested on a scene an-
notation problem based on the Scene dataset (Boutell et al,
2004). The dataset contains 1211 training instances and 1196
test instances. Each image is represented by a 294 dimen-
sional color proﬁle feature vector (based on a CIE LUV-like
color space). The output can be any combination of 6 pos-
sible scene classes (beach, sunset, fall foliage, ﬁeld, urban,
and mountain).
We compare a fully connected LMSBN with three other
methods: binary classiﬁers (BCs), SSVMs (Finley and Joachims,
2008), threshold selected binary classiﬁers (TSBCs) (Fan and Lin,
2007). BCs train one classiﬁer for each label and predict in-
dependently. For SSVMs, we follow (Finley and Joachims,
2008) to implement a fully connected undirected model with
binary features. We implement a convex relaxation-based
linear programming algorithm for inference, since in both
(Finley and Joachims, 2008) and (Kulesza and Pereira, 2007),
the convex relaxation-based approximate inference algorithm
was shown to outperform other approximate inference al-
gorithms such as loopy belief propagation and graph cuts
(Kolmogorov and Zabih, 2002). TSBCs iteratively tune the
optimal decision threshold for each classiﬁer to increase the
overall performance with respect to a certain measure, e.g.,
exact match ratio and F-scores. Many labels in the multi-
label datasets are highly unbalanced, leading to classiﬁers
that are biased. TSBCs can effectively adjust the classiﬁer’s
precision and recall to achieve state-of-the-art performance.
In our comparisons, we borrow the best results from (Fan and Lin,
2007) directly.
We implemented two BCs, a linear BC (BCl) and a ker-
nelized BC (BCk), and three LMSBNs: (1) LMSBNlo is
trained with default order, i.e., ascending along the label in-
dices; (2) LMSBNlf is trained with the order selected ac-
cording to the F-scores of the BC. We sort the variables ac-
cording to their F-scores of the BC. The higher the F-score,
the smaller the index in the order; (3) LMSBNkf is a kernel-
ized model with the same order as LMSBNlf. We also im-
plemented two SSVMs: (1) SSVMhmm is trained by using
a ﬁrst-order Markov chain. It is different from the SSVMhmm
package that does not consider all inputs X for each Yi. The
inference algorithm for SSVMhmm is the Viterbi algorithm;
(2) SSVMfull is trained by using a fully connected graph.
We consider three categories of performance measures.
The ﬁrst consists of instance-based measures and includes
the exact match ratio (E) (Equation 9) and instance-based
F-score (Fsam) (Equation 11). The second consists of label-
based measures and includes the Hamming loss (H) (Equa-
tion 10) and the macro-F score (Fmac) (Equation 12). The

10
last is a mixed measure, the micro-F score (Fmic) (Equa-
tion 13). Fsam calculates the F-score for each instance, and
averages over all instances. Fmac calculates the F-score for
each label, and averages over all labels. Fmic calculates the
F-score for the entire dataset.
E = 1
N ∑
l
1(yl = ˆyl)
(9)
H =
1
NK ∑
li
1(yli ̸= ˆyli)
(10)
Fsam = 1
N ∑
l
2∑i 1(yli = ˆyli = 1)
∑i(1(yli = 1)+ 1(ˆyli = 1))
(11)
Fmac = 1
K ∑
i
2∑l 1(yli = ˆyli = 1)
∑l(1(yli = 1)+ 1(ˆyli = 1))
(12)
Fmic =
2∑il 1(yli = ˆyli = 1)
∑il(1(yli = 1)+ 1(ˆyli = 1))
(13)
(14)
The instance-based measure is more informative if the
correct prediction of co-occurrences of labels is important;
the label-based measure is more informative if the correct
prediction of each label is deemed important.
The results are shown in Figure 4. LMSBNkf consis-
tently performs the best on all measures. Even the LMSBN
models without kernels outperform TSBC on instance-based
measures.
SSVMhmm performs better than the BCl, but worse than
the SSVMfull as expected. The inference speed of BCl is
faster than SSVMhmm, which in turn is faster than SSVM-
full. This demonstrates the trade-off between modeling power
and efﬁciency.
With the help of kernels, LMSBNkf further outperforms
the TSBC on all measures. LMSBNs as proposed in this
paper are geared towards minimizing 0-1 errors. Threshold
tuning is particularly effective in the case of highly unbal-
anced labels. An interesting line of research is combining
LMSBNs with threshold tuning to further improve the per-
formance.
5 Conclusions
This paper proposes the use of large margin graphical mod-
els for fast structured prediction in images with complicated
graph structures. A major advantage of the proposed ap-
proach is the existence of fast training and inference algo-
rithms, which open the door to tackling very large-scale im-
age annotation problems. Unlike previous inference algo-
rithms for structured prediction, the proposed BB inference
algorithm does not sacriﬁce representational power for speed,
thereby allowing complicated graph structures to be mod-
eled. Such complicated graph structures are essential for ac-
curate semantic modeling and labeling of images. Our ex-
perimental results demonstrate that the new approach out-
performs current state-of-the-art approaches. Future research
will focus on applying the framework to annotating parts of
images with their spatial relationships, and enhancing the
representational power of the model by introducing hidden
variables.
