Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 32 (2008) 453–486
Submitted 02/08; published 06/08
Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control:
A Machine Learning Approach
Bal´azs Csan´ad Cs´aji

Computer and Automation Research Institute,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Kende utca 13–17, Budapest, H–1111, Hungary
L´aszl´o Monostori

Computer and Automation Research Institute,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences; and
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
Abstract
The paper investigates stochastic resource allocation problems with scarce, reusable
resources and non-preemtive, time-dependent, interconnected tasks. This approach is a
natural generalization of several standard resource management problems, such as schedul-
ing and transportation problems. First, reactive solutions are considered and deﬁned as
control policies of suitably reformulated Markov decision processes (MDPs). We argue that
this reformulation has several favorable properties, such as it has ﬁnite state and action
spaces, it is aperiodic, hence all policies are proper and the space of control policies can be
safely restricted. Next, approximate dynamic programming (ADP) methods, such as ﬁtted
Q-learning, are suggested for computing an eﬃcient control policy. In order to compactly
maintain the cost-to-go function, two representations are studied: hash tables and support
vector regression (SVR), particularly, ν-SVRs. Several additional improvements, such as
the application of limited-lookahead rollout algorithms in the initial phases, action space
decomposition, task clustering and distributed sampling are investigated, too.
Finally,
experimental results on both benchmark and industry-related data are presented.
1. Introduction
Resource allocation problems (RAPs) are of high practical importance, since they arise in
many diverse ﬁelds, such as manufacturing production control (e.g., production scheduling),
warehousing (e.g., storage allocation), ﬂeet management (e.g., freight transportation), per-
sonnel management (e.g., in an oﬃce), scheduling of computer programs (e.g., in massively
parallel GRID systems), managing a construction project or controlling a cellular mobile
network. RAPs are also central to management science (Powell & Van Roy, 2004). In
the paper we consider optimization problems that include the assignment of a ﬁnite set of
reusable resources to non-preemtive, interconnected tasks that have stochastic durations
and eﬀects. Our objective is to investigate eﬃcient reactive (closed-loop) decision-making
processes that can deal with the allocation of scarce resources over time with a goal of
optimizing the objectives. For “real world” applications, it is important that the solution
should be able to deal with large-scale problems and handle environmental changes, as well.
c⃝2008 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Cs´aji & Monostori
1.1 Industrial Motivations
One of our main motivations for investigating RAPs is to enhance manufacturing production
control. Regarding contemporary manufacturing systems, diﬃculties arise from unexpected
tasks and events, non-linearities, and a multitude of interactions while attempting to control
various activities in dynamic shop ﬂoors. Complexity and uncertainty seriously limit the
eﬀectiveness of conventional production control approaches (e.g., deterministic scheduling).
In the paper we apply mathematical programming and machine learning (ML) tech-
niques to achieve the suboptimal control of a general class of stochastic RAPs, which can
be vital to an intelligent manufacturing system (IMS). The term of IMS can be attributed
to a tentative forecast of Hatvany and Nemes (1978). In the early 80s IMSs were outlined as
the next generation of manufacturing systems that utilize the results of artiﬁcial intelligence
research and were expected to solve, within certain limits, unprecedented, unforeseen prob-
lems on the basis of even incomplete and imprecise information. Naturally, the applicability
of the diﬀerent solutions to RAPs are not limited to industrial problems.
1.2 Curse(s) of Dimensionality
Diﬀerent kinds of RAPs have a huge number of exact and approximate solution methods,
for example, in the case of scheduling problems (Pinedo, 2002). However, these methods
primarily deal with the static (and often strictly deterministic) variants of the various prob-
lems and, mostly, they are not aware of uncertainties and changes. Special (deterministic)
RAPs which appear in the ﬁeld of combinatorial optimization, such as the traveling sales-
man problem (TSP) or the job-shop scheduling problem (JSP), are strongly NP-hard and,
moreover, they do not have any good polynomial-time approximation, either.
In the stochastic case RAPs can be often formulated as Markov decision processes
(MDPs) and by applying dynamic programming (DP) methods, in theory, they can be
solved optimally. However, due to the phenomenon that was named curse of dimensionality
by Bellman (1961), these methods are highly intractable in practice. The “curse” refers
to the combinatorial explosion of the required computation as the size of the problem in-
creases. Some authors, e.g., Powell and Van Roy (2004), talk about even three types of
curses concerning DP algorithms. This has motivated approximate approaches that require
a more tractable computation, but often yield suboptimal solutions (Bertsekas, 2005).
1.3 Related Literature
It is beyond our scope to give a general overview on diﬀerent solutions to RAPs, hence, we
only concentrate on the part of the literature that is closely related to our approach. Our
solution belongs to the class of approximate dynamic programming (ADP) algorithms which
constitute a broad class of discrete-time control techniques. Note that ADP methods that
take an actor-critic point of view are often called reinforcement learning (RL).
Zhang and Dietterich (1995) were the ﬁrst to apply an RL technique for a special RAP.
They used the TD(λ) method with iterative repair to solve a static scheduling problem,
namely, the NASA space shuttle payload processing problem.
Since then, a number of
papers have been published that suggested using RL for diﬀerent RAPs. The ﬁrst reactive
(closed-loop) solution to scheduling problems using ADP algorithms was brieﬂy described
454

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
by Schneider, Boyan, and Moore (1998). Riedmiller and Riedmiller (1999) used a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) based neural RL approach to learn local heuristics. Aydin and
¨Oztemel (2000) applied a modiﬁed version of Q-learning to learn dispatching rules for pro-
duction scheduling. Multi-agent versions of ADP techniques for solving dynamic scheduling
problems were also suggested (Cs´aji, K´ad´ar, & Monostori, 2003; Cs´aji & Monostori, 2006).
Powell and Van Roy (2004) presented a formal framework for RAPs and they applied
ADP to give a general solution to their problem.
Later, a parallelized solution to the
previously deﬁned problem was given by Topaloglu and Powell (2005). Our RAP frame-
work, presented in Section 2, diﬀers from these approaches, since in our system the goal
is to accomplish a set of tasks that can have widely diﬀerent stochastic durations and
precedence constraints between them, while Powell and Van Roy’s (2004) approach con-
cerns with satisfying many similar demands arriving stochastically over time with demands
having unit durations but not precedence constraints. Recently, support vector machines
(SVMs) were applied by Gersmann and Hammer (2005) to improve iterative repair (local
search) strategies for resource constrained project scheduling problems (RCPSPs). An agent-
based resource allocation system with MDP-induced preferences was presented by Dolgov
and Durfee (2006). Finally, Beck and Wilson (2007) gave proactive solutions for job-shop
scheduling problems based on the combination of Monte Carlo simulation, solutions of the
associated deterministic problem, and either constraint programming or tabu-search.
1.4 Main Contributions
As a summary of the main contributions of the paper, it can be highlighted that:
1. We propose a formal framework for investigating stochastic resource allocation prob-
lems with scarce, reusable resources and non-preemtive, time-dependent, intercon-
nected tasks. This approach constitutes a natural generalization of several standard
resource management problems, such as scheduling problems, transportation prob-
lems, inventory management problems or maintenance and repair problems.
This general RAP is reformulated as a stochastic shortest path problem (a special
MDP) having favorable properties, such as, it is aperiodic, its state and action spaces
are ﬁnite, all policies are proper and the space of control policies can be safely re-
stricted. Reactive solutions are deﬁned as policies of the reformulated problem.
2. In order to compute a good approximation of the optimal control policy, ADP meth-
ods are suggested, particularly, ﬁtted Q-learning. Regarding value function represen-
tations for ADP, two approaches are studied: hash tables and SVRs. In the latter,
the samples for the regression are generated by Monte Carlo simulation and in both
cases the inputs are suitably deﬁned numerical feature vectors.
Several improvements to speed up the calculation of the ADP-based solution are sug-
gested: application of limited lookahead rollout algorithms in the initial phases to
guide the exploration and to provide the ﬁrst samples to the approximator; decom-
posing the action space to decrease the number of available actions in the states;
clustering the tasks to reduce the length of the trajectories and so the variance of the
cumulative costs; as well as two methods to distribute the proposed algorithm among
several processors having either a shared or a distributed memory architecture.
455

Cs´aji & Monostori
3. The paper also presents several results of numerical experiments on both benchmark
and industry-related problems. First, the performance of the algorithm is measured
on hard benchmark ﬂexible job-shop scheduling datasets. The scaling properties of
the approach are demonstrated by experiments on a simulated factory producing
mass-products. The eﬀects of clustering depending on the size of the clusters and
the speedup relative to the number of processors in case of distributed sampling are
studied, as well. Finally, results on the adaptive features of the algorithm in case of
disturbances, such as resource breakdowns or new task arrivals, are also shown.
2. Markovian Resource Control
This section aims at precisely deﬁning RAPs and reformulating them in a way that would
allow them to be eﬀectively solved by ML methods presented in Section 3. First, a brief
introduction to RAPs is given followed by the formulation of a general resource allocation
framework.
We start with deterministic variants and then extend the deﬁnition to the
stochastic case. Afterwards, we give a short overview on Markov decision processes (MDPs),
as they constitute a fundamental theory to our approach. Next, we reformulate the reactive
control problem of RAPs as a stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem (a special MDP).
2.1 Classical Problems
In this section we give a brief introduction to RAPs through two strongly NP-hard combina-
torial optimization problems: the job-shop scheduling problem and the traveling salesman
problem. Later, we will apply these two basic problems to demonstrate the results.
2.1.1 Job-Shop Scheduling
First, we consider the classical job-shop scheduling problem (JSP) which is a standard de-
terministic RAP (Pinedo, 2002). We have a set of jobs, J = {J1, . . . , Jn}, to be processed
through a set of machines, M = {M1, . . . , Mk}. Each j ∈J consists of a sequence of nj
tasks, for each task tji ∈T , where i ∈{1, . . . , nj}, there is a machine mji ∈M which can
process the task, and a processing time pji ∈N. The aim of the optimization is to ﬁnd a
feasible schedule that minimizes a given performance measure. A solution, i.e., a schedule,
is a suitable “task to starting time” assignment. Figure 1 visualizes an example schedule
by using a Gantt chart. Note that a Gantt chart (Pinedo, 2002) is a ﬁgure using bars, in
order to illustrate the starting and ﬁnishing times of the tasks on the resources.
The concept of “feasibility” will be deﬁned in Section 2.2.1. In the case of JSP a feasible
schedule can be associated with an ordering of the tasks, i.e., the order in which they will
be executed on the machines. There are many types of performance measures available for
JSP, but probably the most commonly applied one is the maximum completion time of the
tasks, also called “makespan”. In case of applying makespan, JSP can be interpreted as the
problem of ﬁnding a schedule which completes all tasks in every job as soon as possible.
Later, we will study an extension of JSP, called the ﬂexible job-shop scheduling problem
(FJSP) that arises when some of the machines are interchangeable, i.e., there may be tasks
that can be executed on several machines. In this case the processing times are given by
a partial function, p : M × T ,→N.
Note that a partial function is a binary relation
456

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
that associates the elements of its domain set with at most one element of its range set.
Throughout the paper we use “,→” to denote partial function type binary relations.
Figure 1: A possible solution to JSP, presented in a Gantt chart. Tasks having the same
color belong to the same job and should be processed in the given order. The
vertical gray dotted line indicates the maximum completion time of the tasks.
2.1.2 Traveling Salesman
One of the basic logistic problems is the traveling salesman problem (TSP) that can be
stated as follows.
Given a number of cities and the costs of travelings between them,
which is the least-cost round-trip route that visits each city exactly once and then returns
to the starting city. Several variants of TSP are known, the most standard one can be
formally characterized by a connected, undirected, edge-weighted graph G = ⟨V, E, w⟩,
where V = {1, . . . , n} is the vertex set corresponding to the set of “cities”,E ⊆V × V is
the set of edges which represents the “roads” between the cities, and w : E →N deﬁnes the
weights of the edges: the durations of the trips. The aim of the optimization is to ﬁnd a
Hamilton-circuit with the smallest possible weight. Note that a Hamilton-circuit is a graph
cycle that starts at a vertex, passes through every vertex exactly once, and returns to the
starting vertex. Take a look at Figure 2 for an example Hamilton-circuit.
Figure 2: A possible solution to TSP, a closed path in the graph. The black edges constitute
a Hamilton-circuit in the given connected, undirected, edge-weighted graph.
457

Cs´aji & Monostori
2.2 Deterministic Framework
Now, we present a general framework to model resource allocation problems. This frame-
work can be treated as a generalization of several classical RAPs, such as JSP and TSP.
First, a deterministic resource allocation problem is considered: an instance of the
problem can be characterized by an 8-tuple ⟨R, S, O, T , C, d, e, i⟩. In details the problem
consists of a set of reusable resources R together with S that corresponds to the set of
possible resource states. A set of allowed operations O is also given with a subset T ⊆O
which denotes the target operations or tasks. R, S and O are supposed to be ﬁnite and
they are pairwise disjoint. There can be precedence constrains between the tasks, which are
represented by a partial ordering C ⊆T ×T . The durations of the operations depending on
the state of the executing resource are deﬁned by a partial function d : S × O ,→N, where
N is the set of natural numbers, thus, we have a discrete-time model. Every operation can
aﬀect the state of the executing resource, as well, that is described by e : S × O ,→S which
is also a partial function. It is assumed that dom(d) = dom(e), where dom(·) denotes the
domain set of a function. Finally, the initial states of the resources are given by i : R →S.
The state of a resource can contain all relevant information about it, for example, its type
and current setup (scheduling problems), its location and load (transportation problems) or
condition (maintenance and repair problems). Similarly, an operation can aﬀect the state
in many ways, e.g., it can change the setup of the resource, its location or condition. The
system must allocate each task (target operation) to a resource, however, there may be
cases when ﬁrst the state of a resource must be modiﬁed in order to be able to execute
a certain task (e.g., a transporter may need, ﬁrst, to travel to its loading/source point, a
machine may require repair or setup). In these cases non-task operations may be applied.
They can modify the states of the resources without directly serving a demand (executing
a task). It is possible that during the resource allocation process a non-task operation is
applied several times, but other non-task operations are completely avoided (for example,
because of their high cost). Nevertheless, ﬁnally, all tasks must be completed.
2.2.1 Feasible Resource Allocation
A solution for a deterministic RAP is a partial function, the resource allocator function,
ϱ : R × N ,→O that assigns the starting times of the operations on the resources. Note
that the operations are supposed to be non-preemptive (they may not be interrupted).
A solution is called feasible if and only if the following four properties are satisﬁed:
1. All tasks are associated with exactly one (resource, time point) pair:
∀v ∈T : ∃! ⟨r, t⟩∈dom(ϱ) : v = ϱ(r, t).
2. Each resource executes, at most, one operation at a time:
¬∃u, v ∈O : u = ϱ(r, t1) ∧v = ϱ(r, t2) ∧t1 ≤t2 < t1 + d(s(r, t1), u).
3. The precedence constraints on the tasks are satisﬁed:
∀⟨u, v⟩∈C : [u = ϱ(r1, t1) ∧v = ϱ(r2, t2)] ⇒[t1 + d(s(r1, t1), u) ≤t2] .
4. Every operation-to-resource assignment is valid:
∀⟨r, t⟩∈dom(ϱ) : ⟨s(r, t), ϱ(r, t)⟩∈dom(d),
458

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
where s : R × N →S describes the states of the resources at given times
s(r, t) =



i(r)
if t = 0
s(r, t −1)
if ⟨r, t⟩/∈dom(ϱ)
e(s(r, t −1), ϱ(r, t))
otherwise
A RAP is called correctly speciﬁed if there exists at least one feasible solution. In what
follows it is assumed that the problems are correctly speciﬁed. Take a look at Figure 3.
Figure 3: Feasibility – an illustration of the four forbidden properties, using JSP as an
example. The presented four cases are excluded from the set of feasible schedules.
2.2.2 Performance Measures
The set of all feasible solutions is denoted by S. There is a performance (or cost) associated
with each solution, which is deﬁned by a performance measure κ : S →R that often depends
on the task completion times, only. Typical performance measures that appear in practice
include: maximum completion time or mean ﬂow time. The aim of the resource allocator
system is to compute a feasible solution with maximal performance (or minimal cost).
Note that the performance measure can assign penalties for violating release and due
dates (if they are available) or can even reﬂect the priority of the tasks. A possible generaliza-
tion of the given problem is the case when the operations may require more resources simul-
taneously, which is important to model, e.g., resource constrained project scheduling prob-
lems. However, it is straightforward to extend the framework to this case: the deﬁnition of
d and e should be changed to d : S⟨k⟩×O →N and e : S⟨k⟩×O →S⟨k⟩, where S⟨k⟩= ∪k
i=1Si
and k ≤|R|. Naturally, we assume that for all ⟨ˆs, o⟩∈dom(e) : dim(e(ˆs, o)) = dim(ˆs).
Although, managing tasks with multiple resource requirements may be important in some
cases, to keep the analysis as simple as possible, we do not deal with them in the paper.
Nevertheless, most of the results can be easily generalized to that case, as well.
459

Cs´aji & Monostori
2.2.3 Demonstrative Examples
Now, as demonstrative examples, we reformulate (F)JSP and TSP in the given framework.
It is straightforward to formulate scheduling problems, such as JSP, in the presented
resource allocation framework: the tasks of JSP can be directly associated with the tasks of
the framework, machines can be associated with resources and processing times with dura-
tions. The precedence constraints are determined by the linear ordering of the tasks in each
job. Note that there is only one possible resource state for every machine. Finally, feasible
schedules can be associated with feasible solutions. If there were setup-times in the prob-
lem, as well, then there would be several states for each resource (according to its current
setup) and the “set-up” procedures could be associated with the non-task operations.
A RAP formulation of TSP can be given as follows.
The set of resources consists
of only one element, namely the “salesman”, therefore, R = {r}.
The possible states
of resource r (the salesman) are S = {s1, . . . , sn}. If the state (of r) is si, it indicates
that the salesman is in city i. The allowed operations are the same as the allowed tasks,
O = T = {t1, . . . , tn}, where the execution of task ti symbolizes that the salesman travels to
city i from his current location. The constraints C = {⟨t2, t1⟩, ⟨t3, t1⟩. . . , ⟨tn, t1⟩} are used
for forcing the system to end the whole round-tour in city 1, which is also the starting city,
thus, i(r) = s1. For all si ∈S and tj ∈T : ⟨si, tj⟩∈dom(d) if and only if ⟨i, j⟩∈E. For all
⟨si, tj⟩∈dom(d) : d(si, tj) = wij and e(si, tj) = sj. Note that dom(e) = dom(d) and the ﬁrst
feasibility requirement guarantees that each city is visited exactly once. The performance
measure κ is the latest arrival time, κ(ϱ) = max {t + d(s(r, t), ϱ(r, t)) | ⟨r, t⟩∈dom(ϱ)}.
2.2.4 Computational Complexity
If we use a performance measure which has the property that a solution can be precisely
deﬁned by a bounded sequence of operations (which includes all tasks) with their assignment
to the resources and, additionally, among the solutions generated this way an optimal
one can be found, then the RAP becomes a combinatorial optimization problem.
Each
performance measure monotone in the completion times, called regular, has this property.
Because the above deﬁned RAP is a generalization of, e.g., JSP and TSP, it is strongly
NP-hard and, furthermore, no good polynomial-time approximation of the optimal resource
allocating algorithm exits, either (Papadimitriou, 1994).
2.3 Stochastic Framework
So far our model has been deterministic, now we turn to stochastic RAPs. The stochastic
variant of the described general class of RAPs can be deﬁned by randomizing functions d,
e and i. Consequently, the operation durations become random, d : S × O →∆(N), where
∆(N) is the space of probability distributions over N. Also the eﬀects of the operations
are uncertain, e : S × O →∆(S) and the initial states of the resources can be stochastic,
as well, i : R →∆(S). Note that the ranges of functions d, e and i contain probability
distributions, we denote the corresponding random variables by D, E and I, respectively.
The notation X ∼f indicate that random variable X has probability distribution f. Thus,
D(s, o) ∼d(s, o), E(s, o) ∼e(s, o) and I(r) ∼i(r) for all s ∈S, o ∈O and r ∈R. Take a
look at Figure 4 for an illustration of the stochastic variants of the JSP and TSP problems.
460

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
2.3.1 Stochastic Dominance
In stochastic RAPs the performance of a solution is also a random variable. Therefore,
in order to compare the performance of diﬀerent solutions, we have to compare random
variables.
Many ways are known to make this comparison.
We may say, for example,
that a random variable has stochastic dominance over another random variable “almost
surely”, “in likelihood ratio sense”, “stochastically”, “in the increasing convex sense” or
“in expectation”. In diﬀerent applications diﬀerent types of comparisons may be suitable,
however, probably the most natural one is based upon the expected values of the random
variables. The paper applies this kind of comparison for stochastic RAPs.
Figure 4: Randomization in case of JSP (left) and in case of TSP (right). In the latter, the
initial state, the durations and the arrival vertex could be uncertain, as well.
2.3.2 Solution Classification
Now, we classify the basic types of resource allocation techniques. First, in order to give a
proper classiﬁcation we begin with recalling the concepts of “open-loop” and “closed-loop”
controllers.
An open-loop controller, also called a non-feedback controller, computes its
input into a system by using only the current state and its model of the system. Therefore,
an open-loop controller does not use feedback to determine if its input has achieved the
desired goal, and it does not observe the output of the process being controlled. Conversely,
a closed-loop controller uses feedback to control states or outputs of a dynamical system
(Sontag, 1998). Closed-loop control has a signiﬁcant advantage over open-loop solutions in
dealing with uncertainties. Hence, it has improved reference tracking performance, it can
stabilize unstable processes and reduced sensitivity to parameter variations.
In deterministic RAPs there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between open- and closed-loop
controls. In this case we can safely restrict ourselves to open-loop methods. If the solution
is aimed at generating the resource allocation oﬀ-line in advance, then it is called predictive.
Thus, predictive solutions perform open-loop control and assume a deterministic environ-
ment. In stochastic resource allocation there are some data (e.g., the actual durations)
that will be available only during the execution of the plan. Based on the usage of this
information, we identify two basic types of solution techniques. An open-loop solution that
can deal with the uncertainties of the environment is called proactive. A proactive solution
allocates the operations to resources and deﬁnes the orders of the operations, but, because
the durations are uncertain, it does not determine precise starting times.
This kind of
461

Cs´aji & Monostori
technique can be applied only when the durations of the operations are stochastic, but, the
states of the resources are known perfectly (e.g., stochastic JSP). Finally, in the stochastic
case closed-loop solutions are called reactive. A reactive solution is allowed to make the
decisions on-line, as the process actually evolves providing more information. Naturally,
a reactive solution is not a simple sequence, but rather a resource allocation policy (to be
deﬁned later) which controls the process. The paper focuses on reactive solutions, only. We
will formulate the reactive solution of a stochastic RAP as a control policy of a suitably
deﬁned Markov decision process (specially, a stochastic shortest path problem).
2.4 Markov Decision Processes
Sequential decision-making under the presence of uncertainties is often modeled by MDPs
(Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998; Feinberg & Shwartz, 2002).
This
section contains the basic deﬁnitions, the notations applied and some preliminaries.
By a (ﬁnite, discrete-time, stationary, fully observable) Markov decision process (MDP)
we mean a stochastic system characterized by a 6-tuple ⟨X, A, A, p, g, α⟩, where the compo-
nents are as follows: X is a ﬁnite set of discrete states and A is a ﬁnite set of control actions.
Mapping A : X →P(A) is the availability function that renders each state a set of actions
available in the state where P denotes the power set. The transition-probability function is
given by p : X × A →∆(X), where ∆(X) is the space of probability distributions over X.
Let p(y | x, a) denote the probability of arrival at state y after executing action a ∈A(x)
in state x. The immediate-cost function is deﬁned by g : X × A →R, where g(x, a) is the
cost of taking action a in state x. Finally, constant α ∈[0, 1] denotes the discount rate or
discount factor. If α = 1, then the MDP is called undiscounted, otherwise it is discounted.
It is possible to extend the theory to more general state and action spaces, but at
the expense of increased mathematical complexity. Finite state and action sets are mostly
suﬃcient for digitally implemented controls and, therefore, we restrict ourselves to this case.
Figure 5: Markov decision processes – the interaction of the decision-maker and the uncer-
tain environment (left); the temporal progress of the system (right).
An interpretation of an MDP can be given if we consider an agent that acts in an
uncertain environment, which viewpoint is often taken in RL. The agent receives information
about the state of the environment, x, in each state x the agent is allowed to choose an
action a ∈A(x). After an action is selected, the environment moves to the next state
according to the probability distribution p(x, a), and the decision-maker collects its one-
462

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
step cost, g(x, a), as illustrated by Figure 5. The aim of the agent is to ﬁnd an optimal
behavior (policy) such that applying this strategy minimizes the expected cumulative costs.
A stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem is a special MDP in which the aim is to ﬁnd
a control policy such that reaches a pre-deﬁned terminal state starting from a given initial
state, additionally, minimizes the expected total costs of the path, as well. A policy is
called proper if it reaches the terminal state with probability one.
A usual assumption
when dealing with SSP problems is that all policies are proper, abbreviated as APP.
2.4.1 Control Policies
A (stationary, Markov) control policy determines the action to take in each possible state.
A deterministic policy, π : X →A, is simply a function from states to control actions. A
randomized policy, π : X →∆(A), is a function from states to probability distributions
over actions. We denote the probability of executing action a in state x by π(x)(a) or, for
short, by π(x, a). Naturally, deterministic policies are special cases of randomized ones and,
therefore, unless indicated otherwise, we consider randomized control policies.
For any ex0 ∈∆(X) initial probability distribution of the states, the transition probabil-
ities p together with a control policy π completely determine the progress of the system in
a stochastic sense, namely, they deﬁne a homogeneous Markov chain on X,
ext+1 = P(π)ext,
where ext is the state probability distribution vector of the system at time t, and P(π)
denotes the probability transition matrix induced by control policy π, formally deﬁned as
[P(π)]x,y =
X
a∈A
p(y | x, a) π(x, a).
2.4.2 Value Functions
The value or cost-to-go function of a policy π is a function from states to costs. It is deﬁned
on each state: Jπ : X →R. Function Jπ(x) gives the expected value of the cumulative
(discounted) costs when the system is in state x and it follows policy π thereafter,
Jπ(x) = E
" N
X
t=0
αtg(Xt, Aπ
t )
 X0 = x
#
,
(1)
where Xt and Aπ
t are random variables, Aπ
t is selected according to control policy π and the
distribution of Xt+1 is p(Xt, Aπ
t ). The horizon of the problem is denoted by N ∈N ∪{∞}.
Unless indicated otherwise, we will always assume that the horizon is inﬁnite, N = ∞.
Similarly to the deﬁnition of Jπ, one can deﬁne action-value functions of control polices,
Qπ(x, a) = E
" N
X
t=0
αtg(Xt, Aπ
t )
 X0 = x, Aπ
0 = a
#
,
where the notations are the same as in equation (1). Action-value functions are especially
important for model-free approaches, such as the classical Q-learning algorithm.
463

Cs´aji & Monostori
2.4.3 Bellman Equations
We say that π1 ≤π2 if and only if, for all x ∈X, we have Jπ1(x) ≤Jπ2(x). A control policy
is (uniformly) optimal if it is less than or equal to all other control policies.
There always exists at least one optimal policy (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Although there
may be many optimal policies, they all share the same unique optimal cost-to-go function,
denoted by J∗. This function must satisfy the Bellman optimality equation (Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 1996), TJ∗= J∗, where T is the Bellman operator, deﬁned for all x ∈X, as
(TJ)(x) = min
a∈A(x)
h
g(x, a) + α
X
y∈X
p(y | x, a)J(y)
i
.
(2)
The Bellman equation for an arbitrary (stationary, Markov, randomized) policy is
(T πJ)(x) =
X
a∈A(x)
π(x, a)
h
g(x, a) + α
X
y∈X
p(y | x, a)J(y)
i
,
where the notations are the same as in equation (2) and we also have T πJπ = Jπ.
From a given value function J, it is straightforward to get a policy, e.g., by applying a
greedy and deterministic policy (w.r.t. J) that always selects actions of minimal costs,
π(x) ∈arg min
a∈A(x)
h
g(x, a) + α
X
y∈X
p(y | x, a)J(y)
i
.
MDPs have an extensively studied theory and there exist a lot of exact and approx-
imate solution methods, e.g., value iteration, policy iteration, the Gauss-Seidel method,
Q-learning, Q(λ), SARSA and TD(λ) - temporal diﬀerence learning (Bertsekas & Tsitsik-
lis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998; Feinberg & Shwartz, 2002). Most of these reinforcement
learning algorithms work by iteratively approximating the optimal value function.
2.5 Reactive Resource Control
In this section we formulate reactive solutions of stochastic RAPs as control policies of
suitably reformulated SSP problems. The current task durations and resource states will
only be incrementally available during the resource allocation control process.
2.5.1 Problem Reformulation
A state x ∈X is deﬁned as a 4-tuple x = ⟨τ, µ, ϱ, ϕ⟩, where τ ∈N is the current time and the
function µ : R →S determines the current states of the resources. The partial functions ϱ
and ϕ store the past of the process, namely, ϱ : R×Nτ−1 ,→O contains the resources and the
times in which an operation was started and ϕ : R × Nτ−1 ,→Nτ describes the ﬁnish times
of the already completed operations, where Nτ = {0, . . . , τ}. Naturally, dom(ϕ) ⊆dom(ϱ).
By TS(x) ⊆T we denote the set of tasks which have been started in state x (before the
current time τ) and by TF (x) ⊆TS(x) the set of tasks that have been ﬁnished already in
state x. It is easy to see that TS(x) = rng(ϱ) ∩T and TF (x) = rng(ϱ|dom(ϕ)) ∩T , where
rng(·) denotes the range or image set of a function. The process starts from an initial state
464

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
xs = ⟨0, µ, ∅, ∅⟩, which corresponds to the situation at time zero when none of the operations
have been started. The initial probability distribution, β, can be calculated as follows
β(xs) = P (µ(r1) = I(r1), . . . , µ(rn) = I(rn)) ,
where I(r) ∼i(r) denotes the random variable that determines the initial state of resource
r ∈R and n = |R|. Thus, β renders initial states to resources according to the (multivariate)
probability distribution I that is a component of the RAP. We introduce a set of terminal
states, as well. A state x is considered as a terminal state (x ∈T) in two cases. First, if all
the tasks are ﬁnished in the state, formally, if TF (x) = T and it can be reached from a state
ˆx, where TF (ˆx) ̸= T . Second, if the system reached a state where no tasks or operations
can be executed, in other words, if the allowed set of actions is empty, A(x) = ∅.
It is easy to see that, in theory, we can aggregate all terminal states to a global unique
terminal state and introduce a new unique initial state, x0, that has only one available
action which takes us randomly (with β distribution) to the real initial states. Then, the
problem becomes a stochastic shortest path problem and the aim can be described as ﬁnding
a routing having minimal expected cost from the new initial state to the goal state.
At every time τ the system is informed on the ﬁnished operations, and it can decide
on the operations to apply (and by which resources). The control action space contains
operation-resource assignments avr ∈A, where v ∈O and r ∈R, and a special await
control that corresponds to the action when the system does not start a new operation at
the current time. In a non-terminal state x = ⟨τ, µ, ϱ, ϕ⟩the available actions are
await ∈A(x) ⇔TS(x) \ TF (x) ̸= ∅
∀v ∈O : ∀r ∈R : avr ∈A(x) ⇔(v ∈O \ TS(x) ∧∀⟨ˆr, t⟩∈dom(ϱ) \ dom(ϕ) : ˆr ̸= r ∧
∧⟨µ(r), v⟩∈dom(d) ∧v ∈T ⇒(∀u ∈T : ⟨u, v⟩∈C ⇒u ∈TF (x)))
Thus, action await is available in every state with an unﬁnished operation; action avr is
available in states in which resource r is idle, it can process operation v, additionally, if v
is a task, then it was not executed earlier and its precedence constraints are satisﬁed.
If an action avr ∈A(x) is executed in a state x = ⟨τ, µ, ϱ, ϕ⟩, then the system moves
with probability one to a new state ˆx = ⟨τ, µ, ˆϱ, ϕ⟩, where ˆϱ = ϱ ∪{⟨⟨r, t⟩, v⟩}. Note that
we treat functions as sets of ordered pairs. The resulting ˆx corresponds to the state where
operation v has started on resource r if the previous state of the environment was x.
The eﬀect of the await action is that from x = ⟨τ, µ, ϱ, ϕ⟩it takes to an ˆx = ⟨τ + 1, ˆµ, ϱ, ˆϕ⟩,
where an unﬁnished operation ϱ(r, t) that was started at t on r ﬁnishes with probability
P(⟨r, t⟩∈dom( ˆϕ) | x, ⟨r, t⟩∈dom(ϱ) \ dom(ϕ)) = P(D(µ(r), ϱ(r, t)) + t = τ)
P(D(µ(r), ϱ(r, t)) + t ≥τ),
where D(s, v) ∼d(s, v) is a random variable that determines the duration of operation v
when it is executed by a resource which has state s. This quantity is called completion rate
in stochastic scheduling theory and hazard rate in reliability theory. We remark that for
operations with continuous durations, this quantity is deﬁned by f(t)/(1 −F(t)), where f
denotes the density function and F the distribution of the random variable that determines
the duration of the operation. If operation v = ϱ(r, t) has ﬁnished (⟨r, t⟩∈dom( ˆϕ)), then
465

Cs´aji & Monostori
ˆϕ(r, t) = τ and ˆµ(r) = E(r, v), where E(r, v) ∼e(r, v) is a random variable that determines
the new state of resource r after it has executed operation v. Except the extension of its
domain set, the other values of function ϕ do not change, consequently, ∀⟨r, t⟩∈dom(ϕ) :
ˆϕ(r, t) = ϕ(r, t). In other words, ˆϕ is a conservative extension of ϕ, formally, ϕ ⊆ˆϕ.
The immediate-cost function g for a given κ performance measure is deﬁned as follows.
Assume that κ depends only on the operation-resource assignments and the completion
times. Let x = ⟨τ, µ, ϱ, ϕ⟩and ˆx = ⟨ˆτ, ˆµ, ˆϱ, ˆϕ⟩. Then, in general, if the system arrives at
state ˆx after executing control action a in state x, it incurs cost κ(ϱ, ϕ) −κ(ˆϱ, ˆϕ).
Note that, though, in Section 2.2.2 performance measures were deﬁned on complete
solutions, for most measures applied in practice, such as total completion time or weighted
total lateness, it is straightforward to generalize the performance measure to partial solu-
tions, as well. One may, for example, treat the partial solution of a problem as a complete
solution of a smaller (sub)problem, namely, a problem with fewer tasks to be completed.
If the control process has failed, more precisely, if it was not possible to ﬁnish all tasks,
then the immediate-cost function should render penalties (depending on the speciﬁc prob-
lem) regarding the non-completed tasks proportional to the number of these failed tasks.
2.5.2 Favorable Features
Let us call the introduced SSPs, which describe stochastic RAPs, RAP-MDPs.
In this
section we overview some basic properties of RAP-MDPs. First, it is straightforward to see
that these MDPs have ﬁnite action spaces, since |A| ≤|R| |O| + 1 always holds.
Though, the state space of a RAP-MDP is denumerable in general, if the allowed num-
ber of non-task operations is bounded and the random variables describing the operation
durations are ﬁnite, the state space of the reformulated MDP becomes ﬁnite, as well.
We may also observe that RAP-MDPs are acyclic (or aperiodic), viz., none of the states
can appear multiple times, because during the resource allocation process τ and dom(ϱ) are
non-decreasing and, additionally, each time the state changes, the quantity τ + |dom(ϱ)|
strictly increases. Therefore, the system cannot reach the same state twice. As an immediate
consequence, all policies eventually terminate (if the MDP was ﬁnite) and, thus, are proper.
For the eﬀective computation of a good control policy, it is important to try to reduce
the number of states. We can do so by recognizing that if the performance measure κ is
non-decreasing in the completion times, then an optimal control policy of the reformulated
RAP-MDP can be found among the policies which start new operations only at times when
another operation has been ﬁnished or in an initial state. This statement can be supported
by the fact that without increasing the cost (κ is non-decreasing) every operation can be
shifted earlier on the resource which was assigned to it until it reaches another operation,
or until it reaches a time when one of its preceding tasks is ﬁnished (if the operation was
a task with precedence constrains), or, ultimately, until time zero. Note that most of the
performance measures used in practice (e.g., makespan, weighted completion time, average
tardiness) are non-decreasing. As a consequence, the states in which no operation has been
ﬁnished can be omitted, except the initial states. Therefore, each await action may lead to
a state where an operation has been ﬁnished. We may consider it, as the system executes
automatically an await action in the omitted states. By this way, the state space can be
decreased and, therefore, a good control policy can be calculated more eﬀectively.
466

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
2.5.3 Composable Measures
For a large class of performance measures, the state representation can be simpliﬁed by
leaving out the past of the process. In order to do so, we must require that the performance
measure be composable with a suitable function. In general, we call a function f : P(X) →
R γ-composable if for any A, B ⊆X, A∩B = ∅it holds that γ(f(A), f(B)) = f(A∪B), where
γ : R × R →R is called the composition function, and X is an arbitrary set. This deﬁnition
can be directly applied to performance measures. If a performance measure, for example, is
γ-composable, it indicates that the value of any complete solution can be computed from the
values of its disjoint subsolutions (solutions to subproblems) with function γ. In practical
situations the composition function is often the max, the min or the “+” function.
If the performance measure κ is γ-composable, then the past can be omitted from the
state representation, because the performance can be calculated incrementally. Thus, a
state can be described as x = ⟨¯τ, ¯κ, ¯µ, TU⟩, where ¯τ ∈N, as previously, is the current
time, ¯κ ∈R contains the performance of the current (partial) solution and TU is the set of
unﬁnished tasks. The function ¯µ : R →S × (O ∪{ι}) × N determines the current states of
the resources together with the operations currently executed by them (or ι if a resource is
idle) and the starting times of the operations (needed to compute their completion rates).
In order to keep the analysis as simple as possible, we restrict ourselves to composable
functions, since almost all performance measures that appear in practice are γ-composable
for a suitable γ (e.g., makespan or total production time is max-composable).
2.5.4 Reactive Solutions
Now, we are in a position to deﬁne the concept of reactive solutions for stochastic RAPs. A
reactive solution is a (stationary, Markov) control policy of the reformulated SSP problem.
A reactive solution performs a closed-loop control, since at each time step the controller is
informed about the current state of system and it can choose a control action based upon
this information. Section 3 deals with the computation of eﬀective control policies.
3. Solution Methods
In this section we aim at giving an eﬀective solution to large-scale RAPs in uncertain and
changing environments with the help of diﬀerent machine learning approaches. First, we
overview some approximate dynamic programming methods to compute a “good” policy.
Afterwards, we investigate two function approximation techniques to enhance the solution.
Clustering, rollout algorithm and action space decomposition as well as distributed sam-
pling are also considered, as they can speedup the computation of a good control policy
considerably and, therefore, are important additions if we face large-scale problems.
3.1 Approximate Dynamic Programming
In the previous sections we have formulated RAPs as acyclic (aperiodic) SSP problems.
Now, we face the challenge of ﬁnding a good policy. In theory, the optimal value function of a
ﬁnite MDP can be exactly computed by dynamic programming (DP) methods, such as value
iteration or the Gauss-Seidel method. Alternatively, an exact optimal policy can be directly
calculated by policy iteration. However, due to the “curse of dimensionality”, computing
467

Cs´aji & Monostori
an exact optimal solution by these methods is practically infeasible, e.g., typically both
the required amount of computation and the needed storage space, viz., memory, grows
quickly with the size of the problem.
In order to handle the “curse”, we should apply
approximate dynamic programming (ADP) techniques to achieve a good approximation of
an optimal policy. Here, we suggest using sampling-based ﬁtted Q-learning (FQL). In each
trial a Monte-Carlo estimate of the value function is computed and projected onto a suitable
function space. The methods described in this section (FQL, MCMC and the Boltzmann
formula) should be applied simultaneously, in order to achieve an eﬃcient solution.
3.1.1 Fitted Q-learning
Watkins’ Q-learning is a very popular oﬀ-policy model-free reinforcement learning algo-
rithm (Even-Dar & Mansour, 2003). It works with action-value functions and iteratively
approximates the optimal value function. The one-step Q-learning rule is deﬁned as follows
Qi+1(x, a) = (1 −γi(x, a))Qi(x, a) + γi(x, a)( eTiQi)(x, a),
( eTiQi)(x, a) = g(x, a) + α
min
B∈A(Y ) Qi(Y, B),
where γi(x, a) are the learning rates and Y is a random variable representing a state gen-
erated from the pair (x, a) by simulation, that is, according to the probability distribution
p(x, a). It is known (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996) that if γi(x) ∈[0, 1] and they satisfy
∞
X
i=0
γi(x, a) = ∞
and
∞
X
i=0
γ2
i (x, a) < ∞,
then the Q-learning algorithm converges with probability one to the optimal action-value
function, Q∗, in the case of lookup table representation when each state-action value is
stored independently. We speak about the method of ﬁtted Q-learning (FQL) when the
value function is represented by a (typically parametric) function from a suitable function
space, F, and after each iteration, the updated value function is projected back onto F.
A useful observation is that we need the “learning rate” parameters only to overcome
the eﬀects of random disturbances. However, if we deal with deterministic problems, this
part of the method can be simpliﬁed. The resulting algorithm simply updates Q(x, a) with
the minimum of the previously stored estimation and the current outcome of the simulation,
which is also the core idea of the LRTA* algorithm (Bulitko & Lee, 2006). When we dealt
with deterministic resource allocation problems, we applied this simpliﬁcation, as well.
3.1.2 Evaluation by Simulation
Naturally, in large-scale problems we cannot update all states at once. Therefore, we per-
form Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations (Hastings, 1970; Andrieu, Freitas,
Doucet, & Jordan, 2003) to generate samples with the model, which are used for comput-
ing the new approximation of the estimated cost-to-go function. Thus, the set of states to
be updated in episode i, namely Xi, is generated by simulation. Because RAP-MDPs are
acyclic, we apply prioritized sweeping, which means that after each iteration, the cost-to-go
estimations are updated in the reverse order in which they appeared during the simulation.
468

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
Assume, for example, that Xi =

xi
1, xi
2, . . . , xi
ti
	
is the set of states for the update of the
value function after iteration i, where j < k implies that xi
j appeared earlier during the
simulation than xi
k. In this case the order in which the updates are performed, is xi
ti, . . . , xi
1.
Moreover, we do not need a uniformly optimal value function, it is enough to have a good
approximation of the optimal cost-to-go function for the relevant states. A state is called
relevant if it can appear with positive probability during the application of an optimal pol-
icy. Therefore, it is suﬃcient to consider the case when xi
1 = x0, where xi
1 is the ﬁrst state
in episode i and x0 is the (aggregated) initial state of the SSP problem.
3.1.3 The Boltzmann Formula
In order to ensure the convergence of the FQL algorithm, one must guarantee that each
cost-to-go estimation be continuously updated. A technique used often to balance between
exploration and exploitation is the Boltzmann formula (also called softmin action selection):
πi(x, a) =
exp(−Qi(x, a)/τ)
P
b∈A(x)
exp(−Qi(x, b)/τ)
,
where τ ≥0 is the Boltzmann (or Gibbs) temperature, i is the episode number. It is easy
to see that high temperatures cause the actions to be (nearly) equiprobable, low ones cause
a greater diﬀerence in selection probability for actions that diﬀer in their value estimations.
Note that here we applied the Boltzmann formula for minimization, viz., small values result
in high probability. It is advised to extend this approach by a variant of simulated annealing
(Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, & Vecchi, 1983) or Metropolis algorithm (Metropolis, Rosenbluth,
Rosenbluth, Teller, & Teller, 1953), which means that τ should be decreased over time, at
a suitable, e.g., logarithmic, rate (Singh, Jaakkola, Littman, & Szepesv´ari, 2000).
3.2 Cost-to-Go Representations
In Section 3.1 we suggested FQL for iteratively approximating the optimal value function.
However, the question of a suitable function space, onto which the resulted value functions
can be eﬀectively projected, remained open. In order to deal with large-scale problems (or
problems with continuous state spaces) this question is crucial. In this section, ﬁrst, we
suggest features for stochastic RAPs, then describe two methods that can be applied to
compactly represent value functions. The ﬁrst and simpler one applies hash tables while
the second, more sophisticated one, builds upon the theory of support vector machines.
3.2.1 Feature Vectors
In order to eﬃciently apply a function approximator, ﬁrst, the states and the actions of the
reformulated MDP should be associated with numerical vectors representing, e.g., typical
features of the system. In the case of stochastic RAPs, we suggest using features as follows:
• For each resource in R, the resource state id, the operation id of the operation being
currently processed by the resource (could be idle), as well as the starting time of the
last (and currently unﬁnished) operation can be a feature. If the model is available
to the system, the expected ready time of the resource should be stored instead.
469

Cs´aji & Monostori
• For each task in T , the task state id could be treated as a feature that can assume
one of the following values: “not available” (e.g., some precedence constraints are not
satisﬁed), “ready for execution”, “being processed” or “ﬁnished”. It is also advised to
apply “1-out-of-n” coding, viz., each value should be associated with a separate bit.
• In case we use action-value functions, for each action (resource-operation assignment)
the resource id and the operation id could be stored. If the model is available, then
the expected ﬁnish time of the operation should also be taken into account.
In the case of a model-free approach which applies action-value functions, for example,
the feature vector would have 3·|R|+|T |+2 components. Note that for features representing
temporal values, it is advised to use relative time values instead of absolute ones.
3.2.2 Hash Tables
Suppose that we have a vector w = ⟨w1, w2, . . . , wk⟩, where each component wi corresponds
to a feature of a state or an action. Usually, the value estimations for all of these vectors
cannot be stored in the memory. In this case one of the simplest methods to be applied is
to represent the estimations in a hash table. A hash table is, basically, a dictionary in which
keys are mapped to array positions by hash functions. If all components can assume ﬁnite
values, e.g., in our ﬁnite-state, discrete-time case, then a key could be generated as follows.
Let us suppose that for all wi we have 0 ≤wi < mi, then w can be seen as a number in a
mixed radix numeral system and, therefore, a unique key can be calculated as
ϕ(w) =
k
X
i=1
wi
i−1
Y
j=1
mj,
where ϕ(w) denotes the key of w, and the value of an empty product is treated as one.
The hash function, ψ, maps feature vector keys to memory positions. More precisely,
if we have memory for storing only d value estimations, then the hash function takes the
form ψ : rng(ϕ) →{0, . . . , d −1}, where rng(·) denotes the range set of a function.
It is advised to apply a d that is prime. In this case a usual hashing function choice is
ψ(x) = y if and only if y ≡x (mod d), namely, if y is congruent to x modulo d.
Having the keys of more than one item map to the same position is called a collision. In
the case of RAP-MDPs we suggest a collision resolution method as follows. Suppose that
during a value update the feature vector of a state (or a state-action pair) maps to a position
that is already occupied by another estimation corresponding to another item (which can be
detected, e.g., by storing the keys). Then we have a collision and the estimation of the new
item should overwrite the old estimation if and only if the MDP state corresponding to the
new item appears with higher probability during execution starting from the (aggregated)
initial state than the one corresponding to the old item. In case of a model-free approach,
the item having a state with smaller current time component can be kept.
Despite its simplicity, the hash table representation has several disadvantages, e.g., it
still needs a lot of memory to work eﬃciently, it cannot easily handle continuous values
and, it only stores individual data, moreover, it does not generalize to “similar” items. In
the next section we present a statistical approach that can deal with these issues, as well.
470

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
3.2.3 Support Vector Regression
A promising choice for compactly representing the cost-to-go function is to use support vector
regression (SVR) from statistical learning theory. For maintaining the value function esti-
mations, we suggest using ν-SVRs which were proposed by Sch¨olkopf, Smola, Williamson,
and Bartlett (2000). They have an advantage over classical ε-SVRs according to which,
through the new parameter ν, the number of support vectors can be controlled. Addition-
ally, parameter ε can be eliminated. First, the core ideas of ν-SVRs are presented.
In general, SVR addresses the problem as follows. We are given a sample, a set of data
points {⟨x1, y1⟩, . . . , ⟨xl, yl⟩}, such that xi ∈X is an input, where X is a measurable space,
and yi ∈R is the target output. For simplicity, we shall assume that X ⊆Rk, where k ∈N.
The aim of the learning process is to ﬁnd a function f : X →R with a small risk
R[f] =
Z
X
l(f, x, y)dP(x, y),
(3)
where P is a probability measure, which is responsible for the generation of the observations
and l is a loss function, such as l(f, x, y) = (f(x) −y)2. A common error function used
in SVRs is the so-called ε-insensitive loss function, |f(x) −y|ε = max {0, |f(x) −y| −ε}.
Unfortunately, we cannot minimize (3) directly, since we do not know P, we are given the
sample, only (generated, e.g., by simulation). We try to obtain a small risk by minimizing
the regularized risk functional in which we average over the training sample
1
2 ∥w∥2 + C · Rε
emp[f],
(4)
where, ∥w∥2 is a term that characterizes the model complexity and C > 0 a constant that
determines the trade-oﬀbetween the ﬂatness of the regression and the amount up to which
deviations larger than ε are tolerated. The function Rε
emp[f] is deﬁned as follows
Rε
emp[f] = 1
l
l
X
i=1
|f(xi) −yi|ε.
It measures the ε-insensitive average training error. The problem which arises when we
try to minimize (4) is called empirical risk minimization (ERM). In regression problems we
usually have a Hilbert space F, containing X →R type (typically non-linear) functions,
and our aim is to ﬁnd a function f that is “close” to yi in each xi and takes the form
f(x) =
X
j wjφj(x) + b = wT φ(x) + b,
where φj ∈F, wj ∈R and b ∈R. Using Lagrange multiplier techniques, we can rewrite the
regression problem in its dual form (Sch¨olkopf et al., 2000) and arrive at the ﬁnal ν-SVR
optimization problem. The resulting regression estimate then takes the form as follows
f(x) =
l
X
i=1
(α∗
i −αi)K(xi, x) + b,
where αi and α∗
i are the Lagrange multipliers, and K denotes an inner product kernel
deﬁned by K(x, y) = ⟨φ(x), φ(y)⟩, where ⟨·, ·⟩denotes inner product. Note that αi, α∗
i ̸= 0
471

Cs´aji & Monostori
holds usually only for a small subset of training samples, furthermore, parameter b (and ε)
can be determined as well, by applying the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions.
Mercer’s theorem in functional analysis characterizes which functions correspond to an
inner product in some space F. Basic kernel types include linear, polynomial, Gaussian
and sigmoid functions. In our experiments with RAP-MDPs we have used Gaussian kernels
which are also called radial basis function (RBF) kernels.
RBF kernels are deﬁned by
K(x, y) = exp(−∥x −y∥2 /(2σ2)), where σ > 0 is an adjustable kernel parameter.
A variant of the ﬁtted Q-learning algorithm combined with regression and softmin action
selection is described in Table 1. It simulates a state-action trajectory with the model and
updates the estimated values of only the state-action pairs which appeared during the
simulation. Most of our RAP solutions described in the paper are based on this algorithm.
The notations of the pseudocode shown in Table 1 are as follows. Variable i contains
the episode number, ti is the length of episode i and j is a parameter for time-steps inside
an episode. The Boltzmann temperature is denoted by τ, πi is the control policy applied in
episode i and x0 is the (aggregated) initial state. State xi
j and action ai
j correspond to step
j in episode i. Function h computes features for state-action pairs while γi denotes learning
rates. Finally, Li denotes the regression sample and Qi is the ﬁtted value function.
Although, support vector regression oﬀers an elegant and eﬃcient solution to the value
function representation problem, we presented the hash table representation possibility not
only because it is much easier to implement, but also because it requires less computation,
thus, provides faster solutions. Moreover, the values of the hash table could be accessed
independently; this was one of the reasons why we applied hash tables when we dealt with
distributed solutions, e.g., on architectures with uniform memory access.
Nevertheless,
SVRs have other advantages, most importantly, they can “generalize” to “similar” data.
Regression Based Q-learning
1.
Initialize Q0, L0, τ and let i = 1.
2.
Repeat (for each episode)
3.
Set πi to a soft and semi-greedy policy w.r.t. Qi−1, e.g.,
πi(x, a) = exp(−Qi−1(x, a)/τ)/
hP
b∈A(x) exp(−Qi−1(x, b)/τ)
i
.
4.
Simulate a state-action trajectory from x0 using policy πi.
5.
For j = ti to 1 (for each state-action pair in the episode) do
6.
Determine the features of the state-action pair, yi
j = h(xi
j, ai
j).
7.
Compute the new action-value estimation for xi
j and ai
j, e.g.,
zi
j = (1 −γi)Qi−1(xi
j, ai
j) + γi
h
g(xi
j, ai
j) + α minb∈A(xi
j+1) Qi−1(xi
j+1, b)
i
.
8.
End loop (end of state-action processing)
9.
Update sample set Li−1 with

yi
j, zi
j

: j = 1, . . . , ti
	
, the result is Li.
10.
Calculate Qi by ﬁtting a smooth regression function to the sample of Li.
11.
Increase the episode number, i, and decrease the temperature, τ.
12.
Until some terminating conditions are met, e.g., i reaches a limit
or the estimated approximation error to Q∗gets suﬃciently small.
Output: the action-value function Qi (or π(Qi), e.g., the greedy policy w.r.t. Qi).
Table 1: Pseudocode for regression-based Q-learning with softmin action selection.
472

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
3.3 Additional Improvements
Computing a (close-to) optimal solution with RL methods, such as (ﬁtted) Q-learning, could
be very ineﬃcient in large-scale systems, even if we apply prioritized sweeping and a capable
representation. In this section we present some additional improvements in order to speed
up to optimization process, even at the expense of achieving only suboptimal solutions.
3.3.1 Rollout Algorithms
During our experiments, which are presented in Section 4, it turned out that using a sub-
optimal base policy, such as a greedy policy with respect to the immediate costs, to guide
the exploration, speeds up the optimization considerably. Therefore, at the initial stage
we suggest applying a rollout policy, which is a limited lookahead policy, with the optimal
cost-to-go approximated by the cost-to-go of the base policy (Bertsekas, 2001). In order to
introduce the concept more precisely, let ˆπ be the greedy policy w.r.t. immediate-costs,
ˆπ(x) ∈arg min
a∈A(x)
g(x, a).
The value function of ˆπ is denoted by J ˆπ. The one-step lookahead rollout policy π based
on policy ˆπ, which is an improvement of ˆπ (cf. policy iteration), can be calculated by
π(x) ∈arg min
a∈A(x)
E
h
G(x, a) + J ˆπ(Y )
i
,
where Y is a random variable representing a state generated from the pair (x, a) by simu-
lation, that is, according to probability distribution p(x, a). The expected value (viz., the
expected costs and the cost-to-go of the base policy) is approximated by Monte Carlo simu-
lation of several trajectories that start at the current state. If the problem is deterministic,
then a single simulation trajectory suﬃces, and the calculations are greatly simpliﬁed.
Take a look at Figure 6 for an illustration. In scheduling theory, a similar (but simpliﬁed)
concept can be found and a rollout policy would be called a dispatching rule.
Figure 6: The evaluation of state x with rollout algorithms in the deterministic (left) and
the stochastic (right) case. Circles denote states and rectangles represent actions.
The two main issues why we suggest the application of rollout algorithms in the initial
stages of value function approximation-based reinforcement learning are as follows:
473

Cs´aji & Monostori
1. We need several initial samples before the ﬁrst application of approximation techniques
and these ﬁrst samples can be generated by simulations guided by a rollout policy.
2. General reinforcement learning methods perform quite poorly in practice without any
initial guidance.
However, the learning algorithm can start improving the rollout
policy π, especially, in case we apply (ﬁtted) Q-learning, it can learn directly from the
trajectories generated by a rollout policy, since it is an oﬀ-policy learning method.
Our numerical experiments showed that rollout algorithms provide signiﬁcant speedup.
3.3.2 Action Space Decomposition
In large-scale problems the set of available actions in a state may be very large, which can
slow down the system signiﬁcantly. In the current formulation of the RAP the number
of available actions in a state is O(|T | |R|).
Though, even in real world situations |R|
is, usually, not very large, but T could contain thousands of tasks.
Here, we suggest
decomposing the action space as shown in Figure 7. First, the system selects a task, only,
and it moves to a new state where this task is ﬁxed and an executing resource should be
selected. In this case the state description can be extended by a new variable τ ∈T ∪{∅},
where ∅denotes the case when no task has been selected yet.
In every other case the
system should select an executing resource for the selected task. Consequently, the new
action space is A = A1 ∪A2, where A1 = { av | v ∈T } ∪{aω} and A2 = { ar | r ∈R }. As
a result, we radically decreased the number of available actions, however, the number of
possible states was increased. Our experiments showed that it was a reasonable trade-oﬀ.
Figure 7: Action selection before (up) and after (down) action space decomposition.
474

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
3.3.3 Clustering the Tasks
The idea of divide-and-conquer is widely used in artiﬁcial intelligence and recently it has
appeared in the theory of dealing with large-scale MDPs.
Partitioning a problem into
several smaller subproblems is also often applied to decrease computational complexity in
combinatorial optimization problems, for example, in scheduling theory.
We propose a simple and still eﬃcient partitioning method for a practically very im-
portant class of performance measures. In real world situations the tasks very often have
release dates and due dates, and the performance measure, e.g., total lateness and number
of tardy tasks, depends on meeting the deadlines. Note that these measures are regular.
We denote the (possibly randomized) functions deﬁning the release and due dates of the
tasks by A : T →N and B : T →N, respectively. In this section we restrict ourselves to
performance measures that are regular and depend on due dates. In order to cluster the
tasks, we need the deﬁnition of weighted expected slack time which is given as follows
Sw(v) =
X
s∈Γ(v)
w(s) E
h
B(v) −A(v) −D(s, v)
i
,
where Γ(v) = { s ∈S | ⟨s, v⟩∈dom(D) } denotes the set of resource states in which task v
can be processed, and w(s) are weights corresponding, for example, to the likelihood that
resource state s appears during execution, or they can be simply w(s) = 1/ |Γ(v)|.
Figure 8: Clustering the tasks according to their slack times and precedence constraints.
In order to increase computational speed, we suggest clustering the tasks in T into suc-
cessive disjoint subsets T1, . . . , Tk according to the precedence constraints and the expected
slack times; take a look at Figure 8 for an illustration. The basic idea behind our approach
is that we should handle the most constrained tasks ﬁrst. Therefore, ideally, if Ti and Tj are
two clusters and i < j, then tasks in Ti had expected slack times smaller than tasks in Tj.
However, in most of the cases clustering is not so simple, since the precedence constraints
must also be taken into account and this clustering criterion has the priority.
Thus, if
⟨u, v⟩∈C, u ∈Ti and v ∈Tj, then i ≤j must hold. During learning, ﬁrst, tasks in T1 are
allocated to resources, only. After some episodes, we ﬁx the allocation policy concerning
tasks in T1 and we start sampling to achieve a good policy for tasks in T2, and so on.
Naturally, clustering the tasks is a two-edged weapon, making too small clusters may
seriously decrease the performance of the best achievable policy, making too large clusters
475

Cs´aji & Monostori
may considerably slow down the system. This technique, however, has several advantages,
e.g., (1) it eﬀectively decreases the search space; (2) further reduces the number of available
actions in the states; and, additionally (3) speeds up the learning, since the sample trajecto-
ries become smaller (only a small part of the tasks is allocated in a trial and, consequently,
the variance of the total costs is decreased). The eﬀects of clustering relative to the size of
the clusters were analyzed experimentally and are presented in Section 4.5.
3.3.4 Distributed Sampling
Finally, we argue that the presented approach can be easily modiﬁed in order to allow
computing a policy on several processors in a distributed way.
Parallel computing can
further speed up the calculation of the solution. We will consider extensions of the algorithm
using both shared memory and distributed memory architectures. Let us suppose we have
k processors, and denote the set of all processors by P = {p1, p2, . . . , pk}.
In case we have a parallel system with a shared memory architecture, e.g., UMA (uniform
memory access), then it is straightforward to parallelize the computation of a control policy.
Namely, each processor p ∈P can sample the search space independently, while by using
the same, shared value function. The (joint) policy can be calculated using this common,
global value function, e.g., the greedy policy w.r.t. this function can be applied.
Parallelizing the solution by using an architecture with distributed memory is more
challenging. Probably the simplest way to parallelize our approach to several processors
with distributed memory is to let the processors search independently by letting them
working with their own, local value functions. After a given time or number of iterations,
we may treat the best achieved solution as the joint policy. More precisely, if we denote the
aggregated initial state by x0, then the joint control policy π can be deﬁned as follows
π ∈arg min
πp (p∈P)
Jπp(x0)
or
π ∈arg min
πp (p∈P)
min
a∈A(x0)Qπp(x0, a),
where Jπp and Qπp are (approximate) state- and action-value functions calculated by pro-
cessor p ∈P.
Control policy πp is the solution of processor p after a given number of
iterations. During our numerical experiments we usually applied 104 iterations.
Naturally, there could be many (more sophisticated) ways to parallelize the computation
using several processors with distributed memory.
For example, from time to time the
processors could exchange some of their best episodes (trajectories with the lowest costs)
and learn from the experiments of the others. In this way, they could help improve the
value functions of each other. Our numerical experiments, presented in Section 4.3, showed
that even in the simplest case, distributing the calculation speeds up the optimization
considerably. Moreover, in the case of shared memory the speedup was almost linear.
As parallel computing represents a very promising way do deal with large-scale systems,
their further theoretical and experimental investigation would be very important. For ex-
ample, by harmonizing the exploration of the processors, the speedup could be improved.
4. Experimental Results
In this section some experimental results on both benchmark and industry-related problems
are presented. These experiments highlight some characteristics of the solution.
476

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
4.1 Testing Methodology
In order to experimentally study our resource control approach, a simulation environment
was developed in C++.
We applied FQL and, in most of the cases, SVRs which were
realized by the LIBSVM free library for support vector machines (Chang & Lin, 2001).
After centering and scaling the data into interval [0, 1], we used Gaussian kernels and
shrinking techniques. We always applied rollout algorithms and action decomposition, but
clustering was only used in tests presented in Section 4.5, furthermore, distributed sampling
was only applied in test shown in Section 4.3. In both of the latter cases (tests for clustering
and distributed sampling) we used hash tables with approximately 256Mb hash memory.
The performance of the algorithm was measured as follows. Testing took place in two
main ﬁelds: the ﬁrst one was a benchmark scheduling dataset of hard problems, the other
one was a simulation of a “real world” production control problem. In the ﬁrst case the best
solution, viz., the optimal value of the (aggregated) initial state, J∗(x0) = mina Q∗(x0, a),
was known for most of the test instances. Some “very hard” instances occurred for which
only lower and upper bounds were known, e.g., J∗
1(x0) ≤J∗(x0) ≤J∗
2(x0). In these cases
we assumed that J∗(x0) ≈(J∗
1(x0) + J∗
2(x0))/2. Since these estimations were “good” (viz.,
the length of the intervals were short), this simpliﬁcation might not introduce considerable
error to our performance estimations. In the latter test case we have generated the problems
with a generator in a way that J∗(x0) was known concerning the constructed problems.
The performance presented in the tables of the section, more precisely the average, Ei,
and the standard deviation, σ(Ei), of the error in iteration i were computed as follows
Ei = 1
N
N
X
j=1

G i
j −J∗(x0)

,
and
σ(Ei) =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
j=1
h
G i
j −J∗(x0) −Ei
i2
,
where G i
j denotes the cumulative incurred costs in iteration i of sample j and N is the
sample size. Unless indicated otherwise, the sample contained the results of 100 simulation
trials for each parameter conﬁguration (which is associated with the rows of the tables).
As it was shown in Section 2.5.2, RAP-MDPs are aperiodic, moreover, they have the
APP property, therefore, discounting is not necessary to achieve a well-deﬁned problem.
However, in order to enhance learning, it is still advised to apply discounting and, therefore,
to give less credit to events which are farther from the current decision point. Heuristically,
we suggest applying α = 0.95 for middle-sized RAPs (e.g., with few hundreds of tasks),
such as the problems of the benchmark dataset, and α = 0.99 for large-scale RAPs (e.g.,
with few thousands of tasks), such as the problems of the industry-related experiments.
4.2 Benchmark Datasets
The ADP based resource control approach was tested on Hurink’s benchmark dataset
(Hurink, Jurisch, & Thole, 1994). It contains ﬂexible job-shop scheduling problems (FJSPs)
with 6–30 jobs (30–225 tasks) and 5–15 machines. The applied performance measure is
the maximum completion time of the tasks (makespan). These problems are “hard”, which
means, e.g., that standard dispatching rules or heuristics perform poorly on them. This
dataset consists of four subsets, each subset contains about 60 problems. The subsets (sdata,
edata, rdata, vdata) diﬀer in the ratio of machine interchangeability (ﬂexibility), which is
477

Cs´aji & Monostori
shown in the “ﬂex(ib)” columns in Tables 3 and 2. The columns with label “n iters” (and
“avg err”) show the average error after carrying out altogether “n” iterations. The “std
dev” columns in the tables of the section contain the standard deviation of the sample.
Table 2 illustrates the performance on some typical dataset instances and also gives
some details on them, e.g., the number of machines and jobs (columns with labels “mcs”
and “jbs”). In Table 3 the summarized performance on the benchmark datasets is shown.
benchmark conﬁguration
average error (standard deviation)
dataset
inst
mcs
jbs
ﬂex
1000 iters
5000 iters
10 000 iters
sdata
mt06
6
6
1
1.79 (1.01) %
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
sdata
mt10
10
10
1
9.63 (4.59) %
8.83 (4.37) %
7.92 (4.05) %
sdata
la09
5
15
1
5.67 (2.41) %
3.87 (1.97) %
3.05 (1.69) %
sdata
la19
10
10
1
11.65 (5.21) %
6.44 (3.41) %
3.11 (1.74) %
sdata
la39
15
15
1
14.61 (7.61) %
12.74 (5.92) %
11.92 (5.63) %
sdata
la40
15
15
1
10.98 (5.04) %
8.87 (4.75) %
8.39 (4.33) %
edata
mt06
6
6
1.15
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
edata
mt10
10
10
1.15
18.14 (8.15) %
12.51 (6.12) %
9.61 (4.67) %
edata
la09
5
15
1.15
7.51 (3.33) %
5.23 (2.65) %
2.73 (1.89) %
edata
la19
10
10
1.15
8.04 (4.64) %
4.14 (2.81) %
1.38 (1.02) %
edata
la39
15
15
1.15
22.80 (9.67) %
17.32 (8.29) %
12.41 (6.54) %
edata
la40
15
15
1.15
14.78 (7.14) %
8.08 (4.16) %
6.68 (4.01) %
rdata
mt06
6
6
2
6.03 (3.11) %
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
rdata
mt10
10
10
2
17.21 (8.21) %
12.68 (6.81) %
7.87 (4.21) %
rdata
la09
5
15
2
7.08 (3.23) %
6.15 (2.92) %
3.80 (2.17) %
rdata
la19
10
10
2
18.03 (8.78) %
11.71 (5.78) %
8.87 (4.38) %
rdata
la39
15
15
2
24.55 (9.59) %
18.90 (8.05) %
13.06 (7.14) %
rdata
la40
15
15
2
23.90 (7.21) %
18.91 (6.92) %
14.08 (6.68) %
vdata
mt06
6
6
3
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
0.00 (0.00) %
vdata
mt10
10
10
5
8.76 (4.65) %
4.73 (2.23) %
0.45 (0.34) %
vdata
la09
5
15
2.5
9.92 (5.32) %
7.97 (3.54) %
4.92 (2.60) %
vdata
la19
10
10
5
14.42 (7.12) %
11.61 (5.76) %
6.54 (3.14) %
vdata
la39
15
15
7.5
16.16 (7.72) %
12.25 (6.08) %
9.02 (4.48) %
vdata
la40
15
15
7.5
5.86 (3.11) %
4.08 (2.12) %
2.43 (1.83) %
Table 2: Performance (average error and deviation) on some typical benchmark problems.
Simple dispatching rules (which are often applied in practice), such as greedy ones,
perform poorly on these benchmark datasets. Their average error is around 25–30 %. In
contrast, Table 3 demonstrates that using our method, the average error is less than 5 %
after 10 000 iterations. It shows that learning is beneﬁcial for this type of problems.
The best performance on these benchmark datasets was achieved by Mastrolilli and
Gambardella (2000).
Though, their algorithm performs slightly better than ours, their
solution exploits the (unrealistic) specialties of the dataset, e.g., the durations do not depend
on the resources; the tasks are linearly ordered in the jobs; each job consists of the same
478

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
number of tasks. Moreover, it cannot be easily generalized to stochastic resource control
problem our algorithm faces. Therefore, the comparison of the solutions is hard.
benchmark
1000 iterations
5000 iterations
10 000 iterations
dataset
ﬂexib
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
sdata
1.0
8.54 %
5.02 %
5.69 %
4.61 %
3.57 %
4.43 %
edata
1.2
12.37 %
8.26 %
8.03 %
6.12 %
5.26 %
4.92 %
rdata
2.0
16.14 %
7.98 %
11.41 %
7.37 %
7.14 %
5.38 %
vdata
5.0
10.18 %
5.91 %
7.73 %
4.73 %
3.49 %
3.56 %
average
2.3
11.81 %
6.79 %
8.21 %
5.70 %
4.86 %
4.57 %
Table 3: Summarized performance (average error and deviation) on benchmark datasets.
4.3 Distributed Sampling
The possible parallelizations of the presented method was also investigated, i.e., the speedup
of the system relative to the number of processors (in practise, the multiprocessor envi-
ronment was emulated on a single processor, only). The average number of iterations was
studied, until the system could reach a solution with less than 5% error on Hurink’s dataset.
The average speed of a single processor was treated as a unit, for comparison.
In Figure 9 two cases are shown: in the ﬁrst case (rear dark bars) each processor could
access a common global value function. It means that each processor could read and write
the same global value function, but otherwise, they searched (sampled the search space)
independently. Figure 9 demonstrates that in this case the speedup was almost linear.
In the second case (front light bars) each processor had its own (local) value function
(which is more realistic in a strongly distributed system, such as a GRID) and, after the
search had been ﬁnished, these individual value functions were compared. Therefore, all of
the processors had estimations of their own, and after the search, the local solution of the
best performing processor was selected. Figure 9 shows the achieved speedup in case we
stopped the simulation if any of the processors achieved a solution with less than 5% error.
Figure 9: Average speedup relative to the number of processors.
The experiments show that the computation of the resource allocator function can be
eﬀectively distributed, even if there is not a commonly accessible value function available.
479

Cs´aji & Monostori
4.4 Industry Related Tests
We also initiated experiments on a simulated factory by modeling the structure of a real
plant producing customized mass-products, especially, light bulbs. These industrial data
came from a huge national industry-academia project, for research and development of solu-
tions which support manufacturing enterprises in coping with the requirements of adaptive-
ness, realtimeness and cooperativeness (Monostori, Kis, K´ad´ar, V´ancza, & Erd˝os, 2008).
optimal
1000 iterations
5000 iterations
10 000 iterations
slack ratio
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
50 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
40 %
0.12 %
0.10 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
30 %
0.52 %
0.71 %
0.24 %
0.52 %
0.13 %
0.47 %
20 %
1.43 %
1.67 %
1.11 %
1.58 %
1.05 %
1.49 %
10 %
5.28 %
3.81 %
4.13 %
3.53 %
3.91 %
3.48 %
0 %
8.89 %
5.17 %
7.56 %
5.04 %
6.74 %
4.83 %
Table 4: Summarized performance relative to the optimal slack ratio of the system.
Since, we did not have access to historical data concerning past orders, we used randomly
generated orders (jobs) with random due dates. The tasks and the process-plans of the jobs,
however, covered real products; as well as, the resources covered real machine types. In this
plant the machines require product-type dependent setup times, and there are some special
tasks that have durations but that do not require any resources to be processed, for example,
cooling down. Another feature of the plant is that at some previously given time points
preemptions are allowed, e.g., at the end of a work shift. The applied performance measure
was to minimize the number of late jobs, viz., jobs that are ﬁnished after their due dates,
and an additional secondary measure was to minimize the total cumulative lateness, which
can be applied to compare two schedules having the same number of late jobs.
During these experiments the jobs and their due dates were generated by a special
parameterizable generator in a way that optimally none of the jobs were late. Therefore, it
was known that J∗(x0) = 0 and the error of the algorithm was computed accordingly.
In the ﬁrst case, shown in Table 4, we applied 16 machines and 100 random jobs, which
altogether contained more than 200 tasks. The convergence properties were studied relative
to the optimal slack ratio. In the deterministic case, e.g., the slack ratio of a solution is
Φ(ϱ) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
B(Ji) −F(Ji)
B(Ji) −A(Ji),
where n is the number of jobs; A(J) and B(J) denote the release and due date of job J,
respectively; F(J) is the ﬁnish time of job J relative to solution ϱ, namely, the latest ﬁnish
time of the tasks in the job. Roughly, the slack ratio measures the tightness of the solution,
for example, if Φ(ϱ) > 0, then it shows that the jobs were, on the average, ﬁnished before
their due dates and if Φ(ϱ) < 0, then it indicates that, approximately, many jobs were late.
If Φ(ϱ) = 0, then it shows that if all the jobs meet their due dates, each job was ﬁnished
480

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
just in time, there were no spare (residual) times. Under the optimal slack ratio we mean
the maximal achievable slack ratio (by an optimal solution). During the experiments these
values were known because of the special construction of the test problem instances. We
applied the optimal slack ratio to measure how “hard” a problem is. The ﬁrst column of
Table 4 shows the optimal slack ratio in percentage, e.g., 30 % means a 0.3 slack ratio.
conﬁguration
1000 iterations
5000 iterations
10 000 iterations
machs
tasks
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
avg err
std dev
6
30
4.01 %
2.24 %
3.03 %
1.92 %
2.12 %
1.85 %
16
140
4.26 %
2.32 %
3.28 %
2.12 %
2.45 %
1.98 %
25
280
7.05 %
2.55 %
4.14 %
2.16 %
3.61 %
2.06 %
30
560
7.56 %
3.56 %
5.96 %
2.47 %
4.57 %
2.12 %
50
2000
8.69 %
7.11 %
7.24 %
5.08 %
6.04 %
4.53 %
100
10000
15.07 %
11.89 %
10.31%
7.97 %
9.11 %
7.58 %
Table 5: Summarized performance relative to the number of machines and tasks.
In the second case, shown in Table 5, we have ﬁxed the optimal slack ratio of the
system to 10 % and investigated the convergence speed relative to the plant size (number
of machines) and the number of tasks. In the last two experiments (conﬁguration having
2000 and 10 000 tasks) only 10 samples were generated, because of the long runtime. The
computation of 10 000 iterations took approximately 30 minutes for the 50 machines & 2000
tasks conﬁguration and 3 hours for the 100 machines & 10000 tasks conﬁguration1.
The results demonstrate that the ADP and adaptive sampling based solution scales well
with both the slack ratio and the size (the number of machines and task) of the problem.
4.5 Clustering Experiments
The eﬀectiveness of clustering on industry-related data was also studied. We considered
a system with 60 resources and 1000 random tasks distributed among 400–500 jobs (there
were approximately 1000–2000 precedence constraints). The tasks were generated in a way
that, in the optimal case, none of them are late and the slack ratio is about 20 %.
First, the tasks were ordered according to their slack times and then they were clustered.
We applied 104 iterations on each cluster. The computational time in case of using only
one cluster was treated as a unit. In Table 6 the average and the standard deviation of the
error and the computational speedup are shown relative to the number tasks in a cluster.
The results demonstrate that partitioning the search space not only results in a greater
speed, but it is often accompanied by better solutions. The latter phenomenon can be ex-
plained by the fact that using smaller sample trajectories generates smaller variance that is
preferable for learning. On the other hand, making too small clusters may decrease the per-
formance (e.g., making 50 clusters with 20 tasks in the current case). In our particular case
applying 20 clusters with approximately 50 tasks in each cluster balances good performance
(3.02 % error on the average) with remarkable speedup (approximately 3.28 ×).
1. The tests were performed on a Centrino (Core-Duo) 1660Mhz CPU (≈P4 3GHz) with 1Gb RAM.
481

Cs´aji & Monostori
conﬁguration
performance after 10 000 iterations per cluster
clusters
tasks
late jobs
avg error
std dev
speed
speedup
1
1000
28.1
6.88 %
2.38 %
423 s
1.00 ×
5
200
22.7
5.95 %
2.05 %
275 s
1.54 ×
10
100
20.3
4.13 %
1.61 %
189 s
2.24 ×
20
50
13.9
3.02 %
1.54 %
104 s
3.28 ×
30
33
14.4
3.15 %
1.51 %
67 s
6.31 ×
40
25
16.2
3.61 %
1.45 %
49 s
8.63 ×
50
20
18.7
4.03 %
1.43 %
36 s
11.65 ×
Table 6: Speedup and performance relative to the number of tasks in a cluster.
As clustering the tasks represents a considerable help in dealing with large-scale RAPs,
their further theoretical and experimental investigations are very promising.
4.6 Adaptation to Disturbances
In order to verify the proposed algorithm in changing environments, experiments were
initiated and carried out on random JSPs with the aim of minimizing the makespan. The
adaptive features of the system were tested by confronting it with unexpected events, such
as: resource breakdowns, new resource availability (Figure 10), new job arrivals or job
cancellations (Figure 11). In Figures 10 and 11 the horizontal axis represents time, while
the vertical one, the achieved performance measure. The ﬁgures were made by averaging
hundred random samples. In these tests 20 machines were used with few dozens of jobs.
During each test episode there was an unexpected event (disturbance) at time t = 100.
After the change took place, we considered two possibilities: we either restarted the iterative
scheduling process from scratch or continued the learning, using the current (obsolete) value
function. We experienced that the latter approach is much more eﬃcient.
An explanation of this phenomenon can be that the value functions of control policies
and the optimal value function Lipschitz continuously depend on the transition-probability
and the immediate-cost functions of the MDP (Cs´aji, 2008). Therefore, small changes in
the environmental dynamics cannot cause arbitrary large changes in the value function.
The results of our numerical experiments, shown in Figures 10 and 11, are indicative of the
phenomenon that the average change of the value function is not very large. Consequently,
applying the obsolete value function after a change took place in the MDP is preferable
over restarting the whole optimization process from scratch. This adaptive feature makes
ADP/RL based approaches even more attractive for practical applications.
The results, black curves, show the case when the obsolete value function approximation
was applied after the change took place. The performance which would arise if the system
recomputed the whole schedule from scratch is drawn in gray in part (a) of Figure 10.
One can notice that even if the problem became “easier” after the change in the envi-
ronment (at time t = 100), for example, a new resource was available (part (b) of Figure 10)
or a job was cancelled (part (b) of Figure 11), the performance started to slightly decrease
(κ started to slightly increase) after the event. This phenomenon can be explained by the
fact that even in these special cases the system had to “explore” the new conﬁguration.
482

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
Figure 10: The black curves, κ(t), show the performance measure in case there was a re-
source breakdown (a) or a new resource availability (b) at t = 100; the gray
curve, κ’(t), demonstrates the case the policy would be recomputed from scratch.
Figure 11: The black curves, κ(t), show the performance measure during resource control
in case there was a new job arrival (a) or a job cancellation (b) at time t = 100.
5. Concluding Remarks
Eﬃcient allocation of scarce, reusable resources over time in uncertain and dynamic environ-
ments is an important problem that arises in many real world domains, such as production
control. The paper took a machine learning (ML) approach to this problem. First, a general
resource allocation framework was presented and, in order to deﬁne reactive solutions, it
was reformulated as a stochastic shortest path problem, a special Markov decision process
(MDP). The core idea of the solution was the application of approximate dynamic program-
ming (ADP) and reinforcement learning (RL) techniques with Monte Carlo simulation to
stochastic resource allocation problems (RAPs). Regarding compact value function repre-
sentations, two approaches were studied: hash table and support vector regression (SVR),
specially ν-SVRs. Afterwards, several additional improvements, such as the application of
limited-lookahead rollout algorithms in the initial phases, action space decomposition, task
clustering and distributed sampling, were suggested for speeding up the computation of a
good control policy. Finally, the eﬀectiveness of the approach was demonstrated by results
of numerical simulation experiments on both benchmark and industry-related data. These
experiments also supported the adaptive capabilities of the proposed method.
483

Cs´aji & Monostori
There are several advantages why ML based resource allocation is preferable to other
kinds of RAP solutions, e.g., classical approaches. These favorable features are as follows:
1. The presented RAP framework is very general, it can model several resource manage-
ment problems that appear in practice, such as scheduling problems, transportation
problems, inventory management problems or maintenance and repair problems.
2. ADP/RL based methods essentially face the problem under the presence of uncer-
tainties, since their theoretical foundation is provided by MDPs. Moreover, they can
adapt to unexpected changes in the environmental dynamics, such as breakdowns.
3. Additionally, for most algorithms theoretical guarantees of ﬁnding (approximately)
optimal solutions, at least in the limit, are known. As demonstrated by our experi-
ments, the actual convergence speed for RAPs is usually high, especially in the case
of applying the described improvements, such as clustering or distributed sampling.
4. The simulation experiments on industrial data also demonstrate that ADP/RL based
solutions scale well with the workload and the size of the problem and, therefore, they
can be eﬀectively applied to handle real world RAPs, such as production scheduling.
5. Domain speciﬁc knowledge can also be incorporated into the solution. The base policy
of the rollout algorithm, for example, can reﬂect a priori knowledge about the structure
of the problem; later this knowledge may appear in the exploration strategy.
6. Finally, the proposed method constitutes an any-time solution, since the sampling can
be stopped after any number of iterations. By this way, the amount of computational
time can be controlled, which is also an important practical advantage.
Consequently, ML approaches have great potentials in dealing with real world RAPs, since
they can handle large-scale problems even in dynamic and uncertain environments.
Several further research directions are possible. Now, as a conclusion to the paper, we
highlight some of them. The suggested improvements, such as clustering and distributed
sampling, should be further investigated since they resulted in considerable speedup. The
guidance of reinforcement learning with rollout algorithms might be eﬀectively applied in
other applications, as well. The theoretical analysis of the average eﬀects of environmental
changes on the value functions could result in new approaches to handle disturbances.
Another promising direction would be to extend the solution in a way which also takes risk
into account and, e.g., minimizes not only the expected value of the total costs but also the
deviation, as a secondary criterion. Finally, trying to apply the solution in a pilot project
to control a real plant would be interesting and could motivate further research directions.
6. Acknowledgments
The work was supported by the Hungarian Scientiﬁc Research Fund (OTKA), Grant No.
T73376, and by the EU-funded project “Coll-Plexity”, Grant No. 12781 (NEST). Bal´azs
Csan´ad Cs´aji greatly acknowledges the scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
The authors express their thanks to Tam´as Kis for his contribution related to the tests on
industrial data and to Csaba Szepesv´ari for the helpful discussions on machine learning.
484

Adaptive Stochastic Resource Control
