U-Trustworthy Models.
Reliability, Competence, and Confidence in Decision-Making
Ritwik Vashistha,1 * Arya Farahi, 1
1 The Univertsity of Texas at Austin

Abstract
With growing concerns regarding bias and discrimination
in predictive models, the AI community has increasingly
focused on assessing AI system trustworthiness. Conven-
tionally, trustworthy AI literature relies on the probabilistic
framework and calibration as prerequisites for trustworthi-
ness. In this work, we depart from this viewpoint by propos-
ing a novel trust framework inspired by the philosophy lit-
erature on trust. We present a precise mathematical defi-
nition of trustworthiness, termed U-trustworthiness, specif-
ically tailored for a subset of tasks aimed at maximizing a
utility function. We argue that a model’s U-trustworthiness is
contingent upon its ability to maximize Bayes utility within
this task subset. Our first set of results challenges the prob-
abilistic framework by demonstrating its potential to favor
less trustworthy models and introduce the risk of mislead-
ing trustworthiness assessments. Within the context of U-
trustworthiness, we prove that properly-ranked models are
inherently U-trustworthy. Furthermore, we advocate for the
adoption of the AUC metric as the preferred measure of
trustworthiness. By offering both theoretical guarantees and
experimental validation, AUC enables robust evaluation of
trustworthiness, thereby enhancing model selection and hy-
perparameter tuning to yield more trustworthy outcomes.
Introduction
In recent years, the AI community has expressed growing
concerns about bias and discrimination embedded within
predictive models. These concerns have prompted a shift in
focus from performance to fairness and trustworthiness as a
pilar of model evaluation (Mehrabi et al. 2021; Eshete 2021).
While fairness aims to mitigate disparate impacts on differ-
ent population groups, trustworthiness encompasses broader
notions of model reliability, robustness, competence, gen-
eralization, explainability, transparency, reproducibility, pri-
vacy, security, and accountability (Serban et al. 2021; von
Eschenbach 2021; Li et al. 2023; Broderick et al. 2023). In
this paper, by borrowing from the philosophy literature, we
develop a theory of trustworthiness from a lens of reliability
and competence and investigate its implications for classifi-
cation models in the context of decision-making.
*Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Our theoretical framework is rooted in competence-based
trust theories, which draws from the philosophical literature
on the relation between trust, reliability, and competence
(Baier 1986; Jones 1996; Ryan 2020; Alvarado 2022). Epis-
temologically, trust is commonly understood as the act of
placing confidence in a source of information or in an agent
to perform a task based on its perceived competence to be ac-
curate and reliable. In the context of predictive models and
decision-making, this notion translates into our reliance on a
model that consistently demonstrates competence in achiev-
ing its goal in a decision-making task. In competence-based
trust theories, trust is described through a three-part relation-
ship “A trusts B to do X,” (Horsburgh 1960; Ryan 2020; von
Eschenbach 2021; Alvarado 2022; Afroogh 2023) where, in
our case, A represents the end-user, B represents the predic-
tive model, and X specifies the delegated task. What counts
as good reasons for trusting is a matter of considerable de-
bate, but at the very least, that B is capable or competent to
do X is necessary for A to trust B. Since our interest lies in
the trustworthiness of B rather than A’s trust, we reframe the
investigation as a two-part inquiry, “B is trustworthy to do
X.” Formalizing this inquiry provides a foundation for trust-
worthiness evaluation and is the primary aim of this work.
To achieve this goal, this work first constructs a math-
ematical framework for trustworthy evaluation; to evaluate
the claim of whether “B is trustworthy to do X,” where B
is a predictive model, and X is a subset of decision-making
tasks. Establishing trustworthiness requires guaranteeing re-
liance, competence, and confidence. Reliance reflects the
user may rely on the model to achieve its promised goal(s),
while competence provides theoretical guarantees that there
exists no other model that can achieve a superior result in
task X. Confidence is a statistical claim that, given the exist-
ing empirical evidence, B is competent.
Traditionally, probabilistic assessment or risk calibration
has been considered a crucial aspect of model trustworthi-
ness evaluation, as it ensures that predicted risks align with
observed frequencies of outcomes and provides some infor-
mation regarding the model uncertainty (Crowson, Atkin-
son, and Therneau 2016; Pleiss et al. 2017; H´ebert-Johnson
et al. 2018; La Cava, Lett, and Wan 2022; Afroogh 2023).
However, its role in determining the trustworthiness of a
model, as described above, remains an open question. Draw-
ing upon competence-based trust theories, we challenge this
arXiv:2401.02062v1  [stat.ML]  4 Jan 2024

prevailing belief that risk calibration alone is sufficient or
necessary to establish trustworthiness (Barocas, Hardt, and
Narayanan 2017; La Cava, Lett, and Wan 2022; Afroogh
2023). To do so, we analyze the limitations of calibration
and closely related metrics as a standalone condition for
trustworthiness. This work reveals the shortcomings of the
probabilistic framework (Afroogh 2023) in capturing the
holistic notion of model trustworthiness. Additionally, our
results uncover a limitation in the traditional metrics, such
as accuracy, that are used for model comparison and hyper-
parameter tuning. We find that relying solely on accuracy or
related measures can lead to misleading conclusions regard-
ing the trustworthiness of a model.
Related Work
Trustworthy AI has garnered widespread attention from
practitioners, policy-makers, and AI developers alike, so-
lidifying its position as a frontrunner in addressing press-
ing societal concerns surrounding AI bias and discrimina-
tion (Li et al. 2023). While prediction accuracy is undoubt-
edly an essential aspect of trustworthiness, factors such as
robustness, transparency, reproducibility, replicability, sta-
bility, interpretability, and consistency are integral to trust-
worthiness (Broderick et al. 2023). These aspects elucidate
how an AI system performs under varying conditions, en-
sures unbiased predictions, and maintains consistent outputs
(Varshney 2019; Serban et al. 2021; von Eschenbach 2021).
Calibration, which is closely related to the probability the-
ory of trust (Afroogh 2023), is claimed to be as one of the
key requirements for trustworthy AI and used by many prac-
titioners (e.g., Safavi, Koutra, and Meij 2020; Tomani and
Buettner 2021). By calibrating a classifier, it can be ensured
that the predicted probabilities of the classifier more accu-
rately reflect the true likelihood of each outcome, thereby
increasing trust in the model’s predictions. The literature in
trustworthiness has heavily skewed on evaluating calibration
of a predictive model (Murphy and Winkler 1977; Naeini,
Cooper, and Hauskrecht 2015; Kumar, Sarawagi, and Jain
2018; Widmann, Lindsten, and Zachariah 2019) and devel-
oping post-processing calibration methods for risk manage-
ment (e.g., Murphy and Winkler 1977; Platt et al. 1999;
Zadrozny and Elkan 2002; Guo et al. 2017).
However, AI trustworthiness literature extends beyond the
probabilistic paradigm. In this context, interpretability is
proposed as a gateway to establishing trust (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016). Moreover, trustworthiness is further ex-
plored through the creation of diverse trust scores (Jiang
et al. 2018; Wong, Wang, and Hryniowski 2020), as well as
learning-based approaches like enhancing the loss function
(Luo et al. 2021). Our work reexamines the foundation of
AI trustworthiness and proposes a novel, competence-based
trustworthiness paradigm.
Problem Setup
In our study, we aim to investigate the concept of trustwor-
thiness in the context of “B (a predictive model) is trustwor-
thy to do X (a decision-making task).” This work is only
concerned with a subset of tasks whose goal is to maximize
a class of utility functions, hence U-Trustworthiness. We de-
fine a U-trustworthy model as one that possesses a decision
boundary (reliability) capable of achieving maximum util-
ity among all possible models (competence) with empirical
guarantees (confidence). Next, we formalize this definition.
Let x ∈X, Y ∈{0, 1}, bY ∈{0, 1} denote the input
features, binary outcome, and binary decision respectively;
and D be the distribution generating (x, Y ) ∈X × {0, 1}
pairs. fθ : X →[0, 1] is a predictive model that maps in-
puts from X to a score used to assign a binary decision. θ
specifies the parameters of the model that will be learned
through a learning process. This work is not concerned with
parameter estimation, so we assume that the model and its
parameters are fixed, thus suppressing the notation θ from
now on. As we will see later, the output of f does not
need to be interpreted probabilistically. However, after cali-
bration, it can take probabilistic meaning. When necessary,
we assume a finite test sample, denoted with S. Finally, let
U(x, Y, bY ) : X × {0, 1} × {0, 1} →R be a utility function
that quantifies the desirability or usefulness of a decision
outcome. Higher utility values indicate more desirable out-
comes. See the Supplementary Materials for examples and
discussion on the distinction between Y and bY .
The ultimate goal of decision-making is to assign bY based
on the output of f(x) and observed covariates x such that it
maximizes the expected value of the utility function. The
optimal decision rule is determined by solving
g∗(x; U, f) = arg max
bg∈G EY,x∼D
h
U(x, Y, bY ) | f
i
.
(1)
where bY might be dependent on some decision rule bg. Sup-
pose the solution to 1 has the form of
bY =
1
if f(x) ≥bg(x; U)
0
otherwise.
(2)
This implies that there is a decision rule, denoted with
bg(x; U), that separates the prediction scores into regions as-
sociated with the binary decision assignment. We denote
the maximum expected utility with U (m), where U (m)
f
=
maxbg∈G EY,x∼D
h
U(x, Y, bY ) | f
i
. As we shall see, for this
class of problems, we can provide generalizable trustwor-
thiness guarantees. We acknowledge that there is no funda-
mental reason that the solution to Equation (1) must take
the form of Equation (2); on the contrary, we can imagine
examples in which the solution to Equation (2) cannot be
expressed in the form of Equation (1).
U-Trustworthy
Next, we seek to formalize the proposition “B is trustworthy
to do X” for the class of tasks defined in Equation (1) with
the solution of the form in Equation (2).
Definition 1 (U-Trustworthy). A model, denoted with ef(.),
is U-trustworthy if U (m)
f
≤U (m)
e
f
∀U ∈U and ∀f ∈F.
In simpler terms, for a class of utility functions U, a U-
trustworthy model is one that can be relied on to achieve the

highest possible expected utility. For all U ∈U, there exists
a decision boundary of a U-trustworthy model effectively
separates the input space into regions that lead to the most
desirable outcome.
Reliance.
The reliance condition is met when a solution to
Equation (1) exists. This implies that model ef(.) can be re-
lied on to accomplish the intended goal, setting the founda-
tion for competency, which represents the maximum achiev-
able utility across all possible models.
Competency.
The competency condition is met when
U (m)
f
≤U (m)
e
f
holds for all U ∈U and f ∈F. This ensures
that no other model can attain a higher expected maximum
utility than what model ef(.) achieves.
Confidence.
By subjecting the claim U (m)
f
≤U (m)
e
f
to hy-
pothesis testing using the test data in S, users can establish
statistical confidence in the trustworthiness of the model.
Bayes Classifier
Definition 2. Let f ⋆(x) denotes the Bayes classifier, imply-
ing f ⋆(x) = P(Y = 1 | x); and Y ⋆and g⋆(x; U) be the
optimal Bayes decision and decision rule associated with the
utility function U.
Proposition 1. Let f ⋆(x) be the Bayes classifier, then
U (m)
f
≤U (m)
f ⋆
∀U ∈U and ∀f ∈F.
This statement arises from the definition of the Bayes
classifier. This proposition implies that the utility of the
Bayes classifier equals that of a U-trustworthy classifier.
Consequently, we arrive at the following theorem:
Theorem 1. Model ef(.) is U-trustworthy, if U (m)
f ⋆
=
U (m)
e
f
∀U ∈U and ∀f ∈F.
Although this theorem may seem a straightforward conse-
quence of our definitions, it carries two significant implica-
tions. It implies that the maximum utility of a U-trustworthy
model aligns with that of the Bayes classifier. Additionally, it
streamlines the process of hypothesis testing when the null
hypothesis is U (m)
f ⋆
= U (m)
e
f
. For the rest of this work, we
adopt the notation of Table 1.
Table 1: Notation.
Type
Classifier
Decision Rule
Assignment
Max Utility
Bayes
f ⋆(x)
g⋆(x)
Y ⋆
U (m)
f⋆
U-trustworthy
e
f(x)
eg(x)
eY
U (m)
e
f
Generic
f(x)
bg(x)
bY
U (m)
f
Limitations of Calibration Requirements in
U-Trustworthiness Assessment
Calibration, which is closely related to the probability the-
ory of trust (Afroogh 2023), is claimed to be as one of the
key requirements for trustworthy AI and used by many prac-
titioners (e.g., Safavi, Koutra, and Meij 2020; Tomani and
Buettner 2021). In this section, we revisit this claim.
Definition 3. Model f(x) is calibrated if P(Y
= 1 |
f(x) = α) = α for all α ∈[0, 1].
We generated 400 data sets each with a sample size of
15,000 and evaluated the performance of three classifiers:
(1) the Bayes classifier (blue), (2) a properly-ranked classi-
fier (green), and (3) a calibrated adversarial classifier (red).
See Supplementary Materials for the full description of the
simulation.
Results.
Properties of these classifiers are illustrated in
Figure 1. The top-left present the calibration plot for these
classifiers. The Bayes, by definition, and calibrated, by
construction, classifiers are calibrated; while the properly-
ranked classifier is miscalibrated. At first glance, this might
lead to the conclusion that the calibrated and Bayes classi-
fiers are more trustworthy for decision-making tasks, which
could be reinforced by considering popular metrics like
mean calibration error, Brier score (Brier 1950), and accu-
racy.
Upon closer examination of the utility curve (top row),
we observe that both the Bayes and properly-ranked clas-
sifiers have similar maximum utilities, while the calibrated
classifier consistently exhibits lower maximum utility. This
suggests that the properly-ranked classifier may be a U-
trustworthy model, while the calibrated classifier falls short.
This example motivates us to reevaluate the significance of
calibration in trustworthy evaluation and to study the char-
acteristics of U-trustworthy models more closely.
We also examine NetTrust score (Wong, Wang, and
Hryniowski 2020). NetTrust score ranks the Properly ranked
classifier higher than calibrated and Bayes classifier, which
can lead to a misleading conclusion that the Bayes classifier
is suboptimal.
Recapitulation.
This example highlights two key find-
ings:
• The notion that a calibrated classifier is inherently trust-
worthy is challenged, as we demonstrate that a calibrated
classifier can actually be incompetent, hence untrustwor-
thy. Conversely, a mis-calibrated classifier can exhibit
trustworthy behavior. This counterintuitive result empha-
sizes the need to reconsider the traditional assumption
that calibration is a precursor to trustworthiness.
• The limitations of existing performance measures be-
come evident in the context of trustworthy evaluation. We
reveal that these measures fall short in accurately assess-
ing the which classifier is trustworthy. This highlights the
importance of reassessing evaluation metrics in capturing
the nuanced aspects of trustworthiness.
Characteristics of U-trustworthy Classifiers
Definition 4 (Properly-Ranked Classifier). Let a classifier
fPR(.) be a properly-ranked classifier if
∀x1, x2 ∈X
f ⋆(x1) > f ⋆(x2) ⇒fPR(x1) > fPR(x2)
f ⋆(x1) = f ⋆(x2) ⇒fPR(x1) = fPR(x2)
.

Figure 1: Performance of three models under different criteria. Top row: Calibration plot (left). Utility comparison using
0-1 loss (middle) as a function of decision threshold. Utility comparison using a general utility function as a function of
decision threshold (right). The confidence bands represent the 16th and 84th percentiles of 400 data realizations. Bottom row:
Distribution of Brier score (left), Accuracy(middle), NetTrustScore (right) under 400 data realizations.
Theorem 2 (U-Competency Theorem). Suppose for the util-
ity class U with a solution of the form Equation (2). Any
properly-ranked classifier is a U-trustworthy classifier with
respect to sample S with |S| < ∞.
This theorem has two important implications. First, if the
solution to the general problem of Equation (1) that is as-
sociated with the utility class U can be expressed with the
form in Equation (2), where there is a decision boundary
above which bY = 1 and below which bY = 0, then any
properly-ranked classifier is U-trustworthy. This provides
competency criteria. A properly-ranked classifier, even with
an incorrect risk estimation, is competent for the decision-
making of the class described here. Theorem 2 indicates
that U-trustworthiness can be achieved without calibration
or proper risk estimation. Hence, for this class of problems,
calibration alone is neither a necessary nor a sufficient con-
dition for a classifier to be U-trustworthy.
While properly-ranked classifiers possess desirable prop-
erties, they do not encompass the most general class of U-
trustworthy classifiers. The following proposition serves as
an example in this regard.
Proposition 2. Suppose a group indicator G splits S into
two non-overlapping subsets. Then, if, for each group, the
properly-ranked classifier condition is satisfied, then the
classifier is U-trustworthy.
According to the proposition, if the sample S can be split
into two non-overlapping subsets based on a group indicator
G, and within each group separately, we get the correct rank-
ing, then the classifier is U-trustworthy. However, it is im-
portant to note that the properly-ranked condition may not be
satisfied when comparing data points across the two groups.
Therefore, while the properly-ranked condition is sufficient,
it is not necessary for a classifier to be U-trustworthy. In gen-
eral, however, we do not consider the classifiers in Propo-
sition 2 as U-trustworthy unless the grouping is known or
is learned. If such grouping exists, but it is unknown, ad-
ditional search and considerations on the user’s side are re-
quired to guarantee U-trustworthiness.
Cost-sensitive trustworthy classifiers
Let U be a class cost-sensitive utility functions that are given
by a weighted combination of the four fundamental popula-
tion quantities closely related to elements of the “confusion
matrix” - true positives, false positives (a.k.a. type-I error),
false negatives (a.k.a. type-II error) and true negatives as de-
fined below 








TP = I(Y = 1, bY = 1 | x),
FP = I(Y = 0, bY = 1 | x),
FN = I(Y = 1, bY = 0 | x),
TN = I(Y = 0, bY = 0 | x),
(3)
where I is the indicator function.
Definition 5. The cost-sensitive utility family is defined as
U({aij}) = a11TP −a01FP −a10FN + a00TN.
(4)
where aij ≥0 for all i, j ∈{0, 1}.
Example 1. The 0-1 loss function belongs to the family of
cost-sensitive utility functions.

This is straightforward to show by setting a11 = a00 = 1
and a10 = a01 = 0. This is equivalent to 0-1 loss function.
Lemma 1. The decision rule for the Bayes classifier is
g⋆=
a01 + a00
a11 + a00 + a10 + a01
This lemma is the reliability condition that suggests for
cost-sensitive utility function that there exists a solution of
form Equation (2). We also note that this class of utility func-
tions is characterized by the coefficients aij, which in prin-
ciple can be functions of x, where x represents additional
contextual information. For example, consider the utility as-
sociated with the survival of young teens, which might be
higher compared to older individuals in certain scenarios.
Similarly, the costs associated with the passing away of in-
dividuals could also vary based on contextual factors.
Theorem 3. Let U be the cost-sensitive utility class.
Properly-ranked classifiers are U-trustworthy.
Equity-aware trustworthy classifiers
There has been a surge of interest in formulating utility func-
tions that simultaneously account for both efficiency and eq-
uity. In this section, we utilize a class of equity-aware func-
tions proposed by Kleinberg et al. (2018) and demonstrate
that properly-ranked classifiers are U-trustworthy. First, we
define the compatibility criteria and a class of equity-aware
utility functions.
Definition 6 (Compatibility). The utility function ϕ is com-
patible with the Bayes classifier if the following natural
monotonicity condition holds. If S and S′ are two sets of X
of the same size, sorted in descending order of f ⋆(x), and
f ⋆(x) of the ith item in S is at least as large as f ⋆(x) of the
ith item in S′ for all i, then ϕ(Si) ≥ϕ(S′
i).
Definition 7 (Equity-aware Utility Class). Suppose there
is a binary variable G that splits the data into two non-
overlapping subsets. The equity-aware utility family is de-
fined as
U(ϕ, γ) = ϕ(S) + γ(S),
(5)
where S ⊆X, ϕ(S) ∈Φ is compatible with Bayes probabil-
ity, and γ(S) ∈Γ is monotonically increasing in the number
of items in S who have G = 1.
The first term characterizes the benefit while the second
term characterizes the fairness. An equity-aware decision-
maker seeks to maximize U(S) = ϕ(S) + γ(S). This util-
ity function class and the following Lemma follow that of
Kleinberg et al. (2018).
Lemma 2 (Theorem 1, Kleinberg et al. (2018)). For some
choice of K0, from group G = 0, and K1, from group G =
0, with K0 + K1 = K, the solution that maximizes utility
in the G = 0 and in the G = 1 group are the ones with the
highest f ⋆(x).
This lemma provides the reliability condition.
Theorem 4. Let U be an equity-aware utility class.
Properly-ranked classifiers are U-trustworthy.
AUC and Its Relation to U-Trustworthiness
An ROC curve provides a graphical representation of classi-
fier performance by comparing the true positive rate (TPR)
to the false positive rate (FPR) across various decision
thresholds. AUC – the area under the ROC curve – is a nu-
merical measure of the classifier’s performance. It quantifies
the classifier’s ability to rank a randomly selected positive
example higher than a randomly chosen negative example,
given that the positive class is ranked higher than the nega-
tive class (Hanley and McNeil 1982).
Pairwise estimator of AUC.
In probabilistic terms, the
AUC represents the probability of correctly ranking the two
examples (Hanley and McNeil 1982). The pairwise estima-
tor for the AUC is commonly known as the Wilcoxon-Mann-
Whitney statistic (Agarwal et al. 2005). It is calculated by
comparing all possible pairs of observations, where one ob-
servation belongs to class 1 and the other belongs to class
0,
AUC(f) = E

H(f(x+) −f(x−))

.
(6)
(x+, x−) is a pair on i.i.d. draws from class 1 and zero. The
expected value is computed over {(x+, x−) ∈D+ × D−}
where D+/−is the distribution over data with class 1/0. H(.)
is the Heaviside step function which returns 1 if the argu-
ment is positive, 1/2 if the argument is zero, and 0 otherwise.
An estimator of this expected value is
[
AUC(f) =
1
|S+||S−|
|S+|
X
i=1
|S−|
X
j=1
H(f(xi) −f(xj))
(7)
where S+/−= {x ∈S : y = 1/0}. The properties of
this estimator are studied extensively in the literature (Airola
et al. 2011; Agarwal et al. 2005; Cortes and Mohri 2004).
Theorem 5 (U-Competency Measure). Let U be a utility
class with a decision boundary of Equation (2). If and only
if fPR is a properly-ranked classifiers then AUC(f ⋆) =
AUC(fPR).
Theorem 5 provides a theoretical justification for why
AUC may be used as a measure of competency, implying
that if the AUC of a classifier is equal to the Bayes clas-
sifier, then the classifier is competent to achieve the max-
imume possible expected utility. Unlike the measures con-
structed by the confusion matrix entries, the AUC is the pre-
cision of pairwise rankings (Hanley and McNeil 1982). A
properly-ranked classifier produces the same ranking as the
Bayes classifier. Hence, both classifiers are expected to ex-
hibit similar AUC performance, as implied from the above
theorem, while their error rate, accuracy, and calibration can
differ significantly (Cortes and Mohri 2004; Huang and Ling
2005).
The literature regarding the suitability of AUC as an eval-
uation metric is subject to varying opinions. For instance,
Huang and Ling (2005) have supported the use of AUC by
providing evidence that it has greater discriminative abil-
ity than accuracy, while Lobo, Jim´enez-Valverde, and Real
(2008) have cautioned against using AUC, primarily because
it does not assess goodness-of-fit or might result in poor

calibration. However, our results contend that in applica-
tions where utility maximization is a priority, AUC or poten-
tially other ranking quality metrics may be more favorable.
These applications include tasks where the relative order-
ing of actions is crucial for decision-making, such as rec-
ommendation systems (Schr¨oder, Thiele, and Lehner 2011),
information retrieval (Nguyen et al. 2016), or task delegation
(Farzaneh et al. 2023). In the next section, we provide em-
pirical evidence that utilizing AUC and accuracy can lead to
different results, and when utility maximization is a priority,
one should rely on AUC.
Applications and Empirical Evidence
In this section, we illustrate various practical benefits of us-
ing AUC as a performance measure in the context of U-
trustworthiness. We provide empirical evidence that AUC
outperforms popular performance metrics such as accuracy
in model comparison and hyperparameter tuning. We recall
the definition of U-trustworthiness, a model that achieves the
highest maximum expected utility. So a model with the high-
est maximum expected utility is more trustworthy. When not
mentioned, we use a 0-1 utility function U(f) = TP+TN.
We note that the decision threshold, bg, might be different
across the models. We first solve for bg by varying the de-
cision threshold, and then report the maximum utility. We
additionally use a more complex utility function to illustrate
the results hold as long as it belongs to the class of utility
function discussed above. Our prediction task is to predict
which household is a homeowner using the 2019 American
Housing Survey data. See Supplementary Materials for the
description of data sets and additional experiments.
Table 2: Model selection results.
Measure
RF
LR
kNN
AUC
0.797 ± 0.003
0.788 ± 0.004
0.785 ± 0.003
Accuracy
0.731 ± 0.005
0.736 ± 0.005
0.731 ± 0.004
Brier
0.182 ± 0.001
0.177 ± 0.002
0.180 ± 0.002
NetTrust
0.580 ± 0.001
0.591 ± 0.002
0.598 ± 0.002
U (m)
0.744 ± 0.004
0.739 ± 0.004
0.735 ± 0.004
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Mean Predicted Probability
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction of Positives
Calibration Plot
Random Forest
Logistic Regression
KNN
Perfectly calibrated
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Cost Coefficient
0.71
0.72
0.73
0.74
0.75
Maximum Utility
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
Figure 2: Left: Average calibration curve. Right: The per-
formance of Logistic Regression, selected based on accura-
cy/Brier score, and Random Forest, chosen based on AUC,
for a class of utility functions specified by parameter c, cost
coefficient. The average maximum utility on the test sample
for 20 random test/train realizations and the shaded region
is 68% error on the mean.
Model Selection
During model selection, conflicting performance measures
can lead to uncertainty about which metric should be given
priority. To address this issue, we argued that AUC should be
the preferred choice if the ultimate goal is U-trustworthiness.
This study compares several popular performance measures
across different models using data from the homeownership
dataset. Additional experiments and results can be found
in the Supplementary Materials. For model comparison, we
consider four metrics: AUC, Brier score, accuracy, and Net-
Trust score, and three models: Logistic Regression, Random
Forest, and k-nearest neighbors. The evaluation results are
presented in Table 2. Notably, relying solely on the accuracy
or Brier score would select Logistic Regression, and Net-
Trust would select kNN as the preferred model. This con-
clusion could be further reinforced by examining the calibra-
tion properties of Logistic Regression compared to Random
Forest. (the left panel of Figure 2). However, when consid-
ering AUC, Random Forest emerges as the preferred choice.
Given that the ultimate goal is to maximize expected util-
ity (U-trustworthy setting), Random Forest should be the
preferred choice, as it aligns with the AUC criteria for U-
trustworthiness. This observation highlights the importance
of AUC as a reliable measure for model selection when con-
sidering the ultimate objective of maximizing expected util-
ity.
The second experiment evaluates the above claim but for
a class of utility functions. We now explore the maximum
expected utility for a class of utility functions specified by
parameter c, defined as
U[c] = TP + TN −c × FP −0.5c × FN.
(8)
In the right panel of Figure 2, we present the average max-
imum utility on the test sample for 20 random test/train re-
alizations. The model selected based on AUC consistently
outperforms the model with lower AUC but higher Brier or
accuracy score in terms of expected maximum utility. This
demonstrates the significance of AUC as a reliable measure
for model comparison in the context of U-trustworthiness.
Hyper-parameter Tuning
Tuning of hyper-parameters is an integral part of the model-
building procedure. Next, we focus on a k-nearest neighbor
classifier with k as the hyperparameter and investigate the
impact of tuning based on different performance measures.
Specifically, we compare the use of AUC and accuracy
as the performance metrics during the tuning process. To
conduct our analysis, we employ a homeownership dataset
and perform 20-fold cross-validation to fine-tune k. We
evaluated the model’s performance using both AUC and
accuracy metrics during the tuning process. The left panel of
Figure 3 shows the results of tuning using AUC (blue curve)
and accuracy (red curve) as performance measures. Next,
we maximize the utility by varying the decision threshold.
We use a non-trivial utility function that changes with the
age of the householder. Let the reward of TP = TN
be 1, and the costs of the FP and FN be C(FP) =
(1 −Age/100) × 3 and C(FN) = (1 −Age/100) × 0.5,

and the utility function for the test sample is U
=
1
ntest
Pntest
i=1
h
I(yi −ˆfi) × R(xi, yi) −|yi −ˆfi| × C(xi, yi)
i
.
Finally, we train two models, one with k = 150 and one
with k = 200, and compute and report the utility of the test
sample by varying the decision threshold (The right panel of
Figure 3). We find that selecting the hyperparameter based
on AUC (k = 200) leads to a model with higher utility than
one with a hyperparameter based on accuracy (k = 150).
This observation is evident in both graphs, emphasizing the
superiority of AUC as a performance measure when aiming
to maximize utility. To account for randomness, we repeated
the experiment with 200 random data realizations, and the
line shows the mean, and the shaded region is the standard
error on the mean. This result supports our claim that AUC is
superior to accuracy, where utility maximization is the even-
tual goal, even for nontrivial utility functions.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
n_neighbors
0.779
0.780
0.781
0.782
0.783
0.784
Mean CV AUC
0.7305
0.7310
0.7315
0.7320
0.7325
0.7330
Mean CV Accuracy
0.63
0.64
0.65
0.66
0.67
0.68
0.69
0.70
Decision Threshold
0.532
0.533
0.534
0.535
0.536
0.537
Utility
k = 150
k = 200
Figure 3: Hyper-parameter Tuning of k-NN. Left: Average
cross-validation performance vs. n neighbors. The op-
timal k for (accuracy) AUC is (150) 200, indicated by the
dotted horizontal line. Right: Utility as a function of deci-
sion threshold for k = 150 (red curve) and k = 200 (blue
curve). The shaded region represents the standard error on
mean based on 200 random test/train realizations.
Discussion
AUC has faced criticism for its limited consideration of pre-
dicted probability values and the model’s goodness-of-fit
(Lobo, Jim´enez-Valverde, and Real 2008). Other findings in-
dicate that AUC surpasses metrics built on the elements of
the confusion matrix, such as accuracy or the Matthew cor-
relation coefficient, in terms of discriminative power (Huang
and Ling 2005; Halimu, Kasem, and Newaz 2019). Our re-
sults provide a clear guideline for selecting the appropri-
ate model performance measure, specifically focusing on
AUC, within the class of problems concerned with util-
ity maximization. The findings suggest that for such prob-
lems, calibration and goodness-of-fit, although closely re-
lated measures are neither necessary nor sufficient condi-
tions for U-trustworthiness. It is important to note that U-
trustworthiness definition does not apply to problems requir-
ing an unbiased risk estimate or involving objectives other
than maximizing utility. While our proposed trust frame-
work can be extended to a broader class of problems, we
acknowledge its limitations in generalizing beyond utility
maximization concerns.
Limitations
This work comes with certain limitations that should be ac-
knowledged and provides a path for future studies. First and
foremost, we recall that our framework is grounded on the
competence-based trust theory; but there are other theoreti-
cal trust/trustworthiness frameworks proposed and used by
the AI community (Toreini et al. 2020; Serban et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2023). Our framework establishes a foundation on
hypothesis testing the claim “A trusts B to do X.” To sim-
plify the problem further, we remove trustor A from the
traditional three-part trust relation. This is the first step to-
wards establishing full, three-part trustworthiness. Gaining
users’ trust requires additional domain-specific efforts in
utilizing the predictive model’s outcomes (Chatzimparmpas
et al. 2020; Boyd et al. 2023; Mittermaier, Raza, and Kvedar
2023). Secondly, the theorem presented in this work are for
binary classifiers and do not generalize to the multi-class
case. Furthermore, the U-trustworthy evaluation framework
proposed in this work is specifically designed for a subset
of tasks that seek to maximize the expected utility with so-
lutions in the form of Equation (2). Consequently, this defi-
nition of trustworthiness should not be generalized to other
tasks, such as risk mitigation or population inference, po-
tentially rendering a model trustworthy for one set of tasks
but not others. Lastly, the use of AUC as an evaluation met-
ric in this work presents its own challenges, as the AUC of
a U-trustworthy model remains unknown, making hypothe-
sis testing difficult. Further research is needed to understand
better the relationship between the U-trustworthy AUC and
performing hypothesis testing, that is related to the last re-
quirement of U-trustworthy which is confidence.
Distinction with Fairness
We differentiate between the fairness concepts and trust-
worthiness, as defined here, specifically in the context of
the equity-aware utility class. A predictive model that as-
signs rankings or a risk score to individuals cannot be char-
acterized as fair or unfair. Fairness becomes relevant when
this ranking is employed to make decisions about individ-
uals (who get the load, who will be released on bail, who
will be hired). In the absence of decision-making and a de-
cision rule, fairness does not come into play. Conversely,
U-trustworthy refers to an inherent characteristic of a pre-
dictive model with respect to a utility function class. It asks
whether the maximum achievable utility can be realized for
every utility function belonging to this class or not, but
which utility function should be used is a concern of fair-
ness.
Conclusion
In this work, grounded in the philosophy of trust, we inte-
grate competence-based trust theory with the evaluation of
predictive models. This work establishes a foundation for
modeling and quantifying the trustworthiness of predictive
models in decision-making contexts. The outcome of this
effort promotes responsible AI development, enhances re-
liability and competence, and fosters user confidence, con-
tributing to the advancement of ethical and transparent AI
systems. Moreover, embracing a non-motives-based per-
spective aligns with the quest for objectivity and reliability
in AI technologies, paving the way for ethically sound and
socially beneficial applications of AI systems.
