Energy Saving Additive Neural Network
Arman Afrasiyabi1⋆, Ozan Yildiz1⋆, Baris Nasir1, Fatos T. Yarman Vural1 and A. Enis Cetin2
1 Computer Engineering Department, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey

⋆Equal contribution
2 Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey

Abstract—In recent years, machine learning techniques based
on neural networks for mobile computing become increasingly
popular. Classical multi-layer neural networks require matrix
multiplications at each stage. Multiplication operation is not
an energy efﬁcient operation and consequently it drains the
battery of the mobile device. In this paper, we propose a new
energy efﬁcient neural network with the universal approximation
property over space of Lebesgue integrable functions. This
network, called, additive neural network, is very suitable for
mobile computing. The neural structure is based on a novel vector
product deﬁnition, called ef-operator, that permits a multiplier-
free implementation. In ef-operation, the ”product” of two real
numbers is deﬁned as the sum of their absolute values, with
the sign determined by the sign of the product of the numbers.
This ”product” is used to construct a vector product in RN. The
vector product induces the l1 norm. The proposed additive neural
network successfully solves the XOR problem. The experiments
on MNIST dataset show that the classiﬁcation performances of
the proposed additive neural networks are very similar to the
corresponding multi-layer perceptron and convolutional neural
networks (LeNet).
I. INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) have been shown to
solve many real world problems, such as, computer vision,
natural language processing, recommendation systems and
many other ﬁelds [1]. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
architectures achieve human performance in many computer
vision problems including image classiﬁcation tasks [2], [3],
[4], [5], [6]. However, the number of parameters in these high-
performance networks ranges from millions to billions which
require computers capable of handling high computational
complexity, high energy and memory size. Consequently, the
minimal computational environment for such a network is a
desktop computer with a powerful CPU and a dedicated high-
end GPU.
Recent developments in VLSI industry create powerful mo-
bile devices which can be used in many practical recognition
applications. ANNs are already being used in drones and
unmanned aerial vehicles for ﬂight control, path estimation
[7], obstacle avoidance and human recognition like abilities
[8] (DJI Phantom 4).
However, the current structure of the ANNs, especially, deep
networks, prohibits us to implement these algorithms effec-
tively on mobile devices due to high energy requirements. A
typical neuron needs to perform three main tasks to produce an
output: (i) an inner product operation involving multiplication
of inputs by weights, (ii) addition, and (iii) pass the result of
the inner product through an activation function. According
to the [9], the multiplication operation is the most energy
consuming operation.
In this paper, we propose an l1 norm based energy efﬁcient
neural network, called additive neural network, that replaces
the multiplication operation with a new energy efﬁcient opera-
tor, called ef-operator. Instead of multiplications, we use sign
multiplications and addition operations in a typical neuron.
The sign multiplication of two real numbers is a simple
bit operation. An addition consumes relatively lower energy
compared to a regular multiplication as shown in [9] in most
processors. Our object recognition experiments on MNIST
and CIFAR datasets show that we are able to match the
performance of the state of the art neural networks without
performing any other changes on the ANN structure.
In Section 2, we review the related work in energy efﬁcient
neural network design. In Section 3, we deﬁne a new vector
product and the corresponding operator, called ef-operator. In
Section 4, we introduce the additive neural network, based on
the ef-operator. In Section 5, we made a brief analysis for the
existence and convergence problems of the proposed additive
neural network. Section 6, provides the experimental results
to compare the performance of the proposed additive neural
network with multi-layer perceptron and convolutional neural
networks. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Due to large size of the parameter space, artiﬁcial neural
networks are generally computationally prohibitive and be-
come inefﬁcient in terms of energy consumption and mem-
ory allocation. Several approaches from different perspectives
have been proposed to design computationally efﬁcient neural
network structures to handle high computational complexity.
We ﬁrst introduced the l1 norm based vector product for
some image processing applications in 2009 [10], [11], [12],
[13]. We also proposed the multiplication free neural network
structure in 2015 [14]. However, the recognition rate was
arXiv:1702.02676v1  [cs.NE]  9 Feb 2017

below 10%of a regular neural network. In this article, we
are able to match the performance of regular neural networks
by introducing a scaling factor to the l1 norm based vector
product and new training methods. We are only 0.034% below
the recognition rate of a regular neural network in MNIST
dataset.
Other solutions to energy efﬁcient neural networks include
dedicated software for a speciﬁc hardware, i.e. neuromorphic
devices [15], [16], [17], [18], [19]. Although such approaches
reduces energy consumption and memory usage, they require
special hardware. Our neural network framework can be
implemented in ordinary microprocessors and digital signal
processors.
Sarwar et al. used the error resiliency property of neural net-
works and proposed an approximation to multiplication opera-
tion on artiﬁcial neurons for energy-efﬁcient neural computing
[20]. They approximate the multiplication operation by using
the Alphabet Set Multiplier (ASM) and Computation Sharing
Multiplication (CSHM) methods. In ASM, the multiplication
steps are replaced by shift and add operators which are
performed by some alphabet deﬁned by a pre-computer bank.
This alphabet is basically a subset of the lower order multiplies
of the input. The multiplies that are not exist in the computed
subset are approximated by rounding them to nearest existing
multiplies. This method reduces the energy consumption since
addition and bit shifting operations are much efﬁcient than the
multiplication. Therefore, the smaller sized alphabets result
in a more efﬁcient architecture. Additionally, they deﬁne a
special case called Multipler-less Artiﬁcial Neuron (MAN), in
which there is only one alphabet for each layer. This method
provides more energy efﬁciency with a minimum accuracy
loss. It should be noted that this method is applied on test
stages, therefore, the training step still uses the conventional
method.
Han et al. proposed a model that reduces both computational
cost and storage by feature learning [9]. Their approach
consists of three steps. In the ﬁrst step, they train the network
to discriminate important features from redundant ones. Then,
they remove the redundant weights, and occasionally neurons,
according to a threshold value to obtain a sparser network. This
step reduces the test step’s cost. At the ﬁnal step they retrain
the network to ﬁne tune the remaining weights. They state that
this step is much more efﬁcient than using the ﬁxed network
architecture. They tested the proposed network architecture
with ImageNet and VGG-16. The parameter size for these
networks reduces between ×9 to ×13 without any accuracy
loss.
Abdelsalam et al. approximate the tangent activation func-
tion using the Discrete Cosine Transform Interpolation Filter
(DCTIF) to run the neural networks on FPGA boards efﬁ-
ciently [21]. They state that DCTIF approximation reduces the
computational complexity at the activation function calculation
step by performing simple arithmetic operations on stored
samples of the hyperbolic tangent activation function and input
set. The proposed DCTIF architecture divides the activation
function into three regions, namely, pass, process and sat-
uration regions. In the pass region the activation function
is approximated by y = x and in the saturation region the
activation function is taken as y = 1. The DCTIF takes place
in the process region. Parameters of the transformation should
be selected carefully to ﬁnd a balance between computational
complexity and accuracy. They have shown that the proposed
method achieve signiﬁcant decrease on energy consumption
while keeping the accuracy difference within 1% with con-
ventional method.
Rastegari et al. proposes two methods to provide efﬁciency
on CNNs. The ﬁrst method, Binary-Weight-Networks, approx-
imates all the weight values to binary values [22]. In this way
the network needs less memory (nearly ×32). Since the weight
values are binary, convolutions can be estimated by only
addition and subtraction, which eliminates the main power
draining multiplication operation. Therefore, this method both
provides energy efﬁciency and faster computations.
The second method proposed by them is called XNOR-
Networks where both weights and inputs to the convolutional
and fully connected layers are approximated by binary values.
This extends the earlier proposed method by replacing addition
and subtraction operations with XNOR and bitcounting opera-
tions. This method offers ×58 faster computation on CPU on
average. While this method enables us to run CNNs on mobile
devices, it costs 12% loss accuracy on average.
III. A NEW ENERGY EFFICIENT OPERATOR
Let x and y be two vectors in Rd. We deﬁne an new
operator, called ef-operator, as the vector product of x and
y as follows;
x ⋄y :=
d
X
i=1
sign(xi × yi)(|xi| + |yi|),
(1)
which can also be represented as follows;
x ⋄y :=
d
X
i=1
sign(xi)yi + sign(yi)xi,
(2)
where x = [x1, . . . , xd]T , y = [y1, . . . , yd]T ∈Rd. The
new vector product operation does not require any multiplica-
tions. The operation (xi × yi)(|xi| + |yi|) uses the sign of the
ordinary multiplication but it computes the sum of absolute
values of xi and yi. ef-operator, ⋄, can be implemented
without any multiplications. It requires summation, unary
minus operation and if statements which are all energy efﬁcient
operations.
Ordinary inner product of two vectors induces the ℓ2 norm.
Similarly, the new vector product induces a scaled version of
the ℓ1 norm:
x ⋄x =
d
X
i=1
sign(xi × xi)(|xi| + |xi|) = 2||x||1
(3)
Therefore, the ef-operator performs a new vector product,
called ℓ1 product of two vectors, deﬁned in Eq. 1.

We use following notation for a compact representation of
ef-operation of a vector by a matrix. Let x ∈Rd and W ∈
Rd×M be two matrices, then the ef-operation between W and
x is deﬁned as follows;
x ⋄W :=
x ⋄w1
. . .
x ⋄wM
T ∈RM,
(4)
where wj is jth column of W for j = 1, 2, . . . , M.
IV. ADDITIVE NEURAL NETWORK WITH EF-OPERATOR
We propose a modiﬁcation to the representation of a neuron
in a classical neural network, by replacing the vector product
of the input and weight with the l1 product deﬁned in ef-
operation. This modiﬁcation can be applied to a wide range
of artiﬁcial neural networks, including multi-layer perceptrons
(MLP), recurrent neural networks (RNN) and convolutional
neural networks (CNN).
A neuron in a classical neural network is represented by the
following activation function;
f(xW + b),
(5)
where W ∈Rd×M, b∈RM are weights and biases, respec-
tively, and x ∈Rd is the input vector.
A neuron in the proposed additive neural network is repre-
sented by the activation function, where we modify the afﬁne
transform by using the ef-operator, as follows;
f(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b),
(6)
where ⊙is element-wise multiplication operator, W ∈
Rd×M, a, b ∈RM are weights, scaling coefﬁcients and biases,
respectively, and x ∈Rd is the input vector. The neural
network, where each neuron is represented by the activation
function deﬁned in Eq. 6, is called additive neural network.
Comparison of Eq. 5 and Eq. 6 shows that the proposed
additive neural networks are obtained by simply replacing the
afﬁne scoring function (xW+b) of a classical neural network
by the scoring function function deﬁned over the ef-operator,
(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b). Therefore, most of the neural networks
can easily be converted into the additive network by just
representing the neurons with the activation functions deﬁned
over ef-operator, without modiﬁcation of the topology and
the general structure of the optimization algorithms of the
network.
A. Training the Additive Neural Network
Standard back-propagation algorithm is applicable to the
proposed additive neural network with small approximations.
Back-propagation algorithm computes derivatives with respect
to current values of parameters of a differentiable function
to update its parameters. Derivatives are computed iteratively
using previously computed derivatives from upper layers due
to chain rule. Activation function, f, can be excluded during
these computations for simplicity as its derivation depends
on the speciﬁc activation function and choice of activation
function does not affect the remaining computations. Hence,
the only difference in the additive neural network training
is the computation of the derivatives of the argument, (a ⊙
(x ⋄W) + b), of the activation function with respect to the
parameters, W, a, b, and input, x, as given below:
∂(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b)
∂a
= Diag(x ⋄W),
(7)
(∂a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b)
∂b
= IM,
(8)
∂(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b)
∂xi
=


a1(sign(Wi,1) + 2Wi,1δ(xi))
...
aM(sign(Wi,M) + 2Wi,Mδ(xi))


≈a ⊙sign(wi),
(9)
∂(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b)
∂Wi,j
=(aj(sign(xi) + 2xiδ(Wi,j)))ej
≈ajxiej,
(10)
where a, b ∈RM, and W ∈Rd×M are the parameters
of the hidden layer, x ∈Rd is the input of the hidden layer,
ei ∈RM is the ith element of standard basis of RM, wi is
the ith column of W, sign(wi) = PM
j=1 sign(Wi,j)ej for
i = 1, . . . , M, δ is the dirac delta function.
The above derivatives can be easily calculated using the
following equation suggested by [23]:
d
dxsign(x) = 2δ(x).
(11)
Approximations to derive the above equation are based on
the fact that δ(x) = 0, almost surely.
B. Existence and Convergence of the Solution in Additive
Neural Network
In this section, ﬁrst, we show that the proposed additive
neural network satisﬁes the universal approximation property
of [24], over the space of Lebesgue integrable functions. In
other words. there exists solutions computed by the proposed
additive network, which is equivalent to the solutions obtained
by activation function with classical vector product. Then,
we make a brief analysis for the convergence properties of
the back propagation algorithm when the vector product is
replaced by the ef-operators.
1) Universal Approximation Property: The universal ap-
proximation property of the suggested additive neural network
is to be proved for each speciﬁc form of the activation
function. In the following proposition, we sufﬁce to provide
the proofs of universal approximation theorem for linear and
ReLU activation functions, only. The proof (if it exits) for a
general activation function requires a substantial amount of
effort, thus it is left to a future work.
Proposition IV.1. The additive neural network, deﬁned by the
neural activation function with identity

f(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b) = a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b,
(12)
or an activation function with Rectiﬁed Linear Unit,
f(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b) = ReLU(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b),
(13)
is dense in L1(In).
In order to prove the above proposition, the following two
lemmas are proved ﬁrst:
Lemma IV.2. If activation function f is taken as identity (as in
Eq. 12), then there exist additive neural networks, deﬁned over
the ef-operator, which can compute f(x) = sign(yT x + b),
for any y ∈Rd and b ∈R.
Proof. Constructing an additive neural network, deﬁned over
ef-operator, is enough to prove the lemma. We can construct
explicitly a sample network for any given y ∈Rd and b ∈R.
One such network consists of four hidden layers for d = 2,
this network can easily extended into higher dimensions. Let
x be [x0, x1]T and y be [y0, y1]T , then four hidden layers with
following parameters can compute f(x) = sign(yT x + b).
• Hidden layer 1,
a1 = [y1, y1, y1, y2, y2, y2]T ,
b1 = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]T ,
W1 =
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2

.
• Hidden layer 2,
a2 = [1],
b2 = [b],
W2 =
1
1
−2
1
1
−2T .
• Hidden layer 3,
a3 =

1
1
T ,
b3 =
0
0T ,
W3 =

2
1

.
• Hidden layer 4,
a4 = [1],
b4 = [0],
W4 =

1
−1
T
.
The function computed by this network can be simpliﬁed
using the fact that, ∀a, u ∈R and ∀b ∈R+,
sign(a(u + bsign(u))) = sign(au).
(14)
Then, the hidden layers h1, h2, h3 and h4 can be represented
as follows;
h1 = a1 ⊙(x ⋄W1) + b1 =


y1(x1 + sign(x1))
y1(x1 + sign(x1))
y1(x1 + 2sign(x1))
y2(x2 + sign(x2))
y2(x2 + sign(x2))
y2(x2 + 2sign(x2))


h2 = a2 ⊙(h1 ⋄W2) + b2 = yT x + b
h3 = a3 ⊙(h2 ⋄W3) + b3 =

h2 + 2sign(h2)
h2 + sign(h2)

h4 = a3 ⊙(h3 ⋄W4) + b4 = sign(yT x + b)
(15)
Lemma IV.3. If the function g(x) can be computable with
activation function
f(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b) = a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b,
(16)
then there exist an additive neural network architectures
with a Rectiﬁed Linear Unit activation function,
f(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b) = ReLU(a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b),
(17)
which can also compute g(x).
Proof. This lemma can be proven using the following simple
observations,
• Observation 1: If
g(x) = a ⊙(x ⋄w) + b,
(18)
then,
−g(x) = a′ ⊙(x ⋄w′) + b′,
(19)
where a′ = a, w′ = −w, and b′ = −b.
• Observation 2: If
g(x) = a ⊙(x ⋄w) + b,
(20)
then,
g(x) = a′′ ⊙((−x) ⋄w′′) + b′′,
(21)
where a′ = a, w′ = −w, and b′ = b.
• Observation 3: If
g(x) = a ⊙(x ⋄w) + b,
(22)
then,
g(x) = a′′′ ⊙(ReLU(x)⋄w +ReLU(−x)⋄w′′′)+b′′′,
(23)
where a′′′ = a, w′′′ = −w, and b′′′ = b.
Lets assume that there exists an additive neural network,
deﬁned over the ef-operator, using identity as activation func-
tion which can compute the function g(x). We can extend each

Fig. 1: The plots of loss changes in the stochastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) algorithm in the training phase of XOR
problem while using single hidden layer MLP. While the
Figure (1.a) shows the the changes of loss in the network
by using classical score function (c-operator), Figure (1.b)
shows the loss changes in the same network with our proposed
(ef-operator). The results have been obtained by training
the network 200 times in 1000 epochs which are shown by
different colors.
layer using Observation 1, to compute both g(x) and −g(x).
Afterwards, we can replace zeros on the weights introduced
during previous extension on each layer using Observation
3, to replace the activation function with ReLU. This works,
because either ReLU(x) or ReLU(−x) is 0. The modiﬁed
network is an additive neural network with ReLU activation
function, which can compute the function g(x).
Proof of Proposition IV.1. This can be shown by the universal
approximation theorem for bounded measurable sigmoidal
functions [24]. This theorem states that ﬁnite sums of the form
G(x; {αi}N
i=1, {yi}N
i=1, {θi}N
i=1) =
N
X
i=1
αiσ(yT
i x+θi), (24)
are dense in L1(In), where αi, θi ∈R and x, yi ∈Rd for
i = 1, 2, . . . , N. It can be easily shown that sign function
is a bounded sigmoidal function. Lemma IV.2 shows that,
if the activation function is taken as identity, then there exist
networks which compute sign(yT
i x+θi) for i = 1, 2 . . . , N.
Lemma IV.3 shows that there are equivalent networks using
ReLU as the activation function which compute the same func-
tions. These networks can be combined with concatenation of
layers of the additive neural networks to a single network.
Also, proposed architecture contains fully connected linear
layer at the output, and this layer can compute superposition
of the computed sign functions yielding G(x). Since G(x)
can be computable by the additive neural networks, and G(x)
functions are dense in L1(In), then functions computed by the
additive neural networks are also dense in L1(In).
2) Computational efﬁciency: The proposed additive neural
network contains more parameters then the classical neuron
representation in MLP architectures. However, each hidden
layer can be computed using considerably less number of
multiplication operator. A classical neural network, repre-
sented by the activation function f(xW + b), containing
M neurons with d dimensional input, requires d × M many
multiplication operator to compute xW + b. On the other
hand, the additive neural network, represented by the activation
function, f(a⊙(x⋄W)+b) with the same number of neurons
and input space requires M many multiplication operator to
compute a ⊙(x ⋄W) + b. This reduction on number of
multiplications is especially important when input size is large
or hidden layer contains large number of neurons. If activation
function is taken as either identity or ReLU, then output of
this layer can be computed without any complex operations,
and efﬁciency of the network can be substantially increased.
Multiplications can be removed entirely, if scaling coefﬁcients,
a are taken as 1. However, these networks may not represent
some functions, and consequently may perform poorly on
some datasets.
3) Optimization problems: Due to the sign operation per-
formed in each neuron, the ef-operator creates a bunch of
hyperoctants in the cost function at each layer of the additive
neural network. Therefore, the local minima computed at each
layer, depends on the speciﬁc hyperoctant for a set of weights.
The change in the signs results in a jump from a hyperoctant
to another one.
For some datasets, some of the local minima may lie on
the boundaries of the hyperoctants. Since the hyperoctants
are open sets, this may leave some hyperoctands with non-
existing local minima. A gradient based search algorithm may
update the weights such that the algorithm converges to the
local minima on the boundary. If the step size and number
of epochs are increased, then the updated weights leave the
current hyperoctant without converging to a local minima on
the boundary and new set of weights make the algorithm to
converge to a local minima in another hyperoctant. However,
the new hyperoctant may have the same problem.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [25] is used to measure the
ability of the proposed additive neural network, in machine
learning problems. MLP consists of a single input and output
layer and multiple hidden layers. The size and the number of
hidden layers can vary a great deal, depending on the problem
domain. In this research, we use one, two and three hidden
layers, respectively, in two different classiﬁcation problems,
namely XOR problem and character recognition of MNIST
dataset. The input layer receives pattern sample x ∈RD to
the network.
On the other hand, the hidden layer(s) contains biological
inspired units called neurons which learns a new represen-
tations from the input patterns. Each neuron consists of a
scoring function and an activation function. As discussed in
the Section IV, the scoring function is an afﬁne transform in
the form of (xW + b) in the classic neural network where x
and b are the parameters. In this study, we call the widely used
classic scoring function (xW+b) as c-operator. As discussed

Fig. 2: Plots of classiﬁcation accuracies in different architectures with different score functions. Subplots (a) and (b) shows
the results of MLP with 2 and 3 hidden layers using classic c-operator. Subplots (c) and (d) shows the results of MLP with 2
and 3 hidden layers using our proposed ef-operator.
in the Section III and IV, the proposed score function, ef-
oprerator, is an energy efﬁcient alternative of the classical
vector product.
In addition to the score function, each neuron of a hidden
layer also has an activation function that makes the network
nonlinear. Several activation functions such as sigmoid, hyper-
bolic tangent (Tanh) and rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) functions
have been used as the activation function. While some studies
such as [3] have shown that ReLU outperform the others in
most of the cases, we also examined sigmoid and Tanh in the
following experiments. Finally, the last layer of MLP, called
output layer, maps the ﬁnal hidden layer to the scores of the
classes by using its own score function. We used both the
classical c-operator and the new ef-operator at the output layer
to make the ﬁnal decision.
The aim of MLP is to ﬁnd the optimal values for param-
eters W and b using backpropagation [26] and optimization
algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). In order
to implement the network, Tensorﬂow [27], a python library
for numeric computation, is used.
In the ﬁrst experiment, we examine the ability of additive
neural network to partition a simple nonlinear space, solving
the XOR problem. We compare the classical MLP with afﬁne
scoring function and additive neural network with ef-operator.
Since a single hidden layer MLP with c-operator can solve
XOR problem, we used one hidden layer in both classical and
the proposed architectures. Mean squared error is used as cost
function to measure the amount of loss in training phase of the
network, and we ﬁxed the number of neurons in the hidden
layer to 10.
The additive neural network with ef-operator could success-
fully solve the XOR problem and reached to 100% accuracy
in this problem. We also investigate the rate of changes inloss
changes at each epoch. It is also notable that some of the
runs that are shown by colors, do not reach to minimum
values in 1000 epochs. This shows that more epochs is needed
in some runs. Generally, the number of epochs depends on
learning rate and initialization condition, and the ﬁnal epoch
can be determined by some stopping criteria. However, in this
study, we are only interested to see the variations in the cost;
therefore, we ﬁxed the number of epochs to 1000.
Left and right sides of Fig. 1 show the change of loss in
the MLP using c-operator and ef-operator, respectively, with
ReLU as the activation function. We rerun the network for
200 times in 1000 epochs, and used k-fold cross validation to
specify the learning-rate parameter of SGD. Each color of the
plots shows the variations in loss or cost value (x axis) across
the epochs (y axis) in one speciﬁc run of the network. As the
ﬁgure shows, the cost value of the network with our proposed
ef-operator decreases along the epochs and acts similar to
classical afﬁne operator, called c-operator.
In the second experiment, we classiﬁed the digits of MNIST
dataset of [2] which consists of handwritten examples to
examine our proposed additive neural network in multiclass
classiﬁcation problem. MNIST dataset consists of 30,000
training samples and 5,000 test data. Each example is an image
of a digit from 0 to 9. One-hot code is used to encode the class
labels. Each example is an image of size 28 × 28, and each
image is concatenated in a single vector to input the network.
Therefore, the size of the input layer of the network is 784. We
used cross-entropy based cost function and SGD to train the
network. We used 150 number of examples in each iteration
of SGD. In other words, the batch size is equal to 150.
Table I contains the classiﬁcation accuracies of the MLP
architecture using three activation functions: ReLU, Tanh and
Sigmoid with four different learning rates. As the table shows,
our additive neural network over ef-operator reaches to the
performance of classic MLP with c-operator. In other words,
with a slightly sacriﬁcing the classiﬁcation performance we
can use the proposed ef-operator which much more energy-
efﬁcient. Note that, we have not used any regularization
methods such as drop out used by Krizhevsky et al. [3],
because we simply aim to show that our proposed ef-operator
gives the learning ability to the deep MLP. Also Table. I shows
that maximum of the performances have been obtained using
ReLU activation function. We are also interested to see the
variations in the classiﬁcation performances during the epochs
and along the epochs.
With addition to MLP, we have used the proposed ef-
operator to learn the parameters of LeNet-5 [2] to classifying
MNIST dataset. Table I contains the classiﬁcation accuracy of
LeNet-5 architecture that contains two conventional and one
fully connected layer. We trained the network with SGD and
cross-entropy based cost functions as we did on MLP case. It

should be noted that we have used the conventional c-operator
in the output layer of both MLP and LeNet-5 architectures. As
shown in the table, the proposed ef-operator catches up the c-
operator with a small amount of loss.
Figure 2 shows the results of the classiﬁcation accuracies
obtained from MLP based on our proposed ef-operator and
traditionally used c-operator. The performances (shown in the
y axis of the sub ﬁgures) obtained in successive epochs (shown
in the x axis of the sub ﬁgures). In each epoch, the network is
trained with all of the training examples. The plots of the sub-
ﬁgures are obtained using four different learning rates: 0.1,
0.005, 0.001 and 0.0005. Subplots (a) and (b) at the left of
ﬁgure shows the results of c-operator in MLP with 2 and 3
hidden layers respectively, and subplots (c) and (d) shows the
results of our proposed ef-operator. As Figure 2 shows, our
operator effectively increases the classiﬁcation performance
as the number of epochs increases and reaches nearly to the
original linear function.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we propose an energy efﬁcient additive
neural network architecture. The core of this architecture is
the lasso norm based ef-operator that eliminates the energy-
consumption multiplications in the conventional architecture.
We have examined the universal approximation property of the
proposed architecture over the space of Lebesgue integrable
functions and test it in real world problems. We showed that
ef-operator can successfully solve the nonlinear XOR problem.
Moreover, we have observed that with sacriﬁcing 0.39% and
0.69% accuracy, our proposed network can be used in the
multilayer perceptron (MLP) and conventional neural network
respectively to classify MNIST dataset. As a future work, we
plan to test the proposed architecture in the state-of-the-art
deep neural networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A. Enis Cetin’s work was funded in part by a grant from
Qualcomm.
