Energy Disaggregation & Appliance Identification
in a Smart Home: Transfer Learning enables Edge
Computing
M. Hashim Shahab∗, Hasan Mujtaba Buttar∗, Ahsan Mehmood∗, Waqas Aman†, M. Mahboob Ur Rahman∗,
M. Wasim Nawaz‡, Haris Pervaiz§, Qammer H. Abbasi¶,∥
∗Electrical engineering department, Information Technology University, Lahore 54000, Pakistan
† College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Doha, Qatar
‡ Department of Computer Engineering, The University of Lahore, Lahore, 54000, Pakistan
§school of computer science and electronic engineering, University of Essex, UK
¶James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK
∥Artificial Intelligence Research Centre, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE

Abstract—Non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) or energy
disaggregation aims to extract the load profiles of individual
consumer electronic appliances, given an aggregate load profile
of the mains of a smart home. This work proposes a novel
deep-learning and edge computing approach to solve the NILM
problem and a few related problems as follows. 1) We build
upon the reputed seq2-point convolutional neural network (CNN)
model to come up with the proposed seq2-[3]-point CNN model
to solve the (home) NILM problem and site-NILM problem
(basically, NILM at a smaller scale). 2) We solve the related
problem of appliance identification by building upon the state-
of-the-art (pre-trained) 2D-CNN models, i.e., AlexNet, ResNet-18,
and DenseNet-121, which are fine-tuned two custom datasets that
consist of Wavelets and short-time Fourier transform (STFT)-
based 2D electrical signatures of the appliances. 3) Finally,
we do some basic qualitative inference about an individual
appliance’s health by comparing the power consumption of the
same appliance across multiple homes. Low-frequency REDD
dataset is used for all problems, except site-NILM where REFIT
dataset has been used. As for the results, we achieve a maximum
accuracy of 94.6% for home-NILM, 81% for site-NILM, and
88.9% for appliance identification (with Resnet-based model).
Index Terms—energy disaggregation, edge computing, smart
homes, appliance identification, transfer learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Edge computing is a promising paradigm that could en-
able edge-intelligence, could reduce the latency between the
sensing and actuation by closing the control loop within the
consumer electronic devices, and is an enabler for federated
learning on the consumer electronic devices [1]. Thus, edge
computing is anticipated to be an integral component of
artificial intelligence (AI)-empowered consumer electronics
devices in smart homes of the future [2]. It goes without saying
that edge computing will also empower the smart energy
management/conservation systems, which are now considered
This work is supported in part by UK EPSRC under the grant:
EP/X040518/1.
as essential ingredients of smart green cities of future [3]. This
paper focuses on non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM)—
a building block of smart energy management/conservation
systems—as one potential usecase scenario that could im-
mensely benefit from edge computing.
NILM, also known as energy disaggregation is an inverse
problem whereby the goal is to estimate the power con-
sumption profile of multiple individual consumer electronic
appliances, given the aggregate power consumption profile of
the mains of a smart home. As NILM could help identify
the power usage patterns of individual appliances in a home,
it could help realize novel energy conservation schemes for
smart homes. It has been estimated that NILM could help
reduce energy consumption up to 15% in a household setting
[4]. Thus, NILM is being boasted as one key enabler to realize
smart homes and smart cities of the future.
The idea of NILM at the appliance level was first conceived
by G. W. Hart [5]. He modeled each appliance as a finite state
machine, and his proposed NILM algorithm consisted of four
major steps: data collection, event detection, feature extraction,
and load identification. He argued that both steady-state analy-
sis (i.e., fundamental frequency, harmonics, direct current) and
transients analysis (shape, size, duration of transients) provide
valuable information for NILM purpose.
NILM framework has spawned many other interesting prob-
lems. For example, NILM finds its application in future smart
grid systems where power utility companies will charge a
customized tariff to their clients, based upon the appliance-
level power usage data collected from their homes via smart
meters [6]. NILM could also help consumers to cut down
their energy bills by providing them a detailed picture of
the power usage report of appliances in their homes. Some
other examples include: energy audit of buildings, estimating
the remaining useful life of an appliance, inferring the build
quality of an appliance, demand response prediction, inferring
1
arXiv:2301.03018v2  [eess.SP]  14 Mar 2024

the lifestyle of consumers in a home (based upon power
consumption behavior of appliances in a household) etc1.
A. Contributions
The key contributions of this work are as follows:
• We present a novel sequence-to-sequence deep learning
(DL) model—so-called seq2-[3]point model, which ef-
ficiently predicts the power consumption of individual
appliances from power consumption data of the aggregate
signal (of mains of a home, or of a site).
• We do appliance signature classification by customizing
the state-of-the-art 2D convolutional neural networks
(CNN), i.e., AlexNet, ResNet18, DenseNet-121. To this
end, we translate the 1D time-series data (of aggregate
power of the mains and individual appliances) into 2D
(image) data using two different transforms: Wavelet
transform, Short-time Fourier transform (STFT), and their
fusion (Wavelets + STFT).
• We do qualitative inference about an appliance (i.e. the
state it is in, its health and well-being) by analysing its
power consumption patterns.
Note that both proposed DL-based methods for NILM
and appliance classification utilize the transfer learning (TL)
approach where the weights of the convolutional layers are
frozen after training for one appliance is complete, and are
reused to learn the signatures of other appliances. This greatly
reduces the computational requirements of the two proposed
DL-based methods, and makes them amenable for edge com-
puting (by the individual consumer electronic devices). Last
but not the least, low-frequency REDD dataset was used for all
the problems, except the site-NILM task where REFIT dataset
was used.
B. Outline
Section II summarizes the selected related work. Section
III describes the essentials details of the two datasets used,
as well as critical data pre-processing steps performed on
both datasets. Section IV outlines the details of our proposed
seq2-[3]point DL & TL-based method for home-NILM and
site-NILM. Section V presents our proposed DL & TL-based
method for appliance identification. Section VI does some
qualitative inference from the power consumption analysis
of appliances. Section VII provided some selected results.
Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
NILM and its derivative problems have consistently at-
tracted quite some attention during the past two decades.
Further, with the rise of sophisticated machine/deep learning
techniques during the last few years, many researchers have
proposed efficient algorithms that learn/train on huge datasets
with the ultimate aim to exhibit good performance when tested
on unseen data (with potentially different distribution than the
1The interested reader is referred to the survey/review articles [15], [16],
[17], [20] for a more systematic and detailed review of the works on NILM
as well as the existing NILM datasets.
data the algorithm was originally trained on). Given the large
volume of works on NILM, we discuss only selected related
work (most relevant to our work), which is classified into
three broad categories: classical signal processing methods,
machine/deep learning methods, and NILM prototypes.
Signal processing methods: In [8], authors present a new
NILM dataset called REDD dataset, and utilize a variant of
hidden Markov model (HMM) known as factorial HMM to
model the NILM problem. They train the factorial HMM
by means of Baum-Welch expectation-maximization algo-
rithm, and eventually estimate the actual (hidden) state of
each appliance using the observations of the aggregate signal
from the whole-home power monitor. [9] solves the energy
disaggregation problem by using a variant of sparse coding
known as discriminative sparse coding, along with structured
prediction methods. The data used in this work was taken
from a European company Plugwise who collected it from 590
homes (and 10,165 unique devices), over a period of two years.
[18] utilizes a custom equipment to collect data in a residential
setting, and proposes to construct the unique load signature
for each appliance using the first three odd harmonic current
vectors. [31] formulates the NILM problem as a constrained
optimization program that is based on a combinatorial (cross-
entropy) method, and solves it using a new penalty-based
method that utilizes Hamming distance between the current
and previously known states of the appliances. They show-
case the performance of their proposed method on publicly
available REDD and AMPds datasets, [8] and [13].
Machine learning approaches: [14] collects the custom data,
pre-processes it, and utilizes support vector machine (SVM)
and 5-nearest neighbors (NN) algorithms to determine the
switching time (i.e., the time instant when an On/Off transition
occurs) for each appliance, which in turn helps in identification
of the unique load signature of each appliance (and hence the
NILM). [22] exploits the step-changes in the features (active
power, reactive power, power factor) of individual appliances
when they switch on or off, in order to extract the appliance-
level power consumption from the aggregate power signal.
Specifically, authors utilize SVM model and k-NN methods,
and report an accuracy of 90% and 98%, respectively. [36]
utilizes a two-stage fuzzy classifier for load identification that
is based upon the transients information extracted from the
aggregate power signal. They first learn the coarse parameters
of their proposed classifier by means of the fuzzy C-Means
clustering algorithms, and later refine the coarse parameter
estimates by means of the two algorithms: error back propa-
gataion and genetic algorithm. [37] proposes an unsupervised
learning approach that builds upon soft computing methods
(i.e., fuzzy clustering), and tests the performance of their
proposed methods on a controlled dataset (collected via smart
meters of various households) and UK-DALE dataset [38].
Deep learning approaches: [7] proposes a long short-
term memory (LSTM)-based recurrent neural network (RNN)
model to solve the NILM problem for a peculiar scenario
where many appliances could have a very similar load profile;
furthermore, each appliance could be in one of many states
2

at any given time. Authors in [10] train three different deep
learning models, i.e., an RNN , a denoising auto-encoder and
a regression based model, on a custom dataset to perform
the NILM task. [11], on the other hand, utilizes a random
forest classifier to do feature selection for NILM, whereby
the candidate features are eliminated one by one until a few
most relevant features remain are left in the end. Further, [12]
argues that there is a lack of a robust performance metric to
reliably assess the performance of various competing NILM
solutions, proposes one such metric and tests its performance
using the AMPds dataset [13]. [23] utilizes a dataset called
BLUED, computes the spectrogram of the energy data, feeds
it to a convolutional neural network (CNN), that returns the
load signature of each appliance as well as its current state
(On or Off). This work reports an F1 score and an accuracy of
99.8% and 87.9% respectively. [24] utilizes the REFIT dataset,
and proposes the pinball (or, quantile) loss function instead of
more common mean squared error (MSE) loss function on a
custum-built deep neural network, due to the fact that the MSE
function tends to guide the model towards the median of the
distribution, which may not be desired because NILM tends
to penalize large errors.
Up to this point, all the deep learning-based works discussed
above consider a single-task learning approach. That is, each
of the above-mentioned works trains a neural network exclu-
sively for each appliance. However, in reality, more than one
appliance could be simultaneously active at any given time,
thus the inter-dependency between various appliances needs
to be incorporated as well. Such methods called multi-task
deep learning methods are discussed next.
Multi-task deep learning methods: The study [25] takes
this limitation into account and proposes a 1D CNN model
based on popular U-Net architecture, which exploits multi-
label learning and multi-target quantile regression, in order to
learn the power usage and exact state of each of the many
appliances (from the UK-DALE dataset). The work in [26]
constructs a number of time-domain and frequency-domain
sequences from the aggregate power signal, implements deci-
sion trees and feedforward neural network classifiers, and test
the performance of their proposed approach on two datasets:
UK-DALE and REDD. Authors in [27] propose the use of
principal component analysis (PCA) as an effective method for
dimensionality reduction (of aggregate power data) with min-
imal information loss, and showcase its performance for two
NILM datasets, AMPds dataset and a private dataset. The work
[28] considers the BLUED dataset [29], and proposes two
event-detection methods: chi-squared goodness of fit test, and
cepstrum smoothing. Both models are then fine-tuned using the
surrogate-based optimization (SBO) method. [30] utilizes the
PLAID dataset, and makes use of Fryze power theory to split
the activation current into active and non-active components,
which are then transformed into image-like representations
using a Euclidean distance similarity function, and are fed into
a multi-label CNN classifier for appliance identification. [32]
considers the aggregate load profile data collected from a non-
residential setup (basically a hospital building). They propose
two deep learning architectures, i.e., a CNN-based denoising
auto-encoder (dAE) architecture and a vanilla dAE, and test its
performance on their custom collected data. [34] implements
a range of deep learning architectures, i.e., RNNs (both LSTM
and GRU), CNNs (RCNN and residual), and tests them all on
REDD dataset in order to do appliance classification as well
as appliance power consumption estimation. [40] constructs
various kinds of temporal and spectral signatures from the
measured data of aggregate load and feeds them to a two-
stream CNN (built upon AlexNet) which does the feature
extraction and performs load classification. The work [33]
focuses on the design of a light-weight neural network (based
upon seq2point CNN) suitable for edge-computing. To this
end, they propose a multi-task learning-based architecture, do
filter pruning and neuron pruning to lower the memory and
computational costs, and test its accuracy on REDD and UK-
DALE datasets.
NILM prototypes: The work [39] proposes MobileNet, an
edge-computing framework that provides a reliable solution
to NILM as a service problem. There, authors implement and
test a light-weight neural network solution for NILM, and then
compress their model further using TensorflowLite so that the
end users could access the NILM results in real-time on an app
in their smartphones. [19] measures the aggregate steady-state
active power and reactive power consumed by a group of four
appliances using a custom equipment and feeds the collected
data to an artificial neural network (ANN) in order to train
it for NILM of the four appliances. [35] builds and tests an
NILM prototype that collects aggregate power data, detects
transients, separates the power consumption of two appliances
(a fridge and an air conditioner), and displays the results on
a web/GUI interface.
III. NILM DATASETS AND DATA PREPROCESSING
This section first describes the essentials details of the two
public NILM datasets (REDD and REFIT) utilized in this
work2. We then outline the key data preprocessing steps that
were carried out on the two datasets in order to prepare them
for the training of the various proposed deep learning models.
A. Datasets used in this work
1) REDD Dataset [8] : The REDD dataset consists of 119
days of data collected from 10 homes. For each home, the
data was collected from the mains and (up to 20) plug-level
monitors, and is split into three categories: low-frequency data,
high-frequency data, and high-frequency raw data. For each
home, the low-frequency data consists of a time series of the
aggregate power consumed by the home (at a rate of 0.3 Hz)
as well as the time series of the power consumed by each of
the many appliances in the home (at a rate of 1 Hz). The high-
frequency data, on the other hand, consists of the raw current
and voltage waveforms for the mains as well as each of the
appliances (at a rate of 15 KHz), along with the corresponding
UTC timestamps.
2For the interested, other than REDD and REFIT, there are a few more
public NILM datasets too, e.g., BLUED, PLAID, AMPds, UK-DALE.
3

2) REFIT Dataset [21] : The REFIT dataset contains both
aggregate and appliance-level data collected after every 8
seconds, from 20 homes over a period of two years. Unlike
REDD, REFIT dataset provides additional information about
the various composite sites in a house. For example, load
profile of a ”Computer site” implies the aggregate power usage
of two or more appliances, e.g., desktop computer, laptop,
charging stations, printer etc. Metadata about the homes is
also present; it includes the following: number of occupants
in a home, construction year, size of the home, number of
appliances etc.
B. Pre-processing on REDD dataset
Initial investigation of REDD dataset revealed that the
task of synchronizing the time series of the mains with the
time series of various appliances for each home is a non-
trivial task, due to the presence of missing data. This may
be due to loss in power, a malfunctioning equipment, and
network problems. Furthermore, in REDD dataset, the mains
readings are separated by an interval of either 3 or 4 seconds,
whereas appliance readings are separated by 1 second. But,
the time synchronization task requires that the timestamp of
the appliance needs to be matched with the mains timestamp,
for each data point.
Synchronization of mains time-series with the time-series
of appliances: The synchronization challenge prompted us
to redesign/re-arrange the dataset such that each house gets
exactly one file that contains the power readings of the mains
and all the appliances, along with a file that contains the
appliance labels. Let us elaborate this further by taking House
1 as an example. For House 1, A new data file was created
with a total of N +3 columns, where N represents the number
of appliances in House 1. Then, the first 3 columns of the new
data file store the UTC timestamps corresponding to the data
points, and the readings of mains 1 and mains 2, respectively.
The (reference) UTC timestamps were taken from appliance-
level data as timestamps for the appliance-level data were all
in harmony with each other. Thereafter, all those readings
of mains 1 and mains 2 were discarded whose timestamps
were not in harmony with the reference UTC timestamps.
The remaining N columns store the power readings of the
N appliances. For those UTC stamps where mains data was
not available, 0 was placed.
Final Data Files for home-NILM:
The final step was to
create a custom dataset to feed it to the proposed deep learning
model. Because the model takes data of 1 appliance at a time,
each appliance has a test and train csv file containing of 2
columns, where 1st column represents the aggregate signal,
while the 2nd column represents appliance data. The aggregate
signal was constructed by adding the power readings of mains
1 and mains 2 together.
Data Normalization:
Data for each appliance as well
as the aggregate signal was normalized using the standard
normalizing technique: Z = X−µ
σ
, where µ, σ, X, Z represent
the mean of the data, the standard deviation of the data, the
un-normalized data, and normalized data, respectively.
C. Pre-processing on REFIT dataset
As the reader may recall, we utilize the REFIT dataset
in order to do site-NILM—the home-NILM problem toned
down to a smaller scale of a site. As an example, consider
a computer site. The power readings collected from a plug-
monitor connected to a computer site will encapsulate the
power usage by multiple appliances, e.g., desktop computer,
monitors, a speaker system, printer, router etc. Then, the
natural task of site-NILM is to estimate appliance-level power
usage from the site-level aggregate power data. To this end, we
consider a computer site that consists of a desktop computer
and a monitor3. Then, for site-NILM, we construct a training
(test) dataset out of two (one) houses with a computer site
as follows. By applying different thresholds on the aggregate
power X drawn, the computer site could be classified into
being in one of the four classes (states) A, B, C, D. That is,
if X < 10 Watts, then computer site is in class (state) A:
monitor off and computer in sleep. 10 < X < 15 Watts leads
to class B: both monitor and computer in sleep. 15 < X < 80
Watts leads to class C: monitor in use but computer in sleep.
Finally, X > 80 Watts leads to class D: both monitor and
computer in use. Eventually, the training and test dataset have
3 columns each: 1st column contains the aggregate signal
readings, 2nd column contains the appliance readings, and 3rd
column contains the class labels.
IV. HOME-NILM & SITE-NILM
This section succinctly describes the proposed seq2-[3]point
DL method which we utilize to solve the home-NILM problem
and the site-NILM problem.
A. Home-NILM
Seq2-point CNN model. This work builds upon the reputed
seq2-point CNN model of [42] in order to do NILM. A brief
description of the seq2-point model is as follows. Time syn-
chronize the load profile of an appliance with that of the mains,
consider a specific time duration to determine the window
size, and fetch synchronized data vectors/windows for both
the mains and the appliance from their load profiles. Then, the
seq2-point CNN model takes at its input a window/vector of
L data points of the aggregate mains power signal, and returns
a scalar at its output, which is by definition the mid-point of
the corresponding appliance window/vector.
Proposed Seq2-[3]point CNN model. We customize the
seq2-point CNN model such that the model takes as its input a
window/vector of L data points of the aggregate mains power
signal as before, but now returns a vector of three elements
at its output. The elements of output vector are the first
point, mid-point, and last point of the corresponding appliance
window/vector. Another notable difference is that the proposed
seq2-[3]point model has its own (two) fully-connected (FC)
layers. Thus, in the proposed seq2-[3]point model, there are a
total of five convolutional (conv.) layers followed by a flatten
3We considered only two appliances for site-NILM because they were the
only appliances that were common among all the houses.
4

(a)
Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed seq2-[3]point CNN model. It consists of
five convolutional layers, two custom FC layers, and outputs a sequence/vector
of size three.
layer, followed by two custom FC layers. Table I describes
the attributes of each of the five conv. layers Ci.
TABLE I
Attributes of the conv. layers of the proposed seq2-[3]point CNN
Ci
inc
outc
ks
St
P
C1
1
30
10
1
0
C2
30
30
8
1
0
C3
30
40
6
1
0
C4
40
50
5
1
0
C5
50
50
5
1
0
Here, ks, St, P represent the filter size, stride and padding,
respectively. Note that each conv. layer has a ReLu activation
applied. A total of 48,550 parameters are returned by the final
conv. layer. These parameters are then flattened, and passed on
to the FC layers of the model. The first FC layer takes as input
48,550 parameters and outputs 1300 parameters, and uses the
ReLu activation function. The second FC layer takes 1300
parameters and returns 3 parameters (i.e., start point, mid-point
and end point of the appliance window). Once the very first
appliance was learned by the proposed model, the convolution
layers were freezed for the sake of transfer learning so that
the rest of the appliances so that each appliance has similar
conv. features. Fig. 1 shows in detail the architecture of the
proposed seq2-[3]point CNN model.
Train Test data construction. Data used is the pre-processed
data obtained in Section III-B. Further, let S and E be start
and end index, L be length of a window, B be the batch size.
Then, we begin as follows: S = 0, E = L = 1000, B =
20000, offset = 35. Next, update S and E as follows: S =
S + offset and E = E + offset. This process is repeated
until a total samples of B is reached. Test data is constructed
using the same method.
Model Evaluation. The input to the model is a window
containing 1000 points, with a batch size of 20,000. Thus,
Train X has a shape of (20000, 1000), formally described as
(B, L). The output returned by conv. layer C1 is (1000, 30,
991, 1). The output returned by conv. layer C2 is (1000, 30,
984, 1). The output returned by conv. layer C3 is (1000, 40,
979, 1). The output returned by conv. layer C4 is (1000, 50,
971, 1). The final conv. layer, when flattened gives a total of
48,550 trainable parameters which are passed to the FC layers
of the model. Size of each convolution layer can be computed
as follows: COut = W −ks+2P
St
+ 1, where W = width of the
matrix. This work uses mean squared error (MSE) as criterion,
Adam optimizer, and a learning rate of 0.001.
Back propagation. The back pass done by the model in this
work required gradients for the conv. layers for the very first
appliance. Therefore, during the backward pass, the weights
are updated as follows: Wn = Wo −α ×
∂e
∂Wo , where Wn is
the new weight, Wo is the old weight, α is the learning rate
and e is the error from the previous layer. For the rest of the
appliances, weights for the very first trained appliance were
used as a base (inline with the transfer learning principle).
Thus, the gradients for the conv. layers were freezed so that
each appliance has similar conv. features.
Translation of MSE to accuracy. Because the model learns
to predict power values for a given appliance from the ag-
gregate signal, the model evaluation process requires caution.
In this work, we take the absolute difference D between the
model predictions PD and the actual ground truth GT as
follows: D = |PD −GT|. We then compare D against a
threshold τ. If D < τ, the predicted value is considered a
correct predicted value, and vice versa. We carefully define
different threshold values for different appliances. An impor-
tant note. Model evaluation was done in batches, so PD and
GT are essentially arrays, which makes D an array as well.
B. Site-NILM
We utilized the same CNN architecture as described in
section IV-A for site-NILM. As the predictions were to be
classified in 4 different classes (see Section III-C), training
the data as is did not help the model converge. So, we came
up with a solution of first normalizing the data, and during the
testing phase, denormalized the data again to be able to assign
classes. For normalising purposes, Gaussian normalization was
used. During the test phase, the denormalizing process is given
by the following: Xo = (Xn∗σ)+µ, where Xo is the original
value, Xn is the normalized value, σ is the standard deviation
and µ is the mean.
V. APPLIANCE IDENTIFICATION
This section outlines the pertinent details of our proposed
method for appliance identification whereby we utilize the
appliance-level load signatures from the low-frequency data of
the REDD dataset. Since the proposed custom CNN model is
to be trained on 2D images, we first discuss our methodology
to convert the 1D time-series into 2D images. Subsequently,
we describe the key details of the proposed CNN model.
A. Custom 2D dataset generation
We apply two kinds of transforms on the REDD low-
frequency data: i) Wavelet Transform, ii) Short Time Fourier
Transform (STFT), in order to translate the 1D dataset (load
5

profiles of appliances) into a 2D dataset (consisting of Wavelet
and STFT images). Below, we describe both transform oper-
ations, one by one.
1) Wavelet Transform: The load profile data of each appli-
ance was projected onto a 2D-space by passing it through a
Wavelet function which returned the detailed and approxima-
tion coefficients. Precisely speaking, the load profile data of
each appliance was split into windows/frames of duration one
second, and a sliding window mechanism (with an offset of
0.5 seconds) was used in order to generate enough Wavelet
images. The mother wavelet used was Mexican hat, and scale
range was varied in the range 1-500. Algorithm 1 shows a
generalised version of wavelet generation algorithm.
Algorithm 1 Wavelets-based image generation algorithm
Require: Hi: House Number, Ci: Channel Number, Maxr:
Maximum data point length, Itm: Maximum Iterations, Do:
Data Offset point
Ensure: S: Wavelet coefficient Spectrogram
Sp ←0
Ep ←Maxr
PR ←GET-APPLIANCE-READINGS(Hi, Ci)
for i = 0, Itm do
ODD ←PR[Sp : Ep]
SG ←GENERATE-WAVELET-SPECTROGRAM(ODD)
ODD ←∅
Sp ←Sp + Do
Ep ←Sp + Maxr
end for
The Wavelet-based dataset was generated using the Python
library PYWT, also known as py-wavelets. The final classes
were not divided into houses because the goal was to classify
any appliance based on this signature. There are a total of
19 unique appliances from all 6 houses combined, excluding
the mains. Figure 2 (first column from left) shows load pro-
files of three appliances (i.e., refrigerator, microwave, kitchen
outlets), while Figure 2 (third column from left) shows the
corresponding 2D image consisting of wavelet coefficients
(here, x-axis represents the time, while the y-axis represents
the signal frequencies).
Data Augmentation: Image augmentation was applied after
the images were generated because for some appliances,
there wasn’t simply enough data to go with. For example,
some appliances have data readings which exceed 1 Million,
whereas some appliances struggle to cross the 300K barrier.
Due to this reason, images in each classes were subjected to
augmentation, in order to increase the dataset size artificially.
A range of augmentation techniques was applied on the
Wavelets dataset, e.g., rotation by a certain angle in degrees,
shearing image, cropping image etc. The benefit of the
augmentation was that for each train-test data split, each class
had an equal number of images in each of the split.
2) Short Time Fourier Transform: For the computation of
STFT spectrograms, Algorithm 1 was used again, but the data
points were passed to an STFT function (instead of the Wavelet
function). Again, the classes were not divided into houses
because the main goal was to classify appliances based on
their unique signatures. Figure 2 (second column from left)
shows the STFT spectrogram of the three appliances (here,
x-axis represents the time, while the y-axis represents the
frequency (in Hz). As in the case of Wavelet transform, the
data was simply not enough for some appliances. Thus, data
augmentation was applied again in order to make sure that
train and test classes had an equal number of images. The
main purpose for computing STFTs was to generate a fused
electrical signal by combining two different electrical signals,
i.e., the Wavelet transforms and STFTs (in our case).
3) Fused Spectrograms: Wavelet + STFT: As the name sug-
gests, the third type of electrical signature of an appliance this
work proposes is obtained by combining Wavelet transform
and STFT images (basically, adding the two images, pixel-by-
pixel). Data augmentation was done for this dataset too, but
only after the dataset was generated using the original Wavelet
transform and STFT images. Figure 2 (right-most column)
shows the fusion of both transforms for the three appliances.
Train-Test Split of the custom 2D Dataset: With 19 classes
in total for each of the transforms (Wavelet, STFT, Fused),
the train-test split was done as follows. Wavelet Transform:
Total Train images: 600, Total Test images: 200. Wavelet +
STFT: Total Train images: 600, Total Test images: 200. Note
that about 75% to 80% of the images in each category were
the originals, the rest were augmented images.
B. Custom CNN model design for Appliance Classification
1) Proposed CNN models for appliance classification on
Wavelet-based dataset : The wavelet signature of appliances
were classified using a simple deep neural network (NN) and
multiple CNNs. The simple deep NN was the maiden network
used in this study for classification, and its details are as
follows: Input size: 56 x 34, Total no. of hidden layers: 2,
Hidden layer 1 size: 500, Hidden layer 2 size: 150, Output
layer size: 20, Loss function: Cross entropy, Optimizer: SGD.
Two
state-of-the-art
pre-trained
2D-CNNs,
namely
ResNet18 [41] and AlexNet [44] were used with the
modification that for both of the networks, the conv. layers
were preserved, but the FC layers were cut-out and replaced
with custom FC layers. Both models used cross-entropy loss
function and SGD optimizer during training.
For Resnet18, custom FC layers were added as follows: FC1
= [2500,2000], and FC2 = [2000, 1500], FC3 = [1500,500],
and FC4 = [500, 20].
For Alexnet, custom FC layers were added as follows: FC1
= [4096,1024], and FC2 = [1024, 20].
2) Proposed CNN model for appliance classification on
Wavelet+STFT-based dataset : The fused signatures of ap-
pliances were classified using a state-of-the-art CNN, called
Densenet-121 [43]. As before, the conv. layers were not
changed but the FC layers were completely stripped off, and
custom FC layers were added as follows: FC1 = [1024,512],
6

(a)
Fig. 2.
Starting from left, first column shows (time-domain) load profile of three appliances (refrigerator, microwave, kitchen outlet); second column shows
STFT spectrograms of the three appliances; third column shows the Wavelet of the three appliances; fourth column shows the fusion of two transforms
(Wavelet+STFT) for the three appliances. Overall, it can be appreciated that Wavelets and STFT for three appliances are distinct, and thus, could help in
appliance identification.
and FC2 = [512, 20]4. Some Additional details are as fol-
lows: FC1 activation function: Relu, FC2 activation function:
Softmax, Loss function: Cross entropy, Optimizer: SGD.
VI. INFERENCE ABOUT THE APPLIANCE BEHAVIOUR
In addition to (home and site) NILM and appliance iden-
tification, we also study the related problem of appliance
usage pattern and behavior analysis using the REDD dataset.
To this end, we do a high-level performance comparison of
the refrigerators—the most common appliance in the REDD
dataset (as 5 out of 6 houses have refrigerators). Specifically,
we extract from the dataset the maximum and average power
consumption of the refrigerators over a period of two days.
Additionally, we define following five classes/states for each
refrigerator based upon the amount of the transient power X
drawn: stable/steady state (X < 3), minor increase or decrease
in power drawn (3 < X < 10), sudden large increase or
decrease in power drawn (10 < X < 50). This is done by
computing the pairwise difference of consecutive elements,
given a list of appliance power readings.
Fig. 3 (a) shows that there is not much (relative) disparity in
the max. and average power usage by the refrigerators in five
homes (over a period of two days). This in turn indicates that
even though the refrigerators in five homes may potentially
have a different model, manufacturer and year of making, they
4This configuration of FC layers was the best this study could come up
with, with main reason being GPU running out of CUDA memory.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. The histograms of (refrigerators across five homes): (a) Max and avg.
power consumption (b) five power states.
seem to be in similar health condition, have a similar build
quality, and undergo similar kind of use by their consumers.
Fig. 3 (b) indicates that the sudden large changes in power
drawn are most prominent in the refrigerator of Home 6. This
may imply any of the following: appliance overload, open door
problem, failure of a component (temperature sensor, regulator,
compressor etc.), appliance approaching its end-of-life.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Computing Machine Specs.
The training and testing of the proposed deep learning
models on the REDD and REFIT datasets was done on an
HP laptop machine with the following specifications: model
Omen 15, Intel Core i7-7700HQ (KabyLake Architecture)
CPU, Nvidia 1050ti 4GB GPU, 16 GB RAM, 1 TB HDD.
7

B. Evaluation Metrics
We use accuracy and F1 score as the main performance
evaluation metrics. Since accuracy is most meaningful for a
balanced dataset, we minimized the class imbalance by means
of data augmentation.
1) Accuracy: The accuracy of a dataset is the ratio of num-
ber of correct predictions Samplesc by the model and total
number of samples Samplest: Accuracy = Samplesc
Samplest × 100.
2) F1 Score: F1 score is a statistical measure to rate a
model’s performance. It is the harmonic mean of 2 factors,
precision and recall. Precision is obtained by dividing total
number of correctly classified elements, i.e. True Positives by
total positively classified elements, i.e. True Positives (TP)
+ False Positives (FP). Thus, Precision =
T P
T P +F P . Recall
is obtained by dividing total number of positively classified
samples by the total number of samples that should had been
marked as positive, i.e., True Positives and True Positives +
False Negatives (FN) respectively. Thus, Recall =
T P
T P +F N .
When precision and recall in hand, F1 score is calculated as:
F1 = 2 ∗P ∗R
P +R, where P is precision and R is recall.
C. Home-NILM & site-NILM Results
1) Home-NILM results: For home-NILM, the proposed
seq2-[3]point CNN was trained for four appliances. Table II
showcases the test accuracy obtained by the proposed method
for all the four appliances. Note that to compute the accuracy,
the predictions provided by the proposed DL model were
translated to the notion of accuracy, as explained in section
IV-A (see last paragraph). Table II demonstrates that the
accuracy of the proposed DL model remained quite high, and
varied from 86.58% to 94.6%, for all the four appliances (for
carefully chosen values of thresholds).
TABLE II
Home-NILM Results
Appliance
Threshold
Accuracy
Dish Washer
0.05
94.6%
Microwave
0.055
94.41%
Refrigerator
0.4
86.58%
Washer Dryer
0.025
89.97%
Fig. 4 provides a qualitative assessment of the performance
of proposed DL model for home-NILM for two appliances: a
dishwasher and a microwave. For each appliance, we observe
that the load profile predicted by the proposed DL model
closely follows the its actual load profile (note that both load
profiles, i.e., actual and predicted, are in normalized form).
2) Site-NILM results: The proposed seq2-[3]point model
was trained and tested on REFIT dataset in order to do
site-NILM. Recall from Section III-C that the site under
consideration is a Computer site with a PC and a monitor.
For the classification problem (with four classes) described
in Section III-C, the proposed DL was able to achieve an
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. Home-NILM (a) on Dishwasher (b) on Microwave. GT is acronym
for ground truth, PD is acronym for prediction by the seq2-[3]point model.
overall test accuracy of 81% (where form 6,000,000 samples,
4,860,000 were correctly classified).
D. Appliance Identification Results
Recall from Section V-B that the Wavelet appliance sig-
natures were classified using ResNet18 and AlexNet DL
models with custom FC layers, while the fused signatures were
classified using the Densenet-121 DL model with custom FC
layers.
Table III compares the classification accuracy and F1 score
achieved by each of the three DL models. From Table III, we
learn the following: 1) the accuracy and F1 score of DenseNet
model improves with a lower value of learning rate; 2) ResNet
model outperformed the other two models with a classification
accuracy of 88.9% and F1 score of 88%.
TABLE III
Appliance Identification Results
Model
Feature
Learn. Rate
Accuracy
F1 Score
ResNet18
wavelets
0.001
88.9%
88%
AlexNet
wavelets
0.001
80.67%
81%
DenseNet-121
fused
0.001
86.17%
86%
DenseNet-121
fused
0.01
85.52%
85%
VIII. CONCLUSION
This work proposed a seq2-[3]-point CNN model to solve
the (home) NILM problem and site-NILM problem. We built
upon the state-of-the-art (pre-trained) 2D-CNN models, i.e.,
AlexNet, ResNet-18, and DenseNet-121, which were trained
upon two custom datasets that consist of Wavelets and STFT-
based 2D electrical signatures of the appliances, to do ap-
pliance classification. We also did some basic qualitative
inference about an individual appliance’s health by comparing
the power consumption of the same appliance across multiple
homes. We achieved a maximum accuracy of 94.6% for
home-NILM, 81% for site-NILM, and 88.9% for appliance
identification (with ResNet-based model). The low-complexity
of proposed DL models makes them well-suited for edge
computing for the consumer electronic devices of a smart
home.
8
