Sample Efﬁcient Policy Search for Optimal Stopping Domains
Karan Goel
Carnegie Mellon University

Christoph Dann
Carnegie Mellon University

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University

Abstract
Optimal stopping problems consider the question
of deciding when to stop an observation-generating
process in order to maximize a return. We examine
the problem of simultaneously learning and plan-
ning in such domains, when data is collected di-
rectly from the environment. We propose GFSE,
a simple and ﬂexible model-free policy search
method that reuses data for sample efﬁciency by
leveraging problem structure. We bound the sample
complexity of our approach to guarantee uniform
convergence of policy value estimates, tightening
existing PAC bounds to achieve logarithmic depen-
dence on horizon length for our setting. We also
examine the beneﬁt of our method against preva-
lent model-based and model-free approaches on 3
domains taken from diverse ﬁelds.
Introduction
Sequential decision making and learning in unknown en-
vironments, commonly modeled as reinforcement learning
(RL), is a key aspect of artiﬁcial intelligence. An impor-
tant subclass of RL is optimal stopping processes, where an
agent decides at each step whether to continue or terminate a
stochastic process and the reward upon termination is a func-
tion of the observations seen so far. Many common problems
in Computer Science and Operations Research can be mod-
eled within this setting, including the secretary problem [Fer-
guson, 1989], house selling [Glower et al., 1998; Lippman
and McCall, 1976], American options trading [Jacka, 1991;
Mordecki, 2002], product pricing [Feng and Gallego, 1995]
and asset replacement [Jiang and Powell, 2015], as well as
problems in artiﬁcial intelligence like mission monitoring
robots [Best et al., 2015], metareasoning about the value of
additional computation [Zilberstein, 1995] and automatically
deciding when to purchase an airline ticket [Etzioni et al.,
2003]. Often the stopping process dynamics are unknown in
advance and so ﬁnding a good stopping policy (when to halt)
requires learning from experience in the environment. As real
experience can incur real losses, we desire algorithms that
can quickly (with minimal samples) learn good policies that
achieve high reward for these problems.
Interestingly, most prior work on optimal stopping has fo-
cused on the planning problem: how to compute near-optimal
policies given access to the dynamics and reward of the
stochastic stopping process [Peskir and Shiryaev, 2006]. Op-
timal stopping problems can also be framed as a partially ob-
servable Markov decision process (POMDP), and there also
exists work on learning a good policy for acting in POMDPs,
that bounds the number of samples required to identify the
near optimal policy out of a class of policies [Kearns et al.,
1999; Ng and Jordan, 2000]. However, such work either (i)
makes the strong assumption that the algorithm has access
to a generative model (ability to simulate from any state) of
the stochastic process, which makes this work more suited to
improving the efﬁciency of planning using simulations of the
domain, or (ii) can use trajectories directly collected from the
environment, but incurs exponential horizon dependence.
In this paper, we consider how to quickly learn a near-
optimal policy in a stochastic optimal stopping process with
unknown dynamics, given an input class of policies. We as-
sume there is a ﬁxed maximum length horizon for acting,
and then make a simple but powerful observation: for stop-
ping problems with process-dependent rewards, the outcomes
of a full length trajectory (that is, a trajectory in which the
policy only halts after the entire horizon) provide an esti-
mated return for halting after one step, after two steps, and
so on, till the horizon. In this way, a single full-length tra-
jectory yields a sample return for any stopping policy. Based
on this, we propose an algorithm that ﬁrst acts by stopping
only after the full length horizon for a number of trajec-
tories, and then performs policy search over an input pol-
icy class, where the full length trajectories are used to pro-
vide estimates of the expected return of each policy con-
sidered in the policy class. The policy in the set with the
highest expected performance is selected for future use. We
provide sample complexity bounds on the number of full
length trajectories sufﬁcient to identify a near optimal pol-
icy within the input policy class. Our results are similar
to more general results for POMDPs [Kearns et al., 1999;
Ng and Jordan, 2000], but due to the structure of optimal stop-
ping we achieve two key beneﬁts: our bounds’ dependence on
the horizon is only logarithmic instead of linear (with a gener-
ative model) and exponential (without), and our results apply
to learning in stochastic stopping processes, with no genera-
tive model required. Simulation results on student tutoring,
arXiv:1702.06238v2  [cs.AI]  24 May 2017

ticket purchase, and asset replacement show our approach
signiﬁcantly improves over state-of-the-art approaches.
Problem Formulation
We consider the standard stochastic discrete-time optimal
stopping process setting. As in Tsitsiklis and Van Roy [1999],
we assume there is a stochastic process P that generates ob-
servations o1, . . . , ot (they may be vectors). There are two
actions: halt or continue the process. The reward model is
a known, deterministic function of the sequence of observa-
tions and the choice of whether to continue or halt. While
there do exist domains where the reward model can be a
nondeterministic function of the observations and the actions
(such as a medical procedure that reveals the patient’s true
condition after a sequence of waiting), most common opti-
mal stopping problems fall within the framework considered
here, including the secretary problem (the quality of each sec-
retary is directly observed), house selling (the price for the
house from each bidder is known), asset replacement (pub-
lished guides on the worth of an asset, plus knowledge of the
cost of buying a new one), etc. We focus on the episodic set-
ting where there is a ﬁxed maximum time horizon for each
process. The ﬁnite horizon value of a policy Vπ = EP[r|π]
is the expected return from following π over a horizon of H
steps, where the expectation is taken over the stochastic pro-
cess dynamics P. Note the policy may choose to halt before
H steps. The goal is to maximize return across episodes.
We focus here on direct policy search methods (see e.g.
[Sutton et al., 1999]). More precisely, we assume as input a
parameterized policy class Π = {f(θ)|θ ∈Θ} where Θ is the
set of policy parameters. Direct policy search does not require
building a model of the domain, and has been very successful
in a variety of reinforcement learning (RL) contexts [Deisen-
roth and Rasmussen, 2011; Levine and Abbeel, 2014].
Sample Efﬁcient Policy Search
We are particularly interested in domains where evaluation
of a policy incurs real cost in the environment, such as stock
market options selling. In such settings we wish to ﬁnd sam-
ple efﬁcient methods for doing policy search, that can min-
imize the number of poor outcomes in the real world. The
challenge is that we do not know the stochastic dynamics
P and so it is not possible to, in advance of acting, perform
policy search to identify a good policy. Instead we can only
obtain information about the domain dynamics by executing
policies in the real world. We seek to efﬁciently leverage such
experience to quickly make good decisions.
We now present a simple approach, GFSE (Gather Full,
Search and Execute) (Algorithm 1), to do sample efﬁcient
policy search. GFSE collects a set of full-length (horizon H)
trajectories, uses these to evaluate the performance of any pol-
icy in the input policy class Π, identiﬁes a good policy, and
then executes the resulting policy on all future episodes.
The key insight is in the ﬁrst step, gathering the data to be
used to evaluate the performance of any policy in the policy
class Π. Monte Carlo estimation can be used to estimate the
expected return of a policy by running it many times. How-
ever, this scales poorly with the cardinality of the policy class.
Algorithm 1: Gather Full, Search and Execute (GFSE)
Input: policy class Π, search method S, ϵ, δ
n ←Use Theorem 1 with ϵ, δ
Γ ←Gather n full trajectories from environment
π∗←Identify policy using S(Π, Γ) \\evaluation uses Γ
Execute π∗
Building a dynamics model from a set of data is more efﬁ-
cient, as a model can be used to simulate the performance of
any policy, but this requires us to make certain assumptions
about the domain (for ex. the Markov property) Which can
lead to biased estimates. Alternatively, importance sampling
can be used to do off-policy evaluation [Precup, 2000] but
unfortunately such estimates tend to be very high variance.
However, a simple but powerful observation is that a full-
horizon (H-step) trajectory can be used to yield a sample re-
turn for all optimal stopping policies in Π. Given a full length
trajectory (o1, . . . , oH), the performance of a particular pol-
icy π can be simulated by providing (o1, o2, . . . ) to the target
policy until it halts at some time step t ≤H. Therefore we
can take the subsequence of observations (o1, o2, . . . , ot) and
use it to directly compute the return that would have been ob-
served for executing π on this trajectory. A single full-horizon
trajectory will provide just one sample of the return of any
policy. But a set of n full-horizon trajectories can be used to
provide n sample returns for a given policy π, thereby pro-
viding an empirical estimate of V π. We can do this off policy
evaluation of V π for any policy in the class Π.
Prior work has shown that given access to a generative
model of the domain, policy search can be done in an ef-
ﬁcient way by using common random numbers to evaluate
policies that act differently in an episode [Kearns et al., 1999;
Ng and Jordan, 2000]. In our setting, a full-horizon trajec-
tory is essentially equivalent to having access to a generative
model that can produce a single return for any policy. How-
ever, access to a full length trajectory can be obtained by run-
ning in the environment, whereas generic generative models
typically require ”teleporation”: the ability to simulate what
would happen next under a particular action given an arbi-
trary prior history, which is hard unless in a planning scenario
in which one already has knowedge of the dynamics process.
Our results require weaker assumptions than prior results that
use stronger generative models to obtain similar sample ef-
ﬁciency, while also achieving better sample efﬁciency than
approaches with access to similar generative models.
We will shortly provide a sufﬁcient condition on the num-
ber of full length trajectories n, to guarantee that we can
evaluate any policy sufﬁciently accurately to enable policy
search to identify a near-optimal policy (within the input pol-
icy class). Of course, empirically, we will often wish to select
a smaller n: our simulation experiments will demonstrate that
often a small n still enables us to identify a good policy.
Theoretical Analysis
We now provide bounds on the sample complexity of GFSE:
the number of full length trajectories required to obtain near
accurate estimates of all policies in a policy class. This is suf-

ﬁcient to identify the optimal (or near-optimal) policy in the
policy class with the highest expected return.
First, we note that the optimal stopping problems we con-
sider in this paper can be viewed as a particular instance of
a POMDP. Brieﬂy, there is some hidden state space, with a
dynamics model that determines how the current state transi-
tions to a new state stochastically, given the continue action.
The observation is a function of the hidden state, and the re-
ward is also a function of the hidden state and action.
Our main result is that, given a policy class Π, the sam-
ple complexity scales logarithmically with the horizon. We
make no assumption of access to a generative model. This
is a signiﬁcant improvement over prior sample complex-
ity results for policy search for generic POMDPs and large
MDPs [Kearns et al., 1999; Ng and Jordan, 2000] which re-
quired access to a generative model of the environment and
had a sample complexity that scaled linearly with the hori-
zon. These results can be thought of as bounding the com-
putation/simulation time required during planning, when one
has access to a generative model that can be used to sample
an outcome (reward, observation) given any prior history and
action. In contrast, our results apply during learning, where
the agent has no generative model of the domain, but must in-
stead explore to observe different outcomes. Without a gen-
erative model of the domain, sample complexity results for
policy search in generic POMDPs when learning scale expo-
nentially with the horizon [Kearns et al., 1999].
Optimal stopping trajectories are related to the trajectory
trees of Kearns et al. which were used to evaluate the returns
of different POMDP policies. For a POMDP with 2 actions,
each trajectory tree is a complete binary tree (of depth H)
rooted at a start state. Nodes in the tree are labeled with a
state and observation, and a path from the root to any node
in the tree denotes a series of actions taken by a policy. A
trajectory tree can be used to evaluate any policy in Π, since
every action sequence is part of the tree. However, while for
generic POMDPs the size of a trajectory tree is exponential in
the horizon, for optimal stopping problems the tree size is lin-
ear in the horizon (Figure 1). This allows us to obtain signiﬁ-
cantly tighter dependence on H than for generic POMDPs.
Our analysis closely follows the prior sample complexity
results of [Kearns et al., 1999]. Kearns et al. proceeded by
ﬁrst considering a bound on the VC-dimension of Π when
viewed as a set of real-valued mappings from histories to re-
turns, as a function of the VC-dimension of Π when viewed
as mappings of histories to actions. Then they use this result
to bound the sample complexity needed to get near-accurate
estimates of the returns of all policies in the policy class.
We will follow a similar procedure to bound the sample
complexity when Π contains a potentially inﬁnite number of
deterministic policies.1 Let d = VC(Π) be the VC-dimension
of our policy class. This is well-deﬁned, since each optimal-
stopping policy maps trajectories to 2 actions (binary label-
ing). Let VCr(Π) be the VC-dimension of Π when viewed as
a set of real-valued mappings from full trajectories to returns
1 Similar to Kearns et al. (1999) our results extend to ﬁnite Π and
inﬁnite, stochastic Π, as well as the discounted inﬁnite-horizon case
(using an ϵ-approximation to Vπ with horizon Hϵ).
Figure 1: The structure of a full trajectory for horizon H.
Each node represents an observation while arrows represent
one of the two available actions.
and assume Vπ is bounded by Vmax. From [Vapnik and Kotz,
1982], we know that VCr(Π) can be computed as VC(H),
where H = {I(π, ∆, ·)|π ∈Π, ∆∈[−Vmax, Vmax]} with
I(π, ∆, x) = 1 if π(x) ≥∆, and 0 otherwise (π(x) is the
return for full trajectory x under π).
Lemma 1. Let Π be a set of deterministic optimal-stopping
policies with VC-dimension d when viewed as a set of maps
from trajectories to actions. Then, when viewed as a set of
maps from the space of all full trajectories to [−Vmax, Vmax],
Π has dimension bounded by,
VCr(Π) = O(d log H)
Proof. Our proof proceeds similarly to Lemma A.1 in Kearns
et al.. The crucial difference is that our policies operate on
a full-trajectory structure that contains H nodes (Figure 1),
rather than Kearns et al.’s trajectory trees with 2H+1 nodes.
In our setting at each point the agent only gets to consider
whether to halt or continue, and if the halt action is chosen,
the trajectory terminates. This implies that in contrast to stan-
dard expectimax trees where the size of the tree depends on
the action space as an exponential of the horizon, |A|H, in our
setting the dependence induced by the actions is only linear in
H. Thus Π can produce a much smaller set of behaviors, and
our dependence on H is logarithmic, rather than polynomial.
More formally, by Sauer’s lemma, k trajectories can be la-
beled in atmost ( ek
d )d ways by Π. First note that n full tra-
jectories contain at most nH distinct trajectories across them
(one per node; refer to Figure 1 for the structure of full tra-
jectories). Each action labeling of these k = nH trajectories
by Π, corresponds to selecting n paths (1 path per full trajec-
tory), where each path starts at the ﬁrst observation and ends
at a terminal node. The number of possible selections by Π is
thus atmost ( enH
d )d. Each path can be viewed as mapping a
full trajectory to a return, and a selection therefore maps the
n full trajectories to n real-valued returns.
There are nH terminal nodes across the n full trajectories.
Thus there are at most nH distinct real-valued returns on the
n full trajectories under Π. If we set the indicator threshold
∆to equal each of these nH returns in turn, there would be
atmost ( enH
d )d distinct binary labelings of the full trajecto-
ries for each such ∆. Thus, the set of indicator functions that
deﬁne VCr(Π) can generate atmost nH( enH
d )d distinct la-
belings on n full trajectories. To shatter the n full trajectories,
we set nH( enH
d )d ≥2n, and the result follows.
We now proceed similarly to Theorem 3.2 in Kearns et al.
Theorem 1. Let Π be a potentially inﬁnite set of deterministic
optimal stopping policies and let d be the VC-dimension of Π.

Let Γ be n full trajectories collected from the environment,
and let ˆ
Vπ be the value estimates for π ∈Π using Γ. Let the
return Vπ be bounded by Vmax for any trajectory. If
n = O
 Vmax
ϵ
2 
d log H + log 1
δ
!
then with probability at least 1 −δ, |Vπ −ˆVπ| ≤ϵ holds
simultaneously for all π ∈Π.
Proof. Let X be the space of full trajectories. Every pol-
icy π
∈Π is a bounded real-valued map π
: X
→
[−Vmax, Vmax]. Let x1, . . . , xn
∼
P be i.i.d. full tra-
jectories generated by the environment dynamics. Us-
ing a result of [Vapnik and Kotz, 1982], we have with
probability 1 −δ, supπ∈Π
EP[π(x)] −1
n
Pn
i=1 π(xi)
 ≤
O

Vmax
q
VCr(Π) log
n
VCr(Π) +log 1
δ
n

. Substitute EP[π(x)] =
Vπ, 1
n
Pn
i=1 π(xi) = ˆVπ, VCr(Π) = O(d log H) in the in-
equality and upper-bound by ϵ to get the result.
In practice it may be impossible for us to evaluate every
policy in Π, and then select the one with the best estimated
mean. In such cases, we can use a different search method (S
in Algorithm 1) to ﬁnd a local optima in Π, while using our
bound to ensure that policy values are estimated accurately.
Lastly, we discuss [Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1999], who
estimate Q values for ﬁnite-horizon Markov optimal stop-
ping problems using a linear combination of basis functions,
and then use that to ﬁnd a threshold policy. They outline a
procedure to tune the basis function weights that asymptoti-
cally guarantees their policy value’s convergence to the best
basis-function approximation. Under their assumptions, if we
construct a policy class using basis functions, we inherit the
useful convergence results relying on their search procedure,
along with retaining our ﬁnite sample complexity results.
Experiments
We now demonstrate the setting we consider is sufﬁciently
general to capture several problems of interest and that our
approach, GFSE, can improve performance in optimal stop-
ping problems over some state-of-the-art baselines.
Ticket Purchase
Many purchasing problems can be posed as an optimal stop-
ping process where the return from stopping is simply the ad-
vertised cost. We consider deciding when to purchase an air-
line ticket for a later trip date in order to minimize cost. The
opaque way in which prices are set, and competitive pricing
makes this domain difﬁcult to model. Prior work [Etzioni et
al., 2003; Groves and Gini, 2015] has focused on identifying
features to create sophisticated models that make good pur-
chase decisions. Surprisingly, it can be hard to improve on an
earliest purchase baseline that buys after the ﬁrst observation.
We use data from Groves and Gini (2015) who collected
real pricing data for a ﬁxed set of routes over a period of 2
years, querying travel sites regularly to collect price informa-
tion. Each route has several departure dates distributed over
the 2 year period. For a price observation sequence of length
Table 1: Mean expenditure of deploying different policies on
the test set for ticket purchase. Earliest purchase buys imme-
diately, latest purchase waits till the departure date.
Method
NYC-MSP
MSP-NYC
SEA-IAD
Ours (Πsimple)
$355
$374
$565
Ours (Πcomplex)
$351
$344
$560
Earliest purchase
$380
$383
$578
Latest purchase
$631
$647
$938
Best possible price
$307
$306
$513
T, a customer could commence his ticket search at any point
in the sequence (e.g. some customer starts 60 days before de-
parture while another only a week before). Thus, we consider
all such commencement points separately to get T distinct
full trajectories (similar to [Groves and Gini, 2015]).
We construct a parameterized policy class (Πsimple) based
on Ripper’s decision rules in [Etzioni et al., 2003]: WAIT if
(curr price > θ0 AND days to depart > θ1) else BUY,
where BUY corresponds to halting. We also constructed a
more complex class (Πcomplex) with 6 parameters, that learns
different price thresholds depending on how far the departure
date is. We consider nonstop ﬂights on 3 routes, NYC-MSP,
MSP-NYC and SEA-IAD, training/testing each separately.
Our method, GFSE collects full length trajectories dur-
ing the ﬁrst 200 days (∼1000 trajectories) and uses them to
construct a single stopping policy. It performs a simple pol-
icy search by sampling and evaluating 500 policies randomly
from the policy space. It then uses the best identiﬁed policy
to simulate ticket purchasing decisions for departure dates oc-
curring during the remaining part of the 2 years (∼2000 tra-
jectories). We restrict the data to departure dates that contain
at-least 30 price observations.2
Results on the test sets are shown in Table 1. Our pol-
icy search method succeeds in ﬁnding a policy that leads to
non-trivial improvement over the difﬁcult earliest purchase
baseline. Our improvements are in line with prior approaches
speciﬁcally designed for this particular domain.3 These re-
sults highlight how our setting can capture important purchas-
ing tasks and how our approach, even with a simple policy
search, can ﬁnd policies with signiﬁcantly better performance
than competitive domain-speciﬁc baselines.
Tutoring and Asset Replacement
We now consider 2 simulated domains and compare GFSE
to several approaches for learning to act quickly in these
domains. Unless speciﬁed, all results are averaged over 20
rounds and error bars indicate 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Baselines. One natural idea is to proceed as GFSE, but use
the gathered data to build parametric domain models that can
be used to estimate the performance of potential policies. We
2We found that shorter trajectories were collected close to the
departure date, where prices ﬂuctuate more and for which our il-
lustrative policy classes are inadequate. In such cases, our method
adopted a risk-averse earliest purchase policy.
3Unfortunately, the authors were unable to provide us with the
train/test split used in [Groves and Gini, 2015].

call these ”model-based” approaches. A second idea is to con-
sider the initial set of collected data as a budget of free ex-
ploration, and instead use this budget to do Monte Carlo on-
policy evaluation of a set of policies.
Of course, doing all exploration, as we do in GFSE, is
not always optimal. We also consider a state-of-the-art ap-
proach for quickly identifying the global optima of a func-
tion where the function is initially unknown and each function
evaluation is expensive, Bayesian Optimization (BO). Multi-
ple papers have shown BO can be used to speed online policy
search for reinforcement learning tasks [Wilson et al., 2014;
Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011]. Given the policy class, BO
selects a policy to evaluate at each step, and maintains esti-
mates over the expected value of every policy. We use Yelp’s
MOE for BO [Yelp, 2016] with a Gaussian kernel and the
popular expected improvement heuristic for picking policies
from Π. The hyper-parameters for BO are picked by a sepa-
rate optimization to ﬁnd maximum-likelihood estimates.
Simulated Student Learning. We ﬁrst consider a simulated
student tutor domain. A number of tutoring systems use mas-
tery teaching, in which a student is provided with practice
examples until they are estimated to have mastered the mate-
rial. This is an optimal stopping problem because at each time
step, after observing whether a student got the activity correct
or not, the tutor can decide whether to halt or continue pro-
viding the student with additional practice. On halting, the
student is given the next problem in the sequence; the objec-
tive is to maximize the score on this ‘posttest’, while giving
as few problems as possible overall. As is popular in the liter-
ature, we model student learning using the Bayesian Knowl-
edge Tracing (BKT) model [Corbett and Anderson, 1995].
BKT is a 2-state Hidden Markov Model (HMM) with the
state capturing whether the student has mastered the skill or
not. Within the HMM, 4 probabilities – pi (prior mastery),
pt (transition to mastery), pg (guess) and ps (slip) describe
the model. To simulate student data, we ﬁx BKT parameters4
pi = 0.18, pt = 0.2, pg = 0.2, ps = 0.1 and generate student
trajectories using this BKT model for H = 20 problems.
For GFSE, we consider two policy classes, both of which
halt when the probability of the student’s next response (ac-
cording to the model in use) being correct crosses a thresh-
old. Thus, we halt if Pr(ot = correct|o1, . . . , ot−1) > θ0
where θ0 is some threshold. In fact, policies of this kind are
widely used in commercial tutoring systems [Koedinger et
al., 2013]. If we use the BKT model to implement this pol-
icy class, it is parameterized by (pi, pt, pg, ps, θ0). Π then
contains all possible instantiations of these parameters for
our model-free approach to search over. We also consider
a policy class based on another popular educational data
mining model of student learning: Additive Factors Model
(AFM) [Draney et al., 1995]. AFM is a logistic regression
model used to predict the probability that a student will get
the next problem correct given their past responses. Thus,
Pr(ot = correct|o1, . . . , ot−1) =
1
1+e−(β1+β2nc) where nc
is the number of correct past attempts.
We ﬁrst note that GFSE is signiﬁcantly more effective than
4Our results hold for other instantiations of these parameters as
well. See [Ritter et al., 2009] for other reasonable parameter settings.
Figure 2: Comparison of best policy found on varying budget
under (a) matched model setting; (b) model mismatch setting.
taking the same budget of exploration, and using it to evaluate
each policy in an on-policy manner using Monte Carlo (MC)
estimation. More precisely, we sample k = 100 policies from
the BKT policy class, and ﬁx a budget of B ∈{100, 1000}
trajectories. GFSE uses B trajectories to evaluates all k poli-
cies while MC runs every policy on B
k trajectories (e.g. 1 tra-
jectory/policy for B = 100) and selects the one with the high-
est mean performance. Averaging results across 20 separate
runs, we found that GFSE identiﬁes a much better policy;
MC chose poor policies because it is mislead by the potential
performance of a policy due to the limited data.
We also explored the performance of building a model of
the domain, both in the setting when the model matches the
true domain (here, a BKT model), and a model-mismatch
case, where the policy class is based on a student AFM model
(which does not match the BKT process dynamics). We use
maximum likelihood estimation to ﬁt the assumed model’s
parameters given the collected data and then separately opti-
mize over the threshold parameters θ0. We compare, on vary-
ing the budget B: (a) GFSE; (b) model-based; (c) BO. All
results are averaged over 50 trials.
The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 2. Our
approach does well in both settings, quickly ﬁnding a near op-
timal policy. As one would expect, the model-based approach
does well under the matched model setting, making full use
of the knowledge of the underlying process dynamics. How-
ever, on ﬁtting the mismatched AFM model, the model-based
approach suffers. As has been noted by prior work [Mandel et
al., 2014] model-ﬁtting procedures focus on maximizing the
likelihood of the observed data rather than trying to directly
identify a policy that is expected to perform well. BO can ﬁnd
a good policy, but takes more samples to do so.
Since BO is an online approach whereas GFSE uses a ﬁxed
budget of exploration, we also compare the averaged cumula-
tive performance of BO to variants of GFSE in Figure 3. This
mimics a scenario where we care about online performance
on every individual trajectory, rather than having access to a
ﬁxed budget before deploying a policy. For our method, we
can choose to collect more or less full trajectories before ﬁnd-
ing the best policy. Interestingly, if we use 5 trajectories as the
initial budget to collect full length trajectories, GFSE meets
or exceeds BO performance in this setting in both the matched
and mismatched model cases, within 10 trajectories.
BO suffers from the highly stochastic returns of policies in
this setting. For more efﬁcient data reuse, we also consider a
variant of BO (BO-REuse) where we evaluate each proposed

Figure 3: Average cumulative performance on the simulated
student domain. (a) matched model; (b) model-mismatch.
GFSE-k collects k initial full-length trajectories before iden-
tifying and then executing the best policy.
Figure 4: Cumulative performance of augmented methods on
(a) matched model; (b) model-mismatch.
policy online and also using previously collected trajectories,
yielding a more robust estimate of the policy’s performance.
Similarly, for GFSE we deploy a policy using an initial bud-
get of trajectories, and then use its on-policy trajectory (in ad-
dition to earlier trajectories) to rerun policy search and iden-
tify another policy for the next time step (GFSE-RE). Fig-
ure 4 shows this improved both methods (especially in the
mismatch case), with our approaches still performing best.
Asset Replacement. Another natural problem that falls into
our optimal stopping problem is when to replace a depreciat-
ing asset (such as a car, machine, etc). For simulation, we use
a model described in [Jiang and Powell, 2015]. Variants of
this model are widely used in that ﬁeld [Feldstein and Roth-
schild, 1974; Rust, 1987]. In the model, observations are d
dimensional vectors of the form (X, Y1, . . . , Yd−1). Each as-
set starts at a ﬁxed valuation X = Xmax which depreciates
stochastically5 while emitting observations Y1, . . . , Yd−1 at
every time step. The reward function used incorporates the
cost of replacement (which increases over time), the utility
derived from the asset and a penalty if the asset becomes
worthless before replacement. We use d = 3 for experiments.
We construct a logistic threshold policy class; replacing the
asset if
1
1+e−(β1+β2·depr) > β3 where depr is the total depre-
ciation from Xmax seen so far (normalized to lie in [0, 1]).
In addition to the approaches seen before, we also include
baseline policies that choose to (i) replace the asset immedi-
ately; (ii) never replace. Lastly, we include the optimal value
(known only in hindsight) for reference.
The results are shown in Fig 5. Surprisingly, our method
5Details of the model can be found in [Jiang and Powell, 2015].
Figure 5: Results from asset replacement.
outperforms competing methods by a considerable margin.
It appears that our chosen policy class is tricky to optimize
over: most policies in the space perform poorly. For 500 ran-
dom policies chosen from this space, the mean cost is around
240 with a 95% conﬁdence interval of only 16. However, the
domain itself is not very noisy, with robust value estimation
requiring less than 5 trajectories (see Figure 5). This enables
our method to consistently ﬁnd a good policy even with a
low budget: one that corresponds to replacing the asset when
depreciation is around 50%. BO improves slowly; either sam-
pling bad policies due to the sparse nature of the space, or dis-
believing the estimate of a good policy due to the bad policies
surrounding it. Manually adjusting the BO hyperparameters
to account for this did not improve performance signiﬁcantly.
Discussion and Conclusion
GFSE performed well, outperforming state-of-the-art algo-
rithms and common baselines, in a variety of simulations of
important domains. While we randomly searched over poli-
cies in relatively simple policy classes for illustration, more
sophisticated search methods and policy classes could be em-
ployed, without effecting the theoretical guarantees we de-
rived. Another extension is in using shorter trajectories that
terminate before the horizon for policy evaluation (similar
to how full trajectories are used). This is useful in a sce-
nario where we get trajectories on-policy using the best pol-
icy found by GFSE. We can then rerun policy search with all
trajectories (full length or short) collected so far. Our policy
value estimates will be biased in this case, since only a pol-
icy that halts earlier than a shorter trajectory can use it for
evaluation. Values for policies that halt later may be overes-
timated (higher variance of estimation due to fewer trajecto-
ries), biasing us to pick them. If the number of evaluations
per policy exceeds the number in Theorem 1, our estimates
would remain within ϵ of the true values (with high probabil-
ity), which would minimize the effect of this bias. As we saw
from Figure 4, this (GFSE-RE) works well empirically.
To summarize, we introduced a method for learning to act
in optimal stopping problems, which reuses full length trajec-
tories to perform policy search. Our theoretical analysis and
empirical simulations demonstrate that this simple observa-
tion can lead to beneﬁts in sample complexity and practice.
