Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
Heinrich Jiang * 1 Oﬁr Nachum * 2
Abstract
Datasets often contain biases which unfairly dis-
advantage certain groups, and classiﬁers trained
on such datasets can inherit these biases. In this
paper, we provide a mathematical formulation of
how this bias can arise. We do so by assuming
the existence of underlying, unknown, and unbi-
ased labels which are overwritten by an agent who
intends to provide accurate labels but may have
biases against certain groups. Despite the fact that
we only observe the biased labels, we are able to
show that the bias may nevertheless be corrected
by re-weighting the data points without chang-
ing the labels. We show, with theoretical guar-
antees, that training on the re-weighted dataset
corresponds to training on the unobserved but un-
biased labels, thus leading to an unbiased machine
learning classiﬁer. Our procedure is fast and ro-
bust and can be used with virtually any learning
algorithm. We evaluate on a number of standard
machine learning fairness datasets and a variety
of fairness notions, ﬁnding that our method out-
performs standard approaches in achieving fair
classiﬁcation.
1. Introduction
Machine learning has become widely adopted in a variety
of real-world applications that signiﬁcantly affect people’s
lives (Guimaraes and Toﬁghi, 2018; Guegan and Hassani,
2018). Fairness in these algorithmic decision-making sys-
tems has thus become an increasingly important concern: It
has been shown that without appropriate intervention during
training or evaluation, models can be biased against certain
groups (Angwin et al., 2016; Hardt et al., 2016). This is due
to the fact that the data used to train these models often con-
tains biases that become reinforced into the model (Boluk-
basi et al., 2016). Moreover, it has been shown that simple
*Equal contribution
1Google Research, Mountain View, CA
2Google Brain, Mountain View, CA. Correspondence to: Hein-

remedies, such as ignoring the features corresponding to the
protected groups, are largely ineffective due to redundant
encodings in the data (Pedreshi et al., 2008). In other words,
the data can be inherently biased in possibly complex ways,
thus making it difﬁcult to achieve fairness.
Research on training fair classiﬁers has therefore received a
great deal of attention. One such approach has focused on
developing post-processing steps to enforce fairness on a
learned model (Doherty et al., 2012; Feldman, 2015; Hardt
et al., 2016). That is, one ﬁrst trains a machine learning
model, resulting in an unfair classiﬁer. The outputs of the
classiﬁer are then calibrated to enforce fairness. Although
this approach is likely to decrease the bias of the classiﬁer,
by decoupling the training from the fairness enforcement,
this procedure may not lead to the best trade-off between
fairness and accuracy. Accordingly, recent work has pro-
posed to incorporate fairness into the training algorithm
itself, framing the problem as a constrained optimization
problem and subsequently applying the method of Lagrange
multipliers to transform the constraints to penalties (Zafar
et al., 2015; Goh et al., 2016; Cotter et al., 2018b; Agarwal
et al., 2018); however such approaches may introduce un-
desired complexity and lead to more difﬁcult or unstable
training (Cotter et al., 2018b;c). Both of these existing meth-
ods address the problem of bias by adjusting the machine
learning model rather than the data, despite the fact that
oftentimes it is the training data itself – i.e., the observed
features and corresponding labels – which are biased.
In this paper, we provide an approach to machine learning
fairness that addresses the underlying data bias problem
directly. We introduce a new mathematical framework for
fairness in which we assume that there exists an unknown
but unbiased ground truth label function and that the la-
bels observed in the data are assigned by an agent who is
possibly biased, but otherwise has the intention of being
accurate. This assumption is natural in practice and may
also be applied to settings where the features themselves
are biased and that the observed labels were generated by
a process depending on the features (i.e. situations where
there is bias in both the features and labels).
Based on this mathematical formulation, we show how one
may identify the amount of bias in the training data as a
closed form expression. Furthermore, our derived form for
arXiv:1901.04966v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jan 2019

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
x1
y1
x2
y2
x3
y3
x4
y4
x5
y5
x1
y1
x2
y2
x3
y3
x4
y4
x5
y5
Underlying, true, unbiased labels
Observed, biased labels
Biased 
labeler
Standard loss
Our loss
biased classifier
unbiased classifier
Equivalent to training on original,
 unknown, unbiased labels.
wi
protected group
ytrue
ybias
Figure 1. In our approach to training an unbiased, fair classiﬁer, we assume the existence of a true but unknown label function which has
been adjusted by a biased process to produce the labels observed in the training data. Our main contribution is providing a procedure that
appropriately weights examples in the dataset, and then showing that training on the resulting loss corresponds to training on the original,
true, unbiased labels.
the bias suggests that its correction may be performed by as-
signing appropriate weights to each example in the training
data. We show, with theoretical guarantees, that training the
classiﬁer under the resulting weighted objective leads to an
unbiased classiﬁer on the original un-weighted dataset. No-
tably, many pre-processing approaches and even constrained
optimization approaches (e.g. Agarwal et al. (2018)) op-
timize a loss which possibly modiﬁes the observed labels
or features, and doing so may be legally prohibited as it
can be interpreted as training on falsiﬁed data; see Barocas
and Selbst (2016) (more details about this can be found in
Section 6). In contrast, our method does not modify any of
the observed labels or features. Rather, we correct for the
bias by changing the distribution of the sample points via
re-weighting the dataset.
Our resulting method is general and can be applied to vari-
ous notions of fairness, including demographic parity, equal
opportunity, equalized odds, and disparate impact. More-
over, the method is practical and simple to tune: With the
appropriate example weights, any off-the-shelf classiﬁca-
tion procedure can be used on the weighted dataset to learn
a fair classiﬁer. Experimentally, we show that on standard
fairness benchmark datasets and under a variety of fairness
notions our method can outperform previous approaches to
fair classiﬁcation.
2. Background
In this section, we introduce our framework for machine
learning fairness, which explicitly assumes an unknown
and unbiased ground truth label function. We additionally
introduce notation and deﬁnitions used in the subsequent
presentation of our method.
2.1. Biased and Unbiased Labels
Consider a data domain X and an associated data distri-
bution P. An element x ∈X may be interpreted as a
feature vector associated with a speciﬁc example. We let
Y := {0, 1} be the labels, considering the binary classiﬁca-
tion setting, although our method may be readily generalized
to other settings.
We assume the existence of an unbiased, ground truth label
function ytrue : X →[0, 1]. Although ytrue is the assumed
ground truth, in general we do not have access to it. Rather,
our dataset has labels generated based on a biased label
function ybias : X →[0, 1]. Accordingly, we assume that
our data is drawn as follows:
(x, y) ∼D ≡x ∼P, y ∼Bernoulli(ybias(x)).
and we assume access to a ﬁnite sample D[n]
:=
{(x(i), y(i))}n
i=1 drawn from D.
In a machine learning context, our directive is to use the
dataset D to recover the unbiased, true label function ytrue.
In general, the relationship between the desired ytrue and the
observed ybias is unknown. Without additional assumptions,
it is difﬁcult to learn a machine learning model to ﬁt ytrue.
We will attack this problem in the following sections by
proposing a minimal assumption on the relationship between
ytrue and ybias. The assumption will allow us to derive an
expression for ytrue in terms of ybias, and the form of this
expression will immediately imply that correction of the
label bias may be done by appropriately re-weighting the
data. We note that our proposed perspective on the problem
of learning a fair machine learning model is conceptually
different from previous ones. While previous perspectives
propose to train on the observed, biased labels and only
enforce fairness as a penalty or as a post-processing step
to the learning process, we take a more direct approach.
Training on biased data can be inherently misguided, and
thus we believe that our proposed perspective may be more
appropriate and better aligned with the directives associated
with machine learning fairness.
2.2. Notions of Bias
We now discuss precise ways in which ybias can be biased.
We describe a number of accepted notions of fairness; i.e.,

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
what it means for an arbitrary label function or machine
learning model h : X →[0, 1] to be biased (unfair) or
unbiased (fair).
We will deﬁne the notions of fairness in terms of a constraint
function c : X × Y →R. Many of the common notions of
fairness may be expressed or approximated as linear con-
straints on h (introduced previously by Cotter et al. (2018c);
Goh et al. (2016)). That is, they are of the form
Ex∼P [⟨h(x), c(x)⟩] = 0,
where ⟨h(x), c(x)⟩:= P
y∈Y h(y|x)c(x, y) and we use
the shorthand h(y|x) to denote the probability of sampling
y from a Bernoulli random variable with p = h(x); i.e.,
h(1|x) := h(x) and h(0|x) := 1 −h(x). Therefore, a label
function h is unbiased with respect to the constraint function
c if Ex∼P [⟨h(x), c(x)⟩] = 0. If h is biased, the degree of
bias (positive or negative) is given by Ex∼P [⟨h(x), c(x)⟩].
We deﬁne the notions of fairness with respect to a protected
group G, and thus assume access to an indicator function
g(x) = 1[x ∈G]. We use ZG := Ex∼P[g(x)] to denote the
probability of a sample drawn from P to be in G. We use
PX = Ex∼P[ytrue(x)] to denote the proportion of X which
is positively labelled and PG = Ex∼P[g(x) · ytrue(x)] to
denote the proportion of X which is positively labelled and
in G. We now give some concrete examples of accepted
notions of constraint functions:
Demographic parity (Dwork et al., 2012): A fair classiﬁer
h should make positive predictions on G at the same rate as
on all of X. The constraint function may be expressed as
c(x, 0) = 0, c(x, 1) = g(x)/ZG −1.
Disparate impact (Feldman et al., 2015): This is identical
to demographic parity, only that, in addition, during infer-
ence the classiﬁer does not have access to the features of x
indicating whether it belongs to the protected group.
Equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016): A fair classiﬁer
h should have equal true positive rates on G as on all
of X. The constraint may be expressed as c(x, 0) = 0,
c(x, 1) = g(x)ytrue(x)/PG −ytrue(x)/PX .
Equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016): A fair classiﬁer h
should have equal true positive and false positive rates
on G as on all of X. In addition to the constraint asso-
ciated with equal opportunity, this notion applies an ad-
ditional constraint with c(x, 0) = 0, c(x, 1) = g(x)(1 −
ytrue(x))/(ZG −PG) −(1 −ytrue(x))/(1 −PX ).
In practice,
there are often multiple fairness con-
straints {ck}K
k=1 associated with multiple protected groups
{Gk}K
k=1. It is clear that our subsequent results will assume
multiple fairness constraints and protected groups, and that
the protected groups may have overlapping samples.
3. Modeling How Bias Arises in Data
We now introduce our underlying mathematical framework
to understand bias in the data, by providing the relationship
between ybias and ytrue (Assumption 1 and Proposition 1).
This will allow us to derive a closed form expression for
ytrue in terms of ybias (Corollary 1). In Section 4 we will
show how this expression leads to a simple weighting pro-
cedure that uses data with biased labels to train a classiﬁer
with respect to the true, unbiased labels.
We begin with an assumption on the relationship between
the observed ybias and the underlying ytrue.
Assumption 1. Suppose that our fairness constraints are
c1, .., .cK, with respect to which ytrue is unbiased (i.e.
Ex∼P [⟨ytrue(x), ck(x)⟩] = 0 for k ∈[K]). We assume
that there exist ϵ1, . . . , ϵK ∈R such that the observed, bi-
ased label function ybias is the solution of the following
constrained optimization problem:
arg min
ˆy:X→[0,1]
Ex∼P [DKL(ˆy(x)||ytrue(x))]
s.t. Ex∼P [⟨ˆy(x), ck(x)⟩] = ϵk
for k = 1, . . . , K,
where we use DKL to denote the KL-divergence.
In other words, we assume that ybias is the label function
closest to ytrue while achieving some amount of bias, where
proximity to ytrue is given by the KL-divergence. This is a
reasonable assumption in practice, where the observed data
may be the result of manual labelling done by actors (e.g.
human decision-makers) who strive to provide an accurate
label while being affected by (potentially unconscious) bi-
ases; or in cases where the observed labels correspond to a
process (e.g. results of a written exam) devised to be accu-
rate and fair, but which is nevertheless affected by inherent
biases.
We use the KL-divergence to impose this desire to have an
accurate labelling. In general, a different divergence may be
chosen. However in our case, the choice of a KL-divergence
allows us to derive the following proposition, which pro-
vides a closed-form expression for the observed ybias. The
derivation of Proposition 1 from Assumption 1 is standard
and has appeared in previous works; e.g. Friedlander and
Gupta (2006); Botev and Kroese (2011). For completeness,
we include the proof in the Appendix.
Proposition 1. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds. Then
ybias satisﬁes the following for all x ∈X and y ∈Y.
ybias(y|x) ∝ytrue(y|x) · exp
(
−
K
X
k=1
λk · ck(x, y)
)
for some λ1, . . . , λK ∈R.

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
Given this form of ybias in terms of ytrue, we can immedi-
ately deduce the form of ytrue in terms of ybias:
Corollary 1. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds. The unbi-
ased label function ytrue is of the form,
ytrue(y|x) ∝ybias(y|x) · exp
( K
X
k=1
λkck(x, y)
)
,
for some λ1, . . . , λK ∈R.
We note that previous approaches to learning fair classi-
ﬁers often formulate a constrained optimization problem
similar to that appearing in Assumption 1 (i.e., maximize
the accuracy or log-likelihood of a classiﬁer subject to lin-
ear constraints) and subsequently solve it, usually via the
method of Lagrange multipliers which translates the con-
straints to penalties on the training loss. In our approach,
rather than using the constrained optimization problem to
formulate a machine learning objective, we use it to express
the relationship between true (unbiased) and observed (bi-
ased) labels. Furthermore, rather than training with respect
to the biased labels, our approach aims to recover the true
underlying labels. As we will show in the following sec-
tions, this may be done by simply optimizing the training
loss on a re-weighting of the dataset. In contrast, the penal-
ties associated with Lagrangian approaches can often be
cumbersome: The original, non-differentiable, fairness con-
straints must be relaxed or approximated before conversion
to penalties. Even then, the derivatives of these approxi-
mations may be near-zero for large regions of the domain,
causing difﬁculties during training.
4. Learning Unbiased Labels
We have derived a closed form expression for the true, un-
biased label function ytrue in terms of the observed label
function ybias, coefﬁcients λ1, . . . , λK, and constraint func-
tions c1, . . . , cK. In this section, we elaborate on how one
may learn a machine learning model h to ﬁt ytrue, given
access to a dataset D with labels sampled according to ybias.
We begin by restricting ourselves to constraints c1, . . . , cK
associated with demographic parity, allowing us to have full
knowledge of these constraint functions. In Section 4.3 we
will show how the same method may be extended to general
notions of fairness.
With knowledge of the functions c1, . . . , cK, it remains
to determine the coefﬁcients λ1, . . . , λK (which give us a
closed form expression for the dataset weights) as well as
the classiﬁer h. For simplicity, we present our method by
ﬁrst showing how a classiﬁer h may be learned assuming
knowledge of the coefﬁcients λ1, . . . , λK (Section 4.1). We
subsequently show how the coefﬁcients themselves may be
learned, thus allowing our algorithm to be used in general
setting (Section 4.2). Finally, we describe how to extend to
more general notions of fairness (Section 4.3).
4.1. Learning h Given λ1, . . . , λK
Although we have the closed form expression ytrue(y|x) ∝
ybias(y|x) exp
nPK
k=1 λkck
o
for the true label function,
in practice we do not have access to the values ybias(y|x)
but rather only access to data points with labels sampled
from ybias(y|x). We propose the weighting technique to
train h on labels based on ytrue.1
The weighting tech-
nique weights an example (x, y) by the weight w(x, y) =
ew(x, y)/ P
y′∈Y ew(x, y′), where
ew(x, y′) = exp
 K
X
k=1
λkck(x, y′)

.
We have the following theorem, which states that training
a classiﬁer on examples with biased labels weighted by
w(x, y) is equivalent to training a classiﬁer on examples
labelled according to the true, unbiased labels.
Theorem 1. For any loss function ℓ, training a classi-
ﬁer h on the weighted objective Ex∼P,y∼ybias(x)[w(x, y) ·
ℓ(h(x), y)] is equivalent to training the classiﬁer on the
objective Ex∼˜
P,y∼ytrue(x)[ℓ(h(x), y)] with respect to the
underlying, true labels, for some distribution ˜P over X.
Proof. For a given x and for any y ∈Y, due to Corollary 1
we have,
w(x, y)ybias(y|x) = φ(x)ytrue(y|x),
(1)
where φ(x) = P
y′∈Y w(x, y′)ybias(y′|x) depends only
on x. Therefore, letting ˜P denote the feature distribution
˜P(x) ∝φ(x)P(x), we have,
Ex∼P,y∼ybias(x)[w(x, y) · ℓ(h(x), y)] =
C · Ex∼˜
P,y∼ytrue(x)[ℓ(h(x), y)],
(2)
where C = Ex∼P[φ(x)], and this completes the proof.
Theorem 1 is a core contribution of our work. It states that
the bias in observed labels may be corrected in a simple and
straightforward way: Just re-weight the training examples.
We note that Theorem 1 suggests that when we re-weight the
training examples, we trade off the ability to train on unbi-
ased labels for training on a slightly different distribution ˜P
over features x. In Section 5, we will show that given some
mild conditions, the change in feature distribution does not
affect the bias of the ﬁnal learned classiﬁer. Therefore, in
these cases, training with respect to weighted examples with
biased labels is equivalent to training with respect to the
same examples and the true labels.
1See the Appendix for an alternative to the weighting technique
– the sampling technique, based on a coin-ﬂip.

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
4.2. Determining the Coefﬁcients λ1, . . . , λK
We now continue to describe how to learn the coefﬁcients
λ1, . . . , λK. One advantage of our approach is that, in prac-
tice, K is often small. Thus, we propose to iteratively learn
the coefﬁcients so that the ﬁnal classiﬁer satisﬁes the desired
fairness constraints either on the training data or on a vali-
dation set. We ﬁrst discuss how to do this for demographic
parity and will discuss extensions to other notions of fair-
ness in Section 4.3. See the full pseudocode for learning h
and λ1, . . . , λK in Algorithm 1.
Intuitively, the idea is that if the positive prediction rate for a
protected class G is lower than the overall positive prediction
rate, then the corresponding coefﬁcient should be increased;
i.e., if we increase the weights of the positively labeled
examples of G and decrease the weights of the negatively
labeled examples of G, then this will encourage the classiﬁer
to increase its accuracy on the positively labeled examples
in G, while the accuracy on the negatively labeled examples
of G may fall. Either of these two events will cause the
positive prediction rate on G to increase, and thus bring h
closer to the true, unbiased label function.
Accordingly, Algorithm 1 works by iteratively performing
the following steps: (1) evaluate the demographic parity
constraints; (2) update the coefﬁcients by subtracting the
respective constraint violation multiplied by a ﬁxed step-
size; (3) compute the weights for each sample based on these
multipliers using the closed-form provided by Proposition 1;
and (4) retrain the classiﬁer given these weights.
Algorithm 1 takes in a classiﬁcation procedure H, which
given a dataset D[n] := {(xi, yi)}n
i=1 and weights {wi}n
i=1,
outputs a classiﬁer. In practice, H can be any training
procedure which minimizes a weighted loss function over
some parametric function class (e.g. logistic regression).
Our resulting algorithm simultaneously minimizes the
weighted loss and maximizes fairness via learning the co-
efﬁcients, which may be interpreted as competing goals
with different objective functions. Thus, it is a form of a
non-zero-sum two-player game. The use of non-zero-sum
two-player games in fairness was ﬁrst proposed in Cotter
et al. (2018b) for the Lagrangian approach.
4.3. Extension to Other Notions of Fairness
The initial restriction to demographic parity was made so
that the values of the constraint functions c1, . . . , cK on any
x ∈X, y ∈Y would be known. We note that Algorithm 1
works for disparate impact as well: The only change would
be that the classiﬁer does not have access to the protected
attributes. However, in other notions of fairness, such as
equal opportunity or equalized odds, the constraint functions
depend on ytrue, which is unknown.
Algorithm 1 Training a fair classiﬁer for Demographic Par-
ity, Disparate Impact, or Equal Opportunity.
Inputs: Learning rate η, number of loops T, training
data D[n] = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, classiﬁcation procedure H.
constraints c1, ..., cK corresponding to protected groups
G1, ..., GK.
Initialize λ1, ..., λK to 0 and w1 = w2 = · · · = wn = 1.
Let h := H(D[n], {wi}n
i=1)
for t = 1, ..., T do
Let ∆k := Ex∼D[n][⟨h(x), ck(x)⟩] for k ∈[K].
Update λk = λk −η · ∆k for k ∈[K].
Let f
wi := exp
PK
k=1 λk · 1[x ∈Gk]

for i ∈[n]
Let wi = f
wi/(1 + f
wi) if yi = 1, otherwise wi =
1/(1 + f
wi) for i ∈[n]
Update h = H(D[n], {wi}n
i=1)
end for
Return h
For these cases, we propose to apply the same technique
of iteratively re-weighting the loss to achieve the desired
fairness notion, with the weights w(x, y) on each exam-
ple determined only by the protected attribute g(x) and the
observed label y ∈Y. This is equivalent to using The-
orem 1 to derive the same procedure presented in Algo-
rithm 1, but approximating the unknown constraint function
c(x, y) as a piece-wise constant function d(g(x), y), where
d : {0, 1} × Y →R is unknown. Although we do not
have access to d, we may treat d(g(x), y) as an additional
set of parameters – one for each protected group attribute
g(x) ∈{0, 1} and each label y ∈Y. These additional pa-
rameters may be learned in the same way the λ coefﬁcients
are learned. In some cases, their values may be wrapped
into the unknown coefﬁcients. For example, for equal op-
portunity, there is in fact no need for any additional param-
eters. On the other hand, for equalized odds, the unknown
values for λ1, . . . , λK and d1, . . . , dK, are instead treated
as unknown values for λT P
1
, . . . , λT P
K , λF P
1
, . . . , λF P
K ; i.e.,
separate coefﬁcients for positively and negatively labelled
points. Due to space constraints, see the Appendix for fur-
ther details on these and more general constraints.
5. Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we provide theoretical guarantees on a
learned classiﬁer h using the weighting technique. We show
that with the coefﬁcients λ1, ..., λK that satisfy Proposi-
tion 1, training on the re-weighted dataset leads to a ﬁnite-
sample non-parametric rates of consistency on the estima-
tion error provided the classiﬁer has sufﬁcient ﬂexibility.
We need to make the following regularity assumption on the
data distribution, which assumes that the data is supported
on a compact set in RD and ybias is smooth (i.e. Lipschitz).

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
Assumption 2. X is a compact set over RD and both
ybias(x) and ytrue(x) are L-Lipschitz (i.e.
|ybias(x) −
ybias(x′)| ≤L · |x −x′|).
We now give the result. The proof is technically involved
and is deferred to the Appendix due to space.
Theorem 2 (Rates of Consistency). Let 0 < δ < 1. Let
D[n] = {(xi, yi)}n
i=1 be a sample drawn from D. Suppose
that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Let H be the set of all
2L-Lipschitz functions mapping X to [0, 1]. Suppose that
the constraints are c1, ..., cK and the corresponding coefﬁ-
cients λ1, ..., λK satisfy Proposition 1 where −Λ ≤λk ≤Λ
for k = 1, ..., K and some Λ > 0. Let h∗be the optimal
function in H under the weighted mean square error objec-
tive, where the weights satisfy Proposition 1. Then there
exists C0 depending on D such that for n sufﬁciently large
depending on D, we have with probability at least 1 −δ:
||h∗−ytrue||2 ≤C0 · log(2/δ)1/(2+D) · n−1/(4+2D).
where ||h −h′||2 := Ex∼P[(h(x) −h′(x))2].
Thus, with the appropriate values of λ1,...,λK given by
Proposition 1, we see that training with the weighted dataset
based on these values will guarantee that the ﬁnal classi-
ﬁer will be close to ytrue. However, the above rate has a
dependence on the dimension D, which may be unattrac-
tive in high-dimensional settings. If the data lies on a d-
dimensional submanifold, then Theorem 3 below says that
without any changes to the procedure, we will enjoy a rate
that depends on the manifold dimension and independent of
the ambient dimension. Interestingly, these rates are attained
without knowledge of the manifold or its dimension.
Theorem 3 (Rates on Manifolds). Suppose that all of the
conditions of Theorem 2 hold and that in addition, X is a
d-dimensional Riemannian submanifold of RD with ﬁnite
volume and ﬁnite condition number. Then there exists C0
depending on D such that for n sufﬁciently large depending
on D, we have with probability at least 1 −δ:
||h∗−ytrue||2 ≤C0 · log(2/δ)1/(2+d) · n−1/(4+2d).
6. Related Work
Work in fair classiﬁcation can be categorized into three
approaches: post-processing of the outputs, the Lagrangian
approach of transforming constraints to penalties, and pre-
processing training data.
Post-processing: One approach to fairness is to perform a
post-processing of the classiﬁer outputs. Examples of pre-
vious work in this direction include Doherty et al. (2012);
Feldman (2015); Hardt et al. (2016). However, this ap-
proach of calibrating the outputs to encourage fairness has
limited ﬂexibility. Pleiss et al. (2017) showed that a de-
terministic solution is only compatible with a single error
constraint and thus cannot be applied to fairness notions
such as equalized odds. Moreover, decoupling the training
and calibration can lead to models with poor accuracy trade-
off. In fact Woodworth et al. (2017) showed that in certain
cases, post-processing can be provably suboptimal. Other
works discussing the incompatibility of fairness notions
include Chouldechova (2017); Kleinberg et al. (2016).
Lagrangian Approach: There has been much recent work
done on enforcing fairness by transforming the constrained
optimization problem via the method of Lagrange multi-
pliers. Some works (Zafar et al., 2015; Goh et al., 2016)
apply this to the convex setting. In the non-convex case,
there is work which frames the constrained optimization
problem as a two-player game (Kearns et al., 2017; Agar-
wal et al., 2018; Cotter et al., 2018b) . Related approaches
include Edwards and Storkey (2015); Corbett-Davies et al.
(2017); Narasimhan (2018). There is also recent work simi-
lar in spirit which encourages fairness by adding penalties
to the objective; e.g, Donini et al. (2018) studies this for
kernel methods and Komiyama et al. (2018) for linear mod-
els. However, the fairness constraints are often irregular and
have to be relaxed in order to optimize. Notably, our method
does not use the constraints directly in the model loss, and
thus does not require them to be relaxed. Moreover, these
approaches typically are not readily applicable to equality
constraints as feasibility challenges can arise; thus, there is
the added challenge of determining appropriate slack during
training. Finally, the training can be difﬁcult as Cotter et al.
(2018c) has shown that the Lagrangian may not even have a
solution to converge to.
When the classiﬁcation loss and the relaxed constraints have
the same form (e.g. a hinge loss as in Eban et al. (2017)),
the resulting Lagrangian may be rewritten as a cost-sensitive
classiﬁcation, explicitly pointed out in Agarwal et al. (2018),
who show that the Lagrangian method reduces to solving
an objective of the form Pn
i=1 wi1[h(xi) ̸= y′
i] for some
non-negative weights wi. In this setting, y′
i may not nec-
essarily be the true label, which may occur for example in
demographic parity when the goal is to predict more posi-
tively within a protected group and thus may be penalized
for predicting correctly on negative examples. While this
may be a reasonable approach to achieving fairness, it could
be interpreted as training a weighted loss on modiﬁed labels,
which may be legally prohibited (Barocas and Selbst, 2016).
Our approach is a non-negative re-weighting of the original
loss (i.e., does not modify the observed labels) and is thus
simpler and more aligned with legal standards.
Pre-processing: This approach has primarily involved mas-
saging the data to remove bias. Examples include Calders
et al. (2009); Kamiran and Calders (2009); ˇZliobaite et al.
(2011); Kamiran and Calders (2012); Zemel et al. (2013);
Fish et al. (2015); Feldman et al. (2015); Beutel et al. (2017).

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
Many of these approaches involve changing the labels and
features of the training set, which may have legal implica-
tions since it is a form of training on falsiﬁed data (Barocas
and Selbst, 2016). Moreover, these approaches typically do
not perform as well as the state-of-art and have thus far come
with few theoretical guarantees (Krasanakis et al., 2018). In
contrast, our approach does not modify the training data and
only re-weights the importance of certain sensitive groups.
Our approach is also notably based on a mathematically
grounded formulation of how the bias arises in the data.
7. Experiments
7.1. Datasets
Bank Marketing (Lichman et al., 2013) (45211 examples).
The data is based on a direct marketing campaign of a bank-
ing institution. The task is to predict whether someone will
subscribe to a bank product. We use age as a protected at-
tribute: 5 protected groups are determined based on uniform
age quantiles.
Communities and Crime (Lichman et al., 2013) (1994
examples). Each datapoint represents a community and the
task is to predict whether a community has high (above
the 70-th percentile) crime rate. We pre-process the data
consistent with previous works, e.g. Cotter et al. (2018a)
and form the protected group based on race in the same way
as done in Cotter et al. (2018a). We use four race features as
real-valued protected attributes corresponding to percentage
of White, Black, Asian and Hispanic. We threshold each at
the median to form 8 protected groups.
ProPublicas COMPAS (ProPublica, 2018) Recidivism
data (7918 examples). The task is to predict recidivism
based on criminal history, jail and prison time, demograph-
ics, and risk scores. The protected groups are two race-based
(Black, White) and two gender-based (Male, Female).
German Statlog Credit Data (Lichman et al., 2013) (1000
examples). The task is to predict whether an individual is a
good or bad credit risk given attributes related to the indi-
vidual’s ﬁnancial situation. We form two protected groups
based on an age cutoff of 30 years.
Adult (Lichman et al., 2013) (48842 examples). The task
is to predict whether the person’s income is more than 50k
per year. We use 4 protected groups based on gender (Male
and Female) and race (Black and White). We follow an
identical procedure to Zafar et al. (2015); Goh et al. (2016)
to pre-process the dataset.
7.2. Baselines
For all of the methods except for the Lagrangian, we train
using Scikit-Learn’s Logistic Regression (Pedregosa et al.,
2011) with default hyperparameter settings. We test our
Figure 2. Results as λ changes: We show test error and fairness vi-
olations for demographic parity on Adult as the weightings change.
We take the optimal λ = λ∗found by Algorithm 1. Then for each
value x on the x-axis, we train a classiﬁer with data weights based
on the setting λ = x · λ∗and plot the error and violations. We
see that indeed, when x = 1, we train based on the λ found by
Algorithm 1 and thus get the lowest fairness violation. On the other
hand, x = 0 corresponds to training on the unweighted dataset
and gives us the lowest prediction error. Analogous charts for the
rest of the datasets can be found in the Appendix.
method against the unconstrained baseline, post-processing
calibration, and the Lagrangian approach with hinge relax-
ation of the constraints. For all of the methods, we ﬁx the
hyperparameters across all experiments. For implementa-
tion details and hyperparameter settings, see the Appendix.
7.3. Fairness Notions
For each dataset and method, we evaluate our procedures
with respect to demographic parity, equal opportunity, equal-
ized odds, and disparate impact. As discussed earlier, the
post-processing calibration method cannot be readily ap-
plied to disparate impact or equalized odds (without added
complexity and randomized classiﬁers) so we do not show
these results.
7.4. Results
We present the results in Table 1. We see that our method
consistently leads to more fair classiﬁers, often yielding a
classiﬁer with the lowest test violation out of all methods.
We also include test error rates in the results. Although
the primary objective of these algorithms is to yield a fair
classiﬁer, we ﬁnd that our method is able to ﬁnd reasonable
trade-offs between fairness and accuracy. Our method often
provides either better or comparative predictive error than
the other fair classiﬁcation methods (see Figure 2 for more
insight into the trade-offs found by our algorithm).
The results in Table 1 also highlight the disadvantages of
existing methods for training fair classiﬁers. Although the
calibration method is an improvement over an unconstrained
model, it is often unable to ﬁnd a classiﬁer with lowest bias.

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
Table 1. Experiment Results: Benchmark Fairness Tasks: Each row corresponds to a dataset and fairness notion. We show the accuracy
and fairness violation of training with no constraints (Unc.), with post-processing calibration (Cal.), the Lagrangian approach (Lagr.) and
our method. Bolded is the method achieving lowest fairness violation for each row. All reported numbers are evaluated on the test set.
Dataset
Metric
Unc. Err.
Unc. Vio.
Cal. Err.
Cal. Vio.
Lagr. Err.
Lagr. Vio.
Our Err.
Our Vio.
Bank
Dem. Par.
9.41%
.0349
9.70%
.0068
10.46%
.0126
9.63%
.0056
Eq. Opp.
9.41%
.1452
9.55%
.0506
9.86%
.1237
9.48%
.0431
Eq. Odds
9.41%
.1452
N/A
N/A
9.61%
.0879
9.50%
.0376
Disp. Imp.
9.41%
.0304
N/A
N/A
10.44%
.0135
9.89%
.0063
COMPAS
Dem. Par.
31.49%
.2045
32.53%
.0201
40.16%
.0495
35.44%
.0155
Eq. Opp.
31.49%
.2373
31.63%
.0256
36.92%
.1141
33.63%
.0774
Eq. Odds
31.49%
.2373
N/A
N/A
42.69%
.0566
35.06%
.0663
Disp. Imp.
31.21%
.1362
N/A
N/A
40.35%
.0499
42.64%
.0256
Communities
Dem. Par.
11.62%
.4211
32.06%
.0653
28.46%
.0519
30.06%
.0107
Eq. Opp.
11.62%
.5513
17.64%
.0584
28.45%
.0897
26.85%
.0833
Eq. Odds
11.62%
.5513
N/A
N/A
28.46%
.0962
26.65%
.0769
Disp. Imp.
14.83%
.3960
N/A
N/A
28.26%
.0557
30.26%
.0073
German Stat.
Dem. Par.
24.85%
.0766
24.85%
.0346
25.45%
.0410
25.15%
.0137
Eq. Opp.
24.85%
.1120
24.54%
.0922
27.27%
.0757
25.45%
.0662
Eq. Odds
24.85%
.1120
N/A
N/A
34.24%
.1318
25.45%
.1099
Disp. Imp.
24.85%
.0608
N/A
N/A
27.57%
.0468
25.15%
.0156
Adult
Dem. Par.
14.15%
.1173
16.60%
.0129
20.47%
.0198
16.51%
.0037
Eq. Opp.
14.15%
.1195
14.43%
.0170
19.67%
.0374
14.46%
.0092
Eq. Odds
14.15%
.1195
N/A
N/A
19.04%
.0160
14.58%
.0221
Disp. Imp.
14.19%
.1108
N/A
N/A
20.48%
.0199
17.37%
.0334
We also ﬁnd the results of the Lagrangian approach to not
consistently provide fair classiﬁers. As noted in previous
work (Cotter et al., 2018c; Goh et al., 2016), constrained
optimization can be inherently unstable or requires a cer-
tain amount of slack in the objective as the constraints are
typically relaxed to make gradient-based training possible
and for feasibility purposes. Moreover, due to the added
complexity of this method, it can overﬁt and have poor
fairness generalization as noted in (Cotter et al., 2018a). Ac-
cordingly, we ﬁnd that the Lagrangian method often yields
poor trade-offs in fairness and accuracy, at times yielding
classiﬁers with both worse accuracy and more bias.
8. MNIST with Label Bias
We now investigate the practicality of our method on a
larger dataset. We take the MNIST dataset under the stan-
dard train/test split and then randomly select 20% of the
training data points and change their label to 2, yielding a
biased set of labels. On such a dataset, our method should
be able to ﬁnd appropriate weights so that training on the
weighted dataset roughly corresponds to training on the true
labels. To this end, we train a classiﬁer with a demographic-
parity-like constraint on the predictions of digit 2; i.e., we
encourage a classiﬁer to predict the digit 2 at a rate of 10%,
the rate appearing in the true labels. We compare to the same
baseline methods as before. See the Appendix for further
experimental details. We present the results in Table 2. We
Table 2. MNIST with Label Bias
Method
Test Accuracy
Trained on True Labels
97.85%
Unconstrained
88.18%
Calibration
89.79%
Lagrangian
94.05%
Our Method
96.16%
report test set accuracy computed with respect to the true
labels. We ﬁnd that our method is the only one that is able
to approach the accuracy of a classiﬁer trained with respect
to the true labels. Compared to the Lagrangian approach
or calibration, our method is able to improve error rate by
over half. Even compared to the next best method (the La-
grangian), our proposed technique improves error rate by
roughly 30%. These results give further evidence of the
ability of our method to effectively train on the underlying,
true labels despite only observing biased labels.
9. Conclusion
We presented a new framework to model how bias can arise
in a dataset, assuming that there exists an unbiased ground
truth. Our method for correcting for this bias is based on
re-weighting the training examples. Given the appropriate
weights, we showed with ﬁnite-sample guarantees that the
learned classiﬁer will be approximately unbiased. We gave
practical procedures which approximate these weights and
showed that the resulting algorithm leads to fair classiﬁers
in a variety of settings.

Identifying and Correcting Label Bias in Machine Learning
