Predicting Contextual Sequences via Submodular
Function Maximization
Debadeepta Dey∗, Tian Yu Liu∗, Martial Hebert∗, and J. Andrew Bagnell∗
∗The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract—Sequence optimization, where the items in a list are
ordered to maximize some reward has many applications such
as web advertisement placement, search, and control libraries
in robotics. Previous work in sequence optimization produces a
static ordering that does not take any features of the item or
context of the problem into account. In this work, we propose a
general approach to order the items within the sequence based
on the context (e.g., perceptual information, environment descrip-
tion, and goals). We take a simple, efﬁcient, reduction-based
approach where the choice and order of the items is established
by repeatedly learning simple classiﬁers or regressors for each
“slot” in the sequence. Our approach leverages recent work on
submodular function maximization to provide a formal regret
reduction from submodular sequence optimization to simple cost-
sensitive prediction. We apply our contextual sequence prediction
algorithm to optimize control libraries and demonstrate results
on two robotics problems: manipulator trajectory prediction and
mobile robot path planning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Optimizing the order of a set of choices is fundamental to
many problems such as web search, advertisement placements
as well as in robotics and control. Relevance and diversity are
important properties of an optimal ordering or sequence. In
web search, for instance, if the search term admits many differ-
ent interpretations then the results should be interleaved with
items from each interpretation [16]. Similarly in advertisement
placement on web pages, advertisements should be chosen
such that within the limited screen real estate they are diverse
yet relevant to the page content. In robotics, control libraries
have the same requirements for relevance and diversity in the
ordering of member actions. In this paper, we apply sequence
optimization to develop near-optimal control libraries. In the
context of control libraries, a sequence refers to a ranked
list of control action choices rather than a series of actions
to be taken. Examples of control actions include grasps for
manipulation, trajectories for mobile robot navigation or seed
trajectories for initializing a local trajectory optimizer.
Control libraries are a collection of control actions obtained
by sampling a useful set of often high dimensional control
trajectories or policies. Examples of control libraries include a
collection of feasible grasps for manipulation [5], a collection
of feasible trajectories for mobile robot navigation [9], and
a collection of expert-demonstrated trajectories for a walking
robot (Stolle et. al. [20]). Similarly, recording demonstrated
trajectories of experts aggressively ﬂying unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) has enabled dynamically feasible trajectories
to be quickly generated by concatenating a suitable subset of
stored trajectories in the control library [8].
Such libraries are an effective means of spanning the space
of all feasible control actions while at the same time dealing
with computational constraints. The performance of control
libraries on the speciﬁed task can be signiﬁcantly improved by
careful consideration of the content and order of actions in the
library. To make this clear let us consider speciﬁc examples:
Mobile robot navigation. In mobile robot navigation the
task is to ﬁnd a collision-free, low cost of traversal path
which leads to the speciﬁed goal on a map. Since sensor
horizons are ﬁnite and robots usually have constrained motion
models and non-trivial dynamics, a library of trajectories
respecting the dynamic and kinematic constraints of the robot
are precomputed and stored in memory. This constitutes the
control library. It is desired to sample a subset of trajectories
at every time step so that the overall cost of traversal of the
robot from start to goal is minimized.
Trajectory optimization. Local trajectory optimization
techniques are sensitive to initial trajectory seeds. Bad trajec-
tory initializations may lead to slow optimization, suboptimal
performance, or even remain in collision. In this setting,
the control actions are end-to-end trajectory seeds that act
as input to the optimization. Zucker [27] and Jetchev et
al. [11] proposed methods for predicting trajectories from a
precomputed library using features of the environment, yet
these methods do not provide recovery methods when the
prediction fails. Having a sequence of initial trajectory seeds
provides fallbacks should earlier ones fail.
Grasp libraries. During selection of grasps for an object,
a library of feasible grasps can be evaluated one at a time
until a collision-free, reachable grasp is found. While a naive
ordering of grasps can be based on force closure and stability
criteria [2], if a grasp fails, then grasps similar to it are also
likely to fail. A more principled ordering approach which takes
into account features of the environment can reduce depth of
the sequence that needs to be searched by having diversity in
higher ranked grasps.
Current state-of-the-art methods in the problems we address
either predict only a single control action in the library that
has the highest score for the current environment, or use an
ad-hoc ordering of actions such as random order or by past
rate of success. If the predicted action fails then systems
(e.g. manipulators and autonomous vehicles) are unable to
arXiv:1202.2112v1  [cs.AI]  9 Feb 2012

recover or have to fall back on some heuristic/hard-coded
contingency plan. Predicting a sequence of options to evaluate
is necessary for having intelligent, robust behavior. Choosing
the order of evaluation of the actions based on the context of
the environment leads to more efﬁcient performance.
A naive way of predicting contextual sequences would be
to train a multi-class classiﬁer over the label space consisting
of all possible sequences of a certain length. This space is
exponential in the number of classes and sequence length
posing information theoretic difﬁculties. A more reasonable
method would be to use the greedy selection technique by
Steeter et al. [21] over the hypothesis space of all predictors
which is guaranteed to yield sequences within a constant
factor of the optimal sequence. Implemented naively, this
remains expensive as it must explicitly enumerate the label
space. Our simple reduction based approach where we propose
to train multiple multi-class classiﬁers/regressors to mimic
greedy selection given features of the environment is both
efﬁcient and maintains performance guarantees of the greedy
selection.
Perception modules using sensors such as cameras and li-
dars are part and parcel of modern robotic systems. Leveraging
such information in addition to the feedback of success or
failure is conceptually straightforward: instead of considering
a sequence of control actions, we consider a sequence of
classiﬁers which map features X to control actions A, and
attempt to ﬁnd the best such classiﬁer at each slot in the
control action sequence. By using contextual features, our
method has the beneﬁt of closing the loop with perception
while maintaining the performance guarantees in Streeter et
al.[21].
The outlined examples present loss functions that depend
only on the “best” action in the sequence, or attempt to
minimize the prediction depth to ﬁnd a satisfactory action.
Such loss functions are monotone, submodular – i.e., one
with diminishing returns.1 We deﬁne these functions in section
II and review the online submodular function maximization
approach of Streeter et al. [21]. We also describe our contex-
tual sequence optimization (CONSEQOPT) algorithm in detail.
Section III shows our algorithm’s performance improvement
over alternatives for local trajectory optimization for manipu-
lation and in path planning for mobile robots.
Our contributions in this work are:
• We propose a simple, near-optimal reduction for contex-
tual sequence optimization. Our approach moves from
predicting a single decision based on features to making
a sequence of predictions, a problem that arises in many
domains including advertisement prediction [22, 16] and
search.
• The application of this technique to the contextual opti-
mization of control libraries. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy
of the approach on two important problems: robot ma-
nipulation planning and mobile robot navigation. Using
1For more information on submodularity and optimization of submodular
functions we refer readers to the tutorial [4].
the sequence of actions generated by our approach we
observe improvement in performance over sequences
generated by either random ordering or decreasing rate
of success of the actions.
• Our algorithm is generic and can be naturally applied
to any problem where ordered sequences (e.g., advertise-
ment placement, search, recommendation systems, etc)
need to be predicted and relevance and diversity are
important.
II. CONTEXTUAL OPTIMIZATION OF SEQUENCES
A. Background
The control library is a set V of actions. Each action is
denoted by a ∈V . 2 Formally, a function f : S →ℜ+ is
monotone submodular for any sequence S ∈S where S is
the set of all sequences of actions if it satisﬁes the following
two properties:
• (Monoticity) for any sequence S1,S2 ∈S , f(S1) ≤f(S1⊕
S2) and f(S2) ≤f(S1 ⊕S2)
• (Submodularity) for any sequence S1,S2 ∈S , f(S1) and
any action a ∈V , f(S1 ⊕S2 ⊕⟨a⟩)−f(S1 ⊕S2) ≤f(S1 ⊕
⟨a⟩)−f(S1)
where ⊕denotes order dependent concatenation of sequences.
These imply that the function always increases as more actions
are added to the sequence (monotonicity) but the gain obtained
by adding an action to a larger pre-existing sequence is less
as compared to addition to a smaller pre-existing sequence
(sub-modularity).
For control library optimization, we attempt to optimize one
of two possible criteria: the cost of the best action a in a
sequence (with a budget on sequence size) or the time (depth
in sequence) to ﬁnd a satisﬁcing action. For the former, we
consider the function,
f ≡No −min(cost(a1),cost(a2),...,cost(aN))
No
,
(1)
where cost is an arbitrary cost on an action (ai) given an
environment and No is a constant, positive normalizer which
is the highest cost. 3 Note that the f takes in as arguments the
sequence of actions a1,a2,...,aN directly, but is also implicitly
dependent on the current environment on which the actions are
evaluated in cost(ai). Dey et al. [6] prove that this criterion is
monotone submodular in sequences of control actions and can
be maximized– within a constant factor– by greedy approaches
similar to Streeter et al. [21].
For the latter optimization criteria, which arises in grasping
and trajectory seed selectin, we deﬁne the monotone, sub-
modular loss function f : S →[0,1] as f ≡P(S) where
P(S) is the probability of successfully grasping an object in
2In this work we assume that each action choice takes the same time to
execute although the proposed approach can be readily extended to handle
different execution times.
3For mobile robot path planning, for instance, cost(ai) is typically a
simple measure of mobility penalty based on terrain for traversing a trajectory
ai sampled from a set of trajectories and terminating in a heuristic cost-to-go
estimate, compute by, e.g. A*.

a given scenario using the sequence of grasps provided. It
is easy to check [6] that this function is also monotone and
submodular, as the probability of success always increases as
we consider additional elements. Minimizing the depth in the
control library to be evaluated becomes our goal. In the rest of
the paper all objective functions are assumed to be monotone
submodular unless noted otherwise.
While optimizing these over library actions is effective, the
ordering of actions does not take into account the current
context.
People do not attempt to grasp objects based only
on previous performance of grasps: they take into account
the position, orientation of the object, the proximity and
arrangement of clutter around the object and also their own
position relative to the object in the current environment.
B. Our Approach
We consider functions that are submodular over sequences
of either control actions themselves or, crucially, over clas-
siﬁers that take as input environment features X and map
to control actions V . Additionally, by considering many
environments, the expectation of f in equation (1) over these
environments also maintains these properties. In our work, we
always consider the expected loss averaged over a (typically
empirical) distribution of environments.
In Algorithm 1, we present a simple approach for learning
such a near-optimal contextual control library.
C. Algorithm for Contextual Submodular Sequence Optimiza-
tion
Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram for algorithm 1 which
trains a classiﬁer for each slot of the sequence. Deﬁne matrix
X to be the set of features from a distribution of example
environments (one feature vector per row) and matrix Y to be
the corresponding target action identiﬁer for each example.
Let each feature vector contain L attributes. Let D be the
set of example environments containing |D| examples. The
size of X is |D| × L and size of Y is |D|× 1. We denote the
ith classiﬁer by πi. Deﬁne MLi to be the matrix of marginal
losses for each environment for the ith slot of the sequence.
In the parlance of cost-sensitive learning MLi is the example-
dependent cost matrix. MLi is of dimension |D| × |V |. Each
row of MLi contains, for the corresponding environment, the
loss suffered by the classiﬁer for selecting a particular action
a ∈V . The most beneﬁcial action has 0 loss while others
have non-zero losses. These losses are normalized to be within
[0−1]. We detail how to calculate the entries of MLi below.
Classiﬁer inputs are the set of feature vectors X for the dataset
of environments and the marginal loss matrix MLi.
For ease of understanding let us walk through the training
of the ﬁrst two classiﬁers π1 and π2.
Consider the ﬁrst classiﬁer training in Figure 1 and its inputs
X and ML1. Consider the ﬁrst row of ML1. Each element of
this row corresponds to the loss incurred if the corresponding
action in V were taken on the corresponding environment
whose features are in the ﬁrst row of X. The best action has 0
loss while all the others have relative losses in the range [0−1]
Π1#(train)#
Π1#(classify)#
0000000000#
0000000000
0000000000#
0000000000#
0000000000
0000000000#
000000
000000
000000#
000000
000000
000000#
X#
X#
Yπ1#
Marginal#Loss#ML1#
Π2#(train)#
Π2#(classify)#
0000000000#
0000000000
0000000000#
0000000000#
0000000000
0000000000#
000000
000000
000000#
000000
000000
000000#
X#
X#
Yπ2#
Marginal#Loss#ML2#
!#
!#
!#
Fig. 1: Schematic of training sequence of classiﬁers for regret
reduction of contextual sequence optimization to multi-class,
cost-sensitive, classiﬁcation
depending on how much worse they are compared to the best
action. This way the rest of the rows in ML1 are ﬁlled out.
The cost sensitive classiﬁer π1 is trained. The set of features X
from each environment in the training set are again presented
to it to classify. The output is matrix Yπ1 which contains the
selected action for the 1st slot for each environment. As no
element of the hypothesis class performs perfectly this results
in Yπ1, where not every environment had the 0 loss action
picked.
Consider the second classiﬁer training in Figure 1. Consider
the ﬁrst row of ML2. Suppose control action id 13 was
selected by classiﬁer π1 in the classiﬁcation step for the ﬁrst
environment, which provides a gain of 0.6 to the objective
function f i.e. f[13] = 0.6. For each of the control actions a
present in the library V ﬁnd the action which provides maxi-
mum marginal improvement i.e. amax = argmaxa(f([13,a])−

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for training CONSE QOP T using classifiers
Input: sequence length N, multi-class cost sensitive classifier routine π, dataset D of
|D| number of environments and associated features X, library of control actions V
Output: sequence of classifiers π1,π2,...,πN
1: for i = 1 to N do
2:
MLi ←computeTargetActions(X,Yπ1,π2,...,πi−1,V )
3:
πi ←train(X,MLi)
4:
Yπi ←classify(X)
5: end for
Algorithm 2 Algorithm for training CONSE QOP T using regressors
Input: sequence length N, regression routine ℜ, dataset D of |D| number of
environments, library of control actions V
Output: sequence of regressors ℜ1,ℜ2,...,ℜN
1: for i = 1 to N do
2:
Xi,MBi ←computeFeatures&Benefit(D,Yℜ1,ℜ2,...,ℜi−1,V )
3:
ℜi ←train(Xi,MBi)
4:
˜MBi ←regress(Xi,ℜi)
5:
Yℜi = argmax( ˜MBi)
6: end for
f([13])) = argmaxa(f([13,a]) −0.6. Additionally convert the
marginal gains computed for each a in the library to propor-
tional losses and store in the ﬁrst row of ML2. If amax is the
action with the maximum marginal gain then the loss for each
of the other actions is f([13,amax]) −f([13,a]). amax has 0
loss while other actions have >= 0 loss. The rest of the rows
are ﬁlled up similarly. π2 is trained, and evaluated on same
dataset to produce Yπ2.
This procedure is repeated for all N slots producing a se-
quence of classiﬁers π1,π2,...,πN. The idea is that a classiﬁer
must suffer a high loss when it chooses a control action
which provides little marginal gain when a higher gain action
was available. Any cost-sensitive multi-class classiﬁer may be
used.
During test time, for a given environment features are
extracted, and the classiﬁers associated with each slot of the
sequence outputs a control action to ﬁll the slot. This sequence
can then be evaluated as usual. This procedure is formalized in
Algorithm 1. In computeTargetActions the previously
detailed procedure for calculating the entries of the marginal
loss matrix MLi for the ith slot is carried out, followed by the
training step in train and classiﬁcation step in classify.
Algorithm 2 has a similar structure as algorithm 1. This
alternate formulation has the advantage of being able to add
actions to the control library without retraining the sequence
of classiﬁers. Instead of directly identifying a target class, we
use a squared-loss regressor in each slot to produce an estimate
of the marginal beneﬁt from each action at that particular slot.
Hence MBi is a |D|×|V | matrix of the actual marginal beneﬁt
computed in a similiar fashion as MLi of Algorithm 1, and ˜MBi
is the estimate given by our regressor at ith slot. In line 2 we
compute the feature matrix Xi. In this case, a feature vector
is computed per action per environment, and uses information
from the previous slots’ target choice Yℜi. For feature vectors
of length L, Xi has dimensions |D||V |×L. The features and
marginal beneﬁts at ith slot are used to train regressor ℜi,
producing the estimate ˜MBi. We then pick the action a which
produces the maximum ˜MBi to be our target choice Yℜi, a |D|
length vector of indices into V for each environment.
D. Reduction Argument
We establish a formal regret reduction [3] between cost
sensitive multi-class classiﬁcation error and the resulting er-
ror on the learned sequence of classiﬁers. Speciﬁcally, we
demonstrate that if we consider the control actions to be the
classes and train a series of classiﬁers– one for each slot of the
sequence– on the features of a distribution of environments
then we can produce a near-optimal sequence of classiﬁers.
This sequence of classiﬁers can be invoked to approximate
the greedy sequence constructed by allowing additive error in
equation (3).
Theorem 1. If each of the classiﬁers (πi) trained in Al-
gorithm 1 achieves multi-class cost-sensitive regret of ri,
then the resulting sequence of classiﬁers is within at least
(1−1
e)maxS∈S f(S)−∑N
i=1 ri of the optimal such sequence of
classiﬁers S from the same hypothesis space. 4
Proof:
(Sketch)
Deﬁne
the
loss
of
a
multi-class,
cost-sensitive
classiﬁer
π
over
a
distribution
of
envi-
ronments
D
as
l(π,D).
Each
example
can
be
repre-
sented as (xn,m1
n,m2
n,m3
n,...,m|V |
n ) where xn
is the set
4When the objective is to minimize the time (depth in sequence) to ﬁnd a
satisﬁcing element then the resulting sequence of classiﬁers f( ˆS⟨N⟩) ≤4
R ∞
0 1−
maxS∈S f(S⟨n⟩)dn+∑N
i=1 ri.

of features representing the nth example environment and
m1
n,m2
n,m3
n,...,m|V |
n
are the per class costs of misclassifying
xn. m1
n,m2
n,m3
n,...,m|V |
n
are simply the nth row of MLi (which
corresponds to the nth environment in the dataset D). The best
class has a 0 misclassiﬁcation cost and while others are greater
than equal to 0 (There might be multiple actions which will
yield equal marginal beneﬁt). Classiﬁers generally minimize
the expected loss l(π,D) =
E
(xn,m1n,m2n,m3n,...,m|V |
n
)∼D
[Cπ(xn)] where
Cπ(xn) = mπ(xn)
n
denotes the example-dependent multi-class
misclassiﬁcation cost. The best classiﬁer in the hypothesis
space Π minimizes l(π,D)
π∗= argmin
π∈Π
E
(xn,m1n,m2n,m3n,...,m|V |
n
)∼D
[Cπ(xn)]
(2)
The regret of π is deﬁned as r = l(π,D) −l(π∗,D). Each
classiﬁer associated with ith slot of the sequence has a regret
ri.
Streeter et al. [21] consider the case where the ith decision
made by the greedy algorithm is performed with additive error
εi. Denote by ˆS = ⟨ˆs1, ˆs2,..., ˆsN⟩a variant of the sequence S in
which the ith argmax is evaluated with additive error εi. This
can be formalized as
f( ˆSi ⊕ˆsi)−f( ˆSi) ≥max
si∈V f( ˆSi ⊕si)−f( ˆSi)−εi
(3)
where ˆS0 = ⟨⟩, ˆSi = ⟨ˆs1, ˆs2, ˆs3,..., ˆsi−1⟩for i ≥1 and si is the
predicted control action by classiﬁer πi. They demonstrate that,
for a budget or sequence length of N
f( ˆS⟨N⟩) ≥(1−1
e)max
S∈S f(S)−
N
∑
i=1
εi
(4)
assuming each control action takes equal time to execute.
Thus the ith argmax in equation (3) is chosen with some
error εi = ri. An εi error made by classiﬁer πi corresponds to
the classiﬁer picking an action whose marginal gain is εi less
than the maximum possible. Hence the performance bound on
additive error greedy sequence construction stated in equation
(4) can be restated as
f( ˆS⟨N⟩) ≥(1−1
e)max
S∈S f(S)−
N
∑
i=1
ri
(5)
Theorem 2. The sequence of squared-loss regressors (ℜi)
trained in Algorithm 2 is within at least (1−1
e)maxS∈S f(S)−
∑N
i=1
p
2(|V |−1)rregi of the optimal sequence of classiﬁers S
from the hypothesis space of multi-class cost-sensitive classi-
ﬁers.
Proof: (Sketch) Langford et al. [14] show that the re-
gret reduction from multi-class classiﬁcation to squared-loss
regression has a regret reduction of
p
2(|k|−1)rreg where k
is the number of classes and rreg is the squared-loss regret
on the underlying regression problem. In Algorithm 2 we use
squared-loss regression to perform multi-class classiﬁcation
thereby incurring for each slot of the sequence a reduction
regret of
p
2(|V |−1)rregi where |V | is the number of actions
in the control library. Theorem 1 states that the sequence of
classiﬁers is within at least f( ˆS⟨N⟩) ≥(1−1
e)maxS∈S f(S)−
∑N
i=1 ri of the optimal sequence of classiﬁers. Plugging in
the regret reduction from [14] we get the result that the
resulting sequence of regressors in Algorithm 2 is within
at least (1 −1
e)maxS∈S f(S) −∑N
i=1
p
2(|V |−1)rregi of the
optimal sequence of multi-class cost-sensitive classiﬁers.
III. CASE STUDIES
A. Robot Manipulation Planning via Contextual Control Li-
braries
We demonstrate the application of CONSEQOPT for manip-
ulation planning on a 7 degree of freedom manipulator.
Recent work [18, 11] has shown that by relaxing the hard
constraint of avoiding obstacles into a soft penalty term on
collision, simple local optimization techniques can quickly
lead to smooth, collision-free trajectories suitable for robot
execution. Often the default initialization trajectory seed is
a simple straight-line initialization in joint space [18]. This
heuristic is surprisingly effective in many environments, but
suffers from local convergence and may fail to ﬁnd a trajectory
when one exists. In practice, this may be tackled by providing
cleverer initialization seeds [11, 27]. While these methods
reduce the chance of falling into local minima, they do not
have any alternative plans should the chosen initialization
seed fail. A contextual ranking of a library of initialization
trajectory seeds can provide feasible alternative seeds should
earlier choices fail. Proposed initialization trajectory seeds can
be developed in many ways including human demonstration
[17] or use of a slow but complete planner[13].
For this experiment we attempt to plan a trajectory to a
pre-grasp pose over the target object in a cluttered envi-
ronment using the local optimization planner CHOMP [18]
and minimize the total planning and execution time of the
trajectory. A training dataset of |D| = 310 environments and
test dataset of 212 environments are generated. Positions of the
target object and obstacles on the table are randomly assigned.
To populate the control library, we consider initialization
trajectories that move ﬁrst to an “exploration point” and
then to the goal. The exploration points are generated by
randomly perturbing the midpoint of the original straight line
initialization in joint space. The resulting initial trajectories
are then piecewise straight lines in joint space from the start
point to the exploration point, and from the exploration point
to the goal. Half of the seed trajectories are prepended with a
short path to start from a left-arm conﬁguration, and half are
in right-arm conﬁguration. This is because the local planner
has a difﬁcult time switching between conﬁgurations, while
environmental context can provide a lot of information about
which conﬁguration to use. 30 trajectories are generated and
form our action library V . Figure 2a shows an example set for
a particular environment. Notice that in this case the straight-
line initialization of CHOMP goes through the obstacle and

therefore CHOMP has a difﬁcult time ﬁnding a valid trajectory
using this initial seed.
In our results we use a small number (1−3) of slots in our
sequence to ensure the overhead of ordering and evaluating the
library is small. When CHOMP fails to ﬁnd a collision-free
trajectory for multiple initializations seeds, one can always
fall back on slow but complete planners. Thus the contextual
control sequence’s role is to quickly evaluate a few good
options and choose the initialization trajectory that will result
in the minimum execution time. We note that in our experi-
ments, the overhead of ordering and evaluating the library is
negligible as we rely on a fast predictor and features computed
as part of the trajectory optimization, and by choosing a
small sequence length we can effectively compute a motion
plan with expected planning time under 0.5s. We can solve
most manipulation problems that arise in our manipulation
research very quickly, falling back to initializing the trajectory
optimization with a complete motion planner only in the most
difﬁcult of circumstances.
For each initialization trajectory, we calculate 17 simple
feature values which populate a row of the feature matrix
Xi: length of trajectory in joint space; length of trajectory in
task space, the xyz values of the end effector position at the
exploration point (3 values), the distance ﬁeld
values used
by CHOMP at the quarter points of the trajectory (3 values),
joint values of the ﬁrst 4 joints at both the exploration point
(4 values) and the target pose (4 values), and whether the
initialization seed is in the same left/right kinematic arm con-
ﬁguration as the target pose. During training time, we evaluate
each initialization seed in our library on all environments in
the training set, and use their performance and features to train
each regressor ℜi in CONSEQOPT. At test time, we simply
run Algorithm 2 without the training step to produce Yℜ1,...,ℜN
as the sequence of initialization seeds to be evaluated. Note
that while the ﬁrst regressor uses only the 17 basic features,
the subsequent regressors also include the difference in feature
values between the remaining actions and the actions chosen
by the previous regressors. These difference features improve
the algorithm’s ability to consider trajectory diversity in the
actions chosen.
We compare CONSEQOPT with two other methods of
ranking the initialization library: a random ordering of the
actions, and an ordering by sorting the output of the ﬁrst
regressor. Sorting by the ﬁrst regressor is functionally the same
as maximizing the absolute beneﬁt rather than the marginal
beneﬁt at each slot. We compare both the number of CHOMP
failures as well as the average execution time of the ﬁnal
trajectory. For execution time, we assume the robot can be
actuated at 1 rad/second for each joint and use the shortest
trajectory generated using the N seeds ranked by CONSEQOPT
as the performance. If we fail to ﬁnd a collision free trajectory
and need to fall back to a complete planner (RRT [13] plus
trajectory optimization), we apply a maximum execution time
penalty of 40 seconds due to the longer computation time and
resulting trajectory.
The results over 212 test environments are summarized
(a) The default straight-line initialization of CHOMP is marked in
orange. Notice this initial seed goes straight through the obstacle and
causes CHOMP to fail to ﬁnd a collision-free trajectory.
(b) The initialization seed for CHOMP found using CONSEQOPT is
marked in orange. Using this initial seed CHOMP is able to ﬁnd a
collision free path that also has a relatively short execution time.
Fig. 2: CHOMP initialization trajectories generated as control
actions for CONSEQOPT. Blue lines trace the end effector path
of each trajectory in the library. Orange lines in each image
trace the initialization seed generated by the default straight-
line approach and by CONSEQOPT, respectively.

in Figure 3. With only simple straight line initialization,
CHOMP is unable to ﬁnd a collision free trajectory in 162/212
environments, with a resulting average execution time of 33.4s.
While a single regressor (N = 1) can reduce the number of
CHOMP failures from 162 to 79 and the average execution
time from 33.4s to 18.2s, when we extend the sequence
length, CONSEQOPT is able to reduce both metrics faster
than a ranking by sorting the output of the ﬁrst regressor.
This is because for N > 1, CONSEQOPT chooses a primitive
that provides the maximum marginal beneﬁt, which results
in trajectory seeds that have very different features from the
previous slots’ choices. Ranking by the absolute beneﬁt tends
to pick trajectory seeds that are similar to each other, and
thus are more likely to fail when the previous seeds fail. At a
sequence length of 3, CONSEQOPT has only 16 failures and an
average execution time of 3 seconds. A 90% improvement
in success rate and a 75% reduction in execution time.
Note that planning times are generally negligible compared to
execution times for manipulation hence this improvement is
signiﬁcant. Figure 2b shows the initialization seed found by
CONSEQOPT for the same environment as in Figure 2a. Notice
that this seed avoids collision with the obstacle between the
manipulator and the target object enabling CHOMP to produce
a successful trajectory.
B. Mobile Robot Navigation
An effective means of path planning for mobile robots is
to sample a budgeted number of trajectories from a large
library of feasible trajectories and traverse the one which has
the lowest cost of traversal for a small portion and repeat
the process again. The sub-sequence of trajectories is usually
computed ofﬂine [9, 7]. Such methods are widely used in
modern, autonomous ground robots including the two highest
placing teams for DARPA Urban Challenge and Grand Chal-
lenge [25, 15, 24, 23], LAGR [10], UPI [1], and Perceptor [12]
programs. We use CONSEQOPT to maximize this function and
generate trajectory sequences taking the current environment
features.
Figures 4a and 4b shows a section of Fort Hood, TX and
the corresponding robot cost-map respectively. We simulated
a robot traversing between various random starting and goal
locations using the maximum-discrepancy trajectory [9] se-
quence as well as sequences generated by CONSEQOPT using
Algorithm 1. A texton library [26] of 25 k-means cluster
centers was computed for the whole overhead map. At run-
time the texton histogram for the image patch around the robot
was used as features. Online linear support vector machines
(SVM) with slack re-scaling [19] were used as the cost-
sensitive classiﬁers for each slot. We report a 9.6% decrease
over 580 runs using N = 30 trajectories in the cost of traver-
sal as compared to ofﬂine precomputed trajectory sequences
which maximize the area between selected trajectories [9]. Our
approach is able to choose which trajectories to use at each
step based on the appearance of terrain (woods, brush, roads,
etc.) As seen in Figure 4c at each time-step CONSEQOPT the
trajectories are so selected that most of them fall in the empty
Fig. 3: Results of CONSEQOPT for manipulation planning in
212 test environments. The top image shows the number of
CHOMP failures for three different methods after each slot
in the sequence. CONSEQOPT not only signiﬁcantly reduces
the number of CHOMP failures in the ﬁrst slot, but also
further reduces the failure rate faster than both the other
methods when the sequence length is increased. The same
trend is observed in the bottom image, which shows the
average execution time of the chosen trajectory. The ‘No Seed’
column refers to the straight-line heuristic used by the original
CHOMP implementation
space around obstacles.
