THE GATEDTABTRANSFORMER. AN ENHANCED
DEEP LEARNING ARCHITECTURE FOR TABULAR MODELING.
Radostin Cholakov
High School of Mathematics
Plovdiv, Bulgaria

Todor Kolev
Obecto
Soﬁa, Bulgaria

ABSTRACT
There is an increasing interest in the application of deep learning architectures to tabular
data. One of the state-of-the-art solutions is TabTransformer which incorporates an attention
mechanism to better track relationships between categorical features and then makes use of a
standard MLP to output its ﬁnal logits. In this paper we propose multiple modiﬁcations to the
original TabTransformer performing better on binary classiﬁcation tasks for three separate
datasets with more than 1% AUROC gains. Inspired by gated MLP, linear projections are
implemented in the MLP block and multiple activation functions are tested. We also evaluate
the importance of speciﬁc hyper parameters during training.
Keywords deep learning · Transformer · tabular data
1
Introduction
Some of the most common machine learning pipelines with real-world applications involve manipulation of
tabular data. The current state-of-the-art approaches for tabular modeling are treebased ensemble methods
such as the gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs) [1]. However, there is also an increasing interest in the
application of deep learning techniques in the ﬁeld due to the possibility for bypassing manual embedding
creation and feature engineering. [2]. Multiple neural network solutions such as DNF-Net [3], TabNet [4] or
MLP+ [2] have been introduced, all of which demonstrate performance comparable to GBDTs.
On the other hand, as we’ve described in previous studies [5], attention-based architectures, originally
introduced to tackle NLP tasks, such as the Transformer [6] are constantly being adapted to solve a wider
range of problems. One proposal is the TabTransformer [7] which focuses on using Multi-Head Self Attention
blocks to model relationships between the categorical features in tabular data, transforming them into robust
contextual embeddings. The transformed categorical features are concatenated with continuous values and
then fed through a standard multilayer perceptron [8] (section 1.1). This way the TabTransformer signiﬁcantly
outperforms pure MLPs and recent deep networks (e.g. TabNet [4]) for tabular data. We believe that it
is possible to further enhance its architecture by replacing the ﬁnal MLP block with a gated multi-layer
perceptron (gMLP) [9] - a simple MLP-based network with spatial gating projections, which aims to be on
par with Transformers in terms of performance on sequential data (section 1.2).
In this paper we will present an enhanced version of the TabTransformer with incorporated gMLP block
and the intuition behind it. Also multiple other architecture design decisions based on hyper parameter
optimization experiments will be described.
arXiv:2201.00199v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2022

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
1.1
The TabTransformer
The TabTransformer model, introduced in December 2020 by researchers at Amazon manages to outperform
the other state-of-the-art deep learning methods for tabular data by at least 1.0% on mean AUROC. It consists
of a column embedding layer, a stack of N Transformer layers, and a multilayer perceptron (ﬁgure 2). The
inputted tabular features are split in two parts for the categorical and continuous values. For each categorical
feature the so called column embedding is performed (see [7]). It generates parametric embeddings which are
inputted to a stack of Transformer layers. Each Transformer layer [6] consists of a multi-head self-attention
layer followed by a position-wise feed-forward layer.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(1)
After the processing of categorical values xcat, they are concatenated along with the continuous values xcont
to form a ﬁnal feature vector x which is inputted to a standard multilayer perceptron.
1.2
The gMLP
The gMLP model [9] introduces some simple yet really effective modiﬁcations to the standard multilayer
perceptron. It consists of a stack of multiple identically structured blocks (ﬁgure 1.2) deﬁned as follows:
Z = σ(XU), Z′ = s(Z), Y = Z′V
(2)
s(Z) = Z ∗fW,b(Z)
(3)
fW,b(Z) = WZ + b
(4)
where σ is an activation function (e.g. ReLU), U and V - linear projections along the channel dimension and
s(.) is the so called spatial gating unit which captures spatial cross-token interactions. fW,b is a simplistic
linear projection and ∗represents element-wise multiplication. Usually the weights W are initialized as
near-zero values and the biases b as ones at the beginning of training.
This structure does not require positional embeddings because relevant information will be captured in the
gating units. From the original gMLP paper we can denote that the presented block layout is inspired by
inverted bottlenecks which deﬁne s(.) as a spatial convolution [10].
gMLP has been proposed by Google in May 2021 as an alternative to Transformers for NLP and vision
tasks having up to 66% less trainable parameters. In our study we will replace the pure MLP block in the
TabTransformer with gMLP and test how well it can model tabular data and whether it is able to extract any
additional information.
2
Related work
In recent years a lot of experiments have been conducted to test the applicability of standard MLPs for tabular
modeling [11]. Multiple Transformer-based methods have been also used to ﬁt tabular features [12], [13].
For example AutoInt [12] proposes multi-head self-attentive neural network to explicitly model the feature
interactions in a low-dimensional space.
An extensive performance comparison of the most popular tabular models along with their advantages and
disadvantages can be found in a paper from August 2021 [2]. It also features enhancements to AutoInt and
MLPs such as the use of element-wise linear transformations (gating) followed by LeakyReLU activation.
The intuition behind the gates implemented there is similar to the gMLP block in our architecture.
2

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
Activation
Channel Proj
Channel Proj
Input Embeddings
Norm
Spatial 
Gating Unit
Lx
Spatial Proj
Norm
split
Figure 1: Overview of the gMLP architecture. Z to be split into two independent parts during spatial gating -
one for multiplicative bypass and one for gating is also proposed for further optimization.
Another recently published paper [14] from June 2021, initially named "Regularization is all you Need",
suggests that implementing various MLP regularization strategies in combination with some of the already
described techniques has a potential for further performance boosts in deep networks for tabular problems.
3
Model
As described in section 1.1, column embeddings are generated from categorical data features. If continuous
values are present in the dataset they are passed through a normalization layer.
The categorical embeddings are then processed by a Transformer block. In our case a Transformer block
represents the encoder part of a typical Transformer [6]. It has two sub-layers - a multi-head self-attention
mechanism, and a simple, positionwise fully connected feed-forward network.
As a ﬁnal layer we have placed a slight modiﬁcation of the original gMLP, called gMLP_Classiﬁcation in our
code. It is adapted to output classiﬁcation logits and works best for optimization of cross entropy or binary
cross entropy loss1.
By stacking multiple Transformer blocks and gMLP structures we were able to outperform some state-of-the-
art deep models. More details on how well this solution performs can be found in section 5.
Model implementation2 is done with the PyTorch [15] machine learning framework in a CUDA environment
[16].
4
Experiments
To test the proposed architecture multiple experiments were conducted. Their main objective was to compare
the standard TabTransformer’s performance to the proposed model.
1https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.BCELoss.html
2Model implementation, experiments setup and dataset characteristics are publicly available on https://github.com/
radi-cho/GatedTabTransformer.
3

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
Layer
Normalization
Concatenation
Multi-Head
Attention
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
Add & Norm
Norm
SGU
Activation (e.g. ReLU)
Channel Projection
Channel Projection
Sum
Categorical
Embeddings
Continuous
Values
Spatial Gating Unit (SGU)
Split
Linear
gating
Norm
Spatial
Projection
gMLP
Transformer block
Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed GatedTabTransformer. N Transformer blocks can be stacked on one
another. The same is true for L gMLP layers.
4.1
Data
We made use of three main datasets for experimentation - namely blastchar, 1995_income from Kaggle3, and
bank_marketing from UCI repository4. Their size varies between 7K and 45K samples with 14 to 19 features.
In all datasets the label values are binary, thus binary classiﬁcation should be performed. These three sets are
all also mentioned in the original TabTransformer paper [7]. Detailed data characteristics can be found in
Appendix B.
Dataset splitting follows the 65/15/20% pattern for train/validation/test. The validation split is used to pick
the best performing model state during training and the test split is only used to determine the ﬁnal scores.
During our research the pandas [17] and seaborn [18] packages were used for data analysis, manipulation
and visualisation.
4.2
Hyper parameter optimization
To generate our results (section 5) we set up a simpliﬁed pipeline without the optional embedding pre-
trainning or self-supervised learning steps described in [7]. As a ﬁrst step we recreated the implementation of
3https://kaggle.com/
4http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php
4

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
the original TabTransformer and ﬁtted it to the mentioned datasets with manually selected hyper parameters.
Secondly, tuning environment was created to ﬁnd the best performing set of hyper parameters (initial learning
rate, hidden layers count, hidden dimensions, dropouts, etc.) for each dataset.
Then we upgraded the TabTransformer as described in section 3 and repeated the HPO process again, ﬁnding
the best set of parameters for the new model. More details on what parameter values were tested can be found
in Appendix A. To avoid overﬁtting and to speed up training early stopping was implemented.
To train and tune our models efﬁciently we used the Ray Tune [19] Python library.
4.2.1
Learning rate and optimization objectives
A key parameter when training a ML model is learning rate5. In our experiments a learning rate scheduler6
was implemented to decay the initial rate α by γ every step size n and help for quicker convergence. Values
for α, γ and n together with epoch count patience p for early stopping were tuned with a grid search strategy.
The process was executed separately for the gated and baseline TabTransformers.
4.2.2
Hidden layers and dimensions
Other important hyper parameters are count and dimensions of the hidden layers in either the MLP or gMLP
and number of heads for the Multi-Head Attention. All of these were also tuned with Ray. Our ﬁndings
suggest that by increasing the baseline model’s number of MLP neurons its performance peaks at a certain
value and slowly decreases from that point onward, whereas the gMLP continues to increase its performance
at small steps for much longer. For example if the two models perform equivalently well with hidden
dimension of 32, increasing it to 128 is more likely to higher the performance of the gMLP TabTransformer
compared to baseline.
4.2.3
Neuron Activation
Yet another aspect of optimization is to choose an activation function for the multilayer perceptorn neurons
[20]. During tuning we tested ReLU, GELU, SELU and LeakyReLU7 with multiple options for its negative
slope (Appendix A).
LeakyReLU(x) =
x,
if x ≥0
negative_slope ∗x,
otherwise
(5)
For both models LeakyReLU with slopes from 0.01 up to 0.05 and the standard ReLU performed with highest
results. For simplicity and consistency we proceeded our work with standard ReLU activation. More about
the effect of LeakyReLU can be found in the following study - [2].
5
Results
5.1
Performance evaluation metrics
For consistency with previously conducted studies we utilized area under receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC)8 as a performance evaluation technique [21]. The reported results are generated by training
and evaluating a model conﬁguration with the same parameters but with different seeds or randomized order
of data samples multiple times (usually 5, 25 or 50), computing the mean AUROC and then comparing it to
the mean scores of the other model conﬁgurations. For the TabNet model comparison expected gains were
manually calculated based on the results reported in [7] and [2].
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_rate
6https://bit.ly/3lt15km
7https://paperswithcode.com/method/leaky-relu
8https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Receiver_operating_characteristic
5

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
To estimate and visualise the performance of our models we used the scikit-learn [22] and matplotlib [23]
packages for Python.
5.2
Performance comparisons
As a result of our proposals the GatedTabTransformer shows between 0.5% and 1.1% performance increase in
terms of mean AUROC (ﬁgure 3) compared to the baseline TabTransformer and 1% to 2% increase compared
to MLPs (table 1).
Table 1: Performance gain in mean percent AUROC compared to baseline models.
Gain over
Gain over
Gain over
Dataset
MLP
TabTransformer
TabNet
bank_marketing
1.3
1.0
3.1
1995_income
0.9
0.7
2.5
blastchar
0.4
0.5
1.6
Figure 3: AUROC gain charts for the 3 datasets - comparison between baseline TabTransformer (blue) and
the proposed GatedTabTransformer (orange).
6
Future work
A fruitful direction for further research would be to investigate the effects of combining our current solutions
with some of the recent breakthroughs in regularization, feature engineering, etc.
6

Radostin Cholakov and Todor Kolev
The GatedTabTransformer.
As a long term direction we will be working on a custom AutoML9 pipeline focused on tabular data modeling.
It will require the implementation of neural architecture search10 strategies such as reinforcement learning
or evolutionary algorithms [24] to test and discover new model designs. As a reference a paper titled "The
Evolved Transformer" [25] by Google from 2019 should be mentioned. It describes how NAS can be used
with a Transformer [6] as initial seed to discover more sophisticated architectures. Analogically TabNet,
TabTransformer and other tabular models could be used as seeds in a potential NAS process. Additional
embedding techniques and manipulated representations of the data (e.g. TaBERT [26], TabFormer [27]) can
be incorporated as pre-processing steps.
7
Conclusion
In the presented study we have explored some modiﬁcations to the original TabTransformer [7] architecture
which impact beneﬁcially binary classiﬁcation tasks for three separate datasets with more than 1% area under
receiver operating characteristic curve gains. Linear projections inspired by gated multilayer perceptrons
[9] have been proposed for the TabTransformer’s ﬁnal MLP block where its ﬁnal logits are generated. We
have also conducted multiple hyper parameter optimization iterations during training to test the impact of
different activation functions, learning rates, hidden dimensions and layer structures. These ﬁndings have
signiﬁcant importance when working with tabular predictions and we’ve open-sourced our model and applied
it in practical use cases to further showcase their importance.
8
