JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
1
Waveform Modeling and Generation Using
Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks for Speech
Bandwidth Extension
Zhen-Hua Ling, Member, IEEE, Yang Ai, Yu Gu, and Li-Rong Dai
Abstract—This paper presents a waveform modeling and
generation method using hierarchical recurrent neural networks
(HRNN) for speech bandwidth extension (BWE). Different from
conventional BWE methods which predict spectral parame-
ters for reconstructing wideband speech waveforms, this BWE
method models and predicts waveform samples directly without
using vocoders. Inspired by SampleRNN which is an uncon-
ditional neural audio generator, the HRNN model represents
the distribution of each wideband or high-frequency waveform
sample conditioned on the input narrowband waveform samples
using a neural network composed of long short-term memory
(LSTM) layers and feed-forward (FF) layers. The LSTM layers
form a hierarchical structure and each layer operates at a speciﬁc
temporal resolution to efﬁciently capture long-span dependencies
between temporal sequences. Furthermore, additional conditions,
such as the bottleneck (BN) features derived from narrowband
speech using a deep neural network (DNN)-based state classiﬁer,
are employed as auxiliary input to further improve the quality
of generated wideband speech. The experimental results of
comparing several waveform modeling methods show that the
HRNN-based method can achieve better speech quality and run-
time efﬁciency than the dilated convolutional neural network
(DCNN)-based method and the plain sample-level recurrent
neural network (SRNN)-based method. Our proposed method
also outperforms the conventional vocoder-based BWE method
using LSTM-RNNs in terms of the subjective quality of the
reconstructed wideband speech.
Index Terms—speech bandwidth extension, recurrent neural
networks, dilated convolutional neural networks, bottleneck
features
I. INTRODUCTION
S
PEECH communication is important in people’s daily life.
However, due to the limitation of transmission channels
and the restriction of speech acquisition equipments, the
bandwidth of speech signal is usually limited to a narrowband
of frequencies. For example, the bandwidth of speech signal
in the public switching telephone network (PSTN) is less than
4kHz. The missing of high-frequency components of speech
signal usually leads to low naturalness and intelligibility, such
This work was partially funded by National Key Research and Development
Project of China (Grant No. 2017YFB1002202) and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grants No. U1636201).
Z.-H. Ling, Y. Ai, and L.-R. Dai are with the National Engineering
Laboratory of Speech and Language Information Processing, University

Y. Gu is with Baidu Speech Department, Baidu Technology Park, Beijing,

was a graduate student at the National Engineering Laboratory of Speech and
Language Information Processing, University of Science and Technology of
China.
as the difﬁculty of distinguishing fricatives and similar voices.
Therefore, speech bandwidth extension (BWE), which aims to
restore the missing high-frequency components of narrowband
speech using the correlations that exist between the low and
high-frequency components of the wideband speech signal, has
attracted the attentions of many researchers. BWE methods can
not only be applied to real-time voice communication, but also
beneﬁt other speech signal processing areas such as text-to-
speech (TTS) synthesis [1], speech recognition [2], [3], and
speech enhancement [4], [5].
Many researchers have made a lot of efforts in the ﬁeld
of BWE. Some early studies adopted the source-ﬁlter model
of speech production and attempted to restore high-frequency
residual signals and spectral envelopes respectively from
input narrowband signals. The high-frequency residual signals
were usually estimated from the narrowband residual signals
by spectral folding [6]. To estimate high-frequency spectral
envelopes from narrowband signals is always a difﬁcult task.
To achieve this goal, simple methods, such as codebook
mapping [7] and linear mapping [4], and statistical methods
using Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) [8]–[11] and hidden
Markov models (HMMs) [12]–[15], have been proposed. In
statistical methods, acoustic models were build to represent
the mapping relationship between narrowband spectral param-
eters and high-frequency spectral parameters. Although these
statistical methods achieved better performance than simple
mapping methods, the inadequate modeling ability of GMMs
and HMMs may lead to over-smoothed spectral parameters
which constraints the quality of reconstructed speech signals
[16].
In recent years, deep learning has become an emerging
ﬁeld in machine learning research. Deep learning techniques
have been successfully applied to many signal processing
tasks. In speech signal processing, neural networks with deep
structures have been introduced to the speech generation tasks
including speech synthesis [17], [18], voice conversion [19],
[20], speech enhancement [21], [22], and so on. In the ﬁeld
of BWE, neural networks have also been adopted to predict
either the spectral parameters representing vocal-tract ﬁlter
properties [23]–[25] or the original log-magnitude spectra
derived by short-time Fourier transform (STFT) [26], [27].
The studied model architectures included deep neural networks
(DNN) [28]–[30], recurrent temporal restricted Boltzmann
machines (RBM) [31], recurrent neural networks (RNN) with
long short-term memory (LSTM) cells [32], and so on.
These methods achieved better BWE performance than using
arXiv:1801.07910v1  [cs.SD]  24 Jan 2018

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
2
conventional statistical models, like GMMs and HMMs, since
deep-structured neural networks are more capable of modeling
the complicated and nonlinear mapping relationship between
input and output acoustic parameters.
However, all these existing methods are vocoder-based ones,
which means vocoders are used to extract spectral param-
eters from narrowband waveforms and then to reconstruct
waveforms from the predicted wideband or high-frequency
spectral parameters. This may lead to two deﬁciencies. First,
the parameterization process of vocoders usually degrades
speech quality. For example, the spectral details are always
lost in the reconstructed waveforms when low-dimensional
spectral parameters, such as mel-cepstra or line spectral
pairs (LSP), are adopted to represent spectral envelopes in
vocoders. The spectral shapes of the noise components at
voiced frames are always ignored when only F0 values
and binary voiced/unvoiced ﬂags are used to describe the
excitation. Second, it is difﬁcult to parameterize and to predict
phase spectra due to the phase-warpping issue. Thus, simple
estimation methods, such as mirror inversion, are popularly
used to predict the high-frequency phase spectra in existing
methods [26], [32]. This also constraints the quality of the
reconstructed wideband speech.
Recently, neural network-based speech waveform synthe-
sizers, such as WaveNet [33] and SampleRNN [34], have
been presented. In WaveNet [33], the distribution of each
waveform sample conditioned on previous samples and addi-
tional conditions was represented using a neural network with
dilated convolutional neural layers and residual architectures.
SampleRNN [34] adopted recurrent neural layers with a hier-
archical structure for unconditional audio generation. Inspired
by WaveNet, a waveform modeling and generation method
using stacked dilated CNNs for BWE has been proposed in
our previous work [35], which achieved better subjective BWE
performance than the vocoder-based approach utilizing LSTM-
RNNs. On the other hand, the methods of applying RNNs to
directly model and generate speech waveforms for BWE have
not yet been investigated.
Therefore, this paper proposes a waveform modeling and
generation method using RNNs for BWE. As discussed above,
direct waveform modeling and generation can help avoid the
spectral representation and phase modeling issues in vocoder-
based BWE methods. Considering the sequence memory and
modeling ability of RNNs and LSTM units, this paper adopts
LSTM-RNNs to model and generate the wideband or high-
frequency waveform samples directly given input narrowband
waveforms. Inspired by SampleRNN [34], a hierarchical RNN
(HRNN) structure is presented for the BWE task. There are
multiple recurrent layers in an HRNN and each layer operates
at a speciﬁc temporal resolution. Compared with plain sample-
level deep RNNs, HRNNs are more capable and efﬁcient
at capturing long-span dependencies in temporal sequences.
Furthermore, additional conditions, such as the bottleneck
(BN) features [32], [36], [37] extracted from narrowband
speech using a DNN-based state classiﬁer, are introduced into
HRNN modeling to further improve the performance of BWE.
The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, this
paper makes the ﬁrst successful attempt to model and gen-
erate speech waveforms directly at sample-level using RNNs
for the BWE task. Second, various RNN architectures for
waveform-based BWE, including plain sample-level LSTM-
RNNs, HRNNs, and HRNNs with additional conditions, are
implemented and evaluated in this paper. The experimental
results of comparing several waveform modeling methods
show that the HRNN-based method achieves better speech
quality and run-time efﬁciency than the stacked dilated CNN-
based method [35] and the plain sample-level RNN-based
method. Our proposed method also outperforms the conven-
tional vocoder-based BWE method using LSTM-RNNs in
terms of the subjective quality of the reconstructed wideband
speech.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we brieﬂy
review previous BWE methods including vocoder-based ones
and the dilated CNN-based one. In Section III, the details of
our proposed method are presented. Section IV reports our
experimental results, and conclusions are given in Section V.
II. PREVIOUS WORK
A. Vocoder-Based BWE Using Neural Networks
The vocoder-based BWE methods using DNNs or RNNs
have been proposed in recent years [26], [32]. In these meth-
ods, spectral parameters such as logarithmic magnitude spectra
(LMS) were ﬁrst extracted by short time Fourier transform
(STFT) [38]. Then, DNNs or LSTM-RNNs were trained under
minimum mean square error (MMSE) criterion to establish a
mapping relationship from the LMS of narrowband speech
to the LMS of the high-frequency components of wideband
speech. Some additional features extracted from narrowband
speech, such as bottleneck features, can be used as auxiliary
inputs to improve the performance of networks [32]. At the
stage of reconstruction, the LMS of wideband speech were
reconstructed by concatenating the LMS of input narrowband
speech and the LMS of high-frequency components predicted
by the trained DNN or LSTM-RNN. The phase spectra of
wideband speech were usually generated by some simple
mapping algorithms, such as mirror inversion [26]. Finally,
inverse FFT (IFFT) and overlap-add algorithm were carried
out to reconstruct the wideband waveforms from the predicted
LMS and phase spectra.
The experimental results of previous work showed that
LSTM-RNNs can achieve better performance than DNNs in
the vocoder-based BWE [32]. Nevertheless, there are still some
issues with the vocoder-based BWE approach as discussed
in Section I, such as the quality degradation caused by the
parameterization of vocoders and the inadequacy of restoring
phase spectra.
B. Waveform-Based BWE Using Stacked Dilated CNNs
Recently, a novel waveform generation model named
WaveNet was proposed [33] and has been successfully
applied to the speech synthesis task [39]–[41]. This model
utilizes stacked dilated CNNs to describe the autoregressive
generation
process
of
audio
waveforms
without
using
frequency analysis and vocoders. A stacked dilated CNN
consists of many convolutional layers with different dilation

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
3
 t  t+1 
 t-1 
...
...
yt yt+1 
yt-1 
...
...
Fig. 1. The structure of stacked dilated non-causal CNNs [35].
factors. The length of its receptive ﬁled grows exponentially
in terms of the network depth [33].
Motivated by this idea, a waveform modeling and generation
method for BWE was proposed [35], which described the con-
ditional distribution of the output wideband or high-frequency
waveform sequence y = [y1, y2, . . . , yT ] conditioned on the
input narrowband waveform sequence x = [x1, x2, . . . , xT ]
using stacked dilated CNNs . Similar to WaveNet, the samples
xt and yt were all discretized by 8-bit µ-law quantization
[42] and a softmax output layer was adopted. Residual and
parameterized skip connections together with gated activation
functions were also employed to capacitate training deep
networks and to accelerate the convergence of model esti-
mation. Different from WaveNet, this method modeled the
mapping relationship between two waveform sequences, not
the autoregressive generation process of output waveform
sequence. Both causal and non-causal model structures were
implemented and experimental results showed that the non-
causal structure achieved better performance than the causal
one [35]. The stacked dilated non-causal CNN, as illustrated
in Fig. 1, described the conditional distribution as
p(y|x) =
T
Y
t=1
p(yt|xt−N/2, xt−N/2+1, . . . , xt+N/2),
(1)
where N + 1 is the length of receptive ﬁeld.
At the extension stage, given input narrowband speech, each
output sample was obtained by selecting the quantization level
with maximum posterior probability. Finally, the generated
waveforms were processed by a high-pass ﬁlter and then added
with the input narrowband waveforms to reconstruct the ﬁnal
wideband waveforms. Experimental results showed that this
method achieved better subjective BWE performance than the
vocoder-based method using LSTM-RNNs [35].
III. PROPOSED METHODS
Inspired by SampleRNN [34] which is an unconditional
audio generator containing recurrent neural layers with a
hierarchical structure, this paper proposes waveform modeling
and generation methods using RNNs for BWE. In this section,
we ﬁrst introduce the plain sample-level RNNs (SRNN) for
waveform modeling. Then the structures of hierarchical RNNs
(HRNN) and conditional HRNNs are explained in detail.
Finally, the ﬂowchart of BWE using RNNs is introduced.
Embedding layer
et-1
et
et+1
 t-1
 t
 t+1
yt-1
yt
yt+1
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
LSTM
layers
FF
layers
Fig. 2. The structure of SRNNs for BWE, where concentric circles represent
LSTM layers and inverted trapezoids represent FF layers.
A. Sample-Level Recurrent Neural Networks
The LSTM-RNNs for speech generation are usually built
at frame-level in order to model the acoustic parameters
extracted by vocoders with a ﬁxed frame shift [32], [43]. It
is straightforward to model and generate speech waveforms
at sample-level using similar LSTM-RNN framework. The
structure of sample-level recurrent neural networks (SRNNs)
for BWE is shown in Fig. 2, which is composed of a cascade
of LSTM layers and feed-forward (FF) layers. Both the input
waveform samples x = [x1, x2, . . . , xT ] and output waveform
samples y = [y1, y2, . . . , yT ] are quantized to discrete values
by µ-law. The embedding layer maps each discrete sample
value xt to a real-valued vector et. The LSTM layers model
the sequence of embedding vectors in a recurrent manner.
When there is only one LSTM layer, the calculation process
can be formulated as
ht = H(ht−1, et),
(2)
where ht is the output of LSTM layers at time step t, H
represents the activation function of LSTM units. If there are
multiple LSTM layers, their output can be calculated layer-
by-layer. Then, ht passes through FF layers. The activation
function of the last layer is a softmax function which generates
the probability distribution of the output sample yt conditioned
on the previous and current input samples {x1, x2, . . . , xt} as
p(yt|x1, x2, . . . , xt) = FF(ht),
(3)
where function FF denotes the calculation of FF layers.
Given a training set with parallel input and output waveform
sequences, the model parameters of the LSTM and the FF
layers are estimated using cross-entropy cost function. At gen-
eration time, each output sample yt is obtained by maximizing
the conditional probability distribution (3). Our preliminary
and informal listening test showed that this generation criterion
can achieve better subjective performance than generating
random samples from the distribution. The random sampling
is necessary for the conventional WaveNet and SampleRNN
models because of their autoregressive architecture. However,
the model structure shown in Fig. 2 is not an autoregressive
one. The input waveforms provide the necessary randomness
to synthesize the output speech, especially the unvoiced
segments.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
4
 1, , L
(3)  
 1, , L
(2)  
 L
(2)+1, , 2L
(2)  
 L
(3)-L
(2)+1, , L
(3)  
e1
eL
(2) eL
(2)+1
e2L
(2)
eL
(3)
eL
(3)-L
(2)+1
y1 
yL
(2) 
yL
(2)+1
y2L
(2)
yL
(3)-L
(2)+1
yL
(3)
···
(3)
1
d
(3)
2
d
(3)
L(3)/L(2)
d
(2)
1
d
(2)
L(2)
d
(2)
L(2)+1
d
(2)
2L(2)
d
(2)
L(3)-L(2)+1
d
(2)
L(3)
d
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Fig. 3. The structure of HRNNs for BWE, where concentric circles represent
LSTM layers and inverted trapezoids represent FF layers.
In an SRNN, the generation of each output sample depends
on all previous and current input samples. However, this
plain LSTM-RNN architecture still has some deﬁciencies
for waveform modeling and generation. First, sample-level
modeling makes it difﬁcult to model long-span dependencies
between input and output speech signals due to the signiﬁ-
cantly increased sequence length compared with frame-level
modeling. Second, SRNNs suffer from the inefﬁciency of
waveform generation due to the point-by-point calculation at
all layers and the dimension expansion at the embedding layer.
Therefore, inspired by SampleRNN [34], a hierarchical RNN
(HRNN) structure is proposed in next subsection to alleviate
these problems.
B. Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks
The structure of HRNNs for BWE is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Similar to SRNNs mentioned in Section III-A, HRNNs are
also composed of LSTM layers and FF layers. Different from
the plain LSTM-RNN structure of SRNNs, these LSTM and
FF layers in HRNNs form a hierarchical structure of multiple
tiers and each tier operates at a speciﬁc temporal resolution.
The bottom tier (i.e., Tier 1 in Fig. 3) deals with individual
samples and outputs sample-level predictions. Each higher tier
operates on a lower temporal resolution (i.e., dealing with
more samples per time step). Each tier conditions on the tier
above it except the top tier. This model structure is similar
to SampleRNN [34]. The main difference is that the original
SampleRNN model is an unconditional audio generator which
employs the history of output waveforms as network input and
generates output waveforms in an autoregressive way. While,
the HRNN model shown in Fig. 3 describes the mapping
relationship between two waveform sequences directly without
considering the autoregressive property of output waveforms.
This HRNN structure is speciﬁcally designed for BWE be-
cause narrowband waveforms are used as inputs in this task.
Removing autoregressive connections can help reduce the
computation complexity and facilitate parallel computing at
generation time. Although conditional SampleRNNs have been
developed and used as neural vocoders to reconstruct speech
waveforms from acoustic parameters [44], they still follow the
autoregressive framework and are different from HRNNs.
Assume an HRNN has K tiers in total (e.g., K = 3 in Fig.
3). Tier 1 works at sample-level and the other K −1 tiers are
frame-level tiers since they operate at a temporal resolution
lower than samples.
1) Frame-level tiers: The k-th tier (1 < k ≤K) operates
on frames composed of L(k) samples. The range of time
step at the k-th tier, t(k), is determined by L(k). Denoting
the quantized input waveforms as x = [x1, x2, . . . , xT ] and
assuming that L represents the sequence length of x after
zero-padding so that L can be divisible by L(K), we can get
t(k) ∈T (k) = {1, 2, . . . ,
L
L(k) }, 1 < k ≤K.
(4)
Furthermore, the relationship of temporal resolution between
the m-th tier and the n-th tier (1 < m < n ≤K) can be
described as
T (n) = {t(n)|t(n) = ⌈
t(m)
L(n)/L(m) ⌉, t(m) ∈T (m)},
(5)
where ⌈·⌉represents the operation of rounding up. It can
be observed from (5) that one time step of the n-th tier
corresponds to L(n)/L(m) time steps of the m-th tier. The
frame inputs f (k)
t
at the k-th tier (1 < k ≤K) and the
t-th time step can be written by framing and concatenation
operations as
˜
f (k)
t
= [x(t−1)L(k)+1, . . . , xtL(k)]⊤,
(6)
f (k)
t
= [ ˜
f (k)⊤
t
, ..., ˜
f (k)⊤
t+c(k)−1]⊤,
(7)
where t ∈T (k), ˜
f (k)
t
denotes the t-th waveform frame at the
k-th tier, and c(k) is the number of concatenated frames at
the k-th tier. We have c(3) = c(2) = 1 in the model structure
shown in Fig. 3.
As shown in Fig. 3, the frame-level ties are composed of
LSTM layers. For the top tier (i.e., k = K), the LSTM units
update their hidden states h(K)
t
based on the hidden states of
previous time step h(K)
t−1 and the input at current time step
f (K)
t
. If there is only one LSTM layer in the K-th tier, the
calculation process can be formulated as
h(K)
t
= H(h(K)
t−1, f (K)
t
), t ∈T (K).
(8)
If the top tier is composed of multiple LSTM-RNN layers, the
hidden states can be calculated layer-by-layer iteratively.
Due to the different temporal resolution at different tiers, the
top tier generates r(K) = L(K)/L(K−1) conditioning vectors
for the (K −1)-th tier at each time step t ∈T (K). This
is implemented by producing a set of r(K) separate linear
projections of h(K)
t
at each time step. For the intermediate tiers
(i.e., 1 < k < K), the processing of generating conditioning
vectors is the same as that of the top tier. Thus, we can describe
the conditioning vectors uniformly as
d(k)
(t−1)r(k)+j = W (k)
j
h(k)
t
, j = 1, 2, . . . , r(k), t ∈T (k),
(9)
where 1 < k ≤K and r(k) = L(k)/L(k−1).
The input vectors of the LSTM layers at intermediate tiers
are different from that of the top tier. For the k-th tier
(1 < k < K), the input vector i(k)
t
at the t-th time step is

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
5
composed by a linear combination of the frame inputs f (k)
t
and the conditioning vectors d(k+1)
t
given by the (k + 1)-th
tier as
i(k)
t
= W (k)f (k)
t
+ d(k+1)
t
, t ∈T (k),
(10)
Thus, the output of the LSTM layer at the k-th tier (1 < k <
K) can be calculated as
h(k)
t
= H(h(k)
t−1, i(k)
t
), t ∈T (K).
(11)
2) Sample-level tier: The sample-level tier (i.e., Tier 1
in Fig. 3) gives the probability distribution of the output
sample yt conditioned on the current input sample xt (i.e.,
L(1) = 1) together with the conditioning vector d(2)
t
passed
from the above tier which encodes history information of the
input sequence, where t ∈T (1) = {1, 2, . . . ,
L
L(1) }. Since xt
and yt are individual samples, it is convenient to model the
correlation among them using a memoryless structure such as
FF layers. First, xt is mapped into a real-valued vector et by
an embedding layer. These embedding vectors form the input
at each time step of the sample-level tier, i.e.,
f (1)
t
= [e⊤
t , ..., e⊤
t+c(1)−1]⊤,
(12)
where t ∈T (1), c(1) is the number of concatenated sample
embeddings at the sample-level tier. In the model structure
shown in Fig. 3, c(1) = 1. Then, the input of the FF layers is
a linear combination of f (1)
t
and d(2)
t
as
i(1)
t
= W (1)f (1)
t
+ d(2)
t , t ∈T (1).
(13)
Finally, we can obtain the conditional probability distribu-
tion of the output sample yt by passing i(1)
t
through the FF
layers. The activation function of the last FF layer is a softmax
function. The output of FF layers describes the conditional
distribution
p(yt|x1, x2, . . . , x(⌈
t
L(K) ⌉+c(K)−1)L(K)) = FF(i(1)
t ),
(14)
where t ∈T (1).
It is worth mentioning that the structure shown in Fig. 3 is
non-casual which utilizes future input samples together with
current and previous input samples to predict current output
sample (e.g., using x1, . . . , xL(3) to predict y1 in Fig. 3).
Generally speaking, at most c(K)L(K) −1 input samples after
the current time step are necessary in order to predict current
output sample accroding to (14). This is also a difference
between our HRNN model and SampleRNN, which has a
causal and autoregressive structure.
Similar to SRNNs, the parameters of HRNNs are estimated
using cross-entropy cost function given a training set with
parallel input and output sample sequences. At generation
time, each yt is predicted using the conditional probability
distribution in (14).
C. Conditional Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks
Some frame-level auxiliary features extracted from input
narrowband waveforms, such as bottleneck (BN) features [36],
have shown their effectiveness in improving the performance
 1, , L
(3)  
 L
(4)-L
(3)+1, , L
(4)  
y1 
yL
(2) 
···
(4)
1
d
(4)
2
d
(4)
L(4)/L(3)
d
···
···
···
···
···
Tier 4
Tier 3
Tier 1
1
1c
1
dc
, ,
···
 1, , L
(2)  
 L
(3)-L
(2)+1, , L
(3)  
···
e1
eL
(2)
···
Tier 2
···
Fig. 4.
The structure of conditional HRNNs for BWE, where concentric
circles represent LSTM layers and inverted trapezoids represent FF layers.
of vocoder-based BWE [32]. In order to combine such auxil-
iary inputs with the HRNN model introduced in Section III-B,
a conditional HRNN structure is designed as shown in Fig. 4.
Compared with HRNNs, conditional HRNNs add an addi-
tional tier named conditional tier on the top. The input features
of the conditional tier are frame-level auxiliary feature vectors
extracted from input waveforms rather than waveform samples.
Assume the total number of tiers in a conditional HRNN is K
(e.g., K = 4 in Fig. 4) and let L(K) donate the frame shift of
auxiliary input features. The equations (4) and (5) in Section
III-B still works here. Similar to the introductions in Section
III-B, the frame inputs at the conditional tier can be written
as
ct = [ct
1, ct
2, . . . , ct
d], t ∈T (K),
(15)
where ct
d represents the d-th dimension of the auxiliary feature
vector at time t. Then the calculations of (8)-(13) for HRNNs
are followed. Finally, the conditional probability distribution
for generating yt can be written as
p(yt|x1, . . . , x(⌈
t
L(K) ⌉+c(K)−1)L(K),c1, c2, . . . , c⌈
t
L(K) ⌉)
= FF(i(1)
t ),
(16)
where t ∈T (1), {c1, c2, . . . , c⌈
t
L(K) ⌉} are additional condi-
tions introduced by the auxiliary input features.
D. BWE Using SRNNs and HRNNs
The ﬂowchart of BWE using SRNNs or HRNNs are
illustrated in Fig. 5. There are two mapping strategies. One is
to map the narrowband waveforms towards their corresponding
wideband counterparts (named WB strategy in the rest of this
paper) and the other is to map the narrowband waveforms
towards the waveforms of the high-frequency component of
wideband speech (named HF strategy).
A database with wideband speech recordings is used for
model training. At the training stage, the input narrowband
waveforms are obtained by downsampling the wideband wave-
forms. To guarantee the length consistency between the input

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
6
Downsampling
Upsampling
Quantization 
encoding
SRNNs
or
HRNNs
Highpass filter
Amplification
Wideband
waveform
Quantization 
encoding
BN feature 
extractor
BN feature
vectors
Waveform 
prediction
Quantization 
encoding
Upsampling
Narrowband
waveform
Quantization 
decoding
Highpass filter
Waveform 
adding
Reconstructed
wideband waveform
Deamplification 
Narrowband
waveform
High-frequency
waveform
High-frequency
waveform
Wideband
waveform
Training
Extension
 
y
y^
Fig. 5. The ﬂowchart of our proposed BWE methods.
and output sequences, the narrowband waveforms are then
upsampled to the sampling rate of the wideband speech with
zero high-frequency components. The upsampled narrowband
waveforms are used as the model input. The output wave-
forms are either the unﬁltered wideband waveforms (WB
strategy) or the high-frequency waveforms (HF strategy). The
high-frequency waveforms are obtained by sending wideband
speech into a high-pass ﬁlter and an ampliﬁer for reducing
quantization noise as the dotted lines in Fig. 5. Before the
waveforms are used for model training, all the input and output
waveform samples are discretized by 8-bit µ-law quantization.
The model parameters of SRNNs or HRNNs are trained under
cross-entropy (CE) criterion which optimizes the classiﬁcation
accuracy of discrete output samples on training set.
At the extension stage, the upsampled and quantized nar-
rowband waveforms are fed into the trained SRNNs or
HRNNs to generate the probability distributions of output
samples. Then each output sample is obtained by selecting the
quantization level with maximum posterior probability. Later,
the quantized output samples are decoded into continuous
values using the inverse mapping of µ-law quantization. A
deampliﬁcation process is conducted for the HF strategy in
order to compensate the effect of ampliﬁcation at training time.
Finally, the generated waveforms are high-pass ﬁltered and
added with the input narrowband waveforms to generate the
ﬁnal wideband waveforms.
Particularly for conditional HRNNs, BN features are used
as auxiliary input in our implementation as shown by the gray
lines in Fig. 5. BN features can be regarded as a compact
representation of both linguistic and acoustic information
[36]. Here, BN features are extracted by a DNN-based state
classiﬁer, which has a bottleneck layer with smaller number
of hidden units than that of other hidden layers. The inputs
of the DNN are mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC)
extracted from narrowband speech and the outputs are the
posterior probability of HMM states. The DNN is trained
under cross-entropy (CE) criterion and is used as the BN
feature extractor at extension time.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
The TIMIT corpus [45] which contained English speech
from multi-speakers with 16kHz sampling rate and 16bits
resolution was adopted in our experiments. We chose 3696
and 1153 utterances to construct the training set and validation
set respectively. Another 192 utterances from the speakers
not included in the training set and validation set were
used as the test set to evaluate the performance of different
BWE methods. In our experiments, the narrowband speech
waveforms sampled at 8kHz were obtained by downsampling
the wideband speech at 16kHz.
Five BWE systems1 were constructed for comparison in our
experiments. The descriptions of these systems are as follows.
• VRNN: Vocoder-based BWE method using LSTM-RNNs
as introduced in Section II-A. The DRNN-BN system
in [32] was used here for comparison, which predicted
the LMS of high-frequency components using a deep
LSTM-RNN with auxiliary BN features. Backpropaga-
tion through time (BPTT) algorithm was used to train
the LSTM-RNN model based on the minimum mean
square error (MMSE) criterion. In this system, a DNN-
based state classiﬁer was built to extract BN features.
11-frames of 39-dimensional narrowband MFCCs were
used as the input of the DNN classiﬁer and the posterior
probabilities of 183 HMM states for 61 monophones were
regarded as the output of the DNN classiﬁer. The DNN
classiﬁer adopt 6 hidden layers where there were 100
hidden units at the BN layer and 1024 hidden units at
other hidden layers. The BN layer was set as the ﬁfth
hidden layer so that the extractor could capture more
linguistic information. This BN feature extractor was also
used in the CHRNN system.
• DCNN: Waveform-based BWE method using stacked
dilated CNNs as introduced in Section II-B. The CNN2-
HF system in [35] was used here for comparison, which
predicted high-frequency waveforms using non-causal
CNNs and performed better than other conﬁgurations.
• SRNN: Waveform-based BWE method using sample-
level RNNs as introduced in Section III-A. The built
model had two LSTM layers and two FF layers. Both
the LSTM layers and the FF layers had 1024 hidden
units and the embedding size was 256. The model
was trained by stochastic gradient decent with a mini-
batch size of 64 to minimize the cross entropy between
the predicted and real probability distribution. Zero-
padding was applied to make all the sequences in a mini-
batch have the same length and the cost values of the
added zero samples were ignored when computing the
gradients. An Adam optimizer [46] was used to update the
parameters with an initial learning rate 0.001. Truncated
backpropagation through time (TBPTT) algorithm was
employed to improve the efﬁciency of model training and
the truncated length was set to 480.
1Examples of reconstructed speech waveforms in our experiments can be
found at http://home.ustc.edu.cn/∼ay8067/IEEEtran/demo.html.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
7
• HRNN: Waveform-based BWE method using HRNNs as
introduced in Section III-B. The HRNN was composed of
3 tiers with two FF layers in Tier 1 and one LSTM layer
each in Tier 2 and 3. Therefore, there were two LSTM
layers and two FF layers in total which was the same as
the SRNN system. The number of c(k), k = {1, 2, 3} in
(14) and (19) were set as c(3) = c(2) = 2, c(1) = L(2)
in our experiments after tuning on the validation set.
Some other setups, such as the dimension of the hidden
units and the training method, were the same as that
of the SRNN system mentioned above. The frame size
conﬁgurations of the HRNN model will be discussed in
Section IV-B.
• CHRNN: Waveform-based BWE method using condi-
tional HRNNs as introduced in Section III-C. The BN
features extracted by the DNN state classiﬁer used by
the VRNN system were adopted as auxiliary conditions.
The model was composed of 4 tiers. The top conditional
tier had one LSTM layer with 1024 hidden units and
the other three tiers were the same as the HRNN system.
Some basic setups and the training method were the same
as the HRNN system. The setup of the conditional tier
will be introduced in detail in Section IV-E.
In our experiments, we ﬁrst investigated the inﬂuence of
frame sizes and mapping strategies (i.e., the WB and HF
strategies introduced in Section III-D) on the performance of
the HRNN system. Then, the comparison between different
waveform-based BWE methods including the DCNN, SRNN
and HRNN systems was carried out. Later, the effect of
introducing BN features to HRNNs was studied by comparing
the HRNN system and the CHRNN system. Finally, our
proposed waveform-based BWE method was compared with
the conventional vocoder-based one.
B. Effects of Frame Sizes on HRNN-Based BWE
As introduced in Section III-B, the frame sizes L(k) are
key parameters that makes a HRNN model different from
the conventional sample-level RNN. In this experiment, we
studied the effect of L(k) on the performance of HRNN-
based BWE. The HRNN models with several conﬁgurations
of (L(3), L(2)) were trained and their accuracy and efﬁciency
were compared as shown in Fig. 6. Here, the classiﬁcation
accuracy of predicting discrete waveform samples in the
validation set was used to measure the accuracy of different
models. The total time of generating 1153 utterances in
the validation set with mini-batch size of 64 on a single
Tesla K40 GPU was used to measure the run-time efﬁciency.
Both the WB and HF mapping strategies were considered
in this experiment. From the results shown in Fig. 6, we
can see that there existed conﬂict between the accuracy and
the efﬁciency of the trained HRNN models. Using smaller
frame sizes of (L(3), L(2)) improved the accuracy of sample
prediction while increased the computational complexity at the
extension stage for both the WB and HF strategies. Finally,
we chose (L(3), L(2)) = (16, 4) as a trade-off and used this
conﬁguration for building the HRNN system in the following
experiments.
Fig. 6.
Accuracy and efﬁciency comparison for HRNN-based BWE with
different (L(3), L(2)) conﬁgurations and using (a) WB and (b) HF mapping
strategies.
TABLE I
AVERAGE PESQ SCORES WITH 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALS ON THE
TEST SET WHEN USING WB AND HF MAPPING STRATEGIES FOR
HRNN-BASED BWE.
Narrowband
HRNN-WB
HRNN-HF
PESQ score
3.63±0.0636
3.53± 0.0438
3.75± 0.0456
C. Effects of Mapping Strategy on HRNN-Based BWE
It can be observed from Fig. 6 that the HF strategy
achieved much lower classiﬁcation accuracy than the WB
strategy. It is reasonable since it is more difﬁcult to predict
the aperiodic and noise-like high-frequency waveforms than
to predict wideband waveforms. Objective and subjective
evaluations were conducted to investigate which strategy can
achieve better performance for the HRNN-based BWE.
Since it is improper to compare the classiﬁcation accuracy
of these two strategies directly, the score of Perceptual Eval-
uation of Speech Quality (PESQ) for wideband speech (ITU-
T P.862.2) [47] was adopted as the objective measurement
here. We utilized the clean wideband speech as reference and
calculated the PESQ scores of the 192 utterances in the test
set generated using WB and HF strategies (i.e., the HRNN-
WB system and the HRNN-HF system) respectively. For
comparison, the PESQ scores of the upsampled narrowband
utterances (i.e., with empty high-frequency components) were
also calculated. The average PESQ scores and their 95% conﬁ-
dence intervals are shown in Table I. The differences between
any two of the three systems were signiﬁcant according to the
results of paired t-tests (p < 0.001). From Table I, we can see
that the HF strategy achieved higher PESQ score than the WB
strategy. The average PESQ of the HRNN-WB system was
even lower than that of the upsampled narrowband speech.
This may be attributed to that the model in the HRNN-WB
system aimed to reconstruct the whole wideband waveforms
and was incapable of generating high-frequency components
as accurately as the HRNN-HF system.
A 3-point comparison category rating (CCR) [48] test

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
8
Fig. 7.
Average CCR scores of comparing ﬁve system pairs, including (1)
HRNN-HF vs. HRNN-WB, (2) HRNN vs. DCNN, (3) HRNN vs. SRNN, (4)
CHRNN vs. HRNN, and (5) CHRNN vs. VRNN. The error bars represent
95% conﬁdence intervals and the numerical values in parentheses represent
the p-value of one-sample t-test for different system pairs.
was conducted on the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
crowdsourcing platform (https://www.mturk.com) to compare
the subjective performance of the HRNN-WB and HRNN-HF
systems. The wideband waveforms of 20 utterances randomly
selected from the test set were reconstructed by the HRNN-
WB and HRNN-HF systems. Each pair of generated wideband
speech were evaluated in random order by 15 native English
listeners after rejecting improper listeners based on anti-
cheating considerations [49]. The listeners were asked to judge
which utterance in each pair had better speech quality or
there was no preference. Here, the HRNN-WB system was
used as the reference system. The CCR scores of +1, -1,
and 0 denoted that the wideband utterance reconstructed by
the evaluated system, i.e., the HRNN-HF system, sounded
better than, worse than, or equal to the sample generated by
the reference system in each pair. We calculated the average
CCR score and its 95% conﬁdence interval through all pairs of
utterances listened by all listeners. Besides, one-sample t-test
was also conducted to judge whether there was a signiﬁcant
difference between the average CCR score and 0 (i.e., to
judge whether there was a signiﬁcant difference between two
systems) by examining the p-value. The results are shown as
the ﬁrst system pair in Fig. 7, which suggests that the HRNN-
HF system outperformed the HRNN-WB system signiﬁcantly.
This is consistent with the results of comparing these two
strategies when dilated CNNs were used to model waveforms
for the BWE task [35]. Therefore, the HF strategy was adopted
in the following experiments for building waveform-based
BWE systems.
D. Model Comparison for Waveform-Based BWE
The performance of three waveform-based BWE systems,
i.e., the DCNN, SRNN and HRNN systems, were compared
by objective and subjective evaluations. The accuracy and
efﬁciency metrics used in Section IV-B and the PESQ score
TABLE II
OBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE DCNN, SRNN AND HRNN SYSTEMS
ON THE TEST SET.
DCNN
SRNN
HRNN
Accuracy (%)
7.18±0.336
7.40±0.387
7.52±0.388
PESQ score
3.62±0.0532
3.70±0.0477
3.75±0.0456
SNR (dB)
19.06±0.5983
18.95±0.6053
19.00±0.6099
SNR-V (dB)
26.14±0.7557
26.06±0.7648
26.21±0.7716
SNR-U (dB)
10.49±0.4094
10.32±0.4126
10.26±0.4124
LSD (dB)
8.46±0.122
8.61±0.136
8.30±0.127
LSD-V (dB)
7.71±0.172
8.09±0.203
8.02±0.194
LSD-U (dB)
9.34±0.124
9.19±0.124
8.57±0.107
Generation time (s)
3.97
19.39
3.61
used in Section IV-C were adopted as objective measurements.
Besides, two extra metrics were adopted here, including signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) [40] which measured the distortion
of waveforms and log spectral distance (LSD) [40] which
reﬂected the distortion in frequency domain. The SNR and
LSD for voiced frames (denoted by SNR-V and LSD-V)
and unvoiced frames (denoted by SNR-U and LSD-U) were
also calculated separately for each system. For the fairness of
efﬁciency comparison, we set the mini-batch size as 1 for all
the three systems when generating utterances in the test set.
The time of generating 1 second speech (i.e., 16000 samples
for 16kHz speech) using a Tesla K40 GPU was recorded as
the measurement of efﬁciency in this experiment.
Table II shows the objective performance of the three
systems on the test set. The 95% conﬁdence intervals were
also calculated for all metrics except the generation time.
The results of paired t-tests indicated that the differences
between any two of the three systems on all metrics were
signiﬁcant (p < 0.01). For accuracy and PESQ score, the
DCNN system was not as good as the other two systems.
The HRNN system achieved the best performance on both
accuracy and PESQ score. For SNR, the HRNN system and
the DCNN system achieved the best performance on voiced
segments and unvoiced segments respectively. For LSD, the
HRNN system achieved the lowest overall LSD and the lowest
LSD of unvoiced segments. On the other hand, the DCNN
system achieved the lowest LSD of voiced frames among the
three systems. Considering that LSDs were calculated using
only amplitude spectra while SNRs were inﬂuenced by both
amplitude and phase spectra of the reconstructed waveforms, it
can be inferred that the HRNN system was better at restoring
the phase spectra of voiced frames than the DCNN system
according to the SNR-V and LSD-V results of these two
systems shown in Table II. In terms of the efﬁciency, the
generation time of the SRNN system was more than 5 times
longer than that of the HRNN system due to the sample-
by-sample calculation at all layers in the SRNN structure as
discussed in Section III-A. Also, the efﬁciency of the DCNN
system was slightly worse than that of the HRNN system. The
results reveal that HRNNs can help improve both the accuracy
and efﬁciency of SRNNs by modeling long-span dependencies
among sequences using a hierarchical structure.
The spectrograms extracted from clean wideband speech
and the output of BWE using the DCNN, SRNN and HRNN
systems for an example sentence in the test set are shown

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
9
Fig. 8. The spectrograms of clean wideband speech and the output of BWE
using ﬁve systems for an example sentence in the test set.
in Fig. 8. It can be observed that the high-frequency energy
of some unvoiced segments generated by the DCNN system
was much weaker than that of the natural speech and the
outputs of the SRNN and HRNN systems. Compared with the
SRNN and HRNN systems, the DCNN system was better at
reconstructing the high-frequency harmonic structures of some
voiced segments. These observations are in line with the LSD
results discussed earlier.
Furthermore, two 3-point CCR tests were carried out to
evaluate the subjective performance of the HRNN system
by using the DCNN system and the SRNN system as the
reference system respectively. The conﬁgurations of the tests
were the same as the ones introduced in Section IV-C. The
results are shown as the second and third system pairs in
Fig. 7. We can see that our proposed HRNN-based method
generated speech with signiﬁcantly better quality than the
dilated CNN-based method. Compared with the SRNN system,
the HRNN system was slightly better while the superiority was
insigniﬁcant at 0.05 signiﬁcance level. However, the HRNN
system was much more efﬁcient than the SRNN system at
generation time as shown in Table II.
E. Effects of Additional Conditions on HRNN-Based BWE
We compared the HRNN system with the CHRNN system
by objective and subjective evaluations to explore the effects
of additional conditions on HRNN-based BWE. As introduced
in Section IV-A, the BN features were used as additional
conditions in the CHRNN system since they can provide
linguistic-related information besides the acoustic waveforms.
The CHRNN system adopted the conditional HRNN structure
introduced in Section III-C with 4 tiers. The dimension of BN
TABLE III
OBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE HRNN AND CHRNN SYSTEMS ON
THE TEST SET TOGETHER WITH THE p VALUES OF PAIRED t-TESTS.
HRNN
CHRNN
p-value
Accuracy (%)
7.52±0.388
7.46±0.385
<0.001
PESQ score
3.75±0.0456
3.79±0.0394
<0.001
SNR (dB)
19.00±0.6099
18.99±0.5946
0.322
SNR-V (dB)
26.21±0.7716
26.13±0.7539
<0.001
SNR-U (dB)
10.26±0.4124
10.34±0.4097
<0.001
LSD (dB)
8.30±0.127
8.27±0.123
0.301
LSD-V (dB)
8.02±0.194
7.89±0.185
<0.001
LSD-U (dB)
8.57±0.107
8.66±0.103
<0.01
Generation time (s)
3.61
4.17
–
features was 100 and the frame size at the top conditional tier
was L(4) = 160 because the frame shift of BN features was
10ms, corresponding to 160 samples for 16kHz speech.
The objective measurements used in Section IV-D were
adopted here to compare the HRNN and CHRNN systems.
The results are shown in Table III. The CHRNN system
outperformed the HRNN system on PESQ score while its
prediction accuracy was not as good as the HRNN system.
For SNR, these two systems achieved similar performance.
The results of LSD show that the CHRNN system was better
at reconstructing voiced frames and the HRNN system was on
the contrary. In terms of efﬁciency, the generation time of the
CHRNN system was higher than that of the HRNN system
due to the extra conditional tier.
A 3-point CCR test was also conducted to evaluate the
subjective performance of the CHRNN system by using the
HRNN system as the reference system and following the
evaluation conﬁgurations introduced in Section IV-C. The
results are shown as the fourth system pairs in Fig. 7, which
reveal that utilizing BN features as additional conditions in
HRNN-based BWE can improve the subjective quality of
reconstructed wideband speech signiﬁcantly. Fig. 8 also shows
the spectrogram of the wideband speech generated by the
CHRNN system for an example sentence. Comparing the
spectrograms produced by the HRNN system and the CHRNN
system, we can observe that the high-frequency components
generated by the CHRNN system were stronger than the
HRNN system. This may lead to better speech quality as
shown in Fig. 7.
F. Comparison between Waveform-Based and Vocoder-Based
BWE Methods
Finally, we compared the performance of vocoder-based
and waveform-based BWE methods by conducting objective
and subjective evaluations between the VRNN system and
the CHRNN system since both systems adopted BN features
as auxiliary input. The objective results including PESQ,
SNR and LSD are shown in Table IV. The CHRNN system
achieved signiﬁcantly better SNR than that of the VRNN
system, which suggested that our proposed waveform-based
method can restore the phase spectra more accurately than the
conventional vocoder-based method. For PESQ and LSD, the
CHRNN system was not as good as the VRNN system. This
is reasonable considering that the VRNN system modeled and

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007
10
TABLE IV
OBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE VRNN AND CHRNN SYSTEMS ON THE
TEST SET TOGETHER WITH THE p VALUES OF PAIRED t-TESTS.
VRNN
CHRNN
p value
PESQ score
3.87±0.0368
3.79±0.0394
<0.001
SNR (dB)
17.76±0.6123
18.99±0.5946
<0.001
SNR-V (dB)
25.00±0.7333
26.13±0.7539
<0.001
SNR-U (dB)
9.01±0.424
10.34±0.4097
<0.001
LSD (dB)
6.69±0.110
8.27±0.123
<0.001
LSD-V (dB)
6.86±0.148
7.89±0.185
<0.001
LSD-U (dB)
6.45±0.0972
8.66±0.103
<0.001
TABLE V
MAXIMAL LATENCIES (ms) OF THE FIVE BWE SYSTEMS. THE SAMPLING
RATE OF WIDEBAND WAVEFORMS IS fs = 16kHz.
Maximal Latency
Remarks
VRNN
W S = 25
W S: window size in ms of STFT
for extracting spectral parameters.
DCNN
N/2
fs
= 32
N + 1: length of receptive ﬁeld.
SRNN
0
None
HRNN
c(3)L(3)−1
fs
= 1.9375
c(3), L(3): number of concatenated
frames, frame size at Tier 3.
CHRNN
W S = 25
W S: window size in ms of STFT
for extracting spectral parameters.
predicted LMS directly which were used in the calculation of
PESQ and LSD. A 3-point CCR test was also conducted to
evaluate the subjective performance of the CHRNN system by
using the VRNN system as the reference system and following
the evaluation conﬁguratioins introduced in Section IV-C. The
results are shown as the ﬁfth system pairs in Fig. 7. We can
see that the CCR score was high than 0 signiﬁcantly which
indicates that the CHRNN system can achieve signiﬁcantly
higher quality of reconstructed wideband speech than the
VRNN system.
Comparing the spectrograms produced by the VRNN system
and the CHRNN system in Fig. 8, it can be observed
that the CHRNN system performed better than the VRNN
system in generating the high-frequency harmonics for voiced
sounds. Besides, the high-frequency components generated
by the CHRNN system were less over-smoothed and more
natural than that of the VRNN system at unvoiced segments.
Furthermore, there was a discontinuity between the low-
frequency and high-frequency spectra of the speech generated
the VRNN system, which was also found in other vocoder-
based BWE method [26]. As shown in Fig. 8, the waveform-
based systems alleviated this discontinuity effectively. These
experimental results indicate the superiority of modeling and
generating speech waveforms directly over utilizing vocoders
for feature extraction and waveform reconstruction on the
BWE task.
G. Analysis and Discussion
1) Maximal latency of different BWE systems
Some application scenarios have strict requirement on the
latency of BWE algorithm. We compared the maximal latency
of the ﬁve BWE systems listed in Section IV-A and the
results are shown in Table V. Here, the latency refers to
the duration of future input samples that are necessary for
predicting current output sample. The maximal latencies of the
VRNN system and the CHRNN system were both determined
by the window size of STFT for extracting LMS and MFCC
parameters, which was 25 ms in our implementation. The
maximal latencies of the other three systems depended on their
structures. The SRNN system processed input waveforms and
generate output waveforms sample-by-sample without latency
according to (3). Because the non-causal CNN structure shown
in Fig. 1 was adopted by the DCNN system and its receptive
ﬁeld length was about 64ms [35], it made the highest latency
among the ﬁve systems. The latency of the HRNN system was
relatively short because the number of concatenated frames
and the frame size of the top tier were small (c(3) = 2 and
L(3) = 16).
2) Run-time efﬁciency of waveform-based BWE
One deﬁciency of the waveform-based BWE methods is that
they are very time-consuming at generation time. As shown
in Table II and Table III, the HRNN system achieved the best
run-time efﬁciency among the four waveform-based systems,
which still took 3.61 seconds to generate 1 second speech
in our current implementation. Therefore, to accelerate the
computation of HRNNs is an important task of our future
work. As shown in Fig. 6, using longer frame sizes may
help reduce the computational complexity of HRNNs. Another
possible way is to reduce the number of hidden units and
other model parameters similar to the attempt of accelerating
WaveNet for speech synthesis [39].
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a novel waveform modeling
and generation method using hierarchical recurrent neural
networks (HRNNs) to fulﬁll the speech bandwidth extension
(BWE) task. HRNNs adopt a hierarchy of recurrent modules
to capture long-span dependencies between input and output
waveform sequences. Compared with the plain sample-level
RNN and the stacked dilated CNN, the proposed HRNN
model achieves better accuracy and efﬁciency of predicting
high-frequency waveform samples. Besides, additional con-
ditions, such as the bottleneck features (BN) extracted from
narrowband speech, can further improve subjective quality of
reconstructed wideband speech. The experimental results show
that our proposed HRNN-based method achieves higher sub-
jective preference scores than the conventional vocoder-based
method using LSTM-RNNs. To evaluate the performance of
our proposed methods using practical band-limited speech
data, to improve the efﬁciency of waveform generation using
HRNNs, and to utilize other types of additional conditions will
be the tasks of our future work.
