Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction
and Allocation in Feed
Xuejian Li∗
Meituan
Beijing, China

Ze Wang∗
Meituan
Beijing, China

Bingqi Zhu
Meituan
Beijing, China

Fei He
Meituan
Beijing, China

Yongkang Wang
Meituan
Beijing, China

Xingxing Wang
Meituan
Beijing, China

ABSTRACT
E-commerce platforms usually present an ordered list, mixed with
several organic items and an advertisement, in response to each
user’s page view request. This list, the outcome of ad auction and
allocation processes, directly impacts the platform’s ad revenue and
gross merchandise volume (GMV). Specifically, the ad auction deter-
mines which ad is displayed and the corresponding payment, while
the ad allocation decides the display positions of the advertisement
and organic items. The prevalent methods of segregating the ad
auction and allocation into two distinct stages face two problems:
1) Ad auction does not consider externalities, such as the influence
of actual display position and context on ad Click-Through Rate
(CTR); 2) The ad allocation, which utilizes the auction-winning ad’s
payment to determine the display position dynamically, fails to
maintain incentive compatibility (IC) for the advertisement. For
instance, in the auction stage employing the traditional Generalized
Second Price (GSP) , even if the winning ad increases its bid, its
payment remains unchanged. This implies that the advertisement
cannot secure a better position and thus loses the opportunity to
achieve higher utility in the subsequent ad allocation stage. Previ-
ous research often focused on one of the two stages, neglecting the
two-stage problem, which may result in suboptimal outcomes.
Therefore, this paper proposes a deep automated mechanism
that integrates ad auction and allocation, ensuring both IC and
Individual Rationality (IR) in the presence of externalities while
maximizing revenue and GMV. The mechanism takes candidate ads
and the ordered list of organic items as input. For each candidate
ad, several candidate allocations are generated by inserting the ad
in different positions of the ordered list of organic items. For each
candidate allocation, a list-wise model takes the entire allocation as
input and outputs the predicted result for each ad and organic item
to model the global externalities. Finally, an automated auction
mechanism, modeled by deep neural networks, is executed to select
∗Corresponding authors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0431-4/24/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657774
the optimal allocation. Consequently, this mechanism simultane-
ously decides the ranking, payment, and display position of the ad.
Furthermore, the proposed mechanism results in higher revenue
and GMV than state-of-the-art baselines in offline experiments and
online A/B tests.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Computational advertising; Display
advertising; Learning to rank.
KEYWORDS
Automated Mechanism Design, Ad Auction, Externalities, Ad Allo-
cation
ACM Reference Format:
Xuejian Li, Ze Wang, Bingqi Zhu, Fei He, Yongkang Wang, and Xingxing
Wang. 2024. Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction
and Allocation in Feed. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’24),
July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657774
1
INTRODUCTION
In many e-commerce feeds, an ordered list, mixed with several or-
ganic items and a pay-per-click ad, is displayed for each page view
request of users [31, 32], as is shown in Figure 1. If users click on the
ad, the platform will charge the corresponding advertiser, which
is a key source of revenue for the platform [5, 21]. Meanwhile, if
users purchase the product in organic items or ad, the platform’s
gross merchandise volume (GMV) will increase. In practice, this
list, produced by ad auction and allocation processes, directly deter-
mines the platform’s revenue and GMV. More specifically, the ad
auction determines which ad is displayed and the payment of the ad
[5, 25], while the ad allocation determines the display positions of
the ad and organic items in feeds [17, 32]. Ad auction and allocation
are interactive [19]. Hence, mechanism design for ad auction and
allocation to maximize platform revenue and GMV has become a
very meaningful and challenging problem.
The widely used method is to divide ad auction and allocation
into two stages. Initially, in the ad auction, such as the classic GSP
[25], candidate ads are ranked by eCPM which is calculated by the
product of the predicted click-through-rate (pCTR) and bid of ad,
and the ad with the maximum eCPM wins and its payment is the
arXiv:2401.01656v2  [cs.GT]  11 Apr 2024

SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Xuejian Li, et al.
Figure 1: On Meituan retail delivery platform, the ad ’LAYS
CHIPS’ in the feed is presented to user along with external
organic items. Whether a user clicks on the ad is easily im-
pacted by both the position and the context of the ad.
eCPM of the next rank ad divided by its own pCTR. Evidently, the
payment for the winning ad depends on the bid of the next ranked
ad, not its own bid. Meanwhile, the organic items list are sorted
by the estimated GMV. Subsequently, the ad allocation algorithm
dynamically inserts the auction-winning ad into the ordered organic
items list, where the winning ad’s payment is used for positions
decision [17], aiming to maximize revenue and GMV. From the
perspective of ad mechanism design, this method of segregating
the ad auction and allocation into two distinct stages face two
problems as follows:
• Ad auction does not take externalities into account. Ad
externalities generally refer to the impact of its display position
and context on its CTR [9]. Traditional auctions, including the
GSP, often do not consider externalities and obtain stable results
based on the separated CTR assumption [25]. However, in prac-
tice, the CTR of ad surrounded by organic items is impacted by
its actual display position and context. Externalities result in
complicated strategic competition among advertisers, preclud-
ing stable outcomes and social welfare optimization [21]. Hence,
when considering the externalities, traditional auctions are not
suitable.
• Ad allocation, using the winning ad’s payment to deter-
mine display position dynamically is not IC for the ad. For
the winning ad, even if its bid is increased, it does not secure a
better position, thereby losing the opportunity to gain greater
utility. This is because in the aforementioned ad auction, even
if the winning ad increases bid, its payment remains the same,
and thus the ad allocation outcomes do not change. Furthermore,
using the bid of the winning ad to determine the display position
is also inappropriate. Similarly, without any change in payment,
the winning ad is motivated to increase its bid until it secures the
best position and maximum utility. However, at this juncture, the
GMV loss of the platform may exceed the increase in revenue.
In order to solve these problems, designing a mechanism that
integrates ad auction and allocation in feed should be considered.
This mechanism needs to consider externalities and satisfy the
economic properties of IC and IR [13, 20]. IC means that when the
advertiser truthfully reports his value, his utility is maximized. IR
means that the advertiser’s payment will not be higher than his
bid. Under the externalities, The ad’s CTR varies with its position
and context, which makes it not easy to calculate the social welfare
of the mechanism [13]. Consequently, designing an externality-
aware mechanism that satisfies both IC and IR is very difficult. VCG
[5], another classic mechanism, provides ideas for solving these
problems. But VCG’s expected revenue is lower than that of GSP
[5, 25], which is not acceptable for the platform. This mechanism
also needs to maximize the platform’s revenue and GMV.
Therefore, this paper proposes a deep automated Mechanism
for Integrating ad Auction and Allocation in feed, referred to as
MIAA, which satisfies both IC and IR in the presence of externali-
ties and maximizes revenue and GMV. Inspired by affine maximizer
auction(AMA) [23] based VCG, MIAA is designed to include the
following three parts. Firstly, MIAA takes candidate ads and the
ordered list of organic items as input. For each candidate ad, several
candidate allocations are generated by inserting the ad in differ-
ent positions of the ordered organic items list. Secondly, for each
candidate allocation, a list-wise prediction model takes the entire
allocation as input and outputs the predicted results for each ad and
organic item to model the global externalities. Finally, an automated
auction mechanism is executed to select the optimal allocation to
display from these candidate allocations. The mechanism parame-
ters modeled by deep neural networks are learned in an end-to-end
way to maximize platform revenue and GMV. Obviously, MIAA
simultaneously obtains the ranking, payment, and display position
of ad. The contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
• A deep automated mechanism for integrating ad auction
and allocation. This mechanism simultaneously decides the
ranking, payment, and display position of the ad. To the best
of our knowledge, the proposed mechanism is the first to con-
sider addressing the externalities and IC issues caused by the
separation of ad auction and allocation.
• Detailed industrial and practical experience. We successfully
deploy MIAA on the Meituan retail feed and obtain significant
improvements in both platform revenue and GMV.

Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction and Allocation in Feed
SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
2
RELATED WORK
Previous work largely focused on studying optimization of ad auc-
tion and allocation separately. The main points of these work are
summarized as follows::
• Externality-aware ad auction design. The design of ad auction
with externalities has always been a hot topic in both academic
and industrial research. The CTR model considering the impact
of ad externalities has evolved from local model to global model.
Ghosh and Mahdian [9] initially studied the externalities of user
click interactions between advertisers. They used a choice model
to describe user click behaviors and adopted a VCG-style pay-
ment scheme to guarantee IC and IR. User browsing model [4]
and cascade models [6, 7, 11], built based on user browsing be-
havior from top to bottom of the page, take the local impact of
externalities into consideration. And then ad auction with user
browsing model or cascade models are designed based on GSP
or VCG. DNA [18] and DPIN [10] respectively modeled the lo-
cal externalities on candidate ad sets and ad positions. EXTR
[1] modeled the global externalities, but did not consider the
subsequent auction mechanism design. The global externalities,
such as the interaction between ads and organic items, were
considered in [8, 13, 15]. Similarly, this paper directly models the
allocation list mixed with organic items and an ad, taking the
global externalities into account.
• Ad allocation. The platform initially assigned fixed positions
to organic items and ads. Dynamic ad allocation strategies to
optimize the whole-page performance gains growing attention.
These strategies can be divided into two categories. In the first cat-
egory, the dynamic ad allocation strategies, proposed by Xie et al.
[29], Xu et al. [30], Yan et al. [31], Zhang et al. [32], Zhao et al.
[33], do not take into account the relative ranking of candidate
ads in auction, which dose not satisfy the IC and IR restrictions.
In the second category, the strategies maintain the relative rank-
ing of ads and determine the optimal number and positions of
ads in the mixed list [16, 24, 27, 28]. Liao et al.[17] propose a
DQN architecture to incorporate the arrangement signal into
the allocation model without modifying the relative ranking of
advertisements. Similarly, Chen et al.[2] propose hierarchically
constrained adaptive ad exposure that possesses the desirable
game-theoretical properties and computational efficiency.
Recently, Li et al. [14] prospectively analyze that this separated
method in search scenarios is detrimental to the platform user ex-
perience. They propose an integrated model to describe the mixed
arrangements of organic items and ads. Based on this model, they
design a truthful optimal mechanism with the separated CTR as-
sumption and publicly known distribution of advertising value.
Furthermore, this paper breaks the separated CTR assumption and
aims to design deep automated mechanism for integrating ad auc-
tion and allocation in feed, which satisfies both IC and IR in the
presence of externalities and maximizes revenue and GMV.
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
Setting for Ad Auction and Allocation
This paper considers the mechanism design that integrates pay-
per-click ad auction and allocation in feed. For each user page view
Table 1: Main notations.
Notation
Meaning
𝑎𝑑
Ad item
𝑜𝑖
Organic item
𝑚
Number of available positions
𝑛
Number of ads
𝑣𝑖∈B
Real click value of 𝑎𝑖
v = (𝑣1, . . . , 𝑣𝑛)
Values profile of ads
v−𝑖
Values profile of ads except ad 𝑖
𝑏𝑖∈B
Submitted click bid of 𝑎𝑖
b = (𝑏1, . . . ,𝑏𝑛)
Bids profile of ads
b−𝑖
Bids profile of ads except ad 𝑖
a ∈A
An ad allocation
A−𝑖
all the ad allocations except ad 𝑖
a−𝑖∈A−𝑖
An ad allocation except ad 𝑖
𝜎(𝑖)
Position index of ad 𝑖in an allocation
𝑞𝑗(a)
pCTR of the 𝑗-th item in a
𝑔𝑗
Estimate GMV per click of the 𝑗-th item
𝑒𝑗(a)
Externality of the 𝑗-th item in a
e(a)
Externality of the items in a
M⟨R, P⟩
Ad auction and allocation mechanism
R
Allocation rule
P
Pricing rule rule
Rev(b; e)
Platform expected revenue
Gmv(b; e)
Platform expected GMV
request, there are 𝑚available positions for placing ads and organic
items. There are 𝑛advertisers competing for one ad position and
other 𝑚−1 positions are filled with organic items. Due to the
limitations of platform business division, we assume that these
organic items have been sorted according to the estimated GMV. In
the subsequent process, the relative ranking of organic items will
not be modified, but their CTR and GMV will be re-predicted. The
main notations in this paper are summarized in Table 1.
Each advertiser 𝑖∈[𝑛] has a private click value 𝑣𝑖∈B ⊆𝑅+
on his ad and reports a click bid 𝑏𝑖∈B ⊆𝑅+ for auction. We
assume that the click value and bid for the organic items are 0.
Let v = (𝑣1, 𝑣2, . . . , 𝑣𝑛) ∈B𝑛and b = (𝑏1,𝑏2, . . . ,𝑏𝑛) ∈B𝑛be the
value profile and the bid profile of all ads. We use v−𝑖and b−𝑖to
represent the value profile and bid profile of all ads except ad 𝑖. An
ad allocation can be represented by a = 𝑎(𝑖, 𝑗), where 𝑎(𝑖, 𝑗) means
that the ad 𝑖is inserted into the 𝑗-th position. Let 𝑗= 𝜎(𝑖) represent
the position index of ad 𝑖in an allocation. The set of all possible
allocations is denoted by A = {𝑎(𝑖, 𝑗) : ∀𝑖∈[𝑛], 𝑗∈[𝑚]}.
Formally, as shown in the Figure 1, one of the allocations is an
ordered list mixed with several organic items and an ad. When
modeling the impact of the global externalities, the CTR prediction
needs to take various aspects into consideration, such as attributes
of the ad itself, the position and context of the ad, and the attributes
of surrounding organic items [13]. We denote the pCTR of the
𝑗-th item in the allocation a by 𝑞𝑗(a). Let 𝑔𝑗(a) be the estimated
merchandise volume per click of the 𝑗-th item in the allocation. For
convenience, we use 𝑒𝑗∈E ⊆𝑅to represent the externalities such
as CTR and GMV for the 𝑗-th item in the allocation.

SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Xuejian Li, et al.
3.2
Problem Formulation
Given bids from advertisers and the ordered organic items list,
we represent an ad auction and allocation mechanism M⟨R, P⟩,
where:
• R(b; e) : B𝑛× E𝑚→A is the ad allocation rule, which is
used to select one winning ad from the 𝑛advertisers and
insert it at the certain position in the organic items list.
• P(b; e) is the payment rule and 𝑝𝑖(b; e) is the pay-per-click
price of advertiser 𝑖.
For a mechanism M⟨R, P⟩, the expected utility of advertiser 𝑖is
𝑢M
𝑖
(𝑣𝑖; b; e) = (𝑣𝑖−𝑝𝑖(b; e)) × 𝑞𝜎(𝑖) (R(b; e)),
(1)
and the expected revenue and GMV of the platform is
RevM (b; e) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑝𝑖(b; e)) × 𝑞𝜎(𝑖) (R(b; e)),
GmvM (b; e) =
𝑚
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑔𝑗(R(b; e)) × 𝑞𝑗(R(b; e)).
(2)
For the design of ad auction mechanisms, IC and IR are standard
economic constraints that must be considered [13]. An auction
mechanism M⟨R, P⟩is IC, if for each advertiser truthfully reports
his bid 𝑏𝑖= 𝑣𝑖and then his utility is maximized. Formally, for any
e, for each 𝑖, it holds that
𝑢𝑖(𝑣𝑖;𝑣𝑖, b−1; e) ≥𝑢𝑖(𝑣𝑖;𝑏𝑖, b−1; e), ∀𝑏𝑖∈B,
(3)
and an auction mechanism M⟨R, P⟩is IR, if for each advertiser
would not be charged more than his bid for the allocation. Formally,
for any e, for each 𝑖, it holds that
𝑝𝑖(b; e) ≤𝑏𝑖.
(4)
We aim to design a mechanisms M⟨R, P⟩which satisfies both
IC and IR in the presence of externalities and maximizes revenue
and GMV of the platform, as follows:
maximize
M
Ea∈A [Rev(b; e) + 𝛼Gmv(b; e)],
s.t.
IC and IR constraint,
(5)
where 𝛼is a weight coefficient set by the platform to balance rev-
enue and GMV.
3.3
Automated Mechanism Design
Formally, the integration of ad auction and allocation can be seen as
a combination auction (CA) of ads and organic items, where the pri-
vate value and bid of organic items on click can be assumed to be 0.
Sandholm and Likhodedov [23] proposed an automated mechanism
based VCG named AMA for revenue-maximizing combinatorial
auctions. The AMA is defined as follows.
Each bidder 𝑗submits a valuation function 𝑣𝑗. The allocation,
a∗, is computed to maximize
SW𝜇
𝜆(a) =
𝑚
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝜇𝑗𝑣𝑗(a) + 𝜆(a),
(6)
where 𝜇𝑗is a positive number that is related to the value distribution
of the bidder 𝑗but not related to the allocation, and meanwhile
𝜆(a) is an arbitrary function of the allocation. The payments are
𝑝𝑗(a∗) = 1
𝜇𝑗

SW𝜇
𝜆(a∗
−𝑗) −
∑︁
𝑖≠𝑗
𝜇𝑖𝑣𝑖(a∗) −𝜆(a∗)

,
(7)
where
a∗
−𝑗= maximize
a∈A−𝑗
SW𝜇
𝜆(a).
(8)
a∗
−𝑗is the best allocation where bidder 𝑗is not present.
AMAs are a family of mechanisms, parameterized by the vectors
𝜇and 𝜆. VCG is the special case where for all bidders 𝑗and any
allocation, 𝜇𝑗= 1 and 𝜆(·) = 0. The 𝜇𝑗and 𝜆(·) are solved using
automated search theory to maximize revenue [23]. Roberts et al.
[22] and Lavi et al.[12] has proven that only AMAs are IC and IR
for all CA settings. Hence, inspired by AMA, this paper extends its
application to integrate ad auction and allocation. Unlike search the-
ory, in this paper, 𝜇𝑗and 𝜆(·) are modeled as deep neural networks
and trained by end-to-end learning methods.
4
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the details of deep automated mechanism
for integrating ad auction and allocation in feed, namely MIAA,
which satisfies both IC and IR in the presence of externalities and
maximizes revenue and GMV. As shown in Figure 2, MIAA takes
candidate ads and the ordered organic items list as input, and out-
puts the optimal allocation by three modules. The three modules
of MIAA are the Externality-aware Prediction Module (EPM), the
Automated Auction Module (AAM) and the Differentiable Sorting
Module (DSM). More specifically, EPM takes an allocation as in-
puts to model the impact of the global externalities and outputs
the predicted results for each ad and organic item. AAM uses two
deep neural networks to model the two mechanism parameters 𝜇𝑗
and 𝜆(·) with the aim of improving the expressive ability of this
automated mechanism while guaranteeing IC and IR. DSM uses
multi classification model softmax to conduct a continuous relax-
ation of sorting operator in the mechanism, and outputs a vector
representing the winning probability for each candidate allocation.
And then the expected revenue and GMV of the platform can be
differentiably calculated and optimized by an end-to-end learning
way. Next we will introduce each module separately.
4.1
Externality-aware Prediction Module
In most traditional auction mechanisms, the position and contex-
tual information of ads can only be known after the auction, so the
CTR prediction model cannot obtain them in advance. However,
auctions rely on the pCTR by the prediction model. In order to solve
this interdependence problem and obtain stable allocation result,
the mechanism design is based on the separated CTR assumption,
that is, the final CTR of an ad is equal to the product of the CTR of
its own content and the CTR of its position, ignoring the influence
of contextual items. Therefore, under this assumption, the point-
wise model is often used to predict CTR, which do not consider
the impact of ads display positions and interaction between ads
and organic items [25]. Several models [1, 10, 18] capturing local
externalities have been proposed successively, focusing solely on
the display position of ad or the local context of ad. To this end,

Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction and Allocation in Feed
SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
...
...
candidate  allocations
DSM
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
AAM
...
EPM
...
EPM
...
...
      AAM
...
...
...
...
...
...
      AAM
...
...
...
...
      AAM
...
EPM
EPM
sparse feat
dense feat
Figure 2: The architecture of MIAA. MIAA consists of three modules: Externality-aware Prediction Module (EPM), Automated
Auction Module (AAM) and Differentiable Sorting Module (DSM).
the paper uses a list-wise prediction module to model global ex-
ternalities explicitly, outputting the more accurate pCTR for each
item.
Firstly, for each candidate ad, several candidate allocations are
generated by inserting the ad in different positions of the ordered
organic items list. This step corresponds to a time complexity of
𝑂(𝑚×𝑛). In actual production processes, the value of 𝑚is typically
not greater than 5, which is acceptable in terms of performance for
the platform.
Then, EPM adopts a parameter-sharing structure for all the can-
didate allocations. Here we take one allocation a as an example to
illustrate. As shown in Figure 2, EPM takes the allocation a and two
types of public information (i.e., request information, user profile in
current request) as input and outputs the pCTR of each item in the
allocation. We first use embedding layers to extract the embeddings
from raw sparse features and then concatenate dense features with
the embeddings to form 𝑑-dimensional feature vector z𝑗∈R𝑑for
the 𝑗-th item. The feature matrix of the allocation a is represented
as Za ∈R𝑚×𝑑, while the feature vector of request information, user
profile are respectively represented by z𝑢, and z𝑟.
Next, We use a Self Attention Unit [26] to model the interaction
between the ad and the organic items in the candidate allocation:
Ha = SelfAtt (Qa, Ka, Va) = softmax
 Qa(Ka)⊤
√
𝑑

Va,
(9)
where Qa, Ka, Va represent query, key, and value, respectively.
Here query, key, and value are transformed linearly from feature
information of the allocation a , as follows:
Qa = ZaW𝑄, Ka = ZaW𝐾, Va = ZaW𝑉.
(10)
Finally, we reshape Ha as one vector ha ∈R𝑚𝑑and concatenate
z𝑢, z𝑟and put them into a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) to model
the global externalities:
ˆ𝑞𝑗= 𝑞𝑗(a) =Sigmoid  FC𝑗
 MLP𝑒(ha|z𝑢|z𝑟) , ∀𝑗∈[𝑚],
(11)
where 𝑞𝑗(a) denotes the pCTR of the 𝑗-th item in the allocation. In
EPM, the cross entropy loss is calculated by the real click behavior
of each item to train this list-wise model:
Loss𝑐𝑒= −
𝑚
∑︁
𝑗=1
 𝑦𝑗log(𝑞𝑗(a) + (1 −𝑦𝑗)log(1 −𝑞𝑗(a) ,
(12)
where 𝑦𝑗∈{0, 1} represents whether user clicks the 𝑗-th item in
the allocation or not.
EPM takes a candidate allocation as input and outputs the pCTR
for each position in the allocation. It is built and trained indepen-
dently, without coupling to downstream modules. EPM is a general
framework that can easily be extended to multiple targets predic-
tion such as conversion rate (CVR) and GMV. The 𝑔𝑗(a) used in the
following text can be predicted simultaneously in EPM, without
further elaboration. Compared with point-wise models, list-wise
models capture the global externalities and output more accurate
results, which can help the subsequent modules achieve better
performance.

SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Xuejian Li, et al.
4.2
Automated Auction Module
This module selects the optimal allocation from all possible candi-
date allocations, which simultaneously decides the ranking, pay-
ment, and display position of the ads. Extending AMA into a deep
automated mechanism, 𝜇and 𝜆(·) are modeled as deep neural net-
works 𝜇-network and 𝜆-network to improve the expressive ability
of ranking formula while guaranteeing IC and IR properties.
Firstly, 𝜇represents the strength of item bidding capability and
is independent of the allocations [23]. Thus, more specifically, the
value distribution information of ads, the features of request in-
formation, user profile and items are the main input features of
the 𝜇-network. Let x𝑗represent the value distribution information
vector of the 𝑗-th item in the allocation. The 𝜇-network can be
formally expressed as:
𝑓𝜇
𝑗= Sigmoid  MLP𝜇(x𝑗|z𝑢|z𝑟) , ∀𝑗∈[𝑚],
(13)
where the sigmoid function ensures a positive output. Each item
has a 𝑓𝜇
𝑗to represent its competitive ability.
Then, 𝜆is an arbitrary function of the allocation a. The features
of each item in the allocation a are concatenated to represent the
entire allocation, and the 𝜆-network for the allocation a is:
𝑓𝜆(a) = MLP𝜆 o1|o2| . . . |o𝑚|z𝑢|z𝑟 ,
(14)
where o𝑗= x𝑗|𝑞𝑗(a)|𝑔𝑗(a).
Finally, the social welfare of the allocation a is calculated as:
SW𝜇
𝜆(a) =
𝑚
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑓𝜇
𝑗× eCPM𝑗(a) + 𝑓𝜆(a),
(15)
where eCPM𝑗(a) = 𝑏𝑗× 𝑞𝑗(a) is the 𝑗-th item valuation function
on the allocation a.
The optimal allocation a∗is computed to maximize SW𝜇
𝜆(·). The
payment on click of the ad 𝑖in the 𝜎(𝑖)-th position of a∗are
𝑝𝑖(a∗) =
1
𝑓𝜇
𝜎(𝑖) (a∗)
h
SW𝜇
𝜆(a∗
−𝑖) −SW𝜇
𝜆(a∗)−𝑖
i
×
1
𝑞𝜎(𝑖) (a∗) , (16)
where a∗
−𝑖is the optimal allocation where ad 𝑖is not present and
SW𝜇
𝜆(a∗)−𝑖= Í
𝑗≠𝜎(𝑖) 𝑓𝜇
𝑗· 𝑏𝑗· 𝑞𝑗(a∗) + 𝑓𝜆(a∗). Because there is
only one ad in the allocation, and the bid of each organic item is 0,
so SW𝜇
𝜆(a∗)−𝑖= 𝑓𝜆(a∗).
Obviously, the process maintains the IC and IR properties of
AMA. The 𝜇-network and 𝜆-network are trained by end-to-end
learning in the next module DSM.
4.3
Differentiable Sorting Module
The search theory used in AMA [23] to solve 𝜇and 𝜆parameters is
inefficient. This paper aims to improve the efficiency and effective-
ness of solving this mechanism problem in the end-to-end learning
way. However, We are faced with two challenges, the first one is
the non-differentiability of the ranking process in auctions, and the
second one is the lack of user real behavior feedback.
In AAM, the sorting operation to obtain the optimal allocation
leads to a non-differentiable process for the entire procedure. In-
spired by the differentiable sorting engine proposed by Liu et al.
[18], we use multi classification model softmax to conduct a con-
tinuous relaxation of sorting operator in the mechanism. Given the
allocations set SW = [SW𝜇
𝜆(a1), . . . , SW𝜇
𝜆(a𝑚𝑛)], the vector Pr of
the allocations is mapped by the softmax function:
Pr = softmax( SW
𝜏) = [𝑃𝑟(a1), 𝑃𝑟(a2), . . . , 𝑃𝑟(a𝑚𝑛)],
(17)
where 𝜏is a temperature parameter. Intuitively, Pr can be inter-
preted as the winning probabilities on all allocations.
We use the pCTR and preditcted GMV (pGMV) indicators to
simulate user behavior, and calculate the performance metrics of
the allocations, which are then used for feedback training. Hence,
the expected revenue and GMV of the allocations are calculated by
Eq.(2) as:
Rev =[Rev(a1), Rev(a2), . . . , Rev(a𝑚𝑛)],
Gmv =[Gmv(a1), Gmv(a2), . . . , Gmv(a𝑚𝑛)].
(18)
Specifically, only the winning allocation’s revenue is greater than
0, while the non-winning allocations’ revenues are 0. Finally, The
overall optimization goal is to maximize Reward𝜇
𝜆, i.e., minimize
Loss = −Reward𝜇
𝜆= −
𝑚𝑛
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑃𝑟(a𝑘) (Rev(a𝑘) + 𝛼Gmv(a𝑘)) .
(19)
This Loss provides direct feedback for training 𝜇-network and 𝜆-
network, which is a partial differentiable method. This training
process is highly dependent on the accuracy of the pCTR and pGMV,
which may lead to inconsistencies between the offline and online
effects of this mechanism. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the
prediction performance of pCTR and pGMV in EPM and perform
list-wise calibration on them [3].
4.4
Training and Online Serving
The data (e.g., the candidate ads set, the organic items list, and
the real display ordered list and so on) in each request should be
recorded for the training of MIAA. The training of 𝜇-network and
𝜆-network in AAM relies on the prediction output of the list-wise
model in EPM. Hence, the list-wise model in EPM first needs to
be trained separately, using real display ordered list data. Then,
for each request record, all the possible allocations are generated
based on candidate ads and the organic items list. Next, the trained
list-wise model in EPM provides the prediction results of pCTR
and pGMV for each allocation, which will be used for subsequent
training of 𝜇-network and 𝜆-network in AAM. This training process
cannot obtain real user behavior feedback, so it relies on prediction
data for evaluating model performance.
The trained models in EPM and AAM are deployed online simul-
taneously and online serving is provided according to the following
process:
• Step1. Generate all the possible allocations.
• Step2. Predict the pCTR and pGMV by EPM for each allocation.
• Step3. Select the optimal allocation by AAM from all the possible
allocations.
• Step4. Return the winnning ad and its position.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed mech-
anism MIAA with the aim of answering the following questions:

Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction and Allocation in Feed
SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Table 2: Statistics of the datasets. Avg items represents the
average number of items per request.
Dataset
Requests
Users
Items
Avg items
Avito
112,159,463
4,284,824
36,893,299
3.64
Meituan
232,171,262
65,459,719
3,889,579
4.74
• Q1: Compared with the point-wise pCTRs, how does our list-wise
model perform in terms of CTR prediction?
• Q2: Compared with widely used ad auction and allocation mech-
anisms in the industrial platform, how does our mechanism per-
form in terms of platform revenue and GMV?
We conduct extensive offline experiments on public and indus-
trial datasets and online A/B tests on Meituan retail delivery plat-
form.
5.1
Experimental Settings
5.1.1
Dataset. In the offline experiments, we provide empirical
evidence for the effectiveness of our mechanism on both public and
industrial datasets. The statistics of the two datasets are summarized
in Table 2 and their detailed descriptions are as follows:
• Avito1. The public dataset is the Avito dataset used for the
Avito context ad clicks competition of Kaggle. It is a random
sample of previously selected users’ searches on avito.ru dur-
ing at least 26 consecutive days. In each search result page,
only five items in position 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 are logged. And only
the items (i.e., contextual ads) in the 1-st and 7-th positions are
marked with whether the user clicked or not. For subsequent
experiments, we simulate whether users click on items in the
2-nd and 6-th positions, based on the click behavior in the 1-st
and 7-th positions. Let CTR𝑗represent the CTR of position 𝑗.
The CTR1 and CTR7 can be obtained through statistical anal-
ysis. Then, CTR2 is simulated to follow a normal distribution
𝑁(0.8CTR1 + 0.2CTR7, 0.1CTR1), while CTR6 is simulated to fol-
low a normal distribution 𝑁(0.2CTR1 + 0.8CTR7, 0.1CTR7). The
public information consists of search ID, user ID and search date,
while the item information consists of ad ID, location ID, cate-
gory ID and title. For each sample, we select the 1-st item and
the 7-th item as candidate ads, and the remaining three items are
treated as organic items. Therefore, each candidate allocation is
1https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/avito-context-ad-clicks/data
Table 3: Experiment results about AUC and PCOC on Avito
dataset. ’Pos’ stands for the position in allocation.
Position
Method
AUC
PCOC
All Pos
EPM
0.7344 ± 0.0016
1.4875 ± 0.0165
point-wise
0.7308 ± 0.0011
1.6224 ± 0.0605
1st Pos
EPM
0.7386 ± 0.0015
1.4952 ± 0.0262
point-wise
0.7349 ± 0.0013
1.6107 ± 0.0608
4th Pos
EPM
0.7264 ± 0.0018
1.4763 ± 0.0146
point-wise
0.7225 ± 0.0010
1.6394 ± 0.0602
composed of a candidate ad and these three organic items. Here
we use the data from 20150425 to 20150517 as the training set and
the data from 20150518 to 20150520 as the testing set to avoid
data leakage.
• Meituan. The industrial dataset is collected under GSP auction
and fix positions on Meituan retail delivery platform during De-
cember 2023. Converted from each feed request, each sample
contains all possible candidate allocations composed of candi-
date ads and organic items, as well as the final winning optimal
allocation. Each candidate allocation is composed of a candidate
ad and three organic items. In each candidate allocation, the
information of each item consists of bid, sparse features (e.g.,
ID, category, brand and so on), dense features(e.g., historical
CTR, sales volume, value distribution information and so on).
Moreover, the point-wise pCTR in the production environment
is recorded for subsequent performance comparison. According
to the date of data collection, we divide the dataset into training
and test sets with the proportion of 8:2.
5.1.2
Evaluation Metrics. We construct an offline simulation sys-
tem based on the pCTR and pGMV to evaluate the effectiveness of
MIAA. Each experiment is repeated 5 times with different random
seeds and each result is presented in the form of mean ± standard.
The following evaluation metrics are used in our offline experiments
and online A/B tests.
• Click-Through Rate. CTR =
Í𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑘
Í𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛.
• AUC. AUC stands for Area Under the Curve, which is often used
to evaluate the performance of a model in machine learning. The
closer the AUC value is to 1, the better the model performs.
• PCOC. PCOC stands for Predicted CTR Over posterior CTR,
which is a measure of prediction accuracy. If the PCOC value is
close to 1, it indicates a high prediction accuracy.
• Revenue Per Mille. RPM =
Í𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑘×𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
Í𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
× 1000.
• GMV Per Mille. GPM =
Í𝐺𝑀𝑉
Í𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛× 1000.
5.1.3
Baselines. In terms of externalities modeling, we compare
the pCTR of the proposed list-wise model with that of the point-
wise model. In terms of platform revenue and GMV, we compare
Table 4: Experiment results about AUC and PCOC on Meituan
dataset. ’Pos’ stands for the position in allocation.
Position
Method
AUC
PCOC
All Pos
EPM
0.7077 ± 0.0005
0.9989 ± 0.0096
point-wise
0.6485
0.9075
1st Pos
EPM
0.7191 ± 0.0004
0.9921 ± 0.0269
point-wise
0.6631
0.7246
2nd Pos
EPM
0.7320 ± 0.0006
0.9924 ± 0.0502
point-wise
0.6988
0.9685
3rd Pos
EPM
0.6812 ± 0.0009
1.0075 ± 0.0362
point-wise
0.6157
0.9804
4th Pos
EPM
0.6617 ± 0.0003
0.9786 ± 0.0517
point-wise
0.6037
0.9002

SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Xuejian Li, et al.
Table 5: Experiment results of the five methods on two datasets. Each result is presented in the form of mean ± standard
deviation. The pRPM and pGPM represent the RPM and GPM values calculated based on pCTR and pGMV. The 𝛼is 0.5. Lift
percentage means the improvement of the method in this line over the result of GSP and Fixed Position. Considering the
confidentiality of commercial data, the experimental results on the Meituan dataset are presented based on GSP and Fixed
Position.
Dataset
Model
Revenue+𝛼GMV
pRPM
pGPM
Avito
GSP and Fixed Position
86,445.13 ± 12.30
2.9435 ± 0.0016
31.2695 ± 0.0053
GSP and Cross DQN
88,596.27 ± 5.43 (+2.49%)
2.9606 ± 0.0020 (+0.58%)
32.0757 ± 0.0014(+2.58%)
Score-Weighted VCG
88,008.38 ± 7.20(+1.81%)
5.6909 ± 0.0006(+93.34%)
30.4879 ± 0.0025(-2.50%)
IAS
88,613.62 ± 8.01(+2.51%)
5.004 ± 0.0040(+70.02%)
31.0604 ± 0.0018(-0.67%)
MIAA
91,069.80 ± 8.48(+5.35%)
5.0732 ± 0.0007(+72.35%)
31.9563 ± 0.0032(+2.20%)
Meituan
GSP and Fixed Position
1.0
1.0
1.0
GSP and Cross DQN
1.0547 ± 0.0024(+5.47%)
1.0346 ± 0.0013(+3.46%)
1.0573 ± 0.0008(+5.73%)
Score-Weighted VCG
1.0123 ± 0.0031(+1.23%)
1.1980 ± 0.0022(+19.80%)
0.9887 ± 0.0015(-1.13%)
IAS
1.0330 ± 0.0026(+3.30%)
1.1310 ± 0.0018(+13.10%)
1.0205 ± 0.0027(+2.5%)
MIAA
1.1105 ± 0.0023 (+11.05%)
1.1560 ± 0.0029(+15.60%)
1.1047 ± 0.0025(+10.47%)
Table 6: Online A/B tests (2023.10.15-2023.12.15 two months) compared with GSP+Fixed Position and GSP+Cross DQN on
promoting all performance metrics. The 𝛼is 0.3.
Model
Revenue+𝛼GMV
RPM
GPM
% Improved Compared with GSP and Fixed Position
+8.17%
+11.25%
+7.37%
% Improved Compared with GSP and Cross DQN
+4.87%
+7.63%
+4.15%
MIAA with the following four common auction and allocation
mechanisms:
• GSP [25] and Fixed Position. This is a mechanism where the
ad auction and allocation are separated into two stages. First, the
GSP mechanism is used to select the winning ad, and then this
ad is displayed in a fixed position.
• GSP and Cross DQN [17]. The winning ad in GSP and the or-
ganic items form multiple combinations of candidate positions,
which are evaluated and selected through cross DQN, finally
determining the display position of the ad.
• Score-Weighted VCG [13]. The Score-Weighted VCG frame-
work decomposes the optimal auction design into two parts:
designing a monotone score function and an matching-based
allocation algorithm. But it does not consider the platform GMV
and its incentive effect.
• IAS [14]. IAS treats organic items as special ads with a bid of
0 and integrates both ads and organic items into the optimal
auction to get their rankings.
5.2
Offline Experiments
5.2.1
Performance Comparison of externalities modeling (Q1). On
the public Avito dataset, we need to construct point-wise model
and list-wise model of EPM. The point-wise model is a deep neural
network with multiple fully connected layers of 256×128×64×32×1.
For each request, The items in the 1-st, 2-nd, 6-th, and 7-th positions
are extracted to form a list for constructing the list-wise model of
EPM. As mentioned earlier, only the 1-st position and 4-th position
in this list have real user click behavior data that can be used
to evaluate the performance of these two models. The detailed
experimental results on the Avito dataset are shown in Table 3. For
all positions in allocation, the list-wise pCTR in EPM improves the
AUC by 0.0036 compared with the point-wise pCTR, and its PCOC
is closer to 1. And at each position, the prediction results of the
list-wise model in EPM is better than that of the point-wise model.
On the Meituan industrial dataset, the point-wise pCTR by DIN
[34] model is already included, which is used in the production
environment. Therefore, we only need to construct the list-wise
model of EPM to predict CTR, and then compare it with the former.
The detailed experimental results on Meituan industrial dataset
are shown in Table 4. From the results, the list-wise model in EPM
significantly improves the AUC of all positions from 0.6485 of the
point-wise model to 0.7077, and the PCOC of all positions is even
closer to 1. Considering positional externalities, the list-wise model
in EPM solves the problem of low predition at the first position,
which has always existed in the point-wise model.
Obviously, considering the externalities (e.g., the display position
and context of the ad), the list-wise model in EPM performs better
on AUC and PCOC metrics than the point-wise models on both the
public Avito dataset and Meituan industrial dataset.
5.2.2
Performance Comparison of mechanisms (Q2). To validate
the efficacy of the proposed mechanism in enhancing platform
revenue and GMV, we implemente the GSP and Fixed Position,
GSP and Cross DQN, Score-Weighted VCG and IAS on these two
datasets for comparative analysis. On the public Avito dataset, we

Deep Automated Mechanism Design for Integrating Ad Auction and Allocation in Feed
SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
select the 1-st item and the 7-th item as candidate ads, and the
remaining three items are treated as organic items. Moreover, we
provide a simulated bid for each ad and a simulated pGMV per click
for each item. The bid of each ad is independently sampled from
uniform distribution between 0.5 and 1.0. Meanwhile, the pGMV
per click for organic items is independently sampled from uniform
distribution between 3.5 and 6.0, and the pGMV per click for ads is
independently sampled from uniform distribution between 2.0 and
4.0. On these two datasets, the fixed position is set as 2 in the GSP
and Fixed Position baseline. Particularly, it should be pointed out
that, as the offline simulation systems are unable to obtain actual
user behavior data under different mechanisms, the assessment of
these experiments’ effectiveness is statistically derived from the
pCTR and pGMV of users on items. Considering the confidential-
ity of commercial data, the experimental results on the Meituan
dataset are presented based on GSP and Fixed Position. The detailed
experiment results on public and industrial datasets are shown in
Table 5.
From the experiment results, we can see that MIAA achieves
obtains the highest revenue and GMV, outperforming all base-
line mechanisms. Compared with GSP and Fixed Position, MIAA
achieves significant improvements, as items with higher eCPM or
GMV obtain better positions, and the payment of ads is increased.
MIAA, considering the incentive effect of organic items on ads,
achieves higher pRPM compared with GSP and Cross DQN. Score-
Weighted VCG achieves maximum pRPM without considering the
loss of GMV. Compared with IAS, MIAA, which considers external-
ities, achieves higher pRPM and pGMV.
5.3
Online Results
We present the online experiments by deploying the proposed
mechanism in Meituan retail delivery platform. In the production
environment of feed, for each page request, the system returns
an ordered list containing one ad and three organic items. There
are two baselines, one is GSP and fixed position (that is, the ad is
inserted at the second position), and the other one is GSP and Cross
DQN, in which the ad is dynamically assigned to a certain position.
To demonstrate the performance of the proposed mechanism, we
conduct online A/B tests with 5% of whole production traffic from
Oct 15, 2023 to Dec 15, 2023. In the real production environment,
we cannot conduct A/B tests based on advertisers. The A/B tests
using user-based traffic makes it difficult to evaluate the proposed
mechanism’s incentive effect on advertisers’ bidding. Therefore, we
only focus on the performance of revenue, GMV, RPM, and GPM
in the experiments. In order to make fair and efficient comparisons
between different baselines in production traffic, we will equalize
the number of ad displays in the experimental group with that in the
baselines. The experiment results in online A/B tests are shown in
Table 6. From the results, we can find that the proposed mechanism
achieves the highest promotion for revenue, GMV, RPM and GPM
compared with GSP and Fixed Position, and GSP and Cross DQN.
6
CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes a deep automated mechanism for integrat-
ing ad auction and allocation, that satisfies both IC and IR in the
presence of externalities and maximizes revenue and GMV. Specifi-
cally, for all candidate allocations formed by the mixture of the ad
and organic items, we use a list-wise model for global externalities
modeling. Then, we use an automated mechanism based on deep
neural networks to select the optimal allocation from the candidate
allocation set in an end-to-end learning way. In this process, the
ranking, payment, and display position of the ads are determined at
the same time. We conduct extensive offline experiments on public
and industrial datasets and online A/B tests on Meituan retail deliv-
ery platform. The offline experimental results and online A/B tests
showed that the proposed mechanism significantly outperforms the
other existing mechanism baselines. In future research, we aim to
investigate efficient mechanisms design for integrating multi-slots
ads auction and allocation.

SIGIR ’24, July 14–18, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
Xuejian Li, et al.
