Explainable AI for Robot Failures: Generating Explanations that
Improve User Assistance in Fault Recovery
Devleena Das
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

Siddhartha Banerjee
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

Sonia Chernova
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

ABSTRACT
With the growing capabilities of intelligent systems, the integration
of robots in our everyday life is increasing. However, when interact-
ing in such complex human environments, the occasional failure of
robotic systems is inevitable. The field of explainable AI has sought
to make complex-decision making systems more interpretable but
most existing techniques target domain experts. On the contrary,
in many failure cases, robots will require recovery assistance from
non-expert users. In this work, we introduce a new type of explana-
tion, E𝑒𝑟𝑟, that explains the cause of an unexpected failure during
an agent’s plan execution to non-experts. In order for E𝑒𝑟𝑟to be
meaningful, we investigate what types of information within a set
of hand-scripted explanations are most helpful to non-experts for
failure and solution identification. Additionally, we investigate how
such explanations can be autonomously generated, extending an ex-
isting encoder-decoder model, and generalized across environments.
We investigate such questions in the context of a robot performing
a pick-and-place manipulation task in the home environment. Our
results show that explanations capturing the context of a failure and
history of past actions, are the most effective for failure and solution
identification among non-experts. Furthermore, through a second
user evaluation, we verify that our model-generated explanations
can generalize to an unseen office environment, and are just as
effective as the hand-scripted explanations.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Interaction paradigms.
KEYWORDS
Explainable AI, Fault Recovery
ACM Reference Format:
Devleena Das, Siddhartha Banerjee, and Sonia Chernova. 2021. Explainable
AI for Robot Failures: Generating Explanations that Improve User Assis-
tance in Fault Recovery. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI ’21), March 8–11, 2021, Boul-
der, CO, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3434073.3444657
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

HRI ’21, March 8–11, 2021, Boulder, CO, USA
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8289-2/21/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3434073.3444657
1
INTRODUCTION
In homes, hospitals, and manufacturing plants, robots are increas-
ingly being tested for deployment alongside non-roboticists to
perform complex tasks, such as folding laundry [49], delivering
laboratory specimens [9, 25], and moving inventory goods [22, 33].
When operating in such complex human environments, occasional
robot failures are inevitable. When failures occur, human assistance
is often required to correct the problem [7], and co-located users
– homeowners, medical lab technicians, and warehouse workers –
will be first on the scene. We classify such users as everyday users,
or non-experts, because of their lack of formal training in machine
learning, AI, or robotics.
In order for everyday users to be able to assist in robot failure
recovery, they will need to understand why a failure has occurred.
For example, a homeowner waiting for a robot to bring them coffee
may need to determine why the robot suddenly stopped in the
middle of the kitchen, or a production line worker may need to
determine why a packing robot suddenly stopped picking up items.
The field of Explainable AI (XAI) has sought to address the
challenge of understanding "black-box" systems through the de-
velopment of interpretable machine learning (ML) algorithms that
can explain their decision making to users [2, 21]. Furthermore, a
subfield of XAI, Explainable Planning (XAIP), has focused on gener-
ating explanations specifically for sequential-decision making tasks,
including explaining an agent’s chosen plan and explaining unsolv-
able plans to end-users [12]. Such techniques hold great promise for
the development of more transparent robotic systems but they do
not incorporate explanations for unexpected failures during a plan
execution. Additionally, the majority of existing XAI techniques
are designed for technical domain experts who understand AI or
ML at its core [2, 40, 42, 48, 51]. While expert understanding is
crucial, such XAI methods are not suitable for the vast majority of
end-users, who are non-experts [18, 20, 26].
In this work, we seek to make robotic systems more transparent
to their users by leveraging techniques from explainable AI, while
also extending the capabilities of XAI systems toward greater trans-
parency for non-expert users. Specifically, our work addresses fault
recovery cases in which the robot’s task execution is halted due to
an error. We investigate whether providing explanations can not
only help non-expert users understand the system’s point of failure,
but also help them determine an appropriate solution required to
resume normal operation of the task.In some cases (e.g., complex
hardware failures), the user might not have the knowledge to fix the
point of failure regardless of the provided error explanation. In this
work, we focus on failures that we expect to be within the user’s
understanding (e.g., object is too far away), and we address this
arXiv:2101.01625v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2021

question in the context of pick-and-place manipulation tasks in the
home environment. Our work makes the following contributions:
• Formalization of error explanations: Providing justifica-
tions for points of failures that occur unexpectedly amidst an
agent’s plan execution has not previously been studied within
the XAIP community. We expand upon the existing set of expla-
nations available in the XAI and XAIP community, introducing
error explanations designed to explain failures that occur during
the execution of a task.
• Explanation content: We empirically evaluate what informa-
tion an error explanation should contain to aid non-experts in
understanding the cause of failure and to select a recovery strat-
egy. We show that explanations that include both (i) history
of recently accomplished actions, and (ii) contextual reasoning
about the environment, are the most effective in enabling users
to identify the cause of and solution to a failure.
• Explanation generation: We present an automated technique
for generating natural language error explanations that ratio-
nalize encountered failures in a manner that is understandable
by non-experts. Specifically, we extend an encoder-decoder
model for autonomously generating natural language expla-
nations introduced by [20] to generate context-based history
explanations within a continuous state-space.
• Validation with non-expert users: We demonstrate that ex-
planations generated by the encoder-decoder model can gen-
eralize to an unseen environment and are as effective as hand-
scripted, context-based history explanations.
We validate our approach through two user studies and com-
putational model analysis. In the first study, we examine what
information an error explanation should contain by evaluating how
the content of an explanation affects user performance in identify-
ing and assisting with a robot error (Sec. 4). From these results, we
identify an explanation type that leads to the highest performance,
and then contribute a computational model to automatically gener-
ate such explanations from robot states (Sec. 5). In our second study,
we demonstrate that our automated explanations are as effective
as hand-scripted explanations in guiding non-experts to identify
the cause of a failure and its potential solution.
2
RELATED WORKS
The XAI community has primarily focused on developing inter-
pretability methodologies for understanding the inner workings of
black-box models [2, 40]. Many of these approaches have focused
on model-agnostic implementations, designed to increase expert
understanding of deep learning outputs [2, 38, 39]. Additionally,
most XAI approaches [40, 42, 48, 51] have primarily focused on
understanding classification-based tasks. However, classification
tasks do not capture the complexity of sequential decision-making
an agent, such as a robot, may perform while having long-term
interactions with users [12].
To address the need for interpretable explanations in sequential
decision making tasks, the XAIP community has focused on explain-
ing an agent’s plans to end-users. A recent survey paper highlights
some of the key components of plan explanations studied by the
community [12]: (1) contrastive question-answering, (2) explain-
ing unsolvable plans, and (3) providing explicable justifications
for a chosen plan. In the realm of contrastive question-answering,
Krarup et al. provide a framework to transfer domain-independent
user questions into constraints that can be added to a planning
model [32], while Hoffmann et al. utilize common properties within
a set of correct plans as an explanation for unmet properties in in-
correct plans [24]. In order to explain unsolvable plans, Sreedharan
et al. abstract the unsolvable plan into a simpler example through
which explanations can be formulated [43]. Finally, in order to pro-
vide explicable justifications for a plan, Zhang et al. use conditional
random fields (CRFs) to model human explanations of existing agent
plans, and use such a human “mental model” as a constraint for gen-
erating explicable plans [52]. The work is extended by Chakraborti
et al., who eschew constraining an agent’s plan and instead achieve
explicability through model reconciliation, whereby the agent pro-
vides explanations that reconcile its model to the human “mental
model” [11, 13]. However, in these works, an explanation justifies
a chosen plan, or the lack of one. In our work, we aim to explain
the possible failures that can arise during a plan.
Techniques for plan repair enable a task plan to be adapted
to overcome an error [14, 23]. Methods in this domain reuse the
failing plan and search the plan space to find local deviations that
allow continued execution [15], or transform the plan to adapt it
to the situation [27, 34]. Such repairs are often found and executed
autonomously, with no human intervention.
Recently, works have considered interactive plan repair with
a human-in-the-loop. Boteanu et al. showed a proof-of-concept
model in which a human approved repair action is proposed by
a common-sense reasoning framework [10]. However, this work
was limited to errors involving missing items, and did not focus on
explaining errors to users. Meanwhile, Knepper et al. investigated
the grounding of natural language requests to best garner help from
non-expert humans [31]. They found that the requests were suc-
cessful when they were targeted, e.g. helped listeners disambiguate
between multiple objects, and told them what to do. The authors
developed a system to generate such requests. We build upon these
findings to investigate the characteristics of natural language error
explanations that allow non-experts to help a robot; unlike [31], we
do not assume the robot is aware of a correct recovery and able to
direct the user on the recovery process.
Plan repair for failures that occur during execution require a
fault diagnosis [23] and there is a large body of ongoing work in
robotics focused on fault diagnosis techniques [29]. These works
use a range of methods, including unsatisfied preconditions [10,
15, 31], first-order logic inference [50], case-based reasoning [23,
36], sensor signal processing [1, 17, 28], Bayes nets and Dynamic
Bayesian Networks [8, 30], Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [47],
particle filters [44, 53], and neural networks [35, 37] to diagnose
failures. Depending on the context of the work, the diagnosis either
identifies what is wrong with the robot—e.g., object not visible [31]
or sonar is blind [17]—or why it is wrong—e.g., there was a collision
with the environment [35]. However, the prior work aims to use
the diagnoses for autonomous robot recovery from failure or to
facilitate debugging by experts. The problem of generating natural
language explanations from a fault diagnosis to allow non-experts
to help a robot recover remains largely unexplored.
In efforts to provide explanations to non-experts on infeasible
agent behaviors, prior work has presented a linear temporal logic

Figure 1: The pipeline used to generate E𝑒𝑟𝑟explanations for a non-expert user. (a) Data collection in failure simulations and
the extraction of the agent’s state space. (b) Study of hand-scripted E𝑒𝑟𝑟explanations with varying information types (Sec. 4).
(c) Autonomously generated E𝑒𝑟𝑟explanations using an encoder-decoder model (Sec. 5).
(LTL) framework to explain actions unsatisfiable by a robot [39].
The explanations focus on what actions are unattainable by the
robot, but do not include the underlying reasons for why they may
be unattainable. Similarly, an algorithm called HIGHLIGHTS uses
visual animations to summarize agent capabilities—what an agent
can achieve—to non-expert users, based on the features dictating an
agent’s reward function [3]. In our work, we show that non-experts
need to be told why an action is unattainable in order to help an
agent recover; explaining what is unattainable is insufficient.
Finally, prior work in XAI has found that natural language expla-
nations can provide “justification” and are “understandable” by non-
experts [20]. The study, conducted in the discrete domain of Frogger,
used sequence-to-sequence learning to treat explanation generation
as a neural translation problem, where an agent’s internal states
are translated into natural language, with impressive results on
non-experts’ abilities to comprehend the agent’s decisions [19, 20].
We build on these findings and adapt the sequence-to-sequence
learning approach to a continuous robotics domain.
3
PROBLEM DEFINITION
We define the problem of providing explanations for task failures by
extending the framework introduced by Chakraborti et al. [12] for
producing explanations to goal-directed plans. In the framework, a
planning problem Π is defined by a transition function 𝛿Π : 𝐴×𝑆→
𝑆× R, where 𝐴is the set of actions available to the agent, 𝑆is the
set of states it can be in, and R is a cost of making the transition. A
planning algorithm A solves Π subject to a desired property 𝜏to
produce a plan or policy 𝜋, i.e. A : Π×𝜏↦→𝜋. Here,𝜏may represent
different properties such as soundness, optimality, etc. The solution
to this problem, i.e. the plan, 𝜋= ⟨𝑎1,𝑎2, ...,𝑎𝑛⟩,𝑎𝑖∈𝐴, which
transforms the current state 𝐼∈𝑆of the agent to its goal 𝐺∈𝑆, i.e.
𝛿Π(𝜋, 𝐼) = ⟨𝐺, Σ𝑎𝑖∈𝜋𝑐𝑖⟩. The second term in the output denotes a
plan cost 𝑐(𝜋).
Given the above framework, we define two explanation types.
The first is from [12], and the second is contributed by our work:
E𝜋: This explanation justifies to a human user that solution 𝜋satis-
fies property 𝜏for a given planning problem Π. For example,
the user may ask “Why 𝜋and not 𝜋′?”. In response to this
question, E𝜋must enable the user to compute A : Π × 𝜏↦→𝜋
and verify that either A : Π × 𝜏̸↦→𝜋′, or that A : Π × 𝜏↦→𝜋′
but 𝜋≡𝜋′ or 𝜋is greater than 𝜋′ with respect to some criteria.
E𝜋applies to the plan solution as a whole and can be elicited
at any time. Approaches addressing E𝜋are discussed in Sec. 2.
E𝑒𝑟𝑟: This explanation applies when an unexpected failure state, 𝑓∈
F , is triggered by a failed action in ⟨𝑎1,𝑎2, ...,𝑎𝑛⟩, and halts the
execution of 𝜋. For example, the user may ask “The robot is at
the table, but why did it not pick up my beverage?” In response
to this question, E𝑒𝑟𝑟must allow the user to understand the
cause of error in order to help the system recover.
In this work, we develop the second variant of explanations, E𝑒𝑟𝑟.
We assume that both the algorithm A and the plan 𝜋are sound,
and that the cause of error is triggered by a failure state 𝑓∈F
from which an agent cannot recover without user assistance. For
example, a situation in which a robot requires human help to discern
an occluded object or pickup a tool out of reach. Our objective is
to generate E𝑒𝑟𝑟such that the user (1) correctly understands the
cause of failure, and (2) helps the agent recover from the error by
providing a solution.
In the following sections, we present our methods to achieve the
above objective. In Sec. 4, we introduce a set of information types, Λ,
that are characteristics of E𝑒𝑟𝑟. We then develop scripted explana-
tions satisfying different 𝜆∈Λ, and evaluate them to find a mean-
ingful 𝜆that satisfy our objective for non-expert users (Fig. 1(b)).
The results from Sec. 4 inform our efforts in Sec. 5 to automatically
generate E𝑒𝑟𝑟without using pre-defined scripts (Fig. 1(c)).
4
INFORMATION TYPES OF E𝑒𝑟𝑟
In order to generate E𝑒𝑟𝑟, the first question we have to answer is:
given an error while executing a plan 𝜋for a particular task, what
types of information should explanation E𝑒𝑟𝑟contain?

Study Condition
𝑎𝑡
𝑎𝑡−1
𝑐𝑡
Example Explanation for “object is occluded” failure
None
N/A
Action Based (AB)
✓
Robot could not find the object.
Context Based (CB)
✓
✓
Robot could not find the object because the object is hidden from view.
Action
Based
History
(AB-H)
✓
✓
The robot finished scanning objects at its current location but could not find the desired object.
Context Based History
(CB-H)
✓
✓
✓
The robot finished scanning objects at its current location, but could not find the desired object
because the desired object is hidden from view.
Table 1: The features that can encompass an explanation based on the study conditions. 𝑎𝑡represents current action, 𝑎𝑡−1
represents last successful action, and 𝑐𝑡represents captured environmental context.
For our application, we desire that E𝑒𝑟𝑟is (1) accessible to non-
experts, and (2) representative of the fault cause. Unfortunately, it
is not clear from prior literature what information from an agent’s
plan 𝜋, or its failure, satisfies these requirements. Ehsan et al. [20]
propose that explanations for everyday users should take the form
of rationales, which justify the agent’s decision in layperson’s terms.
However, their rationales are trained from non-expert labels, do
not reveal the true decision making process of an agent, and thus
would not be able to disambiguate among visually similar robot
errors (e.g., failure to grasp object due to kinematic constraints vs.
object occlusion vs. a segmentation error). By contrast, prior work
on fault diagnosis [29] has extensively studied how to describe
error states, but such work exclusively targets expert users, with
resulting explanations referencing specific system components or
agent internals (e.g., “localization mismatch with odometry” [17]).
Thus, our first step is to determine what information E𝑒𝑟𝑟should
contain to be both accurate and interpretable by non-experts.
In this section, we define a set of information types, 𝜆∈Λ, that
we use to generate scripted explanations during a failure. In a user
study with non-experts, we determine which 𝜆best help users
identify the cause of a failure and suggest solutions to the failure.
Specifically, we conducted a between-subjects user study in which
Λ consists of four values that are a cross-product of two factors:
2 (history, no history) x 2 (context-based, action-based). In the user
study, the four explanation conditions were contrasted against a
baseline condition. The five conditions are enumerated below:
• Baseline (None): Participants receive no explanation on the
cause of error. This is the current standard in deployed robotic
systems, e.g., [41].
• Action-Based (AB): Participants receive E𝑒𝑟𝑟containing only
the currently failed action 𝑎𝑡as the cause of error.
• Context-Based (CB): Participants receive E𝑒𝑟𝑟containing
both 𝑎𝑡and context, 𝑐𝑡, retrieved from the environment as
the cause of error.
• Action-Based-History (AB-H): Participants receive E𝑒𝑟𝑟con-
taining the previous action 𝑎𝑡−1 and 𝑎𝑡as the cause of error.
• Context-Based-History (CB-H): Participants receive E𝑒𝑟𝑟
containing 𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡, and 𝑐𝑡as the cause of error.
Table 1 summarizes the study conditions and provides example ex-
planations for each condition. In the following sections, we discuss
our experimental setup, the study procedure, and our results.
4.1
Goal, Action Space, & State Space
We conduct our experiment in Gazebo simulations of a Fetch ro-
bot [46]. The Fetch robot is a mobile manipulator with a differential
drive base, a 7DoF arm, a parallel-jaw gripper, a pan-tilt head, and
an adjustable torso. For sensing, the base includes a laser scanner
and the head contains an RGB-D camera. The robot is simulated
in a kitchen setting performing a pick-and-place task (as seen in
Fig. 1a). The robot’s task is to move a task-specified object (e.g.,
milk carton) from the dining table to the kitchen counter.
Similar to prior work in robotics [5], we define the robot’s action
space as the set 𝐴= {𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒,𝑠𝑒𝑔𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡,𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡, 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝,𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝,𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑡,
𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒}, where 𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒navigates the robot to a specified location,
𝑠𝑒𝑔𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡is used to identify which pixels in its sensory space corre-
spond to objects, 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡performs object detection to obtain a label
for a given object, 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝executes grasp sampling to identify
possible grasp poses for the gripper, 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝moves the robot arm
into a grasp pose and closes the gripper, 𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑡raises the arm, and
𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒places a held object at a specified location.
The robot’s state at each time step 𝑡is defined as 𝑠𝑡∈𝑆, where
𝑆= 𝑆𝑒∪𝑆𝑙∪𝑆𝑖∪𝑆𝑘. Here, 𝑆𝑒= 𝑆𝑜∪𝑆𝑝denotes the set of names
for all entities in the environment, where 𝑆𝑜consists of {milk, coke
can, ice cream, bottle, cup}, and 𝑆𝑝consists of: {dining table, kitchen
counter}. 𝑠𝑙(𝑡) ∈𝑆𝑙is a vector of ⟨𝑥,𝑦,𝑧⟩locations for each en-
tity 𝑠𝑒∈𝑆𝑒at a given time step 𝑡. 𝑠𝑖(𝑡) ∈𝑆𝑖is defined by three
tuples ⟨𝑥𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑙,𝑦𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑙,𝑧𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑙⟩, ⟨𝑥𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑙,𝑦𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑙,𝑧𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑙⟩,⟨𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠,𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑠,𝑧𝑝𝑜𝑠⟩that
describe the angular velocity, linear velocity and position of the ro-
bot at𝑡. Finally,𝑆𝑘= {𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝,𝑘𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑝,𝑘𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒,𝑘𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑘,𝑘𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡,𝑘𝑠𝑒𝑔}
where𝑠𝑘(𝑡) ∈𝑆𝑘describes the status of each𝑎∈𝐴at𝑡, and whether
each action is: active (0), completed (1) or errored (-1). Therefore,
at all time steps, the number of elements in 𝑠𝑘(𝑡) is equal to the
number of actions in 𝐴.
4.2
Failure Taxonomy
The agent’s initial state is defined as𝑠0 = {⟨0, 0, 0⟩, ⟨0, 0, 0⟩, ⟨0, 0, 0⟩,
{𝑛𝑢𝑙𝑙}}, where the position tuple and the velocity tuples are set to
zero, and the action states 𝑠𝑘(0) are not defined. If there are no er-
rors, the agent’s final state is defined as 𝑠𝑇= {⟨𝑥𝑇,𝑦𝑇,𝑧𝑇⟩, ⟨0, 0, 0⟩,
⟨0, 0, 0⟩, {1, 1, ..., 1}}, where the position tuple is set to the goal lo-
cation, the velocity tuples are zero, and each action state in 𝑠𝑘(𝑇)
is 1. In this context, plan 𝜋is the set of actions ⟨𝑎1,𝑎2, ...,𝑎𝑛⟩∈𝐴
that transform the agent’s initial state 𝑠0 to its final state 𝑠𝑇. We
then define a failure 𝑓in plan 𝜋as the event when any action state
in 𝑠𝑘has a value -1.
Following the example of prior work [35], we study our work in
the context of a representative sample of failures in robot behavior.
We classify these failures using fault-tree analysis (Fig. 2)1. Failed
1Our fault-tree analysis identifies errors and solutions relevant to our domain, and we
leave generating explanations for unknown errors for future work. Visualization of
each failure is available at: https://youtu.be/jYn3FaqG65E.

Figure 2: Fault tree analysis of failures in this work. We also
show the failed action used to detect the failure, and a short-
hand label of the solution to fix the failure.
robot behaviours characterize coarse failure types (𝐹𝑡), e.g., a failure
in “object detection”. Each failure type can have multiple failure
causes (𝐹𝑐), e.g., “object not present” or “object occluded” are possi-
ble causes for an “object detection” failure. In our system, failures
are detected by an errored action. For example, 𝑠𝑘𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡= −1 can
indicate that either the “object is occluded” or the “object is not
present”. Crucially, however, each failure cause has an associated
resolution action, not in the robot’s action space, but which can be
selected by humans to rectify the cause of failure.
The fault-tree analysis also groups failure causes 𝐹𝑐into causal
groups, which we define as Internal and External. These categories
roughly correspond to system and environment failures, respec-
tively, in the prior work [35]. Internal failures are not apparent
through visual cues in the environment and are often the result
of failures of hardware or software modules. By contrast, external
failures are often caused by unexpected conditions in the environ-
ment and are therefore visually apparent in the environment. In
Section 4.5, we investigate the effect of different information types
on users when the error stems from the different causal groups.
4.3
Study Design
Our objective is to evaluate the different information types of error
explanations across a variety of failures. We simulated |F | = |𝑆𝑜| ×
|𝐹𝑐| = 30 failures to capture all possible object × failure cause
combinations. In our domain, each failure 𝑓∈F has a single
cause in 𝐹𝑐and therefore a single resolution method 𝐹𝑟. The study
consisted of the following three stages.
Familiarization: Participants in all conditions were first shown
three videos of the Fetch robot successfully executing the task with
randomly selected objects from 𝑆𝑜using a plan 𝜋. This served to
accustom participants to the robot, its abilities, and its actions.
Baseline: All participants were then shown six randomly sam-
pled failure simulations from F , one for every failure cause 𝐹𝑐.
To visualize the failure, participants were shown animated snap-
shots (GIFs) of actions leading up to a failure, and three perspective
shots of the robot in the final environment state2. Participants were
provided no explanations and asked to identify the cause of the
failure and suggest a solution. Participant responses established the
2Humans subject study is available here: https://robotasks00.web.app/.
participants’ baseline understanding of the robot and the domain,
allowing us to measure improvement in understanding.
Explanation: Finally, participants were exposed to twelve addi-
tional randomly sampled failures from F (different from Baseline),
two for every failure cause 𝐹𝑐. Depending on the assigned study
condition, a participant was either provided a hand-scripted ex-
planation matching the information type of the assigned study
condition, or the participant was provided no explanation if in the
None condition. As before, the participant was required to identify
the cause of failure and suggest a solution. For each simulation,
after identifying a failure and solution, participants received their
accuracy score. This was the only feedback given to all participants.
4.4
Measures & Hypotheses
We evaluate participant performance using F1 score. In particular,
we evaluate the difference between participant Baseline F1 score and
their Explanation F1 score. The difference in F1 score is evaluated
for the following measures:
• Failure Identification (FId): measures a participants’ ability
to correctly identify the cause of each failure.
• Solution Identification (SId): measures a participants’ ability
to correctly identify the solution to each failure.
Our data analysis then aims to answer the following questions
with respect to the measures:
• Q1: Do action-based (AB) or context-based (CB) explanations
lead to the greatest improvement in user failure identification
(FId) and solution identification (SId)?
• Q2: Does the inclusion of history within an explanation im-
prove users’ failure identification (FId) and solution identifica-
tion (SId)?
• Q3: How do users’ failure identification (FId) and solution iden-
tification (SId) compare for Internal vs External robot errors?
4.5
User Evaluation of Scripted Explanations
Participants. We recruited 80 individuals from Amazon’s Mechan-
ical Turk. Since our target audience is non-experts, we filtered out
10 participants for achieving 100% accuracy in the Baseline stage,
under the assumption that they were not novices. The remaining
70 participants included 51 males and 19 females, all whom were
18 years or older (M = 35.2 , SD = 9.4). Due to the exclusion crite-
ria, each study condition had 13-15 participants. The task took on
average 20 - 40 minutes and participants were compensated $3.50.
Data Analysis. The data on the FId and SId metrics are analyzed
with a two-way ANOVA for Q1 and Q2 and a one-way ANOVA
for Q3, followed by a Tukey HSD post-hoc test for each.
Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b answer Q1 by showing the benefit of including
environmental context (CB, CB-H conditions) in failure identifi-
cation (FId) and solution identification (SId). In both figures, we
see that explanations with context have the highest improvement
in FId and SId scores. Specifically, the presence of context had a
significant effect on FId (F(2,67)= 6.95, p=0.0018), with a significant
FId improvement for Context-based explanations over both None
(t(67)=3.729, p=0.0012) and Action-based (t(67)=2.923,p=0.014) ex-
planations. Similarly, the presence of context had a trending effect
on SId (F(2,67)=2.92, p=0.06), with a significant improvement in

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: Average F1 score across explanation conditions grouped by Context Based vs. Action Based (a-b) and History vs. No
History (c-d). In Fig. 3, 4, and 6, statistical significance is reported as: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Average F1 score across all conditions grouped by Internal versus External errors.
SId for Context-based explanations vs. None (t(67)=3.12, p=0.007).
This indicates that the inclusion of environmental context in the
CB explanation conditions (CB, CB-H) helped participants better
understand the underlying causes of the failures thereby allowing
them to better assist the robot.
Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d answer Q2 by showing the benefit of including
history (AB-H, CB-H conditions), on FId and SId. In both figures,
history-based explanations have the highest improvement in FId
and SId scores. Similar to the effects of including context, includ-
ing history had a significant improvement on FId (F(2,67)= 3.36,
p=0.04), with History vs. None as significant (t(67)=3.447, p=0.003).
Although including history did not have a significant effect on
SId overall (F(2,67)= 1.38, p=0.25), we observe a significant differ-
ence in improvement between History-based explanations vs. None
(t(67)=3.1857, p=0.006). This supports the idea that knowledge of
the most recently completed action (AB-H, CB-H conditions) can
help users gauge what a robot was able to successfully accomplish,
thereby helping users better pinpoint the exact cause of failure and
provide correct suggestions for recovery.
Our analysis so far investigates the independent effects of includ-
ing context and history on explanation utility. The results suggest
that context-based explanations incorporating history, i.e. CB-H ex-
planations, are the best suited to non-experts. We next consider each
explanation type individually and their efficacy for non-experts
based on the causal group of the originating fault.
Fig. 4 answers Q3 by showing the different effects of the explana-
tion types for failures stemming from the different causal groups—
Internal and External failures. Explanations have a significant effect
on the improvement in FId for External errors (F(4,62)= 3.53, p=0.01),
with CB-H showing the most pronounced improvement, specifically
vs. AB (t(62)=-3.216, p=0.017) and vs. None(t(62)=-3.046, p=0.027).
Additionally, we see a significant effect of explanations in improv-
ing FId for Internal errors ((F(4,62)= 4.39, p=0.003), with a significant
difference in CB-H vs. None (t(62)=-3.955, p=0.0018). With respect
to improvement in SId for External errors, we see a trending effect
of explanations (F(4,62)=2.16, p=0.083) with a trending difference be-
tween AB-H vs. None (t(62)=2.648, p=0.073). For Internal errors, we
notice a trending effect of explanations (F(4,62)=2.37, p=0.061), but
with a significant difference between CB-H and None (t(62)=-2.86,
p=0.044). Overall, we find that CB-H explanations are valuable to
participants for both error types, but especially for the Internal case
when failure causes are not discernible through the environment.
5
AUTOMATED GENERATION OF E𝑒𝑟𝑟
In Sec. 4 we discovered CB-H explanations to be most effective. In
this section, we introduce an automated explanation generation
system that can generate the CB-H 3 explanations word by word,
without a template.
5.1
Encoder-Decoder Model Overview
We adapt a popular encoder-decoder network [4, 6] utilized by [20]
to train a model to generate CB-H explanations from an agent’s state.
The model’s features, 𝑈, are derived from the state space, 𝑆(see
Sec. 5.2), and are comprised of environment features 𝑋, continuous
3The system is also able to generate AB, AB-H, and CB explanations; but we focus on
CB-H due to its highest FId and SId scores in Sec. 4.5.

Figure 5: Confusion matrix analysis of our model’s perfor-
mance where the first six columns represent E𝑒𝑟𝑟explana-
tions and the last column represents E𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟rationalizations.
The x-axis represents the true labels, and the y-axis repre-
sents the predicted labels.
features, 𝑁, and a desired object of interest, 𝑜. The encoder receives
the environment features as input and produces an embedding of
the environment context in its hidden state, ℎ𝑛. The embedding is
then appended to the continuous features and the object of interest,
and the concatenated features are given to the decoder as input. The
decoder generates a sequence of target words, 𝑌= {𝑦1,𝑦2...𝑦𝑚},
where𝑦𝑖is a single word, and 𝑌is the CB-H explanation. The model
architecture is shown in Fig. 1(c).
The encoder and decoder are comprised of Gated Recurrent
Units (𝐺𝑅𝑈) [16]. Given a sequence of environment features, 𝑋=
{𝑥1,𝑥2...𝑥𝑛}, the encoder generates the context embedding at se-
quence step 𝑖by, ℎ𝑖= 𝐺𝑅𝑈(𝑥𝑖,ℎ𝑖−1), where ℎ𝑖−1 is the previous
step’s context embedding. The decoder uses the final context em-
bedding, ℎ𝑛, concatenated to the continuous features, 𝑁, and the
object of interest, 𝑜, as its initial input, 𝑠0. The decoder also gener-
ates and uses a weighted attention vector, 𝑐𝑖, for step i (initialized
with𝑐0 = 0). At each step,𝑐𝑖attends over the features in 𝑠0 and 𝑠𝑖−1,
the decoder’s input at the previous step. The decoder then updates
its state according to the function 𝑠𝑖= 𝐺𝑅𝑈(𝑠𝑖,𝑦𝑖−1,𝑐𝑖), where𝑦𝑖−1
is the previous predicted word, and a word, 𝑦𝑖, is predicted from
the maximum softmax probability over 𝑠𝑖. A complete explanation
is generated when the decoder predicts the ‘END’ token.
5.2
Feature Set
Recall from Sec. 4.1 that the agent’s state space is defined as 𝑆=
𝑆𝑒∪𝑆𝑙∪𝑆𝑖∪𝑆𝑘. We derive the features,𝑈= 𝑋∪𝑁∪𝑜for the encoder-
decoder model from 𝑆. The object of interest, 𝑜∈𝑆𝑒, is specified
as part of the task and represented by its word embedding in 𝑈.
The environment, 𝑋, is comprised of the word embeddings of the
names of the objects, 𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺, located in the robot’s area of interest,
such that ∀𝑜′ ∈𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺, 𝑜′ ∈𝑆𝑒. The remaining continuous features,
𝑁= {𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎−𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙, 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎−𝑜, 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔, 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛,𝑆𝑘, 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑜−𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺,𝑜𝑝}, characterize
the robot and the target object in the environment. 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎−𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙is the
distance of the robot from its goal location, 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎−𝑜is the distance of
the robot from the target object, 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔and 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛are the angular and
linear velocities of the robot base, and 𝑆𝑘are the action statuses as
defined in Sec. 4.1. Additionally, 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑜−𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺is the distance between
the desired object 𝑜and the objects in 𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺, and 𝑜𝑝is a boolean
that evaluates to true if 𝑜∈𝑂𝑏𝑗𝐺. Note that not all the features in
𝑁contain valid values at all times. If a feature value is invalid, the
feature is masked before it is concatenated into 𝑈.
5.3
Data Collection
To further evaluate the generalizability of our method across envi-
ronments, we expand our data to include simulations from an office
environment (Fig. 1(a)), in addition to the kitchen environment in-
troduced in Sec. 4. The office environment contains different objects
and locations, i.e. entities 𝑆𝑒, but the robot’s pick-and-place task
remains the same. Entities in the office environment have a one-to-
one correspondence to the entities in the kitchen environment.
Our dataset 𝐷consists of 72 simulations (60 and 12 from the
kitchen and office environments, respectively). Each timestep in 𝐷
is defined by 𝑢𝑡, where 𝑢𝑡∈𝑈represents the input features to our
encoder-decoder model at timestep 𝑡. Each simulation begins with
𝑛active or successful action timesteps, denoted by 𝑠𝑘(𝑡) = 0 or
𝑠𝑘(𝑡) = 1, and ends with 𝑚error timesteps, denoted by 𝑠𝑘(𝑡) = −1.
In our work, 𝑛ranges from 15 to 20, and 𝑚= 10. The 𝑚error
timesteps simulate a robot repeatedly attempting to autonomously
remedy a failure upon encountering it, reflecting a real world solu-
tion to errors where robots try to repeat actions that fail [5].
Given our dataset, we annotate error timesteps with a CB-H
explanation, E𝑒𝑟𝑟, and annotate successful or active timesteps with
a natural language rationalization of the state, E𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟, as in [19]. In
our work, examples of such rationales include, “robot moving to
dining table” and “robot segmented objects in the scene”. Addition-
ally, E𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟explanations were only used for model training, and
were not a focus of the human subjects study in Sec. 5.5. The total
size of 𝐷is 2100 timesteps where there are 1380 successful or active
timesteps, and 720 error timesteps.
5.4
Model Training & Evaluation
Our encoder-decoder model is trained with the 60 kitchen sim-
ulations using a two-step grouped leave one out cross validation
(LOOCV) with 10 folds, where the grouped LOOCV leaves out an en-
tire simulation for each failure cause, 𝐹𝑐. The first grouped LOOCV
creates a split between the training set, 𝑑𝑡𝑟, and test set, 𝑑𝑡𝑒, while
the second LOOCV creates the validation set, 𝑑𝑣. As a result, in each
fold, 𝑑𝑡𝑟includes 48 simulations with 480 error explanations, while
𝑑𝑣and 𝑑𝑡𝑒include 6 simulations, each with 60 error explanations.
To evaluate each fold, we utilize an evaluation set, 𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙, which
includes the 12 office simulations with 120 error explanations.
Training. Our models trained for an average of 180 epochs, de-
pending on the validation loss. We train with a batch size of 20.
Our GRU cells in the encoder have a hidden state size of 20 and the
GRU cells in the decoder have a hidden state size of 49. We train
our model using a Cross Entropy loss optimized via Adam with a
learning rate of 0.0001.
Evaluation. Fig. 5 shows the average performance of the model on
𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙across the 10 folds of cross-validation. The confusion matrix

(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Average F1 scores between participants who re-
ceived model generated explanations (CB-H-M), scripted ex-
planations (CB-H), and no explanations (None).
includes accuracy on explanations, E𝑒𝑟𝑟, for the six failure causes
as well as accuracy on the non-error rationalizations, E𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟. An
explanation or rationalization is marked correct only if it identically
matches its target phrase.
On average, our model can generalize explanations across the
six failure causes with 81.81% accuracy. For each failure scenario,
the model has a larger true positive rate than false positive rate
or false negative rate. We observe that the model is accurate in
determining “arm motion planning” failures but struggles to differ-
entiate between its causes: “object too far away” and “object too
close to others” (Fig. 2). We also notice that explanations of the
“navigation” and “object detection” failure types sometimes indi-
cate causes they are not associated: e.g., “controller error” wrongly
predicted as “object too far away” or “object too close to others”,
or “object occluded” wrongly predicted as “object too far away” or
“object too close together”. We suspect that the challenges stem
from our model’s continuous feature space, making certain features
harder to distinguish and that with additional training data, the
generalizability of our model can be improved.
Model Selection. Of the 10 models trained with LOOCV, we se-
lected the best model based on its performance on 𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙. The best
model was deployed in a user evaluation described below.
5.5
User Evaluation of Model Explanations
We conducted a user evaluation similar to the one described in
Sec. 4. The study was a three condition between subjects study,
where participants were either provided with no explanations of
errors (None), context-based-with-history scripted explanations
(CB-H), or context-based-with-history model-generated explana-
tions (CB-H-M). During the study, participants were shown kitchen
simulations in the Baseline portion of the study, and evaluated on
the 12 office simulations in the Explanation portion of the study.
Hypotheses. We wished to evaluate whether (1) the model gen-
erated explanations improved participants’ failure and solution
identification compared to the None condition, and (2) the model
generated explanations performed on par with the hand-scripted
explanations in improving participants’ performance.
Participants. We recruited 45 individuals from Amazon’s Mechan-
ical Turk. After applying the exclusion criteria as before, the re-
maining 41 participants included 25 males and 16 females, all whom
were 18 years or older (M = 39 , SD = 11.3). Due to the exclusion
criteria, each study condition had 12-15 participants. The task took
roughly 20 - 40 minutes and participants were compensated $3.50.
Data Analysis. The data on FId and SId metrics are analyzed with
a one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey HSD post-hoc test.
Fig. 6 answers our hypotheses by showing that CB-H-M explana-
tions are just as effective as CB-H scripted explanations. We observe
a significant effect of explanations on FId (F(2,38)=10.52, p=0.0002)
and SId((F(2,37)=3.94, p=0.027). With respect to FId we observe a
significant improvement in participant accuracy between CB-H-M
and None (t(38)=-4.158,p=0.00049), and no significant difference
between CB-H and CB-H-M (t(38)=-0.208, p=0.97). With respect
to SId we observe a trending difference in improvement between
CB-H-M vs. None (t(37)=2.354, p=0.060), a significant difference
between CB-H vs, None (t(37)=2.561, p=0.038) and no significant
difference between CB-H and CB-H-M (t(37)=0.215, p=0.974). Thus,
we conclude that given CB-H-M explanations, participants perform
just as well in helping the robot as when given CB-H explanations.
6
CONCLUSION & DISCUSSION
In this work, we investigate what types of information within an ex-
planation help non-experts identify robot failures and help assist in
recovery. We introduce a new type of explanation, E𝑒𝑟𝑟, which has
not been previously addressed in the XAIP community, and which
describes the cause of unexpected failures amidst plan execution.
Our results indicate that for explanations to improve failure and
solution identification, they should encompass both environmen-
tal context and history of past successful actions. Furthermore, in
our first user evaluation we showcase the importance that context-
based-history explanations serve in the cases of Internal errors,
which are not visually observable through environmental changes.
Additionally, we investigate a method to autonomously generate
such explanations, and verify that they are as effective as its scripted
counterpart and generalizable across environments.
Our work brings XAI techniques into the domain of fault recov-
ery and aims to aid non-expert users (1) understand unexpected
failures of a complex robot system and (2) provide recovery so-
lutions in such an event. Although our work includes important
contributions, there are limitations that should be addressed by
future work. First, while the context-based-history explanations
are useful for assisting in failure recovery, they are not guaran-
teed to be useful to all non-experts. Therefore future work can
explore tailoring explanations to individual users, perhaps with
the reinforcement learning techniques used in recommender sys-
tems [45]. Second, our work has characterized the utility of context
and history in providing meaningful E𝑒𝑟𝑟, but we have assumed
that explanations can be arbitrarily long. Future work should in-
vestigate additional factors that characterize a good E𝑒𝑟𝑟, and the
tradeoffs of providing more information vs. remaining concise. Fi-
nally, while the current encoder-decoder model can generalize over
varying failure scenarios, there is still room to improve its gener-
alizability to additional situations. Future work can investigate a
wider range of simulation domains, tasks, and failures.
7
