1 
 
Nurse-in-the-Loop Artificial Intelligence for Precision Management of Type 2 Diabetes 
in a Clinical Trial Utilizing Transfer-Learned Predictive Digital Twin 
 
Syed Hasib Akhter Faruqui1, Adel Alaeddini2, Yan Du3, Shiyu Li3, Kumar Sharma3, Jing 
Wang4 
1 Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, TX 
2 The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 
3 The University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 
4 Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 
Abstract:  
Background: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a prevalent chronic disease with a significant risk of 
serious health complications and negative impacts on the quality of life. Given the impact of 
individual characteristics and lifestyle on the treatment plan and patients’ outcomes, it is crucial 
to develop precise and personalized management strategies. Artificial intelligence (AI) 
provides great promise in combining patterns from various data sources with nurses’ expertise 
to achieve optimal care. 
Methods: This is a 6-month ancillary study among T2D patients (n = 20, age = 57 ± 10). 
Participants were randomly assigned to an intervention (AI, n=10) group to receive daily AI 
generated individualized feedback or a control group without receiving the daily feedback 
(non-AI, n=10) in the last three months. The study developed an online nurse-in-the-loop 
predictive control (ONLC) model that utilizes a predictive digital twin (PDT). The PDT was 
developed using a transfer-learning based Artificial Neural Network. The PDT was trained on 
participants' self-monitoring data (weight, food logs, physical activity, glucose) from the first 
three months, and the online control algorithm applied particle swarm optimization to identify 
impactful behavioral changes for maintaining the patient’s glucose and weight levels for the 
next three months. The ONLC provided the intervention group with individualized feedback 
and recommendations via text messages. The PDT was re-trained weekly to improve its 
performance. 
Findings: The trained ONLC model achieved ≥80% prediction accuracy across all patients 
while the model was tuned online. Participants in the intervention group exhibited a trend of 
improved daily steps and stable or improved total caloric and total carb intake as recommended. 
The intervention group exhibited significant weight loss (p-value 4.731e-8, average:5.871 lbs.) 
and maintained glucose levels over time (p-value 0.661) compared to baseline. 
Interpretation: Nurse-in-the-loop AI using a digital twin approach can potentially improve 
adherence to recommended healthy lifestyle behaviors. Further studies with larger sample sizes 
and long-term follow-ups are warranted. 
Keywords: Type 2 Diabetes Management, AI in Healthcare, Predictive Digital Twin, Nurse-
in-the-Loop Intervention, Personalized Healthcare, mHealth, AI-Enhanced Lifestyle 
Interventions 

2 
 
 
Introduction: 
Recently, there has been a rise in the implementation of machine learning algorithms to 
improve blood glucose control 14. Machine learning models that have been implemented so far 
include support vector machines 1, gaussian process 2, ensemble methods 3, multilayer 
perceptron 4, time series convolution neural networks 5, deep convolutional neural networks 6, 
and RNN & LSTM models 5,7, etc. Zhu et al.7 systematically reviewed deep learning algorithms 
for diabetes diagnosis, complication diagnosis, and glucose management. In addition, 
researchers have proposed using transfer learning strategies for small and imbalanced datasets, 
which also gives them the advantage of fine-tuning for specific patients 8,9. This also gives the 
researchers the advantage of fine-tuning for specific patients 8,9. Faruqui et al.9 developed 
similar algorithms that utilize a transfer-learning methodology to fine-tune models for patient-
specific characteristics, which focuses on how the amount of macro-nutrients (fat, carb, fiber, 
protein, physical activity, and previous days' blood glucose levels) affects the patient blood 
glucose level and weight.  
To mitigate extended delays, several optimization and controller-based models have been 
developed to automate the insulin delivery system 10–12. Most of these studies focus on 
controlling insulin infusion devices 12,13 to control blood glucose levels. However, only a few 
studies cover the effects of macro-nutrients on a patient's blood glucose level and weight 14. 
Furthermore, various factors determine blood glucose levels, including how much fat, carb, 
fiber, and protein patients consume and how much physical activity they have engaged in 14. 
Again, most studies focus on controlling insulin infusion devices rather than providing 
suggestions to patients to support their pursuit of self-control in their diet and activity 
behaviors, which are key to weight and glucose control in T2D patients. Thus, there is a 
pressing demand for highly efficient online models capable of considering a patient's real-time 
condition and subsequently generating supportive measures, such as motivational messages, 
dietary recommendations, and physical activity guidance, among others. 
This study leverages a transfer-learned digital twin model to develop a nurse-in-the-loop 
predictive control model for daily self-management of glucose and weight management in T2D 
patients. The online control model at its core utilizes an artificial neural network (ANN) 
predictive digital twin model that has been trained using transfer learning strategies to improve 
its performance (for both data rich and data scares setup) to generate food intake suggestions. 
As a proof of concept, we have the following contributions in this work- 
1. A nurse-in-the-loop artificial intelligence feedback system. 
2. A transfer-learned predictive digital twin model of patients. 
3. An evolutionary optimization-based online control model in mHealth devices.    
Figure 1 shows the overall schema of the proposed model. We first build a predictive model 
where inputs are the daily lifestyle choices, and the outputs are the next day's glucose and 
weight levels. Next, we used the predictive model as the core block for the online control 
model. The control model is built based on the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) method, 
which generates feedback that minimizes glucose and weight outputs. This is to be mentioned 
to cope with and further fine-tune the prediction model towards a patient; we re-trained the 

3 
 
models every week while the PSO algorithm doesn't need further training. Instead, PSO utilizes 
the fine-tuned model as a core plant to generate diet suggestions.  
  
Figure 1: Overall Scheme of the proposed method.  
Methods: 
This is an ancillary randomized controlled trial (RCT) that was deployed at the same time as 
the parent RCT. The model development and analysis consist of several steps, including data 
preprocessing, prediction model construction, optimization, evaluation, and finally, 
development of the online control model.  
Data Collection: 
This study utilizes data collected from mobile health devices in a single center, 6-month, 
stratified, randomized controlled trial 27. The parent trial recruited 60 overweight/obese adults 
(18+ years old), including 40 T2D patients. The study patients were equally randomized to a 
ketogenic or low-fat, low-calorie diet. The patients were to self-monitor their diet intake using 
a smartphone-based application. Fitbit Inspire 2 was used to monitor daily physical activity 
and diet, and the Withing’s body scale was used for weight self-monitoring. Additionally, the 
patients were provided health education based on evidence-based behavioral lifestyle 
interventions. Further details on the study can be found in Du et al 27. 
This ancillary study used data from 20 T2D patients to develop the online control model. This 
selected sample was then randomly assigned into two groups: Group 1-Daily individualized 
feedback messages (Intervention group), Group 2- No feedback messages were provided 
(Control group). The data collected during the first three months of the study was used to train 
the predictive digital twin model. Continuous data from 3 months on were streamed directly to 
the online control model to generate daily suggestions and were sent to the participating 

4 
 
subjects via text message starting from the end of 3 months. The predictive digital twin was 
also re-trained at the end of every week to improve the models’ performance. 
Model Construction 
Predictive Digital Twin: Transfer Learning-Based Artificial Neural Network to Predict Patient 
States 
Before developing the control model, we start by developing a predictive twin that will emulate 
the patient's behavior. By definition, a predictive twin models the future behavior and state of 
any system in consideration. These models utilize historical data to incorporate possible system 
modes within the model. We construct the digital twin to receive input (self-monitoring data) 
from patients (their food intake, weight, exercise regimen, etc.). In our case, these data are 
collected through mobile devices. This allows the twin to simulate the physical object in real-
time, in the process offering insights into their performance (weight and blood glucose control).  
We construct a simple multilayer perceptron/artificial neural network (with three hidden layers) 
(ANN) for predictive modeling of daily glucose levels using the health time series data. As the 
data to train the model contains missing/imputed data and based on the patients' physical 
conditions (and different diets) they experience a vast number of complex patterns, we utilize 
a transfer learning strategy. In literature, transfer learning strategies have proved to make 
learning from data efficient, fast, and under sparse data fruitful 15. To achieve this goal, we 
concatenated and sampled all the patient's data and created the transfer learning dataset to pre-
train the ANN model. Once the pre-training is done, the model is fine-tuned for each patient 
diet-condition group (1. Keto Diet – Obese and T2D, 2. Keto Diet – Obese, Kidney Disease, 
and T2D, 3. Low-Fat Diet – Obese and T2D, 4. Low-Fat Diet – Obese, Kidney Disease, and 
T2D). The training procedure involves sampling data to train a deep learning model for each 
patient group of interest, where the ANN model weights of the pre-trained model will be used 
as the prior. In the results section, we compare the performance of the model with classic 
machine learning models (KNN, Gaussian Process, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Gradient 
Boosting). Parameters for all the models are tuned using a grid search approach. While many 
of the above-mentioned algorithms can be used for building the predictive twin (comparable 
accuracy; later shown in the results section), we selected the transfer learning (TF)-based ANN 
algorithm for our analysis for two specific reasons:  
(1) They adapt to learning complex patterns present in the data, and  
(2) The predictive twin can be trained even if there is a low amount of data (data sparsity) 
for a new patient group.  
Figure 2 shows a visual representation of the transfer learning strategy used in this work. We 
followed the same steps as Faruqui et 9. The only change was that they fine-tuned their models 
for each patient, and we fine-tuned for each patient’s diet-condition group.  
 

5 
 
 
Figure 2: Scheme of the transfer learning strategy to train an artificial neural network for predictive modeling. For patients 
with fewer observations, we pre-train a model with observations sampled from all the patients in the dataset. The pre-trained 
model is then fine-tuned with the data of the patient of interest. 
Online Control Model: Particle Swarm Algorithm 
Once the predictive twin is developed, we focus on developing the control module of the 
proposed algorithm. The purpose of the control model is to use the predictive twin (of the 
patient-diet group) to determine what combination of food intake and exercise would help a 
patient maintain their blood glucose level and help them lose weight while maintaining their 
blood glucose level. This highly non-linear problem needs to be optimized efficiently within 
the search space. We deploy the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) 16 algorithm as the 
controller due to its simple implementation; it doesn't need a gradient/differential form of the 
objective function and, depending on the setting, is less memory consuming (can be used in 
both online and off-line setup). For a function defined in multidimensional vector space (as in 
our study case), PSO is a robust meta-heuristic optimization algorithm and one of the best 
optimization algorithms to find the minimum or maximum of the objective function. The PSO 
algorithm (Step 2 of Figure 1) is then used with the predictive twin to determine the best 
parameters to minimize the objective function. The PSO algorithm consists of two components: 
(1) the Objective function and (2) The constraints. 
The Objective Function 
To set up PSO for our case study, we need an objective function that helps us achieve our goal. 
For a patient in the low-fat diet group, our goal is to suggest a food and exercise regimen that 
can help them lose weight (𝑊) till they reach their target weight level (𝑊𝐺= 𝑊0 −0.2𝑊0). 
Once they reach their target level, we switch the goal to maintaining that weight. The patients 
will also need to maintain their Glucose levels (𝐺) within an acceptable range (70 ≤𝐺≤130). 
A patient in the keto diet group must attain (or close to) a certain blood ketosis level. To do 
that, They need to reach a keto ratio (𝐾) of 1.5 or higher. The keto ratio can be computed from 
the suggested food intake (macronutrients) by the PSO algorithm. The objective function is 
special in the sense that we don’t want the algorithm to select extreme parameters (in our case, 
food intake and physical activity suggestions) that cause the glucose level to go near zero or 
too much of a higher ketone level. To resolve this issue, we introduced a tuning parameter 𝜆, 
which takes the value of 0 whenever a generated suggestion reaches its desired value; 

6 
 
otherwise, it takes a value of 1. This helped control the model to achieve its desired output. We 
integrated the feedback of the nursing knowledge using a second multiplier (penalty factor, 𝑚) 
for each element of the objective function. Depending on the suggestion provided by the 
controller, if the predicted glucose/weight/ketone level is too diverse, a nurse can assign a 
higher penalty and vice versa. In our case, this assigned score ranged from 1 to 1000 to penalize 
the model if it’s too far away from desired values. At the end of each evaluation phase, the 
score derived from nursing knowledge is assigned to the model. The details of the decision 
boundaries considered by the nurses are provided in Appendix A.1. Thus, considering the 
above, the objective function for the PSO algorithm is set as below: 
Objective Function 
min
l=1, …., L∑𝜆1𝑚1𝐺̂𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
+ 𝜆2𝑚2𝑊̂𝑖+ λ3𝑚3(1.5 −Ki) 
Were,  
Tuning parameter,  
 
𝜆1 = 0; if 70 ≤𝐺̂𝑖≤130 
 
𝜆2 = 0; if (𝑊𝑖− 𝑊𝑖
̂) ≥0 or 𝑊𝐺= 𝑊𝑖
̂ 
 
𝜆3 = 0; if Patient-Diet Group = ‘keto-diet’ or (1.5 −𝐾𝑖) ≥0 
 
𝑚𝑖={1,2,3} = Score assigned by a nurse-in-the-loop. This is used in conjuncture with the 
tuning parameters (𝜆𝑖={1,2,3}) 
𝐾 =
𝑓𝑎
(𝑐 −𝑓𝑏 + 𝑝); 𝐾 = Keto ratio, 𝑐 = carb, 𝑓𝑎 = fat, 𝑓𝑏 = fiber, 𝑝 = protein 
𝑊𝐺= 𝑊0 −0.2𝑊0; 𝑊𝐺= Weight Goal, 𝑊0 = Patients weight at the start of the study 
The scores (𝑚) assigned by the nurse/s in the loop can also be automated future studies by: 
1. Building a lookup table generated by the nurse/s for all the factors to be used during 
the optimization session. This will use ranges of values to assign penalty factors (for 
example, for glucose levels between 131 – 140, the penalty assigned can be 10). 
2. Building an approximation linear function by using the lookup table. That way, we 
can approximate the penalty factors even if there is a value present that wasn’t 
assigned a penalty by the nurse/s.  
The Constraints 
Furthermore, we also define the search space for the proposed model. The model constraints 
are decided based on the appropriate diet requirement 17,18 and discussions with nurse/s in the 
loop (nutritionists and nurses). The constraints may also be adapted (exception case) based on 
patient specific needs based on their physical condition and nutritional needs. Thus making the 
model adaptive not only patient group specific but also patient-specific. For this work, the 
general constraints were defined as follows- 
 

7 
 
Low-Fat Group 
Keto Group 
195 ≤𝑐≤300 
20 ≤𝑐≤50 
20 ≤𝑓𝑎≤55 
90 ≤𝑓𝑎≤200 
20 ≤𝑓𝑖≤50 
20 ≤𝑓𝑖≤50 
100 ≤𝑝≤160 
30 ≤𝑝≤110 
 
Results and Discussion 
Evaluation of Predictive Twin 
We considered two variations of the proposed predictive twin model. The two variations are 
(1) The base ANN (without transfer learning) and (2) ANN-TF (with transfer learning). Several 
baseline methods are used to compare the performance of the proposed model. All the models 
are tuned using a grid search approach.  
To evaluate the performance of the proposed model, we trained it using the first three months 
of data, during which no intervention was performed in both groups. We used one month of 
test data immediately following the third month's intervention. Although not explicitly included 
in the reported evaluation (as shown in Table 1), the predictive twin utilized for the control 
model was re-trained at the end of each week as the patient’s new data became available. We 
evaluated all the models using Clark Error Grid 19. Table 1 summarizes the percentage of 
prediction that falls on Zone A of the Clark Error Grid for all comparing methods.  
Table 1: Prediction accuracy of the proposed neural network models along with other comparing methods based on Clark 
Error Grids zone A. 
Model 
Keto Diet  
Group 
Low-Fat  
Diet Group 
Obese + 
Diabetes 
Obese + 
Kidney + 
Diabetes 
Obese + 
Diabetes 
Obese + 
Kidney 
+ 
Diabetes 
Glucose 
Level 
Glucose 
Level 
Glucose 
Level 
Glucose 
Level 
KNN Regression (Weight: Distance) 
77.50% 
77.50% 
77.50% 
77.50% 
KNN Regression (Weight: Uniform) 
77.78% 
77.78% 
77.78% 
77.78% 
Gaussian Process (Kernel: RBF) 
76.94% 
76.94% 
76.94% 
76.94% 
Decision Tree 
71.67% 
71.67% 
71.67% 
71.67% 
Random Forest 
84.17% 
84.17% 
84.17% 
84.17% 
Gradient Boosting 
84.44% 
84.44% 
84.44% 
84.44% 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) 
79.72% 
87.44% 
87.78% 
84.23% 
ANN (with Transfer Learning) 
80.00% 
87.85% 
87.22% 
84.90% 
 

8 
 
The proposed model, ANN-TF, performs the best, followed by ANN, Gradient Boosting, and 
Random Forest. Both Random Forest and Gradient Descent showed significant performance 
(84.17% and 84.44%) in predicting the blood glucose level for patients in the Keto-Diet group 
with obesity and Diabetes. They are competitive with the proposed ANN-TF model for patients 
with a Low-Fat Diet group with obesity. Kidney disease and Diabetes (84.17% and 84.44%). 
Compared to these, the all-other method falls below 80% in performance, especially the 
Decision Tree, which has the lowest prediction performance (71.67%) across all the patient 
groups. Therefore, based on the evaluation in Table 1 (also considering the advantage of 
transfer learning whenever the data is sparse) and ease of use for control steps, we decided to 
utilize the ANN-TF model as the core/plant digital twin for the control model.  
Evaluation of the Control Model 
The objective of this study is to provide patients with dynamic suggestions (for food intake and 
exercise) every day to help them manage their blood glucose level and support a steady weight 
loss till they achieve their target weight. To achieve this, we deployed the PSO algorithm as a 
control model with a predictive twin. To evaluate the performance of the control model and its 
effect on patients, we separated the study patients into two sub-groups (as mentioned earlier). 
Group 1 started receiving feedback from the proposed model daily (intervention group), and 
Group 2 will not receive any feedback from the model (control model). The participants didn't 
receive any feedback for the first three months of the study. After the first in-person 
intervention (at month three), group 1 started receiving daily feedback messages. Group 2 
continued to follow their suggested diet (the same diet they followed the first three months). 
Both groups of participants had the primary goal of –  
1. Maintaining a steady weight loss till they achieve their weight goal was decided at the 
beginning of the study. 
2. Maintaining their blood glucose level within a certain range. 
This was an online setup, so we continued to receive patients self-monitoring data daily, and 
based on that, we continued to provide them with daily food and exercise feedback for three 
months.  
AI feedback on self-monitored physical activity and diet.  
Figure 3 shows the Self-monitored lifestyle data for the patients in this study. It shows the 
average monthly breakdown of the collected self-monitored data, including patients' average 
daily steps, daily caloric intake, total carb, and fat consumed across two distinct groups among 
the patients adhering to either a ketogenic diet or a low-fat diet. We identify the start of the 
message received by the red-dotted line in the figure. Over the six months, daily step counts 
were initially higher in the non-AI group as compared to the AI group. Interestingly, although 
a general decline in steps was noted across the six months for both groups, the AI group 
exhibited a rebound in physical activity starting at the four months, gradually approaching the 
step counts of the non-AI group while they showed a declining trend. The diet intake is 
visualized by diet groups as the diet regimen is different. Calorie intake in the KD group was 
stable and decreased in the AI group, while it increased in the non-AI group. In the LF group 
in which a low-calorie and low-fat diet was suggested, calorie intake decreased after AI 
feedback, while it increased in the non-AI group. For KD participants, the total carb intake 
maintained to be low in the AI group since the second month, while it increased in the LF 
group; for LF participants, carb intake increased around four months but started to decline in 

9 
 
the AI group. In the KD group, despite the fat intake trending to decrease in both AI and non-
AI groups, AI group participants, on average, maintained higher fat intake; fat intake in the LF 
group in the AI group maintained lower than in the non-AI group.  
 
Figure 3: Self-monitored lifestyles data of A. average daily steps by month; B. daily caloric intake by month between keto 
(KD) and low-fat (LF) group; C. daily total carb intake by month between KD and LF group; and D. daily total fat intake by 
month between KD and LF group. Physical activity was recommended the same for both groups, and KD was suggested to 
take low carb and high fat diet, while LF group was suggested to take low fat diet. Red dash vertical lines meant the time 
point (3-month) AI message started to be sent out. 
The AI group adhered to their weight loss target much better than the non-AI group. The non-
AI group showed a smaller weight decrease (3.574 lbs) from a baseline mean of 92.29 lbs, 
while the control group exhibited a more considerable weight decrease (5.871 lbs ) from a 
baseline mean of 97.35 lbs. Notably, the intervention effect was significant (time intervention 
p = 4.731e-8, group, p = 0.310, and interaction, p = 0.423). In terms of achieving their weight 
goals, four subjects in AI group (highest 14.82% weight loss) and two subjects in non AI group 
(highest 8.36% weight loss) reached their assigned goals. Both groups maintained glucose 
levels over time (p-value 0.661) compared to their respective baseline. In summary, we 
observed that AI-generated feedback may serve as a beneficial tool for participants to either 
sustain or recommit to their recommended lifestyle changes.  
Limitations 
There are several limitations to this study. As blood glucose and weight are not solely 
determined by lifestyle, other factors, such as age, gender, gut microbe, environment, and 
genes, also contribute to glucose and weight management. While our blood glucose prediction 
model is generalized for the study group, it may not be represented in the population. Also, 
considering the traits mentioned earlier are beyond the scope of this study, further reward 
systems could be developed in conjunction with the model to further motivate the patients to 
self-managing their daily food and exercise habits. In addition, other factors, such as food 
accessibility, which are important to help adherence to healthy lifestyles, were not evaluated in 
the current study. Lastly, the sample size was small with a relatively short follow-up period, 
future studies with a larger sample size and a longer study period are warranted. 

10 
 
Conclusion 
This study developed a novel nurse-in-the-loop predictive online control model that may 
promote recommended lifestyles for T2D self-management by providing AI-generated 
personalized feedback on daily lifestyle choices. The proposed model utilizes a transfer 
learning-based artificial neural network as a predictive digital twin to learn the characteristics 
of T2D patients following a specific diet and exercise regimen. Our findings revealed that 
participants who received AI-generated feedback maintained or reengaged their recommended 
physical activity and diet regimens. The model has the potential to be integrated into mobile 
health environments to support T2D individuals in managing their lifestyle behaviors for health 
benefits. Nonetheless, it should be acknowledged that our study was a proof-of-concept, and 
further research is warranted to optimize and validate the model. Future studies are 
recommended to utilize more rigorous study designs to examine the effect of the model on 
individuals’ lifestyles and health outcomes. Furthermore, the generalizability of the model 
should be tested in a larger trial with longer follow-ups and a more diverse population to ensure 
its effectiveness in enhancing the weight and glycemic control of T2D patients.
