e-Valuate: A Two-player Game on Arithmetic
Expressions
Sarang Aravamuthan∗
Biswajit Ganguly∗
November 23, 2021
Abstract
e-Valuate is a game on arithmetic expressions.
The players have con-
trasting roles of maximizing and minimizing the given expression. The
maximizer proposes values and the minimizer substitutes them for vari-
ables of his choice. When the expression is fully instantiated, its value is
compared with a certain minimax value that would result if the players
played to their optimal strategies. The winner is declared based on this
comparison.
We use a game tree to represent the state of the game and show how
the minimax value can be computed eﬃciently using backward induction
and alpha-beta pruning. The eﬃcacy of alpha-beta pruning depends on
the order in which the nodes are evaluated. Further improvements can be
obtained by using transposition tables to prevent reevaluation of the same
nodes. We propose a heuristic for node ordering. We show how the use
of the heuristic and transposition tables lead to improved performance by
comparing the number of nodes pruned by each method.
We describe some domain-speciﬁc variants of this game. The ﬁrst is a
graph theoretic formulation wherein two players share a set of elements of
a graph by coloring a related set with each player looking to maximize his
share. The set being shared could be either the set of vertices, edges or
faces (for a planar graph). An application of this is the sharing of regions
enclosed by a planar graph where each player’s aim is to maximize the area
of his share. Another variant is a tiling game where the players alternately
place dominoes on a 8 × 8 checkerboard to construct a maximal partial
tiling. We show that the size of the tiling x satisﬁes 22 ≤x ≤32 by
proving that any maximal partial tiling requires at least 22 dominoes.
Keywords: Arithmetic expressions, game tree, games on graphs, tiling
∗Ignite R&D Labs, Tata Consultancy Services, Chennai, India.

1
arXiv:1202.0862v4  [math.CO]  12 Sep 2014

1
Introduction
Given an arithmetic expression E involving variables and the standard operators
(+, −, ∗and /), players MAX and MIN evaluate E with contrasting goals; MAX
would like to maximize E while MIN would like to minimize E. Towards this
end, they take turns to instantiate the variables. MAX starts and, at each move,
proposes a value (digit 0–9) that MIN substitutes for a variable of his choice.
When the expression is fully instantiated, it is evaluated and compared with a
certain minimax value that would result if the players played to their optimal
strategies. Let val(E) be the value of E at the end of the game and minimax(E)
be the minimax value. The winner is then determined in the following way.
◦If val(E) > minimax(E) then MAX is declared the winner.
◦If val(E) < minimax(E) then MIN is declared the winner.
◦If val(E) = minimax(E), then the game is a draw.
For example, if E = X ∗(Y −Z), a possible sequence of moves is
1. MAX chooses 5 and MIN replaces X with 5 so that E = 5 ∗(Y −Z).
2. Next MAX chooses 3 that MIN substitutes 3 for Z leading to E = 5∗(Y −
3).
3. Finally MAX chooses 9 which MIN substitutes for the remaining variable
Y and the ﬁnal value for the expression is 5(9 −3) = 30.
With more strategic play from either player, the expression is evaluated diﬀer-
ently. For instance, with the same moves from MAX and optimal play from
MIN, the substitutions would be 5 →Y, 3 →X and 9 →Z and the expression
evaluates to −12. With optimal play from both players, a possible sequence of
moves is 6 →Y, 3 →X and 0 →Z with E evaluating to the minimax value 18.
We will refer to this version of the game as e-Valuate. Speciﬁc instances of
the game have appeared in books on mathematical puzzles. For example, in
[10], the expression is a diﬀerence of two four digit numbers and the reader is
asked to ﬁnd the minimax value.
Some possible variations on this form of the game are the following.
◦The expression as well as the domain can be generalized. For example,
other mathematical operators can be introduced in the expression and
the domain can include other values over which the expression can be
evaluated.
◦An alternate way of playing the game is for the players to switch roles
at the end of the game and reevaluate the expression. If the expression
2

evaluates to a larger value in one of the games then the maximizer in that
game is the winner. This version could be applicable when the number of
variables is large enough that computing the minimax value is infeasible.
Another variant is for the ﬁrst player to take on the role of the minimizer and
the second player that of the maximizer.
This is however equivalent to the
original version since min(E) = −max(−E) and max(E) = −min(−E) where
the minimum and maximum are carried out over the domain of the variables.
Thus, the ﬁnal value under optimal play from both players is −minimax(−E).
Minimax is a more general term and applies to any two player zero-sum game
[9]. By using a game tree to represent the states of the game and the moves of
the players, the minimax algorithm can be used to determine the best move at
each position in the game in the following manner. First values are assigned to
the leaf nodes using an evaluation function. Next, the players MAX and MIN
attempt to maximize and minimize the value of the nodes corresponding to their
turn of play. For an intermediate node that corresponds to MAX’s turn to play,
the value of the node is the maximum of the values of its children. Similarly, for
an intermediate node that corresponds to MIN’s turn to play, the value of the
node is the minimum of the values of its children. The value at the root is the
minimax value of the game. For example, if a game is designed such that under
optimal play, MIN has a winning strategy, and the leaf nodes are assigned a
value of +1 or −1 according to whether the corresponding position is a win for
MAX or MIN, then the minimax value will be −1.
Several optimizations to this method of computing the minimax value have
been studied [5, 9]. Some well known techniques are
◦Alpha-beta pruning: This is a windowing procedure that starts with an
interval of (−∞, +∞) for the minimax value. As nodes are evaluated,
the window shrinks and any node that evaluates to a value outside this
window is pruned along with the subtree rooted at that node.
◦Negascout: Negascout [8] works by assuming that for each node, the ﬁrst
child will be in the principal variation (the sequence of moves leading
to the minimax value). It uses a null search window for the remaining
children and on failure, uses a full search window. Thus this method is
most eﬀective when there is a good ordering for evaluating the nodes.
◦Transposition tables: This is a memoization technique where the values
of nodes that are evaluated are stored and retrieved when another node
that corresponds to the same game position has to be evaluated. This
eﬀectively prunes the subtree rooted at that node.
The computational challenge in e-Valuate is an eﬃcient way of determin-
ing the minimax value in order to identify the winner.
We show how these
3

techniques lead to more eﬃcient ways of determining minimax(E).
The game can also be cast in other domains. In particular we study some
graph theoretic versions of the game wherein two players share a set of entities
of a graph by coloring a diﬀerent set with each player aiming to maximize his
share. The entities being shared can be the set of vertices, edges or faces of the
graph.
In the next section, we introduce the game tree for e-Valuate and show how
the minimax value can be computed using backward induction. In Section 3, we
show how improved performance can be obtained by combining the minimax
algorithm with alpha-beta pruning. We describe these methods in the context
of our game. The eﬃcacy of alpha-beta pruning methods depends on the order
in which the the children of each node are evaluated. We describe a heuristic
for determining this order. Further improvements can be obtained by avoiding
repeated reevaluation of the same game position through the use of transposi-
tion tables. In Section 4, we provide implementation details and compare the
number of nodes pruned by the two methods, alpha-beta and alpha-beta with
node ordering and transposition tables, for diﬀerent arithmetic expressions. In
Section 5 we introduce some versions of e-Valuate that can be played on graphs.
In Section 6 we describe another variant that is based on a maximal partial
tiling of an 8 × 8 checkerboard by dominoes. In particular we show that any
maximal partial tiling requires at least 22 dominoes. We conclude with some
unanswered questions related to this game.
We ﬁx some notations. For an arithmetic expression E, let n be the number of
variables in E. E(i →X) denotes the expression E with variable X replaced by i.
For a domain D diﬀerent from the set of digits, we will denote by minimax(E, D),
the minimax value of E where each variable in E takes values from D. The set
[k] = {1, . . . , k}. All the games we describe in this paper are sequential two-
player games played by MAX and MIN with MAX making the ﬁrst move.
For general aspects of game theory, see [6]; [4] is a useful online resource
for lectures, glossary of terms and articles related to game theory. The game
algorithms we have outlined above are well documented in books on artiﬁcial
intelligence (e.g. [5], [9]). [1] provides an excellent introduction to graph theory.
2
The Game Tree for e-Valuate
In the framework of game theory, e-Valuate can be classiﬁed as a ﬁnite, sequen-
tial, two person game with perfect information. It is ﬁnite as the game ends
after a ﬁnite number of moves, sequential since the players take turns in making
their moves (rather than move simultaneously as, say, in the rocks, paper and
scissors game) and it’s a game of perfect information as each player is aware of
the other’s moves at any point in the game.
4

Sequential games with perfect information can be represented using a game
tree. The root of the tree corresponds to the initial conﬁguration of the game
(in our case, the expression E) and the edges represent possible moves that the
players make. Each node in the tree represents a position in the game. The
root and the leaf nodes are MAX nodes and the nodes at intermediate levels are
alternately MAX and MIN nodes and represent positions where the MAX or
MIN has to make a move. Thus each MAX node has 10 children corresponding
to 10 possible moves (choosing any digit). A MIN node at a height d has (d+1)/2
children that correspond to (d + 1)/2 uninstantiated variables. The height of
the tree is 2n. We will denote by tree(E), the game tree corresponding to E.
The number of nodes in the tree, T(n), depends only on n and satisﬁes the
recursion
T(n) = 11 + 10nT(n −1)
(1)
which follows from observing that the root node has 10 children each of which
has n children that correspond to game trees on expressions with (n −1) vari-
ables.
We can use this to bound T(n) by
2n!10n ≤T(n) ≤2n!10ne1/10
from the following argument. Let N = n!10n be the number of leaves of tree(E).
Starting from the bottom and counting the number of nodes at each level we
get
T(n)
=
N + N/1 + N/(1 ∗10) + N/(1 ∗10 ∗2) + · · · + N/(n!10n)
=
n
X
i=0
N/(i!10i) +
n
X
i=1
N/(i!10i−1) ≤2
n
X
i=0
N/(i!10i) ≤2e1/10N
as desired.
We identify each node in a tree by
◦a sequence of instantiations of the variables and possibly an additional
digit (for a MIN node). For example if E = (10 −X) ∗Y , then a MAX
node in tree(E) is {1 →Y } and a MIN node is {1 →Y, 3}. Thus MAX
nodes correspond to partially instantiated expressions and MIN nodes to
(expression, digit) pairs.
◦a value which is the minimax value of the partially instantiated expression
for a MAX node and the minimum of the minimax values of the children
for a MIN node. This is the value E would evaluate to under optimal play
starting from the position given by the node. This is also referred to as
the score of the position given by the node [5].
5

X
X
X
X
X
Y
Y
Y
Y
0
1
2
9
0
1
2
9
. . .
. . .
MAX
MIN
MIN
MAX
MAX
{1→Y,2→X}, 8
{2}, 20
X
X
X
. . .
{}, 45
Figure 1: A partial game tree for E = (10 −X) ∗Y
The game tree tree((10 −X) ∗Y ) is shown partially in Figure 2. The edges are
labeled by the moves corresponding to the players.
The minimax value is computed by the method of backward induction ap-
plied to tree(E). This procedure works by reasoning backwards from the end
of the game and computing the optimal move for the players at each position.
At a leaf node, the expression is a constant, and the value of the node is this
constant. Working up, each MIN node has as its value, the minimum of the
values of its valid children and each MAX node, the maximum of the values of
its valid children1. The value of the root is minimax(E).
3
Alpha-beta Pruning and Node Ordering
To determine minimax(E), it’s not necessary to evaluate every node in the tree.
Suppose alpha is the current maximum (over the children evaluated so far) for
a MAX node and beta the current minimum for a MIN node. For a MAX node,
if its alpha value is at least the beta value of its parent, then there is no reason
to explore the node further as the ﬁnal value of its parent will be smaller than
alpha. Each pruning of a subtree of a MAX node in this manner is referred to
1An internal node is deemed valid if it has a valid child. A leaf node is valid if it evaluates
to a ﬁnite value.
6

as a beta cutoﬀ. Similarly, for a MIN node, if its beta value is at most the alpha
value of its parent then the remaining subtrees of this node can be pruned as
the ﬁnal value of its parent will be larger than beta. These prunings are alpha
cutoﬀs.
A subtree at height d that is pruned by an alpha cutoﬀis rooted at a MAX
node and prunes T(d/2) nodes. A subtree at height d that is pruned by a beta
cutoﬀis rooted at a MIN node and prunes (T(⌈d/2⌉) −1)/10 nodes.
For example, suppose E = (10 −X) ∗Y . Then minimax(E) = 45 and a leaf
node that achieves this value is {5 →X, 9 →Y }. To compute minimax(E), we
start at the root node and evaluate the MIN nodes {0}, {1}, . . . , {5} in succession
which return the values 0, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 45 respectively. At this point, the
alpha value at the root is max(0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 45) = 45.
When node {6} is
explored, the MIN node computes the value of the MAX node {6 →X} which
returns 36 as its minimax value.
Thus the beta value of {6} is 36 which is
smaller than 45, the alpha value of its parent. As a result, the node {6 →Y }
is not evaluated. Similarly, the nodes {7 →Y }, {8 →Y } and {9 →Y } are not
evaluated leading to 4 alpha cutoﬀs.
The pseudocode for computing the minimax value of E with alpha-beta prun-
ing is given by Algorithm 1. The function alphabeta() takes as its parameters,
the current node, its height, the current value (alpha or beta) of the parent node,
the digit passed (valid for a MIN node) and the current player. Apart from the
minimax value, the algorithm also returns the number of nodes pruned by alpha
and beta cutoﬀs, which are computed using the recursion formula (1), as well
as the entire principal variation. The function is called with the command
alpha prunes = beta prunes = 0; principal var = ‘‘’’
alphabeta (root, 2n, ∞, −1, MAX)
3.1
A Heuristic for Node Ordering
The eﬀectiveness of alpha-beta pruning depends on the order in which each
node’s children are explored. For example, with E = (10 −X) ∗Y , suppose we
evaluate a MAX node by choosing the digits in sequence {5, 4, 6, 3, 7, 2, 8, 1, 9, 0},
and evaluate a MIN node by setting the variable sequence as (Y, X) if the digit
passed to it is less than 5 and (X, Y ) otherwise. Then, to calculate minimax(E),
the node {5} is evaluated ﬁrst and returns 45. Subsequently, for each of the
MIN nodes, the order in which its children are explored ensures that there is an
alpha cutoﬀ.
Let ˜v(x) be an estimate for the value v(x) of node x. We propose a heuristic
for determining the order in which the digits are to be chosen at a MAX node.
The ordering is static in the sense that it is determined by E and is the same for
all nodes being evaluated. We estimate the values of the MAX nodes 2 levels
7

Algorithm 1 Minimax value of E with alpha-beta pruning
function alphabeta(node, height, parent αβ, digit, player)
if height = 0
▷leaf node
principal var = “”
return the value of node
if player = MAX
▷process MAX node
maxstr = “”
▷principal variation from this node
maxval = −∞
▷current α
for each i from 0 to 9
▷evaluate each child in this loop
value = alphabeta (node, height −1, maxval, i, MIN)
if value > maxval and value ̸= +∞
▷update α
maxval = value
maxstr = principal var + ‘i’
if maxval ≥parent αβ
▷beta prune
beta prunes = beta prunes + (9 −i) ∗(T(height/2) −1)/10
break
principal var = maxstr
return maxval
else
minstr = “”
minval = +∞
▷current β
j = (height + 1)/2
▷number of children left to explore
for each uninstantiated variable v in node
j = j - 1
grandchild = node (digit →v)
▷replace v by digit in node
value = alphabeta (grandchild, height −1, minval, −1, MAX)
if value < minval and value ̸= −∞
▷update β
minval = value
minstr = principal var + ‘v’
if minval ≤parent αβ
▷alpha prune
alpha prunes = alpha prunes + j ∗T((height −1)/2)
break
principal var = minstr
return minval
end function
8

below the root node. These estimates are backed up, by taking the minima, to
estimate the values of their parents. If these estimates are placed in decreasing
order, as ˜v({i0}) ≥˜v({i1}) ≥· · · ≥˜v({i9}) then the children of a MAX node
are evaluated in sequence i0, i1, . . . , i9.
For a MAX node x = {i →X}, our estimate for v(x) is simply the maximum
of E over some random instantiations of the variables of E while ﬁxing X at i.
More precisely, to estimate v({i →X}), we ﬁx X at i and randomly instantiate
the other variables in E with digits and compute val(E). We do this a ﬁxed
number of times and take the maximum of the resulting values.
The performance of minimax algorithm is further enhanced by noting that
several nodes in tree(E) correspond to the same game position and thus have
to to be evaluated only once. An example are nodes {2 →X, 1 →Y } and
{1 →Y, 2 →X} in tree(X ∗(Y −Z)). We exploit this fact by storing, for each
MAX node x that is fully evaluated (i.e. none of its children are pruned by
beta cutoﬀs), its value and the principal variation starting at x. On subsequent
visits to nodes that correspond to the same game position, this value is retrieved
instead of being recomputed.
4
Implementation Details
We ﬁrst convert E to a postﬁx form using Dijkstra’s shunting yard algorithm
[3]. During evaluation, the variables are substituted with values, and val(E) is
computed using the reverse polish evaluation [2] algorithm.
Table 1 compares the number of nodes pruned by alpha-beta and alpha-beta
with node ordering and also shows the ordering of digits at each MAX node as
determined by the heuristic. For the alpha-beta method, the number of nodes
pruned is the sum of the number of nodes pruned by alpha and beta cutoﬀs.
For alpha-beta with node ordering, the number of nodes pruned is the sum of
the number of nodes pruned by alpha and beta cutoﬀs and the transposition
tables. For expressions with ﬁve or six variables, we have observed a ten-fold
speedup in the performance of the second method over the ﬁrst.
We also attempted ordering the MIN nodes as well as using diﬀerent or-
derings for MAX nodes at diﬀerent heights using the same heuristic but any
gains in the number of nodes pruned was oﬀset by the computational time in
determining the order. Other promising approaches such as Negascout [8] and
the MTD-f [7] algorithm have not been attempted yet.
9

E
minimax(E)
and
principal
variation
α-β:
No.
of
nodes pruned
α-β with node ordering
and transposition tables
Digit order
No. of nodes
pruned
x
y + 2∗y
z −z
x
16/3, 3 →x,
3 →z, 9 →y
4515
1, 4, 3, 5, 6,
7, 2, 8, 9, 0
7526
w −y∗z
3 + 3 ∗x
21, 6 →w, 7 →
y, 5 →x, 0 →z
302271
9, 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, 1, 0
464162
v +w +x−y −z
12, 7 →y, 8 →
v, 7 →w, 4 →
x, 0 →z
≈2.18 ∗108
7, 3, 4, 5, 6,
1, 2, 8, 9, 0
≈2.53 ∗108
a+b
c
+ d+e
f
7.6, 3 →a, 3 →
c, 5 →f, 9 →b,
9 →d, 9 →e
≈1.33 ∗1010
5, 4, 3, 2, 8,
1, 9, 0, 6, 7
≈1.55∗1010
Table 1: Comparison of alpha-beta and alpha-beta with node ordering
5
e-Valuate on Graphs
In this section, we describe two-player games on graphs where each player’s
goal is to maximize his share of a set B of resources (which could be vertices,
edges or faces – for planar graphs).
In each game, players MAX and MIN
color the elements of a (diﬀerent) set A in the following manner. At each turn,
MAX proposes a color from a palette of available colors that MIN assigns to an
uncolored element of A of his choice. When all the elements of A are colored, a
criterion is used to determine which elements of B belong to MAX and which
to MIN.
The games we describe will be of the form game(G, A, B, [k], f) where
◦G is the graph on which the game is played. G has vertex set V and edge
set E. When G is planar, we will denote its set of faces by R.
◦A is the set of elements to be colored.
◦B is the set of elements to be shared.
◦[k] is the set of colors and
◦f prescribes the rule for determining whether a given x ∈B belongs to
MAX or MIN. There is one such f for each x which we denote by fx. x
belongs to MAX (resp. MIN) if fx evaluates to 1 (resp. 0). fx is deﬁned
10

in the following manner. We ﬁrst associate a nonempty set S(x) ⊆A with
x. fx evaluates to 0 if all elements of S(x) are assigned the same color
and 1 otherwise.
At the conclusion of the game, MAX’s share is given by evaluating the function
F := P
x∈B
fx on the input colors.
If we interpret F as a mapping F : [k]|A| 7→N on the variable set A, then the
game we have described is equivalent to playing e-Valuate on F; MAX proposes
values (colors) that MIN assigns to variables (elements of A) of his choice. Thus,
under optimal play from both players, MAX’s share is minimax(F, [k]). The win-
ner can then be determined by comparing MAX’s share with minimax(F, [k]).
If |S(x)| > 1 for each x ∈B, then the game has the following monotonic
property.
◦If k = 1, then MAX has to choose the same color at each turn and ends
up not acquiring any element of B. Thus minimax(F, [1]) = 0.
◦If k = |A|, then MAX chooses a diﬀerent color at each turn and ends up
acquiring all elements of B. Thus minimax(F, [|A|]) = |B|.
◦minimax(F, [i]) ≤minimax(F, [i + 1]) for i = 1, 2, . . . , |A| −1.
This leads to the chain of inequalities:
0 = minimax(F, [1]) ≤minimax(F, [2]) ≤· · · ≤minimax(F, [|A|]) = |B|
Thus an interesting problem is determining min{k : minimax(F, [k]) = |B|} for
diﬀerent classes of graphs.
The game is generalized by applying weights to each element of B. In this
case, the goal of each player is to maximize the sum of the weights of his share.
The corresponding function F is then a weighted sum of fs i.e. if w(x) is the
weight of x ∈B, then F = P
x∈B w(x)fx.
There are six possible choices for the pair (A, B): (V, E), (E, V ), (E, R),
(V, R), (R, E) and (R, V ). We now describe the games corresponding to each
pair.
Sharing of Edges
This is game(G, V, E, [k], f), i.e. the set of edges are shared by coloring the
vertices. For an edge e = (u, v), let S(e) = {u, v}. Then e belongs to MAX if u
and v are assigned diﬀerent colors and to MIN otherwise.
11

Sharing of Vertices
This is game(G, E, V, [k], f), i.e. the set of vertices are shared by coloring the
edges. For v ∈V , S(v) := {e ∈E : e is incident to v}. As S(v) ̸= ∅we require
that all vertices have positive degree. Then v belongs to MAX if there are two
edges incident to v colored diﬀerently and to MIN otherwise.
Sharing of Faces
Here we assume that G is planar. This is then game(G, E, R, [k], f), i.e. the set
of faces are shared by coloring the edges. With a given face r, we associate the
set of edges on its boundary, i.e. S(r) = {e ∈E : e lies on r’s boundary}. This
implies that r belongs to MAX if there are two edges on its boundary colored
diﬀerently and to MIN otherwise.
We observe that
◦Coloring the vertices instead of the edges leads to game(G, V, R, [k], f).
The criterion for determining if a face belongs to MAX is similar; two
vertices on its boundary should be assigned diﬀerent colors. It’s not clear
which version is more favorable to MAX.
◦A natural choice for the weights of the faces are their areas (we exclude
the outer face by assigning it a weight of zero). In this weighted version,
each player tries to maximize his share of the area enclosed by the graph.
Finally there are two other games involving coloring of faces to share vertices
or edges: game(G, R, V, [k], f) and game(G, R, E, [k], f). If x is a vertex or an
edge, we associate with it the set of faces it lies on, i.e.
S(x) = {r ∈R :
x lies on r’s boundary}.
Here’s an example demonstrating these games.
Example 1: We illustrate the games we have described on the Friendship graph
F3 (see Figure 2). We assume k = 2 and optimal play from both players. For
convenience, we assume that the colors are red and blue. We describe the edge-
sharing game in detail. The other games use similar reasoning and we outline
the steps.
game(F3, V, E, [2], f): We show that MAX’s share is s = 4 edges. MAX ensures
that s ≥4 by proposing three red and four blue colors (in any order). If vertex
v0 is colored red, then it is adjacent to 4 vertices colored blue implying s ≥4.
If v0 is colored blue, then it is adjacent to 3 vertices colored red. Moreover, at
least one of the edges (v1, v2), (v3, v4), (v5, v6) has its ends colored diﬀerently
resulting in s ≥4.
12

On the other hand MIN ensures that s ≤4 by assigning red colors to the
vertices v1, v2, v3, v0, v4, v5, v6 (in that order) and blue colors in the reverse order
(i.e. v6, v5, v4, v0, v3, v2, v1). After all the vertices are colored, at least one of the
3 triangles will be monochromatic. The other two will each have utmost two
edges whose ends are colored diﬀerently.
The function F, such that minimax(F, [2]) = 4, is given by
F
=
f(v0, v1) + f(v1, v2) + f(v2, v0) + f(v0, v3) + f(v3, v4) +
f(v4, v0) + f(v0, v5) + f(v5, v6) + f(v6, v0)
where f(x, y) = 1 if x ̸= y and 0 otherwise.
game(F3, E, V, [2], f): Here MAX’s share is s = 2 vertices. MAX chooses one
red and eight blue colors (in any order) ensuring s ≥2. MIN assigns red colors
to the edges e1, . . . , e9 in that order and blue colors in the reverse order. This
ensures s ≤2.
game(F3, E, R, [2], f): For this game, MAX’s share is 2 faces. The strategy for
choosing and assigning colors to edges is same as in game(F3, E, V, [2], f). Using
this strategy, MIN ensures that two of the triangular faces are monochromatic.
Thus MAX acquires one triangular face and the outer face.
game(F3, V, R, [2], f): For this game, MAX’s share is 3 faces. The strategy for
choosing and assigning colors to vertices is same as in game(F3, V, E, [2], f).
game(F3, R, V, [2], f): Let the three triangular faces and the outer face be
labeled T1, T2, T3 and T4 respectively. MAX’s share is 5 vertices. MAX chooses
two red and two blue colors. If T4 is colored red (say), then the ﬁve vertices
in the two triangular faces colored blue are acquired by MAX. MIN applies red
colors to the faces T1, T4, T2, T3 (in that order) and blue colors in the reverse
order ensuring that T4 and one of the triangular faces share the same color.
game(F3, R, E, [2], f): MAX’s share is 6 edges. The strategy of both players is
same as in game(F3, R, V, [2], f).
□
Finally we note that other variants of the game can be derived by changing
the rule f that determines whether elements of B belong to MAX or MIN. One
variant when k = 2, is to assign an x ∈B to MAX if an odd number of elements
in S(x) are colored 1. If MAX proposes color 1 at every turn, then he will
acquire all x ∈B such that |S(x)| is odd (for example, in game(G, E, V, [2], f),
MAX would acquire all vertices of odd degree). Thus care must be taken to
ensure that |S(x)| is even for each x ∈B by modifying G if necessary. In the
vertex sharing game this can be achieved by joining pairs of odd-degree vertices
by edges. The resulting graph may not be simple but the game is still playable.
13

Figure 2: The Friendship Graph F3
The interesting feature of this variant is that under random assignment of
colors to A, an element in B is equally likely to belong to MAX or MIN (since
S(x) has an equal number of subsets of odd and even size). Then by linearity
of expectation, the expected share of MAX (and MIN) is |B|/2.
6
A Tiling Game
In the standard two-player sequential game, the game tree is used to determine
the player (if any) with the winning strategy. At the leaf node, the game has
concluded and the value assigned to the node depends on the winner; usually
±1 or 0 depending on whether the winner is MAX or MIN or it’s a draw. These
values are then backed up to the root to identify the player with the winning
strategy.
On the other hand, in e-Valuate, the value at the leaf node is the evaluation of
the function associated with the game. The winner is determined by comparing
this value with that at the root of the tree (found by backing up values as
before). Thus in e-Valuate, under optimal play, the game is always a draw.
Thus once we have an activity that can be completed in diﬀerent ways (such
as coloring a graph, instantiating a function or vector, creating a Hamiltonian
tour in a weighted graph etc.)
and for each completion, we can associate a
value, we have a game on; MAX and MIN complete the activity together but
with contrasting goals of maximizing and minimizing the ﬁnal value.
14

Here is a tiling game based on this idea.
A partial tiling of an 8×8 checkerboard is the placement of non-overlapping
dominoes on the board such that each domino occupies exactly two squares (so
each domino is either horizontal or vertical). The tiling is said to be maximal if
it cannot be extended any further, i.e. all unoccupied regions are 1 × 1 squares.
Figure 3(a) shows a maximal partial tiling with 22 dominoes.
In the tiling game, MAX and MIN take turns in placing dominoes on the
board until the tiling is maximal.
The value at the end of the game is the
number of dominoes on the board. Thus, left to himself, MAX would like to
cover every square of the board using 32 dominoes. On the other hand, MIN
would choose a maximal tiling that uses only 22 dominoes as shown in Figure
3(a). This is the minimum as proved in Theorem 1. Thus under optimal play,
the ﬁnal number of dominoes x, satisﬁes 22 ≤x ≤32.
Theorem 1 Any maximal partial tiling of an 8 × 8 checkerboard by dominoes
requires at least 22 dominoes.
Proof: We label the squares of the board by their coordinates (i, j) : 0 < i, j < 8
(see Figure 3(c)). A line refers to a row or column of the board. The maximality
of the partial tiling implies the following easily veriﬁable facts:
1. Each line contains utmost 4 unoccupied squares.
2. Each line intersects at least 3 dominoes.
For j > 0, we map an unoccupied square at (i, j), to the domino on its left,
i.e. occupying the square at (i, j −1). This deﬁnes a one-to-one mapping from
the set of unoccupied squares in columns 1 to 7 to the the set of dominoes
not intersecting column 7. If there are utmost 3 unoccupied squares in column
0, then these can be mapped to the 3 dominoes intersecting column 7. This
completes the one-to-one mapping from the set of unoccupied squares to the set
of dominoes. Thus if there are x unoccupied squares, then number of dominoes
≥x and together they occupy at least 3x squares implying 3x ≤64. Since x is
even, this implies x ≤20 resulting in at least 22 dominoes on the board.
A similar reasoning shows that if the rightmost column or the top or bottom
row have utmost 3 unoccupied squares, then there are at least 22 dominoes.
We now consider the case where the lines along the border have 4 unoccupied
squares each. Our goal is to ﬁnd an additional domino that is not mapped to any
unoccupied square under the mapping described above. Then this, along with
the three dominoes intersecting column 7 can be mapped to the 4 unoccupied
squares on column 0 and our proof will be complete.
A maximal partial tiling that has 4 unoccupied squares along each of the
border lines is possible only if the following conditions are satisﬁed.
15

◦The 4 corner squares are unoccupied.
◦If the square at (0, 2) is unoccupied, then the square at (2, 0) is occupied
(since otherwise the dominoes occupying the squares at (0, 1) and (1, 0)
would overlap) and vice versa.
These observations imply, apart from symmetry, a unique conﬁguration of
the unoccupied squares along the border lines as shown in Figure 3(b); the
unoccupied squares are marked by x while some of the squares that must be
occupied are marked by o.
If we cover the squares marked by o by dominoes, we get a partial tiling as
shown in Figure 3(c). If the domino at (1, 3) is horizontal then (1, 2) is occupied
and the domino at (1, 0) is left unmapped. Similarly if the domino at (1, 3) is
vertical then (2, 3) is occupied and the domino at (2, 1) is left unmapped. In
either case we have uncovered a domino left unmapped and this completes our
proof.
□
Figure 3: Tiling by dominoes. (a) A maximal partial tiling by 22 dominoes,
(b) A conﬁguration with 4 unoccupied squares along each border, (c) A partial
tiling of (b)
7
Conclusion
We have demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of search algorithms for computing the
minimax value of e-Valuate. Other heuristics for node values could yield more
eﬀective ordering of the nodes of the game tree and thus faster algorithms. We
have also described some games on graphs based on e-Valuate.
16

One would also like to understand what expressions and associated domains
constitute a fair game. A fair game is one where if MAX and MIN make their
moves randomly, they have equal chances of winning. For example, if E has only
+ and ∗operators or is deﬁned on one variable, then minimax(E) = max(E)
and MIN can never lose.
On the games on graphs, some unresolved questions are:
◦Computation of the minimax value: Can the graph structure be exploited
to compute the value more eﬃciently than using the game tree approach
for arithmetic expressions?
◦Estimates for the minimax value in terms of the graph parameters and
the number of colors.
◦Estimate of the number of colors so that MAX and MIN have approxi-
mately the same share under optimal play.
Acknowledgment. The authors thank Rohit Sabharwal and Aman Arora for
helpful discussions.
