SMDT: Selective Memory-Augmented Neural Document Translation
Xu Zhang1 ∗, Jian Yang2, Haoyang Huang3, Shuming Ma3, Dongdong Zhang3,
Jinlong Li1, Furu Wei 3,
1University of Science and Technology of China
2Beihang University
3Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Existing document-level neural machine trans-
lation (NMT) models have sufﬁciently ex-
plored different context settings to provide
guidance for target generation. However, lit-
tle attention is paid to inaugurate more diverse
context for abundant context information. In
this paper, we propose a Selective Memory-
augmented
Neural
Document
Translation
model (SMDT) to deal with documents con-
taining large hypothesis space of the context.
Speciﬁcally, we retrieve similar bilingual sen-
tence pairs from the training corpus to aug-
ment global context and then extend the two-
stream attention model with selective mech-
anism to capture local context and diverse
global contexts. This uniﬁed approach allows
our model to be trained elegantly on three
publicly document-level machine translation
datasets and signiﬁcantly outperforms previ-
ous document-level NMT models.
1
Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved
great progress in sentence-level translation (Bah-
danau et al., 2015b; Xia et al., 2017; Vaswani et al.,
2017). However, sentence-level models may ig-
nore discourse phenomena and translate sentences
in isolation. The use of context in document-level
translation has been advocated by NMT pioneers
for decades and can be divided into two categories.
The ﬁrst uses several surrounding sentences as the
context (Miculicich et al., 2018; Voita et al., 2019;
Ma et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020a), the other uses
the whole document context (Maruf and Haffari,
2018; Tan et al., 2019; Xiong et al., 2019; Zheng
et al., 2020). But these contexts are limited to a
ﬁxed span of the document and how to increase the
diversity of context is still a challenge.
Inspired by memory-based methods in sentence-
level translation (Gu et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020b;
∗Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research
Asia.
Shang et al., 2021), we can explicitly retrieve sim-
ilar sentences to augment document-context. But
Bao et al. (2021) conducted a detailed analysis
that translating longer document may fail to not
converge or stick around local minima. Besides,
more document-contexts may contain more irrel-
evant words. Therefore, how to effectively lever-
age knowledge and select the proper words from a
larger hypothesis space is another challenge.
To address the aforementioned problems, we
propose a Selective Memory-augmented Neu-
ral Document Translation model (SMDT). The
SMDT ﬁrstly retrieves sentence pairs from train-
ing corpus to enrich translation memory (TM). We
merge the entire document and the retrieval con-
tent into one input unit and divide it by sentence.
To capture the short- and long-term dependencies,
we introduce two-stream attention with selective
mechanism: 1) For each sentence, local attention
can empower the model to capture the short-term
dependencies and block other sentences, 2) and
diverse global attention adopts three types of atten-
tion to obtain different aspects of context including
retrieved sentence pairs, all sentences of the entire
document and the most adjacent sentences. Follow-
ing (Yang et al., 2021), we add a selection mech-
anism at the top of the encoder block to reduce
redundant words from TM. In addition, sentence-
level translation task has been shown can also help
document-level translation task (Bao et al., 2021).
To verify the idea, we perform multi-task learning
and achieve signiﬁcant improvement.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
(i) We introduce SMDT, a novel method of aug-
menting translation memory with retrieved similar
sentences and including two-stream attention with
selective mechanism to capture appropriate knowl-
edge from multiple contextual information. (ii) We
evaluate this model on three document-level ma-
chine translation datasets. The experimental results
show that our model can achieve competitive per-
arXiv:2201.01631v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2022

formance compared to previous works. We also
present ablation studies to provide useful insights
on the effectiveness of model variants.
2
Method
2.1
Problem Deﬁnition
Given a source document X = {x1, . . . , xm}
and target document Y = {y1, . . . , ym}, we can
retrieve a set of similar sentence pairs ZX =
{z1, . . . , zm} using similarity metric, where each
pair is combined with the retrieved source and tar-
get sentence. The target translation probability is
formulated as below:
P(Y |X) =
m
Y
i=1
P(yi|X, ZX; θ)
(1)
where θ are model parameters.
2.2
Input Construction
We ﬁrst use the widely-used search engine Lucene1
to retrieve similar sentences, which provide diverse
context candidates. Given a source sentence x, the
similar source sentence xr
i and corresponding tar-
get sentence yr
i from the bilingual training corpus
are concatenated as one part zi = (xr
i , yr
i ). The
input of our work is set as the concatenated source
sentences and the corresponding translation pairs
[X; Z], where we use a special separator to dis-
tinguish the original document and the retrieval
sentences.
2.3
Two-Stream Attention with Selective TM
Self-attention and cross-attention with multi-head
are used to obtain information from different repre-
sentation subspaces at different positions (Vaswani
et al., 2017). Each head corresponds to a scaled
dot-product attention, which operates on the query
Q, key K, and value V . The masking matrix M is
used to mask illegal tokens before softmax:
Attention(Q, K, V, M) = softmax(QKT
√dk
+ M)V
(2)
where dk is the dimension of the key vector.
The output values are concatenated and pro-
jected by a feed-forward layer to get ﬁnal values:
MHA(Q, K, V, M) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
where headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i , M)
(3)
where MHA denotes the multi-head attention with
h heads. WO, WQ, WK, and WV are parameters.
1https://github.com/apache/lucene-solr
…
𝑥𝑚
𝑥1
…
𝑧𝑚
𝑧1
Document
Memory
Single-head Attention 𝒊
…
𝑥2
𝑥1
Document Attention
Adjacent Sentence Attention
…
𝑥𝑚
𝑥1
…
𝑧𝑚
𝑧1
Memory-focus attention
(1)
(2)
(3)
or
or
𝑥𝑚
…
𝑥2
𝑥1
𝑥𝑚
Figure 1: Explanation of the diverse global attention.
Each head chooses one attention type from (1)-(3).
Our model extends the multi-head attention with
two-stream attention architecture including local
attention and diverse global attention. The local
attention is employed to capture local dependencies
and diverse global attention at top layers is used for
global context information.
Local Attention
Local attention for encoder and
decoder only obtains the local sentence informa-
tion and disregards other sentences. We modify
the masking matrix M in Equation 2 to discard
irrelevant sentences.
Diverse Global Attention
Since different heads
focus on diverse spans of the sentence (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2019), we adopt diverse global attention
to concentrate on different context ranges. More
speciﬁcally, we provide three types of attention for
each head to obtain different aspects of context. In
Figure 1, the diverse global attention includes three
parts: (i) Memory-focus attention, where each
source sentence depends on the corresponding re-
trieved sentence pair. The translation memory can
provide additional information and the context of
the target locale. (ii) Document Attention, which
simultaneously focuses on all sentences in the same
document. The entire document can provide rich
information, but will also introduce a lot of noise.
(iii) Adjacent Sentence Attention, which regards
close sentences as the context instead of entire doc-
ument. Close sentences provide high-relevant con-
text and alleviate the problem of large hypothesis
space. In our work, we unify three types of atten-
tion as the diverse global attention to extract global
and abundant representations from the document
and retrieved pairs. Local attention and diverse
global attention are combined using a commonly
used gate-sum module (Zhang et al., 2016) at the

top two layers.
Selection Mechanism
Following Yang et al.
(2021), we add a selection layer at the top of the en-
coder to select useful pieces of the translation mem-
ory. We use hidden states hL+1 of L weighted com-
binations of the encoder block features to choose
the proper words, where the binary classiﬁcation
is used to decide whether the j-th position in the
retrieved is retained:
hL+1 = Self-Attn(
L
X
i=1
aihi)
σ = argmax softmax(WshL+1)
(4)
where ai is the learnable weight of the i-th block
and Ws ∈Rd×2. σ = (σ1, ..., σt) with t words.
σj = 1 denotes the j-th word is selected while
σj = 0 denotes j-th word is discarded.
2.4
Multi-task Learning Framework
Our multi-task learning framework consists of main
and auxiliary tasks. Herein, we refer to the doc-
ument machine translation task as the main task
and the sentence machine translation task as the
auxiliary task. We separately construct the training
objectives for sentence-level and document-level
translation based on Equation 1.
L = EX,Y,ZX∈Db log[−P(Y |X, ZX; θ)]
(5)
where θ are model parameters. Db is the bilingual
corpus and ZX are retrieved pairs.
Document Translation
The main task is transla-
tion at the document level. When preprocessing the
data, we do not limit the number of sentences in
the document, so each instance contains multiple
sentences and retrieved translation pairs.
Sentence Translation
The auxiliary task is
sentence-level translation. When m = 1 in Equa-
tion 1, each instance is composed of a single sen-
tence and the corresponding retrieved pair. Com-
pared with the main task, sentence-level translation
allows the model to focus on learning the local de-
pendencies under the current single sentence and
the external dependencies provided by translation
memory, which helps the model learn to select im-
portant retrieved pieces.
3
Experiments
Datasets
Following the previous work (Maruf
et al., 2019), we use three public datasets includ-
ing TED, News, and Europarl. Statistics of these
Method
TED
News
Europarl
RNN (Bahdanau et al., 2015a)
19.24
16.51
26.26
SENTNMT (Vaswani et al., 2017)
23.10
22.40
29.40
SENTNMT (our implementation)
24.71
25.04
31.50
HAN (Miculicich et al., 2018)
24.58
25.03
28.60
SAN (Maruf et al., 2019)
24.42
24.84
29.75
Hybrid Context (Zheng et al., 2020)
25.10
24.91
30.40
Flat-Transformer (Ma et al., 2020)
24.87
23.55
30.09
G-Transformer (Bao et al., 2021)
23.53
23.55
32.18
SMDT (Our method)
25.12
25.76
32.42
Table 1: Comparison results on three document-level
machine translation benchmarks with BLEU metrc.
Dataset
#Sent
#Documents
TED
0.21M/9K/2.3K
1.7K/92/22
News
0.24M/2K/3K
6K/80/154
Europarl
1.67M/3.6K/5.1K
118K/239/359
Table 2: Statistics of three datasets.
datasets are reported in Table 2. The documents are
truncated to 1000 tokens. We use Moses toolkit2 to
tokenize the sentences and encode words into sub-
words (Sennrich et al., 2016) with 30K merge oper-
ations. The evaluation metric is the case-sensitive
BLEU points (Papineni et al., 2002).
Training Setting
We use 512 embedding size,
2048 FFN size, and 8 attention heads. For diverse
global attention, 3 heads use memory-focus atten-
tion, 3 heads use document attention, and 2 heads
use adjacent sentence attention. Diverse global at-
tention is only used in the top two layers. A dropout
rate of 0.3 is applied to residuals, attentions, and
ReLU connections. We use Adam optimizer with
β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.98 to train all models, and
apply label smoothing with an uncertainty of 0.1.
All models are trained on 4 GPUs of Nvidia V100.
We determine the number of updates/steps automat-
ically by the early stop on validation set.
Main Results
In Table 1, we present the BLEU
score of our model and other baselines on TED,
News, and Europarl.
The results show that
our SMDT can obtain a leading performance of
25.12/25.76/32.42 on three datasets. It is noticeable
that our proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms
the Transformer-based SENTNMT baseline model
on average, which proves our method sufﬁciently
utilizes different types of contextual information.
Compared with the G-Transformer that also uses
2https://github.com/moses-smt/
mosesdecoder

two-stream attention, our SMDT has improved sig-
niﬁcantly on TED and News, partly because of the
use of the auxiliary task, and partly because of the
improvements in our model architecture.
4
Analysis
Ablation Study
To analyze the effect of each
component of our SMDT, we conduct an ablation
study by removing them from our models on the
TED dataset in Table 3. To eliminate the experimen-
tal interference of the auxiliary task, our ablation
study is only trained on the main task. After re-
moving the selection layer, the performance drops
by 0.86 BLEU scores, indicating the necessity of
introducing the selection mechanism for noise ﬁl-
tering. After removing the diverse global attention,
the performance of the model drops by 1.04 BLEU
scores, which shows that only using local attention
is not enough for document-level translation.
Operation
BLEU
SMDT
24.55
w/o select layer
23.69
w/o diverse global attention
23.51
Table 3: Ablation study of our model only trained with
the document translation task on the TED dataset.
Context
TED
News
Europarl
diverse (SMDT)
24.55
24.32
32.24
only doc
23.87
24.09
32.20
only retrieval
24.17
24.28
32.02
Table 4: Context replacement results of our model only
trained with the document translation task on three
datasets, emphasizing importance of document and re-
trieved sentence pairs.
Context Replacement
To investigate the inﬂu-
ence of different contexts on translation quality,
we conduct a context replacement experiment for
global attention. We only use the main task for
training in the context replacement experiment to
avoid the interference of the auxiliary task. Table
4 summarizes the results of the context replace-
ment experiment. It can be seen that the perfor-
mance of our SMDT model on TED and News
has declined due to the absence of the auxiliary
task, which shows the important role of the sen-
tence translation task. After replacing the contexts
of all heads in global attention with the whole input
document, the model drops 0.68/0.23/0.04 on three
datasets respectively. Similarly, if the contexts of
all heads are replaced with retrieved translation
memory, the model drops 0.38/0.04/0.22 on three
datasets respectively. The experiment shows that
the use of multiple types of contexts, including the
context of the target locale and the context of high-
relevant content using a smaller hypothesis space,
is effective for improving the quality of document
translation.
5
Related Work
Neural Machine Translation
Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) has achieved great progress in
sentence-level translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015b;
Xia et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017). Context-
aware NMT is a more practical task because the
sentence to be translated requires supplementary
context to address the problem of pronoun transla-
tion, lexical cohesion, and discourse connectives
(Maruf and Haffari, 2018).
Document-level Translation
Previous works ex-
tend NMT models with an extra module to encode
context (Zhang et al., 2018; Maruf et al., 2019;
Werlen et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). They ig-
nore the relationship between current sentences
and context since the dual encoder lacks inter-
action with each other. A uniﬁed encoder (Ma
et al., 2020) is proposed to jointly encode current
sentences and context. Following this line of re-
search, two-stream self-attention (Bao et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2020) is adopted to capture long- and
short-term dependencies. But these methods using
the whole document encounter training difﬁcul-
ties, such as large hypothesis space and low-quality
context with much noise. Different from aforemen-
tioned methods, our model extends the two-stream
self-attention with selective memory and diverse
global attention to enrich context information.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we explored solutions to improve
the diversity of context in document-level machine
translation. We propose a two-stream attention
model called SMDT based on selective memory of
retrieved pairs. To utilize useful spans of the docu-
ment and retrieved pairs, diverse global attention is
proposed to provide different aspects of global de-
pendencies, which separately focuses on retrieved
sentence pairs, the whole document, and the adja-
cent sentences. Experimental results demonstrate
our model can effectively improve performance on
three benchmarks in English→German translation
direction.
