Unsupervised Diverse Colorization via
Generative Adversarial Networks
Yun Cao, Zhiming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract. Colorization of grayscale images is a hot topic in computer
vision. Previous research mainly focuses on producing a color image to
recover the original one in a supervised learning fashion. However, since
many colors share the same gray value, an input grayscale image could
be diversely colorized while maintaining its reality. In this paper, we de-
sign a novel solution for unsupervised diverse colorization. Speciﬁcally,
we leverage conditional generative adversarial networks to model the
distribution of real-world item colors, in which we develop a fully con-
volutional generator with multi-layer noise to enhance diversity, with
multi-layer condition concatenation to maintain reality, and with stride
1 to keep spatial information. With such a novel network architecture,
the model yields highly competitive performance on the open LSUN
bedroom dataset. The Turing test on 80 humans further indicates our
generated color schemes are highly convincible.
1
Introduction
Image colorization assigns a color to each pixel of a target grayscale image. Early
colorization methods [15,21] require users to provide considerable scribbles on
the grayscale image, which is apparently time-consuming and requires expertise.
Later research provides more automatic colorization methods. Those colorization
algorithms diﬀer in the ways of how they model the correspondence between
grayscale and color.
Given an input grayscale image, non-parametric methods ﬁrst deﬁne one or
more color reference images (provided by a human or retrieved automatically) to
be used as source data. Then, following the Image Analogies framework [10], the
color is transferred onto the input image from analogous regions of the reference
image(s) [24,17,9,4]. Parametric methods, on the other hand, learn prediction
functions from large datasets of color images in the training stage, posing the
colorization problem as either regression in the continuous color space [3,6,26] or
classiﬁcation of quantized color values [2], which is a supervised learning fashion.
Whichever seeking the reference images or learning a color prediction model,
all above methods share a common goal, i.e. to provide a color image closer to
the original one. But as we know, many colors share the same gray value. Purely
from a grayscale image, one cannot tell what color of clothes a girl is wearing
or what color a bedroom wall is. Those methods all produce a deterministic
arXiv:1702.06674v2  [cs.CV]  1 Jul 2017

2
Fig. 1. Left: The original grayscale image. Middle: Image colorized by non-adversarial
CNNs. Right: Image colorized by human on Reddit. (Figure from [14])
mapping function. Thus when an item could have diverse colors, their models
tend to provide a weighted average brownish color as pointed out in [14] (See
Figure 1 as an example).
In this paper, to avoid this sepia-toned colorization, we use conditional gen-
erative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] to generate diverse colorizations for a
single grayscale image while maintaining their reality. GAN is originally pro-
posed to generate vivid images from some random noise. It is composed of two
adversarial parts: a generative model G that captures the data distribution, and
a discriminative model D that estimates the probability of whether an image
is real or generated by G. The generator part tries to map an input noise to a
data distribution closer to the ground truth data distribution, while the discrim-
inator part tries to distinguish the generated “fake” data, which comes to an
adversarial situation. By careful designation of both generative and discrimina-
tive parts, the generator will eventually produce results, forming a distribution
very close to the ground truth distribution, and by controlling the input noise
we can get various results of good reality. Thus conditional GAN is a much more
suitable framework to handle diverse colorization than other CNNs. Meanwhile,
as the discriminator only needs the signal of whether a training instance is real
or generated, which is directly provided without any human annotation during
the training phase, the task is in an unsupervised learning fashion.
On the aspect of model designation, unlike many other conditional GANs
[12] using convolution layers as the encoder and deconvolution layers as the de-
coder, we build a fully convolutional generator and each convolutional layer is
splinted by a concatenate layer to continuously render the conditional grayscale
information. Additionally, to maintain the spatial information, we set all convo-
lution stride to 1 to avoid downsizing data. We also concatenate noise channels
to the ﬁrst half convolutional layers of the generator to attain more diversity in
the color image generation process. As the generator G would capture the color
distribution, we can alter the colorization result by changing the input noise.
Thus we no longer need to train an additional independent model for each color
scheme like [3].
As our goal alters from producing the original colors to producing realistic
diverse colors, we conduct questionnaire surveys as a Turing test instead of
calculating the root mean squared error (RMSE) comparing the original image to
measure our colorization result. The feedback from 80 subjects indicates that our

3
model successfully produces high-reality color images, yielding more than 62.6%
positive feedback while the rate of ground truth images is 70.0%. Furthermore,
we perform a signiﬁcance t-test to compare the percentages of human judges as
real color images for each test instance (i.e. a real or generated color image). The
resulting p-value is 0.1359 > 0.05, which indicates that there is no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between our generated color images and the real ones. We share the
repeatable experiment code for further research1.
2
Related Work
2.1
Diverse Colorization
The problem of colorization was proposed in the last century, but the research
of diverse colorization was not paid much attention until this decade. In [3],
they used additionally trained model to handle diverse colorization of a scene
image particularly in day and dawn. [26] posed the colorization problem as a
classiﬁcation task and use class re-balancing at training time to increase the
colorfulness of the result. And in the work of [5], a low dimensional embedding of
color ﬁelds using a variational auto-encoder (VAE) is learned. They constructed
loss terms for the VAE decoder that avoid blurry outputs and take into account
the uneven distribution of pixel colors and ﬁnally developed a conditional model
for the multi-modal distribution between gray-level image and the color ﬁeld
embeddings.
Compared with above work, our solution uses conditional generative adver-
sarial networks to achieve unsupervised diverse colorization in a generic way
with little domain knowledge of the images.
2.2
Conditional GAN
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] have attained much attention in
unsupervised learning research during the recent 3 years. Conditional GANs have
been widely used in various computer vision scenarios. [22] used text to generate
images by applying adversarial networks. [12] provided a general-purpose image-
to-image translation model that handles tasks like label to scene, aerial to map,
day to night, edges to photo and also grayscale to color.
Some of the above works may share a similar goal with us, but our conditional
GAN structure diﬀers a lot from previous work in several architectural choices
mainly for the generator. Unlike other generators which employ an encoder-like
front part consisting of multiple convolution layers and a decoder-like end part
consisting of multiple deconvolution layers, our generator uses only convolution
layers all over the architecture, and does not downsize data shape by applying
convolution stride no more than 1 and no pooling operation. Additionally, we add
multi-layer noise to generate more diverse colorization, while using multi-layer
conditional information to keep the generated image highly realistic.
1 Experiment code is available at https://github.com/ccyyatnet/COLORGAN.

4
Fig. 2. The illustration of conditional GAN. Generator G is given conditional informa-
tion (Grayscale image) together with noise z, and produces generated color channels.
Discriminator D is trained over the real color image and the generated color image by
G. The goal of D is to distinguish real images from the fake ones. Both nets are trained
adversarially.
3
Methods
3.1
Problem formulation
GANs are generative models that learn a mapping from random noise vector z to
an output color image x: G : z →x. Compared with GANs, conditional GANs
learn a mapping from observed grayscale image y and random noise vector z, to
x: G : {y, z} →x. The generator G is trained to produce outputs that cannot
be distinguished from “real” images by an adversarially trained discriminator
D, which is trained with the aim of detecting the “fake” images produced by the
generator. This training procedure is illustrated in Figure 2.
The objective of a GAN can be expressed as
LGAN(G, D) =Ex∼Pdata(x)[log D(x)]+
Ez∼Pz(z)[log (1 −D(G(z)))],
(1)
while the objective of a conditional GAN is
LcGAN(G, D) =Ex∼Pdata(x)[log D(x)]+
Ey∼Pgray(y),z∼Pz(z)[log (1 −D(G(y, z)))],
(2)
where G tries to minimize this objective against an adversarial D that tries to
maximize it, i.e.
G∗= arg min
G max
D LcGAN(G, D).
(3)
Without z, the generator could still learn a mapping from y to x, but would
produce deterministic outputs. That is why GAN is more suitable for diverse
colorization tasks than other deterministic neural networks.

5
Auto Encoder
U-Net
Our Model
Convolution
（Encoder）
Deconvolution
（Decoder）
Skip
Connection
Continuous Condition
Concatenation
Fig. 3. Structure comparison of auto encoder, U-Net and our generator. Left: Auto
encoder with convolutional encoder part and deconvolutional decoder part. Middle:
U-Net structure [23,12] with skip connections between layer i and n −i. Right: Our
fully convolutional generator with continuous condition concatenation
.
3.2
Architecture and implementation details
The high-level structure of our conditional GAN is consistent with traditional
ones [12,5], while the detailed architecture of our generator G diﬀers a lot.
Convolution or deconvolution Convolution and deconvolution layers are
two basic components of image generators. Convolution layers are mainly used
to exact conditional features. And additionally, many researches [26,12,5] use
superposition of multiple convolution layers with stride more than 1 to downsize
the data shape, which works as a data encoder. Deconvolution layers are then
used to upsize the data shape as a decoder of the data representation [18,12,5].
While many other researches share this encoder-decoder structure, we choose to
use only convolution layers in our generator G. Firstly, convolution layers are
well capable of feature extraction and transmission. Meanwhile, all the convolu-
tion stride is set to 1 to prevent data shape from downsizing, thus the important
spatial information can be kept along the data ﬂow till the ﬁnal generation layer.
Some other researches [23,12] also takes this spatial information into considera-
tion. They add skip connections between each layer i and layer n −i to form a
“U-Net” structure, where n is the total number of layers. Each skip connection
simply concatenates all channels at layer i with those at layer n −i. Whether
adding skip connections or not, the encoder-decoder structure more tends to
extract global features and generate images by this overall information which is
more suitable for global shape transformation tasks. But in image colorization,
we need a very detailed spatial local guidance to make sure item boundaries
will be accurately separated by diﬀerent color parts in generated channels. Let
alone our modiﬁcation is more straightforward and easy to implement. See the
structural diﬀerence between “U-Net” and our convolution model in Figure 3.

6
YUV or RGB A color image can be represented in diﬀerent forms. The
most common representation is RGB form which splits a color pixel into red,
green, blue three channels. Most computer vision tasks use RGB representation
[6,12,19] due to its generality. Other kinds of representations are also included like
Y UV (or Y CrCb) [3] and Lab [2,26,16]. In colorization tasks, we have grayscale
image as conditional information, thus it is straightforward to use Y UV or Lab
representation because the Y and L channel or so called Luminance channel rep-
resents exactly the grayscale information. So while using Y UV representation,
we can just predict 2 channels and then concatenate with the grayscale channel
to give a full color image. Additionally, if you use RGB as image representation,
all result channels are predicted, thus to keep the grayscale of generated color
image consistent with the original grayscale image, we need to add an additional
L1 loss as a controller to make sure Gray(G(y, z)) ≃y:
LL1(G) = Ey∼Pgray(y),z∼Pz(z)[∥y −Gray(G(y, z))∥],
(4)
where for any color image x = (r, g, b), the corresponding grayscale image (or
the Luminance channel Y ) can be calculated by the well-known psychological
formulation:
Gray(x) = 0.299r + 0.587g + 0.114b.
(5)
Note that Eq. (4) can still maintain good colorization diversity, because this L1
loss term only lays a constraint on one dimension out of three channels. Then
the objective function will be modiﬁed to:
G∗= arg min
G max
D LcGAN(G, D) + λLL1(G).
(6)
Since there is no equality constraint between the recovered grayscale Gray(G(y, z))
and the original one y, the LL1(G) factor will normally be non-zero, which makes
the training unstable due to this additional trade-oﬀ. The results will be shown
in Section 4.2 with experimental comparison on both RGB and Y UV represen-
tations.
Multi-layer noise The authors in [12] mentioned noise ignorance while training
the generator. To handle this problem, they provide noise only in the form of
dropout, applied on several layers of the generator at both training and test
time. We also noticed this problem. Traditional GANs and conditional GANs
receive noise information at the very start layer, during the continuous data
transformation through the network, the noise information is attenuated a lot.
To overcome this problem and make the colorization results more diversiﬁed, we
concatenate the noise channel onto the ﬁrst half of the generator layers (the ﬁrst
three layers in our case). We conduct experimental comparison on both one-layer
noise and multi-layer noise representations, with results shown in Section 4.2.

7
Fc
64x64
130 channels
66
65
65
33
64x64
64x64
64x64
64x64
=
( Modified ) Generator G
64
32x32
128
16x16
256
8x8
512
4x4
reshape
Fc
Or
Discriminator D
Fig. 4. Detailed structure of our conditional GAN. Top: Generator G. Each cubic part
represents a Convolution-BatchNorm-ReLU structure. Red connections represent our
modiﬁcations of the traditional conditional GANs. Bottom: Discriminator D
.
Multi-layer conditional information Other conditional GANs usually add
conditional information only in the ﬁrst layer, because the layer shape of pre-
vious generators changes along their convolution and deconvolution layers. But
due to the consistent layer shape of our generator, we can apply concatenation of
conditional grayscale information throughout the whole generator layers which
can provide sustained conditional supervision. Though the “U-Net” skip struc-
ture of [12] can also help posterior layers receive conditional information, our
model modiﬁcation is still more straightforward and convenient.
Wasserstein GAN The recent work of Wasserstein GAN [1] has acquired much
attention. The authors used Wasserstein distance to help getting rid of problems
in original GANs like mode collapse and gradient vanishing and provide a mea-
surable loss to indicate the progress of GAN training. We also try implementing
Wasserstein GAN modiﬁcation into our model, but the results are no better than
our model. We make comparison between the results of Wasserstein GAN and
our GAN in Section 4.2.
The illustration of our model structure is shown in Figure 4.
3.3
Training and testing procedure
The training phase of our conditional GANs is presented in Algorithm 1. To
assure the BatchNorm layers to work correctly, one cannot feed an image batch

8
Algorithm 1 Training phase of our conditional GANs, with the default param-
eters kD = 1, kG = 1, m = 64, sz = 100, s = 64.
1: for the number of training iterations do
2:
for kD steps do
3:
Generate minibatch of m randomly sampled noise {z(1), . . . , z(m)} each of size
[sz].
4:
Sample minibatch of m grayscale images {y(1), . . . , y(m)} each of shape [s, s, 1].
5:
Get the corresponding minibatch of m color images {x(1), . . . , x(m)} from data
distribution pdata(x).
6:
Update the discriminator D by:
∇θd
1
m
m
X
i=1
[log D(x(i)) + log (1 −D(G(y(i), z(i))))]
7:
end for
8:
for kG steps do
9:
Generate minibatch of m randomly sampled noise {z(1), . . . , z(m)}
10:
Sample minibatch of m grayscale images {y(1), . . . , y(m)}
11:
Update the generator by:
∇θg
1
m
m
X
i=1
log(1 −D(G(y(i), z(i))))
12:
end for
13: end for
of the same images to test various noise responses. Thus we use multi-round
testing with same batch and rearrange them to test diﬀerent noise responses of
each image, which is described in Algorithm 2.
4
Experiments
4.1
Dataset
There are various kinds of color image datasets, and we choose the open LSUN
bedroom dataset2 [25] to conduct our experiment. LSUN is a large color im-
age dataset generated iteratively by human labeling with automatic deep neural
classiﬁcation. It contains around one million labeled images for each of 10 scene
categories and 20 object categories. Among them we choose indoor scene bed-
room because it has enough samples (more than 3 million) and unlike outdoor
scenes in which trees are almost always green and sky is always blue, items in
indoor scenes like bedroom have various colors, as shown in Figure 5. This is
exactly what we need to fully explore the capability of our conditional GAN
model. In experiments, we use 503, 900 bedroom images randomly picked from
2 LSUN dataset is available at http://lsun.cs.princeton.edu.

9
Algorithm 2 Testing phase of our conditional GANs with the default parame-
ters m = 64, sz = 100.
1: Sample minibatch of m grayscale images {y(1), . . . , y(m)}
2: for round i in ktest rounds do
3:
Generate minibatch of m randomly sampled noise {z(1,i), . . . , z(m,i)} each of size
[sz].
4:
Generate color image using the trained model G:
{x(1,i), . . . , x(m,i)} ←G({y(1), . . . , y(m)}, {z(1,i), . . . , z(m,i)})
5: end for
6: Rearrange generated results x into
{x(1,1), . . . , x(1,ktest)}, . . . , {x(m,1), . . . , x(m,ktest)}
LSUN/church_outdoor
LSUN/bedroom
Fig. 5. Demonstration of LSUN dataset. Top: Outdoor scene (church). Always blue
sky and green trees. Bottom: Indoor scene (bedroom). Various item colors.
the LSUN dataset. We crop a maximum center square out of each image and
reshape them into 64 × 64 pixel as preprocessing.
4.2
Comparison Experiments
YUV and RGB The generated colorization results of a same grayscale image
using Y UV representation and RGB representation with additional L1 loss are
shown in Figure 6. Each group of images consists of 3×4 images generated from
a same grayscale image by each model at a same epoch. Focus on the results in
red boxes, we can see RGB representation suﬀers from structural miss due to the
additional trade-oﬀbetween L1 loss and the GAN loss. Take the enlarged image
on the top right in Figure 6 as an example, both the wall and the bed on the left
are split by unnaturally white and orange colors, while the results of Y UV setting
acquire more smooth transitions. Moreover, the model using RGB representation
shall predict 3 color channels while Y UV representation only predicts 2 channels
given the grayscale Y channel as ﬁxed conditional information, which makes the
Y UV model training much more stable.

10
YUV
Enlarged
RGB + L1
Enlarged
Fig. 6. Comparison of diﬀerent color space representation. Top: training and testing
with Y UV representation. Bottom: training with RGB representation and L1 loss.
Focus on the results in red boxes, RGB representation results lack of item continuity
due to the additional trade-oﬀbetween L1 loss and the GAN loss.
Single-layer and multi-layer noise The generated colorization results of the
same grayscale images using single-layer noise model and multi-layer noise model
are shown in Figure 7. Each group consists of 8 × 8 images generated from a
grayscale image by each model at the same epoch. We can see from the results
that multi-layer noise possesses our generator G of higher diversity as those
results on the right in Figure 7 are apparently more colorful.
Single-layer and multi-layer condition The generated colorization results
of the same grayscale images using single-layer conditional model and multi-
layer conditional model are shown in Figure 8. We show 2 × 5 images generated
by single-layer condition setting and multi-layer condition setting at the same
epoch. We can see from the results that the multi-layer condition model makes
the generator more structural information and thus the results of multi-layer
condition model are more stable while the single-layer conditional model suﬀers
from colorization derivation like those images in red boxes in Figure 8.
Wasserstein GAN Three groups of colorization results of the same grayscale
images using GAN and Wasserstein GAN are shown in Figure 9. We can see
from the result that Wasserstein GAN can produce comparable results as the
ﬁrst two column of Wasserstein GAN shows, but there are still failed results

11
Fig. 7. Comparison of single-layer and multi-layer noise model results. Left: results of
single-layer noise model. Right: results of multi-layer noise model. Apparently multi-
layer noise possesses our generator G of higher diversity.
by Wasserstein GAN like the last column, even to note that the Wasserstein
GAN results(40 epoch) come after training twice the number of epochs of the
GAN results(20 epoch). This is mainly due to that our training LSUN bedroom
dataset is quite large (503,900 image), the discriminator will not overﬁt easily,
which prevents the gradient vanishing problem. And also because of the large
dataset, the discriminator needs quite a lot times of optimization to convergence,
not to mention Wasserstein GAN shall not use momentum based optimization
strategies like Adam due to the non-linear parameter value clipping, Wasserstein
GAN needs much longer training to produce comparable results as our model.
Since Wasserstain GAN only helps to improve the stability of GAN training at
a price of much longer training time and we have achieved results of good reality
through our GAN, we did not use Wassserstein GAN structure.
More results and discussion of our ﬁnal model will be shown in the next
section.
5
Results and Evaluation
5.1
Colorization Results
A variety of image colorization results by our conditional GANs are provided in
Figure 10. Apparently, our fully convolutional (without stride) generator with
multi-layer noise and multi-layer condition concatenation produces various kinds
of colorization schemes while maintaining good reality. Almost all color parts are
kept within correct components without deviation.
5.2
Evaluation via Human Study
Previous methods share a common goal to provide a color image closer to the
original one. That is why many of their models [13,20,5] take image distance
like RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) and PSNR (Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio)

12
Single-layer condition
Multi-layer condition
Fig. 8. Comparison of single-layer and multi-layer condition model result. Top: results
of single-layer condition model, suﬀer from colorization derivation (red box). Bottom:
results of multi-layer condition model, smooth transition.
as their measurements. And others [11,12] use additional classiﬁers to predict
if colorized image can be detected or still correctly classiﬁed. But our goal is
to generate diverse colorization schemes, so we cannot take those distance as
our measurements as there exist reasonable colorizations that diverge a lot from
the original color image. Note that some previous work on image colorization
[3,7,19,18] does not provide quantiﬁed measurements.
Therefore, just like some previous researches [12,26], we provide questionnaire
surveys as a Turing test to measure our colorization results. We ask each of the
total 80 participants 20 questions. In each question, we display 5 color images,
one of which is the ground truth image, the others are our generated colorizations
of the grayscale image of the ground truth, and ask them if any one of them is
of poor reality. We add ground truth image among them as a reference in case of
participants do not think any of them is real. And we arrange all images randomly
to avoid any position bias for participants. The feedback from 80 participants
indicates more than 62.6% of our generated color images are convincible while
the rate of ground truth images is 70.0%. Furthermore, we run signiﬁcance t-
test between the ground truth and the generated images on the percentages of
humans rating as real image for each question. The p-value is 0.1359 > 0.05,
indicating our generated results have no signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the ground
truth images. Also we calculate the credibility rank within each group of the
ground truth image and the four corresponding generated images. An image gets
higher rank if higher percentage of participants mark it real. And the average
credibility rank of the ground truth images is only 2.5 out of 5, which means at

13
Ground
Truth
GAN
Wasserstein GAN
Fig. 9. Comparison between the results of GAN and Wasserstein GAN. Each line
consists of the leftmost ground truth color image and three results by GAN, then three
results by Wasserstein GAN. The rightmost images are failed results by Wasserstein
GAN.
least (2.5−1)/(5−1) = 37.5% of our generated results are even more convincible
than true images.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a novel solution to automatically generate diverse
colorization schemes for a grayscale image while maintaining their reality by ex-
ploiting conditional generative adversarial networks which not only solved the
sepia-toned problem of other models but also enhanced the colorization diver-
sity. We introduced a novel generator architecture which consists of fully con-
volutional non-stride structure with multi-layer noise to enhance diversity and
multi-layer condition concatenation to maintain reality. With this structure, our
model successfully generated diversiﬁed high-quality color images for each in-
put grayscale image. We performed a questionnaire survey as a Turing test to
evaluate our colorization result. The feedback from 80 participants indicates our
generated colorization results are highly convincible.
For future work, as so far we have investigated methods to generate color
images by conditional GAN given only corresponding grayscale images, which
provides the model maximum freedom to generate all kinds of colors, we can also
lay additional constraints on the generator to guide the colorization procedure.
Those conditions include but not limited to (i) speciﬁed item color, such as blue
bed and white wall etc.; and (ii) global color scheme, such as warm tone or cool
tone etc. And note that given those constraints, generative adversarial networks
shall still produce various vivid colorizations.

14
Fig. 10. Example results of our conditional GAN on LSUN bedroom data. 20 groups
of images, each consists of the leftmost ground truth color image and 4 diﬀerent
colorizations generated by our conditional GANs given the grayscale version of the
ground truth image. One can clearly see that our novel structure generator produces
various colorization schemes while maintaining good reality.

15
