1 
Optimal Synthesis of Finite State Machines with Universal Gates using 
Evolutionary Algorithm 
1Noor Ullah, 2 Khawaja M. Yahya, 3 Irfan Ahmed 
1,2,3 Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan. 

 
ABSTRACT 
 
This work presents an optimization method for the synthesis of finite state machines. The focus is on the reduction in the on-
chip area and the cost of the circuit. A list of finite state machines from MCNC91 benchmark circuits have been evolved using 
Cartesian Genetic Programming. On the average, almost 30% of reduction in the total number of gates has been achieved. The 
effects of some parameters on the evolutionary process have also been discussed in the paper. 
 
Keywords: Cartesian Genetic Programming, Finite State Machines, Genetic Algorithms. 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Circuit size and cost are among the main issues in 
digital circuit design these days. Finite State Machines (FSMs) 
are considered as the heart of sequential systems. FSMs are 
generally referred to the two models of sequential digital 
circuits namely Mealy and Moore models. Mealy model 
describes the output of a system as a function of both the input 
and current state.  Moore model expresses it in terms of the 
current state only. These sequential systems consist of 
combinational logic circuits, which are connected to the 
storage elements making feedback path. Designing of FSMs 
involves seven crucial steps [1]. One of the most vital steps is 
to obtain optimal state equations, which include input and 
output variables. This is an indispensable step towards an 
efficient, small and cost effective hardware design. 
 
This paper focuses on the objective to obtain an optimal 
combinational logic circuit for the FSM. The primary goal is 
to reduce the number of gates as much as possible. This leads 
to a reduction in total number of MOSFETs, which saves the 
on-chip area of FSMs and reduces the cost of circuit as well. 
 
Many researchers have worked on the optimization of 
FSMs using different techniques. A symbolic description of 
FSMs has been considered for logic minimization in PLA 
based machines [2]. S. Devadas introduced algorithms using 
migration and utilization of don’t-care sequences [3]. Cellular 
automata based synthesis scheme for sequential circuits has 
been described [4]. Different genetic algorithms have been 
proposed in the area [5-9]. Heuristic algorithms for two level 
logic and two-hot encoding have been introduced [10],[11]. R. 
S. Shelar et. al., have decomposed FSMs into two interactive 
machines [12]. Mean Field Annealing based solution of graph-
embedding problem has been given [13]. L. Yuan et. al., have 
devised a state splitting technique for FSMs [14]. The 
aforementioned research work is mainly aimed at one of the 
two goals or both: First to reduce the number of states that 
describe the behavior of FSMs. Secondly, to encode the states 
with such binary sequences that the switching between the 
states is minimized. In any case the purpose is a reduction in 
total area either as a primary objective or secondary. Three 
MCNC benchmark FSMs have also been evolved using a 
Genetic Programming (GP) [15]. However the above research 
evolves FSMs using many types of logic gates. Shanti et. al., 
have presented the evolution of asynchronous sequential 
circuits using developmental Cartesian Genetic Programming 
[16]. The research was carried out to evolve the combinational 
part for each memory element individually. 
In this paper, the evolution of combinational logic part of 
FSMs 
has 
been 
proposed 
using 
Cartesian 
Genetic 
Programming (CGP). The circuits are evolved with universal 
gates (NAND and NOR) only. The evolution encompasses all 
the state elements and the outputs of the system together in the 
same program. The benefit of the combined evolution is that 
many redundant nodes are removed. This results in very 
compact circuit architecture. The rest of the paper is organized 
in the following manner. Section 2 gives an overview of CGP. 
Section 3 describes the detailed experimental setup. Section 4 
is about the simulation process and results of the experiments. 
Section 5 concludes the paper. 
 
2.  CARTESIAN GENETIC PROGRAMMING 
 
CGP is a variant of GP, which was invented for the 
evolution of digital circuits by Miller and Thompson [17]. In 
CGP programs are represented as directed acyclic graphs in 
contrast to the conventional tree-based GP. This allows the 
indirect reuse of the nodes. In start the CGP graphs were 
represented by two-dimensional grid of nodes. Any number of 
rows, columns and level backs could be chosen by the user, 
creating a number of different topologies. Later work showed 
that a special case, having a single row with level backs equal 
to the number of columns was more effective [18]. 
 
A list of integers called genes represents a fixed-length 
genotype in CGP. It encodes all the incoming and outgoing 
connections and the function of each node. The decoded 
genotype is called phenotype. Its size can vary from zero 
nodes to the maximum number of nodes in the genotype. This 
is due to the fact that all the nodes in genotype may not be 
used in the phenotype. Such nodes and their genes that have 
no influence on phenotype are called non-coding. They have a 
neutral effect on the fitness of genotype often called as 
neutrality, which is discussed in detail in [17]. Each 
computational node in the genotype represents a function from 
a user defined list in a function look-up table and is encoded 
by two types of genes: 
 

 
 
 
2 
i. 
The address of a node-function in the function look-
up table is called a function gene. It decides the 
operation of the node and is always the first gene in 
the node. 
ii. Connection genes are determined by the arity of any 
function. They encode the input connections of the 
nodes and are basically indices in an array. 
 
In the special case topology described above, a program 
input or any previous node’s output can become the input of 
the nodes in a feed forward manner. Absolute values are 
assigned to program inputs from 0 to ni-1 where ni is the 
number of inputs. The nodes’ outputs are also ordered in a 
sequential manner from 0 to ni+m-1, where m is the maximum 
number of nodes. At the end of the genotype, as many integers 
as the required number of outputs are added representing the 
outputs, where Each integer represents the address of the node 
from where the output is taken. The general form of Miller’s 
CGP is shown in figure 1. 
 
Fig.1. General Form of Miller’s CGP, where ni, nr and nc and a 
represent number of inputs, number of rows, number of columns and 
arity respectively [19] 
 
Fig.2. CGP Genotype [19] 
 
In CGP, some constraints must be obeyed at the 
initialization or mutation of genotype. The function gene’s 
allele fi for a total number of functions nf must obey the 
following relation:  
 
0 ≤𝑓𝑖≤𝑛𝑖 
(1) 
 
The connection genes’ alleles Cij for all nodes in column j 
must follow the given relations, where l is the value of level-
backs: 
𝑛𝑖+ (𝑗−𝑙)𝑛𝑟≤𝐶𝑖𝑗≤𝑛𝑖+ 𝑗𝑛𝑟, 𝑖𝑓 𝑗≥𝑙 
(2) 
0 ≤𝐶𝑖𝑗≤𝑛𝑖+ 𝑗𝑛𝑟, 𝑖𝑓 𝑗< 𝑙 
 
(3) 
 
In CGP, a point mutation operator is used, in which a 
randomly chosen gene’s value is changed with another valid 
random value. A valid value for a function gene is any index 
in the function look-up table. For an input gene it is the index 
of any previous node’s output or any program input. For an 
output gene it can take the output index of any node or 
program input. Mutation rate, µr is a user defined value (a 
percentage of total number of genes), which gives the number 
of mutations per application of mutation. All the off-springs 
go through the mutation process. 
 
In any CGP program, a fitness criterion must be set, based 
on which the decision of when to stop the evolution process is 
taken. This is determined by the magnitude of error between 
the evolved output and the desired output. In order to achieve 
100% accuracy, the magnitude of error must be equal to 0. 
During the process among the parent and all the off-springs, 
the one with the least error is considered as the fittest and is 
promoted as a parent for the next iteration. If a parent and an 
off-spring have the same least error then the off-spring is 
considered as the fittest. If all of them have the same 
magnitude of error then any one of the randomly chosen off-
springs is considered as the fittest. CGP evolution is 
performed normally with a simplified form of 1+λ 
evolutionary algorithm, where λ is the number of off-springs. 
CGP decoding is done from the output to the input to yield the 
phenotype. The non-coding nodes are ignored in this process. 
 
3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
 
A one dimensional CGP graph is used for all the 
experiments, which consists of a single row and m number of 
columns and level-backs. The input array in the program 
contains all the possible combinations of the system inputs 
and the current state values of all the flip flops of FSM. An 
array stores the desired outputs for all the combinations of 
input array. These outputs are comprised of the system outputs 
and the next state output values of all the flip flops. Another 
array contains the outputs that are created per iteration by the 
CGP program, for all combinations of input array. A 
simplified form of 1+λ evolutionary algorithm is used for the 
evolution purpose. Two values of λ (4 and 8) are used to 
evolve each FSM separately. The maximum number of nodes 
in the program varies according to the requirement of each 
FSM. The function lookup table contains only NAND and 
NOR functions (which make the universal gates), taking only 
two inputs each. The root mean square error between the 
desired outputs and the CGP evolved outputs, decides the 
fitness of the parent and off-springs. To achieve 100% 
accuracy in the design, the least error must become zero. Point 
mutation operator creates the randomly mutated off-springs. A 
mutation rate ranging from 3% to 10% is used, which depends 
on the size of each circuit. The CGP code is written in C++. 
4. SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
 
The CGP evolved circuit design is compared with the 
espresso based architecture of six MCNC91 benchmark FSMs. 
The same comparison is done for four custom made Moore 
type sequence detectors also. First, the state transition tables 
are fed into the espresso based software, logic Friday for logic 
minimization. The minimized logic equations are mapped into 
universal gates in Logic Friday. The obtained combinational 
circuit is connected with D flip flops, constructing complete 
F0C0,0 … C0,     ….     F(c+1)r C(c+1)r,0       …     C(c+1),a       O1…Om 
output genes 
Connection genes 
function genes 
 
C0,a 
C1,0 
C1,a 
Cr-1,0 
Cr-1,a 
C2r-1,a 
C r+1,a 
C2r-1,0 
C r+1,0 
Cr,a 
C(c+1)r-1,a 
C cr+1,a 
C(c+1)r-1,0 
C cr+1,0 
Ccr,a 
F0 
F1 
Fr-1 
Fr+1 
F2r-1 
Fcr 
Fcr+1 
F(c+1)r-1 
Fr 
C0,0 
Cr,0 
Ccr,0 
n+cr 
n+cr+1 
n+(c+1)+r-1 
O0 
O1 
Om 
n 
n+1 
n+r 
n+r-1 
n+r+1 
n+2r-1 
0 
1 
n-1 
F0C0,0…C0,a F1C1,0…C1,a …….. F(c+1)r-1C(c+1)r-1,0…C(c+1)r-1a O0 O1…Om 

 
 
 
3 
FSM. To get the optimized design, the same logic tables are 
used to evolve the circuit in CGP. The evolved circuits have 
been tested for all combinations of inputs and yield accurate 
outputs. The results are shown in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
TABLE 1: Comparison b/w conventional and CGP designed MCNC91 benchmark FSM circuits 
 
Name 
No. of Gates 
Percentage 
Reduction 
No. of 
States 
No. of 
Inputs 
No. of 
Outputs 
Espresso 
CGP 
dk27 
23 
18 
21.73 
7 
1 
2 
Lion9 
25 
19 
24 
9 
2 
1 
S8 
31 
22 
29.03 
5 
4 
1 
beecount 
38 
26 
31.57 
7 
3 
4 
bbara 
62 
43 
30.64 
10 
4 
2 
dk14 
124 
79 
36.29 
7 
3 
5 
 
TABLE 2: Comparison b/w conventional and CGP designed custom made Moore type sequence detector FSMs 
 
Name 
No.of Gates 
Percentage 
Reduction 
No. of 
States 
Espresso 
CGP 
10101 
23 
19 
17.39 
6 
0001000 
27 
18 
33.33 
8 
01100110 
30 
20 
33.33 
9 
12-0s-then-1 
42 
20 
52.38 
14 
 
 
Almost 30% reduction in number of gates has been 
achieved in CGP evolved MCNC91 FSMs as compared with 
the conventional espresso based design. Similarly 34% 
reduction in custom made Moore type sequence detectors has 
been achieved. This is a significant amount of reduction in the 
total number of MOSFETS used to construct the FSMs. So a 
lot of on-chip area can be saved using CGP evolved FSMs. 
Also smaller design reduces the total cost of the circuit 
especially in larger FSMs. From the above data it is also 
evident that the reduction in total number of gates using CGP 
is independent of the number of states of FSMs. To 
demonstration the above results, the circuit diagrams of dk27 
for the espresso based design and CGP evolved circuit are 
shown in Fig. 3a and b. 
 
 
Fig. 3a. dk27 circuit with universal gates espresso based design 
 
 
Fig. 3b. dk27 circuit with universal gates CGP based design 
 
As mentioned in section 3 that two different values of λ 
are used for CGP evolution, different circuit architectures have 
been evolved for each value. The results are shown in Table 3 
and Plots 1 and 2. 
 
TABLE 3: Comparision of the effects λ =4 on circuit size and 
simulation time with λ =8 
Name 
m 
Nodes 
used 
No. of Generations 
µr 
λ=4 
λ=8 
λ=4 
λ=8 
dk27 
25 
21 
18 
199855 
372007 
10 
s8 
25 
24 
22 
367382 
1634471 
10 
lion9 
25 
19 
18 
2747861 
3200766 
10 
beecount 
55 
30 
28 
192728 
985972 
3 
 

 
 
 
4 
 
Plot. 1. Number of nodes used in phenotype vs λ 
 
 
Plot. 2.  Number of generation vs λ 
 
In the above results, it is observed that the evolution 
process is much faster with a smaller value of λ. λ=4 needs 
lesser number of generations to converge into the desired 
circuit than λ=8. On the other hand, the later value of λ 
evolves circuits with lesser number of gates than the former. 
So a simplified version of (1+8) evolutionary algorithm is a 
better choice for more compact circuits, which is the primary 
goal of the paper. 
It is also observed that for most of the time, a smaller 
value of m in the genotype creates much smaller circuits. 
However there is a bound on the least value of m, below 
which simulation will take forever to converge into a 
particular FSM. As an example bbara can be evolved with 
m=89 and m=64, where the first case uses 53 nodes to 
construct the circuit while the second needs only 43 nodes. 
Another parameter of CGP that plays a great role in the 
simulation time and up to some extent on the circuit size is 
mutation rate. A smaller value of µr evolves the FSMs much 
faster but with a slightly bigger size. So in case of smaller 
FSMs like dk27 and s8 a mutation rate of 10% is used while 
3% in bigger circuits like bbara. Also finding suitable value of 
m could get extremely difficult in bigger circuits with higher 
mutation rate. 
The circuit diagrams for other evolved MCNC91 
benchmark FSMs used in the research are given below: 
 
Fig. 4. lion9 circuit with universal gates CGP based design 
 
 
Fig. 5. s8 circuit with universal gates CGP based design 
 
 
Fig. 6. beecount circuit with universal gates CGP based design 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. bbara circuit with universal gates CGP based design 
 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
CGP based design shows that a significant reduction in 
the size of FSMs can be achieved as compared with the 

 
 
 
5 
conventional K-Map or espresso based design hence saving a 
lot of on-chip area and money which is the need of the day in 
digital electronics industry. To achieve this goal, suitable 
selection of certain CGP parameters is of great importance 
determining the trade-off with simulation time. 
In future this work can be extended to design and 
optimize more complex sequential circuits in terms of power, 
cost, size and propagation delay using either the proposed 
functions or other Boolean functions. Different CGP 
parameters can also be evaluated to achieve the required goal.
