A QUANTUM-INSPIRED NEURAL NETWORK FOR GE-
OMETRIC MODELING
Weitao Du∗
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Huawei Technologies Ltd

Shengchao Liu∗
Universit´e de Montr´eal

Xuecang Zhang∗
Huawei Technologies Ltd

ABSTRACT
By conceiving physical systems as 3D many-body point clouds, geometric graph
neural networks (GNNs), such as SE(3)/E(3) equivalent GNNs, have showcased
promising performance. In particular, their effective message-passing mechanics
make them adept at modeling molecules and crystalline materials. However, cur-
rent geometric GNNs only offer a mean-field approximation of the many-body
system, encapsulated within two-body message passing, thus falling short in cap-
turing intricate relationships within these geometric graphs. To address this limita-
tion, tensor networks, widely employed by computational physics to handle many-
body systems using high-order tensors, have been introduced. Nevertheless, inte-
grating these tensorized networks into the message-passing framework of GNNs
faces scalability and symmetry conservation (e.g., permutation and rotation) chal-
lenges. In response, we introduce an innovative equivariant Matrix Product State
(MPS)-based message-passing strategy, through achieving an efficient implemen-
tation of the tensor contraction operation. Our method effectively models com-
plex many-body relationships, suppressing mean-field approximations, and cap-
tures symmetries within geometric graphs. Importantly, it seamlessly replaces the
standard message-passing and layer-aggregation modules intrinsic to geometric
GNNs. We empirically validate the superior accuracy of our approach on bench-
mark tasks, including predicting classical Newton systems and quantum tensor
Hamiltonian matrices. To our knowledge, our approach represents the inaugural
utilization of parameterized geometric tensor networks.
1
INTRODUCTION
The conceptualization of physical systems as dynamic 3D many-body point clouds has instigated
a transformative shift in learning to model graph structured data. In this innovative paradigm, ge-
ometric neural networks (GNNs) (Sch¨utt et al., 2018; Smidt et al., 2018), notably exemplified by
SE(3)/E(3) equivalent GNNs (Sch¨utt et al., 2021; Liao & Smidt, 2022; Satorras et al., 2021; Du
et al., 2022), have emerged as powerful tools, demonstrating exceptional performance through ef-
fectively capturing atomic interactions in molecules and crystalline materials. Notably, their efficacy
is prominently attributed to the deployment of effective message-passing mechanics, rendering them
well-suited for modeling the intricate structures in these geometric data (Liu et al., 2023).
Despite their promising performance, contemporary geometric GNNs are undesirably encapsu-
lated within two-body message passing mechanism (Gilmer et al., 2017a). That is, the messaging
paradigm in these geometric GNNs, despite its computational expediency, confines the expressive
capabilities of the GNN models due to its reliance on a mean-field approximation of many-body in-
teraction (Krzakala et al., 2015; Barbier, 2015). This limitation becomes particularly evident when
modeling intricate relationships involving more than two bodies, as is the case for atomic interac-
tions in molecules and materials. Thus, empowering current geometric GNNs to achieve compre-
hensive expressiveness necessitates a paradigm shift towards effective modeling of the high-order
interactions of such systems.
To attain the aforementioned goal, we leverage tensor networks, a well-established tool in computa-
tional physics for representing intricate many-body interactions using high-order tensors (Kottmann,
1
arXiv:2401.01801v2  [cs.LG]  28 Jan 2024

2022), which are multi-dimensional arrays of numbers 1. These tensor networks are developed to
effectively represent quantum states and capture transformation between these states in a physi-
cal system. Furthermore, the ability to compress high-order tensors by truncating the virtual di-
mension between tensors makes tensor networks an attractive solution for modeling large systems.
Nevertheless, seamlessly integrating tensorized networks into the message-passing framework of
geometric GNNs encounters issues of scalability and preservation of permutation and rotation sym-
metry. To address these challenges, we devise a novel approach called Spatial and Temporal Ten-
sor Network Aggregation (SpaTea). In specific, it leverages a novel equivariant Matrix Product
State (MPS)-based message-passing strategy (1-dimensional tensor network (Perez-Garcia et al.,
2007; Verstraete et al., 2009)), capitalizing on a scalable and efficient implementation of the tensor
contraction operation 2 embedded within the deep GNN framework. This contraction effectively
reduces the tensors’ dimensions, enhancing computational efficiency. Significantly, drawing inspi-
ration from the density matrix renormalization group, our method offers a unified perspective on
traditional message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) concerning nodes and layers. As a result,
our strategy seamlessly replaces the standard message-passing and layer-aggregation modules in-
trinsic to geometric GNNs. This seamless integration of tensorized networks elevates the geometric
model’s expressive capacity without disrupting the conventional geometric deep GNN architecture.
Different from sub-graph based graph neural networks which aggregates information on the sub-
graph level, our basic unit is still in the node level. On the other hand, from the data point view, the
existence many-body entanglement between tokens inside the data has been demonstrated, e,g, CV
data (Liu et al., 2021), NLP data (Pestun & Vlassopoulos, 2017), materials (Sommer & Dunham,
2022), which makes the tensor-network based modeling natural.
We empirically validate the performance of our method SpaTea on benchmark tasks, including pre-
dicting classical Newton systems and quantum tensor Hamiltonian matrices. Our results establish
new state-of-the-art accuracy for these specific tasks. To our knowledge, SpaTea represents the
first utilization of parameterized geometric tensor networks. Also, it is worth noting that, owing to
its tensor network foundation, SpaTea holds the potential to evolve into genuine quantum learning
algorithms tailored for geometric graphs, offering potential advantages for quantum-related tasks.
We summarize our main contributions as follows.
• Identify and resolve the mean-field message passing limitation in geometric GNNs.
• Devise the first parameterized geometric tensor networks for geometric graph modeling.
• Empirically show our method’s superior accuracy on benchmark tasks.
2
PRELIMINARIES
2.1
KEY COMPONENTS OF MESSAGE PASSING NEURAL NETWORKS
The foundation of message-passing neural networks can be traced back to a model that represents
structured data as a sequence of tokens. This concept has evolved into a unified framework where
data processing can be viewed as an attention mechanism between tokens, especially from a trans-
former’s perspective. For instance, in the context of a 2D image, tokens are defined as local patches
within the image, while in natural language processing (NLP), tokens are individual words or char-
acters. Both scenarios can be understood as ordered graphs with fully connected edges linking the
tokens. However, it is noteworthy that in this paper, we specifically focus on an entirely different
paradigm: unordered graphs, denoted as (V, E), where V denotes the vertices and E represents
the edge features. These unordered graphs are instrumental in the context of our tensor network
algorithm, which draws an analogy to a many-body interaction system as we develop our method.
We now introduce the “classical” message passing scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017b) from layer t −1 to
t, which is also equivalent to the token mixing module introduced in (Guibas et al., 2021) when the
1Intuitively, tensors generalize scalars (order-0 tensors), vectors (order-1 tensors), and matrices (order-2
tensors) to higher dimensions or orders. A tensor network is constructed using a set of tensors, where certain
tensor indices are interconnected to form the network structure.
2Tensor contraction generalizes both matrix multiplication and vector inner product. It involves multiplying
two tensors along a pair of indices that share equal dimensions.
2

Figure 1: The initial step of spatial mixing: organizing neighborhood embeddings according to their
(Euclidean) distance, e.g., ϕs3 →ϕs2 and ϕs1 →ϕs. When ϕs2 and ϕs1 are equidistant from ϕs, the
spatial mixing process should be permutation-invariant when the order of s1 and s2 is exchanged.
graph is a regular mesh. This scheme also encompasses the attention mechanism as a special case:
xt
i =
X
xj∈N(xt−1
i
)
Wij(xt−1
i
, xt−1
j
)ϕ(xt−1
i
, xt−1
j
),
(1)
where the neighbors of N(xi) are determined by the adjacency matrix, and Wij, ϕ are matrix-,
vector-valued functions parameterized by multi-layer neural networks (MLP). It’s worth noting that
the summation P can be replaced with other permutation pooling operations, such as maximum or
minimum. By summarizing Wij and ϕ, we can broadly state that the representation of each node,
xt
i, is updated using an operator HN(xt−1
i
) that depends on the local neighborhood of each node xi
for each layer:
xt
i = HN(xt−1
i
)(xt−1
i
).
(2)
However, from a statistical physics perspective, Equation 1 serves as a mean-field approximation of
the many-body interaction system. In other words, only information that is in the range of mean-field
approximation can be obtained in the form of 1. As this mixing occurs at the token level, we refer to
this process as spatial aggregation. Note that in standard GNN pipeline, there is also an additional
node update layer for transforming xt
i. For example, in a standard graph transformer architecture
(e.g., Kreuzer et al. (2021)), node update is formulated as
xt
i = Layer normalization(xt
i) + Wxt−1
i
.
(3)
In addition to spatial aggregation, Xu et al. (2018) observed that the output representations of each
layer contain varying hierarchical information. For example, shallower layers contain more local
information. Therefore, Xu et al. (2018) proposed various methods for aggregating the outputs of
each layer, rather than simply pooling the representation of the final layer as the output (see also Xu
et al.; Guo et al. (2021)). Since we index the layers with the variable t, we refer to this aggregation
as temporal aggregation.
Temporal aggregation involves a dynamic process of merging information from different layers. One
common approach is to apply a function, denoted as At, that aggregates the representations from all
layers up to time step t. This can be formulated as:
xt
i = At
 x0
i , x1
i , . . . , xt−1
i

.
(4)
The choice of the aggregation function At can vary and may depend on the specific problem at
hand. It is designed to capture the different information across different layers, with the flexibility
to emphasize contributions from earlier or later stages of the computation.
2.2
TENSOR NETWORK AS AN EFFICIENT TENSOR REPRESENTATION
To efficiently represent complex many-body systems, we turn to tensor networks, a powerful frame-
work used to mitigate the challenges posed by high-order tensors appeared both as a representation
3

Table 1: A non-formal analogy between machine learning and many-body quantum mechanics.
Quantum Mechanics
Machine Learning
Quantum State
Raw Data
Coefficients of Quantum State
Embedding
Hamiltonian Operator
Layer Update
Renormalization
Aggregation and Pooling
Tensor-Product State
Product Probability
Entanglement State
Non-Independent Probability
of quantum states and the transformation between quantum states (Ran et al., 2020). To facilitate our
discussion, we adopt the Dirac ket and bra notation to represent vectors and their dual vectors. Con-
sider a basis {|s⟩} for a d-dimensional vector space H, which represents the single-body state space.
The N-body (entangled) state space is the repeated tensor product of H = H0 ⊗H1 ⊗· · · ⊗HN−1,
where each Hi is an identical copy of the high dimensional vector space H. In other words, we only
consider many-body system consisted of bosonic particles. In this space, the basis is given by:
|s0, s1, . . . , sN−1⟩:= {|s0⟩⊗· · · ⊗|sN−1⟩}, where s0, . . . , sN−1 = 0, 1, . . . , d −1.
(5)
Any N-body state can be expressed as |ϕ⟩= P
s0,...,sN−1 ϕs0,...,sN−1|s0, . . . , sN−1⟩. The coeffi-
cients ϕs0,...,sN−1 constitute a tensor with N indices, leading to the issue of the “exponential wall”
as N grows. Specifically, the dimension of the high-order tensor ϕs0,...,sN−1 becomes dN. This phe-
nomenon is often referred to as the ’curse of dimensionality,’ wherein the computational cost and
storage requirements become overwhelmingly large as N increases. Once defined the state space as
a high rank tensor space, the transformation of quantum states O is a linear operator, which can also
be written in the ket and bra notation:
O =
X
s0,...,sN−1
Os0s,
0 . . . OsN−1s,
N−1|s0, . . . , sN−1⟩⟨s0, . . . , sN−1|.
(6)
We expect a similar ”exponential wall” issue when dealing with an expressive aggregation operator
HN(xt−1
i
) in Equation 2, as it also depends on the many-body state of the neighbors N(xt−1
i
). To ef-
ficiently tackle this problem, physicists have developed various tensor network state representations
for compressing high-order tensors. In our context, we employ a specialized tree tensor network
state known as the Matrix Product State (MPS):
ϕs0,...,sN−1 =
X
a0,a1,...,aN−2
A0
s0,a0A1
a0,s1,a1 · · · AN−1
aN−2,sN−1.
(7)
We call the index ai as virtual indexes, as they are contracted and absent in the final ϕs0,...,sN−1.
On the contrary, si is the physics index. We choose the matrix product state for two main reasons:
Firstly, it requires less specialized domain knowledge compared to other tensor network states (e.g.,
Projected Entangled Pair States (PEPS) Cirac et al., 2021). Secondly, it shares a low-rank approx-
imation property guaranteed by the tensor-train decomposition. While the physical index remains
the set {s0, . . . , sN−1}, the dimension χ of the virtual indices {a0, . . . , aN−2} can be set as a hy-
perparameter. As a result, the dimension of an N-order matrix product state becomes:
O(Nχ2d).
(8)
This representation offers an efficient compression of the original high-order tensor when N > 1
and χ ≪d. Moreover, it’s been mathematically proven that every N-th order tensor has an optimal
low-rank approximation in the MPS form (Oseledets, 2011).
2.3
QUANTUM-INSPIRED ASPECTS
In this subsection, we shed light on the quantum-inspired elements that underpin our tensor network-
based approach. While our primary focus is on adapting tensor networks for many-body systems
within the domain of machine learning, we draw inspiration from quantum principles to address the
challenges of high-dimensional data representation.
4

Quantum physics has long served as a source of inspiration for various computational and machine
learning techniques. In our case, the inspiration from quantum mechanics lies in the efficient repre-
sentation of multi-dimensional data, similar to the way quantum states and operators are expressed
in the quantum realm. By harnessing quantum-inspired concepts, we aim to bridge the gap between
classical machine learning methodologies for geometric graphs and the complexities of many-body
systems.
The integration of Matrix Product State (MPS) into our tensor network architecture, for instance,
reflects the quantum-inspired notion of efficiently encoding complex states. As we explore the ap-
plications of MPS and other tensor network forms within the context of message-passing neural
networks, we aspire to achieve a balance between the elegance of quantum principles and the com-
putational needs of our many-body system models.
Throughout this paper, we will elucidate the specific quantum-inspired aspects of our method and
demonstrate how they enhance our ability to model and process high-dimensional data efficiently,
offering a unique perspective on the fusion of quantum concepts and machine learning principles
within a tensor network framework.
3
METHOD
As we have briefly mentioned in the Introduction section, the universal expressiveness of 3D equiv-
ariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) hinges on the network’s ability to represent and compute
equivariant polynomials of arbitrary orders, a fundamental requirement for capturing the complex
relationships within geometric graphs.
To build a neural layer capable of expressing these equivariant polynomials, one might turn to ten-
sorized graph neural networks (Maron et al., 2018), which provide a generalization of polynomial
neural networks (Kileel et al., 2019) while preserving permutation invariance. However, we imme-
diately encounter two significant practical challenges:
1. The dimension of the tensor representation, required for learning transformations between these
polynomials, scales as O(dN ×dN). In practice, this dimension becomes prohibitively large, neces-
sitating effective truncation techniques.
2. The architecture of tensorized graph neural networks does not align with the spatial and temporal
aggregation scheme introduced in Section 2.1, creating a challenge for the expression of higher-order
geometric tensors within Equations 1 and 4 with a well-controlled truncation parameter.
A natural question we may ask is: why do we need to model and compute higher-order geomet-
ric tensors? A key insight is captured in the concept of “frame transition”, one of the essential
building blocks for constructing expressive equivariant GNNs. The frame transition (FT) encodes
critical information, such as the torsion angle between chemical bonds in molecular structures. For
instance, in scenarios involving shared atoms connected by k bonds, the computation of frame tran-
sitions necessitates a quadratic complexity of O(k2). Frame transitions, however, can be efficiently
represented as rank-two polynomials by introducing node-wise equivariant frames (see Appendix
A.3).
FT offers a concrete example to underscore the importance of higher-order geometric tensors in
modeling complex relationships within geometric graphs. Moreover, many real-world problems,
such as solving the Schr¨odinger equation in quantum chemistry, involve Hamiltonian operators with
many-body interactions up to the fourth order. In the quantum realm, the Density Matrix Renor-
malization Group (DMRG) algorithm plays a critical role for approximately solving such systems,
as well as offering a theoretical guarantee on the accuracy of truncation in complex Hamiltonian
operators.
Therefore, the motivation behind the development of our equivariant Matrix Product State (MPS)-
based message-passing method, inspired by the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG)
algorithm, lies in addressing the challenge of effectively and efficiently modeling many-body rela-
tionships and symmetries in geometric graphs. To embark on this journey, we establish a crucial
link between the aggregation mechanisms described in Equations 1 and 4 with the renormalization
procedures employed in DMRG.
5

3.1
MATRIX PRODUCT OPERATOR AS A GENERAL RENORMALIZATION TECHNOLOGY
In this section, we elaborate on the integration of the matrix product state (MPS) to facilitate the
realization of the spatial mixing operator HN(xt−1
i
) and the temporal mixing module.
From Equation 2, the operator HN(xt−1
i
) essentially performs a parameterized tensor contraction
operation, possibly with non-linearity, utilizing the concatenation of each node’s neighbors: |x0⟩⊗
· · · ⊗|xn⟩, where {|x0⟩, . . . , |xn⟩} represents the vector embeddings of the neighboring nodes. It’s
worth noting that tensor contractions within the context of a given tensor network structure remain
a subject of active research in the physics community. Here, we briefly mention two standard tensor
contraction algorithms: 1. Time-Evolving Block Decimation (TEBD, Suzuki (1976)); 2. Density
Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG, White (1993)).
While both algorithms can be adapted into a deep neural network framework (with time in TEBD
roughly corresponding to the layer index in deep learning), DMRG is better suited for fitting the tra-
ditional message-passing scheme. More precisely, in TEBD, each contraction operation will double
the dimension virtual indexes. Therefore, to derive a node representation from it, a subsequent com-
pression (pooling) is usually required (see Verstraete et al. (2004) for an illustration). Conversely,
DMRG defines an effective Hamiltonian operator for each node by renormalizing the global in-
formation of other body states, aligning well with the form of HN(xt−1
i
). We provide an illustration
in our framework for DMRG in Appendix A.1. Given the complexity of geometric graph scenar-
ios, where spatial mixing necessitates HN(xt−1
i
) to be both permutation and SE(3) equivariant, we
reserve the detailed implementation for the subsequent section.
As for the layer aggregation step 4, it inherently possesses a renormalization direction from t −1
to t, proceeding through the layers until the final layer is reached. To implement this module, we
adapt the 1-dimensional aResMPS introduced in Meng et al. (2023). Specifically, let v0
n represent
the initial node embedding (commonly a one-hot embedding in our experiments), and xl denote the
node representation for the l-th layer. The layer aggregation formula Ψ(v0
n, x1
n, . . . , xL
n) is defined
iteratively as follows:
vl+1
nal+1 = vl
nal + σ
 X
alsl
vl
nalxl
nsl
ϕl
alslal+1
Z(l)
+ bl
al+1
!
.
(9)
In this equation, the three-order tensor ϕl
alslal+1 represents the parameterized matrix product oper-
ator for aggregating the previous representation and the newly incoming representation xl
nsl, while
bl
al+1 denotes the bias for the l-th layer. From now on, Ψ(v0
n, x1
n, . . . , xL
n) is named as the temporal
aggregation kernel. Notably, Z(l) := ∥xl
nslϕl
alslal+1∥is utilized as a normalizing factor to main-
tain the scale of the aggregation. While it’s possible to address the scale exploration problem by
multiplying a small ϵ to xl
nsl, as discussed in (Meng et al., 2023), our empirical findings favor the
presented normalization strategy.
3.2
AN EQUIVARIANT MODIFICATION OF TENSOR NETWORKS
The application of the spatial aggregation module to geometric graphs introduces two key challenges
that need to be addressed: 1. Ensuring that the spatial aggregation remains invariant under the
permutation of nodes; 2. Assuring that the spatial aggregation remains equivariant when the input
embeddings are subjected to rotation.
Recalling the standard pipeline for mapping raw data to a tensor network (Stoudenmire & Schwab
(2016); Glasser et al. (2018)) (see also Table 1), the first feature mapping step involves lifting the
scalar-valued raw data, typically of low dimension, into a high-dimensional complex-valued vector
space. Formally, if we denote the scalar raw data as x, the mapped data φx can be represented as:
φx := φ1(x)e1(x) + · · · + φn(x)en(x).
(10)
In this equation, ei represents a set of basis vectors, and φi
x ∈C signifies the coefficients determined
by these basis vectors and the raw data x. This process is akin to projecting a quantum state into a
basis of a Hilbert space. When no SE(3) symmetry is involved, the basis vectors ei can be set as
ei = (0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0), allowing the coefficients φi
x to be directly fed into the tensor network. We
6

Figure 2:
The second step of spatial mixing: constructing the effective Hamiltonian operator by
contracting the embeddings of ϕs neighbor nodes with their matrix product state kernels. This
process is inspired by the sweeping procedure of DMRG, and the resulting operator acts on ϕs for
updating the representation. We note that the matrix-kernel of each node itself follows a matrix-
product structure. For a comparison with a similar figure, see Figure 4 in the appendix.
note that a good choice of the basis and its corresponding feature mapping may be crucial for the
final performance; see (Stoudenmire & Schwab, 2016; Glasser et al., 2018) for examples of feature
mapping.
However, when dealing with SE(3) transformations, it is imperative to ensure that the coefficients
φi
x remain invariant. To achieve this, the basis vectors ei(x) must exhibit invariance under SE(3)
transformations. This geometric invariance is characterized as follows:
x →gx ⇒ei(x) →gei(gx).
(11)
For each basis vector, this transformation must hold for every g ∈SE(3). Notably, such invariant
frames exist for each node, and an example is provided in Appendix A.3. In the context of a geomet-
ric graph, we initially obtain three coefficients φi
x for each node x. These three invariant coefficients
can subsequently be embedded into a high-dimensional representation as usual vector embeddings.
In conclusion, we achieve SE(3) equivariance by expressing the equivariant 3D coordinates by
equivariant bases, which is also called Scalarization in (Du et al., 2023). The formulas of con-
structing edge- and node-wise equivariant frames out of a geometric graph are provided in (), see
also (13) and (14) of (Du et al., 2023).
Remark on the output
In the context of geometric graphs, the desired output may encompass
invariant scalars or equivariant vector fields. Given that the input embedding of our spatial mix-
ing module is inherently invariant, and the matrix product state is designed to transform invariant
quantities into invariant quantities, the output naturally inherits this invariance property. However,
if an equivariant output is desired, it can be achieved by pairing the original output with equivariant
frames once again. For detailed information on this process, please refer to the vectorization block
in (Du et al., 2022) (formula (6)).
Parameterization of the spatial aggregation kernel
Following the invariant feature mapping step
10, we obtain a feature embedding ϕ(x) = {ϕi(x)}d
i=1 for each node x. Then, we further introduce
its complex conjugate ¯ϕ(x) = {¯ϕi(x)}d
i=1 as the input of the spatial aggregation kernel. Now we
consider the aggregation from the node i’s neighbors indexed by j to i itself. Fixing an edge eij, the
7

edge-wise spatial aggregation kernel is parameterized as a matrix product operator with one virtual
leg and four physical legs:
Kabmn(eij) =
X
σ
Gσ
ab · Aσ
mn(eij),
(12)
where σ denotes the virtual dimension within each aggregation kernel, and is usually taken to be
small for a better efficient-expressiveness trade-off. Note that index (a, b) will be contracted with
the embedding (ϕ(x), ¯ϕ(x)), and the A(eij) is paramterized by a standard Hypernet (Ha et al., 2017)
with respect to the edge feature eij. In this paper, we will apply a specific frame transition feature
(Appendix A.3) as the default edge feature. Then, the “renormalization” direction is along the index
(m, n):
Rm0nN−1(i) =
X
n0,...,mN−1
[ϕa(0)Kabm0n0(ei0)¯ϕb(0)] · · · [ϕa(j)Kabmjnj(eij)¯ϕb(j)] · · · ,
(13)
where we denote the virtual dimension of mi, ni by χ. From the formula, the two-rank tensor
Rm0nN−1(i) aggregates the information from the neighbor of node i. Finally, the effective Hamilto-
nian operator ˆHi with respect to i is formulated as:
ˆHab(i) =
X
m,n
RmnSnm
ab ,
(14)
where S is a node kernel that may depend on node i and the layer index t. Now, we obtain the
MPS-based aggregation formula that replaces Equation 2:
xt
i = ˆHi(xt−1
i
) =
X
b
ˆHab(i)(ϕb(xt−1
i
)).
(15)
In conclusion, besides {A(eij} which is parameterized by a neural network, {Rmn}, {Gσ
ab} are also
tensor parameters.
Permutation symmetry
In the context of a general graph (V, E) with |v| = N nodes, there is no
inherent natural ordering between nodes, that is the mapping f from the input to the output satisfies:
f(. . . , xi, . . . , xj, . . . ) = f(. . . , xj, . . . , xi, . . . ), for ∀1 < i, j < N.
This permutation symmetry complicates the parameterization of the matrix product state via induc-
tion from 1 to N for the spatial mixing module. However, geometric graphs offer an advantage:
they possess an intrinsic order for a given node’s neighbors based on Euclidean distances (which
also fits the locality anstz in quantum many body systems). Specifically, for nodes x and y within
the neighborhood of node z (x, y ∈N(z)), we can establish an order such that x precedes y if
d(x, z) < d(y, z). In other words, we assign a sequential order on neighborhoods according to a
distance function, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Nevertheless, a challenge arises when multiple points lie within a ball of the same radius around
node z. In such cases, where d(x, z) = d(y, z), the principle of permutation symmetry requires that
the contraction of x and y with the matrix product kernel remains commutable:
φm
x φm′
y Kmn
ab (ezx)Km′n′
bc
(ezy) ¯φn
x ¯φn′
y = φm
x φm′
y Km′n′
bc
(ezy)Kmn
ab (ezx) ¯φn
x ¯φn′
y .
A sufficient condition for this commutativity constraint to hold is that the matrices M σ
ab(x) and
M σ′
bc (y) inside Equation 12 are diagonalizable under the same unitary transformation for all values
of σ:
Gσ
ab(x) = Udiag(x)U ∗
and
Gσ′
bc(y) = Udiag(y)U ∗.
(16)
Remarkably, this condition is both sufficient and necessary when Kmn
ab (x) and Km′n′
bc
(y) are param-
eterized by normal matrices. Furthermore, the commutativity property implies permutation symme-
try, as the permutation group can be generated by transpositions. Combining Equations 15 and 16,
we provide a visual illustration of our equivariant MPS-based message passing in Figure 2.
8

Figure 3:
Stacking each spatial and temporal layer will form our quantum inspired deep neural
network architecture. We also add the standard residual and layer-normalization blocks as a node
update between each layer (Vaswani et al., 2023).
3.3
DEEP ARCHITECTURES
In the previous section, we introduced a novel spatial aggregation method SpaTea based on Matrix
Product States (MPS). This method serves as an extension of the traditional Message Passing Neural
Network (MPNN), as described in Equation 2, from one layer (t −1) to the next layer (t). By
stacking multiple layers of matrix product spatial and temporal mixing modules, we can construct
a deep Matrix Product Neural Network for geometric graphs. We provide a general visualization of
our deep architecture in Figure 3. Notably, the node update layer and the final output layer remain
to be determined. As demonstrated in the previous section, the output of our matrix product layers
exhibits SE(3) invariance. On the other hand, the original node update layer and the final output
layer are ready to be modified for incorporating invariant and equivariant quantities such as vectors
and higher order tensors. This flexibility opens the door to integrating our temporal and spatial
modules into other equivariant neural networks.
Scalarization
It is important to note that the only requirement for incorporating our method
SpaTea is that the input of both the spatial and temporal mixing blocks should be SE(3) invari-
ant. This condition is automatically satisfied for invariant message-passing graph neural networks,
such as (Sch¨utt et al., 2018), (Unke et al., 2021). However, for architectures that involve equivariant
information, as seen in (Jing et al., 2020), (Satorras et al., 2021), and (Du et al., 2023), we employ
the scalarization method presented in (Du et al., 2022) to transform the equivariant components of
the representation.
For instance, the tensor product of spherical harmonics can be scalarized using techniques like CG-
decomposition, while the tensor product of vectors can be scalarized by projecting them onto the
node-equivariant frames (see Appendix A.3 for details). As we have demonstrated in the previous
section, this scalarization procedure can be seen as analogous to expressing a quantum state in a
physical basis, followed by feeding the coefficients of the expansion into a tensor network.
To obtain an equivariant output from our matrix product block, we implement the reverse process,
known as tensorization, as presented in Equation 6 of (Du et al., 2022). This allows us to recover
equivariant information from the transformed representations, ensuring compatibility with architec-
tures that involve both invariant and equivariant features. For example, let F represent an equivariant
9

operator, and O denote the output of our combined temporal and spatial modules. The integration
into an equivariant neural network can be mathematically expressed as:
. . .
Spatial MPS
−−−−−−→O
Tensorization
−−−−−−−→T (O)
Equivariant Layer
−−−−−−−−−→F(T (O))
Scalarization
−−−−−−→SF(T (O)) . . . ,
(17)
where S and T represent the scalarization and tensorization procedure, respectively. The formal for-
mulas of S and T are provided in Appendix A.3. This approach allows us to preserve the equivariant
nature of the network while benefiting from the spatial aggregation and temporal mixing capabili-
ties offered by our quantum-inspired matrix product layers. The flexibility of our approach and its
compatibility with existing equivariant neural network structures make it a promising candidate for
a wide range of applications.
3.4
ARCHITECTURE MERGING
Our tensor network based spatial and temporal aggregation method SpaTea is flexible for merging
into other deep architectures that can model euqivariant quantities like vector fields and Hamiltonian.
SpaTea Clofnet.
In this study, we explore the integration of our spatial and temporal mixing lay-
ers in Equation 9 with an equivariant final output layer, using the classical Clofnet (Du et al., 2022)
as our example. We replace the attention mechanism with edge features used in Clofnet’s MPNN
phase with our matrix-product spatial mixing module in Equation 14. Given that the node repre-
sentation in Clofnet is purely invariant, the temporal mixing component can be applied without any
modifications. Next, we inherit the equivariant output layer from Clofnet by pairing the invariant
output with edge frames, ensuring that equivariant features are appropriately maintained in the final
layers of the network.
SpaTea DeepH-E3.
DeepH-E3 (Gong et al., 2023) is invented as an advanced deep neural artite-
ture for predicting the DFT-Hamiltonian. Different from equivariant vector fields, DFT-Hamiltonian
tansforms according to higher dimensional group representations of SO(3)/O(3). DeepH-E3 in-
corporates both invariant and equivariant components in its message-passing phase and edge up-
date layers. We replace the invariant message-passing of DeepH-E3 by Equation 14 directly. The
edge-update layers with the Clebsch–Gordan coefficients are left unchanged to make sure that our
method’s output respects Hamiltonian’s symmetry.
We note that detailed formal formulas for both SpaTea Clofnet and SpaTea DeepH-E3 are provided
in Appendix A.3.
3.5
DISCUSSION
From our detailed construction of spatial and temporal aggregation method, the matrix product con-
sists of polynomials for each component of the node-wise vector embedding ϕa(j), where index j
is ranged from the neighbors of a given node. Suppose the initial feature of node i is a scalar xi,
and ϕa(j) consists of monomials: ϕa(j) := {1, xi, . . . , xn
i }, then we can easily conclude that for
an infinite virtual dimension χ of formula 13, the spatial temporal aggregation is able to express
many-body polynomials up to an arbitrary order. The similar conclusion holds for the temporal
aggregation, thus lead to a more powerful READ-OUT function of different layers than traditional
layer aggregations. On the other hand, we usually perform dimension cutoff for the virtual index
χ following the classical tensor network algorithms for modeling quantum systems (Ba˜nuls, 2023),
which leads to the following additional privileges.
Quantum privilege
From a quantum computing perspective, our algorithm’s adaptability for im-
plementation as a classical-quantum hybrid algorithm (N et al., 2022) is significant. It opens the
door to utilizing the advantages of quantum computation in combination with the computational ef-
ficiency and easy compression of our quantum-inspired approach. Furthermore, the original inven-
tion of Matrix Product State (operator) aimed to efficiently compress many-body quantum states.
Consequently, our quantum-inspired algorithm is expected to inherit two valuable traits from the
quantum physics perspective:
1. Ease of Compression: Like its quantum counterpart, our algorithm allows for efficient compres-
sion by cutting off the dimension of χ for each layer, reducing the computational complexity and
memory requirements for distilling our MPS-based large pre-trained model.
10

2. Quantum-Compatible: The classical-quantum hybrid algorithm in a quantum computer setting
can also be implemented, taking advantage of the quantum-inspired nature of our approach.
To create a parameterized version of the tensor network for efficient compression, we must param-
eterize our spatial and temporal matrix product states in a canonical form, specifically the central-
orthogonal form. The five necessary conditions for the central-orthogonal form are elaborated in
the appendix. It is essential to understand that all tensors can be represented in a central-orthogonal
form through tensor-train decomposition. This means that not only our matrix-product state-based
algorithm but also all tensorized neural networks can be transformed into this canonical form. How-
ever, this transformation process involves flattening N −1 dimensions’ indices and performing the
QR decomposition (Wendland, 2017).
It’s worth mentioning that ordinary neural networks can also be compressed by tensor networks
by reshaping the linear layers, see Gao et al. (2019); Liu & Ng (2022). On the other hand, since
our modules possess an explicit matrix-product structure, we can obtain their canonical form by
individually conducting local Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) for each kernel k(eij). The
detail is left in Appendix 20.
4
EXPERIMENT
To underscore the effectiveness of our geometric graph tensor network, we conducted comprehen-
sive assessments across three intricate many-body system prediction tasks, encompassing both dy-
namical state prediction and property prediction. Given the inherent entanglement within these
systems, we assert that the utilization of tensor network-based spatial and temporal aggregations,
as explicated in our methodology section, surpasses the efficacy of conventional geometric Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs). This approach allows us to address two distinct types of geometric sym-
metries: many-body dynamcis and quantum tensors.
4.1
NEWTON DYNAMICS PREDICTION
In this experiment, we employ the SpaTea Clofnet, as detailed in Section 3.4, to predict future po-
sitions of synthetic many-body systems driven by Newtonian force fields. This task is inherently
equivariant, as any rotations or translations applied to the initial system state yield identical trans-
formations on the future system positions.
Following the setup proposed in (Fuchs et al., 2020; Du et al., 2022), we consider a 20-body charged
system controlled by pre-designed Newtonian force fields. We present three intricate force fields
following (Du et al., 2022) (formulas in (44), (45), and (46)), despite their two-body nature. Our goal
is to forecast the future positions of particles in these many-body systems, which exhibit complex
entanglement. Consequently, we anticipate that our SpaTea Clofnet outperforms Clofnet in these
scenarios.
Dataset
The three systems under evaluation each consist of 20 nodes (particles) and are influenced
by electrostatic force fields (denoted as ES(20)), an additional gravity field (denoted as G+ES(20)),
and a Lorentz-like force field (denoted as L+ES(20)). We generated these SE(3)-equivariant datasets
using the descriptions and source code from (Du et al., 2022), with each dataset comprising 7,000
total trajectories. Results are presented in terms of mean squared error (MSE) between a method’s
node position predictions on the test dataset and the corresponding ground-truth node positions after
1,000 timesteps. Additionally, results for a 40-body system are provided in the appendix.
Results
Besides the standard baselines provided in (Du et al., 2022), we add a new equivariant
model GCPNet following (Morehead & Cheng, 2022). The results are provided in Table 2. As we
can see from the table, SpaTea Clofnet achieves supreme results for all the three dynamical sce-
narios, indicating that our spatial and temporal aggregations based on tensor-network are effective.
For example, in the cases of G+ES(20) and L+ES(20), our method enhances the performance of
the state-of-the-art approach ClofNet, reducing the error from 0.009 to 0.0076 and from 0.023 to
0.0189, respectively. These improvements correspond to a notable reduction in errors of 15% and
17% for the two cases.
11

Table 2: MSE for future position prediction over four datasets.
Model
ES(20)
G+ES(20)
L+ES(20)
GNN
0.0720
0.0721
0.0908
TFN
0.0794
0.0845
0.1243
SE3 Transformer
0.1349
0.1000
0.1438
Radial Field
0.0377
0.0399
0.0779
EGNN
0.0128
0.0118
0.0368
GCPNet
0.0077
0.0001
0.0172
ClofNet
0.0079
0.009
0.0230
SpaTea Clofnet
0.0076
0.0076
0.0189
Table 3: MAE for DFT Hamiltonian matrix elements averaged over atom-pairs of MoS2. Unit:
mev.
Model
Mo-Mo
Mo-S
S-Mo
S-S
DeepH
1.3
1.0
0.8
0.7
DeepH-E3
0.63
0.57
0.56
0.46
SpaTea DeepH-E3
0.47
0.38
0.38
0.29
4.2
QUANTUM TENSOR PREDICTION
In this section, we apply the SpaTea DeepH-E3 as discussed in Section 3.4, which is modified
from the DeepH-E3 model in (Gong et al., 2023) for predicting the Hamiltonian tensor of density
functional theory HDF T . We provide the detail of how to incorporate our spatial and temporal
matrix-product method into the DeepH-E3 model in (Gong et al., 2023) in Appendix A.3. In a
nutshell, HDF T is an equivariant physical tensor that transforms according to the representation
theory of O(3). More precisely, HDF T = {Hip1,jp2}l1l2
m1m2, where i, j are the body index, p is
the multiplicity index, and l, m are the angular momentum quantum number and its corresponding
magnetic quantum number (which is necessary for identifying a spherical harmonic function). For
the reader’s convenience, we copy the transformation rule of HDF T :
 H′
ip1,jp2
l1l2
m1m2 =
l1
X
m′
1=−l1
l2
X
m′
2=−l2
Dl1
m1m′
1(R)Dl2
m2m′
2(R)∗(Hip1,jp2)l1l2
m′
1m′
2 ,
(18)
where R is any rotation matrix and Dl
mm′(R) is the corresponding Wigner D-matrix.
Dataset
We test our model’s performance following the setting in Li et al. (2022); Gong et al.
(2023). The datasets are comprised of DFT supercell calculation results of MoS2, and different
geometric configurations are sampled from ab initio molecular dynamics. Five hundred structures
with 5 × 5 supercells are generated by ab initio molecular dynamics performed by VASP with PAW
pseudopotential and PBE functional.
Results
The test results are summarized in Table 3 and compared with those of the original DeepH
and DeepH-E3. Our experiments show that the mean absolute errors (MAEs) of Hamiltonian matrix
elements averaged over atom pairs are all within a fraction of a meV. We rerun the DeepH-E3 exper-
iment with the same hyper-parameters as Gong et al. (2023) for 1000 epochs with Adam optimizer
and ReduceLROnPlateau as our learning rate scheduler. As we can see from the table, our method
consistently delivers superior results across all cases, showcasing a substantial margin of improve-
ment. For example,Our strategy outperforms the DeepH-E3 method by 25%, 33%, 32%, and 36% in
the Mo-Mo, Mo-S, S-Mo, and S-S cases, respectively. Furthermore, our method exhibits significant
improvements over DeepH, with enhancements of 63%, 62%, 52%, and 58% for the Mo-Mo, Mo-S,
S-Mo, and S-S orbitals, respectively.
12

5
RELATED WORK
We here extend the discussions on related works presented in the Introduction and Preliminaries
sections.
The intersection of tensor networks and deep learning has witnessed significant developments in
recent years. For instance, modeling sequential data, such as time series and natural language, as a
long-ranged tensor has demonstrated its effectiveness in uncovering intricate correlations among se-
quential tokens (Tjandra et al., 2016; Goeßmann et al., 2020; Pestun & Vlassopoulos, 2017; Huang
et al., 2017). Notably, some research has adopted the spatial and temporal terminologies for model-
ing space-time scenarios (Zhou et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022), aligning with how traditional Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNN) (O’Shea & Nash, 2015)), and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN),
including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Sherstinsky, 2020), approach these aspects. CNN
treats spatial information as regular regions in a grid mesh, a contrast to our irregular graph-based
setting. On the other hand, RNN interprets temporal aspects as the sequential order of data in a
sequence. In fact, when stacking an infinite number of layers with residual connections, the limit
of this process becomes a temporal Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE), as seen in Neural ODE
(Chen et al., 2018). On the other hand, the spatial and temporal design is intrinsically embedded in
our model, regardless of the data types.
In our research, we introduce the Matrix-Product-State as an effective approach for tackling the ten-
sor modeling required by the Geometric Universality Theorem in (Du et al., 2022), while circum-
venting the exponential wall issue. We provide a concrete example of how many-body entangled
geometric information affects the geometric expressiveness in appendix A.3. Besides geometric
graph data, other modalities of data like natural language also reveals the entangled property, see
Wang et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2019). For a theoretical understanding, the reader can consult
the tensorized tangent kernel theory (Guo & Draper, 2021) for measuring the expressiveness of
1-dimensional tensor network in the infinite regime. Analogous to the impossibility of increasing
the width of a neural network to infinity, the virtual index of our parameterized Matrix-Product-
State also remains finite. Consequently, understanding the expressiveness of this finite setting is a
challenging problem. It is worth noting that exploring entanglement entropy, which can be easily
calculated if we parameterize the Matrix-Product-State in the canonical form, and its relationship
with the area law (Decker et al., 2022), can provide insights into the expressiveness of various tensor
networks and autodecoders based on tensor networks (Eisert et al., 2010).
Complex-Valued Neural Network
After feature mapping, all tensors are transformed into
complex-valued tensors, and the transformation map between tensors is also complex-valued. How-
ever, tensor networks and learning algorithms based on quantum computing are not the sole method
for constructing complex-valued transformations. Architectures like Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)
also employ complex-valued Fourier transforms (Li et al., 2020), and Rajesh et al. (2021) introduced
the imaginary part into the Vision Transformer to convey the quantum “phase” information between
pixels.
Equivariant Graph Neural Network
Recall that, our spatial and temporal modules based on
Matrix-Product-State can seamlessly integrate into prevalent equivariant neural networks. At a high
level, our modules can replace any equivariant aggregation, provided the input remains invariant.
This adaptation extends to models like Schnet (Sch¨utt et al., 2021), Spookey-net (Unke et al., 2021),
and others. For a comprehensive categorization, the readers can consult (Liu et al., 2023). Beyond
invariant aggregation, an alternative research avenue leverages spherical harmonics as equivariant
embeddings and transformations. In this paper, the tensor network’s input comprises the invariant
coefficients of an equivariant quantum state, expanded through an equivariant basis. Besides our in-
variant feature mapping approach, another common approach for implementing non-parameterized
tensor networks in physics systems with gauge symmetry is to directly input the equivariant quantum
state. However, this approach constrains the tensor network’s design, as it must be SE(3) equivariant,
exemplified by (Weichselbaum, 2012; Slagle, 2023).
13

6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
We introduced SpaTea, a novel equivariant Matrix Product State (MPS)-based message-passing
strategy. SpaTea utilizes an efficient implementation of tensor contraction to effectively model intri-
cate many-body relationships, avoiding mean-field approximations and capturing symmetries within
geometric graphs. SpaTea also enables a straightforward substitution of the standard message-
passing and layer-aggregation modules inherent in geometric GNNs, requiring minimal effort.
Through empirical verification, we demonstrated the superior performance of SpaTea in predict-
ing classical Newton systems and quantum tensor Hamiltonian matrices.
We posit that SpaTea’s adaptability to existing GNNs and modeling capabilities beyond mean-filed
approxmiation make it a versatile tool applicable across diverse fields, including materials science,
chemistry, physics, drug discovery, quantum computing, and beyond. For example, the definition
of the Matrix-Product-State underscores that matrix product operations establish entanglement be-
tween individual tensor states. Notably, the entanglement procedure is vital in quantum computing
and is realized through quantum circuits. Consequently, effectively parameterized tensor network
architectures serve as a guiding principle for shaping parameterized quantum circuits, as detailed in
(Huggins et al., 2019b). Reciprocally, every quantum circuit can be represented as a tensor network,
with the bond dimension contingent on the circuit’s width and connectivity. The quantum tangent
kernel method (Shirai et al., 2021) also leverages these concepts. We detail the possible extensions
of our method along this direction in Appendix A.2.
