Diverse Landmark Sampling from Determinantal Point Processes
for Scalable Manifold Learning
Christian Wachinger
Polina Golland
CSAIL, MIT
MGH, Harvard Medical School
CSAIL, MIT
Abstract
High computational costs of manifold learn-
ing prohibit its application for large point
sets.
A common strategy to overcome this
problem is to perform dimensionality reduc-
tion on selected landmarks and to succes-
sively embed the entire dataset with the
Nystr¨om method. The two main challenges
that arise are: (i) the landmarks selected in
non-Euclidean geometries must result in a
low reconstruction error, (ii) the graph con-
structed from sparsely sampled landmarks
must approximate the manifold well.
We
propose the sampling of landmarks from de-
terminantal distributions on non-Euclidean
spaces.
Since current determinantal sam-
pling algorithms have the same complexity as
those for manifold learning, we present an ef-
ﬁcient approximation running in linear time.
Further, we recover the local geometry after
the sparsiﬁcation by assigning each landmark
a local covariance matrix, estimated from the
original point set.
The resulting neighbor-
hood selection based on the Bhattacharyya
distance improves the embedding of sparsely
sampled manifolds.
Our experiments show
a signiﬁcant performance improvement com-
pared to state-of-the-art landmark selection
techniques.
1
Introduction
Spectral methods are central for a multitude of appli-
cations in machine learning, statistics, and computer
vision, such as dimensionality reduction [30, 34], clas-
siﬁcation [25, 33], and segmentation [28, 31]. A lim-
iting factor for the spectral analysis is the computa-
tional cost of the eigen decomposition. To overcome
this limitation, the Nystr¨om method [36] is commonly
applied to approximate the spectral decomposition of
the Gramian matrix. A subset of rows/columns is se-
lected and based on the eigen decomposition of the
resulting small sub-matrix, the spectrum of the origi-
nal matrix can be approximated. While the Nystr¨om
extension is the standard method for the matrix re-
construction, the crucial part is the subset selection.
In early work [36], uniform sampling without replace-
ment was proposed. This was followed by numerous
alternatives including K-means clustering [37], greedy
approaches [23, 14] , and volume sampling [4, 11]. A
recent comparison of several approaches is presented
in [20].
Of particular interest for subset selection is vol-
ume sampling [11], equivalent to determinantal sam-
pling [4], because reconstruction error bounds exist.
This method is, however, not used in practice because
of the high computational complexity of sampling from
the underlying distributions [20]. Independently, de-
terminantal point processes (DPPs) have been pro-
posed recently for tracking and pose estimation [18].
They were originally designed to model the repulsive
interaction between particles.
DPPs are well suited
for modeling diversity in a point set. A sampling al-
gorithm for DPPs was presented in [17, 18], which has
complexity O(n3) for n points. Since this algorithm
has the same complexity as the spectral analysis, it
cannot be directly used as a subset selection scheme.
In this paper, we focus on nonlinear dimensional-
ity reduction for large datasets via manifold learning.
Popular manifold learning techniques include kernel
PCA [27], Isomap [30], and Laplacian eigenmaps [6].
All of these methods are based on a kernel matrix of
size O(n2) that contains the information about the
pairwise relationships between the input points. The
spectral decomposition of the kernel matrix leads to
the low-dimensional embedding of the points.
For
large n, one is interested in avoiding its explicit cal-
culation and storage.
In contrast to general rank-k
matrix approximation, this is possible by taking the
nature of the non-linear dimensionality reduction into
account and relating the entries of the kernel matrix
arXiv:1503.03506v1  [cs.LG]  11 Mar 2015

Sampling from DPPs for Scalable Manifold Learning
directly to the original point set.
Consequently, we propose to perform DPP sampling
on the original point set to extract a diverse set of land-
marks. Since the input points lie in a non-Euclidean
space, ignoring the underlying geometry leads to poor
results. To account for the non-Euclidean geometry
of the input space, we replace the Euclidean distance
with the geodesic distance along the manifold, which
is approximated by the graph shortest path distance.
Due to the high complexity of DPP sampling, we de-
rive an eﬃcient approximation that runs in O(ndk),
with input dimensionality d and subset cardinality k.
The algorithm restricts the updates to be local, which
enables sampling on complex geometries.
This, to-
gether with its low computational complexity, makes
the algorithm well suited for the subset selection in
large scale manifold learning.
A consequence of the landmark selection is that the
manifold is less densely sampled than before, making
its approximation with neighborhood graphs more dif-
ﬁcult. It was noted in [3], as a critical response to [30],
that the approximation of manifolds with graphs is
topologically unstable. In order to improve the graph
construction, we retain the local geometry around each
landmark by locally estimating the covariance matrix
on the original point set. This allows us to compare
multivariate Gaussian distributions with the Bhat-
tacharyya distance for neighborhood selection, yield-
ing improved embeddings. A shorter version of this
work was published in [32].
2
Background
We assume n points in high dimensional space
x1, . . . , xn ∈Rd and let X ∈Rd×n be the matrix
whose i-th column is the point xi.
Non-linear di-
mensionality reduction techniques are based on a pos-
itive semideﬁnite kernel K, with a typical choice of
Gaussian or heat kernel Ki,j = exp(−∥xi −xj∥2/2σ2).
The resulting kernel matrix is of size O(n2). Neces-
sary for spectral analysis is the eigen decomposition of
the kernel matrix, which has complexity O(n3). For
most techniques, it is only necessary to compute the
leading k eigenvectors.
The problem can therefore
also be considered as ﬁnding the best rank-k approx-
imation of the matrix K, with the optimal solution
Kk = Pk
i=1 λiuiu⊤
i , where λi is the i-th largest eigen-
value and ui is the corresponding eigenvector.
2.1
Nystr¨om Method
Suppose J ⊆{1, . . . , n} is a subset of the original point
set of size k and ¯J is its complement. We can reorder
the kernel matrix K such that
K =
KJ×J
KJ× ¯
J
K⊤
J× ¯
J
K ¯
J× ¯
J

,
˜K =
KJ×J
KJ× ¯
J
K⊤
J× ¯
J
K⊤
J× ¯
JK−1
J×JKJ× ¯
J

with ˜K being the matrix estimated via the Nystr¨om
method [36].
The Nystr¨om extension leads to the
approximation K ¯
J× ¯
J ≈K⊤
J× ¯
JK−1
J×JKJ× ¯
J. The ma-
trix inverse is replaced by the Moore-Penrose gen-
eralized inverse in case of rank deﬁciency.
The
Nystr¨om method leads to the minimal kernel comple-
tion [4] conditioned on the selected landmarks and has
been reported to perform well in numerous applica-
tions [10, 16, 24, 29, 36]. The challenge lies in ﬁnding
landmarks that minimize the reconstruction error
∥K −˜K∥tr = tr(K ¯
J× ¯
J) −tr(K⊤
J× ¯
JK−1
J×JKJ× ¯
J). (1)
The trace norm ∥.∥tr is applied because results only
depend on the spectrum due to its unitary invariance.
2.2
Annealed Determinantal Sampling
A large variety of methods have been proposed for
selecting the subset J.
For general matrix approx-
imation, this step is referred to as row/column se-
lection of the matrix K, which is equivalent to se-
lecting a subset of points X.
This property is im-
portant because it avoids explicit computation of the
O(n2) entries in the kernel matrix K. We focus on
volume sampling for subset selection because of its
theoretical advantages [11].
We employ the factor-
ization KJ×J = Y ⊤
J YJ, which exists because KJ is
positive semideﬁnite. Based on this factorization, the
volume Vol({Yi}i∈J) of the simplex spanned by the ori-
gin and the selected points YJ is calculated, which is
equivalent to the volume of the parallelepiped spanned
by YJ.
The subset J is then sampled proportional
to the squared volume.
This is directly related to
the calculation of the determinant with det(KJ×J) =
det(Y ⊤
J YJ) = det(YJ)2 = Vol2({Yi}i∈J). These ideas
were further generalized in [4] based on annealed de-
terminantal distributions
ps(J) ∝det(KJ×J)s = det(Y ⊤
J YJ)s = det(YJ)2s. (2)
This distribution is well deﬁned because the princi-
pal submatrices of a positive semideﬁnite matrix are
themselves positive semideﬁnite.
Varying the expo-
nent s ≥0 results in a family of distributions, model-
ing the annealing behavior as used in stochastic com-
putations.
For s = 0 this is equivalent to uniform
sampling [36]. In the following derivations, we focus on
s = 1. It was shown in [11] that for J ∼p(J), |J| = k
E
h
∥K −˜K∥tr
i
≤(k + 1)∥K −Kk∥2
F ,
(3)

Christian Wachinger, Polina Golland
where ˜K is the Nystr¨om reconstruction of the kernel
based on the subset J, Kk the best rank-k approxi-
mation achieved by selecting the largest eigenvectors,
and ∥.∥F the Frobenius norm. It was further shown
that the factor k+1 is the best possible for a k-subset.
Related bounds were presented in [5]. A further result
is that for any matrix K, there exist k + k(k + 1)/ϵ
rows whose span contains the rows of a rank-k matrix
˜Kk such that
∥K −˜Kk∥2
F ≤(1 + ε)∥K −Kk∥2
F .
(4)
This result establishes a connection between matrix
approximation and projective clustering, with the se-
lection of a subsets columns being similar to the con-
struction of a coreset [1, 15].
3
Method
In the following, we will ﬁrst analyze the sampling
from determinantal distributions on non-Euclidean ge-
ometries. Subsequently, we introduce an eﬃcient al-
gorithm for approximate DPP sampling on manifolds.
Finally, we present our approach for robust graph con-
struction on sparsely sampled manifolds.
3.1
DPP Sampling on Manifolds
As described in Section 2.2, sampling from determi-
nantal distributions is used for row/column selection.
Independently, determinantal point processes (DPPs)
were introduced for modeling probabilistic mutual ex-
clusion [22].
They present an attractive scheme for
ensuring diversity in the selected subset. An interest-
ing construction of DPPs is based on L-ensembles [9].
Given a positive semideﬁnite matrix L ∈Rn×n, the
likelihood for selecting the subset J ⊆{1, . . . , n} is
PL(J) = det(LJ×J)
det(L + I),
(5)
where I is the identity matrix and LJ×J is the sub-
matrix of L containing the rows and columns indexed
by J. Identifying the L-ensemble matrix L with the
kernel matrix K, we can apply DPPs to sample subsets
from the point set X.
To date, applications using determinantal point pro-
cesses have assumed Euclidean geometry [8, 18]. For
non-linear dimensionality reduction, we assume that
the data points lie on non-Euclidean spaces, such as
the Swiss roll in Fig. 1(a). To evaluate the performance
of DPPs on manifolds, we sample from the Swiss roll.
Since we know the construction rule in this case, we
can invert it and display the sampled 3D points in the
underlying 2D space. The result in Fig. 1(b) shows
that the inner part of the roll is almost entirely ne-
glected, as a consequence of not taking the manifold
structure into account. A common solution is to use
geodesic distances [30], which can be approximated
by the graph shortest path algorithm. Consequently,
we replace the Euclidean distance ∥.∥in the construc-
tion of the kernel matrix K with the geodesic distance
Ki,j = exp(−∥xi −xj∥2
geo/2σ2). The result is shown
in Fig. 1(c). We observe a clear improvement in the
diversity of the sampling, now also including points in
the interior part of the Swiss roll.
3.2
Eﬃcient Approximation of DPP
Sampling on Manifolds
We have seen in the last sections that it is possi-
ble to adapt determinantal sampling to non-Euclidean
geometries and that error characterizations for the
subset selection exist.
However, we are missing an
eﬃcient sampling algorithm for dealing with large
point sets. In [11], an approximative sampling based
on the Markov chain Monte Carlo method is pro-
posed to circumvent the combinatorial problem with
 n
k

possible subsets. Further approximations include
sampling proportional to the diagonal elements Kii
or its squared version K2
ii, leading to additive error
bounds [5, 13]. In [12], an algorithm is proposed that
yields a k! approximation to volume sampling, wors-
ening the approximation from (k + 1) to (k + 1)!.
Algorithm 1 DPP sampling equivalent to [18]
Require: Eigen decomposition of K: {(vi, λi)}n
i=1
1: for i = 1 to n do
2:
Add eigenvector vi with probability
λi
λi+1 to V
3: end for
4: B = V ⊤
5: for 1 to |V | do
6:
Select i ∈1 . . . n with probability P(i) ∝∥Bi∥2
7:
J ←J ∪i
8:
Bj ←Proj⊥BiBj for all j ∈{1, . . . , n}
9: end for
10: return J
An exact sampling algorithm for DPPs was presented
in [17, 18], which requires the eigen decomposition of
K = Pn
i=1 λiviv⊤
i . We state an equivalent reformula-
tion of this sampling algorithm in Algorithm 1. First,
eigenvectors are selected proportional to the magni-
tude of their eigenvalues and stored as columns in V .
Assuming m vectors are selected then V ∈Rn×m. By
setting B = V ⊤, we denote the rows of V as Bi ∈Rm.
In each iteration, we select one of the n points where
point i is selected proportional to the squared norm
∥Bi∥2. The point is added to the subset J. After the
selection of i, all vectors Bj are projected to the or-

Sampling from DPPs for Scalable Manifold Learning
(a) Swiss Roll
(b) Standard
(c) Geodesic
(d) Eﬃcient
Figure 1: DPP sampling from 1,000 points lying on a manifold. We show results for standard DPP sampling,
geodesic DPP sampling, and eﬃcient DPP sampling. Note that the sampling is performed in 3D, but we can
plot the underlying 2D manifold by reversing the construction of the Swiss roll. Geodesic and eﬃcient sampling
yields a diverse subset from the manifold.
thogonal space of Bi. Since Proj⊥BiBi = 0, the same
point is almost surely not selected twice. The update
formulation diﬀers from [18], where an orthonormal
basis of the eigenvectors in V to the i-th basis vector
ei ∈Rn is constructed. Both formulations are equiva-
lent but provide a diﬀerent point of view on the algo-
rithm. The modiﬁcation is, however, essential for the
justiﬁcation of the proposed eﬃcient sampling proce-
dure. The following proposition characterizes the be-
havior of the update in the algorithm.
Proposition 1. Let Bi, Bj ∈Rm \ {0} be two non-
zero vectors in Rm, and θ = ∠(Bi, Bj) be the angle
between them. Then
∥Proj⊥BiBj∥2 = ∥Bj∥2 sin2 θ,
(6)
where Proj⊥BiBj is the the projection of Bj on the
subspace perpendicular to Bi. For Bi ̸= 0 and Bj = 0
the projection is ∥Proj⊥BiBj∥2 = 0.
We state the proof in the supplementary material.
Sampling from a determinantal distribution is not only
advantageous because of the presented error bounds
but it also makes intuitive sense that a selection of
a diverse set of points yields an accurate matrix re-
construction. The computational complexity of Algo-
rithm 1 is, however, similar or even higher than for
manifold learning because the spectral decomposition
of a dense graph is required, whereas Laplacian eigen-
maps operate on sparse matrices. An approach for ef-
ﬁcient sampling proposed in [18] works with the dual
representation of K = Y ⊤Y to obtain Q = Y Y ⊤, with
Q being hopefully smaller than the matrix K. Consid-
ering that we work with a Gaussian kernel matrix, this
factorization corresponds to the inner product in fea-
ture space φ(xi)⊤φ(xj) of the original points xi, xj. It
is noted in the literature that the Gaussian kernel cor-
responds to an inﬁnite dimensional feature space [27].
Since we work with symmetric, positive deﬁnite matri-
ces, we can calculate a Cholesky decomposition. How-
ever, the dual representation has the same size as the
original matrix and therefore yields no improvement.
Algorithm 2 Eﬃcient approximation of DPP sam-
pling
Require: Point set X, subset cardinality k, nearest
neighbors m, update function f
1: Initialize D = 1n
2: for 1 to k do
3:
Select i ∈1 . . . n with probability p(i) ∝Di
4:
J ←J ∪i
5:
Calculate ∆j = ∥xi −xj∥, ∀j ∈1 . . . n
6:
Set m nearest neighbors as neighborhood Ni
based on {∆j}j=1...n
7:
Dj ←Dj · f(∆j), ∀j ∈Ni
8:
Optional:
Calculate covariance Ci in local
neighborhood Ni around xi
9: end for
10: return J and optionally {Ci}i∈J
To cope with the high computational costs of exact
DPP sampling, we present an eﬃcient approximation
in Algorithm 2.
The computational complexity is
O(ndk). Vector D ∈Rn models the probabilities for
the selection of points as does ∥Bi∥2 in the original
DPP sampling algorithm. The algorithm proceeds by
sampling k points. Note that the cardinality of the
subset cannot be set in the original DPP sampling al-
gorithm, which led to the introduction of k-DPPs [19].
At each iteration we select one point xi with probabil-
ity p(i) ∝Di. Next we calculate distances {∆j}j=1...n
of the selected point xi to all points in X. Based on
these distances we identify a local neighborhood Ni of
m nearest neighbors around the selected point xi. The
update of the probabilities D is restricted to the neigh-
borhood Ni, which proves advantageous for sampling
on manifolds. In contrast, Algorithm 1 updates prob-
abilities for all points. If we are interested in achiev-

Christian Wachinger, Polina Golland
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
 
sin(x)2
1-exp(-x2)
Figure 2: Comparison of sin2(x) and (1 −exp(−x2))
used for f in Algorithm 2.
ing a similar behavior to Algorithm 1, the local neigh-
borhood should include all points. The update func-
tion f takes distances ∆as input, where we consider
f(∆) = sin2(∆/τ) and f(∆) = (1 −exp(−∆2/2σ2)),
as motivated below. In subsequent iterations of the
algorithm, points close xi will be selected with lower
probability.
We initialize the vector D = 1n, since it was noted
in [18] that the squared norm of the vectors ∥Bi∥2
gives rise initially to a fairly uniform distribution be-
cause no points have yet been selected. For the update
step, Proposition 1 implies that the update of the prob-
abilities for selecting a point changes with sin2(θ). The
angle θ = ∠(Bi, Bj) correlates strongly with the dis-
tance ∥Bi −Bj∥, since ∥Bj∥and ∥Bi∥are initially the
same. The selection of the eigenvectors in Algorithm 1
will most likely choose the ones with the largest eigen-
values. We can therefore draw the analogy to multi-
dimensional scaling (MDS) [35] with a Gaussian ker-
nel, where MDS selects the top eigenvectors.
Con-
sequently, vectors Bi correspond to low-dimensional
embeddings produced by multidimensional scaling of
original points xi. The characteristic property of MDS
is to preserve pairwise distances between the origi-
nal space and the embedding space, permitting the
approximation ∥Bi −Bj∥≈∥xi −xj∥. This allows
us to approximate the update dependent on the an-
gle θ by the distance of points in the original space,
sin2(θ) ≈sin2(∥xi −xj∥/τ). The scaling factor τ en-
sures that values are in the range [−π/2; π/2]. This
update is actually very similar to the Welsch function
(1 −exp(−∥xi −xj∥2/2σ2)), which is directly related
to the weights in the kernel matrix and is commonly
used in machine learning. We illustrate the similar-
ity of both functions in Fig. 2 and focus on the Welsch
function in our experiments. For subsequent iterations
of the algorithm, the assumption of a similar norm
of all vectors Bi is violated, because the projection
r	

r	

Figure 3: Two landmarks (crosses) selected in pre-
vious steps and two candidates for the current step
(discs). K-means++ selects both candidates equally
likely since they have the same distance r to the land-
mark (blue). The proposed algorithm more likely se-
lects the green point because also the black cross in-
ﬂuences the landmark selection, yielding an increase
in diversity.
on the orthogonal space changes their lengths. Note,
however, that this change is locally restricted around
the currently selected point. Since this region is less
likely to be sampled in the subsequent iterations, the
assumption still holds for parts of the space that con-
tain most probability.
Remark: The proposed algorithm bears similarities
to K-means++ [2], which replaces the initialization
through uniform sampling of K-means by a new seed-
ing algorithm. K-means++ seeding is a heuristic that
samples points based on the minimal distance to pre-
viously selected landmarks. Initially, when only one
landmark is selected, our proposed algorithm has a
nearly identical update rule for a maximal neighbor-
hood Ni. In later iterations, the algorithms diﬀer be-
cause K-means++ bases the selection only on the dis-
tance to the nearest landmark, while all landmarks
inﬂuence the probability space in our algorithm. Con-
sequently, our approach potentially yields subsets with
higher diversity, as illustrated in the Fig. 3.
3.3
Robust Landmark-based Graph
Construction
After selecting the landmarks, the next step in the
spectral analysis consists of building a graph that ap-
proximates the manifold. Common techniques for the
graph construction include selection of nearest neigh-
bors or ε-balls around each node.
Both approaches
require the setting of a parameter, either the number
of neighbors or the size of the ball, which is crucial
for the performance. Setting the parameter too low
leads to a large number of disconnected components,
while for many applications one is interested in having
all points connected to obtain a consistent embedding

Sampling from DPPs for Scalable Manifold Learning
of all points. Choosing too high values of the param-
eters leads to short cuts, yielding a bad approxima-
tion of the manifold. The appropriate selection of the
parameters is more challenging on sparsely sampled
manifolds. This is problematic for the subset selection
with consecutive Nystr¨om reconstruction because we
dramatically reduce the sampling rate to limit compu-
tational complexity.
To address this issue, we propose a new technique for
graph construction that takes the initial distribution
of the points into account. For each landmark xi, we
estimate the covariance matrix Ci around this point
from its nearest neighbors Ni, as indicated as optional
step in Algorithm 2. This corresponds to multivariate
Gaussian distributions G(xi, Ci) centered at the land-
mark. A commonly used distance to compare distri-
butions is the Bhattacharyya distance, which in case
of Gaussian distributions corresponds to
B(Gi, Gj) = 1
8(xi−xj)⊤C−1(xi−xj)+1
2 ln
 
|C|
p
|Ci||Cj|
!
,
(7)
with C = Ci+Cj
2
. This distance is less likely to produce
short cuts across the manifold because points that fol-
low the local geometry appear much closer than points
that are oﬀthe geometry. Consequently, we replace
the Euclidean distance for neighborhood selection in
manifold learning with the Bhattacharyya distance, as
schematically illustrated in Fig. 4. Space requirements
of this step are O(d2k).
An alternative for limited
space and large d is to only use the diagonal entries of
the covariance matrix, requiring O(dk). We summa-
rize all steps of the proposed scalable manifold learning
in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Summary of scalable manifold learning
1: Select landmarks with approximate DPP sampling
(Algorithm 2)
2: Construct neighborhood graph on landmarks with
Bhattacharyya distance (Equ. 7)
3: Calculate low-dimensional embedding based on
neighborhood graph
4: Embed non-landmark points by performing out-
of-sample extension with Nystr¨om method
4
Experiments
In our ﬁrst experiment, we show that the proposed eﬃ-
cient DPP sampling algorithm is well suited for subset
selection on non-Euclidean spaces. The beneﬁt for this
scenario is that we can restrict the update of the sam-
pling probability D to a local neighborhood Ni around
Figure 4:
Nearest neighbor selection with Bhat-
tacharyya distance.
Covariance matrices (ellipsoids)
are estimated for landmarks based on the original
point set.
Points marked as O and X have equal
Euclidean distance, easily leading to short cuts in
the neighborhood graph. The Bhattacharyya distance
considers the local geometry and is smaller for O than
for X, better approximating the geodesic distance.
the current point xi. This is in line with the motiva-
tion of many manifold learning algorithms, assuming
that the space behaves locally like a Euclidean space.
In our experiment, we set the local neighborhood Ni to
be the 20 nearest neighbors around the selected point
xi. The sampling result is shown in Fig. 1(d). We ob-
tain a point set with high diversity, covering the entire
manifold. This illustrates that the proposed algorithm
preserves the DPP characteristic on complex geome-
tries and is therefore appropriate for subset selection
in the context of non-linear dimensionality reduction.
In our second experiment, we quantify the recon-
struction error for matrix completion as formulated
in Equ. (1). We compare the eﬃcient DPP sampling
result with uniform sampling [36] and K-means clus-
tering with uniform seeding [37], which performed best
in several studies including a recent one [20]. More-
over, we compare to selecting the subset with the
K-means++ seeding and the K-means++ algorithm,
which we have not yet seen for landmark selection. We
construct a Gaussian kernel matrix from 1,000 points
on a Swiss roll (Fig. 1) and on a ﬁsh bowl (Fig. 5).
The ﬁsh bowl dataset is a punctured sphere proposed
in [26], which is sparsely sampled at the bottom and
densely at the top, as shown in the supplementary ma-
terial. We select subsets varying in size between 25
and 100 and set the parameters σ = 1 and m = 30
for the Swiss roll and σ = 1 and m = 150 for the
ﬁsh bowl.
Note that a further improvement can be
achieved by adapting these parameters to the size of

Christian Wachinger, Polina Golland
Data
Sampling
25
50
60
70
80
90
100
Swiss Roll
Uniform
70.384
8.006
4.838
2.785
1.676
0.731
0.442
K-means Uniform
28.124
3.848
2.319
1.393
0.756
0.403
0.235
K-means++ Seeding
50.114
5.832
3.033
1.655
1.013
0.683
0.347
K-means++
24.954
3.575
1.915
1.018
0.711
0.383
0.222
Eﬃcient DPP
33.036
3.371
1.466
0.844
0.488
0.312
0.202
Fish Bowl
Uniform
44.026
8.394
6.512
4.678
1.025
0.935
0.758
K-means Uniform
12.627
1.230
0.612
0.393
0.192
0.119
0.080
K-means++ Seeding
22.841
2.337
1.436
0.643
0.252
0.089
0.045
K-means++
11.503
0.859
0.402
0.150
0.096
0.039
0.021
Eﬃcient DPP
10.846
0.657
0.249
0.095
0.014
0.005
0.002
Table 1: Average reconstruction errors over 50 runs for several sampling schemes: uniform, K-means uniform,
K-means++ seeding, K-means++, and eﬃcient DPP. The subset sizes vary from 25 to 100. Best results are
highlighted in bold face.
Figure 5: Fish bowl dataset used for experiments. It is
a punctured sphere, which is sparsely sampled at the
bottom and densely at the top. Uniform sampling is
likely to pick points at the top, neglecting the bottom
part.
the subset. For smaller subsets, larger σ and m lead
to improvements. We show the average reconstruction
error for the diﬀerent methods and datasets in Table 1,
calculated over 50 diﬀerent runs. Generally, the perfor-
mance of uniform sampling is worst. The K-means++
seeding yields better results. K-means improves the
results on both initializations, where K-means++ ben-
eﬁts from the better seeding. The diverse set of land-
marks selected with eﬃcient DPP sampling leads to
the lowest average reconstruction errors for almost all
settings.
In our third experiment, we perform manifold learning
with Laplacian eigenmaps on a point set consisting of
10 million points lying on a Swiss roll. The dataset
is too large to apply manifold learning directly. We
select 2,500 landmark points with the eﬃcient DPP
sampling algorithm and estimate the local covariance
matrices, which we feed into the manifold learning al-
gorithm. We compare the the graph construction with
Euclidean and Bhattacharyya neighborhood selection.
The graph construction yields a weight matrix W and
the corresponding degree matrix Dj,j = P
i Wi,j. The
weight matrix W is a sparse version of the kernel ma-
trix KJ×J, where the sparsity is controlled by the num-
ber of nearest neighbors in the graph. The generalized
eigenvalue problem solved in Laplacian eigenmaps is
(D −W)φj = λjDφj,
(8)
with eigenvalues λj and eigenvectors φj. The l eigen-
vectors corresponding to the l smallest non-zero eigen-
values Λj,j = λj, j = 1, . . . l constitute the embed-
ding in l-dimensional space, ΦJ = [φ1, . . . , φl]. Fig. 6
shows the low-dimensional embedding in 2D for Eu-
clidean (ﬁrst row) and Bhattacharyya neighborhood
selection (second row). We vary the number of near-
est neighbors in the graph from 25 to 500. The re-
sults show that the Bhattacharyya based neighbor-
hood selection is much more robust with respect to
the number of neighbors. Moreover, we notice that for
Euclidean neighborhood selection the points seem to
cluster along stripes. While we observe this eﬀect also
on the Bhattacharyya based embeddings, it is much
less pronounced.
4.1
Image Data
After having evaluated each of the steps of the pro-
posed approach separately, we now present results for
scalable manifold learning on image data. We work
with two datasets, one consisting of handwritten dig-
its and a second one consisting of patches extracted
from 3D medical images.
Each dataset is too large
to apply manifold learning directly. Consequently, we
select landmarks with the discussed method, perform
manifold learning on the landmarks with the Bhat-
tacharyya distance, and use the Nystr¨om method to

Sampling from DPPs for Scalable Manifold Learning
(a) 25
(b) 60
(c) 200
(d) 500
Figure 6: Selection of 2,500 landmarks from a set of 10 million points. Embedding of landmarks to 2D with
Laplacian eigenmaps. Results for Euclidean (ﬁrst row) and Bhattacharyya neighborhood selection (second row)
are shown. Varying the number of nearest neighbors between 25 and 500, we observe that Bhattacharyya based
embeddings are more robust to the parameter setting and of higher quality.
embed the entire point set. We only consider the di-
agonal entries of the covariance matrices due to space
limitations. Given the low-dimensional embedding of
the landmarks ΦJ ∈Rk×l and the diagonal matrix of
eigenvalues Λ ∈Rl×l, we use out-of-sample extension
with the Nystr¨om method to calculate the embedding
of the remaining points
Φ ¯
J = ˜K⊤
J× ¯
JΦJΛ−1,
(9)
˜Ki,j =
Ki,j
k ·
p
Ei′[Ki′,j] · Ej′[Ki,j′]
, i ∈J, j ∈¯J
(10)
where ˜K is the normalized kernel for Laplacian eigen-
maps and the expectation is calculated over landmark
points [7].
Since it is diﬃcult to quantify the quality of the em-
bedding, we use the labels associated to the image
data to perform nearest neighbor classiﬁcation in the
low dimensional space. We expect advantages for the
DPP landmark selection scheme because a diverse set
of landmarks spreads the entire point set in the embed-
ding space and helps the classiﬁcation. For the same
reason, we also expect a good performance for the K-
means++ seeding algorithm.
Note that we abstain
from pre-processing the data and from applying more
advanced classiﬁers because we are not interested in
the absolute classiﬁcation performance but only in the
relative performances across the diﬀerent landmark se-
lection methods.
4.1.1
MNIST
We work with the MNIST dataset [21], consisting of
60,000 binary images of handwritten digits for train-
ing and 10,000 for testing, with a resolution of 28 × 28
pixels. We set the neighborhood size to m = 5000 and
σ = 5. We embed the images into 100 dimensional
space with Laplacian eigenmaps. Fig. 7(a) shows the
statistical analysis over 20 repetitions for several land-
mark selection schemes across diﬀerent numbers of
landmarks k, as well as the Bhattacharyya based graph
construction. The results show that the K-means++
seeding outperforms the uniform initialization, where
K-means++ cannot further improve the initialization.
Moreover, we observe a signiﬁcant improvement in
classiﬁcation performance for approximate DPP sam-
pling compared to K-Means++ seeding. Finally, the
Bhattacharyya based graph construction further im-
proves the results.
4.1.2
Head and Neck
In a second classiﬁcation experiment, we use 3D CT
scans from the head and neck region, having a reso-
lution of 512 × 512 × 145 voxels. These images were
acquired for radiation therapy of patients with head
and neck tumors.
Fig. 8 shows one cross sectional
slice with segmentations of three structures of risk: left
parotid (green), right parotid (blue), and brainstem
(green). The segmentation of these structures during
treatment planning is of high clinical importance to
ensure that they obtain a low radiation dose. We ex-

Christian Wachinger, Polina Golland
150
200
300
400
500
600
750
95
95.5
96
96.5
97
Dimensions: 100
Classification Performance in %
Number of Selected Landmarks
 
 
*
***
*
**
***
***
***
**
***
**
**
***
***
***
Uniform
K−Means uniform
K−Means++ Seeding
K−Means++
DPP
DPP Bhattacharyya
(a) MNIST
150
200
300
400
500
600
750
70
75
80
85
Dimensions: 50
Classification Performance in %
Number of Selected Landmarks
 
 
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
Uniform
K−Means uniform
K−Means++ Seeding
K−Means++
DPP
DPP Bhattacharyya
(b) Head and Neck
Figure 7: Classiﬁcation results for MNIST and head and neck data. Comparison of diﬀerent subset selection
schemes (uniform, K-means with uniform seeding, K-means++ seeding, K-means++, eﬃcient DPP, eﬃcient DPP
with Bhattacharyya based graph construction) for varying numbers of selected landmarks. Bars indicate mean
classiﬁcation performance and error bars correspond to standard deviation. *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance
levels at 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively.
Figure 8: Cross sectional head and neck slice. Overlaid
are the perimeters of left parotid (green), right parotid
(blue), and brainstem (green).
tract image patches from the left and right parotid
glands, the brainstem and the surrounding region. We
are interested in classifying patches into these four
groups, where the outcome can readily serve in seg-
mentation algorithms. We work with patches of size
7 × 7 × 3 to reﬂect the physical resolution of the data
which is 0.98×0.98×2.5 mm3. This results in roughly
150,000 patches extracted from three scans.
80,000
patches are used for training and the remaining ones
for testing.
We extract landmarks from the train-
ing patches (m = 5000, σ = 5) and embed them
into 50 dimensional space with Laplacian eigenmaps.
Fig. 7(b) shows the statistical analysis of the classiﬁca-
tion performance over 20 repetitions for various num-
bers of selected landmarks and selection schemes. K-
means++ seeding outperforms uniform sampling. K-
means clearly improves the uniform initialization. K-
means++ shows a similar performance to the initial
seeding. Similar to the experiments for MNIST, the
eﬃcient DPP approximation leads to signiﬁcantly bet-
ter classiﬁcation results, with an additional gain for the
Bhattacharyya based graph construction. In addition
to the signiﬁcant improvement, our runtime measure-
ments showed that our unoptimized Matlab code for
eﬃcient DPP sampling runs approximately 15% faster
than an optimized MEX version of K-means.
5
Conclusion
We have presented contributions for two crucial is-
sues of scalable manifold learning: (i) eﬃcient sam-
pling of diverse subsets from manifolds and (ii) ro-
bust graph construction on sparsely sampled mani-
folds. Precisely, we analyzed the sampling from de-
terminantal distributions on non-Euclidean spaces and
proposed an eﬃcient approximation of DPP sampling.
The algorithm is well suited for landmark selection on
manifolds because probability updates are locally re-
stricted. Further, we proposed the local covariance es-
timation around landmarks to capture the local char-
acteristics of the space. This enabled a more robust
graph construction with the Bhattacharyya distance
and yielded low dimensional embeddings of higher
quality. We compared to state-of-the-art subset selec-
tion procedures and obtained signiﬁcantly better re-
sults with the proposed algorithm.
Acknowledgements:
This work was supported

Sampling from DPPs for Scalable Manifold Learning
in
part
by
the
Humboldt
foundation,
the
Na-
tional Alliance for Medical Image Computing (U54-
EB005149), and the NeuroImaging Analysis Center
(P41-EB015902).
