arXiv:1401.8269v1  [cs.CL]  31 Jan 2014
Experiments with Three Approaches to
Recognizing Lexical Entailment
P. D. T U R N E Y and S. M. M O H A M M A D
National Research Council Canada
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6.

January 2014
Abstract
Inference in natural language often involves recognizing lexical entailment (RLE); that
is, identifying whether one word entails another. For example, buy entails own. Two gen-
eral strategies for RLE have been proposed: One strategy is to manually construct an
asymmetric similarity measure for context vectors (directional similarity) and another is
to treat RLE as a problem of learning to recognize semantic relations using supervised
machine learning techniques (relation classiﬁcation). In this paper, we experiment with
two recent state-of-the-art representatives of the two general strategies. The ﬁrst approach
is an asymmetric similarity measure (an instance of the directional similarity strategy),
designed to capture the degree to which the contexts of a word, a, form a subset of the
contexts of another word, b. The second approach (an instance of the relation classiﬁcation
strategy) represents a word pair, a : b, with a feature vector that is the concatenation of
the context vectors of a and b, and then applies supervised learning to a training set of
labeled feature vectors. Additionally, we introduce a third approach that is a new instance
of the relation classiﬁcation strategy. The third approach represents a word pair, a : b,
with a feature vector in which the features are the diﬀerences in the similarities of a and
b to a set of reference words. All three approaches use vector space models (VSMs) of
semantics, based on word–context matrices. We perform an extensive evaluation of the
three approaches using three diﬀerent datasets. The proposed new approach (similarity
diﬀerences) performs signiﬁcantly better than the other two approaches on some datasets
and there is no dataset for which it is signiﬁcantly worse. Along the way, we address some
of the concerns raised in past research, regarding the treatment of RLE as a problem of se-
mantic relation classiﬁcation, and we suggest it is beneﬁcial to make connections between
the research in lexical entailment and the research in semantic relation classiﬁcation.
1 Introduction
Recognizing textual entailment (RTE) is a popular task in natural language pro-
cessing research, due to its relevance for text summarization, information retrieval,
information extraction, question answering, machine translation, paraphrasing, and
other applications (Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis 2010). RTE involves pairs of
sentences, such as the following (Dagan, Dolan, Magnini, and Roth 2009):

2
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Text: Norway’s most famous painting, ‘The Scream’ by Edvard Munch,
was recovered Saturday, almost three months after it was stolen
from an Oslo museum.
Hypothesis: Edvard Munch painted ‘The Scream’.
The objective is to develop algorithms that can determine whether the text sen-
tence entails the hypothesis sentence. In RTE, the gold standard for entailment is
established by common sense, rather than formal logic. The text entails the hypoth-
esis if the meaning of the hypothesis can be inferred from the meaning of the text,
according to typical human interpretations of the text and the hypothesis (Dagan
et al. 2009). In the above example, the text entails the hypothesis. In recent years,
the RTE pairs have grown richer and more challenging. The text may now be a
whole paragraph.
In many cases, to recognize when one sentence entails another, we must ﬁrst be
able to recognize when one word entails another (Geﬀet and Dagan 2005). Consider
this sentence pair (our example):
Text: George was bitten by a dog.
Hypothesis: George was attacked by an animal.
To recognize that the text entails the hypothesis, we must ﬁrst recognize that bitten
entails attacked and dog entails animal. This is the problem of recognizing lexical
entailment (RLE). (We discuss the deﬁnition of lexical entailment in Section 2.)
Vector space models (VSMs) of semantics have been particularly useful for lexical
semantics (Turney and Pantel 2010), hence it is natural to apply them to RLE. In
this paper, we experiment with three VSM algorithms for lexical entailment. All
three use word–context matrices, in which a word corresponds to a row vector, called
a context vector. For a given word, the corresponding context vector represents the
distribution of the word over various contexts. The contexts consist of the words
that occur near the given word in a large corpus of text. These models are inspired
by the distributional hypothesis (Harris 1954; Firth 1957):
Distributional hypothesis: Words that occur in similar contexts tend to
have similar meanings.
The ﬁrst of the three algorithms, balAPinc (balanced average precision for dis-
tributional inclusion), attempts to address the problem of RLE with an asym-
metric similarity measure for context vectors (Kotlerman, Dagan, Szpektor, and
Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet 2010). The idea is to design a measure that captures the con-
text inclusion hypothesis (Geﬀet and Dagan 2005):
Context inclusion hypothesis: If a word a tends to occur in a subset of
the contexts in which a word b occurs (b contextually includes a),
then a (the narrower term) tends to entail b (the broader term).
This is our paraphrase of what Geﬀet and Dagan (2005) call the distributional
inclusion hypothesis. We prefer to call it context inclusion rather than distributional
inclusion, to be clear about what is included. In the text–hypothesis example above,

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
3
the narrower terms are bitten and dog and the broader terms are attacked and
animal.
The intent of balAPinc is to take the context vectors a and b for the words a and
b and calculate a numerical score that measures the degree to which b contextually
includes a. The context inclusion hypothesis is inspired by model theory in formal
logic (Hunter 1996). Let a and b be assertions in formal logic. In model theory,
‘a |= b’ means a entails b. If a |= b, then the set of models in which a is true is a
subset of the set of models in which b is true. That is, the models of b include the
models of a.
The second and third algorithms approach the task of recognizing lexical entail-
ment by using techniques from research in semantic relation classiﬁcation. Semantic
relation classiﬁcation is the task of learning to recognize when a word pair is an in-
stance of a given semantic relation class (Rosario and Hearst 2001; Rosario, Hearst,
and Fillmore 2002; Nastase and Szpakowicz 2003; Turney 2006; Girju, Nakov, Nas-
tase, Szpakowicz, Turney, and Yuret 2007).
An important subclass of lexical entailment is covered by the hyponymy–
hypernymy semantic relation. If a word pair a : b is an instance of the hyponym–
hypernym relation (dog:animal), then a |= b. There is a relatively large body of work
on semantic relation classiﬁcation in general, with good results on the hyponym–
hypernym relation in particular (Hearst 1992; Snow, Jurafsky, and Ng 2006). Since
semantic relation classiﬁcation algorithms have worked well for this important sub-
class of lexical entailment, it seems plausible that this approach can be expanded
to cover other subclasses of lexical entailment, and perhaps all subclasses of lexical
entailment. (We say more about this in Section 3.)
The second of the three algorithms represents a word pair, a : b, with a feature
vector that is the concatenation of the context vector a for a and the context vector
b for b (Baroni, Bernardi, Do, and Shan 2012). For example, the concatenation of
the two three-dimensional vectors ⟨1, 2, 3⟩and ⟨4, 5, 6⟩is the six-dimensional vector
⟨1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6⟩. This algorithm was not given a name by Baroni et al. (2012). For
ease of reference, we will call it ConVecs (concatenated vectors).
ConVecs is based on the context combination hypothesis (Baroni et al. 2012):
Context combination hypothesis: The tendency of a to entail b is cor-
related with some learnable function of the contexts in which a
occurs and the contexts in which b occurs; some conjunctions of
contexts tend to indicate entailment and others tend to indicate
a lack of entailment.
This hypothesis implies that the contexts of a (the elements in the context vector
a) and the contexts of b (elements in b) are suitable features for a feature vector
representation of the word pair a:b. That is, if this hypothesis is correct, concate-
nated context vectors are an appropriate representation of word pairs for supervised
machine learning of lexical entailment. This hypothesis was not explicitly stated by
Baroni et al. (2012) but it is implicit in their approach.
In the semantic relation classiﬁcation literature, vector concatentation (but not
necessarily with context vectors) is a common way to construct feature vectors

4
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
for supervised learning with word pairs (Rosario and Hearst 2001; Rosario et al.
2002; Nastase and Szpakowicz 2003). Context concatentation is a ﬁrst-order feature
vector representation of word pairs. We call it ﬁrst-order because the features are
directly based on the elements of the context vectors.
This paper introduces a new algorithm, SimDiﬀs (similarity diﬀerences), as the
third of the three algorithms we evaluate. SimDiﬀs uses a second-order feature
vector representation of a:b, in which the features are diﬀerences in the similarities
of a and b to a set of reference words, R. The similarities are given by cosines of
the ﬁrst-order context vectors for a, b, and the reference words, r ∈R. (We use a
set of common words for R, as described in Section 6.3. We do not experiment with
other choices for R.)
SimDiﬀs is dependent on the similarity diﬀerences hypothesis (introduced here):
Similarity diﬀerences hypothesis: The tendency of a to entail b is corre-
lated with some learnable function of the diﬀerences in their sim-
ilarities, sim(a, r) −sim(b, r), to a set of reference words, r ∈R;
some diﬀerences tend to indicate entailment and others tend to
indicate a lack of entailment.
For example, consider dog |= animal versus table ̸|= animal. Suppose that life is one
of the reference words. We see that dog and animal are similar with respect to the
reference word life; the diﬀerence in their similarities is small. On the other hand,
table and animal are dissimilar with respect to life; there is a large diﬀerence in
their similarities. Some diﬀerences are important for entailment (such as whether
something is animate or inanimate) and others usually have little eﬀect (such as
the colour of a thing). Given labeled training data, we may be able to learn how
diﬀerences in similarities aﬀect lexical entailment.
We empirically evaluate the three algorithms, balAPinc, ConVecs, and SimDiﬀs,
using three diﬀerent datasets. We ﬁnd that SimDiﬀs performs signiﬁcantly better
than the other two algorithms in some cases and there is no case for which it is
signiﬁcantly worse. ConVecs is signiﬁcantly worse than balAPinc and SimDiﬀs on
one dataset, whereas balAPinc is signiﬁcantly worse than ConVecs on one dataset
and signiﬁcantly worse than SimDiﬀs on two datasets.
Section 2 deﬁnes lexical entailment in terms of semantic relations between words.
There is some disagreement about whether lexical entailment should be approached
as a semantic relation classiﬁcation task. We address this issue in Section 3. Past
work on RLE is examined in Section 4. Performance measures for RLE algorithms
are presented in Section 5. We describe the three algorithms in detail in Section 6.
The three algorithms are evaluated using three datasets, which are presented in
Section 7. We use the datasets of Kotlerman et al. (2010), Baroni et al. (2012), and
Jurgens, Mohammad, Turney, and Holyoak (2012). The experimental results are
reported in Section 8. We discuss some implications of the experiments in Section 9.
Limitations of this work are considered in Section 10 and we conclude in Section 11.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
5
2 Deﬁning lexical entailment
Let w and v be two words. Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan (2009, p. 442) deﬁne
substitutable lexical entailment as follows:
... w entails v, if the following two conditions are fulﬁlled:
1. Word meaning entailment: the meaning of a possible sense of w implies a possible
sense of v;
2. Substitutability: w can substitute for v in some naturally occurring sentence, such that
the meaning of the modiﬁed sentence would entail the meaning of the original one.
We call this the substitutional deﬁnition of lexical entailment.
We present a diﬀerent deﬁnition of lexical entailment here. The idea is that
whether one word entails another depends on the semantic relation between the
words. We discuss some objections to this idea in Section 3.
Let x and y be two words. To be able to say that x entails y outside of the context
of a speciﬁc sentence, it must be the case that there is a strong semantic relation
between x and y, and the entailment must follow from the nature of that semantic
relation. We say that x entails y if the following three conditions are fulﬁlled:
1. Typical relation: Given x and y, there should be a typical semantic relation
R(x, y) that comes to mind. Let R(x, y) be the typical semantic relation be-
tween x and y. If there is no typical semantic relation between x and y, then
x cannot entail y outside of a speciﬁc context.
2. Semantic relation entailment: If x and y typically have the semantic relation
R(x, y), then it should follow from the meaning of the semantic relation that
x implies y.
3. Relation entailment agreement: If x and y have two or more typical semantic
relations and the relations do not agree on whether x implies y, then assume
that x does not imply y.
We call this the relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment.
In the ﬁrst condition of the relational deﬁnition, the typical relation between x
and y is the relation that naturally comes to mind when x and y are presented
together. If x and y have multiple senses, the juxtaposition of x and y may suggest
a semantic relation and it may also constrain the possible senses of the words. The
constrained senses of the words are not necessarily the most frequent or prototypical
senses of the words.
For example, consider the words lion and cat. The word cat has the senses house
cat (a speciﬁc type of cat) and feline (the general class of cats, including domestic
cats and wild cats). When the words lion and cat are juxtaposed, the relation that
naturally comes to mind (for us) is hyponym–hypernym (a lion is a type of cat)
and the sense of cat is constrained to feline, although the house cat sense is more
frequent and prototypical than the feline sense.
Context determines the sense of an ambiguous word, but lexical entailment con-
siders word pairs outside of the context of sentences. Since word senses can aﬀect
entailment, any approach to lexical entailment must decide how to handle ambigu-
ous words. The substitutional deﬁnition of lexical entailment invites us to imagine

6
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
a natural sentence that provides the missing context and constrains the possible
senses of the two words. The relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment invites us
to imagine a semantic relation that connects the two words and constrains their
possible senses.
The second condition of the relational deﬁnition determines whether one word
entails another, based on their semantic relation. Since a hyponym implies its hy-
pernym, lion entails cat. The second condition excludes semantic relations that do
not imply entailment. For example, antonymy is excluded (e.g., tall does not imply
short) and the hyponym–hypernym relation is only included when the direction is
correct (e.g., lion implies cat but cat does not imply lion).
The ﬁrst condition in the substitutional deﬁnition of lexical entailment (word
meaning entailment) asks us to consider whether the sense of one word implies
the sense of another word. We hypothesize that any such implication must depend
on the semantic relation between the senses of the words. It seems to us that, if
there is no semantic relation between the words, then it is not possible for one
word to imply the other. If one words implies another, the implication must follow
from the nature of their semantic relation. The idea of the second condition in
the relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment is to make this connection between
semantic relations and lexical entailment explicit.
The third condition of the relational deﬁnition handles ambiguous cases by erring
on the side of non-entailment. Some people might feel that lion and cat suggest ei-
ther the hyponym–hypernym relation (assuming cat means feline) or the coordinate
relation (assuming that cat means house cat). Coordinates are words with a shared
hypernym. Lion and house cat share the hypernym feline. If cat means house cat,
then lion and cat are coordinates. A hyponym implies its hypernym, but coordinates
do not imply each other. Lion implies cat in the feline sense but not in the house cat
sense. Thus these two relations (hyponym–hypernym and coordinate) do not agree
on whether lion implies cat. In this case, we believe that the hyponym–hypernym
is more natural, so we say that lion implies cat. For people who feel both semantic
relations are natural, the third condition says that there is no entailment; for them,
lion does not imply cat.
The third condition could be modiﬁed for diﬀerent uses. For our dataset (Sec-
tion 7.3), we chose to err on the side of non-entailment, but ideally the choice would
be made based on the downstream application. For some applications, it may be
better to err on the side of entailment. One possibility is to give higher weight
to some relations and use the weighting to choose between entailment and non-
entailment when two or more relations disagree. The weighting could be based on
the corpus frequency of the relations or the contexts in which the words appear.
To apply the relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment, it is helpful to have a
taxonomy of semantic relations, to provide options for R. In this paper, we use
the taxonomy of Bejar, Chaﬃn, and Embretson (1991), which includes seventy-
nine subcategories of semantic relations, grouped into ten high-level categories.
The taxonomy is given in Tables 2 and 3 in Section 7.3.
It might seem that the relational deﬁnition redeﬁnes lexical entailment in a way
that makes our results incomparable with past results, but we believe that our

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
7
results are indeed comparable with past work. Both the substitutional deﬁnition
and the relational deﬁnition are operational deﬁnitions: They are tests used to
determine the presence of entailment. They both require an understanding of the
word implies, but implies is a synonym for entails; they are not theoretical deﬁnitions
of entailment. They attempt to objectively capture the same underlying notion of
implication, and hence they may be compared and contrasted in terms of how well
they capture that notion.
Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan’s (2009) substitutional deﬁnition of lexical en-
tailment was intended to capture only substitutional cases of entailment. They
explicitly excluded non-substitutable lexical entailment. They argue that their two
conditions yield good inter-annotator agreement and result in lexical entailment
decisions that ﬁt well with the needs of systems for recognizing textual entailment.
We believe that there is a trade-oﬀbetween inter-annotator agreement and cov-
erage. The substitutional and relational deﬁnitions diﬀer regarding this trade-oﬀ.
The substitutional deﬁnition leads to higher levels of inter-annotator agreement
than the relational deﬁnition, but the substitutional deﬁnition excludes (by design)
important cases of lexical entailment (see Section 7.3.2).
Consider the following example:
Text: Jane accidentally broke a glass.
Hypothesis: Jane accidentally broke something fragile.
For the word pair glass:fragile, the typical relation that comes to mind is
item:attribute, ‘an x has the attribute y’ (ID 5a in the semantic relation taxon-
omy); thus the ﬁrst condition of the relational deﬁnition is fulﬁlled. An item entails
its attributes; glass entails fragile; thus the second condition is fulﬁlled. There are
exceptions, such as bulletproof glass, but bulletproof glass is not typical glass. There
is no other typical relation between glass and fragile, so the third condition is ful-
ﬁlled.
One limitation of substitutability as deﬁned by Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan
(2009) is that it does not allow lexical entailment from one part of speech to another.
For example, glass entails fragile, but glass is a noun and fragile is an adjective, so we
cannot substitute one for the other in a sentence. However, in spite of the diﬀerence
in their parts of speech, it seems reasonable to say that glass entails fragile. In a
typical situation that involves glass, the situation also involves something fragile.
As another example of a case where the substitutional deﬁnition excludes a lex-
ical entailment that the relational deﬁnition captures, consider bequeath:heir, an
instance of the act:recipient relation (ID 7e in the relation taxonomy):
Text: George bequeathed his estate to Jane.
Hypothesis: Jane was the heir to George’s estate.
It is reasonable to say that the act of bequeathing entails that there is an heir,
although the verb bequeathed cannot be substituted for the noun heir.
To address this limitation of the substitutional deﬁnition, one possibility would
be to relax the deﬁnition of substitutability to cope with diﬀerent parts of speech.
For example, given a noun x and an adjective y, we could allow ‘an x’ (a glass)

8
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
to be replaced with ‘something y’ (something fragile). Perhaps a relatively small
list of substitutional patterns could handle most part of speech substitution cases.
However, we do not pursue this option here, because it does not address a funda-
mental limitation of the substitutional deﬁnition, which is the absence of semantic
relations. We believe that semantic relations and lexical entailment are intimately
connected (see Section 3).
The idea of substitional patterns suggests the generalization of lexical entailment
to phrasal entailment. For example, the phrase ‘x bequeathed y to z’ entails the
phrase ‘z was the heir to x’s y’. Patterns like this have been learned from corpora
(Lin and Pantel 2001) and applied successfully to RTE (Mirkin, Bar-Haim, Berant,
Dagan, Shnarch, Stern, and Szpektor 2009a). However, our focus here is lexical
entailment, not phrasal entailment. We believe that a good algorithm for lexical
entailment should be useful as a component in an algorithm for phrasal entailment.
In our experiments, we use three diﬀerent datasets. All three consist of word pairs
that have been labeled entails or does not entail. One dataset (Section 7.1) was
labeled using Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan’s (2009) substitutional deﬁnition. On
preliminary inspection, it seems that the semantic relations in this dataset are often
part–whole and hyponym–hypernym relations, but the word pairs have not been
systematically labeled with relation categories. In another dataset (Section 7.2),
all of the pairs that are labeled entails are instances of the hyponym–hypernym
relation. In the third dataset (Section 7.3), the pairs were generated from Bejar
et al.’s (1991) taxonomy. This dataset includes pairs sampled from all seventy-nine
of the subcategories in the taxonomy. Each pair was labeled entails or does not
entail based on the subcategory it came from. Tables 2 and 3 in Section 7.3 list all
of the subcategories of relations and their entailment labels.
Lexical entailment is sometimes asymmetric (e.g., for word pairs that are in-
stances of the hyponym–hypernym relation) and sometimes symmetric (e.g., for
synonyms) (Geﬀet and Dagan 2005; Kotlerman et al. 2010). Both the substitu-
tional and relational deﬁnitions allow this blend of symmetry and asymmetry.
In the semantic relation classiﬁcation literature (discussed in Section 4), super-
vised learning algorithms are applied to the task of classifying word pairs. In gen-
eral, these algorithms are capable of classifying both symmetric and asymmetric
relations. In particular, ConVecs and SimDiﬀs both approach lexical entailment as
a problem of supervised relation classiﬁcation, and both are capable of learning
symmetric and asymmetric relations. They should be able to learn when lexical
entailment behaves asymmetrically (e.g., with cases like glass:fragile) and when it
behaves symmetrically (e.g., with cases like car:automobile).
The balAPinc measure is designed to capture asymmetry, but it is likely to give
approximately equal scores to car:automobile and automobile:car. This can be seen
by considering the details of its deﬁnition (see Section 6.1).
3 Semantic relations and lexical entailment
Some researchers have applied semantic relation classiﬁcation to lexical entailment
(Akhmatova and Dras 2009; Baroni et al. 2012), but Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
9
(2009, p. 443) have argued against this:
... lexical entailment is not just a superset of other known relations, but it is rather
designed to select those sub-cases of other lexical relations that are needed for applied
entailment inference. For example, lexical entailment does not cover all cases of meronyms
(e.g., division does not entail company), but only some sub-cases of part–whole relationship
mentioned herein. In addition, some other relations are also covered by lexical entailment,
like ocean and water and murder and death, which do not seem to directly correspond to
meronymy or hyponymy relations.
Notice also that whereas lexical entailment is a directional relation that speciﬁes which
word of the pair entails the other, the relation may hold in both directions for a pair of
words, as is the case for synonyms.
We agree with Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan (2009) that some sub-cases of part–
whole involve lexical entailment and other sub-cases do not. However, this issue can
be addressed by breaking the part–whole category into subcategories.
One of the high-level categories in Bejar et al.’s (1991) taxonomy is part–whole
(ID 2 in the taxonomy), which has ten subcategories. We claim that eight of the ten
subcategories involve entailment and two do not involve entailment, which is con-
sistent with the claim that ‘lexical entailment does not cover all cases of meronyms’
(in the above quotation).
Regarding ‘ocean and water and murder and death’ (in the above quotation), the
word pair ocean:water is an instance of Bejar et al.’s (1991) object:stuﬀsubcate-
gory (ID 2g in the taxonomy) and murder:death is an instance of the cause:eﬀect
subcategory (ID 8a). Regarding relations for which there is lexical entailment in
both directions, synonymy (ID 3a) is readily handled by marking it as entailing in
both directions (see Tables 2 and 3 in Section 7.3).
We believe that Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan’s (2009) argument is correct for
high-level categories but incorrect for subcategories. We oﬀer the following hypoth-
esis (introduced here):
Semantic relation subcategories hypothesis: Lexical entailment is not a
superset of high-level categories of semantic relations, but it is a
superset of lower-level subcategories of semantic relations.
This hypothesis implies a tight connection between research in RLE and research
in semantic relation classiﬁcation.
ConVecs and SimDiﬀs treat RLE as a semantic relation classiﬁcation problem.
These algorithms do not require the semantic relation subcategories hypothesis: It
is possible that it may be fruitful to use ideas from research in semantic relation
classiﬁcation even if the hypothesis is wrong. However, if the semantic relation
subcategories hypothesis is correct, then there is even more reason to treat RLE as
a semantic relation classiﬁcation problem.
We use the semantic relation subcategories hypothesis in Section 7.3, as a new
way of generating a dataset for evaluating RLE algorithms. In our experiments (Sec-
tion 8), we train the algorithms using data based on Bejar et al.’s (1991) taxonomy
and then test them on previous lexical entailment datasets.
We do not claim that Bejar et al.’s (1991) taxonomy handles all cases of lexical
entailment, but our results suggest that it covers enough cases to be eﬀective. Future

10
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
work may discover lexical entailments that do not ﬁt readily in Bejar et al.’s (1991)
taxonomy, but we believe that the taxonomy can be expanded to handle exceptions
as they are discovered.
4 Related work
The ﬁrst RTE Challenge took place in 2005 (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2006)
and it has been a regular event since then.1 Since the beginning, many RTE systems
have included a module for recognizing lexical entailment (Hickl, Bensley, Williams,
Roberts, Rink, and Shi 2006; Herrera, Pe˜nas, and Verdejo 2006). The early RLE
modules typically used a symmetric similarity measure, such as the cosine measure
(Salton and McGill 1983), the LIN measure (Lin 1998), or a measure based on
WordNet (Pedersen, Patwardhan, and Michelizzi 2004), but it was understood that
entailment is inherently asymmetric and any symmetric measure can only be a
rough approximation (Geﬀet and Dagan 2005).
Lee (1999) proposed an asymmetric similarity measure for the degree to which a
word a can be replaced by a word b in a sentence, without substantially changing
the meaning of the sentence. Weeds and Weir (2003) introduced an asymmetric
similarity measure for the degree to which a speciﬁc term a is subsumed by a more
general term b (see also Weeds, Weir, and McCarthy 2004). This idea was developed
further, speciﬁcally for application to lexical entailment, in a series of papers that
culminated in the balAPinc measure of the degree to which a entails b (Geﬀet
and Dagan 2005; Szpektor and Dagan 2008; Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan 2009;
Kotlerman et al. 2010). We describe balAPinc in detail in Section 6.1.
Glickman, Dagan, and Shnarch (2006) deﬁne lexical reference, which is somewhat
similar to lexical entailment, but it is deﬁned relative to a speciﬁc text, such as a
sentence. Mirkin, Dagan, and Shnarch (2009b) deﬁne entailment between lexical el-
ements, which includes entailment between words and non-compositional elements.
Their deﬁnition is not based on substitutability; they accept many kinds of lexical
entailment that are excluded by substitutability. Their deﬁnition involves what can
be inferred from a lexical element in the context of some natural text.
Compared to the number of papers on lexical entailment, there is a relatively
large body of literature on semantic relation classiﬁcation (Rosario and Hearst
2001; Rosario et al. 2002; Nastase and Szpakowicz 2003; Turney 2006; Girju et al.
2007). Semantic relation classiﬁcation has been part of several SemEval (Semantic
Evaluation) exercises:2
• SemEval-2007 Task 4: Classiﬁcation of Semantic Relations between Nominals
(Girju et al. 2007)
– seven semantic relation classes
• SemEval-2010 Task 8: Multi-Way Classiﬁcation of Semantic Relations Be-
tween Pairs of Nominals (Hendrickx, Kim, Kozareva, Nakov, S´eaghdha, Pad´o,
1 The RTE Challenge usually takes place once a year. See the Textual Entailment Portal
at http://aclweb.org/aclwiki for more information.
2 See the SemEval Portal at http://aclweb.org/aclwiki for more information.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
11
Pennacchiotti, Romano, and Szpakowicz 2010)
– nine semantic relation classes
• SemEval-2012 Task 2: Measuring Degrees of Relational Similarity (Jurgens
et al. 2012)
– seventy-nine semantic relation classes
Only a few papers apply semantic relation classiﬁcation to lexical entailment
(Akhmatova and Dras 2009; Do and Roth 2010; Baroni et al. 2012; Do and Roth
2012). All of these papers emphasize the hyponym–hypernym semantic relation,
which is important for lexical entailment, but it is not the only relation that involves
entailment.
Baroni et al. (2012) compared their ConVecs algorithm with the balAPinc mea-
sure and found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in their performance. They also consider
how quantiﬁers (e.g., some, all) aﬀect entailment.
Most algorithms for semantic relation classiﬁcation are supervised (Rosario and
Hearst 2001; Rosario et al. 2002; Nastase and Szpakowicz 2003; Turney 2006; Girju
et al. 2007), although some are not (Hearst 1992). One objection to supervised
learning for lexical entailment is that it can require a large quantity of labeled
training data.
Baroni et al. (2012) oﬀer an elegant solution to the training data issue, based on
the observation that, in adjective–noun phrases, the adjective–noun pair generally
entails the head noun. For example, big cat entails cat. This observation allows them
to label a large quantity of training data with relatively little eﬀort. However, their
technique does not seem to be applicable to many of the relevant subcategories
in Bejar et al.’s (1991) taxonomy. Our solution is to use word pairs that were
labeled with Bejar et al.’s (1991) classes using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (Jurgens
et al. 2012). (See Section 7.3.) This dataset covers a much wider range of semantic
relations than Baroni et al.’s (2012) dataset.
5 Performance measures
One diﬀerence between an asymmetric similarity measure (such as balAPinc) and
a classiﬁcation model based on supervised machine learning (such as ConVecs or
SimDiﬀs) is that the former yields a real-valued score whereas the latter gives a
binary-valued classiﬁcation (0 = does not entail and 1 = entails). However, this
diﬀerence is superﬁcial. Many supervised learning algorithms (including the algo-
rithms we use here) are able to generate a real-valued probability score (the prob-
ability that the given example belongs in class 1). Likewise, it is easy to generate a
binary-valued class from a real-valued score by setting a threshold on the score.
In our experiments (Section 8), we evaluate all three algorithms both as real-
valued asymmetric similarity measures and binary-valued classiﬁers. We use av-
erage precision (AP) as a performance measure for real-valued scores, following
Kotlerman et al. (2010). We use precision, recall, F-measure, and accuracy as per-
formance measures for binary-valued classiﬁcation, following Baroni et al. (2012).
The balAPinc measure (balanced average precision for distributional inclusion) is

12
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
partly inspired by the average precision measure, thus it is useful to discuss average
precision now, before we discuss balAPinc (in Section 6.1).
5.1 Average precision
AP was originally designed as a performance measure for information retrieval sys-
tems. Suppose we have issued a query to a search engine and it has returned a
ranked list of N documents, sorted in descending order of their automatically esti-
mated degree of relevance for our query. Assume that human judges have manually
labeled all of the documents as either relevant or irrelevant for the given query. Let
P(r) be the fraction of the top r highest ranked documents that have the label rel-
evant. That is, P(r) is the precision of the ranked list if we cut the list oﬀafter the
r-th document. Let rel(r) be 1 if the r-th document is labeled relevant, 0 otherwise.
AP is deﬁned as follows (Buckley and Voorhees 2000):
AP =
PN
r=1[P(r) · rel(r)]
total number of relevant documents
(1)
AP ranges from 0 (very poor performance) to 1 (perfect performance). Buckley and
Voorhees (2000) demonstrate that AP is more stable and more discriminating than
several alternative performance measures for information retrieval systems.
The deﬁnition of AP reﬂects a bias in information retrieval. For a typical query
and a typical document collection, most documents are irrelevant and the emphasis
is on ﬁnding the few relevant documents. In machine learning, if we have two
classes, 0 and 1, they are usually considered equally important. Kotlerman et al.
(2010) emphasize the class 1 (entails), but we believe class 0 (does not entail) is also
important. For example, the scoring of the RTE Challenge gives an equal reward
for recognizing when a text sentence entails a hypothesis sentence and when it does
not. Therefore we report two variations of AP, which we call AP0 (average precision
with respect to class 0) and AP1 (average precision with respect to class 1), which
we deﬁne in the next paragraph.
Suppose we have a dataset of word pairs manually labeled 0 and 1. Let N be the
number of word pairs in the dataset. Let M(a, b) ∈ℜbe a measure that assigns
a real-valued score to each word pair, a : b. Sort the pairs in descending order of
their M(a, b) scores. Let P1(r) be the fraction of the top r highest ranked pairs that
have the label 1. Let P0(r) be the fraction of the bottom r lowest ranked pairs that
have the label 0. Let C1(r) be 1 if the r-th document from the top is labeled 1,
0 otherwise. Let C0(r) be 1 if the r-th document from the bottom is labeled 0, 0
otherwise. Let N0 be the total number of pairs labeled 0 and let N1 be the total
number of pairs labeled 1. We deﬁne AP0 and AP1 as follows:
AP0 =
PN
r=1[P0(r) · C0(r)]
N0
(2)
AP1 =
PN
r=1[P1(r) · C1(r)]
N1
(3)

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
13
In their experiments, Kotlerman et al. (2010) report only AP1. It is possible
to increase a system’s performance according to AP1 at the cost of lower AP0
performance. The formula for AP1 is more sensitive to the labels in the top of the
list. What happens at the bottom of the list has little impact on AP1, because
P1(r) gives a low weight to labels at the bottom of the list. On the other hand, the
formula for AP0 is more sensitive to labels at the bottom of the list. If we focus on
AP1 and ignore AP0, we will prefer algorithms that get the top of the list right,
even if they do poorly with the bottom of the list. Therefore it is important to
report both AP0 and AP1.
5.2 Precision, recall, F-measure, and accuracy
Like AP, precision and recall were originally designed as performance measures
for information retrieval systems. The precision of a system is an estimate of the
conditional probability that a document is truly relevant to a query, if the system
says it is relevant. The recall of a system is an estimate of the conditional probability
that the system will say that a document is relevant to a query, if it truly is relevant.
There is a tradeoﬀbetween precision and recall; one may be optimized at the
cost of the other. The F-measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. It
is designed to reward a balance of precision and recall.
Accuracy is a natural and intuitive performance measure, but it is sensitive to
the relative sizes of the classes. It is easy to interpret accuracy when we have two
equal-sized classes, but it is diﬃcult to interpret when one class is much larger than
the other. The F-measure is a better measure when the classes are not balanced.
As with AP, there are two variations of precision, recall, and F-measure, depend-
ing on whether we focus on class 0 or class 1. Let C be a 2 × 2 confusion matrix,
where cij is the number of word pairs that are actually in class i and the algorithm
has predicted that they are in class j (here i, j ∈{0, 1}). We deﬁne precision, recall,
and F-measure as follows:
Pre0 = c00/(c00 + c10)
(4)
Pre1 = c11/(c11 + c01)
(5)
Rec0 = c00/(c00 + c01)
(6)
Rec1 = c11/(c11 + c10)
(7)
F0 = 2 · Pre0 · Rec0/(Pre0 + Rec0)
(8)
F1 = 2 · Pre1 · Rec1/(Pre1 + Rec1)
(9)
Following standard practice (Witten, Frank, and Hall 2011), we merge the two
variations of each measure by taking their weighted averages, where the weights
are determined by the class sizes:
w0 = (c00 + c01)/(c00 + c01 + c10 + c11)
(10)

14
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
w1 = (c11 + c10)/(c00 + c01 + c10 + c11)
(11)
Pre = w0 · Pre0 + w1 · Pre1
(12)
Rec = w0 · Rec0 + w1 · Rec1
(13)
F = w0 · F0 + w1 · F1
(14)
Finally, we deﬁne accuracy as usual:
Acc = 100 · (c00 + c11)/(c00 + c01 + c10 + c11)
(15)
The factor of 100 converts the accuracy from a fraction to a percentage score.
6 Three approaches to lexical entailment
In this section, we discuss the three approaches to RLE and describe the algorithms
for each approach in detail. All three approaches are based on word–context ma-
trices. For an introduction to the concepts behind word–context matrices, see the
survey paper by Turney and Pantel (2010).
In preliminary experiments with our development datasets, Dev1 and Dev2, we
tuned the three approaches to optimize their performance. We describe how Dev1
and Dev2 were generated in Section 8.1.1. For each algorithm, we selected the
matrix or matrices that were most accurate with the development data. For both
balAPinc and ConVecs, we chose the word–context matrix from Turney, Neuman,
Assaf, and Cohen (2011). For SimDiﬀs, we chose two word–context matrices from
Turney (2012).3
ConVecs and SimDiﬀs use support vector machines (SVMs) for supervised learn-
ing. We used the development datasets to select the best kernels for the SVMs. The
best kernel for ConVecs was a second-degree polynomial kernel and the best kernel
for SimDiﬀs was a radial basis function (RBF) kernel.
6.1 The context inclusion hypothesis: balAPinc
We include balAPinc in our experiments because Kotlerman et al. (2010) exper-
imentally compared it with a wide range of asymmetric similarity measures and
found that balAPinc had the best performance. The balAPinc asymmetric similar-
ity measure is a balanced combination of the asymmetric APinc measure (Kotler-
man et al. 2010) with the symmetric LIN measure (Lin 1998). Balance is achieved
by using the geometric mean:
balAPinc(u, v) =
p
APinc(u, v) · LIN(u, v)
(16)
To deﬁne APinc and LIN, we must ﬁrst introduce some terminology. Kotlerman
et al. (2010) deﬁne balAPinc with terminology from set theory, whereas ConVecs
3 Copies of all three matrices used here are available from the ﬁrst author by request.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
15
and SimDiﬀs are more naturally deﬁned with terminology from linear algebra. We
will use the set theoretical terminology of Kotlerman et al. (2010) and the linear
algebraic terminology of Turney and Pantel (2010), so that the reader can easily
see both perspectives. This leads to a small amount of redundancy, but we believe
it is helpful to connect the two points of view.4
First, some linear algebraic notation: Suppose that we have a word–context ma-
trix, in which each row vector corresponds to a word and each column vector corre-
sponds to a context. Let F be the matrix of raw co-occurrence frequencies. If w is
the word corresponding to the i-th row vector, fi:, and c is the context correspond-
ing to the j-th column vector, f:j, then fij is the number of times w occurs in the
context c in the given corpus.
Let the matrix X be the result of calculating the positive pointwise mutual in-
formation (PPMI) between the word w and the context c for each element fij
in F (Bullinaria and Levy 2007; Turney and Pantel 2010). PPMI takes the raw
co-occurrence frequencies and transforms them to weights that represent the im-
portance of a given context for a given word. The PPMI matrix X is typically
sparse (most cells are zero) and no cells are negative.5
The matrix X has the same number of rows (nr) and columns (nc) as the raw
frequency matrix F. The value of an element xij in X is deﬁned as follows (Turney
and Pantel 2010):
pij =
fij
Pnr
i=1
Pnc
j=1 fij
(17)
pi∗=
Pnc
j=1 fij
Pnr
i=1
Pnc
j=1 fij
(18)
p∗j =
Pnr
i=1 fij
Pnr
i=1
Pnc
j=1 fij
(19)
pmiij = log

pij
pi∗p∗j

(20)
xij =
pmiij
if pmiij > 0
0
otherwise
(21)
Now, some set theoretical notation: Given a word w corresponding to the i-th
row in X, let Fw be the set of contexts for which xij is nonzero. That is, c ∈Fw if
and only if xij ̸= 0, where w corresponds to row i and c corresponds to column j.
We may think of the contexts in the set Fw as features that characterize the word
w. Let |Fw| be the number of features in Fw. If w corresponds to the i-th row in
X, then |Fw| is the number of nonzero cells in the i-th row vector, xi:.
4 ConVecs and SimDiﬀs are fundamentally linear algebraic in conception, whereas bal-
APinc is fundamentally set theoretic. We cannot readily describe all three systems with
only one kind of notation.
5 Other measures of word association may be used instead of PPMI. See Chapter 5 of
Manning and Sch¨utze (1999) for a good survey of association measures.

16
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Each feature f in Fw corresponds to a PPMI value xij. Let us rank the features
in Fw in descending order of their corresponding PPMI values. Let fwr be the r-th
feature in the ranking of Fw, where r ranges from 1 to |Fw|. Let rank(f, Fw) be the
rank of f in Fw. Thus rank(fwr, Fw) = r. We want to normalize this rank so that it
ranges between 0 and 1, where higher PPMI values are closer to 1 and lower PPMI
values are closer to 0. The function rel(f, Fw) provides this normalization:
rel(f, Fw) =
(
1 −rank(f,Fw)
|Fw|+1
if f ∈Fw
0
if f /∈Fw
(22)
We may interpret rel(f, Fw) as a measure of the importance of the feature f for
characterizing the word w. This function is called rel because it is somewhat anal-
ogous to relevance in information retrieval.
Recall the context inclusion hypothesis: If a word u tends to occur in a subset
of the contexts in which a word v occurs (v contextually includes u), then u (the
narrower term) tends to entail v (the broader term). Suppose we test the features
of u, f ∈Fu, in order of their rank, r, to see which features of u are contextually
included in v. Let inc(r, Fu, Fv) be the set consisting of those features, among the
ﬁrst r features in Fu, that are included in Fv:
inc(r, Fu, Fv) = {f | rank(f, Fu) ≤r and f ∈(Fu ∩Fv)}
(23)
The size of this set, |inc(r, Fu, Fv)|, ranges from 0 to r, where r ≤|Fu|. The function
P(r, Fu, Fv) normalizes the size to range from 0 to 1:
P(r, Fu, Fv) = |inc(r, Fu, Fv)|
r
(24)
We may interpret P(r, Fu, Fv) as a measure of the density of Fv features among the
top r features of Fu. This function is called P because it is somewhat analogous to
precision in information retrieval.
Now we are ready to deﬁne APinc:
APinc(u, v) =
P|Fu|
r=1[P(r, Fu, Fv) · rel(fur, Fv)]
|Fu|
(25)
APinc is a variation of the average precision (AP) measure, originally developed
for measuring the performance of information retrieval systems (see Section 5.1).
Consider the ﬁrst term in the sum, r = 1. If fu1, the highest-ranking feature in Fu, is
included in Fv, then P(1, Fu, Fv) will be 1; otherwise it will be 0. If fu1 is in Fv, then
the product P(1, Fu, Fv) · rel(fu1, Fv) reduces to rel(fu1, Fv), the importance of the
feature fu1 for the word v. APinc will have a high score when the most important
features of u are also important features of v. APinc is asymmetric because it does
not require that the most important features of v are important features of u.
Let wu(f) be the weight of the feature f in the word u. The weight is given by
the PPMI value in X. If u corresponds to the i-th row and f corresponds to the
j-th column, then wu(f) = xij. (It may seem redundant to have both wu(f) and

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
17
xij. The ﬁrst is set theoretical and the second is linear algebraic.) LIN is deﬁned as
follows (Lin 1998):
LIN(u, v) =
P
f∈Fu∩F v[wu(f) + wv(f)]
P
f∈Fu wu(f) + P
f∈Fv wv(f)
(26)
In balAPinc (Equation 16), the LIN measure is combined with the APinc measure
because the APinc measure by itself tends to be sensitive to cases where |Fu| or
|Fv| are unusually small (Kotlerman et al. 2010).
There are two parameters, maxF and T , that can be varied to control the perfor-
mance of balAPinc. The parameter maxF sets the maximum number of features for
each word. For a given word w, we calculate all of the features, Fw. If |Fw| > maxF ,
then we remove the lowest-ranking features until |Fw| = maxF . This reduces the
impact of low-ranking features on the APinc score. The parameter T is a threshold
for classiﬁcation. If balAPinc(u, v) < T , then the word pair u : v is classiﬁed as 0
(does not entail); otherwise, u:v is classiﬁed as 1 (entails). We describe how these
parameters are tuned in Section 8.
Kotlerman et al. (2010) do not use the threshold T , since they do not evaluate
balAPinc as a classiﬁer. They also do not use the parameter maxF , although their
analysis supports the utility of this parameter; see Section 5.4.4 of Kotlerman et al.
(2010).
In the experiments with balAPinc in Section 8, the PPMI matrix X is the same
matrix as used by Turney et al. (2011). The matrix has 114,501 rows and 139,246
columns. The rows correspond to single and multi-word entries (n-grams) in Word-
Net and the columns correspond to unigrams in WordNet, distinguished according
to whether they appear in the left or right context of the given n-gram. The window
size for context is four words to the left and four words to the right of the n-gram.
The matrix has a density (percentage of nonzero values) of 1.22%.
The PPMI matrix is based on a corpus of 5×1010 words, collected from university
websites by a webcrawler.6 The corpus was indexed with the Wumpus search engine
(B¨uttcher and Clarke 2005), which is designed for passage retrieval, rather than
document retrieval.7 Suppose fij is an element in the matrix of raw co-occurrence
frequencies F. The i-th row of the matrix corresponds to an n-gram w in WordNet
and the j-th column of the matrix corresponds to a unigram c. The value of fij was
calculated by sending the query w to Wumpus and counting the frequency of c in
the retrieved passages. The matrix is described in detail in Section 2.1 of Turney
et al. (2011).
It is common to smooth the PPMI matrix by applying a truncated singular value
decomposition (SVD) (Turney and Pantel 2010). On the development datasets, we
experimented with smoothing the matrix but the results were poor. The problem
is that the truncated SVD yields a matrix with a density of 100%, but balAPinc is
designed for highly sparse matrices.
6 The corpus was collected by Charles Clarke at the University of Waterloo.
7 Wumpus is available at http://www.wumpus-search.org/.

18
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Consider Equation 23 for example. If the matrix has a density of 100%, then all
of the contexts (all of the matrix columns) are nonzero, so Fu and Fv are simply
the entire set of features, and (Fu ∩Fv) is also the entire set of features. Likewise,
in Equation 26, all of the sums, P
f, range over the entire set of features. The
equations behind balAPinc are based on the assumption that most of the elements
in the matrix are zero (i.e., the matrix is sparse), but this assumption is false if we
apply a truncated SVD.
In the experiments in Section 8, we use the raw PPMI matrix, with no SVD
smoothing. Baroni et al. (2012) also found that balAPinc works better without
SVD smoothing (see their Footnote 3).
6.2 The context combination hypothesis: ConVecs
With the ConVecs algorithm, Baroni et al. (2012) were able to match the perfor-
mance of balAPinc. In ConVecs, we represent a word pair a:b by the concatentation
of the context vectors a for a and b for b. We apply a supervised learning algorithm
to a training set of word pairs, where each word pair is represented by concatenated
context vectors that are labeled entails or does not entail. The supervised learning
algorithm generates a classiﬁcation model, which enables us to assign labels to new
word pairs, not present in the training data.
Let X be a word–context matrix, where the value of the cell xij in X is given by
the PPMI between the i-th word w and the j-th context c. In our experiments, we
use the word–context matrix X from Turney et al. (2011), as in Section 6.1, but
now we smooth X with a truncated SVD.
SVD decomposes X into the product of three matrices UΣVT, where U and V
are in column orthonormal form (i.e., the columns are orthogonal and have unit
length, UTU = VTV = I) and Σ is a diagonal matrix of singular values (Golub and
Van Loan 1996). If X is of rank r, then Σ is also of rank r. Let Σk, where k < r, be
the diagonal matrix formed from the top k singular values, and let Uk and Vk be
the matrices produced by selecting the corresponding columns from U and V. The
matrix UkΣkVT
k is the matrix of rank k that best approximates the original matrix
X, in that it minimizes the approximation errors. That is, ˆX = UkΣkVT
k minimizes
∥ˆX −X∥F over all matrices ˆX of rank k, where ∥. . . ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm
(Golub and Van Loan 1996).
We represent a word pair a : b using row vectors from the matrix UkΣp
k. If a
and b correspond to row vectors a and b in UkΣp
k, then a:b is represented by the
2k-dimensional vector that is the concatenation of a and b. We normalize a and b
to unit length before we concatenate them.
There are two parameters in UkΣp
k that need to be set. The parameter k controls
the number of latent factors and the parameter p adjusts the weights of the factors,
by raising the corresponding singular values in Σp
k to the power p.
The parameter k is well-known in the literature (Landauer, McNamara, Dennis,
and Kintsch 2007), but p is less familiar. Caron (2001) introduced p for improving
the performance of truncated SVD with term–document matrices in information
retrieval. The use of p to improve the performance with word–context matrices in

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
19
lexical semantics is supported by the empirical evaluations of Bullinaria and Levy
(2012) and Turney (2012). In the following experiments (Section 8), we explore a
range of values for p and k. Baroni et al. (2012) use k = 300 and p = 1.8
Recall the context combination hypothesis: The tendency of a to entail b is corre-
lated with some learnable function of the contexts in which a occurs and the con-
texts in which b occurs; some conjunctions of contexts tend to indicate entailment
and others tend to indicate a lack of entailment. Given the context combination
hypothesis, vector concatenation is a natural way to represent a : b for learning
lexical entailment.
For their supervised learning algorithm, Baroni et al. (2012) used Weka with
LIBSVM.9 They used a polynomial kernel for the support vector machine (SVM).
We also use Weka and a polynomial kernel, but we use the sequential minimal
optimization (SMO) SVM in Weka (Platt 1998), because it can generate real-valued
probability estimates, as well as binary-valued classes. The probability estimates
are based on ﬁtting the outputs of the SVM with logistic regression models (Witten
et al. 2011).
We tried various kernels with ConVecs on the development datasets (Dev1 and
Dev2; see Section 8.1.1), and found that a second-degree polynomial kernel had
the best performance. We use the default settings for the polynomial kernel SMO
SVM in Weka, except we disable normalization, because the vectors are already
normalized to the same length.
It seems to us that ConVecs is a good algorithm for a generic semantic relation,
but a representation that takes advantage of some background knowledge about
lexical entailment might require less training data. One thing we know about lexical
entailment is a |= a, for any a. ConVecs can only reliably recognize that a |= a if
a is similar to some x, such that the word pair x : x appears in the training data
and has been labeled entails. To cover a broad range of possible values for a, there
must be many diﬀerent x:x pairs in the training data. The ConVecs representation
does not make eﬃcient use of the training data.
6.3 The similarity diﬀerences hypothesis: SimDiﬀs
SimDiﬀs uses two diﬀerent word–context matrices, a domain matrix, D, and a
function matrix, F (Turney 2012). The domain matrix is designed for measuring
the domain similarity between two words (similarity of topic, subject, or ﬁeld). For
example, carpenter and wood have a high degree of domain similarity; they both
come from the domain of carpentry. The function matrix is designed for measuring
function similarity (similarity of role, relationship, or usage). For example, carpenter
and mason have a high degree of function similarity; they both function as artisans.
8 Baroni et al. (2012) mention k = 300 in their Footnote 3. In personal communication
in November 2012, they said they used p = 1.
9 Weka is available at http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ and LIBSVM is avail-
able at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/.

20
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
The two matrices use diﬀerent types of context. The domain matrix uses the
nouns that occur near a given word as the context for the word, whereas the func-
tion matrix uses the verbs that occur near the given word. The part-of-speech
information was generated with the OpenNLP tagger.10 Our motivation for using
two matrices in SimDiﬀs is to generate a larger and more varied set of features for
the supervised learning algorithm. Turney (2012) demonstrated that domain and
function matrices work together synergetically when applied to semantic relations.
In experiments with the development datasets (Dev1 and Dev2), we tried using
the domain and function matrices with balAPinc and ConVecs, but both algorithms
worked better with the word–context matrix from Turney et al. (2011). For Sim-
Diﬀs, the combination of the domain and function matrices from Turney (2012)
had the best performance on the development datasets.
Both D and F use PPMI and SVD, as in Section 6.2. This results in a total of
four parameters that need to be tuned, kd and pd for domain space and kf and pf
for function space. In the following experiments (Section 8), to simplify the search
through parameter space, we make kd = kf and pd = pf.
The domain and function matrices are based on the same corpus as the word–
context matrix from Turney et al. (2011). Wumpus was used to index the corpus
and search for passages, in the same way as described in Section 6.1. D has 114,297
rows and 50,000 columns. The PPMI matrix has a density of 2.62%. F has 114,101
rows and 50,000 columns. The PPMI matrix has a density of 1.21%. For both
matrices, truncated SVD results in a density of 100%.
The rows for both matrices correspond to single and multi-word entries (n-grams)
in WordNet. The columns are more complex; Turney (2012) provides a detailed
description of the columns and other aspects of the matrices. The matrices have
diﬀerent numbers of rows because, before applying SVD, we removed rows that were
entirely zero. The function matrix, with its lower density, had more zero-valued rows
than the domain matrix.
Suppose that the words a and b correspond to the row vectors ad and bd in the
domain matrix, D. Let simd(a, b) be the similarity of a and b in domain space, as
measured by the cosine of the angle between ad and bd, cos(ad, bd). Likewise, let
simf(a, b) be cos(af, bf), the cosine in function space.
Let R be a set of reference words. Recall the similarity diﬀerences hypothesis:
The tendency of a to entail b is correlated with some learnable function of the
diﬀerences in their similarities, sim(a, r) −sim(b, r), to a set of reference words,
r ∈R; some diﬀerences tend to indicate entailment and others tend to indicate a
lack of entailment. In SimDiﬀs, we represent a word pair a:b with a feature vector
composed of four sets of features, S1, S2, S3, and S4, deﬁned as follows:
S1 = {simd(a, r) −simd(b, r) | r ∈R}
(27)
S2 = {simf(a, r) −simf(b, r) | r ∈R}
(28)
10 OpenNLP is available at http://opennlp.apache.org/.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
21
S3 = {simd(a, r) −simf(b, r) | r ∈R}
(29)
S4 = {simf(a, r) −simd(b, r) | r ∈R}
(30)
S1 is the diﬀerence between a and b in domain space, with respect to their simi-
larities to the reference words, R. S2 is the diﬀerence between a and b in function
space. S1 and S2 are based on diﬀerences in the same spaces, whereas S3 and S4
are based on diﬀerences in diﬀerent spaces.
The cross-spatial diﬀerences (S3 and S4) may seem counterintuitive. Consider
the example murder |= death, suggested by the quotation from Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet
and Dagan (2009) in Section 3. Murder typically involves two people, the victim
and the aggressor, whereas death typically involves one person, the deceased. This
suggests that there is a functional diﬀerence between the words, hence the function
similarities of murder may be quite diﬀerent from the function similarities of death.
However, perhaps the domain similarities of murder are somewhat similar to the
function similarities of death (S3) or perhaps the function similarities of murder
are somewhat similar to the domain similarities of death (S4). We include these
similarities here to see if the supervised learning algorithm can make use of them.
For R, the set of reference words, we use 2,086 words from Basic English (Ogden
1930).11 Thus a word pair a : b is represented by 2,086 × 4 = 8,344 features. The
words of Basic English were selected by Ogden (1930) to form a core vocabulary,
suﬃcient to represent most other English words by paraphrasing. We chose this set
of words because it is small enough to keep the number of features manageable yet
broad enough to cover a wide range of concepts. Other reference words may also
be suitable; this is a topic for future work.
We mentioned in Section 6.2 that ConVecs may be ineﬃcient for learning a |= a.
On the other hand, consider how a |= a is represented in SimDiﬀs. Looking at
Equations 27 and 28, we see that, given the word pair a:a, every feature in S1 and
S2 will have the value zero. Therefore it should not take many examples of x:x in
the training data to learn that a |= a, for any a.
For our supervised learning algorithm, we use the SMO SVM in Weka. Based on
experiments with the development datasets (Dev1 and Dev2), we use a radial basis
function (RBF) kernel. We use the default settings, except we disable normalization.
We generate probability estimates for the classes.
7 Three datasets for lexical entailment
This section describes the three datasets we use in our experiments. The ﬁrst two
datasets have been used in the past for lexical entailment research. The third dataset
has been used for semantic relation research; this is the ﬁrst time it has been used
for lexical entailment. We refer to each dataset by the initials of the authors of the
paper in which it was ﬁrst reported.
11 This word list is available at http://ogden.basic-english.org/word2000.html.

22
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
7.1 The KDSZ dataset
The KDSZ dataset was introduced by Kotlerman et al. (2010) to evaluate balAPinc.
The dataset contains 3,772 word pairs, 1,068 labeled entails and 2,704 labeled does
not entail. It was created by taking a dataset of 3,200 labeled word pairs from
Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan (2009) and adding 572 more labeled pairs.12 The
labeling of the original subset of 3,200 pairs is described in detail by Zhitomirsky-
Geﬀet and Dagan (2009). The deﬁnition of lexical entailment that the judges used
was the substitutional deﬁnition given in Section 2. Three judges labeled the pairs,
with inter-annotator agreement between any two of the three judges varying from
90.0% to 93.5%.
This dataset has two properties that complicate the experiments. First, the class
sizes are not balanced; 71.7% of the pairs are labeled does not entail and 28.3% are
labeled entails. Second, although every word pair is unique, there are a few words
that appear many times, in many diﬀerent pairs. We address these points in our
experiments.
The words in the word pairs are mainly unigrams, but there are a few bigrams
(central bank, higher education, state government). Fortunately all of the bigrams
appear in WordNet, so they have corresponding row vectors in our matrices.
7.2 The BBDS dataset
The BBDS dataset was created by Baroni et al. (2012) and has been applied to
evaluating both balAPinc and ConVecs. In their paper, Baroni et al. (2012) discuss
several diﬀerent datasets. We use the dataset they call N1 |= N2, described in their
Section 3.3. The dataset contains 2,770 word pairs, 1,385 labeled entails and 1,385
labeled does not entail. All of the 1,385 pairs labeled entails are hyponym–hypernym
noun–noun pairs, such as pope |= leader. The pairs were generated automatically
from WordNet and then validated manually.
Although the class sizes are balanced, 50% entails and 50% does not entail, the
BBDS dataset is not representative of the variety of semantic relations that involve
entailment, as we will see in Section 7.3. Also, although every word pair is unique,
there are a few words that appear many times. All of the word pairs are composed
of unigrams and all of the unigrams appear in WordNet, so they have corresponding
row vectors in our matrices.
7.3 The JMTH dataset
Jurgens et al. (2012) created a semantic relation dataset for SemEval-2012 Task 2:
Measuring Degrees of Relational Similarity.13 This dataset contains 3,218 word pairs
labeled with seventy-nine types of semantic relations. In this section, we describe
12 Personal communication with Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet in March 2012.
13 The dataset is available at https://sites.google.com/site/semeval2012task2/. We
used the package called SemEval-2012-Gold-Ratings.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
23
Table 1. Types of information about the classes in the relation taxonomy
Type
Example
1.
ID
1a
2.
Category
class-inclusion
3.
Subcategory
taxonomic
4.
Paradigmatic examples (x:y)
ﬂower:tulip, emotion:rage, poem:sonnet
5.
Relational schema
y is a kind/type/instance of x
6.
Turker examples (Phase 1)
fruit:grape, song:opera, rodent:mouse, ...
7.
Turker ratings (Phase 2)
fruit:grape: 24.0, song:opera: -18.0, ...
the original SemEval-2012 dataset and the process we used to convert the dataset
into 2,308 word pairs, 1,154 labeled entails and 1,154 labeled does not entail.
The original dataset consists of word pairs labeled using the relation classiﬁcation
scheme of Bejar et al. (1991). This is a hierarchical classiﬁcation system with ten
high-level categories, each of which has between ﬁve and ten subcategories, for a
total of seventy-nine distinct subcategories.
For each subcategory in Bejar et al.’s (1991) relation taxonomy, we have several
types of information, shown in Table 1. The ﬁrst four types of information come
from Bejar et al. (1991) and the rest were added by Jurgens et al. (2012).14
The original SemEval-2012 dataset was generated in two phases, using Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (Jurgens et al. 2012).15 We refer to Mechanical Turk workers as
Turkers. In the ﬁrst phase, for each of the seventy-nine subcategories, Turkers were
shown paradigmatic examples of word pairs in the given subcategory, and they
were asked to generate more word pairs of the same semantic relation type. In the
second phase, for each of the seventy-nine subcategories, Turkers were shown word
pairs that were generated in the ﬁrst phase, and they were asked to rate the pairs
according to their degree of prototypicality for the given semantic relation type.
(See Table 1 for examples of the results of the two phases.)
We transformed the original SemEval-2012 semantic relation dataset to the new
lexical entailment dataset in four steps:
1. Cleaning: To improve the quality of the dataset, we removed the ten lowest-
rated word pairs from each subcategory. Since the original dataset has 3,218
word pairs, the average subcategory has 40.7 word pairs. Our cleaning oper-
ation reduced this to 30.7 pairs per subcategory, a total of 2,428 word pairs
(3218 −79 × 10 = 2428).
2. Doubling: For each word pair a : b labeled with a subcategory X, we gener-
ated a new word pair b : a and labeled it X−1. For example, car:engine is
14 All of this information is provided in the ﬁle SemEval-2012-Complete-Data-Package at
https://sites.google.com/site/semeval2012task2/download.
15 See https://www.mturk.com/.

24
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
labeled object:component, so we created the pair engine:car and labeled it
object:component−1. This increased the number of pairs to 4,856 and the
number of subcategories to 158.
3. Mapping: We then mapped the 158 subcategory labels to the labels 0 (does
not entail) and 1 (entails). The mapping is given in Tables 2 and 3. We
assume all word pairs within a subcategory belong to the same class (either
all entail or none entail). (This assumption is tested in Section 7.3.2.) The
result of mapping was 4,856 word pairs with two labels. There were 1,154
pairs labeled 1 and 3,702 pairs labeled 0.
4. Balancing: To make a balanced dataset, we randomly removed pairs labeled
0 until there were 1,154 pairs labeled 0 and 1,154 pairs labeled 1, a total of
2,308 word pairs.
Here is how to interpret Tables 2 and 3: Given the pair anesthetic:numbness
with the label instrument:goal, we see from Table 3 (ID 8f) that a |= b has the
value 1, so we map the label instrument:goal to the label 1 (entails). Given the pair
numbness:anesthetic labeled instrument:goal−1, we see from the table (ID 8f) that
b |= a has the value 0, so we map the label instrument:goal−1 to the label 0 (does
not entail). In other words, anesthetic |= numbness:
Text: Due to the anesthetic, Jane felt no pain.
Hypothesis: Due to the numbness, Jane felt no pain.
Text |= Hypothesis
However, numbness ̸|= anesthetic; for example, the numbness might be caused by
cold temperature, not anesthetic:
Text: George had frostbite. Due to the numbness, he felt no pain.
Hypothesis: Due to the anesthetic, he felt no pain.
Text ̸|= Hypothesis
Of the seventy-nine subcategories, twenty-ﬁve were labeled with class 1 for a |= b
and twelve were labeled with class 1 for b |= a. Note that two of the subcategories
are labeled with class 1 for both a |= b and b |= a (IDs 3a and 9e). This shows that
our transformation handles both symmetric and asymmetric semantic relations.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
25
Table 2. Semantic relation categories 1 to 5, based on Bejar et al. (1991)
ID
Category
Subcategory
Example (a:b)
a |= b
b |= a
1a
class-inclusion
taxonomic
ﬂower:tulip
0
1
1b
class-inclusion
functional
weapon:knife
0
1
1c
class-inclusion
singular:collective
cutlery:spoon
0
1
1d
class-inclusion
plural:collective
dishes:saucers
0
1
1e
class-inclusion
class:individual
mountain:Everest
0
1
2a
part-whole
object:component
car:engine
1
0
2b
part-whole
collection:member
forest:tree
1
0
2c
part-whole
mass:potion
time:moment
1
0
2d
part-whole
event:feature
banquet:food
1
0
2e
part-whole
stage:activity
kickoﬀ:football
0
1
2f
part-whole
item:topological part
room:corner
1
0
2g
part-whole
object:stuﬀ
glacier:ice
1
0
2h
part-whole
creature:possession
millionaire:money
1
0
2i
part-whole
item:nonpart
horse:wings
0
0
2j
part-whole
item:ex-part
prisoner:freedom
0
0
3a
similar
synonymity
car:auto
1
1
3b
similar
dimension similarity
simmer:boil
0
0
3c
similar
dimension excessive
concerned:obsessed
0
1
3d
similar
dimension naughty
listen:eavesdrop
0
1
3e
similar
conversion
grape:wine
0
0
3f
similar
attribute similarity
rake:fork
0
0
3g
similar
coordinates
son:daughter
0
0
3h
similar
change
crescendo:sound
1
0
4a
contrast
contradictory
alive:dead
0
0
4b
contrast
contrary
happy:sad
0
0
4c
contrast
reverse
buy:sell
0
0
4d
contrast
directional
left:right
0
0
4e
contrast
incompatible
slow:stationary
0
0
4f
contrast
asymmetric contrary
hot:cool
0
0
4g
contrast
pseudoantonym
popular:shy
0
0
4h
contrast
defective
limp:walk
1
0
5a
attribute
item:attribute
glass:fragile
1
0
5b
attribute
attribute:condition
edible:eaten
0
0
5c
attribute
object:state
beggar:poverty
1
0
5d
attribute
attribute:state
contentious:conﬂict
1
0
5e
attribute
object:typical act
soldier:ﬁght
0
0
5f
attribute
attribute:typical act
viable:live
0
0
5g
attribute
act:act attribute
creep:slow
1
0
5h
attribute
act:object attribute
sterilize:infectious
0
0
5i
attribute
act:resultant
rain:wet
1
0

26
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 3. Semantic relation categories 6 to 10, based on Bejar et al. (1991)
ID
Category
Subcategory
Example (a:b)
a |= b
b |= a
6a
non-attribute
item:nonattribute
harmony:discordant
0
0
6b
non-attribute
attr.:noncondition
brittle:molded
0
0
6c
non-attribute
object:nonstate
laureate:dishonor
0
0
6d
non-attribute
attr.:nonstate
dull:cunning
0
0
6e
non-attribute
obj.:atypical act
recluse:socialize
0
0
6f
non-attribute
attr.:atypical act
reticent:talk
0
0
6g
non-attribute
act:act nonattr.
creep:fast
0
0
6h
non-attribute
act:object nonattr.
embellish:austere
0
0
7a
case relations
agent:object
tailor:suit
0
0
7b
case relations
agent:recipient
doctor:patient
0
0
7c
case relations
agent:instrument
farmer:tractor
0
0
7d
case relations
act:object
plow:earth
0
0
7e
case relations
act:recipient
bequeath:heir
1
0
7f
case relations
object:recipient
speech:audience
0
0
7g
case relations
object:instrument
pipe:wrench
0
0
7h
case relations
recipient:instr.
graduate:diploma
0
0
8a
cause-purpose
cause:eﬀect
enigma:puzzlement
1
0
8b
cause-purpose
cause:counteract
hunger:eat
0
0
8c
cause-purpose
enabler:object
match:candle
0
0
8d
cause-purpose
act:goal
ﬂee:escape
0
0
8e
cause-purpose
agent:goal
climber:peak
0
0
8f
cause-purpose
instrument:goal
anesthetic:numbness
1
0
8g
cause-purpose
instrument:use
abacus:calculate
0
0
8h
cause-purpose
prevention
pesticide:vermin
0
0
9a
space-time
location:item
arsenal:weapon
1
0
9b
space-time
location:product
bakery:bread
1
0
9c
space-time
location:activity
highway:driving
0
0
9d
space-time
location:instr.
beach:swimsuit
0
0
9e
space-time
contiguity
coast:ocean
1
1
9f
space-time
time:activity
childhood:play
0
0
9g
space-time
time:associated
retirement:pension
0
0
9h
space-time
sequence
prologue:narrative
0
0
9i
space-time
attachment
belt:waist
0
0
10a
reference
sign:signiﬁcant
siren:danger
1
0
10b
reference
expression
hug:aﬀection
1
0
10c
reference
representation
person:portrait
0
1
10d
reference
plan
blueprint:building
0
1
10e
reference
knowledge
psychology:minds
1
0
10f
reference
concealment
disguise:identity
1
0

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
27
7.3.1 Making the mapping table
We (Turney and Mohammad) each independently created a mapping like Tables 2
and 3. We disagreed on twelve of the 158 (79 × 2) mappings (92.4% agreement).
We compared our tables and discussed them until we arrived at a consensus. For
all twelve disagreements, our consensus was to label them 0. Tables 2 and 3 are the
result of our consensus.
We used the ﬁrst ﬁve types of information in Table 1 to decide how to map relation
classes to entailment classes. Before we each independently created a mapping table,
we agreed to approach the task as follows:
Procedure for annotation:
1. The relational schemas have more weight than the paradigmatic examples when de-
ciding whether x entails y or y entails x.
2. Consider each of the paradigm pairs as instances of the given relational schema. That
is, interpret the pairs in the light of the schema. If the three paradigmatic pairs are
such that x entails y, when interpreted this way, then annotate the given category as
‘x entails y’, and likewise for y entails x. If two out of three paradigmatic pairs are
such that x entails y, and the pair that is the exception seems unusual in some way,
make a note about the exceptional pair, for later discussion.
3. If any of the paradigmatic pairs are in the wrong order, correct their order before
proceeding. Make a note of the correction.
We then compared our tables and combined them to form the ﬁnal Tables 2 and 3.
7.3.2 Inter-annotator agreement
As we mentioned above, we assume all word pairs within a subcategory belong
to the same class (either all entail or none entail). To test this assumption, we
randomly selected 100 word pairs, 50 labeled entails and 50 labeled does not entail.
We hid the labels and then we each independently manually labeled the pairs, ﬁrst
using the relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment and then a second time using
the substitutional deﬁnition of lexical entailment (see Section 2). Table 4 shows the
percentage agreement between our manual labels and automatic labeling, generated
from the SemEval-2012 dataset by the mapping in Tables 2 and 3.
With the relational deﬁnition of lexical entailment, we agreed on 81% of the
labels. The agreement between our manual labels and the labels that were generated
automatically, by applying the mapping in Tables 2 and 3 to the SemEval dataset,
varied from 70% to 81%. These numbers suggest that our assumption that all word
pairs within a subcategory belong to the same class is reasonable. The assumption
yields levels of agreement that are comparable to the agreement in our manual
labels.
We mentioned in Section 7.1 that Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan (2009) had
inter-annotator agreements in the 90% range, whereas our agreement is 81%. We
hypothesize that substitutability is a relatively objective test that leads to higher
levels of agreement but excludes important cases of lexical entailment. We discussed
some examples of cases that are missed by the substitutional deﬁnition in Section 2.

28
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 4. Agreement and entailment for the two deﬁnitions of lexical entailment
Measure
Annotation
Relational
Substitutional
percent agreement
Turney versus Mohammad
81
89
percent agreement
Turney versus SemEval
81
68
percent agreement
Mohammad versus SemEval
70
65
percent entailing
Turney
51
22
percent entailing
Mohammad
48
25
percent entailing
SemEval
50
50
Table 4 shows that the agreement in our manual labels is 81% for the relational
deﬁnition and 89% for the substitutional deﬁnition. This supports our hypothesis
that substitutability is more objective. The agreement of 89% is close to the levels
reported by Zhitomirsky-Geﬀet and Dagan (2009). On the other hand, the number
of pairs labeled entails drops from 48-51% for the relational deﬁnition to 22-25%
for the substitional deﬁnition. This supports our hypothesis that substitutability
excludes many cases of entailment. The relational deﬁnition yields approximately
twice the number of lexical entailments that are captured by the substitutional
deﬁnition.
As expected, the automated labeling using SemEval corresponds more closely
to manual labeling with the relational deﬁnition (70-81%) than manual labeling
with the substitional deﬁnition (65-68%). This conﬁrms that the construction of
the dataset is in accordance with the intention of our relational deﬁnition.
8 Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the three approaches to lexical entailment (balAPinc,
ConVecs, and SimDiﬀs) on the three datasets.
8.1 Experiments with the JMTH dataset
For the ﬁrst set of experiments, we used the JMTH dataset (Section 7.3). This
dataset has 2,308 word pairs, 1,154 in class 0 and 1,154 in class 1.
8.1.1 Experimental setup
For the experiments, we split the dataset into three (approximately) equal parts,
two development sets (Dev1 and Dev2) and one test set (Test). The splits were
random, except the balance of the class sizes was maintained in all three subsets.
Dev1 and Dev2 both contain 768 pairs and Test contains 772 pairs.
Table 5 shows the number of word pairs in the Test set for each of the ten high-
level categories. In Tables 2 and 3, we see that a |= b is 0 for all subcategories of

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
29
Table 5. The distribution of the ten high-level categories in the Test set
ID
Category
a |= b
a ̸|= b
b |= a
b ̸|= a
Total
1
class-inclusion
0
12
55
0
67
2
part-whole
72
7
12
27
118
3
similar
28
15
28
15
86
4
contrast
9
25
0
26
60
5
attribute
56
13
0
26
95
6
non-attribute
0
40
0
31
71
7
case relations
6
24
0
27
57
8
cause-purpose
21
15
0
29
65
9
space-time
35
17
10
17
79
10
reference
34
8
20
12
74
—
total
261
176
125
210
772
the category class-inclusion, hence there are 0 pairs for a |= b in the row for class-
inclusion in Table 5 but there are 12 pairs for a ̸|= b. On the other hand, in Tables 2
and 3, b |= a is 1 for all subcategories of the category class-inclusion, so it is not
surprising to see that there are 55 pairs for b |= a in the row for class-inclusion in
Table 5 and 0 pairs for b ̸|= a. The number of pairs labeled entails is 261+125 = 386
and the number labeled does not entail is 176 + 210 = 386.
The balAPinc measure has two parameters to tune, maxF for the maximum
number of features and T as a threshold for classiﬁcation. On Dev1, we calculated
balAPinc ﬁve times, using ﬁve diﬀerent values for maxF , 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000,
and 5000. For each given value of maxF , we set T to the value that optimized
the F-measure on Dev1. This gave us ﬁve pairs of values for maxF and T . We
tested each of these ﬁve settings on Dev2 and chose the setting that maximized
the F-measure, which was maxF = 1000. The balAPinc measure is robust with
respect to the parameter settings. The accuracy on Dev2 ranged from 56.5% with
maxF = 1000 to 52.5% with maxF = 5000. We kept the best maxF setting, but we
tuned T again on the union of Dev1 and Dev2. With these parameter settings, we
then applied balAPinc to the Test set.
ConVecs has two parameters to tune, k and p for UkΣp
k. For k, we tried 100,
200, 300, 400, and 500. For p, we tried ten values, from 0.1 to 1.0 in increments
of 0.1. For each of the ﬁfty pairs of values for k and p, we ran Weka, using Dev1
as training data and Dev2 as testing data. The maximum F-measure on Dev2 was
achieved with k = 100 and p = 0.4. ConVecs is robust with respect to the parameter
settings. The accuracy on Dev2 ranged from a high of 70.1% to a low of 64.6%. We
then ran Weka one more time, using k = 100 and p = 0.4, with the union of Dev1
and Dev2 as training data and Test as testing data.
SimDiﬀs has four parameters to tune, kd and pd for domain space and kf and

30
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 6. Comparison of the three algorithms on the JMTH dataset
Algorithm
AP0
AP1
Pre
Rec
F
Acc
95% C.I.
balAPinc
0.57
0.56
0.573
0.573
0.573
57.3
53.8–60.7
ConVecs
0.76
0.77
0.703
0.702
0.702
70.2
66.9–73.3
SimDiﬀs
0.80
0.79
0.724
0.724
0.724
72.4
69.1–75.4
pf for function space, but we reduced this to two parameters, k and p, by setting
k = kd = kf and p = pd = pf. We tried the same ﬁfty pairs of values for k and
p as we did with ConVecs. The maximum F-measure on Dev2 was achieved with
k = 200 and p = 0.6. SimDiﬀs is robust with respect to the parameter settings. The
accuracy on Dev2 ranged from 74.1% to 68.2%. We then ran Weka one more time,
with the union of Dev1 and Dev2 as training data and Test as testing data.
8.1.2 Results
Table 6 shows the performance of all three algorithms on the Test set. The accuracy
of ConVecs (70.2%) is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the accuracy of SimDiﬀs
(72.4%), according to Fisher’s Exact Test (Agresti 1996). However, both ConVecs
and SimDiﬀs are more accurate than balAPinc (57.3%), at the 95% conﬁdence
level. The other performance measures (AP0, AP1, Pre, Rec, and F) follow the
same general pattern as accuracy, which is what we would usually expect for a
balanced dataset. The ﬁnal column in Table 6 shows the 95% conﬁdence interval
for accuracy, calculated using the Wilson method.
Table 7 shows how the accuracies of the three algorithms vary over the ten
high-level categories in the Test set. ConVecs and SimDiﬀs have roughly similar
proﬁles but balAPinc is substantially diﬀerent from the other two. This is what we
would expect, given that ConVecs and SimDiﬀs both approach lexical entailment
as a semantic relation classiﬁcation problem, whereas balAPinc approaches it as a
problem of designing an asymmetric similarity measure. The approach of balAPinc
is near the level of the other two for some relation categories (e.g., class-inclusion,
non-attribute) but substantially below for others (e.g., attribute, case relations,
reference).
In Table 8, we explore the contribution of each set of features to the performance
of SimDiﬀs. In the columns for S1 to S4, a value of 1 indicates that the set is included
in the feature vector and 0 indicates that the set is excluded (see Section 6.3). S1 is
the diﬀerence between a and b in domain space, with respect to their similarities to
the reference words, R. S2 is the diﬀerence between a and b in function space. S1
and S2 are based on diﬀerences in the same spaces, whereas S3 and S4 are based
on diﬀerences in diﬀerent spaces. The parameters are tuned individually for each
row in Table 8, the same way they are tuned for SimDiﬀs in Table 6. The results
are based on the Test set.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
31
Table 7. Accuracy for each of the ten high-level categories in the Test set
ID
Category
balAPinc
ConVecs
SimDiﬀs
Size
1
class-inclusion
79.1
76.1
88.1
67
2
part-whole
61.0
69.5
66.9
118
3
similar
46.5
44.2
54.7
86
4
contrast
65.0
76.7
80.0
60
5
attribute
44.2
68.4
70.5
95
6
non-attribute
77.5
74.6
76.1
71
7
case relations
43.9
64.9
71.9
57
8
cause-purpose
49.2
73.8
75.4
65
9
space-time
68.4
83.5
77.2
79
10
reference
40.5
75.7
73.0
74
—
average
57.3
70.2
72.4
77
Table 8. Experiments with subsets of SimDiﬀs features
S1
S2
S3
S4
AP0
AP1
Pre
Rec
F
Acc
95% C.I.
1
1
1
1
0.80
0.79
0.724
0.724
0.724
72.4
69.1–75.4
1
1
0
0
0.76
0.75
0.680
0.680
0.680
68.0
64.6–71.2
0
0
1
1
0.79
0.79
0.717
0.716
0.716
71.6
68.3–74.7
1
0
0
0
0.71
0.69
0.663
0.663
0.663
66.3
62.9–69.6
0
1
0
0
0.75
0.72
0.684
0.684
0.684
68.4
65.0–71.6
0
0
1
0
0.76
0.74
0.690
0.690
0.690
69.0
65.7–72.2
0
0
0
1
0.75
0.73
0.701
0.701
0.701
70.1
66.8–73.2
Most of the diﬀerences in the accuracies in Table 8 are not signiﬁcant, but the
accuracy of all of the features together (72.4%) is signiﬁcantly higher than the
accuracy of S1 and S2 without the help of S3 and S4 (68.0%), according to Fisher’s
Exact Test at the 95% conﬁdence level. This supports the view that working with
two diﬀerent spaces has a synergetic eﬀect, since each feature in S3 and S4 is based
on two diﬀerent spaces, whereas each feature in S1 and S2 is based on one space.
(See the discussion of this in Section 6.3.)
Let Gen (general) refer to the matrix from Turney et al. (2011) and let Dom and
Fun refer to the domain and function matrices from Turney (2012). In Section 6,
we mentioned that we performed experiments on the development datasets (Dev1
and Dev2) in order to select the matrices for each algorithm. Based on these ex-
periments, we chose the Gen matrix for both balAPinc and ConVecs, and we chose

32
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 9. Eﬀect of the matrices on the performance of the algorithms
Algorithm
Matrices
AP0
AP1
Pre
Rec
F
Acc
95% C.I.
balAPinc
Gen
0.57
0.56
0.573
0.573
0.573
57.3
53.8–60.7
Dom
0.53
0.54
0.532
0.532
0.532
53.2
49.7–56.7
Fun
0.54
0.53
0.530
0.530
0.530
53.0
49.5–56.5
ConVecs
Gen
0.76
0.77
0.703
0.702
0.702
70.2
66.9–73.3
Dom
0.72
0.75
0.676
0.675
0.674
67.5
64.1–70.7
Fun
0.79
0.78
0.719
0.719
0.719
71.9
68.6–75.0
SimDiﬀs
Dom, Fun
0.80
0.79
0.724
0.724
0.724
72.4
69.1–75.4
Gen, Fun
0.79
0.79
0.728
0.728
0.728
72.8
69.5–75.9
Dom, Gen
0.77
0.77
0.702
0.702
0.702
70.2
66.9–73.3
Gen, Gen
0.75
0.76
0.689
0.689
0.689
68.9
65.6–72.1
the Dom and Fun matrices for SimDiﬀs.
In Table 9, we vary the matrices and evaluate the performance on the Test set,
to see whether the development datasets were a reliable guide for choosing the
matrices. The matrices that were chosen based on the development datasets are
in bold font. For balAPinc, Gen (57.3%) is indeed the best matrix. For ConVecs,
it seems that Fun (71.9%) might be a better choice than Gen (70.2%), but the
diﬀerence in their accuracy is not statistically signiﬁcant. For SimDiﬀs, Dom and
Fun (72.4%) are slightly less accurate than Gen and Fun (72.8%), but again the
diﬀerence is not signiﬁcant. As expected, no matrices are signiﬁcantly better on the
Test set than the matrices that were chosen based on the development datasets.
8.2 Experiments with the KDSZ dataset
The second set of experiments used the KDSZ dataset (Section 7.1). This dataset
has 3,772 word pairs, 2,704 in class 0 and 1,068 in class 1.
8.2.1 Experimental setup
We experimented with four diﬀerent ways of splitting the dataset. The Evaluation
column in Table 10 indicates the experimental setup (dataset splitting).
The standard evaluation is ten-fold cross-validation in which the folds are random.
This evaluation yields relatively high scores, because, although every pair in the
KDSZ dataset is unique, many pairs share a common term. This makes supervised
learning easier, because a pair in the testing fold will often share a term with several
pairs in the training folds.
The clustered evaluation is designed to be more challenging than the standard
evaluation. The clustered evaluation is ten-fold cross-validation with non-random

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
33
folds. We put pairs that share a common term into the same fold. Due to the large
number of pairs with shared terms, it is not possible to construct ten folds such
that there are absolutely no terms that are shared by any two folds. Therefore we
gave a high priority to isolating the most common shared words to single folds, but
we allowed a few less common shared words to appear in more than one fold. Thus
a pair in the testing fold will only rarely share a term with pairs in the training
folds.
The standard and clustered evaluations have more examples in class 0 (does not
entail) than in class 1 (entails). The balanced dataset takes the clustered evaluation
a step further, by ﬁrst clustering folds and then randomly removing pairs labeled
as class 0, until the folds all have an equal number of pairs in both classes.
For the diﬀerent evaluation, instead of cross-validation, the algorithms are trained
on the JMTH dataset and tested on the KDSZ dataset, after the KDSZ dataset
has been balanced by randomly removing pairs labeled as class 0.
The balAPinc measure has two parameters, maxF for the maximum number of
features and T as a threshold for classiﬁcation. In all four experimental setups, we
used the setting maxF = 1000, based on the tuning experiments with the JMTH
dataset (Section 8.1). For T , we used the training split in each of the four experi-
mental setups. For the standard, clustered, and balanced setups, the training split is
the nine folds used for training in each step of the ten-fold cross-validation. For the
diﬀerent setup, the training split is the whole JMTH dataset. For all four setups,
we set T to the value that optimized the F-measure on the training split.
ConVecs has two parameters to tune, k and p for UkΣp
k. In all four experimental
setups, we used k = 100 and p = 0.4, based on the experiments with the JMTH
dataset. The training splits were used to teach the supervised learning algorithm
(the polynomial kernel SMO SVM in Weka).
SimDiﬀs has four parameters to tune. We used kd = kf = 200 and pd = pf = 0.6,
based on the experiments with the JMTH dataset. The training splits were used to
teach the supervised learning algorithm (the RBF kernel SMO SVM in Weka).
8.2.2 Results
In Table 10, the four experimental setups (standard, clustered, balanced, and dif-
ferent) are given in order of increasing challenge and increasing realism. Of the four
experimental setups, we believe that the diﬀerent evaluation is the most challeng-
ing and most realistic. If an RLE module is part of a commercial RTE system,
the module will inevitably encounter word pairs in the ﬁeld that are quite diﬀerent
from the pairs it saw during training. The diﬀerent evaluation comes closest to
approximating ﬁeld usage.
On the diﬀerent evaluations, balAPinc achieves an accuracy of 58.2%, ConVecs
has an accuracy of 56.1%, and SimDiﬀs reaches 57.4%. There is no statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between any of these accuracies, according to Fisher’s Exact
Test at the 95% conﬁdence level.
With ConVecs and SimDiﬀs, compared to balAPinc, there is a relatively large
gap between the standard performance and the diﬀerent performance. This is be-

34
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 10. Comparison of the three algorithms on the KDSZ dataset
Algorithm
Evaluation
AP0
AP1
Pre
Rec
F
Acc
95% C.I.
balAPinc
standard
0.79
0.37
0.645
0.645
0.645
64.5
63.0–66.0
clustered
0.79
0.37
0.644
0.643
0.644
64.3
62.8–65.8
balanced
0.60
0.59
0.583
0.583
0.583
58.3
56.2–60.4
diﬀerent
0.61
0.60
0.582
0.582
0.582
58.2
56.1–60.3
ConVecs
standard
0.87
0.56
0.731
0.747
0.735
74.7
73.3–76.1
clustered
0.78
0.36
0.636
0.690
0.645
69.0
67.5–70.5
balanced
0.60
0.59
0.567
0.554
0.531
55.4
53.3–57.5
diﬀerent
0.57
0.62
0.569
0.561
0.547
56.1
54.0–58.2
SimDiﬀs
standard
0.88
0.60
0.749
0.757
0.752
75.7
74.3–77.0
clustered
0.80
0.40
0.664
0.684
0.671
68.4
66.9–69.9
balanced
0.63
0.64
0.596
0.592
0.588
59.2
57.1–61.3
diﬀerent
0.58
0.61
0.581
0.574
0.564
57.4
55.3–59.5
cause ConVecs and SimDiﬀs use supervised learning and thus they beneﬁt from
the standard setup, where the training data is highly similar to the testing data. In
balAPinc, the training data is used only to tune the threshold, T , which limits the
beneﬁt of the training data.
Note that the gap between the standard performance and the diﬀerent perfor-
mance is not simply a question of the quantity of data. In the diﬀerent setup, there
is a qualitative diﬀerence between the training data and the testing data. Increasing
the size of the training dataset with more data of the same type will not be helpful.
The goal of the diﬀerent setup is to test the ability of the algorithms to bridge the
qualitative gap between the training and testing data. This qualitative gap is more
challenging for supervised learning than a quantitative gap. It is a gap that learning
algorithms inevitably face in real applications (Pan and Yang 2010).
The KDSZ dataset has been used in previous research, but the past results are
not comparable with our results. Kotlerman et al. (2010) reported AP1 without
AP0, but there is a trade-oﬀbetween AP1 and AP0. Kotlerman et al. (2010) did
not attempt to evaluate balAPinc as a classiﬁer, so they did not report precision,
recall, F-measure, or accuracy.
8.3 Experiments with the BBDS dataset
The ﬁnal set of experiments used the BBDS dataset (Section 7.2). The dataset has
2,770 word pairs, 1,385 in class 0 and 1,385 in class 1.

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
35
Table 11. Comparison of the three algorithms on the BBDS dataset
Algorithm
Evaluation
AP0
AP1
Pre
Rec
F
Acc
95% C.I.
balAPinc
standard
0.79
0.73
0.722
0.722
0.722
72.2
70.5–73.8
clustered
0.79
0.73
0.722
0.722
0.722
72.2
70.5–73.8
diﬀerent
0.79
0.73
0.701
0.687
0.682
68.7
67.0–70.4
ConVecs
standard
0.95
0.95
0.876
0.876
0.876
87.6
86.3–88.8
clustered
0.92
0.91
0.829
0.821
0.819
82.1
80.6–83.5
diﬀerent
0.72
0.71
0.652
0.651
0.650
65.1
63.3–66.9
SimDiﬀs
standard
0.97
0.97
0.913
0.913
0.913
91.3
90.2–92.3
clustered
0.96
0.96
0.883
0.881
0.881
88.1
86.8–89.3
diﬀerent
0.84
0.82
0.751
0.745
0.743
74.5
72.8–76.1
8.3.1 Experimental setup
We experimented with three diﬀerent ways of splitting the dataset. In Table 11,
the evaluations follow the same setups as in Table 10. However, there is no balanced
setup, since the BBDS dataset is already balanced. In the diﬀerent evaluation, the
algorithms are trained on the JMTH dataset and evaluated on the BBDS. This is
the most realistic evaluation setup.
8.3.2 Results
In Table 11, on the diﬀerent evaluations, balAPinc achieves an accuracy of 68.7%,
ConVecs has an accuracy of 65.1%, and SimDiﬀs reaches 74.5%. All of these ac-
curacies are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, according to Fisher’s Exact Test at the 95%
conﬁdence level.
The BBDS data was used by Baroni et al. (2012) to compare balAPinc with
ConVecs. They used two diﬀerent evaluation setups, similar to our standard and
diﬀerent setups. For balAPinc using a standard setup, they obtained an accuracy
of 70.1%, slighly below our result of 72.2%. The diﬀerence is likely due to minor
diﬀerences in the word–context matrices that we used. For balAPinc using a diﬀer-
ent setup, their accuracy was 70.4%, compared to our 68.7%. They used their own
independent dataset to tune balAPinc, whereas we used the JMTH dataset. Given
that our word–context matrices and our training data are diﬀerent from theirs, the
accuracies are closer than might be expected.16
For ConVecs using a standard setup, Baroni et al. (2012) report an accuracy of
88.6%, whereas we achived 87.6%. Using a diﬀerent setup, they obtained 69.3%,
whereas our accuracy was 65.1%. It seems likely that our training data (the JMTH
16 These accuracy numbers and the numbers reported in the next paragraph are taken
from Table 2 in Baroni et al. (2012).

36
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
Table 12. Summary of accuracy for the three algorithms with the three datasets
Algorithm
JMTH Accuracy
KDSZ Accuracy
BBDS Accuracy
balAPinc
57.3
58.2
68.7
ConVecs
70.2
56.1
65.1
SimDiﬀs
72.4
57.4
74.5
dataset) was less similar to the BBDS dataset than their own independent dataset,
which made our diﬀerent setup more challenging than theirs. Nonetheless, the ac-
curacies are closer than might be expected, given the diﬀerences in the setups.
9 Discussion of results
Table 12 summarizes the accuracy results from the experiments. For the KDSZ and
BBDS experiments, only the diﬀerent evaluation is shown. Bold font is used to mark
the cases where the accuracy is signiﬁcantly less than the accuracy of SimDiﬀs. In
no case is the accuracy signiﬁcantly greater than the accuracy of SimDiﬀs.
The JMTH dataset is based on seventy-nine types of semantic relations. The
pairs in this dataset were labeled in accordance with the relational deﬁnition of
lexical entailment (see Section 2). This explains why balAPinc, which was designed
with the substitutional deﬁnition in mind, performs poorly on the JMTH dataset.
ConVecs and SimDiﬀs were designed for semantic relation classiﬁcation, so it is not
surprising that they perform much better than balAPinc.
The KDSZ dataset was labeled using the substitutional deﬁnition of lexical entail-
ment (see Section 2). On this dataset, there is no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between any of the algorithms. This is the ideal dataset for balAPinc, the dataset
for which it was designed, so it is natural that balAPinc has the highest accuracy.
On the other hand, we see that the two learning algorithms handle this dataset well,
although they were trained on the JMTH dataset (recall that this is the diﬀerent
setup), which is quite diﬀerent from the KDSZ dataset. It is good that they are
both able to cope with the qualitative diﬀerence between the training data and the
testing data.
All of the positive pairs in the BBDS dataset are instances of the hyponym–
hypernym semantic relation. Instances of this relation are substitutable, so bal-
APinc is designed to handle them. ConVecs was also designed speciﬁcally for this
dataset, and we see from Table 11 that ConVecs reaches an accuracy of 87.6%
when the training data is similar to the testing data. However, ConVecs has trou-
ble bridging the qualitative gap between the training data (the JMTH dataset) and
the testing data with the diﬀerent setup. On the other hand, SimDiﬀs is able to
bridge this gap.
We have argued that the diﬀerent evaluation is the most realistic scenario, but
it could be argued that the entails class is more important than the does not entail

Three Approaches to Recognizing Lexical Entailment
37
Table 13. Summary of AP1 for the three algorithms with the three datasets
Algorithm
JMTH AP1
KDSZ AP1
BBDS AP1
balAPinc
0.56
0.37
0.73
ConVecs
0.77
0.36
0.91
SimDiﬀs
0.79
0.40
0.96
class, and entails is also more scarce in natural settings. Therefore Table 13 presents
an alternative summary of the results. The table reports AP1 instead of accuracy;
this puts the emphasis on the entails class. For the KDSZ and BBDS datasets,
we report the clustered setup. This is closer to the evaluation setup of Kotlerman
et al. (2010). In this table, we do not use bold font to mark signiﬁcant diﬀerences,
because there is no agreement on the appropriate statistical test for AP1.
Although Tables 12 and 13 are based on diﬀerent scores and experimental setups,
both support SimDiﬀs and the similarity diﬀerences hypothesis. More generally,
they suggest that second-order features are useful for modeling lexical entailment.
They also suggest that it is beneﬁcial to use two diﬀerent spaces when constructing
features for lexical entailment.
Manually designing an asymmetric similarity measure is a diﬃcult task, as we
can see from the equations in Section 6.1. We believe that lexical entailment is
more tractable when it is approached as a supervised learning problem. The eﬀort
involved in manually designing feature vectors is less than that required for de-
signing similarity measures. The performance of SimDiﬀs indicates that supervised
learning can yield better results than manually designing measures.
10 Limitations and future work
We have evaluated RLE directly, but most applications would use RLE as a mod-
ule inside a larger system. Future work will be needed to demonstrate that our
results with a direct evaluation can predict how an RLE module will perform as a
component of a larger system.
Although SimDiﬀs performs better than the competition, there is much room for
improved performance. However, when SimDiﬀs is used as a component in a larger
RTE system, words will be given in the contexts of sentences. With the support
of this contextual information and help from the other modules in the system,
SimDiﬀs might yield substantial improvements in RTE performance. Related to this
proposed future work, Shnarch, Barak, and Dagan (2009) evaluated lexical reference
rules (Glickman et al. 2006) derived from Wikipedia on the RTE-4 dataset. Used
as a component in an RTE system, the rules improved the RTE-4 score by 1%.
Most of the past work on RLE has been based on the context inclusion hypothesis,
but ConVecs and SimDiﬀs show that other approaches, based on novel hypotheses,
can achieve competitive results. We believe that progress on the problem will come

38
P. D. Turney and S. M. Mohammad
from exploring a wide range of hypotheses and approaches. It is too early at this
stage of research to commit the ﬁeld to a single hypothesis.
Recall the semantic relation subcategories hypothesis: Lexical entailment is not a
superset of high-level categories of semantic relations, but it is a superset of lower-
level subcategories of semantic relations. The experiments lend some support to
this hypothesis, but more research is needed. Any counterexamples for the hypoth-
esis could be handled by revising the taxonomy. However, if the required revisions
become onerous, then the hypothesis should be rejected.
The three algorithms here are based on three diﬀerent hypotheses, but all three
achieve some degree of success on the task of RLE. This suggests that it would be
fruitful to combine the three approaches. One simple way to combine them would be
to average their real-valued outputs or apply voting to their binary-valued outputs.
This could be a useful direction for future research.
We have focused here on individual words, but the natural next step is to extend
these ideas to phrases. Baroni et al. (2012) have achieved promising results with
quantiﬁer phrases, such as all dogs |= some dogs.
Looking at Tables 2 and 3 in Section 7.3, we see a high density of 1’s (entails) for
class-inclusion and part-whole. The strong connection between these two categories
and lexical entailment may explain why Morris and Hirst (2004) call hypernymy
and meronymy classical relations, whereas the relation in chapel:funeral (space-
time, location:activity, ID 9c) is non-classical (this is one of their examples of a
non-classical relation). For instance, WordNet contains information about hyper-
nymy and meronymy, but not space-time relations. Particular relations might be
considered classical because we ﬁnd them particularly useful for making inferences.
This connection is another topic for future work.
11 Conclusion
In this paper, we have evaluated three diﬀerent algorithms for RLE on three dif-
ferent datasets. Each algorithm relies on a diﬀerent hypothesis about lexical entail-
ment. We ﬁnd that SimDiﬀs has the best performance on two of the three datasets.
On the third dataset, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the three algorithms. The
performance of SimDiﬀs suggests that similarity diﬀerences make useful features
for learning to recognize lexical entailment.
We have approached lexical entailment as a supervised learning problem of se-
mantic relation classiﬁcation. The results indicate that this is a promising approach
to lexical entailment. This builds a bridge between research in lexical entailment
and research in semantic relation classiﬁcation. We hope that this connection will
strengthen research in both ﬁelds.
