Arming the public with artiﬁcial intelligence to
counter social bots
Kai-Cheng Yang1, Onur Varol2, Clayton A. Davis1, Emilio
Ferrara3, Alessandro Flammini1,4, and Filippo Menczer1,4
1Center for Complex Networks & Systems Research, Indiana
University
2Center for Complex Networks Research, Northeastern University
3Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
4Indiana University Network Science Institute
Abstract
The increased relevance of social media in our daily life has been ac-
companied by eﬀorts to manipulate online conversations and opinions.
Deceptive social bots — automated or semi-automated accounts designed
to impersonate humans — have been successfully exploited for these kinds
of abuse. Researchers have responded by developing AI tools to arm the
public in the ﬁght against social bots. Here we review the literature on
diﬀerent types of bots, their impact, and detection methods.
We use
the case study of Botometer, a popular bot detection tool developed at
Indiana University, to illustrate how people interact with AI countermea-
sures. A user experience survey suggests that bot detection has become
an integral part of the social media experience for many users. However,
barriers in interpreting the output of AI tools can lead to fundamental
misunderstandings. The arms race between machine learning methods to
develop sophisticated bots and eﬀective countermeasures makes it neces-
sary to update the training data and features of detection tools. We again
use the Botometer case to illustrate both algorithmic and interpretabil-
ity improvements of bot scores, designed to meet user expectations. We
conclude by discussing how future AI developments may aﬀect the ﬁght
between malicious bots and the public.
1
arXiv:1901.00912v2  [cs.CY]  6 Feb 2019

1
Introduction
During the past two decades, we have progressively turned to the Internet and
social media to ﬁnd news, share opinions, and entertain conversations (Morris
and Ogan, 1996; Smith and Brenner, 2012). What we create and consume on
the Internet impacts all aspects of our daily lives, including our political, health,
ﬁnancial, and entertainment decisions. This increased inﬂuence of social media
has been accompanied by an increase in attempts to alter the organic nature of
our online discussions and exchanges of ideas. In particular, over the past 10
years we have witnessed an explosion of social bots (Lee et al., 2011; Boshmaf
et al., 2013), a presence that doesn’t show signs of decline.
Social bots are social media accounts controlled completely or in part by
computer algorithms. They can generate content automatically and interact
with human users, often posing as, or imitating, humans (Ferrara et al., 2016a).
Automated accounts can be harmless and even helpful in scenarios where they
save manual labor without polluting human conversations. In this paper, how-
ever, we focus on those actors in online social networks that surreptitiously aim
to manipulate public discourse and inﬂuence human opinions and behavior in an
opaque fashion. While more traditional nefarious entities, like malware, attack
vulnerabilities of hardware and software, social bots exploit human vulnerabil-
ities, such as our tendencies to pay attention to what appears to be popular
and to trust social contacts (Jun et al., 2017). Unlike other social engineering
attacks, such as spear phishing (Jagatic et al., 2007), bots can achieve scal-
ability through automation.
For example, multiple accounts controlled by a
single entity can quickly generate posts and make speciﬁc content trend or am-
plify misinformation. They can trick humans and engagement-based ranking
algorithms alike, creating the appearance that some person or opinion is pop-
ular. Therefore, defending from social bots raises serious research challenges
(Boshmaf et al., 2012).
Manipulation of public opinion is not new; it has been a common practice
since the dawn of humanity. The technological tools of all eras — printed media,
radio, television, and the Internet — have been abused to disseminate misinfor-
mation and propaganda. The deceptive strategies employed on all these types
of channels share striking similarities (Varol and Uluturk, 2018). Nevertheless,
social media are particularly vulnerable because they facilitate automatic in-
teractions via software. As a result, social media platforms have to combat a
deluge of attacks. Facebook recently announced that 1.5 billion fake accounts
were removed over six months in 2018.1 Even a very low miss rate could leave
millions of accounts available to be used as bots. In this light, it is not surprising
that as many as 9–15% of active Twitter accounts were estimated to be bots in
2017 (Varol et al., 2017a), and that social bots are responsible for generating
two thirds of links to popular websites (Wojcik et al., 2018). Public interest in
social bots has also dramatically increased during the past few years. A recent
Pew survey shows that 66% of Americans are aware of the existence of social
1A Blueprint for Content Governance and Enforcement. www.facebook.com/notes/mark-
zuckerberg/a-blueprint-for-content-governance-and-enforcement/10156443129621634/
2

bots and a consistent fraction of those believes that they are malicious (Stocking
and Sumida, 2018). Despite high awareness, the survey also reveals that many
people are not conﬁdent in their ability to identify social bots. Part of the diﬃ-
culty in learning to recognize bots is that they continuously evolve in response
to eﬀorts by platforms to eliminate them.
Social bots that go undected by
platforms have become increasingly sophisticated and human-like (Varol et al.,
2017a), introducing an arms race between bot creators and the research commu-
nity. Indeed, industry and academic research about social bots has ﬂourished
recently.
A ﬁrst concern of this paper is to brieﬂy review recent studies about social
bots and the development of AI countermeasures. A second goal is to present
a study on how people interact with bot detection tools and what insight they
gain. This is an important perspective that is often neglected by developers
of AI tools. After all, winning this ﬁght requires broad participation by social
media users.
2
Literature review
There are many types of social bots. In this section, we review recent studies on
the diverse characteristics of social bots, their activities, and impact. We then
review the literature on bot detection algorithms.
2.1
Characterization of social bots
Some simple bots only do one thing: they post content automatically. The Twit-

tweets every hour mimicking the real Big Ben. Similar accounts can automati-
cally post or retweet/share to publicize information such as news and academic
papers (Lokot and Diakopoulos, 2016; Haustein et al., 2016). These bots are
naive and easy to identify: they share only one type of content and they don’t
try to misrepresent themselves or their motivations. In 2011, Lee et al. (2011)
identiﬁed thousands of social bots. They created bots that posted meaningless
messages through automated scripts. The underlying expectation was that only
other bots and no human would follow these honeypot accounts. The honeypot
accounts did end up having many followers. Subsequent analysis conﬁrmed that
these followers were indeed bots and revealed the common strategy of randomly
following accounts to grow the number of social connections.
More sophisticated bots adopt various strategies to impersonate human
users. Social bot developers can populate bot proﬁles by searching and collect-
ing material from other platforms. A more extreme example of these kinds of
bots are identity thieves: they copy usernames, proﬁle information, and pictures
of other accounts and use them as their own, making only small changes (Cresci
et al., 2015). State-of-the-art machine learning technologies can be employed as
part of the algorithms that automatically generate bot content (Freitas et al.,
2015). Sophisticated bots can emulate temporal patterns of content posting and
3

consumption by humans. They can even interact with other users by engaging
in conversations, commenting on posts, and answering questions (Hwang et al.,
2012).
Bots employ a variety of strategies to form an audience. There are bots
designed to gather followers and expand social circles, with the goal of exerting
some form of inﬂuence. Some bots, for example, search the social networks for
popular accounts, follow them, and ask to be followed back (Aiello et al., 2012).
This type of inﬁltration has been proven to be more eﬀective when the target
community is topically centered. Bots can identify and generate appropriate
content around speciﬁc topics to gain trust and attention from people interested
in those topics. Such attention often translates in following relationships (Freitas
et al., 2015). This ﬁnding is even more worrisome when one considers that the
targets were programmers, a population expected to be more aware of social
bots compared to other users.
Another class of bots, whose activity is less evident, is that of so-called fake
followers (Cresci et al., 2015; De Micheli and Stroppa, 2013). These accounts
are managed by entities that get paid in exchange for following customers who
want to increase their perceived popularity. The fake followers often follow each
other, forming a network that lends credibility to each member and allows them
to elude being ﬂagged for lack of followers. A few dollars can buy thousands of
fake followers. A recent report2 revealed that reality television stars, professional
athletes, comedians, TED speakers, pastors, and fashion models all purchased
fake followers on Twitter at least once. The companies that sell fake followers
also sell fake engagement (likes, comments, retweets) and even custom-made
fake personas.
A group of social bots, sometimes referred to as a botnet, may act in coordi-
nation, posting the same content again and again to generate false popularity.
This type of behavior is generally harder to detect as the accounts involved,
when inspected individually, may appear as genuine. Their behavior becomes
conspicuous only when one is able to detect a large number of such accounts act-
ing in a strongly coordinated manner (Chavoshi et al., 2016). Not surprisingly,
hybrid approaches that mix human and automated activity have been devised
to bypass bot and bot-coordination detection systems (Grimme et al., 2018). A
recent study by Cresci et al. (2017) shows that neither humans nor supervised
machine learning algorithms can identify this kind of bots successfully.
2.2
Activity and impact of social bots
Bot activity has been reported in several domains, with the potential to aﬀect
behaviors, opinions, and choices. Health is one domain of particular concern
(Allem and Ferrara, 2018), where we have observed social bots inﬂuencing de-
bates about vaccination policies (Ferrara et al., 2016a; Broniatowski et al., 2018)
and smoking (Allem and Ferrara, 2016; Allem et al., 2017). Politics is another
2The Follower Factory.
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/01/27/technology/social-
media-bots.html
4

key domain. During the 2010 U.S. midterm elections, primitive social bots were
found to support some candidates and attack their opponents (Metaxas and
Mustafaraj, 2012), injecting thousands of tweets pointing to websites with fake
news (Ratkiewicz et al., 2011).
During the 2016 U.S. presidential election, social bots were found to generate
a large amount of content, possibly distorting online conversations. Our analysis
(Bessi and Ferrara, 2016) suggests that retweets were a vulnerable mode of
information spreading: there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the amount of
retweets that humans generated by resharing content produced by other humans
or by bots. In fact, humans and bots retweeted each other substantially at the
same rate.
This suggests that bots were very eﬀective at getting messages
reshared in the human communication channels. We further explored how bots
and humans talked about the two presidential candidates. We noted that bots
tweeting about Donald Trump generated the most positive tweets (Bessi and
Ferrara, 2016). The fact that bots produce systematically more positive content
in support of a candidate can bias the perception of the individuals exposed to
this content, suggesting that there exists an organic, grassroots support for a
given candidate, while in reality it is all artiﬁcially generated.
Similar cases of political manipulation were reported in other countries
(Stella et al., 2018). Our analysis highlighted the presence of Twitter bots dur-
ing the 2017 French Presidential Election (Ferrara, 2017). We explored tweets
related to candidates Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron in the days lead-
ing to the election. We identiﬁed 18K active bots that pushed the so-called
MacronLeaks disinformation campaign. Accounts who engaged with these bots
were mostly US-based users with pre-existing interest in alt-right topics and
alternative news media, rather than French users. Hundreds of bots posting
about the French elections were also active in the 2016 US Election discussion,
suggesting the existence of a black market for reusable political disinformation
bots.
The spread of fake news online is another area in which the eﬀect of bots is
believed to be relevant (Lazer et al., 2018; Bessi et al., 2015). A study based on
14 million tweets posted during and after the 2016 U.S. presidential election re-
vealed that bots played a key role in the spread of low-credibility content (Shao
et al., 2018a,b). The study uncovered strategies by which social bots target in-
ﬂuential accounts and amplify misinformation in the early stages of spreading,
before it becomes viral. Even bots created with good intentions may contribute
to the spread of misinformation. After the Boston marathon bombing, for ex-
ample, bots started to automatically retweet indiscriminately, without verifying
the credibility of the posts being retweeted or that of their sources (Gupta et al.,
2013), unintentionally amplifying the diﬀusion of misinformation.
Social bots have been used to promote terrorist propaganda and proselytize
online extremism. By analyzing a sample of 20,000 ISIS-supporting accounts,
Berger and Morgan (2015) found that that the terrorist organization was ac-
tively using social media and bots to spread its ideology. Abokhodair et al.
(2015) dissected a botnet that tried to misdirect the online discussion during
the Syrian civil war in 2012. Ferrara et al. (2016c) analyzed a dataset of millions
5

of extremist tweets and found that social bots produced some of the content.
2.3
Bot detection methods
An early attempt by Wang et al. (2012) involved building a crowdsourcing social
bot detection platform.
This method proved to be eﬀective, but scalability
was a prominent issue: while bots can be multiplied at will at essentially no
cost, human detectors cannot. Later eﬀorts therefore mostly leveraged machine
learning methods.
Approaches based on supervised machine learning algorithms are the most
common (Subrahmanian et al., 2016). Supervised approaches depend and often
start with the collection of an extensive dataset, with each account labeled as
either human or bot. These labels usually come from human annotation (Varol
et al., 2017a), automated methods (e.g., those based on honey pots described
earlier (Lee et al., 2011)), or botnets that display suspicious behaviors (Echev-
erria and Zhou, 2017a,b).
A critical issue with existing datasets is the lack
of ground truth. There is no objective, agreed-upon, operational deﬁnition of
social bot. One of the factors that explain this is the prevalence of accounts
that lie in the gray area between human and bot behavior, where even experi-
enced researchers cannot easily discriminate. Nevertheless, datasets do include
many typical bots; using the training labels as proxies for ground truth makes it
possible to build practically viable tools (Davis et al., 2016; Varol et al., 2017a).
The choice of relevant features used to describe entities to be classiﬁed is
a critical step of machine learning classiﬁers. Diﬀerent choices have been con-
sidered, but in general six broad categories of features have been identiﬁed
as relevant for discriminating between human and bot accounts (Varol et al.,
2018): user metadata, friend metadata, retweet/mention network structure,
content and language, sentiment, and temporal features.
In the case of su-
pervised learning, after extraction and preprocessing, the features are fed into
supervised machine-learning models for training, then the trained models are
used to evaluate previously unseen accounts.
Most techniques attempt to detect bots at the account level, by process-
ing many social media posts to extract the features listed above.
Recently,
Kudugunta and Ferrara (2018) proposed a deep neural network approach based
on the contextual long short-term memory (LSTM) architecture that exploits
content and metadata to detect bots at the tweet level. Contextual features
are extracted from user metadata and fed as auxiliary input to LSTM deep
nets processing the tweet text. The proposed framework, designed to predict
whether a given tweet was posted by a human or a bot, exhibited promising
performance on test benchmarks.
While supervised methods have proven to be eﬀective in many cases, they do
not perform well at detecting coordinated social bots that post human-generated
content (Cresci et al., 2017; Grimme et al., 2018; Chen and Subramanian, 2018).
As mentioned earlier, those coordinated bots are not usually suspicious when
considered individually. Their detection requires information about their co-
ordination, which becomes available only once the activity of multiple bots is
6

considered. Unsupervised learning methods have been proposed to address this
issue. Early attempts combined multiple features via Euclidean distance and
then applied clustering or network community algorithms (Ahmed and Abu-
laish, 2013; Miller et al., 2014).
Cresci et al. (2016) encoded tweet type or
content as strings of symbols, then considered the longest common substring to
detect coordination. By comparing the time series of accounts sampled from the
Twitter streaming API, Chavoshi et al. (2016) built an unsupervised tool called
DeBot that is able to ﬁnd accounts tweeting in synchrony, suggesting they are
automated. Chen and Subramanian (2018) adopted a similar method to detect
bots by ﬁnding accounts tweeting similar content. These unsupervised methods
have the advantage of focusing on what accounts (or tweets) have in common
rather than what is distinct, but also the disadvantage of having to consider
quadratic numbers of account pairs in the worst case.
A recent research direction is to test the limits of current bot detection
frameworks in an adversarial setting. The idea is to propose methodologies to
engineer systems that can go undetected. Cresci et al. (2019) proposed the use
of evolutionary algorithms to improve social bot skills. Grimme et al. (2018)
employed a hybrid approach involving automatic and manual actions to achieve
bots that would be classiﬁed as human by a supervised bot detection system.
Despite the good intention of pointing to weaknesses in existing systems, this
research might also inspire bot creators and give them a competitive advantage.
3
User engagement with bot detection tools
Research eﬀorts aimed at bot detection may be valuable to mitigate the unde-
sired consequences of bot activity, but their eﬃcacy is limited by two factors:
limited public awareness of the bot problem, and unwillingness to adopt sophis-
ticated tools to combat it. The success of research eﬀorts also critically depends
on the capacity to adapt to ever changing and increasingly sophisticated arti-
ﬁcial accounts. This, in turn, depends on the ability to engage the public and
collect the feedback it provides. It is therefore important to understand how the
public adopts, interacts with, and interprets the results of bot detection tools.
This perspective is often neglected by research on social bots. In this section,
we use Botometer — a bot detection tool developed at Indiana University — as
a case study to illustrate eﬀorts aimed at understanding the needs of the users
and how their feedback can help improve tools.
Botometer is based on a supervised machine learning approach (Davis et al.,
2016; Varol et al., 2017a). Given a Twitter account, Botometer extracts over
1,000 features relative to the account from data easily provided by the Twitter
API, and produces a classiﬁcation score called bot score: the higher the score,
the greater the likelihood that the account is controlled completely or in part
by software, according to the algorithm. Because some of the features are based
on English-language content, the bot score is intended to be used with English-
language accounts. To evaluate non-English accounts, Botometer also provides
a language-independent score that is produced by a classiﬁcation model trained
7

Nov 2017
Jan 2018
Mar 2018
May 2018
Jul 2018
Sep 2018
Nov 2018
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Daily requests
1e6
Figure 1: Number of daily requests handled by Botometer.
excluding linguistic features. Botometer additionally reports six subscores, each
produced by a model based on a distinct subset of features. The score names
refer to the feature classes: user meta-data, friends, content, sentiment, network,
and timing. The subscores are provided to help users identify which features
contribute to the overall score.
The earliest version of Botometer (known as “BotOrNot”) became available
to the public in May 2014. Free access is oﬀered through both a web interface
(botometer.org) and an API. In the past four years, Botometer has constantly
increased its basin of adoption, and has provided data for a number of inﬂuential
studies, including by Vosoughi et al. (2018) and the Pew Research Center (Wo-
jcik et al., 2018). Even more importantly, Botometer is used by many regular
Twitter users. Currently, it handles over a quarter million requests every day
(Figure 1), while the website receives over 500 daily visits. Botometer also sup-
ports several third-party tools, including browser extensions, bot-hunting bots,
and localized versions in non-English-speaking countries.
Between August and October 2018, we conducted a user experience survey
with participants recruited among the visitors of the Botometer website. The
survey contained two questions with required answers and a few optional ones.
It also allowed respondents to enter some free-text comments. We collected us-
able answers from 731 participants; they are listed in Figure 2 together with the
questions. A few interesting facts emerge. First, more than one third of partic-
ipants use Botometer at least weekly, implying that detecting bots is becoming
a recurring need for at least some users (Figure 2A). Second, over 80% of the
users believe Botometer is accurate in classifying bots and humans (Figure 2B).
Third, over 80% of the users ﬁnd the bot scores presented by Botometer easy
to understand (Figure 2C). Although these numbers are encouraging, we are
aware of self-selection bias, as respondents of the survey tend to be active users
of Botometer. Finally, users seem to be equally worried by false positives (hu-
mans misclassiﬁed as bots) and false negatives (bots misclassiﬁed as humans)
as shown in Figure 2D. A more nuanced picture of this last observation emerges
when these results are disaggregated into frequency-of-usage categories: Fig-
ure 3 shows that occasional users care more about false positives. A typical
example of usage that might elicit this concern is when an individual checks
whether their own account looks like a bot. On the other hand, frequent users
care more about false negatives. For example, an advertiser interested in the
8

Figure 2: Botometer user experience survey questions and responses. Questions
A and B are required, others are optional.
number of fake followers of a celebrity paid to endorse a product may be more
worried about missing bots.
Botometer is based on Random Forest classiﬁers (Breiman, 2001). The score
produced by such a model is the fraction of trees that classify the account under
examination as a bot. This interpretation of the bot score is obscure to the
typical user, who is unlikely to have background knowledge in machine learning.
Because a bot score is deﬁned in the unit interval, it is tempting to interpret
it as the probability that the account is a bot — if the score is 0.3, say, then
30% of accounts with similar feature values are bots. Another interpretation
is that such an account is 30% automated. Judging from early user feedback,
such incorrect interpretations were prevalent. Despite an explanation oﬀered
on the website, the confusion persisted. To address this concern and bridge
the gap between classiﬁer output and user expectations, in the next section we
describe three changes in how scores are presented: a non-linear re-calibration
of the model, a linear rescaling of scores to the [0, 5] range, and the introduction
of a new statistics called Complete Automation Probability.
These changes
were incorporated into the latest version of Botometer (v3), launched in May
9

Figure 3: Responses to the Botometer user experience survey question about
error type concerns (Figure 2D), grouped by frequency of usage. Respondents
who use Botometer daily or weekly are considered frequent users.
2018, together with other improvements described in Section 5. Users seem to
appreciate these changes, as shown in Figure 4.
4
Bot score interpretability
4.1
Model calibration
As previously described, the raw output of the random forest classiﬁer is not a
probability. Consider the classiﬁer C and two Twitter accounts A and B such
that C(A) = x and C(B) = y with x < y. Here we can say that account A
is less likely to be a bot than account B, but we cannot say that account A
is x% likely to be a bot. While this is not a problem for measures like AUC,
which quantiﬁes the probability that a classiﬁer will rank a randomly chosen
bot higher than a randomly chosen human, it does present an obstacle when
interpreting bot scores.
Proper contextualization of the raw classiﬁer output requires comparison to
the rest of the scores in the training set. For example, maximum-likelihood
estimation is employed by Varol et al. (2017a) to ﬁnd the appropriate cutoﬀfor
binary classiﬁcation: the best score above which an account is classiﬁed as a
bot and below which it is classiﬁed as human. This threshold approach is useful
for scientists counting bots in a collection (Su´arez-Serrato et al., 2016; Haustein
et al., 2016; Gorwa, 2017; Stella et al., 2018; Shao et al., 2018a), but it is not
intuitive for humans evaluating a single account.
A calibrated classiﬁer C′ is one whose output can be interpreted as a prob-
ability, i.e., one in which C′(A) = x means that the classiﬁer estimates as x%
the probability that account A is a bot. As a corollary, the binary classiﬁcation
threshold of a well-calibrated model is 50%. Calibrated models are ideal from
the point of view of interpreting their results. To generate such a calibrated
10

Figure 4:
Botometer user experience survey result:
comparison between
Botometer v2 and v3.
model C′ from our classiﬁer C, we want a calibration function F such that
F ◦C = C′.
To calibrate Botometer, we employed Platt’s scaling (Niculescu-Mizil and
Caruana, 2005), a logistic regression model trained on classiﬁer outputs. Fig-
ure 5 presents the initial model outcomes and the calibrated scores. Note that
this mapping shifts scores within the unit interval but preserves order, therefore
leaving the AUC unchanged. The ﬁgure also shows reliability diagrams for raw
and calibrated scores (DeGroot and Fienberg, 1983). We split the unit interval
into 20 bins; an instance in the training dataset is assigned to a bin based on
its predicted (raw) score. For each bin, the mean predicted score is computed
and compared against the fraction of true positive cases. In a well-calibrated
model, the points should align with the diagonal. Observe that the blue line on
the right side of Figure 5 is steepest in the middle of the range; this is because
most uncalibrated bot scores fall near the middle of the unit interval. Since
users, when presented with a single uncalibrated bot score, do not know that
most scores fall into this relatively narrow range, they are misled into perceiv-
ing uncertainty about classiﬁcation of most accounts. The ﬂatter red line in the
plot shows that each bin has approximately the same number of scores in the
calibrated model.
As mentioned earlier, the percentage of bot accounts is estimated around 9–
15% (Varol et al., 2017a), which means the probability of a randomly selected
account being automated is low. The calibrated score cannot reﬂect this fact,
since it is a likelihood estimation based on our roughly balanced (half humans,
half bots) training datasets. In the next subsection we oﬀer a Bayesian posterior
11

Figure 5: Calibration of the bot scores. The mapping function projects raw
classiﬁer outputs to calibrated scores (left). Reliability curves plot true positive
rates against mean predicted scores (right).
The calibrated curve indicates
higher reliability because it is closer to the unbiased diagonal line.
probability that overcomes this problem. The bot score presented on the current
Botometer website (v3) is the calibrated likelihood score, linearly transformed
to a [0, 5] scale in order to diﬀerentiate it from the probability that an account
with that score is a bot. The API, whose users tend to be more advanced, also
provides uncalibrated scores.
4.2
Complete automation probability
Users of Botometer are asking the question: “Is this account a bot, or not?”
While model calibration makes the bot scores easier to interpret, a calibrated
model still lacks one additional piece of information necessary to answer this
“bot or not” question: the background level of bots in the population. To see
why, consider that the less likely a claim, the more evidence is required to accept
it. In our case, the rarer the bots, the higher the score needed to have conﬁdence
that an account is a bot. This connection between likelihood and background
probability is formalized by Bayes’ theorem. The “bot or not” question can be
expressed mathematically as P(Bot | S), the conditional probability that an
account is a bot given its bot score S. Applying Bayes’ rule allows us to rewrite
the conditional probability as:
P(Bot | S) = P(Bot)P(S | Bot)
P(S)
.
(1)
We call P(Bot | S), the quantity we are after, the posterior probability. The
prior probability P(Bot) is the background probability that any randomly-
chosen account is a bot. The P (S|Bot)
P (S)
term is called the evidence. It compares
12

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Bot score, uncalibrated
0
2
4
6
8
10
Density
Human
Bot
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Bot score, uncalibrated
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Posterior probability
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
Figure 6: Likelihood distributions (left) and posterior probabilities (right) for
the CAP calculation. The left plot shows the binned, empirical bot score distri-
bution for accounts labeled human and bot, along with dashed lines displaying
the density estimate for each. On the right, posterior probability curves are
calculated for several choices of the prior, P(Bot).
the likelihood that a bot has score S, P(S | Bot), with the probability that any
account has that score. Since this is a ratio of functions of the score S, it is not
aﬀected by transformations of S as done in model calibration. Therefore we use
raw, uncalibrated scores in our calculations.
To calculate the posterior probability, we can expand the denominator in
the evidence term of Eq. 1:
P(S) = P(S | Bot)P(Bot) + P(S | Human)P(Human)
= P(S | Bot)P(Bot) + P(S | Human)(1 −P(Bot)).
(2)
The task is then to obtain distributions for the likelihoods P(S | Bot) and
P(S | Human). The model’s training data provides empirical distributions of
scores for both humans and bots (Figure 6); density estimation can be used
to ﬁnd a probability density function likely to produce a particular empirical
distribution. Binning is the simplest approach to density estimation, sometimes
employing a sliding window. However, this approach proved unsuitable because
quantization artifacts in the Botometer classiﬁer output lead to discontinuities
in the density functions.
The existence of these artifacts suggests curve-ﬁtting or kernel density esti-
mation (KDE) methods. KDE is widely used for generating distribution func-
tions from empirical data, but the commonly-used implementations assume un-
bounded support, i.e., a theoretically inﬁnite range of possible bot score values.
Since the support of our distribution is necessarily the unit interval, the use of
KDE in this case leads to biased estimates near the interval boundaries (Leblanc,
2012).
Seeking to avoid this systematic bias, Botometer uses curve ﬁtting, choosing
among curves that naturally admit a bounded support. One well-known can-
didate meeting this criterion is the Beta distribution. However, three diﬀerent
13

ﬁtting algorithms (maximum-likelihood, method of moments, and negative log-
likelihood) all failed to produce adequate ﬁts. This is likely due to the shape of
the P(S | Human) curve, with its mode near, but not at, zero. Ultimately we
chose a lesser-known family of curves for our ﬁt: Bernstein polynomials (Babu
et al., 2002). Implementation is straightforward as computing values of a poly-
nomial curve is simple, even one with high degree. Experiments showed that a
40th-degree polynomial ﬁt produced satisfactory results (Figure 6).
With likelihood curves generated from our classiﬁer testing data, it is straight-
forward to calculate the evidence term in Bayes’ rule. The other term is the
prior P(Bot), the background probability of a given account being a bot. This
is necessary because the training data does not include information on how com-
mon bots are in the wild. Failure to take the prior into account leads one to
overestimate the number of bots in a sample due to humans being more common
than bots, leading to false positives outnumbering false negatives. The best we
can do is use an informed estimate for the prior. In general, one could allow
users to estimate the prior probability; a user might have information about the
proportion of bots in a particular sample. For example, a sample of suspicious
accounts would require a high prior probability. Botometer uses P(Bot) = 0.15,
corresponding to a previously published estimate of the proportion of bots on
Twitter (Varol et al., 2017a).
Taken together, the prior and the evidence allow us to calculate the posterior
probability that an account with a particular bot score S is a bot. In Botometer,
the posterior is called Complete Automation Probability (CAP). As shown in
Figure 6, this probability is generally more conservative than the calibrated
bot score, reﬂecting the relative rarity of bots. The reported CAP estimates the
probability that the account is indeed a bot, and gives end users the information
they need to act on the data returned. For example, there are Twitter bots that
use Botometer to call out other bot accounts. Whereas these bot-hunting bots
previously had to pick a somewhat-arbitrary threshold, now they can use the
CAP to make an informed decision based on their tolerance for the risk of falsely
labeling accounts.
5
Updating detection models
A supervised machine learning tool is only as good as the data used for its train-
ing. Social bots evolve rapidly, and even the most advanced algorithms will fail
with outdated training datasets. Therefore it is necessary to update classiﬁca-
tion models, using newly available data as well as feedback collected from users.
At the same time, one must continuously evolve the set of features that may
discriminate between human behaviors and increasingly complex bot behaviors.
Let us again use the Botometer case to illustrate the need for retraining bot
detection models via new data and feature engineering.
In the past few years, several bot datasets collected by colleagues in academia
have been included in our training data. Such data are now shared with the
public at large via a platform called Bot Repository (botometer.iuni.iu.edu/
14

Dataset name
#bots
#human
Notes
caverlee
22,179
19,276
Honeypot-lured bots and sample
human accounts (Lee et al., 2011)
varol-icwsm
826
1,747
Manually labeled bots and humans
sampled by Botometer score deciles
(Varol et al., 2017a)
cresci-17
10,894
3,474
Spam bots and normal humans
(Cresci et al., 2017)
pornbots
21,963
0
Pornbots shared by Andy Patel
(github.com/r0zetta/pronbot2)
celebrity
0
5,970
Celebrity
accounts
collected
by
CNetS team
vendor-purchased
1,088
0
Fake followers purchased by CNetS
team
botometer-feedback
143
386
Botometer feedback accounts man-
ually labeled by author K.-C.Y.
political-bots
62
0
Automated political accounts run
by

(now
suspended),

ter
Total
57,155
30,853
All
datasets
available
at
botometer.iuni.iu.edu/
bot-repository
Table 1: Training data used by Botometer.
CNetS refers to the Center for
Complex Networks and Systems Research at Indiana University.
Version
(activity period)
#features
Training datasets
Notes
v1 (2014-05-01 –
2016-05-03)
1150
caverlee
Initial
version
of
Botometer (known as
BotOrNot at the time)
v2 (2016-05-03 –
2018-05-11)
1150
caverlee,
varol-icwsm
Version used in results
presented
by
Varol
et al. (2017a)
v3 (2018-05-11 –
present)
1209
caverlee,
varol-icwsm,
cresci-17,
pornbots,
vendor-purchuased,
botometer-feedback,
celebrity
New
features
intro-
duced to capture more
sophisticated
behav-
iors
and
to
comply
with
Twitter
API
changes.
Table 2: Datasets and numbers of features used for training subsequent versions
of Botometer models.
15

bot-repository). Table 1 lists the datasets currently included and used for
training, while Table 2 summarizes the diﬀerent versions of Botometer and the
growing training dataset it employed.
Retraining does not only mean adopting new datasets as they become avail-
able, but also engineering new features — or redesigning features that are al-
ready in use — to best describe the behaviors of new classes of bots. In light of
journalistic evidence and other academic research, the list of features employed
by Botometer was recently enriched to incorporate new ones that are designed
to capture bots employed in information operations. Examples include:
• Time zones: an account would be suspicious if its proﬁle indicates the
US Eastern Standard Time zone while most of its followers appear to be
in the Moscow Standard Time zone.
• Language metadata: anomalous patterns in language use and audi-
ence language preferences can be revealed by a low fraction of neighbors
(friends, followers) having the same language as a target account.
• Device metadata: we capture the types of devices and platforms used
for posting tweets, as well as the entropy across diﬀerent platforms.
• Content deletion patterns: highly-active accounts frequently create
and delete content to hijack user attention without revealing too much
information on their excessive posting behavior. We incorporated features
to estimate content production rates based on the account creation date,
metadata on total tweets, recent content volume, and inter-event times
between recent posts — the mismatch between these statistics can be used
as a proxy of content deletion. An account that appears to have tweeted
once per day on average over the past ﬁve years, but has generated 500
tweets per day during the last two days, should raise ﬂags.
When updating a supervised learning framework for bot detection, a cen-
tral question is whether, or to what extent, the retrained model can recog-
nize new classes of bots on which the model has not been trained. To explore
this question about generalization, we trained models on increasingly large and
complex datasets, and measured how such models perform both on the training
dataset (via cross-validation) and on datasets explicitly excluded from the train-
ing dataset. Accuracy results are shown in Figure 7. We note that the addition
of datasets about unseen classes of bots in the training data does not seem to
degrade model performance: the accuracy remains high across models trained
on increasingly richer datasets. In other words, the present framework seems
ﬂexible enough to accommodate the learning of new examples without forgetting
the old ones. Novel datasets used for testing, in general, lead to lower perfor-
mance compared to when models can learn from those instances. But models
tend to generalize better when classifying human accounts. Bot instances with
similar data used for training the model, such as spam bots, also yield better
generalization. The most signiﬁcant gain is observed by adding training data
about porn bots, which have very few tweets and realistic proﬁle details. All
16

Figure 7: Model accuracy (percentage of instances correctly classiﬁed) based on
in-sample evaluation via cross-validation and testing on out-sample datasets.
In-sample evaluation is indicated by the version tags, which list the versions of
Botometer in which each dataset was used for training. See Tables 1 and 2 for
further information on datasets and Botometer versions, respectively.
17

models in this experiments are trained using the full set of 1,209 features used
in the latest version of Botometer. Overall, the current model trained with the
new features and on the new datasets improved the cross-validation accuracy
from 0.95 to 0.97 AUC.
6
Discussion and perspectives
Research on online manipulation, especially social bot detection, is a rapidly
growing ﬁeld; its contributions are yielding numerous academic publications,
tools, and datasets. As long as the arms race between bot creators and bot
detection systems continue, this research will remain relevant. Beyond the recent
research developments, let us make a few considerations on how the online
ecosystem may change in the next several years. We focus on the perspectives
of social bots and AI countermeasures.
6.1
Future of social bots
In all likelihood, bots will become regular and acknowledged parts of the social
media ecosystems of the future. Despite all the nefarious uses of social bots,
there are great examples of bots providing valuable services to social media users
(Mønsted et al., 2017). Optimistic viewpoints expect an increase in service bots
and regulations that will mitigate the impact of bots with malicious intentions.
Recent developments of deep-learning models create opportunities to employ
sequence-to-sequence models for automatic conversations (Li et al., 2015, 2016),
deep reinforcement learning for controlling account behaviors (Mnih et al., 2015;
He et al., 2016; Serban et al., 2017), and generative adversarial networks for
creating fake proﬁle images and content (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Zhao et al.,
2017). Some of these methodologies have already demonstrated a capability to
surpass human performance on various tasks, such as face recognition and game
playing (Mnih et al., 2015; Taigman et al., 2014). Deep-learning approaches can
also be used to detect sentiment online (Socher et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2014;
Severyn and Moschitti, 2015), allowing the next generation of social bots to be
more perceptive about human emotions. Successful implementation and further
advances of these technologies can pose serious threats, since discriminating
between organic human behavior and automation is likely to become a more
and more challenging task, even for experts.
The future of social bots may be shaped by legal, ethical, and political con-
siderations as much as technological ones.
Recent events, including election
manipulations discussed in Section 2.2, have led to loud public calls for plat-
forms to apply stricter safeguards against abuse and for policymakers to enact
regulations of social media platform in several countries. While platforms are in
theory free to police their systems according to their own terms of service and
community standards, they are under increasing pressure from politicians. On
the one hand, this may lead to needed actions, such as more robust measures
to counter impersonation and deception by social bots. On the other hand,
18

political interference could also be counterproductive. For example, aggressive
suspension of abusive bots that spread false or misleading political content has
been criticized by some politicians as censorship (Kang and Frenkel, 2018; Ty-
nan, 2018); even research on bot detection has been targeted by partisan attacks
and labeled as suppression of free speech (Mervis, 2014).
Another set of legal questions relate to whether bots have rights (Schroeder,
2018). Are bots entitled to journalistic protections such as those that shield re-
porters from compelled disclosure of sources? Do they have free-speech rights?
The latter question is attracting signiﬁcant attention following a recent Cali-
fornia law requiring online bots to identify themselves as such when they inter-
act with humans, for example promoting a political candidate during elections
(Sacharoﬀ, 2018). While this law seems to strike a reasonable balance between
free speech and regulation, a combination of US Supreme Court decisions about
the First Amendment — the free speech rights of corporations, the right against
compelled speech, the right to anonymous speech, and the right to lie — may
lead to the conclusion that states cannot compel entities to disclose the auto-
mated nature of online content. These types of questions are yet to be addressed
by the courts, and may have huge repercussions on social media platform reg-
ulations designed to protect the information ecosystem from manipulation by
bots.
6.2
Future of AI countermeasures
So far, the technical response to increasingly sophisticated bots has largely fo-
cused on increased sophistication in detection approaches. As reviewed in Sec-
tion 2.3, recently proposed tools for social bot detection employ deep learning,
evolutionary algorithms, and unsupervised learning. These techniques can pro-
vide solutions for speciﬁc problems, such as addressing the shortage of human-
labeled training data on bot activity and analyzing online sentiment. For exam-
ple, we plan to employ deep-learning models to replace lexicon-based sentiment
analysis in the Botometer feature extraction pipeline.
The detection of coordinated bots will continue to be a challenge. Monitoring
conversations and coordinated activities among groups of accounts may reveal
anomalous behaviors. While the unsupervised methods reviewed in Section 2.3
have proven eﬀective at identifying some coordinated bots with high precision,
they can only check a single feature. As a result, only narrow groups of bots
that coordinate in speciﬁc ways can be captured. To keep up with all kinds
of coordinated manipulation, new algorithms are needed to leverage the many
possible dimensions of similarity between suspicious accounts. Another research
challenge that could be relevant for the dismantling of coordinated bot attacks
is the detection of promoted campaigns at their early stages (Ferrara et al.,
2016b; Varol et al., 2017b). Future eﬀorts should aim for a pro-active approach
to mitigate the eﬀects of social bots by engaging with them early (Cresci et al.,
2018).
Our recent analysis points to the existence of many distinct types of social
bots, such as spam bots, mention bots, cyborgs, and many others (Mitter et al.,
19

2014). Botometer employs an ensemble model to learn complex rules able to
recognize multiple types of bot behavioral patterns. Detection models need to
be able to rapidly adapt to changes in both human and bot behaviors. The
iterative process of detecting novel accounts by expanding training datasets,
presented in Section 5, is an eﬀective approach but requires extensive and con-
tinual manual eﬀorts. We are currently exploring ways to automatically detect
novel bot behavior classes and build specialized classiﬁers. Using multiple mod-
els may lead to better discrimination between human behavior and speciﬁc bot
strategies.
Machine learning is playing a growing role in decision making on issues of
broad societal importance (Munoz et al., 2016; Barocas and Selbst, 2016). As
AI systems employ more sophisticated learning methodologies, model complex-
ity increases and systems become vulnerable to overlooked biases (Kirkpatrick,
2016). Social bot detection systems are not immune to the problem of algo-
rithmic bias.
Models trained on manually annotated data might inherit the
biases of annotators. Algorithmic interpretability would make it easier to spot
such biases, and in fact a recent European Union regulation grants users the
right to ask for an explanation of an algorithmic decision that was made about
them (Goodman and Flaxman, 2016). Unfortunately, many machine learning
algorithms, including those used by Botometer, do not make it easy to interpret
their classiﬁcations. Deep-learning methods are even more challenging in this
respect. As bot detection tools are used to make important decisions, such as
whether an account should be suspended, the issue of algorithmic bias is an
important direction for future research.
As discussed in Section 3, technical solutions should take into account how
humans interact with them. Ultimately, the ﬁght against online manipulation
must be carried out by our entire society and not just AI researchers. Media
literacy eﬀorts may be critical in this respect (Lazer et al., 2018).
Much public debate revolves around how humans will interact with artiﬁ-
cial intelligence. Because of the signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and political incentives for
developing benign and malicious social bots, this domain provides us with a
concrete and realistic scenario to imagine the future of both collaborative and
adversarial human-bot interactions.
