Multi Document Reading Comprehension
Avi Chawla

Indian Institute Of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
Varanasi, India
ABSTRACT
Reading Comprehension (RC) is a task of answering a ques-
tion from a given passage or a set of passages. In the case
of multiple passages, the task is to find the best possible
answer to the question. Recent trials and experiments in
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) have proved
that machines can be provided with the ability to not only
process the text in the passage and understand its mean-
ing to answer the question from the passage, but also can
surpass the Human Performance on many datasets such as
Standford’s Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) [38]. This
paper presents a study on Reading Comprehension and its
evolution in Natural Language Processing over the past few
decades. We shall also study how the task of Single Docu-
ment Reading Comprehension acts as a building block for
our Multi-Document Reading Comprehension System. In the
latter half of the paper, we’ll be studying about a recently
proposed model for Multi-Document Reading Comprehen-
sion — RE3QA [22] that is comprised of a Reader, Retriever,
and a Re-ranker based network to fetch the best possible
answer from a given set of passages.
KEYWORDS
Reading Comprehension, Neural Networks, Question An-
swering, Natural Language Processing.
1
INTRODUCTION
The ability to read and understand the unstructured text, and
then answer the questions about it is an ordinary skill among
literate humans. But for machines, it is not easy. Teaching our
machines to read natural human language has always been
a long-standing goal expected from Natural Language Pro-
cessing [21]. Throughout many years of efforts, researchers
in the field of NLP have used more and more powerful NLP
tools to analyze and understand different aspects of human
texts. A point that arises here is why we should build these
tools, and what is the need behind building such tools? Ba-
sically, how can a machine’s reading ability be evaluated is
the primary question that comes to mind. The answer to the
question lies in the task of Reading Comprehension. Just like
human knowledge is tested based on asking questions, we
should similarly ask machines about what it has understood
from the text.
Figure 1: Diagram representing a basic Reading Comprehen-
sion System
Reading Comprehension is not a new topic. As earlier as
1977, Researchers already realized the importance of Reading
Comprehension. Wendy Lehnert [1] stated the following line
in his book, "The Process of Question Answering":
"Only when we can ask a program to answer a
question about what it reads will we be able to be-
gin to access that program’s comprehension."
Reading Comprehension can be cast as a Question Answer-
ing task, which is also an application of Natural Language
Processing(NLP) wherein a model is supposed to answer
a question put up by the user. The machine answers the
question by arbitrarily using some complex, unstructured,
semi-structured knowledge bases and returns the correct
answer to its user. Question Answering is another of the big
successes in using Deep Learning inside Natural Language
Processing, and it’s a technology that has some obvious com-
mercial usage.
arXiv:2201.01706v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2022

S.No.
Question Category
Description
1
Verification Questions
Intends a ’Yes’ or ’No’ answer.
2
Factoid-type Questions
What, Which, When, Who or How?
3
Casual Questions
Why or How?
4
Hypothetical Questions
What would happen if ...?
5
Complex Questions
What are the reasons for ...?
6
Definition Questions
What is the definition of ...?
7
Quantification Questions
How much is ...?
Table 1: A few question types generally posed by humans.
Question Answering systems can be classified into two
types:
(1) Closed-Domain Question Answering [26]: This is an eas-
ier type of Question Answering wherein the question
belongs to a particular domain/topic. Questions in this
domain are generally asked for descriptive or factoid
information.
(2) Open-Domain Question Answering [9] : In contrast to
the category mentioned above, here the question can
belong to any class and thus, can pose anything in the
world. These systems generally require much data to
answer the question accurately, e.g., Wikipedia Dump.
Here, the goal is to understand the passage and answer the
question from the passage. NLP systems in such a scenario
are expected to leverage the power of Natural Language Un-
derstanding, Natural Language Inference or Entailment, and
Information Retrieval, etc. Thus, reading comprehension is
challenging for us.
There are two main paradigms for Question Answering.
These two paradigms cover the majority of Question An-
swering Systems that we use or build today. These are:
(1) IR-based Approaches: These systems concentrate on
finding an answer to a question by looking at strings
of text. Google Search is a common example of this
approach. [2] and [16] also presents a detailed survey
on the same.
(2) Knowledge-based or Hybrid Approaches: These systems
build the answer from understanding a part of the
text. Natural Language Understanding plays a crucial
role in building such systems. Examples include IBM
Watson, Apple Siri. A detailed study on such systems
is given by [11] and [56]
A comprehensive study between the IR-based approaches
and Knowledge-based approaches is presented in [30]. Ques-
tion asked to a Question Answering can be of many times,
ranging from Factoid Questions to Complex Narrative Ques-
tions. A few types of Question Categories are shown in Table
1.
2
HISTORY OF QUESTION ANSWERING
Two of the oldest Question Answering system were called
BASEBALL [15] and LUNAR [52].
BASEBALL was designed way back in 1961 to answer
questions related to US Baseball League for little more than a
year. It accepted question in English language and answered
from an already stored knowledge base.
On the other hand, LUNAR was developed in 1971 and
was capable of answering questions about moon rocks and
soil that the Apollo 11 Mission had gathered in July 1969.
Both the systems, BASEBALL and LUNAR, were Closed-
Domain Question Answering systems as they answered ques-
tions related to a particular topic only and not about anything
in the world at that time.
SHRDLU [34] was another such domain-restricted ques-
tion answering system that was developed in late 1968. Re-
searchers also called this system the "Blocks World" wherein
a user interacted in English with SHRDLU to move various
objects in the "Blocks World." It comprised of different basic
geometrical objects such as Cone, Cylinder, Cube, etc.
Figure 2: SHRDLU system working
Simmons [42] also did an exploration of answering ques-
tions using dependency parses matching techniques of ques-
tion and the answer. This is demonstrated in the figure below.
2

Figure 3: Question
Figure 4: Potential Answers
Considering the above example, the system took the ques-
tion and parsed it into a dependency format to establish a
relationship between the words. The next step was to find a
matching dependency structure in the extensive database of
answers. Figure 4 above shows some of the potential answers
that the system fetched through it’s matching algorithm.
At the start of this decade, IBM’s Watson [14] [7] came at
the forefront of a new era of Cognitive Computing, beating
humans in the very famous Jeopardy Challenge, back in 2011.
Cognitive Computing is a very different type of computing
that is very different from the programmed systems that have
preceded it. With today’s world of big data and the need for
more complex evidence-based decisions, approaches such
as Decision Tress [41] or Tabulated Answer Retrieval based
approach often breaks or fails to keep up with the available
information. Cognitive Computing enables machines to cre-
ate a new kind of value and find answers through insights
drawn from vast amounts of data. Watson and its Cognitive
capabilities adhere to some of the critical abilities and ele-
ments of human expertise, leading to a system that solves
a problem as a human does. When we seek to understand
something and try to make a decision, we go through four
key steps:
(1) We observe the visible phenomena and bodies of evi-
dence.
(2) We mix what we know and see to interpret its meaning
and generate a hypothesis about what it means.
(3) We evaluate which hypothesis is right and wrong.
(4) Finally, we decide, choosing the option that seems best
and acting accordingly.
Just as humans become experts by going through Observa-
tion, Evaluation, and Decision-making, Cognitive Systems
like Watson use similar processes to explain the information
they read. Watson can do all this at a massive speed and
scale.
3
EVOLUTION
Although the importance of Reading Comprehension has
been recognized for over 45 years, Reading Comprehension
is a very new domain to explore in the Natural Language
Processing Research Community. This is evident from the
following information:
Pre-2015
In this period, i.e., before 2015, we didn’t have any statistical
NLP systems capable of reading a simple passage and answer-
ing questions from it. Considering the Dataset aspect of this
period, before 2015, we hardly had two datasets consisting
of passage, question, and answer pairs. There were:
(1) MCTest [40]: 2600 pairs of question, passage and an-
swer.
(2) ProcessBank [6]: 500 pairs of question, passage and
answer.
If we look at the system or model aspect of this period, most
of the models built for experimentation in this period were
hand-built systems like linear classifiers with some com-
monly used linguistic features known at that time.
Post-2015
In this period, some significant changes came in the field of
Reading Comprehension. Talking about the Dataset aspect
of this period, post-2015, we had enormous datasets with
us to build Reading Comprehension or Question Answering
Systems. These datasets were collected from various sources
like News Articles or Wikipedia or children’s books. A few
examples of these datasets are:
(1) CNN Daily Mail [17]
(2) SQuAD [38]
(3) LAMBADA [35]
(4) Who Did What (WDW) [33]
(5) Children’s Book Test (CBT) [19]
(6) MSMACRO [32]
(7) Maluuba News QA [45]
(8) TriviaQA [23]
3

(9) WikiReading [18]
(10) SearchQA [13]
(11) CMU Race [25]
One common thing among all these datasets was that they
all contained more than 1 lakh pairs of Passage, Question,
and Answer. If one looks at the system side of this period,
a revolution in the model designs and architectures took
place. We saw that all the hand-built systems of the Pre-
2015 period evolved into robust end-to-end neural network
architectures. Not only did it outperform the earlier-used
linear classifier based models but also started achieving near-
human performance on many datasets mentioned above.
4
APPLICATIONS OF QUESTION ANSWERING IN
DAILY-LIFE
These days it seems like every major tech company either has
or is working on a Virtual Assistant to enhance the customer
experience. Researchers in Artificial Intelligence have been
dreaming of computers we could talk to for decades now. It
appears that now, we have started to get to the point where
these friendly, helpful voices are beginning to feel unavoid-
able. Recent innovations in the field of Artificial Intelligence
have led to the development of numerous Virtual Assistants
that help us significantly in our day to day lives. These Vir-
tual Assistants are based on Machine Learning Techniques
like Question Answering Systems. Each Virtual Assistant
and its closely related chat-bot systems run just a bit differ-
ently, but they all have the same result, making our lives
much more comfortable. These chat-bots eliminate the avail-
ability of humans on a variety of tasks like the management
of a company’s Customer Assistance portal, guiding school
students with their study plan, and many more. Virtual Assis-
tants and the technology around them are helping us do the
things we do every day just quicker and more comfortable.
In recent times, these technologies have now even surpassed
the Question Answering System. These systems have be-
come proficient in making real-time conversations with the
users and asking follow-up questions to understand better
what we want. Some popularly known examples of Virtual
Assistants that we use daily are Google Assistant by Google,
Siri by Apple, Alexa by Amazon, and Cortana by Microsoft.
A comprehensive overview of such Virtual Assistants and
their working is presented in [46].
5
RELATED WORKS TO QUESTION ANSWERING
Machine Reading Comprehension is a very old problem in
the field of NLP. With massive collections of full-text docu-
ments, i.e., the Web, simply returning relevant documents
is of limited use. So instead, what we look for these days
is the direct answer to our questions. In this regard, many
recent Natural Language Processing Systems have heavily
leveraged the power of Deep Learning and other massive
NLP architectures for providing a solution to the Question
Answering problem of NLP.
Statistical Question Answering
A majority of basic and traditional approaches to answering
question answering involve techniques such as rule-based
algorithms or the employment of linear classifiers on a set
of hand-engineered features. Lynette Hirschman proposed
Deep Read [20] built on a training corpus of short stories
in the books of students of 3rd to 6th grade. The task aimed
at reading a story and answering a question based on that.
The proposed system made use of a simple bag-of-words
approach technique for matching the question with the pas-
sage to find the most relevant answer. [40] proposed two
baselines for the task of Question Answering. One of them
uses used some simple techniques such as a sliding window
to match the bags-of-words from the passage. The other
made use of word-distances between words present in the
question and in the document. Some statistical approaches
have also focused on learning a structured representation
of the entities in the data and storing the relations in the
document as a knowledge-base [5]. The next step focuses on
the conversion of the question to a structured query. This
allows the model to match the content of the question to that
of the knowledge-base. Other statistical approaches have
revolved around the usage of semantic features and the syn-
tactic features of words such as POS [49]. One of the finest
and competitive baseline came through the efforts of [8].
They proposed an approach using a set of carefully crafted
lexical, syntactic, and word order features of the Question
and Answering data. Christopher Burges [40] proposed a
challenge problem for Artificial Intelligence and released a
Reading Comprehension training corpus called the MCTest
[40].
Neural Question Answering
Deep Learning has always been the key to many extraordi-
nary advancements done in the field of NLP. Neural Models
find a vast application in the field of Question Answering also.
For instance, the use of Neural-attention models has been
widely applied in recent times for machine comprehension
in NLP. [17] proposed an Attentive Reader model in addition
to a large cloze-style question answering dataset CNN/Daily
Mail that led the foundation of many Deep Learning-based
architectures in the future. Another dataset was released that
originated from the Children’s book data [19]. As a baseline,
they proposed a window-based memory network. The use
of pointer networks has also gained popularity for answer
prediction [24]. [43] also made attempts in using the neu-
ral attention model for the task of machine comprehension.
One major revolution in Neural QA came about through
4

S.No.
Dataset Name
Description
Release Year
Training Samples
Testing Samples
1
CliCR [44]
Created from reports of Clinical Cases
2018
91,344
7,184
2
CNN [17]
Created from News Articles
2016
380,298
3,198
3
Daily Mail [17]
Created from News Articles
2016
879,450
53,182
4
CoQA [39]
Meant for Building Conversational Question
Answering system
2019
1,27,000*
-
5
MS MARCO [32]
Obtained from Bing’s Search Results
2016
1,010,916
-
6
NewsQA [45]
Created from CNN News Articles
2016
119,633
-
7
RACE [25]
Created from English examinations in China
2016
87,866
4,934
8
SQuAD [38]
Created from Wikipedia Data
2016
129,941
5,915
Table 2: A few question types generally posed by humans.
the release of the SQuAD dataset [38], which comprises of
Question, Passage and Answer triplets. The answer is al-
ways a continuous span to words in the passage, and the
questions appear to be more realistic in this dataset. Since
then, many attempts have been made to build a Question-
Answering system on SQuAD. [50] proposed an end-to-end
neural network-based approach that comprises of a Match-
LSTM encoder. [55] make use of a dynamic chunk reader,
which is a neural reading comprehension model aimed at the
extraction of a set of potential answers from the passage and
then ranks these answers to answer the question precisely.
The scope of Question Answering is not restricted to only
text-based Question Answering. Many attempts have also
been made in the past to propose models for Visual Ques-
tion Answering. For instance, [28] proposed a hierarchical
co-attention model for this task. The performance of this
model on the COCO-VQA dataset [4] achieved the state of
the art results. This followed the development of another
VQA model that made use of a co-attention mechanism to
compute a conditional representation of the image given the
question and vice versa [29]. Inspired by the above idea, [4]
proposed a Dynamic Co-attention Network (DCN) and an
year later a Dynamic Co-attention Network+ (DCN+) [53].
The architecture comprises of a Co-attentive encoder and a
Dynamic Decoder. The answer is predicted with the help of
a Pointer Network [48].
In recent times, NLP has witnessed a considerable work in
the direction of generating Contextualised Word Embeddings
(CWEs) [12] [37] [3]. CWEs have been inspired by the idea
of Sense Embeddings, which suggests using different Word
Embeddings for each sense of the word. Word Embeddings
models such as Word2Vec [31] and Glove [36] ignore poly-
semy of words and provide only a single embedding for each
word. In contrast, CWEs provide a separate embedding for
each word’s occurrence in the context it appears. One such
revolution in the field of CWEs can be realized by the efforts
made by the [12] and their proposed BERT model. The model
is based on a Transformer [47] architecture that makes use of
Attention Mechanism to find the Contextualised Embeddings
for words. Recent approaches in Question Answering have
also focused on using these models in place of the previously
used Static pre-trained Embeddings.
6
DATASETS
In the past few years, researchers in the field of NLP have put
in many efforts of curate Reading Comprehension datasets.
Most of these datasets are composed of a Passage, Question,
and Answer triplets and consists of approximately one lakh
training examples. A brief overview and statistics of some
of the popularly used datasets for Reading Comprehension
are given in Table 2.
7
MULTI DOCUMENT READING
COMPREHENSION
The task of natural Reading Comprehension is of minimal
practical use. It does not allow the system to search in mul-
tiple documents to search for an answer. The approaches
discussed in the Related Work Section primarily focus on
such a scenario of Question Answering. In contrast, Multi-
Document Reading Comprehension refers to the task of find-
ing the correct answer to a question by searching in more
than one documents. This task has more applications as an
end product than the Single document Reading Comprehen-
sion.
Most of the approaches proposed in this area have heavily
relied on the working mechanism of a natural Reading Com-
prehension system. This system functions very in a fashion
remarkably similar to that of the natural one. It just adds
an extra step of ranking the answers obtained from various
sources. A basic pipeline to this task is explained below in
the following steps:
(1) Document Selection: Out of the myriad of documents
available in the knowledge base, this step involves
the selection of top n-documents that match to the
question.
5

Figure 5: Figure shows the flow of final answer prediction from the RE3QA approach to Multi-Document Reading Compre-
hension
(2) Finding Candidate Answers: In this step, the model tries
to find some potential answers to the question from
the selected sets of documents.
(3) Answer Ranking and Selection: This step aims to rank
the answers extracted from the previous step according
to their relevance to the question and return the best
answer to the question.
In recent times, researchers working in the area on Multi-
ple Document Reading Comprehension have gained consid-
erable success in building efficient systems that can find an-
swers to question hidden in volumes of data [54] [22]. These
systems leverage the power of highly efficient and effective
algorithms and architectures at each step. [10] focused on
the construction of a coarse-to-fine grained framework that
answers the question from a retrieved document summary.
[27] proposed a pipeline system consisting of a paragraph
selector and a paragraph reader. [51] extended [10] and in-
troduced a network for cross-passage answer verification.
This paper studies one such recent approach that makes use
of the end-to-end network for efficient answer retrieval from
multiple documents. This approach is based on Retriever,
Reader, and Re-ranker model that works in the exact similar
to the pipeline described above. The approach is described
in the following section.
8
RE3QA: RETRIEVER, READER, AND RE-RANKER
BASED QUESTION ANSWERING
Figure 1 gives an overview of the RE3QA model for Multi-
Document Reading Comprehension taken from [22]. The
model comprises of three sub-networks. These are:
(1) Retriever: Retriever aims to select a few relevant docu-
ments from volumes of data available to us as a knowl-
edge base.
(2) Reader: Reader’s works on the output of Retriever, and
it is used to extract candidate answers from the re-
trieved documents.
(3) Re-ranker: Re-ranker aims to re-score multiple candi-
date answers generated by the Reader and return the
best answer to the question.
In contrast to previously adopted approaches, the RE3QA
model integrates the Retriever, Reader, and Re-ranker com-
ponents into a unified network instead of a pipeline and is
trained using an end-to-end strategy. One more improve-
ment is brought to the model by providing it Contextualised
Word Embeddings (CWEs) of BERT rather than pre-trained
Embeddings such as Glove Vectors. The use of BERT has
already been found to be very useful on many NLP task, and
the use of BERT Contextualised Embeddings in RE3QA is
what accounts for its exceptional performance gains. This
6

helps the model better understand the text and establish re-
lationships between the question and the knowledge base to
be searched.
The three sub-networks that govern the entire answer
generation process run through a five-staged process. These
are described in the following sub-sections:
Document Pruning
This is the first of five steps involved in the answer retrieval
process for this model. As the name suggests, this step in-
volves the selection of potential documents from the entire
database which may contain the answer to the question.
Figure 6
The input to this step is the Question Q and the set of
Documents 𝐷∈{𝐷1, 𝐷2, 𝐷3, . . . 𝐷N}. Paragraphs in each
Document are ranked according to TF-IDF scores with the
question and top-K paragraphs are selected for further steps.
These paragraphs are then concatenated to form a a single
document d.
Segment Encoding
As the name suggests, this part involves splitting of the Doc-
ument d obtained in the previous step into small components.
To achieve this, the model slides a window of length l with
a stride r over the Document d. This results in the formation
of a set of text-segments 𝐶∈{𝐶1,𝐶2,𝐶1, . . .𝐶N}.
In the next step, these segments are individually concate-
nated with the Question Q and encoded with the help of
the BERT model. Input to the Transformer Block is QC =
[’[CLS]’; Q ; ’[SEP]’ ; Ci ; ’[SEP]’] where ’[CLS]’ is called the
Classification Token and ’[SEP]’ is a token used for separat-
ing sentences. The length of vector QC is LX. This is then
passed into the TransformerBlock which returns I hidden
layers. The value of I for bert-small is 12 and for bert-large is
24. Each hidden layer is of size LX*DH where DH is the size
of hidden layer.
ℎ𝑖= 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘(ℎ(𝑖−1))𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑖∈[1, 𝐼]
ℎ𝑖∈RLX*DH
Early Stopped Retriever
The above encoding is very effective and appealing but there
is a lot of computational efficiency involved in it as well. This
becomes evident from the fact that average number of text-
segments C for each question is roughly 20. Each segment is
concatenated with the Question Q and passed through atleast
12 hidden layers for encoding it. Each hidden layer is atleast
of size 768. The Early Stopped Retriever applies another level
of pruning. In a nutshell, it ranks all the text-segments using
the hidden representations obtained in Segment Encoding
step. This is done using a series of Multi-Layer Perceptron
and a self-aligning layer with the hidden states. To train
this component, it is trained on an objective function which
computes the loss over those ranked segments that don’t
contain any word of the final answer. From this step, we
select M text-segments according to the ranks obtained for
further processing.
Distantly-Supervised Reader
The aim of the Reader is to generate multiple candidate an-
swers. This is achieved by projecting the last hidden layer
of each text-segment obtained in the previous step into two
scores. These scores determine the potential start and end
of the answer. The objective function defines a loss that is
totally similar to that of the Early Stopped Retriever model.
The module returns the start and the end position of the pre-
liminary answers from each of the M text-segments. These
are: A = [A1, A2, A3, ..., AM].
Answer Re-ranker
This module ranks the potential answers from the previous
module with the help of their span representations. The ob-
jective function defined here is also similar to that described
in the earlier modules. This objective function takes into
account whether a particular span representation contains
at least one token from the original answer or not. Those
representations that don’t contain any such token are used
in the loss function.
In the above sub-sections, the objective of each of the
three-modules, i.e. the Retriever, Reader and the Re-ranker
are defined. Rather than separately training each component,
the training strategy involves an end-to-end strategy for
training them together. This is done by adding the three loss
functions and train the entire network in based on this loss
function using Gradient Descent.
Datasets
Experimentation is done on 3 prominent and widely used
Question Answering datasets. These are:
(1) TriviaQA-Wikipedia: This dataset consists of Top-10
search documents from Wikipedia.
7

(2) SQuAD Document: It is variant of the original SQuAD
dataset. Difference is that it maps the question to the
entire Wikipedia Page instead of a specific paragraph.
(3) SQuAD Open: This dataset is basically the entire Wikipedia-
domain.
Results
The RE3QA model, when trained with the appropriate data
and training strategy, outperforms the previously adopted
approaches and achieves state-of-the-art results on the three-
datasets written above. The results for each of these models
is shown in the following table:
Dataset
RE3QA Large
RE3QA Base
TriviaQA-Wikipedia
83.0
79.9
SQuAD Document
87.20
84.81
SQuAD Open
50.2
48.4
Table 3: F1(%) scores obtained by using the BERT-base and
the BERT-large model on each of the three datasets. There
are taken directly from [22].
9
CONCLUSION
This paper presented a study on the evolution of Question
Answering as an AI problem and its importance in our day to
day lives. We also discussed the history of Question Answer-
ing over the past few decades and how the advancements in
the field have led to the development of plenty of Chat-bots
using Question Answering techniques. In addition to this, we
discussed two significant periods of Question Answering, i.e.,
the Pre-2015 and the Post-2015. While coming to the end of
our study, we saw one of the recently proposed approaches to
Multi-Document Reading Comprehension that made use of a
unified network to answer questions by looking into multiple
documents at a time. The model discussed is currently the
state-of-the-art in this domain on three challenging datasets
of Question Answering.
