“No, to the Right” – Online Language Corrections for Robotic
Manipulation via Shared Autonomy
Yuchen Cui∗

Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Siddharth Karamcheti∗

Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Raj Palleti
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Nidhya Shivakumar
The Harker School
San Jose, CA, USA
Percy Liang
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
Systems for language-guided human-robot interaction must satisfy
two key desiderata for broad adoption: adaptivity and learning effi-
ciency. Unfortunately, existing instruction-following agents cannot
adapt, lacking the ability to incorporate online natural language
supervision, and even if they could, require hundreds of demonstra-
tions to learn even simple policies. In this work, we address these
problems by presenting Language-Informed Latent Actions with
Corrections (LILAC), a framework for incorporating and adapting
to natural language corrections – “to the right”, or “no, towards
the book” – online, during execution. We explore rich manipulation
domains within a shared autonomy paradigm. Instead of discrete
turn-taking between a human and robot, LILAC splits agency be-
tween the human and robot: language is an input to a learned model
that produces a meaningful, low-dimensional control space that the
human can use to guide the robot. Each real-time correction refines
the human’s control space, enabling precise, extended behaviors –
with the added benefit of requiring only a handful of demonstra-
tions to learn. We evaluate our approach via a user study where
users work with a Franka Emika Panda manipulator to complete
complex manipulation tasks. Compared to existing learned base-
lines covering both open-loop instruction following and single-turn
shared autonomy, we show that our corrections-aware approach
obtains higher task completion rates, and is subjectively preferred
by users because of its reliability, precision, and ease of use.1
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Cooperation and coordina-
tion; Natural language processing; Learning from demonstrations.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
1Project website with videos & study interface: https://sites.google.com/view/hri-lilac.
Code for data collection, model definition, training, and evaluation:
https://github.com/Stanford-ILIAD/lilac.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9964-7/23/03.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3568162.3578623
“Pick up the book 
and insert it into 
the bookshelf” 
“Tilt down a 
little bit!” 
Shared Autonomy 
Regime
User reaches an 
“irrecoverable” state 
(gets stuck!)
2
1
3
Figure 1: LILAC: Whereas prior work only allows for issuing
a single language utterance for the entire task (“Pick up the
book and insert it into the bookshelf” – solid line), our ap-
proach allows users to provide language corrections at any
point during execution, allowing the robot to adapt online
(“Tilt down a little bit!” – right window).
KEYWORDS
Online corrections, language & shared autonomy, robot learning
ACM Reference Format:
Yuchen Cui, Siddharth Karamcheti, Raj Palleti, Nidhya Shivakumar, Percy
Liang, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2023. “No, to the Right” – Online Language Cor-
rections for Robotic Manipulation via Shared Autonomy. In Proceedings of
the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI ’23), March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3568162.3578623
1
INTRODUCTION
Research in natural language for robotics has focused on dyadic,
turn-based interactions between humans and robots, often in the
instruction following regime [2, 3, 46, 49]. In this paradigm a human
arXiv:2301.02555v1  [cs.RO]  6 Jan 2023

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Cui & Karamcheti et. al.
“Pick up the book and insert it into the bookshelf!”
I am stuck!
“Tilt down a little bit”
Figure 2: A user interacts with our system. [Left] The user utters “pick up the book and insert it into the bookshelf,” inducing
a low-dimensional controller (depicted with the joystick and shaded inputs). [Middle] This control space is state and language-
conditioned: pressing down brings the end-effector close to the book, while holding up/left after grasping the book moves the
end-effector towards the shelf. However, this static controller is not enough; the user gets stuck! [Right] Our approach allows
users to provide real-time corrections (“tilt down a little bit”) refining the control space so the user can complete the task.
gives an instruction, then the robot executes autonomously – simul-
taneously resolving the human’s goal as well as planning a course of
actions to execute in the environment, without any additional user
input. This explicit division of agency between humans and robots
places a tremendous burden on learning; existing systems either
require large amounts of language-aligned demonstration data to
learn policies [10, 34, 44, 45], or make other restrictive assumptions
about known environment dynamics, in addition to the ability to
perform perfect object localization and affordance prediction to
plug into task and motion planners [27, 37].
Coupled with the sample inefficiency of these approaches is
their lack of adaptivity. Consider the robot in Figure 1, trying to
execute “Pick up the book and insert it into the bookshelf.” This
is a long-horizon task with several critical states requiring precise
manipulation – from grasping the book by its spine, to raising
it above the table without hitting the side table, to lining it up
precisely with the bookshelf for insertion (with less than a few
millimeters of clearance on either side). In such circumstances, even
the best existing approaches fail to complete the task repeatably.
Yet these “task failures” are often predictable and recoverable. A
user watching a robot diving towards a glass bowl knows that
catastrophe is seconds away, and how to avert it; similarly, fine-
grained errors such as a missed grasp, or a misaligned end-effector
are similarly fixable – as long as the user is provided with the right
mechanism to adapt the robot’s behavior.
One way to enable such adaptation is through natural language
corrections – from the simple “left!” or “tilt down a little bit” (as
in Figure 1), to the more complex “no, towards the blue marker.”
While recent work tries to get at the spirit of this idea by learning
from dialogue [47, 48], post-hoc corrections [7, 8, 12, 43], or implicit
feedback [22], none of these approaches work in real-time. Instead,
we argue that scalable systems for language-driven human-robot
interaction must be able to handle online corrections in a manner
that is both adaptive and sample efficient.
We introduce a novel approach – LILAC: Language-Informed
Latent Actions with Corrections – that presents a generalizable
framework for adapting to online natural language corrections built
within a shared autonomy [1, 14, 20, 30] paradigm for human-robot
collaboration. With LILAC, a user provides a stream of language
utterances, starting with a high-level goal (“Pick up the book and
insert it into the bookshelf”), with each utterance shaping the con-
trol the user is afforded over the robot. At any point during ex-
ecution, a user can provide a new utterance – a correction like
“tilt down a little bit!” – which updates that control space online,
reflecting the user’s intent in real time. Working in a shared auton-
omy setting like this gives us the adaptivity mentioned above, but
also allows us to develop correction-aware systems with extreme
sample efficiency. With LILAC, we can learn to perform complex
manipulation tasks like those in Figure 1 from 10-20 demonstrations
instead of the thousands to tens of thousands of demonstrations
required by fully autonomous imitation or reinforcement learning
approaches[10, 19, 33, 34]. These gains are rooted in the idea of
splitting agency between the human and robot; during execution,
both parties influence the ultimate actions of the robot, sharing the
burden of reasoning over actions.
We evaluate LILAC via a within-subjects user study (𝑛= 12),
where users complete a complex set of manipulation tasks on a
Franka Emika Panda arm using LILAC and two baselines – the state-
of-the-art language-informed latent actions (LILA) model [23], as
well as a fully autonomous language-conditioned imitation learning
approach. We find that LILAC obtains higher task success rates
than either baseline because of its ability to adapt given online
language instructions, and that users qualitatively find LILAC to
be more reliable, precise, and easy to use.
2
MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
The learned latent actions paradigm [21, 32] was initially conceived
of in the context of assistive teleoperation; given users with lim-
ited mobility, finding an intuitive manner of controlling a 7-DoF+
assistive robotic arm with low-dimensional controllers (e.g., a 2-
DoF joystick attached to a wheelchair) is extremely difficult. Naive

Online Language Corrections via Shared Autonomy
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
approaches for mapping the high-dimensional robotic control prob-
lem to a low-DoF interface – for example, by controlling the (x/y,
z/roll, pitch/yaw) axes of the end-effector independently with the
joystick – lead to high amounts of user discomfort, with frequent
mode-switching, imprecise controls, and high cognitive load for
users [1, 16]. Learned latent actions – and specifically, the latest
work on Language-Informed Latent Actions (LILA) [23] – offer a
compromise: use a small number of task-specific demonstrations to
learn a nonlinear mapping from joystick axes to end-effector con-
trol axes, such that each axis of the joystick represents semantically
meaningful movement through task space.
As a concrete example, consider Figure 2 for the task of “pick up
the book and insert it into the bookshelf.” LILA learns a single, static
mapping to use for the entirety of the episode, and hits a key failure
mode; due to compounding errors as the user navigated the book
from the table up towards the shelf, the end-effector is misaligned
with the shelf, making a clean insertion impossible! This is where
we need online language corrections – the mechanism that allows
the user to quickly diagnose the problem and refine the robot’s
behavior. With LILAC, the user provides the correction “tilt down
a little bit,” in the midst of execution and switch into a new control
space. Pressing left on the joystick now provides explicit, precise
control over the robot’s orientation, allowing the user to even-out
the end-effector and complete the task.
3
RELATED WORK
LILAC builds off of a rich body of work spanning methods for
incorporating language corrections, learning language-conditioned
policies, and incorporating other forms of corrective feedback.
Incorporating Language Corrections for Manipulation. Most
relevant to our approach are recent methods for incorporating var-
ious types of natural language corrections in the context of robotic
manipulation. These methods can be stratified based on the as-
sumptions they make, and when during execution a user provides a
correction. For example, Broad et al. [5] enables data-efficient online
corrections (similar to LILAC) using distributed correspondence
graphs to ground language, via use of a semantic parser that maps
language to a predefined space of correction groundings; these
groundings are brittle and hand-designed, additionally requiring
access to a motion planner (and fully known environment dynam-
ics) to identify a fulfilling set of actions for the robot to execute.
In contrast, later work in incorporating corrections removes the
need for brittle, hand-designed correction primitives, instead using
post-hoc corrections provided at the end of task execution to define
composable cost functions that are fed to a trajectory optimizer [43];
the post-hoc nature of these corrections is limiting, especially in
cases where tasks have irreversible or “hard-to-reset” components,
and the trajectory optimizer requires non-trivial knowledge of the
environment. Later work relaxes these prior knowledge assump-
tions, but can only incorporate correction information post-hoc,
directly “modifying” trajectory waypoints following a language
correction in both 2D [7] and 3D [8] environments using massive
datasets of paired corrections and demonstrations. In contrast to
these approaches, LILAC is a shared autonomy approach that op-
erates online, in real-time, without a need for massive amounts of
data, prior environment dynamics, or full state knowledge.
Learning Language-Conditioned Policies. More general than
incorporating corrections is a tremendous body of work on learning
language-conditioned policies in both the full and shared autonomy
regimes. Early work in this space used semantic parsers to map natu-
ral language instructions to predefined motion planning primitives,
given modest sized datasets [2, 3, 27, 46]. While these approaches
were able to accomplish a limited range of tasks with high reliabil-
ity, reliance on predefined primitives and motion planners made
it hard to scale these approaches to more complex manipulation
domains, where environment knowledge is hard to come by, and
hand-defined primitives are brittle and limiting. As a result, more
recent work in this space learn language-conditioned policies di-
rectly via imitation learning from large datasets of paired (language,
demonstration) pairs [19, 34, 38, 44, 45]. While expressive, these
approaches are still tremendously data hungry, requiring hundreds
or thousands of examples to learn even the simplest tasks. To ad-
dress the sample efficiency problem, other work such as LILA [23]
have turned to the shared autonomy regime, learning collaborative
human-robot policies from orders of magnitude fewer demonstra-
tions. LILA is the starting point of our proposed approach.
Incorporating Other Forms of Corrective Feedback. Other ap-
proaches tackle learning from other forms of corrective feedback,
such as physical corrections [28, 31], targeted interventions wherein
a human fully assumes control over a robot via remote teleopera-
tion [17, 25, 35], critiques [9, 13], as well as trajectory preferences
[4, 11]. More recently, Schmittle et al. [42] have proposed a meta-
algorithm for online learning from multiple types of corrective
feedback (excluding language). While this work is promising, we
focus our approach on language corrections, a natural communica-
tion modality for human users. Learning to incorporate language
corrections also allows for transfer across tasks as correction lan-
guage such as “to the left” are general and often independent of the
current state of the robot, whereas other correction modalities can
be more context-dependent.
4
LILAC: FRAMING CORRECTIONS
LILAC builds off of LILA as introduced by Karamcheti et al. [23]
by incorporating natural language corrections during the course
of execution. The LILAC architecture is depicted in Figure 3; solid
lines denote inference, while dashes denote training. LILAC incor-
porates natural language corrections in a data-driven way; this
work focuses on directional corrections (e.g., “to the left”) and ref-
erential corrections (e.g., “towards the blue marker”) – all with a
generalizable and scalable procedure that can be extended to other
more complex types of corrections. This section outlines all the
elements of our approach.
4.1
Problem Statement
Our setting is that of a sequential decision making problem defined
by elements (S, A, T, U, C∗, Z) where 𝑠∈S ⊆R𝑛denotes the
state of the robot and environment, 𝑎∈A ⊆R𝑘denotes a robot’s
𝑘-dimensional action (in our case, a 6-DoF delta in end-effector pose
– Cartesian coordinates for position and Euler angles for orienta-
tion), and T : S × A →S is a (stochastic) unobserved transition
function. Furthermore, 𝑢∈U denotes a high-level natural lan-
guage instruction provided by the user, c ∈C∗denotes the ordered

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Cui & Karamcheti et. al.
=
“Pick up the book and 
insert it into the bookshelf.”
Instruction & Correction  
“Gating” Function
hstate
hlanguage
α = 1
×
Projection
Basis 1 — (6-DoF)
Basis 2 — (6-DoF)
z1
z2
⋅
Inference 
Human controls!
Predicted 
 Robot 
Action
“Tilt down a little bit!”
α = 0
Distil-RoBERTa
Training Utterances
Distil-RoBERTa
“Tilt downwards” 
“Towards the marker.”
“Place the book up on 
the shelf”
Similarity  
Search
State 
Encoder
Proprioceptive 
State
Object Poses
+
=
State
[Train-Only] 
Action 
Encoder
Action
Figure 3: LILAC Overview – solid lines represent the inference pipeline, while dashed lines indicate training-only steps. Part
of LILAC’s ability to incorporate language corrections efficiently is the “gating” module (orange) which controls the amount
of state-context for a given input – for example, grounding a correction such as “tilt down a little bit” requires no state context
(𝛼= 0), whereas a high-level instruction such as “pick up the book and insert it into the bookshelf” does require context (𝛼= 1).
We use GPT-3, a pretrained language model, to provide 𝛼(see §4.3 for discussion).
(possibly empty) stack of natural language corrections the user has
provided, and 𝑧∈Z ⊆R𝑑where 𝑑≪𝑘denotes a user-provided
input via their low-dimensional control device (e.g., a 2-DoF joy-
stick). Users can provide an arbitrary number of online corrections
throughout the episode to adapt the robot’s behavior.
The goal of LILAC is to learn a function F𝜃(𝑠𝑡,𝑧𝑡,𝑢𝑡, c𝑡) : S ×
Z × U × C∗→A that maps the current robot and environment
state 𝑠𝑡, low-dimensional control input 𝑧𝑡, initial high-level utter-
ance 𝑢provided by the user (held constant throughout the given
episode), and (possibly empty) stack of language corrections c𝑡
to a high-dimensional robot action 𝑎𝑡that is to be executed in
the environment. The corresponding low-DoF control manifold
Ð
𝑧𝑡∈Z F𝜃(𝑠𝑡,𝑧𝑡,𝑢𝑡, c𝑡) provides an intuitive interface for the user
to maneuver the robot towards satisfying the task in question. At
each new timestep 𝑡+ 1, a user can either provide a new language
correction 𝑐′ which is “pushed” onto the stack, press a button to
“pop” their latest correction off of the stack c𝑡signalling that their
correction has been addressed, or provide a control input 𝑧𝑡that is
mapped to the corresponding robot action 𝑎𝑡.
4.2
Modeling: Inference & Learning
Given the current state 𝑠and language 𝑢and c, F𝜃maps low-
dimensional user control inputs 𝑧to the high-dimensional robot
actions 𝑎. Crisply, we define ˆ𝑎= F𝜃(𝑠,𝑧,𝑢, c) as:
ℎstate ∈R𝑚= EncodeState𝜃(𝑠)
ℎlanguage ∈R𝑚= EncodeLanguage𝜃(𝑢, c)
𝛼∈[0, 1] = GPTGating(𝑢, c)
ℎgated ∈R𝑚= 𝛼· ℎstate + (1 −𝛼) · bias𝜃
ℎfused ∈R𝑚= FiLM𝜃(ℎgated,ℎlanguage)
𝐵bases ∈R𝑘×𝑑= Gram-Schmidt(Projection𝜃(ℎfused))
ˆ𝑎∈R𝑘= 𝐵bases · 𝑧
where 𝑚is a hyperparameter denoting the hidden dimensionality
of the model (we set 𝑚= 128 for this work).
We first learn a state encoder EncodeState𝜃. The state space we
use in this work consists of the robot’s proprioceptive state (joint
angles & end-effector pose) concatenated with a vector of (𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)
positions for each object in the scene; EncodeState𝜃is a two-layer
MLP that takes this input and outputs ℎstate.
To encode language (𝑢and c), we adopt a last-in-first-out strat-
egy for selectively encoding utterances, only encoding on the most
recent utterance – 𝑢at the beginning of an interaction, then the
most recent correction 𝑐′. We embed this utterance with a frozen
variant of the Distil-RoBERTa language model [41] as released by
the Sentence-BERT project [40]. This process is backed by an “un-
natural language processing” nearest neighbors index [36] where
inference-time utterances are mapped onto the closest existing
training exemplars, which are then retrieved and fed to the rest
of the model. This process, similar to that used in LILA [23] pre-
vents LILAC from degenerating in the presence of slight varia-
tions of language, which could lead to practical user safety issues.
EncodeLanguage𝜃is another two-layer MLP that takes in the re-
trieved embedding and outputs ℎlanguage.
Next, we consider how to fuse the state and language embeddings.
A key component of LILAC and its ability to remain data efficient
is the GPT-3 [6] “gating” module (shown in orange in Figure 3),
and denoted by the scalar value 𝛼∈[0, 1] in the equations above.
The gating value 𝛼reflects a simple insight – certain utterances
require different amounts of object/state dependence. For example,
an utterance such as “go left” does not require reasoning over any
objects in the environment (𝛼= 0). A detailed discussion on gating
and how we operationalize GPT-3 can be found in §4.3. We use this
gating value 𝛼to module the amount of state information in ℎgated
by taking the convex combination of 𝛼with ℎstate and a vector
bias𝜃, where 𝛼= 0 obviates 𝑥state.
We incorporate language by using FiLM [39], mapping ℎlanguage
to affine transformation parameters 𝛾∈R𝑚and 𝛽∈R𝑚via sepa-
rate learned two-layer MLPs. We then apply the resulting transfor-
mation elementwise to ℎgated, producing ℎfused = 𝛾· ℎgated + 𝛽.

Online Language Corrections via Shared Autonomy
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Finally, we predict basis vectors 𝐵bases ∈R𝑘×𝑑(recall that 𝑘
is the dimensionality of the high-DoF robot action space, while
𝑑is the dimensionality of the user’s low-DoF control interface).
𝐵bases uniquely defines the user’s control manifold for the given
timestep; we learn a two-layer MLP Projection𝜃that takes ℎfused
and outputs a matrix with the required dimensions. To serve as
an appropriately conditioned control manifold, we run modified
Gram-Schmidt to orthonormalize the bases. The final high-DoF
robot action ˆ𝑎∈R𝑘is then the matrix-vector product between
𝐵bases and the user’s input 𝑧∈R𝑑.
Learning from Language & Demonstrations. To learn F𝜃, we
assume a dataset of (𝑢= language, 𝜏= trajectory) pairs, where
each trajectory is comprised of a sequence of (𝑠,𝑎) pairs; 𝜏=
{(𝑠1,𝑎1) . . . (𝑠𝑇,𝑎𝑇)}, and a desired latent action dimensionality
𝑑(e.g., 𝑑= 2 in this work for the number of axes on a joystick).
The action space we use are deltas in end-effector space (Cartesian
position, Euler angle orientation). Note that these inputs don’t fully
line up with the signature of F𝜃– notably, we do not have access
to “ground-truth” latent actions 𝑧for each given robot action 𝑎. To
address this, we adopt the insight used in prior work on learned
latent actions [23, 24, 32]: frame the training process as learning a
state-and-language conditional autoencoder, using compression as
a way to induce meaningful latent action control manifolds.
Specifically, we implement this by adding a layer to compress
high-DoF robot actions down to a 𝑑-dimensional latent:
𝑧compressed ∈R𝑑= Compress𝜃(𝑎)
𝑎reconstruct ∈R𝑘= 𝐵bases · 𝑧compressed
where 𝐵bases is computed from state and language as above.
Given this reconstruction objective, we can write a compact
loss function for training: L(𝜃) = ||𝑎−𝑎reconstruct||2
2 – in other
words, minimize the mean squared error between the action high-
DoF robot action 𝑎and 𝑎reconstruct. Compress𝜃is implemented as a
two-layer MLP, and is discarded after training.
4.3
Gating Instructions vs. Corrections
Key to scaling LILAC is the insight that various forms of correction
language are generalizable across states – in other words, different
language utterances require different amounts of object/environment
state-dependence. Formally defining the “state-dependence” of a
language utterance is hard; one heuristic might be to categorize
different utterances based on the number of referents present; an
utterance like “grab the thing on the side table and place it on the
table” as in Figure 1 has 3 referents, indicating a large degree of state
dependence; the robot must ground the utterance in the objects
of the environment to resolve the correct behavior. However, an
utterance like “no, to the left!” has no explicit referents; one can
resolve the utterance by relying solely on the user’s static reference
frame and induced deltas in end-effector space.
To operationalize this idea with LILAC, further contributing to
the sample efficiency of our approach,2 we use a gating function
(orange, in Figure 3) that given language, predicts a discrete value
2A valid question is why not treat all utterances as requiring uniform, or the same
amount of state-dependence; the answer is rooted in the small data regime we operate
in. We’d need to collect several instances of the same correction “to the left” in different
states to generalize, whereas with LILAC “gating” approach, we only need one!
𝛼∈{0, 1}. A value of 0 signifies a state-independent utterance –
for example, the correction “tilt down a little bit.” Appropriately, in
our architecture, this zeroes out any state-dependent information
(see the 𝛼term in Figure 3), and predicts an action solely based
on the provided language. Critically, the fused representation of
language and state provided to the rest of the network defining in
F𝜃is modulated by 𝛼– more detail in §4.4.
Using GPT-3 to Identify Corrections. In this work, we construct
a prompt harness with GPT-3 [6] to output 𝛼. We do this because
characterizing the state-dependence of an utterance is difficult;
while the aforementioned reference counting heuristic may work in
some cases, utterances such as “no, the blue!” have implicit referents
(in this case, perhaps a marker, or cup) that need to be grounded in the
environment state. Many other phenomena make it hard to define
heuristics for computing 𝛼– anaphora, null referents (“move the
robot left”), etc. Instead of crafting grammars or heuristics, we opt to
tap into the power of large language models with in-context learning
abilities, that learn to extrapolate given a prompt and small set of
examples. We specifically build off of GPT-3 text-davinci-002
(175B parameters) [6]. To define our prompt, we allocated a 10
minute budget to iteratively engineer the input/output examples
and task description, using a held-out set of 5 language utterances
to provide signal.3
4.4
Reproducibility
To facilitate reproducibility and future work, we release an open-
source codebase (https://github.com/Stanford-ILIAD/lilac) with the
complete pipeline spanning data collection, model definition, train-
ing, and real-robot deployment.
Model Architecture. All MLPs detailed in §4.2 use 𝑚= 128 and
the GELU activation [15]. For stability, we add a single Batch Nor-
malization layer [18] before feeding the concatenated state repre-
sentation to the state encoder. As implemented, LILAC is extremely
lightweight at only 188K parameters.
Training Details. Training LILAC is efficient, and can be run on
consumer laptop CPUs, eschewing the need for expensive GPUs.
We train for 50 epochs, with a batch size of 512, using the AdamW
optimizer [26] with default learning rate of 0.001 and weight de-
cay of 0.01. We do not use any other form of regularization (e.g.,
dropout). We select models based on validation loss with respect to
a small number (𝑛= 5) of held out (language, trajectory) pairs.
As mentioned in §4.2, we assume a dataset of utterances and
corresponding trajectories. These utterances consist of both the
high-level task utterances (e.g., “pick up the book and insert it into
the bookshelf”) and correction utterances (e.g., “tilt down a little
bit”). We run the GPT-3 alpha labeling procedure as a preprocessing
step, marking each example with the degree of context-dependence
required, then train F𝜃jointly, on all of our data.
5
USER STUDY PRELIMINARIES
To evaluate LILAC with respect to prior methods for language-
informed policy learning, we conduct a within-subjects user study
with 𝑛= 12 participants, with each participant evaluating LILAC
3Prompt: https://github.com/Stanford-ILIAD/lilac/tree/main/scripts/alphas.py.

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Cui & Karamcheti et. al.
Figure 4: Results from our user study (𝑛= 12) across three conditions: 1) Language-Conditioned Imitation Learning, 2)
Language-Informed Latent Actions (LILA) – an instantiation of language-informed shared autonomy without online correc-
tions, and 3) LILAC – our approach where users can provide online corrections at any point during robot execution.
against language-conditioned approaches for full and shared au-
tonomy – namely, a language-informed imitation learning baseline
(“Imitation”) trained on the same demonstrations as LILAC, as well
as a non-corrective shared autonomy baseline (“LILA”), also trained
on the same demonstrations. The following sections detail the en-
vironment, tasks, data collection process, as well as user study
procedure. Finally, we list our independent variables, dependent
measures and concrete hypotheses.
Environment & Tasks. We consider a multi-task “desk” environ-
ment (Figure 5) with the following tasks listed by complexity:
(1) clean-trash: throw away a piece of crumpled paper (de-
formable) into the black trash bin.
(2) transfer-pen: transfer the blue marker (upper left of Fig-
ure 5) from the shelf into the metal tin holder (lower left).
(3) open-drawer: Open the bottom drawer on the shelf by grasp-
ing the small knob, and sliding out horizontally (requires
fine-grained end-effector orientation control).
2
1
3
4
5
Figure 5: Setup of our tabletop manipulation environment
with sketches of our high-level tasks (further details in §5).
(4) insert-book: Pick up the book on the table by its spine, and
insert it into the bookshelf (has only a few millimeters of
clearance on either side).
(5) water-plant: Water the succulent (white bowl on the upper
right of Figure 5) using the water in the yellow cup (rather
than actual water, we use marbles for easy cleanup).
Each of the 5 tasks we define are difficult from a manipulation
perspective, especially in the small data regime we operate in. For
fine-grained comparison between the three approaches under study,
we define a set of subtasks to use to measure partial task success
(turning a sparse full-task success rate into a denser measure of
progress): a) reaching the desired object to manipulate (e.g., the book
in the insert-book task), b) successfully grasping the manipulable
object, c) transferring the desired object to the target location (e.g.,
moving the water cup above the plant for the water-plant task),
and finally, d) completing the full task.
Demonstration & Correction Data Collection. For each task,
we collected dense, human-guided kinesthetic demonstrations – 50
full-task demonstrations total (orders of magnitude fewer demon-
strations than what is typically required for fully autonomous in-
struction following approaches [34, 38]). The robot’s proprioceptive
state is encoded as the concatenation of its joint states (7-DoF; in
radians), as well as the end-effector poses computed via forward
kinematics (expressed as 3-DoF Cartesian position, and 3-DoF Euler
angle orientation), and compute the high-level robot actions as
the deltas in end-effector space between consecutive time steps
in our demonstrations (resulting in 6-DoF high-level actions). We
record our demonstrations and run our controllers at 10 Hz; we use
Polymetis [29] as the basis for our robot control platform.
For LILAC, we additionally collect a small set of correction
demonstrations (collected under 2 hours of interaction with the ro-
bot) with associated correction language utterances, spanning two
loose categories: 1) directional corrections such as “tilt down,” “to
the right,” “rotate counterclockwise”, and 2) contextual referential
corrections such as “towards the blue marker” or “no, move down
towards the knob on the drawer.” We collect these demonstrations
by replaying the full-task demonstrations, and sampling random
intermediate states during playback to initiate corrections. The

Online Language Corrections via Shared Autonomy
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Imitation Learning
LILA (No Corrections)
LILAC (Ours)
“Go up”
“Lower”
“Tilt left”
High-Level Instruction
Correction
“Water the succulent 
with the yellow cup.”
“Open the bottom 
drawer of the shelf.”
Figure 6: Qualitative trajectories across the different control strategies for the open-drawer and water-plant tasks. The fully
autonomous imitation learning approach fails to make it beyond the first stage of the task, while LILA is able to reach the
drawer as well as the cup but fails to precisely aim and grasp the object. LILAC gets stuck at the same place, but is able to
recover as the user issues low-level corrections to precisely maneuver the end-effector and fully complete the tasks.
authors of this work served as the expert demonstrators for both
full-task and correction demonstrations.
Participants & Procedures. All user studies were conducted sub-
ject to a university-approved IRB protocol, with participants re-
cruited from a pool of 12 university students (8 male/4 female, age
range 20-30 with mean 24.8). Of the 12 total participants, only 4
users had prior experience teleoperating a robot. All our studies
used a Franka Emika Panda robot (as depicted in Figure 5), a 7-DoF
fixed-arm manipulator with a parallel-jaw gripper. In all settings,
the maximum joint velocity norm of the Panda was bounded to 1
rad/sec, with conservative torque limits of 40.0 Nm.
We conducted a within subjects user study where each participant
used all three candidate methods (denoted as Imitation, LILA, and
LILAC (Ours) in Figure 4) to complete 3 of the 5 high-level tasks. We
shuffled the order of candidate methods between users to ensure a
fair comparison. Upon starting, each user read a detailed written
description of each control method (the explicit text can be found
on the project website), viewed a video depicting the high-level task
to perform, and were allowed a single “practice” session to with the
control method in question. Each user performed two trials for a
given task; we recorded partial success rates and asked the user to
fill out a qualitative survey before switching to the next strategy.
Hypotheses. In this study, we vary the control strategy (Imita-
tion, LILA and LILAC) and use the objective measures of subtask
and full-goal success rates to assess efficacy. We additionally track
qualitative aspects such as “ease of use,” “smooth control,” and “like-
lihood of using this control strategy again” (the full set of qualitative
measures can be found in Figure 4) by surveying our users via a 7-
point Likert scale. We test the following two hypotheses regarding
LILAC’s performance relative to the baseline strategies:
H1 – LILAC allows users to obtain higher subtask and full-goal
success rates when completing complex manipulation tasks relative
to specifying tasks for a language-conditioned imitation learning
agent, or LILA trained on the same amount of data.
H2 – LILAC is qualitatively preferred by users over both baseline
strategies in terms of overall usability measured by their subjective
responses to the survey questions.
Baseline Implementations. Both the LILA and Imitation (language-
conditioned behavioral cloning) baselines are trained on the exact
same data as LILAC following nearly identical processes.4 LILA
is trained following the exact same architecture as LILAC from
Figure 3, without the GPT-3 gating component. The imitation learn-
ing model is implemented as a history-aware policy that is able to
attend to prior states (in this work, we truncate history at 1 second).
We use the same state and language encoder as LILAC, but use a
2-layer Transformer [50] to encode the full history sequence. We
use again use a FiLM layer to fuse language and state embeddings,
then use a final 2-layer MLP to directly predict the action to execute
in the environment (for open-loop control).
6
USER STUDY RESULTS
We report the success rate for each subtask averaged across users
in Figure 4 (Left). Objectively, we find that LILAC achieves the high-
est success rate across all subtasks, and is significantly (𝑝< 0.05)
more performant than the imitation learning and LILA baselines
for the latter three subtasks – grasping, transfer, and full task com-
pletion – results that fully support H1. We also find that LILAC is
subjectively preferred by users, as evidenced by Figure 4 (Right).
Looking at the survey results, we find that LILAC is significantly
(𝑝< 0.05) preferred on 6 out of the 7 metrics, including “ease of use,”
“intuitiveness,” and “willingness to use again,” amongst others. The
subjective results support H2; LILAC is favored for its adaptability,
allowing users to execute targeted, precise motions.
Visualizations. To further understand the value of LILAC and
incorporating online corrections, we visualize example trajectories
for each of the three control strategies for two high-level tasks in
Figure 6. On the left are trajectories for the simple open-drawer
task: we see that the fully autonomous imitation learning model
fails to reach the drawer entirely, whereas LILA and LILAC are able
to successfully reach the drawer, but get stuck trying to precisely
aim and grasp the small knob. While LILA cannot recover, LILAC
is receptive to the user’s correction, producing a refined control
space allowing for the user to complete the grasp and finish out the
task. We see a similar story with the more difficult water-plant
4Implementations: https://github.com/Stanford-ILIAD/lilac/tree/main/models.

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, Sweden
Cui & Karamcheti et. al.
Training State Distribution
LILA (No Corrections)
LILAC (Ours)
Shelf
Shelf
Shelf
Figure 7: Observed trajectories for LILA and LILAC on the open-drawer task (with train trajectories shown on the left). While
LILA deviates from the observed state distribution, states traversed with LILAC are close to those seen at training.
task: imitation learning fails catastrophically by knocking over the
cup, causing irreversible damage to the environment, while LILA
reaches the cup, but does not afford the user enough precision
to make a successful grasp. With LILAC, two tightly sequenced
corrections allow the user precise, targeted control, first in acquiring
the cup, then in aligning the end-effector orientation to complete
the pouring motion successfully. These trajectory visualizations
offer insight into where and when corrections are most useful –
specifically showing the need for adaptivity in critical states.
Figure 7 additionally plots the 3D end-effector trajectories (po-
sition; orientation is omitted for clarity) across all users for the
open-drawer task for both LILA and LILAC, in addition to the tra-
jectories represented in the training data. We find that states LILAC
allows the users to stay closer to the training state distribution
compared to LILA, further explaining LILAC’s strong performance.
7
DISCUSSION
While the results of the user study are compelling, we find it im-
portant to be transparent about the shortcomings of the current
approach, addressing possible avenues for future work.
Limitations. Future work should address different types of lan-
guage corrections that are more context sensitive; as a concrete
example, due to the way we encode incoming corrections (as de-
scribed in §4), we interpret each utterance on its own, independent
of what was said previously. This is limiting for interpreting phe-
nomena such as anaphora or implicit coreference – corrections such
as “no, the other way,” or “undo that” cannot be correctly interpreted
using the current instantiation of the framework. Furthermore, we
find that while corrections offer additional flexibility over the base
shared autonomy control space, they can be easily overused – we
noticed that certain participants in our study quickly departed from
the control space induced by the high-level instruction, instead
opting to complete the bulk of the task in correction mode, effec-
tively turning LILAC into a glorified end-effector control, with
users moving one axis at a time. Work on making the underlying
high-level control spaces more natural and intuitive – naturalizing
the control interface – will be crucial for scaling LILAC to more
complex, temporally extended tasks where low-level corrections
alone may not afford users enough expressivity to solve tasks. Some
scenarios where this may occur would be in tasks requiring modu-
lating 3+ degrees-of-freedom simultaneously, or where sequences
of low-level corrections only allow users to make frustratingly slow
progress at the task at hand (e.g., for long-horizon tasks like making
a cup of tea). Finally, we find that corrections such as “rotate” or
“tilt” can be ambiguously interpreted, with some users intending
for the correction to be interpreted subject to their reference frame
rather than the robot’s reference frame, or vice-versa.
Conclusion. Throughout this work, we have argued that scalable
systems for language-driven human-robot interaction must be able
to exhibit both adaptivity and sample efficiency. We identified the
ability to handle online natural language corrections as a way to
enrich existing systems with such adaptivity, presenting LILAC –
Language-Informed Latent Actions with Corrections – as a poten-
tial answer. LILAC is built within the shared autonomy paradigm
whereby natural language utterances are mapped to meaningful,
low-dimensional control spaces that humans can use to guide the
robot, with each correction provided by the user working to refine
the underlying control space, allowing for precise, targeted control.
Our user study comparing LILAC with language-conditioned imita-
tion learning and language-informed shared autonomy shows the
importance of being able to adapt to online corrections, as LILAC
is both subjectively preferred by users and objectively performant
than both baselines. LILAC marks a strong step forward in adaptive
language-driven approaches for shared autonomy, and we hope that
its core tenets of reliability, precision, and ease of use are carried
forward throughout future work.
