1
Expert Level control of Ramp Metering based on
Multi-task
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Francois Belletti∗, Daniel Haziza†, Gabriel Gomes‡, Alexandre M. Bayen§, Member, IEEE ∗Computer Science
Dept., UC Berkeley, 94720, USA †Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, 91128, France ‡ Inst. of Transportation
Studies, UC Berkeley, 94720, USA §EECS Dept., CEE Dept. and Inst. of Transportation Studies, UC Berkeley,
94720, USA
Abstract—This article shows how the recent breakthroughs in
Reinforcement Learning (RL) that have enabled robots to learn
to play arcade video games, walk or assemble colored bricks,
can be used to perform other tasks that are currently at the
core of engineering cyberphysical systems. We present the ﬁrst
use of RL for the control of systems modeled by discretized
non-linear Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) and devise a
novel algorithm to use non-parametric control techniques for
large multi-agent systems. Cyberphysical systems (e.g., hydraulic
channels, transportation systems, the energy grid, electromag-
netic systems) are commonly modeled by PDEs which historically
have been a reliable way to enable engineering applications
in these domains. However, it is known that the control of
these PDE models is notoriously difﬁcult. We show how neural
network based RL enables the control of discretized PDEs
whose parameters are unknown, random, and time-varying. We
introduce an algorithm of Mutual Weight Regularization (MWR)
which alleviates the curse of dimensionality of multi-agent control
schemes by sharing experience between agents while giving each
agent the opportunity to specialize its action policy so as to tailor
it to the local parameters of the part of the system it is located in.
A discretized PDE such as the scalar Lighthill-Whitham-Richards
(LWR) PDE can indeed be considered as a macroscopic freeway
trafﬁc simulator and which presents the most salient challenges
for learning to control large cyberphysical system with multiple
agents. We consider two different discretization procedures and
show the opportunities offered by applying deep reinforcement
for continuous control on both. Using a neural RL PDE controller
on a trafﬁc ﬂow simulation based on a Godunov discretization of
the of the San Francisco Bay Bridge we are able to achieve precise
adaptive metering without model calibration thereby beating
the state of the art in trafﬁc metering. Furthermore, with the
more accurate BeATS simulator we manage to achieve a control
performance on par with ALINEA, a state of the art parametric
control scheme, and show how using MWR improves the learning
procedure.
Index Terms—Deep learning, reinforcement learning, deep re-
inforcement learning, continuous control, transportation systems,
macroscopic trafﬁc models, Partial Differential Equations.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N the United States alone, the cost of direct and indirect
consequences of trafﬁc congestion was estimated to 124
billions USD in 2013, this cost taking the form of time spent
by commuters in trafﬁc jam, air pollution, accidents, etc. It
represents almost 1% of the country’s GDP, and is expected
to grow by 50% within the next 15 years. Dealing with this
issue is becoming a priority of government agencies, as the
U.S. Department of Transportation Budget rose to almost 100
billions USD in 2016. In this context, any improvement to
travel times on highways can lead to tremendous nationwide
and worldwide improvements for the economy and the envi-
ronment.
Maintaining and building road infrastructure, as well as
urban planning are the most obvious ways to adapt the trafﬁc
network to the ever growing demand for mobility. However,
changing the network architecture can only occur seldom and
at an expensive cost.
Control of trafﬁc ﬂow is an alternate approach to addressing
this issue as it aims at using existing infrastructure more
efﬁciently and adapt it dynamically to the demand. In this
article, we introduce new techniques for trafﬁc control based
on advances in Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Neural
Networks. As opposed to most commonly used approaches
in trafﬁc control, we want to achieve control in a model-free
fashion, meaning that we do not assume any prior knowledge
of a model or the parameters of its dynamics, and thus do
not need to rely on the expensive and time consuming model
calibration procedures.
Recent developments in Reinforcement Learning (RL) have
enabled machines to learn how to play video games with
no other information than the screen display [1], remark-
ably beat champion human players at Go with the AlphaGo
program [2], or complete various tasks including locomotion
and simple problem solving [3], [4], [5]. The advent of
policy gradient-based optimization algorithms enabling RL
for highly-dimensional continuous control systems as can be
found in [6], [7], has generalized model-free control to systems
that were characteristically challenging for Q-learning. Q-
learning approaches, although successful in [1] suffer from
a curse of dimensionality in continuous control if they rely on
discretizing the action space.
In this article, RL trains a trafﬁc management policy able
to control the metering of highway on-ramps. The current
state of the art Ramp-Metering policy ALINEA [8] controls
incoming ﬂow in order to reach an optimal density locally.
This optimal density depends on the model used and has to be
manually speciﬁed to have an optimal control. Recently, non-
parametric approaches based on Reinforcement Learning such
as [9] or [10] have been proposed to achieve ramp-metering,
but face two main limitations. These methods are not scalable
arXiv:1701.08832v1  [cs.AI]  30 Jan 2017

2
beyond a few on-ramps, and limit trafﬁc management to on-
ramp control.
We introduce a way to learn an optimal control policy
with numerous agents, and demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our
approach by applying it to different scenarios. The following
contributions of our work are presented in this article:
• We introduce a framework to use RL as a generic opti-
mization scheme that enables the control of discretized
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) in a robust and
non-parametric manner. To our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst use of RL for control of PDEs discretized by ﬁnite
differencing. Discretized non-linear PDEs are notoriously
difﬁcult to control if the difference scheme used is non-
smooth and non-continuous, which is usually required to
capture nonlinear and non-smooth features of the solution
(as is the case here).
• In the case of PDEs used to model trafﬁc, we demonstrate
on different examples an extensive control over boundary
conditions as well as inner domain for the ﬁrst time in a
non-parametric way. We showcase the robustness of the
approach and its ability to learn from real-world examples
by assessing its performance after an extremely noisy
training phase with stochastic variations in the underlying
PDE parameters of the model used
• We introduce an algorithm to train Neural Networks that
we denote Mutual Weights Regularization (MWR) which
enables the sharing of experience between agents and
specialization of each agent thanks to Multi Task Learn-
ing [11]. MWR is a Neural Network training approach
that allows Reinforcement Learning to train a policy in
a multi-agent environment without being hampered by
a curse of dimensionality with respect to the number
of agents. Applied to the actual trafﬁc control problem
of “Ramp metering”, our model-free approach achieves
a control of a comparable level to the currently used
and model-dependent implementation of ALINEA which
constitutes the state art and was in our case calibrated by
an world-wide renowned trafﬁc engineer.
We ﬁrst present the PDEs used to simulate trafﬁc and intro-
duce the generic PDE discretization scheme. A ﬁrst simulator
based on a Godunov scheme [12] is used to demonstrate
the efﬁciency of our approach on multiples situations. The
Berkeley Advanced Transportation Simulator (BeATS), a state
of the art macroscopic simulator implementing a particular
instantiation of the Godunov scheme sometimes referred to as
the Cell Transmission Model [13] and used in trafﬁc research
[14] is also introduce, as we use it for our ﬁnal benchmark.
Trafﬁc control is presented in the form of a Reinforcement
Learning problem and we present the MWR algorithm to
mitigate the issues arising from the high dimensionality of
the problem. We eventually present the results we achieve,
and compare our algorithm to the pre-existing state of the
art techniques. This state of practice reference, an ALINEA
control scheme calibrated by trafﬁc engineers at California
PATH can be considered representative of state of the art
expert performance. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to present a non-parametric scalable method calibrated
with RL that performs as well as the pre-existing parametric
solutions provided by trafﬁc engineering experts.
II. MODELS AND METHODOLOGY
A. Highway trafﬁc PDE
A highway vehicle density may be modeled by a Partial
Differential Equation (PDE) of the following form:
∂tρ + ∂xF (ρ) = 0.
(LWR PDE)
For a given uniform vehicle density ρ, F(ρ) is the ﬂow of
the vehicles (in vehicles per time unit); F is the fundamental
diagram, its maximum is called the critical density, and
corresponds to the optimal density to maximize the ﬂow.
F usually has the following typical shape:
• When the density ρ is lower than the critical density ρcrit,
the vehicle ﬂow increases with the density
• When the density exceeds this value, congestion appears,
and adding more vehicles actually reduces the ﬂow
Fig. 1: Example fundamental diagram
B. Control of PDEs with reinforcement learning
Non-parametric control of PDEs takes the form in the
present article of a Markov Decision Process (MDP) which is
formally introduced below in III-A. The PDE in its discretized
form devises a transition probability P between two different
states of the system. Solving a MDP is a known procedure
if the transition probability P is known beforehand, using
techniques such as Dynamic or Linear Programming. If P
is unknown, it is more challenging. However, it is more
appealing a procedure as devising P for discretized PDEs is
generally intractable and requires estimates of the parameters
of the system. Also, as we operate in a continuous action
space we will not consider Q-learning based approaches
which are typically challenged by high-dimensionality in
that setting. Therefore, policy gradient algorithms present a
compelling opportunity as model dynamics are sampled from
the simulation trials in algorithms such as [15], [16], [17],
[18] and no prior knowledge of the model is necessary to
train the policy. This creates a model-independent paradigm
which abstracts out the model and makes the approach generic.

3
C. Simulation
The experimental method we followed consists of two steps.
A ﬁrst one uses a coarser less realistic discretization scheme
for the LWR PDE named after its inventor: Godunov [12]. We
provide more details about this scheme in Appendix A. This
step serves the purpose of a proof of concept that discretized
PDEs can be controlled by a neural net trained using a RL
scheme in completely different situations and with different
objectives. Our ﬁrst contribution is to show that policy gradient
algorithms achieve that aim.
In our second step we use a more accurate cell transition
model [13] scheme entailed in the state of the art BeATs
simulator in order to show that the procedure we present
is still valid in a more realistic setting. We also change the
tasks we assigned to the control scheme in order to precisely
account for the actual needs of trafﬁc management systems
used in production. We show that training our neural net
based policy by policy gradient methods achieves comparable
performance with the state of the art ALINEA control scheme
[8] although the former is non-parametric when the latter
requires a calibration of trafﬁc related parameters. In both
cases, the neural net manages to implicitly learn the intrinsic
properties of the road segment under consideration and provide
a good control policy.
III. CONTROLLING CYBERPHYSICAL SYSTEMS WITH
NEURAL NETWORKS TRAINED BY REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING
In order to be able to control a complex cyberphysical
system a non-parametric manner, we adopt a Reinforcement
Learning formulation.
A. Reinforcement Learning formulation
RL is concerned with solving a ﬁnite-horizon discounted
Markov Decision Process (MDP). A MDP is deﬁned by a
tuple (S, A, P, R, P0, γ, T). The set of states is denoted S
and will typically be Rd in our instance where d is the
number of ﬁnite differences cells as in [12]. The action space
A will correspond to a vector in Rd which represents the
vehicular ﬂow that the actuator lets enter the freeway which
corresponds in the present case to the weak boundary condition
implemented in the form of a ghost cell. The transition
probability P : S×A×S →R+ is determined by the freeway
trafﬁc simulator we use i.e. the Godunov discretization scheme
and the stochastic queue arrival model devised, discussed
below. Random events such as perturbations to the input ﬂow
of vehicles or accidents affect the otherwise deterministic
dynamics of the discretized system. The transition probability
P is affected by these events and there likelihood but does
not need to be known analytically for the system to operate
nor be estimated. This is one of the key advantages offered
by Reinforcement Learning over other approaches. The real
valued reward function R is for the practitioner to deﬁne which
implies that the same training algorithm can be used to achieve
different objectives. The initial state distribution is denoted
P0, the discount factor γ and the horizon T. Generically, RL
consists in ﬁnding the policy πθ : S×A →R+ that maximizes
the expected discounted reward
E (η(π)) where η(π) :=
Tmax
X
t=0
γtrt
We
denote
τ
=
(s0, a0, . . .)
the
representation
of
a
trajectory
deﬁned
by
the
probability
distributions
s0 ∼P0, at ∼π(at|st), the state transition probability
st+1
∼
P (st+1|st, at)
and
the
reward
distributioon
rt ∼P (rt|st, at). We will consider a stochastic policy which
deﬁnes a probability distribution of at conditional to st (or
the observation of the state at time t) parametrized by θ.
This creates a stochastic regularization of the objective to
maximize and enables to computation of the gradient of a
policy with respect to its parameters in spite of the dynamics
of the system under consideration not being differentiable,
continuous, or even known.
1) Reinforcement Learning based control of discretized
PDEs: The recent developments in RL featured in [19], [7],
[20] guarantee convergence properties similar to those of
standard control methods and therefore strongly motivates
their usage for the control of PDEs. On the contrary, since
they are being model-independent, they are intrinsically
robust to varying parameters and are able to track parameter
slippage. This leads us to consider them as the new generation
of generic control schemes. We show how the use of RL
on discretized PDEs enables the extension of schemes to
systems featuring random dynamics, unknown parameters
and regime changes, hence surpassing parametric control
schemes. The MPC approach in [21] and the adjoint method
based technique of [22] both rely on the deﬁnition of a cost
function which needs to be minimized. For PDEs such as the
LWR PDE, one typically maximizes throughput, minimizes
delay, or a functional of the state (for example encompassing
energy emissions). A RL approach will therefore focus on
maximizing a decreasing function of that cost which will be
our accumulated reward. This is standard practice to encode
an operational objective.
2) State
and
action
space.:
Consider
a
discretized
approximation of the solution y to Eq. (3) (see appendix)
by the Godunov scheme described in appendix. The solution
domain is [0, T] × [0, L], the discretization resolutions ∆t
and ∆x satisfying ∆t ≤c∆x are chosen to meet well
posedness requirements (Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition
where c is the maximum characteristic speed of Eq. (3)).
The solution to the equation is approximated by a piecewise
constant solution computed at the discrete time-space points
{0, ∆t, . . . , T −∆t, T}
×
{0, ∆x, . . . , L −∆x, L}.
The
action space for this system consists of incoming ﬂow at
the discretized elements {0, ∆t, . . . , T −∆t, T} × {0}, and
generally belongs to a bounded domain [0 . . . umaxi,j]. The
policy will control this vector of incoming ﬂows at each time
step.

4
B. Neural Networks for Parametrized stochastic policies.
In this paragraph we show how to construct an actuator
based on a Neural Network.
1) Parametrized stochastic policies.:
A vast family of
stochastic policies are available for us to use so as to
choose an action conditionally to an observation of the state.
A common paradigm is to create a regression operator,
typically a Neural Network, which is going to determine the
values of the parameters of a probability distribution over
the actions based on the space observation. We practically
use a Multilayer Perceptron that determines the mean and
covariance of a Gaussian distribution over the action space.
The action the policy undertakes is sampled from this
parametrized distribution and will manage to maximize its
expected rewards provided a reliable training algorithm is
used.
C. Neural Networks
The policy we train are implemented as Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks, containing Artiﬁcial Neural wired together.
1) Artiﬁcial Neural Model: For p ∈N, an Artiﬁcial Neural
computes an output y ∈R from an input vector X ∈Rp with
the following formula:
y = φ(WX + b)
Where φ : R →R is called the activation function which
responds to the outcome of an afﬁne transformation of its input
space parametrized by W ∈Rp and b ∈R.
2) Networks: A group of q artiﬁcial neurons can be linked
to a single input X ∈Rp to create an output vector Y ∈Rq.
This forms a neural layer. When several layers are stacked,
with the output of one being the input of the next one, one
can speak of an Artiﬁcial Neural Network, whose input is the
input of the ﬁrst layer, and output is the output of the last
layer.
The general organization and architecture of such a network
may vary depending on usages, the type of input data to
process. In the setting of computer vision, convolutional neural
networks famously achieved human level image classiﬁcation
thanks to the invariance by translation and rotation of the
convolution masks they progressively learnt [23].
Back propagation In order to train Neural Networks back-
propagation [24] is a key algorithm that performs a stochastic
gradient descent on a non-convex function [25]. Approaches
to train such a Neural Network for control in the Q-learning
framework has been adopted in [1] and were successful in a
discrete control setting. With continuous control, a different
family of methods is generally used that encourage the policy
entailed in the network parameters to take actions that are
on average advantageous and discourage actions that have an
expected negative reward.
D. Training algorithms in a RL context
Modern training algorithms for continuous control stochas-
tic policies can be divided in policy gradient-based approaches
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
Observations
Likelihood of decision
Control decision
Likelihood of decision
Control decision
Mean of Gaussian 
distribution
Mean of Gaussian 
distribution
Variance of Gaussian 
distribution
Variance of Gaussian 
distribution
Actions
Cyberphysical 
system
Reward
Update of weights through 
back propagation
Learning to control a cyberphysical system with a neural 
network with Value Policy Gradient
Fig. 2: Non parametric control learnt by experience. A neural
network decides the parameter of probability distributions the
actions will be sampled from based on observations of the
state.
and non-gradient-based approaches. The former family encom-
passes ﬁrst order methods such as REINFORCE [7] which
we will denote Vanilla Policy Gradient (VPG), approximated
second order methods based on the use of natural gradient
descent [15], local line search methods such as Trust Region
Policy Optimization (TRPO) [20], LBGFs inspired methods
such as Penalized Policy Optimization (PPO) [5] and gradient
free approaches such as the cross-entropy method [26]. The
performance of these algorithms have been thoroughly com-
pared in [5] where the natural gradient based method Trun-
cated Natural Policy Gradient (TNPG) and TRPO generally
outperformed other approaches. In our numerical experiments
we ﬁnd that when the statistical patterns at the stochastic
boundary conditions are stationary enough, all approaches
perform conveniently. However, TNPG and TRPO outperform
other methods when regime changes occur.
1) REINFORCE: The Reinforce algorithm [7] has been
used to train our policy to maximize E (η(π)).
We consider a parametric policy and we denote by θ
its parameters. In our case, the policy is a neural network
parametrized by its weights. The input layer is ﬁlled with
the environment observation, and the output layer contains the
action probability distribution.
For a ∈A, and s ∈S, we note πθ(a|s) the probability
to take action a while being under state s, and following the
policy parametrized by θ.
In practice, we use the following equality to compute a
gradient average across multiple trajectories:
∂θE (η(πθ)) = E
  Tmax
X
t=0
∂θ log (πθ (at|st))
! Tmax
X
t=0
γtrt
!
The right side term can be approximated by simply running
enough simulations with the given policy according to the law
of large numbers.
Once we obtain the gradient ∂θE (η(πθ)) we can perform
a gradient ascent on the parameters to incrementally improve
our policy.
2) Architecture and choices: Beside these theoretical con-
siderations and algorithms, the network architecture choice has
a crucial impact on the training of the policy. If the layers

5
Agent
Agent
Agent
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
A, b
L2 regularization to 
generalize decision 
making in topmost layers
Specialization
Specialization
Specialization
Mutual Weight 
Regularization
Forward pass: computation of 
regularization term
Back-propagation: send 
regularization gradient
Fig. 3: Sharing experience across agents while allowing for
specialization.
are not adapted to the input data, the training algorithm will
converge to a bad local minimum, or may not converge at all.
In our settings, the observation consists of a n × 3 array,
where n is the number of discretization cells of the highway
in the simulator, and every cell contains 3 information:
• The vehicle density scaled to have a median value of 0,
and a standard deviation of 1 in average
• A boolean value indicating the presence of an off-ramp
• A logarithmic scaled value indicating the number of
vehicle waiting in the on-ramp queue if there is any, 0
otherwise.
As this data is spatially structured, we chose to process it with
convolutionnal neural layers the core idea being to handle data
in a spatially invariant way. Local features are created as a
function of these local values independently of the highway
location. A pipeline of 3 convolutionnal neural network layers
are stacked to create local features. A last layer on the top of
these convolution takes the action which consists in deciding
how many vehicle can enter at the highway respective on-
ramp. This practically achieve by ramp metering trafﬁc lights.
This algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3.
3) Sharing
information
while
allowing
specialization
among agents: the Mutual Weight Regularization algorithm:
The features used for decision making on the low level
layers of the network are created with a convolutionnal neural
network, which exploits the spatial invariance of the problem.
There are two possible situations for the last layer:
• Parameters sharing for all on-ramp policies. This results
into having the exact same policy for all agents. This
should not be the case because of local speciﬁcity of the
highway, such as a reduced number of lanes, or a different
speed limit for instance.
• Every on-ramp has its dedicated set of parameters. It
allows more ﬂexibility and different control for every on-
ramp, but dramatically increases the number of parame-
ters, does not share learning between agents, and ﬁnally
does not converge to a good policy
The novel approach we introduce and call Mutual Weight
Regularization (MWR) is between these 2 extremes. It ac-
knowledges the fact that experiences and feedback should be
shared between agents, to mitigate the combinatorial explosion
when the number of agents scales, and still allows some agent
speciﬁc modiﬁcations to adapt to local variations.
Let us consider:
• m ∈N the number of features computed per cell.
• i ∈R where R is the set of cells linked to a controllable
on-ramp.
• X ∈Mn,m(R) the output of the convolutionnal layers
and we note X[i] the features of the agent i.
We introduce W0, W1, . . . , Wn ∈Rm the distinct parame-
ters of every agent, and deﬁne, for i ∈R, yi as
yi = ⟨Wi , X[i]⟩
The decision for the average of the distribution of actions of
a given agent will be determined by a non-linear transforms
of yi. Similarly for the variance of this Gaussian stochastic
policy distribution [27].
The MWR methods consist in adding a regularization term
to the global gradient used for the gradient ascent:
∂θE

η(πθ) −α
2
n
X
j=1
(Wj −W0)2

=
(1)
∂θE (η(πθ)) −α
n
X
j=1
(Wj −W0) ∂θE (Wj −W0)
(2)
Where the hyperparameter α deﬁnes the strength of the
regularization and therefore how much mutual information is
shared between agents in the gradient descent. Note that:
• α = 0 is equivalent to having independant policies for
every on-ramp.
• α = ∞is equivalent to having a shared policy making
algorithm for every on-ramp (shares weights).
• W0 is not actually used for control computation, but is
rather a reference weight.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Proof of concept on different scenario cases
In this ﬁrst experimentation set, we demonstrate that RL
can be used to control PDEs in a robust and generic way. The
same training procedure converges to a successful policy for
two very different tasks. In this section, simulations are run
using a simple Godunov discretization scheme for the LWR
PDE (Eq. (3)), see appendix.

6
1) Highway outﬂow control: Trafﬁc management sce-
nario. We consider a 5 mile section of I80W starting from
the metering toll plaza and ending within San Francisco (see
Figure 5. The ﬂow is metered at the toll plaza at a rate
shown in Figure 5 (iii) (i.e. a vehicle rate). The Godunov
scheme is implemented with 20 cells and simulated over a time
span enabling several bridge crossings. The inﬂow integrates
random arrival rates for inbound trafﬁc, which consists of a
sinusoid perturbed by random noise. The state is vehicular
density (i.e. ρ(t, x) as deﬁned by the LWR PDE, vehicles per
unit length) from which ﬂow F(ρ(t, x)) (numbers of vehicles
per unit time at x) can be computed.
Action space and environment We consider the follow-
ing operational scenario. The number of vehicles upstream
from the meter (see Figure 5 (iii)) is randomized for each
simulation in order to reproduce the diversity of freeway
ﬂow dynamics as they actually occur. At every time step, the
observation forward propagated in the policy Neural Network
is the value of current time step in time unit. An action
undertaken is also a positive scalar representing the number
of cars permitted to enter the highway per time unit. We train
the policy to reproduce a pattern z(t) on the outﬂow with the
following reward
R (st, at) = −(ρ(t, L) −z(t))2 .
The choice of this reward function encodes our intention
to replicate the function z(t) on the downstream boundary
condition (located at spatial offset L). In particular, what is
remarkable here is that this is the only way the environment
provides information to the policy about the state of the
freeway. Indeed, we only provide the current time step t
as state observation to our policy along with the reward
associated with the result obtained after a simulation roll out.
Learning in the presence of disruptive perturbations The
discretized model we use is well-suited for representing trafﬁc
accidents. The state update mechanism may be randomly al-
tered by accidents which drastically change the maximum ﬂow
the freeway can carry at local points in space. Accidents can
be simulated by locally decreasing the maximum ﬂow speed
in a given discretization cell for a given time interval. A key
goal of our work is alleviating the impact of accidents while
simultaneously tracking operational objectives (e.g. desired
outﬂow of the bridge into the city), and achieving it with a
robust and generic method is a tremendous breakthrough for
urban planning. See the appendix for a presentation of the
accident scenario.
Learning algorithms and convergence to an effective
policy In Figure 5, we analyze the results of the control
scheme learnt by a given policy consisting of two fully
connected hidden layers of size 32. The policy controls the
inﬂow of cars (boundary control). We choose an arrival
rate sufﬁciently high on average to provide the controller
with sufﬁcient numbers of vehicles to match the prescribed
downstream conditions (note obviously in congestion this
is always the case). The results prove that in spite of the
problem being non-differentiable, non-smooth, non-linear and
perturbed drastically by unpredictable accidents and random
input queues, the policy converges to a control scheme that
manages to replicate the objective density. The learning phase
uses different policy update methods such as [15], [6], [20]
and benchmarked in [5]. In this benchmark, among gradient
based methods, TNPG, TRPO and PPO seem to outperform
the simpler REINFORCE method which only leverages ﬁrst
order gradient information. In Figure 6 we show how PPO,
TRPO and REINFORCE are all reliable in this instance and
converge to more effective policies than TNPG. It is also
noteworthy that PPO converges faster to a plateau of rewards.
2) Inner domain control: Reward shaping, in the form
of assigning a target density and penalizing the L2 distance
between the observed density and the objective enables us
to reproduce an arbitrary image with the solution density in
the solution domain only by controlling it on the boundaries.
The results in Figure 7 demonstrate the ability of the method
we present to train a policy to extensively control the values
of a solution to the discretized PDE we study in its solution
domain. The action space here is much higher dimensional as
ramps are present all along the freeway that can let cars in at
a sequence spatial offsets each separated by 3 cells. An off
ramp split model handles the vehicle leaving the freeways.
In spite of the increased dimensionality, a neural net with
tree fully connected hidden layers of size 64 trained by the
TRPO method converges to a policy capable of reproducing
a target solution in the interior domain as shown in Figure
7, whereas TNPG failed in this instance to converge to an
efﬁcient policy. From a practitioner’s perspective, this example
is very powerful, it shows the ability to generate arbitrary
congestion patterns based on metering along the freeway. From
a PDE control standpoint, this is even more powerful, as direct
state actuation is a very hard problem in manufacturing and
has a lot of applications with PDEs such as the (nonlinear)
heat equation, Hamilton-Jacobi equations, and several others.
B. Optimal ramp metering control
In order to demonstrate the applicability of this novel
method to real world cases, we consider the Ramp-Metering
problem in a 20 miles (33 km) long section of the 210
Eastbound freeway in southern California as illustrated in
Figure 8. For this simulation, we use the BeATS simulator
calibrated by trafﬁc experts based on real-world data. Every
simulation run lasts for 4 hours, after a 30 minutes warmup
period to initialize the freeway. The simulation starts at 12pm
and the trafﬁc peak happens between 3pm and 4pm, as the
demand curve reaches a maximum (Fig. 14).
Two reinforcement learning algorithms and the ALINEA
control scheme are benchmarked against the baseline scenario
in which no control occurs at all:
• NoRM, baseline: The baseline without any ramp meter-
ing. Cars instantly enter the freeway when they reach an
onramp, and if the freeway has enough capacity
• NoMWR, standard deep reinforcement learning: The
Reinforcement Learning based policy we introduce,
trained with shared weights for the last layer
• MWR, novel approach to training: The same policy as
NoMWR, but trained with MWR.

7
Fig. 4: I80 Bay Bridge metering control. The control (iii)
generated by neural RL leads to a solution (ii) of the PDE,
which achieves an outﬂow shown in (i), close to the desired
proﬁle in (i). In the process, the queue, shown in (iv) grows
as vehicles into the toll plaza continue to arrive at a higher rate
than allowed by the control scheme. The time space diagram
i.e. (ii) is a common tool used in transportation engineering
to show the solution of the PDE in space (x) and time (y).
The tracking policy learned through neural RL.
Fig. 5: During the training period, major variations in the
trafﬁc model are generated to illustrate the robustness of the
trained policy. Despite a highly perturbed training phase, the
learnt control policy manages to converge to the prescribed
objective of outbound downstream ﬂow.
Fig. 6: Comparison of different policy training algorithms for
the control of the downstream boundary condition by the
upstream boundary condition in the presence of accidents.
We notice that TNPG performs poorly, VPG and TRPO offer
mediocre performance and PPO outperforms all the methods.
Objective assigned
Objective achieved after 2000 iterations
Fig. 7: Control of multiple entry points on the freeway enables
the training of a policy capable of replicated a prescribed
density.
• Alinea, parametric control: The state of the art reference
algorithm, using with model and parameters the exact
same values used in the simulator it is being benchmarked
on.
1) Reinforcement Learning problem: In this scenario, the
agent takes an action every 32 seconds. An action is a R29
vector with the ramp-metering rates for the 29 on-ramps on
the highway section, in vehicle per time unit. The reward we
collect at every time step is the total outﬂow in the last 32
seconds (in number of vehicle per time unit).
The highway is discretized in 167 cells of 200 meters each
to generate an observation vector in R167×3. For every cell,
the following 3 data values are provided to the network:
• Density in vehicle per space unit, normalized
• A boolean value indicating the presence of an off-ramp
on this cell
• The number of cars waiting in this cell’s onramp queue

8
Freeway input 
ﬂow
time
West bound 
ﬂow
On-ramp input 
ﬂow
time
Freeway output 
ﬂow
time
Ramp 
meters
Fig. 8: Setting simulated by BeATS in our experiment
Approach
Score in veh.hr
Score in veh.mile
(lower is better)
(higher is better)
ALINEA
10514
644522
MWR
10575
644334
NoMWR
10617
643605
NoRM
11085
639709
TABLE I: Aggregated scores of the different control strategies
over the congested period. Reinforcement learning enables a
non parametric control scheme whose performance is similar
to that of the parametric ALINEA scheme and MWR, the
new learning algorithm we introduce, for improves this per-
formance.
(logarithmically scaled), or 0 if there is no onramp
It is worth mentioning that the Reinforcement Learning
policies are trained in a stochastic way to ensure that a generic
policy is learned. This is done by introducing some noise in
the actions taken by the Neural Network: the ramp metering
actually applied is sampled from a Gaussian distribution
centered on the network output. This strategy, along with
the use of shared learning techniques over the 29 onramps,
globally prevents overﬁtting issues.
2) Numerical results: After the training, we compared
the results of our approach to existing algorithm on several
criteria. The average speed is globally increased as expected
(Fig. 9). We also report the Total Vehicle Miles in Fig. 13,
along with the Total Vehicle Hour (Fig. 12) that assess the
performance of our approach with a single score. In both
cases, the MWR training approach provides a signiﬁcative
performance increase regular parameters sharing (NoMWR),
and almost reaches the performance of the reference and state
of the art parametric method Alinea.
V. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated how neural RL substantially im-
proves upon the state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld of control of
discretized PDE. It enables reliable non-parametric control
while offering theoretical guarantees similar to that of classic
parametric control techniques. In particular, neural RL can
be applied without an explicit model of system dynamics,
and instead only requires the ability to simulate the system
under consideration. Through our experimental evaluation, we
demonstrated that neural RL approach can be used to control
discretized macroscopic vehicular trafﬁc equations by their
boundary conditions in spite of accidents drastically perturb-
ing the system. Achieving such robustness is a signiﬁcant
breakthrough in the ﬁeld of control of cyberphysical systems.
Speciﬁc to the practice of transportation, the results are a major
disruption as they enable us to beat current controllers by
Fig. 9: Alinea maintains speed above the optimal level deﬁned
during calibration by experts. Reinforcement Learning meth-
ods and the MWR especially, manage to implicitly deduce this
optimal speed during training.
Fig. 10: RM methods reduce by 20% the number of vehicles
in the freeway during congestion peak times. Our RL learning
trained with MWR maintains the number of vehicles in the
simulation to a level similar to what Alinea performs.
Fig. 11: Vehicle ﬂux

9
Fig. 12: Total Vehicle Hour during congestion time
Fig. 13: MWR provides a signiﬁcant performance improve-
ment and almost reaches Alinea performance. Compared to no
ramp-metering, MWR reproduces 96% of Alinea performance
improvement, while the regular RL training only reaches 80%
of Alinea performance.
Fig. 14: Total demand curve. Congestion occurs after a few
hours of simulation.
performing adaptive control, without the need for model cal-
ibration. By eliminating the need for calibration, our method
addresses one of the critical challenges and dominant causes of
controller failure making our approach particularly promising
in the ﬁeld of trafﬁc management. We also introduced a novel
algorithm, MWR, to achieve multi-agent control and leverage
trial and error experiences across different agents while at
the same time allowing each agent to learn how to tailor its
behavior to its localization in the large cyberphysical system
under study.
APPENDIX A
GODUNOV DISCRETIZATION SCHEME
Because of the presence of discontinuities in their solutions,
the benchmark PDE we consider is formulated in the weak
sense. We consider an open set Ωin R, and a measurable
function ρ = ρ(t, x) is a distributional solution to the system
of conservation laws
∂tρ + ∂xF (ρ) = 0.
(3)
if, for every C1 function φ deﬁned over Ωwith compact
support, one has
Z
t∈R,x∈Ω
[ρ∂tφ + F (ρ) ∂xφ] dxdt = 0.
(4)
The operator F in Eq. (3) will be referred to as ﬂux func-
tion, also called the “Fundamental diagram” in transportation
engineering. The operator F deﬁnes entirely the dynamics at
stake and therefore is often domain speciﬁc. Given an initial
condition
ρ(0, x) = ¯ρ(x)
(5)
where ¯ρ(x) is locally integrable, y : [0, T] × R →R is
a distributional solution to the Cauchy problem deﬁned by
Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) if
Z
t∈[0, T ],x∈Ω
[ρ∂tφ + F (ρ) ∂xφ] dxdt+
Z
x∈Ω
[¯ρ(x)φ(0, x)] dx = 0.
(6)
for every C1 function φ with compact support contained in
]−∞, T] × R. If y is a continuous function from [0, T] into
the set of locally integrable on Ω, solves the Cauchy problem
above in the distribution sense, ρ is referred to as a weak
solution to the Cauchy problem.
The Dirichlet problem corresponding to a boundary con-
dition (as done later in the article) can be formulated in a
similar manner and is left out of the article for brevity. Such a
deﬁnition of weak solutions is not sufﬁcient to guarantee their
being admissible solutions.The entropy condition guarantees
the uniqueness to the problem and continuous dependence with
respect to the initial data (derivation also left out of the article
for brevity).
The Godunov’s scheme computes an approximate weak
solution ˜ρ to the Dirichlet problem Eq. (4), Eq. (5) with the
following recursive equation and Godunov ﬂux G:
˜ρ(n∆t + ∆t, i∆x) =
˜ρ(n∆t, i∆x) −∆t
∆x G (˜ρ(n∆t, i∆x −∆x), ˜ρ(n∆t, i∆x + ∆x))

10
G (˜ρl, ˜ρr) =F(˜ρl) if ˜ρl > ˜ρr and (F(˜ρr) −F(˜ρl))/(˜ρr −˜ρl) > 0,
F(˜ρr) if ˜ρl > ˜ρr and (F(˜ρr) −F(˜ρl))/(˜ρr −˜ρl) < 0,
F(˜ρl) if ˜ρl < ˜ρr and DF(˜ρl) > 0,
F(˜ρl) if ˜ρl < ˜ρr and DF(˜ρr) < 0, DF −1(0) otherwise .
The Godunov scheme is second order accurate in space. Unfortunately, like
most numerical schemes, it is non-differentiable because of the presence of
the “if-then-else” statements in its explicit form. Another problematic aspect
related with computing numerical weak entropy solutions with most numerical
schemes (incl. Godunov) is their relying on a numerical evaluation of F
which often takes the form of a parametrized function. The estimation of
these parameters is often difﬁcult and it is practically intractable to assess
the impact of the parameter uncertainty on the solutions because of the non-
linearity, non-smoothness and non-differentiability of the schemes.
