Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support
Systems
DEVLEENA DAS, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
BEEN KIM, Google Research, USA
SONIA CHERNOVA, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Intelligent decision support (IDS) systems leverage artificial intelligence techniques to generate recommendations that guide human
users through the decision making phases of a task. However, a key challenge is that IDS systems are not perfect, and in complex
real-world scenarios may produce suboptimal output or fail to work altogether. The field of explainable AI (XAI) has sought to develop
techniques that improve the interpretability of black-box systems. While most XAI work has focused on single-classification tasks,
the subfield of explainable AI planning (XAIP) has sought to develop techniques that make sequential decision making AI systems
explainable to domain experts. Critically, prior work in applying XAIP techniques to IDS systems has assumed that the plan being
proposed by the planner is always optimal, and therefore the action or plan being recommended as decision support to the user is
always optimal. In this work, we examine novice user interactions with a non-robust IDS system – one that occasionally recommends
suboptimal actions, and one that may become unavailable after users have become accustomed to its guidance. We introduce a new
explanation type, subgoal-based explanations, for plan-based IDS systems, that supplements traditional IDS output with information
about the subgoal toward which the recommended action would contribute. We demonstrate that subgoal-based explanations lead to
improved user task performance in the presence of IDS recommendations, improve user ability to distinguish optimal and suboptimal
IDS recommendations, and are preferred by users. Additionally, we demonstrate that subgoal-based explanations enable more robust
user performance in the case of IDS failure, showing the significant benefit of training users for an underlying task with subgoal-based
explanations.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →Interaction paradigms; • Computing methodologies →Planning and
scheduling.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Explainable AI, Intelligent Decision Support Systems, Planning
ACM Reference Format:
Devleena Das, Been Kim, and Sonia Chernova. 2018. Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems.
In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Intelligent decision support (IDS) systems leverage artificial intelligence techniques to generate recommendations that
guide human users through the decision making phases of a task [39]. While much prior work has focused on decision
support for domain experts (e.g., cancer diagnosis for oncologists [43]), increasingly, IDS systems have been proven
particularly useful in helping novice users make decisions [19, 27]. However, a key challenge is that IDS systems are not
perfect, and in complex real-world scenarios the actions recommended by IDS systems may be far from optimal [18].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to

© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2201.04204v3  [cs.AI]  3 Feb 2023

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
Such errors particularly affect novice users, who lack the knowledge to assess the correctness of an IDS recommendation
[30].
The field of explainable AI (XAI) has sought to make the decision making of AI systems more transparent by
developing interpretability techniques for black-box AI models [12]. While prior work on XAI largely focuses on
explaining single classification tasks, the subfield of explainable AI Planning (XAIP) seeks to explain decisions in
sequential decision making tasks. Prior work in XAIP has largely focused on explaining plan solutions that help
users answer questions “Why plan P?" and "Why not plan Q?" through techniques such as causal-link-chain (CLC)
explanations [37] and contrastive explanations [20]. These techniques have been effective in helping domain-experts
understand how their proposed solution differs from a planner’s solution [20], as well as how performing a current
action affects the preconditions of future actions [37].
Critically, prior work in applying XAIP techniques to IDS systems has assumed that the planner within the plan-based
IDS system is always optimal, and therefore the actions being recommended to the user are always optimal [17, 42].
However, the assumption of robust IDS system, with an optimal planner, cannot be guaranteed in complex real world
deployments. In fact, in real world systems, other assumed, robust characteristics of IDS systems may not hold true as
well, such as the ability to always receive suggestions at deployment. In other words, there may be situations in which
a user’s query is unanswerable, or the IDS system runs into a failure and is no longer available to the user.
In this work, we examine novice user interactions with a non-robust IDS system – one that occasionally recommends
a suboptimal action, and one that may become unavailable after users have become accustomed to its guidance. A user
of such a system, given an IDS action recommendation, must be able to determine whether the recommendation is
optimal or not. Additionally, in the absence of an IDS recommendation, the user should have sufficient understanding
of the task such that their task performance is not negatively impacted by the sudden absence of previously available
recommendations. Leveraging insights from psychology, which demonstrate that humans naturally break down large
complex tasks into a smaller set of more manageable subgoals [8, 28, 36, 41], we introduce a new explanation type
– subgoal-based explanations – that supplements traditional IDS output with information about the subgoal toward
which the recommended action would contribute. We then evaluate the impact such an explanation has on novice user
performance through experiments with 105 participants in a complex restaurant planning domain. We compare our
subgoal-based explanations with the traditional action recommendation outputs of IDS systems, as well as causal-link
chain (CLC) explanations [37], an XAIP technique most relevant to our work. We contribute several key findings:
• In the context of a suboptimal IDS system, subgoal-based explanations enable users to successfully detect
and avoid more suboptimal IDS recommendations than users who are only provided traditional IDS action
recommendations or CLC explanations.
• Users who receive subgoal-based explanations achieve better performance when performing a task under
IDS guidance than users who receive IDS guidance with CLC or those who receive traditional IDS action
recommendations.
• Users who are exposed to subgoal-based explanations for some period of time, are able to perform the task
more reliably in the absence of further IDS, compared to users who only receive action recommendations or
CLC explanations. This finding suggests that explanations contribute a significant training benefit beyond both
traditional IDS output as well as CLC explanations.
• In a direct comparison, users exhibit a strong preference for IDS output that includes subgoal-based explanations
versus CLC explanations or IDS output that traditionally only includes the next action.
2

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
We also show a simple way to generate domain-independent subgoal-based explanations that can generalize to any
hierarchical plan-based system and are broadly applicable across a wide range of IDS systems and application areas.
Together with our findings, our work is a first step towards investigating how and when subgoal-based explanations in
XAIP systems are beneficial in complex real-world IDS systems that are not fail-proof.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we situate our work in the context of the two prominent research areas most closely related to our work:
Intelligent Decision Support Systems and Explainable AI.
2.1
Intelligent Decision Support (IDS) Systems
IDS systems have been developed to assist domain-experts as well as novice-users in decision making across a wide
range of applications. For example, in the context of aiding domain-experts, IDS systems have been investigated in
clinical settings such as aiding doctors in prescribing medicine [25] or aiding general practitioners for pathology
orderings [47]. Similarly, in the context of aiding novice-users, IDS systems have been developed to help dental students
manage dental trauma [27], aid non-financial experts in stock market investment [19], and support novice business
owners in management decisions [3]. Among these decision support systems, depending on the domain, there are a
range of mediums through which support is provided. For instance, in Machado et al. [27], the authors develop a mobile
app for clinical decision support that allows dental students to answer a series of questions to determine a diagnosis
and provide treatment suggestions. Similarly, in Gutierrez et al. [19], researchers investigate how to best portray visual
representations and interaction techniques to aid novice users in business decisions. Alternatively, Papamichail &
French [31] develop a natural language generator to justify decision support in nuclear emergencies via natural language
based reports.
Given that many IDS systems interact with end-users who are not AI-experts, several bodies of work have investigated
how to enhance the transparency of IDS systems to improve user trust. These transparency techniques have been
primarily studied in the context of explaining recommendations for single-classification tasks, such as clinical decision
support [15, 22]. For example, Jones et al. [22] develop a classification model that can be used in the testing process of
a clinical decision support system to identify failure modes. Additionally, Feng et al. [15] leverage ClinicalBERT and
attention mechanisms to provide interpretable rationales for predicting Sepsis and mortality in ICUs. By contrast, our
work investigates IDS in sequential decision making settings. Specifically, we investigate how to provide explanations
that help novice users improve their decision making performance in the presence of potentially suboptimal suggestions.
2.2
Explainable AI
The field of explainable AI (XAI) aims to improve a user’s understanding of the inner workings of complex models
[1, 12]. Given that AI and ML models are not guaranteed to be optimal, an important objective of XAI techniques
includes being able to help users identify vulnerabilities or “bugs" within a model [2] as well as identify any spurious
correlations [24]. Our work explores a scenario in which the underlying AI model, and therefore the explanation that
results from it, may be suboptimal. We examine how, even under these settings, users can leverage explanations to
ultimately improve their task performance.
While the field of XAI has primarily focused its interests in interpretability techniques for classification-based tasks
to improve AI-expert understanding [24, 33, 45], a recently growing field of XAI research has focused on explainability
techniques for sequential-decision making systems [6]. Specifically, the subfield of explainable AI Planning (XAIP)
3

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
seeks to develop methods for explaining sequential decision making problems, where an agent engages in a longer-term
interaction with a user [6]. To provide greater context for our work, we first review the types of explanations that have
been developed in sequential decision making. Within the community, techniques have primarily focused on explaining
an agent’s entire plan solution to end-users. A recent survey by Chakraborti et al. [6] highlights the key areas of plan
explanations that have been investigated, including generating contrastive explanations [20], explaining unsolvable
plans [38], and generating explicable plan explanations [7].
Additionally, XAIP techniques have also been applied to plan-based decision support systems in efforts to improve
human-in-the-loop planning. For example, RADAR by Grover et al. [17] provides XAIP features such as plan summa-
rization, plan explanations in the form of minimally complete contrastive explanations, plan validation, and action and
plan suggestions to improve domain-expert decision making. Furthermore, Valmeekam et al.[42] develop RADAR-X
which leverages user queries to understand user preferences for providing refined plan suggestions. Our work similarly
aims to support human-in-the-loop planning, with important differences in that we do not make the assumption of
an optimal AI planner or optimal IDS system recommendations. Specifically, we intentionally examine the role of
plan-based IDS systems in the context of suboptimal suggestions, and our work focuses on providing explanations of
IDS systems to novice users.
Furthermore, under sequential decision making scenarios, growing bodies of work have investigated how to provide
meaningful explanations to end-users and what types of information aid non-AI expert understanding. For example,
Ehsan et al. [13] utilize sequence to sequence learning to autonomously translate state and action information of a
game agent into natural language. In a user study, the authors validate a wide range of human factors that influence
users’ preferences of explanations, concluding that users prefer "complete-view" rationales which utilized the entire
game state space as context. Similarly, Das et al. [10] utilize machine translated, natural language explanations to help
non-AI experts understand robot failures and provide accurate recovery. Results from Das et al. [10] demonstrate that
contextual information from the environment significantly improves users’ failure understanding in comparison no
contextual information. Additionally, within the planning domain, Canal et al. [4] propose PlanVerb, a domain and
planner independent method for verbalizing task plan solutions into natural language to increase user understandability
of plan solutions. Using PlanVerb, the authors generate natural language plan explanations by semantically tagging
action and predicate information. In our work, we seek to provide investigate how contextual information in the form
of subgoals in IDS systems can help novice users improve their decision making in the presence of non-robust IDS
systems.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we first provide definitions for the planning problem that underlies our IDS system. We then formalize
the problem of providing explanations in support of plan-based IDS and present our research hypotheses.
3.1
Planning Problem
Formally, a classical planning problem [29] is defined by a model M = ⟨D, I, G⟩where domain D is represented by
⟨𝐹,𝐴⟩, such that 𝐹is a finite set of fluents that define a state 𝑠⊆𝐹, and 𝐴represents a finite set of actions. I and G
represent the initial and goal states, respectively, such that I,G ⊆𝐹. Note that G may be modeled as a set of ⟨𝑔0...𝑔𝑗⟩,
where 𝑔𝑖∈G represents a subgoal. An action 𝑎∈𝐴is defined by a tuple ⟨𝑐𝑎, 𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑎),𝑒𝑓𝑓+(𝑎),𝑒𝑓𝑓−(𝑎)⟩, where 𝑐𝑎is the
associated cost of 𝑎, and 𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑎),𝑒𝑓𝑓+(𝑎),𝑒𝑓𝑓−(𝑎) denote the set of preconditions, add and delete effects, respectively.
An action 𝑎∈𝐴can only be executed in a state 𝑠if 𝑠|= 𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑎). A transition function, 𝛿M (𝑠,𝑎) is used to transition an
4

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
agent from I to G, performing a sequence of actions ⟨𝑎1...𝑎𝑛⟩, each with an associated cost 𝑐𝑎. In other words, the
cost of plan 𝐶(𝜋, M) is defined by Í
𝑎∈𝜋𝑐𝑎, the sum cost of all actions within the plan, or ∞if the goal is not met. The
solution to a planning problem is a plan 𝜋= ⟨𝑎1...𝑎𝑛⟩such that 𝛿𝑀(I, 𝜋|= G). The optimal plan solution, 𝜋∗, is defined
by 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜋{𝐶(𝜋, M)∀𝜋such that 𝛿M (I, 𝜋) |= G}.
In general, the objective of a classical planning problem is to solve for a plan solution, made up of a sequence of
actions that transforms the AI agent from its initial state to a goal state. Each action within a plan solution has an
associated cost, and may include a set of preconditions that need to be met. Each action, when performed, also produces
a set of effects within the domain. An optimized plan solution is one that has the lowest plan cost. Below we formalize
the problem of providing explanations for action suggestions from plan-based IDS systems.
3.2
Explainability in Plan-Based IDS Systems
The goal of a plan-based IDS system is to provide the user with action recommendations 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆∈𝜋. In turn, the user,
who is given 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆as input, must select their own action 𝑎ℎto take in response. In the ideal case, the IDS guides the
user along some optimal plan 𝜋∗by always recommending an optimal action, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆= 𝑎∗∈𝜋∗, which results in the user
always taking the optimal action, 𝑎ℎ= 𝑎∗∈𝜋∗. However, there are two limitations to this idealized formulation.
First, in complex real-world scenarios an IDS systems may not be able to generate an optimal plan, resulting in
suboptimal recommendations [18]. In this case, the user is faced with the challenge to discern whether the IDS system’s
recommended action is optimal (i.e., 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆
?= 𝑎∗). Relating to this, we state the following hypothesis:
H1: We hypothesize that there exists a type of explanation, E, that when presented in conjunction with
𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆can aid users in determining 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆
?= 𝑎∗.
Specifically, we hypothesize that with the aid of E, users will more likely accept 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆when 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆= 𝑎∗and correctly
reject 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆when 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆≠𝑎∗.
Second, in complex real-world scenarios an IDS system may not always be available due to being offline, a failure, or
the query being outside its scope. In this case, the user may suddenly be required to select 𝑎ℎwithout the benefit of an
IDS system’s guidance. This scenario will pose a particularly significant challenge to users who had previously only
performed the task under the support of an IDS system. Relating to this, we state the following hypothesis:
H2: We hypothesize that exposure to explanations E improves user understanding of the task, such that
when IDS recommendations are turned off, users with previous exposure to E will achieve greater task
performance than users who had the same amount of domain experience but without exposure to E.
Specifically, we posit that users previously exposed to explanation E will be able to select actions 𝑎ℎthat lead to more
optimal task performance than users who were not previously exposed to explanation E (i.e, 𝐶(𝜋E
ℎ, M) < 𝐶(𝜋E
ℎ, M)).
In this perspective, explanations can be seen as a training mechanism that leverages IDS to improve user understanding
of the task.
Finally, prior work across many XAI applications has demonstrated that incorporating explanations into the output
of automated systems improves user performance in a given task [11, 40]. Relating to this, we state the following two
hypotheses in the context of IDS systems:
H3: We hypothesize that user performance on the task will improve when IDS output, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, is supple-
mented with explanation E.
H4: We hypothesize that users will prefer the output of a system that includes E over a system that only
includes 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆.
5

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
Specifically, we posit that overall plan cost for users exposed to explanations will be lower than for users who did
not receive explanations (i.e., 𝐶(𝜋E
ℎ, M) < 𝐶(𝜋E
ℎ, M)), and that users will prefer to see explanations as part of an IDS
output.
In the next sections, we first present a new variant of E for explaining IDS systems action recommendations,
leveraging findings in psychology [8, 28, 36, 41]. We then describe our validation domain, and the experiments that
were conducted to support the above hypotheses.
4
SUBGOAL-BASED EXPLANATIONS
Research in psychology shows that humans faced with a complex sequential decision making task naturally construct a
mental model of the task as a decomposition of multiple subgoals [8, 28, 36, 41]. The utility of such subgoals has been
briefly explored within the XAIP and AI community. For example, many AI techniques utilize hierarchical structures
to leverage the improved computational efficiency of such representations [21, 23]. Similarly, subgoals have been
leveraged to explain the infesability of a defined planning problem [38], and also learned via human annotations to
label optimal plan solutions to humans in an interpretable manner [46]. These approaches, however, have explored
the utility of subgoals in extreme scenarios, to explain unsolvable planning definitions or to explain plan solutions
that are always optimal. As mentioned in Section 3.2, in more complex, real-world scenarios, the reliability of IDS
systems may be more subtle. In other words, a plan-based decision support may sometimes provide suboptimal solutions,
and sometimes become unavailable to end-users who may be depending on the IDS systems. Therefore, in this work,
inspired by the natural hierarchical representations used by both human users and AI systems, we introduce a new
type of explanation known as subgoal-based explanations, ESB which aims to improve user task performance both in
optimal and suboptimal IDS settings. Below we further detail the definition of ESB by leveraging the definition of a
planning problem (see Section 3.1):
E𝑆𝐵: Given planning goal G, which is decomposed into a set of subgoals ⟨𝑔0...𝑔𝑛⟩, a subgoal-based
explanation is described by E𝑆𝐵= 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆+ 𝑔𝑖(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆).
In other words, a subgoal-based explanation provides the next recommended action from an IDS system, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆along
with the associated subgoal 𝑔𝑖that is satisfied by 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆. For example, consider a car manufacturing scenario where
the goal, G, is building a car. The overall goal requires multiple subassemblies which can be formulated as subgoals,
⟨𝑔0...𝑔𝑛⟩. Subassemblies may include chassis assembly, drivetrain assembly, car interior assembly and external assembly
for the car. In this scenario, examples of subgoal explanations, E𝑆𝐵, may include “Attach the lights to finish the internal
assembly," where “internal assembly" is the subgoal. Similarly another explanation may include, “Fasten the bolts for
the chassis before fastening bolts for the drivetrain", where “for the chassis" and “for the drivetrain" are the subgoals.
We posit that especially in scenarios of lengthy task plans, with often overlapping actions (i.e fasten the bolts) for
different requirements (subgoals), E𝑆𝐵explanations can help end-users verify the IDS system’s underlying reasoning
for a particular action. Understanding such reasoning is crucially important in the context where IDS systems may
sometimes be suboptimal. In general, subgoals for a particular plan may be predefined in the planning representation, or
may be autonomously derived [9, 34, 46]. In this work, we encode the subgoals within our planning problem definition.
5
IDS IN RESTAURANT PLANNING DOMAIN
We investigate the efficacy of ESB explanations in the context of a complex sequential planning scenario: running a
restaurant kitchen. In our task, a user plays as a chef to deliver a set of 𝑀meals, each within unique delivery times,
6

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
with the help of an anthropomorphized IDS known as Manager Molly. Below, we further detail the restaurant planning
game and our plan-based IDS system.
5.1
Restaurant Game Overview
Figure 1 provides a visualization of our restaurant planning game which is inspired by the online game Overcooked.
Variations of the Overcooked restaurant planning game have been widely studied in the AI community because tasks
in this domain are difficult for users to optimize [5, 26, 44]. Particularly, characteristics such as parallelizable actions (i.e
cooking the salmon, while chopping the tomato), variable action durations, and one-to-many mapping between actions
and the subgoal they achieve (i.e multiple dishes may require chopping tomatoes) all provide challenges for both users
and IDS systems. Therefore, we posit that identifying suboptimal suggestions in such domain is non-trivial since a
single action can satisfy multiple subgoals (lettuce for salad vs. burger) and parallelizing tasks can lead to surprising
orderings (boiling water for pasta while preparing salad). These characteristics especially motivate us to investigate the
utility of subgoal based explanations under a similarly designed restaurant planning game.
Within our game, the user controls a chef avatar, and utilizes five meal prep stations to prepare 𝑀meals consisting
of various ingredients. The game objective is to deliver the meals to restaurant customers within the designated meal
delivery time for each meal, denoted as 𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦. As seen in Figure 1, panel (a) in the game interface illustrates the
set of meals the user has to complete in a given game, along with their associated delivery times. The five meal-prep
stations include: gather station, cutting station, cooking station, plating station, and delivery station. Within the game, the
user is able to perform an action 𝑎ℎfrom the action space 𝐴= {cut, move-chef, move-item, start-cook, end-cook, deliver,
prepare-meal}, so long as the preconditions of 𝑎ℎare met and that the effects of 𝑎ℎresult in a valid game state 𝑆. The
game does not allow players to perform an invalid action (e.g., start cooking the steak without the steak being present at
the cooking station). Panel (b) in the game interface provides the subset of actions, 𝐴𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛∈𝐴, that can be performed
at the user’s current station. For each time step in the game, the game interface displays the recommended next action;
Fig. 1. A visualization of our restaurant planning game interface that highlights, via the red boxes, the different types of information
available to the user at any given time, including (a) the set of meals that need to be delivered and their respective delivery times, (b)
the set of actions available at the user’s current station, (c) the game state information, and (d), the provided IDS output.
7

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
Fig. 2. Our IDS system utilized to evaluate the efficacy of ESB. A user performs any action 𝑎ℎ, which updates the environment
𝑆. The underlying planner utilizes 𝑆to produce a plan solution 𝜋. The IDS system provides either ESB, ECLC or 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆. If the user
ignores the planner’s suggestion, the planner will replan for a new 𝜋
′ for subsequent action suggestions.
an example is shown in panel (d) of Figure 1. The game interface also displays the game state, 𝑆, at any given time step
in a user-friendly manner such as panel (c) in Figure 1. Specifically, 𝑆= {𝑆𝑙,𝑆𝑖} where 𝑆𝑙defines the location of the
chef and each ingredient (i.e which station), and 𝑆𝑖defines the state of each ingredient,(i.e. chopped tomato, cooked
chicken). Note, to mimic the complexities described in prior restaurant planning domains, we explicitly include the
complexities of allowing parallelizable actions and tasks, variable action duration, and one-to-many mapping between
actions and subgoals.
5.2
Plan-Based IDS System
Figure 2 provides an overview of our overall IDS system. When a user action 𝑎ℎis performed, game state 𝑆is updated
and utilized by the underlying planner to find a plan solution 𝜋. Recall, in this scenario, solution 𝜋consists of a sequence
of actions, {𝑎0,𝑎1, ..𝑎𝑛} that meets the task objective of delivering each required meal to restaurant customers within
the goal meal delivery time, 𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦∀𝑚∈𝑀. The IDS system leverages 𝜋to provide a recommendation to the
user, either in the form of a subgoal-explanation ESB, a causal-link-chain explanation ECLC [37], or as a default action
recommendation 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆. Given a recommendation, the user can choose either to conform to 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆or select an alternative
action (i.e. 𝑎ℎ≠𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆). If the user selects an alternative action, the underlying planner in the game utilizes the updated
state information to find a new plan solution 𝜋
′ from which subsequent actions are suggested to the user.
To find a plan solution 𝜋, we represent the problem domain in PDDL [16], a common programming language for
planning problems, and utilize a state-of-the-art planner known as Temporal Fast Downward (TFD) [14]. Although TFD
is a temporal planner with abilities to handle durative actions, we formulate our planning problem as a classical planning
problem in which the objective is to minimize action costs as opposed to duration. We utilize TFD to more accurately
model a restaurant domain where actions can occur simultaneously. To simulate multitasking, we leverage TFD’s
support for numeric fluents which allows us to track the cost of actions 𝑎∈𝐴being performed while an ingredient is
cooking to ensure that an appropriate duration has elapsed for an ingredient to cook.
8

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Action (𝑎∈𝜋)
Action
Recommen-
dation (𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆)
Causal-Link-Chain Explana-
tion (ECLC)
Subgoal-Based
Explanation
(ESB)
cut
chef
gather-
Station cutStation
tomato1
Chop the tomato.
Chop the tomato for the salad
meal or pasta meal or veggie
burger meal.
Chop the tomato for the salad
meal.
move-item
chef
gatherStation plat-
eStation salmon1
Move the salmon to the
cooking station.
Move the salmon to the cooking
station to cook the salmon.
Move the salmon to the cooking
station for preparing the teriyaki
salmon meal.
end-cook
chef
cookStation broth1
Finish
cooking
the
broth.
Finish cooking the broth for
preparing the soup.
Finish cooking the broth for
preparing the soup.
move-chef
chef
plateStation gather-
Station
Move to the gather sta-
tion.
Move to the gather station to
move the tomato.
Move to the gather station for
preparing the pasta meal.
Table 1. Action recommendations (𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆), causal-link chain explanations ECLC and subgoal explanations (ESB) for select action
𝑎∈𝜋. Note, 𝑎is represented in PDDL [16], a standard language definition for programming planning problems; however for legibility,
the key action is emphasized in bold.
To solve for a plan solution 𝜋, the planner utilizes the same action space 𝐴and state space 𝑆as that available to
the user. The planner’s initial state I is defined with select, pre-performed actions to guarantee that the planner can
find a plan solution within 5 seconds for system usability, ensuring that suggestions and explanations are given to
the user in a reasonable amount of time. The planner’s goal state G is defined by reaching the delivered state for all
necessary 𝑀meals. Each action 𝑎∈𝐴has a static cost of 𝑐𝑎where the cost represents the time needed to perform
𝑎. If each meal 𝑚is delivered at 𝑡𝑚
𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑, the objective of the planner is to minimize the overtime delivery cost,
Í|𝑀|
𝑚=1 𝑡𝑚
𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑−𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦. In this work, the goal meal delivery times, 𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦are designed such that there
exists one optimal solution for delivering all meals on time. 1
5.3
Generating Suboptimal Plans
A central objective of our work is to examine explanatory action suggestions in the context of suboptimal IDS recom-
mendations. To achieve this objective, we intentionally corrupt the optimal plan, 𝜋∗, generated by our planner such
that the resulting plan ˜𝜋is suboptimal. At run time, we randomly select with probability 𝑝whether a recommended
action, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, is provided from an optimal or suboptimal plan. Specifically:
𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆=


𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆∈˜𝜋,
if 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑() ≤𝑝
𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆∈𝜋∗,
otherwise
Recall, the goal of the planner in our restaurant planning domain is to minimize the overtime in delivering each meal
𝑚∈𝑀. Therefore, to generate a suboptimal plan ˜𝜋, we replace the optimal action of interest required for a particular
meal 𝑚𝑖with a random action required for some other random future meal 𝑚𝑗. The resulting suboptimal action is
therefore still relevant to the overall cooking task, and is not an obvious and trivially identifiable error (e.g., throw steak
on floor). Reordering actions in this way is guaranteed to result in a suboptimal plan because it delays meals and leads
meals to be completed out of order, causing the planner’s overtime delivery cost to be non-zero.
1We leave the exploration of our IDS system under the context of partially ordered plans solutions, scenarios in which multiple, optimal solutions may
exist, for future work.
9

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
5.4
Generating Subgoal-Based Explanations
Given a set of subgoals ⟨𝑔0...𝑔𝑛⟩(defined a priori), we employ a post-hoc search to map actions ⟨𝑎0...𝑎𝑛⟩within 𝜋with
a corresponding subgoal 𝑔𝑖∈𝐺. In our work, subgoals are defined as the designated meal for which an action 𝑎is being
performed. To present ESB in a manner understandable by novice users, we leverage templated, natural language. We
parse each action 𝑎output in 𝜋to retrieve the contextual information that action 𝑎is acting upon. In our work, the
contextual information corresponds to the ingredient(s) the action would be applied on or the location the action would
be applied to. In this manner, we template our explanation as follows, “⟨action⟩the ⟨ingredients /location⟩for ⟨𝑔𝑖(𝑎)⟩".
We compare our subgoal explanations, ESB, to notable baselines from prior work: action suggestions, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, and
causal link chain explanations [37], ECLC, from the XAIP community. A causal link 𝑙is defined as (𝑠→𝑝𝑠′) where 𝑝
denotes the set of preconditions for future plan step(s) 𝑠′ that are met by the effects of the current plan step 𝑠[37]. Thus
ECLC justify the action 𝑎in the current plan step by indicating the set of satisfied causal links 𝑙∈𝐿. Alternatively,
𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆models the default output of current IDS systems.
In Table 1, we provide examples highlighting differences between our ESB explanations, causal link chain explana-
tions [37], and action suggestions. For example, the first entry in Table 1 indicates a level of ambiguity causal-link-chain
explanations may present since they enumerate all preconditions a current action meets. In contrast, our subgoal
explanations provide only the most appropriate subgoal related to a given action. Additionally, as seen by all the
examples in Table 1, causal link chain explanations do not differentiate between the type of precondition being fulfilled.
In some instances the preconditions are other primitive actions (second and third example), and in other instances
when there is only one action required for a subgoal, the met precondition is the subgoal. Therefore, causal-link-
explanations can be identical to subgoal-explanations, such as the third example in Table 1; however, this occurrence
is rare in complex tasks since it is an artifact of a subgoal requiring only a single action for completion. In contrast,
our subgoal-explanations always highlight the relevant subgoal for a given action, instead of focusing on action-level
preconditions, providing a more consistent level of abstraction for complex tasks.
6
STUDY DESIGN
Our primary goal is to evaluate the effect ESB explanations have on user task performance in IDS settings. Recall, that
in real world settings, IDS systems may be non-robust, sometimes providing suboptimal suggestions to end-users [18].
To examine the utility of ESB in both suboptimal and optimal IDS settings, we conducted a seven-way, between-subjects
study in which participants were asked to play the restaurant planning game. Specifically, we used a 3 x 2 factorial
study design with one factor being the type of IDS (with 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆suggestions, ECLC or ESB explanations) and the second
factor being optimality of IDS recommendation (optimal IDS and suboptimal IDS). The seventh study condition was an
additional baseline study condition in which participants did not receive any help from an IDS. Below, we detail each
study condition:
• None (Baseline): Participants receive no suggestions from an IDS system.
• 𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆) (Baseline): Participants receive action recommendations from an optimal IDS system, and is closely
modeled after the default action suggestion features available in plan-based IDS systems [17].
• 𝜋(ECLC) (Baseline): Participants receive causal link chain explanations from an optimal IDS system and is
closely modelled after the causal link explanations in [37].
• 𝜋(ESB): Participants receive subgoal-based explanations from an optimal IDS system.
• ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆): Participants receive action recommendations from a suboptimal IDS system.
10

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
• ˜𝜋(ECLC): Participants receive causal link explanations from a suboptimal IDS system.
• ˜𝜋(ESB): Participants receive subgoal-based explanations from a suboptimal IDS system.
The study consisted of three stages in which participants played a total of five games, each consisting of a unique set
of 𝑀meals to prepare. Participants proceeded to the next game when they finished delivering all required 𝑀meals, or
when time cost in a game reached 80, whichever came first. The study consisted of three stages: the familiarization
stage, IDS stage and an assessment stage, detailed below.
Familiarization: The participants first played through an interactive tutorial which explained the components of the
interface as the participants made a burrito meal. While the interactive tutorial remained the same across all study
conditions, the None study condition did not receive support from the IDS system, whereas all other study conditions
received their respective guidance from the IDS system. Participants also played a second game to get further acquainted
with the system. In the practice round, participants were tasked with making two meals (BLT sandwich, hotdog), and
participants received IDS based on their study conditions. The familiarization stage was designed to familiarize users
with all aspects of the interface and to minimize learning effects in future games.
IDS: Participants played two more games, each with the objective of preparing three meals with the help from an
IDS system (or no help in the None study condition). These games were themed by cuisine: Italian Bistro (salad, pasta,
veggie burger) and Asian Fusion (chicken quesadilla, soup, sushi). Prior to playing, participants were told that the
anthropomorphized IDS system, Manager Molly, may provide suboptimal suggestions. The goals of the participants
in all study conditions were to delivery meals on time and to identify suboptimal suggestions. Both games were
counterbalanced, such that a random 50% of participants played the Italian Bistro game first, while remaining played
the Asian Fusion game first. In the two suboptimal recommendation study conditions ( ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆) and ˜𝜋(ESB)), 𝑝= 0.85,
such that the accuracy of our IDS was 85%, and approximately 15% of recommendations viewed by the users were
corrupted to be suboptimal 2.
Assessment: Participants in all seven study conditions played a final game, with no support from the IDS system.
Similar to the IDS stage, the assessment game required delivering 3 meals (teriyaki salmon, steak & potatoes, chili). In
this assessment, participants in all study conditions had one objective, which was to deliver meals by their designated
delivery time. The goal of the assessment stage was to simulate a scenario where a failure occurs in an IDS system, and
guidance is no longer available to a novice user. Our goal is to understand how previous exposure to IDS in an optimal
or suboptimal setting may impact participant performance on a task when in the absence of any IDS.
6.1
Metrics
To measure user task performance and overall understanding of the task, we evaluate three metrics:
• User Plan Cost (UPC): represents participant overtime cost in delivering meals per game. This metric is analogous
to how the planner optimizes for the optimal plan solution. Below, 𝑀represents the total number of meals
to complete for a game, 𝑡𝑚
𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑represents the accumulated time cost at which meal 𝑚is delivered, and
𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑represents the designated time cost at which a meal should have been delivered.
𝑈𝑃𝐶=
|𝑀|
∑︁
𝑚=1
𝑡𝑚
𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑−𝑡𝑚
𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙_𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦
(1)
2The level of acceptable error in a deployable IDS system varies significantly by application (e.g., medical diagnosis systems may be expected to perform
with greater accuracy than those in lower risk domains). From prior work, we find accuracy rates of 75-95% across applications [32, 35]. We selected an
accuracy of 85% as it models many state of the art systems.
11

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
• Optimal Action Conformance (OAC%): represents the total percentage of optimal actions suggested from the
IDS system that participants performed.
• Suboptimal Action Avoidance (SAA%): represents the total percentage of suboptimal actions suggested from
the IDS system that participants avoided.
Both OAC and SAA are measured during the IDS Stage of the user study, while UPC is measured for games within the
IDS Stage and Assessment Stage.
Additionally, we utilize the following metric to understand user preferences in IDS system outputs:
• Perceived Preference (Pref%): represents the total percentages of 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, ECLC or ESB IDS output types
preferred by participants for understanding the chef’s next action.
6.2
Participants
We recruited 120 individuals from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. We filtered participants that showed no effort to play the
game in the form of taking repeated actions until the timeout. The filtration process yielded 105 remaining participants
(53 males, 52 females). All participants were 18 years or older (M = 36.3, SD =10.3). Each study condition had 15
participants. The task took on average 40 minutes and participants were compensated $5.00.
7
STUDY RESULTS
All metrics, Optimal Action Conformance (OAC), Suboptimal Action Avoidance (SAA) User Plan Cost (UPC), and
Perceived Preference (Pref%) were analyzed with a one-way ANOVA, followed by a post-hoc Tukey Test.
H1: In Figure 3, we present user optimal action conformance (OAC%) as well as suboptimal action avoidance (SAA%)
in order to analyze the benefit of providing subgoal-based explanations, ESB, for understanding suboptimality in
IDS systems. We observe in Figure 3(a) that ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆), ˜𝜋(ECLC) and ˜𝜋(ESB) study conditions had similarly high
OAC%s. In other words, action recommendations, causal link chain explanations and subgoal-based explanations helped
participants discern optimal recommendations. However, in Figure 3(b), we observe that participants in the ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆)
study condition and ˜𝜋(ECLC) study condition had much lower SAA%s than participants in the ˜𝜋(ESB) study condition.
In fact, in the Asian Fusion game, we observe a significant difference in SAA% between the ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆) and ˜𝜋(ESB) study
conditions (t(42)=-2.80, 𝑝< 0.05) as well as between the ˜𝜋(ECLC) and ˜𝜋(ESB) study conditions (t(42)=-2.95, 𝑝< 0.05).
These results support H1, indicating that in the context of an suboptimal IDS system, subgoal-based explanations,
ESB, help participants detect and avoid more suboptimal suggestions compared to those who only receive 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆or
ECLC.
H3: In Figure 4, we present user plan costs (UPC) across each study condition in the two themed games to analyze the
impact of including subgoal information on IDS-supported user performance. Overall, we observe that in both games
participants in the 𝜋(ESB) study condition, subgoal-based explanations from an optimal IDS system, have the best
overall task performance in comparison to the other study conditions. Additionally, out of the explanation-based study
conditions, we observe ECLC explanations to lead to the highest plan cost under suboptimal IDS across both games.
Participants in 𝜋(ESB) had significantly lower UPC compared to participants in the None study condition for both the
Italian Bistro game (t(95)=-3.46, 𝑝< 0.05) and the Asian Fusion game (t(101)=-4.00, 𝑝< 0.01). We additionally observe
that participants in the 𝜋(ESB) study condition had significantly lower UPC than participants in the ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆) study
condition for the Asian Fusion game (t(101)=8.17, 𝑝< 0.05). Moreover, we observe that participants in 𝜋(ESB) had
significantly lower UPC compared to participants in the ˜𝜋(ECLC) study condition in both the Italian Bistro (t(95)=4.08,
12

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. User optimal action conformance and action avoidance percentages for participants that received ESB, ECLC and 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, from
suboptimal IDS systems. Statistical significance is reported as: *p <0.05.
𝑝< 0.01) and Asian Fusion game (t(101)=3.10, 𝑝< 0.05). These results support H3 by indicating that supplementing
IDS outputs with explanations grounded in subgoal information help participants understand the underlying motivation
for a suggestion, and therefore perform the task significantly better those who only receive 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆or even causal-link
based explanations (ECLC).
H2: In Figure 5, we present user plan cost (UPC) from the Assessment stage across each study condition. None of the
participants had access to IDS recommendations in this game, and the results allow us to assess how prior exposure to
ESB impacts user performance once IDS recommendations are unavailable. Overall, we observe that both 𝜋(ESB)
and ˜𝜋(ESB) study conditions have the lowest UPC compared to the other study conditions, including prior work’s
ECLC explanations. In fact, participants in the 𝜋(ESB) study condition, those previously received ESB explanations
under an optimal IDS system, have significantly lower UPC than participants in the ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆) study condition (t(67)=2.83,
𝑝< 0.05). Similarly, we observe participants in the ˜𝜋(ESB) study condition, those who previously received ESB
explanations under a suboptimal IDS system, also have significantly lower UPC than those who received ˜𝜋(𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆)
(t(67)=2.87, 𝑝< 0.05). These results support H2, demonstrating the important role of subgoal-based explanations,
ESB, in training users to understand the underlying task, compared to action-based recommendations 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, even if
IDS was suboptimal during training.
H4: To evaluate H4 we conducted an additional experiment in which we presented users with three IDS system
output options, 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, ECLC, and ESB, and asked them to select their preferred IDS system output3. Specifically, each
participant was presented with 25 randomly shuffled, pre-recorded videos of optimal actions the chef would perform
while preparing meals in the restaurant game. Each video was 10-15 seconds in duration and included two actions
that the chef performed towards the goal. Participants were tasked with watching each video, to gain contextual
understanding of which portion of the task the chef was working on, and select which form of the provided IDS output,
ESB, ECLC or 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, they preferred in understanding the chef’s next action. Figure 6 presents the Perceived Preference
(Pref%) metric results for the above experiment, which was analyzed with a one-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey Test.
3Since our previous study was between-subjects and participants were only exposed to one type of IDS, ESB, ECLC, or 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, we conducted an additional
within-subjects study with 20 participants from AMT (Male=11, Female=9, mean=36.4 SD=8.7) to measure user preference between the three types of IDS
system outputs.
13

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. User Plan Cost across all study conditions for the two themed games within the IDS Stage of the user study. Statistical
significance is reported as: *p <0.05, **p <0.01.
Fig. 5. User Plan Costs for the assessment game in which all participants did not receive any guidance from an IDS system. Statistical
significance is reported as: *p <0.05.
We observe that participants significantly prefer ESB explanations compared to both ECLC explanations (t(54)=-3.50,
𝑝< 0.01), and 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆(t(54)=-6.66, 𝑝< 0.001). Additionally, we observe that ECLC explanations are significantly preferred
compared to 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆(t(54)=-3.17, 𝑝< 0.01). These results support H4 demonstrating that ESB explanations are more
frequently preferred by users, a factor that may aid in adoption of subgoal-based explanations for IDS systems.
8
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
In this work, we relax a critical assumption of prior explainable AI research related to plan-based IDS, and consider a
scenario where IDS systems can sometimes be non-robust and unreliable, occasionally recommending a suboptimal
action or becoming unavailable after a period of time. Leveraging insights from psychology, that humans naturally
break complex tasks into smaller subgoals, we introduce a new, subgoal-based explanation type, ESB, for plan-based
IDS systems that explains a recommended action by grounding the action in the resulting subgoal that is satisfied. We
14

Subgoal-Based Explanations for Unreliable Intelligent Decision Support Systems
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Fig. 6. User perceived preferences towards 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆, ECLC and ESB in understanding the chef’s next action. Statistical significance is
reported as: **p <0.01, ***p <0.001.
validate the usefulness of ESB through a user study involving a complex, restaurant planning game in which users play
as a chef to prepare and deliver a set number of meals within each meal’s delivery time. Our user study findings support
our hypotheses, demonstrating that subgoal-based explanations (E𝑆𝐵) improve user task performance, improve user
ability to distinguish optimal and suboptimal IDS recommendations, are preferred by users, and enable more robust
user performance in case of IDS failure. We find the results from the Assessment stage of the study (H2) particularly
surprising. All users received detailed task instructions and performed the same tutorials; the Assessment game was
the 5th in the series of games, meaning that participants were reasonably familiar with the task at this stage. Yet E𝑆𝐵
significantly impacted performance such that in both the optimal and suboptimal IDS study conditions, users learned
the task objectives better than users who received causal-link explanations, E𝐶𝐿𝐶, and those who received only action
recommendations 𝑎𝐼𝐷𝑆. These results point to important benefits explanation-based IDS systems can have in real-world
deployments, highlighting that even suboptimal IDS systems can serve as a useful training tool for users when E𝑆𝐵are
added to IDS output. To our knowledge, this is the first investigation of E𝑆𝐵in suboptimal IDS systems.
While these results are promising, our work has several limitations that present opportunities for future work. First,
we conducted our study only with novice users4. Further studies should explore whether the observed benefits of
E𝑆𝐵hold for expert users. Second, we conducted our study over a limited period of time, and thus factors such as
long-term learning effects, fatigue, and automation bias were not fully explored. Further work is needed to fully explore
the effect that explanations have on long-term IDS deployment. Third, our subgoals were predefined. Coupling our
approach with existing techniques that autonomously identify subgoals may yield new insights on the usability of
E𝑆𝐵in plan-based IDS systems. Furthermore, we validate the utility of E𝑆𝐵with an acceptable probability of error in
IDS systems noted in prior work. However, future investigation is needed to examine other probability of errors in
which benefits of E𝑆𝐵continue to exist or when the benefits of E𝑆𝐵may diminish. Additionally, given the usefulness
of contrastive explanations in many XAIP applications where users may prompt back-and-forth “Why X and not P?"
questions to an intelligent system, it is important to examine the utility of subgoal-based explanations in a contrastive
question-answering setting. Finally, further investigation is needed to see the benefits of E𝑆𝐵when subgoals are more
4Our domain differs from both real world cooking and the Overcooked online game, and thus has significant novelty to all users.
15

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Das et al.
hierarchical. For example, in complex tasks there may exist multiple goals where goals have interdependencies. In
these scenarios, there may also be multiple optimal solutions. An open ended question on how to retrieve meaningful
subgoals in these complex hierarchical settings with partially ordered plan solutions still remains.
