Adaptive Recurrent Neural Network Based on Mixture Layer
Kui Zhao, Yuechuan Li, Chi Zhang, Cheng Yang, Huan Xu
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Although Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) has
been a powerful tool for modeling sequential data,
its performance is inadequate when processing se-
quences with multiple patterns. In this paper, we
address this challenge by introducing a novel mix-
ture layer and constructing an adaptive RNN. The
mixture layer augmented RNN (termed as M-RNN)
partitions patterns in training sequences into several
clusters and stores the principle patterns as proto-
type vectors of components in a mixture model. By
leveraging the mixture layer, the proposed method
can adaptively update states according to the simi-
larities between encoded inputs and prototype vec-
tors, leading to a stronger capacity in assimilating
sequences with multiple patterns. Moreover, our
approach can be further extended by taking advan-
tage of prior knowledge about data. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method.
1
Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great success of deep learn-
ing models. Owing to the increasing computation resources
and strong model capacity, neural network models have been
applied to numerous applications.
Among all neural net-
work models, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [Williams
and Hinton, 1986] have shown notable potential on se-
quence modeling tasks, e.g.
speech recognition [Dario et
al., 2016] and machine translation [Sutskever et al., 2014],
and therefore receive particular attentions. With increasing
explorations on RNN, several variants, such as Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997],
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [Chung et al., 2015] have been
proposed successively.
The key advantages of RNN come from the recurrent struc-
tures, which carry out the same transition at all time steps, and
eventually contribute to a satisfactory performance. Yet this
merit may validate under the assumption that all sequences
follow the same pattern. The conventional RNN may be inap-
propriate when processing sequences with multiple patterns.
As mentioned in [Goodfellow et al., 2016] [Cao et al., 2017]
[Shazeer et al., 2017], it is difﬁcult to optimize the network
when using the same parameters at all time steps under mul-
tiple pattern scenarios. To this end, more adaptive RNN net-
works are required.
Recently, some extended mechanisms on RNN are pro-
posed to augment model capability. The ﬁrst one is the at-
tention mechanism [Bahdanau et al., 2014], which is a pop-
ular technique in machine translation. The attention mecha-
nism suggests aligning data to capture different patterns when
translating different words. Another attractive mechanism is
the Memory-Augmented Neural Networks (MANN) [Weston
et al., 2014], whose basic idea is to setup an external mem-
ory to memorize the recent and useful samples. In this paper,
instead of aligning to different parts of current input or mem-
orizing speciﬁc samples, we introduce a novel mixture layer
to memorize principle patterns in training sequences and then
align the current state to similar patterns in historical data.
In the proposed mixture layer, patterns in training se-
quences are partitioned into several clusters and their dis-
tribution is expressed as a mixture model.
Consequently,
principle patterns can be represented by prototype vectors of
components in the mixture model, i.e. the centers of clus-
ters.
When processing input sequences, the mixture layer
augmented RNN (termed as M-RNN) ﬁrst measures similari-
ties between the current state and prototype vectors. Based on
these similarities, the probability that current state belongs to
each cluster is calculated and we align the current state to his-
torical principle patterns by soft assignments. After that, the
state in new M-RNN is adaptively updated according to the
assignments, and therefore it is able to assimilate sequences
with multiple patterns. In practical situations, some prior or
domain knowledge about data is often known beforehand,
and our approach is readily to take advantage of that informa-
tion to further improve the performance. Moreover, although
there is a new type of layer added, the proposed M-RNN can
still be trained by gradient decent in an end-to-end manner.
To summarize, the contributions of our work are as follows:
• We introduce a novel mixture layer, which can be inter-
preted from the mixture model perspective.
• By leveraging the mixture layer, we construct M-RNN
to adaptively process sequences with multiple patterns.
• Our approach can be easily extended by combining the
prior knowledge about data.
• Extensive experiments are conducted, including syn-
arXiv:1801.08094v4  [cs.LG]  27 Feb 2019

thetic sequences prediction, time series prediction and
language modeling. The experimental results demon-
strate signiﬁcant advantages of our M-RNN.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 reviews related work. In Section 3, the mixture layer is
introduced in detail, as well as its application on LSTM and
combination with prior knowledge. Experimental evaluations
are included in Section 4, and ﬁnal conclusion with looking
forward comes in Section 5.
2
Related Work
The research on RNN can be traced back to 1990’s [Williams
and Hinton, 1986]. In the past decades, a number of vari-
ants of RNN model appear, in which the most popular one is
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber, 1997]. LSTM networks introduce memory cells and
utilize a gating mechanism to control information ﬂow. An-
other classic RNN variant, Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), sim-
pliﬁes LSTM with a single update gate, which controls the
forgetting factor and updating factor simultaneously [Chung
et al., 2015].
Recently, some advanced mechanisms appear to extend
RNNs. The ﬁrst one is attention mechanism and particularly
useful in machine translation [Cho et al., 2014] [Sutskever et
al., 2014], which requires extra data alignment, and the sim-
ilarity between the encoded source sentence and the output
word is calculated. Beyond machine translation, the attention
mechanism gains notable popularity in other areas includ-
ing image captioning [Chen et al., 2018], rating prediction
[Cheng et al., 2018] and so on. A comprehensive study on
attention mechanism can be found in [Vaswani et al., 2017].
Instead of aligning to different parts in the current input, our
M-RNN aligns the current state to similar patterns in histor-
ical data. Moreover, while the attention model is often used
in speciﬁc scenarios (such as Seq2Seq), our mixture layer fo-
cuses on solving the problem of modeling multiple patterns
and it is a universal block for RNNs.
Another mechanism is augmented-memory, and its basic
idea is to borrow an external memory for each sequence [We-
ston et al., 2014]. The Memory-Augmented Neural Network
(MANN) aims to memorize the recent and useful samples,
and then compare them with the current one in the input se-
quence. The MANN is often used in meta learning and one-
shot learning tasks [Graves et al., 2014] [Santoro et al., 2016],
and also extended to other applications such as question an-
swering [Kim et al., 2017] and poetry generation [Yi et al.,
2018]. Different from memorizing speciﬁc samples, the mix-
ture layer in our approach memorizes principle patterns in
training sequences.
The MOE is a newly introduced layer to extend RNNs by
mixture models [Shazeer et al., 2017], and it is quite related
to our work. In MOE, multiple experts are constructed, and
the output is controlled by a sparse gating function. However,
MOE is fairly large and hard to implement without enough
resources. In contrast, our M-RNN simply introduces a mix-
ture layer to store principle patterns, and it is more concise.
RNN
...
mixture layer
+
lookup
Figure 1: The architecture of our MRNN.
3
M-RNN
3.1
Mixture Layer
In conventional RNNs, the hidden states are updated with a
unique cell at all time steps, which can be expressed as:
ht = g(ht−1, xt).
(1)
In this paper, a novel mixture layer is introduced and a la-
tent matrix M (with dimension m × n) is employed to mem-
orize the principal patterns in training sequences. The mix-
ture layer augmented RNN (M-RNN) can ﬂexibly process se-
quences with multiple patterns. The structure for M-RNN is
illustrated in Figure 1, and the hidden states in M-RNN are
formally updated by:
ht = g(ht−1, xt, p(ht−1, M)),
(2)
where p(ht−1, M) denotes looking up latent matrix and
aligning the current state to similar patterns in historical data.
Note that when the mixture layer is introduced, the function
g(·) remains similar, which means the RNN cell need not
change its inner structure. Therefore, our mixture layer can
easily equip any RNN cell, and thus it is generally applicable.
The latent matrix Mm×n contains n different prototype
vectors, and each vector represents certain patterns in train-
ing sequences.
Given an input sequence [x1, x2, . . . ], the
hidden state ht−1 is able to represent the subsequence
[x1, . . . , xt−1]. And the similarity between ht−1 and each
prototype vector Mi(i ∈{1, . . . , n}), denoting as si, can be
easily calculated by retrieving each column of the latent ma-
trix. This similarity si is then used to produce a weight vector
w, with elements computed according to a softmax:
wi =
exp(si)
P
j
exp(sj).
(3)
The weight vector w is the strength to amplify or attenu-
ate prototype vectors. Consequently, looking up latent matrix
and aligning the current state to similar historical patterns can
be formulated as:
p(ht−1, M) =
X
i
wiMi.
(4)
In terms of the similarity measure, two alternative ap-
proaches are suggested in this section. The ﬁrst one is derived
from Mahalanobis distance and it is deﬁned as:
si = −1
2(ht−1 −DMi)TP(ht−1 −DMi),
(5)

where D is the projection matrix from prototype vectors to
hidden states, and P denotes the precision matrix. Another
measure is the cosine similarity, which is widely applied in
related works [Graves et al., 2014] [Santoro et al., 2016] con-
sidering its robustness and computational efﬁciency:
si =
hT
t−1DMi
||ht−1||2||DMi||2
.
(6)
Although there is a new type of layer added, the proposed
M-RNN can still be trained in an end-to-end manner. That is
to say the original parameters in RNN as well as new param-
eters in mixture layer are all updated via gradient decent.
3.2
Mixture Model Perspective
As the latent matrix M has n vectors, the mixture layer
intends to partition all hidden states into n clusters (z ∈
{1, . . . , n}). Given the hidden state ht−1, the probability that
ht−1 belongs to the i-th cluster is:
P(z = i|ht−1) = P(z = i)P(ht−1|z = i)
P(ht−1)
=
P(z = i)P(ht−1|z = i)
P
j
P(z = j)P(ht−1|z = j).
(7)
Assume the hidden states ht−1 are Gaussian variables, then
P(ht−1|z = i)
=
1
(2π)
h
2
1
det(Σi)
1
2 exp

−1
2(ht−1 −µi)TΣ−1
i (ht−1 −µi)

,
(8)
where h is the dimension of ht−1, µi and Σi are the mean
vector and covariance matrix of component i respectively.
For uniformly distributed prior, i.e. P(z = i) = 1
n, assume
all clusters share the same covariance matrix Σ (Σ−1 = P)
and let µi = DMi, we have:
P(z = i|ht−1)
=
1
n exp
 −1
2(ht−1 −µi)TΣ−1(ht−1 −µi)

P
j
1
n exp
 −1
2(ht−1 −µj)TΣ−1(ht−1 −µj)

=
exp(si)
P
j
exp(sj) = wi,
(9)
which is consistent with Eq. (3) when the similarity measure
follows Eq. (5). Thus, aligning the current state to similar
historical patterns is equal to the soft assignment of ht−1 to
speciﬁc components in the mixture model:
p′(ht−1, M) =
X
i
P(z = i|ht−1)µi
=
X
i
wiDMi = Dp(ht−1, M).
(10)
Let D+ be the Moore-Penrose inverse of D, we have:
p(ht−1, M) = D+p′(ht−1, M) =
X
i
wiMi,
(11)
and thus looking up latent matrix in Eq. (4) can be interpreted
from the mixture model perspective.
As a matter of fact, looking up and updating the latent ma-
trix can be seen as a variant of EM algorithm. For given hid-
den state ht−1 and current latent matrix M, E-step assigns
“responsibility” wi to each cluster via measuring similarities
in forward propagation. The M-step optimizes the parameters
in prototype vectors based on wi in backward propagation.
Rather than explicit parameter updating mechanism, which
appears in conventional EM procedure for Gaussian mixture
model, the update of mixture layer is implicit and based on
gradient descent.
When cosine similarity is selected instead of the similarity
in Eq. (5), and ht−1 follows Von Mises-Fisher distribution
(κ = 1) with the following probability density function:
P(ht−1|z = i) = C exp
 hT
t−1µi

,
(12)
where µi = DMi and C is the normalization constant, we
also have P(z = i|ht−1) = wi, and thus it can be interpreted
from the mixture model perspective as well.
3.3
LSTM with Mixture Layer
As a general mechanism, the mixture layer is able to equip
almost all RNN models. In this section, we take LSTM as an
example and illustrate how the mixture layer works in prac-
tice. Since the retrieved result of looking up latent matrix in
mixture layer is added to all gates and cells, the forget gate ft
and the input gate it are revised as:
ft = σ(Wf[ht−1, xt, p(ht−1, M)] + bf).
(13)
it = σ(Wi[ht−1, xt, p(ht−1, M)] + bi).
(14)
Then the memory cell ct can be updated adaptively:
˜ct = tanh(Wc[ht−1, xt, p(ht−1, M)] + bc).
(15)
ct = ft ◦ct−1 + it ◦˜ct.
(16)
Consequently, the output gate ot and cell ht become:
ot = σ(Wo[ht−1, xt, p(ht−1, M)] + bo).
(17)
ht = ot ◦tanh(ct).
(18)
3.4
Mixture Layer with Prior Knowledge
In many practical situations, some prior or domain knowl-
edge, about sample distribution or data pattern, is known be-
forehand. As a matter of fact, the prior knowledge can pro-
vide much information and help to build more efﬁcient mix-
ture layer, which substantially beneﬁts the training process.
In this subsection, we select an example in text modeling for
illustration. The category information (e.g. sports, science)
is often provided in advance in text modeling. To leverage
this prior knowledge, we set up multiple latent matrices for
RNN. Assume there exist B different buckets (categories) in
the training data, a unique latent matrix Mk (k ∈{1, . . . B})
will be allocated for each bucket. Therefore, Eq. (4) is ex-
tended to be:
p(ht−1, Mk) =
X
i
wiMk
i .
(19)
The samples are partitioned according to bucket information,
and speciﬁc samples are utilized to update each latent matrix.

4
Experiments
The performance of our M-RNN is evaluated on three differ-
ent tasks: synthetic sequences prediction, time series predic-
tion and language modeling. Experiments are implemented
in Tensorﬂow [Abadi et al., 2016]. As two different mea-
sures for calculating similarities are suggested in above sec-
tions and their performances are very close in practice, we
only report results under cosine similarities for simplicity. It
is claimed that for any baseline model (e.g. LSTM), we name
the mixture layer augmented model with preﬁx M (e.g. M-
LSTM), and name the prior knowledge based mixture layer
augmented model with preﬁx PM (e.g. PM-LSTM).
All trainable parameters are initialized randomly from a
uniform distribution over [-0.05, 0.05]. The parameters are
updated through back propagation with Adam rule [Kingma
and Ba, 2014] and the learning rate is 0.001. When tuning
the hyper-parameters (e.g. the dimension m of vector and
the number n of clusters in mixture model), an independent
validation set is randomly drawn from the training set, and the
model is trained on the remaining samples. After the hyper-
parameters have been determined, the model is trained again
on entire training set. All experiments are run several times
and the average results are reported.
4.1
Synthetic Sequences Prediction
Dataset.
We conduct sequences prediction on a synthetic dataset to
show how mixture layer helps to learn from data with multi-
ple patterns. Let N be the number of generated sequences and
M be the length of each sequence. The j-th (j = 1, . . . , M)
elements in i-th (i = 1, . . . , N) sequence is calculated as:
sij = (i + j) mod 3 × sin

i + j
i mod 3 + 1

,
(20)
where
mod denotes the modulo operator, and some sam-
ples are shown in Figure 2. For each sequence si, the task
is to predict the last element siM when [si1, . . . , siM−1] is
given. In the experiment, N is set to be 25600 and M is set
to be 128, and one half of sequences are randomly selected as
the testing set.
Setup.
We select LSTM as baseline and add the mixture layer to con-
struct our M-LSTM. From Eq. (20), we can see that there are
three different types of cycles, and we accordingly construct
the prior knowledge based M-LSTM (termed as PM-LSTM).
The LSTM has a single layer where the number of hidden
units equals to 8. The dimension of latent matrix in M-LSTM
is 4 × 3, and a unique M4×3 is assigned to each type of cycle
in PM-LSTM. The models are trained for 10 epochs.
Results.
The results are measured by Mean Absolute Error (MAE),
and it is written as:
MAE =
PN
i=1 |yi −ˆyi|
N
,
(21)
where N is the number of testing samples, yi is the true value
and ˆyi is the prediction result. All MAE results are shown
Figure 2: Three samples of synthetic sequences.
Table 1: The MAE results on synthetic sequences prediction tasks
(lower is better).
Model
MAE
LSTM
0.090
M-LSTM
0.076
PM-LSTM
0.026
in Table 1. We can see that mixture layer can signiﬁcantly
enhance the capability of LSTM in processing sequences with
multiple patterns. Moreover, it is readily to leverage prior
knowledge to further enhance the performance.
4.2
Time Series Prediction
Dataset.
We conduct time series prediction experiments on two
datasets: Power Consumption (PC) and Sales Forecast (SF).
• Power Consumption (PC) [Lichman, 2013].
This
dataset contains measurements of electric power con-
sumption in one household over a period of 198 weeks1.
The global-active-power is aggregated into hourly aver-
aged time series, and the prediction target is the global-
active-power at every hour on the next day. Each day is
divided into two periods: high consumption time (7:00-
13:00 and 18:00-22:00) and low consumption time (oth-
erwise), which can be utilized as the prior knowledge.
The entire dataset is separated into two parts: training
part (dates range [2007-04-08, 2010-11-19]) and testing
part (dates range [2010-11-20, 2010-11-26]).
• Sales Forecast (SF). This dataset is collected from one
of the largest E-commerce platforms in the world, and
it contains four features (i.e. browse times, customer
number, price and sales) of 1 million items from 769
categories over 13 weeks. The target is to predict the
total sales in the next week for each item. As the cat-
egory information is provided, it can be utilized as the
prior knowledge. The training set includes over 3 mil-
lion samples, and the size of testing set is about 2 thou-
sand (testing sample list is provided by large merchants).
1https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Individual+household+
electric+power+consumption

Table 2: The RMAE results on time series prediction tasks (lower is
better).
Model
RMAE (%)
PC
ARIMA
40.2
LSTM
35.4
M-LSTM
34.4
PM-LSTM
33.9
SF
ARIMA
84.2
LSTM
56.8
M-LSTM
52.5
PM-LSTM
42.9
Setup.
We select LSTM as baseline model. The LSTM is ﬁrst com-
pared with the classical ARIMA model [Hamilton and James,
1994]. Then the mixture layer is added to construct our ap-
proaches. The hyper-parameters are set up on two datasets as
follows respectively:
• Power Consumption (PC). For each hour, the input se-
quence contains the related power consumption on the
last 56 days. At every step, the sequence contains val-
ues at three adjacent hours centering at the target hour.
The goal is to predict global-active-power at every hour
on the next day. The LSTM has a single layer where
the dimension of hidden units is 32. In terms of our ap-
proach, the M-LSTM is constructed by adding a mix-
ture layer with M4×8. To construct the prior knowledge
based M-LSTM (termed as PM-LSTM), a unique M4×8
is assigned to each period (high consumption or low con-
sumption). The models are trained for 30 epochs.
• Sales Forecast (SF). For each item, the input is a se-
quence of four features on recent 56 days, and the target
is to predict total sales in the next week. The LSTM has
a single layer where the dimension of hidden units is 64.
Similarly, our M-LSTM is constructed by adding a mix-
ture layer with M8×16. By taking the category informa-
tion as prior knowledge, we assign a unique M8×16 to
each category and construct the PM-LSTM model. The
models are trained for 15 epochs.
Results.
The results are measured in Relative Mean Absolute Error
(RMAE), and it is written as:
RMAE =
PN
i=1 |yi −ˆyi|
PN
i=1 yi
,
(22)
where N is the number of testing samples, yi is the true value
and ˆyi is the prediction result. All RMAE results are shown in
Table 2. It is evident to see that multiple patterns commonly
exist in real-world data. Thus our M-LSTM model signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms LSTM and ARIMA, on both PC and SF
datasets. Therefore, the advantages of our mixture layer is
fully demonstrated. In addition, by leveraging prior knowl-
edge, the PM-LSTM is able to further enhance the predic-
tion accuracy on both PC and SF datasets, which indicates
the strong adaptability of our approach as well.
4.3
Language Modeling
Dataset.
We conduct word-level prediction experiments on 20NG:
• 20-Newsgroup (20NG) [Lang, 1995]. This dataset is
originally a benchmark for text categorization, where 20
thousand news documents are evenly categorized into 20
groups. In word-level prediction, the group information
is considered as prior knowledge. The preprocessed data
can be found in [Cardoso-Cachopo, 2007]2, and it con-
sists of 5 million words and the vocabulary contains 74
thousand words. The most frequent 10 thousand words
are selected as the ﬁnal vocabulary in our experiment.
Setup.
There are two different settings in the experiments: simple
setting and complex setting. As the purpose of simple setting
is to demonstrate the beneﬁt of mixture layer, the complex
setting extends the advantages of our approach to more com-
plicated models.
• Simple setting. In this setting, each word is ﬁrst em-
bedded into a 32-dimensional vector. The size of hidden
units in LSTM is 128. The dimension of latent matrix in
M-LSTM is 16 × 10. The group information is utilized
as prior knowledge, and we construct PM-LSTM by al-
locating a unique M16×10 for each group. The model is
trained for 20 epochs.
• Complex setting. The “large” network architecture in
[Zaremba et al., 2014] is one of the state-of-art models
and provides a strong baseline for language modeling
tasks3. This model contains many extensions, includ-
ing multiple layers stacking, dropout, gradient clipping,
learning rate decay and so on. In this setting, we select
the “large” network (named by LARGE) as the base-
line model. In terms of our approach, a mixture layer
with M512×32 is added into LARGE to construct our M-
LARGE model. Similarly, the prior knowledge based
M-LARGE (termed as PM-LARGE) is established by
introducing a particular M512×32 for each group.
With more sophisticated model [Zilly et al., 2016] or
ensemble of multiple models, lower perplexities can be
achieved. However, we here simply focus on assessing the
impact of mixture layer when added to existing architectures,
rather than the most absolute state-of-the-art performance.
Results.
All results are measured in perplexity, which is a popular met-
ric to evaluate language models [Katz, 1987], and the results
are summarized in Table 3. In the simple setting, the beneﬁt
from the mixture layer is signiﬁcant. The content in 20NG is
semantically rich, and our model can easily distinguish vari-
ous semantic patterns in the dataset. Similarly, with the assist
from prior knowledge, the efﬁciency of mixture layer is fur-
ther improved. The advantages of our approach remain in the
2http://ana.cachopo.org/datasets-for-single-label-text-categorization
3An open source implementation: https://github.com/tensorﬂow/
models/blob/master/tutorials/rnn/ptb/ptb word lm.py

Table 3: The word-level perplexity results on language modeling
tasks (lower is better).
Simple
Perp.
Complex
Perp.
LSTM
178.9
LARGE
109.1
M-LSTM
168.2
M-LARGE
108.4
PM-LSTM
157.1
PM-LARGE
105.4
complex setting. We can see that the LARGE model has al-
ready achieved a high accuracy, and our approach is able to
further enhance the model performance. Thus, the general su-
periority of our approach is proved under both simple setting
and complex setting.
4.4
Discussion
Other mechanisms analysis.
We also conduct some experiments on other mechanisms, in-
cluding GRU and attention mechanism, and all results are are
summarized in Table 4. GRU is another well-known RNN
variant and we test the augmented GRUs (termed as M-GRU
and PM-GRU) on 20NG dataset under the simple setting. As
we can see, although GRU has better performance on this
task, the mixture layer still signiﬁcantly enhances its perfor-
mance, and thus the proposed mixture layer is a universal
block for RNNs. The attention mechanism is often used in
speciﬁc scenarios, such as Seq2Seq, and we have tried to ap-
ply it in language modeling experiments. However, the atten-
tion method cannot achieve satisfying results, and the testing
perplexity on 20NG dataset is only 558.6, which shows the
attention mechanism may be not suitable for such tasks.
Model size analysis.
After introducing the mixture layer, the number of parameters
increases, and the comparison seems unfair at ﬁrst glance.
However, the increase of model size caused by mixture layer
is very small. Taking the simple setting in language model
for illustration, the original LSTM has 82432 parameters in
the cell, and 1362432 parameters in the entire network (cell
parameters plus parameters in 10000-classes sigmoid func-
tion). After introducing mixture layer, the number of newly
added parameters is 10400. So the increment in model size is
0.76%, while the word-level perplexity decreases 6%. There-
fore, the improvement is signiﬁcant and the introduction of
mixture layer is economic. To better understand the effect of
increasing model size, we conduct an additional experiment
on 20NG dataset. By increasing the number of hidden units,
we make the number of parameters in cell of new LSTM al-
most equal to that in cell of M-LSTM. This new LSTM has
much more parameters than our M-LSTM due to larger lin-
ear projection, and the comparison is quite unfair for our M-
LSTM. However, the perplexity achieved by new LSTM is
176.9, which is still far away from our M-LSTM (168.2). Ob-
viously, simply increasing the model size cannot effectively
enhance the performance.
Mixture model convergence.
As mentioned before, the mixture layer can be interpreted
from mixture model perspective, and the mixture layer stores
Table 4: The word-level perplexity results of other mechanisms on
20NG dataset under simple setting (lower is better).
Model
Perplexity
GRU
174.3
M-GRU
163.7
PM-GRU
152.9
Attention
558.6
0
5
10
15
20
Epochs
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Perplexity
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Inter-cluster distance
Figure 3:
The changing process of average Euclidean distance
among all centers.
each principle pattern as the center of each cluster (or pro-
totype vector). To gain more insights about latent matrix,
we take the simple setting on 20NG dataset as an example,
and plot the change of average Euclidean distance among all
centers during the training procedure in Figure 3. The green
solid line denotes the word-level perplexity on testing set and
the red dotted line is the average Euclidean distance. As we
can see, all vectors are similarly initialized at the beginning
of training, and they gradually become isolated as the model
converges, which means each cluster center represents a dis-
tinct pattern in the training data.
5
Conclusion
Conventional RNN is limited to adaptively process sequences
with multiple patterns. In this paper, an adaptive RNN is
proposed and a novel mixture layer is introduced to memo-
rize the principal patterns in training sequences by a mixture
model. By aligning the current state to similar patterns in his-
torical data, the mixture layer augmented RNN (termed as M-
RNN) applies adaptive transition at each time step. Moreover,
the proposed approach can easily utilize the prior knowledge
about data. Although there is a new type of layer added, the
entire network can still be trained by gradient decent in an
end-to-end manner. Experiments on extensive tasks demon-
strate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach.
The proposed mixture layer is a universal block, and we
look forward to applying it to other types of neural networks,
such as feed-forward networks and convolutional neural net-
works. Another interesting but challenging topic for further
studies is adding sparsity to the weight vector computed by
Eq. (3), which is helpful to boost the computation.
