Single Shot Multitask Pedestrian Detection and
Behavior Prediction
Prateek Agrawal
Volkswagen Group
Innovation Center California
Belmont, California 94002

Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma
Volkswagen Group
Innovation Center California
Belmont, California

Abstract
Detecting and predicting the behavior of pedestrians is extremely crucial for self-
driving vehicles to plan and interact with them safely. Although there have been
several research works in this area, it is important to have fast and memory efﬁ-
cient models such that it can operate in embedded hardware in these autonomous
machines. In this work, we propose a novel architecture using spatial-temporal
multi-tasking to do camera based pedestrian detection and intention prediction. Our
approach signiﬁcantly reduces the latency by being able to detect and predict all
pedestrians’ intention in a single shot manner while also being able to attain better
accuracy by sharing features with relevant object level information and interactions.
1
Introduction
A typical autonomous driving modular stack consists of several modules like sensors, perception,
localization, prediction, planning, and control. The perception module consists of tasks, like object
detection or free space detection, that perceive the environment around the ego vehicle. The prediction
module can anticipate the intended behavior and future trajectories of trafﬁc agents. In order to deal
safely with Vulnerable Road Users (VRUs) like pedestrians, both of these modules are extremely
crucial.
The standard pipeline typically perceives the pedestrians ﬁrst. This is followed by predicting their
behavior or future trajectory by using information like their past motion from corresponding sensor
data. We call this as the sequential approach. Pedestrians typically do not follow kinematic models
like vehicles and thus it is challenging to have fast and highly accurate predictions in a computationally
efﬁcient manner. As an overall system, the sequential approach demands high memory usage and
high inference time which may be problematic given the limited computing capability.
In this work, we present a novel approach to solve the problem of pedestrian intention prediction, as
deﬁned in [18], by taking a parallel multi-tasking approach between detection and prediction. As
shown in Figure 1, we hypothesize that our approach can have manifold advantages: (a) Low latency
by executing parts of prediction and perception in parallel, (b) Practical and ﬁxed inference time by
detecting and predicting for all pedestrians in a single shot manner, (c) Low parameter and feature
memory usage, (d) Multi-tasking leverages correlations to help improving accuracy. In the following
sections, we explain the design and compare its performance with a baseline sequential approach on
the Pedestrian Intention Estimation (PIE) data set [18].
Machine Learning for Autonomous Driving Workshop at the 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:2101.02232v1  [cs.AI]  6 Jan 2021

Figure 1: (a) Sequential approach with perception followed by prediction, and (b) proposed auxiliary
approach that multi-tasks both followed by a spatial association of pedestrian behavior
2
Related Work
Pedestrian understanding
Several recent works [11, 12, 7] have pushed the boundaries in the ﬁeld
of pedestrian detection. Also for most multi-object detection and pixel wise semantic segmentation
driving data sets [4, 23], pedestrian is usually a distinct category. Pedestrian understanding however
goes beyond that by attempting to detect multiple aspects [2] like pose [5], gesture [19] and actions [3]
of human beings and being able to predict the intended behavior and eventually the actual trajectory
that the pedestrian is expected to execute in future. Most of the approaches [18, 13] for intention
prediction however fall under the sequential approach mentioned in Figure 1(a). Predicting pedestrian
behavior is also an interactive problem since each person’s future depends on the state of other VRUs,
vehicles, trafﬁc lights and other proximal map elements. Although there have been several works
[6, 22, 1] towards conducting a social prediction for all interacting agents, most of these again assume
that the pedestrians have already been detected and are being tracked.
Multi-task learning
Many works [21, 15, 9] have shown the advantage of using multi-task learning
for different applications, like Mask R-CNN [8] for instance level segmentation. There have been
efforts like [16] to do multi-task pedestrian detection and action recognition but the actual time-to-
cross prediction is only done after the bounding boxes are obtained through detection. It is also similar
in [17] where multiple prediction sub-modules are multi-tasked but only run after obtaining semantic
segmentation output. PnPNet [10] proposes end-to-end learning of perception and prediction but the
architecture still executes the trajectory prediction LSTM only after the actual detection network. FaF
[14] is another end-to-end solution for detection, tracking and motion forecasting but also places the
forecasting prediction model after detection. Thus, the inference time for these methods is typically
large. Contrary to these approaches, our proposed methodology leverages low level feature sharing to
capture better interactive information and parallel execution of task speciﬁc layers for doing detection
and behavior prediction of all pedestrians simultaneously.
3
Methodology
The baseline model that we compare with is as suggested in [18]. They use a convolutional LSTM
model on top of pre-trained VGG16 features obtained from cropped image regions of pedestrians
using ground truth annotations (for a real life system, this input would come from the perception
system and hence it is a sequential model) in 15 continuous frames.
Our proposed method contains a multi-task architecture that consists of an object detection network
called the primary network and a pedestrian intention network called auxiliary network as shown
in Figure 2. For every input image, the auxiliary network receives its inputs from the feature maps
calculated at an intermediate Lth layer of the primary network and thus operates in parallel to the
remainder of the primary network. Given a sequence of images from time T0 to time Tt, the primary
network detects the bounding boxes of all the pedestrians in the images. The auxiliary network uses
the information from previous frames and outputs the intention to cross for all the pedestrians in
the frame at time Tt. In our implementation, the primary network is a single shot YOLOv2 [20]
detector with output shape of H × W × A × (1 + NC + 4), where A is the number of anchor
boxes and NC deﬁnes the number of classes to be detected. We consider NC = 4 with pedestrians,
cross-walks, vehicles and trafﬁc lights as the object classes since this can help the feature maps to
capture relevant information regarding the spatial-temporal relationships between the scene objects
and can be useful for the auxiliary pedestrian intention network. The auxiliary network is a three
layered ConvLSTM model. It receives a time sequence of t = 15 feature maps from an intermediate
2

layer L = 18 of the YOLOv2 and produces a similar spatial grid output of shape H × W × A × NI,
where ﬁrst three dimensions H, W and A has the same values as the primary network’s output and
the fourth dimension NI deﬁnes the number of pedestrian intention classes. The raw images of size
1920 × 1080 are resized to 640 × 360 before feeding as input to the YOLOv2 and our ﬁnal layer
parameters are H = 11 and W = 20 with A = 5 anchor boxes. NI = 2 indicating whether the
pedestrian intends to cross the street or not. We use binary cross entropy as the auxiliary loss. The
last step is a constant time spatial mapping between the pedestrian detected from the primary network
and the corresponding intentions from auxiliary network. If a pedestrian is detected at {i,j,k} grid in
the YOLOv2 output, we assign the softmax output at the same {i,j,k} grid at the auxiliary network as
the corresponding classiﬁed intention for the detected pedestrian. Thus, our architecture does not
have to wait for the detection to be over before performing prediction. During the training process
for the auxiliary side, only the loss corresponding to the cells that contain pedestrians are computed
and back propagated to train the layers below. The modules can either be trained end-to-end in a
multi-task learning manner or just the auxiliary network can be trained separately by using features
from a pre-trained object detector. The latter scenario can be particularly useful when the perception
network is either trained on a separate and comparatively bigger data set or in real life automotive
system integration scenarios where the detection module may be obtained from a different party or
supplier. For our experiments in the current paper, we assume an oracle tracking system and thus
use the object tracking IDs directly from annotations. However, tracking can also be included in the
whole end-to-end system, similar to as it is described in FaF [14].
Figure 2: Spatial-temporal multitask network to do detection and intention prediction of all pedestrians
simultaneously
4
Experiments
4.1
Dataset
In this paper, we use the PIE data set [18] to train both the detection and prediction models. The
pedestrian intention was annotated using Amazon Mechanical Turks where each human subject was
asked to observe a highlighted pedestrian in a sequence of consecutive frames and answer whether the
3

Table 1: Comparing intention prediction results for auxiliary and multitask approaches with baseline
sequential approach. The branching is done at the 18th layer of YOLOv2 detector
Method
Pedestrian Height (px)
Accuracy
F1 Score
Sequential
All peds > 0
79%
87%
Auxiliary
Training
All peds > 0
81.19%
88.67%
All peds > 120
82.00%
88.27%
Multitask
Training
All peds > 0
83.83%
90.59%
All peds > 120
84.37%
90.246%
Table 2: Comparing intention predictions results for different values of L
Input Layer
Accuracy
F1 Score
17th
76.79%
83.85%
19th
76.26%
83.87%
20th
75.1%
82.82%
pedestrian wants to cross the street. Intention of a pedestrian is deﬁned as the ultimate objective of the
pedestrian and not the actual path the pedestrian executes based on the trafﬁc scenarios. All videos
are recorded in HD format (1920 × 1080 pixels) at 30 frames per second with intention annotated for
a total of 1842 pedestrians.
However, we found out that not all the pedestrians that can potentially interact with the ego vehicle
are annotated. This posed difﬁculty for us in training the primary YOLOv2 network because of too
many false negatives. Thus, in our current paper, we primarily compare the improvement in the
intention prediction task only using our methodology over the sequential approach.
4.2
Quantitative Results
The results shown in this section are on the default test set of the PIE data set. Table 1 summaries the
accuracy and F1 score obtained for the baseline as well as the approaches presented in this paper for
the 18th layer feature map from YOLOv2 as input to auxiliary model. Using the code and model
weights provided by [18], we were able to reproduce the intention prediction accuracy of 79% (and
an F1 score of 87% ) for the baseline sequential approach as claimed in their paper.
For the auxiliary only training, we ﬁrst trained the YOLOv2 object detector and subsequently froze
all its layers. Given a training image, we pass the image through the frozen object detector, extract
features from an intermediate layer and use that as input to the auxiliary intention network. For a
sequence of images, we would then compute the loss for training only the layers in the auxiliary
network. Keeping all the hyper-parameters same as set by [18] and trying out multiple different
intermediate layers from object detector, the auxiliary approach was able to obtain an accuracy of
81.19% and F1 score of 88.67% with no size restriction on the pedestrians. Restricting the pedestrian
size to a more humanly perceivable constraint ( that is by considering only those pedestrians with
size more than 120 pixels in the original high deﬁnition whole scene image) increased the accuracy
to 82%. We found that the best accuracy is achieved when the 18th layer from YOLOv2 is used as
the input to auxiliary network. We did a grid search to ﬁx this hyperparameter and results from some
other intermediate layers as input to auxiliary network are shown in Table 2. By Lth layer, we mean
taking the features generated after the application of batch normalization and activation on the Lth
convolutional layer of the YOLOv2 architecture.
Keeping all the hyper parameters same, we ﬁnally did the end-to-end multi-task training of both the
detection and prediction networks simultaneously. This helped the common feature extraction layers
in both detection and prediction tasks to be generic enough for both the tasks. This gave us a further
increase in the accuracy to 83.83% and F1 score to 90.59%. Restricting the size of the pedestrian
to a height of greater than 120 pixels only further increased the accuracy to 84.37% and F1 score
to 90.246%. We thus see an improvement of 4.83% in the pedestrian intention from the sequential
approach. This end-to-end multi-task training also helped to improve the mean average precision
(mAP) of the object detection model by 2%.
4

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Pedestrian crossing results -
Green background icon shows the ground
truth intention and pink background icon
shows the predicted intention
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4: Pedestrian not crossing- Green
background icon shows the ground truth
intention and pink background icon
shows the predicted intention
5

Table 3: Comparing memory and latency at the overall system level
Method
Memory (MB)
Time to prediction
Sequential
276.1
137.576ms
Auxiliary/Multi-Tasking
261.5
50.4ms
Other major advantage of the proposed approach is the lower latency and lower parameter memory
footprint. As shown in Table 3, the parameter memory of the auxiliary model was about 15 MB lower
than the total memory of sequential approach. This can be attributed to the fact that the sequential
method uses an extra feature extractor (VGG16) where as the auxiliary method utilizes the features
extracted by the object detection network itself. The average inference time for a single image also
reduced from 137.5 ms to 50.4 ms. This is because of the single shot inference behaviour of our
approach in contrast to running the intention model for individual pedestrians separately in sequential
method. Inference time of the sequential approach depends on the number of pedestrians in the image.
Increased number of detected pedestrians increases the inference time for sequential approach. On
the other hand, the inference time for the auxiliary approach is ﬁxed and does not depend on the
number of pedestrians in the image. The numbers reported here are corresponding to the average
pedestrians per image in the PIE data set, which is 2.12. This would help for faster detection of the
dynamic behaviour of the pedestrians. A more elaborate study on reducing the memory requirement
and inference time with better hyper parameter optimization and architecture search is left as future
work.
4.3
Qualitative Results
Figure 3 and 4 compare the predicted intention of the pedestrians with the ground truth annotations.
In a crowded scene as seen in Figure 3(a), we can see the beneﬁt of such a single shot approach
for predicting the intention of all the pedestrians at the same time irrespective of the number of
pedestrians in the image. Also, since the pedestrians are never cropped out of the original image, the
intention network has access to the features of stimulus objects in the image such as trafﬁc light, cross
walk and vehicles. Figure 3(b) and 3(c) show the intention being predicted correctly for pedestrians
that are walking and standing in the images respectively. Figure 4(a) shows a pedestrian who is
waiting for something and the model correctly predicts the intention of not crossing. Figure 4(b) and
(c) show pedestrians walking parallel to the ego vehicle and construction workers with no intention to
cross the road respectively. Our model is able to accurately predict their intended behavior.
5
Conclusion
Given the complex dynamics and interactive nature of pedestrian motion patterns, it is extremely
critical for autonomous vehicles to predict their intended behavior with maximum accuracy and in
the most computationally efﬁcient manner. We proposed a novel way to multitask detection and
behavioral prediction directly from sensors data. We could show 2.7x inference speed increase and
accuracy improvement of 4.83%. It is worth noting here that the memory and latency improvement
obtained by our methodology is orthogonal to other techniques like pruning, quantization and other
hardware optimization of neural networks. Such multi-task methodology can be applied onto dealing
with any combination of robotic perception and prediction tasks. For example, one can also use such
spatial temporal feature sharing for single shot detection as well as prediction of the future trajectories
of all vehicles in the scene in order to anticipate possible scenarios like cut ins and sudden braking.
One possible weakness of our approach can be that the compressed features may or may not capture
very ﬁne details like hand gesture, eye gaze or head pose that may be needed to predict pedestrian
intention whereas sequential approach may have an advantage here since its input is rectangular crops
of pedestrians at the original whole image resolution. However, we hope that joint multi-task training
can force the common layers to focus and retain such needed features. Although it requires further
and extensive experiments to validate the safety and reliability of this methodology, our initial results
seem encouraging to continue working in this direction.
6
