arXiv:1801.10055v4  [cs.AI]  14 Jun 2018
Features, Projections, and Representation Change for Generalized Planning
Blai Bonet1 and Hector Geffner2
1 Universidad Sim´on Bol´ıvar, Caracas, Venezuela
2 ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
Generalized planning is concerned with the char-
acterization and computation of plans that solve
many instances at once.
In the standard formu-
lation, a generalized plan is a mapping from fea-
ture or observation histories into actions, assum-
ing that the instances share a common pool of
features and actions.
This assumption, however,
excludes the standard relational planning domains
where actions and objects change across instances.
In this work, we extend the standard formulation
of generalized planning to such domains. This is
achieved by projecting the actions over the fea-
tures, resulting in a common set of abstract actions
which can be tested for soundness and complete-
ness, and which can be used for generating general
policies such as “if the gripper is empty, pick the
clear block above x and place it on the table” that
achieve the goal clear(x) in any Blocksworld in-
stance. In this policy, “pick the clear block above
x” is an abstract action that may represent the ac-
tion Unstack(a, b) in one situation and the action
Unstack(b, c) in another. Transformations are also
introduced for computing such policies by means of
fully observable non-deterministic (FOND) plan-
ners. The value of generalized representations for
learning general policies is also discussed.
1
Introduction
Generalized
planning
is
concerned
with
the
charac-
terization and computation of plans that solve many
instances at once [Srivastava et al., 2008; Bonet et al., 2009;
Srivastava et al., 2011a;
Hu and De Giacomo, 2011;
Belle and Levesque, 2016;
Segovia et al., 2016].
For
example, the policy “if left of the target, move right” and “if
right of the target, move left”, solves the problem of getting
to the target in a 1 × n environment, regardless of the agent
and target positions or the value of n.
The standard, semantic, formulation of generalized plan-
ning due to Hu and De Giacomo [2011] assumes that all the
problems in the class share a common set of features and ac-
tions. Often, however, this assumption is false. For example,
in the Blocksworld, the policy “if the gripper is empty, pick
the clear block above x and place it on the table” eventually
achieves the goal clear(x) in any instance, yet the set of such
instances do not have (ground) actions in common. Indeed,
the expression “pick up the clear block above x” may mean
“pick block a from b” in one case, and “pick block c from
d” in another. A similar situation arises in most of the stan-
dard relational planning domains. Instances share the same
action schemas but policies cannot map features into action
schemas; they must select concrete, ground, actions.
In this work, we show how to extend the formulation of
generalized planning to relational domains where the set of
actions and objects depend on the instance. This is done by
projecting the actions over a common set of features, result-
ing in a common set of general actions that can be used in
generalized plans. We also address the computation of the re-
sulting general policies by means of transformations and fully
observable non-deterministic (FOND) planners, and discuss
the relevance to work on learning general policies.
Generalized planning has also been formulated as a prob-
lem in ﬁrst-order logic with solutions associated with pro-
grams with loops, where actions schemas do not need to be
instantiated [Srivastava et al., 2011a]. The resulting formula-
tion, however, is complex and cannot beneﬁt from existing
propositional planners. First-order decision theoretic plan-
ning can also be used to generate general plans but these
are only effective over ﬁnite horizons [Boutilier et al., 2001;
Wang et al., 2008; van Otterlo, 2012].
The paper is organized as follows. We review the deﬁni-
tion of generalized planning and introduce abstract actions
and projections. We then consider the computation of gen-
eralized policies, look at examples, and discuss related work
and challenges.
2
Generalized Planning
The planning instances P that we consider are classical plan-
ning problems expressed in some compact language as a tu-
ple P = ⟨V, I, A, G⟩where V is a set of state variables that
can take a ﬁnite set of values (boolean or not), I is a set of
atoms over V deﬁning an initial state s0, G is a set of atoms
or literals over V describing the goal states, and A is a set of
actions a with their preconditions and effects that deﬁne the
set A(s) of actions applicable in any state s, and the succes-
sor state function f(a, s), a ∈A(s). A state is a valuation
over V and a solution to P is an applicable action sequence

π = a0, . . . , an that generates a state sequence s0, s1, . . . , sn
where sn is a goal state (makes G true). In this sequence,
ai ∈A(si) and si+1 = f(ai, si) for i = 0, . . . , n−1. A state
s is reachable in P if s = sn for one such sequence.
A general planning problem Q is a collection of instances
P assumed to share a common set of actions and a common
set of features or observations [Hu and De Giacomo, 2011].
A boolean feature p for a class Q of problems represents a
function φp that takes an instance P from Q and a reachable
state s in P,1 and results in a boolean value denoted as φp(s),
with the reference to the problem P omitted. Features are
sometimes associated with observations, and in such cases
φp is a sensing function. For example, if Q is the class of
all block instances with goal on(a, b) for two blocks a and b,
above(a, b) would be a feature that is true when a is above
b. If F denotes the set of all boolean features, φF (s) denotes
the values of all features in the state s.
A general policy or plan for a class of problems Q shar-
ing a common set of boolean features and actions is a partial
function π that maps feature histories into actions. A pol-
icy π solves the generalized problem Q if it solves each in-
stance P in Q. A policy π solves P if the state trajectory
s0, . . . , sn induced by π on P is goal reaching. In such tra-
jectory, ai = π(φF (s0), . . . , φF (si)), si+1 = f(ai, si) for
i < n, and sn is the ﬁrst state in the sequence where the goal
of P is true, the policy π is not deﬁned, or π returns an action
an that is not applicable at sn. In the following, for simplicity,
we only consider memoryless policies that map single feature
valuations into actions and thus ai = π(φF (si)).
2.1
Numerical Features
For extending the formulation to domains where actions take
arguments that vary from instance to instance, we need nu-
merical features. A numerical feature n for a generalized
problem Q represents a function φn that takes an instance
P and a state s, and results in a non-negative integer value
denoted as φn(s).
For the problem Q representing the
Blocksworld instances with goal on(a, b), a numerical fea-
ture n(a) can represent the number of blocks above a. The
set of features F becomes thus a pair F = ⟨B, N⟩of boolean
and numerical features B and N. A valuation over F is an
assignment of truth values to the boolean features p ∈B and
non-negative integer values to the numerical features n ∈N.
A boolean valuation over F, on the other hand, is an assign-
ment of truth values to the boolean features p ∈B and to the
atoms n = 0 for n ∈N. The feature valuation for a state s
is denoted as φF (s), while the boolean valuation as φB(s).
The number of feature valuations is inﬁnite but the number of
boolean valuations is 2|F |. Policies for a generalized problem
Q over a set of features F = ⟨B, N⟩are deﬁned as:
Deﬁnition 1 (Generalized Planning). A policy for a general-
ized problem Q over the features F = ⟨B, N⟩is a partial
mapping π from boolean valuations over F into the common
actions in Q. The policy π solves Q if π solves each instance
P in Q; i.e., if the trajectory s0, . . . , sn induced by the policy
π in P is goal reaching.
1 Non-reachable states are often not meaningful, like a state
when one block is on top of itself.
As before, the trajectory s0, . . . , sn induced by π is such
that ai = π(φB(si)), si+1 = f(ai, si) for i < n, and sn is
the ﬁrst state in the sequence where π(φB(sn)) = ⊥, an ̸∈
A(sn), or the goal of P is true.
2.2
Parametric Goals and Features
We are often interested in ﬁnding a policy for all instances
of a domain whose goal has a special form.
For exam-
ple, we may be interested in a policy for the class Q of all
Blocksworld instances with goal of the form on(x, y) where
x and y are any blocks. Two instances P and P ′ with goals
on(a, b) and on(c, d) respectively, are part of Q with values
for x and y being a and b in P, and c and d in P ′. General fea-
tures using such parameters can be used, with the value of the
parameters in an instance P being determined by matching
the goal of P with the generic goal. A parametric feature like
n(x) that tracks the number of blocks above x thus represents
the feature n(a) in P and the feature n(c) in P ′.
3
Abstract Actions
A generalized planning problem like “all Blocksworld in-
stances with goal of the form on(x, y)” admits simple and
general plans yet such plans cannot be accounted for in the
current framework. The reason is that such instances share
no common pool of actions. This is indeed the situation in
relational domains where objects and actions change across
instances. For dealing with such domains, we deﬁne the no-
tion of abstract actions that capture the effect of actions on
the common set of features.
The abstract actions for a generalized problem Q are de-
ﬁned as pairs ¯a = ⟨Pre; Eﬀ⟩where Pre and Eﬀare the
action precondition and effects expressed in terms of the set
of features F = ⟨B, N⟩. The syntax is simple: precondi-
tions may include atoms p and n = 0 or their negations, for
p ∈B and n ∈N, and effects may be boolean, p or ¬p for
p ∈B, or numerical increments and decrements expressed as
n↑and n↓respectively for n ∈N. In the language of abstract
actions, features represent state variables (ﬂuents), not func-
tions, with n representing a non-negative integer, and n↑and
n↓representing updates n := n+∆and n := n−∆′ for ran-
dom positive integers ∆and ∆′ that are not allowed to make n
negative. The numerical updates are thus non-deterministic.
The negation of atom n = 0 is expressed as n > 0 and it
must be a precondition of any abstract action that decrease n
for ensuring that n remains non-negative.
Deﬁnition 2. An abstract action ¯a over the features F =
⟨B, N⟩is a pair ⟨Pre; Eﬀ⟩such that 1) each precondition
in Pre is a literal p or ¬p for p ∈B, or a literal n = 0
or n > 0 for n ∈N, 2) each effect in Eﬀis a boolean lit-
eral over B, or a numerical update n↑or n↓for n ∈N, and
3) n > 0 is in Pre if n↓is in Eﬀ.
We want abstract actions that represent the diverse set of
concrete actions in the different instances P of the general-
ized problem Q. The number of concrete actions across all
instances in Q is often inﬁnite but the number of abstract ac-
tions is bounded by 32|F |.
Abstract actions operate over abstract states ¯s that are val-
uations over the feature variables. An abstract action ¯a =

⟨Pre; Eﬀ⟩represents a concrete action a over a state s in
instance P if the two actions are applicable in s, and they af-
fect the values of the features in a similar way. Let us say that
Pre is true in s if Pre is true in the valuation φB(s). Then:
Deﬁnition 3. The abstract action ¯a = ⟨Pre; Eﬀ⟩over a set
of features F represents the action a on the state s of in-
stance P in Q iff 1) the preconditions of a and ¯a both hold in
s, and 2) the effects of a and ¯a over F are similar:
a) for each boolean feature p in B, if p changes from true to
false (resp. from false to true) in transition s ⇝f(a, s)
then ¬p ∈Eﬀ(resp. p ∈Eﬀ),
b) for each boolean feature p in B, if p (resp. ¬p) is in Eﬀ,
then p is true (resp. false) in f(a, s), and
c) for each numerical feature n in N, n↓(resp. n↑) in Eﬀiff
φn(f(a, s)) < φn(s) (resp. φn(f(a, s)) > φn(s)).
Example. Let Qclear be the set of Blocksworld instances P
with goal of the form clear(x) and initial situation where the
arm is empty,2 and let F = {H, n(x)} be the set of features
where H holds iff the arm is holding some block, and n(x)
counts the number of blocks above x. The abstract action
¯a = ⟨¬H, n(x) > 0; H, n(x)↓⟩
(1)
represents any action that picks up a block from above x, as
it makes H true and decreases the number of blocks above x.
If P is an instance with goal clear(a) and s is a state where
on(b, a), on(c, b), and clear(c) are all true, ¯a represents the
action Unstack(c, b) as both actions, the abstract and the con-
crete, are applicable in s, make H true, and decrease n(x).
Likewise,
¯a′ = ⟨H; ¬H⟩
(2)
represents any action that places the block being held any-
where but above x (as it does not affect n(x)). In the state s′
that results from the state s and the action Unstack(c, b), ¯a′
represents the action Putdown(c), and also Stack(c, d) if d is
a block in P that is clear in both s and s′.
We say that an abstract action ¯a is sound when it represents
some concrete action in each (reachable) state s of each in-
stance P of Q where ¯a is applicable:
Deﬁnition 4. An abstract action ¯a = ⟨Pre; Eﬀ⟩is sound
in the problem Q over the features F iff for each instance P
in Q and each reachable state s in P where Pre holds, ¯a
represents one or more actions a from P on the state s.
The abstract action (1) is sound in Qclear as in any reachable
state of any instance where the arm is empty and there are
blocks above x, there is an unstack action that makes the fea-
ture H true and decreases the number of blocks above x. The
abstract action (2) is sound too. The two actions, however, do
not provide a complete representation:
Deﬁnition 5. A set A of abstract actions over the set of fea-
tures F is complete for Q if for any instance P in Q, any
reachable state s of P, and any action a that is applicable at
s, there is an abstract action ¯a in A that represents a on s.
2Throughout, Blocksworld refers to the encoding with action
schemas Stack(x, y), Unstack(x, y), Pickup(x), and Putdown(x).
The set made of the two actions above is not complete as
they cannot represent concrete actions that, for example, pick
up the target block x or a block that is not above x.
Example.
A sound and complete set of abstract actions
AF ′ for Qclear can be obtained with the features F ′ =
{X, H, Z, n(x), m(x)} where H, X, and Z represent that
block x is being held, that some other block is being held, and
that there is a block below x respectively. The new counter
m(x) tracks the number of blocks that are not in the same
tower as x or being held. The abstract actions in AF ′, with
names for making their meaning explicit, are:
– Pick-x-some-below=⟨¬H,¬X,n(x)=0,Z; X,¬Z,m(x)↑⟩,
– Pick-x-none-below = ⟨¬H, ¬X, n(x) = 0, ¬Z; X⟩,
– Pick-above-x = ⟨¬H, ¬X, n(x) > 0; H, n(x)↓⟩,
– Pick-other = ⟨¬H, ¬X, m(x) > 0; H, m(x)↓⟩,
– Put-x-on-table = ⟨X; ¬X⟩,
– Put-x-above-some = ⟨X; ¬X, Z, m(x)↓⟩,
– Put-aside = ⟨H; ¬H, m(x)↑⟩,
– Put-above-x = ⟨H; ¬H, n(x)↑⟩.
4
Generalized Planning Revisited
The notion of generalized planning can be extended to rela-
tional domains, where instances share no common pool of
actions, by moving to the abstract representation provided by
abstract actions:
Deﬁnition 6. Let Q be a generalized planning problem, F be
a set of features, and AF be a set of sound abstract actions. A
policy for Q over F is a partial mapping π from the boolean
valuations over F into AF . The (abstract) policy π solves Q
if π solves each instance P in Q; i.e., if all the trajectories
s0, . . . , sn induced by π in P are goal reaching.
Abstract policies π map boolean valuations over F into
sound abstract actions. We write ai ∈π(φB(si)) to express
that ai is one of the concrete actions represented by the ab-
stract action ¯ai = π(φB(si)) in the state si of instance P.
Since the abstract actions in AF are assumed to be sound,
there must be one such concrete action ai over any reach-
able state si of any problem P where ¯ai is applicable. Such
concrete action, however, is not necessarily unique. The tra-
jectories s0, . . . , sn induced by the policy π in P are such
that ai ∈π(φB(si)), si+1 = f(ai, si) for i < n, and sn
is the ﬁrst state in the sequence where the goal of P is true,
π(φB(sn)) = ⊥, or an ̸∈A(sn).
Example. For the generalized problem Qclear with features
F = {H, n(x)}, and actions (1) and (2), the following policy,
expressed in compact form in terms of two rules, is a solution:
¬H, n(x) > 0 ⇒¯a ,
H, n(x) > 0 ⇒¯a′ .
(3)
The policy picks blocks above x and puts them aside (not
above x) until n(x) becomes zero.

5
Computation
We focus next on the computation of general policies. We
proceed in two steps. First, we map the generalized prob-
lem Q given features F
=
⟨B, N⟩and a set AF of
sound actions into a numerical non-deterministic problem
QF . While numerical planning problems can be undecid-
able [Helmert, 2002], these numerical problems are sim-
pler and correspond to the so-called qualitative numerical
problems (QNPs) whose solutions can be obtained using
standard, boolean FOND planners [Srivastava et al., 2011b;
Bonet et al., 2017].
5.1
Feature Projection QF
For deﬁning the ﬁrst reduction, we assume a set AF of sound
abstract actions and formulas IF and GF , deﬁned over the
atoms p for p ∈B and n = 0 for n ∈N, that provide a sound
approximation of the initial and goal states of the instances in
Q. For this, it must be the case that for any instance P in Q:
a) the truth valuation φB(s) for the initial state s of P satisﬁes
IF , and b) the reachable states s in P with a truth valuation
φB(s) that satisﬁes GF are goal states of P.
Deﬁnition 7. For a given set of sound abstract actions AF ,
and sound initial and goal formulas IF and GF for Q, the
projection QF = ⟨VF , IF , GF , AF ⟩of Q is a numerical, non-
deterministic planning problem with actions AF , initial and
goal situations IF and GF , and state variables VF = F.
The states in a projection QF are valuations ¯s over the fea-
tures F that in QF , like in abstract actions, represent state
variables and not functions. The possible initial states are
the valuations that satisfy IF , the goal states are the ones that
satisfy GF , and the actions are the abstract actions in AF .
Solutions to a projection QF are partial policies π that map
boolean valuations over F into actions in AF such that all
the state trajectories induced by π in QF are goal reaching.
A state trajectory ¯s0, . . . , ¯sn is induced by π in QF if ¯s0 is
a state that satisﬁes IF , ¯ai = π(¯si), ¯si+1 ∈¯F(¯ai, ¯si) for
i < n, and ¯sn is the ﬁrst state in the sequence where GF
is true, π(¯sn) is not deﬁned, or ¯an is not applicable in ¯sn.
¯F(·, ·) is a non-deterministic transition function deﬁned by
the actions in AF in the usual way.
The soundness of IF ,
GF , and AF imply the soundness of the projection QF :
Theorem 8. If AF is a set of sound abstract actions for the
features F, and the formulas IF and GF are sound for Q,
then a solution π for QF is also a solution for Q.
To see why this results holds, notice that if ¯ai is an abstract
action applicable in ¯si and s, where s is a state for some in-
stance P in Q, then there is at least one concrete action ai
in P that is represented by ¯ai in s. Also, for every state tra-
jectory s0, . . . , sn induced by the policy π on P, there is one
abstract state trajectory ¯s0, . . . , ¯sn induced by π in QF that
tracks the values of the features, i.e. where ¯si = φF (si) for
i = 0, . . . , n, as a result of the soundness of AF and the def-
inition of IF . Since the latter trajectories are goal reaching,
the former must be too since GF is sound.
The projections QF are sound but not complete.
The
incompleteness is the result of the abstraction (non-
deterministic feature increments and decrements), and the
choice of AF , IF , and GF that are only assumed to be sound.
Example. Let us consider the features F = {H, n(x)}, the
set of abstract actions AF = {¯a, ¯a′} given by (1) and (2),
IF = {¬H, n(x) > 0}, and GF = {n(x) = 0}. The policy
given by (3) solves the projection QF = ⟨VF , IF , GF , AF ⟩
of Qclear, and hence, by Theorem 8, also Qclear.
5.2
Boolean Projection and FOND Problem Q+
F
The second piece of the computational model is the reduc-
tion of the projection QF into a standard (boolean) fully
observable non-deterministic (FOND) problem.
For this
we exploit a reduction from qualitative numerical plan-
ning problems (QNPs) into FOND [Srivastava et al., 2011b;
Bonet et al., 2017].
This reduction replaces the numerical
variables n by propositional symbols named “n = 0” that
are meant to be true when the numerical variable n has value
zero. The negation of the symbol “n = 0” is denoted as
“n > 0”.
Deﬁnition 9. Let Q be a generalized problem and QF be a
projection of Q for F = ⟨B, N⟩. The boolean projection
Q′
F associated with QF is the FOND problem obtained from
QF by replacing 1) the numerical variables n ∈N by the
symbols n = 0, 2) ﬁrst-order literals n = 0 by propositional
literals n = 0, 3) effects n↑by deterministic effects n > 0,
and 4) effects n↓by non-deterministic effects n > 0 | n = 0.
The boolean projection Q′
F is a FOND problem but
neither the strong or strong cyclic solutions of Q′
F
[Cimatti et al., 2003] capture the solutions of the numerical
problem QF . The reason is that the non-deterministic effects
n > 0 | n = 0 in Q′
F are neither fair, as assumed in strong
cyclic solutions, nor adversarial, as assumed in strong so-
lutions. They are conditionally fair, meaning that from any
time point on, inﬁnite occurrences of effects n > 0 | n = 0
(decrements) imply the eventual outcome n = 0, on the con-
dition that from that point on, no action with effect n > 0
(increment) occurs.
The policies of the boolean FOND problem Q′
F that cap-
ture the policies of the numerical problem QF are the strong
cyclic solutions that terminate [Srivastava et al., 2011b]. We
call them the qualitative solutions of Q′
F and deﬁne them
equivalently as:
Deﬁnition 10. A qualitative solution of the FOND Q′
F =
⟨V ′
F , I′
F , G′
F , A′
F ⟩is a partial mapping π from boolean fea-
ture valuations into actions in A′
F such that the state-action
trajectories induced by π over Q′
F that are conditionally fair
are all goal reaching.
A state-action trajectory s′
0, a′
0, s′
1, . . . over Q′
F is not con-
ditionally fair iff a) it is inﬁnite, b) after a certain time step
i, it contains inﬁnite actions with effects n > 0 | n = 0 and
no action with effect n > 0, and c) there is no time step after
i where n = 0. The qualitative solutions of Q′
F capture the
solutions of the numerical projection QF exactly:
Theorem 11. π is a qualitative solution of the boolean
FOND Q′
F iff π is a solution of the numerical projection QF .
This is because for every trajectory s0, s1, . . . induced by
policy π over the numerical problem QF , there is a trajectory
s′
0, s′
1, . . . induced by π over the boolean problem Q′
F , and
vice versa, where s′
i is the boolean projection of the state si;

namely, p is true in s′
i iff p is true in si, and n = 0 is true
(resp. false) in s′
i iff n has value (resp. greater than) 0 in si.
We say that Q+
F is a qualitative FOND associated with the
boolean projection Q′
F if the strong cyclic solutions π of Q+
F
represent qualitative solutions of Q′
F ; i.e., strong cyclic solu-
tions of Q′
F that terminate [Srivastava et al., 2011b]. Under
some conditions, roughly, that variables that are decreased by
some action are not increased by other actions, Q+
F can be set
to Q′
F itself. In other cases, a suitable translation is needed
[Bonet et al., 2017]. Provided a sound translation,3 solutions
to a generalized problem Q can be computed from Q+
F using
off-the-shelf FOND planners:4
Theorem 12. Let QF be a feature projection of a general-
ized problem Q, and let Q+
F be a qualitative FOND problem
associated with the boolean projection Q′
F . The strong cyclic
solutions of Q+
F are solutions of the generalized problem Q.
This is a soundness result. Completeness is lost already in
the reduction from Q to QF as discussed above.
Example. For Qclear and the projection QF above with F =
{H, n(x)}, the boolean projection Q′
F = ⟨V ′
F , I′
F , G′
F , A′
F ⟩
has boolean variables V ′
F = {H, n(x) = 0}, initial and goal
formulas I′
F = {¬H, n(x) > 0} and G′
F = {n(x) = 0},
and actions A′
F
= {¯a′
1, ¯a′
2} where ¯a′
1 = ⟨¬H, n(x) >
0; H, n(x) > 0 | n(x) = 0⟩and ¯a′
2 = ⟨H; ¬H⟩. Since there
are no actions in QF that increment the numerical variable
n(x), Q+
F is Q′
F and hence, by Theorem 12, the strong cyclic
solutions to Q′
F are solutions to Qclear. The policy shown
in (3) was computed from Q′
F by the FOND planner MyND
[Mattm¨uller et al., 2010] in 58 milliseconds.
6
Examples and Experiments
We illustrate the representation changes and the resulting
methods for computing policies in four problems. Experi-
ments were done on an Intel i5-4670 CPU with 8Gb of RAM.
6.1
Moving in Rectangular Grids
The generalized problem Qmove involves an agent that moves
in an arbitrary n × m grid. The instances P are represented
with atoms at(x, y) and actions Move(x, y, x′, y′), and have
goals of the form at(x∗, y∗). A general policy for Qmove can
be obtained by introducing the features ∆X = |x∗−xs| and
∆Y = |y∗−ys| where at(xs, ys) is true in the state s. A
projection QF of Qmove is obtained from this set of features
F, the goal formula GF = {∆X = 0, ∆Y = 0}, and the
initial DNF formula IF with four terms corresponding to the
four truth valuations of the atoms ∆X = 0 and ∆Y = 0. The
set AF of abstract actions
– Move-in-row = ⟨∆X > 0; ∆X↓⟩,
– Move-in-column = ⟨∆Y > 0; ∆Y ↓⟩
3 The translation by Bonet et al. [2017] is actually not sound in
general as claimed. We’ll report the ﬁx elsewhere.
4For this, the formulas IF and GF must be expressed in DNF.
Compiling them into conjunctions of literals, as expected by FOND
planners, is direct using extra atoms.
is sound and captures the actions that move the agent toward
the target horizontally and vertically. AF is not complete as
it is missing the two abstract actions for moving away from
the target. The boolean projection Q′
F is QF with the atoms
∆X = 0 and ∆Y = 0, and their negations, interpreted as
propositional literals, and the two actions transformed as:
– Move-in-row′ = ⟨∆X > 0; ∆X = 0 | ∆X > 0⟩,
– Move-in-column′ = ⟨∆Y > 0; ∆Y = 0 | ∆Y > 0⟩.
The resulting FOND problem Q+
F is equal to Q′
F . The MyND
planner yields the policy below in 54 milliseconds, which
from Theorem 12, is a solution of Qmove:
– ∆X > 0, ∆Y > 0 ⇒Move-in-row′,
– ∆X = 0, ∆Y > 0 ⇒Move-in-column′.
6.2
Sliding Puzzles
We consider next the generalized problem Qslide where a
designated tile t∗must be moved to a target location (x∗
t , y∗
t )
in a sliding puzzle. The STRIPS encoding of an instance P
contains atoms at(t, x, y) and atB(x, y) for the location of
tiles and the “blank”, and actions Move(t, x, y, x′, y′) for ex-
changing the location of tile t and the blank if in adjacent
cells. For solving Qslide, we consider two numerical fea-
tures: the Manhattan distance ∆t from the current location of
the target tile to its target location, and the minimal total dis-
tance ∆b that the blank must traverse without going through
the current target location so that that target tile can be moved
and decrement the value of ∆t.
The feature projection QF has goal formula GF = {∆t =
0}, initial formula IF given by the DNF with four terms cor-
responding to the four truth valuations of the atoms ∆t = 0
and ∆b = 0, and the two abstract actions
– Move-blank = ⟨∆b > 0; ∆b↓⟩,
– Move-tile = ⟨∆b = 0, ∆t > 0; ∆t↓, ∆b↑⟩.
The boolean projection Q′
F is QF with the atoms ∆t = 0
and ∆b = 0, and their negations, interpreted as propositional
literals, and the two actions transformed as:
– Move-blank′ : ⟨∆b > 0; ∆b > 0 | ∆b = 0⟩,
– Move-tile′ : ⟨∆b = 0, ∆t > 0; ∆b > 0, ∆t > 0 | ∆t = 0⟩.
As before, Q+
F is equal to Q′
F because the only action that
increments a variable, ∆b, cannot be used until ∆b = 0.
MyND solves Q+
F in 65 milliseconds, producing the policy
below which by Theorem 12 solves the generalized problem
Qmove:
– ∆b > 0, ∆t > 0 ⇒Move-blank′,
– ∆b = 0, ∆t > 0 ⇒Move-tile′.
6.3
Blocksworld: Achieving on(x, y)
The problem Qon is about achieving goals of the form
on(x, y) in Blocksworld instances where for simplicity, the
gripper is initially empty, and the blocks x and y are in differ-
ent towers with blocks above them. We use a set of features
F given by n(x) and n(y) for the number of blocks above x
and y, booleans X and H that are true when the gripper is
holding x or another block, and on(x, y) that is true when x

is on y.
As before, we include a sound but incomplete set
of actions AF needed to solve Qon where E abbreviates the
conjunction ¬X and ¬H:
– Pick-x = ⟨E, n(x) = 0; X⟩,
– Pick-above-x = ⟨E, n(x) > 0; H, n(x)↓⟩,
– Pick-above-y = ⟨E, n(y) > 0; H, n(y)↓⟩,
– Put-x-on-y = ⟨X, n(y) = 0; ¬X, on(x, y), n(y)↑⟩,
– Put-other-aside = ⟨H; ¬H⟩.
The projected problem QF has this set of actions AF , IF =
{n(x) > 0, n(y) > 0, E, ¬on(x, y)}, and GF = {on(x, y)}.
The projection Q′
F is QF but with the propositional reading
of the atoms n(·) = 0 and their negations, and actions A′
F :
– Pick-x′ = ⟨E, n(x) = 0; X⟩,
– Pick-above-x′ = ⟨E, n(x) = 0; H, n(x) > 0 | n(x) = 0⟩,
– Pick-above-y′ = ⟨E, n(y) = 0; H, n(y) > 0 | n(y) = 0⟩,
– Put-x-on-y′ = ⟨X, n(y) > 0; ¬X, on(x, y), n(y) > 0⟩
– Put-other-aside′ = ⟨H; ¬H⟩.
Since the effects that increment a variable also achieve the
goal, the qualitative problem Q+
F is equal to Q′
F . The planner
MyND over Q+
F yields the policy π below in 70 milliseconds,
that solves Q+
F and hence Qon. The negated goal condition
¬on(x, y) is part of the following rules but it is for reasons of
clarity:
– E, n(x) > 0, n(y) > 0 ⇒Pick-above-x′,
– H, ¬X, n(x) > 0, n(y) > 0 ⇒Put-other-aside′,
– H, ¬X, n(x) = 0, n(y) > 0 ⇒Put-other-aside′,
– E, n(x) = 0, n(y) > 0 ⇒Pick-above-y′,
– H, ¬X, n(x) = 0, n(y) = 0 ⇒Put-other-aside′,
– E, n(x) = 0, n(y) = 0 ⇒Pick-above-x′,
– X, ¬H, n(x) = 0, n(y) = 0 ⇒Put-x-on-y′.
6.4
Blocksworld: Building a Tower
We consider a ﬁnal generalized blocks problem, Qtower,
where the task is building a tower with all the blocks. For this,
we consider the feature set F ′ and the set of abstract actions
AF ′ above (end of Sect. 3), with IF ′ = {¬X, ¬H, Z, n(x) >
0, m(x) > 0} and GF ′ = {¬X, ¬H, m(x) = 0}. For space
reasons we do not show the projections QF ′ and Q′
F ′, or the
problem Q+
F ′ fed to the planner. The resulting policy
– ¬X, ¬H, m(x) > 0 ⇒Pick-other,
– ¬X, H, m(x) > 0 ⇒Put-above-x,
– ¬X, H, m(x) = 0 ⇒Put-above-x.
is
obtained
with
the
FOND-SAT-based
planner
[Geffner and Geffner, 2018]
in
284
milliseconds
(the
FOND planner MyND produces a buggy plan in this case).
Interestingly, the addition of the atom ¬Z to GF yields a
very different policy that builds a single tower but with x at
the bottom.
7
Discussion
Arbitrary Goals, Concepts, Indexicals, and Memory.
Most of the examples above deal with instances involv-
ing atomic goals (except Qtower).
The deﬁnition of a
generalized problem that would yield a policy for solv-
ing any Blocksworld instance is more challenging. Induc-
tive, as opposed to model-based approaches, for obtaining
such policies have been reported [Mart´ın and Geffner, 2004;
Fern et al., 2006]. These approaches learn generalized poli-
cies from sampled instances and their plans.
They do
not learn boolean and numerical features but unary pred-
icates or concepts like “the clear block that is above x”,
yet features, concepts, and indexical or deictic representa-
tions [Chapman, 1989; Ballard et al., 1997] are closely re-
lated to each other. The execution of general policies re-
quires tracking a ﬁxed number of features, and hence con-
stant memory, independent of the instance size, that is given
by the number of features. This is relevant from a cognitive
point view where short term memory is bounded and small
[Ballard et al., 1995].
General Policy Size, Polynomial Features, and Width. The
numerical feature h∗that measures the optimal distance to
the goal can be used in the policy πGen given by the rule
h∗> 0 ⇒MoveT oGoal for solving any problem. Here
MoveT oGoal is the abstract action ¯a = ⟨h∗> 0; h∗↓⟩that is
sound and represents any concrete optimal action. The prob-
lem with the feature h∗is that its computation is intractable
in general, thus it is reasonable to impose the requirement
that features should be computable in (low) polynomial time.
Interestingly, however, instances over many of the standard
classical domains featuring atomic goals have a bounded and
small width, which implies that they can be solved optimally
in low polynomial time [Lipovetzky and Geffner, 2012]. This
means that the general policy πGen is not useless after all, as
it solves all such instances in polynomial time. The general
policy π computed by FOND planners above, however, in-
volves a ﬁxed set of boolean variables that can be tracked in
time that is constant and does not depend on the instance size.
Deep Learning of Generalized Policies,
and Chal-
lenge.
Deep
learning
methods
have
been
recently
used
for
learning
generalized
policies
in
domains
like Sokoban [Groshev et al., 2017] and 3D navigation
[Mirowski et al., 2016].
Deep learning methods however
learn functions from inputs of a ﬁxed size. Extensions for
dealing with images or strings of arbitrary size have been
developed but images and strings have a simple 2D or linear
structure. The structure of relational representations is not
so uniform and this is probably one of the main reasons that
we have not yet seen deep (reinforcement) learning methods
being used to solve arbitrary instances of the blocks world.
Deep learning methods are good for learning features but in
order to be applicable in such domains, they need the inputs
expressed in terms of a ﬁxed number of features as well,
such as those considered in this work. The open challenge is
to learn such features from data. The relevance of this work
to learning is that it makes precise what needs to be learned.
A crisp requirement is that the set of features F to be learned

for a generalized problem Q should support a sound set of
actions AF sufﬁcient for solving the problem.
8
Summary
We have extended the standard semantic formulation of gen-
eralized planning to domains with instances that do not have
actions in common by introducing abstract actions: actions
that operate on the common pool of features, and whose
soundness and completeness can be determined.
General
plans map features into abstract actions, which if sound, can
always be instantiated with a concrete action. By a series
of reductions, we have also shown how to obtain such poli-
cies using off-the-shelf FOND planners. The work relates to
a number of concepts and threads in AI, and raises a num-
ber of crisp challenges, including the automatic discovery of
the boolean and integer features that support general plans in
relational domains.
