arXiv:1401.5980v1  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2014
Reasoning about Meaning in Natural Language
with Compact Closed Categories
and Frobenius Algebras ∗
Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, Stephen Pulman, and Bob Coecke
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QD

Abstract
Compact closed categories have found applications in modeling quantum information pro-
tocols by Abramsky-Coecke. They also provide semantics for Lambek’s pregroup algebras,
applied to formalizing the grammatical structure of natural language, and are implicit in
a distributional model of word meaning based on vector spaces. Speciﬁcally, in previous
work Coecke-Clark-Sadrzadeh used the product category of pregroups with vector spaces
and provided a distributional model of meaning for sentences. We recast this theory in terms
of strongly monoidal functors and advance it via Frobenius algebras over vector spaces. The
former are used to formalize topological quantum ﬁeld theories by Atiyah and Baez-Dolan,
and the latter are used to model classical data in quantum protocols by Coecke-Pavlovic-
Vicary. The Frobenius algebras enable us to work in a single space in which meanings of
words, phrases, and sentences of any structure live. Hence we can compare meanings of
diﬀerent language constructs and enhance the applicability of the theory. We report on
experimental results on a number of language tasks and verify the theoretical predictions.
1
Introduction
Compact closed categories were ﬁrst introduced by Kelly [21] in early 1970’s. Some thirty years
later they found applications in quantum mechanics [1], whereby the vector space foundations
of quantum mechanics were recasted in a higher order language and quantum protocols such
as teleportation found succinct conceptual proofs.
Compact closed categories are complete
with regard to a pictorial calculus
[21, 38]; this calculus is used to depict and reason about
information ﬂows in entangled quantum states modeled in tensor spaces, the phenomena that
were considered to be mysteries of quantum mechanics and the Achilles heel of quantum logic
[5]. The pictorial calculus revealed the multi-linear algebraic level needed for proving quantum
information protocols and simpliﬁed the reasoning thereof to a great extent, by hiding the
underlying additive vector space structure.
Most quantum protocols rely on classical, as well as quantum, data ﬂow. In the work of
[1], this classical data ﬂow was modeled using bi-products deﬁned over a compact closed cate-
gory. However, the pictorial calculus could not extend well to bi-products, and their categorical
∗To appear in Chubb, J., Eskandarian, A. and Harizanov, V., editors, Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quan-
tum Computing and Information (2014), Cambridge University Press. Support by EPSRC grant EP/F042728/1
is acknowledged by the ﬁrst two authors.
1

axiomatization was not as clear as the built-in monoidal tensor of the category. Later, Frobe-
nius algebras, originally used in group theory [14] and later widely applied to other ﬁelds of
mathematics and physics such as topological quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT) [2, 24, 3], proved
useful. It turned out that the operations of such algebras on vector spaces with orthonormal
basis correspond to a uniform copying and deleting of the basis, a property that only holds for,
hence can be used to axiomatize, classical states [9].
Compact closed categories have also found applications in two completely orthogonal areas
of computational linguistics: formalizing grammar and reasoning about lexical meanings of
words. The former application is through Lambek’s pregroup grammars [26], which are compact
closed categories [33] and have been applied to formalizing grammars of a wide range of natural
languages, for instance see [27]. The other application domain, referred to as distributional
models of meaning, formalizes meanings of words regardless of their grammatical roles and via
the context of their occurrence [13]. These models consist of vector spaces whose basis are sets
of context words and whose vectors represent meanings of target words. Distributional models
have been widely studied and successfully applied to a variety of language tasks [37, 28, 30] and
in particular to automatic word-synonymy detection [11].
Whereas the type-logical approaches to language do not provide a convincing model of word
meaning, the distributional models do not scale to meanings of phrases and sentences. The long
standing challenge of combining these two models was addressed in previous work [6, 10, 34].
The solution was based on a cartesian product of the pregroup category and the category of
ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces. The theoretical predictions of the model were made concrete in
[15], then implemented and veriﬁed in [16]. In this article, we ﬁrst recast the theoretical setting
of [10] using a succinct functorial passage from a free pregroup of basic types to the category of
ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces. Then, we further advance the theory and show how Frobenius
algebras over vector spaces provide solutions for the problem of the concrete construction of
linear maps for predicative words with complex types. As a result, we are able to compare
meanings of phrases and sentences with diﬀerent structures, and moreover compare these with
lexical vectors of words. This enhances the domain of application of our model: we show how
the theoretical predictions of the model, and in particular the Frobenius algebraic construc-
tions, can be empirically veriﬁed by performing three experiments: the disambiguation task of
[16], comparing meanings of transitive and intransitive sentences, and a new term/deﬁnition
classiﬁcation task.
2
Recalling Some Categorical Deﬁnitions
We start by recalling some deﬁnitions. A monoidal category [21] is a category C with a monoidal
tensor ⊗, which is associative. That is, for all objects A, B, C ∈C, we have that A ⊗(B ⊗C) ∼=
(A ⊗B) ⊗C. Moreover there exists an object I ∈C, which serves as the unit of the tensor, that
is, A ⊗I ∼= A ∼= I ⊗A. These isomorphisms need to satisfy the usual coherence conditions.
A monoidal category is called symmetric whenever we have A⊗B ∼= B ⊗A, again satisfying
the standard conditions. Furthermore, a monoidal category is compact closed whenever any
object A ∈C has a left Al and a right adjoint Ar, that is, the following morphisms exist:
ǫr
A : A ⊗Ar →I
ηr
A : I →Ar ⊗A
ǫl
A : Al ⊗A →I
ηl
A : I →A ⊗Al
and they satisfy the following yanking conditions:
(1A ⊗ǫl
A) ◦(ηl
A ⊗1A) = 1A
(ǫr
A ⊗1A) ◦(1A ⊗ηr
A) = 1A
(ǫl
A ⊗1Al) ◦(1Al ⊗ηl
A) = 1Al
(1Ar ⊗ǫr
A) ◦(ηr
A ⊗1Ar) = 1Ar
2

In a symmetric compact closed category, the left and right adjoints collapse into one, that is we
have A∗:= Al = Ar and the above four equalities collapse to the following two:
(ǫA ⊗1A) ◦(1A ⊗ηA) = 1A
(1A∗⊗ǫA) ◦(ηA ⊗1A∗) = 1A∗
A functor F from a monoidal category C to a monoidal category D is a monoidal functor
[23], whenever F is a functor and moreover there exists a morphism I →F(I) and the following
is a natural transformation:
F(A) ⊗F(B) →F(A ⊗B)
satisfying the corresponding coherence conditions.
A monoidal functor is strongly monoidal
[23], whenever the above morphism and natural transformation are invertible.
A strongly monoidal functor on two compact closed categories C and D preserves the compact
structure, that is F(Al) = F(A)l and F(Ar) = F(A)r. To see this, consider the case of the left
adjoint, for which we have the following two compositions of morphisms:
F(Al) ⊗F(A) →F(Al ⊗A) →F(I) →I
I →F(I) →F(A ⊗Al) →F(A) ⊗F(Al)
From these, and since adjoints are unique, it follows that F(Al) must be left adjoint to F(A).
The case for the right adjoint is similar.
An example of a compact closed category is a Lambek pregroup [26], denoted by (P, ≤
, 1, ·, (−)l, (−)r); we refer to this category by Preg. This is a partially ordered monoid where
each element of the partial order has a left and a right adjoint, that is we have the following
inequalities, which are the partial order versions of the yanking conditions of a compact closed
category:
p · pr ≤1 ≤pr · p
pl · p ≤1 ≤p · pl
An example of a pregroup is the set of all unbounded monotone functions on integers, with
function composition as the monoidal tensor and the identity function as its unit. The left and
right adjoints are deﬁned using the standard deﬁnition of adjoints and in terms of the min and
max operations on the integers as follows, for f ∈ZZ and m, n ∈Z:
f r(n) =
_
{m ∈Z | f(m) ≤n}
f l(n) =
^
{m ∈Z | n ≤f(m)}
An example of a symmetric compact closed category is the category of ﬁnite dimensional
vector spaces and linear maps over a ﬁeld (which for our purposes we take to be the set of real
numbers R); we refer to this category by FVect. The monoidal tensor is the tensor product
of vector spaces whose unit is the ﬁeld. The adjoint of each vector space is its dual, which,
by ﬁxing a basis {ri}i, becomes isomorphic to the vector space itself, that is we have A∗∼= A
(note that this isomorphism is not natural). The ǫ and η maps, given by the inner product and
maximally entangled states or Bell pairs, are deﬁned as follows:
ǫA : A ⊗A →R
given by
X
ij
cij ri ⊗rj 7→
X
ij
cij⟨ri | rj⟩
ηA : R →A ⊗A
given by
1 7→
X
i
ri ⊗ri
An example of a monoidal functor is Atiyah’s deﬁnition of a topological quantum ﬁeld theory
(TQFT). This is a representation of category of manifolds and cobordisms Cob (representing,
respectively possible choices of space and spacetime) over the category of ﬁnite dimensional
vector spaces FVect. This representation is formalized using a strongly monoidal functor from
Cob to FVect by Baez and Dylon [3], and assigns a vector space of states to each manifold
and a linear operation to each cobordism.
3

3
Category Theory in Linguistics
We brieﬂy review two orthogonal models of meaning in computational linguistics: pregroup
grammars and distributional models of meaning, and we show how one can interpret the former
in the latter using a strongly monoidal functor.
3.1
Type-Logical Pregroup Grammars
Consider the simple grammar generated by the following set of rules:
S →Np V p
V p →tV Np | N
Np →Adj Np | N
itV →smile
tV →build
Adj →strong
N →man, woman, house
The above rules are referred to as generative rules. The rules on the left describe the formation of
a grammatical sentence S in terms of other non-terminals. According to these rules, a sentence
is a noun phrase Np followed by a verb phrase V p, where a verb phrase itself is a transitive verb
tV followed either by a Np or a noun N, and a noun phrase is an adjective Adj followed either
by a Np or a noun N. The rules on the right instantiate all but one (S) of the non-terminals to
terminals. According to these, ‘smile’ is an intransitive verb, ‘build’ is a transitive verb, ‘strong’
is an adjective, and ‘man’, ‘woman’, and ‘house’ are nouns. We treat these words as lemmas
and take freedom in conjugating them in our example sentences.
In a predicative approach, the non-terminals of the above grammar (except for S) are
interpreted as unary or binary predicates to produce meaning for phrases and sentences. There
are various options when interpreting these non-terminals: for instance, according to the ﬁrst
rule, we can either interpret a verb phrase as a binary predicate that inputs a noun phrase
and outputs a sentence, or we can interpret a noun phrase as a binary predicate that inputs
a verb phrase and outputs a sentence. We adhere to the more popular (among computational
linguistics) verb-centric view and follow the former option. The types of the resulting predicates,
obtained by recursively unfolding the rules, form an algebra of types, referred to as a type-logical
grammar.
A pregroup type-logical grammar, or a pregroup grammar for short, is the pregroup freely
generated over a set of basic types which, for the purpose of this paper, we take to be {n, s}.
We refer to this free pregroup grammar by PregF . Here, n is the type representing a noun
phrase and s is the type representing a sentence. The complex types of this pregroup represent
the predicates. For instance, nr · s is the type of an intransitive verb, interpreted as a unary
predicate that inputs a noun phrase and outputs a sentence. Explicit in this type is also the
fact that the intransitive verb has to be on the right hand side of the noun phrase. This fact is
succinctly expressed by the adjoint r of the type n. Similarly, nr ·s·nl is the type of a transitive
verb, which is a binary predicate that inputs two noun phrases, has to be to the right of one
and to the left of the other, and outputs a sentence. Finally, n · nl is the type of an adjective
in attributive position, a unary predicate that inputs a noun phrase and outputs another noun
phrase; furthermore, it has to be to the left of its input noun phrase. These types are then
assigned to the vocabulary of a language, that is to the non-terminals of the generative rules,
via a relation referred to as a type dictionary. Our example type dictionary is as follows:
man
woman
houses
strong
smiled
built
n
n
n
n · nl
nr · s
nr · s · nl
4

Every sequence of words w1w2 · · · wn from the vocabulary has an associated type reduction,
to which we refer to by αw1w1···wn. This type reduction represents the grammatical structure
of the sequence. In a pregroup grammar, a type reduction is the result of applying the partial
order, monoid, and adjunction axioms to the multiplication of the types of the words of the
sequence. For example, the type reduction αstrong house associated to the sequence ‘strong
house’ is computed by multiplying the types of ‘strong’ and ‘house’, that is n · nl · n, then
applying to it the adjunction and monoid axioms, hence obtaining n · nl · n ≤n. Similarly, the
type reduction of the sentence ‘strong man built houses’ is as follows:
αstrong man built houses
:
n · nl · n · nr · s · nl · n ≤n · nr · s ≤s
In categorical terms, the type reduction is a morphism of the category PregF , denoted by
tensors and compositions of the ǫ and identity maps. For instance, the morphisms corresponding
to the above adjective-noun phrase and sentence are as follows:
strong man
strong man built houses
1n ⊗ǫl
n
(ǫr
n ⊗1s) ◦(1n ⊗ǫl
n ⊗1nr·s ⊗ǫl
n)
The generative rules formalize the grammar of a natural language and their consequent
type-logical grammars provide a predicative interpretation for the words with complex types.
However, all the words with the same type have the same interpretation, and even worse, words
with basic types are only interpreted as atomic symbols. In the next section, we will see how
distributional models of meaning address this problem.
3.2
Distributional Models of Word Meaning
Meanings of some words can be determined by their denotations. For instance, meaning of
the word ‘house’ can be the set of all houses or their images; and the answer to the question
‘what is a house?’ can be provided by pointing to a house. Matters get complicated when it
comes to words with complex types such as adjectives and verbs. It is not so clear what is the
denotation of the adjective ‘strong’ or the verb ‘build’. The problem is resolved by adhering to
a meaning-as-use model of meaning, whereby one can assign meaning to all words, regardless of
their grammatical type, according to the context in which they often appear. This context-based
approach to meaning is the main idea behind the distributional models of meaning.
First formalized by Firth in 1957 [13] and about half a century later implemented and applied
to word sense disambiguation by Sch¨utze [37], distributional models of meaning interpret words
as vectors in a highly dimensional (but ﬁnite) vector space with a ﬁxed orthonormal basis over
real numbers. A basis for this vector space is a set of target words, which in principle can be
the set of all lemmatized words of a corpus of documents or a dictionary. In practice, the basis
vectors are often restricted to the few thousands most occurring words of the corpus, or a set of
specialized words depending on the application domain, e.g. a music dictionary. Alternatively,
they can be topics obtained from a dimensionality reduction algorithm such as single value
decomposition (SVD). We refer to such a vector space with an orthonormal basis {wi}i, no
matter how it is built, as our basic distributional vector space W; and to FVect restricted to
tensor powers of W as FVectW.
In this model, to each word is associated a vector, which serves as the meaning of the word.
The weights of this vector are obtained by counting how many times the word has appeared
‘close’ to a basis word, where ‘close’ is a window of n (usually equal to 5) words. This number is
5

usually normalized, often in the form of Tf-Idf values which show how important is a speciﬁc
basis word by taking into account not only the number of times it has occurred to the document,
but also the number of documents in which it appears in the corpus.
human
✲mortal
✻
      ✠
brick
     ✒
man
✁
✁
✁
✁✁✕
woman
✟
✟
✟
✟
✟
✟
✙
build
✘
✘
✘
✘
✘
✘
✾
house
Figure 1: A Toy Distributional Model of Meaning
As an example, consider the toy vector space of Figure 1. The set {human, mortal, brick}
is the basis of this vector space and the words ‘man’, ‘woman’, ‘house’ and ‘build’ each have
a vector assigned to them. The words that have often appeared in the same context have a
smaller angle between their vectors.
For instance, ‘house’ and ‘build’ often appear close to
‘brick’, whereas ‘man’ and ‘woman’ often appear close to ‘mortal’ and ‘human’. The cosine of
the angle between the word vectors has proved to be a good measure in predicting synonymy of
words [11]. Despite these good predictions, the distributional models of meaning cannot serve
as the deﬁnite models of natural language, as there is more to a language than the contexts of
its words and these models on their own do not scale up to the interpretations of phrases and
sentences. In the next section, we will see how a combination of type-logical and distributional
models overcome both of their corresponding shortcomings.
3.3
Quantizing the Grammar
We provide a mapping of the free pregroup grammar PregF to FVectW via a strongly monoidal
functor F. This functor assigns the basic vector space W to both of the basic types, that is, we
have:
F(n) = F(s) = W
By functoriality, the partial orders between the basic types (for example those presented in
[26]) are mapped to linear maps from W to W. The adjoints of basic types are also mapped
to W, since for x ∈{n, s} we have the following, motivated by the above mentioned fact that
W ∗∼= W:
F(xl) = F(xr) = F(x)
Since W ∗∗∼= W ∗∼= W, the iterated adjoint types are also mapped to W:
F(xll) = F(xrr) = F(x)
6

The complex types are mapped to tensor products of vector spaces, that is:
F(n · nl) = F(nr · s) = W ⊗W
F(nr · s · nl) = W ⊗W ⊗W
Similarly, the type reductions are mapped to the compositions of tensor products of identity
and ǫ maps of FVectW , for instance the type reduction of a transitive sentence is mapped as
follows:
F(αsbj verb obj) = F(ǫr
n ⊗1s ⊗ǫl
n) = ǫW ⊗1W ⊗ǫW : W ⊗(W ⊗W ⊗W) ⊗W −→W
Now we can use the deﬁnition of [10] to provide a meaning for phrases and sentences of our
grammar. The meaning of a sequence of words w1w2 · · · wn with type reduction αw1w2···wn is:
Deﬁnition(*)
F(αw1w2···wn) (−→
w1 ⊗−→
w2 ⊗· · · ⊗−→
wn)
As an example, take:
−−→
men =
X
i
cmen
i
−→
wi
−−−−→
houses =
X
k
chouses
k
−→
wk
built =
X
ijk
cbuilt
ijk (−→
wi ⊗−→
wj ⊗−→
wk)
Substituting these in Deﬁnition(*), we obtain the following for the meaning of the sentence
‘men built houses’:
F

ǫr
n ⊗1s ⊗ǫl
n
 −−→
men ⊗built ⊗−−−−→
houses

=
(ǫW ⊗1W ⊗ǫW )
−−→
men ⊗built ⊗−−−−→
houses

=
X
ijk
cbuilt
ijk ⟨−−→
men|−→
wi⟩⟨−→
wk|−−−−→
houses⟩−→
wj
This deﬁnition ensures that the interpretations of noun phrases and sentences of any gram-
matical structure, for instance intransitive or transitive, will be a vector in W, hence we can
measure the cosine of the angle between them and compute their synonymy. In order to de-
termine that this measure of synonymy provides good predictions, we need to run some exper-
iments. However, whereas we know very well how to build vectors in W for words with basic
types such as ‘man’ and ‘house’, our method further requires interpretations of words with
complex types to be in tensor spaces, and there is no known standard procedure to construct
these. In the next section we show how the notion of a Frobenius algebra over a vector space
can be of use in addressing this matter.
4
Frobenius Algebras
Frobenius algebras were originally introduced in 1903 by F. G. Frobenius in the context of
proving representation theorems for group theory [14]. Since then, they have found applications
in other ﬁelds of mathematics and physics, e.g. in topological quantum ﬁeld theories [24] and in
categorical quantum mechanics [9]. The general categorical deﬁnitions recalled below are due
to Carboni and Walters [7]. Their concrete instantiations to algebras over vector spaces were
developed in [9].
A Frobenius algebra over a symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I) is a tuple (F, σ, ι, µ, ζ),
where for an F object of C the triple (F, σ, ι) is an associative coalgebra, that is, the following
are morphisms of C, satisfying the coalgebraic associativity and unit conditions:
σ: F →F ⊗F
ι: F →I
7

The triple (F, µ, ζ) is an associative algebra, that is, the following are morphisms of C, satisfying
the algebraic associativity and unit conditions:
µ: F ⊗F →F
ζ : I →F
Moreover, the above σ and µ morphisms satisfy the following Frobenius condition:
(µ ⊗1F ) ◦(1F ⊗σ) = σ ◦µ = (1F ⊗µ) ◦(σ ⊗1F )
A Frobenius Algebra is commutative if it satisﬁes the following two conditions for δ : X⊗Y →
Y ⊗X, the symmetry morphism of (C, ⊗, I):
δ ◦σ = σ
µ ◦δ = µ
Finally, a Frobenius Algebra is isometric or special if it satisﬁes the following condition:
µ ◦σ = Id
In the category FVect, any vector space V with a ﬁxed basis {−→
vi }i has a commutative special
Frobenius algebra over it, explicitly given as follows:
σ :: −→
vi 7→−→
vi ⊗−→
vi
ι :: −→
vi 7→1
µ :: −→
vi ⊗−→
vi 7→−→
vi
ζ :: 1 7→−→
vi
In a Frobenius algebra over an orthonormal vector space, the coalgebra and algebra operations
relate to each other via the equation σ† = µ, where † is the adjoint, equal to the transpose for
vector spaces over reals.
In such Frobenius algebras, the operation σ corresponds to copying and its unit ι corresponds
to deleting of the vectors. They enable one to faithfully encode vectors of W into spaces with
higher tensor ranks, such as W ⊗W, W ⊗W ⊗W, · · · . In linear algebraic terms, for v ∈W, we
have that σ(v) is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are weights of v. The operation
µ is referred to as uncopying; it loses some information when encoding a higher rank tensor
into a lower rank space. In linear algebraic terms, for z ∈W ⊗W, we have that µ(z) is a
vector consisting only of the diagonal elements of z, hence losing the information encoded in
the non-diagonal part.
5
Pictorial Calculi
The framework of compact closed categories comes with a complete diagrammatic calculus that
allows convenient graphical representations of the derivations. We brieﬂy introduce the fragment
of this calculus that we are going to use in this paper. The objects of this fragment are the
tensors of multi-linear algebra; that is, a vector is a rank-1 tensor, a matrix is a rank-2 tensor,
and a 3d-array is a rank-3 tensor. Each tensor is represented by a triangle, whose rank can be
determined by its wires. Words are represented by tensors that correspond to their meaning:
subjects and objects are rank-1 tensors (vectors), adjectives and intransitive verbs are rank-2
tensors, and transitive verbs are rank-3 tensors. The ǫ maps are depicted as cups, whereas the
identity morphism is a vertical straight line. The tensor products of vectors are represented by
juxtaposing their corresponding triangles. For example, the meaning of a transitive sentence,
following Deﬁnition(*), is depicted as follows:
8

Men
built
houses
W
WWW
W
Computations with Frobenius algebras can also be represented within the more general
diagrammatic calculus of symmetric monoidal categories, referred to as string diagrams, ﬁrst
formalized in [20]. Speciﬁcally, the linear maps of the coalgebra and algebra are depicted by:
(σ, ι) =
(µ, ζ) =
The Frobenius condition is depicted by:
=
=
The commutativity conditions are shown as:
=
=
The isometry condition is depicted by:
=
Finally, the Frobenius conditions guarantee that any diagram depicting a Frobenius algebraic
computation can be reduced to a normal form that only depends on the number of input and
output wires of the nodes, provided that the diagram of computation is connected. This justiﬁes
depicting computations with Frobenius algebras as spiders, referring to the right hand side
diagram below:
...
=
· · ·
· · ·
...
For an informal introduction to compact closed categories, Frobenius algebras, and their
diagrammatic calculi, see [8].
6
Building Tensors for Words with Complex Types
The type-logical models of meaning treat words with complex types as predicates. In a matrix
calculus, predicates can be modeled as matrices (or equivalently, linear maps), over the semiring
of booleans. In vector spaces over reals, one can extend these 0/1 entries to real numbers and
9

model words with complex types as weighted predicates. These are predicates that not only
tell us which instantiations of their arguments are related to each other, but also that to what
extent these are related to each other. For instance, a transitive verb is a binary predicate that,
in the type-logical model, tells us which noun phrases are related to other noun phrases. In a
vector space model, the verb becomes a linear map that moreover tells us to what extent these
noun phrases are related to each other.
Building such linear maps from a corpus turns out to be a non-trivial task. In previous work
[15, 16] we argue that such a linear map can be constructed by taking the sum of the tensor
products of the vectors/linear maps of its arguments. For instance, the linear map representing
an n-ary predicate p with arguments a1 to an is P
i a1 ⊗· · · ⊗an, where aj is the vector/linear
map associated to the argument aj and the index i counts the number of times each word
aj has appeared in the corpus as the argument of p. Following this method, the linear maps
corresponding to the predicates of our simple grammar are as follows:
intransitive verb
transitive verb
adjective
P
i
−→
sbji
P
i
(−→
sbji ⊗−→
obji)
P
i −−−→
nouni
There is a problem: this method provides us with a linear map in a space whose tensor rank
is one less than the rank of the space needed by Deﬁnition(*). For instance, the linear map of
the transitive verb ends up being in W ⊗W, but we need a linear map in W ⊗W ⊗W. This
problem is overcome by using the operations of a Frobenius algebra over vector spaces. We
use the pictorial calculi of the compact closed categories and Frobenius algebras to depict the
resulting linear maps and sentence vectors.
6.1
Adjectives and Intransitive Verbs
The linear maps of adjectives and intransitive verbs are elements of W. In order to encode them
in W ⊗W, we use the Frobenius σ operation and obtain the following linear map:
For the intransitive verb, when substituted in Deﬁnition(*), that is, when applied to its subject,
the above will result in the left hand side vector below, which is then normalized to the right
hand side vector.
=
When an adjective is applied to a noun, the order of the above application is swapped: the
triangle of the adjective will change place with the triangle of the subject of the intransitive
verb.
6.2
Transitive Verbs
The linear map of a transitive verb is an element of W ⊗W; this has to be encoded in W ⊗W ⊗W.
We face a few options here, which geometrically speaking provide us with diﬀerent ways of
“diagonally” placing a plane into a cube.
10

CpSbj
The ﬁrst option is to copy the “row” dimension of the linear map corresponding to the
verb; this dimension encodes the information of the subjects of the verb from the corpus. In the
left hand side diagram below we see how σ transforms the verb in this way. Once substituted
in Deﬁnition(*), we obtain the diagram in the right hand side:
Verb:
Sentence:
In this case, the σ map transforms the matrix of the verb as follows:
σ ::
X
ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj)
7→
X
ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
ni ⊗−→
nj)
CpObj
Our other option is to copy the “column” dimension of the matrix, which encodes the
information about the objects of the verb from the corpus:
Verb:
Sentence:
Now the σ-map does the following transformation:
σ ::
X
ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj)
7→
X
ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj ⊗−→
nj)
The diagrams above simplify the calculations involved, since they suggest a closed form
formula for each case.
Taking as an example the diagram of the copy-subject method, we
see that: (a) the object interacts with the verb; (b) the result of this interaction serves as
input for the σ map; (c) one wire of the output of σ interacts with the subject, while the
other branch delivers the result.
Linear algebraically, this corresponds to the computation
σ(verb × −→
obj)T × −→
sbj, which expresses the fact that the meaning of a sentence is obtained by
ﬁrst applying the meaning of the verb to the meaning of the object, then applying the (σ version
of the) result to the meaning of the subject. This computation results in the Equation 1 below:
−−−−−−−−→
sbj verb obj = −→
sbj ⊙(verb × −→
obj)
(1)
This order of application is the exact same way formalized in the generative rules of the language.
On the contrary, the meaning of a transitive sentence for the copy-object results is given by
Equation 2 below, which expresses the fact that the meaning of a sentence is obtained by ﬁrst
applying the (transposed) meaning of the verb to the meaning of the subject and then applying
the result to the meaning of the object:
−−−−−−−−→
sbj verb obj = −→
obj ⊙(verb
T × −→
sbj)
(2)
Note that equipped with the above closed forms we do not need to create or manipulate
rank-3 tensors at any point of the computation, something that would cause high computational
overhead.
Purely syntactically speaking, in a pregroup grammar the order of application of a transitive
verb does not matter: it is applied to its subject and object in parallel.
Semantically, as
originated in the work of Montague [35], a transitive verb is ﬁrst applied to its object and
11

then to its subject. In the more modern approaches to semantics via logical grammars, this
order is some times based on the choice of the speciﬁc verb [19]. Our work in this paper is
more inline with the latter approach, where for the speciﬁc task of disambiguating the verbs of
our dataset, ﬁrst applying the verb to the subject then to the object seems to provide better
experimental results. According to our general theoretical setting, the linear map corresponding
to the transitive verb should be a rank-3 tensor, but at the moment, apart from work in progress
which tries to conjoin eﬀorts with Machine Learning to directly build these as rank-3 tensors, we
do not have the technology to do other than described in this paper. However, in the ideal case
that the linear maps of words are already in the spaces allocated to them by the theory, these
choices will not arise, as the compact nature of the matrix calculus implies that the application
can be done in parallel in all the cases that parallel applications are prescribed by the syntax.
From a linear-algebra perspective, fully populated rank-3 tensors for verbs satisfy the following
equality:
subj verb obj = (verb × −→
obj)T × −−→
subj = (verb
T × −−→
subj) × −→
obj
which shows that the order of application does not actually play a role.
MixCpDl
We can also use a mixture of σ and µ maps. There are three reasonable options
here, all of which start by applying two σ’s to the two wires of the linear map of the verb (that
is, one for each of the dimensions). Then one can either apply a ι to one of the copies of the ﬁrst
wire, or a ι to one of the copies of the second wire. These two options are depicted as follows:
The ﬁrst diagram has the same normal form as the copy-subject option, and the second one has
the same normal form as the copy-object option.
Finally, one can apply a µ to one wire from each of the copied wires of the verb, the result
of which is depicted in the following left hand side diagram. When substituted in Deﬁnition(*),
we obtain the following right hand side diagram for the meaning of the transitive sentence:
Verb:
Sentence:
The normal form of the diagram of the sentence is obtained by collapsing the three dots and
yanking the corresponding wires, resulting in the following diagram:
Linear algebraically, the spider form of the verb is equivalent to P
i(−−→
sbji⊙−−→
obji). A verb obtained
in this way will only relate the properties of its subjects and objects on identical bases and
there will be no interaction of properties across bases. For instance, for a certain verb v, this
construction will result in a vector that only encodes to what extent v has related subjects and
objects with property −→
w1, and has no information about to what extent v has related subjects
with property −→
w1 to objects with property −→
w2. The closed form of the above diagram is:
−→
sbj ⊙
  X
i
(−−→
sbji ⊙−−→
obji)

⊙−→
obj
12

6.3
Encoding the Existing Non-Predicative Models
Apart from the predicative way of encoding meanings of words with complex types, there exists
two other approaches in the literature, who simply work with the context vectors of such words
[29, 17]. These two approaches are representable in our setting using the Frobenius operations.
Multp
To represent the model of [29] in our setting, in which the meaning of a sentence
is simply the point-wise multiplication of the context vectors of the words, we start from the
context vector of the verb, denoted by −−→
verb, and apply three σ’s and then one µ to it. The result
is depicted in the left hand side diagram below; once this verb is substituted in Deﬁnition(*),
we obtain the right hand side diagram below as the meaning of a transitive sentence:
Verb:
Sentence:
The normal form of the diagram of the sentence and its closed linear algebraic form are as
follows:
=
−→
sbj ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−→
obj
Kron
In the model of [17], the tensor of a transitive sentence is calculated as the Kronecker
product of the context vector of the verb with itself, so we have verb = −−→
verb ⊗−−→
verb. To encode
this, we start from the Kronecker product of the context vector of the verb with itself, apply
one σ to each one of the vectors and then a µ to both of them jointly. The result is the following
left hand side verb, which when substituted in the equation of Deﬁnition(*) results in a normal
form (depicted in the right hand side below) very similar to the normal form of the Multp
model:
Verb:
Sentence:
Linear algebraically, the above normal form is equivalent to:
−→
sbj ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−→
obj
(3)
7
Experiments
The diﬀerent options presented in Section 6 and summarized in Table 1 provide us a number
of models for testing our setting. We train our vectors on the British National Corpus (BNC),
which has about six million sentences and one million words, classiﬁed into a hundred million
diﬀerent lexical tokens. We use the set of its 2000 most frequent lemmas as a basis of our basic
distributional vector space W. The weights of each vector are set to the ratio of the probability
of the context word given the target word to the probability of the context word overall. As
our similarity measure we use the cosine distance between the vectors.
13

Model
Description
CpSbj
Copy subject on relational matrices
CpObj
Copy object on relational matrices
MixCpDl
Diagonalize on relational matrices
Kron
Diagonalize on direct matrices
Multp
Multiplicative model
Table 1: The models.
7.1
Disambiguation
We ﬁrst test our models on a disambiguation task, which is an extension of Sch¨utze’s original
disambiguation task from words to sentences. A dataset for this task was originally developed
in [29] for intransitive sentences, and later extended to transitive sentences in [16]; we use the
latter. The goal is to assess how well a model can discriminate between the diﬀerent senses of an
ambiguous verb, given the context (subject and object) of that verb. The entries of this dataset
consist of a target verb, a subject, an object, and a landmark verb used for the comparison.
One such entry for example is, “write, pupil, name, spell”. A good model should be able to
understand that the sentence “pupil write name” is closer to the sentence “pupil spell name”
than, for example, to “pupil publish name”. On the other hand, given the context “writer,
book” these results should be reversed.
The evaluation of this experiment is performed by
calculating Spearman’s ρ, which measures the degree of correlation of the cosine distance with
the judgements of 25 human evaluators, who has been asked to assess the similarity of each pair
of sentences using a scale from 1 to 7. As our baseline we use a simple additive model (Addtv),
where the meaning of a transitive sentence is computed as the addition of the relevant context
vectors.
Results
The results of this experiment are shown in Table 2, indicating that the most suc-
cessful model for this task is the copy-object model. The better performance of this model
against the copy-subject approach provides us some insights about the role of subjects and
objects in disambiguating our verbs. By copying the dimension associated with the object, the
compression of the original sentence matrix, as this was calculated in [16], takes place along the
dimension of subjects (rows), meaning that the resulting vector will bring much more informa-
tion from the objects than the subjects (this is also suggested by Equation 2). Hence, the fact
that this vector performs better than the one of the copy-subject method provides an indication
that the object of some ambiguous verbs (which turns out to be the case for our dataset) can be
more important for disambiguating that verb than the subject. Intuitively, we can imagine that
the crucial factor to disambiguate between the verbs “write”, “publish” and “spell” is more the
object than the subject: a book or a paper can be both published and written, but a letter or
a shopping list can only be written. Similarly, a word can be spelled and written, but a book
can only be written. The subject in all these cases is not so important.
The copy-object model is followed closely by the (Kron) and the Multp models. The sim-
ilar performance of these two is not a surprise, given their almost identical nature. Finally, the
bad performance of the model (MixCpDl) that is obtained by the application of the uncopying
µ map conforms to the predictions of the theory, as these were expressed in Section 6.
7.2
Comparing Transitive and Intransitive Sentences
In this section we will examine the potential of the above approach in practice, in the context of
an experiment aiming to compare transitive and intransitive sentences. In order to do that, we
14

Model
High
Low
ρ
Addtv
0.90
0.90
0.050
Multp
0.67
0.60
0.163
MixCpDl
0.75
0.77
0.000
Kron
0.31
0.21
0.168
CpSbj
0.95
0.95
0.143
CpObj
0.89
0.90
0.172
UpperBound
4.80
2.49
0.620
Table 2: Disambiguation results. High and Low refer to average scores for high and low land-
marks, respectively. UpperBound refers to agreement between annotators.
use the dataset of the previous verb disambiguation task (see detailed description in Section 7.1)
to conduct the following simple experiment: We create intransitive versions of all the transitive
sentences from target verbs and their high and low landmarks by dropping the object; then, we
compare each transitive sentence coming from the target verbs with all the other intransitive
sentences, expecting that the highest similarity would come from its own intransitive version,
the next higher similarity would come from the intransitive version that uses the corresponding
high landmark verb, and so on. To present a concrete example, consider the entry “write, pupil,
name, spell, publish”. Our transitive sentence here is str = “pupil write name”; the intransitive
version of this is sin = “pupil write”. We also create intransitive versions using the high and the
low landmarks, getting shi = “pupil spell” and slo =“pupil publish”. If the similarity between
two sentences s1 and s2 is given by sim(s1, s2), we would expect that:
sim(str, sit) > sim(str, shi) > sim(str, slo) > sim(str, su)
where su represents an unrelated intransitive version coming from a target verb diﬀerent than
the one of str. The results of this experiment are shown in Table 3 below, for 100 target verbs.
Case
Errors
%
sim(str, shi) > sim(str, sit)
7 of 93
7.5
sim(str, slo) > sim(str, sit)
6 of 93
5.6
sim(str, su) > sim(str, sit)
36 of 9900
0.4
Table 3: Results of the comparison between transitive and intransitive sentences.
The outcome follows indeed our expectations for this task. We see, for example, that the
highest error rate comes from cases where the intransitive sentence of the high-landmark verb
is closer to a transitive sentence than the intransitive version coming from the sentence itself
(ﬁrst row of the table). Since the meaning of a target verb and the high-landmark verb were
speciﬁcally selected to be very similar given the context (subject and object), this is naturally
the most error-prone category. The seven misclassiﬁed cases are presented in Table 4, where
the similarity of the involved intransitive versions is apparent.
The six cases of the second category (where an intransitive sentence from a low-landmark
gives higher similarity than the normal intransitive version) are quite similar, since in many cases
dropping the object leads to semantically identical expressions.
For the transitive sentence
“tribunal try crime”, for example, the low-landmark intransitive version “tribunal test” has
almost identical meaning with the normal intransitive version “tribunal try”, so it is easier to
be “mistakenly” selected by the model as the one closest to the original transitive sentence.
15

str
sin
shi
people run round
people run
people move
boy meet girl
boy meet
boy visit
management accept responsibility
management accept
management bear
patient accept treatment
patient accept
patient bear
table draw eye
table draw
table attract
claimant draw beneﬁt
claimant draw
claimant attract
tribunal try crime
tribunal try
tribunal judge
Table 4: Errors in the ﬁrst category of comparisons.
Finally, the model performs really well for cases when an unrelated intransitive sentence is
compared with a transitive one, with only a 0.4% error rate. Here many of the misclassiﬁcations
can also be attributed to the increased ambiguity of the involved verbs when the object is absent.
For example, the similarity between “man draw sword” and “man draw” is considered smaller
than the similarity of the ﬁrst sentence with “man write”. Although this is an obvious error,
we should acknowledge that the two intransitive sentences, “man draw” and “man write”, are
not so diﬀerent semantically, so the error was not completely unjustiﬁed.
7.3
Deﬁnition Classiﬁcation
The ability of reliably comparing the meaning of single words with larger textual fragments, e.g.
phrases or even sentences, can be an invaluable tool for many challenging NLP tasks, such as
deﬁnition classiﬁcation, sentiment analysis, or even the simple everyday search on the internet.
In this task we examine the extend to which our models can correctly match a number of terms
(single words) with a number of deﬁnitions. Our dataset consists of 112 terms (72 nouns and
40 verbs) extracted from a junior dictionary together with their main deﬁnition. For each term
we added two more deﬁnitions, either by using entries of WordNet for the term or by simple
paraphrase of the main deﬁnition using a thesaurus, getting a total of three deﬁnitions per
term. In all cases a deﬁnition for a noun-term is a noun phrase, whereas the deﬁnitions for the
verb-terms consist of verb phrases. A sample of the dataset entries can be found in Table 5.
Term
Main deﬁnition
Alternative def. 1
Alternative def. 2
blaze
large strong ﬁre
huge potent ﬂame
substantial heat
husband
married man
partner of a woman
male spouse
foal
young horse
adolescent stallion
juvenile mare
horror
great fear
intense fright
disturbing feeling
apologise
say sorry
express regret or sadness
acknowledge shortcoming or failing
embark
get on a ship
enter boat or vessel
commence trip
vandalize
break things
cause damage
produce destruction
regret
be sad or sorry
feel remorse
express dissatisfaction
Table 5: Sample of the dataset for the term/deﬁnition comparison task (noun-terms in the top
part, verb-terms in the bottom part).
We approach this evaluation problem as a classiﬁcation task, where terms have the role of
classes. First, we calculate the distance between each deﬁnition and every term in the dataset.
The deﬁnition is “classiﬁed” to the term that gives the higher similarity. Due to the nature the
dataset, this task did not require human annotation and we evaluate the results by calculating
16

separate F1-scores for each term, and getting their average as an overall score for the whole
model. The results are presented in Table 6.
Results
Since this experiment includes verb phrases, where the subject is missing, we con-
struct our verb vectors by summing over all context vectors of objects with which the verb
appears in the corpus; that is, we use verb = P
i
−−→
obji. This is referred to as the relational model
(Reltn), and is compared with the multiplicative model. Additive model serves again as our
baseline. We evaluate separately the performance on the noun terms and the performance on
the verb terms, since a mixing of the two sets would be inconsistent.
The relational model delivers again the best performance, although the diﬀerence from the
multiplicative model is small. All models perform better on the verb terms than the noun part
of the dataset, yet in general F-scores tend to be low. This is natural, since the challenge that
this task poses to a machine is great, and F-score considers anything but the perfect result
(every deﬁnition assigned to the correct term) as unacceptable.
An error analysis shows that for the noun-term set the relational model returns the correct
main deﬁnition in 25 of the 72 cases, whereas in 47 cases (65%) the correct deﬁnition is in the
top-ﬁve list for that term (Table 7). The multiplicative model performs similarly, and better
for the verb-term set. For this experiment we also calculated Mean Reciprocal Ranks values,
which again were very close for the two models. Furthermore, some of the “misclassiﬁed” cases
can also be considered as somehow “correct”. For example, the deﬁnition we originally assigned
to the term ‘jacket’ was ‘short coat’; however, the system “preferred” the deﬁnition ‘waterproof
cover’, which is also correct. Some interesting other cases are presented in Table 8.
8
Conclusion and Future Work
In summary, after a brief review of the deﬁnitions of compact closed categories and monoidal
functors, we ramiﬁed their applications to natural language syntax and semantics. We recasted
the categorical setting of [10], which was based on the product of the category of a pregroup
type-logic with the category of ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces, in terms of a monoidal functor
from the former to the latter. This passage is similar to the vector space representation of
category of manifolds in a topological quantum ﬁeld theory. We showed how the operations of
Frobenius algebras over vector spaces provide a concrete instantiation of this setting and used
their pictorial calculus to simplify the multi-linear algebraic computations. This instantiation
resulted in meanings of all sentences living in a basic vector space W, hence we became able to
compare their meanings with one another and also with meanings of single words and phrases.
We developed experiments based on this instantiation and evaluated the predictions of our
model in a number of sentence and phrase synonymy tasks.
We conclude that the concrete setting of this paper provides a robust and scalable base for an
implementation of the framework of [10], ready for further experimentation and applications. It
overcomes the shortcomings of our ﬁrst implementation [16], whose main problem was that the
Nouns
Verbs
Model
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Addtv
0.21
0.17
0.16
0.28
0.25
0.23
Multp
0.21
0.22
0.19
0.31
0.30
0.26
Reltn
0.22
0.24
0.21
0.32
0.28
0.27
Table 6: Results of the term/deﬁnition comparison task.
17

Multp
Reltn
Rank
Count
%
Count
%
Nouns
1
26
36.1
25
34.7
2-5
20
27.8
22
30.6
6-10
11
15.3
5
6.9
11-72
15
20.8
20
27.8
Verbs
1
15
37.5
8
20.0
2-5
10
25.0
13
32.5
6-10
6
15.0
4
10.0
11-40
9
22.5
15
37.5
Table 7: Results of the term/deﬁnition comparison task based on the rank of the main deﬁnition.
Term
Original deﬁnition
Assigned deﬁnition
rod
ﬁshing stick
round handle
jacket
short coat
waterproof cover
mud
wet soil
wet ground
labyrinth
complicated maze
burial chamber
Table 8: A sample of ambiguous cases where the model assigned a diﬀerent deﬁnition than the
original.
vector space representation of the atomic type s was taken to be the tensor space W ⊗W (for a
transitive sentence), hence the logical and the concrete types did not match. As a consequence,
sentences with nested structures such as ‘Mary saw John reading a book’ could not be assigned a
meaning; furthermore, meanings of phrases and sentences with diﬀerent grammatical structure
lived in diﬀerent vector spaces, so a direct comparison of them was not possible.
An experimental future direction is a higher order evaluation of the deﬁnition classiﬁcation
task using an unambiguous vector space along the lines of [37], where each word is associated
with one or more sense vectors.
A model like this will avoid encoding diﬀerent meanings
of words in one vector, and will help us separate the two distinct tasks of composition and
disambiguation that currently are interwoven in a single step.
From the theoretical perspective, one direction is to start from type-logical grammars that
are more expressive than pregroups. In recent work [36] we have shown how the functorial
passage to FVect can be extended from a pregroup algebra to the Lambek Calculus [25], which
has a monoidal (rather than compact) structure. It remains to show how this passage can be
extended to more expressive versions of Lambek calculi, such as Lambek-Grishin algebras [31],
calculi of discontinuity [32], or abstract categorial grammars [18]. More speciﬁcally, one wants
to investigate if the new operations and axioms of these extensions are preserved by the vector
space semantic functor.
Another venue to explore is meanings of logical words, where any context-dependant method
fails to succeed. The abstract operations of Frobenius algebras have been used to model a limited
class of logical operations on vector spaces [9], hence these might turn out to be promising in
this aspect too.
