Adversarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for
Understanding Civic Issues
Shanu Kumar
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India

Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
IBM Research AI, India

ABSTRACT
Citizen engagement and technology usage are two emerging trends
driven by smart city initiatives. Governments around the world are
adopting technology for faster resolution of civic issues. Typically,
citizens report issues, such as broken roads, garbage dumps, etc.
through web portals and mobile apps, in order for the government
authorities to take appropriate actions. Several mediums – text,
image, audio, video – are used to report these issues. Through a
user study with 13 citizens and 3 authorities, we found that image
is the most preferred medium to report civic issues. However, ana-
lyzing civic issue related images is challenging for the authorities
as it requires manual effort. Moreover, previous works have been
limited to identifying a specific set of issues from images. In this
work, given an image, we propose to generate a Civic Issue Graph
consisting of a set of objects and the semantic relations between
them, which are representative of the underlying civic issue. We
also release two multi-modal (text and images) datasets, that can
help in further analysis of civic issues from images. We present
a novel approach for adversarial training of existing scene graph
models that enables the use of scene graphs for new applications
in the absence of any labelled training data. We conduct several
experiments to analyze the efficacy of our approach, and using
human evaluation, we establish the appropriateness of our model
at representing different civic issues.
KEYWORDS
Civic Engagement, Scene Graph Generation, Adversarial Training,
Smart Cities, Intelligent Systems on Web
ACM Reference Format:
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain. 2019. Adver-
sarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for Understanding Civic Issues. In
Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 4, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.475/123_4
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a significant increase in smart city
initiatives [9, 30, 31]. As a result, government authorities are em-
phasizing the use of technology and increased citizen participation
for better maintenance of urban areas. Various web platforms –
SeeClickFix [27], FixMyStreet [1], ichangemycity [16] – have been
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06.
https://doi.org/10.475/123_4
Figure 1: Comparison between Civic Issue Graph and Scene
Graph for the same image. The scene graph provides a com-
plete representation of all objects and relationships in the
image, while the Civic Issue Graph only consists of relations
representative of the civic issue.
introduced across the world, which enable the citizens to report
civic issues such as poor road condition, garbage dumps, missing
traffic signs, etc., and track the status of their complaints. Such ini-
tiatives have resulted in exponential increase in the number of civic
issues being reported [2]. Even social media sites (Twitter, Face-
book) have been increasingly utilized to report civic issues. Studies
have found the importance of civic issue reporting platforms and
social media sites in enhancing civic awareness among citizens
[36]. These platforms help the concerned authorities to not only
identify the problems, but also access the severity of the problems.
Civic issues are reported online through various mediums – textual
descriptions, images, videos, or a combination of them. Previous
work [10] highlights the importance of mediums in citizen partici-
pation. Yet, no prior work has tried to understand the role of these
mediums in reporting of civic issues.
In this work, we first identify the most preferred medium for
reporting civic issues, by conducting a user study with 13 citizens
and 3 government authorities. Using the 84 civic issues reported by
the citizens using our mobile app, and follow-up semi-structured
interviews, we found that images are the most usable medium for
the citizens. In contrast, authorities found text as the most preferred
medium, as images are hard to analyze at scale.
To fill this gap, several works have proposed methods to auto-
matically identify a specific category of civic issues from images,
such as garbage dumps [28] and road damage [24]. However, their
methods are limited to the specific categories that they address.
arXiv:1901.10124v1  [cs.AI]  29 Jan 2019

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
Furthermore, existing holistic approaches of analyzing civic issues
are limited to text [4]. To this end, we propose an approach to un-
derstand various civic issues from input images, independent of
the type of issue being reported.
One of the latest advancements in the field of image understand-
ing is generation of scene graphs [17], with the objective of getting a
complete structured representation of all objects in an image along
with the relations between them. However, to understand a civic
issue, only certain crucial objects need to be detected, along with
the relations between them, which are representative of the civic
issue in the image. Inspired from the task of scene graph generation,
we propose to generate Civic Issue Graphs that provide complete
representations of civic issues in images.
Figure 1 shows a comparison between the two representations.
In contrast to the scene graph, the Civic Issue Graph only consists
of objects conveying a civic issue, their bounding boxes, and the
predicate between these objects. We present a formal definition of
this representation in Section 5.
Training a scene graph model requires a large amount of data con-
sisting of images with grounded annotations (objects and relations
in the images). Due to the lack of sufficient annotated images of
civic issues, we use an existing scene graph model in a cross-domain
setting, with partially annotated and unpaired data. We utilize a
dataset extracted by collating and processing public datasets of
images from civic issue complaints, for training our model, and
make this dataset publicly available1. We present a novel adver-
sarial approach that uses an existing scene graph model for a new
task in the absence of any labelled training data. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first attempt at adversarial training of an
existing scene graph model. We conduct various experiments to
establish the efficacy of our approach using metrics derived from
standard scene graph evaluation metrics. Finally, through human
evaluation, we demonstrate that civic issues from images can be
appropriately represented using our Civic Issue Graph.
To summarize, the major contributions of this paper are: (i) un-
derstanding the usability of different mediums for reporting civic
issues, (ii) introducing a novel unsupervised mechanism using ad-
versarial adaptation of existing scene graph models to a new domain,
(iii) experimental evaluation which shows significant performance
gains for identification of civic issues from user uploaded images,
and (iv) releasing two multi-modal (text and image) datasets with
information on civic issues, to encourage future work in this do-
main.
2
RELATED WORK
Civic Issue Detection and Analysis. Traditionally, different meth-
ods have been employed that use technology to gather data about
civic issues: such as using laser imaging to identify uneven roads
[11] or gathering data from GPS sensors [39] for detecting potholes.
However, these methods are specific to a particular type of civic
issue and require a technological setup with additional costs, which
may not be convenient at a larger scale. More recently, social media
has provided a convenient interface that allows citizens to report
civic issues [3, 18]. Several works try to analyze online platforms to
automatically mine issues related to civic amenities [26, 29], but the
1Link hidden for blind review
analysis is limited to textual descriptions. Specific to images, [24]
and [28] use object detection and image segmentation techniques to
identify road damage and garbage dumps respectively, from input
images. However, their methods are also limited to the specific
category of civic issues that they address. One of the more recent
works, ‘Citicafe’ [4] goes a step ahead by allowing users to report
various types of civic issues and further employs machine learning
techniques to understand and analyze the civic issue from the user
input. However, they do not provide a method for understanding
images reporting different types of civic issues, as we do in this
paper.
Scene-Graph Generation. Several works [19, 40] propose meth-
ods for generating scene graphs from images to represent all objects
in an image and the relationships between them. One approach
[21] includes aligning object, phrase, and caption regions with a
dynamic graph based on their spatial and semantic connections.
Another approach [38] uses standard RNNs and learns to itera-
tively improve its predictions via message passing. Zellers et al.
[40] present a state-of-the-art technique by first establishing that
several structural patterns exist in scene-graphs (which they call
motifs) and showing how object labels are highly predictive of rela-
tion labels by analyzing the Visual Genome dataset [20]. All of these
approaches require a large set of images for training with grounded
annotations for objects and relations. Some works [22, 42] utilize
zero shot learning for generating a scene-graph. However, their
results show that the learning is restricted to the task of detecting
new predicates which were not seen during the training phase. Our
approach can be used to generalize existing scene graph models to
predict new relations belonging to a different domain, which are
absent from the training data.
Domain Adaptation. Domain adaptation is a long studied prob-
lem, where approaches range from fine-tuning networks with target
data [32] to adversarial domain adaptation methods [37]. Some of
the deep learning methods propose to learn a latent space that
minimizes distance metrics such as maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [23] between the source and target domains. A different
approach involves domain separation networks which learn to ex-
tract image representations that are partitioned into two subspaces:
one component which is private to each domain and one which is
shared across the two domains [5].
The more recently introduced adversarial domain adaptation
methods [12, 33, 37] take a different approach by using a domain
classifier to learn mappings from the source domain to target do-
main, which are used to generalize the model to the target domain.
Adversarial methods have shown promising results for image un-
derstanding tasks such as captioning [6] and object detection [8].
Hence, in this work, we propose to use Adversarial Discriminative
Domain Adaptation (ADDA) [37] for adapting scene graph models
to our new task.
3
USER STUDY
We conducted a user study to understand the preference of different
mediums – text, audio, image and video – to report civic issues, both
from citizens and authorities perspective. For this, we developed a

Adversarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for Understanding Civic Issues
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
custom Android app, with the landing page having four buttons,
each corresponding to the four mediums. To report an issue, any
of the medium(s) could be used any number of times, e.g., a report
can comprise of 1 video, few lines of text, and 2 images.
13 participants (9 male, 4 female, age=28.5±6.1 years) reported
civic issues over a period of 7-10 days. All the participants were
recruited using word-of-mouth and snowball sampling. All of them
were experienced smartphone users, using it for the past 6.2±2.2
years, and well educated (highest education: 1 high school, 3 Bache-
lors, 6 Masters, 4 PhDs). However, only two of them have previously
reported civic issues on online web portals. At the end of the study,
a 30-mins semi-structured interview was conducted, to delve deeper
into the reasons for (not) using specific medium(s). Participants
were also asked to rate each of the mediums they used on a 5-point
Likert scale from NASA-TLX questionnaire [14] along with pro-
viding subjective feedback. Participants were not compensated for
participation.
Furthermore, we interacted with 3 government authorities (3
male, age = 35-45 years) for 30-mins each, to understand their per-
spective on the medium of the received complaints. All interviews
were audio-recorded, and later transcribed for analysis.
3.1
Results
Overall, 84 (6±3.7) civic issues were reported by the 13 participants,
mainly in the category of garbage (11/13 participants), potholes
causing water-logging (9), blocked sidewalk (6), traffic (5), illegal
car parking (3), and stray dogs (3). 81 of these issues consisted of
image, text, or their combination, while only 2 had audio and 1 had
video. Hence, here we only focus on image and text as preferred
mediums.
A majority of the participants (10/13) found image to be the
best medium for reporting civic issues, followed by text (2/13) and
video (1/13). Images were preferred mainly because it is quick and
easy to click an image, and they convey a lot of information: “An
image is worth 1000 words.”-P4, “its super quick to take pics... even
when I pause at a traffic signal, I can take a pic”-P10. Participants
also felt that images are best for conveying the severity of a civic
problem. They took multiple images from different angles to show
the severity of various issues, such as amount of garbage, size of
potholes, etc. Interestingly, participants thought that images can
“act as a proof of the problem... as images don’t lie”-P6. On the other
hand, participants complained that people might ‘bluff ’/‘exaggerate’
when reporting issues using text.
However, participants complained that images can not be used
to capture the temporal variations of civic problem, e.g., “images
can’t say that this garbage has been here for the past week-P2. For
this, participants favored text medium, as it enables providing de-
tails about the temporal variations of an issue. But participants
also found that texting requires more time and effort, compared to
clicking images.
When participants were asked to choose the best combination of
mediums for reporting civic issues, majority of them (9/14) chose
image with text. The combination allows them the freedom to
show severity and truthfulness of the issue using image, along with
adding other details in text. Interestingly when participants were
asked to think from the perspective of a government authority, a
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mental
Demand
Physical
Demand
Temporal
Demand
Perceived
Success
Effort
Frustration
Images
Text
Figure 2: NASA-TLX Likert-scale ratings for Image and Text.
majority of them (6/13) found text to be the best medium, followed
by image (4/13). The main reasons identified by participants were
“with huge amounts of data, text is much easier to analyze”-P7 and
at times, images may not be self-explanatory.
Participants’ responses to the 5-point NASA-TLX Likert scale
questions for images and text are shown in Figure 2, with the er-
ror bars showing the standard deviations. For all metrics, except
perceived success, lower score is better. As only a few participants
used audio (2/13) and video (3/13), we do not discuss their ratings.
A paired t-test showed that images were reported to be signifi-
cantly better than text, with respect to mental demand (t12=3.56,
p<0.005) and perceived success (t12=2.7, p<0.01). Only in tempo-
ral demand, images performed poorly compared to text, though
the difference was not statistically significant. This was because at
times participants had to rush/hurry to click the right image.
Following this, we interviewed 3 government authorities, and
found about the process of human annotators analyzing the re-
ceived civic issue image to generate tags and captions describing
the issue. These complaint tags are then passed on to the relevant
authority in writing or via phone calls to take appropriate actions.
Also the authorities confirm that a majority of the received com-
plaints comprise of images. However, these images never reach
them due to lack adequate technological infrastructure. This con-
firms that image is the most preferred medium for users, but au-
thorities rely only on textual complaints. To bridge this gap, in this
work, we generate text-based descriptions of images that are used
for reporting civic issues.
4
DATASET
Object Class
#Images
#Bounding boxes
Garbage
650
831
Manhole
374
419
Pothole
518
677
Water logging
290
375
Total
1505
2302
Table 1: Statistics for Dataset-1
An extensive dataset of images with annotations for a wide
variety of civic issues is currently unavailable. To this end, we
mined 485,927 complaints (with 131,020 images) from two civic
issue reporting forums – FixMyStreet [1] and ichangemycity [16].
We use them to generate two datasets.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
Dataset-1 consists of human-annotated images with the bound-
ing boxes and object labels for 4 object categories (Table 1) belong-
ing to the civic issue domain. Some of these object categories are
not present in any publicly available image datasets. We utilize
the annotations from two existing datasets for garbage [28] and
potholes [24], and add new images representative of the new object
categories along with their annotations, to build Dataset-1.
Dataset-2 consists of examples of Civic Issue Graphs, represented
through triples of the form [object1,predicate,object2], specifying
the relationship (predicate) between a pair of objects (object1 and
object2). We use natural language processing techniques [25, 35]
to extract these triples from complaint descriptions. We manually
define a set of 19 target object categories which are relevant to
the civic domain and map the objects from these triples to our set
of target objects using semantic similarity2. We retain only those
triples where the predicate defines positional relations (manually
determined) and for which both objects are matched with a similar-
ity value greater than 0.4. This dataset consists of 44,353 Civic Issue
Graphs, where 8204 are paired with images. There are total 5799
unique relations with 19 object classes and 183 predicate classes.
5
CIVIC ISSUE GRAPH GENERATION
We now present our approach for understanding civic issues from
input images. We first present the formal definition of Civic Issue
Graphs, followed by our detailed approach, consisting of scene
graph generation and adversarial domain adaptation.
Formal Definition: A scene graph is a structured representation
of objects and the relationships between them present in an im-
age. It consists of triples or relations (used inter-changeably) of
the form [object1,predicate,object2] where predicate defines the
relationship between the two objects and both object1 and object2
are grounded to their respective bounding box representations in
the image. While a scene graph provides a complete representation
of the contents of the scene in an image, our proposed Civic Issue
Graph (CG) only consists of objects conveying a civic issue, their
bounding boxes, and the predicate between these objects. We use
the following notations to define a CG:
• B = {b1, . . . ,bn}: Set of bounding boxes bi ∈R4; bi rep-
resents the bounding box for an object i, defined as bi =
(x,y,w,h), where x and y are co-ordinates of the centre of
the bounding box, and w and h are the width and height of
the bounding box.
• O1 = {o1
1, . . . ,o1n}: Set of objects essential for defining a civic
issue, , e.g., ‘pothole’, ‘garbage’, etc.
• O2 = {o2
1, . . . ,o2n}: Set of objects that define the context of
objects in O1, e.g., ‘street’, ‘building’, etc.
• O = O1 ∪O2: Set of all objects that assign a class label oi ∈O
to each bi
• P = {p1, . . . ,pn}: Set of predicates defining geometric or
position-based relationships between o1
i ∈O1 and o2
i ∈O2,
e.g., ‘above’, ‘next_to’, ‘in’, etc.
• RCG = {r1, . . . ,rn}: Set ofCG relations with nodes (bi,o1
i ) ∈
B × O1, (bj,o2
j ) ∈B × O2, and predicate label pi→j ∈P, e.g.,
2http://swoogle.umbc.edu/SimService/GetSimilarity
Figure 3: An overview of the MotifNet model
[дarbaдe,on,street], where ‘garbage’ ∈O1, ‘street’ ∈O2,
and ‘on’ ∈P
5.1
Scene Graph Generation
Several methods have been proposed for generating scene graphs
from images and all of them require labelled training data [38, 40].
The MotifNet model, proposed by Zellers et al. [40], is the current
state-of-the-art for generating scene graphs and we utilize this
model for demonstrating our approach. However, our approach is
generic and can be applied to other models with similar architecture
as well.
MotifNet Model: As part of their approach, Zellers et al. highlight
that the elements of a visual scene are often governed by the pres-
ence of high-level structural regularities, or motifs, such as, “people
tend to wear clothes”. Such regularities indicate that given an im-
age – i) predicted object labels may depend on one another, and
ii) predicted predicate labels may depend on the predicted object
labels. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [15] are known
to capture such dependencies in the input sequence, when the gap
between the dependencies is not known. The MotifNet model uses
two bidirectional LSTMs [41] to – i) capture the dependencies be-
tween object labels (referred as object context), and ii) capture the
dependencies between the predicate labels and the object labels
(referred as edge context). Fig 3 presents a high-level overview of
the model, which consists of:
• Object Detection: The MotifNet architecture consists of a Faster
R-CNN model [34] to detect the objects present in an image.
For each image I, the object detector provides a set of region
proposals, B = [b1, . . . , bn]. Each region proposal bi, is indicative
of an object present in the image and is associated with a feature
vector fi and an object label probability vector li.
• Object Context: The MotifNet model uses bidirectional LSTM
layers to construct a contextualized representation C, for the set
of region proposals B. Here C models the dependencies between
different region proposals. Eq. 1 shows the formulation of C, in
terms of fi, li and W1 where W1 is a parameter matrix that maps
li to R100.
• Object Decoder: The contextualized representation C, is used
to predict the final object labels O. The labels (ˆoi) are decoded
sequentially using another LSTM, where the hidden state for
each label (hi) is conditioned on the previously decoded label
(Eq. 2). The hidden state is then used to compute the final object
labels ˆoi (Eq. 3).

Adversarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for Understanding Civic Issues
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 4: An illustration of our model: Faster R-CNN provides the object labels and their bounding regions. Object context
generates a contextualized representation for each object. Edge context generates a contextualized representation for each edge
using the representation of the object pairs (head and tail). During adversarial training, information regarding the edge context
is passed on to the Discriminator, which learns to distinguish between the seen and unseen object pairs. The training objective
of the Discriminator results in gradients flowing into the Discriminator as well as the edge context layer of the MotifNet Model.
The loss for the model decreases as the model learns to fool the Discriminator by adapting a uniform representation for seen
and unseen classes.
• Edge Context: The model constructs another contextualized rep-
resentation D using additional bidirectional LSTM layers, where
D models the dependency between the relation labels and the
object labels . Eq. 4 shows the formulation of D, in terms of ci, ˆoi
and W2 where W2 is a parameter matrix that maps ˆoi to R100.
• Predicate Classification: For a sequence of region proposals
(B), quadratic number of object pairs are possible. An object pair
(bi,bj), is represented by the model using the final contextualized
representations, (di, dj) and the feature vector (fi,j) representing
the union of these objects (Eq. 5). Here Wh, Wt project di, dj into
R4096. The model uses a softmax layer with this representation
as input to identify the predicate label (pi→j) for each object pair
or label it as background (Eq. 6). Here, Wt, woi,oj represent the
weights of the softmax layer. Object pairs with a valid predicate
label (non-background) denote the final relations present in the
scene graphs.
Here is the mathematical formulation of the model:
C = [c1, . . . , cn] = biLSTM([fi; W1li]i=1,...,n)
(1)
hi = LSTMi([ci; ˆoi−1])
(2)
ˆoi = arдmax(Wohi) |one hot vector|
(3)
D = [d1, . . . , dn] = biLSTMi([ci; W2ˆoi]i=1,...,n)
(4)
gi,j = (Whdi) ◦(Wt dj) ◦fi,j
(5)
P(pi→j |B,O) = sof tmax(Wr gi,j + woi,oj )
(6)
5.2
Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Domain adaption involves using an existing model trained on
“source” domain where labelled data is available, and generaliz-
ing it to a “target” domain, where labelled data is not available.
Domain adaptation has been helpful for tasks such as image cap-
tioning [7] that require a large corpora of images and their labels,
as getting this data for each and every domain is unfeasible. More
recently, adversarial methods for domain adaptation [37] have also
been proposed, where the training procedure is similar to the train-
ing of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)[13]. We present
an adversarial training approach for a scene graph model, which,
to the best of our knowledge, has not been explored before. Do-
main adaptation for scene graphs is challenging due to the large
domain shift in the images as well as the feature space of relations
(Fig. 5). For instance, the Visual Genome dataset (VG) [20] used
for training scene graph models, consists of a mix of indoor and
outdoor scenes with more object instances, whereas our dataset
of civic issues consists of specific outdoor scenes depicting a civic
issue. Moreover, some of the relations observed in the civic issue
domain are not even present in the visual genome dataset (e.g.,
garbage-on-street). In the following subsections, we provide more
details about our cross-domain setting followed by our approach
for adversarial domain adaption.
5.2.1
Cross-Domain Setting. Scene graph models trained on a par-
ticular dataset can detect only those relations that are already seen
by the model, or in other words, present in the training dataset.
For our task of generating CG, the model needs to detect RCG, i.e.,
the set of relations contained in CG. Note that the set of relations
in RCG can be further divided into Rs and Rn, where Rs is the set
of relations previously seen by the model, e.g.: [tree,over, f ence]
and Rn is the set of relations previously unseen by the model e.g.:
[дarbaдe,on,street]. In the absence of any labelled data for Rn, we
want to generalize the model already trained on Rs, to adapt to Rn
as well.
5.2.2
Adversarial Approach. Adversarial approach for domain adap-
tation consists of two models – a pre-trained generator model and a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
discriminator model. In our setting, we use the MotifNet model pre-
trained on VG dataset as the generator and propose a discriminator
model that can distinguish between Rs and Rn. During pre-training,
the MotifNet model learns a representation for the object pairs
(Eq. 5 and 6) which is used to predict the final set of relations (Rs).
Without adversarial training, the model has not learned the repre-
sentation for any unseen pair of objects from the civic domain and
will not be able to predict such relations (Rn). Therefore, during
adversarial training, the objective of the MotifNet model is to learn
a mapping of target object pairs (unseen) to the feature space of
the source object pairs (seen). This objective is supported via the
discriminator, which is a binary classifier between the source and
target domains. The MotifNet model can be said to have learned
a uniform representation of object pairs corresponding to Rs and
Rn, if the classifier trained using this representation can no longer
distinguish between Rs and Rn. Therefore, we introduce two con-
strained objectives which seek to – i) find the best discriminator
model that can accurately classify Rs and Rn, and ii) “maximally
confuse” the discriminator model by learning new mapping for
Rn. Once the source and target feature spaces are regularized, the
predicate classifier trained on the seen object pairs can be directly
applied to unseen object pairs, thereby eliminating the need for
labelled training data.
Fig 4 summarizes our adversarial training procedure. We first
pre-train the MotifNet model on the VG dataset using cross-entropy
loss and then update it using adversarial training. During adver-
sarial training, the parameters for the MotifNet model and the
discriminator are optimised according to a constrained adversarial
objective. To optimize the discriminator model, we use the standard
classification loss (Ld). In order to optimize the MotifNet model,
we use the standard loss function (La) with inverted labels (seen →
unseen, unseen →seen) thereby satisfying the adversarial objec-
tive. This entire training process is similar to the setting of GANs.
We iteratively update the MotifNet model and the Discriminator
with a ratio of Nm:Nd with Nm < Nd, i.e., the Discriminator is
updated more often than the MotifNet model. We now provide a
mathematical formulation of our training approach.
Discriminator We define the Discriminator as a binary classifier
with seen and unseen as the two set of classes. For each object pair
(oi,oj), the Discriminator is provided with two inputs: 1) gi,j: final
representation of the object pair generated by the model and 2)
(Whdi) ◦(Wt dj): contextualized representation of the object pair
without the visual features. We further experimented with different
inputs to the discriminator (details in Appendix). The Discriminator
consists of 2 fully connected layers, followed by a softmax layer
to generate probability Cd(l|oi,oj), where l ∈{seen,unseen}. The
mathematical formulation of the discriminator for a given object
pair (oi, oj) is:
Fi,j = Dis([gi,j; (Whdi) ◦(Wtdj)])
(7)
Cd = sof tmax(WdFi,j + bd)
(8)
Training Discriminator Let OPcv be the set of all object pairs
identified by the model for an image belonging to the civic domain
Icv.
OPcv = Motif Net(Icv)
The goal of the Discriminator is formulated as a supervised classifi-
cation training objective:
Ld(θd) = −
N
Õ
OPcv, n=1
log Cd(ln|yn)
(9)
ln =
(
1(seen)
if yn ∈Ys
0(unseen)
if yn ∈Yn,
where yn = (oi,oj)n, and Yn and Ys are the set of object pairs
corresponding to Rn and Rs, respectively.θd denotes the parameters
of the Discriminator to be learned. We minimize Ld while training
the discriminator.
Training Model In accordance with the inverted label loss de-
scribed above, the training objective of the model is defined as
follows:
La(θa
m) = −
N
Õ
OPcv, n=1
log Cd(ln|yn)
∀yn ∈Yn
Here θam : {Wh, Wt } denotes the parameters of the model that
are updated during adversarial training. We minimize La while
updating the model.
6
EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
The simplest approach to identify the civic issue from images is
to classify them into a predefined set of categories. We first report
the performance of the baseline classifier which categorizes input
images into different civic issue categories. The results show the
limitations of a classification-based approach for handling images
depicting a wide range of civic issues. Following this, we provide
the implementation details of our model. We define a set of metrics
which are derived from the standard metrics used for scene graph
evaluation, for appropriately evaluating our approach. We conduct
multiple experiments and provide generic insights for adversarial
training of scene graph models. Finally, using human evaluation,
we establish the efficacy of our model in appropriately representing
civic issues from images.
Classification Approach We trained a classifier (using VGG-16
network pre-trained on MS COCO dataset) to categorize images us-
ing the set of ten most frequent categories as defined on FixMyStreet
complaint forum [1]. The classifier was trained on 80640 images
and tested using 4992 images.
On the test data, this model achieves an accuracy of 47.13%3,
with F1-score of 38.76. Table 2 shows the class-wise accuracy for
the classifier. While the accuracy for the three most accurate classes
were 86.5%, 83.6% and 75.2%, 4 out of 10 classes had their accuracy
less than 17%. Such large variation in the accuracy for different
classes indicates that classifying images into different categories is
not sufficient.
6.1
Implementation Details
6.1.1
Data Preprocessing. For all our experiments, we use the
datasets defined in Section 4. In order to train the Discriminator,
it requires a set of examples corresponding to the two classes:
3Please refer to Appendix for more details on the classifier accuracy

Adversarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for Understanding Civic Issues
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Category
Test Accuracy
Potholes
82.59
Fly-tipping
81.34
Street/Traffic light
68.37
Graffiti
64.73
Pavements
52.0
Road traffic signs
31.89
Roads
16.42
Garbage
15.59
Drainage/Manhole
7.84
Street Cleaning
4.04
Table 2: Class-wise Accuracy for the classifier
Figure 5: Comparison between the representations (t-SNE
embeddings) for seen andunseen object pairs before and after
Adversarial Adaptation
Rn and Rs. Using the dataset-2, we extracted the set of relations
(RCG) and considered the 150 most frequent triples from this list.
We manually refined this set by removing erroneous triples (e.g.:
[pothole,on,buildinд]) and adding new triples based on existing
triples (e.g.: [дarbaдe,on,sidewalk] ⇒[sidewalk,has,дarbaдe]).
This resulted in 130 triples which are classified as follows: the
triples for which the object pair is previously seen by the model,
i.e., it is present in the VG dataset, are classified as Rs (80 out of
130 triples), and the rest 50 triples are classified as Rn. For predi-
cate fine-tuning, we use the same set of 130 triples. From dataset-2,
we use 90% (7384) of the images for updating the model, and the
remaining 820 as test set, which is used for reporting experimental
results and for the final human evaluation.
6.1.2
Faster R-CNN Training. For the model to detect the objects in
the civic domain, we train a Faster R-CNN model for the 19 object
classes (present in the Dataset-2). 14 of these classes such as tree,
building, street, etc. are already present in VG dataset, and we utilize
that for our training. For the remaining 5 classes, such as garbage,
pothole, etc., we use the dataset-1. The number of samples of a class
from the VG dataset is much higher compared to the number of
samples for a class in our new dataset. While training, we ensure
an upper limit of 8000 and a lower limit of 3000 on the sample
size for each class through a combination of under-sampling and
over-sampling. The Faster R-CNN is trained for 10 epochs using
SGD optimizer on 3 GPUs, with a batch size of 18 and a learning
rate of 1.8 x 10−2, which was reduced to 1.8 x 10−3 after validation
mAP plateaus.
6.1.3
Scene Graph Model Pre-training. We train the MotifNet model
on a subset of VG dataset. We consider the 19 object classes (same as
Faster R-CNN) and a (manually) filtered set of 32 predicate classes
which are commonly found in the civic domain. We use the Faster
R-CNN model trained on the civic domain for object detection.
In the final setting, the model is trained without the ‘Object De-
coder’ and the difference is highlighted as part of experimental
results. The rest of the training setup is same as the original Mo-
tifNet model (described in [40]), with the model being trained for
32 epochs. Please see the Appendix more details on pre-training of
the MotifNet model.
6.1.4
Adversarial Training. Discriminator used in adversarial train-
ing consists of 3 fully connected layers: two layers with 4096 hidden
units followed by the final softmax output. Each hidden layer is
followed by a batch normalization, leakyReLU activation function
with negative slope of 0.2 and apply a dropout in the training phase
with keeping probability of 0.5. Both discriminator and model are
trained using ADAM optimizer with a learning rate of 1.2 x 10−2
and 1.2 x 10−3, respectively. The value of Nd is set to 150 steps,
while Nm is set to 50 steps, with the model and the discriminator
being trained iteratively for 12 epochs.
6.2
Evaluation Metrics
Previous work [38] defines three different modes for analyzing
a scene graph model: Predicate Classification (PredCls), Scene
Graph Classification (SGCls), and Scene Graph Generation (SGgen).
PredCls task examines the performance of the model for detecting
the predicate, given a set of object pairs, in isolation from other
factors. SGCls task measures the performance of the model for
predicting the right object labels and predicates, given a set of
localized objects. In SGgen task, the model has to simultaneously
detect the set of objects and predict the right predicate for each pair
of objects. For our approach of generating Civic Issue Graph (CG)
using existing scene graph models, it is appropriate to report: (i) the
performance of the existing model when generalized to this new
domain, and (ii) the accuracy of the output CG for representing the
civic issue in the image. Deriving from the existing set of tasks, we
define a new set of tasks which can help in evaluating our model
along these dimensions:
• OPCls: the task is to predict the set of object pairs which
are indicative of the civic issue present in the image.
• CGCls: the task is to predict the set of relations which can
represent the civic issue present in the image.
• CGGen: the task is to simultaneously detect the region in
the image and predict the right relations which are indicative
of the civic issue.
For task OPCls, we report the experimental results, and use human
evaluation for the task CGCls and CGGen. In accordance with
previous work, for OPCls, we report results for the image-wise

using both Precision and Recall metrics (k : {1, 3, 5})

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
Figure 6: Qualitative examples presenting the Civic Issue Graphs generated by our model. We show the top 3 relations and
highlight the ones that are representative of the civic issue along with their bounding regions
6.3
Experimental Results
6.3.1
Removing Object Decoder. The MotifNet model after adver-
sarial training performed poorly when tested on the images from

able to predict the correct object labels when the input image con-
tains new objects from the civic domain, as the model has not been
trained on these labels. On removing the decoder during test time
(denoted as Motif NetAdv in the table), the performance improves

new domain requires ground-truth data in terms of the sequence
of objects and the labels, which may not be possible for the civic
domain. Therefore, we decided to pre-train the MotifNet model
without the decoder (denoted by Motif Netwd) and directly use
the object labels predicted by the Faster R-CNN. On updating the
new model using adversarial training (denoted by Motif Netwd
Adv),

with Motif Netwd
Adv performing significantly better than all other
models, for all the metrics.
6.3.2
Adversarial Training vs Fine-tuning. Results from the previous
experiment shows that using adversarial training can significantly
improve the performance, as the model has now been generalized
to both seen and unseen classes. As an alternative approach, we
also try to adapt the pre-trained model to our new domain by fine-
tuning the predicate classification in the model. Mathematically,
we aim to increase the value of P(pi→j |B,O)), where (oi,pi→j,oj)
correspond to RCG. The training objective for this phase is defined
as:
Lf (θf
m) = −
N
Õ
OPcv, n=1
l log P(pn
i→j |Bn,On)
(10)
l =
(
1
if pn
i→j ∈RCG
0
otherwise,
where θf
m : {Wr , woi,oj }, i.e., the weights and bias of the pred-
icate classifier of the model. We minimize Lf while fine-tuning
the model which is trained for 6 epochs. Table 3 shows that fine-
tuning a pre-trained MotifNet model (Motif Netwd
f ine) brings slight
improvement in the performance when compared to the original
model (Motif Net). However, the model with adversarial train-
ing (Motif Netwd
Adv) performs significantly better than the fine-
tuned model (Motif Netwd
f ine). Fine-tuning the model will only im-
prove the detection of relations which are already seen by the
model, while adversarial training will generalize the performance
across both seen and unseen classes. This is further highlighted
in Fig. 5 that shows how the difference between the representa-
tions of seen and unseen relations has reduced through adversarial
training. Further fine-tuning the adversarially updated MotifNet
(Motif Netwd
Adv+f ine) model brings no improvement in the perfor-
mance.
Model Settings

Motif Net
35.6
64.9
75.4
79.7
Motif NetAdv
37.7
65.7
76.0
79.8
Motif Netwd
37.7
63.0
73.3
78.9
Motif Netwd
Adv
43.3
67.7
76.3
80.2
Motif Netwd
f ine
38.9
63.6
73.8
79.2
Motif Netwd
Adv+f ine
43.1
67.7
76.3
80.2
Table 3: Recall for different settings; Adv: Adversarial Train-
ing; f ine: fine-tuning; wd: without decoder setting
6.4
Human Evaluation
To establish the efficacy of our model at appropriately representing
civic issues from images, we asked Amazon Mechanical Turk work-
ers to evaluate the output of our model. We randomly sampled 300
images from the test set; each image was evaluated by 3 workers.
In accordance with our definition of CG, we filtered the final set of
relations generated by our model and kept only the top 5 relations

Adversarial Adaptation of Scene Graph Models for Understanding Civic Issues
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
for which oi ∈O1 and oj ∈O2 where (oi,oj) denotes the unordered
set of objects in a relation (refer Section ??).
The evaluation was carried out for the two tasks – CGCls and
CGGen in two phases. For the task CGCls, workers were shown
an image along with 5 relations and were asked to select 0 or more
relations that appropriately represent the civic issue(s) in that image
along with an option to specify any additional relations separately.
For the task CGGen, we retrieved the set of relations which were
marked as relevant for a given image. For each such relation, the
workers were shown the bounding regions for the objects present in
the relation, and asked to evaluate the coverage of these bounding
regions, on a scale of 0 to 10. We report two metrics – Precision
and Recall, for both the tasks and consider only the majority voted
relations with a minimum average rating of 5 for the bounding
regions. Table 4 shows the performance of our model. The results
show that 83.3% of the times, the relation representing a civic issue
is present in the top 3 relations of ourCG, and 53.0% of the times, the
top relation itself represents a civic issue in the image. The accuracy
on the CGGen task further indicates that our model is capable of
generating accurate groundings for the objects representing the
civic issue.
CGCls
CGGen

Precision
53.0
31.9
24.7
50.9
30.3
24.1
Recall
53.0
84.0
99.0
50.9
83.3
99.0
Table 4: Precision and Recall values for the tasks CGCls and
CGGen based on human evaluation
7
DISCUSSION
The approach we presented in this paper can be utilized in exist-
ing platforms, which allow users to report civic issues using im-
ages. Once the user uploads an image, our model can automatically
generate text-based relations (e.g., garbage-on-street, garbage-next
to-building) depicting the civic issue in the input image. These text-
based relational descriptions can be shared with the authorities,
which can be utilized for large scale analysis, thereby automating
the process and removing any dependency on the actual image
uploaded by the user. Furthermore, if needed, natural language de-
scriptions can be generated from these relations using a template-
based approach. If the confidence of our model is low, the user
can be asked to verify the output generated by the model, before
sending it to the authorities. Data collected in this process can be
further used for retraining the model to improve its performance.
Limitations: While our model can understand a wide range of
civic issues from images, some issue categories either cannot be
captured using images or require additional information in text to
adequately report the issue. For example, irregular water supply
problem, car speeding on the road, etc. requires text to report the
number of days of irregular water supply or the car number plate
details.
The importance of scene graph representation of images has
already been proven for several tasks, including semantic image
retrieval [17] and visual question answering [20]. However, previ-
ous approaches rely on extensive ground truth annotations to train
the scene graph model. This has limited the scope of scene graphs
in domains where obtaining such annotated data is either unfeasi-
ble or costly. For instance, in the education domain, the semantic
understanding of an image through a scene graph representation
(e.g., bat-has-wings, bat-inside-cave) can support learning through
automatic generation of picture stories and image-based assess-
ments. In the fashion domain, scene graphs can be used to create
ontologies with objects such as accessories, clothes, and more. Even
though we present a specific application of generating Civic Issue
Graphs, our presented approach and the insights gained from our
experiments can help expand the generation of scene graphs for
other domains as well, by reducing the dependency on extensive
ground truth annotations.
8
CONCLUSION
We introduce a novel unsupervised mechanism of adapting existing
scene graph models via adversarial training and present an applica-
tion of our approach for generating Civic Issue Graph. The Civic
Issue Graph can provide a complete representation for images with
different types of civic issues, to help bridge the gap between im-
ages and text descriptions used to report issues. Our experimental
analysis helps provide a framework for adapting scene graph mod-
els to other settings as well. We also release two multi-modal (text
and images) datasets with information of civic issues, to encourage
future work in this domain.
A
APPENDIX
A.1
MotifNet Model
We use 32 predicates classes and 19 object classes to train the
MotifNet model on a subset of Visual Genome dataset. Table 5
and 6 show the frequencies of objects and predicates used for the
training of MotifNet model.
Object
Frequency
Object
Frequency
animal
3611
bag
7391
bottle
6246
box
5467
building
31805
car
17352
fence
12027
house
5006
letter
6630
pole
21205
sidewalk
9478
sign
23499
street
10996
tree
49902
crack
1313
garbage
217
pothole
19
manhole
179
Table 5: Object Frequency for training MotifNet
We trained 2 variants of MotifNet model: with object decoder and
without object decoder. Table 7 shows the evaluation of both the
models on the VG dataset.
A.2
Classification
Table 8 highlights the confusion between the different classes of
the classifier. The confusion occurs mostly because the images

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Shanu Kumar and Shubham Atreja, Anjali Singh, Mohit Jain
Predicate
Frequency
Predicate
Frequency
above
47341
across
1996
against
3092
along
3624
at
9903
attached to
10190
behind
41356
between
3411
carrying
5213
covered in
2312
covering
3806
flying in
1973
from
2945
growing on
1853
hanging from
9894
has
277936
in
251756
in front of
13715
laying on
3739
lying on
1869
mounted on
2253
near
96589
on
712409
on back of
1914
over
9317
painted on
3095
parked on
2721
part of
2065
sitting on
18643
standing on
14185
under
22596
with
66425
Table 6: Predicate Frequency for training MotifNet
Model

Motif Net −VG
24.56
28.08
30.18
Motif Netwd −VG
22.49
26.58
28..35
Table 7: MotifNet model Results on Visual Genome dataset
describing different types of civic issues can have very similar
visual features (e.g. Roads and Potholes) and some categories of
issues only differ in their semantic interpretation (e.g. Garbage and
Fly-tipping). Despite the similarities, it is still important to maintain
this distinction in order to understand the nature of civic issues.
Different categories often have different resolution process and
may involve different authorities.
True Class
Predicted Class (%)
C1: Potholes
C1, 86.5
C6, 4.9
C4, 4.2
C2: Street light
C2, 75.2
C3, 6.4
C7, 5.9
C3: Fly-tipping
C3, 83.6
C6, 4.9
C5, 4.5
C4: Roads
C1, 39.7
C4, 20.7
C6, 18.2
C5: Garbage
C3, 57.8
C5, 25.3
C6, 7.6
C6: Pavements
C6, 53.6
C1, 19.5
C3, 14.2
C7: Road signs
C7, 37.2
C2, 17.6
C3, 6.0
C8: Drainage
C1, 30.3
C6, 20.4
C4, 16.5
C9: Street cleaning
C3, 33.4
C6, 23.5
C1, 15.5
Table 8: Top three predictions per class, representing the
confusion matrix
A.3
Changing the input of the Discriminator
While updating the model using adversarial training (denoted by
Motif Netwd
Adv) the input to the discriminator is: [gi,j; (Whdi) ◦
(Wt dj)] as mentioned in the paper. Here, (Whdi)◦(Wt dj) denotes
the contextualized representation of an object pair (oi, oj) generated
by the model. We also tested the model using another input for the
discriminator: gi,j, which is a dot product of the contextualized
representation ((Whdi) ◦(Wt dj)) and the visual features (fi,j) for
the object pairs. However, in the second case, with gi,j as the input
(denoted by Motif Netwd∗
Adv, Table 9) the improvements in the score
were much less.
Model Settings

Motif Netwd
Adv
43.3
67.7
76.3
80.2
Motif Netwd∗
Adv
38
63.1
73.3
79.2
Table 9: Recall for different inputs to the Discriminator; Adv
denotes Adversarial Training, ∗denotes the setting with gi,j
as input, and wd denotes without decoder setting
