Abstract 
Very large commonsense knowledge bases (KBs) 
often have thousands to millions of axioms, of 
which relatively few are relevant for answering any 
given query. A large number of irrelevant axioms 
can easily overwhelm resolution-based theorem 
provers. Therefore, methods that help the reasoner 
identify useful inference paths form an essential part 
of large-scale reasoning systems. In this paper, we 
describe two ordering heuristics for optimization of 
reasoning in such systems. First, we discuss how 
decision trees can be used to select inference steps 
that are more likely to succeed. Second, we identify 
a small set of problem instance features that suffice 
to guide searches away from intractable regions of 
the search space. We show the efficacy of these 
techniques via experiments on thousands of queries 
from the Cyc KB. Results show that these methods 
lead to an order of magnitude reduction in inference 
time. 
 
1 Introduction 
Commonsense reasoning has always been a core problem for 
artificial intelligence (AI) systems. Effective reasoning about 
the external world often involves drawing deductively valid 
conclusions from known facts. Unfortunately, given the 
combinatorial explosiveness of reasoning in expressive 
knowledge-based systems (KBS), even simple queries might 
get “lost” in millions of seemingly relevant inference paths. 
Efficient reasoning in such systems is critical for building 
large-scale AI systems. 
   Ordering heuristics play an important role in optimization 
of reasoning in KBS for at least two reasons: First, inference 
algorithms of KBS (e.g., backward chaining [Russell and 
Norvig 2003] in Cyc, tableaux algorithms in description logic 
(DL)) typically represent the search space as a graph, the 
structure of which is determined by the rules applicable to the 
given node in the graph. Generally, many rules might 
simultaneously apply to a given vertex, and the order of rule 
expansion can have a significant effect on efficiency 
[Tsarkov and Horrocks 2005]. Second, researchers have used 
first-order logic (FOL) theorem provers as tools for inference 
with very expressive languages (e.g., OWL DL, the Semantic 
Web Rule Language (SWRL)) where reasoning with the 
complete language is beyond the scope of existing DL 
algorithms or the language does not correspond to any 
decidable fragment of FOL [Tsarkov et al. 2004, Horrocks 
and Voronkov 2006]. Very large FOL systems often have 
thousands to millions of axioms, of which only a few are 
relevant for answering any given query [Hoder and Voronkov 
2011, Tsarkov et al. 2004]. Since hundreds of thousands of 
axioms that are irrelevant for a given query might overwhelm 
resolution-based theorem provers, the reasoner is expected to 
assess the utility of further expanding numerous incomplete 
inference paths. A naïve ordering of paths can lead to 
potentially infinite subtrees and cause unproductive 
backtracking.  
 To make inferences more efficient, this paper suggests two 
types of ordering heuristics. First, we discuss how 
implausible search paths are created when domain-specific 
axioms are used to prove queries involving fairly general 
predicates. We argue that decision trees can be used to 
represent the semantic context in which a rule is likely to 
contribute to a proof. We show that ordering nodes with the 
help of decision trees helps in guiding search toward the 
solution.  Second, a key impediment in the development of 
fast broad-application first-order reasoning systems has been 
an insufficient understanding of what makes problems 
difficult. We propose a comprehensive set of features that 
correlate with the answerability of nodes. We run the 
inference engine on a large number of queries, sample nodes 
from the resulting search graphs, and record values for their 
instance features. We use statistical regression methods to 
derive a model for predicting the answerability of nodes. We 
use the resulting model to order nodes during search and 
demonstrate that this improves search performance. 
This paper is organized as follows: We start by discussing 
relevant previous work. Our decision tree algorithm and 
statistical regression methods are discussed next. We 
conclude by discussing our results and plans for future work. 
 
2 Related Work 
Controlling Search in Very Large Commonsense Knowledge Bases: A Machine 
Learning Approach
 
Abhishek Sharma1    Michael J. Witbrock2    Keith M. Goolsbey1 
1Cycorp, Inc., 7718 Wood Hollow Drive, Suite 250, Austin, TX 78731 
 2Lucid AI, 600 Congress Avenue, Austin, TX 78701 

 

Prior research has examined the use of machine learning to 
identify best heuristics1 for problems [Bridge et al. 2014] and 
to select a small set of axioms/lemmas that are most relevant 
for answering a set of queries [Hoder and Voronkov 2011, 
Sharma and Forbus 2013, Meng and Paulson 2009, Kaliszyk 
et al. 2015, Kaliszyk and Urban 2015, Alama et al. 2014]. In 
contrast, we focus on ordering heuristics that enable inference 
algorithms to reason with all axioms. In [Taylor et al. 2007], 
the authors use reinforcement learning to guide inference, 
whereas in [Tsarkov and Horrocks 2005], the authors study 
different types of rule-ordering heuristics (e.g., preference 
between ∃ and ⨆ rules) and expansion-ordering heuristics 
(e.g., descending order of frequency of usage of each of the 
concepts in the disjunction). This paper proposes that rule-
ordering heuristics should be based on the search state, and 
we use a regression-based model to learn the effects of 
different features on the answerability of nodes. Work in 
other fields (e.g., database community [Chaudhuri 1998], 
SAT reasoning [Hutter et al. 2014], answer set programming 
[Brewka et al. 2011]) is less relevant because the studies do 
not address the complexity of deep and cyclic search graphs 
that arise from expressive first-order reasoning. To the best 
of our knowledge, no work in the AI community has used 
decision trees and statistical regression-based methods to 
control inference in large commonsense reasoning systems.  
3 Background 
 
We assume familiarity with the Cyc representation language 
[Lenat and Guha 1990, Matuszek et al. 2006, Taylor et al. 
2007]. In Cyc, concept hierarchies are represented by the 
‘genls’ relation. For instance, (genls Person Mammal) holds. 
During backward inference, the rule P(x) → Q(x) is used to 
transform a query like Q(a) into P(a). The link between Q(a) and 
P(a) is a type of transformation link. A node like s0: (and 
(performedBy ?x JohnMcCarthy-ComputerScientist) (isa ?x Buying)) 
leads to sub-goals like s1: (isa JohnMcCarthyBuysABook-012 
Buying) and s2: (isa JohnMcCarthyWritesAPaper-087 Buying), some of 
which may be satisfiable. The links between s0 and s1 and s0 
and s2 are examples of restriction links. Transformation and 
restriction links play a major role in determining the out-
degree of nodes. Every node in the search graph is 
timestamped with an id. A node y is called a successor of x if 
there is a path consisting of transformation links from x to y 
and id(x) < id(y). A node x is a parent of y if a transformation 
link exists between x and y and id(x) < id(y). Parents(x) and 
Successors(x) denote the sets of all parents and successors of 
node x respectively.  Let S be the set of all nodes in a search 
graph. Then, a transformation link set p = {a(1), a(2), 
…,a(n)} is a set of transformation links that transform an 
initial state s0 to an intermediate state sn. Rule(a) and 
                                                 
1 Examples of heuristics (or strategies) include “give priority to 
axioms in clause selection” and “sort symbols by inverse 
frequency”. 
2 For instance, the negated query is often used as the set of 
support. 
Substitutions(a) denote the rule and bindings associated with 
the transformation link a. Transitive inference is well 
supported in Cyc. The query (genls ?x Person) has more than 
6,700 answers because the predicate ‘genls’ allows transitive 
inference in its first argument position. The aforementioned 
query has one open transitive argument position.  
   Reasoning in Cyc KB is difficult due to the sheer size of the 
KB and the expressiveness of the CycL representation 
language. In its default inference mode, the Cyc inference 
engine uses the following types of axioms/facts during 
backward inference: (i) 21,743 role inclusion axioms (e.g., 
P(x, y) → Q(x, y)), (ii) 2,601 inverse role axioms (e.g., P(x, 
y) → Q (y, x)), (iii) 365,593 concepts and 986,965 concept 
inclusion axioms (i.e., ‘genls’ facts), (iv) 817 transitive roles, 
(v) 99,238 complex role inclusion axioms (e.g., P(x, y) ˄ Q 
(y, z) → R (x, z)), and (vi) 31,897 binary roles and 7,980 roles 
with arities greater than two. The KB has 21.7 million 
assertions and 652,037 individuals. To control search in such 
a large KBS, inference algorithms often use different control 
strategies. They distinguish between a set of clauses known 
as the set of support2 that define the imporant facts about the 
problem and a set of usable axioms that are outside the set of 
support (e.g., see the OTTER theorem prover [Russell and 
Norvig 2003]). At every step, such theorem provers resolve 
an element of the set of support against one of the usable 
axioms. To perform best-first search, a heuristic control 
strategy mesures the “weight” of each clause in the set of 
support, picks the “best” clause, and adds to the set of support 
the immediate consequences of resolving it with the elements 
of the usable list [Russell and Norvig 2003]. Cyc uses a set 
of heuristic modules to identify the best clause from the set 
of support. A heuristic module is a tuple hi = (wi, fi), where fi 
is a function fi: S → ℝ that assesses the quality of a node, and 
wi is the weight of hi. The net score of a node s is Σiwifi(s), 
and the node with the highest score is selected for further 
expansion. In next two sections, we discuss two heuristic 
modules for focusing search. 
4 Decision Trees for Focused Search 
 
The basic idea behind this approach is best explained with a 
few examples. Consider the rules shown below3: 
(sitTypeIsSpecWithTypeRestrictionOnRolePlayer ?absorption PhotonAbsorption                 
absorber ?type) ˄ (sitTypeIsSpecWithTypeRestrictionOnRolePlayer ?excitation 
ChemicalObjectExcitation  objectOfStateChange ?type)  
 → (cotemporalProperSubEventTypes ?absorption ?excitation)                  (Rule A1) 
 
(objectFoundInLocation ?ARG1 ?ARG2) ˄ (geopoliticalSubdivision ?OTHER 
?ARG2) → (objectFoundInLocation ?ARG1 ?OTHER)                          (Rule A2) 
 
To answer the query (properSubEventTypes BirthdayParty ?x), an 
inference engine would backchain on rule A1 (see footnote 
3 A sentence of the form (sitTypeIsSpecWithTypeRestrictionOnRolePlayer SPEC 
SIT-TYPE ROLE TYPE) means that SPEC is the unique specialization of SIT-
TYPE, a specialization of ‘Situation’, such that all objects that play 
ROLE in instances of SPEC are instances of TYPE. 

3) because 
‘cotemporalProperSubEventTypes’ is a sub-role of 
‘properSubEventTypes’. This transformation would lead us to 
reason about photon absorption4. Similarly, we would 
backchain on rule A2 to answer the query (objectFoundInLocation ?x 
MesophyllCell-001). Such search paths are unlikely to succeed.  
 General knowledge bases often have heavily used 
predicates 
with 
hundreds 
of 
specializations. 
These 
specializations partition the space into several domains. For 
example, while rule A1 is expected to be useful for naïve 
physics, A2 is expected to be useful when reasoning about 
geographic sites. Implausible search paths arise when a 
mismatch exists between the query and the implied context 
in which an axiom is likely to work. In this paper, we suggest 
that type/concept based decision trees are the right 
representation choice for this problem because rules are 
expected to fire for a certain class (or type) of things. 
Therefore, we associate restrictive information with the 
variables of axioms. Although the variables are expected to 
range over their entire domain, the restrictive information 
specifies a subset of the domain over which the rule has been 
observed to work. These restrictions are specified in terms of 
sorts or concepts. They derive from the results of successful 
uses of the given rule. A small set of successful bindings for 
rule 2 is shown in Table 1. The fact that Minneapolis, 
Anaheim, and Rochester are US cities helps us derive the 
sorted generalization [Page and Frisch 1992] that ?ARG2 is 
likely to range over the set USCity. Formally, a restriction 
condition is a pair, x:τ, where x is a variable and τ is a concept. 
Let Σ denote the set of sentences that represent relationships 
among the concepts. Then, a substitution θ satisfies the 
restriction condition x:τ if it maps x to a ground term t and Σ 
╞  τ(t). The jth restriction condition for axiom a, RC(a, j), can 
be represented as ⋀
𝑥(𝑖): 𝜏(𝑖)
𝑥(𝑖)𝜖 𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑠(𝑎)
, where Vars(a) is 
the set of variables in a. A disjunction of such constraints can 
be specified as ⋁𝑅𝐶(𝑎, 𝑖)
𝑖
, and decision trees are a natural 
representation for such constraints. Our algorithm for 
constructing a decision tree from a set of successful rule 
bindings is shown in Figure 1. The compact decision tree 
(induced from 1900 bindings) for rule 2 is simply: 
?ARG2:GeopoliticalEntity 
˄ 
?OTHER:GeographicalRegion 
˄ 
?ARG1:TerrestrialFunctioningObject 
            Table 1: Partial Training Set for Rule 2 
The algorithm CreateTree (shown in Figure 1) takes as input 
a training set and the variables that occur in the rule. The 
training set is generated by querying the antecedent of the 
                                                 
4 Readers might wonder about domain constraints. The first 
argument to ‘sitTypeIsSpecWithTypeRestrictionOnRolePlayer’ is expected to 
be a specialization of ‘Situation’, and the concept ‘BirthdayParty’ 
satisfies this condition. The generality of some domain constraints 
ensures that it is difficult to identify implausible sub-queries.  
rule for a fixed duration of time. The bindings returned by the 
query results form the TrainingSet. Given a tuple from the 
training set (see Table 1), we compute the generalizations of 
the bindings.5 In step 3 of the algorithm, membership in the 
most specific maximally covering generalization is chosen as 
the branching test. When a tuple satisfies this test, we explore 
constraints for other variables in the AND branch (step 6). 
Otherwise, other values for the variable are considered in the 
OR branch (step 7). We stop growing the tree (step 2) when 
the number of unexplained training examples is less than a 
pre-determined fraction of the full training set. The 
complexity of top-down decision tree induction is O(m2.n) 
where m is the number of attributes, and n is the size of the 
training set  [Kent and Hirschberg 1996]. To use decision 
trees during search we can define a heuristic module with the 
following function, fDT(s), for assesing the quality of nodes: 
∑
∑
1
|𝑝|  𝐼(𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠(𝑎(𝑖)), 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑅𝑢𝑙𝑒(𝑎(𝑖))))
𝑎(𝑖)∈𝑝
𝑝∈𝐿(𝑠)
             ..(1)                            
                                       
In (1), L(s) is the set of all transformation link sets from node 
s to the root, and I(θ, tree) is 1 when the substitution θ  
satisfies the restriction conditions specified by the tree, and 0 
otherwise6. This module will prioritize search paths that 
satisfy the restriction conditions. For instance, the path that 
uses rule A2 to answer the query (objectFoundInLocation ?x 
MesophyllCell-001) 
would 
be 
expanded 
late 
because 
MesophyllCell-001 is not transitively a GeographicalRegion (see the 
constraint for variable ?OTHER). This helps in early evaluation 
of inference steps that use rules from the domains that are 
pertinent for the given query. However, since the KB might 
have thousands of rules that are relevant for a query, we also 
need other ways to steer the search toward more productive 
states. In the next section, we propose a statistical approach 
to solving this problem.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 The generalization of a substitution, s, is the set Gen(s) = {c | 
Σ ╞ (isa s c)}. For instance, PopulatedPlace is a generalization of 
Minnesota-State.  
6 The ‘Tree’ function in (1) returns the decision tree for a given 
rule. 
?OTHER 
?ARG2 
?ARG1 
Minnesota-
State 
CityOfMinneapolisMN 
UnivOfMinnesota 
NewYork-
State 
CityOfRochesterNY 
Ginna-NuclearPowerPlant 
California-
State 
CityOfAnaheimCA 
AngelStadiumOfAnaheim 
Input: TrainingSet, a set of tuples of successful bindings for the rule. 
 
 
ListOfVars, the list of variables used in the rule. 
Output: Decision Tree for the rule. 
 
1. 
Create a Root node for tree. 
2. 
If stopping criterion has been reached then return Root. 
3. 
(var, value) ← the variable and value that provide the best cov-
ering generalization 
4. 
AccountedSet ← Subset of TrainingSet that have var = value 
5. 
UnaccountedSet ← TrainingSet – AccountedSet 
6. 
LeftChild ← CreateTree (AccountedSet, ListOfVars – var) 
7. 
RightChild ← CreateTree(UnaccountedSet, ListOfVars) 
8. 
Add LeftChild as a new branch below Root corresponding to the 
test var = value. 
9. 
Add RightChild as a new branch below Root corresponding to 
the test var ≠ value. 
10. Return Root. 
                       Figure 1: The CreateTree Algorithm 

5 Statistical Meta-Search Learning 
 
Is it possible to predict whether an inference engine will be 
able to solve an arbitrary node generated during search? In 
this section, we show how supervised machine learning 
methods can be used to build models that predict the number 
of answers for a problem instance. Such models can be used 
by the inference engine to decide how to allocate 
computational resources. Moreover, by shedding light on the 
sources of hardness in problem instances, they help in 
improving knowledge representation and fuel development 
of new algorithms.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To build such models, we take the following steps: (i) 
Identification of features: First, we identify key parameters 
that represent all known relevant features of problem 
instances. (ii) Data collection: Next, we run the inference 
engine on a large set of queries and sample nodes from the 
generated search graph. For each sampled node, the number 
of answers and a set of feature values are recorded. (iii) 
Learning: Finally, we learn a model that maps from instance 
features to the inference engine’s performance, and evaluate 
it on a test set of queries. After introducing some notation that 
is used in Figure 2, we discuss each of these steps in detail. 
Notation: Let P and TERMS denote the set of predicates and 
terms mentioned in the query respectively. For any predicate 
p, let NumGafs(p) and NumRules(p) denote the number of 
ground atomic formulas and number of relevant rules for p. 
Moreover, Cyc maintains an estimate of generality of any 
term based on its position in the ontology. Let 
TermGenerality (t) denote the generality of any term t.  
Feature Identification: Our features and their cost of 
computation are shown in Figure 2. Broadly, they can be 
divided into ten groups. The first group includes well-
understood problem size and type features including number 
of literals and number of variables. The second group 
contains those attributes that involve examining the path that 
led to the node. This includes important features that help in 
maintaining the right shape of the search space. While the 
feature “depth” is critical in ensuring that the inference 
engine is not trapped in depth-first infinite regress, the feature 
“number of transformation links” helps us control the out-
degree of nodes. Figures 3 and 4 show the trade-off between 
depth-first and breadth-first search. We see that the 
conditional probability of success of a node decreases rapidly 
with depth. Similarly, Figure 4 shows that most of the 
successful transformation links are added in the initial phase 
and the utility of adding an additional transformation link 
drops rapidly. Table 2 shows the conditional probability of 
success of nodes as a function of number of literals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of literals (n) 
Prob (success | n) 
             1 
       0.940 
             2 
       0.009 
             3  
       0.001 
             4 
       0.003 
             5 
       0.003 
             6 
       0.003 
Table 2: Conditional Probability of success as a function of 
number of literals 
(1-8) Problem size and type features (Cheap): Number of variables, 
literals, fully unbound literals, single/multi literal query, fully/partially 
bound query, fully unbound single literal query. 
(9-13) Problem state features (Cheap): Depth, number of transformation 
and restriction links, potential fan-out score, number of rules used 
recursively in reaching the state.   
(14-18) Knowledge level features (Moderate): Generality estimate of 
unbound literals, min TERMS TermGenerality(t), number of GAFs for 
predicate in single literal query, min P NumGafs(p), Generality 
estimate of predicate in fully unbound single literal query.  
(19-21) Transitivity features (Moderate): Number of open transitive 
argument positions, Number of open transitive argument positions in 
queries with multiple variables, Number of open argument positions in 
‘genls’ and ‘disjointWith’ literals. 
(22-29) Probing features (Expensive): Number of transformation links 
(mean), number of literals (mean), out degree of nodes (median and 
max), number of variables (median), | ⋃
{𝒔 |𝒔 ∈
𝒑∈𝑷𝒂𝒓𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒔 (𝒏𝒐𝒅𝒆)
𝑺𝒖𝒄𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔𝒐𝒓𝒔(𝒑)} |, depth (median), Knuth’s tree size estimate. 
(30-32) Problem balance features (Cheap): Ratio of number of variables 
and literals, ratio of number of positive and negative literals,       
 |Number of positive literals -1|.        
(33-38) Quadratic Terms (Cheap): (number of literals)2, (number of free 
variables)2, depth2, (number of transformation links)2, (ratio of 
number 
of 
variables 
and 
literals)2, 
(| ⋃
{𝒔 |𝒔 ∈
𝒑∈𝑷𝒂𝒓𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒔 (𝒏𝒐𝒅𝒆)
𝑺𝒖𝒄𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔𝒐𝒓𝒔(𝒑)} |) 2.  
(39-44) Interaction Terms (Moderate): depth * (number of 
transformation links), depth*| ⋃
{𝒔 |𝒔 ∈𝑺𝒖𝒄𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔𝒐𝒓𝒔(𝒑)}
𝒑∈𝑷𝒂𝒓𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒔 (𝒏𝒐𝒅𝒆)
|, 
depth * Knuth’s tree size estimate, single literal query * number of open 
transitive argument positions, min TERMS TermGenerality(t) * single 
literal query, generality of fully unbound literals *multi literal query. 
(45)Misc. (Cheap): Single literal query with procedural support. 
(46) Result feature (Cheap): Number of answers         
Figure 2: List of Features and Their Cost of Computation. 
Features selected by exhaustive subset selection are shown in bold. 
 
Figure 3:  Likelihood of success as a function of depth. 
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
depth
P(success| depth)
 
Figure 4: The x-axis shows the index range of transformation 
links, and the y-axis shows the number of successful 
transformation links in the given range. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26-30
31-100
Transformation Link Index Range (i)
Number of  Successful T- links 
in Range i

The potential fan-out score of a node is a function of the 
number of rules that can potentially be used with it. Formally 
it is ΣP log10 (1+NumRules(p)). The next group includes features 
that encode the level of knowledge the KB has for predicates 
and terms mentioned in the query. The generality estimate 
mentioned in the third group is defined as ∏P log10 
(1+TermGenerality(p)). In the fourth group, we include attributes 
for understanding the cost of transitive queries. The probing 
feature is a special kind of feature that examines the 
neighborhood of the node to assess its quality. Since locally 
available information at a node is insufficient for gauging the 
complexity of the search space below it, in the fifth group, we 
include features that pick a random path originating at the 
given node and record descriptive statistics of various 
properties of interest (e.g., number of literals, out-degree of 
nodes). For example, the third feature of the fifth group is 
computed by finding the median out degree of nodes 
encountered in the randomly selected path.The sixth group 
captures the balance of the node in two ways: we measure the 
ratio of number of variables and literals, and the ratio of 
number of positive and negative literals. Because we expect 
disjunctive queries to be more difficult, we also note whether 
non-Horn axioms were used in deriving the state. In the 
seventh and eighth group, we included quadratic and 
interaction terms for some salient features.  
 Data Collection: The Cyc KB contains thousands of stored 
queries of various level of difficulty. We gathered a large 
amount of data by sampling and running these queries. Forty 
percent of the nodes from the resulting space were sampled, 
and the values of the 46 features shown in Figure 2 were 
recorded. This produced 2.5 million data points. 
 Data Transformation and Learning: Recall that the 
number of answers is the performance measure, and all other 
features shown in Figure 2 are predictor features. We 
performed z-score normalization of the predictor variables by 
subtracting the mean and dividing the difference by their 
standard deviation7. Given the extreme variability in the 
number of answers, we use a log-transformation on the result 
feature (i.e., we predict log10(1+ number of answers)). In our 
initial 
unpublished 
work, 
we 
experimented 
with 
classification techniques (e.g., naïve Bayes, logistic 
regression) to predict the likelihood of success of a node. 
Since the results were not very encouraging, we switched to 
multiple linear regression. In linear regression, the aim is to 
learn a function of the form fSL(s) = Σ wigi (s), where wi is the 
weight for the ith feature of node s, gi(s).  The function fSL(s) 
can then be used by a heuristic module to assess the quality 
of nodes. The values of wi are determined by minimizing the 
metric root mean squared error (RMSE). The R software was 
used to estimate the values of wi [R Core Team 2015]. We 
used the repeated random sub-sampling approach and 10-
fold cross validation to validate our model. While using the 
former method, 90% of the data was selected at random for 
                                                 
7 Missing feature values are ignored during normalization, and 
then set to zero during training. This ensures that they are minimally 
informative because they are equal to the mean of the distribution 
[Hutter et al. 2014]. 
training and the rest were used as the test set. This process 
was repeated 50 times. The mean RMSE from the two 
validation methods was 0.47 and 0.76 respectively. Multiple 
R2 and adjusted R2 for this model were equal to 0.76, and the 
F-statistic was 1.8*105.  
 For a variety of reasons, the features can be uninformative, 
correlated or redundant. Therefore, we use feature selection 
methods to identify a small set of features that explains the 
variance in data as well as the full set of features8.  Such  
analysis helps us to identify properties of nodes that strongly 
affect empirical performance. The set of best 10 features as 
identified by an exhaustive subset selection method is shown 
in bold in Figure 2. The R2 value of subset models with these 
10 features converged to that of models with all inputs. The 
presence of features such as “Knuth’s tree size estimate” 
[Knuth 1975], “ratio of number of positive and negative 
literals” and “(number of transformation links)2” in the 
selected list suggests the following: (i) Locally available 
information is insufficient for predicting the complexity of 
search space, and probing features play an important role in 
guiding a search. (ii) ensuring that the search graph has the 
right shape is of critical importance, and reasoners need to 
find the balance between “depth-first” and “breadth-first” 
search; (iii) negated literals and disjunctive queries are more 
difficult to answer. In the next section, we evaluate how these 
heuristics help the inference engine in answering queries. 
  
6 Experimental Results 
 
The selection of benchmark instances for testing the efficacy 
of heuristics is an important factor in any empirical analysis. 
Our selection of problem instances was guided by two 
principles: (i) The benchmark set should consist of queries 
that are intrinsically difficult to solve for the inference 
engine. Therefore, we excluded simple queries that can be 
answered without any backchaining in a few milliseconds 
(e.g., (isa MarvinMinsky Person), (genls Dog Carnivore)). 
We focused on queries that needed several transformations 
(i.e., depth of rule back-chaining) to be answered. (ii) While 
artificially crafted and randomly generated problem instances 
are very useful for understanding how syntactic properties 
affect the behavior of algorithms, the right methodology for 
generating such instances has not received much attention in 
the commonsense reasoning community. Therefore, this 
work focused on problems from real-world applications.  The 
Cyc KB has thousands of queries that have been created by 
knowledge engineers and programmers for various projects 
(e.g., Project HALO [Friedland et al. 2004], HPKB project 
[Cohen et al. 1998]) and for testing the question-answering 
capability of the system. These queries are of varying levels 
of difficulty: some of them need just one transformation, 
others required the inference engine to back-chain on heavily 
used predicates that can lead to huge fan-out and high search 
8 We have experimented with forward, backward and exhaustive 
subset selection methods. All three methods lead to very similar set 
of selected features.  

cost. We ensured that queries of both types were well 
represented in our test sets9. Based on the terms mentioned in 
them, the queries were divided into three test sets: (i) Test Set 
1: Military and asymmetrical warfare domain, (ii) Test Set 2: 
Biology domain, and (iii) Test Set 3: Others (e.g., 
commonsense queries). The English translation of a query 
from test set 2 is shown below: 
 
What causes the decline in MPF activity in M Phase? 
 
The question shown above would lead to the query10 
(causes-SitTypeSitType 
?cause 
MPFActivityDroppingInMPhase).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recall that the inference engine uses a set of heuristics for 
ordering nodes during search, and the net score of a node can 
be written as f(s) = w0+ w1.fDT(s)+ w2.fSL(s). Here, fDT(s)and 
fSL(s) refer to the scores returned by decision tree and 
statistical learning models discussed above. The first term, 
w0, is the score returned by heuristics not discussed in this 
paper. In Table 3, the “baseline” version is obtained by 
setting both w1 and w2 to zero. By setting w2 to 0, we can 
assess the efficacy of decision tree heuristics (rows labeled 
“DT” in Table 3). Similarly, we can study the utility of 
statistical learning models by setting w1 to 0 (rows labeled 
“SL” in Table 3). The net contribution of both methods is 
shown in rows labeled “DT+SL.” The experimental data was 
collected on a 4-core 3.40 GHz Intel processor with 32 GB of 
RAM. We used 18,383 decision trees, and ten best features 
identified by subset selection in these experiments.  Due to 
                                                 
9 The difficulty level of these queries can be gauged by looking 
at the average time requirements of the “baseline” version in Table 
3. Initially some of the queries in our test set could not be answered 
in 20 minutes. 
the large time requirements of these queries, we restricted the 
cutoff time of each query to 5 minutes.  Table 3 contains the 
results for three test sets. We see that both decision trees and 
multiple regression based models have led to significant 
speedups. The average speedup is a factor of 14. Since these 
heuristics steer the inference engine towards more productive 
parts of the search space, they improve question-answering 
(Q/A) performance too. The fifth column in Table 3 (labeled 
“Q/A Imp. (%)”) shows the improvement in Q/A 
performance with respect to the baseline.  
        
7 Conclusion 
 
Deep deductive reasoning over large commonsense 
knowledge bases is critical for modern AI systems. The 
intractability of first-order logic has presented interesting 
research opportunities for understanding the causes of 
problem hardness and developing new algorithms for 
surmounting them. In this article, we have described two 
techniques to make reasoning more efficient. The first uses 
decision trees to guide the search toward germane rules by 
representing the semantic context in which a rule is expected 
to produce results. The second uses statistical regression 
techniques to provide an estimate of the number of answers a 
node is expected to provide based on search meta-features. 
The inference engine uses these heuristics to order nodes 
during search. Experimental results over thousands of queries 
show an order of magnitude speedup.  These 
results 
suggest several lines of future work. First, we need to test 
these heuristics over even larger set of queries to understand 
their dynamics. Second, we want to extend our decision tree 
implementation to make probabilistic assessments. Next, we 
would like to experiment with other statistical models (e.g., 
regression splines, random forests) to improve the model 
quality. Finally, we believe that coupling this approach with 
a decision-theoretic model [Smith 1989, Greiner 1991] could 
yield a more complete theoretical model for making 
reasoning more efficient.
