Uncertainty Resolution in Misinformation Detection
Yury Orlovskiy1, Camille Thibault2, Anne Imouza3, Jean-François Godbout2,
Reihaneh Rabbany3, Kellin Pelrine3
1University of California, Berkeley
2Université de Montréal
3McGill University; Mila
Abstract
Misinformation poses a variety of risks, such as
undermining public trust and distorting factual
discourse. Large Language Models (LLMs)
like GPT-4 have been shown effective in miti-
gating misinformation, particularly in handling
statements where enough context is provided.
However, they struggle to assess ambiguous or
context-deficient statements accurately. This
work introduces a new method to resolve un-
certainty in such statements. We propose a
framework to categorize missing information
and publish category labels for the LIAR-New
dataset, which is adaptable to cross-domain
content with missing information. We then
leverage this framework to generate effective
user queries for missing context. Compared
to baselines, our method improves the rate at
which generated questions are answerable by
the user by 38 percentage points and classifica-
tion performance by over 10 percentage points
macro F1. Thus, this approach may provide a
valuable component for future misinformation
mitigation pipelines.
1
Introduction
In the era of digital content, both human-made and,
more recently, AI-generated (Zhou et al., 2023),
misinformation poses a significant societal chal-
lenge. The proliferation of misinformation presents
various threats, including undermining public trust
(Ognyanova et al., 2020), spreading health misin-
formation during pandemics (Li et al., 2022), and
influencing political discourse (Bovet and Makse,
2019; Meel and Vishwakarma, 2020).
As the
landscape of information dissemination evolves,
it becomes increasingly important to build reliable
tools for identifying and mitigating misinformation.
With the advent of large language models (LLMs),
there is growing interest in utilizing these models,
particularly the more advanced ones, as tools for
detecting and mitigating misinformation. Previous
work suggests (Pelrine et al., 2023) that models
like GPT-4 can effectively evaluate the veracity of
statements and thus could help reducing the spread
of misinformation in the public sphere.
This paper aims to enhance misinformation mit-
igation tools using GPT-4, focusing on resolving
uncertainties and accurately assessing the truthful-
ness of statements with ambiguous or incomplete
context. While GPT-4 efficiently evaluates well-
contextualized statements, it struggles with state-
ments lacking sufficient context. We identify two
strategies for resolving uncertainty: querying users
for missing information and web retrieval. Our
work primarily centers on querying the user. Using
the LIAR-New dataset, we explore various methods
to improve uncertainty resolution. We formalize
guidelines on when to query the user for missing
information, how to formulate effective questions,
and address whether supplementing missing details
aids GPT-4 in resolving statement uncertainties.
Our main contributions are:
• Developing a comprehensive framework for clas-
sifying missing information in ambiguous state-
ments by category, and publishing category la-
bels for the entire LIAR-New dataset to facilitate
future research in content-specific misinforma-
tion mitigation tools.
• Demonstrating a 38 percentage point improve-
ment in answerability compared to generic ap-
proaches, and a 15% Macro F1 improvement
in veracity evaluation and 36% more uncertainty
resolution with GPT-4 on LIAR-New when given
missing information from the user.
• Establishing guidelines for determining when to
query users for missing information based on
the type of information initially provided. Using
these, we show GPT-4’s ability to identify miss-
ing information types, decide if user querying is
needed, and formulate appropriate queries.
The category labels are available on GitHub.1
1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/LIAR-New-category-labels-D7B5/
arXiv:2401.01197v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2024

2
Related Works
Previous works such as Pelrine et al. (2023); Hsu
et al. (2023) have highlighted how misinformation
detection systems can struggle with insufficient
context and ambiguous inputs. Pelrine et al. (2023)
showed how many example statements from fact-
checking websites could be impossible to evaluate
in isolation due to missing speaker, date, geopoliti-
cal, or other contexts. They created the LIAR-New
dataset labeled to indicate whether given statements
had sufficient context for veracity evaluation. They
also recommended future work focused on web
retrieval to develop systems capable of retrieving
information when it is missing. However, in many
of these cases there is a chicken-and-egg problem:
without the context, it is often impossible to set
up relevant web queries. In this work, we address
this key limitation by introducing a new methodol-
ogy to determine whether it is more appropriate to
query the web or to consult the system’s user, and
an effective approach for the latter.
We leverage the insights from recent studies on
LLM-based methods for addressing ambiguity in
questions and statements to resolve uncertainty and
improve misinformation detection. In designing
methods for resolving uncertainty, we consider
guidelines for when to query the user for infor-
mation from Aliannejadi et al. (2020), and use
prior clarifying question research to understand
what types of queries humans find most natural
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and useful (Wang et al.,
2023). A key influence on our work is the CLAM
(Clarify-if-Ambiguous) framework, which signif-
icantly improves language model performance
in selective clarification question-answering tasks
(Kuhn et al., 2023). The CLAM framework enables
LLMs to detect ambiguous user queries, generate
clarifying questions, and provide a final answer
using the provided information.
We adapt the CLAM’s approach for resolving
uncertainty in cases where the required clarifying
information is expected to be sourced from the
user. We integrate the CLAM’s methodology with
our newly introduced information category classi-
fication using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting
(Wei et al., 2023) to generate user queries. This
approach both yields better-quality questions and
ensures that the clarification process is contextu-
ally relevant, focusing precisely on the key missing
information.
3
Data
We use the LIAR-New dataset, which includes
1,957 statements scraped from the Politfact website
after September 2021 (Pelrine et al., 2023). This
dataset has human-annotated possibility labels for
whether a statement’s veracity can be evaluated.
Specifically, each statement is classified as either
possible, hard, or impossible to verify. A statement
is considered impossible if there is missing context
that cannot be resolved. A statement is consid-
ered hard if the claim is missing context that makes
it hard to evaluate, but it might still be possible.
For our experiments, given the possible statements
already have sufficient context to be correctly val-
idated, we use the hard and impossible ones only,
totaling 1,030 statements.
4
Methodology
Categorizing Missing Information
To resolve
ambiguity in statements, we want to determine the
optimal use of web retrieval versus querying the
user. Our motivation is to both maximize the ef-
fectiveness of web retrieval, and only burden the
user with queries when web retrieval is not feasi-
ble. For instance, ambiguities like an unidentified
speaker require user input, whereas web retrieval
could be effective directly for statements where
context is missing, but can be narrowed down, like
referencing a law in a particular state. To develop
a methodology for deciding between user queries
and web retrieval, we investigate if the type of miss-
ing information affects the best retrieval strategy.
We began by identifying common types of miss-
ing information in the LIAR-New dataset. This
classification task involved a combination of man-
ual statement review and word frequency analysis
on GPT-4 responses to prompts requesting identi-
fication of missing information in statements. For
an in-depth description of this methodology, the
prompts used, and detailed data analysis, please
refer to Appendix C. Through manual review of
the statements in combination with the GPT-4 re-
sponse analysis, we arrived at 6 main categories of
missing information in the LIAR-New dataset:
1. Speaker or person
2. Location
3. Textual context and subject specification
4. Non-textual evidence
5. Date and time period
6. Other (does not belong to any of the other cate-
gories).

We then manually classified all hard and impos-
sible statements with 3 human labelers, finding that
the first 5 categories cover 97.2% of critical missing
information in the LIAR-New dataset. We acknowl-
edge that some statements are missing information
from 2 or more categories, however for this classifi-
cation task, the labelers only reported the category
related to the most critical piece of missing infor-
mation in each statement. Adding category labels
to the LIAR-New dataset is beneficial for two key
reasons. First, it is critical for understanding the
relationship between missing information and un-
certainty resolution strategy in our work. Second,
it offers a structured framework for understanding
the types of missing information, which can be use-
ful for the future development of content-specific
tools aimed at resolving uncertainty.
Guidelines for User Queries
In making the de-
cision between web retrieval and querying the user,
our guidelines are grounded in practicality and ne-
cessity. We assume the each user has key knowl-
edge related to the speaker, location, date, and any
non-textual references in a statement, when this
context is both unattainable through other means
and is vital for assessing a statement’s veracity. For
instance, in the statement “We need filibuster re-
form, and I’ve always been very clear about that.”
the speaker can only be specified by the user, and
the user must provide missing information for ve-
racity evaluation.
Similarly, when a statement
refers to non-textual evidence (“Image shows Don-
ald Trump’s new Christmas card."), it is impossible
to identify the evidence the statement is referring
to without user input. Conversely, we avoid burden-
ing the user with queries when we think the context
can be narrowed down to a specific source or event.
For instance, the statement “CBS News reported
that two more suspects were arrested in the Buffalo
shooting, and that one more victim was identified”
does not specify which shooting is being referred
to, but it is likely possible to search through CBS
reports online to find the necessary information.
Uncertainty Resolution
To evaluate uncertainty
resolution through user queries, we simulate how
they would use GPT-4, focusing on statements
where the missing information aligns with the user
knowledge as defined by our guidelines. We use
a variation of the CLAM framework, and use a
2 LLM approach with GPT-4 (Kuhn et al., 2023).
In this framework, LLM A receives an ambiguous
statement, and generates a question regarding the
missing information in that statement by picking
one of the 5 categories with the most critical piece
of missing information outlined above. To make
sure LLM A asks questions relevant to the specific
category, we also ask it to classify which category it
chooses in formulating a question. Although some
statements have missing information from more
than one category, we focus on the most critical so
we can verify question relevance using our human-
made category labels. LLM B simulates the user,
and answers the question about the statement using
the Politifact article as context, in accordance with
the guidelines on types of information that it can
provide. LLM A then evaluates the veracity of the
statement, using the context provided by LLM B.
The full methodology of this approach and cate-
gory classification accuracy results are provided in
the Appendix A.
In assessing the effectiveness of uncertainty reso-
lution, we focus on two primary metrics: the Macro
F1 score for truthfulness classification and the num-
ber of resolved statements, where GPT-4 accurately
evaluates the veracity without uncertainty.
We
choose Macro F1 over accuracy as our key metric
to account for the dataset’s imbalance, where 85%
of the statements are false. For our baseline, we use
results from uncertainty-enabled (where the LLM
is explicitly prompted that it can abstain on cases
where it isn’t confident) and uncertainty-disabled
veracity evaluation prompts, both without any con-
textual information. As an Oracle Benchmark for
performance comparison, we apply the same types
of prompts but supplemented them with the full
content of Politifact articles, excluding veracity la-
bels. We then compare the performance of a variety
of strategies for resolving uncertainty using user
feedback. We tried a generic question generative
approach with a 2 LLM system described earlier
(generic QA), a fill-in-the-blank approach where
an GPT-4 would fill in context that a user will have
(speaker, location, date). Lastly, we tried a 2 LLM
system with a category based question-generation
prompt (Category-based QA).
5
Experiments
Uncertainty Resolution Results
We find that
compared to other strategies, the 2 LLM approach
with user questions based on categories of miss-
ing information (Category-based QA) is the most
effective approach for two reasons. First, it demon-
strates substantial improvements in veracity evalu-

Table 1: Veracity valuation results for uncertainty resolution strategies. Resolving uncertainty using feedback from
questions generated with categories of missing information shows strong improvement compared to baseline.
Experiment
Macro F1 (%)
Accuracy (%)
Percent Resolution (%)
Baseline (uncertainty disabled)
56.54
79.44
93.49
Baseline (uncertainty enabled)
71.76
91.28
16.70
Fill-in-the-blank method
79.60
91.79
20.09
Category-based QA
85.43
91.03
22.72
Category-based QA (uncertainty disabled)
68.90
81.10
90.30
Oracle Benchmark
96.71
99.16
69.41
ation and uncertainty resolution. Second, it creates
queries that are specific enough to be answered by
the user (i.e., answerability), compared to other ap-
proaches that result in general questions that are
more difficult to answer.
We observed a 36% improvement in uncertainty
resolution from the baseline and a 15% improve-
ment in Macro F1 using both uncertainty-enabled
(when GPT-4 can opt out of evaluating veracity)
prompt, and a 14% improvement in Macro F1 in the
disabled (when GPT-4 must rate the statement True
or False) evaluation prompts with the category-
based QA (Table 1). In the uncertainty-enabled
case, Category-based QA also outperforms the fill-
in-the-blank approach where GPT-4 has access to
the speaker, location, and date for every statement
(when this information is provided in the Politifact
article). This can be possibly explained by spe-
cific questions being more effective at retrieving
information, and that irrelevant context added may
increase confusion around GPT-4’s predictions (see
also Appendix B.1). Overall, these results show
the effectiveness of obtaining specific relevant in-
formation using question generation, compared to
both baselines lacking that information, and the fill-
in-the-blank method where GPT-4 sources context
without understanding what is missing.
To assess the answerability of questions gen-
erated by our category-based approach, two hu-
man labelers (anonymous authors) independently
rated the answerability of questions for 100 ran-
domly selected statements in LIAR-New from our
method and from a generic zero shot prompt to
generate user questions (without leveraging our
categorization). This labeling was done without
knowing which method generated the question.
The results indicated that only 51% of questions
from the generic approach were actually answer-
able by users, in contrast to 89% with our approach,
with 82% agreement from both labelers. Addition-
ally, we observe that in a 2 LLM approach for
question generation and answering, the length of
questions and answers for generic inquiries is 2-3
times longer, often making the answer exceed the
question’s scope, leading to performance that looks
good on paper but relies on information a real user
would be unlikely to have. We provide examples
of questions and answers in the Appendix B.2.
Other Results
3 authors labeled a random sam-
ple of 100 statements from LIAR-New on the ap-
propriate strategy between user query and web re-
trieval for uncertainty resolution. We found that
the user query percentage was highest for cate-
gories representing missing speaker, location and
visual evidence. For the full breakdown by cate-
gory, please refer to the Appendix F.3. In Appendix
F.2, we provide results on classifying categories of
missing information independent from querying
the user, showing that GPT-4 can achieve reason-
able accuracy. This may provide a tool for analysis
of ambiguity and missing context in other datasets.
6
Conclusion
This paper introduced a framework for classifying
missing information in the LIAR-New dataset and
provided category labels that enhance the model’s
ability to handle statements with insufficient con-
text. Our approach, centering on user queries to
retrieve specific missing details, significantly im-
proves GPT-4’s performance.
We hope that this work provides a method to
build more comprehensive misinformation mitiga-
tion approaches, and that the categorization of miss-
ing information on the LIAR-New dataset opens
future research directions. In subsequent work,
we plan to integrate our approach here with web
retrieval, optimizing the web queries the system
produces. We also plan to create a comprehensive
pipeline to handle ambiguity and missing context.
We will then validate our uncertainty resolution ap-
proach with user testing in addition to experiments
on academic datasets like LIAR-New.

7
