1 
 
A Semi-supervised Approach for Activity 
Recognition from Indoor Trajectory Data 
 
Mashud Rana, Ashfaqur Rahman, and Daniel Smith 
 
   Abstract—The increasingly wide usage of location aware 
sensors has made it possible to collect large volume of trajectory 
data in diverse application domains. Machine learning allows to 
study the activities or behaviours of moving objects (e.g., people, 
vehicles, 
robot) 
using 
such 
trajectory 
data 
with 
rich 
spatiotemporal information to facilitate informed strategic and 
operational decision making. In this study, we consider the task 
of classifying the activities of moving objects from their noisy 
indoor trajectory data in a collaborative manufacturing 
environment. Activity recognition can help manufacturing 
companies to develop appropriate management policies, and 
optimise safety, productivity, and efficiency. We present a semi-
supervised machine learning approach that first applies an 
information theoretic criterion to partition a long trajectory into 
a set of segments such that the object exhibits homogeneous 
behaviour within each segment. The segments are then labelled 
automatically based on a constrained hierarchical clustering 
method. Finally, a deep learning classification model based on 
convolutional neural networks is trained on trajectory segments 
and the generated pseudo labels. The proposed approach has 
been evaluated on a dataset containing indoor trajectories of 
multiple workers collected from a tricycle assembly workshop. 
The proposed approach is shown to achieve high classification 
accuracy (F-score varies between 0.81 to 0.95 for different 
trajectories) using only a small proportion of labelled trajectory 
segments. 
 
Index Terms—Activity recognition, behaviour classification, 
trajectory analytics, smart manufacturing, deep learning, semi-
supervised model.   
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
ANUFACTURING systems form a vital part of the 
society and economy, providing jobs to workers 
and products to consumers. The manufacturing 
industry is continuously developing new initiatives (such as 
Industry 4.0, Industrial Internet) to transform traditional 
manufacturing 
paradigms. 
Smart 
manufacturing 
is 
a 
technology-driven approach to improve various factors 
affecting the performance of manufacturing systems through 
the integration of sensor data, analytics and automation [1]. 
The computational analysis of data streams collected from 
 
This research was supported by the Future Digital Manufacturing Fund 
(FDMF) at Data61, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO), Australia. Thanks to Reena Kapoor, Peter 
Baumgartner, and Elena Tartaglia for providing feedback on different sections 
of the paper. 
Mashud Rana, Ashfaqur Rahman, and Daniel Smith are with Data61, 
CSIRO, 
Australia. 

 
Internet of Things (IoT) based sensors at various stages of 
production enables evidence-based decision making, and 
provides a systematic way to  monitor and improve 
manufacturing systems [2, 3].  
Numerous studies investigated the diverse machine learning 
and data mining techniques for analysing heterogenous data 
for a great variety of manufacturing applications. A few 
prominent applications include fault detection and diagnostic 
[4], predictive analytics [5], quality control and monitoring 
[6], efficiency monitoring [7], process optimisation [8], 
product life cycle management [9], workflow evaluation [10], 
indoor space modelling [11],  streamlining supply chains [12], 
and safety [13]. Most of these studies primarily focused on 
utilising the data collected from workstations or equipment via 
accelerometers, gyroscopes, magnetometers etc. Moreover, 
many of the key dynamics of a manufacturing process can be 
observed from trajectory data that has been collected by using 
tracking devices attached to entities or objects. Trajectory data 
consists of the spatial coordinates of an object as a function of 
time as well as the features describing the object that is being 
tracked. In a manufacturing system, the movement of 
materials, vehicles, products, logistics, tools, and workers can 
be used to determine its current state. Translating these 
observations into meaningful insights is the realm of 
movement analytics [14], where machine learning and other 
statistical methods are used to uncover object semantics based 
on its movement patterns.  
In this study, we are interested in a specific aspect of 
movement analytics, viz., activity recognition. Activity 
recognition is generally defined as the task of identifying the 
actions of objects from a series of motion related 
measurements captured by sensors [15, 16]. It can play a vital 
role 
to 
identify 
inefficiencies 
or 
bottlenecks 
within 
manufacturing processes. It also helps to identify the possible 
reasons behind the deviation of the relevant entities from their 
expected behaviours. The decision makers can use this 
information to develop appropriate management policies, and 
optimise the safety, productivity, and efficiency. For example, 
a worker may move back and forth between workstations for 
several reasons including delivery of items produced to co-
workers for subsequent processing, finding misplaced or 
missing tools. Obviously, it is a problematic activity and 
indicative of operational inefficiencies if the visits are related 
to searching for misplaced tools or components. Hence, 
identifying which tools or workstations are involved in these 
activities could help to identify the problems within the 
manufacturing process which is a prerequisite for improving 
operational efficiency.  
M 

2 
 
Although activity recognition has widespread application 
across different fields (e.g., retail ([17, 18]), health [19, 20]), 
tourism [21], construction [22]), it has rarely been studied with 
respect to  manufacturing applications. Several studies (e.g., 
[23-25]) provide insights on the current state of the literature 
to detect, recognize, and monitor activities utilising diverse 
datasets and methods. The two main approaches for activity 
recognition are either vision-based or sensor-based [24]. 
Vision-based approaches utilise cameras to passively capture 
video of the entities of interest, while sensor-based approaches 
commonly use time series from motion sensors (i.e., 
accelerometers, gyroscopes) attached to the entities. In 
contrast to most of these previous studies, we aim to develop a 
model for human activity recognition using spatiotemporal 
trajectories 
acquired 
with 
sensor-based 
localisation 
technologies. Activity recognition especially from indoor 
trajectory data is challenging due to spontaneous nature of 
human movement within a limited indoor space [16]. In 
contrast to outdoor trajectory data of the objects moving over 
large geographical area (e.g., vehicle or tourist trajectories in 
cities, vessels trajectories in oceans), indoor trajectory covers 
a small area with overlaps. The frequent movement of human 
within a small indoor area makes the indoor trajectory data 
noisy and difficult to model. Moreover, majority of activity 
recognition approaches use supervised machine learning 
models, which rely upon large sets of labelled data (ground 
truth) for the training of classification models [15]. Generating 
labelled datasets is a labour intensive and costly process that 
can be a major bottleneck for using supervised machine 
learning. For activity recognition, it is often unwieldly to 
manually label the large number of segments pertaining to the 
different activities that may be present across time. Hence, in 
this study we adopt semi-supervised learning, which only 
requires fewer labelled segments as examples to train the 
activity recognition model.  
Specifically, our contributions in this paper can be 
summarised as follows. We develop an approach for human 
activity recognition from spatiotemporal trajectory data in an 
indoor environment. The proposed approach consists of three 
steps. Firstly, each complete trajectory is partitioned into a set 
of segments by optimising an information coding metric, the 
minimum description length. Partitioning allows to identify 
and classify the different activities of a worker across different 
time periods of their work shift. Secondly, the pseudo labels of 
the trajectory segments were then generated based on a 
constrained hierarchical clustering which requires a small set 
of labelled segments. Finally, a Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN) based deep learning model is trained using the pseudo 
labels of the trajectory segments. The model was then used to 
classify the raw trajectories into a sequence of worker 
activities. While the different components of the developed 
approach (like trajectory partitioning, clustering, convolutional 
neural networks) are all well-known, we emphasise that the 
overall architecture combining these components is new for 
semi-supervised activity recognition especially utilising indoor 
trajectory data. We evaluate the proposed approach by using a 
dataset of workers’ trajectories that were collected with a 
motion capture positioning system during a tricycle assembly 
process. We aim to identify a set of target activities specific to 
the 
manufacturing 
working 
environment: 
standing 
at 
workstation, moving randomly, moving between workstations, 
restocking. However, we note that our approach is generic and 
can be applied to such other activities as well, thus preserving 
the motivation for helping improve operational efficiency. 
This study is the first of its kind to design and develop a semi-
supervised machine learning activity recognition model based 
on indoor trajectory data for manufacturing application. 
II. RELATED WORK 
The technological innovations in tracking systems and IoT 
based sensors have made it possible to collect data from 
moving objects over space and time. In the era of cyber-
physical systems, machine learning has been an integral part 
of smart manufacturing to develop analytics utilising such data 
for intelligent decision making [5]. Numerous studies (e.g., [6, 
7, 26-28]) in the literature investigated the application of 
machine learning to support different applications. In this 
section, we review previous research related to the application 
of machine learning in manufacturing. Whilst reviewing the 
literature, we limit the scope to movement analytics in the 
manufacturing domain and activity recognition in general.  
A. Movement Analytics in Manufacturing 
Movement analytics (also known as trajectory data 
analytics) refers to the process of extraction and utilisation of 
knowledge from tracking data for providing meaningful 
solutions to decision makers [14]. The spatiotemporal tracking 
data can be utilised for optimising the production processes in 
manufacturing and developing domain specific applications. 
Szabo et al. [10] studied the feasibility of different Real Time 
Locating Systems (RTLS) for capturing location data of 
moving 
objects 
to 
support 
different 
applications 
in 
manufacturing. They also presented a use case to identify the 
bottlenecks in defined production zones and measure cycle 
time deviation at the workstations in an automotive company. 
To identify the bottlenecks (in terms of temporary storage or 
unplanned workstations in the production process), they 
grouped the position data by applying the k-means clustering 
algorithm. The cycle time of workstations was measured based 
on classified zone data that were visualized later to provide 
real-time status of the production process. Arkan and Van 
Landeghem [29] considered improving Work-in-Process 
(WIP) visibility in the semi-automated shop floor of an 
automotive manufacturing company. They utilised the 
spatiotemporal data collected with RTLS from a multi-item 
production line to compute a set of Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) such as cycle time, cycle speed, production 
time, defect reject ratio and workspace utilization. These KPIs 
were then analysed to evaluate the existing workflow and 
redesign the floor with a simulation tool. Similarly, Gyulai et 
al. [30] developed analytics to  compute KPIs (from simulated 
trajectory data) to evaluate the performance of a production 
system and facilitate the implementation of situation aware 
production control.  

3 
 
Moreover, different objects are likely to work together in a 
collaborative manufacturing environment. Therefore, it is 
important for the objects to efficiently and accurately identify 
the task plans of others and respond in a safe manner. Chen et 
al. [13] presented an analytics framework to predict human 
trajectories and to infer the work plan to facilitate safe and 
effective collaboration between objects (human and robots). A 
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent networks was 
used to model the temporal dynamics of sequential movement 
data and Bayesian inference method was applied to infer  the 
potential plans of workers utilising LSTM based predictions. 
Locklin et al. [31] also predicted future positions of human 
trajectories by fitting a second degree polynomial function to 
historical location data to enable collaboration amongst a large 
number of workers in the indoor space. Zhang et al. [32] 
proposed an LSTM based method to predict the future motion 
trajectory of human operators for facilitating a robot’s action 
planning and execution in a car engine assembly factory. 
Wang et al. [33] proposed a similarity based model for 
trajectory prediction within indoor spaces. Specifically, they 
applied the k-Nearest Neighbours (kNN) algorithm to find a 
trajectory from the database that was most similar to the given 
trajectory. The next location of the given trajectory was then 
predicted from the path of similar trajectory. The main novelty 
of this model was the formulation of a distance metric that 
considered both the spatial and semantic distance between 
trajectories, which were computed based on the longest 
common sub sequences and dynamic time warping, 
respectively. 
Furthermore, the optimal utilisation of available indoor 
space (such as shop floor, production floor, etc.) is vital for 
mass production. Movement data can be used to understand 
the geospatial interaction patterns between objects, and hence, 
helps to design more efficient factory layouts. Han et al. [11] 
presented a method to study  indoor space utilisation based on 
the common movement patterns in the trajectory data of  
multiple users. They first partitioned  each trajectory into a set 
of segments by optimising an information theoretic criterion 
and then grouped the segments from all of the trajectories into 
a set of clusters by applying the GDBSCAN algorithm [34]. 
The clustering results were used to identify  heavily utilised 
regions and visualize the evolution of utilisation over time for 
the better design of indoor spaces in the future. Additionally, 
Cai et al. [35] proposed a spatiotemporal data model for 
monitoring IoT enabled production systems. Their model 
combined the principle of the Apriori algorithm [36] and depth 
first search to find the frequent trajectory patterns of WIP. Bu 
[37] also described a framework based on the Apriori 
algorithm to mine frequent path patterns from the massive 
amounts of tracking data. This enabled material flow paths to 
be adjusted and helped to reschedule the route of automatic 
guided vehicle robots in a production environment. 
B. Activity Recognition 
Recognising the activities of objects (people, vehicles, 
robots) is a key factor in developing appropriate strategies for 
industrial applications in many domains including but not 
limited to retail ([17, 18]), health ([19, 20]), construction 
([22])  and transport ([38]). Shum et al. [39] reviewed 
utilisation of different types of tracking data collected in 
variety of domains for human activity recognition. Arslan et 
al. [22] developed a model for workers’ activity recognition at 
hazardous construction sites for improving safety management 
strategies. The raw GPS data was transformed into semantic 
trajectories to label mobility related activities in terms of their 
building environment. A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) was 
then trained using the semantic trajectories to classify the 
mobility patterns of workers. Polanti et al. [17] developed an 
intelligent system to improve the shopping experience by 
utilising the movement trajectories of customers in retail 
environments. A HMM was trained with the shopping  
trajectories of customers  in order to predict the customer’s  
future shopping preferences. The system then  presented a 
route map to direct customers to their preferred products in the 
retail store. Alahi et al. [38] proposed social LSTM, a model 
to predict human movement within crowds utilising their 
spatial trajectories. Given the motion of individuals within a 
crowded space are affected by the behaviour of others, the 
social LSTM architecture modelled these spatial interactions. 
The movement of individuals were represented by separate 
LSTMs and a shared pooling layer was used to connect the 
latent states of all the individuals (their LSTMs) within the 
crowded space. The social LSTM was then used to predict the 
future movement of individuals and groups of individuals. 
Several studies investigated activity recognition from indoor 
tracking data to detect early symptoms of abnormal 
behaviours or health risks. Gochoo et al. [19] presented a non-
obtrusive  activity recognition model for elderly people living 
alone. The indoor tracking data of individuals was converted 
into two-dimensional activity images that were then used to 
train a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) with a 
predefined set of home activity classes. The application of 
DCNN and other machine learning models including Random 
Forest (RF) and Gradient Boosting (GBM) were also 
investigated in [40] for the detection of dementia related 
behaviours of elderly people using movement data. Similarly, 
Fang et al. [41] identified abnormal behaviour patterns linked 
with different health risks in order  to prevent their occurrence. 
A hybrid model based on an LSTM and Grey Model was 
proposed using the past movement data of an individual to 
predict their future location and activity class. In contrast to 
the continuous valued position data considered in our study, 
the trajectory data used in [19, 40, 41] consists of binary 
on/off signals  from a set of fixed indoor sensors.  
Moreover, Yu et al. [42] presented a feature-oriented method 
for identifying truck parking behaviours from the vehicle’s 
trajectory data. The raw GPS trajectories were processed to 
extract a set of exploratory features and then association rule 
mining was applied to the extracted features to identify legal 
and illegal parking patterns. Lei [43] described a framework to 
identify the anomalous behaviour of vessels travelling in 
maritime space from their trajectories. The framework mapped 
the trajectories into spatial regions by applying a grid based 
clustering algorithm and then extracted features reflecting the 

4 
 
spatial, sequential, and behavioural characteristics. The 
movement behaviours of the vessels were then classified using 
a probabilistic suffix tree which utilised those features as 
inputs. Likewise, Chatzikokolakis et al. [44] applied RF model 
on vessels trajectories to identify search and rescue activities. 
Kim et al. [45] developed a clustering based method to 
discover travel patterns utilising vehicle trajectory data in a 
traffic network. The vehicle trajectories were first grouped by 
applying a density based clustering algorithm using the 
Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) distance metric. The 
overlapping LCS from all the clusters were then merged using 
hierarchical 
clustering 
to 
generate 
 
travel 
patterns 
representative of the dataset. New trajectories were then 
classified by matching them against the clusters of 
representative travel patterns.  Song et al. [46] presented a 
deep recurrent neural network architecture to simultaneously 
solve multiple learning tasks using spatial trajectories across 
large scale transportation networks. The future motion of an 
individual and their transportation mode were simultaneously 
predicted using a hierarchical network of LSTMs that 
represent motion across different temporal scales. Two LSTM 
based encoders were utilised to represent the inputs of each 
task separately, two LSTMs were used to create a shared 
feature representation and a pair of LSTM decoders that were 
used to generate the outputs of each task. 
C. Summary 
Trajectory data can play a vital role in smart and adaptive 
manufacturing. However, the above review indicates recent 
activity recognition methods utilising tracking data have not 
been well studied in the context of manufacturing. The 
existing studies primarily utilised trajectory data for workflow 
evaluation. There exists many applications that required 
regular monitoring of activities or understanding the 
behaviours of moving objects [47]. A few examples of such 
applications include: i) monitoring suspicious activities in 
large industrial workshops or chemical plants for security 
purposes, ii) identifying when a worker interacted with other 
workers to avoid spreading infectious diseases (e.g., COVID) 
and loss of workforce, iii) understanding why and to what 
extent a worker deviated from their intended workflow. On the 
other hand, while numerous research investigated utilisation of 
outdoor trajectory data (collected using GPS) for different 
applications, activity recognition based on indoor tracking 
data is not sufficiently studied especially for manufacturing 
applications. Indoor tracking data covers small area with 
overlaps. Contrast to outdoor trajectories that are relatively 
smoothed, the segments of indoor trajectories are significantly 
shorter and noisy that make the activity recognition task very 
difficult. Given most of the existing methods for activity 
recognition are supervised, they are not well suited to 
manufacturing applications due to the difficulties in collecting 
labelled activity data in such contexts. Hence, it is also 
important to explore the feasibility of semi-supervised 
methods on indoor tracking data. In this study, we aim to 
address these deficits in the literature.  
III. DATASET 
The indoor tracking dataset used in study was collected from 
a tricycle assembly workshop [48]. The workshop consists of 
multiple workstations and provides a dynamic environment for 
the workers during the assembly process with various 
representative industrial scenarios. The dataset is publicly 
available at [49].  
 
 
Fig.  1. Expected workflow of the people at the tricycle 
assembly workshop which consists of several workstations. 
Fig.  1 shows the arrangement of the workstations of the 
tricycle assembly line and the expected movement scenarios 
of the people across the workstations during the assembly 
process. There are six workstations (also called rigs) in the 
assembly line. The worker at each workstation is responsible 
for building certain parts of a tricycle and concurrently works 
in a collaborative manner with others during the assembly 
process. The worker at rig 1 prepares the lower frame of 
tricycles and delivers it to the worker at rig 2 who assembles 
the axle with the lower frame. The worker at rig 3 builds the 
saddle and pedal board, and then supplies these components to 
the worker at rig 4. The worker at rig 4 builds the rear wheel 
axle unit by assembling the units built by the workers at rigs 2 
and 3. The worker at rig 5 assemble the front wheel axle unit. 
Finally, both the front wheel axle and rear wheel axle units are 
assembled to finalise the tricycle construction by the worker at 
rig 6.  
 

5 
 
 
Fig.  2. The processed tracking data of the workers at the 10×9 square meters tricycle assembly workshop. The shaded area (■) 
indicate the work zone where the workstations are placed, and the colors of the trajectory lines indicate data collection time.  
 
Six tricycles are expected to be built within three hours of 
operation. The workstations can hold the components required 
for the assembly of three tricycles. Hence, the workers need to 
restock the required components from the storage area when 
initial stocking is finished after the first round of work, or if 
there are any missing components or tools. During the 
assembly process each person is responsible for the pre-
assigned task, can go to help co-workers or take breaks as 
necessary. For more details on the site setup and data 
collection procedure, we refer to the previous study [48].  
 
 
 
Fig.  3. Distribution (%) of the spatial points for six trajectories at the tricycle assembly workshop. 
 
Movement data of the workers in the workshop were 
recorded using a Motion Captured (MoCap) system [50] for 3 
hours of operation. Mocap systems provides better indoor 
positioning 
accuracy 
compared 
to 
other 
available 

6 
 
technologies. The interval between consecutive data samples 
varies between 10 to 100 milliseconds. We down sample the 
raw trajectory data for each worker to 1 sample per second to 
synchronise the interval between successive samples and 
reduce the number of missing samples. Fig.  2 shows the 
processed trajectory data of each worker during the entire data 
collection period. The tracking data shows that the workers 
deviate from their planned movement protocol and visit  
locations outside of the defined assembly zones as well. These 
deviations could be associated with taking a break or other 
unknown behaviours (e.g., activity of moving randomly). 
 
 
Fig.  4. Factory layout based on distribution of spatial points 
and site information.  
 
Moreover, we analyse the spatial distribution of worker 
positions  (Fig.  3) to identify the approximate location of the 
workstations and map them into a factory layout.  The factory 
layout is required to manually label the different trajectory 
segments. For each worker, the location of the workstation is 
determined as the point of maximum density within the 
distribution of the worker’s spatial positions over time, since 
each worker should spend majority of his/her time at the 
designated workstation to finish the assigned task. Fig.  4 
presents the approximate layout of the tricycle assembly line 
based upon the spatial distribution of the workers’ trajectories.  
As it shows, the six rigs are placed to make the interactions or 
collaborations among the workers easy by following the 
expected movement scenarios shown in Fig.  1.  
IV. BACKGROUND 
A. Definitions 
 Trajectory: a trajectory of an object or entity is an ordered 
sequence of location points and is denoted as: 𝑇𝑅=
{(𝑝1, 𝑡1), (𝑝2, 𝑡2), … , (𝑝𝑁, 𝑡𝑁) } ∶ 𝑡𝑖−1 < 𝑡𝑖, 𝑖= 2, … , 𝑁, 
where 𝑝𝑖 (1≤𝑖≤𝑁) ∈𝑅𝑑 is a multidimensional vector of spatial 
location information of the object at timestamp 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑁 is the 
total number of location points in 𝑇𝑅. In the simplest form, 
𝑝𝑖 (1≤𝑖≤𝑁) ∈𝑅𝑑 represents the object’s location in a two 
dimensional plane at timestamp 𝑡𝑖. However, the dimension of 
the vector 𝑝𝑖 can be extended further by adding more features 
(e.g., third spatial dimension, velocity, acceleration, etc.) 
depending on the application.  
Sub-trajectory: a sub-trajectory or trajectory segment of a 
trajectory 𝑇𝑅 is a subset of time ordered spatial location points 
in 
𝑇𝑅 
and 
is 
denoted 
as: 
𝑆𝑈𝐵𝑇𝑅=
{(𝑝𝑘, 𝑡𝑘), (𝑝𝑘+1, 𝑡𝑘+1), … , (𝑝𝑘+𝑛, 𝑡𝑘+𝑛) } ∶ 𝑡𝑘< 𝑡𝑘+1, 1 ≤𝑘<
𝑛≤𝑁−1. The straight line joining the two endpoints 
(𝑝𝑘, 𝑝𝑘+𝑛) of 𝑆𝑈𝐵𝑇𝑅is called a trajectory partition of 𝑇𝑅. 
B. Problem Statement 
Given a set of trajectories 𝒯= {𝑇𝑅1, 𝑇𝑅2, … , 𝑇𝑅𝑊}, where 
each trajectory represents the movement patterns of an object 
in an indoor manufacturing environment. For each trajectory 
𝑇𝑅𝑖 in 𝒯= {𝑇𝑅𝑖}𝑖=1
𝑊, the goal is to partition the trajectory into 
a set of non-overlapping segments and then classify each 
segment as a category from a set  of four predefined activities: 
[𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝑙𝑦, 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑡 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,
𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠, 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔].  
The activity of an object is labelled as ‘moving randomly’ 
for the duration of a trajectory segment if the object moves 
outside the work zone (i.e., outside of the tricycle assembly 
area as shown in Fig.  4) for a different purpose such as taking 
a break, meeting others, etc. ‘Standing at workstation’ 
indicates that the object is busy at the designated workstation 
to finish the assigned tasks. ‘Moving between workstations’ 
represents the collaborative behaviour – a worker may visit 
other workstations to deliver the products (or components) 
built according to the workflow or help co-workers. Finally, 
‘restocking’ refers to the activity of visiting storage area if the 
stock required to complete the assigned task at a workstation 
is finished, or when searching for tools or component if they 
are not available at the workstation as expected. 
In a typical manufacturing setting, many objects (e.g., 
workers, AVG, robots, etc.) work collaboratively in a dynamic 
environment. Each of these objects generate its own trajectory 
over time. Segmenting each of the trajectories and labelling 
them manually are not feasible since it requires time, 
resources, and expertise. In this study, we aim to automatically 
segment the trajectories by identifying a set of changepoints 
(or characteristic points) and then develop a semi-supervised 
model that required only few labelled segments (can be as low 
as one labelled segment for each category of the activities or 
behaviours).   
C. Constrained Hierarchical Clustering 
Clustering is the process of grouping the samples (or 
observations) in a dataset such that the samples (e.g., 
trajectory segments in our case) within the same group (called 
a cluster) are similar to one another and dissimilar to the 
samples in other groups. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering 
initially assigns each data sample into a separate cluster and 
then successively merges them using a bottom-up approach. In 
each iteration, the two closest or most similar pair of clusters 
are merged into a single cluster where the closeness or 
similarity is measured based on a linkage criterion. Single link 
refers to distance between the two nearest samples whereas 

7 
 
complete link refers to the distance between the two farthest 
samples as the similarity between two clusters, respectively. 
Average link considers the average of the distances of each 
pair of samples in two clusters. The merging process is 
finished when all the data samples form a single cluster. This 
method produces a set of nested clusters in hierarchical 
structure that can be visualised using a dendrogram which is 
tree like diagram to record the sequence of merges. The 
expected number of clusters can be obtained by drawing lines 
at different levels on the dendrogram depending on the 
applications or specifying the number of clusters during the 
merging process.  
Moreover, it is possible to specify the structural constraint 
into hierarchal clustering process in the form of must link and 
cannot link. Must link constraint indicates which group of data 
samples should be part of the same cluster whereas cannot link 
constraint refers to the samples that should be in different 
clusters. Fig.  5 shows an example of agglomerative 
hierarchical clustering using structural constraints. The 
distance matrix indicates that data samples (b, d) should be 
part of same cluster (must link), whereas pairs of samples in 
(a, e) and (g, f) cannot be in same cluster (cannot link). The 
dendrogram for this example shows that there are two 
different clusters are possible at the top due to the cannot link 
constrained. 
 
 
  
Fig.  5. Constraint agglomerative hierarchical clustering using both must link and cannot link constraint: distance measure 
between examples (left), ‘must link’ and ‘cannot link’ constraint (middle), and clusters merging process (right). In each iteration, 
pair of clusters are merged considering distance measured based on single link criteria.  
 
 
 
Fig.  6. A typical architecture of a convolutional neural networks 
 

8 
 
D. Convolutional Neural Networks 
CNNs [51] are prominent deep learning models that can 
identify the spatial patterns and translation invariant features 
from the input in a layered structure for classification or 
prediction. As shown in Fig.  6, a typical CNN architecture 
consists of a series of convolutional and pooling layers 
followed by one or more fully connected layers (also known 
as dense layers). The convolutional layers are the major 
building blocks of CNNs that apply a set of learnable filters 
(also known as kernels) to local regions of the input to extract 
useful features and create an internal network representation. 
The repeated application of the filters across different input 
locations creates a set of feature maps. The stacking of 
convolutional layers in a deep network allows the shallower 
layers to learn low-level features and the deeper layers to learn 
high-order or more abstract features.  
The feature map outputs from the convolutional layers are 
location sensitive, that is, the layer outputs are dependent upon 
the feature’s position within the data. To make the feature 
maps ‘local translation invariance’ (i.e., the output is not 
changed by local shifts in the feature position) and reduce the 
dimensionality of network representations, it is common for 
pooling layers to be added after the convolutional layers. 
Pooling is a down sampling operation that involves applying a 
sliding window to approximate local regions of the features. 
The approximation commonly involves computing the 
maximum or mean value within the feature window. As such, 
pooling has been considered as a technique to generalize 
feature representations. Overall, this structure allows the 
network to learn filters that represent patterns in the data that 
can be used for prediction or classification [52].  Pooling also 
makes the CNNs more noise tolerant and creates a hierarchy 
of features to  extract  meaningful patterns at different 
temporal scales [53]. 
The last part of a CNN is analogous to traditional 
feedforward NNs and consists of one or more dense layers. 
Before feeding the extracted feature maps to the fully 
connected layer, it is required that the feature maps are 
flattened into a vector. The dense layers are the final network 
layers that apply nonlinear combination of the extracted 
features to compute output predictions. For more detail 
information on CNNs, we refer to [51, 52, 54]. 
V. PROPOSED APPROACH FOR ACTIVITY RECOGNITION 
 
Fig.  7 shows an illustrative diagram of our proposed 
approach for activity recognition from indoor trajectory data. 
The approach consists of three main steps: trajectory 
partitioning, clustering, and model training. The first step 
focuses upon partitioning each trajectory into a set of 
segments representing various movement patterns. This is 
achieved with a segmentation algorithm that identifies a set of 
characteristics points where the statistics or distributions of the 
trajectory changes rapidly. The second step generates pseudo 
labels of the unlabelled segments by applying a clustering 
method: this  requires a small proportion of  trajectory 
segments to be labelled as input. The last step trains a 
classification model for activity recognition utilising the 
segments and their pseudo labels. 
 
 
 
Fig.  7. A simplified schematic diagram of the proposed 
approach for activity recognition. 
A. Trajectory Partitioning 
We aim to partition the individual trajectories into non-
overlapping segments.  The key idea is to identify a set of 𝑀 
characteristics 
points 
(or 
change 
points) 
𝐶𝑃=
{(𝑝𝑐1, 𝑡𝑐1), (𝑝𝑐2, 𝑡𝑐2), … , (𝑝𝑐𝑀, 𝑡𝑐𝑀)} ∶ 𝑡𝑐1 < 𝑡𝑐2 < ⋯< 𝑡𝑐𝑀 
from each trajectory 𝑇𝑅𝑖∊𝒯 and use those to partition each 
trajectory into  𝑀−1 segments. These segments represent the 
different movement patterns in an individual trajectory.  
To discover the characteristics points from individual 
trajectories, we apply an information theoretic criterion, 
Minimum Description Length (MDL) [55]. There are two 
desirable properties of the trajectory partitioning [56]: 
preciseness and conciseness. Preciseness represents the 
accuracy in which a set of chosen trajectory segments 
represent the original trajectory, whereas conciseness 
represents the number of segments (i.e., model parameters) 
used within its representation. These two properties are 
contradictory. For example, the preciseness is maximised (and 
conciseness is minimised) if we consider all the points within 
a trajectory as characteristics points. Likewise, the conciseness 
is maximised (and preciseness is minimised) if only the two 
end points of the trajectory are considered as the characteristic 
points. The MDL principle identifies the characteristics points 
of the trajectories by finding the optimal trade-off between the 

9 
 
preciseness and conciseness properties [11, 56].  
The function defining the MDL principle is given in (1) 
where 𝐻 represents a hypothesis, 𝐷 is the data, 𝐿(𝐻) is the 
description length of the hypothesis and 𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) is the 
description length of the data encoded using the hypothesis, 
both expressed in bits. The hypothesis 𝐻 with the minimum 
𝑀𝐷𝐿 is the one that achieves the highest data compression, or 
equivalently, the best explanation of the data. For our 
segmentation task, the hypothesis 𝐻 corresponds to the set of 
partitions of our trajectory data. Therefore, finding the optimal 
partitioning of the trajectories can be translated into finding 
the best hypothesis based on MDL.  
 
𝑀𝐷𝐿= 𝐿(𝐻) + 𝐿(𝐷|𝐻)                                (1) 
 
The two terms of the MDL function can be formulated using 
(2) and (3), respectively [56]. 𝐿(𝐻) in (2) represents the total 
length of all trajectory partitions where 𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1) is the 
length of a line segment (𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1) that is computed using the 
Euclidean distance between two consecutive characteristics 
points 𝑝𝑐𝑗 and 𝑝𝑐𝑗+1. On the other hand, the formulation of 
𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) in (3) refers to the sum of the difference between a 
trajectory and a set of its trajectory partitions. For each 
partition, the difference between partition and the representing 
line segment is computed by taking the sum of the 
perpendicular distance 𝑑⊥(𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1, 𝑝𝑘𝑝𝑘+1) and the angular 
distance 𝑑Ѳ (𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1, 𝑝𝑘𝑝𝑘+1).  
 
𝐿(𝐻) = ∑
𝑙𝑜𝑔2 (𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1))
𝑀−1
𝑗=1
                      (2) 
 
𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) = ∑
∑
{𝑙𝑜𝑔2 (𝑑⊥(𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1, 𝑝𝑘𝑝𝑘+1)) +
𝑐𝑗+1−1
𝑘=𝑐𝑗
𝑀−1
𝑗=1
𝑙𝑜𝑔2 (𝑑Ѳ (𝑝𝑐𝑗𝑝𝑐𝑗+1, 𝑝𝑘𝑝𝑘+1))}                       (3) 
 
The above formulation of 𝐿(𝐻) represents a measure of the 
conciseness, where as 𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) indicates a measure of the 
preciseness. For our segmentation task, 𝐿(𝐻) increases as the 
number to partitions increases. On the other hand, larger 
deviations between the set of trajectory partitions and original 
trajectory causes 𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) to increase. We aim to find the 
optimal partitioning that minimises the sum of  𝐿(𝐻) and 
𝐿(𝐷|𝐻).  
Moreover, the cost of finding the optimal partitioning for a 
trajectory is exhaustive as it requires every subset of points in 
the trajectory to be considered. Hence, an approximate 
algorithm [56] with time complexity of 𝑂(𝑁) has been applied 
which considers a set of local optima as the global optimum. 
Let 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑗) represents the MDL cost (i.e., 𝐿(𝐻) +
𝐿(𝐷|𝐻)) of a trajectory between two points 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑝𝑗 (𝑖< 𝑗) 
considering 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑝𝑗 are the only characteristic points, 
whereas 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑗) is the MDL cost when persevering 
the original trajectory – i.e., if there is no characteristic point 
between 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑝𝑗. It is obvious that 𝐿(𝐷|𝐻) in 
𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑗) is zero. Hence, a local optimum is the 
longest trajectory partition 𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑗 which satisfies the condition 
𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑘) ≤𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑘) ∶∀𝑘  𝑖< 𝑘≤𝑗.  This 
means if 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑘) smaller than 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑟(𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑘), the 
selection of 𝑝𝑘 as a characteristic point will cause the MDL 
cost smaller compared to the MDL cost if 𝑝𝑘 is not chosen. 
The approximation process considers the first data point 𝑝1 
from the trajectory as the starting characteristic point and 
repeatedly compute 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑝𝑎𝑟 and 𝑀𝐷𝐿𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑟 for each 
subsequent point. In each step, if the cost of partitioning is 
equal or less than the cost of not partitioning, we increase the 
length of trajectory partition and continue computing the two 
costs for next point. Otherwise, we consider the previous point 
as the characteristics point and repeat the same procedure to 
search the next characteristic point until all data points are 
checked. 
B. Cluster and Label 
In this section, we introduce the method for labelling the 
trajectory segments generated by the partitioning process. The 
main idea here is to generate a set of pseudo labels for the 
trajectory segments by applying constrained agglomerative 
hierarchical clustering with a small proportion of labelled 
segments. 
Let 
𝑆𝐿= {(𝑠𝑙1, 𝑦𝑙2), (𝑠𝑙2, 𝑦𝑙2), … , (𝑠𝑖, 𝑦𝑙𝑖) } 
and 
𝑆𝑈=
{𝑠𝑢1, 𝑠𝑢2, … , 𝑠𝑢𝑗 } are the sets of labelled and unlabelled 
segments, respectively.  The members of segments in 𝑆𝐿 are 
called seeds. Our task is to automatically label the trajectory 
segments in 𝑆𝑈 so that we can train a classification model 
using the data samples (e.g., segments in both 𝑆𝐿 and 𝑆𝑈). The 
classification model will then be applied to predict the class 
labels of the data samples in 𝑆𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 that represent the set of test 
segments.  
We adopt the hierarchical clustering method to generates 
labels for trajectory segments in 𝑆𝑈. In contrast to traditional 
clustering approach, we introduce constraints to the clustering 
structure to define how the seeds should be grouped. 
Specifically, we impose cannot-link constraints on the 
elements of 𝑆𝐿 to ensure that no more than one seed should be 
present in any cluster, even if the seeds have the same label. 
Each of the clusters will be comprised of trajectory segments 
that are most similar to its seed, and hence, its members (i.e., 
segments from 𝑆𝑈) will be labelled according to the class of its 
seed.  
When 
applying 
constraint 
agglomerative hierarchical 
clustering, it is very important to choose an appropriate 
distance metric for the linkage criteria used to compute the 
similarity between clusters. The standard metrics based on 
point-to-point distance are not suitable for spatial data 
especially when the length of the time series are not same, as 
in our case [57, 58]. Hence, we apply the Hausdorff distance 
to compute the distance between pairs of trajectory segments. 
Considering the segments as geometric curves, the Hausdorff 
distance from a set of points 𝐴 to another set of points 𝐵 is the 

10 
 
maximum distance of a set 𝐴 to the nearest point in the set 𝐵 
and is defined as in (5).  
 
𝐻𝐷𝐴→𝐵= max
𝑎∈𝐴{min
𝑏∈𝐵𝑑(𝑎, 𝑏)}                            (5) 
 
where 𝑑(𝑎, 𝑏) is the distance between points 𝑎 and 𝑏 
computed using any chosen distance metric (e.g., Euclidean 
distance). Generally, the Hausdorff distance is directed, which 
means that distance 𝐻𝐷𝐴→𝐵 from 𝐴 to 𝐵 is not equal to the 
distance 𝐻𝐷𝐵→𝐴 from 𝐵 to 𝐴. An undirected Hausdorff 
distance can be computed by taking the average of the two 
directed distances as in (6).  
 
𝐻𝐷𝐴→𝐵= 𝐻𝐷𝐵→𝐴= 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝐻𝐷𝐴→𝐵, 𝐻𝐷𝐵→𝐴)            (6) 
 
The presented clustering method can be explained from a 
graph-theoretic perspective. Let 𝐹= 𝑆𝐿∪ 𝑆𝑈 be the set of all 
training observations. Consider 𝐺= (𝑉, 𝐸) as an undirected 
graph. The set of vertices 𝑉 in 𝐺 represents all the 
observations in 𝐹 and a super-vertex (∗). On the other hand, 𝐸 
represents the edges among the vertices for all elements in 𝐹 
as well as the edges between the super-vertex and vertices 
representing all the seeds. The weights of the first group of 
edges corresponds to the distance of two observations (i.e., 
segments) computed using the undirected Hausdorff distance. 
On the other hand, for the edges between the super-vertex (∗) 
and vertices representing the seeds, the weights are set to zero. 
The labelling of the observations in  𝑆𝑈 then can be viewed as 
a specific way of finding a minimum spanning tree of 𝐺 using 
Kruskal’s algorithm considering that the forest which is 
successively joined by Kruskal’s algorithm is a set of clusters 
generated by the agglomerative hierarchical clustering 
dendrogram [59]. Since the weights of the edges between the 
super-vertex and vertices representing the seeds (i.e., the 
labelled segments in 𝑆𝐿) is zero, Kruskal’s algorithm will add 
all the seeds at the beginning to the minimum spanning tree in 
the first 𝑅 iterations where 𝑅 is the cardinality of 𝑆𝐿. This will 
leave  𝑅 branches in the tree – these branches are called the 
main branches. The tree will then grow along the main 
branches in the successive iterations without created any new 
branches since all the edges from the super-vertex have 
already been added by 𝑅 iterations. This is equivalent to 
imposing cannot-link constraints in agglomerative hierarchical 
clustering between each pair of seeds. Upon termination of the 
algorithm, each of the branches in the tree corresponds to a 
cluster in the agglomerative hierarchical clustering.      
 
 
 
 
TABLE  I. PARAMETERS OF THE CNNS USED FOR STEPWISE SEARCH 
Parameters 
Description 
Values used for grid search 
Filters 
number of convolutional filters or kernels. 
(𝐹1, 𝐹2, … 𝐹𝐿) indicates network consists of 𝐿 
convolutional layers and each layer 𝑙 consist of 
𝐹𝑙 filters 
[(16), (32), (64), (128), (32, 16), (32, 
32), (64, 32), (64, 16), (128, 64), (64, 
32, 16), (128, 64, 32, 16)] 
Kernel size 
length of the convolution filters 
[3, 5] 
Activation 
activation functions for convolutional layers 
['relu', 'sigmoid', 'tanh'] 
Strides 
distance 
between 
two 
successive 
kernel 
positions is called a stride 
[1,2,3] 
Padding 
how the centre of each kernel to overlap the 
outermost element of the inputs 
[‘valid, ‘same’] 
Kernel initializer 
how to set initials weights of the convolutional 
filters 
[‘glorot_uniform’, random_uniform’] 
Pooling 
pooling operation to perform on convolutional 
feature map 
[None, ‘max’, ‘avg’] 
Dropout rate 
fraction of neurons and their associated weights 
to disregard at each training epoch 
[0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3] 
Dense neurons 
number of layers in fully connected layers. 
(𝑁1, 𝑁2, … 𝑁𝐿) indicates 𝐿 fully connected 
layers and each layer 𝑙 consist of 𝑁𝑙 neurons 
[(4,), (10, 4), (20, 4)] 
Dense activation 
activation functions for neurons in fully 
connected layers 
[‘relu’, and/or ‘softmax’] 
Batch size 
number of training samples per gradient update 
[64, 128] 
Epochs 
number of epochs to train the model 
[250, 500] 
 

11 
 
C. Classification model 
To develop the classification models, we apply CNNs. The 
rationale of selecting CNNs are their ability to automatically 
learn features that represent meaningful patterns from large 
spatial or temporal datasets.  
The CNNs used in this paper consist of multiple 
convolutional and pooling layers. Hence, the hyper-parameters 
of the networks have a significant influence on generalization 
ability, robustness, and overall predictive performance of the 
models. We find the optimal topology of CNNs and tune their 
hyper-parameters based on a stepwise search method. 
Specifically, we optimise one parameter at a time while 
keeping the remaining parameters unchanged by training the 
CNNs using training data and evaluating its performance on 
the validation data. We apply a stepwise search instead of an 
exhaustive grid search to reduce the training time. We 
consider CNNs up to 4 convolutional layers with a different 
number of filters in the range of 16 to 128, multiple filter sizes 
in each convolutional layer in the range of 3 to 5, two different 
types of pooling layers – max and average pooling, and 
multiple combinations of fully connected layers with a 
different number of nodes.  
To optimise the parameters, we apply Adam optimization 
algorithm [60] with a differing number of epochs, minimizing 
the sparse categorical cross entropy, and applying dropout at 
each layer. Dropout [61] is a regularization method that 
randomly chooses specified fraction of nodes at each training 
epoch and disables their connection, hence disregards them 
during weight optimization. This technique has been found 
very effective for deep learning models to reduce over-fitting. 
TABLE  I presents the entire search space considered to find 
the optimal structure and tune hyper-parameters of CNNs.  
 
 
 
Fig.  8. Partitioning of trajectories. Lines indicate part (randomly selected) of trajectories and circles represent the identified 
partitioning points. The raw noisy data points between partitioning points are not shown for better representation.  
 
The selected best architectures of the CNNs models for all 
the trajectories have similar structures with number of 
convolutional layers between 1 to 2. As an example, the best 
architectures obtained based on stepwise searching for the 
trajectory data for the operator at rig 6 includes 2 1D 
convolutional layers with 32 and 16 filters respectively. Both 
convolutional layers share the same kernel size, strides, 
padding method, and activation function: 3, 1, ‘same’, and 
‘tanh’, respectively. Moreover, each convolutional layer is 
also followed by a max pooling layer, a dropout layer with 
dropout fraction of 0.2. The fully connected component 
consists of one dense layer with a softmax activation function 
and provides a probability of the 4 classes of activities. The 
weights of the CNNs were optimised with a maximum of 500 
epochs and batch size of 128.  
For each trajectory in our dataset, we develop a separate 
classification model using CNNs. Inputs to the CNNs models 
include the trajectory segments along with duration of the 
segments. Each of the models has been trained using the 
observations 
in 
both 
in 
𝑆𝐿 
and 
𝑆𝑈=
{(𝑠𝑢1, 𝑦𝑝𝑙1), (𝑠𝑢2, 𝑦𝑝𝑙2), … , (𝑠𝑢𝑗, 𝑦𝑝𝑙𝑗) } where  𝑠𝑢𝑖 (1≤𝑖≤𝑗) is the 
an element of 𝑆𝑈 and 𝑦𝑝𝑙𝑖the pseudo label for 𝑠𝑢𝑖. This means 
the training data for each trajectory contains both the segments 
in 𝑆𝐿 with their actual class labels, and the segments in 𝑆𝑈 
with the pseudo labels generated in clustering step.  

12 
 
Fig.  9. Distribution of activities of workers into 4 defined 
categories. 
VI. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
The partitioning algorithm is applied to each trajectory 𝑇𝑅𝑖 
in 𝒯= {𝑇𝑅𝑖}𝑖=1
𝑊 separately. Fig.  8 shows the partitioning 
results (the partition points and the segments joining those 
points) for a small proportion of data points (2-3 minutes) 
from each trajectory. The raw noisy trajectory data points are 
not shown for better visualisation. As we can see, the MDL 
based algorithm correctly identify the trajectory segments with 
different characteristics – the portioning points are chosen 
where the behaviour of the trajectories changes significantly. 
The segments have different lengths and represent different 
activities of the workers in the factory. TABLE  II presents the 
summary of trajectory partitioning results. The number of 
partitioning points for the trajectories varies in the range of 
223 for 𝑇𝑅1 to 388 for 𝑇𝑅6. The variation in the number of 
partitioning points is expected since different workers show 
different movement patterns. Fig.  9 presents the distribution 
of activities of the workers into predefined categories: 
standing at workstation, moving randomly, moving between 
workstations, restocking. More than 50% of segments of all 
trajectories are labelled as standing at workstation which 
highlights that the workers are mostly busy completing their 
assigned task for a majority of the time. The workers also 
spend a significant proportion of time moving between 
different workstations – the proportion of segments classified 
as moving between workstations varies between 11.71% to 
24.71%. This is due to the collaborative nature of the tricycle 
assembly task and can be explained by the workflow in Fig.  
1. As shown in  Fig.  1, during the assembly process, the 
components built at each workstation needs to be delivered to 
another co-worker until the completion of work in progress. 
 
TABLE  II. SUMMARY INFORMATION ON TRAJECTORY SEGMENTATION 
Trajectory 
Duration (sec) 
Length 
Partition points 
Total segments 
𝑇𝑅1 
3790 
7727 
223 
222 
𝑇𝑅2 
5214 
7840 
328 
327 
𝑇𝑅3 
3475 
7266 
252 
251 
𝑇𝑅4 
3107 
7712 
264 
263 
𝑇𝑅5 
7194 
7803 
341 
340 
𝑇𝑅6 
7356 
7847 
388 
387 
Moreover, moving randomly is the third most frequent 
observed activity. The worker at rig 1 has the highest 
percentage of segments labelled as moving randomly (22.97% 
segments) followed by the worker at rig 3 (16.33%) and rig 2 
(15.90% segments). The percentage of segments labelled as 
moving randomly is relatively low for the workers at the other 
three rigs. The high percentage of moving randomly segments 
for workers of the rig 1, 2, and 3 is due to the fact that they 
start working earlier compared to the workers at rigs 4, 5, and 
6. This is because workers at the later rigs require their 
components to be built by the other rigs before they can 
commence their tasks. This allows the workers at rig 1, 2, and 
4 to complete their assign tasks earlier and visit outside 
assembly area for taking break, meeting colleagues, etc. The 
restocking is the least frequent activity shown by all workers, 
1.53% to 6.73% segments are labelled as restocking. This is 
expected since all the workstations hold  the components they 
require to assemble 3 tricycles. Workers are then required to 
occasionally restock the parts until 6 tricycles are completed 
within 3 hours.   
For each trajectory 𝑇𝑅𝑖 in 𝒯= {𝑇𝑅𝑖}𝑖=1
𝑊 we aim to develop a 
separate semi-supervised classification model. To achieve this, 
the spatial trajectory segments for each trajectory 𝑇𝑅𝑖 are 
divided into 3 non-overlapping subsets: 𝑆𝐿, 𝑆𝑈, and 𝑆𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡. 𝑆𝐿 
contains only very small proportion (20%) of trajectory 
segments that are manually labelled. 𝑆𝑈 and 𝑆𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 respectively 
contains 80% and 20% of the remaining segments. The 
segments in 𝑆𝑈 are labelled using the constrained 
agglomerative hierarchical clustering. The segments in both 
𝑆𝐿and 𝑆𝑈 are used to train the classification model whereas the 
segments in 𝑆𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 are used to evaluate the accuracy of the 
classification model.  
To evaluate the performance of the models we use two 
different 
metrics: 
misclassification 
rate 
and 
F-score. 
Misclassification Rate (MCR) refers to the percentage of 
observations 
that 
were 
incorrectly 
predicted 
by 
the 
classification model. MCR has a range of 0 to 1: a lower value 
of MCR indicates a higher accuracy. The F-score is a standard 
measure for classification and is defined as in (7) for a binary 
classification problem. For multi-class classification task as 
ours, this is the average of the F-score of each class with 
weighting determined by the number of observations in each 
class. The F-score also has a range of 0 to 1, with 1 being the 
most accurate classifier and 0 indicating the worst possible 
0
20
40
60
80
100
TR1
TR2
TR3
TR4
TR5
TR6
Activity distribution (%)
moving between workstations
restocking
randomly moving
standing at workstation

13 
 
classifier. Although we present the numerical results using 
both metrics, F-score will be considered as the primary metric 
for analysis of prediction accuracy.  
 
𝐹𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒= 2 ×
(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ×𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙)
(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙)                                (7) 
where precision is the fraction of observations that the 
model classified as positive that were true positives and recall 
refers to the fraction of true positive observations that the 
model correctly classified as positive. 
 
TABLE  III. ACCURACY OF THE SEMI-SUPERVISED APPROACH IN 
TERMS OF THE F-SCORE AND MISCLASSIFICATION RATE 
Trajectory 
F-score 
MCR 
𝑇𝑅1 
0.81 
0.19 
𝑇𝑅2 
0.92 
0.08 
𝑇𝑅3 
0.85 
0.15 
𝑇𝑅4 
0.93 
0.07 
𝑇𝑅5 
0.95 
0.05 
𝑇𝑅6 
0.85 
0.15 
 
TABLE  III presents the classification accuracy evaluated on 
the trajectory segments in 𝑆𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 for each trajectory 𝑇𝑅𝑖 in 𝒯=
{𝑇𝑅𝑖}𝑖=1
𝑊. The classification accuracy (in terms of F-score) for 
the trajectories generated by the workers at all rigs is 81% or 
higher. The higher classification accuracy indicates the ability 
of the proposed approach to classify the activities of the 
workers with using only a small set of labelled segments. 
Amongst the trajectories of all six workers,  the trajectory for 
the worker at rig 5 achieved the highest classification accuracy 
followed by the trajectory for workers at rig 4 and 2, 
respectively – their F-scores are above 90%. On the other 
hand, the classification accuracy was lowest for the trajectory 
of the worker at rig 1. The F-scores of the trajectories of two 
other workers is 85% The main reason for relatively lower 
accuracy for the trajectory of worker at rig 1 is the smaller 
number of training samples used in 𝑆𝐿. There are 44 segments 
in 𝑆𝐿 for trajectories of the worker at rig 1 compared 65 
segments in 𝑆𝐿 for trajectories of the worker at rig 2 for 
example. The higher number of labelled segments in 𝑆𝐿 help 
to generate pseudo labels with better accuracy confidence. For 
example, the accuracy of the pseudo labels generated by the 
hierarchical clustering is 80% and 90% for trajectories for 
workers at rig 1 and 2, respectively. Using the more accurate 
pseudo labels helps to train the final CNN models to better 
learn the patterns which consequently reflected in the final 
accuracy results.  
Moreover, we reserve 20% of labelled segments into 𝑆𝐿 for 
each trajectory as previously mentioned. These segments 
(called seeds) are then used in the clustering phase to generate 
pseudo labels for the segments in 𝑆𝑈. Hence, it is important to 
check the influence this selection of labelled segments on the 
performance of the semi-supervised classification model. We 
repeated all the experiments with different proportions of 
labelled data in 𝑆𝐿: 5% to 20% with 5% increments. Fig.  10 
presents the F-scores of the classification models with respect 
to different proportions of segments in 𝑆𝐿 for each trajectory. 
The classification accuracy of all trajectories monotonically 
increases as the proportion of labelled segments in 𝑆𝐿 increase 
from 5% to 20% The improvement in classification accuracy 
is expected since a higher proportion of segments in 𝑆𝐿 
provides more information for the clustering algorithm to 
exploit for pseudo label generation. In other words, more 
manually labelled segments means availability of more 
patterns of different activity types during clustering algorithm 
which consequently helps to the clustering process to generate 
more accurate the pseudo labels for segments in 𝑆𝑈. These 
results provide more accurate training of the final prediction 
models.  
 
Fig.  10. Classification accuracy (F-score) of the model with 
different proportion of manually labelled segments in 𝑆𝐿 used 
to generate pseudo labels for segment in 𝑆𝑈. 
 
The predicted labels of activities for the trajectory segments 
can be used in diverse ways for decision making purposes. For 
example, the distribution of activities of workers during their 
shift (as shown in Fig.  9) can help to improve worker 
productivity. As we can see, the worker at rig 1 spends second 
highest proportion of time doing random movements. The 
worker at rig 1 is the first person in the workflow and likely to 
complete the assigned task before any of the other workers. 
Moreover, from the data it is evident that worker at rig 1 
makes most of the random moves later part of shift. This time 
can be better utilised doing productive work as decided by the 
management. Similarly, the worker at rig 5 spends second 
highest time on moving between workstations as per 
distribution of activities in Fig.  9. If the movements are 
happening to search for missing components or tools, those 
can be made available at rig 5 to reduce the searching time. 
 
TABLE  IV. CENTROIDS OF THE TEN CLUSTERS REPRESENTING 
JOINT ACTIVITIES OF WORKERS. WE USE SHORT NAMES FOR 
FOUR ACTIVITY CLASSES (STAND: STANDING AT WORKSTATION, 
MOVE: MOVE BETWEEN WORKSTATIONS, RANDOM: RANDOMLY 
MOVING, AND RESTOCK: RESTOCKING.) 
Cluster 
ID 
Centroid [Concurrent activities of 6 workers] 
1 
['stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
2 
['stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'move', 'stand', 'stand'] 
3 
['stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'move'] 
4 
['stand', 'stand', 'move', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
5 
['stand', 'stand', 'move', 'random', 'stand', 'stand'] 
6 
['stand', 'random', 'random', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
7 
[restock, 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
8 
['random', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
9 
['move', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand'] 
10 
['stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'stand', 'move', 'stand'] 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
TR1
TR2
TR3
TR4
TR5
TR6
F-score
5%
10%
15%
20%

14 
 
 
 
Fig.  11. Cluster (State) distribution of the joint activity data 
 
Another interesting inference that can be made from the 
activity classification results is ‘factory floor state’. A state 
can be defined in numerous ways. In this case, we refer to the 
joint behaviour of workers as a state, i.e., what the workers are 
doing concurrently. We clustered the joint activity class labels 
of all six workers to obtain the factory floor state. TABLE  IV 
presents the centroids of the ten clusters obtained using K-
mode algorithm [62].  Fig.  11 shows the distribution of 
clusters over joint activity data. Workers working at their 
respective stations is the most common state (cluster 1) and it 
constitutes 46.6% of the joint behaviour classes. The second 
highest cluster observed is cluster 4 where most workers are at 
their rigs except worker at rig 3 who is moving between 
stations. We also observe a lot of movement of that worker 
from rig 3 to rig 2 and this observation aligns well with the 
workflow (see Fig.  1). The third most common state is when 
most workers are at their rigs except the worker at rig 1 who is 
moving randomly (cluster 8). As discussed previously, the 
worker at rig 1 starts the assigned task at the beginning of the 
workflow with no dependencies hence finishes work early and 
moves randomly later while other workers are at their rigs. 
Such state estimation through clustering can summarise 
concisely what’s happening at the factory floor and can be 
used for operational decision making. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented an approach for human activity recognition 
from noisy indoor trajectory data and studied its application in 
manufacturing context. The proposed approach adopted the 
concept of semi-supervised learning: generated pseudo labels 
based on constraint hierarchical clustering and trained 
convolutional neural networks as the classifiers that used the 
trajectory segments as inputs and respective pseudo labels as 
outputs. The approach is comprehensively evaluated using six 
trajectories of human workers at a tricycle assembly 
workshop. Results indicate that proposed approach can 
accurately classify the activities of the workers at different 
part of their trajectories – the classification accuracy in terms 
of F-score varies between 0.81 to 0.95. Moreover, this 
performance is achieved with small proportion of labelled 
examples. The key advantage of this approach over existing 
supervised activity recognition models is that it saves time and 
resources required for manual labelling of input-output 
examples by the domain experts. In addition, although the 
approach is developed to identify four target activities 
(standing at workstation, moving randomly, moving between 
workstations, 
restocking) 
specific 
to 
manufacturing 
environment, it is generic and can be applied to such other 
activities as well. Future research will focus on applying the 
approach on the trajectory datasets from other domains and 
improving pseudo label generation process based on advanced 
self-supervised methods. Another avenue of future work is 
representing the segments using raster images overlayed on 
factory layout and then classify them.
