Misspelling Correction with Pre-trained Contextual
Language Model
Yifei Hu
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University

Xiaonan Jing
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University

Youlim Ko
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University

Julia Taylor Rayz
Computer and Information Technology
Purdue University

Abstract—Spelling irregularities, known now as spelling mis-
takes, have been found for several centuries. As humans, we
are able to understand most of the misspelled words based
on their location in the sentence, perceived pronunciation, and
context. Unlike humans, computer systems do not possess the
convenient auto complete functionality of which human brains
are capable. While many programs provide spelling correction
functionality, many systems do not take context into account.
Moreover, Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems function in the way they
are trained on. With many current Natural Language Processing
(NLP) systems trained on grammatically correct text data, many
are vulnerable against adversarial examples, yet correctly spelled
text processing is crucial for learning. In this paper, we investigate
how spelling errors can be corrected in context, with a pre-
trained language model BERT. We present two experiments,
based on BERT and the edit distance algorithm, for ranking and
selecting candidate corrections. The results of our experiments
demonstrated that when combined properly, contextual word
embeddings of BERT and edit distance are capable of effectively
correcting spelling errors.
Index Terms—Spelling Correction, BERT, Contextual Lan-
guage Model, Natural Language Processing
I. INTRODUCTION
Language is a unique gift for humankind. It conveys in-
formation using rules with a certain amount of informality.
Human can quickly adapt to the informality and develop
new rules to make sense from the informality. However,
understanding the informality in human language has been
a challenging task for computer algorithms. Nowadays, many
state-of-the-art Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools and
architectures are still vulnerable against all sorts of informality.
A simple spelling error can greatly impact the output of a
sophisticated natural language processing tool for tasks that
enjoy very small error rates. For example, Named Entity
Recognition (NER) is one of the common NLP tasks, which
automatically identiﬁes named entities from a given text input.
The following example is taken from AllenNLP [1] ELMO-
based [2] online NER demo:
“this shirt was bought at Grandpa Joe’s in LA.”
In this sentence, two named entities, Grandpa Joe’s (as an
organization) and LA (as a city), are identiﬁed. However, if the
input is slightly modiﬁed by introducing a misspelled word
— “at” changed to “ta” (which is a common misspelling for
“at” ) — an utterance“Grandpa Joe’s”, which was previously
identiﬁed as an organization, will not no longer be identiﬁed
as a named entity. Instead, “Joe”, by itself, will be identiﬁed
as a person.
Similarly, spelling correction affects another common NLP
task, the semantic role labeling (SLR). Consider the following
example:
“the keys, which were needed to access the building, were
locked in the car”
SLR model based on BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Rep-
resentations from Transformers) [3] identiﬁes “the keys” as
the only argument in this sentence. However, if the ﬁrst word
“were” is misspelled as “weer”, the misspelled “weer” would
be captured as a second argument.
For human, the spelling errors above do not impact how
the sentences are interpreted. However, both the ELMO-based
model and the BERT-based model changed their outputs as
a result of misspellings present in the sentences. Similar to
the above examples, many current NLP models are not robust
enough when processing ﬂawed input data. However, corpora
collected through human generated texts often contain errors
such as spelling errors, incorrect usage of words, and gram-
matical mistakes. These mistakes can easily introduce noise to
the corpora and affect NLP parsers used for subsequent tasks.
In many cases, minimizing noise in the corpora by correcting
unintentional human generated mistakes serves an important
procedure in performance enhancement for machine learning
models.
This paper focuses on contextual correction of misspelled
words — one of the most common type of errors in natural
language texts. Spelling errors can be roughly divided into two
types, non-word error and real-word error [4]. The former type
results in a misspelled mistake which is not an actual English
word (i.e. ”weer” in the previous example) and the latter results
arXiv:2101.03204v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2021

in a mistake that is accidentally an English word (i.e. misspell
”access” as ”assess”), but does not work well in context.
While the detection of non-word error can be employed
through a look-up in a large English vocabulary dictionary,
the detection of real-word errors is more challenging. Real-
word error detection often requires training of expensive neural
network models with a large gold standard corpora in order to
locate the desired error. Thus, training a robust error encoder
which detects both types of errors can be difﬁcult. On the
other hand, both the correction of non-word and real-word
errors can share a universal framework as both errors are a
result of unintentional representation of the intended word. For
instance, both ”assess” (real-word error) and ”acsese” (non-
word error) are two edit distance away from the intended word
”access” in the previous example. Fundamentally, the efforts
spent in correcting both misspelled words to the intended
word ”access” are identical. With this intuition, we introduce
a simple approach to correcting spelling errors in this paper
which utilizes the edit distance mechanism and the recently
popular neural network model BERT.
BERT uses transformer [6] architecture to predict masked
word given the context. The attention mechanism in the
transformers allows the model to compute an attention score
for each context word and subsequently use the attention score
to predict the masked word. We are interested in examining
BERT’s ability to predict correct words given the masked
spelling errors.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Traditional Spelling Error Correction
Traditional spelling error correction approaches include
noisy channel models and n-gram models. Church and Gale [5]
presented a context-based system with a noisy channel model,
employing a simple word bi-gram model and Good-Turing
frequency estimation. A similar model from IBM Watson
Research using tri-gram was proposed in [7]. Carlson and
Fette [8] illustrated the effectiveness of n-gram models in
spelling error corrections. They compared the n-gram models
with the GNU Aspell [9] model on Google n-gram dataset.
On non-word error corrections, n-gram model showed a 36%-
49% improvements on top correct word ranking, with highest
accuracy achieved at 92.4% for detecting insertion error with
5-gram. A recent study on real-time spelling error correction
proposed a Symmetric Delete Algorithm (SDA) with n-grams
approach [10]. A weighted sum of unigrams, bigrams, and
trigrams was used as the metric for ranking SDA generated
candidate words. The model was tested on 24 languages with
spelling errors generated by manipulating edit distance and
bi-gram probability, with a 97.1% accuracy on top English
language errors. However, the model showed only 68% top
correction accuracy when tested on public dataset such as
Wikipedia, although it outperforms popular industrial models
Aspell and Hunspell [11].
B. Neural Network Based Spelling Error Correction
Sequence-based neural network models have also been
applied in spelling error correction tasks. Li et al. trained
a nested RNN (Reccurent Neural Network) model with a
large-scale pseudo dataset generated from phonetic similarity
[12]. The model outperforms other state-of-the-art sequential
models, scRNN [13] and LSTM-Char-CNN [14] – which
combined long short-term memory (LSTM) and character-
level convolutional neural networks (Char-CNN) – by 5%
on precision and 2% on recall. Ge et al. trained a neural
sequence-to-sequence model in grammatical error correction
(GEC) [15]. Through ﬂuency boost mechanism, which allows
multi-round sequence-to-sequence corrections, multiple gram-
matical errors in one sentence can be corrected in one setting.
However, such training often requires large amount of data
to enhance the performance of the error encoder. Oftentimes,
spelling error dataset with gold standard labels are small on
size and generated errors can be drastically different from how
human writers make mistakes. In a recent attempt, Shaptala
and Didenko [16] proposed an alternative GEC approach using
pre-trained BERT with fully connected network to detect and
correct errors. However, the error type resolution given by the
model does not consider the dependency between different
errors and error types, and the decoder tends to mistakenly
remove end of sentence tokens. The result of [16] again
demonstrated the difﬁculties in detecting errors without type
independence and the limitation of neural network decoders.
III. DATASET
The dataset used in the paper is a subset from the CLC
(Cambridge Learner Corpus) FCE (First Certiﬁcate in English)
Dataset [17], which consists of 5,124 sentences written by En-
glish as second language learners, from speakers of 16 native
languages. CLC FCE dataset contains 75 types of annotated
errors and corresponding corrections in the original essays.
We extracted a subset which contains only spelling errors,
annotated as ”S”, ”SA”, ”SX” to represent ”spelling”, ”Amer-
ican spelling”, and ”spelling confusion” errors respectively.
A total of 2,075 sentences was extracted from the original
dataset. Each extracted sentence was limited to contain only
one misspelled word in order to provide BERT with the correct
contextual information. TABLE I shows the distribution of the
dataset. We used the Brown corpus (49815 vocabulary) from
NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit) [18] to determine whether
the error was a real-word.
TABLE I
DATASET STATISTICS
sentence
statistics
average sentence length
20.68
std of sentence length
11.00
maximum length
1
minimum length
99
error
types
number of real-word errors
225
number of non-word errors
1850

IV. PROPOSED METHOD
We propose two methods which combine the per-trained
BERT language model and the edit distance algorithm. The
pre-trained BERT model is capable of predicting a masked
word and provide a list of candidate words that make sense
in a given context. The edit distance algorithm can be used
to ﬁnd the words that are similar to the misspelled word. The
detail of this mechanism will be explained in the following
section.
A. Treating Misspelled Words As Masked Words
BERT provides a functionality of predicting a word in a
sentence, marked as needed to be predicted, based on the
context of a sentence. Due to this mechanism, known as
masked word prediction, BERT only takes a sentence with
one masked token (word) as input at a time and output a list
of candidate words with probabilities accordingly from high to
low. Here is an example of a typical masked word prediction
process:
1) Raw sentence: “How are you today?”
2) Replace a word with a MASK: “How [MASK] you
today?”
3) Predictions (with probability) of the MASK: “are
(0.88)”, “do (0.04)”, “about (0.03)”, “have (0.003)”
Based on this mechanism, it is possible to encode the
misspelled words as masked words in each sentence and
utilize the one to one prediction feature in candidate correction
rankings. The number of candidate words is adjusted by a
parameter N which can be as large as the vocabulary size.
However, one limitation for the BERT model is that if the
expected output is not in BERT’s vocabulary, BERT will not
be able to give the correct predictions that would match a gold
standard. In reality, BERT is trained on various corpora with
diverse vocabulary, which makes it very unlikely for BERT to
encounter an out-of-vocabulary word. In this paper, we uses a
pre-trained BERT-Large-Cased model [19] in candidate correct
words generation.
It should be noted that BERT and similar architectures are
not the only mechanisms of providing an unknown word based
on context. An ontology-based approach was described by
Taylor and Raskin [20] by using fuzzy membership functions
of words based on the context of a sentence. The differences
between human and computer processing of information in
context was also touched on by Jing et al. [21].
B. Damerau–Levenshtein Distance
Edit distance [22] [23] measures the similarity between
two words syntactically. In this paper, edit distance refers
to the Damerau–Levenshtein Distance. There are 4 different
operations: insertion, deletion, substitution, and transposition.
Below are the examples for each type of operation:
• Insertion: “wat” →“what”
• Deletion: “whaat” →“what”
• Substitution: “wgat” →“what”
• Transposition: “waht” →“what”
Edit distance is calculated as the count of a minimum
number of operations above needed to covert one word to
another.
In this paper, edit distance is used in two different ways,
comparison and generation. First, edit distance is used to
compare the candidate corrections from the BERT prediction
to the misspelled word. Ideally, the corrections should be very
similar to the misspelled words in terms of edit distance. The
candidate correction with the lowest edit distance is selected
as the correct prediction of the misspelled word. It is possible
that the lower edit distance is selected for a word that is also
slightly lower on the BERT’s list in terms of predictions than
a word with a higher edit distance. However, since all BERT’s
predictions are contextual, and people tend to recover similar
words faster, we choose to optimize edit distance rather than
contextual ranking. Second, edit distance is used to ﬁnd all
similar words of a target token. Given a corpus, we can extract
existing lexical units that are within K edit distance away from
the given word and then test it with BERT. For instance, in the
Brown corpus, all the words close to ”annoying” with an edit
distance under 2: enjoying, annoying. These two approaches
can be seen as bidirectional: one takes BERT’s interpretation
of misspelled words and then applies edit distance to it; the
other one applies edit distance ﬁrst, and then checks whether
it agrees with BERT’s interpretation of what ﬁts well in a
sentence.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experiment 1: Applying BERT before edit distance
In this experiment, we ﬁrst apply the pre-trained BERT-
Large-Cased [19] model to predict the masked misspelled
words, then employ the edit distance to rank the candidate
corrections. The BERT model outputs a list of N candidate
words, where we chose N to be from 10 to 500 for this
experiment. The edit distance between each candidate word
and the misspelled token can be then calculated and ranked
in ascending order. The word with the lowest edit distance
is chosen as the ﬁnal prediction. When multiple candidate
words have the same lowest edit distance, the word with the
highest prediction probability from BERT is chosen as the ﬁnal
prediction.
The result for experiment 1 is shown in Table II. Three met-
rics are applied in evaluating the accuracy of the corrections:

with top 1 prediction.

in the top N output of BERT.

for the edit distance to select top 1 correct prediction
given the label appears in top N output of BERT.
With N = 500, 73.25% of the misspellings were corrected.
According to Fig. 1, by increasing N, the ﬁnal accuracy in-
creased accordingly; however, the trend was slowing down. At
the same time, as we increased N, the edit distance algorithm
started to miss more correct answers from the candidate list.

TABLE II
RESULTS FOR EXPERIMENT 1, BASED ON VARIOUS NUMBER OF BERT
PREDICTIONS, N
top-N
accuracy

accuracy

10
48.77%
49.64%
98.25%
50
64.34%
66.80%
96.32%
100
68.34%
71.71%
95.30%
200
71.08%
75.52%
94.13%
300
72.14%
77.20%
93.45%
400
72.92%
78.17%
93.28%
500
73.25%
78.84%
92.91%
Fig. 1. Final accuracy changes when increasing N

B. Experiment 2: Applying BERT after edit distance
As stated earlier, in this experiment we ﬁrst generate a list
of similar words within the K edit distance of the misspelled
token, then apply BERT to rank the candidate corrections.
BERT is capable of computing a softmax probability for each
candidate word within the provided context. Thus, the word
with the highest probability is chosen as the ﬁnal prediction.
As mentioned in the previous section, edit distance can
also be used as a criteria to ﬁlter lexical entities from an
existing corpus. Without the corpus restriction, many non-
word contents are generated through modifying the misspelled
token, which leaves BERT’s vocabulary as the only criteria
to restrict real-word selection. When a particular corpus is
applied prior to BERT’s selection, it is feasible for common
words or domain speciﬁc vocabularies to be captured to further
improve the accuracy of the corrections.
Note that in experiment 1, a threshold is not required for edit
distance to realize the selection process as the minimal value
is always preferred. In this experiment, as the edit distance
is applied as the ﬁrst round selection criteria, a threshold is
required since it is impossible to generate candidates with an
inﬁnitely large K (one could keep adding letters to a word).
Such restriction of K can affect the accuracy of the corrections,
since the labels can be out-of-vocabulary words which are
ﬁltered out before the subsequent steps.
In order to compare how edit distance and corpus can jointly
affect the candidate selections, we control the example sen-
tences sampled from the dataset to eliminate out-of-vocabulary
words. Three subsets of sentences are created based on the
following mechanism:
• sample the sentence if the label is within K edit distance
of the misspelled token.
• sample the sentence if the label is also in the corpus.
• sample the sentence if the label is within K edit distance
of the misspelled token and that the word is in the corpus.
In this particular experiment, an edit distance of K ≤2
and the Brown corpus are used for all sub-tasks. Among the
2075 testing cases, 1934 of them have K ≤2. If we increased
the K to 3 or 4, the coverage barely grows but the cost of
computation can grow exponentially. TABLE III shows some
examples of words and the number of similar spellings with
different edit distance:
TABLE III
NUMBER OF SIMILAR WORDS WITH DIFFERENT EDIT DISTANCE (ED)
Word
ED = 1
ED = 2
ED = 3
ED = 4
study
4
35
427
3148
annoying
1
2
42
480
adventurous
1
3
7
13

below, are compared with a comparison group with no re-
strictions on either edit distance or corpus. The results are
compared between the following groups:
• no restriction: no sub-sampling on the dataset.
• ED2 only: subset containing examples if the label is
within 2 edit distance of the misspelled token.
• corpus only: subset containing examples if the label is
also in the Brown corpus.
• ED2 + corpus: subset containing examples if the label
is within 2 edit distance of the misspelled token and that
the word is in the Brown corpus.
TABLE IV shows the result for each group.
TABLE IV
EXPERIMENT 2 RESULT
Total Cases
Correct Cases
Accuracy
No Restriction
2075
1491
71.86%
ED2 only
1934
1491
77.09%
corpus only
1885
1491
79.10%
ED2 + corpus
1756
1491
84.91%
VI. DISCUSSION
A. BERT can be used for misspelling correction
In this experiment, the BERT model was not specially
trained or ﬁne-tuned. It was not designed for misspelling
correction task but still provided acceptable result in both
experiments. After applying the edit distance algorithm with

the BERT model, 73.25% of the misspellings were corrected
successfully in experiment 1. If we exclude the out-of-
vocabulary words and the errors with large edit distance in
experiment 2, the accuracy can reach 84.91%. The experiments
showed using BERT to do misspelling correction was possible
if we treated the misspelling correction task as masked word
prediction task.
BERT can always be ﬁne-tuned with new training corpus.
If the BERT model can be trained on some texts related to the
topic of the chosen data set (for instance, some exam scripts
for the same questions without errors), there might still be
room for further improvement.
Other BERT-like models trained on larger corpus are likely
to perform better due to the larger vocabulary size and richer
topics of the texts. However, models like Generative Pre-
trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3) [24] require enormous com-
putation power to do inferences, which are less practical in
the use case of misspelling correction.
B. Analysis on Part of Speech of the misspellings
Among all the testing cases, some of the errors seem easy to
be identiﬁed and corrected by human — here are 2 examples:
example 1: “Another point which I think was ennoying
(correction: annoying) was the concert hall”
example 2: “There, I saw the exibitions (correction:
exhibitions) and admired the building itself”
Both corrections are only 1 edit distance away from the
misspellings. However, in experiment 1, even if we increase
the top-N to 500, BERT and the edit distance algorithm still
failed to ﬁnd the correct answer. BERT provided a list of words
that matched the Part of Speech (POS) and made sense in the
given context. It is possible that if we masked a word with a
certain POS, BERT can be confused due to the lack of context.
In experiment 2, the misspelling “exibitions” in example 2
was corrected as “exhibition” which was the single form of
the expected correction. According to the context, both forms
are acceptable in terms of grammar, but it was counted as a
failed case in the evaluation. For certain types of POS, we
might need to add extra limitations during the evaluation to
eliminate the cases like example 2.
C. BERT can be tolerant of a certain amount of error in the
context
All the testing cases were written by non-native speakers.
Many of sentences contained multiple errors. Not only the
masked word itself was a misspelling, but there were other
types of errors in the sentence as well. BERT showed great
robustness in such situations. To further prove this observation,
we even tested some informal sentences from social media and
BERT still worked properly. Here are some examples:
example 1: “whos gonna tell (masked) my brother that the
mf corona is here already and he needs to stay the [...]1 out
from society for awhile”
1The word is not displayed in the paper due to its offensive nature
example 2: “seal the whole area let the people be there
anyone wants to come in give them a 12hour deadline after
that set up a perimeter around the bagh and let them be one
(masked) gets out or in till corona is over”
The second example was actually a paragraph consisted
of multiple sentences. The punctuation was missing, and the
spellings were chaotic. Even in such situation, BERT still was
able to predict the masked word successfully.
VII. FUTURE WORK
A. Misspellings with larger edit distance
In experiment 2, only similar words with edit distance
under 2 were selected as the candidate words due to the
balance between accuracy and computation cost. However, in
reality, there are spelling errors with a larger edit distance.
For example, sometimes people create abbreviations for the
long words based on the pronunciations or the spellings.
The method used in experiment 2 may not be capable of
correcting such errors with the current algorithms. Future work
is required to solve this problem.
B. Other types of errors
If misspelling correction can be converted to a masked
word prediction task, what about correcting other types of
errors? For example, some syntax error correction task can
also be viewed as a masked prediction task. Some preliminary
experiments were also conducted that considered sentences
such as:
“The book is going to change the way people thinking.”
The example above contained a syntax error. Either the verb
“thinking” was in a wrong form, or, less likely, the words ”will
be” are missing.
The pre-trained BERT model was very good at masked word
prediction as long as the expected output was one word. With
this underlying idea, BERT could become a universal model
that is capable of correcting different types of errors. The CLC
FCE dataset contains different types of error. Some of them
are strictly in one-to-one format (the error was one word and
the correction was also one word). It would be interesting to
compare the results across different types of error.
C. BERT for both misspelling detection and correction
In the experiments described in this paper, the misspellings
were labeled. Therefore BERT did not need to detect the mis-
spelling before ﬁxing it. In real-world application, misspelling
detection and correction are always bounded together. It would
be more useful if BERT could also be used for misspelling
detection.
One approach that allows BERT to detect anomalies could
be: scan each of the word in a given sentence and try to ﬁnd
anomaly based on the BERT prediction probability and the
edit distance. The metrics need to be carefully designed and
tested.
For every single masked word prediction task, BERT would
compute the attention scores for every word in the input

sentence. Thus the speed of scanning every word in a sentence
is similar to the speed of doing one masked work prediction
task.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper explored the possibility of using the pre-trained
BERT model for misspelling correction. We utilized the
masked word prediction capability of BERT to do misspelling
correction. The test result showed the pre-trained BERT model
was capable of ﬁxing spelling errors with the help of the edit
distance algorithm.
During our experiments, we did not train or ﬁne-tune the
BERT model. Although the accuracy was not close to the
ngram model [8] or the RNN model [12], the pre-trained
BERT model proved its potential in the misspelling correction
task.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Baijian Yang for his valuable and
helpful feedback during our research progress and Shinhye
Yun for her input in the early stages of this work.
