Synergistic Formulaic Alpha Generation for
Quantitative Trading based on Reinforcement Learning
Hong-Gi Shin, Sukhyun Jeong, Eui-Yeon Kim, Sungho Hong, Young-Jin Cho, and Yong-Hoon Choi
Division of Robotics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul 01897, South Korea

Abstract— Mining
of
formulaic
alpha
factors
refers
to
the process of discovering and developing specific factors
or indicators (referred to as alpha factors) for quantitative
trading in stock market. To efficiently discover alpha factors
in vast search space, reinforcement learning (RL) is commonly
employed. This paper proposes a method to enhance existing
alpha factor mining approaches by expanding a search space
and utilizing pretrained formulaic alpha set as initial seed
values to generate synergistic formulaic alpha. We employ
information coefficient (IC) and rank information coefficient
(Rank IC) as performance evaluation metrics for the model.
Using CSI300 market data, we conducted real investment
simulations and observed significant performance improvement
compared to existing techniques.
Keywords—Reinforcement learning, Formulaic alpha factor
I. INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence plays a vital role in enhancing
profitability in stock investment and the financial sector.
Specifically, quantitative trading involves an automated
approach to buying and selling stocks to maximize the
final net asset value. Machine learning models trained on
technical stock trading data (e.g., open, close, high, low,
volume, etc.) actively participate in the trading process.
Research on quantitative trading utilizing reinforcement
learning considers the volatility and noise in stock data,
addressing gaps between signal-based trading decisions.
Reinforcement learning (RL) constructs end-to-end models,
bypassing issues related to prediction. This approach proves
suitable for various quantitative trading tasks such as
algorithmic trading and portfolio management [1]. However,
this field still faces several limitations. For instance, given
the importance of risk management, there is a pressing need
for explainable AI due to the black-box nature of agents
[2].
Formulaic alpha factor mining, a subset of artificial
intelligence research in the stock market, involves the
process of generating formulas with high correlations to
future returns from raw features associated with stock
trading. Typically, it calculates correlations between alpha
factor values and future returns and identifies factors
showing high correlations as ’alpha factors,’ believed to
bring returns exceeding the market performance. Symbolic
factors are equated with formulaic factors and are typically
expressions generated using various operators and operands.
Traditionally, human intervention was involved in expression
creation, but recently, machine learning models are used to
automatically generate them. When conducting symbolic
factor mining based on machine learning, it requires a
search space that specifies which operators and operands
to use in creating symbolic factors, as well as a search
algorithm to find the optimal symbolic factors.
There have been studies using genetic algorithms to find
a single formulaic alpha factor [3-7]. Genetic algorithms
aim to start from various initial factors and use an
evolutionary mechanism to generate the optimal factor.
However, explaining the complex stock market with a single
alpha factor is challenging, so it is common to combine
alpha factors with low correlations among them. Existing
methods for alpha factor generation have prioritized the
performance of individual alpha factors without considering
the performance of combined alpha factors. Therefore,
there are limitations in finding a set of alpha factors that
synergistically contribute to each other.
To address these limitations, Yu et al. [8] proposed a new
framework aimed at optimizing the performance of alpha
factor combination during formulaic alpha factor mining.
In their study, they explored the space for alpha factor
generation using proximal policy optimization (PPO)-based
reinforcement learning [9] and updated weights of generated
alpha factor set through gradient descent. The framework
proposed in the paper demonstrated higher correlations with
future returns compared to a single alpha factor generated by
a genetic algorithm. However, unlike other studies on alpha
factor generation, the limited number of operators in the
search space restricts the ability to generate a wide variety
of alpha combinations. These limitations highlight the need
to expand the search space. But excessively expanding the
search space raises complex issues, such as requiring a
more sophisticated policy architecture and a more efficient
search algorithm.
In this paper, we build upon the research of Yu et
al. [8] by proposing an enhanced initialization method
that defines a more extensive search space and initializes
it with pregenerated seed formulaic alpha set, thereby
leveraging the strengths of RL-based search algorithms. Our
approach improves the performance compared with previous
arXiv:2401.02710v2  [cs.CE]  8 Jul 2024

TABLE I: Information on the tokens used in the experiment.
Tokens that were added are indicated in bold.
Category
Symbols
Features
open, close, high, low, volume, VWAP
Operator
Abs, Log, Add, Sub, Mul, Div, Greater, Less,
Ref, Mean, Std, Var, Sum, Max, Min, Med,
Mad, Delta, WMA, EMA, Cov, Corr,
Sign, CSRank, Product, Scale, Pow, Skew,
Kurt, Rank, Delta, Argmax, Argmin, Cond
Times deltas
5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 120, 252
Constant
-30.0, -10.0, -5.0, -2.0, -1.0, -0.5, -0.01, 0.5,
1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 10.0, 30.0
Sequence
BEG(begin), SEP(end of expression)
indicators
synergistic formulaic alpha factor methodologies. To assess
performance against previous researches, we use CSI300
market data for the same period. We sequentially apply the
proposed technique, observe improvements in performance,
and
evaluate
investment
outcomes
through
investment
simulations in comparison with previous methods.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II,
we present the improvements compared to previous syner-
gistic formulaic alpha factor mining techniques. Section III
provides a detailed explanation of data collection and pro-
cessing methods, experimental settings, and results. Finally,
in Section IV, we draw conclusions from this research and
discuss directions for future studies.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
We adopt the alpha definition employed in [8]. We trade
for a period of T days and consider n stocks in the stock
market. For each trading day t ∈{1, . . . , T} each stock i
corresponds to a feature vector xi,t ∈Rmt where, m is the
number of raw features such as opening and closing prices.
With the feature vectors of all stocks on a trading day
X ∈Rn×mt consisting of n feature vectors, the alpha
factor f is defined as a mapping function that converts the
feature vectors X ∈Rn×mt to alpha values f(X) ∈Rn.
Finally, alpha values z are obtained as z = Pk
j=1 wjfj(X)
where k is the number of elements within the alpha set
F = {f1, . . . , fk} and their weights W = {w1, . . . , wk}.
To calculate the correlation between the alpha values and
the real stock trend y ∈Rn, we used IC as an metric. Also,
we based on [8] as a method for generating alpha sets that
can maximize IC. The alpha mining system of [8] consists
of an alpha generator that produces alpha factors and a
combination model that optimizes W to maximize the IC
of the alpha set over the training data.
We propose a search space expansion of the alpha gener-
ator for diversity of alpha factors and initialization with seed
alphas to effectively navigate a large search space.
TABLE II: Description of the operators added in the paper.
Operator
Description
Sign(x)
Returns 0 if the given x value is 0, 1 if it is
positive, and -1 if it is negative.
CSRank(x)
The cross-sectional rank (CSRank) is an
operator that returns the rank of the current
stock’s feature value x relative to the feature
values of all stocks on today’s date.
Product(x, t)
It returns the product of the feature values for
each date from the current date up to t days
ago.
Product(x, t) = Qt
i=0 xt−i
Scale(x)
It returns the value obtained by dividing the
current feature value x by the total sum of the
absolute values of the feature.
Scale(x) =
x
P
i |xi|
Pow(x,y)
Pow(x, y) = xy
Skew(x)
Skewness. It represents the asymmetry of a
data distribution and is expressed using the
third standard moment.
µ = E(x),
µi = E[(x −µ)i],
Skew(x) =

µ3
µ1.5
2

=

E[(x−µ)3]
(E[(x−µ)2])1.5

Kurt(x)
Kurtosis, a value indicating the peakedness of
a data distribution, represents how much the
observations are clustered around the mean.
Kurt(x) = µ4
µ2
2 −3 =

E[(x−µ)4]
(E[(x−µ)2])2

−3
Rank(x, t)
Time-series rank (Rank), an operator that
returns the rank of the current feature value x
among feature values from the current date up
to t days ago.
Delta(x, t)
An operator that returns the difference
between the current feature value x and the
feature value from t days ago.
Delta(x, t) = x −Ref(x, t)
Argmax(x, t)
An operator that returns the date when the
feature value x was the highest within the
period from the current date up to t days ago.
Argmin(x, t)
An operator that returns the date when the
feature value x was the lowest within the
period from the current date up to t days ago.
Cond(x,y,t,f)
An operator that returns t if x > y is true,
and f if it is false.
A. Expanding Search Space
This paper utilizes reinforcement learning to generate
a wide range of formulaic alpha factors by exploring a
much broader search space, thus ensuring the creation of
diverse factors. Table 1 depicts the search space used in
the paper. We have incorporated new operators presented in
[10] to those used in previous research [8], while excluding
industry classification data. Additionally, to gain a deeper
understanding of trend changes, we have included a constant
range of {5, 60, 120, 252}, allowing for the reflection of both
short-term and long-term trends. Table 2 provides detailed
descriptions of the operators added in this paper.
B. Initialization with Seed Alphas
The policy must navigate the given search space to gener-
ate k alpha factors. This implies that as we expand the search
space, the complexity of the search space that the policy
must explore to generate optimal alpha factors increases,
necessitating more sophisticated architectural structures for
the policy and refinement of the search algorithm. This study
sets pre-generated formulaic alpha set as the initial seed

TABLE III: Main results on CSI 300. Values outside parentheses are the
means, and values inside parentheses are the standard deviations across 5
runs.
Method
CSI 300
IC(↑)
Rank IC(↑)
Baseline [8]
0.045
0.058
(0.0036)
(0.0006)
Ours (Expanding search space)
0.069
0.073
(0.0079)
(0.010)
Ours (Expanding search space +
0.071
0.071
Initialization with 101 alpha)
(0.0086)
(0.008)
Ours (Expanding search space +
0.085
0.087
Initialization with generated alpha set)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Fig. 1: Comparison of IC changes according to pool size variations in
the Combination model on CSI300. Display average IC after training
five random seeds for each pool size. Red: Original search space, Blue:
Expanded search space.
alpha set and then performs alpha set mining based on it. By
storing a combination of pre-generated superior alpha set in
the replay buffer, it is possible to bias the search space that
the policy needs to explore, thereby reducing the complexity
of the search and enabling the creation of synergistic alphas
in fewer steps. The process is carried out in two stages. In the
first stage, if there are no previously known alpha factors, the
alpha set is initialized as empty(w/o initial seed alpha factor).
Subsequently, mega alphas are generated through synergistic
formulaic alpha mining. In the second stage, if there are
already known (or generated) alpha factors, the alpha set is
initialized with these factors included. Then, by continuing
to generate mega alphas in a complementary manner, a more
enhanced predictive model is ultimately constructed.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Environment
The data used in this study is from the Chinese A-shares
market, which includes six features: Open, Close, High,
Low, Volume, and volume weighted average price (VWAP).
To prevent survivorship bias, the listing date of each stock
was used as its index inclusion date. Since this study only
considers long positions, the dates when stocks are excluded
from the index were not considered. The target variable
is the stock price change percentage in 20 days later. The
training set spans from January 1, 2009, to December 31,
2018, the validation set from January 1, 2019, to December
TABLE IV: Top 5 formulas from Alpha 101 [10] with the highest IC.
Alpha#
Expression
IC in
test set
Alpha
(-1 * Corr(open, volume, 10))
0.035
006
Alpha
099
(Less(CSRank(Corr(Sum(((high + low) /
0.032
2), 19.8975), Sum(Mean(volume, 60),
19.8975), 8.8136)), CSRank(Corr(low,
volume, 6.28259))) * -1)
Alpha
061
Less(CSRank((vwap - Min(vwap,
0.031
16.1219))), CSRank(Corr(vwap,
Mean(volume, 180), 17.9282)))
Alpha
014
((-1 * CSRank(Delta(Div(Sub(close,
0.028
Ref(close, 1)), close), 3))) * Corr(open,
volume, 10))
Alpha
035
((Rank(volume, 32) * (1 - Rank(((close +
0.024
high) - low), 16))) * (1 -
Rank(Div(Sub(close, Ref(close, 1)),
close), 32)))
Fig. 2: IC change during the Test period when initializing the Alpha set with
Alpha 101’s formulaic alpha factor. Non-Init: Training without initializing
with a separate formulaic alpha. Blue: Original search space, Red: Expanded
search space. Green: IC for the test set of the existing Alpha 101 formula.
31, 2019, and the test set from January 1, 2020, to December
31, 2021. For the backtest framework, Qlib [11] was utilized.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed technique,
we sequentially applied an expanded search space and ini-
tialization with the generated alpha set, setting the model’s
combination size to 20. Additionally, to verify accuracy,
five different random seeds were applied. As a performance
metric, we use the Pearson correlation coefficient to mea-
sure the correlation between the target variable and alpha
factor. Additionally, we use the Spearman rank correlation
coefficient to measure rank-based correlations.
B. Main Result
Table 3 presents the results of the performance comparison
with [8]. Upon examining the experimental results, we
observed
that
the
performance
differences
among
all
models were minimal with changes in seed value. However,
performance improvements were observed when expanding
the search space and sequentially implementing the alpha
set initialization strategy. While [8] showed a significant
value difference between IC and RankIC, the proposed

Fig. 3: IC change during the Test period when initializing the Alpha set
with the created alpha set. Non-Init: Training without inserting any separate
formulaic alpha. Blue: Original search space, Red: Expanded search space.
Green: IC for the test set of alphas created when the pool size is 10.
TABLE V: Parameters used in backtesting.
Parameters
Value
Top K
50
Swap N
5
Minimum number of holding days H
20 days
Top K enter threshold Eth
0.0
Backtest dates
2020-01-01 - 2021-12-31
Survivorship bias
Not included
Backtest platform
Qlib [11]
PPO agent seed
0, 1, 2, 3, 4
Size of alpha pool
20
technique maintained value differences within the range of
standard deviation.
C. Case Study 1: Expanding Search Space
In this paper, we conducted experiments to investigate
the impact of the expansion of operators and operands on
performance. The experiment observed changes in IC by
varying the pool sizes to 1, 10, 20, 50, and 100.
Figure 1 shows the results of IC changes for each pool size
based on the CSI300 data. These results demonstrate a gen-
eral trend of performance improvement with increasing pool
sizes in [8]. However, the expanded search space proposed in
our study showed that even with smaller pool sizes, IC was
higher for the test period. In the expanded search space, we
observed performance improvement up to a pool size of 20,
after which no further changes in performance were noted.
D. Case Study 2: Initialization with alpha 101
In this paper, we conducted experiments to determine
whether initializing with [10]’s alpha factors impacts the
learning effectiveness. During the training process, we
selected 5 formulaic alpha factors from the top 101 alphas
with high IC for the CSI300 index, excluding alphas that
use ’indneutralize’ and ’market cap’. The formulas used
are presented in Table 4. The pool size for the combination
model was set to 20, ensuring that the formulas proposed
Fig. 4: Cumulative return changes during the test period with the created
mega alpha set. Set pool size to 20 and display individually after training
five random seeds. Black: CSI300 index for the test set period. Blue:
alpha set created with original search space, red: alpha set created with
expanded search space, green: alpha set created after initializing with alpha
set generated when pool size is 10.
in [10] were included in the initial alpha set. At the
same time, the setup allowed for the possibility of these
alpha factors being removed from the alpha set by the
combination model during training. For the comparison, we
named the original method without [10]’s seed alpha factors
as ’Non-Init’ and observed the performance differences
depending on the presence or absence of [10]’s seed alpha
factors. We also observed the performance changes in both
the original search space and the expanded search space. In
this experiment, training was conducted with five different
random seeds for the CSI300 index.
Figure 2 presents the results when the alpha set was
initialized using the formulas proposed in [10]. In the original
search space, the average IC increased by 0.0034, indicating
a performance difference within the standard deviation. Con-
versely, in the expanded search space, the average decreased
by 0.0016, showing no significant changes in performance
in both search spaces. The formulas of alpha 101 used in
the experiment displayed low ICs during the test set period.
In the original search space, only alpha 099 was included
in the alpha set for one of the five random seeds, while the
other formulaic alpha factors from alpha 101 were dropped
during the generation process. These results suggest that the
formulaic alpha factors of alpha 101 were generally removed
from the alpha set creation process due to their overall low
performance.
E. Case Study 3: Initialization with pre-generated alpha set
This experiment was designed to determine whether the
initialization of alpha set using synergistic formulaic alpha
impacts the learning effectiveness. During the expanded
search space experiment, we measured the test ICs of the
alpha set generated when the combination model’s pool size
was 10. To conduct a comparative experiment with alpha
101, we selected a single formulaic alpha factor from the
alpha set that showed the highest IC in the test set for use in
alpha set initialization. The selected alpha set demonstrated
an IC of 0.078 in the test set, and from this, a single

formulaic alpha factor with an IC of 0.07 was chosen.
The pool size of the combination model was set to 20,
and 5 different random seeds were used for training and
evaluation of each technique. During the training, selected
formulaic alpha factors were added to the alpha set, and
if necessary, could be removed by the combination model.
This experiment was conducted on the CSI300 index, and
we observed the impact of initialization with seed alphas
from the experiment by comparing performances based on
whether the empty alpha set, marked as ’Non-Init,’ were
initialized or not.
Figure 3 shows the experimental results when alpha set
with a pool size of 20 was initialized using alpha set with
a pool size of 10. Initializing with a single formulaic alpha
factor resulted in an increase of 0.006 in IC compared to
initializing with empty alpha set with a pool size of 20,
and an increase of 0.005 compared to a pool size of 10.
When initialized with 10 formulaic alpha factors, there was
an increase of 0.016 in IC compared to initializing with
empty alpha set with a pool size of 20, and an increase
of 0.007 compared to a pool size of 10. The significant IC
differences observed in experiments with the same pool size
demonstrate that the method of initialization with the initial
seed alpha set can affect model performance.
F. Backtesting
In
this
paper,
the
backtesting
environment
for
the
proposed
investment
strategy
utilized
a
Top-K/Swap-N
based long only strategy. Top-K/Swap-N involves selecting
the top K stocks based on the highest alpha values to form
the portfolio. Daily, at the close of the stock market, the
alpha values of stocks in the portfolio are compared with
those not included in the portfolio. Up to N stocks are
then sold, and up to N new stocks are purchased based
on this comparison. Additionally, stocks initially purchased
must be held for at least a minimum number of days (H)
before they can be sold. A Top-K Enter Threshold(Eth)
is also set, where the value must be higher than this
threshold at the time of purchase and lower at the time
of sale. Table 5 presents the parameters used for backtesting.
Figure 4 displays the cumulative returns after backtest-
ing for each technique trained with 5 random seeds. It is
observed that the proposed technique consistently recorded
higher cumulative returns across all seeds compared to
the existing techniques. While some seeds in the existing
methods failed to achieve excess returns over the CSI300
index during certain periods, the application of the proposed
technique resulted in excess returns over the index for all
seeds.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we explored the efficiency of using
reinforcement learning to generate synergistic formulaic
alpha
collections,
and
confirmed
the
potential
of
reinforcement learning in creating formulaic alpha factors
from a vast search space, demonstrating its capability to
produce alpha set with high IC. We found that initializing
with pre-generated formulaic alphas led to the creation of
superior performing alpha set. Additionally, we expanded
the search space to integrate various operators and operands,
and confirmed that this expansion contributed to improved
results. However, there are limitations due to the complexity
arising from the formula length restriction inherent in
the model structure. To address this, we proposed the
use of predefined auxiliary indicators. We also identified
a problem where IC deteriorated at the beginning of
the training process due to not resetting the experience
buffer, suggesting the need to simultaneously initialize the
alpha set and experience buffer in future to resolve this issue.
Finally, we proposed the necessity of observing perfor-
mance in other markets. While this paper conducted ex-
periments using the CSI300, further experiments in various
financial markets like the CSI500, NASDAQ, and KOSPI
are planned to additionally verify the universality of our
approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korea
Government MSIT under Grant 2021R1F1A1064080.
