Slow manifolds in recurrent networks encode working
memory efﬁciently and robustly
Elham Ghazizadeh1∗& ShiNung Ching1,2,3
1Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO 63130,
USA
2Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
3Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO
63130, USA
Working memory is a cognitive function involving the storage and manipulation of latent in-
formation over brief intervals of time, thus making it crucial for context-dependent compu-
tation. Here, we use a top-down modeling approach to examine network-level mechanisms of
working memory, an enigmatic issue and central topic of study in neuroscience and machine
intelligence. We train thousands of recurrent neural networks on a working memory task
and then perform dynamical systems analysis on the ensuing optimized networks, wherein
we ﬁnd that four distinct dynamical mechanisms can emerge. In particular, we show the
prevalence of a mechanism in which memories are encoded along slow stable manifolds in
the network state space, leading to a phasic neuronal activation proﬁle during memory peri-
ods. In contrast to mechanisms in which memories are directly encoded at stable attractors,
these networks naturally forget stimuli over time. Despite this seeming functional disadvan-
tage, they are more efﬁcient in terms of how they leverage their attractor landscape and
1
arXiv:2101.03163v1  [q-bio.NC]  8 Jan 2021

paradoxically, are considerably more robust to noise. Our results provide new dynamical hy-
potheses regarding how working memory function is encoded in both natural and artiﬁcial
neural networks.
Working memory (WM) is a temporary store that allows for active manipulation of informa-
tion in the absence of external stimuli 1. Critical cognitive functions such as reasoning, planning
and problem solving rely on working memory and thus its mechanistic basis is a key question
in science and machine intelligence. Presumably, memory retention relies on an invariant latent
neural representation of past stimuli 2, but the precise nature of these representations and the dy-
namical mechanisms by which they are created in neural circuits remain enigmatic. Experimental
and theoretical characterizations of working memory typically center on a delay period that occurs
after stimulus presentation and before onset of a behavioral response or action 3–6. Characteriza-
tions of neural activity during delay periods dichotomize into two broad categories: (i) persistent,
tonic activity and (ii) time varying, phasic activity. In the former, neurons are tuned to relevant fea-
tures of a stimulus and produce elevated and relatively constant activity throughout the delay 7–9.
In the latter, neuronal activity ﬂuctuates, ramping up and down during delay periods 5,10,11. Tonic
and phasic paradigms have been observed in working memory tasks in animals 10,11 and artiﬁcial
networks 12,13. However, the mechanisms underlying these descriptions and the reasons why one
may manifest over the other in certain circumstances is far from clear.
Understanding the network mechanism of working memory often revolves around the role of
self-sustaining attractors, including discrete ﬁxed points14, which correspond to neuronal activity
2

patterns that are maintained indeﬁnitely in the absence of exogenous stimuli or perturbation. Tonic
delay activity is thought to coincide with such attractors 14–16, thus allowing for stable maintenance
of memory representations for potentially arbitrary lengths of time.
On the other hand, in the phasic hypothesis memory representations do not coincide with
self-sustaining attractors. Instead, high-dimensional neuronal activity ﬂuctuations may project
onto a lower-dimensional latent space upon which an invariant representation is held during delay
intervals 17,18. For example, if the activity of a neuron gradually drops, the activity of another
neuron increases to compensate for that drop. Thus, during delay, neural activity may traverse a
low-dimensional manifold corresponding to this invariant representation 13,19.
Disambiguating the above mechanisms requires deriving an understanding of the generative
processes that give rise to time-varying, task-evoked neural activity. Ideally, we would be able to
analytically characterize these mechanisms in a dynamical systems framework that could reveal
the details of the attractor landscape embedded within neuronal networks.
However, ascertaining dynamical systems models of biological networks is not straightfor-
ward, especially at a level of scale commensurate with networks thought to be relevant to WM,
such as prefrontal cortex 20,21. Here, artiﬁcial recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can form an
interesting and potentially useful surrogate from which to derive mechanistic hypotheses. Such
networks can be optimized in a top-down fashion to engage high-level cognitive tasks that include
WM requirements 22–26.
3

Then, the emergent dynamics of the synthesized model can be analyzed and used to make ar-
guments for or against different mechanisms, based on the predictive validity of the model outputs
relative to actual brain activity.
In this spirit, recent works have tried to reconcile the aforementioned hypotheses regarding
persistent vs. transient delay activity in the context of WM 27–30. Orhan and colleagues 30 optimized
RNNs to perform several short-term memory tasks and they observed that both tonic and phasic
delay activity could arise, depending on speciﬁc task details and optimization/learning parameters.
Similarly, Nachstedt and colleagues 27 showed that the existence of both mechanisms simultane-
ously can mediate reliable task performance in the face of uncertain stimulus timing. However, it
remains unclear what factors sway RNNs to manifest one mechanism over another and, related,
whether they carry different functional advantages.
With regards to the last point, the ability of optimized RNNs to predict actual brain activity
may depend crucially on certain restrictions regarding the optimization method that is used, e.g.,
by encouraging solutions that manifest connection motifs that are more biologically realistic 13,31.
Thus, using RNNs to build potentially explanatory hypotheses regarding neural circuit mechanisms
likely requires careful consideration of the numerical optimization strategy used, including hyper-
parameters and initialization schemes, as well as prior constraints on network architecture 25,32.
Expanding on this idea, in this work, we pursue the top-down RNN approach to study potential
mechanisms underlying WM function, training thousands of networks to perform an analytically
tractable sequential, memory-dependent pattern matching task. To train our network, we modify
4

the First-Order Reduced and Controlled Error (FORCE) 33 method by using a temporally restricted
error kernel to conﬁne error regression to occur only during brief intervals within each trial. The
proposed framework blends trial-based reinforcement learning with ﬁrst-order regression, thus ob-
viating the need for a continual external supervisory error-signal.
Our premise is that this revised optimization framework, by leaving long epochs uncon-
strained, may allow for a wider range of possible emergent dynamics. Indeed, by optimizing RNNs
across different hyperparameters and initialization schemes within this framework, we identify a
diversity of network mechanisms, each achieving the desired function, but varying in their key
dynamical properties. We ﬁnd that networks can embed predominantly asymptotically stable ﬁxed
points, stable limit cycle attractors, or a combination thereof. Most interestingly, we show here
that there are two distinct mechanisms by which stable ﬁxed points can be used to serve memory
encoding, one leading to tonic activation and the other leading to phasic activation. We show that
the latter, while unable to sustain memories over arbitrary lengths of time (i.e., wherein the model
‘forgets’) nonetheless constitutes a more efﬁcient and robust mechanism by which memories can
be encoded.
Results
Working memory can be encoded via distinct dynamical mechanisms associated with tonic
and phasic neural activation. We enacted a trial-based WM task involving sequential pattern
matching (SPM) that exhibits working memory requirements (Fig. 1a). In our design, high-
5

dimensional stimuli are encoded as bivariate random processes, such that the network is required
to temporally integrate each stimulus and then store a latent representation of said stimulus for
later processing. We optimized RNNs to perform this task by using a modiﬁed FORCE method
33 that included a temporally restricted error kernel. Here, regression occurs at two phases during
each trial: (i) during memory/delay periods, wherein we promote the formation of an invariant
latent linear projection from neural units nominally associated with maintenance of a memory rep-
resentation; and (ii) at the conclusion of each trial, wherein we promote a linearly decoded output
response signal (Fig. 1a,b). All other temporal epochs are unconstrained, thus obviating the need to
generate an error signal continuously throughout trials, which may overly constrain the dynamics
34 (see also Methods for additional details and Supplementary Fig. 1).
We found that optimized networks could produce both tonic and phasic activity patterns
during delay periods, as exempliﬁed for two different networks of 1000 neurons in Fig. 1c. In
order to study the dynamical mechanisms underlying these overt patterns we ﬁrst used a numerical
criteria on neuronal activity at the end of the delay period, Td. Speciﬁcally, we arrested trials
at Td and forward simulated the networks autonomously to ascertain whether the activity was
sustained at a ﬁxed point (see Methods). We identiﬁed four distinct dynamical mechanisms that
could mediate working memory. In the case of tonic activation, network activity would indeed
remain persistent, i.e., x(t), the state vector of neuronal activity, would remain near x(Td) with
∥˙x∥≃0, indicative of a ﬁxed point attractor (Fig. 2a). We refer to this mechanism as direct
ﬁxed point encoding (DFP). In the case of phasic patterns, x(t) in the forward simulation would
deviate from x(Td). In some cases, the network would always settle at a different ﬁxed point from
6

the memory representation (Fig. 2b, termed indirect ﬁxed point encoding, IFP), independent of
the stimulus or network initial condition. In other cases the network would always asymptotically
approach a stable limit cycle attractor (Fig. 2c, limit cycle encoding, LC). In a fourth case (not
depicted), the network could asymptotically approach either a disparate ﬁxed point or a limit cycle,
depending on the stimulus realization (termed mixed encoding, see Supplementary Fig. 2). In total,
we optimized 1524 network models, of which 703 were identiﬁed of the direct ﬁxed point (DFP)
mechanism, 534 were of the indirect ﬁxed point (IFP) mechanism, 182 were of the limit cycle
(LC) mechanism, and 105 were of the mixed (Mix) mechanism. Given their dominance in the
emergent solutions, our subsequent attention will be on understanding the workings of the DFP
and IFP mechanisms, though we will later also untangle the factors that cause each mechanism to
arise over the others.
Indirect encoding efﬁciently uses the network attractor landscape. The above ﬁndings sug-
gests that key invariant structures in the network attractor landscape – stable ﬁxed points and
attractive limit cycles – determine whether and how delay activity takes on a tonic or phasic char-
acteristic. To delve further into these mechanisms, we attempted to analyze how networks in each
of the four categories leverage their respective attractor landscapes during the task.
We began by linearizing the dynamics at the origin and using mean-ﬁeld results 35 to establish
lower bounds on the number of ﬁxed point attractors manifest in the network attractor landscape.
Fig. 3a,b show how our four mechanistic categories break down along three key properties of
spectra of the ensuing Jacobian matrix, where distinctions are readily observed. Most notably,
7

the landscapes associated with direct ﬁxed point encoding involve a greater number of ﬁxed point
attractors relative to indirect encoding. In support of this point, Fig. 3c illustrates representative
low-dimensional projections of network activity in each of the four mechanisms with stable ﬁxed
points overlaid (here, we restrict attention to the positive quadrant, see also Discussion). In DFP
encoding (Fig. 3c), the sequential stimuli move the trajectory between different ﬁxed points (as-
sociated with memory representations), culminating in an output that is itself associated with a
different ﬁxed point (i.e., here a total of four ﬁxed points are used in the service of the task). In
contrast, the landscape for IFP encoding (Fig. 3c) involves a single ﬁxed point that does not en-
code memories, nor does it encode the nominal output (though, it is approached asymptotically if
networks are forward simulated autonomously after trial cessation). Thus, IFP encoding is able to
maintain invariant representations during the relevant memory periods without relying directly on
the presence of multiple ﬁxed point attractors (see also Supplementary Fig. 3.)
Indirect encoding uses slow manifolds to sustain memory representations Following from the
above, IFP encoding appears to use the geometry of the stable manifolds of the single ﬁxed point to
maintain memory representations. Fig. 4a illustrates the spectrum of the linearized dynamics about
the ﬁxed point in the previous IFP example encoding model, where we see many eigenvalues near
the imaginary axis, indicating the presence of slow, stable manifolds along which activity ﬂows in a
relatively invariant fashion. These manifolds provide the opportunity for a low-dimensional latent
representation of memory to be maintained, despite phasic activity (along the manifold). Indeed,
because we encourage linearly mapped latent representations via our optimization method (see
Methods), we know these manifolds have a planar geometry in the ﬁring rate activity variables.
8

In contrast, Fig. 4b illustrates the spectra resulting from linearization about two memory ﬁxed
points in a DFP model. Here we note that eigenvalues are relatively offset from the imaginary axis,
indicating rapid convergence to the ﬁxed point. This conclusion is supported in Fig. 4c, which
shows the relative proportion of delay periods in which neurons are in the saturated (nonlinear) vs.
linear range of the activation function, i.e. tanh(.) , for each model we trained. The much larger
proportion of saturated neurons in DFP encoding indicates that the mass of eigenvalues for these
models is relatively contracted and offset from the imaginary axis (see Methods and equation (10))
and thus associated with fast decay to the ﬁxed points.
To further understand the circuit-level details mediating the DFP and IFP mechanisms, we
characterized the connectivity between neurons. We ﬁrst noted that DFP encoding leads to an
overall much greater distribution of connectivity weights between neurons relative to IFP (Fig.
4d). Next, we sorted neurons according to their peak activation (as in Fig. 1c) and examined
their average pre-synaptic activity throughout the course of trials. We found that neurons in DFP
encoding exhibited highly structured synaptic tuning to different stimuli and memory periods, in
contrast to IFP encoding (Fig. 4e). Finally, we examined the bidirectional synaptic weight between
‘adjacent’ neurons (ones with temporally sequential maximal activation). Here, DFP exhibits no
systematic connectivity structure, while IFP shows that neurons with similar peak activation times
are more tightly coupled (Fig. 4f). This latter point suggests that traversal along the slow manifolds
is mediated by an internal sequential, ‘daisy chain’ type of structure embedded within the trained
IFP encoding network.
9

Stable manifold encoding is forgetful, but robust. We sought to better understand the functional
advantages of the different mechanism types. In this regard, we interrogated networks by extend-
ing delay periods beyond the nominal training requirements, a form of increased memory demand.
The main question here is how increasing the memory demand in this way would affect activity
and consequently degrade task performance. Fig. 5a illustrates the comparison of neural activity
patterns for DFP and IFP encoding categories (with extended delay equal to ﬁve times the nominal
delay interval). For DFP encoding, regardless of the length of the extended delay, the neural activ-
ity is unaffected since the network uses ﬁxed points as the invariant structure to encode memory
traces. Consequently, after the extended delay ends and the network receives the second stimulus,
task computations can be executed correctly. However, for IFP encoding, during the extended de-
lay interval, neural activity gradually drops away which results in loss of function due to deviation
from the ‘correct’ activity pattern upon receiving the second stimulus. Fig. 5b summarizes the de-
viation from the nominally ‘correct’ post-delay neural activity as a function of delay extension for
our two FP mechanisms, as well as LC and Mix. As expected, for DFP encoding this deviation is
near zero. In contrast, for IFP the networks can tolerate extended delay up to % 100 of the nominal
delay, after which point performance gradually drops, i.e., the correct representation is ‘forgotten’.
To assay other functional aspects of these mechanisms, we examined how performance of our
networks would tolerate the presence of a distracting noise added to the actual stimulus. Here, we
found a counterintuitive functional advantage of ‘forgetting,’ relative to the DFP mechanism. We
speciﬁcally added uncorrelated noise of differing variance to the ﬁrst of the two sequential stimuli
and examined deterioration from the nominal ‘correct’ neural representation at trial conclusion.
10

For values of noise variance that are less than the stimulus variance (vertical dotted line Fig. 5c)
IFC (and indeed LC) encoding are highly robust to perturbations, and indeed variances in excess of
an order of magnitude greater than the stimulus can be tolerated. In stark contrast, DFP encoding
is highly fragile with respect to distracting noise, with rapid and near-complete breakdown of the
correct neural representation after modest perturbation (Fig. 5c). To understand this mechanism
we carefully studied the trajectories in low-dimensional space in the presence of distracting noise
(Supplementary Fig. 4), from which we ascertained that the distracting noise was essentially plac-
ing the trajectory in an erroneous basin of attraction, i.e., causing an incorrect memory ﬁxed point
to be induced. This result runs counter to classical Hopﬁeld-type associative memory theory 36,
which presumes that basins are useful to rejecting noise and uncertainty. Our ﬁnding, in essence,
indicates that the high reliance on many ﬁxed points for stable memory representations in DFP
encoding makes this mechanism more susceptible to the temporal integration of noise (see also
Discussion).
Initial network properties dictate the emergence of different solution dynamics. Finally, we
sought to understand the factors prior to optimization that bias the emergent dynamics towards one
type of mechanism versus another. We considered three main network properties: (i) the strength
of connectivity, g, (ii) the variance of feedback, σf, and (iii) the sparsity of the initial connectivity
matrix. We varied these parameters over their possible ranges. Fig. 6 illustrates the effect of
different parameterizations: for small values of g the trainability of networks is poor, but improves
signiﬁcantly as g increases. In other words, large random initial connectivity facilitates training,
consistent with known results 33,35. For g < 1 the untrained network has one stable ﬁxed point
11

at the origin and the emergent trained dynamics tend to be of DFC or IFC encoding (Fig. 6a).
Interestingly, the variance of feedback weights, σf has a notable effect on the emergent dynamics;
for large values of σf the networks tend to form DFC models and as σf decreases only IFC and LC
models arise (Fig. 6b). The sparsity of initial connectivity matrix has no signiﬁcant effect on the
trainability of networks nor the emergent dynamics (Fig. 6c).
Discussion
Learning a diversity of dynamics for working memory function In this work we used a top-
down optimization-based approach to investigate potential dynamical mechanisms mediating WM
function. By training/optimizing RNNs using a modiﬁcation of the FORCE regression method,
we found four qualitatively different types of network dynamics that can mediate function. At a
mechanistic level, these solutions are differentiated on the basis of the number of asymptotically
stable ﬁxed points manifest in the network vector ﬁeld and, crucially, how those ﬁxed points are
leveraged in the service of the task. We note especially two solution types, one reﬂecting neural
memory representations that are highly persistent corresponding to direct encoding at ﬁxed points
(i.e., DFP), versus the other where neural representations are transient and correspond to traversal
along slow manifolds in the network state space (i.e., IFP). At the level of neural activity, DFP pro-
duces tonic sustained activity during delay periods, while IFP produces phasic, transient activity.
Our results are related to prior work that has shown that persistent versus transient encoding
of memories can manifest in neural networks trained on different WM tasks and under different
12

optimization/learning schemes 30. Here, we choose to focus on a single, structured task in an
effort to go beyond overt activity characterizations and carefully dissect the underlying dynamical
mechanisms associated, namely the attractor landscape in the neural state space. Doing so provides
not only insight into potential generative circuit processes but also allows us to perform sensitivity
analyses to ascertain nuanced functional advantages associated with the different mechanisms.
Tradeoff between efﬁciency, memory persistence and robustness In particular, our results sug-
gest an interesting balance between persistence and robustness of memory representations. Specif-
ically, the DFP mechanism resembles in many ways traditional associative memory attractor dy-
namics, in the sense of Hopﬁeld networks 36. Here, each memoranda is associated with a distinct,
asymptotically stable ﬁxed point. On the one hand, such a mechanism is able to retain memories for
arbitrary lengths of time. Further, the dynamics with the attractor basins can nominally correct for
small perturbations to neural trajectories at the onset of memory periods. However, our results sug-
gest that this latter classical interpretation breaks down when considering sequential, time-varying
stimuli. In this case, perturbations to stimuli can accrue over time, causing neural representations
to stray into errant basins of attraction, ultimately leading to failure of performance.
In contrast, in the IFP encoding mechanism, the network vector ﬁeld exhibits a smaller num-
ber of ﬁxed points that do not encode memoranda directly. Rather, memory representations are
formed from projection of neural activity along slow manifolds that are ostensibly shaped through
optimization of the network vector ﬁeld. The ﬁxed points here are, in essence, ‘shared’ between
memoranda. This mechanism turns out to be far more robust to time-varying stimulus perturba-
13

tions. There are likely two factors related to this robustness. First, noisy perturbations may not be
able to easily move trajectories off of the ‘correct’ slow manifold. Second, there are no competing
attractors to absorb errant trajectories, as would be the case in the DFP mechanism. In total, the
IFP encoding can be viewed as an overall more efﬁcient use of neural dynamics wherein the lack
of a persistent representation (i.e., ‘forgetfulness’) is offset by both a lighter weight coding scheme
in terms of the number of attractors deployed in the state space, leading – perhaps paradoxically –
to more robust performance.
Shaping a landscape with few attractors Expanding on the above point of efﬁciency, it is of note
that the limit cycle and mixed mechanisms are most comparable to IFP in terms of the way in which
they attractor landscape is used in the service of the task. In the LC mechanism in particular, the
oscillatory cycle is not itself used to encode or sustain the memory, but rather shapes the landscape
to create slow manifolds for encoding, similar to IFP. Thus, while the oscillation is not directly
functional, it nonetheless is critical in establishing the ‘right’ landscape for task completion. From
an energetic standpoint, the indirect mechanisms are potentially less expensive since most neurons
are inactive at any moment in time, in contrast to DFP encoding.
Temporally restricted optimization promotes solutions that are compatible with observed
dynamics in vivo Our results shed light on the different means by which recurrent networks can
embed memory functions within their dynamics. Such a question is highly relevant to understand-
ing how key machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence constructs such as RNNs encode complex
context-dependent functions 37. However, they also suggest mechanistic interpretations for actual
14

WM circuits in the brain, given the seeming prevalence of phasic activity patterns during delay
intervals observed in vivo 20. Indeed, it has been observed that neurons in memory-relevant regions
such as prefrontal cortex do not necessarily maintain persistent activity throughout long delay pe-
riods, but rather may ‘ramp’ on and off at systematic time points 20, as is compatible with our IFC
mechanism. Further, in the IFC mechanism, most neurons are lightly saturated (Fig. 4c), meaning
that most neurons are within a linear regime, as thought to occur in actual neural circuits 34,38.
Notably, the IFP dynamical mechanism only arises after using the proposed temporally re-
stricted error kernel. Indeed, we found that using the native FORCE method without such a kernel
leads to poor trainability; and further those networks that do manage to be trained are highly fragile
to the extended delay and noise perturbations we considered. This fragility ostensibly arises due to
the latent outputs being overly constrained in this situation. Indeed, the choice of how to constrain
these outputs throughout the task is somewhat arbitrary in the ﬁrst place. Hence, the temporally
restricted error kernel may be allowing for the emergence of more naturalistic dynamics in our
RNNs.
Potential for enhanced fast learning and generalization An important technical caveat is that
we have set up our RNNs to produce activity in the positive quadrant. Hence, our analysis focuses
on characterization of the attractor landscape in that region of the state space. However, because
we consider an odd activation function, we know analytically that the ﬁxed points analyzed in our
networks have ‘mirror’ negative ﬁxed points that are not directly used in the service of the task,
which means that these dynamical features are essentially ‘wasted’ by construction and network
15

design. A speculative hypothesis is that these ﬁxed points may allow the network to more quickly
learn a related task with minimal synaptic modiﬁcation, i.e., by leveraging the mirror dynamics
that are already embedded in the network. Such a concept is related to the idea of meta-learning 39
and may be an interesting line of future study.
Methods
Working memory task details. In this study, we considered a sequential pattern-matching task
that takes into account key aspects of working memory tasks: stimulus processing, memory encod-
ing and response execution 20. Our goal was to use a task of sufﬁciently low dimension as to be able
to perform tractable and potentially illuminating post-hoc analysis on the emergent dynamics of
RNNs. In the proposed task, each trial consists of two random process stimuli that are sequentially
presented and interleaved with delay intervals, followed by a brief response interval (Fig. 1). Each
stimulus is a two-dimensional Gaussian process obtained in the latent space of a Variational Auto
Encoder (VAE) trained on the MNIST dataset of hand-written digits. We designed the task pattern
association rule to emulate summation, which differs from simple match or non-match tasks 40.
Speciﬁcally, to keep the dimensionality of the task low, we use two different stimuli resulting in 3
potential task outcomes (for summation).
Recurrent network model. We considered recurrent networks composed of N nonlinear ﬁring-
rate units speciﬁed by:
τ ˙x(t) = −x(t) + Jr(t)
(1)
16

where x ∈RN is the state vector and r (t) = tanh(x(t)) denotes the activity obtained via applying
hyperbolic nonlinearity to the neuronal state variables. We set the network time constant, τ = 1 for
simplicity. Here, J is the (untrained) synaptic connectivity matrix with elements drawn randomly
from a Gaussian distribution, i.e. Jij ∼N(0, σ2
J). Speciﬁcally, we parameterize σ2
J = g2
N , so that
g controls the strength of synaptic interactions.
Optimization method. Recurrent networks with fully random connectivity as in equation (1) have
a rich dynamical repertoire and thus are capable of generating complex temporal patterns that are
commensurate with spontaneous cortical activities 12,41. To make these networks learn the function
of interest and thus perform the task, we ﬁrst deﬁne two variables decoded from the network
activity:
zo(t) = WT
o r(t)
zd(t) = WT
d r(t)
(2)
where zo(t) is a network output for generating responses, while zd(t) is a low-dimensional la-
tent variable that is linearly decoded from neural ﬁring rate activity, i.e. zd(t) = (zd1(t), zd2(t)).
In our network, invariant memory representations will be formed in this latent space. Optimiza-
tion/learning proceeds by modifying the projection vectors Wo ∈RN×1 and Wd ∈RN×2. The
network output zo(t) and dummy output zd(t) are fed back to the network via feedback weights
i.e. Wf ∈RN×1 and Wfd ∈RN×2 , respectively. This results in modiﬁed synaptic connectivity:
˙x(t) = −x(t) + (J + WfWT
o + WfdWT
d ) r(t) + Wiu(t)
(3)
The elements of Wf and Wfd are drawn independently from Gaussian distributions with zero mean
and variance σ2
f. The network receives the exogenous input (i.e., stimulus) u(t) ∈R2×1 via input
17

weights Wi ∈RN×2 (see Fig. 1b). This strategy effectively modiﬁes the initial connectivity by
addition of a low-rank component, allowing for more interpretable relations between the overall
network connectivity and function 35,42. Note that a minimal rank, i.e. rank 1, perturbation could
be used, but it is known to induce high correlations between emergent ﬁxed points, thus restricting
the potential range of emergent dynamics 35,43. Hence, to allow for a potentially wide range of
solutions, we used a random connectivity plus rank 3 structure for the SPM task.
In our framework, optimization occurs only during the relevant temporal intervals in which
these target signals are deﬁned (Fig. 1a), which we term a temporally restricted error kernel. When
applying this kernel, the total error derived for a given trial is:
E(t) = 1
2
Z
Td
ed(t)2dt + 1
2
Z
Tr
eo(t)2dt
(4)
where Td and Tr are the temporal epochs associated with the two delay periods and response period,
respectively (Fig. 1a). Here,
ed(t) = ∥zd(t) −fd∥,
(5)
where zd = (zd1, zd2) and fd = (fd1, fd2) and
eo(t) = ∥zo(t) −fo∥.
(6)
Here, fd1, fd2 and fo are scalar real numbers chosen prior to optimization to represent the 2-
dimensional stimulus and the trial outcome. During the delay intervals in particular, a low er-
ror thus implies that the neural activity linearly maps to a constant, invariant representation (i.e.,
zd ∈R2×1). Activity during temporal epochs outside of the these periods do not impact the error.
Optimization proceeds by modifying readout weights Wo and Wd to minimize these errors. Within
18

the temporal error kernel, we deploy the FORCE method for parametric regression in RNNs. Here,
Wo and Wd are updated using recursive least squares 33. Brieﬂy, to reduce eo(t), we obtain
Wo(t) = Wo(t −∆t) −eo(t)P (t)r(t)
P (t) = P (t −∆t) −P (t −∆t)r(t)rT(t)P (t −∆t)
1 + rT(t)P (t −∆t)r(t)
(7)
where P (t) denotes the approximate estimate for the inverse of the correlation matrix of network
activities with a regularization term
P (t) =
Z
Tr
r(t)rT(t)dt + αIN
(8)
where α is the regularization parameter and IN the identity matrix. In the same manner, to reduce
ed(t) we have
Wd(t) = Wd(t −∆t) −ed(t)P (t)r(t).
(9)
Note that we update the associated inverse correlation matrices during training intervals Td and Tr
(shown in Fig. 1a). In total, our training paradigm is a temporally regularized FORCE method
that mitigates overﬁtting and in turn provides a potentially broader range of dynamical solutions to
manifest. Indeed, it is known that optimizing RNNs using FORCE for a sequential trial-based task
(here, a pattern association task with memory requirement) prevents the emergence of multiple
ﬁxed points in optimized networks, and thus can overly constrain the range of possible solution
dynamics 43.
Dynamical systems analysis. The central theoretical question in our study pertains to analyzing
the dynamics of our optimized networks. A ﬁrst order question in this regard is to elucidate the
19

landscape of attractors manifest in the network’s vector ﬁeld. In equation (1), the origin is always
a ﬁxed point associated with the Jacobian matrix J (shifted by −I). To study the stability of
the origin, we can thus consider the eigenvalues of the connectivity matrix. It is well known that
the eigenvalues of a random connectivity matrix J are distributed over a disk with radius g for
N →∞41,44. Thus, the stability of origin varies with these parameters. For g < 1 the origin
is asymptotically stable, while for g > 1 the origin is unstable, suggestive of potentially chaotic
dynamics in the overall network. For the optimized networks with the rank 3 structure, the Jacobian
matrix at the origin is JT = J + WfWT
o + WfdWT
d .
Understanding the location and stability of ﬁxed points away from the origin is harder to as-
certain analytically. Hence, we rely on a number of numerical procedures to identify these points.
To locate stable ﬁxed points used for task computations, we arrest trials at relevant time moments,
then forward simulate to ascertain the asymptotic behavior of the network. In one set of simula-
tions, this forward simulation is carried out for trials arrested at the end of the ﬁrst delay period.
In a second set of simulations, it is carried out after trial conclusion. The forward simulation is
carried out for ten times the nominal trial length, at which time we assume the network state is in
a stationary regime, i.e., within an ϵ distance of either a stable ﬁxed point or limit cycle. We can
perform additional linearization about stable ﬁxed points that are discovered numerically in this
way. Here, the eigenvalue spectrum of Jacobian matrix, Q, at these non-zero ﬁxed points, denoted
x∗, is as follows
Q = (J + WfWT
o + WfdWT
d ) R′
(10)
20

where R′ is a diagonal matrix with elements R′
ij = δijr′
i with
r′ = 1 −tanh2(x∗).
(11)
Note that if the states are largely saturated at a ﬁxed point (as in the case of DFP encoding, Fig.
4c), then the entires of r′ are very small, which contracts the spectrum of Q.
Network connectivity analysis. To link network connectivity properties with the identiﬁed mech-
anisms, we ﬁrst sorted neurons based on the time they reach their peak activity for each task
trial. Then, we sorted elements of the optimized connectivity matrix, i.e. JT , using the same or-
dered sequence of neurons. We calculated the average pre-synaptic (or incoming) connections, i.e.
¯
Ji =
PN
j JT ij
N
, see Fig. 4e. Moreover, we performed an analysis suggested by 45; we computed
the average of diagonal and successive off-diagonal elements of sorted connectivity matrix, i.e.
|i−j| = c, c ∈{0, ..., N}, see Fig. 4f, which indicates the strength of reciprocal coupling between
neurons as a function of the temporal distance between their peak activation.
Simulation parameters. In the task, we set the stimulus interval to 100 time steps, delay intervals
to 50 time steps (except for the extended delay experiments) and response interval to 50 time steps.
From the sequential bivariate random process stimuli, we trained a variational auto encoder on the
MNIST digits 1 and 0. We encoded the summation rule outcomes (i.e. 0, 1, 2) as 0.5, 1 and 1.5
(i.e., different values of fo in equation (6)), respectively for training the networks. We encoded
the latent outputs fd1 and fd2 as the two dimensional mean vector for each digit representation,
whenever that digit appeared prior to the delay period being optimized.
For all simulations the value of α is initialized to 1 and P was initialized to the identity
21

matrix. The number of neurons was set as N = 1000 and elements of Wo and Wd are initialized
to zero. Input weights were drawn randomly from zero mean Gaussian distribution with variance
0.02. We set the time step, dt, for Euler integration to 0.1. During training intervals, shown in Fig.
1a, we updated weights every 2 time steps. For four different initialization seeds we considered all
possible combination of feasible values for g, σf and sparsity (in Fig. 6). The value of σf was cho-
sen proportional to the size of network, i.e. σ2
f ∈{
1
1.5N , 1
N ,
1
0.5N ,
1
0.1N ,
1
0.02N ,
1
0.005N ,
1
0.002N ,
1
0.001N }.
Training was terminated if the average root mean squared error between target and output was less
that 0.01 for all trials.
For exemplar networks used in ﬁgures 3a,c and 4a,b,d-f, for type DFP: g = 0.9, σ2
f = 1 and
sparsity is 0.2. For IFP: g = 0.9, σ2
f = 0.05 and sparsity is 0.1. For LC: g = 0.9, σ2
f = 0.2 and
sparsity is 0.1. For Mix: g = 0.9, σ2
f = 0.1 and sparsity is 0.1. The initialization seed is the same
for these 4 exemplar networks.
Code availability. We performed simulations using Python and TensorFlow. All training and anal-
ysis are available on GitHub (https://github.com/Lham71/Working-Memory-Modeling).
