Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases (AIKED), University of Cambridge, UK, 2010, edited by L. A. Zadeh et al, pp 191 - 195
Feature Importance in Bayesian Assessment of Newborn Brain
Maturity from EEG
L. JAKAITE, V. SCHETININ, and C. MAPLE
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Bedfordshire
Luton, LU1 3JU
UK

Abstract: - The methodology of Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) is applied for assessment of newborn
brain maturity from sleep EEG. In theory this methodology provides the most accurate assessments of
uncertainty in decisions. However, the existing BMA techniques have been shown providing biased
assessments in the absence of some prior information enabling to explore model parameter space in details
within a reasonable time. The lack in details leads to disproportional sampling from the posterior distribution.
In  case  of  the  EEG  assessment  of  brain  maturity,  BMA  results  can  be  biased  because  of  the  absence  of
information about EEG feature importance. In this paper we explore how the posterior information about EEG
features can be used in order to reduce a negative impact of disproportional sampling on BMA performance.
We use EEG data recorded from sleeping newborns to test the efficiency of the proposed BMA technique.
Key-Words: - EEG, assessment, brain maturity, Bayesian Model Averaging
1   Introduction
Assessment of brain maturity can be obtained by
estimating newborn’s age from sleep EEG [1] - [3].
This approach is based on the clinical evidences that
the post-conceptional and EEG estimated ages of
healthy newborns typically match each other, and
the newborn’s brain maturity is most likely
abnormal if the ages mismatch [2], [4]. Thus, the
mismatch alerts about abnormal brain development.
     The established assessment methodologies are
based on learning models from EEGs recorded from
sleeping newborns whose brain maturity was
already assessed by clinicians. The regression
models are made capable of mapping the brain
maturity 
into 
EEG 
based 
index 
[5]. 
The
classification 
models 
are 
made 
capable 
of
distinguishing maturity levels: at least one with
normal and other with abnormal brain maturity [4],
[6]. The established methodologies are based on
learning a single model from a given set of data and
they cannot ensure that a model will not be
overfitted to the data
     Probabilistic reasoning, based on the Bayesian
methodology of averaging over decision models,
enables to evaluate the uncertainty in decision
making [7] – [9]. The use of the Bayesian Model
Averaging  (BMA)  over  Decision  Trees  (DTs)
enables to select features which make the most
significant contribution to outcomes, and the
resultant DT ensemble can be interpreted by
clinicians as shown in [10]. However, the success in
implementation of BMA is critically dependent on
the diversity and proportion of models sampled for
averaging. The models should be diverse in
parameters and structure. The portion of models
whose likelihood is high should be largest to ensure
unbiased estimates. The use of a priori information
provides better conditions for achieving these
requirements. In many practical cases when a priori
information about feature importance is absent, the
provision of the diversity and proportion of models
becomes problematic [11], [12].
     In  our  previous  research  [13],  we  attempted  to
overcome the above BMA problems and developed
a new feature selection strategy for Bayesian
averaging over DTs to assess trauma patient
survival. In emergency care, trauma patient’s
condition should be urgently evaluated by a clinician
through a screening procedure which typically
comprises around 20 tests. If the screening tests are
ambiguously interpreted, and evaluation of the
severity of the injury is misleading, the mistake in a
decision  can  be  fatal  for  the  patient.  We  supposed
that  some  tests  make  a  weak  contribution  to  the
outcome, and therefore avoidance of such tests can
improve the assessment accuracy. In contrary, we
observed that the performance had decreased and
then assumed that this could happen because the
discarded weakest attribute was still important for
some portion of the data. An alternative assumption

Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases (AIKED), University of Cambridge, UK, 2010, edited by L. A. Zadeh et al, pp 191 - 195
was that the weakest attribute makes a noticeable
contribution to the learning results. It is important
for  clinical  practice  to  reduce  the  number  of
screening tests required for 
making reliable
decisions. In our experiments we used the UK
Trauma data to test the efficiency of the proposed
strategy and then found that it enables to reduce the
number of screening tests, keeping the performance
and reliability of making decisions high. In this
paper we aim to further explore this strategy being
applied to the problem of EEG assessment of
newborn brain maturity.
     The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
states the problem in Bayesian assessment of
newborn EEG maturity. Section 3 describes the
bases of BMA over DTs, and section 4 describes the
EEG
 data
 used
 for
 the
 experiments.
 The
experimental results are presented in section 5, and
section 6 concludes the paper.
2   Problem Statement
The newborn brain maturity can be estimated by
experts  from  sleep  EEG  in  terms  of  post-
conceptional age measured in weeks. The accuracy
of such assessment is typically two weeks. We aim
to develop a BMA technique to assess the brain
maturity from sleep EEGs which are typically
recorded via the standard C3-C4 electrode system.
These recordings were transformed into the standard
frequency  bands  listed  in  Table  1.  The  spectral
features along with their statistical characteristics
form a multidimensional representation of the EEG
data.  The  spectral  features  are  presented  by  the
absolute and relative spectral powers calculated for
electrodes C3, C4, and their sum. Additionally the
statistical variances are calculated for these features,
so that the total number of EEG attributes becomes
72. No other information about the data is available
to make assumptions on EEG feature importance.
     
Under these conditions the standard BMA
techniques  being  used  for  assessment  of  the  EEG
maturity cannot ensure unbiased results. This mainly
happens because the detailed exploration of a
multidimensional model space becomes problematic
within a reasonable time. The detailed exploration is
needed to ensure that the majority of models are
sampled 
from 
areas 
of 
maximal 
posterior.
Otherwise, instead of exploring all possible areas of
maximal 
posterior, 
the 
models 
will 
be
disproportionally sampled from some of these areas.
The negative effect of disproportional sampling of
models is that results of BMA become biased.
     Obviously, information about feature importance
can reduce a model parameter space that needs to be
explored. However in our case, we have no such
information, and therefore we are forced to make an
unrealistic assumption that all the EEG attributes
make an equal contribution the age assessment.
Fortunately, DT models provide the feature
selection, and the use of Bayesian averaging over
such models gives a posterior information about
feature importance. This means that if a feature is
rarely used in the models, then we conclude that this
attribute makes a weak contribution and should be
deleted.
     Clearly, when there are few weak attributes, the
portion of models using such attributes is small, and
their impact on the outcome is negligible. On the
contrary, when the number of weak attributes is
large, the disproportion in models becomes
significant. Therefore we could improve the BMA
results by reducing the disproportional sampling. In
this research we aim to explore whether discarding
the models using weak EEG attributes will reduce
the bias in the assessment of brain maturity.
     
A trivial strategy of using the posterior
information for feature selection within BMA is to
use this information to learn a new ensemble from a
data set in which the weak attributes were deleted.
This strategy reduces a model parameter space, and
therefore it enables to explore this space in more
detail. The other strategy that can be thought of is
refining the ensemble by discarding models which
use weak attributes. We expect that such refinement
can improve the BMA performance.
3   Implementation
For  a  DT  given  with  parameters T, the predictive
distribution is written as an integral over the
parameters T.
,
)
|
(
)
,
,
|
(
)
,
|
(
³
 
T
ș
D
ș
D
ș
x
D
x
d
p
y
p
y
p
where y is the predicted class (1, …, C), x = (x1, …,
xm) is the m-dimensional vector of input, and D are
the given training data.
     This integral can be analytically calculated only
in simple cases, and in practice part of the integrand,
which is the posterior density of T conditioned on
the data D, p(T | D), cannot usually be evaluated.
However, for T(1), …, T(N) are the samples drawn
from the posterior distribution p(T | D),  we  can
write.

Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases (AIKED), University of Cambridge, UK, 2010, edited by L. A. Zadeh et al, pp 191 - 195
.)
,
,
|
(
1
)
|
(
)
,
|
(
)
,
|
(
1
1
¦
¦
 
 
 
|
N
i
i
i
N
i
i
y
p
N
p
y
p
y
p
D
ș
x
D
ș
D
ș
x
D
x
     The above integral can be approximated by using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique as
described  in  [7],  [9].  To  perform  such  an
approximation, we need to run a Markov Chain until
it has converged to a stationary distribution. Then
we can collect N random samples from the posterior
p(T | D) to calculate the desired predictive posterior
density.
     Using DTs for the classification, we need to find
the probability Mtj with which an input x is assigned
by terminal node t = 1, …, k to the jth class, where k
is  the  number  of  terminal  nodes  in  the  DT.
 The DT parameters are defined by si
pos, si
var, si
rule, i =
1, …, k –  1,  where si
pos, si
var, and si
rule define  the
position, predictor and rule of each splitting node,
respectively. For these parameters the priors can be
specified as follows. First, we can define a maximal
number of splitting nodes, smax = n – 1. Second we
draw any of the m attributes from a uniform discrete
distribution
U(1, 
…,
m) 
and 
assign
}
,...,
1
{
var
m
si

.
     
Finally the candidate value for the splitting
variable xj = si
var can  be  drawn  from  a  discrete
distribution U(xj(1), …, xj(L)), where L is the
number of possible splitting rules for variable xj.
Such priors allow us to explore DTs which split data
in as many ways as possible. However the DTs with
different numbers of splitting nodes should be
explored in the same proportions [7], [9].
     To sample DTs of a variable dimensionality, the
MCMC technique exploits the Reversible Jump
extension. To implement the RJ MCMC technique,
in [7], [9] it has been suggested exploring the
posterior probability by using the following types of
moves:
     Birth. Randomly split the data points falling in
one of the terminal nodes by a new splitting node
with the variable and rule drawn from the
corresponding priors.
     Death. Randomly pick a splitting node with two
terminal nodes and assign it to be one terminal with
the united data points.
     Change-split. Randomly pick a splitting node and
assign it a new splitting variable and rule drawn
from the corresponding priors.
     Change-rule. Randomly pick a splitting node and
assign it a new rule drawn from a given prior.
     
The first two moves, birth and death, are
reversible and change the dimensionality of T. The
remaining moves provide jumps within the current
dimensionality of T. Note that the change-split move
is included to make “large” jumps which potentially
increase the chance of sampling from a maximal
posterior whilst the change-rule move does “local”
jumps.
     The RJ MCMC technique starts drawing samples
from a DT consisting of one splitting node whose
parameters were randomly assigned within the
predefined priors. So we need to run the Markov
Chain while a DT grows and its likelihood is
unstable. This phase is said burn-in and it should be
preset sufficiently long in order to stabilize the
Markov Chain. When the Markov Chain will be
enough stable, we can start sampling. This phase is
said post burn-in.
3   The Proposed Method
To test the assumption made in section 2 and refine
DT model ensembles obtained with BMA, we
propose a new strategy aiming at discarding the DT
models which use weak attributes. According to this
strategy, first the BMA technique described in
section  2  is  used  to  collect  DT  models.  Then
posterior probabilities of using attributes in the
ensemble of DT models are estimated. These
estimates give us the posterior information on
feature importance. Having obtained a range of the
posterior probabilities, we then define a threshold
value to cut off the attributes with the probabilities
below this threshold – we define such attributes as
weak. At the next stage we find the DT models
which use these weak attributes and finally discard
these DT models from the ensemble.
     Obviously, the larger the threshold value, the
greater number of attributes is defined as weak, and
therefore the larger portion of DT models is
discarded. The efficiency of this discarding
technique is evaluated in terms of the accuracy of
the refined DT ensemble on the test data. The
uncertainty in the ensemble outcomes is evaluated in
terms of entropy. Having a set of the threshold
probability 
values 
obtained 
in 
a 
series 
of
experiments, we can expect that there is an optimal
threshold value at which the performance becomes
higher. We can also expect to find a threshold value
at  which  the  uncertainty  becomes  lower.  In  the
following section we test the proposed technique on
the problem of assessment of newborn brain
maturity from sleep EEG.
4   Experiments
In our experiments we used EEG data recorded from
686 newborns during sleep hours. The newborns

Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases (AIKED), University of Cambridge, UK, 2010, edited by L. A. Zadeh et al, pp 191 - 195
were aged from 40 to 45 weeks post-conception.
Each of these 6 groups contains around 100 patients.
The EEGs have been segmented in 10-s intervals to
be represented by 72 attributes as spectral powers
and their variances. We averaged the EEG segments
of each patient to represent the patient by one data
sample, so that the problem was represented by 686
data samples in 72 attribute space.
     For experiments we used the Bayesian averaging
over DT models introduced in section 3 and
described in our previous publications [12]. The
BMA  ran  with  the  following  settings.  In  a  burn-in
phase we collected 200,000 DTs, and in a post burn-
in phase 10,000 DTs. During the post burn-in phase
each 7th model was collected to reduce the
correlation between DT models. The minimal
number of data samples allowed in DT nodes was 6.
Proposal variance was 1.0, and probabilities of
making moves of birth, death, change variable, and
change threshold were set to 0.15, 0.15, 0.1, and 0.6,
respectively. The performance and uncertainty of the
DT ensemble collected in the post burn-in phase
were evaluated within a 3-fold cross-validation and
±2V intervals.
     The BMA with the above settings has accepted
around 0.13 of DT models in both phases. The DT
size becomes stationary around 30 nodes soon after
10,000 samples of burn-in phase. The average
performance was 27.4%, whilst the accuracy of
classification by chance was 100/6 = 16.7%. The
performance varied within 2V interval equal to
8.2%. The entropy of the DT ensemble was
478.3±15.8.
     
According to the proposed technique, we
estimated the importance of all the 72 attributes in
terms of the posterior probabilities of using these
attributes by the DT models collected in the post
burn-in phase. The posterior probabilities of using
the attributes ranged between 0.0 and 0.005. We
then gradually increased the threshold value T from
0 at steps of 0.001 to 0.005 to define features as
weak accordingly to the proposed strategy of feature
selection. From Table 1, we can see that at threshold
value 0.001 the average number of weak attributes,
k, was 14, whilst at level 0.005 their number has
increased to 31.
     Having found the weak attributes, we applied the
proposed technique to refine the DT ensemble.
Table 1 shows the number of weak attributes, k,
versus the threshold values, T, within a 3-fold cross-
validation.  From  Table  1  we  can  see  that  the
performance P of the refined DT ensemble is
slightly increased from 27.4 to 29.2 when the
threshold is gradually increased from 0.0 to 0.005.
At the same time the uncertainty in decisions is
decreased from 478.4 to 469.0 in terms of entropy E
of the ensemble. For comparison, we applied a
technique of discarding the same weak attributes and
then reran the BMA on the data reduced in their
dimensionality.
     
From  Table  1  we  can  see  that  the  BMA
performance has slightly increased from 27.4 to 29.0
when 23 weak attributes were discarded. The
discarding of 31 attribute has resulted in a decrease
in the ensemble entropy from 478.3 to 463.6.
Overall, the both techniques are shown to provide
the comparable performance and ensemble entropy.
However, the technique of discarding attributes has
shown to tend to perform in a larger variation.
Within this technique for each threshold value it is
required to retrain DT ensemble on the data of a new
dimensionality.
Table 1. Performance (P) and entropy (E) of the techniques
versus threshold values (T) within 3-fold cross-validation.
Proposed technique
Technique of
discarding attributes
T
k
P, %
E
P, %
E
0.001
14
27.5±8.4
478.4±15.8 28.7±9.6
469.0±13.7
0.002
18
27.8±9.0
477.7±16.4 25.8±1.7
475.7±16.7
0.003
23
28.7±8.2
475.7±15.3 29.0±8.5
474.1±33.9
0.004
28
28.9±7.6
471.2±10.3 28.4±1.8
472.4±12.0
0.005
31
29.2±7.9
469.0±11.9 27.3±6.5
463.6±26.3
     Fig 1 shows the distributions of performances
calculated for the original and refined DT
ensembles. According to the proposed method, the
refinement has been obtained by discarding those
DTs which use 26 weak attributes. We can see that
the size of 
the refined 
ensemble 
becomes
significantly  smaller.  Most  of  the  DTs  with
performance above 32.0% have been kept, whilst
most of the DTs with performance below 24.0%
have been discarded from the refined ensemble.
Fig. 1. Distributions of performances of DTs included in the
original (in grey) and refined (in black) ensembles.

Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases (AIKED), University of Cambridge, UK, 2010, edited by L. A. Zadeh et al, pp 191 - 195
4 Conclusion and Discussion
Under the lack of prior information, BMA MCMC
technique tends to sample from the posterior
disproportionally that affects the BMA performance.
In this paper we explored how the posterior
information about attributes can be employed in
order to reduce a negative impact of disproportional
sampling on BMA performance. We assumed that
the posterior information about feature importance
can be used to find weak attributes, and we proposed
a new technique aiming at refining an ensemble by
discarding the models which use the weak attributes.
     According to our assumption, in the presence of
weak attributes some models included in the
resultant ensemble will use these weak attributes.
The larger the number of weak attributes, the greater
the negative impact on BMA performance. We
expect that the discarding of models using weak
attributes will reduce the bias and improve the BMA
performance.
     To test the proposed technique we used EEG data
recorded from sleeping newborns. Our experiments
have shown that the proposed technique is capable
of increasing the BMA performance and decreasing
the ensemble entropy. We observed that the
proposed technique enables DTs with higher
performance to be included in the ensemble while
discarding the DTs with lower performance.  Thus
the proportion of DT models included in the
ensemble is improved due to decreasing the number
of DTs with lower performance. We observed that
the MCMC technique makes a candidate model
acceptable with different attributes. An accepted
model may include by chance a weak attribute even
with a small decrease in performance. In the
presence of many weak attributes chances of
accepting a model which includes a weak attribute
are increased, and this leads to a disproportion of
models in the ensemble.
     Typically, a technique of reduction of the data
dimensionality by discarding of the weak attributes
is expected to improve BMA performance due to
reducing a model parameter space needed to be
explored. However this technique requires rerunning
BMA. The proposed technique was shown to
provide the comparable performance without the
need of rerunning the BMA.
References:
[1] B. Tharp, Electrophysiological Brain Maturation
in Premature Infants: an Historical Perspective,
Clinical Neurophysiology, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1990,
pp. 302-314.
[2] M. Scher, Neurophysiological Assessment of
Brain Function and Maturation: a Measure of
Brain Adaptation in High Risk Infants, Pediatric
Neurology, Vol. 16, No. 3, 1997, pp. 191-198.
[3] K. Holthausen, O. Breidbach, B. Scheidt, and J.
Frenzel, Brain Dysmaturity Index for Automatic
Detection of High-Risk Infants,
Pediatric
neurology, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000, pp. 187-191.
[4] V. Schetinin, J. Schult, A Neural-Network
Technique 
to 
Learn 
Concepts 
from
Electroencephalograms, Theory in Biosciences,
Vol. 124, No. 1, 2005, pp. 41-53.
[5] M. Scher, D. Steppe, and D. Banks, Prediction
of Lower Developmental Performances of
Healthy Neonates by Neonatal EEG-Sleep
Measures, Pediatric Neurology, Vol. 14, No. 2,
1996, pp. 137-44.
[6] D. Crowell, L. Kapuniai, and R. Jones,
Autoregressive Spectral Estimates of Newborn
Brain Maturational Level: Classification and
Validation, Psychophysiology, Vol. 15, No. 3,
1978, pp. 204-208.
[7]  H.  Chipman,  E.  George,  R.  McCullock,
Bayesian CART model search,
Journal of
American Statistics, Vol. 93, 1998, pp. 935-960.
[8]  W.  Buntine,  Learning  Classification  Trees,
Statistics and Computing, Vol. 2, 1998, pp. 63-
73.
[9]  D.  Denison,  C.  Holmes,  B.  Malick,  and  A.
Smith,
Bayesian 
Methods 
for 
Nonlinear
Classification and Regression, Willey, 2002
[10] V. Schetinin et al., Confident Interpretation of
Bayesian 
Decision 
Trees 
for 
Clinical
Applications, IEEE Transaction on Information
Technology in Biomedicine,  Vol.  11,  No.  3,
2007, pp. 312-319.
[11] 
P. 
Domingos, 
Bayesian 
Averaging 
of
Classifiers 
and 
the 
Overfitting 
Problem,
Proceedings 17th International Conference. on
Machine Learning, San Francisco, CA. 2000, pp.
223-230.
[12] V. Schetinin, and C.  Maple, A Bayesian Model
Averaging Methodology for Detecting EEG
Artifacts, 
Proceedings
15th 
International
Conference on Digital Signal Processing, 2007,
pp. 499-502.
[13] L. Jakaite, and V. Schetinin, Feature Selection
for Bayesian Evaluation of Trauma Death Risk,
Proceedings 14th Nordic-Baltic Conference on
Biomedical Engineering and Medical Physics,
Vol. 20, 2008, pp. 123-126.
