arXiv:1503.07777v1  [cond-mat.quant-gas]  26 Mar 2015
Disordered cold atoms in diﬀerent symmetry classes
Fernanda Pinheiro1, 2, 3 and Jonas Larson1, 2
1Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova University Center, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
2Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at zu K¨oln, De-50937 K¨oln, Germany
3NORDITA, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, Se-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
(Dated: April 25, 2021)
We consider an experimentally realizable model of non-interacting but randomly coupled atoms
in a two-dimensional optical lattice. By choosing appropriate real or complex-valued random ﬁelds
and species-dependent energy oﬀsets, this system can be used to analyze eﬀects of disorder in four
diﬀerent classes: The chiral BDI and AIII, and the A and AI symmetry classes. These chiral classes
are known to support a metallic phase at zero energy, which here, due to the inevitable ﬁnite size
of the system, should also persist in a neighborhood of non-zero energies. As we discuss, this is of
particular interest for experiments involving quenches. Away from the centre of the spectrum, we
ﬁnd that excitations appear as domain walls in the cases with time-reversal symmetry, or as vortices
in the cases where time-reversal symmetry is absent. Therefore, a quench in a system with uniform
density would lead to the formation of either vortices or domain walls depending on the symmetry
class. For the non-chiral models in the A and AI classes, a population imbalance between the two
atomic species naturally occurs. In these cases, one of the two species is seen to favour a more
uniform density. We also study the onset of localization as the disorder strength is increased for
the diﬀerent classes, and by deriving an eﬀective model for the non-chiral cases we show how their
eigenstates remain extended for larger values of the coupling with the disorder, if compared to the
non-chiral ones.
PACS numbers: 03.75.-b, 67.85.Fg, 71.23.An
I.
INTRODUCTION
Symmetries play a fundamental role in physics, ranging
from predicting planetary motion to understanding inter-
action among elementary particles.
Indeed, properties
of quantum mechanical systems in equilibrium are often
universal and can be characterized according to symme-
tries [1, 2]. Recently, a more in-depth understanding for
the aspects of various lattice models have been advanced
thanks to the development of topological insulators [3].
Not surprisingly, the characteristics of such lattice mod-
els rely on the underlying symmetries, i.e. time-reversal,
particle-hole, and chirality. Structuring the models ac-
cordingly yields a “periodic table” with ten diﬀerent sym-
metry classes [4].
Together with the dimensionality, these symmetry
classes tell much about the properties of a system. Thus,
a question that naturally arises is: Can we identify phys-
ical systems that allow for control of symmetry classes?
Then, by turning a knob the experimentalist could in
principle qualitatively alter the system’s properties. In
this respect, systems of cold atoms loaded into optical
lattices are extremely attractive [5]. These are well iso-
lated from any environments, clean from impurities, and
preparation and detection are relatively easy. The lat-
tice, geometry and dimensionality, can be monitored with
great ﬂexibility, and by using multiple atomic electronic
states one can realize multi-species models [5]. Further-
more, cold atomic systems also allow for a systematic
study of eﬀects deriving from disorder by handling the
type and strength of the disorder with additional laser
ﬁelds [6].
Back in 1958, Anderson predicted that disorder can
fully inhibit transport due to disorder induced coher-
ent scattering resulting in destructive quantum interfer-
ences [7]. This absence of conductance, following the ap-
pearance of spatially localized eigenstates in the system,
is the phenomenon of Anderson localization or strong lo-
calization. In one dimension (1D), arbitrarily weak dis-
order localizes every eigenstate in the entire spectrum,
while in 3D there exists a ‘mobility edge’ separating lo-
calized from extended (or metallic) states [8]. Thus, in
3D it is possible to realize a metal-Anderson insulator
transition by tuning the disorder strength. In 2D, the
situation becomes more intriguing because the presence
or absence of insulating and/or metallic phases strongly
relies on the symmetry classes [9]. The eigenstates of chi-
ral systems in 2D, for example, may become delocalized
at the center of the spectrum [10]. But even if this phe-
nomenon is accepted today, the existence of delocalized
states in such systems was for long debated [11].
In this work we study a cold atom model which is
of easy experimental implementation. We consider two
non-interacting atomic species coupled by random ﬁelds
and conﬁned in an optical lattice. Physically the cou-
pling amounts to a laser induced Raman coupling be-
tween two internal atomic Zeeman levels. By adjusting
the properties of the coupling lasers, i.e. the phase and
frequency, the system may fall in four diﬀerent symme-
try classes, where two supports a metal-Anderson insu-
lator transition at zero energy. Properties of the eigen-
states are explored numerically, and it is found that, de-
pending on the symmetries, the excited states can host
domain-walls or vortices.
The vortices appear in the
cases with a complex-valued Raman coupling, i.e. bro-

2
ken time-reversal symmetry. For the system with chiral
symmetry, the model can be mapped onto a random ﬂux
model [10, 11] where every lattice plaquette is subject
to a (random) synthetic magnetic ﬁeld. When the chiral
symmetry is broken, the two species are reorganized such
that one of them carries the system’s kinetic energy, be-
ing characterized, therefore, by a smooth density, while
the other one shows a vivid structure that follows the
random Raman coupling corresponding to lowering the
potential energy. This behavior is explained in terms of
an eﬀective model valid in the limit of a large popula-
tion imbalance between the two species. We also discuss
the model in light of the Mermin-Wagner theorem [12]
which impose restrictions on the establishment of long
range order, depending on the symmetries and the di-
mensions of the system.
This is in connection to the
phenomenon known by the name of random ﬁeld induced
order (RFIO) [13], in which a particular choice of dis-
order can be used to lower the symmetries of the clean
system and consequently, to invalidate the premisses un-
der which the Mermin-Wagner theorem can be applied,
thereby stabilizing long-range order. Despite clear sim-
ilarities with models studied in the past that have been
shown to exhibit RFIO [14] we do not ﬁnd evidence of
RFIO in the non-interacting case studied here.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section
we introduce the model system and the corresponding
Hamiltonian in a general form. The symmetries and the
diﬀerent classes are presented in Subsec. II C. After sum-
marizing known results on the universal properties of the
symmetry classes discussed here in Sec. III we present
the numerical results: We characterize the eigenstates in
Subsec. III A, and then the RFIO in Subsec. III C. In
the last section IV we give a summary of the results and
brieﬂy touch upon the question how to extend the system
to other classes.
II.
SYSTEM
The controllability of cold atomic systems together
with the possibility to at will determine the disorder
properties have made these systems a perfect testbed to
study eﬀects like Anderson localization [6]. In the early
experiments, 1D tubes of cold (bosonic) atoms were ex-
plored and either speckle potentials [16] or incommen-
surate optical lattices [17] were used to realise disorder
(or quasi-disorder). In these pioneering early cold atom
experiments it was possible to extract both the hindered
matter wave spreading and the localization length. Inﬂu-
ence of interaction was later probed and a crossover from
localized to delocalized states could be observed [18]. At
a mean-ﬁeld level, the non-linearity stemming from the
atom-atom interaction eﬀectively couples localized states
leading to a delocalization [19]. In 3D, Mott argued for
the presence of a mobility edge separating localized states
at the tails of the spectrum, from extended ones at the
centre [20]. This has recently been veriﬁed using both
fermionic [21] as well as bosonic atoms [22]. In the Bose-
Hubbard (BH) model, a suppression of superﬂuidity has
been seen in 3D [23].
Further investigations [24] sug-
gested this as a signature of the Bose glass phase pre-
dicted years ago for this model [25].
In 2D, more relevant for this work, the glass phase of
the disordered BH model has been explored as well as
interaction driven transitions from a localized phase to
a superﬂuid phase and ﬁnally a reentrance into a Mott
insulating phase [26]. The (repulsive) interaction coun-
teracts the disorder induced localization, and for strong
enough interaction the atoms forms a disordered Mott in-
sulator state. For non-interacting gases, the diﬀusion in
a disordered 2D optical lattice was measured in Ref. [27].
By applying the speckle potential with an incident an-
gle the disordered potential shows a diﬀerent correla-
tion length in the two direction which led to anisotropic
spreading.
In terms of the symmetry classes, this ex-
perimental system falls within the AI class (see below)
where all the states are known to be localized, and fur-
thermore, this class does not seem to support topological
states. Following this rapid progress, we continue by sug-
gesting a experimentally simple model which goes beyond
present experiments and show new characteristics.
A.
Model Hamiltonian
We consider non-interacting three-level atoms, with in-
ternal states labeled a, b, and c, conﬁned to a 2D square
optical lattice. The internal electronic states |a⟩, |b⟩and
|c⟩are Raman-coupled with two external lasers as ex-
plained in Fig. 1. By introducing the atomic ﬁeld oper-
ators ˆΨα(x) (α = a, b, c), that obey the regular bosonic
commutations
h
ˆΨα(x), ˆΨ†
β(x′)
i
= δαβδ(x−x′),
h
ˆΨα(x), ˆΨβ(x′)
i
= 0,
(1)
the Hamiltonian is given, in the rotating wave approxi-
mation [28], by

3
ˆH =
Z
dx
(
X
α=a,b,c
ˆΨ†
α(x) ˆH ˆΨα(x) + ∆ˆΨ†
c(x)ˆΨ(x) + δ ˆΨ†
a(x)ˆΨa(x) −δ ˆΨ†
b(x)ˆΨb(x)
+
h
Ω1(x)ˆΨ†
c(x)ˆΨa(x) + h.c.
i
+
h
Ω2(x)ˆΨ†
c(x)ˆΨb(x) + h.c.
i )
.
(2)
Here, ˆH = −ℏ2
2m

∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2

+ V0

cos2(kx) + cos2(ky)

is the 2D lattice Hamiltonian with m the atomic mass, k
the wave vector (the same in both directions), and V0 the
potential amplitude (also equal for both directions). ∆,
δ and Ωi(x) (i = 1, 2) are atom-light detunings and drive
amplitudes as explained in Fig. 1, and in particular, the
two amplitudes Ωi(x) are in general complex (which can
be controlled by the phases of the lasers).
b
a
Ω1
Ω2
∆
2δ
}
{
c
Figure 1: Schematic plot of the atom-laser Λ coupling conﬁg-
uration. The states |a⟩and |c⟩are dipole coupled by a laser
with (spatially dependent) amplitude Ω1, and a second laser
couples the states |b⟩and |c⟩with an amplitude Ω2.
The
atom-laser detuning |∆| ≫|Ω1|, |Ω2| such that the excited
state |c⟩becomes only virtually populated. Thus, it is adia-
batically eliminated resulting in an eﬀective coupling between
the states |a⟩and |b⟩with an amplitude Ω= Ω∗
1Ω2/∆. 2δ is
the detuning for the two-photon process.
B.
Properties
We assume the dispersive coupling regime |∆| ≫
|Ω1(x)|, |Ω2(x)|, |δ| meaning that if the internal states
of the atoms are initialized in the lower states |a⟩and
|b⟩, the excited state |c⟩is only weakly populated and
can be integrated out. In this regime, the ﬁeld
ˆΨc(x) = −Ω1(x)ˆΨa(x) + Ω2(x)ˆΨb(x)
∆
.
(3)
is assumed to follow the other two ﬁelds adiabati-
cally [29]. Within this assumption, we derive an eﬀective
model for the remaining ﬁelds [30]
ˆHeﬀ=
Z
dx
( X
α=a,b
ˆΨ†
α(x) ˆH ˆΨα(x)+µα(x)ˆΨ†
α(x)ˆΨα(x)
+
h
Ω(x)ˆΨ†
b(x)ˆΨa(x) + h.c.
i )
.
(4)
The “chemical potentials” µα(x) (α = a, b) account for
the two-photon detuning 2δ and the Stark shifts arising
from the two lasers Ω1(x) and Ω2(x). Hereafter we omit
the spatial dependence of the chemical potentials as this
will not change the conclusions, i.e. µα(x) →µα. The
eﬀective coupling between the two internal atomic levels
is given by Ω(x) = Ω∗
1(x)Ω2(x)
∆
. Disorder in the present
model derives from the spatial dependence of Ω(x) which
ﬂuctuates both in phase and amplitude from site to site.
We proceed along the standard line [5] and expand the
ﬁeld operators in in the single-band site-localized Wan-
nier functions wαi(x); ˆΨα(x) = P
i ˆαiwαi(x) with i the
site index and ˆai and ˆbi annihilate an a and b species atom
at site i = (ix, iy) respectively. By further imposing the
tight-binding approximation, the Hamiltonian becomes
ˆHeﬀ= −t
X
⟨ij⟩

ˆa†
i ˆaj + ˆb†
iˆbj

+
X
i
(µaˆnai + µbˆnbi)
+
X
i
hi

eiϕiˆa†
iˆbi + h.c.

.
(5)
Here the ﬁrst sum includes only nearest neighbour terms,
and we have neglected Raman-induced couplings be-
tween atoms in neighbouring sites.
The atom number
operators ˆnai = ˆa†
i ˆai and ˆnbi = ˆb†
iˆbi, and the onsite
couplings are hi =
R
dx w∗
ai(x)wbi(x)Ω(x)
 and ϕi =
angle
R
dx w∗
ai(x)wbi(x)Ω(x)

. These are random num-
bers taken from Gaussian distributions with widths ζ and
ξ. Letting ζ = ξ = 0 we recover the clean system, and for
ξ = ∞, which will be assumed throughout, the phases ϕi
are uniformly distributed over 2π. The phase diagram
of the clean model has been studied in the past when
atom-atom interaction was included [32], but the disor-
dered coupled case is to the best of our knowledge so far
unexplored even for zero interaction.
The Hamiltonian (5) will be the starting point for the
analysis in Sec. III. Before presenting the results, how-

4
ever, the various symmetry classes realizable with ˆHeﬀ
are discussed next.
C.
Symmetries
To date, the internal structure of the atoms plays no
particular role in experiments of disorder with systems of
cold atoms. Thus, the applied ﬁelds are very oﬀ-resonant
from any atomic transitions and only the resulting Stark
shifts generate the disordered potential. It is clear that
the coupled system becomes much richer in the sense
that a set of diﬀerent models can be easily monitored by
tuning the laser parameters. In particular, in such gener-
alized situations the eﬀective models carries an intrinsic
pseudo-spin degree of freedom. The idea of this section is
to present the various possible cases that can be achieved
and to relate them to the corresponding symmetry class.
A summary is given in the Tab. I at the end of the sec-
tion.
1.
Real-valued disorder and vanishing chemical potential;
Class BDI
The simplest disordered situations appear when the
two chemical potentials are equal, i.e. we set µa = µb =
0, and the disorder is purely real, ϕi = 0 (hi can still
change from site to site). By introducing the notation
ˆAi =
h
ˆai, ˆbi
it
the Hamiltonian can be written as
ˆHBDI = −t
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆA†
i ˆAj +
X
i
hi ˆA†
i ˆσx ˆAi,
(6)
where ˆσx =

0 1
1 0

is the x-Pauli matrix. Now deﬁning
ˆci = 1
2

ˆai + ˆbi

,
ˆdi = 1
2

ˆai −ˆbi

,
(7)
and ˆCi =
h
ˆci, ˆdi
it
, Eq. (6) becomes
ˆHBDI = −t
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆC†
i ˆCj +
X
i
hi ˆC†
i ˆσz ˆCi.
(8)
In this transformed basis, this model is equivalent to the
original Anderson Hamiltonian [7] in 2D, although here
with two copies that experience the random potential
with the same magnitude but opposite signs. This system
has chiral symmetry [33] and therefore the spectrum is
symmetric around the zero energy. Speciﬁcally, in the
representation of the ˆAi operators introduced above, and
noticing that the dimension is 2L2 where L is, as before,
the size of the lattice in one direction, we have for L even
that the operator [34]
ˆU = diag(+1, −1, +1, . . ., −1| −1, +1, −1, . . ., +1) (9)
anti-commutes with the Hamiltonian.
Moreover, since
the Hamiltonian is real it is also time-reversal symmet-
ric. Thus, the model belongs to the class BDI - of chiral
orthogonal systems [2, 4].
2.
Complex-valued disorder and vanishing chemical
potential; Class AIII
Generalizing the previous case to complex couplings,
ϕi ̸= 0, the model is written
ˆHAIII = −t
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆA†
i ˆAj +
X
i
hi ˆA†
i (cos ϕiˆσx + sin ϕiˆσy) ˆAi.
(10)
Contrary to the case with real disorder, here we cannot
decouple the two species with a spatially-independent
transformation like Eq. (7).
Mixing in the ˆσy compo-
nent does not break the chiral symmetry, as can be seen
from the fact that ˆσz anti-commutes with ˆσx and ˆσy, and
the operator of Eq. (9) has the form ˆU = ˆD ⊗ˆσz with
an L2 × L2 matrix ˆD = diag(+1, −1, +1, . . ., −1). The
Hamiltonian is, however, complex and time-reversal sym-
metry is therefore broken. The symmetry class is AIII -
of chiral unitary systems [2, 4].
An
interesting
observation
is
that
by
trans-
forming
the
model
with
the
unitary
ˆUϕ
=
Q
i exp [−iϕi (ˆnai −ˆnbi) /2],
the
random
phase
ap-
pears on the tunneling terms;
ˆH′
AIII = ˆUϕ ˆHAIII ˆU −1
ϕ
= −
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆA†
i ˆtij ˆAj +
X
i
hi ˆA†
i ˆσx ˆAi,
(11)
with
ˆtij = t

ei(ϕi−ϕj)
0
0
e−i(ϕi−ϕj)

.
(12)
This is a version of the random ﬂux model [10, 11] de-
scribing a random ﬂux through any plaquette in the lat-
tice.
Thus, the spatially dependent phase ϕ(x) of the
Raman coupling eﬀectively generates a synthetic mag-
netic ﬁeld for the neutral atoms [35].
3.
Real-valued disorder and no-zero chemical potential;
Class AI
Adding a chemical potential to the real-valued disorder
case breaks the chiral symmetry, but the time-reversal
one remains intact. The resulting Hamiltonian
ˆHAI = −t
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆA†
i ˆAj +
X
i
ˆA†
i (hiˆσx + µˆσz) ˆAi,
(13)
where we have introduced the eﬀective chemical potential
µ = (µa −µb)/2 (we have subtracted a trivial term (µa +
µb)/2 P
i ˆA†
i ˆAi from the Hamiltonian). With only time-
reversal symmetry present, the model belongs to the class
AI - of Wigner-Dyson orthogonal systems [2, 4].

5
hi
µ
Class
real-valued
zero
BDI (chiral orthogonal)
complex-valued
zero
AIII (chiral unitary)
real-valued
non-zero AI (Wigner-Dyson orthogonal)
complex-valued non-zero
A (Wigner-Dyson unitary)
Table I: Classiﬁcation of Eq. (5) for diﬀerent choices of hi and
µ (see text for details).
4.
Complex-valued disorder and non-zero chemical
potential; Class A
By breaking both the chiral and the time-reversal sym-
metries, i.e., by including a chemical potential and con-
sidering a complex Raman coupling, respectively, the
model belongs to the A class - of Wigner-Dyson unitary
systems [2, 4]. The Hamiltonian is then written
ˆHA =−t
X
⟨ij⟩
ˆA†
i ˆAj+
X
i
hi ˆA†
i (cos ϕiˆσx + sin ϕiˆσy + µˆσz) ˆAi.
(14)
The underlying four symmetry classes of our general
model Hamiltonian (5) are listed in Tab. I.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A.
Universal properties
Having identiﬁed the symmetry classes, it is now possi-
ble to directly determine some properties of the diﬀerent
models that can be realised from (5). The class AI is triv-
ial in the sense that all states are localized and there is
no room for non-trivial topological states, as e.g. delocal-
ized edge states [9]. In the symmetry class A, the states
are also all localized, but the model can be potentially
topological [9]. The two other classes, the chiral ones, are
more interesting in terms of the localization properties.
Chiral structures usually arise when a lattice system
can be equivalently decomposed into two sublattices.
The present model is clearly of this type, as the two
species can be thought of as the constituents of a bilayer
lattice, with a random tunneling hi between the layers.
In the usual classiﬁcation scheme, there are three chiral
classes: AIII, BDI and CII. As mentioned above, in AIII
time-reversal symmetry is broken, while in BDI it is pre-
served and the time-reversal symmetry operator in this
class squares to +1. The class CII is also time-reversal
symmetric, but here the square of the time-reversal sym-
metry operator is -1, i.e. it is chiral symplectic [2]. The
symplectic classes typically contain a spin degree of free-
dom, and will not be of importance here. One can imag-
ine, however, that by using four species (four diﬀerent
electronic Zeeman levels) this class could also be realized
with our model.
Although it has been shown that weak localization
is absent in all orders in perturbation theory in chiral
systems [37], recent studies support the possibility of a
metal-insulator transition at the centre of the spectrum
(for energies E ∼0) [36] as a function of the disorder
strength. We thus expect a diverging localization length
λ for not too strong values of the disorder as the en-
ergy approaches zero in the chiral cases. In particular,
for Gaussian disorder, a renormalization group analysis
gives the localization length [9]
λ(E) ∝eg−1|log(E/∆)|1/2,
(15)
where g−1 is proportional to the conductance and ∆is
the band width (of the clean system).
It follows that
for any ﬁnite energy E the system is localized, albeit the
localization length can get very long (in comparison to
the system size here denoted as L).
According to the
expression (15), the system can be metallic in a strict
sense only for E ≡0, which implies that for ﬁnite sys-
tems the total number of sites has to be odd. Neverthe-
less, when the localization length λ ≫L, more states at
the centre of the spectrum will always appear metallic
in this case. In the inﬁnite system, the analysis via the
eﬀective non-linear-σ-model [9] from which Eq. (15) is
derived, hints that indeed the E = 0 state should always
be delocalized/metallic. However, Eq. (15) can also be
obtained from a modiﬁed action, including higher-order
terms, which shows that the E = 0 state can be local-
ized even for the chiral classes. This allows, therefore,
for a metal-insulator transition. This transition is of the
Kosterlitz-Thouless type and has a topological origin in
terms of creation of vortex excitations which are respon-
sible for the insulating phase [36].
Chirality is however broken as soon as µ ̸= 0, and
the properties of the system are determined by the A
or AI classes. This explains, at least qualitatively, why
the states have to be localized for the non chiral cases
considered in this work.
B.
Numerical results
As we have seen, we have at our disposal a system
Hamiltonian (5) where the parameters can be tuned such
that four diﬀerent symmetry classes can be explored. The
great ﬂexibility of the model compared to earlier studies
of localization in cold atom settings is the multi-species
structure. Thus, in the limit of large chemical potential
µ = |µa −µb|/2 (when one species is almost completely
unpopulated) we recover the standard scenario of the An-
derson model which has served as a theoretical model of
most disordered cold atom experiments [6, 16, 17, 22].
We should mention that even in the absence of interac-
tions, as is the model studied here, the conclusions drawn
from the numerical results should be taken with care;
the system is unavoidably ﬁnite and as soon as the lo-
calization length becomes comparable to the system size
boundary eﬀects play an important role. For this reason,
the metal/insulator transition, conjectured to happen for
E = 0, has not been veriﬁed numerically, for example.

6
1.
Localization properties
A measure of localization is the inverse partition ratio
(IPR) [9]
IPR(E) =
X
i,j
|ψE(i, j)|4,
(16)
where ψE(i, j) is an eigenstate with energy E. This is
considered in the real space basis, and IPR = N −1 for
a maximally delocalized state, with N the dimension of
the Hilbert space, and IPR = 1 for a maximally local-
ized state. We conclude therefore that if IPR ∼N −1 the
localization length exceeds the system size L (which in
our case is the number of sites in one of the directions),
and we expect the IPR to drop as we approach the neg-
ative tail of the spectrum.
As taken here, the IPR is
the second power of the particle density, i.e., P
i,j ρq
E(i, j)
with ρE(i, j) = |ψE(i, j)|2 and q = 2. Other powers of q
might also be of relevance in connection with multifrac-
tality properties of the wavefunction which have been
thoroughly discussed in terms of the Anderson metal-
insulator transition [9, 38]. In general, for given q one
ﬁnds a scaling Lτ(q) where τ(q) is a q- and dimensional
dependent exponent, but such considerations have been
left out of the present study.
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
h
IPR
BDI
AI
AIII
A
Figure 2: The inverse partition ratio IPR (16) for the ground
state of the Hamiltonian (5) averaged over 100 disorder real-
izations in a 30 × 30 lattice. This size of the lattice is chosen
from its relevance for experiments, and throughout this work
we use periodic boundary conditions.
The parameters are
t = 1, µ = (µa −µb)/2 = 2, and ξ = ∞and the dotted
lines display the IPR for the b species atoms (clearly in the
chiral classes the a and b species’ IPRs are identical). As is
seen, localization sets in at weaker disorder strengths for the
chiral models in the ground state, and also for the low-lying
excitations (not shown). As explained in the text, this result
can be understood from an eﬀective model for the non-chiral
classes, which contains an inherent long-range (exponential)
hopping.
Fig. 2 shows the IPR for the ground state of the four
diﬀerent symmetry classes as a function of the disorder
strength ζ. By comparing the models preserving or not
preserving time-reversal symmetry, and chiral with non-
chiral ones - that is, the BDI with AI, and the AIII with
A, we notice that in the non-chiral classes A and AI, lo-
calization sets in later than in the chiral BDI and AIII
in terms of the disorder strength. This result can be un-
derstood by considering Hamiltonian (5) in the regime
of |µ| ≫|t|, |hi| such that the two species can be ef-
fectively decoupled.
In doing so, and integrating out
over one of the species, the eﬀective Hamiltonian describ-
ing the other one contains a tunneling term that is long
range. The equations of motion for the atomic operators,
given (5), obey
∂tˆai = −ihiˆbi −iµaˆai + it
X
j
ˆaj,
∂tˆbi = −ihiˆai −iµbˆbi + it
X
j
ˆbj.
(17)
Here, the sum P
j is over the nearest neighbours to the
site i.
Let us assume that µa has the largest ampli-
tude of all the parameters, and in this situations we set
∂tˆai = 0. In vector notation, the steady state solution
for the species a can be written ˆa = M−1hˆb, with h a
diagonal matrix with the diagonal elements hi and M a
tight-binding matrix with −t as tunnelling strength and
µa on the diagonal. Inserting the steady state solution
of ˆai into the second equation of (17), it directly follows
that the a species atoms induce an eﬀective long range
hopping of the b species ones. If |µa| < |t|, the eﬀective
hopping is inﬁnite range, while for |µa| > |t| it falls oﬀas
(t/µa)−|i−j|. Notice, however that this procedure is only
consistent with the second case (|µa| > |t|) since it relies
on the adiabatic assumption ∂tˆai ≡0. An alternative
derivation using the path integral formalism of the above
result can be found in Ref. [31]. The eﬀective long-range
hopping counteracts localization, and since provided that
|µa| > |t| the hopping is exponential in this model, we
still expect localization to set in but for stronger disor-
der [39].
We have just shown that for non-chiral classes it is
possible to think of the second species as generating an
eﬀective long range hopping. But what about the chiral
classes? For the BDI class, direct inspection of Eq. (8)
shows that there exists a simple (disorder-independent)
localized basis where the model is indeed of short range
character in terms of hopping. For the AIII class this is
not as clear, however, since there is no spatially indepen-
dent transformation decoupling the species in this case,
and neither a scale separation allowing for the derivation
of an eﬀective model.
Let us now turn to localization of the excited states.
As we discussed in the previous subsection, ﬁeld theory
methods have shown that the localization length λ may
diverge at E = 0 in the chiral classes. For small but non-
zero |E|, λ is always ﬁnite, such that the states are local-
ized - however possibly with a long localization length.
A numerical check of Eq. (15) would require a system

7
−0.14
−0.12
−0.1
−0.08
−0.06
−0.04
−0.02
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
E
IPR(E)
BDI
AI
AIII
A
Figure 3: The inverse partition ratio IPR(E) (16) as a func-
tion of the energy. Like in Fig. 2, the IPR for the b species
atoms are marked by dotted lines. As argued in Subsec. III A,
the localization length grows as the energy |E| is decreased.
The ﬂattening of the IPR is a result of the localization length
λ which becomes comparable or longer than the system size
L (L = 30 for the lattice used here). The parameters are the
same as those of Fig. 2 and with the disorder strength h = 10,
i.e. the low energy states are will localized.
size L far beyond of what is computationally achieved
for our system. Indeed, as we see, even for energies not
too close of E = 0 the localization length λ ∼L. When
this happens IPR ∼N −1.
The energy dependence of
the IPR for the four classes is displayed in Fig. 3. The
ground and ﬁrst excited states are clearly localized, but
localization is quickly lost as the energy increases. The
delocalized states appear more pronounced in the A and
AIII models where time-reversal symmetry is broken. In
these cases, the localization length becomes comparable
to the system size already for the 100’th excited state
(the total number of states is 1800). Closer to E = 0,
the IPR increases again, in contrast to what is analyti-
cally predicted in (15). We should point out, however,
that Eq. (15) is obtained from an eﬀective ﬁeld theory
that is valid only in the vicinity of E = 0 and for inﬁnite
systems. As for the ground state, cf. Fig. 2, localization
is more pronounced in the models with chiral symme-
try. It is tempting to argue that this is again a result
deriving from the eﬀective long-range hopping in these
models.
While this might be true, it should be noted
that the population imbalance between the species is de-
creased for higher energies (still in the lower half of the
spectrum) and for states at the center of the spectrum
the two species are approximately equally populated.
2.
Properties of excited states
Much less analytical results are available to describe
the system away from the center of the spectrum. In sys-
tems of cold atom, with the high control of state prepara-
tion and of system parameters it is possible to study out-
of-equilibrium dynamics following a quantum quench, see
for example [40]. By preparing an initial, non-stationary
state with a given energy ε > E0, where E0 is the sys-
tem ground state energy, and by properly adjusting the
quench, the ‘energy window’ scanned by the initial state
could be made narrow [41], and thereby properties of the
excited states could be probed.
The last term with the Raman coupling in Eq. (5)
favours an onsite phase locking between the two species
that is determined by the ﬁeld phase ϕi. Thus, if we are
interested in the ground state and label it as
|ψ0⟩=
"
cai
cbi
#
,
(18)
where cαi (α = a, b) is a vector indexed by the site
subscript i, then it follows that the energy of the cou-
pling term is minimized whenever φi ≡angle [c∗
aicbi] =
−ϕi + (2n + 1)π for any integer n. In the classes with
time-reversal symmetry, BDI and AI, ϕi is 0 or π and
the relative phase φi is an integer multiple of π at every
site. Thus, the coeﬃcients cai and cbi will be real but
may change sign (which also follows from the fact that
the Hamiltonian is real and symmetric). Furthermore, in
the chiral class BDI, φi is independent on the site index
i and according to Eq. (8), the eigenstates are found in
either the c- or the d-subspaces. In the other two classes,
AIII and A, the phase ϕi can be anything and conse-
quently also the relative phase φi. Of course, the above
picture is much simpliﬁed; whenever the phase φi varies
there is an additional cost of kinetic energy (this will be
further discussed in the next subsection). Nevertheless,
by combining the knowledge of the kinetic and coupling
terms it is possible to determine qualitative properties of
the excitations in the diﬀerent models.
In the classes with time-reversal symmetry, the Hamil-
tonian is real and the eigenstates can always be chosen
real. In other words, we can restrict the relative phase
φi to only integer multiples of π.
The kinetic term is
minimized if φi = 0 or φi = π for all i’s. In the BDI
class this means that the φi has to be constant through-
out the lattice, as a consequence of the decoupling of the
species. This does not mean, however, that the phases
of the individual species, i.e. of cai’s and cbi’s, do not
change between 0 and pi. Whenever this occurs it cre-
ates a domain wall in the wavefunction of the species in
question. This implies an additional kinetic energy cost
which is proportional to the length of the domain wall.
Thus, we expect the domain wall to become longer for
more excited states.
This holds true only for not too
highly excited states as we explain below.
For the classes, AIII and A, the Hamiltonian is Hermi-
tian and therefore its eigenstates are in general complex
valued. Due to the kinetic energy cost, we expect the
phase of the wave functions to vary smoothly between
nearby sites. However, since the phase is deﬁned mod-
ulo 2π, the single valuedness of the wavefunction is still
preserved for the 2π phase jumps, or in the presence of
vortices (except at the vortex core were the phase is ill-
deﬁned and the density vanishes). The phase may thus

8
ix
iy
 
 
10
20
30
40
10
20
30
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a)
ix
iy
 
 
10
20
30
40
10
20
30
40
−0.5
0
0.5
(b)
Figure 4: The individual phase for the a species (i.e. the phase
of the coeﬃcients cai) for the 20’th excited state for the class
BDI (a) and AIII (b), and for a single disorder realization. In
BDI the Hamiltonian is real and the only allowed excitations
are domain walls, while in AIII the eigenstates are complex
and vortices are typically formed. The parameters are t = 1,
µ = 0, ζ = 0.4, and ξ = ∞in a 40 × 40 lattice.
contain branch cuts with a singularity at the ends of the
cut, which reﬂects the vanishing density and the presence
of vortices. In analogy with the cases with domain walls,
we expect a larger number of vortices to appear higher
up in the spectrum. In addition, since we consider ﬁnite
lattices with periodic boundary conditions, any branch
cut has two ends (unless it closes itself), and as a result
a vortex is always accompanied with an anti-vortex. It
might happen, though, that if the state is localized, then
the vortex and the anti-vortex are within the region of
non-zero particle density. As a result, experimentally it
may happen that only one of the vortices in the pair is
detected.
These conclusions are conﬁrmed in Fig. 4 showing one
example of the single species’ phase for the BDI and the
AIII classes. The ﬁrst case displays a domain wall struc-
ture, while the appearance of vortices characterize the
second case.
Under periodic boundary conditions, the
domain walls are forced to close. We have indeed seen
that the number of vortices and the length of the do-
main wall depends on the excitation energy as expected
(we focus on energies E < 0). We did not ﬁnd, how-
ever, any particular relation that describes the increase
in the number of vortices or domain walls as one goes
up in the spectrum.
Notice, in addition, that this in-
crease in the number of vortices and in the length of the
domain walls will only continue until roughly the centre
of the spectrum. As mentioned above, this follows from
the fact that in the chiral classes an eigenstate ψE with
energy E has its companion state ψ−E = ˆUψE with en-
ergy −E and where ˆU is the operator given in Eq. (9).
This operator shifts the sign of the state on every sec-
ond site. Therefore, if, say, the phase of ψ−E is smooth
and positive (or negative), the phase of ψE will have a
checkerboard structure. In the AIII class we have also
checked that all the vortices are characterized by wind-
ing number 1 and that no vortices with higher angular
momentum are formed.
In experiments, we expect the vortices or domain walls
to appear after a quench in the system.
The vortices
should be visible via time-of-ﬂight and absorption detec-
tion techniques like in standard experiments [42]. In or-
der to single out vortices in only one of the atomic species,
one can also envision state dependent detection. Like-
wise, the domain walls could be probed with the same
methods; in a time-of-ﬂight detection, a domain wall will
for example be manifested as a zero-density cut in the
momentum distribution.
0
20
40
0
20
400
0.005
0.01
ix
iy
|ai|
(a)
0
20
40
0
20
40
0.022
0.024
0.026
0.028
ix
iy
|bi|
(b)
ix
iy
 
 
10
20
30
40
10
20
30
40
−0.5
0
0.5
(c)
ix
iy
 
 
10
20
30
40
10
20
30
40
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
x 10
−3
(d)
Figure 5: The densities (a) and (b), and the phases (c) and
(d) for the ground state wave function in the non-chiral class
A. As explained in the main text, the dominant species ex-
periences a weaker eﬀective disorder and its density thereby
has a smooth envelope and its phase become constant, while
the other species feels a strong eﬀective disorder and its wave
function then adjust accordingly.
The parameters are the
same as for Fig. 4 except µ = 0.4.
For the above discussion of excited states we consid-
ered the chiral classes for which the a and b species are
equally populated. For the non-chiral classes, A and AI,
this equal balance is lost and for the low lying energy
states the species with smallest chemical potential (we
have deﬁned the chemical potential as a positive energy
cost) will dominate. As can be understood from the equa-
tions of motion (17) this imbalance has a direct conse-
quence on the structure of the states. If say µa > µb ≥0,
and as long as the energy is not too big, mainly the b
species will be populated; ||ˆai|| < ||ˆbi||. Since the amount
of disorder felt by one species is related to the popula-
tion of the states of the other species, it follows that the
atom of the b type will experience a weak disorder, while
the atoms populating the a-species states experience a
strong disorder (in comparison to the tunneling part). In
Eq. (17) this is seen from the fact that the ﬁrst terms
on the right hand side are large in the upper equation
and small in the lower equation. As a consequence, the
wave function for the b species will minimise the kinetic
energy and its density will be smooth. The wave function

9
for the a species, on the other hand, will minimize the dis-
ordered part and the density and phase will show large
ﬂuctuations. This is displayed in Fig. 5 where we plot
the ground-state densities and phases of both species.
Up in spectrum, the species with a higher chemical po-
tential will get more populated, and excitations appear
then partly as exciting the ‘internal’ structure character-
ized by the two species. Finally, the situation is reversed
in the highest excited states and population is predomi-
nantly occupying the a-species states. In addition, in the
same way as for the chiral classes, the excitations in the
classes where chiral symmetry is broken will also appear
in the form of vortices and/or domain walls.
C.
Random ﬁeld induced order vs localization
The phenomenon known as the random-ﬁeld induced
order (RFIO) refers to the ability of certain systems to
order only in the presence of a random ﬁeld of a cer-
tain kind.
This is the case when a clean system with
a continuous symmetry in 2D, for example, is forbidden
to order due to the restrictions of the Mermin-Wagner
theorem [12], and then, after inclusion of a random ﬁeld
with discrete symmetry, the system does not fulﬁl the
assumptions under which the theorem is valid, such that
order is in principle not precluded. This has been proven
to happen in the classical XY model [13], and has also
been suggested as the mechanism of order in graphene
quantum Hall ferromagnets [15].
In the RFIO, order appears in a particular way: In
the ferromagnetic XY model in 2D, for example, the in-
clusion of a random ﬁeld in the x-component of the spin
will induce a ferromagnetic state with long-range order,
but in the direction perpendicular to that of the ﬁeld. In
this case, the expectation value is ﬁnite for magnetiza-
tion in the y component. This can be understood from
an intuitive argument, that the system minimizes the en-
ergetic cost of the random ﬁeld by orienting all the spins
in a direction in which the ﬁeld exerts minimal inﬂuence
- therefore the perpendicular choice [15]. But despite the
activity during the last years in the study of RFIO, the
mechanisms allowing for such phenomenon are still not
fully understood. A step in this direction, however, has
been taken in [13], where the occurrence of RFIO in the
2D XY model has been suggested in connection with the
Anderson localization of spin waves.
This phenomenon has been also shown to happen in
interacting systems of two-species Bose-Einstein conden-
sates that are randomly coupled by a real-valued Raman
ﬁeld in [14]. Here RFIO appears as a π/2 phase lock-
ing between the two species, and an experimental setup
for observation has been proposed. Motivated by this,
we have investigated Eq. (5) in the context of the RFIO.
The advantage of the non-interacting system over the in-
teracting one is the possibility of a direct check of local-
ization properties in all the excited states. Therefore, in
analogy to the system studied in [14], we expected RFIO
to appear as a phase locking between the two species in
the system of the class BDI, and following the reasoning,
localization of the excitations should exhibit a diﬀerent
behavior from what was observed in the system of the
AIII class, where the random Raman coupling only mag-
niﬁes eﬀects of the continuous symmetry.
As we discussed in subsection III B 2, all the states of
the chiral BDI class have a homogeneous phase locking,
whereas this does not happens in the AIII class. This
phase locking, however, does not seem to be a manifes-
tation of the RFIO. First, because Eq. (8) is always real,
and there is no reason for the appearance of a π/2 relative
phase. Second, because since the relative phase is always
locked (at random) at 0 or π, a π/2 relative phase would
be only the result of averaging, and therefore would not
be relevant for experiments with single disorder realiza-
tions. In addition, since all low-lying states are localized
in both the BDI and the AIII classes, the existence of
phase coherence in the BDI one does not seem to have
any relation with the localization of the excitations. This
means that even if the homogeneous phase could be a
manifestation of the RFIO, which appears in a partic-
ular and still unidentiﬁed way for the system discussed
here (see Eq. (5) in [14]), it would nevertheless be unre-
lated to the localization of the low lying excited states in
this case.
The close relation between the present lattice model
and the continuum model of Ref. [14], and the fact that
we do not ﬁnd the expected signatures of RFIO, suggest
that interaction may play a crucial role behind RFIO.
This would have direct consequences on the hypothesis
that understanding better the localization of excitations
could also explain the origin of RFIO. In fact, the mech-
anisms behind localization in single-particle or interact-
ing many-particle systems are very diﬀerent. Anderson
localization can be understood from interfering loops in
conﬁguration space, and especially the loops may be very
long. In an interacting system, the destructive interfer-
ence loops occur instead in a hyper cubic lattice and the
loops are typically extremely short [43]. Our results illus-
trate once again [13] that the mechanisms allowing for the
phenomenon of RFIO constitute a very interesting open
question.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this work we studied a model consisting of two
species in a square optical lattice. The two species repre-
sent internal atomic Zeeman levels that are Raman cou-
pled with an amplitude hi which randomly varies be-
tween the sites. The disorder resulting from the Raman
coupling tend to localize the eigenstates of the system.
However, the properties of the states depend strongly on
the symmetry class of the model. In particular we showed
that with this simple model it is possible to realize four
diﬀerent symmetry classes. In terms of the localization,
two of them, the chiral ones, are especially interesting

10
since they may support a transition to a metallic phase in
the centre of the spectrum. Strictly speaking, the metal-
lic state should only appear at zero energy, but since
the system always has a ﬁnite size, a metallic-looking
phase should also appear at nonzero energies. Experi-
mentally, such extended states could be studied after a
quench were an initially localized state is prepared with
an energy close to zero; if the system is metallic, then one
should see an everlasting diﬀusion of the density, while
in the Anderson insulating phase the diﬀusion is rapidly
hindered following a short expansion.
Properties of the symmetry classes are also reﬂected
in the sort of excitations. We found that excitations can
be characterized as either domain walls or vortices de-
pending on whether the Hamiltonian is hermitian or real
and symmetric. It should be noticed that these results
only follow due to the two-species structure of the prob-
lem, and that similar excitations cannot occur in similar
models with only one species. We also argued that both
the vortices and the domain walls should be veriﬁable in
time of ﬂight measurements following after a quench of
the system, and we concluded with a discussion on the
phenomenon of the RFIO.
The present model could easily be extended to other
situations: for example, to include more species (internal
electronic levels), diﬀerent lattice geometries and dimen-
sions, and to include atom-atom interaction. These ideas
could also be explored to engineer systems in the CII
class by using four-level atoms, were the levels are cou-
pled such as to yield two species, a and b, both with an
intrinsic spin-1/2 structure. Probably most interesting,
however, would be to consider the present model with in-
teraction included. How to characterize interacting sys-
tems in ‘periodic table’ is a most open question, and here
experiments might provide valuable information in order
to understand the new physics.
