Negative Statements Considered Useful
Hiba Arnaouta,∗, Simon Razniewskia, Gerhard Weikuma, JeﬀZ. Panb
aMax Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbr¨ucken 66123, Germany
bSchool of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, Informatics Forum, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, Scotland
Abstract
Knowledge bases (KBs) about notable entities and their properties are an important asset in applications such as
search, question answering and dialogue. All popular KBs capture virtually only positive statements, and abstain from
taking any stance on statements not stored in the KB. This paper makes the case for explicitly stating salient statements
that do not hold. Negative statements are useful to overcome limitations of question answering systems that are mainly
geared for positive questions; they can also contribute to informative summaries of entities. Due to the abundance
of such invalid statements, any eﬀort to compile them needs to address ranking by saliency. We present a statistical
inference method for compiling and ranking negative statements, based on expectations from positive statements of
related entities in peer groups. Experimental results, with a variety of datasets, show that the method can eﬀectively
discover notable negative statements, and extrinsic studies underline their usefulness for entity summarization. Datasets
and code are released as resources for further research.
Keywords:
knowledge bases, negative knowledge, information extraction, statistical inference, ranking
1. Introduction
Motivation and Problem.
Structured knowledge is
crucial in a range of applications like question answering,
dialogue agents, and recommendation systems.
The re-
quired knowledge is usually stored in KBs, and recent years
have seen a rise of interest in KB construction, query-
ing and maintenance, with notable projects being Wiki-
data [60], DBpedia [8], Yago [56], or the Google Knowl-
edge Graph [55]. These KBs store positive statements such
as “Ren´ee Zellweger won the 2020 Oscar for the best ac-
tress”, and are a key asset for many knowledge-intensive
AI applications.
A major limitation of all these KBs is their inability to
deal with negative information [25]. At present, most ma-
jor KBs only contain positive statements, whereas state-
ments such as that “Tom Cruise did not win an Oscar”
could only be inferred with the major assumption that
the KB is complete - the so-called closed-world assump-
tion (CWA). Yet as KBs are only pragmatic collections
of positive statements, the CWA is not realistic to as-
sume, and there remains uncertainty whether statements
not contained in a KBs are false, or truth is merely un-
known to the KB.
Not being able to formally distinguish whether a state-
ment is false or unknown poses challenges in a variety of
∗Corresponding author

http://knowledge-representation.org/j.z.pan/ (JeﬀZ. Pan)
applications. In medicine, for instance, it is important to
distinguish between knowing about the absence of a bio-
chemical reaction between substances, and not knowing
about its existence at all. In corporate integrity, it is im-
portant to know whether a person was never employed by a
certain competitor, while in anti-corruption investigations,
absence of family relations needs to be ascertained.
In
data science and machine learning, on-the-spot counterex-
amples are important to ensure the correctness of learned
extraction patterns and associations.
State of the Art and its Limitations.
Absence of
explicit negative knowledge has consequences for usage of
KBs: for instance, today’s question answering (QA) sys-
tems are well geared for positive questions, and questions
where exactly one answer should be returned (e.g., quiz
questions or reading comprehension tasks) [24, 66]. In con-
trast, for answering negative questions like “Actors with-
out Oscars”, QA systems lack a data basis. Similarly, they
struggle with positive questions that have no answer, like
“Children of Emmanuel Macron”, too often still returning
a best-eﬀort answer even if it is incorrect. Materialized
negative information would allow a better treatment of
both cases.
Approach and Contribution.
In this paper, we make
the case that important negative knowledge should be ex-
plicitly materialized. We motivate this selective materi-
alization with the challenge of overseeing a near-inﬁnite
space of false statements, and with the importance of ex-
plicit negation in search and question answering.
We consider three classes of negative statements: (i)
grounded negative statements “Tom Cruise is not a British
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
September 28, 2021
arXiv:2001.04425v6  [cs.IR]  25 Sep 2021

citizen”, (ii) conditional negative statements “Tom Cruise
has not won an award from the Oscar categories” and (iii)
universal negative statements “Tom Cruise is not member
of any political party”. In a nutshell, given a KB and an
entity e, we select highly related entities to e (we call them
peers). We then use these peers to derive positive expec-
tations about e, where the absence of these expectations
might be interesting for e. In this approach, we are assum-
ing completeness within a group of peers. More precisely,
if the KB does not mention the Nobel Prize in Physics as
an award won by Stephen Hawking, but does mention it
for at least one of his peers, it is assumed to be false for
Hawking, and not a missing statement. This is followed by
a ranking step where we use predicate and object promi-
nence, frequency, and textual context in a learning-to-rank
model.
The salient contributions of this paper are:
1. We make the ﬁrst comprehensive case for material-
izing useful negative statements, and formalize im-
portant classes of such statements.
2. We present a judiciously designed method for collect-
ing and ranking negative statements based on knowl-
edge about related entities.
3. We show the usefulness of our models in use cases like
entity summarization, decision support, and ques-
tion answering.
Experimental datasets and code are released as re-
sources for further research1.
The present article extends the earlier conference pub-
lication [5] in several directions:
1. We extend the statistical inference to ordered sets of
related entities, thereby removing the need to select
a single peer set, and obtaining ﬁner-grained contex-
tualizations of negative statements (Section 5);
2. To bridge the gap between overly ﬁne-grained groun-
ded negative statements and coarse universal nega-
tive statements, we introduce a third notion of nega-
tive statement, conditional negative statements, and
show how to compute them post-hoc (Section 6);
3. We evaluate the value of negative statements in an
additional use case, with hotels from Booking.com
(Section 8).
2. State of the Art
2.1. Negation in Existing Knowledge Bases
Deleted Statements.
Statements that were once part
of a KB but got subsequently deleted are promising can-
didates for negative information [58]. As an example, we
1https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/
databases-and-information-systems/research/
knowledge-base-recall/interesting-negations-in-kbs/
studied deleted statements between two Wikidata versions
from 1/2017 and 1/2018, focusing in particular on state-
ments for people (close to 0.5m deleted statements). On
a random sample of 1k deleted statements, we found that
over 82% were just caused by ontology modiﬁcations, gran-
ularity changes, rewordings, or preﬁx modiﬁcations. An-
other 15% were statements that were actually restored a
year later, so presumably reﬂected erroneous deletions.
The remaining 3% represented actual negation, yet we
found them to be rarely noteworthy, i.e., presenting mostly
things like corrections of birth dates or location updates
reﬂecting geopolitical changes.
In Wikidata, erroneous changes can also be directly
recorded via the deprecated rank feature [38]. Yet again
we found that this mostly relates to errors coming from
various import sources, and did not concern the active
collection of interesting negations, as advocated in this
article.
Count and Negated Predicates.
Another way of ex-
pressing negation is via counts matching with instances,
for instance, storing 5 children statements for Trump and
numerical statement (number of children; 5) allow to in-
fer that anyone else is not a child of Trump. Yet while such
count predicates exist in popular KBs, none of them has
a formal way of dealing with these, especially concerning
linking them to instance-based predicates [29].
Moreover, some KBs contain relations that carry a neg-
ative meaning. For example, DBpedia has predicates like
carrier never available (for phones), or never exceed alt
(for airplanes), Knowlife [22] contains medical predicates
like is not caused by and is not healed by, and Wikidata
contains does not have part and diﬀerent from. Yet these
present very speciﬁc pieces of knowledge, and do not gener-
alize. Although there have been discussions to extend the
Wikidata data model to allow generic opposites2, these
have not been worked out so far.
Wikidata No-Values.
Wikidata can capture state-
ments about universal absence via the “no-value” sym-
bol [23]. This allows KB editors to add a statement where
the object is empty.
For example, what we express as
¬∃x(Angela Merkel; child; x), the current version of Wiki-
data allows to be expressed as (Angela Merkel; child;
no-value)3. As of 8/2021, there exist 135k of such “no-
value” statements, yet only used in narrow domains. For
instance, 53% of these statements come for just two prop-
erties country (used almost exclusively for geographic fea-
tures in Antarctica), and follows (indicating that an art-
work is not a sequel).
2.2. Negation in Logics and Data Management
Negation has a long history in logics and data man-
agement. Early database paradigms usually employed the
2https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Property_
proposal/fails_compliance_with
3https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q567
2

closed-world assumption (CWA), i.e., assumed that all
statements not stated to be true were false [52], [40]. On
the Semantic Web and for KBs, in contrast, the open-
world assumption (OWA) has become the standard. The
OWA asserts that the truth of statements not stated ex-
plicitly is unknown. Both semantics represent somewhat
extreme positions, as in practice it is neither conceivable
that all statements not contained in a KB are false, nor
is it useful to consider the truth of all of them as un-
known, since in many cases statements not contained in
KBs are indeed not there because they are known to be
false [51]. Between these two assumptions, there is also
the so-called local (partial) closed-world assumption [53],
where the open-world assumption is used in general, while
the closed-world assumption can be applied to some pred-
icates (classes or properties).
In limited domains, logical rules and constraints, such
as Description Logics [9], [15] or OWL, can be used to
derive negative statements. An example is the statement
that every person has only one birth place, which allows
to deduce with certainty that a given person who was
born in France was not born in Italy. OWL also allows
to explicitly assert negative statements [39], yet so far is
predominantly used as ontology description language and
for inferring intensional knowledge, not for extensional in-
formation (i.e., instances of classes and relations), with a
few exceptions, like the rewriting based approach to in-
stance retrieval for negated concepts, based on the notion
of inconsistency-based ﬁrst-order-rewritability [21]. Diﬀer-
ent levels of negations and inconsistencies in Description
Logic-based ontologies are proposed in a general frame-
work [25].
In [2, 3], a thorough study on negative information in
the Resource Description Framework (RDF) argues in fa-
vor of explicit negation. In particular, it makes the point
that any knowledge representation formalism must be able
to deal with informative negative information, on top of
informative positive information. The authors then pro-
pose ERDF (extended RDF), where an ERDF triple can
be either positive or negative. The framework also distin-
guishes between two kinds of negation: weak (“she doesn’t
like snow”) and strong (“she dislikes snow”). The former
is denoted using the ~ symbol, and the latter using the ¬
symbol.
The notion of noValue in RDF was introduced in [1]. It
has been recently adapted in [19] for representing no-value
information in RDF and incorporating such information
into query answering. The intuition behind it is to distin-
guish whether a result set of a SPARQL query is empty
due to lack of information or actual negation.
The AMIE framework [26] employed rule mining to
predict the completeness of properties for given entities.
This corresponds to learning whether the CWA holds in a
local part of the KB, inferring that all absent values for a
subject-predicate pair are false. For our task, this could
be a building block, but it does not address the inference
of useful negative statements.
RuDiK [44] is a rule mining system that can learn rules
with negative atoms in rule heads (e.g., people born in
Germany cannot be U.S. president). This could be uti-
lized towards predicting negative statements.
Unfortu-
nately, such rules predict way too many – correct, but
uninformative – negative statements, essentially enumer-
ating a huge set of people who are not U.S. presidents.
The same work also proposed a precision-oriented variant
of the CWA that assumes negation only if subject and
object are connected by at least one other relation. Unfor-
tunately, this condition is rarely met in interesting cases.
For instance, most of the negative statements in Table 6
have alternative connections between subject and object
in Wikidata.
2.3. Related Areas
Linguistics and Textual Information Extraction (IE).
Negation is an important feature of human language [41].
While there exists a variety of ways to express negation,
state-of-the-art methods are able to detect quite reliably
whether a segment of text is negated or not [17], [63].
There is also work on using knowledge graphs to help de-
tect false statements in texts, such as news [46].
A body of work targets negation in medical data and
health records. In [18], a supervised system for detecting
negation, speculation and their scope in biomedical data is
developed, based on the annotated BioScope corpus [57].
In [30], the focus is on negations via the keyword “not”.
The challenge here is the right scoping, e.g., “Examina-
tion could not be performed due to the Aphasia” does not
negate the medical observation that the patient has Apha-
sia. In [14], a rule-based approach based on NegEx [16],
and a vocabulary-based approach for preﬁx detection were
introduced. PreNex [13] also deals with negation preﬁxes.
The authors propose to break terms into preﬁxes and root
words to identify this kind of negation. They rely on a
pattern matching approach over medical documents.
In [35], an anti-knowledge base containing negations is
mined from Wikipedia change logs, with the focus however
being again on factual mistakes, and precision, not inter-
estingness, is employed as main evaluation metric. In [54],
the focus is to obtain meaningful negative samples for aug-
menting commonsense KBs. We explore text extraction
in more details in the proposed pattern-based query log ex-
traction method in our earlier conference publication [5].
Statistical Inference and KB Completion.
As text
extraction often has limitations, data mining and machine
learning are frequently used on top of extracted or user-
built KBs, in order to detect interesting patterns in exist-
ing data, or in order to predict statements not yet con-
tained in a KB. There exist at least three popular ap-
proaches, rule mining, tensor factorization, and vector space
embeddings [61].
Rule mining is an established, inter-
pretable technique for pattern discovery in structured data,
and has been successfully applied to KBs for instance by
the AMIE system [37].
Tensor factorization and vector
space embeddings are latent models, i.e., they discover
3

hidden commonalities by learning low-dimensional feature
vectors [47]. To date, all these approaches only discover
positive statements. On the other hand, if one considers
logical entailments as a means to enhance such rule mining
and latent model based approaches, such as in an iterative
manner [62], negative statements in theory can be discov-
ered with the help of disjoint axioms; however, the quality
of knowledge graph completion methods still have room
for improvement. Recently, an inference model has been
proposed to build a knowledge graph with commonsense
contradictions [34], like “Wearing a mask is seen as respon-
sible” is the contradiction of “Not wearing a mask is seen
as carefree”.
Ranking KB Statements.
In applications such as en-
tity summarization over web-scale KBs, returned result
sets are often very large. Ranking statements is a core task
in managing access to KBs, with techniques often com-
bining generative language-models for queries on weighted
and labeled graphs [36, 64, 4]. In [11], the authors propose
a variety of functions to rank values of type-like predicates.
These algorithms include retrieving entity-related texts,
binary classiﬁers with textual features, and counting word
occurrences. In [32], the focus is on identifying the infor-
mativeness of statements within the context of the query,
by exploiting deep learning techniques. In this work, ap-
plications such as entity summarization returns a set of
negative statements. To assign each statement a relevance
score, we use a mixture of the metrics that are usually
used for ranking positive statements (e.g., frequency of
property), and metrics that are speciﬁc for negative state-
ments (e.g., unexpectedness).
3. Model
For the remainder we assume that a KB is a set of
statements, each being a triple (s; p; o) of subject s, prop-
erty p and object o.
Let Ki be an (imaginary) ideal KB that perfectly rep-
resents reality, i.e., contains exactly those statements that
hold in reality.
Under the OWA, (practically) available
KBs, Ka contains correct statements, but may be incom-
plete, so the condition Ka ⊆Ki holds, but not the con-
verse [50].
We distinguish two forms of negative state-
ments.
Deﬁnition 1 (Negative Statements).
1. A grounded negative statement ¬(s, p, o) is satisﬁed
if (s, p, o) /∈Ki.
2. A universally negative statement ¬∃o : (s, p, o) is sat-
isﬁed if there exists no o such that (s; p; o) ∈Ki.
An example of a grounded negative statement is that
“Bruce Willis was not born in the U.S.”, and is expressed
as ¬(Bruce Willis; born in; U.S.). An example of a uni-
versally negative statement is that “Leonardo DiCaprio
has never been married”, expressed as ¬∃o :(Leonardo DiC-
aprio; spouse; o). Both types of negative statements rep-
resent standard logical constructs, and could also be ex-
pressed in the OWL ontology language. Grounded nega-
tive statements could be expressed via negative property
statements (e.g., NegativeObjectPropertyAssertion (:born
In :Bruce Willis :U.S.)), while universally negative state-
ments could be expressed via ObjectAllValuesFrom or
owl:complementOf [23] (e.g.,
ClassAssertion (ObjectAl-
lValuesFrom (:spouse owl:Nothing) :Leonardo Dicaprio)).
Without further constraints, for these classes of negative
statements, checking that there is no conﬂict with a pos-
itive statement is trivial. In the presence of further con-
straints or entailment regimes, one could resort to (in)cons-
istency checking services [9, 45, 59].
Yet compiling negative statements faces two other chal-
lenges. First, being not in conﬂict with positive statements
is a necessary but not a suﬃcient condition for correctness
of negation, due to the OWA. In particular, Ki is only
a virtual construct, so methods to derive correct negative
statements have to rely on the limited positive information
contained in Ka, or utilize external evidence, e.g., from
text.
Second, the set of correct negative statements is
near-inﬁnite, especially for grounded negative statements.
Thus, unlike for positive statements, negative statement
construction/extraction needs a tight coupling with rank-
ing methods.
Research Problem 1.
Given an entity e, compile a
ranked list of useful grounded negative and universally
negative statements.
4. Peer-based Statistical Inference
We next present a method to derive useful negative
statements by combining information from similar entities
(“peers”) with supervised calibration of ranking heuristics.
The idea is that peers that are similar to a given entity can
give expectations on relevant statements that should hold
for the entity. For instance, several entities similar to the
physicist Stephen Hawking have won the Nobel in Physics.
We may thus conclude that him not winning this prize
could be an especially useful statement. Yet related en-
tities also share other traits, e.g., many famous physicists
are U.S. citizens, while Hawking is British. We thus need
to devise ranking methods that take into account various
clues such as frequency, importance, unexpectedness, etc.
Peer-based Candidate Retrieval. To scale the method
to web-scale KBs, in the ﬁrst stage, we compute a candi-
date set of negative statements using the CWA on certain
parts of the KB, to be ranked in the second stage. Given
a subject e, we proceed in three steps:
1. Obtain peers: We collect entities that set expecta-
tions for statements that e could have, the so-called
peer groups of e. These groups can be based on (i)
structured facets of the subject [10], such as occu-
pation, nationality, or ﬁeld of work for people, or
4

classes/types for other entities, (ii) graph-based mea-
sures such as distance or connectivity [48], or (iii)
entity embeddings such as TransE [12], possibly in
combination with clustering, thus reﬂecting latent
similarity.
2. Count statements: We count the relative frequency
of all predicate-object pairs (i.e., ( ,p,o)) and pred-
icates (i.e., ( ,p, )) within the peer groups, and re-
tain the maxima, if candidates occur in several groups.
This way, statements are retained if they occur fre-
quently in at least one of the possibly orthogonal
peer groups.
3. Subtract positives: We remove those predicate-object
pairs and predicates that exist for e.
Algorithm 1 shows the full procedure of the peer-based
inference method. In line 2, groups of peers P[] are selected
based on some blackbox function peer groups.
P = [P1, ...Pn], with n >= 1.
Every group Pi is a set of peers, deﬁned as follows.
Pi = {pe1, ..., pem}, with m <= s.
Subsequently, for each peer group, it collects all the posi-
tive information that these peers have (line 6 and 7), and
stores them as a list of candidate statements.
candidates = {st1, ..., stw}.
A statement stj in candidates is either a predicate P or
a predicate-object pair PO. After collecting information
about the peers, the loop at line 10 iterates over the list
of unique statements ucandidates, computes their relative
frequency, and stores them in the ﬁnal list of negations
N. N is a list of negation objects 4, where every object
consists of a negation statement and its score.
N = [(¬st1, sc1), ..., (¬str, scr)].
Across peer groups, it retains the maximum relative fre-
quencies (hence, line 13), if a property or statement occurs
across several. Before returning the top k results as output
(line 18), it subtracts those already possessed by entity e
(line 17).
Example 1.
Consider the entity e=Brad Pitt. Table
1 shows a few examples of his peers and candidate nega-
tive statements. We instantiate the peer group choice to
be based on structured information, in particular, shared
occupations with the subject, as in Recoin [10]. In Wiki-
data, Pitt has 9 occupations, thus we would obtain 9 peer
groups of entities sharing one of these with Pitt.
P = [actors, ﬁlm directors, ..., models], with n = 9.
4Here, object is meant as a data type and not a KB-triple object.
For readability, let us consider statements derived from
only one of these peer groups, actor.
Let us assume 3
entities in that peer group.
Pactor = {Russel Crowe, Tom Hanks, Denzel Washington}
The list of negative candidates, candidates, are all the
predicate and predicate-object pairs shown in the columns
of the 3 actors. And in this particular example, N is just
ucandidates with scores for only the actor group.
N = [(¬(award; Oscar for Best Actor), 1.0),
(¬∃x(instagram; x), 0.67),
(¬(citizen; New Zealand), 0.33),
(¬∃x(convicted; x), 0.33),
(¬∃x(child; x), 1.0),
(¬(occupation; screenwriter), 1.0),
(¬(citizen; U.S.), 0.67)].
Candidates that hold for Pitt are then dropped.
N = [(¬(award; Oscar for Best Actor), 1.0),
(¬∃x(instagram; x), 0.67),
(¬(citizen; New Zealand), 0.33),
(¬∃x(convicted;x), 0.33),
(¬(occupation; screenwriter), 1.0)].
The top-k of the rest of candidates in N are ﬁnally re-
turned.
The top-3 negative statements, for this exam-
ple, are ¬(award; Oscar for Best Actor), ¬(occupation;
screenwriter), and ¬∃x(instagram; x).
The “if” statement at line 12 is only needed when mul-
tiple peer groups are considered for an entity. In the case
where a negative statement is inferred from more than 1
group, only the version with the highest score is added
to the ﬁnal set. In the original (full) example, Pitt be-
longs to the group actor and the group model. The nega-
tion ¬(occupation; screenwriter) was inferred twice, once
from each group, with a relative frequency of 0.9 from the
actor group and 0.2 from the model group. We add the
one with the higher score to the ﬁnal set and disregard the
other one. An alternative is to combine or compute the
average of the scores across groups.
Note that without proper thresholding, the candidate
set grows very quickly, for instance, if using only 30 peers,
the candidate set for Pitt on Wikidata is already about
1500 statements.
Ranking Negative Statements.
Given potentially
large candidate sets, in a second step, ranking methods
are needed. Our rationale in the design of the following
four ranking metrics is to combine frequency signals with
popularity and probabilistic likelihoods in a learning-to-
rank model.
1. Peer frequency (PEER): The statement discovery
procedure already provides a relative frequency, e.g.,
5

Algorithm 1: Peer-based candidate retrieval algorithm.
Input
: knowledge base KB, entity e, peer collection function peer groups, max. size of a peer group s, number of
results k
Output: k-most frequent negative statement candidates for e
1 P[]= peer groups(e, s)
▷List of peer group(s); Group Pi at position i is one group (set) with at most s peers.
2 N []= ∅
▷Ranked list of negative statements about e.
3 for Pi ∈P do
4
candidates = []
▷Positive statements (i.e., predicate and predicate-object pairs) of Pi members.
5
for pe ∈Pi do
6
candidates+=collectP(pe)
▷Collecting predicates that hold for one peer (pe).
7
candidates+=collectPO(pe)
▷Collecting predicate-object pairs that hold for pe.
8
end
9
ucandidates = unique(candidates)
▷List of unique statements in candidates.
10
for st ∈ucandidates do
11
sc = count(st,candidates)
s
▷sc computes how many peers share the statement st, normalized by s.
12
if getnegation(N, st).score < sc then
13
setscore(N, st, sc)
14
end
15
end
16 end
17 N-=inKB(e, N)
▷Remove statements e already has.
18 return max(N, k)
Table 1: Discovering candidate statements for Brad Pitt from one peer group with 3 peers.
Russel Crowe
Tom Hanks
Denzel Washington
Brad Pitt
Candidate statements
(award; Oscar for Best Actor)
(award; Oscar for Best Actor)
(award; Oscar for Best Actor)
(citizen; U.S.)
¬(award; Oscar for Best Actor), 1.0
(citizen; New Zealand)
(citizen; U.S.)
(citizen; U.S.)
(child; x)
¬(occup.; screenwriter), 1.0
(child; y)
(child; z)
(child; u)
¬∃l(instagram; l), 0.67
(occup.; screenwriter)
(occup.; screenwriter)
(occup.; screenwriter)
¬w(convicted; w), 0.33
(convicted; v)
(instagram; r)
(instagram; f)
¬(citizen; New Zealand), 0.33
(instagram; t)
0.9 of a given actor’s peers are married, but only 0.1
are political activists. The former is an immediate
candidate for ranking.
2. Object popularity (POP): When the discovered state-
ment is of the form ¬(s; p; o), its relevance might
be reﬂected by the popularity5 of the Object. For ex-
ample, ¬(Brad Pitt; award; Oscar for Best Actor)
would get a higher score than ¬(Brad Pitt; award;
London Film Critics’ Circle Award), because of the
high popularity of the Academy Awards over the
London Film Awards.
3. Frequency of the Property (FRQ): When the discov-
ered statement has an empty Object ¬∃x(s; p; x),
the frequency of the Property will reﬂect the author-
ity of the statement. To compute the frequency of
a Property, we refer to its frequency in the KB. For
example, ¬∃x(Joel Slater; citizen; x) will get a
higher score (4.1m citizenships in Wikidata) than
¬∃x(Joel Slater; twitter; x) (294k Twitter usern-
ames).
4. Pivoting likelihood (PIVO): In addition to these
frequency/view-based metrics, we propose to con-
5Wikipedia page views.
sider textual background information about e in or-
der to better decide whether a negative statement
is relevant.
To this end, we build a set of state-
ment pivoting classiﬁer [49], i.e., classiﬁers that de-
cide whether an entity has a certain statement (or
property), each trained on the Wikipedia embed-
dings [65] of 100 entities that have a certain state-
ment (or property), and 100 that do not6. To score
a new statement (or property) candidate, we then
use the pivoting score of the respective classiﬁer, i.e.,
the likelihood of the classiﬁer to assign the entity to
the group of entities having that statement (or prop-
erty).
The ﬁnal score of a candidate statement is then computed
as follows.
Deﬁnition 2 (Ensemble Ranking Score).
Score =















λ1PEER + λ2POP(o) + λ3PIVO
if
¬(s; p; o) is satisﬁed
λ1PEER + λ4FRQ(p) + λ3PIVO
if
¬∃x(s; p; x) is satisﬁed
6On withheld data, linear regression classiﬁers achieve 74% avg.
accuracy on this task.
6

Hereby λ1, λ2, λ3, and λ4 are parameters to be tuned
on data withheld from training.
5. Order-oriented Peer-based Inference
In the previous section, we assume a binary peer re-
lation as the basis of peer group computation. In other
words, for each entity, any other entity is either a peer,
or is not. Yet in expressive KBs, relatedness is typically
graded and multifaceted, thus reducing this to a binary
notion risks losing valuable information. We therefore in-
vestigate, in this section, how negative statements can be
computed while using ordered peer set.
Orders on peers arise naturally when using real-valued
similarity functions, such as Jaccard-similarity, or cosine
distance of embedding vectors.
An order also naturally
arises when one uses temporal or spatial features for peer-
ing. Here are some examples:
1. Spatial: Considering the class national capital, the
peers closest to London are Brussels (199 miles),
Paris (213 miles), Amsterdam (223 miles), etc.
2. Temporal: The same holds for temporal orders on
attributes, e.g., via his role as president, the enti-
ties most related to Biden are Trump (predecessor),
Obama (pre-predecessor), Bush (pre-pre-predecessor),
etc.
Formalization.
Given a target entity e0, a similarity
function sim(ea, eb) →R, and a set of candidate peers
E = {e1, ..., en}, we can sort E by sim to derive an ordered
list of sets L = [S1, ..., Sn], where each Si is a subset of E
that consists of highly related entities to e0.
Example 2.
Let us consider temporal recency of having
won the Oscars for Best Actor/Actress as similarity func-
tion w.r.t. the target entity Olivia Colman. The ordered
list of closest peer sets S is [{Frances McDormand, Gary
Oldman}, {Emma Stone, Casey Affleck}, {Brie Larson, L-
eonardo DiCaprio}, {Julianne Moore, Eddie Redmayne}..,
{Janet Gaynor, Emil Jannings}].
Given an index of interest m (m ≤n), we have a preﬁx
list S[1,m] of such an ordered peer set list L.
For any
negative statement candidate stmt, we can compute two
ranking features:
1. Preﬁx-volume (VOL): The preﬁx volume denotes the
size of the preﬁx in terms of peer entities considered,
i.e., VOL = |S1 ∪... ∪Sm|. Note that the volume
should not be mixed with the length m of the preﬁx,
which does not allow easy comparison, as sets may
contain very diﬀerent numbers of members.
2. Peer frequency (PEER): As in Section 4, PEER de-
notes the fraction of entities in S1∪...∪Sm for which
stmt holds, i.e., FRQ / VOL, where FRQ is the num-
ber of entities sharing the statement.
Note that these two ranking features change values
with preﬁx length. In addition, we can also consider static
features like POP and PIVO, as introduced before.
Consider the entity e=Olivia Colman from our exam-
ple, with preﬁx length 3. For the statement (citizen of;
U.S.), FRQ is 5 and VOL is 6, i.e., unlike Olivia Colman,
5 out of the 6 winners of the previous 3 years are U.S. cit-
izens. Now considering preﬁx length 2, for the statement
(occupation; director), FRQ is 1 and VOL is 4, i.e., un-
like Olivia Colman, 1 out of the 4 winners of the previous
2 years are directors.
We can now proceed to the actual problem of this sec-
tion.
Research Problem 2. Given an entity e and an ordered
set of peers, compile a ranked list of useful negative state-
ments.
Ranking. What makes a negative statement from an or-
dered peer set informative? It is easy to see that a state-
ment is preferred over another, if it has both a higher peer
frequency (PEER) and preﬁx volume (VOL). For exam-
ple, the statement ¬(citizen of; U.S.) above is prefer-
able over ¬(occupation; director), due to it being both
reported on a larger set of peers, and with higher rela-
tive frequency. Yet statements can be incomparable along
these two metrics, and this problem even arises when com-
paring a statement with itself over diﬀerent preﬁxes: Is it
more helpful if 3 out of the previous 4 winners are U.S.
citizens, or 7 out of the previous 10?
To resolve such situations, we propose to map the two
features into a single one as follows:
score(stmt, L, m) = λ · PEER + (1 −λ) · log(FRQ)
(1)
where λ is again a parameter allowing to trade oﬀthe
eﬀects of the two variables. Note that we propose a loga-
rithmic contribution of FRQ - this is based on the rationale
that larger number of peers is preferable. For example, for
the same PEER value 0.5, we can have a statement with
5 peers out of 10 and 1 peer out of 2.
Given the above example, the score for Olivia Colman’s
negative statement ¬(citizen of; U.S.) at preﬁx length
3 and α = 0.5 is 0.76, with verbalization as “unlike 5 of
the previous 6 winners”. The same statement with preﬁx
length 2 will receive a score of 0.61, with verbalization as
“unlike 3 of the previous 4 winners”. As for ¬(occupation;
director) at preﬁx length 3 and α = 0.5 is 0.08, with ver-
balization as “unlike 1 of the previous 6 winners”. The
same statement with preﬁx length 2 will receive a score
of 0.13, with verbalization as “unlike 1 of the previous 4
winners”. This example is illustrated in Figure 1.
Computation.
Having deﬁned how statements over or-
dered peer sets can be ranked, we now present an eﬃ-
cient algorithm, Algorithm 2, to compute the optimal pre-
ﬁx length per statement candidate, based on a single pass
7

Figure 1: Retrieving useful negative statements about Olivia Col-
man, using an ordered peer group.
𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛; 𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
Larson,
DiCaprio
Stone,
Affleck
McDormand,
Oldman
Colman,
Malek
2018
2017
2016
2015
2
2
1
1
1
1
𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑛; 𝑈. 𝑆.
𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛; 𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
2017
2016
2015
3
2
1
5
3
1
0.83
0.75
0.5
6
4
2
0.76
0.61
0.25
3
2
1
𝐹𝑅𝑄
𝑃𝐸𝐸𝑅
𝑉𝑂𝐿
𝑆𝐶𝑂𝑅𝐸
α =0.5
𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑛; 𝑈. 𝑆.
1
1
1
0.17
0.25
0.5
6
4
2
0.08
0.13
0.25
Colman is not a director, 
unlike 1 of the previous 2 
winners.
Colman is not an 
American, unlike 5 of the 
previous 6 winners
3
2
1
over the preﬁx.
Given the entity e=Olivia Colman, or-
dered sets of her peers are collected in line 2.
L = [winners of Oscar, winners of BAFTA,
..., recipients of CBE].
For readability, we proceed with one ordered peer group,
namely the winners of Oscar for Best Actor/Actress. The
group contains ordered winners prior to e.
Lwinners of Oscar = [{Frances McDormand, Gary Oldman},
{Emma Stone, Casey Aﬄeck},
{Brie Larson, Leonardo DiCaprio},
{Julianne Moore, Eddie Redmayne}
..,
{Janet Gaynor, Emil Jannings}].
Similar to the previous algorithm, all statements of the
peers are then retrieved from the KB (line 11 and 12). For
every candidate statement st, the score(s) of the statement
is computed with diﬀerent preﬁx lengths (loop at line 27),
starting with pos (position of e in the ordered set) and
stopping at the start position 1. The maximum score is
then returned with its corresponding values of FRQ and
VOL, i.e., max frq and max vol (line 37). The returned
candidate statement with its highest score (within one or-
dered group of peers Li) is compared across many ordered
groups of peers (i.e., other groups in L), to be either re-
placed or disregarded from the ﬁnal list of negations N.
6. Conditional Negative Statements
In our negation inference methods, we generate two
classes of negative statements, grounded negative state-
ments, and universally negative statements.
These two
classes represent extreme cases: each grounded statement
negates just a single assertion, while each universally neg-
ative statement negates all possible assertions for a prop-
erty. Consequently, grounded statements may make it dif-
ﬁcult to be concise, while universally negative statements
do not apply whenever at least one positive statement ex-
ists for a property. A compromise between these extremes
is to restrict the scope of universal negation. For exam-
ple, it is cumbersome to list all major universities that
Einstein did not study at, and it is not true that he did
not study at any university. However, salient statements
are that he did not study at any U.S. university, or that
he did not study at any private university. We call these
statements conditional negative statements, as they repre-
sent a conditional case of universal negation. In principle,
the conditions used to constrain the object could take the
form of arbitrary logical formulas. For proof of concept,
we focus here on conditions that take the form of a single
triple pattern.
Deﬁnition 3. A conditional negative statement takes the
form ¬∃o: (s; p; o), (o; p’; o’). It is satisﬁed if there exists
no o such that (s; p; o) and (o; p’; o’) are in Ki.
In the following, we call the property p′ the aspect of
the conditional negative statement.
Example 3.
Consider the statement that Einstein
did not study at any U.S. university.
It could be writ-
ten as ¬∃o : (Einstein; education; o), (o; located in;
U.S.). It is true, as Einstein only studied at ETH Zurich,
Luitpold-Gymnasium, Alte Kantonsschule Aarau, and Uni-
versity of Zurich, located in Switzerland and Germany.
Another possible conditional negative statement is ¬∃o :
(Einstein; education; o), (o; type; private University),
as none of these schools are private.
As before, the challenge is that there is a near-inﬁnite
set of true conditional negative statements, so a way to
identify interesting ones is needed. For example, Einstein
also did not study at any Jamaican university, nor did he
study at any university that Richard Feynman studied at,
etc. One way to proceed would be to traverse the space of
possible conditional negative statements, and score them
with another set of metrics.
Yet compared to univer-
sally negative statements, the search space is considerably
larger, as for every property, there is a large set of possible
conditions via novel properties and constants (e.g., “that
was located in Armenia/Brazil/China/Denmark/...”, “that
was attended by Abraham/Beethoven/Cleopatra/...”). So
instead, for eﬃciency, we propose to make use of previously
generated grounded negative statements: In a nutshell, the
idea is ﬁrst to generate grounded negative statements, then
8

Algorithm 2: Order-oriented peer-based candidate retrieval algorithm.
Input
: knowledge base KB, entity e, ordered peer collection function ordered peers, number of results k,
hypeparameter of scoring function α
Output: top-k negative statement candidates for e
1 L[]= ordered peers(e)
▷List of ordered peer group(s); Group Li at position i is one ordered group (list).
2 N []= ∅
▷Ranked list of negative statements about e.
3 for Li ∈L do
4
candidates = []
5
pos=position(Li, e)
▷Position of e in the ordered set.
6
for pe ∈Li do
7
if pe == p then
8
continue
9
end
10
candidates+=collectP(pe)
11
candidates+=collectPO(pe)
12
end
13
ucandidates = unique(candidates)
14
for st ∈ucandidates do
15
sc = scoring(st, Li, e, pos, α)
▷Dynamic scoring of every statement st with diﬀerent preﬁx lengths.
16
if getnegation(N, st).score < sc then
17
setscore(N, st, sc)
18
end
19
end
20 end
21 N-=inKB(e, N)
22 return max(N, k)
23
24 Function scoring(st, S, e, pos, α):
25
max sc = - inf; max frq = - inf; max vol = - inf;
▷Initializing the maximum score, frequency, and volume for
statement st.
26
frq = 0; vol=0;
▷Initializing the frequency and volume of statement st.
27
for j = pos; j >= 1; j−−do
28
vol += countentities(S[j])
▷Computing number of entities at position j.
29
frq += countif(st, candidates, S[j])
▷Computing number of entities at position j that share st.
30
sc = α ∗frq
vol + (1 −α) ∗log(frq)
▷Computing the score of st at position j.
31
if sc > max sc then
32
max sc = sc;
33
max frq = frq;
34
max vol = vol;
35
end
36
end
37 return max sc, max frq, max vol
in a second step, to lift subsets of these into more expres-
sive conditional negative statements. A crucial step is to
deﬁne this lifting operation, and what the search space for
this operation is.
With the Einstein example, shown in Table 2, we could
start from three relevant grounded negative statements
that Einstein did not study at MIT, Stanford, and Har-
vard.
One option is to lift them based on aspects they
all share: their locations, their types, or their member-
ships. The values for these aspects are then automatically
retrieved: they are all located in the U.S., they are all
private universities, they are all members of the Digital
Library Federation, etc., however, not all of these may be
interesting. So instead we propose to pre-deﬁne possible
aspects for lifting, either using manual deﬁnition, or using
methods for facet discovery, e.g., for faceted interfaces [43].
For manual deﬁnition, we assume the condition to be in the
form of a single triple pattern. A few samples are shown
in Table 3. For educated at, it would result in statements
like “e was not educated in the U.K.” or “e was not edu-
cated at a public university”; for award received, like “e
did not win any category of Nobel Prize”; and for position
held, like “e did not hold any position in the House of Rep-
resentatives”.
Research Problem 3.
Given a set of grounded nega-
tive statements about an entity e, compile a ranked list of
useful conditional negative statements.
9

We propose an approach with Algorithm 3. Consider
e=Einstein, and the set of possible aspects ASP for lifting
containing only two aspects about educated at, for read-
ability.
ASP = [(educated at: located in, instance of)].
The three grounded negative statements about Einstein
with educated at property are:
NEG = [¬(educated at: MIT, Stanford, Harvard)].
The loop at line 2 considers every property (neg.p) in NEG
(e.g., educated at), and collect its aspects at line 3. For
this example, the list of aspects asp for this predicate con-
sists of the location and the type of the educational insti-
tution.
asp = [located in, instance of].
At line 4, the loop visits every aspect a in asp and look
for aspect values (i.e., the locations and types of Einstein’s
schools). neg.o are the objects that share the same predi-
cate in the grounded negative statements list.
neg.o = [MIT, Stanford, Harvard].
For every object o, aspect values are collected and their
relative frequencies are stored. For readability, line 6 is
only a high level version of this step. As mentioned before,
the aspects are manually pre-deﬁned and their values are
automatically retrieved.
getaspvalues(Wikidata, located in, MIT) = [U.S].
getaspvalues(Wikidata, located in, Stanford) = [U.S].
getaspvalues(Wikidata, located in, Harvard) = [U.S].
getaspvalues(Wikidata, instance of, MIT) =
[institute of technology, private university].
getaspvalues(Wikidata, instance of, Stanford) =
[research university, private university].
getaspvalues(Wikidata, instance of, Harvard) =
[research university, private university].
Hence the aspect value for educated at, namely (located
in; U.S.) receives a score of 3, and is added to the condi-
tional negation list cond NEG. After retrieving and scor-
ing all the aspect values, the top-2 (with k =2) conditional
negative statements are returned.
In this example, the
ﬁnal results are cond NEG = [(¬∃o(Einstein; educated
at; o) (o; located in; U.S.), 3), (¬∃o(Einstein; educa-
ted at; o) (o, instance of; private university), 3)].
7. Experimental Evaluation
7.1. Peer-based Inference
Setup. We instantiated the peer-based inference method
with 30 peers, popularity based on Wikipedia page views,
and peer groups based on entity occupations. The choice of
this simple peering function was inspired by Recoin [10]. In
order to further ensure relevant peering, we also only con-
sidered entities as candidates for peers, if their Wikipedia
viewcount was at least a quarter of that of the subject en-
tity. We randomly sampled 100 popular Wikidata people.
For each of them, we collected 20 negative statement can-
didates: 10 with the highest PEER score, 10 being chosen
at random from the rest of retrieved candidates. We then
used crowdsourcing7 to annotate each of these 2000 state-
ments on whether it was interesting enough to be added to
a biographic summary text (Yes/Maybe/No). Each task
was given to 3 annotators.
Interpreting the answers as
numeric scores (1/0.5/0), we found a standard deviation
of 0.29, and full agreement of the 3 annotators on 25% of
the questions. Our ﬁnal labels are the numeric averages
among the 3 annotations.
Parameter Tuning.
To learn optimal parameters for
the ensemble ranking function (Deﬁnition 2), we trained
a linear regression model using 5-fold cross validation on
the 2k labels for usefulness. Four example rows are shown
in Table 4. Note that the ranking metrics were normal-
ized using a ranked transformation to obtain a uniform
distribution for every feature.
The average obtained optimal parameter values were
-0.03 for PEER, 0.09 for FRQ(p), -0.04 for POP(o), and
0.13 for PIVO, and a constant value of 0.3., with a 71%
out-of-sample precision.
Ranking Metric. To compute the ranking quality of our
method against a number of baselines, we used the Dis-
counted Cumulative Gain (DCG) [33], which is a measure
that takes into consideration the rank of relevant state-
ments and can incorporate diﬀerent relevance levels. DCG
is deﬁned as follows:
DCG(i) =
(
G(1)
if i=1
DCG(i −1) +
G(i)
log(i)
otherwise
where i is the rank of the result within the result set, and
G(i) is the relevance level of the result. We set G(i) to a
value between 1 and 3, depending on the annotator’s as-
sessment. We then averaged, for each result (statement),
the ratings given by all annotators and used it as the rel-
evance level for the result. Dividing the obtained DCG
by the DCG of the ideal ranking, we obtained the nor-
malized DCG (nDCG), which accounts for the variance in
performance among queries (entities).
Baselines. We used three baselines: As a naive baseline,
we randomly ordered the 20 statements per entity. This
baseline gives a lower bound on what any ranking model
should exceed. We also used two competitive embedding-
based baselines, TransE [12] and HolE [42].
For these
two, we used pretrained models, from [31], on Wikidata
(300k statements) containing prominent entities of diﬀer-
ent types, which we enriched with all the statements about
7https://www.mturk.com
10

Table 2: Negative statements about Einstein, before and after lifting.
Grounded negative statements
Conditional negative statements
¬(educated at; MIT)
¬∃o(educated at; o) (o; located in; U.S.)
¬(educated at; Stanford)
¬∃o(educated at; o) (o, instance of; private university)
¬(educated at; Harvard)
Algorithm 3: Lifting grounded negative statements algorithm.
Input
: knowledge base KB, entity e, aspects ASP = [(x1: y1, y2, ..), ..., (xn: y1, y2, ..)], grounded negative
statements about e NEG = [¬(p1: o1, o2, ..), ..., ¬(pm: o1, o2, ..)], number of results k
Output: k-most frequent conditional negative statements for e
1 cond NEG= ∅
▷Ranked list of conditional negations about e.
2 for neg.p ∈NEG do
3
asp = getspects(neg.p, ASP)
▷Retrieving aspects of predicate neg.p.
4
for a ∈asp do
5
for o ∈neg.o do
6
cond NEG += getaspvalues(KB, a, o)
▷Collecting aspect values about o.
7
end
8
end
9 end
10 cond NEG-=inKB(e, cond NEG)
11 return max(cond NEG, k)
Table 3: A few samples of property aspects.
Property
Aspect(s)
educated at
located in; instance of;
award received
subclass of;
position held
part of;
the sampled entities. We plugged their prediction score for
each candidate grounded negative statement.8
Results. Table 5 shows the average nDCG over the 100
entities for top-k negative statements for k equals 3, 5, 10,
and 20.
As one can see, our ensemble outperforms the
best baseline by 6 to 16% in nDCG. The coverage column
reﬂects the percentage of statements that this model was
able to score. For example, for the Popularity of Object,
POP(o) metric, a universally negative statement will not
be scored. The same applies to TransE and HolE.
Ranking with the Ensemble and ranking using the Fre-
quency of Property outperforms all other ranking metrics
and the three baselines, with an improvement over the
random baseline of 20% for k=3 and k=5. Examples of
ranked top-3 negative statements for Albert Einstein are
shown in Table 6.
The random rank basically display
any candidate negation if it holds for at least one peer.
For instance, Omar Sharif is Einstein’s peer under the
non-ﬁction writer group. This makes the negation “Tarek
Sharif not a child of Einstein” possible, hence, the neces-
sity for a ranking step. Moreover, Omar Sharif is also an
actor, which brings other topics to the result set of Ein-
8Note that both models are not able to score statements about
universal absence, a trait shared with the object popularity heuristic
in our ensemble.
stein, such as not winning ﬁlm awards. This is where peer
frequency makes a diﬀerence, i.e., most of Einstein’s peers
are not actors. By relying on the property frequency for
ranking, we can see that only universally absent state-
ments get the highest scores.
Even though it displays
interesting negations (e.g., despite his status as famous
researcher, Einstein truly never formally supervised any
PhD student), the top-k result set lacks grounded nega-
tive statements.
Ensemble ranking, on the other hand,
takes into consideration several features simultaneously,
and covers both classes of negation. It returns interesting
statements such as that Einstein notably refused to work
on the Manhattan project, and was suspected of commu-
nist sympathies.
Correctness Evaluation. We used crowdsourcing to as-
sess the correctness of results from the peer-based method.
We collected 1k negative statements belonging to the three
types, namely people, literature work, and organizations.
Every statement was annotated 3 times as either correct,
incorrect, or ambiguous. 63% of the statements were found
to be correct, 31% were incorrect, and 6% were ambigu-
ous. Most incorrect statements are due to KB completion
issues. Interpreting the scores numerically (0/0.5/1), an-
notations showed a standard deviation of 0.23.
PCA (Partial Completeness Assumption) vs. CWA
For a sample of 200 statements about people (10 each for
20 entities), half generated only relying on the CWA, half
additionally ﬁltered to satisfy the PCA (subject has at
least one other object for that property [27]), we manually
checked correctness. We observed 84% accuracy for PCA-
based statements, and 57% for CWA-based statements. So
the PCA yields signiﬁcantly more correct negative state-
ments, though losing the ability to predict universally neg-
11

Table 4: Data samples for illustrating parameter tuning.
Statement
PEER
FRQ(p)
POP(o)
PIVO
Label
¬(Bruce Springsteen; award; Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award)
0.8
0.8
0.55
0.25
0.83
¬(Gordon Ramsay; lifestyle; mysticism)
0.3
0.8
0.8
0.65
0.33
¬∃x(Albert Einstein; doctoral student; x)
0.85
0.9
0.15
0.4
0.66
¬∃x(Celine Dion; educated at; x)
0.95
0.95
0.25
0.95
0.5
Table 5: Ranking metrics evaluation results for peer-based inference.
Ranking Model
Coverage(%)
nDCG3
nDCG5
nDCG10
nDCG20
Random
100
0.37
0.41
0.50
0.73
TransE [12]
31
0.43
0.47
0.55
0.76
HolE [42]
12
0.44
0.48
0.57
0.76
Property Frequency
11
0.61
0.61
0.66
0.82
Object Popularity
89
0.39
0.43
0.52
0.74
Pivoting Score
78
0.41
0.45
0.54
0.75
Peer Frequency
100
0.54
0.57
0.63
0.80
Ensemble
100
0.60
0.61
0.67
0.82
ative statements.
Subject coverage. Our peer-based inference method of-
fers a very high subject coverage and is able to discover
negative statements about almost any existing entity in a
given KB, whereas for pre-trained embedding-based base-
lines, many subjects are out-of-vocabulary, or come with
too little information to predict statements.
7.2. Inference with Ordered Peers
In the following, we used temporal order on speciﬁc
roles, or on speciﬁc attribute values, to compute ordered
peer sets. In particular, we used two common forms of
temporal information in Wikidata to compute such peer
groups:
• Time-based Qualiﬁers (TQ): Temporal qualiﬁers
are time signals associated with statements about
entities. In Wikidata, some of those qualiﬁers are
point in time (P585), start time (P580), and end
time (P582). A few samples are shown in Table 7.
• Time-based Properties (TP): Temporal proper-
ties are properties like follows (P155) and followed
by (P156) indicating a chain of entities, ordered from
oldest to newest, or from newest to oldest. For in-
stance, [The Cossacks; followed by; War and Peace;
followed by; Anna Karenina; ..]9
We created TQ groups from aggregating information
about people sharing the same statements. For example,
position held; President of the U.S. is one TQ group,
where members will have a start time for this position, as
9Novels of by Leo Tolstoy.
well as an end time. In case of absence of an end time,
this implies that the statement holds to this day (Donald
Trump’s statement in Table 7).
In other words, we ag-
gregated entities sharing the same predicate-object pair,
which will be treated as the peer group’s title, and ranked
them in ascending order of time qualiﬁers. For the point
in time qualiﬁer, we simply ranked the dates from oldest
to newest, and for the start/end date, we ranked the end
date from oldest to newest. If the end date is missing, the
entity will be moved to the newest slot.
We collected a total of 19.6k TQ groups (13.6k using
the start/end date qualiﬁer and 6k using the point in time
qualiﬁer). Based on a manual analysis of a random sample
of 100 groups of diﬀerent sizes, we only considered time
series with at least 10 entities10.
We created TP groups by ﬁrst collecting all entities
reachable by one of the transitive properties, follows (P155)
and followed by (P156). Considering each of the collected
entities as a source entity, we computed the longest pos-
sible path of entities with only transitive properties. This
path consists in an ordered set of peers. To avoid the prob-
lem of double-branching (one entity followed by two enti-
ties), we considered the two directions separately. Again,
one path will be chosen at the end; the one with maximum
length. The total number of TP groups is 19.7k groups.
We limited the size of the groups to at least 10 and at most
15011.
Setup and Baseline. We chose 100 entities, that belongs
to at least one ordered set of peers, from Wikidata: 50 peo-
10This variable can be easily adjusted depending on the preference
of the developers and/or the purpose of the application.
11We did not truncate the groups, we simply disregarded any group
smaller or larger than the thresholds.
12

Table 6: Top-3 results for Albert Einstein using 3 ranking metrics.
Random rank
Property frequency
Ensemble
¬∃x(instagram; x)
¬∃x(doctoral student; x)
¬(occup.; astrophysicist)
¬(child; Tarek Sharif)
¬∃x(candidacy in election; x)
¬(party; Communist Party USA)
¬(award; BAFTA)
¬∃x(noble title; x)
¬∃x(doctoral student; x)
Table 7: Samples of temporal information in Wikidata.
Statement
Time-based qualiﬁer(s)
(Barack Obama; position held; U.S. senator)
start time: 3 January 2005; end time: 16 November 2008
(Maya Angelou; award received; Presidential Medal of Freedom)
point in time: 2010
(Donald Trump; spouse; Melania Trump)
start time: 22 January 2005
ple and 50 literature works. We collected top-5 negative
statements for each of those entities (for people, we con-
sider TQ groups, and for literature works, TP groups). We
made this choice because of the lack of entities of type per-
son with transitive properties. In case an entity belongs
to several groups, we merged all the results it is receiv-
ing from diﬀerent groups, ranked them, and retrieved the
top-5 statements. Similarly, as a baseline, using the peer-
based inference method of Section 4, instantiated with co-
sine similarity on Wikipedia embeddings [65] as similarity
function, we collected the top-5 negative statements for
the same entities. We ended up with 1k statements, 500
inferred by each model.
Correctness Evaluation.
We randomly retrieved 400
negative statements from the 1k statements collected above,
200 from each model (100 about people, and 100 about
literature works).
We then assessed the correctness of
each method using crowdsourcing. We showed each state-
ment to 3 annotators, asking them to choose whether this
statement is correct, incorrect, or ambiguous. Results are
shown in Table 8. Our order-oriented inference method
clearly infers less incorrect statements by 9 percentage
points for people, and 5 for literature works. It also pro-
duces more correct statements for people by 10 percentage
points, and literature work by 3. The percentage of queries
with full agreement in this task is 37%. Also, annotations
show a standard deviation of 0.17.
Subject Coverage. To assess the subject coverage of the
order-oriented method, we randomly sampled 1k entities
from each dataset, and tested whether it is a member of
at least one ordered set, thus the ability to infer useful
negative statements about it.
For TQ groups, we ran-
domly sampled 1k people, which results in a coverage of
54%. And for TP groups, we randomly sampled 1k litera-
ture works, and also received a coverage of 54%. Although
the order-oriented method produces better negative state-
ments on both notions of correctness and usefulness (as we
will see next), it does not outperform the baseline on sub-
ject coverage. However, using a diﬀerent function to order
peers might aﬀect this drastically (e.g., using real-valued
similarity functions like cosine distance of embeddings).
Table 8: Correctness of order-oriented and peer-based methods.
People
Literature Work
Peer-based inference
%
%
Correct
81
88
Incorrect
18
12
Ambiguous
1
0
Order-oriented inference
%
%
Correct
91
91
Incorrect
9
7
Ambiguous
0
2
Usefulness. To assess the quality of our inferred state-
ments from the order-oriented inference method against
the baseline (the peer-based inference method), we pre-
sented to the annotators two sets of top-5 negative state-
ments about a given entity, and asked them to choose the
more interesting set. The total number of opinions col-
lected, given 100 entities, 3 annotations each, is 300. To
avoid biases, we repeatedly switched the position of the
sets. Results are shown in Table 10. Overall results show
that our method is preferred by 10% of the entities for
both domains. The standard deviation of this task is 0.24
and the percentage of queries with full agreement is 18%.
We observe two advantages of the ordered set of peers over
the previous method: i) it gives better interpretations of
what a peer is, by automatically producing labels for peer
groups (e.g., Presidents of the U.S., Winners of the Best
Actor Academy Award); and ii) it maximizes the peer-
ness within a group. For instance, with Wikipedia em-
bedding [65], closest peers to Donald Trump are Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump Jr.. While the peerness with
the input entity is obvious, there is not much similarity
between the peers themselves, hence, very sparse candi-
date negations.
However, with the order-oriented peer-
ing, Trump’s peers include Barack Obama and George W.
13

Bush, who are also peers of each other.
Evaluation of Verbalizations. One main contribution
that our order-oriented inference method oﬀers are ver-
balizations produced with every inferred negative state-
ment. In other words, it can, unlike the peer-based in-
ference method, produce more concrete explanations of
the usefulness of the inferred negations. For example, the
inferred negative statement ¬(Abraham Lincoln; cause of
death; natural causes) was inferred by both of our meth-
ods.
However, each method oﬀers a diﬀerent verbaliza-
tion. For the peer-based method, the verbalization is “un-
like 10 of 30 similar people”, and for the order-oriented
method is “unlike 12 of the previous 12 presidents of the
U.S.”. To assess the quality of the verbalizations more for-
mally, we conducted a crowdsourcing task with 100 use-
ful negations that were inferred by both methods from
our previous experiment. For every negative statement,
the annotator was shown two diﬀerent verbalizations on
“why is this negative statement noteworthy”. We asked
the annotator to choose the better verbalization, she can
choose Verbalization1, Verbalization2, or Either/Neither.
Results show that verbalizations produced by our order-
oriented inference method were chosen 76% of the time,
by the peer-based inference method 23% of the time, and
the either or neither option only 1% of the time. The stan-
dard deviation is 0.23, and the percentage of queries with
full agreement is 20%. Table 9 shows a number of exam-
ples, using diﬀerent grouping functions for the peer-based
method.
7.3. Conditional Negative Statements Evaluation
We evaluated our lifting technique to retrieve useful
conditional negative statements, based on three criteria:
(i) compression, (ii) correctness, and (iii) usefulness. We
collected the top-200 negative statements about 100 enti-
ties (people, organizations, and art work), and then ap-
plied lifting on them.
Compression. On average, 200 statements are reduced
to 33, which means that lifting compresses the result set
by a factor of 6.
Correctness. We asked the crowd to assess the correct-
ness of 100 conditional negative statements (3 annotations
per statement), chosen randomly. To make it easier for an-
notators who are unfamiliar with RDF triples12, we manu-
ally converted them into natural language statements, for
example “Bing Crosby did not play any keyboard instru-
ments”. Results show that 57% were correct, 23% incor-
rect, and 20% were uncertain. The standard deviation of
this task is 0.24 and the percentage of queries with full
agreement is 18%.
Usefulness. For every entity, we showed 3 annotators 2
sets of top-3 negative statements: a grounded and univer-
sally negative statements set and a conditional negative
statement set, and asked them to choose the one with
12Especially because of the triple-pattern condition.
more interesting information.
Results are shown in Ta-
ble 11. The conditional statements were chosen 45 percent-
age points more than the grounded and universally nega-
tive statements. The standard deviation of this task is 0.22
and the percentage of queries with full agreement is 21%.
The signiﬁcant out-performance of the conditional class
over the other two classes is that it encapsulates them.
Without losing the information from the original result
set, lifting summarizes negations in meaningful manner,
at the same time, allowing more diverse statements to be
displayed in a top-k set. An example is shown in Table 12,
with entity e =Leonardo Dicaprio, and its top-3 results.
Even though he is one of the most accomplished actors in
the world, unlike many of his peers, he never attempted
directing any kind of creative work (ﬁlms, plays, television
shows, etc..).
8. Extrinsic Evaluation
We highlight the relevance of negative statements for:
• Entity summarization on Wikidata.
• Decision support with hotel data from Booking.com.
• Question answering on various structured search en-
gines.
8.1. Entity Summarization
In this experiment we analyze whether mixed positive-
negative statement set can compete with standard positive-
only statement sets in the task of entity summarization.
In particular, we want to show that the addition of nega-
tive statements will increase the descriptive power of struc-
tured summaries.
We collected 100 Wikidata entities from 3 diverse types:
40 people, 30 organizations (including publishers, ﬁnan-
cial institutions, academic institutions, cultural centers,
businesses, and more), and 30 literary works (including
creative work like poems, songs, novels, religious texts,
theses, book reviews, and more). On top of the negative
statements that we infered, we collected relevant positive
statements about those entities.13 We then computed for
each entity e a sample of 10 positive-only statements, and
a mixed set of 7 positive and 3 correct14 negative state-
ments, produced by the peer-based method.
We relied
on peering using Wikipedia embeddings [65]. Annotators
were then asked to decide which set contains more new
or unexpected information about e. More particularly, for
every entity, we asked workers to assess the sets (ﬂipping
the position of our set to avoid biases), leading to a to-
tal number of 100 tasks for 100 entities. We collected 3
13We deﬁned a number of common/useful properties to each of
type, e.g., for people, “position held”is a relevant property for posi-
tive statements.
14We manually checked the correctness of these negative state-
ments.
14

Table 9: Negative statements and their verbalizations using peer-based and order-oriented methods.
Statement
Order-oriented
Peer-based
Peering
Unlike..
Unlike..
¬(Emmanuel Macron; member; National Assembly)
29 of 36 members of La R´epublique En Marche party
70 of 100 similar people
WP embed. [65]
¬(Tim Berners-Lee; citizenship; U.S.)
101 of previous 115 winners of the MacArthur Fellowship
53 of 100 sim. comp. scientists
Structured facets
¬(Michael Jordan; occupation; basketball coach)
27 of prev. 49 winners of the NBA All-Defensive Team
31 of 100 sim. people
WP embed. [65]
¬(Theresa May; position; Opposition Leader)
11 of prev. 14 Leaders of the Conservative Party
10 of 100 sim. people
WP embed. [65]
¬(Cristiano Ronaldo; citizenship; Brazil)
4 of prev. 7 winners of the Ballon d’Or
20 of 100 sim. football players
Structured facets
Table 10: Usefulness of order-oriented and peer-based methods.
People
Literature Work
%
%
Peer-based inference
42
44
Order-oriented inference
52
54
Both
6
2
Table 11: Usefulness of conditional negative statements.
Preferred
(%)
Conditional negative statements
70
Grounded and universally negative statements
25
Either or neither
5
opinions per task. Overall results show that mixed sets
with negative information were preferred for 72% of the
entities, sets with positive-only statements were preferred
for 17% of the entities, and the option “both or neither”
was chosen for 11% of the entities. Table 14 shows results
per each considered type. The standard deviation is 0.24,
and the percentage of queries with full agreement is 22%.
Table 13 shows three diverse examples. The ﬁrst one is
Daily Mirror. One particular noteworthy negative state-
ment in this case is that the newspaper is not owned by
the “News U.K.” publisher which owns a number of other
British newspapers like The Times, The Sunday Times,
and The Sun. The second entity is Peter the Great who
died in Saint Petersburg and not Moscow, and who did
not receive the Order of St Alexander Nevsky which was
ﬁrst established by his wife, a few months after his death.
And the third entity is Twist and Shout. Although it is a
known song by The Beatles, they were not its composers,
writers, nor original performers.
In this experiment, we showed that adding negative
statements to a set of positive statements increases its
quality, and for that, we chose a split of 7 positive and
3 negative statements for top-10 results. One may wonder
whether that is actually the best proportion. This moti-
vates another analysis, ﬁnding out the portion of negative
statements to be added to a positive top-k set of statements
that maximizes the relevance gain (i.e., nDCG). We used
the annotators’ assessment of relevancy of individual pos-
itive and negative statements. We then compiled them as
sets of top-k results with diﬀerent k values and diﬀerent
portions of negative statements. The decision of adding
a certain negative statement should respect the constraint
of not decreasing the relevance gain (i.e., nDCG) of the
currently chosen top-k results. We calculated the ideal ra-
tio of positive to negative statements for k results. The
ideal portion of negative statements within top-k state-
ments about entity e was obtained for k=3, 5, 10, and 20.
For a set of top-3 or top-5 statements, 1 negative state-
ment is ideal, for 10 statements, 2 are ideal, and for 20, 5
are ideal.
8.2. Decision Support
Negative statements are highly important also in spe-
ciﬁc domains. In online shopping, characteristics not pos-
sessed by a product, such as the IPhone 7 not having a
headphone jack, are a frequent topic highly relevant for
decision making. The same applies to the hospitality do-
main: the absence of features such as free WiFi or gym
rooms are important criteria for hotel bookers, although
portals like Booking.com currently only show (sometimes
overwhelming) positive feature sets.
To illustrate this, based on a comparison of 1.8k hotels
in India, as per their listing on Booking.com, using the
peer-based method, we inferred useful negative features.
For peering, we considered all other hotels in India, and
for ranking, we computed peer frequencies (PEER). We
then used crowdsourcing over the results of 100 hotels.
We asked annotators to check two sets of features about
a given hotel, one set containing 5 random positive-only
features, and one set containing a mix of 3 positive and 2
negative features. Their task was to choose which set of
features will help them more in deciding whether to stay
in this hotel or not. They can choose one of the sets, or
both. For every hotel, we request 3 annotators.
Table 15 shows that sets with negative features were
chosen 16 percentage points more than the positive-only
sets. The standard deviation of this task is 0.22 and the
percentage of queries with full agreement is 28%. Table 16
shows three hotels with useful negative features. Although
the Hotel Asia The Dawn lists 64 positive features, neg-
ative information such as that it does not oﬀer air condi-
tioning and free Wiﬁmay give important clues for decision
making.
Moreover, we collected 20 pairs of hotels from the same
dataset, and showed every pair’s Booking.com pages to 3
annotators. We asked them to choose the better hotel for
them. Then we showed them negative features about the
pair, and asked them whether this new information would
change their mind on their initial decision. A screenshot of
15

Table 12: Top-3 negative statements about Leonardo Dicaprio, before and after lifting.
Negative statements
Conditional negative statements
¬(occupation; ﬁlm director)
¬∃o (occupation; o) (o; subclass of; director)
¬(occupation; theater director)
¬∃x(spouse; x)
¬(occupation; television director)
¬∃x(child; x)
Table 13: Results for the entities Daily Mirror, Peter the Great, and Twist and Shout.
Daily Mirror
Pos-only
Pos-and-neg
(owned by; Reach plc)
¬(newspaper format; broadsheet)
(newspaper format; tabloid)
(newspaper format; tabloid)
(country; United Kingdom)
¬(country; U.S.)
(language of work or name; English)
(language of work or name; English)
(instance of; newspaper)
¬(owned by; News U.K.)
...
...
Peter the Great
Pos-only
Pos-and-neg
(military rank; general oﬃcer)
(military rank; general oﬃcer)
(owner of; Kadriorg Palace)
(owner of; Kadriorg Palace)
(award; Order of the Elephant)
¬(place of death; Moscow)
(award; Order of St. Andrew)
(award; Order of St. Andrew)
(father; Alexis of Russia)
¬(award; Knight of the Order of St. Alexander Nevsky)
...
...
Twist And Shout
Pos-only
Pos-and-neg
(composer; Phil Medley)
¬(composer; Paul McCartney)
(performer; The Beatles)
(performer; The Beatles)
(producer; George Martin)
¬(composer; John Lennon)
(instance of; musical composition)
(instance of; musical composition)
(lyrics by; Phil Medley)
¬(lyrics by; Paul McCartney)
...
...
Table 14: Positive-only vs. positive and negative statements.
Preferred Choice
Person (%)
Organization (%)
Literary work (%)
Pos-and-neg
71
77
66
Pos-only
22
10
17
Both or neither
7
13
17
16

Table 15: Usefulness of hotel features.
Preferred Choice
(%)
Pos-and-neg
54
Pos-only
38
Either or neither
8
the task is shown in Figure 2. 42% changed their pick after
negative features were revealed. The standard deviation
on this task is 0.15. The full agreement of the 3 anno-
tators on changing the hotel after negative features were
revealed is 35%. The full agreement of annotators choos-
ing the same hotel at the end of the task is 30%. The latter
agreement measure disregard whether they have changed
their decision or stayed with their initial choice.
8.3. Question Answering
In this experiment, we compared the results to negative
questions over a diverse set of sources. We manually com-
piled 20 questions that involve negation, such as “Actors
without Oscars”15. We compared them over four highly di-
verse sources: Google Web Search (increasingly returning
structured answers from the Google knowledge graph [55]),
WDAqua [20] (an academic state-of-the-art KBQA sys-
tem), the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint 16 (direct access to
structured data), and our peer-based method. For Google
Web Search and WDAqua, we submitted the queries in
their textual form, and considered answers from Google if
they come as structured knowledge panels. For Wikidata
and peer-based inference, we transform the queries into
SPARQL queries17, which we either fully executed over the
Wikidata endpoint, or executed the positive part over the
Wikidata endpoint, while evaluating the negative part over
a dataset produced by our peer-based inference method.
Note that all queries were safe, since they were designed
to always asks for a class of entities (e.g., entities of occu-
pation actor) that do not satisfy a certain property (e.g.,
having won the Oscar), which was captured via SPARQL
MINUS with a shared variable. For each method, we then
self-evaluated the number of results, the correctness and
relevance of the (top-5) results. All methods were able to
return highly correct statements, yet Google Web Search
and WDAqua return no results for 18 and 16 of the queries,
respectively.
We continued the assessment over a sample of 5 queries.
Wikidata SPARQL returned by far the highest number
of results, 250k on average, yet did not perform rank-
ing, thus returned results that are hardly relevant (e.g.,
15Sample textual queries: “actors with no Oscars”, “actors with no
spouses”, “ﬁlm actors who are not ﬁlm directors”, “football players
with no Ballon d’Or”, “politicians who are not lawyers”.
16https://query.wikidata.org/
17sample SPARQL queries:
https://w.wiki/A6r,
https://w.
wiki/9yk, https://w.wiki/9yn, https://w.wiki/9yp, https://w.
wiki/9yq
a local Latvian actor to the Oscar question). The peer-
based inference outperforms it by far in terms of relevance
(72% vs. 44% for Wikidata SPARQL). We point out that
although Wikidata SPARQL results appear highly cor-
rect, this has no formal foundation, due to the absence
of a stance of OWA KBs towards negative knowledge.
For example, most actors or people did not win Oscars,
which makes 99.99% of the entities returned by Wikidata’s
SPARQL query correct, even under the OWA.
9. Resources
Negative Statement Datasets for Wikidata.
We
publish the ﬁrst datasets that contain dedicated useful
negative statements about entities in Wikidata: (i) Peer-
based and order-oriented inference data:
14m negative
statements about popular 600k entities from various types,
(ii) release the mturk-annotated on the correctness of 1k
negative statements of Section 7.1, and (iii) 40k ordered
set of peers introduced in Section 7.2.
Open-source Code. We publish our code for peer-based
inference, so others can execute it on their own datasets
18.
Demo.
A web-based platform, Wikinegata [6, 7] for
browsing useful negations about Wikidata entities, is avail-
able at: https://d5demos.mpi-inf.mpg.de/negation/.
A screenshot is shown in Figure 3.
All experimental material related to this paper can be
found on a dedicated webpage19.
10. Discussion
10.1. Quality Considerations
The CWA on the Semantic Web.
Negation has tra-
ditionally been avoided on the Semantic Web, as it chal-
lenges the vision that anyone can state anything, without
risking logical conﬂicts. In the present work, we showed
that enriching KBs with useful negative statements is ben-
eﬁcial in use cases such as entity summarization and con-
sumer decision making. In order to compile a set of likely
correct negative statements about an entity, we assumed
the CWA in parts of the KBs, namely within peer groups,
and in the case of grounded negative statements, with
the additional requirement that there is at least one other
positive statement for the same entity-property pair. Al-
though this approach outperforms other techniques, like
embedding-based KB completion, inferences may still be
incorrect. While correctness can be tuned to some extend
by sacriﬁcing recall (e.g., requiring very high thresholds
on PEER and PIVO), errors are still possible. It is there-
fore advised to show candidate statements from automatic
inference to KB curators for ﬁnal assessment [10].
18https://github.com/HibaArnaout/usefulnegations
19https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/
databases-and-information-systems/research/
knowledge-base-recall/interesting-negations-in-kbs
17

Table 16: Negative statements for hotels in India.
Hotel
Number of positive features
Top-3 negative features
The Sultan Resort
106
¬ Parking; ¬ Fan; ¬ Newspapers
Vista Rooms at Mount Road
28
¬ Room service; ¬ Food & Drink; ¬ 24-hour front desk
Hotel Asia The Dawn
64
¬ Air conditioning; ¬ Free Wiﬁ; ¬ Free private parking
Figure 2: Extrinsic use-case: decision support on hotel data.
Figure 3: Interface for Wikinegata - useful negative statements about Leonardo DiCaprio.
18

Real-world Changes and KB Maintenance.
Due to
real-world changes or new information added to the KB,
some of the negative statements already inferred might be-
come incorrect. For instance, DiCaprio has won his ﬁrst
Oscar in 2016. After the year 2016, the negative statement
¬(DiCaprio; award; Oscar) is no longer correct. Negative
statements should therefore be timestamped, and ideally,
additions of positive statements should automatically trig-
ger updates of validity end-point timestamps.
Class Hierarchies. Some incorrect negations can be de-
tected by help of subsumption checks (rdfs:subClassOf).
For example, the presented method might incorrectly in-
fer the statement ¬(Douglas Adams; occupation; author),
which contradicts the two positive assertions that Douglas
Adams is a writer, and writer is a subclass of author. One
could detect such contradictions by use of a generic on-
tology reasoner like Prot´eg´e, or implement custom checks.
For our speciﬁc use case of negative inference at scale,
we found that checks focused on one or two hops in the
class hierarchy capture a signiﬁcant proportion of these
errors. For KBs at the scale of Wikidata, one could pre-
compute prominent subsumptions, and build these checks
into the methodology (e.g., triggering a check for presence
of “occupation-writer” whenever “occupation-not author”
is inferred).
Subsumption similarly also aﬀects properties: the rela-
tion CEO (between a company and a person) is a subprop-
erty of employee, and as such, subject-object-pairs present
for the former should not appear as negations for the lat-
ter.
Modelling and Constraint Enforcement.
Some in-
ferred negations are incorrect due to modelling issues, re-
sulting in inconsistencies.
An example is Dijkstra and
the negative statement that his ﬁeld of work is not Com-
puter Science, and not Information Technology, while he
has the positive value Informatics, which is arguably near-
synonymous, yet in the Wikidata taxonomy, the two rep-
resent independent concepts, two hops apart. Some other
incorrect negative statements could be due to a lack of
constraints. For instance, for most businesses, the head-
quarters location property is completed using cities, but
for Siemens in Wikidata, the building is added instead
(Palais Ludwig Ferdinand), making our inferred statement
¬(Siemens; headquarters location; Munich) incorrect. Al-
though Wikidata encourages editors to use cities for the
headquarters location property and advise them to use an-
other property for speciﬁc buildings, it has not been auto-
matically enforced yet.20
10.2. Discovering Relevant Lifting Aspects
For inferring conditional negative statements, the lift-
ing aspects we used in this paper have been manually de-
ﬁned (see Table 3). For instance, if the grounded nega-
tive statements to be lifted describe educational institu-
tions, then the aspects that make sense are the location
20https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P159
of the institution (U.S., Germany, Japan, etc.) and its
type (public, private, research, etc.). This does not scale
well when the KB contains thousands of properties with
thousands of possible aspects. Automatically discovering
these aspects would improve the quality of conditional neg-
ative statements. A good start is the work in [43]. An
aspect is described as an important characteristic of an
entity. For example, for a book, the number of pages is
not an important aspect, but genre is. This work intro-
duces aspect ranking metrics such as object cardinality:
a good predicate (e.g., genre) has a ﬁnite list of values to
choose from (e.g., comedy, thriller, romance). Unsuitable
predicates using this metric would be the predicate num-
ber of pages or publication date. In addition, the AMIE
system [28, 27] mines rules on millions of triples, and is
speciﬁcally tailored to support open-world KBs.
It can
discover, for example, that musicians that are inﬂuenced
by each other often play the same instrument. The instru-
ment can be directly used as an aspect for lifting grounded
negative statements (with predicate inﬂuenced by) about
a musician-entity. In particular, musician x (a pianist),
is not inﬂuenced by anyone who plays the guitar, or more
surprisingly not inﬂuenced by anyone who plays the piano
(if that is the case). We consider this to be a promising
research direction. It is worth exploring and improving the
ideas in Section 6 further.
10.3. Entity Prominence and Class Speciﬁcity
Negations in the Long Tail. Our method builds on the
assumption that peer entities are available, for which we
have suﬃcient data. For long-tail entities, both assump-
tions may be challenged. For entities with extremely little
positive information (e.g., https://www.wikidata.org/
wiki/Q97355589, for which only ﬁrst name, last name,
and gender are known), it is not possible to identify rele-
vant peers, and hence, our method is not applicable. Low
amounts of positive information on peers, in contrast, can
be better compensated. Since our method is mainly con-
cerned with ﬁnding the most interesting candidates for
negation, absolute frequencies are not important, as long
as it is possible to ﬁnd a reasonable diﬀerence in frequen-
cies among peers (i.e., not every positive statement ap-
pearing only once). If there is interest to put emphasis
on speciﬁc facts, one could also adjust the ranking algo-
rithms, e.g., giving “citizenship” negations a boost in the
ranking.
Negations for Diﬀerent Classes.
In practice, we
have applied our method on 11 diverse classes of enti-
ties: people, literary works, organizations, businesses, sci-
entiﬁc journals, countries, buildings, musical groups, pri-
mary schools, books, and ﬁlms. We have observed that
within each class, interesting negations often cover the
same properties. For instance, for people, interesting neg-
ative knowledge is mostly about awards, occupations, edu-
cation, and family. We show statistics on frequent proper-
ties for every class of entities in Table 17. We do not ﬁlter
nor assign weights for certain properties per class. The
19

Table 17: Negations across classes of Wikidata entities.
Class
Number of entities
3 most frequent negated properties
Sample entities
Book
8k
author, genre, publisher
Fahrenheit 451, Little Birds
Person
500k
spouse, child, occupation
Elon Musk, Oprah Winfrey
Country
199
diplomatic relation, member of, language used
Germany, China
Primary school
14k
instance of, heritage designation, country
Deutsche Schule Helsinki, Saint Joseph school
Film
26k
cast member, genre, screenwriter
Taxi Driver, Inception
Building
28k
architect, instance of, heritage designation
NY Times Building, White House
Organizations
22k
headquarters location, instance of, country
World Trade Organization, BBC
Musical group
8k
instance of, record label, genre
Coldplay, Jonas Brothers
Business
20k
parent organization, headquarters location, industry
Nokia, Facebook
Scientiﬁc journal
5k
main subject, editor, publisher
Journal of Web Semantics, Nature
Literary work
24k
author, composer, lyrics by
Diary of Anne Frank, Don Quixote
relative frequency metric takes care of prioritizing which
property’s negation makes sense in every class. For people,
the reported properties are fairly general and not tied to
speciﬁc subsets of this very large class. For instance, for
sports ﬁgures, member of sports team is the most frequent
property, and for politicians, position held is the dominat-
ing property.
We notice that negations for small classes, such as
buildings and literary works, have a higher correctness ra-
tio than larger classes, such as people. Entities of type per-
son have 3 times more possible properties to ﬁll than enti-
ties of type book. Given a book (e.g., Orientalism), a hand-
ful of properties and property-object pairs could be added
and the information about the entity is considered near-
complete (e.g., main subject, author, genres, publisher, and
language). In contrast, for a person (e.g., Joe Rogan), the
entity requires a greater eﬀort and/or larger information
sources to be considered complete (e.g., occupation, educa-
tion, residence, birth place, citizenship, sport, religion, and
many more). On the other hand, larger classes oﬀer richer
and more diverse possibilities for interesting negations. A
result set for a person often covers a wider range of topics,
such as personal information, professional achievements,
relations with other people. A result set for a book is less
diverse, often negating the same property repeatedly with
diﬀerent objects.
11. Conclusion & Future Directions
This article has made the ﬁrst comprehensive case for
explicitly materializing useful negative statements in KBs.
We have introduced a statistical inference approach on re-
trieving and ranking candidate negative statements, based
on expectations set by highly related peers. We have also
released several resources to encourage further research.
In future work we would like to explore a number of
research directions:
1. Missing vs negative statements: How to maximize
trade-ability between fewer highly correct statements,
and larger sets of interesting negation candidates.
2. Mining complex negations: Our focus was on simple
- grounded and universal - negation, with a hint at
more complex conditional statements. It is open to
extend that to (i) automatically ﬁnding aspects, (ii)
further joins “did not study at a university which was
graduating any Nobel prize winner”, (iii) negation on
sets of entities instead of entity-centric “no African
country has hosted any Olympic games”, etc.
3. Exploring how textual information extraction of im-
plicit negations can boost negation coverage, e.g.,
statements like “Theresa May is an only child.” (cor-
responding to ¬∃x(sibling; x)), or “George Wash-
ington had no formal education.” (corresponding to
¬∃x(educated at; x)).
4. Exploiting the ontology that comes with the KB
to improve the correctness of inferred negations by
making use of constraints like class and property sub-
sumption.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the German Science Founda-
tion (DFG: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) by grant
4530095897: “Negative Knowledge at Web Scale”.
