Characteristics and prevalence of fake social media
profiles with AI-generated faces
Kai-Cheng Yang∗1, 2, Danishjeet Singh1, and Filippo Menczer1
1Observatory on Social Media, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA
2Network Science Institute, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
July 8, 2024
Abstract
Recent advancements in generative artificial intelligence (AI) have raised concerns
about their potential to create convincing fake social media accounts, but empirical evi-
dence is lacking. In this paper, we present a systematic analysis of Twitter (X) accounts
using human faces generated by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for their pro-
file pictures. We present a dataset of 1,420 such accounts and show that they are used
to spread scams, spam, and amplify coordinated messages, among other inauthentic ac-
tivities. Leveraging a feature of GAN-generated faces—consistent eye placement—and
supplementing it with human annotation, we devise an effective method for identify-
ing GAN-generated profiles in the wild. Applying this method to a random sample
of active Twitter users, we estimate a lower bound for the prevalence of profiles using
GAN-generated faces between 0.021% and 0.044%—around 10K daily active accounts.
These findings underscore the emerging threats posed by multimodal generative AI.
We release the source code of our detection method and the data we collect to facili-
tate further investigation. Additionally, we provide practical heuristics to assist social
media users in recognizing such accounts.
1
Introduction
Recent advances in generative artificial intelligence (AI) have resulted in remarkable com-
petencies across various domains (Cao et al., 2023).
Large language models, such as
ChatGPT,1 can understand human language and generate realistic text in different con-
texts (Jakesch et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023). Generative vision models, such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and diffusion models (Song and
Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020), produce photorealistic images that people can no longer dis-
tinguish from human-generated images (Lago et al., 2021; Nightingale and Farid, 2022; Bray
et al., 2023). State-of-the-art multimodal models, such as Google’s Gemini models (Pichai
and Hassabis, 2023), can even understand visual and audio inputs and respond with text or
images. This evolving landscape of generative AI models underscores a significant leap in
AI technology, opening new avenues for research and applications.

1https://chat.openai.com
1
arXiv:2401.02627v2  [cs.CY]  4 Jul 2024

These advancements also present opportunities for misuse.
For instance, adversarial
actors can exploit AI models to create and disseminate disinformation or conduct influ-
ence campaigns (Yamin et al., 2021; Guembe et al., 2022; Goldstein et al., 2023; Yang and
Menczer, 2024), threatening the integrity of online information exchange. In this study,
we focus on the fake social media accounts that leverage generative AI for deceptive pur-
poses (Bommasani et al., 2021). In documented cases, individuals have used AI-generated
human images to fabricate fake personas online, leading to deception and targeted at-
tacks (O’Sullivan, 2020a,b). Major social media platforms, such as Facebook (Martineau,
2019) and LinkedIn (Bond, 2022), have already encountered groups of fake accounts that
utilize AI-generated faces.
Despite these stories, a systematic analysis of such accounts is still lacking. What are the
tactics and goals of these fake accounts? What is their prevalence on social media platforms?
These key questions remain unanswered due to the reluctance of social media platforms to
share data and detailed analysis results. To address this knowledge gap, here we present
an analysis of inauthentic accounts using GAN-generated pictures as their profiles to mimic
real human users on Twitter.2
Although there are other generative vision models, we focus on GANs for several reasons.
Firstly, the introduction of GAN-based models, particularly the StyleGAN series (Karras
et al., 2019, 2020), marks a major milestone in the field of generative AI models (Cao et al.,
2023) because they are capable of producing photorealistic images almost indistinguishable
from real ones (Nightingale and Farid, 2022). Secondly, GANs are easily accessible. With
their source code publicly available online,3 adversarial actors can easily produce fake human
faces as needed. Additionally, for those without technical expertise, websites like https:
//thispersondoesnotexist.com offer an easy means to download GAN-generated images
in large quantities. Last but not least, GAN-generated faces share some distinctive features,
allowing us to identify them with high confidence.
In this study, we create a novel dataset of 1,420 inauthentic Twitter accounts, each
utilizing a GAN-generated face as its profile picture. Upon close examination, these accounts
typically feature human-like names suggesting a deliberate effort to mimic real users. These
accounts engage in inauthentic activities, such as disseminating spam, executing scams,
and amplifying messages in a coordinated fashion, often through automation. We further
estimate the prevalence of such accounts on the platform. Leveraging the feature that GANs
consistently place eyes at the same locations, together with human annotation, we develop
a simple yet effective method to identify GAN-generated profiles in the wild. Applying this
method to a random sample of 254,275 active Twitter users, our analysis indicates that the
prevalence of accounts using GAN-generated faces is between 0.021% and 0.044%. Since our
method emphasizes precision and might miss accounts leveraging more advanced AI models
to generate their profiles, these estimates should be only regarded as lower bounds.
Our findings reveal that generative AI tools, particularly GANs, have been deployed at
scale to create fake personas on Twitter. These accounts are involved in various inauthentic
activities, posing a challenge to the integrity of online interactions.
To support further
research and expand the scope of investigation to other cases and platforms, we share our
dataset and code. We also discuss practical heuristics that can empower social media users
to identify and defend themselves against the manipulative tactics of these AI-powered
accounts.
2Twitter was rebranded as “X” in July 2023, but we refer to the platform as “Twitter” as the data
analyzed in this paper predates the rebranding.
3See https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan and https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan2.
2

2
Related work
2.1
GAN-generated face detection
Due to the popularity of the StyleGAN models (Karras et al., 2019, 2020) and their broad
impact, many studies have aimed to detect GAN-generated pictures in the past few years.
In addition to deep learning models that can capture distinctive features of GAN-generated
pictures automatically (Nataraj et al., 2019; Dang et al., 2018), many methods rely on
physical or physiological features of the generated faces for detection. For example, Hu
et al. (2021) leverage corneal specular highlights; Guo et al. (2022) focus on pupil shapes;
Yang et al. (2019b) and Mundra et al. (2023) exploit the locations of face landmarks. For
details on these methods, readers can refer to the review by Wang et al. (2022).
Although we also need to detect GAN-generated faces in this study, our case differs
from previous studies significantly. The aforementioned methodology papers typically aim to
distinguish generated and real human faces from datasets such as FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019)
and CelebA (Liu et al., 2015). On the other hand, our objective is to identify generated faces
among random Twitter profiles, which presents unique challenges. Firstly, only a subset of
Twitter profiles feature human faces, and their styles may differ greatly from GAN-generated
ones (see Figure 1(c) for examples). Secondly, the instances of GAN-generated faces may be
relatively scarce, necessitating a detection method with high accuracy to address the class
imbalance issue and provide a reliable estimate of the prevalence of fake accounts. Given
these differences, existing methods are not suitable for our purpose.
2.2
GAN-generated faces on social media
While there is a substantial body of literature on detecting GAN-generated images, only a
few studies have specifically targeted social media contexts. Marra et al. (2018) simulate
the case of detecting generated pictures compressed by social media platforms by prepro-
cessing the pictures in their datasets, although their focus is not on human faces. Boato
et al. (2022) upload GAN-generated human pictures to social media platforms, including
Facebook, Twitter, and Telegram, and then download them to examine the effectiveness of
various detection methods on compressed images.
Unfortunately, these studies cannot help address our research questions about the fake
social media accounts that utilize GAN-generated faces. Our knowledge of these accounts is
largely derived from sporadic journalistic reporting, brief communications from social media
platforms, and case studies provided by hobbyists (Norteno, 2023). We hope the present
study can further our understanding of these accounts and their negative impact.
2.3
Social bots and their detection
This study also encompasses the topic of social bots, which, while related, are distinct from
our primary focus. Social bots are accounts partially controlled by algorithms to emulate
humans and act automatically following different instructions (Ferrara et al., 2016). To
appear authentic, bots sometimes employ realistic images as profile pictures, including those
stolen from other accounts (Confessore et al., 2018) or generated using AI models (as we show
below). However, accounts using GAN-generated faces are not necessarily bots; sometimes,
they are operated by real humans.
The detection of social bots often depends on the content produced by the accounts and
their behavioral patterns, such as posting frequency and types of interactions with other
3

Table 1: Detailed information about different groups of accounts in TwitterGAN.
Group name
Size
Date
Note
blue check
11
2022-11-10
Subscribed to the blue-checkmark paid verification
program of Twitter
bart
5
2023-02-02
Used to propagate spammy hashtags,
YouTube
videos, and Tumblr links
elon watch
246
2023-02-03
Repeatedly replied to other accounts with scams in-
volving Elon Musk
sunday
18
2023-03-05

ersenock
astroturf
1,066
2023-04-08
Used to amplify content from a common set of ac-
counts in a coordinated fashion
chatgpt
67
2024-01-31
Used ChatGPT to generate human-like content
ind acc
7
varies
Individual accounts that do not belong to any coor-
dinated groups
Total
1,420
accounts (Yang et al., 2019a; Sayyadiharikandeh et al., 2020). Some recent studies have
explored using GANs for bot detection in adversarial settings (Cresci et al., 2021; Najari
et al., 2022). However, their focus is mainly on the behavioral patterns and content, not on
the profile pictures. Account profile information, such as the user name, description, and
number of friends and followers, typically contributes to bot detection (Yang et al., 2020),
but profile pictures are usually excluded, likely due to image-processing challenges.
Since we aim to identify accounts that use GAN-generated faces in this study, we will
mainly rely on profile pictures for detection. We will then analyze the profile information
and activities of the identified accounts.
3
Data collection
We introduce multiple datasets for different purposes. The key dataset is shared with the
public for further investigation and can be accessed at a public data repository.4
3.1
TwitterGAN dataset
The TwitterGAN dataset comprises a total of 1,420 Twitter accounts that use GAN-generated
human faces as their profiles. We collected their profile information and recent tweets for
analysis.
When Twitter’s V2 API was still available, we used it to collect the data for
most of the accounts. After Twitter shut down its free API, we manually collected the
data through Twitter’s web interface. We also downloaded their profile pictures. Twitter
allowed public access to these pictures in various resolutions. We primarily aimed for the
400-by-400-pixel versions, although some variations in resolution and aspect ratios exist.
4https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10436888
4

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1:
Sample profile pictures from (a) AcademicGAN, (b) TwitterGAN, and (c)
RandomTwitter.
The dataset contains multiple account groups collected between November 2022 and
January 2024. The timeline of data collection and notes can be found in Table 1. The initial

others were spotted by the authors. Following this, we conducted a thorough inspection to
verify the nature of these accounts.
As mentioned earlier, the GAN-generated faces are very realistic, and layman partici-
pants in controlled experiments can no longer distinguish them from real human faces (Nightin-
gale and Farid, 2022). However, after reading extensive literature and reviewing a large num-
ber of GAN-generated human faces, we have identified several distinctive characteristics of
these faces that bolster our confidence in their identification. First, GANs consistently show
face landmarks, especially the eyes, at the same location in the generated pictures (Yang
et al., 2019b). This feature becomes evident when comparing multiple GAN-generated faces
side by side, as illustrated in Figure 1. Second, many GAN-generated pictures have clear de-
fects, which will be discussed in Section 4.3. Third, some profile pictures contain watermarks
explicitly revealing their machine-generated origin.
We also examine the profile information and activities of the accounts to triangulate
their nature. For instance, there are occasional mismatches between account names and
the perceived gender and race of the faces. We further rely on signals of coordinated in-
authentic activities, which proved effective in similar contexts (Pacheco et al., 2021; Yang
and Menczer, 2024). The TwitterGAN accounts in some groups are inter-connected through
mutual following, similar profile information, and identical activity patterns. (These con-
nections also allow us to identify more members of their groups.) Our conclusions are drawn
from a holistic consideration of all these factors.
3.2
AcademicGAN dataset
Since capturing a large number of accounts using GAN-generated profiles in the wild is not
trivial, we supplement the study with the AcademicGAN dataset. It contains 10,000 GAN-
generated human faces obtained from the https://generated.photos/datasets website
upon request. The website trains its own GAN models on proprietary human photos to
produce more synthetic ones for sale. All pictures in AcademicGAN have the same resolution
of 256 by 256 pixels and do not have the common defects observed in TwitterGAN. Neverthe-
5

0
100
200
300
Follower count
0
250
500
750
1000
Frequency
(a)
astroturf
other
100
101
102
103
104
Following count
0
50
100
150
200
(b)
100
101
102
103
104
Tweet count
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
(c)
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Year of creation
0
250
500
750
1000
(d)
Figure 2:
Profile characteristics of accounts in TwitterGAN. We show the distributions of
(a) follower count, (b) following (friend) count, (c) tweet count, and (e) year of creation for
astroturf and other accounts.
less, their face landmarks are still placed at the same locations, as demonstrated in Figure 1.
This dataset is used as the ground truth in our analysis to compare with TwitterGAN and
develop our detection method.
3.3
RandomTwitter dataset
To estimate the prevalence of accounts using GAN-generated profiles on Twitter, we as-
semble the RandomTwitter dataset, a random sample of diverse active Twitter users. We
leverage the streaming endpoint of Twitter’s V2 API, which delivers a 1% sample of all live
tweets in real time. The data collection took place on June 1, 2023, before Twitter shut
down our API access. This yielded 285,747 tweets from 254,275 unique users. Similar to
the TwitterGAN dataset, we also downloaded the 400-by-400-pixel versions of their profile
images whenever possible. Figure 1 shows a sample of 25 of these images.
4
Characterization of TwitterGAN
In this section, we characterize the profiles and activities of accounts in TwitterGAN.
4.1
Profile information
Let us first focus on the profile information of the accounts in TwitterGAN. The distributions
of their follower/following count, tweet count, and creation year are shown in Figure 2.
6

Since the astroturf group has more accounts than the other groups combined and shows
distinctive features, we separate it from the rest of the accounts.
On average, accounts in astroturf have 9.95 (Standard Deviation SD=24.03) followers,
55.68 (SD=51.75) friends, and 14.91 (SD=15.62) tweets, whereas the other accounts have
67.75 (SD=163.64) followers, 162.71 (SD=177.17) friends, and 509.23 (SD=504.02) tweets.
All the differences between astroturf and the other accounts are statistically significant
according to Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests (p < 0.05). These results suggest that accounts in
TwitterGAN are engaging in various activities on Twitter; however, astroturf accounts are
less active than others.
Inspecting the creation years of the accounts suggests that most of them joined Twitter
in the past two years, and astroturf accounts are more recent than others. This is not
surprising since Twitter, both under the old management and Musk, routinely removes
inauthentic accounts identified by their algorithm or reported to them. But this process is
imperfect since some accounts in TwitterGAN are still alive on Twitter despite violating the
policies. Specifically, all accounts in astroturf appeared to be suspended when we checked
their status in December 2023, but only 14.9% of the other accounts in TwitterGAN had
been suspended.
4.2
Tactics and inauthentic activities
To uncover the tactics and inauthentic activities of accounts in TwitterGAN, we performed
human annotation and bot detection. The annotation covered all accounts from blue check,
bart, elon watch, sunday, chatgpt, and ind acc. Since the accounts in astroturf share
similar patterns, we randomly selected 250 for annotation to reduce the workload. In total,
we annotated 604 accounts, and each account was annotated by two authors independently.
Our analyses reveal several patterns, and we illustrate the five most noteworthy ones in
Figure 3. Some patterns are common across multiple groups, while others are exclusive to
specific ones. We discuss the patterns next.
Impersonation. The primary goal of using GAN-generated images in the profiles is to im-
personate real humans. As illustrated in Figure 3(a), these fake accounts often feature
realistic photos, plausible names, and detailed descriptions, creating the illusion that
these accounts are operated by real persons. Our analysis suggests that almost all
TwitterGAN accounts employ believable names despite some being uncommon. None
of these accounts disclose their use of GAN-generated profile images.
Scamming. Our analysis suggests that the accounts in the elon watch group are used to
promote scams. These accounts typically reply to others with screenshots depicting
Elon Musk’s Twitter feed, containing deceptive messages like “Just google [keywords]
and thank me later.” An illustration can be found in Figure 3(b). The screenshots
are fabricated; Elon Musk never posted these messages. Searching the keywords on
Google leads to scam websites.
Spamming. Accounts within TwitterGAN frequently engage in spamming. We show two
such examples from the bart group in Figure 3(c), characterized by repeating messages
with excessive hashtags and external links to platforms like YouTube and Tumblr.
Coordinated amplification. Some of the TwitterGAN accounts exhibit coordinated in-
authentic activity (see Figure 3(d)), a tactic commonly adopted by adversarial actors
7

Figure 3:
Illustrations of the tactics and inauthentic activities of accounts in TwitterGAN.
(a) Fake accounts impersonating persons that do not exist through GAN-generated profiles,
human-like names, and fake descriptions. (b) Accounts replying fake screenshots with scam
messages to other accounts (the keywords are redacted to avoid further spreading the scams).
(c) Accounts posting spam messages repeatedly. (d) Accounts amplifying the messages from
certain accounts by coordinately reposting their tweets. (e) Accounts leveraging ChatGPT
to produce human-like replies. The account illustrations colored in red and blue represent
inauthentic and normal ones, respectively.
during influence campaigns (Pacheco et al., 2021). A clear example is the astroturf
group, where the members retweet content from a common set of accounts. The five

(the official account of https://crunchyroll.com, an anime distribution company).
Their motives remain unclear, given the varied nature of the amplified content.
ChatGPT for content generation. Accounts in chatgpt were found to leverage Chat-
GPT to generate human-like content (see Figure 3(e)). They were identified by the
self-revealing tweets posted by these accounts, which contained phrases such as “as an
AI language model.” This method was used to uncover a larger botnet with the same
tactic earlier (Yang and Menczer, 2024).
Automation. Many accounts in TwitterGAN exhibit characteristics of bots. For instance,
repeatedly sending scams, posting spam messages, and amplifying posts from selected
8

Figure 4:
Common distinctive defects of GAN-generated faces that can help identify them.
(a) Unreal hat. (b) Glass frame blended into the face; surreal background. (c) Unreal collar.
(d) Earrings blended into the ears; irregular ear.
accounts in a coordinated fashion are typical signs of automation. We further apply
the BotometerLite model (Yang et al., 2020), a widely adopted Twitter bot detection
tool, to all accounts in TwitterGAN and find that 75.2% of them are labeled likely bots
(using 0.5 as threshold).
“Verification.” Under Musk’s management, the acquisition of a blue checkmark no longer
requires going through a verification process. Instead, any account willing to pay a
premium fee can obtain the mark to increase its perceived legitimacy. This strategy
is not very common among TwitterGAN accounts, possibly due to the associated cost.
Only the 11 accounts in blue check and 44 accounts in chatgpt adopted this strategy.
4.3
Heuristics for identification
During the annotation, we identified some heuristic indicators that can help spot GAN-
generated profiles.
The most distinctive feature lies in the flaws.
Although GANs can
generate realistic human faces, other parts of the images are often featured with defects.
For instance, GANs sometimes have difficulty producing realistic hats (Figure 4(a)), glasses
(Figure 4(b)), and ears (Figure 4(d)). Similarly, users can pay attention to accessories, such
as earrings (Figure 4(d)) and necklaces, that GANs often struggle with. Clothing details,
especially collars, are also problematic for GANs (Figure 4(c)).
Last but not least, the
background sometimes can hint at the artificial nature of a picture (Figure 4(b)). While an-
notating TwitterGAN accounts, we specifically examined the defects in their profile pictures.
Two annotators agreed that 60.1% of them have clear defects (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.90).
Profile images lacking obvious defects can still be identified through inconsistencies be-
tween images and profile information. For instance, there may be a disconnect between
the perceived gender or ethnicity in the image and the associated names. Such mismatches
9

often result from creators randomly pairing images and names without validation. However,
relying solely on this criterion can be inaccurate and potentially biased, so it should be used
cautiously and complemented with additional verification.
Although it is challenging to determine the nature of suspicious accounts individually,
patterns emerge when comparing multiple accounts. Users can start with one suspicious
account and observe its connections and interactions with others to search for signs of coor-
dinated inauthentic behaviors. These include accounts sharing compatible profile pictures
and/or exhibiting similar activities, such as posting similar content and retweeting similar
posts. Such analysis can contextualize individual accounts within larger networks, aiding in
identifying their true nature.
5
Prevalence on Twitter
In this section, we aim to estimate the prevalence of Twitter accounts using GAN-generated
profiles. We first propose a simple yet effective detection method, then apply it to RandomTwitter.
5.1
Eye locations
Our detection method leverages the observation that GANs place the eyes in the same
locations in all generated pictures, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a,b).
This feature has
been reported and exploited to distinguish true and fake human faces (Yang et al., 2019b).
Note that our task differs from previous methodology papers since our goal is to identify
GAN-generated profiles from random Twitter profiles. As illustrated in Figure 1(c), many
profiles do not feature human faces. And for those containing authentic human faces, we
hypothesize that very few of them happen to have their eyes placed in the same locations
as the GAN-generated ones.
To test our hypothesis, we need to obtain the eye coordinates of input images. We test
different face recognition software and find that the Python package face recognition5
provides an effective and efficient solution. The package returns an empty list if no faces
are detected in the input images.
For images containing faces, the package returns the
coordinates of the landmarks, such as the eyes and nose, of each face (Kazemi and Sullivan,
2014). We focus on the eyes and obtain the center coordinate of each eye by averaging
its landmark points. Since the profile images have different resolutions, we normalize the
coordinates using the image height and width so that all the re-scaled coordinates are in
the unit interval.
We apply the package to the profiles in TwitterGAN, AcademicGAN, and RandomTwitter.
Figure 5 shows the kernel density estimation distributions of the detected eye positions. For
the GAN-generated profiles in both TwitterGAN and AcademicGAN, the eye locations are
highly concentrated and identical. On the other hand, the eye locations of random profiles
in RandomTwitter are scattered across the space. These findings confirm our hypothesis and
suggest that TwitterGAN images were likely generated by the same algorithm as those in
AcademicGAN. In turn, this indicates eye locations can be leveraged to distinguish GAN-
generated and random Twitter profiles.
Inspecting the results of face recognition yields a few more critical observations. The
package can identify exactly one face from each AcademicGAN image and each TwitterGAN
image, except for one with clear defects. On the other hand, the package can only identify
5https://github.com/ageitgey/face_recognition
10

0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized Y coordinate
(a) AcademicGAN
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized X coordinate
(b)
TwitterGAN
Left eye
Right eye
0.0
0.5
1.0
(c) RandomTwitter
Figure 5:
Kernel density estimation distribution of the detected left and right eyes
in (a) AcademicGAN, (b) TwitterGAN, and (c) a random sample of 25,000 accounts from
RandomTwitter.
faces from around 35.7% profiles in RandomTwitter. The remaining profiles either do not
contain faces or are misclassified by the package. Among the profiles with detected faces,
about 92.3% have one face detected, while the others have multiple faces detected. Although
face recognition is not perfect in face detection, it works very well on the GAN-generated
faces, ensuring a high recall for our objective.
5.2
GANEyeDistance metric
Based on the promising results in Figure 5, we propose a metric called GANEyeDistance to
quantify the distances between the detected eyes and the expected coordinates of the eyes
in GAN-generated pictures.
Let us use ⃗L = {xl, yl} and ⃗R = {xr, yr} to represent the coordinates of the left and
right eyes detected by face recognition, where x and y represent the normalized x- and
y-coordinates. We further use ⃗LGAN and ⃗RGAN to denote the expected locations of left and
right eyes in GAN-generated images. The GANEyeDistance for a given profile is defined as:
G(⃗L, ⃗R) =
(
∥⃗L−⃗LGAN∥+∥⃗R−⃗RGAN∥
2
√
2
if one detected face
1
otherwise
(1)
where ∥⃗X −⃗Y ∥represents the Euclidean distance between ⃗X and ⃗Y . Since the longest
distance of two points in a unit square is
√
2 and we combine the distance of both eyes, the
denominator in Eq. (1) ensures that G is a number between 0 and 1. A profile with a G
value close to 0 means the eye locations are close to those of GAN-generated faces.
Note that G is only calculated when one face is detected in the given profile. If face recognition
cannot process the input image or cannot detect any faces, we set G to 1. We also set G to
1 when multiple faces are detected since GAN-generated profiles typically have one face in
them.
To apply Eq. (1), we also need the ground truth values of ⃗LGAN and ⃗RGAN. Inspecting
the profiles in TwitterGAN suggests that the profile pictures are subject to modifications such
as cropping and stretching, introducing noise. On the other hand, pictures in AcademicGAN
11

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
GANEyeDistance
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Frequency
(a)
AcademicGAN
TwitterGAN
RandomTwitter
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
GANEyeDistance
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
(b)
Figure 6:
(a) Distributions of the GANEyeDistance values in AcademicGAN, TwitterGAN,
and RandomTwitter. The results for AcademicGAN and TwitterGAN overlap with each other.
(b) A zoom-in of (a) with a focus on the range of [0, 0.1]. The dashed line indicates the
threshold we choose for identifying likely GAN-generated profiles in RandomTwitter.
have better consistency and quality, so we use the average values of their eye coordinates as
our ground truth. Our implementation of GANEyeDistance is publicly available.6
To demonstrate the effectiveness of GANEyeDistance, we calculate this value for every
image in all three datasets and show their distributions in Figure 6(a). We can see that
the profiles in AcademicGAN and TwitterGAN have GANEyeDistance values very close to 0,
as expected. The results of RandomTwitter show a bimodal distribution: the GANEyeDis-
tance values of the profiles with one detected face are distributed across a wide range, and
the remaining images have a GANEyeDistance value of 1. The difference in the distributions
suggests that GANEyeDistance can effectively distinguish GAN-generated profiles from ran-
dom Twitter profiles. In Figure 6(b), we zoom in to better inspect the difference among the
three datasets. The GANEyeDistance values for AcademicGAN are closest to 0. The results
for TwitterGAN deviate from 0 slightly due to noise. The AcademicGAN distribution has a
very small overlap with those of the GAN-generated profiles.
Despite the promising results shown in Figure 6, we emphasize again that GANEyeDis-
tance only indicates the distance between the locations of detected eyes and the ground
truth. It cannot truly distinguish GAN-generated faces from authentic human faces. This
means that although GAN-generated faces have GANEyeDistance close to zero, images with
very small GANEyeDistance are not necessarily GAN-generated. In other words, a relatively
loose threshold for GANEyeDistance can yield a very high recall for GAN-generated profiles
but also introduce false positives.
For instance, if we use 0.02 as the threshold and consider all images with G < 0.02
as positive cases, then the recall for AcademicGAN and TwitterGAN is 100% and 99.4%,
respectively. At the same time, 0.46% (1,181) of the random profiles are labeled as positive,
so further inspection is needed to determine their nature.
6https://github.com/osome-iu/fake_gan_accounts
12

5.3
Prevalence estimation
In this study, our goal is not to build a perfect algorithm to detect GAN-generated profiles.
Instead, we aim to estimate the prevalence of accounts using GAN-generated profiles on
Twitter, which can be approximated by the prevalence in RandomTwitter. Therefore, the
high recall nature of GANEyeDistance makes it a suitable metric to help us narrow down
the candidate profiles for further inspection.
Here, we settle on 0.02 as the threshold because it yields a very high recall for TwitterGAN.
Increasing the threshold does not boost the recall significantly but introduces many more
false positives. As mentioned above, this threshold leads to 1,181 candidate profiles from
RandomTwitter.
To reduce the false positives where the algorithm flags authentic human photos as GAN-
generated, two authors manually classify these profiles into three categories: (1) highly
likely GAN-generated, (2) likely GAN-generated, and (3) not GAN-generated. Profiles in
the first category demonstrate clear and unique features of GAN-generated human faces,
such as the defects illustrated in Figure 4. Profiles in the second category are very similar
to GAN-generated faces; however, no definitive evidence can be identified.
The Cohen’s Kappa for the ratings is 0.85, indicating high agreement between the two
annotators. 54 profiles are coded as highly likely generated by GANs by both annotators,
and 113 are believed to be likely or highly likely generated by GANs by both annotators.
Profiles are considered not GAN-generated if at least one annotator believes so. Considering
that these profiles are selected from the 254,275 accounts in RandomTwitter and our method
might miss some positive cases, we estimate a lower bound on the prevalence of active
Twitter users using GAN-generated profiles to be between 0.021–0.044%. These accounts
were responsible for 0.022–0.053% of the tweets in RandomTwitter.
6
Discussion
In summary, we present a systematic analysis of fake accounts using GAN-generated faces
on Twitter. We show that they impersonate humans with realistic profiles and are involved
in various inauthentic activities, ranging from spamming and scamming to coordinated
amplification of messages. We also provide some heuristics that social media users can use
to identify the accounts they encounter.
Using a random sample, we further estimate the prevalence of such accounts on Twitter.
We first build a heuristic method exploiting the common feature of GAN-generated faces
to narrow down the potential GAN-generated profiles, then perform manual annotation
to identify those likely to be synthetic. Our results suggest that the percentage of active
Twitter accounts using GAN-generated profiles is between 0.021% and 0.044%. To put the
percentages into perspective, let us consider the total number of daily active Twitter users.
Pfeffer et al. (2023) collected all 375 million tweets posted on September 21, 2022, and found
40,199,195 active users. Using this number, we estimate that at least 8,537–17,864 daily
active accounts on Twitter use GAN-generated profiles.
Since the recall of our machine learning model is not 100%, and GAN-generated images
that are heavily stretched or tilted can evade our method, we might miss some positive
cases in our analysis. Also, the labeling criteria used in our annotation process are very
conservative—we only consider a profile positive when two annotators are both highly certain
about the label. Therefore, these estimates should be considered as a lower bound. In fact,
a recent report by Ricker et al. (2024) produced a similar but slightly higher estimate of
13

0.052% using different detection methods and excluding accounts with default profile images
in the denominator.
Our analysis and estimation have some limitations. We only include a few groups of
accounts in TwitterGAN, so their behavior patterns might not generalize to other cases.
Although we have proposed an effective method to capture more accounts using GAN-
generated profiles in the wild, further analysis is not feasible since Twitter ended free access
to its API. Also, since we only focus on one platform, the findings might not generalize to
other platforms, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, that have been reported to suffer from the
same issue. Unfortunately, limited access to their data makes it impossible for researchers
to study inauthentic accounts on those platforms. The Digital Services Act by the European
Union mandates that large social media platforms, including Twitter and Meta, provide data
access to researchers, bringing hope.7 Nonetheless, it remains uncertain whether researchers
can obtain the necessary data to expand on this research.
The heuristics and detection methods introduced in our study do not necessarily work
on other generative AI models. For example, diffusion models (Song and Ermon, 2019; Ho
et al., 2020) yield better image-generation outcomes than GANs (Dhariwal and Nichol,
2021; Yang et al., 2023).
This architecture has been adopted by many AI companies,
including OpenAI (Ramesh et al., 2022), Midjourney,8 and Stability AI,9 to create advanced
multimodal models. The images generated by these models are astonishing and free from the
issues of GAN-generated ones. Preliminary studies on detecting diffusion model-generated
images suggest that the techniques that work on GAN-generated images are no longer
effective (Ricker et al., 2022), requiring new detection paradigms.
Despite these limitations, our findings provide empirical evidence of the threats posed by
generative AI. We show that GAN-generated images have already been deployed at scale to
create large amounts of convincing fake accounts. Many more social media accounts likely
have already been using more advanced AI models to generate more realistic fake profiles.
We even uncover a group of accounts that also leverage ChatGPT to generate human-like
text and conduct realistic interactions (Yang and Menczer, 2024).
Combining these AI
models can lead to more convincing and realistic fake accounts on social media. In fact,
recent research suggests that advanced AI models enable the creation of autonomous agents
that can ingest multimodal inputs, process the data, reason, and then leverage various tools
to achieve their objectives (Xi et al., 2023). Despite the usefulness of these intelligent agents,
the risk of adversarial actors abusing them is high.
The looming threats call for new intervention strategies. First, we need effective models
that can detect AI-generated images. A recent study finds that assistance from such models
can improve people’s performance in identifying GAN-generated images (Boyd et al., 2023).
However, the research community might struggle to catch up as these cutting-edge genera-
tive models evolve quickly. Another approach requires regulations on the use of generative
AI models to create inauthentic accounts and content. For instance, social media platforms
can require an account to provide evidence of their authenticity before exposing them and
their content to a broader population (Menczer et al., 2023). Last but not least, we believe
that teaching social media users AI literacy is crucial. Understanding the capability and
weaknesses of state-of-the-art generative AI models can help social media users better de-
fend themselves from manipulation by AI-powered fake accounts. However, such initiatives
should be carried out carefully to avoid unintended consequences (Yan et al., 2023).
7https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_2413
8https://docs.midjourney.com
9https://stability.ai/stable-image
14
