1 
 
 
 
Contribution of case based reasoning (CBR) in 
the exploitation of return of experience  
“Application to accident scenarii  in rail transport” 
Ahmed MAALELA and Habib HADJ MABROUKB  
 
A   ISTLS  
Higher Institute of Transport and Logistics of Sousse 

B  INRETS 
National Institute for Research on Transport and Safety 
2 avenue du Général Malleret-Joinville, 94114 Arcueil Cedex - France Tél. : +33 612276612    

 
 
Abstract—The study is from a base of accident scenarii 
in rail transport (feedback) in order  to develop a tool to 
share build and sustain knowledge and safety and secondly 
to 
exploit 
the 
knowledge 
stored 
to 
prevent 
the 
reproduction of accidents / incidents. This tool should 
ultimately lead to the proposal of prevention and 
protection measures to minimize the risk level of a new 
transport system and thus to improve safety. The 
approach to achieving this goal largely  depends on the use 
of artificial intelligence techniques and rarely  the use of a 
method of automatic learning in order to develop a 
feasibility model of a software tool based on case based 
reasoning (CBR) to exploit stored knowledge in order to 
create  know-how that can help stimulate domain experts 
in the task of analysis, evaluation and certification of a new 
system.  
   
Index 
Terms— 
Accident 
scenario, 
Exploitation 
of 
knowledge Return of experience, Case based reasoning  
,Security. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
he importance of taking into consideration  
experience and lessons from the past are the basis 
for the establishment of a system of feedback (Rex) as 
one of the essential means to promote nature 
improving security. The experience feedback allows  
to learn from a lived  experience in order to prevent its 
reproduction by implementing preventive measures to 
minimize the occurrence of situations of insecurity 
and adequate remedial measures to mitigate the 
severity of the damage caused. The Rex is thus a 
dynamic process of collection, storage, analysis and 
data exploitation  for situations contrary to safety 
(accident or incident) [1]. However, until now, we do 
not know of  a tool capable of helping field experts 
develop a new system or an analog system. The work 
that exist in these days to operate the Rex are mainly 
based on analysis of accident statistics and are 
quantitative and therefore do not take into account the 
semantic aspect of knowledge that represents an 
undeniable richness. However, if one wishes to respect 
the national and European regulations in force [2, 
3,4,5,6], it seems essential to use the principle GAME 
(Overall 
At 
Least 
Equivalent)  
This principle requires that the development of a 
project must be at least equivalent in terms of security  
to the existing analog system that is known  safe. The 
use of content of Rex may just be beneficial and 
provides a partial answer to the principle GAME 
advocated by the new regulations. Our study is within  
this context and aims to develop an expert system to 
assist the operating of experience feedback. 
II. 
THE RETURN OF EXPERIENCE  
The first phase of the construction of the experience  
feedback focuses on the enumeration of all the 
anomalies encountered and the collection of maximum  
data. Data collection   relate primarily to the human 
operator, to his internal and external environment 
namely the technical system [7]. The second phase, 
analysis, fulfills the principle of "understand" and 
helps identify the mechanisms generating events 
affecting safety. The storage and archiving of data 
collected comes after analysis in a database and often 
through a tool. The next phase is the operation that 
consists in using and interpreting the results from 
T 

2 
 
 
 
different information which main objective is to 
extract the truly predictive event , to consider isolated 
cases and to predict or  imagine future scenarii of 
accidents or events not taken into account. Finally the 
phase of recommendations is to clarify and identify 
the measures of prevention and protection appropriate 
to limit the reproduction of an event of insecurity. It is 
better to take advantage of the lessons of experience to 
improve safety. 
 
 
Fig 1. Articulation of the various stages of progress of 
Rex [1] 
It is commonly accepted that feedback is of 
undeniable interest in reducing the level of risk and 
therefore in improving safety, and to accomplish this 
objective, data and knowledge from the Rex should be 
organized and well accounted for in the next phases of 
operation 
and 
recommendation. 
Research 
is 
increasingly experienced in process improvement 
REX, however, the majority of this work will explore 
the use of terminologies and formalisms with 
conventional tools. Little attention is given to the 
downstream stages of that particular operation. REX 
approach is usually limited to generating  quantitative 
statistical reports on railway accidents. It is therefore 
for us to propose a way to exploit this knowledge in a 
qualitative way to prevent such scenarii from recurring 
in 
the 
future. 
The approach to give a partial answer depends largely 
on the use of artificial intelligence techniques , 
including automatic learning systems. 
III. 
GENERALITIES ON LEARNING  
A HUMAN LEARNING AND AUTOMATIC-
LEARNING    
 
The ability to learn appears to be an essential 
component of the definition of intelligence which all 
human beings have the privilege of Indeed, man is 
pre-programmed to learn and he cannot do anything  
without memoring what he does, sometimes  against 
his will. The newborn who has already attitudes and 
reflexes is fundamentally curious. Man, cannot help  
pursue information, all his life cannot help turne his 
eyes towards something that  moves, cannot help to 
stretching his ear to an unusual sound [8]. The 
computer is a priori devoid of such a research and 
general learning program. In addition, methods and 
approaches to research currently developed through 
machine learning cannot, in any circumstances, 
replace the mechanisms of learning and intelligent 
behavior that men are endowed with  indeed, most 
results obtained so far for machine learning are 
based on very simplistic assumptions compared to 
the actual mechanisms of human learning.  
B. THE PURPOSE OF AUTOMATIC-LEARNING  
 
The emergence and development of industrial-based 
systems require knowledge of design tools to aid 
learning, including learning mechanisms. Learning 
indeed has created  a growing interest in recent 
years, as evidenced proved by the impressive 
number of publications and conference which is the 
subject. This discipline, regarded as a promising 
solution to aid learning, including attempts to 
answer some questions [9]: how to represent an 
explicit body of knowledge, how to manage, 
enhanced, modify? According to GANASCIA [10], 
machine learning is defined by a double objective: 
an 
objective 
scientific 
: 
understanding 
and 
mechanizing the phenomena of evolution in time 
and the adaptability of reasoning and a practical 
objective 
: 
the 
automatically 
acquisition 
of  
knowledge 
bases 
from 
examples.  
 
Indeed, there is so much different  knowledge to get 
that the ideal should be  an automatic  system learns 
about himself from examples rather than to receive 
the human one by one. Learning can be defined by 
the performance improvement with experience. In 
fact, according to GANASCIA / 90 / [11], learning 
is intimately linked to the generalization: learning 
means passing a series of situations experienced in a 
reusable 
knowledge 
in 
similar 
situations.  
 
In summary, learning is a very general term that 
describes the process by which the human or the 
machine can increase his knowledge. Learning is 
therefore reasoning, discovering analogies and 
similarities, generalization or particularization of 
experience, built on its past mistakes and failures for 
subsequent reasoning. The new findings are used to 
solve new problems, accomplish a new task or 
increase performance in the achievement of an 

3 
 
 
 
existing task, to explain a situation or to predict 
behavior. The fields of human activity are 
increasingly complex and involve amounts of 
information that synthesize the human mind with 
difficulty. Extracting  from this mass of data relevant 
and useful knowledge for explanatory purposes or 
decision is the main objective of machine learning. 
[12]  
 
C. VARIOUS MODES OF REASONING IN 
LEARNING  
 
The machine learning mechanism is based on four 
modes of reasoning or inference: induction, 
deduction, abduction and analogy. The purpose of 
this paragraph is to define these four terms in 
reference to definitions from work by learning and 
artificial intelligence. GRUNDSTEIN [13] defines 
these 
terms 
through 
an 
example:  
 
The deduction  proceeds of a rule and a fact to get 
results:  
Rule: All beans from this bag are white  
      Fact: These beans are from this bag  
      Result: These beans are white.  
 
Induction leads to a rule by starting with a fact and 
a result:  
 
Fact: These beans are from this bag  
Result: These beans are white  
Rules: All beans from this bag are white  
 
Abduction leads to the fact starting from the a rule 
and a result:  
 
Rule: All beans from this bag are white  
Result: 
These 
beans 
are 
white  
Fact: 
These 
beans 
are 
from 
this 
bag.  
 
• Deduction: From A and A => B is "offset" B  
• Abduction: from B and A => B, on "abduit" A  
• Induction: from A (z) => B and A (t) => B is 
"induced" 
A 
(x) 
=> 
B  
 
The analogy is used in practice to understand or 
interpret new situations from previous situations 
already stored. Analogy combines the notion of 
similarity (or resemblance) and the notion of 
causation (Figure 1). More formally, one has a 
situation analogous source of the form (A, B) and a 
target position of the form (A ', B'). There are 
relations of similarity (and dissimilarity) between A 
and A ', respectively B and B', and dependent 
relationships, generally causal nature between A and 
B, 
respectively 
A 
'and 
B'.  
D. 
THE 
CASE 
BASED 
REASONING: 
CBR 
 
The Case Based Reasoning is a type of reasoning in 
AI in the field of automatic learning. Case based 
reasoning means remembering past situations similar 
to the current situation and by these situations to 
help resolve the current situation. The case based 
reasoning (CBR) is a form of reasoning by analogy.. 
[18] The analogy searches for  cause and effect 
relation in past situations and transfer  to the current 
situation  the similarities to between then past 
situations as well as the current situation. The case 
based reasoning research only look for  similarities 
or proximity relations between past situations and 
the current situation. The C.B.R. considers reasoning 
as a process of remembering a small set of practical 
situations: the cases, it bases its decisions on the 
comparison of the new situation (target cases) with 
the old (reference cases). The general principle of 
CBR is to treat a new problem (target case) by 
remembering similar past experiences (base case). 
This type of reasoning rests on the assumption that if 
a past experience and new circumstances are 
sufficiently 
similar, 
then 
everything 
can 
be 
explained or applied to past experience (base case) 
and remains valid when applied to the new situation 
which represents the new problem to solve. From a 
very global view, the CBR uses a basis of 
experience or case, a mechanism for searching and 
retrieving similar cases and a adaptation mechanism 
and evaluation solutions of selected   cases 
emanating in order to  solve the specified problem 
(Figure 2).  
 
 
Fig. 2 cycle case based reasoning (CBR) [8] 

4 
 
 
 
 
 Generally, the reasoning cycle consists of seven main 
steps, detailed below: 
  
1) The development of an index, some indexes are 
assigned to the "new problem (target case) to 
characterize it. These indexes are formed from the 
information we extract from the new problem. 
They are used to find similar cases. 
2) The case-finding (or remembering): Indexes and 
matching rules are used to try to find a previous 
case (source case) similar to the current problem 
(target case). 
3) Adaptation: the old solution is modified to be 
adapted to the new situation. The result is a 
solution to the new problem again. 
4) 
The test: the solution is tested to determine its 
suitability to the problem. 
5) Memorization: If the proposed solution is 
successful, it incorporates the new case (with the 
features of the proposed solution) in memory of 
the event. It is this stage of learning that can enrich 
the knowledge of the system. 
6) The explanation: if the solution fails, we try to 
explain it by looking for causes of failure. 
7) Correction: Knowing the cause or causes of 
failure, the solution is corrected before repeating 
the test. 
The work of [Slade 91], [Harmon 91], [Rougegrez 
93], [Kolodner 89, 91, 92, 93], [Beauboucher 93], 
[Mott 
93]  
[Pinson 93], [Smail 93] and [Lieber 93] trace a fairly 
complete development of research in the field of case 
based 
reasonings.  
 
 
Started ,we have demonstrated that this particular 
process Rex suffers from lack of adequate and 
relevant tools to exploit all the knowledge obtained.  
Our study, is in this context,  and aims to develop a 
model of feasibility based on case based reasoning to 
tackle this problem. The developed tool is presented 
below.  
 
IV. FEASIBILITY OF MODEL BASED ON THE 
ARGUMENT FROM CASE 
  
A. THE PROPOSED APPROACH:  
The approach taken to develop this tool involves two 
major activities:  
- To demonstrate the feasibility and merits of our 
approach, we used a database that includes 70 accident 
scenarii work of acquiring knowledge INRETS 
(related to the problem of collision) [14]  
 
- To exploit the knowledge stored in having recourse 
to case based reasoning in order to identify and deduct 
know-how that can help stimulate domain experts to 
propose solutions or preventive measures and / or 
protection 
Before presenting the general architecture of the 
developed  model, we should   define what is meant 
 by an accident scenario.  
 
B. CHARACTERIZATION OF AN ACCIDENT 
SCENARIO 
 An accident scenario describes a combination of 
circumstances that can lead to a undesirable or even 
dangerous situation. It is characterized by a context 
and a set of events and settings [15,16]. The 
acquisition of knowledge has led to the shaping of a 
particular model based on the identification of eight 
parameters describing an accident scenario (Figure 
3). 
 
Fig.3: Characteristic parameters of an accident 
scenario [15,16] 
 
C. FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE 
MODEL 
OF 
THE 
DEVELOPED 
TOOL 
 
Very briefly, the developed model is built on the 3 
following 
modules: 

5 
 
 
 
• A database of accident scenarii representing 
historical 
knowledge 
from 
Rex. 
• A man-machine interface for archiving, editing and 
entering 
new 
scenarii 
for 
evaluation. 
• A module that represents the process of case based 
reasoning. 
Fig. 4 Functional architecture of the developed model 
 
In order to show the feasibility of the developed tool, 
it seems wise to use a sample application that shows 
the progress of an example of use.  
D. EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION (USAGE):  
Using the developed model requires the passage 
through the 4 phases 
 -Entering a new target case  
-Extraction of the most similar cases 
-Adaptation and evaluation of scenarii extracts  
- Learning and enriching of the database  
a. SEIZURE OF A NEW TARGET EVENT 
Once we have built all accident scenarii which make 
our base of experiences, we must now begin the cycle 
of case based reasoning (CBR) by entering a new 
target case (unsolved problems) the  interface Figure 
5.  
   
 
 
Fig.5 Entering a new target case 
 
b. EXTRACTION OF THE MOST SIMILAR CASES:  
 
Before you start your search for the most similar case 
from the case base (base of experience), you can 
adjust the search by editing the weight of each 
attribute of a script. The tool proposes a similarity 
measure as the compensatory model [17]. This 
similarity measure is called "overall similarity". The 
similarity of case is a percentage calculated from the 
weight of each descriptor and all similarity measures 
performed  descriptor by  descriptor. Thus, if a case 
has 3  descriptors of which 2 are 100% similar to the 
C. 
with the target case and the third not at all (0%), then 
C will be similar with the target case to 66% if all the 
descriptors are the same weight : ((100 × weight 
descriptor 1 + 100 × weight descriptor 2 + 0 × weight 
descriptor 3) / 3 = 66). The user can intervene in 
several ways to calculate the similarity between two 
attributes. It may specify the descriptors that should 
not be taken into account when calculating. It can give 
a weight vector to indicate the relative importance of a 
descriptor against other by clicking the button 
configuration known weights Figure 5. In our 
example, we chose to extract only the 5 most similar 
cases; 
below 
Figure 
6  

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 6: Setting weights for the descriptors of an a 
scenario accident 
   
Fig. 7: Extraction of the five most similar cases  
 
This step allows to find the historical accident 
scenario (event sources) closest to the scenario to the 
considered (target case). The screen shown in Figure 7 
shows, for our example, the results of the research for 
similar cases. 
 The target case is recalled in the right column while 
the left column offers the first 5 cases and more like 
the middle column can show a similar case (here the 
case 
2).  
   
 
Fig. 8: Selection of cases retrieved for adaptation  
 
 
c. ADAPTATION AND EVALUATION OF SCENARII 
EXTRACTS:  
 
Our tool does not propose coping strategies, this is left 
to the user. With the screen shown in Figure 9. The user 
can see the value taken by attribute concept "solution 
adopted in each case similar and an select his self to 
provide value to the attribute" concept "for the target 
case . The user can also use the technique of the vote. In 
our example, the tool proposes a single value for the 
attribute 'solution adopted ": Check the actual docking. 
Thus, the domain expert can adjust if the "Check the 
actual docking" as a solution to the problem or he can 
choose a solution from the base up and in extreme cases 
he may propose a new solution to solve the problem and 
simultaneously 
enrich 
the 
basic 
solutions.  

7 
 
 
 
   
 
Figure 9: Adaptation and decision of the expert  
 
d. LEARNING AND ENRICHMENT OF THE BASE:  
This final step in upgrading is to make learning by adding 
the missing attributes like number, title and class of cases 
suitable target in the base case (scenario historical 
accidents). In this learning tool  is incremental because the 
new case will be integrated into the case database sources 
for 
future 
use. 
see 
Figure 
10. 
 
 
Fig.10: Learning and enrichment of the database  
 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
 This paper is to show the contribution of case based 
reasoning (CBR) to exploit the experience  feedback. 
This approach has an undeniable and original interest 
because this is , in our opinion , the first research on 
exploitation of knowledge in this field of safety. In 
addition the interest of this work lies not only in terms 
of the acquisition, representation  of accident scenarii 
but also at the  level of knowledge exploitation of 
accident scenario in order to  help and assist experts in 
their crucial task of analysis and evaluation studies of 
system 
security.  
However, this tool requires some improvements and 
extensions. These improvements include the choice of 
evaluation criteria and the accuracy of results; namely 
, the treatment of missing values, improved adopted 
inference strategies and improvement and validation 
of formalism representation of accident scenarii . 
Indeed, this model can be improved and  is still only a 
working basis for the definition of a generic model 
acceptable to all actors involved in the development of 
guided transport systems. I would like to thank all 
members of the ACT7 group of Tunisian researchers 
in the Transport Safety chaired by Professor HADJ 
MABROUK .
