Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models
Zixiang Chen * 1 Yihe Deng * 1 Huizhuo Yuan * 1 Kaixuan Ji 1 Quanquan Gu 1
Abstract
Harnessing the power of human-annotated data
through Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is pivotal
for advancing Large Language Models (LLMs).
In this paper, we delve into the prospect of grow-
ing a strong LLM out of a weak one without the
need for acquiring additional human-annotated
data.
We propose a new fine-tuning method
called Self-Play fIne-tuNing (SPIN), which starts
from a supervised fine-tuned model. At the heart
of SPIN lies a self-play mechanism, where the
LLM refines its capability by playing against in-
stances of itself.
More specifically, the LLM
generates its own training data from its previ-
ous iterations, refining its policy by discerning
these self-generated responses from those ob-
tained from human-annotated data. Our method
progressively elevates the LLM from a nascent
model to a formidable one, unlocking the full po-
tential of human-annotated demonstration data
for SFT. Theoretically, we prove that the global
optimum to the training objective function of our
method is achieved only when the LLM policy
aligns with the target data distribution. Empiri-
cally, we evaluate our method on several bench-
mark datasets including the HuggingFace Open
LLM Leaderboard, MT-Bench, and datasets from
Big-Bench. Our results show that SPIN can sig-
nificantly improve the LLM’s performance across
a variety of benchmarks and even outperform
models trained through direct preference opti-
mization (DPO) supplemented with extra GPT-4
preference data. This sheds light on the promise
of self-play, enabling the achievement of human-
level performance in LLMs without the need
for expert opponents.
Codes are available at
https://github.com/uclaml/SPIN.
*Equal contribution 1Department of Computer Science, Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have began a ground-
breaking era in artificial general intelligence (AGI), demon-
strating extraordinary capabilities across a wide range of
domains that require intricate reasoning and specialized
knowledge. These models excel in areas such as math-
ematical reasoning/problem solving (Cobbe et al., 2021;
Wei et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022), code genera-
tion/programming (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022), text generation (Bubeck et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023), summarization and creative
writing, among others. A significant advancement in LLMs
is the post-pre-training alignment with the more desirable
behaviors (Mishra et al., 2021; Victor et al., 2022; Chung
et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022), a process often reliant
on the costly human-annotated data. Typical alignment
methods include Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Tunstall et al., 2023a) based on human demon-
strations, and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-
back (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a) based on human
preferences.
All the aforementioned alignment methods require a sub-
stantial volume of human annotated data. Therefore, there
is increasing interest in developing fine-tuning methods that
can effectively utilize human data, thereby streamlining the
alignment process. This motivates us to study fine-tuning
LLMs without the need for additional human-annotated data
beyond the fine-tuning dataset. Our study is also related to
the broader goal of converting weak models to strong mod-
els without the requirement for extra training data, which
is of central interest in machine learning that can be traced
back to the boosting algorithms (Kearns & Valiant, 1994;
Schapire, 1990; Freund, 1995; Freund & Schapire, 1997).
The self-training algorithm (Vapnik, 1999; Grandvalet &
Bengio, 2004; Lee, 2013) has also been proved to be able to
convert weak learners to strong learners in mixture models
without the need for additional labeled data (Frei et al., 2022;
Kou et al., 2022). However, the pursuit of autonomously
enhancing a weak LLM without external guidance is both
intriguing and understudied. This raises the following ques-
tion:
1
arXiv:2401.01335v3  [cs.LG]  14 Jun 2024

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
Can we empower a weak LLM to improve itself without
acquiring additional human annotated data?
In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively. Inspired
by the success of self-play mechanisms (Samuel, 2000) in
games, exemplified by AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017b),
AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017a), with historical roots traced
back to TD-Gammon (Tesauro et al., 1995), we propose to
convert a weak LLM to a strong one through the lens of
self-play, where the model is enhanced by playing against
itself without requiring any direct supervision. In particu-
lar, we propose a novel fine-tuning method called Self-Play
fIne-tuNing (SPIN), which begins from a supervised fine-
tuned model. SPIN allows the LLM to engage in self-play,
eliminating the need for an expert annotator such as a hu-
man or more advanced LLMs like GPT-4. In detail, with
the LLM from previous iteration t denoted by pθt, we em-
ploy it to generate responses y′ to the prompts x in the
human-annotated SFT dataset. The subsequent objective
is to find a new LLM pθt+1, capable of distinguishing the
responses y′ generated by pθt from the responses y gener-
ated by humans. This process can be seen as a two-player
game: the main player, or the new LLM pθt+1, seeks to dis-
cern between the responses of the opponent player pθt and
human-generated responses, while the opponent, or the old
LLM pθt, generates responses as similar as possible to those
in the human-annotated SFT dataset. The new LLM pθt+1 is
obtained by fine-tuning the old one pθt to prefer responses
from pdata over pθt, resulting in a distribution pθt+1 that
is more aligned with pdata. In the next iteration, the newly
obtained LLM pθt+1 becomes the opponent for response
generation, with the self-play process aiming for the LLM
to eventually converge to pθ∗= pdata, so that the strongest
possible LLM can no longer differentiate the responses gen-
erated by its previous version and those generated by the
human.
Interestingly, our method exhibits similarity with the re-
cently introduced direct preference optimization (DPO)
method (Rafailov et al., 2023), with the notable distinc-
tion being the self-play nature of our method.
Conse-
quently, our approach stands out by eliminating the need
for extra human preference data, a requirement present in
the DPO method. Additionally, the self-play mechanism
in our method resembles the idea of generative adversar-
ial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky
et al., 2017), albeit that both the discriminator (main player)
and the generator (the opponent) in our method are in-
stances of the same LLM from different iterations. The-
oretically, we prove that our method converges when the
distribution of the LLM is identical to the target data dis-
tribution, i.e., pθt = pdata. Our experimental results on
zephyr-7b-sft-full (Tunstall et al., 2023a), a fine-
tuned LLM based on Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023), show
that while continued training using SFT on its own SFT
dataset Ultrachat200k (Ding et al., 2023) reaches a perfor-
mance plateau or even diminished evaluation scores, our
method consistently improves zephyr-7b-sft-full
across successive iterations while leveraging only a 50k sub-
set of Ultrachat200k dataset. Ultimately, SPIN effectively
improves the base model’s average score from 58.14 to
63.16 on the HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard (Beech-
ing et al., 2023) with remarkable 10%+ improvement in
scores on GSM8k and TruthfulQA, and from 5.94 to 6.78
on MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023). Notably, SPIN achieves
results that are even comparable to models trained on ad-
ditional 62k preference dataset (Tunstall et al., 2023a) on
Open LLM leaderboard and MT-Bench.
Concurrent to our work, Singh et al. (2023) proposed the
use of synthetic data with binary feedback in self-training,
reducing the reliance on human data. In contrast, our ap-
proach eliminates the need for additional binary feedback
from humans or an extra reward model thanks to the self-
play mechanism. Additionally, Burns et al. (2023) employed
a weak LLM model as the guidance to train stronger LLMs
in a fashion of weak-to-strong generation. Unlike Burns
et al. (2023), which necessitates both a weak supervisor and
a strong model, our SPIN operates effectively with a single
LLM.
Notation. We use lowercase letters and lowercase bold-
face letters to denote scalars and vectors, respectively. We
use [N] to denote the index set {1, . . . , N}. In the func-
tion space, let F be the function class. The symbol qdata
designates the target data distribution, while p represents
the conditional probability of LLM’s response (i.e., LLM
policy).
2
Related Work
Self-Play. Self-play (Samuel, 1959; Tesauro et al., 1995),
where the algorithm learns by playing against itself, has
gained notable attention due to its effectiveness in multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL). This method in-
volves agents engaging in interactions with copies of them-
selves, enabling an increasing level of challenge and com-
plexity within the learning environment. A fundamental
work in the field of self-play is AlphaGo Zero (Silver
et al., 2017b), which demonstrated exceptional performance
against human players using a self-play learning scheme.
Subsequent research has expanded upon the concept of
self-play, exploring various adaptations and implementa-
tions (Anthony et al., 2017; Lanctot et al., 2017; Bansal
et al., 2018; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2018; Muller et al., 2019;
Vinyals et al., 2019). Our method takes the self-play ap-
proach akin to AlphaGo Zero, which can convert a weak
model to a strong one without additional human-annotated
data. While the effectiveness of self-play in MARL is well-
established, to our knowledge, our work is the first to apply
2

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
this approach to the enhancement of LLMs.
Synthetic Data for LLMs. In the context of supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) of LLMs, human-crafted data has proven
to be a remarkably effective source that enhances the perfor-
mance of LLMs on tasks such as code generation (Roziere
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) and mathematical reason-
ing (Yuan et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). While human data
typically exhibits high quality, acquiring sufficient amount
of such data poses a challenge in cost. In light of this con-
sideration, the use of synthetic data has become increasingly
popular and considered as a proxy for human data. This ap-
proach primarily leverages advanced LLMs such as the GPT
series (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI,
2023) as the guidance to generate high-quality data (Josi-
foski et al., 2023; Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023). Recent research has also highlighted the
rephrasing capability of LLMs in prompting for better LLM
response (Deng et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2023) as well
as augmenting synthetic data for more effective SFT (Yu
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). In contrast to prior studies
that utilized more advanced models for synthetic data gener-
ation when pre-training or fine-tuning a target model, our
approach directly generates synthetic data from the target
model itself.
3
Problem Setting and Preliminaries
We consider a Large Language Model (LLM) parameter-
ized by θ and denoted by pθ.
The model takes as in-
put a sequence x = [x1, . . . , xn], commonly referred to
as the prompt, to generate the corresponding response
y = [y1, . . . , ym]. The response y is therefore considered
as a sample from the conditional probability distribution
pθ(·|x). In LLMs, xi and yj represent individual tokens
from a predetermined vocabulary within the sequences x
and y, respectively. The auto-regressive model pθ generates
tokens sequentially for a given position, leveraging only the
sequence of previously generated tokens. This model there-
fore constitutes a Markov process, where the conditional
probability distribution pθ(y|x) can be expressed through a
decomposition as follows:
pθ(y|x) =
m
Y
j=1
pθ(yj|x, y<j),
where y<1 is null and y<j = [y1, . . . , yj−1] for j =
2, . . . , m. In the following, we review two major fine-tuning
methods for LLMs: supervised fine-tuning and reinforce-
ment learning (RL) fine-tuning.
3.1
Supervised Fine-Tuning
Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is employed to tailor a pre-
trained LLM to specific downstream tasks, leveraging rel-
atively smaller dataset of labeled examples in comparison
to the large-scale pre-training data (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Yu et al., 2023). In this context, we consider a specific
task where the prompts, denoted by x, are derived from
a specified distribution q(·). The notation pdata(·|x) then
represents the probability distribution of the associated high-
quality responses y from the training data. Consequently,
SFT involves training the LLM to minimize the following
negative log-likelihood loss associated with these distribu-
tions,
LSFT(θ) = −Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata(·|x)
h
log pθ
 y|x
i
.
(3.1)
It should be noted that excluding x ∼q(·) from the expecta-
tion term yields the typical cross-entropy loss, expressed as
−Ey∼pdata(·|x)[log pθ(y|x)]. LSFT(θ) attains its minimum
when the model’s predictive distribution pθ(y|x) aligns
perfectly with the distribution of the labeled high-quality
responses pdata(y|x).
Consequently, the LLM after SFT is anticipated to generate
responses that closely resemble those from pdata(y|x). This
procedure is therefore expected to significantly enhance the
model’s performance in generating appropriate responses
for a specific task.
3.2
RL Fine-Tuning
RL fine-tuning (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022a;
Gao et al., 2023a) offers another method for enhancing the
specific capabilities of general-purpose pre-trained models.
Typically, RL fine-tuning is employed subsequent to SFT
to achieve improved alignment for LLMs (Tunstall et al.,
2023a).
For a given sequence pair (x, y), RL fine-tuning necessitates
a deterministic reward function r(x, y). The higher the
reward r(x, y), the better the response y is to the given
prompt x. The objective of the RL fine-tuning process is
then to maximize the following objective function:
LRL(θ) = Ex∼q(·),y∼pθ(·|x)[r(x, y)]
−λEx∼q(·)KL
 pθ(·|x)||pref(·|x)

,
where the Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization enforces
the new model pθ to be close to the reference model pref,
and λ > 0 is the regularization parameter to control the
deviation of the new model pθ from the reference model
pref. In practice, the reference model pref is often initialized
as the supervised fine-tuned model. The inclusion of KL
regularization is vital for preventing excessive deviation
from the reference model, which in turn reduces the risk of
mode collapse.
Meanwhile, the primary challenge in RL fine-tuning lies
in finding a good reward function. Typically, this function
requires training on a preference dataset. The compila-
tion of such a dataset demands significant resources, often
3

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
involving comprehensive evaluations either by human an-
notators, i.e., reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022a) or strong
AI agents, i.e., reinforcement learning from AI feedback
(RLAIF) (Bai et al., 2022b).
4
Method
In this section, we introduce a new fine-tuning method for
enhancing the performance of LLMs without relying on
additional human or AI feedback. Consider a high-quality
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) dataset SSFT = {(x, y)}n
i=1,
which are sampled from the marginal distribution q(x) and
pdata(y|x). Given a supervised fine-tuned LLM pθ0, further
application of the SFT approach in (3.1) with SSFT will be
ineffective and potentially lead to worse performance. In
addition, without human and/or AI feedback, it becomes
infeasible to acquire a preference dataset for RL fine-tuning
(e.g., RLHF and RLAIF). This hinders the application of
RL fine-tuning techniques.
We evaluate pθ0 against SSFT, where pθ0 is the LLM
achieved by SFT using (3.1). We notice a persistent quality
gap between the groundtruth response y from SSFT and the
LLM-generated response y′ ∼pθ(·|x) (refer to Figure 1).
This disparity indicates that there is still room for improve-
ment over pθ0. Therefore, we propose to use the synthetic
data generated by the LLM to enhance LLM’s performance
starting from pθ0 iteratively.
4.1
Self-Play Fine-Tuning (SPIN)
Let us consider a two-player game, where the main player’s
objective is to distinguish the responses generated by the
LLM and those generated by the human. Meanwhile, the
opponent’s role is to generate responses that are indistin-
guishable from the human’s responses. The core of our
method is the self-play mechanism, where both the main
player and the opponent are the same LLM, but from dif-
ferent iterations. More specifically, the opponent is the old
LLM from the previous iteration, and the main player is the
new LLM to be learned in the current iteration.
In iteration t+1, the opponent is the LLM from the previous
iteration, denoted by pθt, which generates responses y′ for
those prompts x in the SFT dataset according to pθt(·|x).
Our method, therefore, consists of the following two steps at
iteration t+1: (1) training the main player, and (2) updating
the opponent player.
Training the Main Player. We begin with illustrating how
we expect a main player is trained to distinguish LLM re-
sponses from human responses. Motivated by integral prob-
ability metric (IPM) (Müller, 1997), we formulate our ob-
jective function such that the main player ft+1 maximizes
the expected value gap between the target data distribution
pdata and the opponent player’s distribution pθt:
ft+1 = argmax
f∈Ft
E

f(x, y) −f(x, y′)

,
(4.1)
where the expectation is computed over the distributions
x ∼q(·), y ∼pdata(·|x), y′ ∼pθt(·|x), and Ft is a se-
quence of highly expressive function classes that we will
determine in later deduction. The subscript t in Ft is due
to that the function class is dependent on pθt. Given such a
ft+1 and a response sequence y to the prompt x, the value
of ft+1(x, y) reflects the main player’s degree of belief that
y originates from pdata rather than pθt. Ideally, the main
player ft+1 should yield a high value when y ∼pdata(·|x)
and a low value when y′ ∼pθt(·|x), where pθt is the op-
ponent’s distribution. Instead of solving (4.1), we can also
solve the following more general optimization problem,
ft+1 = argmin
f∈Ft
E

ℓ
 f(x, y) −f(x, y′)

,
(4.2)
where the expectation is computed over the distribution
x ∼q(·), y ∼pdata(·|x), y′ ∼pθt(·|x), and ℓ(·) is a loss
function that is both monotonically decreasing and convex.
For example, a linear loss function ℓ(t) = −t reduces (4.2)
to the minimization version of (4.1). However, the use of
a linear loss function results in an unbounded objective
value, which, during continuous training, leads to a negative
infinite value of f(x, y′) on the opponent player’s responses.
Therefore, in our work, we choose the logistic loss function
ℓ(t) := log(1+exp(−t)) for its non-negativity, smoothness,
and exponentially decaying tail as t →∞. Such a choice
of loss function aids in preventing the excessive growth in
the absolute value of f.
Updating the Opponent Player. Previously we have dis-
cussed the training of ft+1 given the opponent player’s
distribution pθt. Now suppose we have optimized our main
player ft+1 that can distinguish pdata from pθt, within a cer-
tain function class Ft, we elaborate how we get parameter
θt+1 of the opponent player. Specifically, when presented
with two responses y and y′ to the same prompt x, ft+1
assesses the values ft+1(x, y) and ft+1(x, y′). It then in-
fers that the response with the higher value is from the real
data distribution pdata and the response with lower value
is attributed to the LLM pθt. Subsequently, the objective
of the opponent player is to find a better LLM that gener-
ates responses indistinguishable from pdata for the main
player. This is achieved by maximizing the expected value
Ex∼q(·),y∼p(·|x)[ft+1(x, y)]. In addition, to prevent exces-
sive deviation of pθt+1 from pθt and stabilize the self-play,
we incorporate a Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization term.
Putting these together gives rise to the following optimiza-
tion problem:
argmax
p
Ex∼q(·),y∼p(·|x)[ft+1(x, y)]
4

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
In Southampton, what is the most popular form of 
transportation for commuters?
I don't have access to current data. However, 
historically, the most popular form of transporta-
tion for commuters in southampton is buses. The 
city also has a good network of trains and taxis. 
In Southampton, what is the most popular form of 
transportation for commuters?
55% of commuters in Southampton use cars as 
their primary mode of transportation, while 23% 
use public transportation, 12% use bikes, and 
10% walk.
Chosen: ground truth completion

I do not have access to the latest updates and statistics of southampton. However, based on 
previous reports, the most popular form of transportation for commuters in southampton is 
the public transport network, which includes buses, trains, and ferries. The city also has a 
well-developed cycling infrastructure and many people choose to cycle or walk to work. 
Additionally, private cars and taxis are also commonly used for commuting.

Figure 1. Example of ground truth completion compared to the fine-tuned model generation at iteration 0 and 1. We can observe that
the model generation at iteration 0, although fluent, incorrectly quantifies transportation preferences with specific percentages that are
potentially hallucinations. The model generation at iteration 1 provides a qualitative summary of the transportation forms at Southampton
without specific percentage, aligning more closely with the ground truth while adding more details.
−λEx∼q(·)KL
 p(·|x)||pθt(·|x)

,
(4.3)
where λ > 0 is the regularization parameter. Notably, (4.3)
has a closed-form solution bp(·|x):
bp(y|x) ∝pθt(y|x) exp
 λ−1ft+1(x, y)

.
(4.4)
It is worth noting that bp(·|x) is not guaranteed to be belong
to the LLM space {pθ(·|x)|θ ∈Θ}. Since we hope that the
closed-form solution bp in the probability space can be real-
ized by an LLM with parameter θ, i.e., pθ(y|x) = bp(y|x),
solving for pθ(y|x)
∝
pθt(y|x) exp
 λ−1ft+1(x, y)

gives ft+1(x, y) = λ · log pθ(·|x)
pθt(·|x). This suggests the fol-
lowing function class Ft for ft+1:
Ft =

λ · log pθ(y|x)
pθt(y|x)
θ ∈Θ

,
(4.5)
where Θ is the parameter space of LLMs being considered.
Given the choice of Ft in (4.5), optimizing (4.2) gives ft+1
parameterized by θt+1 in the following form:
ft+1(x, y) = λ · log pθt+1(y|x)
pθt(y|x) .
(4.6)
Substituting (4.6) into (4.4) yields bp(y|x) = pθt+1(y|x). In
other words, θt+1 learned from (4.2) is exactly the LLM
parameter for our ideal opponent selection.
End-to-end Training Objective. We integrate the previ-
ously discussed two steps into a single end-to-end train-
ing objective with an update rule of θt+1. Specifically,
plugging (4.5) into (4.2) arrives at the update rule θt+1 =
argminθ∈Θ LSPIN(θ, θt), where LSPIN is the training ob-
jective defined as follows
LSPIN = E

ℓ

λ log pθ(y|x)
pθt(y|x) −λ log pθ(y′|x)
pθt(y′|x)

,
(4.7)
where the expectation is computed over the distribution x ∼
q(·), y ∼pdata(·|x), y′ ∼pθt(·|x). We summarize the
iterative self-play process of our method SPIN as follows,
. . .
→
pθt(·|x)
| {z }
Opponent Player at t
→
λ · log pθt+1(·|x)
pθt(·|x)
|
{z
}
Main Player at t + 1
→
pθt+1(·|x)
|
{z
}
Opponent Player at t + 1
→
. . .
Namely, the opponent player chosen from the previous it-
eration t is employed to train the main player at iteration
t+1, resulting in the LLM parameterized by θt+1. Then we
determine the next opponent player at iteration t + 1 by di-
rectly copying the LLM parameter θt+1, which is then used
in training the main player at iteration t + 2. The detailed
algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.
4.2
Comparison between SPIN and DPO
In Section 4.1, we propose Self-Play Fine-Tuning (SPIN)
with an end-to-end training objective (4.7) for each iter-
ation. (4.7) bears resemblance to direct preference opti-
mization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) for RL fine-tuning.
However, SPIN and DPO are fundamentally different.
DPO is based on the Bradley-Terry (BT) model: p(y1 ≻
y2|x) =
exp(r∗(x,y1))
exp(r∗(x,y1))+exp(r∗(x,y2)), and maximizes the
5

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
Algorithm 1 Self-Play Fine-Tuning (SPIN)
Input: {(xi, yi)}i∈[N]: SFT Dataset, pθ0: LLM with
parameter θ0, T: Number of iterations.
for t = 0, . . . , T −1 do
for i = 1, . . . N do
Generate synthetic data y′
i ∼pθt(·|xi).
end for
Update θt+1 = argminθ∈Θ
P
i∈[N] ℓ

λ log pθ(yi|xi)
pθt(yi|xi)−
λ log pθ(y′
i|xi)
pθt(y′
i|xi)

.
end for
Output: θT .
log-likelihood of p(y1 ≻y2|x) by direct policy optimiza-
tion without explicit reward estimation. In contrast, SPIN
relies on maximizing the IPM to compete with an increas-
ingly stronger version of itself. More detailed comparisons
are highlighted as follows:
1. DPO does not inherently lead to iterative training. More
specifically, DPO aims to match the preference prob-
ability p(y1 ≻y2|x) induced from its reward model
with the data distribution pdata(y1 ≻y2|x) in a single
iteration. On the contrary, SPIN’s self-play mechanism
naturally leads to an iterative training procedure. SPIN
iteratively refines its generation distribution pθ(y|x) to
match the target distribution pdata(y|x) across iterations.
2. SPIN only requires the SFT dataset, represented by pairs
(x, y). In contrast, DPO necessitates a preference dataset,
represented by (x, yw, yl), where yw and yl denote the
winner (chosen) and loser (rejected) responses, respec-
tively. Moreover, SPIN can be applied between SFT and
RL fine-tuning.
3. In SPIN, we can choose different loss functions ℓwhich
only need to be convex and decreasing (detailed later
in Theorem 5.2), which includes correlation loss, hinge
loss, and logistic loss. Only when ℓis chosen as the lo-
gistic loss would the training objective of SPIN become
similar to that of DPO.
Recently, Xu et al. (2023) proposed to use iterative prefer-
ence optimization with the Pairwise Cringe Loss (PCO), and
generalized DPO to iterative DPO. Concurrent to our work,
Yuan et al. (2024) further proposed a framework named
“self-rewarding language models”, which leverages the LLM
itself as the reward model to provide the preference feed-
back, and employs iterative DPO to train the LLM. Com-
pared with Xu et al. (2023); Yuan et al. (2024), SPIN’s
self-assessment is implicit, as no intermediate reward or
preference feedback is required.
5
Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis for Algo-
rithm 1 in Section 4. Under monotonicity and convexity
assumption of the objective function ℓ, we show that the
global optimum is obtained if and only if parameter θt gen-
erates data distribution. We summarize our assumptions as
follows:
Assumption 5.1. The loss function ℓ(t) : R →R is
monotonically decreasing, i.e., ∀t, ℓ′(t) ≤0 and satisfies
ℓ′(0) < 0. In addition, ℓ(t) is a convex function.
Assumption 5.1 holds for a wide range of loss functions
commonly used in machine learning, including correlation
loss ℓ(t) = 1 −t, hinge loss ℓ(t) = max(0, 1 −t), ex-
ponential loss ℓ(t) = exp(−t) and logistic loss ℓ(t) =
log(1 + exp(−t)). Under Assumptions 5.1, we present the
following theorem, which is pivotal in understanding the
optimization dynamics of our method.
Theorem 5.2. Under Assumption 5.1, suppose there exists
pθ(·|x) = pdata(·|x), then we have that
• (Sufficiency) If pθt(·|x) = pdata(·|x), then θt is the
global minimum of (4.7) for any λ ≥0.
• (Necessity) If pθt(·|x) ̸= pdata(·|x), there exists an appro-
priately chosen λ, such that θt is not the global minimum
of (4.7).
Remark 5.3. Theorem 5.2 suggests that under certain con-
ditions, the optimization process of our method naturally
stops at the point pθ(·|x) = pdata(·|x), implying the effec-
tiveness of our approach in aligning the LLM’s distribution
with the target data distribution. Moreover, Theorem 5.2
also indicates that the optimization process only stops when
the global optimality is achieved, i.e., the LLM’s distribution
aligns with the target data distribution.
For the logistic loss function ℓ(t) = log(1 + exp(−t)), the
following theorem gives a more precise characterization
of the opponent player, enabling a better understanding of
SPIN.
Theorem 5.4. Consider the choice of logistic loss
ℓ(t)
=
log(1 + exp(−t)) in SPIN.
Suppose that
pθt(y|x)
 pdata(y|x)/pθt(y|x)
1/λ lies in the LLM space
{pθ(y|x)|θ
∈
Θ} and θt+1 is global minimum of
LSPIN(θ, θt), then the opponent player at iteration t + 1
satisfies
pθt+1(y|x) ∝pθt(y|x)
 pdata(y|x)/pθt(y|x)
1/λ.
Remark 5.5. According to Theorem 5.4, the model update
from pθt(y|x) to pθt+1(y|x) tends to increase the probabil-
ity pθt+1(y|x) when pθt(y|x) is less than pdata(y|x), and
decrease it when pθt(y|x) is greater than pdata(y|x). Thus,
Theorem 5.4 further confirms that our method’s optimiza-
tion process naturally converges to the point where pθ(·|x)
equals pdata(·|x). The update of the opponent player is con-
trolled by
 pdata(y|x)/pθt(y|x)
1/λ, which is regulated by
6

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
the factor 1/λ. A smaller λ results in a larger change of the
opponent player, while a larger λ leads to a smaller change.
Therefore, as pθ(·|x) approaches pdata(·|x), increasing λ
enhances the stability of LLM training. This observation
aligns with (4.3), where λ is the regularization parameter
of the KL regularization that is employed to control the
deviation of the opponent player.
6
Experiments
This section provides a detailed empirical analysis of
SPIN. Our findings highlight several key points: (1) SPIN
markedly enhances model performance across a wide range
of evaluation benchmarks by breaking the limit of SFT;
(2) even without introducing new human annotated data,
SPIN at iteration 0 achieves performance on par to DPO
training that utilizes even more data; (3) iterative training
is a necessary component in SPIN as it breaks the limit of
multi-epoch training.
6.1
Experiment Setup
Model and Datasets.
In this study,
we adopt
zephyr-7b-sft-full as our base model. This model
derives from the pre-trained Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023)
and has been further fine-tuned on the SFT dataset Ultra-
chat200k1 by HuggingFace. Ultrachat200k represents a
high-quality 200k subset of the larger UltraChat (Ding et al.,
2023) corpus, which comprises approximately 1.4M dia-
logues produced using OpenAI’s Turbo APIs. From Ultra-
Chat200k, We randomly sample 50k prompts and use the
base model to generate the synthetic responses. We subse-
quently follow the optimization method described in Section
4.1 for further training. In multiple iterations, we leverage
the synthetic data from the most recent iteration and add
to the newly generated synthetic data, therefore resulting
in a synthetic dataset size of 50k at iteration 0 and 100k at
iteration 1, 2 and 3. At each iteration, we train our model
for 2 epochs.
Evaluation. We employed the widely used Huggingface
Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) as our eval-
uation benchmark, using the same Language Model Eval-
uation Harness library (Gao et al., 2023b). This leader-
board encompasses 6 different datasets, each focusing
on a a specific capability of LLMs. Collectively, these
datasets provide a thorough assessment framework, evalu-
ating LLMs on commonsense reasoning (Arc (Clark et al.,
2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), Winogrande (Sak-
aguchi et al., 2021)), multi-task language understanding
(MMLU(Hendrycks et al., 2020)), human falsehood mimic
(TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2021)) and math problem solving
(GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021)). We leave further implemen-
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/
HuggingFaceH4/ultrachat_200k
tation details to Appendix B with detailed evaluation setting
adopted by both the leaderboard and our experiments.
6.2
SPIN Effectively Improves Benchmark
Performance
SFT
SPIN
iter-0
SPIN
iter-1
SPIN
iter-2
SPIN
iter-3
58
59
60
61
62
63
Average Accuracy (%)
58.14
60.80
62.12
62.97
63.16
HuggingFace Open LLM Benchmark
Figure 2. The
average
score
of
SPIN
at
different
itera-
tions on the HuggingFace Open LLM leaderboard datasets.
For “SFT”, we report the performance of our base model
zephyr-7b-sft-full, which has been fine-tuned on the
same dataset we use to generate synthetic data.
In Figure 2, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SPIN us-
ing HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard as the evalua-
tion. In Figure 3, we compare the performance of our fine-
tuned model by SPIN after iterations 0 to 3 with the base
model zephyr-7b-sft-full on each task included in
the leaderboard. Detailed performances are presented in
Table 4 in Appendix B. We can observe that SPIN ex-
hibits remarkable effectiveness in improving the model’s
performance by further leveraging the SFT dataset, on
which the base model has already been fully fine-tuned.
At iteration 0, where model responses are generated from
zephyr-7b-sft-full, we observe an overall improve-
ment of 2.66% on the average score. The improvement
is particularly significant on the TruthfulQA and GSM8k
benchmarks, with improvement exceeding 5% and 10% re-
spectively. At iteration 1, we employ the LLM model from
iteration 0 to generate new responses for SPIN, adhering
to the procedure outlined in Algorithm 1. This iteration
yields further enhancements of 1.32% on average, and es-
pecially significant on the Arc Challenge and TruthfulQA
benchmarks. Subsequent iterations continue this trend of
incremental improvement across various tasks. Meanwhile,
the improvement at iteration t + 1 is naturally smaller than
that at iteration t. As the iterative training progresses, the
degree of improvement gradually approaches zero, suggest-
ing that the model has reached a limiting point in the last
iteration.
Comparison with DPO. zephyr-7b-beta is a model
derived from zephyr-7b-sft-full, trained with DPO
7

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
on approximately 62k preference data. This data, the Ultra-
Feedback Binarized dataset (Cui et al., 2023)2, comprises
both chosen and rejected completions evaluated by GPT-4.
We note that, DPO requires either human input or advanced
language model feedback to determine the preference, mak-
ing data generation a rather expensive procedure. In contrast,
our SPIN only requires the initial model itself. Moreover,
unlike DPO which requires new data source, our method
exclusively leverages the existing SFT dataset. In Figure 3,
we show the performance comparison of SPIN at iterations
0 and 1 (employing 50k SFT data) with DPO training, from
the same SFT checkpoint. We can observe that, while DPO
leverages more data from new sources, SPIN based on the
existing SFT data can already achieve comparable average
performance to DPO training at iteration 0. From iteration
1, SPIN even surpasses the performance of DPO on the
leaderboard benchmark.
6.3
Ablation Studies
In this subsection, we examine the effect of synthetic dataset
size and training epochs within an iteration. Our analysis
demonstrates the effectiveness of the synthetic data used by
SPIN compared to the SFT data, as well as the necessity
of iterative training in SPIN. In Appendix B, we present
assessment of SPIN on additional benchmark tasks.
Training Size. We investigate the effect of varying training
data size on the performance of SPIN. In Figure 5, we
demonstrate the effect of training size for SPIN during it-
eration 0 and additionally compare with SFT with the full
original dataset. Specifically, for the SFT baseline, we fully
fine-tune Mistral-7B on Ultrachat200k for three epochs and
report first epoch performance as the starting point (with
x-axis 0) in the figure for SFT. For SPIN, we report the
zephyr-7b-sft-full checkpoint as the starting point,
which has also been fine-tuned on Ultrachat200k for one
epoch. We select the training size of SPIN at iteration 0
to be 14k, 26k, and 50k and generate the data accordingly,
ensuring that the larger dataset encompasses the smaller
dataset. The performance of SPIN was then evaluated after
1 epoch of self-play fine-tuning for each training size. We
can observe that, while SPIN results in notable improve-
ment with increasing training sizes, SFT on further epochs 2
and 3 fails to yield more than 1% improvement. Additional
results are deferred to Appendix B.
Iterative Training v.s. Training for More Epochs. We
further study the training within iteration 0 and compare
with the performance achieved in iteration 1, particularly
contrasting the test performance obtained from extended
training duration with that from next iteration. Figure 4 de-
picts the performance trajectory of the model trained using
2https://huggingface.co/datasets/
HuggingFaceH4/ultrafeedback_binarized
SPIN over multiple epochs at iteration 0. It is evident that
the most substantial improvement occurs during the first
two epochs, followed by only modest gains in subsequent
epochs. Notably, SPIN exhibits robustness and stability; ex-
tending the training duration does not diminish performance
but rather maintains a rather consistent level. Neverthe-
less, the observation suggests an inherent limitation to the
performance achievable within a single iteration, thereby
underscoring the necessity for iterative training. As shown
by the test performance achieved at iteration 1 in the fig-
ures, extending the training in iteration 0 fails to reach the
performance comparable to iteration 1.
7
Conclusion and Discussion
This paper introduces a novel fine-tuning method SPIN, to
convert a weak LLM to a strong LLM by unleashing the full
power of human-annotated data. Central to this method is a
self-play mechanism, wherein a main player (the LLM) is
fine-tuned to differentiate the responses of opponent player
(the LLM from previous iteration) from the target data dis-
tribution, and the LLM is iteratively aligned with the target
data distribution. Therefore, SPIN facilitates the LLM’s
iterative self-evaluation and enhancement through self-play.
In comparison to supervised fine-tuning and RL fine-tuning
methods, SPIN enables the LLM to self-improve without
additional human data or feedback from stronger LLMs.
Empirical results demonstrate that SPIN significantly en-
hances LLM performance across diverse benchmarks, even
outperforming models trained with additional human data
or AI feedback.
Limitation and Future Work.
Our theoretical results
demonstrate that the optimization process of SPIN con-
verges if and only if the LLM’s distribution aligns with
pdata. Therefore, our study focuses on a fixed target data
distribution generated by humans, which inherently imposes
a ceiling on the performance of fine-tuned LLM. Explor-
ing the dynamically changing target data distribution is an
important direction to overcome this limitation and elevate
the LLM’s performance beyond this ceiling or even to a
super-human level. Moreover, considering the resource
demands of synthetic data generation, another promising
avenue for further exploration is to reduce the volume of
required synthetic data.
Acknowledgement
We thank the anonymous reviewers and area chair for their
helpful comments. ZC, YD, HY, KJ, and QG are supported
in part by the National Science Foundation CAREER Award
1906169, IIS-2008981, CHE-2247426 and the Sloan Re-
search Fellowship. The views and conclusions contained
in this paper are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing any funding agencies.
8

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models
Arc
TruthfulQA
Winogrande
GSM8k
Hellaswag
MMLU
Average
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Scores
Zephyr-SFT
Zephyr-DPO
SPIN-iter-0
SPIN-iter-1
SPIN-iter-2
SPIN-iter-3
Figure 3. Performance comparison with DPO training across the six benchmark datasets. Self-play at iteration 0 achieves comparable
performance to DPO training with 62k new data. At iteration 1, self-play has already surpassed DPO training on the majority of datasets.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Epoch
61
62
63
64
65
Accuracy (%)
iter 0
iter 1 (epoch 2)
(a) Arc Challenge.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Epoch
44
46
48
50
52
54
Accuracy (%)
iter 0
iter 1 (epoch 2)
(b) TruthfulQA.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Epoch
58
59
60
61
62
Average Accuracy (%)
iter 0
iter 1 (epoch 2)
(c) Average.
Figure 4. The SPIN training dynamics of zephyr-7b-sft-full on the 50k synthetic data with regard to the number of training
epochs during iteration 0. We can observe that iterative training is pivotal as training for more epochs during iteration 0 reaches a limit
and cannot surpass iteration 1.
0
14k
26k
50k
200k
400k
Training Size
58.0
58.5
59.0
59.5
60.0
60.5
61.0
Average Score
59.04
59.82
59.27
58.14
59.55
60.16
60.83
Performance Comparison
SFT
SPIN
Figure 5. The scaling effect of training size of SPIN compared to
SFT on the average score of Open LLM Leaderboard. For SPIN,
we consider training data of sizes 14k, 26k and 50k where the
larger dataset contains the smaller dataset. The starting point for
SPIN (with x-axis 0) is the zephyr-7b-sft-full checkpoint,
which has been fine-tuned on Ultrachat200k for 1 epoch. We
report the model performance trained for 1 epoch with SPIN on
the varying sizes of dataset. We additionally compare with SFT,
where we fine-tune Mistral-7B on Ultrachat200k for 3 consecutive
epochs and report the model performance at the first epoch as the
starting point (with x-axis 0).
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Large Language Models. We believe that our work con-
tribute meaningfully to the field, specifically on leveraging
synthetic data to enhance LLM without the requirement for
human preference annotations. The synthetic data generated
by SPIN may be used to further augment the training of
various language models. Moreover, SPIN demonstrated
a substantial improvement in LLMs’ capabilities, opening
new avenues for their application in various downstream
tasks. This advancement underscores the transformative po-
tential of LLM fine-tuning in both technological and societal
contexts.
