An Agent-based Architecture for a Knowledge-work
Support System
Arijit Laha
Center for Knowledge-driven
Information Systems (C-KDIS),
SETLabs, Infosys Technologies Ltd.
Hyderabad, India

ABSTRACT
Enhancement of technology-based system support for knowledge
workers is an issue of great importance. The “Knowledge work
Support System (KwSS)” framework analyzes this issue from a
holistic perspective. KwSS proposes a set of design principles for
building a comprehensive IT-based support system,
which
enhances the capability of a human agent for performing a set of
complex and interrelated knowledge-works relevant to one or
more target task-types within a domain of professional activities.
In this paper, we propose a high-level, software-agent based
architecture for realizing a KwSS system that incorporates these
design principles. Here we focus on developing a number of
crucial enabling components of the architecture, including (1) an
Activity Theory-based novel modeling technique for knowledge-
intensive activities; (2) a graph theoretic formalism for
representing these models in a knowledge base in conjunction
with relevant entity taxonomies/ontologies; and (3) an algorithm
for reasoning, using the knowledge base, about various aspects of
possible supports for activities at performance-time.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous; I.2.4
[Computing Methodologies]: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE –
Knowledge Representation Formalisms and Methods
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Theory.
Keywords
knowledge-work, assistive system, activity modeling, agent-based
architecture, activity theory, knowledge representation, reasoning
1. INTRODUCTION
Correct and efficient performance of a “professional knowledge
work” (henceforth referred simply as “knowledge-work”) can
bring about wide-ranging benefits across multiple levels, ranging
from individual to societal. A knowledge-work, also called a
“task” or “project”, is typically performed within a domain of
professional activities, e.g., business, governance, basic and
applied research, healthcare etc., in order to solve problems of
tactical and/or strategic natures. Laha [9] proposed a framework
for designing Information Warehouse (IW) as a specialized
repository of granular and richly contextualized information
sharable among a number of task-specific Knowledge-work
Support Systems (KwSS). In this paper we are interested in the
architectural aspects of a single KwSS. Thus, without loss of
generality, we shall refer to the entire framework as the KwSS
framework, of which the IW is a component that serves as a
dedicated information repository.
The importance and relevance of the problem addressed by KwSS
framework [9] can be seen from the recent spate of works and
initiatives that are addressing various facets of the problem. The
ASAP [4] and the Codex [14] attempt at significantly improving
the support level for works in domains of genome research and
geography research respectively. The US government's SHARP
[13] project mandates research into issues for building
comprehensive support systems for patient-care tasks. Also, there
are a few ongoing research projects that attempt to enhance the
level of support for knowledge-works in various domains.
Examples of such initiatives include NEPOMUK - The Social
Semantic Desktop (http://nepomuk.semanticdesktop.org/), X-
Media (Large Scale Knowledge Sharing and Reuse across Media -
http://www.x-media-project.org/), 
PALETTE 
(Pedagogically
sustained Adaptive Learning through the Exploitation of Tacit and
Explicit Knowledge - http://palette.ercim.org/).
Each of the above is designed for one or more predetermined
tasks in a particular domain and address a limited number of
facets of the problem space. In contrast, the KwSS framework is
largely domain-agnostic and task-neutral, that can be leveraged to
implement a KwSS system for any chosen task in any chosen
domain. Further, the framework is based on a more holistic and
deeper view of the problem than any of the above efforts. In the
current paper, a general system architecture
to aid/guide
implementations of KwSS systems is developed. Here we use the
notion of software agents [15] as components of the architecture
because, (1) we envision a KwSS as an evolving system; and (2)
we want different constituent modules/sub-systems to respond
both on-demand as well as proactively.
2. SYSTEM SUPPORT: THE KWSS WAY
In the context of KwSS, a knowledge-work is performed by one
or more knowledge-workers who possess the requisite expertise
and experience. During the performance, a worker typically needs
to gather a significant body of information from various sources,
understand and interpret the information in the context of the
current problem. This leads to the worker gaining knowledge
about possible solution(s). Once in possession of the knowledge,
the 
worker 
articulates 
it 
in 
the 
form 
of 
various
sharable/communicable informational artifacts (plan, design,
report, advise, etc.). In all, a knowledge-work is a complex
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Conference’10, Month 1–2, 2010, City, State, Country.
Copyright 2010 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0010…$10.00.

interaction between human mind and environment aided by
information and tools for manipulating information.
A KwSS is an information processing system and makes no claim
at being able to do the “thinking” on behalf of a knowledge-
worker. From functional viewpoint, the KwSS perceives a
knowledge-work as consumption/absorption of information and
production/creation of new information, together referred here as
“information usage”, by human agents. Essentially, a KwSS aims
to create a support environment that significantly enhances the
capability of a worker to find relevant (i.e., worth consuming)
information as well as articulate and record new information
worth
communicating/sharing. 
One 
of 
the 
crucial 
and
differentiating premises of the KwSS framework is that actual
processes of information usage take place during performance of
various smaller, cognitively manageable “knowledge-intensive
activities”, hereafter referred simply as
“activities”, which
constitute a larger task. Based on these facts and their various
implications [8, 9], the framework argues that a system, in order
to significantly enhance support for performing episodes of a
knowledge-work, must aim supporting granularity levels of these
cognitively manageable activities, while maintaining the structure
of the whole task.
To illustrate various points over the rest of the paper we shall use
as examples, situations from patient-care as a knowledge-work,
where a physician and her colleagues treat an ailing patient. We
shall assume that a patient-care KwSS is being used for fulfilling
requirements of information access, creation and recording. Note
that, patient-care is chosen as an example as most readers are
likely to be familiar with it. Both the framework and architecture
developed later can be used for building system to support any
knowledge-work. In the following subsection major aspects of
information usage considered within the KwSS framework are
described.
2.1 Cognition-related Support
Performance of a knowledge-work makes great demand on the
cognitive/intellectual 
faculties 
of 
a 
knowledge-worker.
Unfortunately, our cognitive ability to focus our attention to a task
is innately limited [1]. To overcome this limitation, a common
practice is to decompose a large, complex activity into smaller
sub-activities until, given the availability of relevant resources
(expertise, information, support systems), each of the granules of
activities is cognitively manageable.
For example, the task of patient-care is divided into examination,
diagnosis,
treatment, follow-up and so on. The activity
examination is further decomposed into recording of symptoms
(headache, stiffness of limbs, etc.), finding/measuring signs (body
temperature, blood pressure level, etc.) and collection of medical
history. The KwSS design framework recommends that the
support for a task should be extended to the level of granularity of
activities, where they are actually performed, i.e., information is
consumed and new knowledge gained and articulated. The
granular level supports envisaged in KwSS include the areas
described below.
2.1.1 Maintenance of Context
In order to perform an activity, a knowledge-worker needs to
construct and actively maintain a mental model of the work-
context. This requires a high degree of cognitive effort. A KwSS
strives to provide significant aid in this respect. It attempts to
locate enough contextual in formation, present them to a worker
and maintain as well as transfer it among interrelated activities so
that the a human worker can use the information as cues/hints to
(re)construct and effectively maintain her mental model with
significantly lesser effort. In other words, a KwSS needs to
maintain an adequate representation of the context of and across
the activities it supports.
2.1.2 Access to relevant information
During the performance of a knowledge-work, a worker needs to
access significant volume of relevant information. The processes
involved in information seeking and retrieval, judging their
relevance and subsequent internalization by the human worker are
highly complex ones [6]. Nonetheless, these processes are heavily
influenced by the work-context. A KwSS attempts to use available
contextual cues in order to support these processes at the granular
activity level. It attempts to go beyond conventional document-
level access and provide context-aware access to relevant
information granules at text passage levels. Such an approach,
along with providing more efficient access to information, also
plays an important role in avoiding possible information overload.
2.1.3 Granular information articulation and capture
Accessing and understanding relevant information allows a
worker gain new knowledge/insight with respect to the problem-
at-hand. As mentioned earlier, this actually happens when the
worker is engaged in a cognitively manageable granule of activity.
Naturally, this is the point of time when the knowledge and its
context is most vivid in the worker's mind. Many details get lost
with the passage of time. A KwSS supports a worker to articulate
this knowledge without much delay, i.e., as part of performing the
granular activity, as well as without significant additional effort.
In other words, it should provide adequate means to produc,
contextualize and capture the granular information efficiently.
2.2 Support for Behavioral issues
A KwSS is aimed to be used by a community of knowledge-
workers, (sometimes known as a Community-of-Practice (CoP)).
In such environments, several interesting issues arise which may
impede usability and acceptance of such systems. Drawing upon
the analysis by Markus et al. [11], the KwSS framework
recommends system supports covering following areas.
2.2.1 Guidance
A knowledge-work is performed by a human actor who possesses
adequate expertise and experience. However, in real world not all
workers can be expected to possess equal/similar level of
expertise. Thus, a KwSS includes means to guide a user through a
sequence of activities that is likely to result in a performance of
(at least) acceptable quality.
2.2.2 Learning
Performance of a knowledge-work itself is a major source of
learning, often called the “on-the-job learning” for a knowledge
worker. Such learning allows her to gain experience as well as to
avoid professional obsolescence. Satisfying this need requires
catering to a vast and varied information requirement, spanning
across episodes of past performances, semantic and typological
information, legal and various policy/practice-related information,
information from relevant professional literature and many more.
A KwSS is designed to provide efficient access to sources of such
information.
2.2.3 Discretion or Autonomy of a User
A knowledge-work is usually performed in order to solve a
complex and often ill-structured, problem. There is no preferred
or best structure for such an activity that can guarantee high

quality outcomes. Knowledge-workers vary in expertise levels as
well as in their preferred styles of reasoning. For example, Patel et
al. in chapter 30 of [5] distinguish between hypothesis-driven and
data-driven reasoning styles in medicine. Also, due to changes in
environment, the problem may present novel, unprecedented
features. Tackling them requires a worker to exercise her
ingenuity. A KwSS allows practice of ingenuity by allowing
ample scope to its users to exercise their “discretion” at
performance-time.
3. ACTIVITY MODELING
To fulfill above support requirements, the system must be
provided with enough actionable information about activities,
information and their interdependency forming a basis for rich
and fine-grained context-aware computing. This, in turn, requires
that the system be equipped with a formal, i.e., machine-
deployable, model of the supported activities that can represent
the required information. To the best of our knowledge, none of
the existing/established modeling techniques fits the bill. Our
studies revealed that the Workflow-based techniques [16], while
successful in modeling transactional and operational processes,
cannot accommodate the complexity of knowledge-intensive
activities. On the other hand, many Task-Analysis techniques [3]
can be used for analyzing complex activities but are considerably
difficult to formalize. Therefore, we develop a new formal
“activity modeling” approach by co-opting some ideas from
“Activity Theory (AT)” [12].
Before we proceed further, here we specify/reiterate a few terms
and their semantics in context of the discussions ahead. A KwSS
[9] system is designed to provide comprehensive support for
performing “episodes” of a set of interrelated knowledge-
intensive activities or knowledge-works in a domain of
professional activities. In a KwSS, performance of each activity is
identified within the span of performance of a larger unit of
knowledge-work, called a “task”. In other words, a KwSS is
designed to support at least one particular “task-type”, that will be
refered as the “target-type” or “target” of that particular KwSS.
For example, in a patient-care KwSS the target task-type is
treatment of a patient, i.e., bringing an ailing person back to the
state of health. Each episode/instance of the target, known as a
“case” in the medical domain vocabulary, is performed with
respect to the treatment of a particular patient, spanning from her
admission to her discharge. The case, in turn, is a complex web of
inter-dependent knowledge-intensive activities, e.g., examination,
diagnosis, etc., each of which, in itself, is a complex knowledge-
work.
Figure 1: Model of a general “Human Activity” in AT
Figure 2: Knowledge-work in light of AT
3.1 Model of Activity in AT
The notion of a knowledge-work can be highly complex. Here we
co-opt the general model of “human activity” from Activity
Theory (AT) [7] as shown in Figure 1. According to AT, an
activity is essentially an interaction between a subject or human
actor and an object mediated by a set of tools. The element
“object” covers two different senses, firstly, some entity (physical
or abstract) that is manipulated or transformed (including from
state of non-existence to existence) in the course of activity, and
secondly, the objective(s)/motives of the activity. “Tools” refer to
concrete (e.g., a machine), mental (e.g., expertise, experience) and
informational artifacts required/available for performing the
activity. Additionally, an activity often has social context
represented by the element “community”. Interactions of the
members of community with the subject are mediated by a set of
rules governing the engagement of the members of community.
On the other hand, the community interacts with the object
through their division of labor towards achieving the object.
All the elements above constitute an “activity system” (Figure 1).
The model depicts the idea that performance of an activity
requires an adequate activity system, which can enact the
“transformation process” that brings about change of state of the
object in order to produce the outcome(s). If we try to understand
a knowledge-work using this model, we can identify various
elements involved in a knowledge-work with those of the model
of activity. The correspondence is shown in Figure 2.
Also, AT provides us with the notion of hierarchical levels of
activity that includes activity, action and operation. Thus and
activity is performed as a chain of actions in order to achieve
some objective or motive. An action, in turn, is a conscious, goal-
directed execution of a chain of operations. Operations are well-
defined routines
that
can be executed without worker's
consciousness of underlying details. Identification of an activity
with these levels is conditional upon the sophistication of the
activity system.
For example, consider the situation when a researcher needs to
access a paper. In a typical IT-enabled work environment, the
researcher needs to launch a suitable application, formulate and
fire a query, gets the link to the paper and downloads it. We can
easily recognize this as an activity at the level of action. However,
consider the environment where the paper can be found only in a
physical library at the other end of the city. Getting the paper then
involves definitely a significant activity. On the other hand,
consider the other extreme, where the researcher utters the name
of the paper and the system locates, retrieves and opens it on her
computer screen. Here the activity is reduced to an operation from
the worker's perspective.

3.2 Modeling a knowledge-work
Based on the theoretical grounding provided by AT, we formally
model a knowledge-work as a tuple
,
,
,
i
i
i
i
O
P
E
a 
where,
iE
is the set of entities, more specifically information
about entities, their attributes and values (at performance-time)
involved/required in performance of the activity. These entities
are identified according to their roles with the elements of activity
system described above (Fig 2) as their functional categories.
i
P
represents the transformation process or simply process and
i
O
represents the outcome(s) of the activity and nature(s) of the
informational artifact for representing them.
To understand the above, let us consider the patient-care activity
of diagnosis. Here,
iE is consisted of the physician as the actor
with attributes qualification, experience, etc.; results of the
patient's examination and tests as well as a list of possible diseases
constitute the tools; and the disease(s) to be confirmed forms the
object. The informational outcome
i
O of the activity represent a
list (initially empty, to be filled at performance-time) containing
one or more diseases as the result of diagnosis. In this paper, for
the sake of simplicity, we are not considering the community
explicitly. However, even in this single-actor model, engagement
of the community (e.g., hospital staff for patient-care) can be
accommodated through special activities such as delegation,
assignment, consultation, collaboration, etc.
With respect to the nature of
iP , we face two different
possibilities. The first one is when
ia is a cognitively manageable
activity that will be called a “simple” activity. In a simple activity,
a worker can cognitively maintain the context and easily choose a
chain of actions to be performed in order to reach the objective.
For example, recording of a patient's symptoms is a simple
activity. The other possibility is that
ia is sufficiently “complex”
so that it needs to be decomposed into a number of sub-activities,
each of which, in turn, may be
ia complex one or simple one. We
shall refer to such activities as “composite activities”. The general
structure of a composite activity is depicted in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Structure of a composite activity
For example, to make a complicated diagnosis, based on results of
examination, the physician may require hypothesizing a number
of possible diseases, finding and recommending a set of clinical
tests that will enable her to confirm or eliminate the possibilities.
Once the test results are available, she needs to identify, in light of
the test results, most probable disease(s) for which the patient
needs to be treated. This complexity makes the activity of
“diagnosing” as a whole a composite activity.
3.2.1 Structural properties of a composite activity
For a composite activity
ia , the process

)
(
),
(
i
i
i
P
E
P
V
P 
is
represented by a graph whose nodes
)
(
iP
V
represent the set of
sub-activities 
of
ia
and 
edges
)
(
iP
E
represent 
their
interrelationships.
iP has the following properties:

An activity
)
(
i
j
P
V
a 
) inherits the “tools”,
iT of
ia ,
i.e.,



i
j
T
T
;

If for an activity
)
(
i
j
P
V
a 
,
}
{
k
j
O
T 
, where
)
(
}
{
i
k
P
V
a

, then
}
{
ka
is called the support set
of
j
a and denoted as
)
(
j
a
SSet
. The set of edges
}
{ kj
e
are called the dependency edges or d-edges of
j
a
(Fig.
3). Clearly, performance of
j
a cannot be started till
performance of
)
(
j
a
SSet
is completed;

There is at least one sub-activity
)
(
i
j
P
V
a 
for which


)
(
j
a
SSet
. Performance of
ia can be initiated with
performance of any such sub-activity, denoted as the set
)
(
ia
Init
;

There is one and only one sub-activity
)
(
i
f
P
V
a 
,
called the final (sub-)activity, for which
i
f
O
O

and
whose completion denotes of the completion of the
activity
ia .
3.2.2 Modeling a “target task-type”
For building a KwSS that supports performance of episodes of a
particular type of knowledge-intensive task, a typological or
categorical model of the task needs to be built. This serves as the
“reference” or “nominal” task-model for the KwSS. The modeling
starts with consideration of the whole task as the largest unit of
complex activity,
T
T
T
O
P
E
T
,
,

, to be supported. Then, either
based on a careful analysis or a recognized best practice, the
elements of
T
E
and
T
O
as well as the structure of
T
O
is
identified. Then the elements of
T
E
and
T
O
are associated with
their respective functional and semantic (may be drawn from a
domain ontology, more on this later) typologies. Then
TP
is
decomposed into its constituent sub-activities. The process is
carried on recursively till the model includes all cognitively
manageable simple activities required to be performed.
The resulting model serves as a standard or reference for all the
episodes of performance of the target. Note that, the typologies in
the reference model get bound to specific, episodic values during
the performance of a task-episode. To understand this crucial
point, let us consider the activity of diagnosing a patient. Its
typological model carries the in-formation that its (1) tools are

comprised of (informational) entities such as examination results
(symptoms, signs, and medical history), possibilities considered,
tests recommended and their results for a patient; (2) actor is a
physician; and (3) object is a set of disease entities. However, the
values to be bound with the entities, e.g., identity of the patient
and the physician treating her, results of examination conducted
on her, etc., are available only during the particular episode of
treating the patient. The activity diagnosis is performed by the
physician in order to find the values of the entities diseases for the
patient-under-treatment.
4. AN ARCHITECTURE FOR KWSS
In this paper, we propose a software-agent based architecture of a
KwSS as depicted in Figure 4. In the following we describe its
components.
Figure 4: Agent-based architecture of KwSS
4.1 The Knowledge-work Knowledge Base
The “Knowledge-work Knowledge Base or KwKB” shown in
Figure 4, is common sharable information repository for a KwSS.
The “domain activities” component contains the reference task
model described above for the target while the “domain entities”
module contains one or more formal taxonomy/ontology of the
terms and concepts relevant for the activities. Examples of such
taxonomies include general ones such as Wordnet, Cyc etc. as
well as domain-specific ones such as GALEN, UMLS,
SNOMED-CT, etc., in biomedical domain [2]. Elements of a task-
model are associated with relevant elements of these taxonomies
in order to provide “semantics” to the activities and its constituent
elements. This arrangement allows components of the KwSS
system to carry out various types of semantically augmented
computations about activities, information and their contexts.
A KwKB may also include one or more ancillary repositories of
descriptive/explanatory information about domain activities and
entities. The contents of these repositories, associated/indexed
with the elements of the activity models and entities, can be a very
useful resource for on-the-job learning by the knowledge-workers.
4.2 The Knowledge-work Episode Base
The other common and shared information repository in a KwSS
is the “Knowledge-work Episode Base” or KwEB (Figure 4). The
KwEB contains information about the instances or episodes of the
target task-type performed by knowledge-workers using the
KwSS. The logical organization of an episode-information
adheres to the activity modeling formalism described earlier.
However, contents of its activity elements are the “values” of the
entities as they are determined/evaluated or articulated by the
knowledge-worker within the scope of the particular episode.
Also, the dependency structure of the activities and information
reflects the “actual performance” of the task episode. Further, the
episode information is tagged with the functional categories and
semantic categories drawn from the task-model and entity
taxonomies in KwKB (except some cases of “exercise of
discretion” by the knowledge-worker, when the activity and entity
typologies may be unavailable in KwKB).
Finally, at the level of simple activity, the episode is captured in
terms of a chain of actions, where, each action refers to creation,
evaluation, modification and various types of value-additions
(e.g., adding reference/support) of relevant entities. Formally, the
chain of action, leading to the production of the outcome entity of
e-th episode of a simple activity,
e
ia , the
e
i
O is represented in
KwEB as depicted in Figure 5. Overall, the KwEB is designed to
support efficiently various types of computations, e.g., retrieval
and navigation of relevant granular information from past
episodes, to access information contents based on not only
keywords, but also their context
(including argumentative
structure, provenance and lineage) and semantics.
Figure 5: A chain of actions representing a simple activity
4.3 Workspace
The “workspace” shown in Figure 4 is the interface of a KwSS
that a knowledge-worker interacts with (directly or indirectly) in
course of performing an episode
e
ia of an activity at a time. If the
activity is “composite” one, i.e., it is constituted of smaller sub-
activities, the workspace presents her with the reference structure
of activity and she chooses one of the permissible sub-activities.
Here the term “permissible” refers to all sub-activities whose
requisite initial entity set
)
0
(
e
iE
is already value-bound. The
chosen activity can be one recommended by the reference model
or a new discretionary activity introduced by the worker, for
which no or partial typology is available in KwKB. (Here we will
not go into the details of handling discretionary choices.) The
process may be repeated till the knowledge-worker reaches a
cognitively manageable granular activity, i.e., simple activity.
Once a simple activity to be performed is selected, she exercises
her cognitive faculties in conjunction with available system
support for performing the simple activity
e
ia in order to achieve a
set of objective(s) or goal(s). The nature of support provided by
the workspace is described below.

At the beginning of performance of
e
ia , the workspace nominally
presents to the user information about the set of relevant entities
)
0
(
e
iE
along with their episode-specific values as well as a set of
yet unvalued, i.e., typological or categorical entities
e
i
O
constituting the objective or goal entities. The performance of
e
ia
is performance of a chain of actions that conclude successfully
when the worker is able to assign relevant episodic values to the
categorical goal entities.
Formally, the t-th action by the worker involves selecting a set of
entities
)1
(
}
{


t
E
e
e
i
j
and apply an operation on them for
computing a new entity (or the value/instance of an existing
categorical entity)
*
je
to the workspace so that the entity set is
transformed into
)1
(
)
(
*



t
E
e
t
E
e
i
j
e
i
, as depicted in Figure 5.
Clearly, there could be a large variety of entities and possible
operations on them which may need to be accommodated in the
workspace. In the following we divide them into two groups.
Group 1 The operations involve entities either already available
within the workspace, i.e.,
)1
( 
t
E e
i
, or retrievable from internal
repositories, the KwSS knowledge-base (KwKB) and episode-
base (KwEB):

assigning values to yet unvalued entities;

arithmetic and logical operations on the entities with
quantitative values;

compilation of list of entities;

creation of textual information entities (articulation)
such as annotation, interpretation, summarization,
analysis, conclusion, etc.;

creation of referential links among entities in the
workspace;

retrieving granular information from past task-episodes;

seeking 
details, 
including 
that 
of 
relationship
information about an entity from KwKB, including its
ancillary portion as we as episodic contextual
information from KwEB; and

semantic comparisons of entities – comparison of values
(including textual) of semantically commensurate
features of the entities, e.g., comparing symptoms and
signs of a patient with those for a possible disease;
Group 2 The class of operations designed for sending out and
bringing in information to/from the external environment to the
workspace:

creation of contextualized
“query package”
from
)1
( 
t
E e
i
, exporting them to external IR or other
systems/ services and importing their results to
workspace; and

Creation of contextualized “information package” from
)1
( 
t
E e
i
, exporting them to other actors by various
means of communication for collaborative work and
importing their results to workspace;
4.4 The Contextualizing Agent (CA)
The “Contextualizing Agent” or CA is at the heart of a KwSS.
With the help of knowledge about the activities and entities drawn
from the Knowledge-work Knowledge Base (KwKB), it
tracks/monitors 
the 
progress 
of 
a 
knowledge-worker's
performance in workspace. Continuous sensing of the work-
context allows the CA (1) to guide the knowledge-worker through
the maze of activities; (2) to locate and make available relevant
resources (information about entities, people etc.), tools (including
external 
ones) 
and 
other 
artifacts 
(e.g., 
computational
protocols/templates)) in the workspace; (3) to ensure integrity in
case of exercise of discretion by the worker; and (4) to capture,
organize and archive new information created in the workspace
into the episode base for future reuse. The functionalities of CA
described above can be further enhanced and/or expanded in
scopes though use of appropriate services provided by one or
more “specialist agents” (SA) from the agent pool shown in
Figure 4. We shall discuss them in section 4.5.
4.4.1 Reasoning with activities
During the performance of an episode of an activity, the
contextualizing agent or CA needs to decide on the nature (e.g.,
guidance, action-level supports) and content (e.g., information,
computation template) of the support it provides at a point of time.
The problem needs the CA to “reason” about an activity and its
state of progress. The reasoning process encompasses the
typological models available in the knowledge base and the
current states and informational contents of the episodic
performance of the current activity and other activities related to
it. Figure 6 depicts an algorithmic description of the core
reasoning process followed by the workspace.
As indicated in algorithm 1, at any given time during an episode,
the CA maintains three disjoint sets of activities, (1) the ActiveSet
comprised of all activities currently being performed; (2) the
ReadySet containing all activities whose performance can be
started; and (3) CompleteSet consisting of all completed activities.
At a given moment, there can be a number of activities in the
activity model outside these sets. However, as the performance
progresses, each activity moves through these sets so that at the
end of performance ActiveSet and ReadySet are empty and
CompleteSet contains all the activities.
4.4.2 Action-level supports
The reasoning leading to action-level support corresponds to the
block 4b of algorithm 1. However, no details are provided
regarding their possible realizations. The first type of support is
related to locating information resources from the internal
sources, namely, the knowledge base and the case base. This is
formulated as a problem of Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) [10].
To provide this support as the operation involved in t-th action,
the CA constructs a probe/query vector drawing typologies and
values of entities in current entity set
)1
( 
t
Ee
i
. The selection and
retrieval of information is performed based on the similarity of the
probe vector (1) with the context of their production as recorded
in the case base; and (2) with the typological contexts of the
elements of knowledge base.
The support type described in item 2 of block 4b depends on the
availability of suitable interfaces and/or communication channels
to external resources. The CA routes suitably contextualized (by
user and/or CA itself) information and/or query packages to
external resources available to KwSS and channels their response
to the workspace. The next support type in block 4b involves the

Figure 6: Algorithm (s) for activity reasoning
CA 
anticipating 
user's 
information 
needs 
and 
suitably
orchestrating services available from the specialized agents (SA)
to meet them. We will discuss about the SA in the next section.
A user’s discretion (item 4 in block 4b) is essentially results in a
user-introduced deviation from the nominal activity structure
indicated by the typological model. Such deviations include
skipping/deleting an activity, introducing new activity and
substitution of a simple activity with a composite activity and vice
versa. The CA allows them at the episode level and ensures that
the integrity (e.g., the support set of another activity should not
become empty due to deletion of an activity) of the activity
structure (section 3.2.1) is maintained. If such deviations include
introduction of novel activity, it may not be possible for the CA to
categorize its elements in episode base with typologies from
KwKB. In such a case, the CA might be configured to encourage
the worker to provide relevant typological information.
In an activity episode, if the worker is unable to find pertinent
values of the goal entities, the performance is perceived as a
failure (line 4d). The cause of the failure may be rooted in the
inadequate performance of an earlier activity. For example, while
diagnosing a physician may fail to reach a firm diagnosis because
during the examination some signs or symptoms were overlooked.
To remedy the failure the worker needs to re-perform a number of
activities, typically starting from the cause activity up to the failed
activity. However, during the re-performance, the information
produced earlier through those activities are also available to the
worker. Through failure management the CA facilitates the above
in a manner consistent with the structural properties of the
affected activities.
4.5 The Pool of Specialist Agents
The CA in a KwSS is designed to provide a set of
essential/nominal supports. It is easy to envisage a wide range of
enhancements as well as extensions of scopes of these nominal
capabilities with the aid of various cutting-edge computational
techniques. These techniques are emerging in various areas of
research such as text analysis, semantic categorization and
reasoning, information retrieval etc. Currently they are in a state
of rapid and continuous evolution. Naturally, their effectiveness in
a KwSS will also evolve as it accommodates the gradual progress
made in these fields.
However, such accommodations and their management pose
difficult design challenges. If they are not carefully insulated from
the core of the system, they can easily destabilize it, even at the
level of its nominal functionalities.
In view of the above concerns, in proposed agent-based
architecture of a KwSS, these enhancements are implemented as
services from a pool of specialist agents (SA). The pool is an
ecosystem of collaborative agents with varying degrees of
autonomy. As depicted in Figure 4, they fall into two categories,
the interface agents (IA) and the producer agents (PA). An IA
provides a higher level service, such as context-aware information
retrieval, 
recommendation 
(about 
relevant 
information,
computation 
protocol/template, 
external 
tools), 
resource
(people/experts, artifacts) location etc. The CA, and in turn, the
user in workspace are aware of these services. The CA can invoke
these services on-demand from the worker. Also these agents can
be selectively configured to provide their services pro-actively in
response to the work-context as maintained by the CA.

An IA essentially provides its service as one or more (alternative)
compositions of the services of a set of agents that can include
relevant producer agents and other interface agents. A producer
agent or PA has a specific, narrowly defined capability and well-
defined service protocol to invoke the capability. The service of a
PA can be used by more than one IA as part of their respective
composition. For example, consider a PA whose service is to
detect key entities and their relationships from a passage of
natural language text. This is a vital service for an IA that tries to
identify, based on the work-context, relevant text passages from a
large document. The service of the same PA may be utilized by an
IA for context-aware IR, for analyzing a natural language query.
This architectural approach allows us to continuously enhance the
capabilities of a KwSS by improving quality of services of one or
more specialist agents, at a time, without disrupting other services
or functionalities of CA. Such improvements can be brought about
by modifying the techniques/algorithms they employ, suitable
reinforcements of their specialized KB etc. In our works with
KwSS, we are working on design and development of a number of
specialist agents. Most exciting among them is what we call the
“generative resource modeling agent”. It identifies various
resources (information, computational protocols) and profiles
their scope(s) of utility through inductive and/or abductive
analysis of episode base. It can enable a KwSS to adaptively
“chunk” and “operationalize” some parts of chains-of-actions
based on evolving patterns among the historical work-contexts.
5. CONCLUSION
Building  a  KwSS,  as  proposed  in  [9] for providing
comprehensive  task-specific support to  knowledge-workers,
requires  multi-faceted effort in  computing research  and
engineering.    In  identifying  and  solving  relevant  problems
we may need to co-opt ideas and  concepts from a various  fields
outside  computing/IT  research  and  practices.  In this  paper we
have  attempted to  develop  some  important  building blocks,
namely,  a software-agent based  architecture  for knowledge-
based computing, an activity modeling technique, a formal
representation  of activity  models in a knowledge-base  and  an
approach for reasoning with  these  models.  We believe that these
will contribute significantly in building KwSS as well other
KwSS-like systems.  Other  important facets  of the  problem
include  design  of  suitable user  interfaces  in workspace that
can  allow  efficient  and  intuitive presentation  of large  volume
of information,  collaborative connectivity across multiple
platforms 
like
mobile 
devices, 
integration 
 
with
productivity/office  applications, etc.    On the methodological
side, there is a need for developing suitable methodologies to
collect and analyze information on target task(s) that can be
translated into robust activity models.  In our lab we have
implemented an early version of a web-based patient-care KwSS.
We are currently investigating some of these issues for enhancing
the prototype.
6. REFERENCES
[1]
A. Baddeley. Working memory:  looking back and looking
forward.  Nature Review:  Neuroscience, 4:829- 839 , 2003.
[2]
O. Bodenreider and A. Burgun. Medical informatics:
Advances in knowledge management and data mining
in biomedicine, chapter Biomedical Ontologies, pages
211–235. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[3]
D. Diaper and N. Stanton. The Handbook of Task Analysis
for Human-Computer Interaction. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah, NJ, 2004.
[4] J. Glasner,M. Rusch, P.  Liss, G. P. III, E. L. Cabot,
A. Darling, B. D. Anderson, P. Infield-Harm, M.
Gilson, and N. T. Perna. Asap: a resource for
annotating, curating, comparing, and disseminating
genomic data. Nucleic Acids Research, 34(Database
issue):D41–D45, 2006.
[5]
K. J. Holyoak and R. G. Morrison, editors. Cambridge
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2005.
[6]
P.  Ingwersen and K. Jarvelin. The turn: Integration of
information seeking and retrieval in context. Springer,
Dordrecht, 2005.
[7]
V. Kaptelinin and B. A. Nardi. Acting with
Technology. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2006.
[8]
A. Laha. In 1st IIMA International Conference on
Advanced Data Analysis, Business Analytics and
Intelligence (ICADABAI 2009), Ahmedabad, India, 6-7
June 2009. Indian Institute of Management (IIM).
[9]
A. Laha. On the issues of building information
warehouses. In ACM Co mp u te 2010, January 22-23,
Bangalore, India, Bangalore, India, 2010.
[10] R. Lopez De Mantaras, D. McSherry, D. Bridge, D.
Leake, B. Smyth, S. Craw, B. Faltings, M. L. Maher,
M. T. Cox, K. Forbus, M. Keane, A. Aamodt, and I.
Watson. Retrieval, reuse, revision and retention in case-
based reasoning.. Knowl. Eng. Rev., 20(3):215–240,
2005.
[11] M. L. Markus, A. Majchrzak, and L. Gasser. A design
theory for systems that support emergent knowledge
processes. MIS Quarterly, 26(3):179–212, September
2002.
[12] B. Nardi, editor. Context and Consciousness: Activity
Theory and Human Computer Interaction. MIT Press,
1996.
[13] ONC-HHS. Strategic health it advanced research projects
(SHARP), SHARP FOA 12172009 FINAL.docavailable
at [URL: http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt]
(retrieved on 21 Dec. 2009), Dec 2009.
[14] W. Pike and M. Gahegan. Beyond ontologies: Toward
situated representations of scientific knowledge.
International Journal o f Human-Computer Studies,
65(7):674–688, July 2007.
[15] S. J. Russell and P.  Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A
Modern Approach. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 3
edition, 2010.
[16] W. vanderAalst and K. vanHee. Workflow
Management: Models, Methods, and Systems. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, US, 2004.
