Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks
from Decentralized Data
H. Brendan McMahan
Eider Moore
Daniel Ramage
Seth Hampson
Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas
Google, Inc., 651 N 34th St., Seattle, WA 98103 USA
Abstract
Modern mobile devices have access to a wealth
of data suitable for learning models, which in turn
can greatly improve the user experience on the
device. For example, language models can im-
prove speech recognition and text entry, and im-
age models can automatically select good photos.
However, this rich data is often privacy sensitive,
large in quantity, or both, which may preclude
logging to the data center and training there using
conventional approaches. We advocate an alter-
native that leaves the training data distributed on
the mobile devices, and learns a shared model by
aggregating locally-computed updates. We term
this decentralized approach Federated Learning.
We present a practical method for the federated
learning of deep networks based on iterative
model averaging, and conduct an extensive empiri-
cal evaluation, considering ﬁve different model ar-
chitectures and four datasets. These experiments
demonstrate the approach is robust to the unbal-
anced and non-IID data distributions that are a
deﬁning characteristic of this setting. Commu-
nication costs are the principal constraint, and
we show a reduction in required communication
rounds by 10–100× as compared to synchronized
stochastic gradient descent.
1
Introduction
Increasingly, phones and tablets are the primary computing
devices for many people [30, 2]. The powerful sensors on
these devices (including cameras, microphones, and GPS),
combined with the fact they are frequently carried, means
they have access to an unprecedented amount of data, much
of it private in nature. Models learned on such data hold the
Appearing in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2017, Fort Laud-
erdale, Flordia, USA. JMLR: W&CP volume 54. Copyright 2017
by the authors.
promise of greatly improving usability by powering more
intelligent applications, but the sensitive nature of the data
means there are risks and responsibilities to storing it in a
centralized location.
We investigate a learning technique that allows users to
collectively reap the beneﬁts of shared models trained from
this rich data, without the need to centrally store it. We term
our approach Federated Learning, since the learning task is
solved by a loose federation of participating devices (which
we refer to as clients) which are coordinated by a central
server. Each client has a local training dataset which is
never uploaded to the server. Instead, each client computes
an update to the current global model maintained by the
server, and only this update is communicated. This is a
direct application of the principle of focused collection or
data minimization proposed by the 2012 White House report
on privacy of consumer data [39]. Since these updates are
speciﬁc to improving the current model, there is no reason
to store them once they have been applied.
A principal advantage of this approach is the decoupling of
model training from the need for direct access to the raw
training data. Clearly, some trust of the server coordinat-
ing the training is still required. However, for applications
where the training objective can be speciﬁed on the basis
of data available on each client, federated learning can sig-
niﬁcantly reduce privacy and security risks by limiting the
attack surface to only the device, rather than the device and
the cloud.
Our primary contributions are 1) the identiﬁcation of the
problem of training on decentralized data from mobile de-
vices as an important research direction; 2) the selection of
a straightforward and practical algorithm that can be applied
to this setting; and 3) an extensive empirical evaluation of
the proposed approach. More concretely, we introduce the
FederatedAveraging algorithm, which combines lo-
cal stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on each client with
a server that performs model averaging. We perform ex-
tensive experiments on this algorithm, demonstrating it is
robust to unbalanced and non-IID data distributions, and
can reduce the rounds of communication needed to train a
deep network on decentralized data by orders of magnitude.
arXiv:1602.05629v4  [cs.LG]  26 Jan 2023

Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data
Federated Learning
Ideal problems for federated learn-
ing have the following properties: 1) Training on real-world
data from mobile devices provides a distinct advantage over
training on proxy data that is generally available in the data
center. 2) This data is privacy sensitive or large in size (com-
pared to the size of the model), so it is preferable not to log
it to the data center purely for the purpose of model training
(in service of the focused collection principle). 3) For super-
vised tasks, labels on the data can be inferred naturally from
user interaction.
Many models that power intelligent behavior on mobile
devices ﬁt the above criteria. As two examples, we con-
sider image classiﬁcation, for example predicting which
photos are most likely to be viewed multiple times in the
future, or shared; and language models, which can be used
to improve voice recognition and text entry on touch-screen
keyboards by improving decoding, next-word-prediction,
and even predicting whole replies [10]. The potential train-
ing data for both these tasks (all the photos a user takes and
everything they type on their mobile keyboard, including
passwords, URLs, messages, etc.) can be privacy sensitive.
The distributions from which these examples are drawn are
also likely to differ substantially from easily available proxy
datasets: the use of language in chat and text messages is
generally much different than standard language corpora,
e.g., Wikipedia and other web documents; the photos people
take on their phone are likely quite different than typical
Flickr photos. And ﬁnally, the labels for these problems are
directly available: entered text is self-labeled for learning
a language model, and photo labels can be deﬁned by natu-
ral user interaction with their photo app (which photos are
deleted, shared, or viewed).
Both of these tasks are well-suited to learning a neural net-
work. For image classiﬁcation feed-forward deep networks,
and in particular convolutional networks, are well-known
to provide state-of-the-art results [26, 25]. For language
modeling tasks recurrent neural networks, and in particular
LSTMs, have achieved state-of-the-art results [20, 5, 22].
Privacy
Federated learning has distinct privacy advan-
tages compared to data center training on persisted data.
Holding even an “anonymized” dataset can still put user
privacy at risk via joins with other data [37]. In contrast,
the information transmitted for federated learning is the
minimal update necessary to improve a particular model
(naturally, the strength of the privacy beneﬁt depends on the
content of the updates).1 The updates themselves can (and
should) be ephemeral. They will never contain more infor-
1For example, if the update is the total gradient of the loss on
all of the local data, and the features are a sparse bag-of-words,
then the non-zero gradients reveal exactly which words the user
has entered on the device. In contrast, the sum of many gradients
for a dense model such as a CNN offers a harder target for attackers
seeking information about individual training instances (though
attacks are still possible).
mation than the raw training data (by the data processing
inequality), and will generally contain much less. Further,
the source of the updates is not needed by the aggregation
algorithm, so updates can be transmitted without identifying
meta-data over a mix network such as Tor [7] or via a trusted
third party. We brieﬂy discuss the possibility of combining
federated learning with secure multiparty computation and
differential privacy at the end of the paper.
Federated Optimization
We refer to the optimization
problem implicit in federated learning as federated optimiza-
tion, drawing a connection (and contrast) to distributed opti-
mization. Federated optimization has several key properties
that differentiate it from a typical distributed optimization
problem:
• Non-IID The training data on a given client is typically
based on the usage of the mobile device by a particular
user, and hence any particular user’s local dataset will
not be representative of the population distribution.
• Unbalanced Similarly, some users will make much
heavier use of the service or app than others, leading
to varying amounts of local training data.
• Massively distributed We expect the number of
clients participating in an optimization to be much
larger than the average number of examples per client.
• Limited communication Mobile devices are fre-
quently ofﬂine or on slow or expensive connections.
In this work, our emphasis is on the non-IID and unbalanced
properties of the optimization, as well as the critical nature
of the communication constraints. A deployed federated
optimization system must also address a myriad of practical
issues: client datasets that change as data is added and
deleted; client availability that correlates with the local data
distribution in complex ways (e.g., phones from speakers
of American English will likely be plugged in at different
times than speakers of British English); and clients that
never respond or send corrupted updates.
These issues are beyond the scope of the current work;
instead, we use a controlled environment that is suitable
for experiments, but still addresses the key issues of client
availability and unbalanced and non-IID data. We assume
a synchronous update scheme that proceeds in rounds of
communication. There is a ﬁxed set of K clients, each
with a ﬁxed local dataset. At the beginning of each round,
a random fraction C of clients is selected, and the server
sends the current global algorithm state to each of these
clients (e.g., the current model parameters). We only select
a fraction of clients for efﬁciency, as our experiments show
diminishing returns for adding more clients beyond a certain
point. Each selected client then performs local computation
based on the global state and its local dataset, and sends an
update to the server. The server then applies these updates
to its global state, and the process repeats.

H. Brendan McMahan,
Eider Moore,
Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson,
Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas
While we focus on non-convex neural network objectives,
the algorithm we consider is applicable to any ﬁnite-sum
objective of the form
min
w∈Rd f(w)
where
f(w)
def
= 1
n
n
X
i=1
fi(w).
(1)
For a machine learning problem, we typically take fi(w) =
ℓ(xi, yi; w), that is, the loss of the prediction on example
(xi, yi) made with model parameters w. We assume there
are K clients over which the data is partitioned, with Pk the
set of indexes of data points on client k, with nk = |Pk|.
Thus, we can re-write the objective (1) as
f(w) =
K
X
k=1
nk
n Fk(w)
where
Fk(w) = 1
nk
X
i∈Pk
fi(w).
If the partition Pk was formed by distributing the training
examples over the clients uniformly at random, then we
would have EPk[Fk(w)] = f(w), where the expectation is
over the set of examples assigned to a ﬁxed client k. This is
the IID assumption typically made by distributed optimiza-
tion algorithms; we refer to the case where this does not
hold (that is, Fk could be an arbitrarily bad approximation
to f) as the non-IID setting.
In data center optimization, communication costs are rela-
tively small, and computational costs dominate, with much
of the recent emphasis being on using GPUs to lower these
costs. In contrast, in federated optimization communication
costs dominate — we will typically be limited by an upload
bandwidth of 1 MB/s or less. Further, clients will typically
only volunteer to participate in the optimization when they
are charged, plugged-in, and on an unmetered wi-ﬁconnec-
tion. Further, we expect each client will only participate in a
small number of update rounds per day. On the other hand,
since any single on-device dataset is small compared to the
total dataset size, and modern smartphones have relatively
fast processors (including GPUs), computation becomes
essentially free compared to communication costs for many
model types. Thus, our goal is to use additional computation
in order to decrease the number of rounds of communica-
tion needed to train a model. There are two primary ways
we can add computation: 1) increased parallelism, where
we use more clients working independently between each
communication round; and, 2) increased computation on
each client, where rather than performing a simple computa-
tion like a gradient calculation, each client performs a more
complex calculation between each communication round.
We investigate both of these approaches, but the speedups
we achieve are due primarily to adding more computation
on each client, once a minimum level of parallelism over
clients is used.
Related Work
Distributed training by iteratively averag-
ing locally trained models has been studied by McDon-
ald et al. [28] for the perceptron and Povey et al. [31] for
speech recognition DNNs. Zhang et al. [42] studies an asyn-
chronous approach with “soft” averaging. These works only
consider the cluster / data center setting (at most 16 workers,
wall-clock time based on fast networks), and do not consider
datasets that are unbalanced and non-IID, properties that
are essential to the federated learning setting. We adapt
this style of algorithm to the federated setting and perform
the appropriate empirical evaluation, which asks different
questions than those relevant in the data center setting, and
requires different methodology.
Using similar motivation to ours, Neverova et al. [29] also
discusses the advantages of keeping sensitive user data on
device. The work of Shokri and Shmatikov [35] is related in
several ways: they focus on training deep networks, empha-
size the importance of privacy, and address communication
costs by only sharing a subset of the parameters during each
round of communication; however, they also do not consider
unbalanced and non-IID data, and the empirical evaluation
is limited.
In the convex setting, the problem of distributed opti-
mization and estimation has received signiﬁcant attention
[4, 15, 33], and some algorithms do focus speciﬁcally on
communication efﬁciency [45, 34, 40, 27, 43]. In addition
to assuming convexity, this existing work generally requires
that the number of clients is much smaller than the number
of examples per client, that the data is distributed across
the clients in IID fashion, and that each node has an iden-
tical number of data points — all of these assumptions
are violated in the federated optimization setting. Asyn-
chronous distributed forms of SGD have also been applied
to training neural networks, e.g., Dean et al. [12], but these
approaches require a prohibitive number of updates in the
federated setting. Distributed consensus algorithms (e.g.,
[41]) relax the IID assumption, but are still not a good ﬁt for
communication-constrained optimization over very many
clients.
One endpoint of the (parameterized) algorithm family we
consider is simple one-shot averaging, where each client
solves for the model that minimizes (possibly regularized)
loss on their local data, and these models are averaged to
produce the ﬁnal global model. This approach has been
studied extensively in the convex case with IID data, and it
is known that in the worst-case, the global model produced is
no better than training a model on a single client [44, 3, 46].
2
The FederatedAveraging Algorithm
The recent multitude of successful applications of deep
learning have almost exclusively relied on variants of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for optimization; in fact,
many advances can be understood as adapting the struc-
ture of the model (and hence the loss function) to be more
amenable to optimization by simple gradient-based meth-
ods [16]. Thus, it is natural that we build algorithms for

Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data
federated optimization by starting from SGD.
SGD can be applied naively to the federated optimization
problem, where a single batch gradient calculation (say on
a randomly selected client) is done per round of commu-
nication. This approach is computationally efﬁcient, but
requires very large numbers of rounds of training to produce
good models (e.g., even using an advanced approach like
batch normalization, Ioffe and Szegedy [21] trained MNIST
for 50000 steps on minibatches of size 60). We consider
this baseline in our CIFAR-10 experiments.
In the federated setting, there is little cost in wall-clock time
to involving more clients, and so for our baseline we use
large-batch synchronous SGD; experiments by Chen et al.
[8] show this approach is state-of-the-art in the data center
setting, where it outperforms asynchronous approaches. To
apply this approach in the federated setting, we select a C-
fraction of clients on each round, and compute the gradient
of the loss over all the data held by these clients. Thus, C
controls the global batch size, with C = 1 corresponding
to full-batch (non-stochastic) gradient descent.2 We refer to
this baseline algorithm as FederatedSGD (or FedSGD).
A typical implementation of FedSGD with C = 1 and
a ﬁxed learning rate η has each client k compute gk =
▽Fk(wt), the average gradient on its local data at the current
model wt, and the central server aggregates these gradients
and applies the update wt+1 ←wt −η PK
k=1
nk
n gk, since
PK
k=1
nk
n gk = ▽f(wt). An equivalent update is given by
∀k, wk
t+1 ←wt −ηgk and then wt+1 ←PK
k=1
nk
n wk
t+1.
That is, each client locally takes one step of gradient de-
scent on the current model using its local data, and the
server then takes a weighted average of the resulting models.
Once the algorithm is written this way, we can add more
computation to each client by iterating the local update
wk ←wk −η▽Fk(wk) multiple times before the averag-
ing step. We term this approach FederatedAveraging
(or FedAvg). The amount of computation is controlled
by three key parameters: C, the fraction of clients that
perform computation on each round; E, then number of
training passes each client makes over its local dataset on
each round; and B, the local minibatch size used for the
client updates. We write B = ∞to indicate that the full
local dataset is treated as a single minibatch. Thus, at one
endpoint of this algorithm family, we can take B = ∞and
E = 1 which corresponds exactly to FedSGD. For a client
with nk local examples, the number of local updates per
round is given by uk = E nk
B ; Complete pseudo-code is
given in Algorithm 1.
For general non-convex objectives, averaging models in
parameter space could produce an arbitrarily bad model.
2While the batch selection mechanism is different than se-
lecting a batch by choosing individual examples uniformly at
random, the batch gradients g computed by FedSGD still satisfy
E[g] = ▽f(w).
0.20.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
mixing weight θ
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
loss
Independent initialization
0.20.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
mixing weight θ
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
0.54
loss
Common initialization
Figure 1: The loss on the full MNIST training set for models
generated by averaging the parameters of two models w
and w′ using θw + (1 −θ)w′ for 50 evenly spaced values
θ ∈[−0.2, 1.2].The models w and w′ were trained using
SGD on different small datasets. For the left plot, w and w′
were initialized using different random seeds; for the right
plot, a shared seed was used. Note the different y-axis scales.
The horizontal line gives the best loss achieved by w or w′
(which were quite close, corresponding to the vertical lines
at θ = 0 and θ = 1). With shared initialization, averaging
the models produces a signiﬁcant reduction in the loss on
the total training set (much better than the loss of either
parent model).
Following the approach of Goodfellow et al. [17], we see
exactly this bad behavior when we average two MNIST
digit-recognition models3 trained from different initial con-
ditions (Figure 1, left). For this ﬁgure, the parent models w
and w′ were each trained on non-overlapping IID samples
of 600 examples from the MNIST training set. Training
was via SGD with a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.1 for 240 up-
dates on minibatches of size 50 (or E = 20 passes over
the mini-datasets of size 600). This is approximately the
amount of training where the models begin to overﬁt their
local datasets.
Recent work indicates that in practice, the loss surfaces of
sufﬁciently over-parameterized NNs are surprisingly well-
behaved and in particular less prone to bad local minima
than previously thought [11, 17, 9]. And indeed, when we
start two models from the same random initialization and
then again train each independently on a different subset of
the data (as described above), we ﬁnd that naive parameter
averaging works surprisingly well (Figure 1, right): the av-
erage of these two models, 1
2w+ 1
2w′, achieves signiﬁcantly
lower loss on the full MNIST training set than the best
model achieved by training on either of the small datasets
independently. While Figure 1 starts from a random initial-
ization, note a shared starting model wt is used for each
round of FedAvg, and so the same intuition applies.
3We use the “2NN” multi-layer perceptron described in Sec-
tion 3.

H. Brendan McMahan,
Eider Moore,
Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson,
Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas
Algorithm 1 FederatedAveraging. The K clients are
indexed by k; B is the local minibatch size, E is the number
of local epochs, and η is the learning rate.
Server executes:
initialize w0
for each round t = 1, 2, . . . do
m ←max(C · K, 1)
St ←(random set of m clients)
for each client k ∈St in parallel do
wk
t+1 ←ClientUpdate(k, wt)
mt ←P
k∈St nk
wt+1 ←P
k∈St
nk
mt wk
t+1 // Erratum4
ClientUpdate(k, w): // Run on client k
B ←(split Pk into batches of size B)
for each local epoch i from 1 to E do
for batch b ∈B do
w ←w −η▽ℓ(w; b)
return w to server
3
Experimental Results
We are motivated by both image classiﬁcation and language
modeling tasks where good models can greatly enhance the
usability of mobile devices. For each of these tasks we ﬁrst
picked a proxy dataset of modest enough size that we could
thoroughly investigate the hyperparameters of the FedAvg
algorithm. While each individual training run is relatively
small, we trained over 2000 individual models for these
experiments. We then present results on the benchmark
CIFAR-10 image classiﬁcation task. Finally, to demonstrate
the effectiveness of FedAvg on a real-world problem with
a natural partitioning of the data over clients, we evaluate
on a large language modeling task.
Our initial study includes three model families on two
datasets. The ﬁrst two are for the MNIST digit recognition
task [26]: 1) A simple multilayer-perceptron with 2-hidden
layers with 200 units each using ReLu activations (199,210
total parameters), which we refer to as the MNIST 2NN. 2)
A CNN with two 5x5 convolution layers (the ﬁrst with 32
channels, the second with 64, each followed with 2x2 max
pooling), a fully connected layer with 512 units and ReLu
activation, and a ﬁnal softmax output layer (1,663,370 total
parameters). To study federated optimization, we also need
to specify how the data is distributed over the clients. We
study two ways of partitioning the MNIST data over clients:
IID, where the data is shufﬂed, and then partitioned into 100
clients each receiving 600 examples, and Non-IID, where
we ﬁrst sort the data by digit label, divide it into 200 shards
of size 300, and assign each of 100 clients 2 shards. This is
a pathological non-IID partition of the data, as most clients
4Earlier versions of this paper incorrectly indicated summation
over all K clients here.
will only have examples of two digits, letting us explore the
degree to which our algorithms will break on highly non-IID
data. Both of these partitions are balanced, however.5
For language modeling, we built a dataset from The Com-
plete Works of William Shakespeare [32]. We construct a
client dataset for each speaking role in each play with at
least two lines. This produced a dataset with 1146 clients.
For each client, we split the data into a set of training lines
(the ﬁrst 80% of lines for the role), and test lines (the last
20%, rounded up to at least one line). The resulting dataset
has 3,564,579 characters in the training set, and 870,014
characters6 in the test set. This data is substantially unbal-
anced, with many roles having only a few lines, and a few
with a large number of lines. Further, observe the test set is
not a random sample of lines, but is temporally separated
by the chronology of each play. Using an identical train/test
split, we also form a balanced and IID version of the dataset,
also with 1146 clients.
On this data we train a stacked character-level LSTM lan-
guage model, which after reading each character in a line,
predicts the next character [22]. The model takes a series of
characters as input and embeds each of these into a learned
8 dimensional space. The embedded characters are then
processed through 2 LSTM layers, each with 256 nodes.
Finally the output of the second LSTM layer is sent to a
softmax output layer with one node per character. The full
model has 866,578 parameters, and we trained using an
unroll length of 80 characters.
SGD is sensitive to the tuning of the learning-rate parameter
η. The results reported here are based on training over
a sufﬁciently wide grid of learning rates (typically 11-13
values for η on a multiplicative grid of resolution 10
1
3 or
10
1
6 ). We checked to ensure the best learning rates were in
the middle of our grids, and that there was not a signiﬁcant
difference between the best learning rates. Unless otherwise
noted, we plot metrics for the best performing rate selected
individually for each x-axis value. We ﬁnd that the optimal
learning rates do not vary too much as a function of the
other parameters.
Increasing parallelism
We ﬁrst experiment with the
client fraction C, which controls the amount of multi-client
parallelism. Table 1 shows the impact of varying C for both
MNIST models. We report the number of communication
rounds necessary to achieve a target test-set accuracy. To
compute this, we construct a learning curve for each com-
bination of parameter settings, optimizing η as described
above and then making each curve monotonically improving
by taking the best value of test-set accuracy achieved over
5We performed additional experiments on unbalanced versions
of these datasets, and found them to in fact be slightly easier for
FedAvg.
6We always use character to refer to a one byte string, and use
role to refer to a part in the play.

Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data
Table 1: Effect of the client fraction C on the MNIST 2NN
with E = 1 and CNN with E = 5. Note C = 0.0 corre-
sponds to one client per round; since we use 100 clients for
the MNIST data, the rows correspond to 1, 10 20, 50, and
100 clients. Each table entry gives the number of rounds
of communication necessary to achieve a test-set accuracy
of 97% for the 2NN and 99% for the CNN, along with the
speedup relative to the C = 0 baseline. Five runs with
the large batch size did not reach the target accuracy in the
allowed time.
2NN
IID
NON-IID
C
B = ∞
B = 10
B = ∞
B = 10
0.0
1455
316
4278
3275
0.1
1474 (1.0×)
87 (3.6×)
1796 (2.4×)
664 (4.9×)
0.2
1658 (0.9×)
77 (4.1×)
1528 (2.8×)
619 (5.3×)
0.5
—
(—)
75 (4.2×)
—
(—)
443 (7.4×)
1.0
—
(—)
70 (4.5×)
—
(—)
380 (8.6×)
CNN, E = 5
0.0
387
50
1181
956
0.1
339 (1.1×)
18 (2.8×)
1100 (1.1×)
206 (4.6×)
0.2
337 (1.1×)
18 (2.8×)
978 (1.2×)
200 (4.8×)
0.5
164 (2.4×)
18 (2.8×)
1067 (1.1×)
261 (3.7×)
1.0
246 (1.6×)
16 (3.1×)
—
(—)
97 (9.9×)
all prior rounds. We then calculate the number of rounds
where the curve crosses the target accuracy, using linear
interpolation between the discrete points forming the curve.
This is perhaps best understood by reference to Figure 2,
where the gray lines show the targets.
With B = ∞(for MNIST processing all 600 client ex-
amples as a single batch per round), there is only a small
advantage in increasing the client fraction. Using the smaller
batch size B = 10 shows a signiﬁcant improvement in using
C ≥0.1, especially in the non-IID case. Based on these
results, for most of the remainder of our experiments we
ﬁx C = 0.1, which strikes a good balance between com-
putational efﬁciency and convergence rate. Comparing the
number of rounds for the B = ∞and B = 10 columns in
Table 1 shows a dramatic speedup, which we investigate
next.
Increasing computation per client
In this section, we
ﬁx C = 0.1, and add more computation per client on each
round, either decreasing B, increasing E, or both. Figure 2
demonstrates that adding more local SGD updates per round
can produce a dramatic decrease in communication costs,
and Table 2 quantiﬁes these speedups. The expected number
of updates per client per round is u = (E[nk]/B)E =
nE/(KB), where the expectation is over the draw of a
random client k. We order the rows in each section of
Table 2 by this statistic. We see that increasing u by varying
both E and B is effective. As long as B is large enough
to take full advantage of available parallelism on the client
hardware, there is essentially no cost in computation time
for lowering it, and so in practice this should be the ﬁrst
parameter tuned.
Table 2: Number of communication rounds to reach a target
accuracy for FedAvg, versus FedSGD (ﬁrst row, E = 1
and B = ∞). The u column gives u = En/(KB), the
expected number of updates per round.
MNIST CNN, 99% ACCURACY
CNN
E
B
u
IID
NON-IID
FEDSGD
1
∞
1
626
483
FEDAVG
5
∞
5
179
(3.5×)
1000
(0.5×)
FEDAVG
1
50
12
65
(9.6×)
600
(0.8×)
FEDAVG
20
∞
20
234
(2.7×)
672
(0.7×)
FEDAVG
1
10
60
34 (18.4×)
350
(1.4×)
FEDAVG
5
50
60
29 (21.6×)
334
(1.4×)
FEDAVG
20
50
240
32 (19.6×)
426
(1.1×)
FEDAVG
5
10
300
20 (31.3×)
229
(2.1×)
FEDAVG
20
10
1200
18 (34.8×)
173
(2.8×)
SHAKESPEARE LSTM, 54% ACCURACY
LSTM
E
B
u
IID
NON-IID
FEDSGD
1
∞
1.0
2488
3906
FEDAVG
1
50
1.5
1635
(1.5×)
549
(7.1×)
FEDAVG
5
∞
5.0
613
(4.1×)
597
(6.5×)
FEDAVG
1
10
7.4
460
(5.4×)
164 (23.8×)
FEDAVG
5
50
7.4
401
(6.2×)
152 (25.7×)
FEDAVG
5
10
37.1
192 (13.0×)
41 (95.3×)
For the IID partition of the MNIST data, using more compu-
tation per client decreases the number of rounds to reach the
target accuracy by 35× for the CNN and 46× for the 2NN
(see Table 4 in Appendix A for details for the 2NN). The
speedups for the pathologically partitioned non-IID data are
smaller, but still substantial (2.8 – 3.7×). It is impressive
that averaging provides any advantage (vs. actually diverg-
ing) when we naively average the parameters of models
trained on entirely different pairs of digits. Thus, we view
this as strong evidence for the robustness of this approach.
The unbalanced and non-IID distribution of the Shakespeare
(by role in the play) is much more representative of the kind
of data distribution we expect for real-world applications.
Encouragingly, for this problem learning on the non-IID and
unbalanced data is actually much easier (a 95× speedup vs
13× for the balanced IID data); we conjecture this is largely
due to the fact some roles have relatively large local datasets,
which makes increased local training particularly valuable.
For all three model classes, FedAvg converges to a higher
level of test-set accuracy than the baseline FedSGD mod-
els. This trend continues even if the lines are extended
beyond the plotted ranges. For example, for the CNN the
B = ∞, E = 1 FedSGD model eventually reaches 99.22%
accuracy after 1200 rounds (and had not improved further
after 6000 rounds), while the B = 10, E = 20 FedAvg
model reaches an accuracy of 99.44% after 300 rounds. We
conjecture that in addition to lowering communication costs,
model averaging produces a regularization beneﬁt similar
to that achieved by dropout [36].
We are primarily concerned with generalization perfor-
mance, but FedAvg is effective at optimizing the training
loss as well, even beyond the point where test-set accuracy
plateaus. We observed similar behavior for all three model
classes, and present plots for the MNIST CNN in Figure 6

H. Brendan McMahan,
Eider Moore,
Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson,
Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas
Figure 2: Test set accuracy vs. communication rounds
for the MNIST CNN (IID and then pathological non-IID)
and Shakespeare LSTM (IID and then by Play&Role) with
C = 0.1 and optimized η. The gray lines show the target
accuracies used in Table 2. Plots for the 2NN are given as
Figure 7 in Appendix A.
in Appendix A.
Can we over-optimize on the client datasets?
The cur-
rent model parameters only inﬂuence the optimization per-
formed in each ClientUpdate via initialization. Thus,
as E →∞, at least for a convex problem eventually the
initial conditions should be irrelevant, and the global min-
imum would be reached regardless of initialization. Even
for a non-convex problem, one might conjecture the algo-
rithm would converge to the same local minimum as long as
the initialization was in the same basin. That is, we would
expect that while one round of averaging might produce a
reasonable model, additional rounds of communication (and
averaging) would not produce further improvements.
Figure 3 shows the impact of large E during initial training
on the Shakespeare LSTM problem. Indeed, for very large
numbers of local epochs, FedAvg can plateau or diverge.7
This result suggests that for some models, especially in the
later stages of convergence, it may be useful to decay the
7Note that due to this behavior and because for large E not all
experiments for all learning rates were run for the full number of
rounds, we report results for a ﬁxed learning rate (which perhaps
surprisingly was near-optimal across the range of E parameters)
and without forcing the lines to be monotonic.
Figure 3: The effect of training for many local epochs (large
E) between averaging steps, ﬁxing B = 10 and C = 0.1 for
the Shakespeare LSTM with a ﬁxed learning rate η = 1.47.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Communication Rounds
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Test Accuracy
CIFAR-10
FedAvg, η=0.05
FedAvg, η=0.15
FedAvg, η=0.25
FedSGD, η=0.45
FedSGD, η=0.6
FedSGD, η=0.7
Figure 4: Test accuracy versus communication for the CI-
FAR10 experiments. FedSGD uses a learning-rate decay
of 0.9934 per round; FedAvg uses B = 50, learning-rate
decay of 0.99 per round, and E = 5.
amount of local computation per round (moving to smaller
E or larger B) in the same way decaying learning rates
can be useful. Figure 8 in Appendix A gives the analo-
gous experiment for the MNIST CNN. Interestingly, for this
model we see no signiﬁcant degradation in the convergence
rate for large values of E. However, we see slightly better
performance for E = 1 versus E = 5 for the large-scale
language modeling task described below (see Figure 10 in
Appendix A).
CIFAR experiments
We also ran experiments on the
CIFAR-10 dataset [24] to further validate FedAvg. The
dataset consists of 10 classes of 32x32 images with three
RGB channels. There are 50,000 training examples and
10,000 testing examples, which we partitioned into 100
clients each containing 500 training and 100 testing exam-
ples; since there isn’t a natural user partitioning of this data,
we considered the balanced and IID setting. The model
architecture was taken from the TensorFlow tutorial [38],
which consists of two convolutional layers followed by two
fully connected layers and then a linear transformation layer

Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data
Table 3: Number of rounds and speedup relative to baseline
SGD to reach a target test-set accuracy on CIFAR10. SGD
used a minibatch size of 100. FedSGD and FedAvg used
C = 0.1, with FedAvg using E = 5 and B = 50.
ACC.
80%
82%
85%
SGD
18000
(—)
31000
(—)
99000
(—)
FEDSGD
3750
(4.8×)
6600
(4.7×)
N/A
(—)
FEDAVG
280 (64.3×)
630 (49.2×)
2000 (49.5×)
to produce logits, for a total of about 106 parameters. Note
that state-of-the-art approaches have achieved a test accu-
racy of 96.5% [19] for CIFAR; nevertheless, the standard
model we use is sufﬁcient for our needs, as our goal is to
evaluate our optimization method, not achieve the best pos-
sible accuracy on this task. The images are preprocessed as
part of the training input pipeline, which consists of crop-
ping the images to 24x24, randomly ﬂipping left-right and
adjusting the contrast, brightness and whitening.
For these experiments, we considered an additional base-
line, standard SGD training on the full training set (no user
partitioning), using minibatches of size 100. We achieved
an
86% test accuracy after 197,500 minibatch updates
(each minibatch update requires a communication round
in the federated setting). FedAvg achieves a similar test
accuracy of 85% after only 2,000 communication rounds.
For all algorithms, we tuned a learning-rate decay param-
eter in addition to the initial learning rate. Table 3 gives
the number of communication rounds for baseline SGD,
FedSGD, and FedAvg to reach three different accuracy
targets, and Figure 4 gives learning-rate curves for FedAvg
versus FedSGD.
By running experiments with minibatches of size B = 50
for both SGD and FedAvg, we can also look at accuracy as
a function of the number of such minibatch gradient calcula-
tions. We expect SGD to do better here, because a sequential
step is taken after each minibatch computation. However,
as Figure 9 in the appendix shows, for modest values of C
and E, FedAvg makes a similar amount of progress per
minibatch computation. Further, we see that both standard
SGD and FedAvg with only one client per round (C = 0),
demonstrate signiﬁcant oscillations in accuracy, whereas
averaging over more clients smooths this out.
Large-scale LSTM experiments
We ran experiments on
a large-scale next-word prediction task to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach on a real-world problem. Our
training dataset consists 10 million public posts from a large
social network. We grouped the posts by author, for a total
of over 500,000 clients. This dataset is a realistic proxy for
the type of text entry data that would be present on a user’s
mobile device. We limited each client dataset to at most
5000 words, and report accuracy (the fraction of the data
where the highest predicted probability was on the correct
next word, out of 10000 possibilities) on a test set of 1e5
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Communication Rounds
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14

FedAvg (E=1)
FedSGD
Next Word Prediction LSTM, Non-IID Data
´=6.0
´=9.0
´=18.0
´=22.0
´=3.0
´=6.0
´=9.0
´=18.0
Figure 5: Monotonic learning curves for the large-scale
language model word LSTM.
posts from different (non-training) authors. Our model is a
256 node LSTM on a vocabulary of 10,000 words. The input
and output embeddings for each word were of dimension
192, and co-trained with the model; there are 4,950,544
parameters in all. We used an unroll of 10 words.
These experiments required signiﬁcant computational re-
sources and so we did not explore hyper-parameters as thor-
oughly: all runs trained on 200 clients per round; FedAvg
used B = 8 and E = 1. We explored a variety of learn-
ing rates for FedAvg and the baseline FedSGD. Figure 5
shows monotonic learning curves for the best learning rates.
FedSGD with η = 18.0 required 820 rounds to reach 10.5%
accuracy, while FedAvg with η = 9.0 reached an accuracy
of 10.5% in only 35 communication rounds (23× fewer then
FedSGD). We observed lower variance in test accuracy for
FedAvg, see Figure 10 in Appendix A. This ﬁgure also
include results for E = 5, which performed slightly worse
than E = 1.
4
Conclusions and Future Work
Our experiments show that federated learning can be made
practical, as FedAvg trains high-quality models using rel-
atively few rounds of communication, as demonstrated by
results on a variety of model architectures: a multi-layer
perceptron, two different convolutional NNs, a two-layer
character LSTM, and a large-scale word-level LSTM.
While federated learning offers many practical privacy ben-
eﬁts, providing stronger guarantees via differential pri-
vacy [14, 13, 1], secure multi-party computation [18], or
their combination is an interesting direction for future work.
Note that both classes of techniques apply most naturally to
synchronous algorithms like FedAvg.8
8Subsequent to this work, Bonawitz et al. [6] introduced an
efﬁcient secure aggregation protocol for federated learning, and
Koneˇcn´y et al. [23] presented algorithms for further decreasing
communication costs.

H. Brendan McMahan,
Eider Moore,
Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson,
Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas
