The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Fuzzy Controller Design for Assisted Omni-Directional 
Treadmill Therapy 
* Atif Ali Khan, Oumair Naseer, Daciana Iliescu, Evor Hines, 
School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United K 

  
Abstract— One of the defining characteristic of human being is 
their ability to walk upright. Loss or restriction of such ability 
whether due to the accident, spine problem, stroke or other 
neurological injuries can cause tremendous stress on the 
patients and hence will contribute negatively to their quality of 
life. Modern research shows that physical exercise is very 
important for maintaining physical fitness and adopting a 
healthier life style. In modern days treadmill is widely used for 
physical exercises and training which enables the user to set up 
an exercise regime that can be adhered to irrespective of the 
weather conditions. Among the users of treadmills today are 
medical facilities such as hospitals, rehabilitation centers, 
medical and physiotherapy clinics etc. The process of assisted 
training or doing rehabilitation exercise through treadmill is 
referred to as treadmill therapy. A modern treadmill is an 
automated machine having some built in functions and 
predefined features. Most of the treadmills used today are one 
dimensional and user can only walk in one direction. This 
paper presents the idea of using omnidirectional treadmills 
which will be more appealing to the patients as they can walk 
in any direction, hence encouraging them to do exercises more 
frequently. This paper proposes a fuzzy control design and 
possible implementation strategy to assist patients in treadmill 
therapy. By intelligently controlling the safety belt attached to 
the treadmill user, one can help them steering left, right or in 
any direction. The use of intelligent treadmill therapy can help 
patients to improve their walking ability without being 
continuously supervised by the specialists. The patients can 
walk freely within a limited space and the support system will 
provide continuous evaluation of their position and can adjust 
the control parameters of treadmill accordingly to provide best 
possible assistance.   
Keywords- Omni-directional treadmill, fuzzy logic, back pain, 
intelligent control, treadmill therpy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Treadmills are the most popular home exercise 
equipment. The treadmill ranked number one among 
exercise machines in burning calories (up to 865 an hour) at 
a perceived exertion intensity levels according to a 1996 
study at the Medical College of Wisconsin and the Zablocki 
VA Medical Centre in Milwaukee. Treadmill is the most 
used of all indoor aerobic fitness equipment. Walking is one 
of the best forms of exercise and owning a treadmill makes 
sticking with your walking routine easier. If time, personal 
safety, allergies, or weather conditions, limit your outdoor 
walking a treadmill can be a great asset. Applications of 
treadmill include Exercise, Training, Physical Rehabilitation, 
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Treatment, Motion Capture, 
Fully Immersive Gaming, Virtual Reality Simulations and 
Dog Training etc. It can be helpful in adopting a healthier 
lifestyle for back pain patients and the people who are less 
able to walk freely.  
Traditional physical therapy is beneficial in restoring 
mobility in individuals who have sustained spinal injury or 
have less ability to walk but residual limitations often persist. 
Robotic technologies may offer opportunities for further 
gains. Walking recovery programs that use body-weight-
supported treadmills are used in rehabilitation centers around 
the world offering patients a means of improving functional 
walking [1]. In a treadmill theraphy, patient walks on a 
treadmill under the supervison of a specialist with safty belts 
attached in case patient falls over. Medical specialist (often 
called physical therapist or physiotherapist) contineously 
monitors the patients moment and helps them during the 
treadmil walking session. A demonstration of conventioal 
treadmill theaphy is shown un the figure 1 below.    
 
Figure 1, Demostration of assisted treadmill therphy  
(Cortsey: Locomotion Therapy Product by Bio-Med Inc.) 

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
II. 
OMNIDIRECTIONAL TREADMILLS  
One of the most popular types of home exercise 
equipment is the treadmill, which provides a straightforward, 
efficient aerobic workout. Treadmills are usually used for 
cardio workouts, walking in a one way or linear direction. 
An omnidirectional treadmill, or ODT, is a device that 
allows a person to perform locomotive motion in any 
direction. The ability to move in any direction is how these 
treadmills differ from their basic counterparts that permit 
only unidirectional locomotion. Virtual space devices are 
working on a concept that would make treadmills omni-
directional, making the treadmill sense which way you are 
moving and adapting to that position [2]. The Omni-
Directional Treadmill (ODT) is a revolutionary device for 
locomotion in large-scale virtual environments. Figure 2 
below shows a person walking on an omnidirectional 
treadmill (virtual reality) with 3D glasses.   
 
 
Figure 2, Real time Omni directional treadmill walking 
Omnidirectional treadmills are employed in immersive 
virtual environment implementations to allow unencumbered 
movement within the virtual space through user self-motion.  
ODT’s first appeared in 1997. There have been several 
designs aiming at providing the person with the natural 
feeling of walk [3]. Figure 3 and 4 below, shows different 
type of omnidirectional treadmills used for different kind of 
applications.  
Figure 3, The Cyberwalk omni-directional treadmill at the Max 
Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics  
Omnidirectional treadmills were first professionally used by 
US army for the training purposes. This unit employed a belt 
made from plastic, toothed rollers. It employed mechanical 
tracking using a body harness, and included provisions for 
pneumatically powered, full-body force feedback for haptic 
and force display [4].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4, US Army Research Lab's ODT with CAVE Graphics 
 
III. 
TARGETED THERAPY FOR TARGETED PATIENTS 
One of the growing problems now day is back pain 
which restricts the mobility of a person. Previously it was 
believed that a complete bed rest helps patient to overcome 
back pain. Modern research however shows that instead of a 
complete bed rest, physical exercise is more helpful to 
overcome back pain. A study carried out in 2002 [22] shows 
that treadmill therapy is helpful for pain relief and functional 
improvement of back pain patients.     
A. Back Pain 
Back pain is usually associated with the Spine disorder. It 
is the second most common reason for visits to the doctor’s 
clinic, outnumbered only by the upper-respiratory infections. 
[5] Back pain is one of the most common reasons for missed 
work. One-half of all working Americans admit to having 
back pain symptoms each year [5]. Back pain is very 
common; according to a survey published in 2000. Almost 
half the adult population of the UK (49%) report low back 
pain lasting for at least 24 hours at some time in the year [6]. 
In industrialized countries, it is estimated that four out of 
every five adults (80%) will experience back pain at some 
stage in their life [6]. The number of people with back pain 
increases with advancing age, starting in school children and 
peaking in adults of 35 to 55 years of age. Back pain is just 
as common in adolescents as in adults [7]. 
In most cases it is very difficult to identify a single cause 
for back pain. In about 85% of back pain sufferers no clear 
pathology can be identified [8]. The following factors could 
contribute to back pain; having had back pain in the past, 
smoking and obesity [7], physical factors such as heavy 
physical work, frequent bending, twisting, lifting, pulling, 
pushing, repetitive work, static posture and vibrations [10]. 
Psychosocial factors such as stress, anxiety, depression, job 

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
satisfaction, mental stress [7, 11]. The National Health 
Service (NHS) UK spends more than £1 billion per year on 
back pain related costs, this includes: £512 million on 
hospital costs for back pain patients, £141 million on GP 
consultations for back pain, £150.6 million on physiotherapy 
treatments for back pain [9]. In the private healthcare sector 
£565 million is spent on back pain every year. This brings 
the healthcare costs for back pain to a total of £1.6 billion per 
year [9]. In addition there are other (indirect) costs. The 
Health and Safety Executive estimates that musculoskeletal 
disorders, which include back pain cost UK employers 
between £590 million and £624 million per year [12]. The 
total cost of back pain corresponds to between 1% and 2% of 
gross national product (GDP) [13]. The charity BackCare 
estimates that back pain costs the NHS, business and the 
economy over £5 billion a year. Other European countries 
report similar high costs; back pain related costs in The 
Netherlands in 1991 were more than 4 billion euro. For 
Sweden in 1995 these were more than 2 billion euro [14]. 
Americans spend at least $50 billion each year on back pain 
and that’s just for the more easily identified costs [15]. 
Nearly 5 million working days were lost as a result of back 
pain in 2003-04. Each person suffering from such a condition 
took an estimated 17.4 days off work on average in this 
period [16]. Back pain is the number two reason for long 
term sickness in much of the UK. In manual labor jobs, back 
pain is the number one reason [17]. 
B. Treadmill Theraphy   
Treadmill walking training program help patients who 
have difficulty in upright mobility to improve their walking 
ability during the last two decades. Studying and 
understanding the phenomenon of treadmill walking could 
be useful for the rehabilitation applicant. Robotic assisted 
treadmill therapy is a safe method to enable longer periods of 
gait therapy in children and adolescents with gait disorders 
[18]. A research carried out in 2011 showed that persons 
with chronic, motor-incomplete SCI can improve walking 
ability 
and 
psychological 
well-being 
following 
a 
concentrated period of ambulation therapy, regardless of 
training method. Improvement in walking speed was 
associated with improved balance and muscle strength. In 
spite of the fact that we withheld any formal input of a 
physical therapist or gait expert from subjects in the device-
specific training groups, these subjects did just as well as 
subjects receiving comprehensive PT for improving walking 
speed and strength. [19] 
A comfortable, supportive harness is quick and easy to 
put on and off. Worn as a vest around the upper torso, the 
“Support Harness” provides patients with security and safety 
from falling. Versatility includes double shoulder point 
connections to spreader bar or, a single connection point for 
low ceiling applications with tall patients (6’3” on a treadmill 
or 6’11” on the floor).  A pelvic support strap is included to 
keep the harness in place when limited body weight support 
is intended [20]. An example of support harness system is 
shown in figure 5 below.  
 
 
 
Figure 5, Biodex Support Harness DLX,  
BIODEX Medical Systems, Inc. New York. 
The aim of this study is to design an efficient and intelligent 
control system for the harness which can automatically 
adjust itself to provide maximum safety and assistant to the 
patient during the treadmill walking session.   
Treadmills therapy is usually recommended for Stroke, 
Spinal 
Cord, 
Head 
Injury, 
Amputees, 
Orthopedic, 
Neurologic, Vestibular and Older Adult Patients. In 1995, a 
study was conducted to study and clarify the extent to which 
elderly people have difficulties in mobility, and determine 
their association with socioeconomic factors, dwelling 
environment and use of services. The study groups were 
composed of two random samples of 800 persons aged 65-74 
and 75-84, respectively. The respondents were asked to 
assess their ability to get about the house, negotiate stairs and 
walk outdoors, as well as manage certain physical exercise 
tasks. Difficulties in getting about outdoors were found most 
frequently among the women in the older age group (52% 
reported difficulties), and least frequently among the women 
in the younger age group (23%). Logistic regression analyses 
showed that difficulties in getting about outdoors were 
significantly explained by length of education and defects in 
the dwelling environment. It was concluded in that research 
that the difficulties in mobility among elderly people, 
especially among elderly women, should be reduced more 
actively either by improving their physical abilities or by 
developing compensation strategies for their own use or in 
regard to the environment [21]. So treadmill walking can be 
a good alternative to cope with the weather conditions which 
hinders outdoor mobility in elderly peoples. A study carried 
out in 2002 shows that treadmill therapy is helpful for pain 
relief and functional improvement of back pain patients [22]. 
An assisted treadmill walking is shown in figure 6 below.  
     

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
Figure 6, Left: Students in Physical Therapy Program, 
University of North Carolina using supported treadmill therapy to 
regain a patient’s ability to walk. Right: Locomotion Therapy 
Product by Bio-Med Inc.  
IV. 
METHODOLGY 
A basic system diagram is shown in figure 7 below. 
Fuzzy logic is used for the control strategy. Fuzzy logic is 
widely used in machine control. The term itself inspires 
certain scepticism, sounding equivalent to "half-baked logic" 
or "bogus logic", but the "fuzzy" part does not refer to a lack 
of rigour in the method, rather to the fact that the logic 
involved can deal with concepts that cannot be expressed as 
"true" or "false" but rather as "partially true". Although 
genetic algorithms and neural networks can perform just as 
well as fuzzy logic in many cases, fuzzy logic has the 
advantage that the solution to the problem can be cast in 
terms that human operators can understand, so that their 
experience can be used in the design of the controller. This 
makes it easier to mechanize tasks that are already 
successfully performed by humans. Fuzzy logic controller 
gets the information against the position of user on the 
treadmill and computes the best parameter setting for 
treadmill support (belt) to keep user on track. The decision of 
parameter setting is computed on the basis of predefine fuzzy 
set of rules. The model is recursive that is loop. Controller 
checks the position information after certain amount of time 
and decides the appropriate action on the basis of current 
position. The goal of the controller is to assist user in 
walking and make sure that user never crosses the critical 
limit in any direction.     
 
Figure 7 Overview of the system 
 
V. 
FUZZY CONTROLLER 
 
A fuzzy control system is based on fuzzy logic. A 
mathematical system that analyses analog input values in 
terms of logical variables that take on continuous values 
between 0 and 1, in contrast to classical or digital logic, 
which operates on discrete values of either 1 or 0 (true or 
false, 
respectively). 
Classic 
control 
theory 
uses 
a 
mathematical model to define a relationship that transforms 
the desired state (requested) and observed state (measured) 
of the system into an input or inputs that will alter the future 
state of that system [23]. The purpose of control is to 
influence the behaviour of a system by changing an input or 
inputs to that system according to a rule or set of rules that 
model how the system operates.  
In the proposed mode, fuzzy control design is presented 
for controlling the safety belt attached to the omnidirectional 
treadmill user. By efficiently controlling the safety belt, 
assistance can be provided to the patients during the walking 
session on the omni-treadmill. If the person goes too far in 
either direction, there is a chance for over running the 
treadmill and can eventually cause physical damage. To 
overcome such situation, fuzzy controller monitors the 
patient’s location continuously and if patient goes too far in 
any direction and reaches the critical limit, the controller 
drags the safety belt in opposite direction to avoid 
overrunning the track. The overall goal of the controller is to 
keep patient in or near the centre of the treadmill which is the 
safest place. The input to fuzzy controller is the patient’s 
actual position on the treadmill and the output is the steering 
of the assisted safety belt attached to the patient. A fuzzy 
controller design is shown in figure 8 below. 
 

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
Figure 8, Fuzzy controller input and outputs 
The membership functions of the inputs are categorised 
into two groups as “far” and “near”. For the simplicity, only 
two membership functions are used. The number of 
membership functions can be increased to get more fine 
results but on the other hand it will make system more 
complex and computationally less efficient. The range of 
inputs are set to 0 -500. The output is the steering direction 
(the direction in which assistance is required). The range of 
output is set from 0-500. Input and output membership 
functions are shown in figure 9 below.  
 
Figure 9, Input and output membership functions  
 
The fuzzy controller operates on the principle of if-then rules 
called fuzzy set of rules. For the proposed model, 10 rules 
were used which are given below.  
If front is far and rear is near then support is front. 
If front is near and rear is far then support is rear. 
If left is near and front is near then support is right and rear. 
If left is near and rear is near then support is right and front. 
If right is near and front is near then support is left and rear. 
 
 
If right is near and rear is near then support is left and front. 
If left is far and front is far then support is left and front. 
If left is far and rear is far then support is left and rear. 
If right is far and front is far then support is right and front. 
If right is far and rear is far then support is right and rear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10, Fuzzy rule editor 
 
The fuzzy rule base is shown in figure 11 below. Fuzzy rule 
base provides the probability or the firing strength of each 
rule against the input and output variables.   
Figure 11, Fuzzy rule base 

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 12, Surface view of the overall design 
Surface view provides the visual description of the 
relationship between the input and output variables.  
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Some dummy tracks were created in matlab using x-y 
coordinates. A 500x500 two dimensional (x-y coordinates) 
track was created by varying the values of horizontal and 
vertical axis. The efficiency of controller was tested by 
running simulation and traversing patients through the 
dummy tracks. Matlab and Simulink were used for the 
controller design and simulations.  The blue dots represent 
the original path followed by the patient. Figure 13 show 
that patient moves out of the limit of the track and the 
program has crashed. The conventional support system 
attached to patient will just lift the patient in such case to 
avoid any injury.  
 
 
 
Figure 13, Path Followed by the patient without supervision 
Whereas in figure 14 below; it can be seen that in the 
presence of fuzzy logic controller, the patient is able to 
move through the full length of track. Fuzzy logic controlled 
support provides assistance if the patient comes too close to 
the boundaries. Comparing figures 13 above and 14 below, 
it can be seen that fuzzy logic controller is able to avoid 
patient from going off the track. In fig 14, when patient 
reached the critical limit and tends to go off track, fuzzy 
logic controller is good enough to keep patient on track by 
providing assisted in steering towards right side.  
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Distance X-Direction
Distance Y-Direction
Omnidirectional Treadmill Simulation
 
 
Path Followed by the Patient
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Distance X-Direction
Distance Y-Direction
Omnidirectional Tradmill Simulation
Path followed by the patient

 The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  
The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13],  
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.8   
 
e-ISSN: 2251-7545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
Figure 14, Path followed by the patient with fuzzy controller 
supervision  
 
In this proposed model, the controller program does not 
have any pre-defined information of tracks. It just monitors 
the current location of the patient with the treadmill 
boundaries in all four directions. If patient reaches any 
critical limit on left, right, front or rear, the controller assist 
patient to avoid going out the treadmill track.   
VII. CONCLUSION  
The treadmill is a relatively an easy piece of exercise 
equipment to use. A model based on fuzzy logic for 
controlling the walking movement has been proposed in this 
paper. The aims and objectives were achieved successfully. 
The intelligent control strategy and intuitive support method 
is applied in order to control patient walk in a natural 
manner. Fuzzy logic based expert system is developed to 
choose suitable control strategy for different state during 
walking. In conventional system, when dealing with patients 
with walking difficulties, a physiotherapist is required to 
monitor the patient using treadmill consistently. In this 
proposed system, overall work load of a physiotherapist can 
be minimized to a great extent. An intelligence expert system 
serves the basic role of a supervisor and consistently 
monitors the patient moment and adjusts the different 
parameters of the treadmill support accordingly to give a 
maximum confidence and support to the treadmill user. The 
fuzzy controller can be synchronised with the virtual tracks 
to monitor the efficiency of the patient against certain track 
and can help them traversing through the specified track 
more efficiently and safely. By adapting this intelligent 
control strategy the fear factor of falling over for the patients 
can be eliminated or minimised at least. This will encourage 
them to do exercise frequently and more willingly.    
VIII. FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS 
Walking is known as one of the most universal and yet 
most complex for of all human activities. The thoroughly 
understanding of the walk cycle is important to design and 
implement an appropriate control model. The joints, hip, 
knee, wrist, neck and ankle (the junctions linking the lower 
limbs and upper limbs which provide energy to drive the 
segments activities) can be used to design and develop a 
modern and more sophisticated expert system.
