Causal Conclusions that Flip Repeatedly
and Their Justiﬁcation
Kevin T. Kelly and Conor Mayo-Wilson
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Over the past two decades, several consis-
tent procedures have been designed to infer
causal conclusions from observational data.
We prove that if the true causal network
might be an arbitrary, linear Gaussian net-
work or a discrete Bayes network, then every
unambiguous causal conclusion produced by
a consistent method from non-experimental
data is subject to reversal as the sample size
increases any ﬁnite number of times. That
result, called the causal ﬂipping theorem, ex-
tends prior results to the eﬀect that causal
discovery cannot be reliable on a given sam-
ple size. We argue that since repeated ﬂip-
ping of causal conclusions is unavoidable in
principle for consistent methods, the best
possible discovery methods are consistent
methods that retract their earlier conclusions
no more than necessary.
A series of sim-
ulations of various methods across a wide
range of sample sizes illustrates concretely
both the theorem and the principle of com-
paring methods in terms of retractions.
1
Introduction
Over the past two decades, several procedures have
been designed to infer causal conclusions from obser-
vational data.
However, there is an essential diﬀer-
ence between causal conclusions based on experiments
and those inferred from non-experimental data. Con-
sider a randomized experimental trial to determine
whether X causes Y . Following the usual logic of sta-
tistical testing, one can suspend judgment regarding
the relationship between X and Y until a statistically
signiﬁcant correlation is detected.
If sample size is
not suﬃciently large, one can safely conclude that the
missed eﬀect is too small to be of practical consequence
even if it exists. The same cannot be said of causal
relations discovered, even unambiguously, from non-
experimental data when the underlying causal truth is
assumed to be linear gaussian or a discrete Bayes net
(Spirtes et al. 2000, p. 83). Because the orientation
of arbitrarily large causes can be retracted or reversed
as sample size increases in these cases, it is impossible
to ﬁnd non-trivial interval estimates of the eﬀect of
a policy; depending on the orientation of the relevant
causal connection, the result of the policy might either
be null or quite large (Robins et al. 1999).
In this paper, we extend the result in (Robins et al.
1999) that causal discovery cannot be reliable on a
given sample size. We prove that every causal conclu-
sion drawn by a consistent causal discovery procedure
can ﬂip in orientation any number of times and with
arbitrarily high chance as the sample size increases, as
long as the truth might be a linear Gaussian network or
a discrete Bayes network. That is the case regardless
of the sample size at which the ﬁrst conclusion in the
sequence is produced. It is also true regardless of the
strength of the causal connection between X and Y ,
so the practical consequences of the ﬂips could be im-
mense. Finally, it remains true even if the truth might
be an arbitrary, linear Gaussian or a discrete Bayes
net. One application of the causal ﬂipping theorem
is that the two causal ﬂips of the arrow between X
and Y as depicted in ﬁgure 1 are unavoidable, regard-
less of the parameter settings of the ﬁrst network in
the sequence, if the causal discovery procedure is con-
sistent and if the networks are either linear Gaussian
or discrete. We illustrate the causal ﬂipping theorem
by showing in simulations how four published causal
discovery algorithms perform the causal ﬂips in ﬁgure
1 with high chance when provided with random sam-
ples of increasing size generated from a ﬁxed setting of
the free parameters in the third causal network in the
series.
We do not infer from the causal ﬂipping theorem that
causal discovery is unjustiﬁed and should, therefore,
be abandoned. Rather, we view the unavoidability of

Figure 1: Causal Flips
causal ﬂipping as the proper justiﬁcation for causal dis-
covery, in the sense that the best causal discovery algo-
rithms are those that minimize ﬂipping prior to conver-
gence to the true model. It can be shown (Kelly 2010,
Kelly and Mayo-Wilson 2010, Kelly 2007b) that causal
inference methods that systematically prefer simpler
models (where simplicity is measured in terms of the
number of conditional dependencies entailed by the
model, and hence, by number of edges) are exactly
those that also minimize retractions of earlier judg-
ments. That result, called the Ockham Eﬃciency
Theorem, provides a theoretical justiﬁcation for ex-
isting algorithms that favor simpler models; a justiﬁ-
cation that does not depend in any way on question-
begging, simplicity-biased prior probabilities. More-
over, methods that retract their conclusions less can
be said to improve upon methods that retract more,
so retraction minimization provides an objective stan-
dard of progress in the design of causal discovery algo-
rithms. The simulations at the conclusion of the pa-
per illustrate concrete comparisons for some published
methods.
2
Statistical Questions and Consistent
Methods
Let P be a set of probability measures over a common
σ-ﬁeld.
A statistical question with presupposi-
tion P is a partition Θ of P into a countable collec-
tion of mutually exclusive and exhaustive theories.
The aim is to ﬁnd the theory Tp in Θ that contains
the unknown, true probability measure p by means of
samples from p. For example, one might ask whether
the mean of an unknown, one-dimensional normal dis-
tribution of standard variance is or is not exactly 0.
In that case, let P be the set of all normal measures
of standard variance, let Tµ=0 be the set of all such
measures with mean 0, and let Tµ̸=0 be the set of all
measures in P with non-zero mean. Then the question
corresponds to the partition Θµ = {Tµ=0, Tµ̸=0}.
Deﬁne a method for Θ to be a mapping M from i.i.d.
samples to theories in Θ. If p ∈P, let pn denote the
sampling density over i.i.d. samples of size n. Typi-
cally, as in the question whether µ = 0, there is no way
to bound the chance of error at a given sample size
over all of P, but one can at least choose a method
that converges to the truth in probability. Say that
M is consistent for Θ if and only if for each p in P
and for each ϵ > 0, there exists sample size n such
that for each sample size m ≥n, it is the case that
pm(M = Tp) > 1 −ϵ. Consistency is a weak property,
but it is the most that has been claimed for many
published algorithms for causal discovery (Spirtes et
al 2000). Our proposal, described in greater detail be-
low, is that such discovery procedures are motivated
and justiﬁed better if one reﬁnes the concept of consis-
tency by minimizing ﬂuctuations in the chances of pro-
ducing alternative theories prior to convergence down
to those that are unavoidable in principle.
3
Causal Discovery
It is a familiar fact that causal questions are not nec-
essarily reducible to statistical dependency, since sta-
tistical dependency between X and Y is compatible
with X being a cause of Y , with Y being a cause
of X, or with a common cause of X and Y .
One
of the bold insights of the recent literature on causal
discovery is that, nonetheless, some interesting causal
conclusions are determined entirely by probability, un-
der some plausible assumptions. In this section, we
present the most basic ideas behind the approach in
order to ﬁx notation—extended, motivated presenta-
tions may be found in (Pearl and Verma 1991, Spirtes
et al. 2000). Let V be a ﬁxed, ﬁnite set of random vari-
ables and let PV denote the set of all probability mea-
sures induced by joint probability densities over the
variables in V. Let dag denote the set of all directed
acyclic graphs on the ﬁxed variable set V. The arrows
or directed edges in these dags are understood to
indicate causal inﬂuence (as distinct from mere statis-
tical dependence).
The key idea behind causal discovery is to assume some
plausible principles that connect causal structure with
the patterns of statistical dependencies. Let X ⨿Y | S
abbreviate that X is probabilistically independent of
Y conditional on the values of variables in S, where
S ⊆V \ {X, Y }. Call such a statement a conditional
independence constraint (cic) over V, and let cic
denote the set of all cics over V. If p ∈PV, deﬁne
the cic pattern Ip to be the set of all cics satisﬁed
by p. If G ∈dag, say that p is Markov for G if and
only if for all variables X ∈V, it is the case that X is
independent of its non-descendants conditional on its

parents. Let the cic pattern of dag G be deﬁned as
IG = T{Ip : p ∈PV and p is Markov for G}. When
IG = Ip, say that p is faithful to G. Faithfulness is
the assumed connection between probability and cau-
sation. Deﬁne:
fcic
=
{IG : G ∈dag};
F
=
{p ∈PV : (∃A ∈fcic) Ip = A}.
That is, F is the set of measures faithful to some dag
over V. Let A ∈fcic. Deﬁne:
GA
=
{G ∈dag : IG = A};
FA
=
{p ∈F : Ip = A}.
Then Θ0 = {FA : A ∈fcic} is a purely statistical
question over F, since Ip is a function of p. Theory
FA uniquely determines A and, hence, the set of dags
GA, so Θ0 has potential causal signiﬁcance. If all of
the dags in GA share a feature (e.g., the causal arrow
X →Y ), then that feature is entailed by the statistical
hypothesis FA, so the statistical question Θ0 may have
strong, causal implications.
Therefore, causal discovery decomposes naturally into
two parts, the purely empirical problem of determin-
ing Ip by sampling from p and the purely deductive
problem of recovering GIp from Ip. Much of the re-
cent progress in causal discovery has centered on the
deductive phase of the problem, which proceeds as fol-
lows. The causal skeleton skel(G) is just the undi-
rected graph with vertices V that has a undirected
edge X −Y between X and Y if and only if G has an
edge between X and Y . A vee in G is a conﬁguration
of form X −Y −Z such that X and Z are not adja-
cent. An unshielded collision is a vee oriented as
X →Y ←Z.
Proposition 1 (Verma and Pearl 1991). IG = IG′ if
and only if skel(G) = skel(G′) and G, G′ have the same
unshielded collisions.
Thus, the causal skeleton of the true G and all of
the unshielded collisions in G are recoverable uniquely
from the purely probabilistic information IG. It may
also be possible to derive further conclusions about G.
If the vee X →Y −Z results from orienting some un-
shielded collision, then it follows that X →Y −Z is
not a collision, and the only remaining possibility is
Y →Z. Also, dags are acyclic, so if there is a di-
rected path from X to Y and an edge X −Y , then
it is safe to conclude that X →Y . These two con-
ditions can be iterated until no more orientations can
be obtained. The resulting method is called the sgs
algorithm, after the initials of its inventors (Spirtes et
al. 2000). The same authors have produced a several
more eﬃcient and more sophisticated variants of the
same idea, called the pc, cpc, and fci algorithms that
will employed in the simulation studies below.
Often, the pertinent causal question concerns some
local feature of causal structure, such as whether X
causes Y or Y causes X or neither, rather than some
global causal structure, like the cic pattern, which con-
cerns all the variables in V.
Say that causal edge
X →Y is essential in G if for all G′ such that
IG = IG′, the graph G′ contains the directed edge
X →Y . Deﬁne:
TX→Y
=
[
{FG : X →Y is essential in G};
TX←Y
=
[
{FG : X ←Y is essential in G};
TX−Y
=
[
{FG : X →Y or X ←Y is in
G non-essentially};
T¬(X−Y )
=
[
{FG : X and Y are non-adjacent in G}.
Deﬁne the causal question ΘX,Y concerning X, Y to
be
ΘX,Y = {TX→Y , TX←Y , TX−Y , T¬(X−Y )}.
4
Causal Flipping
The preceding section focused entirely on the purely
deductive inference from Ip to GIp. But Ip must be in-
ferred from samples. One approach is to assume that
a given cic is true until it is rejected by a statisti-
cal test. If the signiﬁcance levels of the tests are ad-
justed downward at a suﬃciently slow rate, then this
procedure converges in probability to Ip. Application
of the above deductive rules computes a pattern that
uniquely determines GIp. The resulting method M0
is consistent for Θ0 (Spirtes et al. 2000).
The consistency property does not imply a non-trivial
bound on chance of error in the short run (Robbins
et al.
1999), but the situation is worse than that.
It is possible for a consistent method to produce the
causal conclusion X →Y with arbitrarily high chance
at a given sample size and then to produce the con-
trary conclusion X ←Y with arbitrarily high chance
as sample size increases, and so on, any number of
times as sample size increases. Each such reversal in
chance of the inferred causal orientation is a causal
ﬂip.
Causal ﬂips are not so surprising for the sgs
algorithm, since that algorithm bases its conclusions
entirely on the pattern of currently accepted and re-
jected null hypotheses, and the accepted null hypothe-
ses may be rejected with high chance at higher sample
sizes. The causal ﬂipping theorem, however, asserts
the unavoidability of arbitrarily many causal ﬂips, if
the causal discovery method is consistent and if arbi-
trary, linear Gaussian or discrete Bayes networks are

theoretical possibilities.
In the linear Gaussian and
discrete Bayes net cases, it is as if every consistent
method is essentially forced to base its causal conclu-
sions on inferred patterns of conditional independence,
and the inferred independence hypotheses may always
be overturned as the sample size increases. That in-
cludes methods based on consistent scoring rules like
bic (see the ges simulation below) or even methods
based on Bayesian posterior probabilities.
Recent work (Hoyer et al. 2009) establishes that in
some questions that exclude linear Gaussian models
and discrete Bayes nets as possibilities, the true causal
structure can be identiﬁed without risking any retrac-
tions of earlier conclusions. However, that approach
avoids retractions by producing no causal conclusions
whatever all until the departure from the linear Gaus-
sian case is noticeable in the data. Therefore, unless
one foregoes all causal conclusions in linear Gaussian
models, causal ﬂipping remains an unavoidable feature
of causal discovery from non-experimental data.
5
Empirical Approximation
To prove the causal ﬂipping theorem, we introduce a
few crucial deﬁnitions. Let P be a set of probability
measures on a common σ-ﬁeld F, and deﬁne the total
variation distance between two measures in p, q ∈P
as ρ(p, q) = supE∈F |p(E)−q(E)|. Total variation dis-
tance is a very natural measure of indistinguishability,
since it bounds the diﬀerence in chances the two mea-
sures assign to an arbitrarily chosen “acceptance zone”
for a test that distinguishes them. Total variation
space is the topology induced by open ρ-balls. When
ρ is applied to sampling densities in statistical applica-
tions, we assume that one ﬁrst converts the sampling
densities to their induced, inﬁnite product measures.
Given T, T′ ⊆P, deﬁne the empirical approxima-
tion order with respect to P:
T ≤P T′ ⇔T ⊆cl(T′)
where the topological closure operation is deﬁned with
respect to total variation space. When P is clear from
context, we write drop the subscript P on ≤. The em-
pirical approximation order is one of the main ideas in
this paper—it embodies the philosophical problem of
induction as it arises in statistical inference. Suppose
that T ≤T′. Then no matter how much evidence you
think you have for concluding that the true distribu-
tion is in T, there is an essentially indistinguishable
distribution in T′. For example, recall the question
Θµ = {Tµ=0, Tµ̸=0}, which asks whether the mean of
a univariate normal distribution of standard variance
is or is not identically 0. Let pµ be the univariate nor-
mal with variance 1 and µ.
The unique element of
Tµ=0, then, is p0. If δ > 0 is suﬃciently small, then
ρ(p0, pδ) < ϵ. Thus, Tµ=0 ≤Tµ̸=0.
Because Tµ=0 ≤Tµ̸=0, any consistent method for Θµ
can be forced to ﬁrst conjecture Tµ=0, with arbitrarily
high probability, and then later conjecture Tµ̸=0, again
with arbitrarily high probability, at some larger sample
size. Why? Suppose that M is a consistent solution
to Θµ, and let ϵ > 0 be small. Then there exists sam-
ple size n such that pn
0(M = Tµ=0) > 1 −ϵ/2. Since
Tµ=0 ≤Tµ̸=0, there is some pδ ∈Tµ̸=0 such that
ρ(p0, pδ) < pn
0(M = Tµ=0) −(1 −ϵ/2). By the deﬁni-
tion of ρ, it follows that qn(M = Tµ=0) > 1−ϵ/2, since
M = Tµ=0 is an event in F. But then the consistency
of M in pδ guarantees that pm
δ (M = Tµ̸=0) > 1 −ϵ/2,
for some m > n. Thus, the chance that M produces
Tµ=0 plummets by a whopping 1 −ϵ from sample
size n to sample size m. The change of heart on in-
creasing information is not a mere matter of sampling
noise; it represents a fundamental reversal in the signal
the method sends to the user regarding theory Tµ=0
and it is a consequence of nothing more than the (de-
sirable) consistency of M and an unavoidable struc-
tural fact about the question addressed, namely, that
Tµ=0 ≤Tµ̸=0.
So much is implicit in standard, textbook discussions
of statistical power, but the argument iterates as sam-
ple size increases without bound. Suppose that one is
confronted with a question Θ in which there is an em-
pirical approximation chain T0 ≤T2 ≤. . . ≤Tk,
where Ti ∈Θ for all i ≤k. As long as your method
is consistent, it can be forced to return the various
theories T1, T2, and so on, with arbitrarily high prob-
ability as sample size increases. It does not matter how
clever or subtle your consistent method is at “mining”
empirical samples—in fact more sensitive and infor-
mative data-mining techniques will “leap” for the suc-
cessive theories in the empirical approximation chain
more quickly than dull, insensitive ones.
Moreover,
it turns out that there is no way to bound the time
at which these theories are produced—they happen
when nature chooses, if the method is paying atten-
tion.
These ideas are made precise in the following
proposition, which is the central lemma for the causal
ﬂipping theorem:
Proposition 2. Suppose that M is consistent for Θ
and that there exists chain
T0 ≤T1 ≤. . . ≤Tk
where Ti ∈Θ for all i ≤k. Let p ∈T0 and let O be
an arbitrary, open neighborhood of p in total variation
space.
Let ϵ > 0 and let d be an arbitrary natural
number. Then there exists q ∈O ∩Tk and there exist
increasing sample sizes n0 < n1 < . . . < nk such that
for each i ≤k:
ni > d · (i + 1) and qni(M = Ti) > 1 −ϵ.

Proof: By induction on k. When k = 0, just choose
q to be p and then n0 > d = d · (0 + 1) exists by
the consistency of M.
At k + 1, there exists chain
T0 ≤T1 ≤. . . ≤Tk+1. Let p ∈T0 and let O be an
open neighborhood of p in total variation space. Since
M is consistent, there exists n0 > d such that:
pn0(M = T0) > 1 −ϵ.
There exists total variation ball Bp around p such that
for each p′ in Bp, the preceding, strict inequality holds
(again, ρ bounds the probabilities of arbitrary events
in the sigma ﬁeld of the product measure induced by
the probability measures under consideration). Hence,
the inequality holds over all of S = O ∩Bp, which is
open. Since T0 ≤T1, there exists p′ ∈S∩T1. By the
induction hypothesis, there exists q ∈S ∩Tk+1 and
there exist increasing sample sizes n1, . . . , nk+1 such
that ni > 2 · n0 · (i + 1) and:
qni(M = Ti) > 1 −ϵ,
for each i from 1 to k + 1. Thus, ni > d · (i + 1), for
each i from 0 to k + 1. Since q ∈S ⊆Bp, we have
that:
qn0(M = T0) > 1 −ϵ.
Finally, q ∈S ⊆O. ⊣
If A, B ∈fcic, write A ≤B if FA ≤FB. Say that P is
dependency driven if and only if for all A, B ∈fcic,
B ⊆A ⇒A ≤B.
Dependency driven-ness is the second important con-
cept in this paper.
When P is dependency driven,
statistical dependencies suﬃce to disambiguate any
causal questions that can be disambiguated. As it hap-
pens, two of the most studied applications of causal
discovery are dependency driven:
Proposition 3. The set of linear Gaussian distribu-
tions over V and the set of discrete multinomial dis-
tributions over V are both dependency driven.
The proof of the preceding proposition is presented in
(Kelly and Mayo-Wilson 2010).1 Recent work (Hoyer
et al.
2009) suggests that non-dependency-driven
questions may be more commonplace than we initially
expected.
6
Retractions in Chance
In light of Proposition 2, any method M probably can
be forced, at successively large sample sizes, to pro-
duces T1, then produce T2, and so on, with arbitrarily
1The proof crucially employs the fact the set of unfaith-
ful linear gaussian and discrete multinomial distributions
each have Lebesgue measure zero; the linear gaussian case
is discussed in (Spirtes, et. al 2000), and the discrete case
in (Meek 1995).
high probability. These theories may be diﬀerent. At
each change of heart, the chance of producing the pre-
ceding theory drops severely (by at least the amount
1 −ϵ, where ϵ may be chosen as small as you please).
We call that a retraction in chance. To quantify
retractions in chance, let P be a set of measures on
a common σ-ﬁeld, Θ be a question, and let M be a
method, let p ∈P and let n > 0. For two real num-
bers x and y, deﬁne x ⊖y = max{0, x −y}. Then
deﬁne:
rΘ(M, T, p, n)
=
pn−1(M = T)
⊖pn(M = T);
rΘ(M, p, n)
=
X
T∈Θ
rΘ(M, T, p, n);
rΘ(M, p)
=
X
n>0
rΘ(M, p, n);
rΘ(M)
=
sup
p∈P
rΘ(M, p).
Then rΘ(M, p) represents the total retractions in
chance of M in p as sample size increases, and rΘ(M)
is the worst-case bound on rΘ(M, p) with respect to
P. By tuning ϵ > 0 in the preceding proposition arbi-
trarily low, one obtains the following lower bounds on
retractions in chance:
Proposition 4. Let the situation be as described in
proposition 2, and suppose that Ti ̸= Ti+1 for all i <
k. Then q satisﬁes rΘ(M, q) > k −ϵ and rΘ(M) ≥k.
7
Causal Flipping Theorem
Suppose that X →Y is an edge in G. Say that X →
Y is covered if and only if the parents of X in G
are the same as those of Y except for X itself.
A
covered edge reversal involves ﬂipping a covered
edge to obtain a new G′. Deﬁne G ⪯H to hold if and
only if H is obtained from G by a ﬁnite sequence of
covered edge ﬂips and edge additions. Then:
Theorem 1 (Chickering 2002). IG ⊆IH if and only
if H ⪯G.
Call a sequence G0 ⪯G1 ⪯. . . ⪯Gk a Chickering
chain.
For example, the sequence in ﬁgure 1 is a
Chickering chain.
From (i) to (ii), start by adding
edge Z1 →Z2 and then ﬂip the following edges in se-
quence: Z2 →X, Z1 →X, X →Y , Y →Z3. Then
add edge Z4 →Y . From (ii) to (iii), the process is
similar, starting from the addition of Z3 →Z4. We
now present the main result of the paper. Say that
a vertex X is isolated in G if and only if X has no
causal connections to other variables in G. Then:
Theorem 2 (Causal Flipping). Suppose that M is
consistent for the edge orientation question ΘX,Y over
dependency driven P. Let p ∈P, G ∈Gp, and suppose

there are at least k isolated variables in G. Let O be
an arbitrary, open neighborhood of p in total variation
space, and let ϵ > 0. Then there exists q ∈O such
that rΘX,Y (M, q) > k −ϵ. Thus, rΘX,Y (M) ≥k.
Proof:
It suﬃces to construct a Chickering chain
G = G0 ⪯G1 ⪯. . . ⪯Gk in which causal edge
X −Y ﬂips k times. If k = 0, then the proposition
is trivial, so suppose that k > 0. Suppose that dag
G contains the edge X →Y , so that TG is either
TX→Y
or TX−Y .
Extend G to some complete
dag H on the non-isolated vertices V′ (i.e., a dag
in which each vertex is adjacent to every other).
There exists a complete dag H′ over V′ with edge
Y →X. Then IH = IH′, by proposition 1, and so
H′ results from H by a sequence of (covered) edge
ﬂips, by theorem 1.
Let Z be an isolated variable
of G.
Add the edge Z →X to H′ to obtain the
dag G1.
Then, as Z was isolated in G, the vee
Z →X ←Y is an unshielded collision in G1.
By
Proposition 1, the edge Y →X is essential in G1,
and so TG1 = TY →X. Hence TG1 ̸= TG. Iterate this
construction until the isolated variables are used up. ⊣
Then every published causal conclusion X →Y drawn
by a consistent method for the edge orientation ques-
tion ΘX,Y over dependency driven PV is subject to
ﬂipping any number of times, no matter how strong the
evidence for that conclusion happens to be at present.
The bound k on causal ﬂips based on the number of
isolated variables remaining in V is mainly a formal
nicety. In practice, there are always new, unmeasured
variables that have no noticeable correlation with the
variables in V, so the potential for future ﬂips is, es-
sentially, endless.
8
Causal Flips in Simulation
Suppose that the truth is the standardized struc-
tural equation model with independent, Gaussian er-
ror terms and causal path parameters ﬁxed at the val-
ues depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The Truth Behind the Simulations
We generated line graphs of frequency of output of
the true edge X →Y (the pink “true” line) and the
ﬂipped edge X ←Y (the blue “reversed” line) over 100
trials at each sample size examined, for each of four
causal search algorithms implemented in tetrad ver-
sion 4.3.9-21.2 The algorithms simulated are pc and
fci (Spirtes et al. 2000), cpc (Ramsey et al. 2006)
and ges (Chickering et al. 2002). The retractions in
chance of algorithms pc, cpc, and fci in the causal
scenario depicted in ﬁgure 2 are depicted in ﬁgures 3,
4, and 5. The ges algorithm is a bit hesitant to ﬂip
all the way to the false conclusion in the example de-
picted (the truth is still fully retracted), but on a slight
reﬁnement of the example in ﬁgure 2 (set Z3 →Z4 to
−.02501, Z8 →X to .005, and X →Y to .5 - Revers-
ing the sign on X →Y was an oversight that theoret-
ically has nothing to do with the improved ﬂips.) it
bites enthusiastically for the ﬁrst ﬂip; the second ﬂip
being assured by the consistency of the ges method
(ﬁgure 6).
Figure 3: PC Algorithm
Figure 4: CPC Algorithm
2The
tetrad
package
is
freely
downloadable
at
www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/tetrad/ tetrad4.html.

Figure 5: FCI Algorithm
Figure 6: GES Algorithm
9
What Good are Methods that Flip?
Some advocates of causal discovery techniques invoke
principles stronger than causal faithfulness that rule
out the possibility of causal ﬂips (Zhang and Spirtes
2003).
Bayesians lay down prior probabilities that
make the ﬂips improbable.
In contrast, we propose
that the justiﬁcation for existing causal discovery pro-
cedures is a consequence of the unavoidability of ﬂip-
ping, rather than assurances that ﬂipping will not
happen. Since repeated causal ﬂips are unavoidable
for consistent methods, the best that a truth-seeker
can expect is to minimize such ﬂips or retractions
(Schulte et al. 2007). Hence, we propose that retrac-
tion minimization provides the best available expla-
nation of how it is that causal discovery algorithms
ﬁnd true causes better than alternative strategies bi-
ased against simple causal networks can, at least in
application to linear Gaussian and discrete causal net-
works. For comparisons of the retraction minimization
approach with alternative foundations for model selec-
tion, see (Kelly 2010, Kelly and Mayo-Wilson 2008,
Kelly 2008).
It can be demonstrated that, in both causal inference
and some instances of scientiﬁc theorizing more gen-
erally, methods that minimize retractions are those
that employ Ockham’s razor, i.e. a systematic prefer-
ence for simpler models (Kelly 2010, Kelly and Mayo-
Wilson 2010, Kelly 2007b).
The basic idea is that
simpler theories imply fewer detectable eﬀects, where
eﬀects are arbitrarily subtle phenomena that may me
encountered arbitrarily late or only in arbitrarily large
samples. Therefore, positing a theory that implies a
potentially subtle eﬀect that has not yet been detected
leaves one open to having to retract the theory if the ef-
fect never appears (e.g., after a long sequence of failed
or “null” attempts to produce the eﬀects in question).
That retraction gets added to all the unavoidable re-
tractions that may follow, resulting in a sub-optimal
retraction bound. So one ought not to produce com-
plex theories that imply extra eﬀects until those po-
tentially subtle eﬀects have been veriﬁed.
Some standard causal discovery procedures, like cpc
and ges, do implement a version of Ockham’s razor
because they employ a systematic bias toward causal
networks with fewer edges. That explains the nearly
optimal performance of cpc and ges in terms of re-
tractions (i.e.
two full retractions in chance) in the
above simulations. In contrast to cpc and ges, the
pc and fci algorithms violate Ockham’s razor, which
is why they exhibit “spikes” in the chance of producing
orientation X →Y around sample size 10,000. The pc
algorithm, for example, seeks to minimize conditional
independence tests by deducing some cics from others,
assuming that the data are faithful - which can easily
be false due to sample variation. As a consequence,
pc’s computational heuristics result in less direct con-
vergence to the truth, where “directness” is measured
in terms of total retractions in chance.
Here’s it how happens.
At sample size 10, 000, the
pc algorithm checks the independence of X and Z3
conditional on {Z1}, {Z2}, and {Z8}. The tests fail
to reject about 1/3 of the time. In those cases, the
algorithm deduces, from the false assumption that the
data are faithful, that there is a collision Z3 →Y ←
X.3 The algorithm concludes, therefore, that the truth
is X →Y when X ←Y is compatible with the data
and is equally simple. Ockham’s razor (and common
sense) demand that science wait for the data to choose
among equally simple models.
The penalty for violating Ockham’s razor is not
unreliability—reliability is impossible in this ques-
tion, in any event, unless one adopts unrealistic back-
ground assumptions stronger than faithfulness. How-
ever, there is a demonstrable penalty for violating Ock-
3We are indebted to Joe Ramsey for this explanation.

ham’s razor: the additional retraction in chance in-
curred on the downside of the probability “spike”. In
contrast, the cpc algorithm does cross-check in the
recommended manner, and as a result, it avoids vio-
lating Ockham’s razor in the manner just described.
Thus, it avoids the spike, as does the score-based ges
method. Therefore, the simulation study concretely il-
lustrates, with real methods, how the retraction mini-
mization theory can motivate and justify concrete im-
provements in data mining technology.
