arXiv:2301.00989v1  [cs.CV]  3 Jan 2023
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
1
A New Perspective to Boost Vision
Transformer for Medical Image Classiﬁcation
Yuexiang Li

Yawen Huang

Nanjun He

Kai Ma

Yefeng Zheng

Tencent Jarvis Lab
Shenzhen
China
Abstract
Transformer has achieved impressive successes for various computer vision tasks.
However, most of existing studies require to pretrain the Transformer backbone on a
large-scale labeled dataset (e.g., ImageNet) for achieving satisfactory performance, which
is usually unavailable for medical images. Additionally, due to the gap between medical
and natural images, the improvement generated by the ImageNet pretrained weights sig-
niﬁcantly degrades while transferring the weights to medical image processing tasks. In
this paper, we propose Bootstrap Own Latent of Transformer (BOLT), a self-supervised
learning approach speciﬁcally for medical image classiﬁcation with the Transformer
backbone. Our BOLT consists of two networks, namely online and target branches,
for self-supervised representation learning. Concretely, the online network is trained to
predict the target network representation of the same patch embedding tokens with a dif-
ferent perturbation. To maximally excavate the impact of Transformer from limited med-
ical data, we propose an auxiliary difﬁculty ranking task. The Transformer is enforced
to identify which branch (i.e., online/target) is processing the more difﬁcult perturbed
tokens. Overall, the Transformer endeavours itself to distill the transformation-invariant
features from the perturbed tokens to simultaneously achieve difﬁculty measurement and
maintain the consistency of self-supervised representations. The proposed BOLT is eval-
uated on three medical image processing tasks, i.e., skin lesion classiﬁcation, knee fatigue
fracture grading and diabetic retinopathy grading. The experimental results validate the
superiority of our BOLT for medical image classiﬁcation, compared to ImageNet pre-
trained weights and state-of-the-art self-supervised learning approaches.
1
Introduction
Recently, vision Transformer (ViT) [10] and its variants [23, 32, 36] has been introduced
for various computer vision tasks (e.g., image classiﬁcation [10, 18], object detection [9,
© 2022. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.

2
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
41], semantic segmentation [34, 39] and medical image processing [11, 15, 16, 31, 38])
and gained increasing attentions from the community. The common ViT usually requires
pretrainig on large-scale natural image datasets, e.g., ImageNet, to achieve the satisfactory
performance. For natural images, the labels for pretraining dataset can be efﬁciently obtained
by crowdsourcing, as even ordinary people possess the ability to effectively identify and label
objects in natural images. However, the same strategy cannot be adopted for medical images,
as professional expertise is mandatory for high-quality medical image annotations. Hence,
the limited amount of annotated medical data is the major obstacle for the improvement of
diagnosis accuracy even with the powerful vision Transformer.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) approach is a potential solution to tackle the challenge of
insufﬁcient annotated data. The typical self-supervised learning formulates a proxy task to
extract representative features from unlabeled data, which can boost the accuracy of subse-
quent target task. Existing studies have proposed various proxy tasks, including grayscale
image colorization [19], patch re-ordering [25], and context restoration [27]. The SSL was
ﬁrstly brought to medical image processing by Zhang et al. [37]. Concretely, the neural
network was pretrained with a proxy task that sorted the 2D slices from the conventional
3D medical volumes for the subsequent ﬁne-grained body part recognition. Zhu et al. [40]
enforced 3D networks to play a Rubik’s cube game for pretraining, which can be seen as an
extension of 2D Jigsaw puzzles [24]. Contrastive learning [13] has been recently popular-
ized for self-supervised representation learning. These approaches enforce neural networks
to spontaneously exploit useful information from pairs of positive and negative samples,
instead of permuting the contextual information of images for self-supervised signal for-
mulation. He et al. [14] ﬁrstly introduced the idea of contrastive learning into the area
of self-supervised learning. They proposed an approach, namely MoCo, which addressed
the problem of large number of negative samples for contrastive learning by maintaining a
memory bank of negative samples. Following the direction, various contrastive-learning-
based self-supervised approaches have been proposed [4, 6, 7, 12, 26, 33, 35]. Inspired by
the success of self-supervised learning for CNNs, researchers began to make their efforts to
ViT. Atito et al. [1] directly utilized the existing SSL approaches, including rotation pre-
diction, contrastive learning and image restoration, to pretrain vision Transformers. Several
studies [2, 3] have been proposed along this direction. However, taking the architecture dif-
ference between CNN and ViT into account, i.e., CNN takes the whole image as input, while
the input of ViT is the embedding tokens of image tiles, the self-supervised learning approach
speciﬁcally for ViT is worthwhile to develop.
In the recent study, Chen et al. [7] proposed MoCo V3 as a token-based constrastive
learning approach, speciﬁcally for ViT to extract self-supervised features from raw data.
The network pretrained with MoCo V3 outperformed the ImageNet-pretrained one, which
demonstrated the effectiveness of token-based self-supervised learning. In this paper, we
follow the direction and propose a token-wise perturbation based self-supervised learning
framework speciﬁcally for medical image classiﬁcation with vision Transformer, namely
Bootstrap Own Latent of Transformer (BOLT). Similar to the existing Bootstrap Your Own
Latent (BYOL) [12], our BOLT consists of two networks, namely online and target branches,
for self-supervised representation learning. Instead of image-wise transformation adopted by
BYOL, the online network of our BOLT is trained to predict the target network representa-
tion of the same patch embedding tokens with a different perturbation. Moreover, to encour-
age the vision Transformer to deeply exploit useful information from limited medical data,
we propose an auxiliary difﬁculty ranking task. The difference between the original patch
embedding tokens and the perturbed ones is measured as the difﬁculty (i.e., the larger dif-

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
3
x
Vision Transformer ݂ఏ
Vision Transformer ݂క
Patch 
Embedding
Token  
Perturbation 
Module
Token 
Perturbation 
Module
ݕఏ
ݕక
ݖఏ
ݖక
ݍఏ(ݖఏ)
ݏ݃(ݖక)
Difficulty-awareness Loss
݃క
݃ఏ
Similarity Loss
Online
Target
Figure 1: The architecture of our BOLT framework. Compared to the original BYOL, our
BOLT consists of two main revisions: 1) The proposed BOLT generates two views of em-
bedding tokens for self-supervised learning; 2) A novel difﬁculty-awareness loss is proposed
to encourage the ViT to deeply exploit useful information from raw data. sg(.) means stop-
gradient.
ference means more difﬁcult for the vision Transformer to process), which is then adopted
as the supervision signal. In other words, the vision Transformer is required to identify
which branch (online/target) is processing the more difﬁcult perturbed tokens. Under the
co-supervision of the two tasks, the vision Transformer is encouraged to endeavour itself to
distill the transformation-invariantfeatures from the perturbed tokens, which should be capa-
ble for simultaneous difﬁculty measurement and maintain the consistency of self-supervised
representations. In summary, the main contributions of our work can be concluded into
four-fold:
• A token perturbation based self-supervised learning approach, namely BOLT, specif-
ically designed for vision Transformer is proposed. A token perturbation module is
integrated to the existing BYOL framework for the more effective ViT pretraining.
• An auxiliary self-supervised task, i.e., difﬁculty ranking, is proposed to encourage
ViTs to deeply exploit useful information from limited medical data. The self-supervised
signal of this auxiliary task also derives from the perturbed tokens generated by our
perturbation module. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst SSL framework based on
the difﬁculty-awareness paradigm.
• The proposed BOLT is evaluated on three medical image processing tasks, i.e., skin
lesion classiﬁcation, knee fatigue fracture grading and diabetic retinopathy grading.
The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our BOLT, compared to the
widely-used ImageNet pretrained weights.
• Last but not least, we pretrain the ViT using different self-supervised learning ap-
proaches on a large-scale private fundus image dataset captured from a collaborating
hospital for diabetic retinopathy grading task. The dataset consists of 350,000 fundus
images of normal cohort and patients with various diseases, which may be the largest
fundus image dataset in the worldwide. The pretraining on our private large-scale
dataset is veriﬁed to beneﬁt the related downstream target task. To advance the de-
velopment of automated fundus image processing, we will release the ViT pretrained
models to the community.

4
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
6
1
5
7
3
9
8
2
4
Permutation
6 1 5
7 3 9
8 2 4
Linear Projection
1
2
3
Split
6
1
5
7
3
9
8
2
4
Sliding Window
Token Permutation Module
Embedded Token ࢠ࢕
Content-perturbed Token ࢠ࢙
Long Token ࢠ࢒
Figure 2: The architecture of the proposed token perturbation module. The module consists
of three operations (i.e., permutation, linear projection and split) to perturb the order and
content of embedded tokens. Note that nine embedding tokens in this ﬁgure are taken as an
example. The exact number (N) of embedding tokens is decided by HW
P2 , where H and W are
the height and width of the original image, respectively, and (P, P) is the size of each image
patch.
2
Method
In this section, we introduce the proposed BOLT framework in details. The pipeline of our
Bootstrap Own Latent of Transformer (BOLT) is illustrated in Fig. 1. Similar to BYOL, the
proposed BOLT adopts two branches to extract useful information from raw data, i.e., the
online and target branches. The online branch consists of a set of weights θ, including a
vision Transformer fθ, a projector gθ and a predictor qθ. The target branch is of the same
architecture with a different set of weights ξ. The target branch generates the regression
targets for the online branch to learn, and its parameters ξ are an exponential moving average
of the online branch parameters θ, which can be deﬁned as:
ξ ←τξ + (1 −τ)θ
(1)
where τ ∈[0,1] is the decay rate.
Compared to the existing BYOL [12], the proposed BOLT has two differences: First,
instead of image-based perturbation, we implement a token-based perturbation module for
the constrastive learning. The underlying reason for the token-based perturbation is that the
vision Transformer is insensitive to the order of input embedded tokens due to the mechanism
of self-attention, which neutralizes the effectiveness of typical image-based transformation
(e.g., Jigsaw puzzle permutation [24]) made to the self-supervised learning of ViT. Inspired
by recent studies [8, 36], our token perturbation module involves permutation, fusion and
split operations to simultaneously disarrange the order and content of tokens. Second, since
the recent study [29] demonstrated the difﬁculty-awareness can boost the performance of
CNNs, a difﬁculty-awareness auxiliary task, i.e., requiring the ViT to identify which branch
(online/target) is processing the more difﬁcult perturbed tokens, is integrated to the existing
BYOL framework.

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
5
2.1
Token Perturbation Module
Instead of permuting the image content, we propose a token perturbation module to per-
turb the order and content of embedded tokens for the self-supervised learning of a vision
Transformer. The architecture of our token perturbation module is presented in Fig. 2, which
involves three operations, i.e., permutation, linear projection and split.
Permutation. Similar to the typical vision Transformer, the input image x ∈RH×W×C is
cropped into a sequence of ﬂattened 2D patches xp ∈RN×(P2C), where H and W are the
height and width of the original image, respectively, C is the number of channels, (P, P) is
the size of each image patch, and N = HW
P2 is the resulting number of patches. Therefore, the
embedded tokens zo can be written as:
zo = [x1
pE;x2
pE;··· ;xN
p E],
(2)
where E ∈R(P2C)×D is a trainable linear projection (D is the latent vector size of the vision
Transformer). Then, the permuted tokens zp are obtained using a permutation operation
(Perm(·)), which randomly disarranges the order of zo: zp = Perm(zo). Fig. 2 shows an
example, the order of zo is disarranged to [z6
o;z1
o;z5
o;z7
o;z3
o;z9
o;z8
o;z2
o;z4
o].
Linear Projection. After the permutation, we concatenate M adjacent tokens using a sliding
window with a stride S = W
P , which results in K = N
S long tokens (z′
p) with the length of
M × D. The obtained tokens are then fed to a linear projection layer (Efuse ∈RMD×SD) for
information fusion, which yields K content-perturbed long tokens (zl):
zl = z′
pEfuse.
(3)
Split. As previously mentioned, the typical vision Transformer uses the constant latent vec-
tor size D through all of its layers; hence, the fused tokens with the length of S×D need to be
reshaped back to the length of D to fulﬁll the input requirement of ViT. To achieve that, the
proposed token perturbation module adopts a split operation to separate each long token into
S D-length tokens. The splitted tokens (zs) is then fed to ViT for self-supervised learning.
2.2
Loss Function
As shown in Fig. 1, our BOLT is jointly supervised by two loss functions, i.e., similarity
loss and difﬁculty-awareness loss. The similarity loss is consistent to the existing BYOL
framework. Concretely, for a set of embedded tokens zo, our BOLT produces two augmented
perturbed tokens zt and z′
t for online and target branches, respectively. The perturbed tokens
zt are then fed to a ViT fθ, which yields a representation yθ = fθ(zt) and a projection zθ =
gθ(yθ). For the perturbed tokens for the target branch, a representation yξ = fξ(z′
t) and a
projection zξ = gξ(yξ) are accordingly generated. Consistent to BYOL, a prediction network
qθ(.) is adopted to yield the prediction of zξ and l2-norm is calculated for network training:
Lθ =

qθ(zθ)−zξ

2
2
(4)
where θ denotes the network weights of the online branch including fθ, gθ and qθ. The loss
LBOLT
θ
= Lθ + ˜Lθ only optimizes the weights of online branch θ, where ˜Lθ is the symmetric
loss of Lθ by feeding z′
t and zt to online and target branches, respectively.

6
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
Difﬁculty-awareness Loss. Apart from the similarity loss, inspired by the curriculum learn-
ing [17], we propose an auxiliary task—identifying which branch is processing the tokens
with a larger level of perturbation. Such an auxiliary task can drive ViTs to self-adaptively
pay more attention on the hard case and accordingly better exploit the semantic information
from the embedded tokens, since they are required to understand the content of tokens for
the accurate difﬁculty ranking.
To formulate the auxiliary task, the self-supervised signal needs to be ﬁrst generated. As-
suming the perturbed tokens feeding to online and target branches as zt and z′
t, respectively,
the self-supervised signal ysel f can be deﬁned as:
ysel f =

0,
MSE(Perm−1
zt (zt)−zo) < MSE(Perm−1
z′t (z′
t)−zo)
1,
MSE(Perm−1
zt (zt)−zo) ⩾MSE(Perm−1
z′t (z′
t)−zo)
(5)
where MSE(.) is the mean squared error function; Perm−1(.) is the inverse permutation
operation rearranging the perturbed tokens back to the original order.
After the self-supervision is obtained, the features extracted by the online and target
ViTs (i.e., yθ and yξ) are concatenated (Cat(.)) and sent to a fully-connected layer (FC(.))
for difﬁculty classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, the process can be written as:
LDif f
fθ
= −ysel f ∗log(p)−(1 −ysel f)∗log(1 −p))
(6)
where p = FC(Cat(yθ,yξ))) is the probability of ysel f = 1. Similar to LBOLT
θ,ξ
, the difﬁculty-
awareness loss only optimizes the online branch (fθ).
We notice that the recent study [29] has already proposed a difﬁculty-awareness loss for
scleral spur localization. Hence, it is worthwhile to emphasize the difference between it and
our loss function. Concretely, Tao et al. [29] explicitly enforced networks to predict the Dice
score of input images using segmentation ground truth to achieve difﬁculty-awareness. Due
to the lack of manual annotations, few study introduces the idea of difﬁculty-awareness for
self-supervised learning (SSL). In this study, we obtain the difﬁculty-related information in
a self-supervised manner using the token perturbation module, and implicitly formulate the
difﬁculty-ranking proxy task. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst SSL framework based
on the difﬁculty-awareness paradigm.
Overall Objective. Combining the aforementioned loss functions (LBOLT and LDif f ), the
full objective L for the optimization of the online branch can be written as:
L = LBOLT
θ
+ αLDif f
fθ
(7)
where α = 0.1 is the loss weight of LDif f
fθ
. According to Eq. (1), the weights of target branch
ξ are updated via exponential moving average.
3
Experiments
We evaluate the proposed BOLT on three target tasks, including skin lesion classiﬁcation,
knee fatigue grading and diabetic retinopathy grading, using publicly available and private
datasets. Conventional self-supervised learning approaches often pretrain the models on
a large-scale unlabeled dataset (i.e., proxy set), and then ﬁnetune them on the relatively
smaller target set. In this paper, three different medical image processing tasks are involved

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
7
for performance evaluation and the corresponding proxy and target datasets (example images
are shown in Supplementary Material) for each task are introduced in the followings:
Skin Lesion Classiﬁcation. The publicly available ISIC 2019 dataset1 is used to validate
the effectiveness of the proposed BOLT. Speciﬁcally, the dataset [30] is provided by the
ISIC 2019 challenge, which encourages researchers to develop the automated systems pre-
dicting eight skin disease categories with dermoscopic images, i.e., squamous cell carci-
noma, melanocytic nevus, benign keratosis, actinic keratosis, dermatoﬁbroma, basal cell
carcinoma, vascular lesion, and melanoma. The whole ISIC 2019 dataset, consisting of over
20,000 dermoscopic images, is adopted as the proxy set. Due to the class imbalance prob-
lem of original ISIC dataset, consistent to [21], 628 images are randomly sampled from each
class to establish a balanced target set. It is worthwhile to mention that the images from the
two classes consisting of fewer than 628 images are all taken into the target set. After that,
the balanced target set with 4,260 images is randomly separated into training, validation and
test sets based on the ratio of 70:10:20. Note that the ViT is ﬁrst pretrained on the proxy set
and ﬁnetuned on the training and validation sets, and then evaluated on the test set.
Knee Fatigue Grading. The publicly available MURA dataset2 (musculoskeletal radio-
graphs) [28], which is a large dataset of bone X-rays (over 40,000 images), is adopted as the
proxy set to pretrain ViTs for the subsequent target task (i.e., knee fatigue grading). For the
knee fatigue grading, 2,725 X-ray images are collected from a collaborating hospital as the
target set [20]. The positions of fatigue fracture are different, i.e., navicular bone, tibia and
ﬁbula. Each X-ray image is labeled by three physicians, and the ﬁnal grade is decided via
majority-voting. In particular, the target set has 1,785 normal, 190 grade-1, 452 grade-2, 196
grade-3 and 102 grade-4 cases, respectively. For the evaluation on our private knee fatigue
grading dataset, the target set is divided to training, validation and test sets according to the
ratio of 70:10:20. Similar to [20], due to the imbalance problem (normal vs. fatigue fracture
and grade-2 vs. other fracture grades), an equal number (20) of test images from each cate-
gory are randomly sampled to form an uniform-distribution set for performance evaluation,
instead of using the whole test set.
Diabetic Retinopathy Grading. For the diabetic retinopathy grading task, we pretrain the
ViT on a large-scale private dataset captured from a collaborating hospital (proxy set), with
approval obtained from the institutional review board of the hospital. The dataset consists of
350,000 fundus images of normal cohort and patients with various diseases. Then, the pre-
trained ViT is ﬁnetuned on the publicly available APTOS 2019 blindness detection dataset
(target set) for performance evaluation.3 In particular, there are 3,662 fundus images con-
tained in the target set and the severity of diabetic retinopathy (DR) can be classiﬁed to
four grades, i.e., normal (1,805), mild DR (370), moderate DR (999), severe DR (193) and
proliferative DR (295). Consistent to [22], a ﬁve fold cross-validation is conducted on this
dataset.4
Baselines & Evaluation Criterion. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our BOLT pretrain-
ing, we ﬁnetune ViTs with ImageNet pretrained weights on the target tasks and evaluate
1https://challenge2019.isic-archive.com/
2https://stanfordmlgroup.github.io/competitions/mura/
3https://www.kaggle.com/c/aptos2019-blindness-detection
4The ViT pretrained on our private large-scale dataset may beneﬁt the related downstream target tasks. To
advance the development of automated fundus image processing, we will release the ViT pretrained models to the
community soon.

8
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
Table 1: The classiﬁcation accuracy (ACC) presented in percentage (%) of ViTs using dif-
ferent training strategies with different amounts of training data on the ISIC 2019 test set.
100%
50%
10%
Train-from-scratch
39.4
35.2
31.3
ImageNet Pretrained
80.5
76.1
62.1
SimSam [5]
79.9
75.9
61.2
BYOL [12]
80.1
75.4
61.3
MoCo V3 [7]
80.3
75.2
61.2
BOLT w./o. LDi f f
80.8
75.8
62.1
BOLT (ours)
81.5
76.6
62.4
ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50
75.7
72.5
61.2
their performances on the test set. Consistent to MoCo V3 [7], the basic ViT-B/16 is adopted
as backbone. The original BYOL [12], state-of-the-art self-supervised learning approach
SimSam [5] and token-based self-supervised learning approach MoCo V3 [7] are assessed
for comparison. It is worthwhile to mention that the backbones of representation networks
of BYOL and SimSam implemented in this study are ViT-B/16. The average classiﬁcation
accuracy (ACC) is adopted as metric for the performance evaluation.
3.1
Performance Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of different training strategies on different
datasets and present the experimental results. The widely-used ImageNet pretrained ResNet-
50 is also adopted as a baseline for comparison. Some detailed discussions are presented in
Supplementary Material.
Skin Lesion Classiﬁcation. First, the different training strategies are evaluated on the pub-
licly available ISIC 2019 dataset. The evaluation results of models ﬁnetuned with all train-
ing data (100%) on the test set are listed in Table 1. The ImageNet pretrained ViT is ob-
served to surpass the ImageNet pretrained ResNet-50 by a large margin (i.e., +4.8%), which
demonstrates the superiority of ViT for medical image classiﬁcation. Compared to the state-
of-the-art self-supervised learning approaches (i.e., SimSam, BYOL and MoCo V3), our
token-based BOLT achieves a higher ACC (80.8%). By using the difﬁculty-awareness loss
(LDif f ), the ACC of BOLT can be further improved to 81.5%, which outperforms the runner-
up (MoCo V3) by a margin of +1.2%.
The goal of self-supervised learning approach primarily is to deal with the insufﬁcient
training data. Hence, to better verify the superiority of our BOLT approach, we conduct
an experiment to assess the performance of BOLT pretrained ViTs with different numbers
of labeled samples used for ﬁnetuning (i.e., 10% and 50% in Table 1). It can be observed
that our BOLT can effectively tackle the situation with few labeled training samples—the
proposed BOLT with difﬁculty-awareness loss achieves the best ACC under both 50% and
10% settings.
Knee Fatigue Grading. Consistent to the previous study [20], apart from classiﬁcation ac-
curacy, the F1 score is also adopted for performance evaluation. The experimental results on
the uniform test set are listed in Table 2. As shown, the ViT pretrained with the proposed
BOLT outperforms the ones using existing self-supervised learning approaches and the Ima-
geNet pretrained weights, i.e., an ACC of 54.0% is achieved (+2.0% higher than the runner-

STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
9
Table 2: The accuracy (ACC and F1 score) presented in percentage (%) of different training
strategies on knee fatigue grading and diabetic retinopathy grading tasks.
Knee Fatigue Grading
Diabetic Retinopathy Grading
ACC
F1
ACC
F1
Train-from-scratch
30.0
23.1
71.0
65.3
ImageNet Pretrained
51.0
49.4
83.6
83.2
SimSam [5]
52.0
51.1
84.5
84.3
BYOL [12]
51.0
50.2
84.8
84.7
MoCo V3 [7]
52.0
51.2
84.7
84.3
BOLT w./o. LDif f
52.0
51.2
85.4
85.3
BOLT (ours)
54.0
53.6
85.9
85.8
ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50
36.0
31.7
81.7
82.0
up). Similar trend to ISIC 2019 is observed—the ACC of ImageNet pretrained ViT (51%)
is signiﬁcantly higher than that of ImageNet pretrained ResNet-50 (36%), demonstrating
the effectiveness of ViT backbone. We notice that the improvements to train-from-scratch
yielded by pretraining are more obvious on our knee fatigue grading dataset (over +20%),
compared to the skin lesion classiﬁcation task. The reason may be that the target set of knee
fatigue grading contains less training samples (around 1,000 X-ray images); thus, it is more
difﬁcult to well train the model from scratch, compared to the skin lesion classiﬁcation task
with a target set of 4,260 images.
Diabetic Retinopathy Grading. Consistent to [22], we split the APTOS 2019 dataset into
ﬁve folds for cross-validation and adopt the F1 score for performance evaluation. The grad-
ing accuracy of models using different training strategies is shown in Table 2. The proposed
BOLT pretrained ViT achieves the best ACC (85.9%) and F1 score (85.8%) among the listed
approaches, which are +1.1% and +1.1% higher than the original BYOL, respectively.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, a self-supervised learning approach, termed Boostrap Own Latent of Trans-
former (BOLT), was proposed speciﬁcally for medical image classiﬁcation with the vision
Transformer backbone. The proposed BOLT involved online and target branches, which ex-
tracted the self-supervised representation from raw data via contrastive learning. Concretely,
the online network was trained to predict the target network representation of the same patch
embedding tokens with a different perturbation. Furthermore, we proposed an auxiliary dif-
ﬁculty ranking task to enable the vision Transformer to exploit diverse information from the
limited medical data. The difference between the original patch embedding tokens and the
perturbed ones was calculated as the difﬁculty measurement (i.e., the larger difference means
more difﬁcult for the vision Transformer to process), which was then adopted as the supervi-
sion signal for self-supervised learning. The vision Transformer was trained to identify the
branch (online/target) processing for the more difﬁcult perturbed tokens, which enabled it
to distill the transformation-invariant features from the perturbed tokens. The experimental
results on three medical image classiﬁcation tasks (i.e., skin lesion classiﬁcation, knee fa-
tigue fracture grading and dabetic retinopathy grading) demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed BOLT. We notice several limitations of this study and plan to address them in the
future works:
Extension to Medical Image Segmentation Task. The proposed BOLT can be easily ex-

10
STUDENT, PROF, COLLABORATOR: BMVC AUTHOR GUIDELINES
tended to medical image segmentation in a similar way like [40], i.e., pretraining the encoder
and using a random initialization for the decoder. Yet, the randomly initialized decoder may
neutralize the performance improvement. Therefore, we plan to explore a more effective
way extending our pretrained ViTs for medical image segmentation task in the future.
Pretrained Weights for ViT Variants. Recently, many powerful ViT-based backbones, such
as Swin Transformer [23], have been proposed. The weights of these ViT variants pretrained
on our large-scale fundus image dataset will be continuously provided in the future.
