Organic Computing in the Spotlight
Sven Tomforde, Bernhard Sick, and Christian M¨uller-Schloer
Intelligent Embedded Systems Lab, University of Kassel, Germany
Institute for Systems Engineering, Leibniz University of Hannover

Abstract. Organic Computing is an initiative in the ﬁeld of systems en-
gineering that proposed to make use of concepts such as self-adaptation
and self-organisation to increase the robustness of technical systems.
Based on the observation that traditional design and operation concepts
reach their limits, transferring more autonomy to the systems themselves
should result in a reduction of complexity for users, administrators, and
developers. However, there seems to be a need for an updated deﬁnition
of the term “Organic Computing”, of desired properties of technical, or-
ganic systems, and the objectives of the Organic Computing initiative.
With this article, we will address these points.
1
Introduction
Within the last decade, information and communication technology (ICT) has
witnessed a dramatic change: from isolated manually controlled systems to highly
interconnected and increasingly autonomous systems [1,2]. This change is a re-
action to the observation that traditional engineering and control concepts have
reached their limits: In a complex world of perpetual change and uncertainty,
static design-time decision processes cannot appropriately anticipate runtime
conditions and, consequently, cannot foresee suitable reactions. We still have to
cope with heavily increasing system complexity.
In order to provide mechanisms to cope with these complexity challenges,
initiatives such as Organic Computing [3] have been proposed. The overall goal
of Organic Computing (OC) is nothing less than a paradigm shift in systems en-
gineering. Such a new paradigm should enable future ICT systems to carry out
certain tasks on their own, they should have properties such as self-organisation,
self-healing, self-conﬁguration, self-protection, self-optimisation, and they should
be able to adapt reasonably to changing requirements of their operating envi-
ronment [4]. In particular, they should adjust to human needs in a trustworthy
way and should allow for explicit interference in case of undesired eﬀects of
self-organisation, leading to the—somewhat contradictory—requirement of con-
trolled self-organisation. Introducing self-* properties entails a dramatic change
in the responsibilities: It means to move traditional design-time decisions to
runtime and from the system engineer to the systems themselves. This transfer
of control has impact on all phases of the design process: from initial require-
ment speciﬁcation to design and development, and ﬁnally to the maintenance of
systems.
arXiv:1701.08125v1  [cs.MA]  27 Jan 2017

It is a misconception that the goal of building organic systems is primarily the
construction of self-adaptive and/or self-organising systems. Self-organisation
and self-adaptation are just means to make technical systems resistant against
external or internal disturbances. It is also a misconception to assume that or-
ganic systems (or self-adaptive and self-organising systems in general) generally
achieve a higher performance (e.g., higher speed or better quality of decisions)
than conventional systems. Organic Computing systems are not per se faster
than conventional systems but they return faster to a certain corridor of an
acceptable performance in the presence of disturbances. The ultimate goal of
organic systems is to become more resilient against disturbances and attacks
from outside. We call this property “robustness” [5].
Although several contributions from the state of the art discussed the moti-
vation, the ideas, and key technology of Organic Computing, there is no clear
deﬁnition of the term. Furthermore, we often face a misconception in the sense
that the goal of Organic Computing is to develop self-organising systems. But
mechanisms such as self-organisation and adaptivity are rather the means and
not the end. The ultimate goal of OC systems is to equip ICT systems with
higher degrees of robustness in the presence of external and internal distur-
bances. With this article, we propose a renewed deﬁnition of the term “Organic
Computing” (Section 2) and explain the desired properties an organic system
should have (Section 3). Furthermore, we give a brief summary of the history of
Organic Computing (Section 4) and give an outlook to urgent research challenges
(Section 5).
2
Term Deﬁnition
Organic Computing is based on the insight that we are increasingly surrounded
by large collections of autonomous systems, which are equipped with sensors
and actuators, aware of their environment, communicate freely, and organise
themselves in order to perform the actions and services that seem to be required.
Consequently, we deﬁne the term “Organic Computing” (OC) as follows:
An “Organic Computing System” (or just an organic system) is a technical
system, which is equipped with sensors (to perceive its environment) and actua-
tors (to manipulate it). It adapts autonomously and dynamically to the current
conditions of the perceived environment. This adaptation process has impact on
the system’s utility, which is continuously improved by the organic system itself.
To allow for such an adaptive behaviour, it employs so-called self-* mechanisms.
Typically, an organic system consists of a potentially large set of such au-
tonomous organic subsystems. Conceptually, each OC system contains two com-
plementary parts: one is responsible for the productive operation of the system
(i.e, it fulﬁls the technical purpose) and one for the adaptation aspects (i.e.,
realising the organic capabilities). In order to react to previously unknown and
unanticipated conditions with appropriate behaviour, an organic system is typ-
ically based on (machine) learning techniques.

At this point, some clariﬁcation of the term “Organic Computing” seems to
be useful. The adjective “organic” has several meanings. The Cambridge Dictio-
nary1 lists three of them: “of or concerning organs of the body”, “of, found in,
or produced by, living things”, and “(of food) grown without the use of artiﬁcial
fertilisers”. From the previous discussion, the second meaning is the one relevant
for Organic Computing: It aims at augmenting technical systems with properties
that are similar to those found in “living things”. Organic Computing is about
engineering technical systems, but it does not mean to build them out of or-
ganic material or living organisms! “Organic” has also a connotation reminding
of “organisation”: Organic Computing deals with ways how to organise systems
consisting of systems with increasing autonomy.
It is the objective of Organic Computing to equip technical systems with
“life-like” properties. This includes, in the ﬁrst place, robustness, ﬂexibility, and
resilience against disturbances and attacks. However, in the second place, it also
includes avoidance of single-points-of-failures, a decrease of control and manage-
ment complexity, and more customised behaviour.
3
Self-* Properties of Organic Systems
Occasionally, Organic Computing is equated with self-organisation. However, it
is a misconception that the term “self-organisation” comprises all aspects of sys-
tems with a high degree of autonomy. “Self-organisation” is just one mechanism
which eventually leads to a system with self-* properties.
The attribute “self” refers to a system’s autonomy, meaning there is no or
only limited (or goal-oriented) external control guiding the system’s behaviour.
Autonomy can be formalised using the concept as discussed in [5]: There, a degree
of autonomy is introduced that allows to deﬁne a range of control options: from
total autonomy (i.e., no external control) to no autonomy (all control is exerted
from the outside)—and intermediate degrees of autonomy where internal (self-
)control and external control are combined. For the internal (self) part of control,
an observer/controller unit [4] within the OC system is responsible. We want to
emphasise that neither full autonomy nor zero autonomy are desirable: While we
want to build systems that can take local decisions themselves we do not want
fully autonomous systems that cannot controlled by the human user any longer!
Although researchers in the ﬁeld agree on the need of self-* properties, the
deﬁnitions of the individual properties largely diﬀer—if a clear deﬁnition is given
at all. In the following section we aim at providing a taxonomy of the most
important self-* properties in the context of Organic Computing.
In literature (see e.g. [6]), the terms self-management and structural adaptiv-
ity are used. “Self-management” is especially popular in the Autonomic Comput-
ing community [7]. For clariﬁcation, we suggest the following deﬁnition, which
aims at being compatible with the general usage of the terms:
1. Systems can be modiﬁed at runtime in terms of (i) structure and/or (ii)
behaviour. Structure deﬁnes the components and the connections among
1 See http://dictionary.cambridge.org/ (last access 2016/13/12)

components or subsystems, while behaviour describes the sequence of events
(and actions). “Behaviour” can also be seen as the process running on and
between the components. However, all of the following properties have im-
pact on (at least) the system’s behaviour.
2. Self-conﬁguration (often also called self-adaptation) is used to modify
the parameters of the system. Organic systems conﬁgure themselves (by
parametrisation resulting in a behaviour) in accordance with higher-level
user goals.
3. Self-organisation relates to a change of the structure of a system (i.e., of
components or subsystems and their links). An organic system validates the
status of relations towards other subsystems continuously at runtime based
on the currently active user goal.
4. Self-integration is related to both aspects (i.e., self-conﬁguration and self-
organisation) in the context of combination and interplay of several systems.
The organic system decides autonomously about its role within the overall
system and adapts its behaviour as well as the relations to others (i.e, its
sphere of inﬂuence regarding the system’s structure) to function correctly as
an element of the overall system.2
5. Self-management comprises self-conﬁguration, self-organisation, and pos-
sibly further self-* mechanisms.
Further self-* mechanisms that are particularly important for organic systems
are:
– Self-healing: Organic systems are able to detect, diagnose, and repair fail-
ures. This includes a localisation of these failures (in both, software and
hardware), possibly using external sources through cooperation with other
systems and their sensory equipment.
– Self-protecting: Organic systems have to protect themselves in terms of
defending the system (i.e., the system itself as well as the overall system it
is part of) against attacks. Besides attacks from outside, this also includes
large-scale cascading failures that go beyond the scope of the self-healing
mechanism (i.e., aﬀect the overall system rather than the organic system
under consideration). Protection further requires proactive mechanisms that
try to identify behaviour and conditions that may result in failures—and
work against them before they become pathological.
– Self-stabilising: Organic systems face the challenge to come up with a
stable behaviour: Either due to continuous adaptation processes or due to
external eﬀects caused by the inﬂuences of other subsystems. An organic
system is able to suppress such unstable behaviour over time.
2 Self-integration becomes increasingly important in the context of “Interwoven Sys-
tems” (see, e.g., [1,2,8]), i.e., open, large-scale, and distributed systems that evolve
during runtime and dynamically combine heterogeneous subsystems that belong to
varying authorities with a possibly diﬀerent application ﬁeld.

– Self-improving (often also called self-optimisation3) means that the or-
ganic system continuously analyses its decisions with the goal to ﬁnd better
solutions. In particular, this means that all previous mechanisms (especially
self-conﬁguration and self-organisation) become subject to an improvement
by learning at runtime.
– Self-explaining: The implementation of OC ideas leads to systems with
higher degrees of autonomy. But the (human) user must always keep the
ultimate control over the system although she or he is not involved in low-
level detail decisions. Since the OC system has certain degrees of freedom
regarding its decisions it must be able to reason about them upon request,
and must ask for help. This is often true in situations where a multi-objective
optimisation is required.
An alternative line of classiﬁcation is to consider *-awareness. In this context,
“*” is used as placeholder for the particular scope, i.e., “self”, “environment”,
or “context” to name just the most prominent aspects.
4
A Brief History of Organic Computing
The term “Organic Computing” has been coined in the context of a workshop
on future topics in computer engineering, which has been organised in Novem-
ber 2002 by the special interest group “Computer Architecture” (Fachausschuss
ARCS – Architektur von Computer-Systemen) within the German Computer
Science Society (Gesellschaft f¨ur Informatik, GI). The goal of this workshop was
to predict some important technical developments in computer science for the
next 5 to 10 years and to derive the corresponding challenges for industry and
academia. The results of the workshop have been summarised under the headline
“Organic Computing” in a position paper of GI and ITG (Informationstechni-
sche Gesellschaft – information-technical society), which has been authored by
20 representatives from academia and industry working in the ﬁeld of technical
computer science [9].
Independently of and in parallel to this origin of the term “Organic Comput-
ing”, an initiative mainly inﬂuenced by Christoph von der Malsburg came up
with the same term [10]. He organised a workshop already in 2001 that discussed
challenges in this context. In contrast to the deﬁnition postulated by this book
(and in contrast to the research eﬀorts in the ﬁeld of Organic Computing subse-
quently to the initial workshops), the term there has been used to combine neuro
sciences, molecular biology, and software engineering. The focus of interest was
on developing novel computing systems that make use of biological principles
and method.
3 We favour the term “improvement” over “optimisation”, since optimisation indicates
to search for the optimum and converge to this solution. However, organic systems
have to act under real-world conditions, i.e., in real-time and with limited knowl-
edge. This means they often have to come up with “good-enough” solutions rather
than spending high eﬀort in trying to ﬁnd the optimal one (which might be hardly
achievable in most systems).

In 2002, Forrester Research presented a study that postulated to use “Or-
ganic IT” as novel strategy in information system structures [11]. This vision
has subsequently been supported by a number of large companies, including
HP, IBM, and Microsoft. As one of the consequences, novel adaptive system
architectures have been developed in this environment.
Closely related and almost in parallel to the Organic Computing initiative,
the Autonomic Computing initiative mainly driven by IBM emerged [7]. Inspired
by the functionality of the autonomic nervous system in human beings, a man-
agement solution for large-scale computing and data centres was proposed that
autonomously and self-suﬃciently reacts on changes in the system’s environment
to maintain the desired system utility. Such a process requires a large degree of
self-organisation. For instance, disturbances are countered in a self-healing way
to recover the system from undesired states. This feature of “self-healing” is just
one of several self-* properties that are used to characterised autonomic sys-
tems, the most prominent ones being self-conﬁguration, self-optimisation, and
self-protection. These properties are considered to be mandatory to be able to
master the growing complexity in technical development.
In close timely vicinity, further ideas to equip future computing systems with
self-* properties emerged. Besides the German Research Foundation (DFG) Pri-
ority Programme on Organic Computing (see below), this entailed several closely
related funding programmes. For instance, investigations on complex systems
and concepts for developing such systems have been ﬁnanced by the European
Union in the context of the “Future and Emergent Technologies” programme or
the Australian CSIRO Centre for Complex Systems.
The main driving force behind the Organic Computing initiative was the
Priority Programme 1183, ﬁnanced by the DFG from 2005 to 2011. The results
of this programme have been summarised in [12], a intermediate collection of or-
ganic technology was published in [13]. The priority programme was composed of
three consecutive phases of two years each, Figure 1 illustrates the organisation.
In the ﬁrst phase, a deeper analysis and understanding of self-organisation pro-
cesses has been performed. This has been expected to result in a terminological
framework, quantiﬁcation mechanisms for major aspects of Organic Computing
systems, and a basic concept of how such systems are designed and operated.
Afterwards, the second phase was intended to shift the focus towards insights on
developing Organic Computing systems, including the basic technology to equip
such systems with the desired self-* properties. A deliverable that was assumed
to be subsequently extended was an Organic Computing toolbox that combined
all transferable and generalisable software solutions developed within the priority
programme. Finally, the third phase aimed for transferring the derived knowl-
edge into technical applications. However, this organisation into three phases
was the initial plan, and the underlying research is still an ongoing process.
After ﬁnishing the priority programme, several activities have been started
to keep the OC community together and jointly shed even more light into the
ﬁeld of Organic Computing. As one particular example, an OC perspectives
workshop series has been performed in 2013 and 2014 in H¨unfeld, Germany,

Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
•
Ants
•
Dissipative structures
•
Swarms
•
Brain
•
…
•
Autonomy
•
Self‐*
•
Emergence
•
Awareness
•
Cooperation
•
Competition
•
Basic technologies
•
Observer/Controller
•
Guarding
•
Helper Threads
•
Embedded learning
•
Complex system 
architectures
•
Traffic control
•
Smart Home
•
Energy grid
•
Factory
•
Health and care
•
…
Organic 
Computing 
principles
Organic 
Computing 
technology
Technical 
applications
Emergence
Self‐*
Organic 
Computing 
toolbox
Starting point
Natural 
processes as 
inspiration
Fig. 1. Schematic organisation of the priority programme 1183.
where researchers from Switzerland and Germany came together to discuss the
upcoming challenges for the Organic Computing community.
In addition, two workshop series have been established that both provide a
yearly basis for exchange and discussion of novel insights in the ﬁeld: The Inter-
national Workshop on Self-Optimisation in Autonomic and Organic Computing
Systems (SAOS) [14,15,16] is co-located with the International Conference on Ar-
chitecture of Computing Systems (ARCS) and will see its ﬁfth edition in 2017 in
Vienna, Austria; the International Workshop on Self-Improving System Integra-
tion (SISSY) is either co-located with the ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Autonomic Computing (ICAC) [17] or the IEEE International Conference on
Self-Adaptive and Self-Organising Systems (SASO) [18]. The upcoming event in
2017 is the fourth instance and will take place in Columbus, Ohio, USA.
Finally, a series of Organic Computing Doctoral Dissertation Colloquia (OC-
DDC) has been established [19,20,21], which will take place in its ﬁfth edition
in June 2017 in Bochum, Germany.
5
Outlook: Organic Computing Development Options
Since the conception of the idea in 2002, OC has progressed in diﬀerent di-
rections. While many theoretical and practical results have been achieved, it
became quite clear during this time that there is much more eﬀort needed: OC
is a long-term research project. Within the limited space of this article, we can
only brieﬂy sketch a few development options:
– Design-time to runtime: OC can be characterised by the motto: “Move
design-time decisions into runtime!”. Any autonomous modiﬁcation at run-
time is subject to strict real-time and safety constraints which necessitates
a rethinking of traditional design-time activities such as modelling, design

space exploration (which becomes conﬁguration space exploration), valida-
tion (by simulation), veriﬁcation, testing etc.
– Optimisation at runtime: OC systems can be understood as large dis-
tributed multi-element systems where each sub-system tries permanently to
improve itself (in the sense of a “good enough” solution) and where the col-
lection of sub-systems tries to optimise on the system level as well. Individual
and system goals might coincide or diverge. The optimisation problems the
OC system faces are usually blackbox problems which cannot be described
in a closed form. We need methods that can explore such unknown ﬁtness
landscapes, learn their structure and navigate in this landscape within time
frames still suitable for real-time reactions.
– Social OC: OC systems can be understood as agents interacting with each
other in large collectives. These collectives are usually open, i.e., additional
members can join at any time. This means that we do not know the in-
ternals of the agents. Agents can be trustworthy and co-operative, but they
can as well misbehave unintentionally or on purpose. Social mechanisms such
as trust, reputation, or fairness have been already successfully employed to
help such communities self-organise and improve their overall system per-
formance. There exist more social mechanisms such as, e.g., norms or rule
systems such as those of Enduring Institutions [22] that could be transferred
to technical systems.
– Systems of systems: OC systems will usually not be built from scratch;
they will more often be assembled from existing systems. This poses the
question of system integration at runtime. We have to clarify the relationship
of sub-systems on the same level (peer-to-peer) but also between higher-
level and lower-level systems in a hierarchy. If systems are nested within
other systems: What is the relationship of the contained subsystems to their
superiors, or to other contained sub-systems? The idea of regarding sub-
systems as holons (i.e., two-faced system elements with one role of a part
and one role of a whole, see [23]) linked to other sub-systems via well-deﬁned
goal-response relationships is a promising approach with great potential for
the task of runtime system integration.
– Autonomous learning: An essential property of OC systems is (machine)
learning. In contrast to other research domains, learning processes have to
be utilised in a highly autonomous fashion. In particular, sophisticated pre-
training, parameter studies to determine appropriate conﬁgurations of learn-
ing mechanisms, and continuous user feedback are not an option. Here, cur-
rent developments in the ﬁeld of machine learning that explicitly focus on
autonomy are of potential beneﬁt [24].
As usual in complex systems and OC, these development options are not
independent of each other: Holonic goal-oriented approaches have a strong social
component, the agents strive for improvement or even optimisation individually
and/or collectively, and they use methods for conﬁguration space exploration,
runtime modelling and simulation etc.

6
Conclusion
Within this article, we brieﬂy summarised the historical development in the
context of the Organic Computing initiative. Organic Computing is an initia-
tive of systems engineering that proposed to make use of concepts such as self-
adaptation and self-organisation to increase the robustness of technical systems.
Based on the observation that traditional design and operation concepts reach
their limits, transferring more autonomy to the systems themselves should result
in a reduction of complexity for users, administrator, and developers. Since—at
least from our point of view—no precise and commonly accepted notion of the
term is available in literature, we derived a speciﬁcation of the term and the un-
derlying objectives of the initiative, and augmented this with an explanation of
the most important self-* properties of OC systems. Finally, future development
options of OC have been sketched.
