Octopuses: biological facts and technical solutions
(Author's version accepted for MECO-2021; the final publication is available at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9459727) 
Oxana Shamilyan1, Ievgen Kabin1, Zoya Dyka1 , Michael Kuba3 and Peter Langendoerfer1,2  
1IHP – Leibniz-Institut für innovative Mikroelektronik, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany 
2 BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, Cottbus, Germany 
3 Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0945, 
Japan 

Abstract—Octopus is an invertebrate belonging to the class of 
Cephalopoda. The body of an Octopus lacks any morphological 
joints and rigid parts. Their arms, skin and the complex nervous 
system are investigated by a several researchers all over the world. 
Octopuses are the object of inspiration for my scientists in 
different areas, including AI. Soft- and hardware are developed 
based on octopus features. Soft-robotics octopus-inspired arms are 
the most common type of developments. There are a lot of different 
variants of this solution, each of them is different from the other. 
In this paper, we describe the most remarkable octopus features, 
show solutions inspired by octopus and provide new ideas for 
further work and investigations in combination of AI and bio-
inspired soft-robotics areas. 
Keywords-octopus; artificial intelligence; soft-robots; bio-
inspired solutions 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The most recent vision concerning cyber-physical systems 
(CPS) or cyber-physical systems of systems (CPSoS) is to 
empower them to become resilient. This requires them to be at 
least: 

self-aware,

robust to fluctuation of environmental parameters (or
self-adaptable),

resistant against malicious manipulation,

intelligent to find themselves a correct solution in
complex and non-expected situations.
All these capabilities require that the system is on the one 
hand empowered by sensors to learn about its own state and its 
environment and on the other hand that it is equipped with means 
to interpret the data collected and to determine how to adapt its 
behaviour or event itself to changes detected. Most biological 
“systems” at least those assumed to be on a higher level of 
development have these capabilities, which is the reason why 
often engineers rely on inspiration of biological systems. The 
term “bio-inspired” means that solution is taken from biosphere 
and mimics nature. The architecture normally is based on 
animals´ behaviour, their lifestyle, ways of making decision, 
interaction with surroundings, etc. Therefore, researchers 
achieve a lot of different results, because expansion of the study 
area allows to looking at the problem from other perspective. 
In our case we are aiming at learning and adapting resilient 
systems based on the fascinating capabilities of Octopus. They 
are smart, show unusual behaviour and have remarkable 
features, like body arrangement, embodied intelligence and 
distributed nervous system. Many researchers and researcher 
groups are inspired by them. There are many scientific studies, 
inspired by the octopuses, in different areas: biological 
researches, robotics, soft- and hardware developments, 
investigation and implementation of AI methods. The octopus 
projects encompassing groups of researchers are very common 
as well.  
The scope of materials is huge, but more than the half of 
them are biological papers. Robotics solutions are the ones that 
are mostly researched in the field of engineering. But there are 
also software solutions and system architectures inspired by 
Octopus. The least part is the investigation in the field of AI 
despite this was the first field that used Octopus as inspiration or 
at least to verify own ideas.  
The aim of this paper is to show known octopus benefits and 
describe ideas of further investigations in the intersection of 
octopuses and artificial intelligence and resilience.  
This work is based on 70 science articles we found 
performing an exhaustive search of papers published in the last 
the 20 years. Table I provides numbers of papers evaluated in 
this paper sorted by topics. 
TABLE I.  
TOPICS DISCUSSED IN REFERENCED HERE ARTICLES 
Article topic
Bio Robotics Software AI
Projects 
Total 
Quantity 
38 
17 
5 
5 
5 
70 
In order to ensure self-containment of this paper we will 
introduce biological facts of Octopus in some detail. On the one 
hand this aims at providing common ground but on the other 
hand we hope that these fascinating feature will trigger more 
ideas how to improve technical systems. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First, as 
mentioned already we introduce the Octopus as the source of 
inspiration. Then we introduce technical systems fully or 
partially inspired by Octopuses. 
II.
OCTOPUSES: BIOLOGICAL FACTS
Octopuses now are one of the most popular cephalopods 
thanks to their interesting morphology, features of their soft 

body structure with a bilaterally symmetric form with eight arms 
and their evolved cognition. Fig. 1 shows the octopus 
morphology. Octopuses belong to the class of Cephalopoda. 
They are invertebrates with lack of any rigid part [1]. Octopuses 
live in every ocean and most species spend a significant amount 
of their time in their dens. 
 
Figure 1.  Octopus morphology 
In average octopus lives about 12-18 months. Females 
usually die soon after hatching their eggs [2], [3]. Young 
individuals do not have parents care and always scattering right 
after hatching. Many octopuses spend their life solitary and limit 
contacts with other octopuses. Many species are described as 
non-social and solitary animals. This means that the individuals 
are gathering their fascinating skill almost on themselves which 
indicates even more cognition as if they would be taught from 
older conspecifics and thus learn from adult octopuses. 
Octopuses are predators and feed on other invertebrates like 
clams, snails, crabs and prawns they also hunt vertebrates like 
small fish. As they are predators, but not on the top of the food 
chain, in different marine inhabitants octopuses are prey as well. 
Cannibalism is also found among cephalopods [2], [4]. They are 
soft-bodied and can become an easy prey for predators, likely 
because of this they encompass a lot of features to avoid it. They 
include body mimicry and anti-predatory strategies. For 
example, octopuses can shoot black ink with a water jet creating 
a dark non-transparent, olfactory disturbing cloud allowing them 
to escape [5]. Octopuses are smart enough to use different tools 
as protection, for example cocoanut shells and stones [5], [6]. 
Octopuses, squids and cuttlefishes have three hearts: two 
branchial hearts and one systemic heart, in addition to these 3 
hearts several vessels of the closed blood system are muscular 
and help to move the blood trough the soft body. The branchial 
hearts help oxygenate blood in the gills and are connected to the 
systemic heart, which pumps blood to the whole body [7]. 
The one of the most remarkable features of octopus is 
nervous system. Overall it counts 300-500 million nerve cells 
for adult common octopuses. Their complex nervous system and 
their cognition make them one of the most intelligent of all 
vertebrates [1], [2]. For comparison a dog has about 600 million 
nerve cells. The neural system of octopus has a unique structure. 
The most interesting feature is that the octopus intelligence is 
not centralized, and have highest brain-to-body mass ratio within 
all invertebrate. The whole nervous system is divided into two 
groups: a central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral 
nervous (PNS) system [1], [5], [8]. 
The neural system is the most important component of the 
sophisticated octopus behaviour and cognition. Many research 
works are studying how octopuses interact with the 
environment, make a decisions, etc. The following four main 
components can be distinguished here: sensory perception, 
perception-based cognition, learning, and memory. Each of 
these groups has a significant impact on the complex octopus 
cognition [9]. 
Octopus vulgaris has fewer neurons in the CNS than in its 
arms. The octopus CNS supports an acute and sensitive vision 
system, good spatial memory, decision-making, and camouflage 
behaviour [3]. Two large optic lobes are connected to the retinae 
of the camera-like eyes [1]. The PNS in the arms accounts for 
almost two third of all neurons that means each arm possesses 
about 40 million neuron cells. Each arm has an autonomous 
individual structure so it can act alone or in coordination with 
other arms without coordination or control from the CNS. To 
understand the inner structure of the brain several studies were 
conducted by researchers for the last 150 years. More recently 
scientists started to use neurophysiological methods and modern 
imaging techniques to better understand the neurological 
procedures and the connection of the different brain sections 
[10], [11], [12], [13]. 
The study of the octopus cognition structure shows that all 
components of the octopus body are connected with each other. 
Neuron signals are transmitted from brain to arms to implement 
some actions, from arms to brain to process sensory information, 
from eyes to skin to change appearance and so on [14]. The 
whole body works as a single mechanism and implements 
various complex tasks. 
Octopuses are intelligent, soft-bodied animals with keen 
senses that perform reliably in a variety of visual and tactile 
learning tasks. They are capable of solving problems such as: 
opening a screw top jar, using coconut halves as protection [3], 
moving an object rough a hole in a wall and finding prey in a 
transparent maze [15].They are able to learn and have a short- 
and a long- term memory. The evidence of octopus memory was 
presented in [16]. The research proves that cephalopods possess 
“What-Where-When” memory – ‘what’ (prey type) was located, 
‘where’ (location of the visual cue) and ‘when’ (time elapsed 
since they previously ate). In the wild, octopuses tend to avoid 
places where they have fed in previous days [2], so they use their 
brains and memory to maintain the productive hunting “win 
switch” strategy. 
A thorough understanding of how octopuses receive 
information from their environment and process it can be very 
helpful knowledge that can be replicated in implementing of AI 
methods.  
Researches show that Octopus vulgaris can use vision to 
learn, i.e. they have the ability for observation learning [3], [15], 
[17]. Octopus can learn to choose correct objects, how to find 
the place with food, which place of feeding is correct and which 
is not. Octopuses are rapidly learning by observing. For 
brain 
eye 
arms 
suckers 

example, training Octopus vulgaris to choose a correct ball 
needed about 4 trials. Right after the training phase octopuses 
choose the correct ball in 85% of all trails. The result remains 
approximately the same (81%) even 5 days after training [16], 
[18]. 
As mentioned before, octopus is a soft-bodied animal 
without any rigid external or internal skeleton. They use their 
boneless to change their shape and taking different forms. This 
ability allows them to squeeze into different narrow holes [5].  
The lack of a skeleton is compensated by a muscular 
structure called “muscular hydrostat”. Muscles in the octopus 
body can easily stiffen, relax, elongate or shorten. This allows 
octopuses to solve different tasks, explore items and use tools by 
their arms. Each arm is independent and can be monitored by 
itself. If an arm is damaged, it can be regenerated. The size and 
force of regenerated arm, depends on the age of the octopus [19]. 
Amputated arm is still active within an hour after amputation, it 
continues to bend, makes same movements as usual, grabs the 
objects by the suckers [1], [4]. This behaviour confirms 
distributed structure of nervous system. Arms do not need to be 
attached to the central brain to make stereotypical movements. 
The big number of nervous cells might provide a memory ability 
and allows to arms “be alive” for a next hour even without 
receiving the nerve impulses from the brain. 
Octopus arms represent a high flexible and multifunctional 
instruments.. Octopus arm encompasses three types of muscles. 
Each of the type is responsible for a particular action. For 
example, extending of the longitudinal muscles leads to the arm-
elongation and stiffness of the whole arm depends on the 
transverse muscles. The nerve cord runs along whole arm and 
has a sinusoidal arrangement that allows elongating and bending 
of an arm without stretching the cord itself [20]. These arms have 
potentially infinite degrees of freedom, can bend in any direction 
and twist either clockwise or counter clockwise. The general arm 
movements are complicated. However, for grabbing objects 
octopuses use rather simple and predictable locomotion strategy 
and stereotyping movements [1]. Octopus uses their arm either 
for locomotion – swimming, walking on the sea bottom, 
crawling – for reaching, grasping, digging and grooming. While 
crawling arms push the body by elongating thus the direction of 
the arms is opposite to the direction of body movement [1]. 
These methods of locomotion were taken as an example in 
development of artificial octopus [21]. Researches show that 
octopuses prefer to use particular arms (or pairs of arms) while 
crawling [22]. Usually octopuses prefer crawling in 45 degrees 
[1], [22]. This direction of crawling is quite usual for animals 
with bilateral symmetry in the body. In addition, it provides 
more efficient work of their sensory system that means it helps 
perceive the environment better. Octopuses use their arms for 
changing the direction of swimming. Using different 
combinations of arms or pairs of arms allows them to change the 
angle and speed of movements. Arms are also used to seize, 
manipulate, and bring food to the mouth [4]. 
Another interesting part of octopus arm are the suckers. The 
octopus’ pelvic side of the arms can have up to hundreds of 
suckers. Each sucker contains a large number of tactile and 
chemical receptors [4]. The suckers are a sophisticated organ. It 
can attach to objects with varying degrees of force. This includes 
anchoring to perfectly smooth surfaces as well as to surfaces 
with a certain roughness [23]. Suckers apply significantly 
different forces to different types of objects and surfaces, but the 
suckers neither grasped their own arm, because of a skin self-
recognition mechanism [4], [24], even if the arm was amputated. 
Cephalopods can change the skin colour and texture very 
quickly i.e. within 270–730 milliseconds even though being 
colour blind, but sensitive to polarised light [2], [25]. Their skin 
is a perfect tool for anti-predatory strategy as it provides an ideal 
means for camouflage, to make cephalopods difficult to detect 
in their surroundings, or, in opposite, become very bright, to 
make predators think they are venomous. 
The skin is divided into the five layers of different optical 
elements – three layers of chromatophores, mirror-like 
iridophores, and matte white leucophores [26]. 
The chromatophore system encompass millions of pigment 
cells called chromatophores. Each chromatophore cell contains 
an elastic sac with the pigment, which is opened by muscles 
attached to the cell. Changing the colour depends on situation 
and surroundings [27]. This process can be represented as a 
sequence of neural signals (see Fig. 2) [28].  
The colour changing is directly connected with information 
received from the eyes and appears as a product of polarization 
vision [29]. If chromatophore sacs are narrowed, then the light 
reflects in iridophores which give a good camouflage at low light 
levels [19]. 
Octopuses are able to mimicry. A good example of this 
ability is described in [30]. The mimic octopus (Thaumoctopus 
mimicus) can imitate behaviour and skin pattern of a sea-snake 
lion fish or other toxic and potentially dangerous animals. This 
colour changing is used as an anti-predatory strategy. 
 
Figure 2.  Sequence of neural signals from eyes to skin 
Octopuses use a lot of different patterns in their skin 
painting. The most common is so called «passing clouds» that 
looks like a travelling waves on cephalopods skin [31]. Skin 
colour-patterns also depend on the cephalopod species, for 
example Larger Pacific Striped Octopus is striped and uses his 
skin to mimic the see snake as Thaumoctopus mimicus Octopus 
does [32]. 
Cephalopods eyes have one unusual property called visual 
lateralization. Visual lateralization allows to prioritize 
information from one visual field over the other one. In addition 
one side of the cuttlefish brain is specialized on processing 
information used for hunting, and the other side is used for 
monitoring area to occurring predators [25], [33]. Eyes are also 
used for body- and arms-positioning and to locate food [17]. 
eye
optic lobe
lateral basal lobe
chromatophore lobes
skin

III. OCTOPUS-INSPIRED SOLUTIONS  
External and internal parts of the octopus body are also 
remarkable not only from biological perspective, but also for 
technical development. A lot of works and researches are made 
within projects [34], [35], [36], [37], [38] and within a PhD 
thesis [39], [40]. The next subsection give insight into how 
octopus features can be used in technical developments. 
A. Nervous system 
The nervous system represent an unusual organization. The 
central brain acts like a decision-making mechanism, it 
initializes and pulls the impulse to the peripheral. However brain 
does not issue top-down commands for every small movement 
of the arms [41], a lot of decisions arms make by themselves. 
The scientists in The Octopus project [42] are focused in 
study of octopus brain functions. Their aim is to understand the 
behaviour of octopuses and how the octopus brain works. Using 
this information, they want to create a model to simulate a 
distributed intelligence of octopuses.  
A similar research is done at University of Nevada, Reno. 
They use an electroencephalography sensor to record nervous 
signal. After analysis they plan to divide all this record to its 
simplest parts. These primitives will be helpful in understanding 
of how octopus brains work and in development of octopus-like 
nervous system as well [38]. 
The structure of octopus nervous system and the way how 
brain communicates with arms can be used in software 
architecture developments. For example, [43] demonstrates the 
developing process and application of multiprocessing 
framework with a core based on octopus nervous system 
arrangement. The main idea is to distribute control between 
main processor and coprocessors, to make coprocessors solve 
small tasks by their own and to increase the processing speed of 
whole system. 
An additional example of an Octopus inspired software 
development is described in [44]. The group of scientists 
provides a model of a system that detects the malicious node and 
drains its battery using the other nodes of network i.e. the nodes 
start to send the messages (flooding) to malicious node, just as 
the octopus spread the ink to predators. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is an interesting field of research 
providing powerful and flexible mechanisms suited for different 
application fields such as – analytics, agriculture, medicine, 
robotics, software development. Despite the huge advancements 
of AI in recent years due to increased computing power there is 
still a huge perspective for further improvements and 
developments. In the field of artificial intelligence, the exchange 
of ideas between scientists in the technical and biological fields 
is extremely fruitful [45]. The comparatively simple 2-layer 
neural network of octopuses corresponds to the first artificial 
networks that could learn classifications. AI methods are often 
used in robotics. Different AI algorithms can be used in robotics. 
[46] provides an overview of major AI paradigms such as the 
hierarchical paradigm and the reactive paradigm. Furthermore, 
it includes examples how to transfer principles of the paradigm 
into a real robotic solution. Robots become more intelligent, 
adjust behaviour algorithms, learn how to perform the tasks, and 
then are able to apply this knowledge in real situations. Data are 
collected from sensors and processed by machine learning 
algorithms [47]. Usually AI methods were inspired from human 
intelligence. Recently, the focus is shifted from human to animal 
intelligence.  
B. Arrangement of body and arms 
There are two types of bio-inspired robots namely soft-
robots and rigid ones. The later are usually built by rigid modules 
linked with each other by rigid joints and are wide used in 
industry. Such robots increase efficiency of factory work and 
improve is quality. They perform the tasks with higher accuracy 
and don’t need breaks as humans do. However, they also have a 
major disadvantage. Rigid robots are placed in known 
environment or even sometimes the environment is built 
regarding the robots dimensions and other specifics. This type 
of robots loses its advantages to a certain extend or even became 
useless in unexplored and unprepared areas. Here soft-robots are 
by far more promising. These bio- solutions imitate a whole 
body of animal or some parts of their bodies. There are 
developments of insect, aquatic and amphibious animals and 
primates. In more particular, there are soft-robotics inspired by 
worms, fish, elephant trunk, octopus arm, caterpillars, etc. [48], 
[49]. The main advantages of soft-robots is their lack of rigid 
modules. They are usually made of soft materials such as gels, 
rubber or silicone. This soft structure allows them to squeeze 
into hard-accessible areas. Also, the soft-robots can grasp and 
manipulate the objects without them.  
Octopus arms are source of inspirations for many 
researchers. Their main purpose is to build robots from a soft 
materials – soft-robots. Such robots have a list of advantages 
compared to rigid robots. First of all they are highly resistant to 
stress forces, as they don´t have rigid links, can be used in 
different areas with unexplored environment and can bend 
producing a smooth curves [50]. The soft structure of these 
robots allows to use them as search or rescue robots, which could 
crawl into a hard-accessible area and explore it [51]. 
A large part of soft-robotics solutions and octopus 
investigations were made by the group of researchers from 
BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy 
within The OCTOPUS project [35]. For example, [20] includes 
description of instruments developed and measuring protocols 
to obtain measurement of octopus arm inner structure. The group 
of researchers made mechanical measurements of significant 
properties of octopus arm such as: elongation, strength, 
shortening 
and 
longitudinal 
stiffness. 
They 
also 
did 
morphological measurement of transverse and longitudinal 
muscles, sinusoidal nerve cord and density of the arm. The 
biomechanical and anatomical investigations were used in 
prototype development in the second part of research [52]. The 
development process and final solution of silicone arm are 
shown, which are based on the measurements and the 
morphological features obtained in their previous work. In [53] 
their prototype was improved and tested in the water area. 
Octopuses control their arms thanks to mechanism of embodied 
intelligence, what´s make them a good prototype for including 

artificial intelligence in soft robotic arms [53]. The example of 
octopus control system representation shown in Fig. 3. 
A soft arm prototype with locomotion and grasping abilities 
was developed by the same group. The prototype has a conic 
shape made of silicone with one steel and one fibre cable inside. 
The steel cable allows the arm to elongate and shorten providing 
locomotion. The fibre cable allows the arm to bend and grasp 
the objects. Both cables are actuated by servomotors [50]. At the 
end an eight-arm octopus-like robot was constructed. It is fully 
functioning under the water, using a remote control, , due to its 
soft arm materials and conical shape it can grasp objects of 
different size and shape [54]. 
Another soft-robotic octopus arm was developed by 
Researchers at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of 
Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS) and Beihang 
University. The soft-robotic arm encompasses all main features 
of real octopus arm and mimicked the general structure. It can 
grip, move, and manipulate a range of different objects with its 
flexible and tapered design [55]. 
 
Figure 3.  Octopus control system 
The development of soft robot arm-prototypes requires as 
much similarity with real octopus arms as possible. This is the 
reason why researches need to test different texture and 
materials. In [56] a platform for testing mock-ups was designed 
and developed. It helps to reveal all advantages and 
disadvantages of using the arm prototype. 
The development of an octopus-like arm it is just a first step. 
The main idea of a lot of scientific works is to empower such 
arms to move and act like a real octopus arm. To achieve this 
real octopus movements were analysed. [57] describes the 
process of recording octopus movements, dividing them into 
primitives, clustering and classifying them. The information 
provided can be used as in further investigations e.g. when 
developing octopus-like locomotion strategies for artificial 
prototypes. Octopus motor control is a sophisticated system, but 
it can be investigated, divided into primitive parts and used in 
octopus-inspired prototypes [11]. 
Also a group of researchers from Michigan state university 
analysed the movements of octopus arms using video-recording 
and artificial intelligence. Data was collected by electrodes 
implanted in the octopus’ arms. The analysed information can 
be helpful in development of intelligent sensors [34]. 
Machine learning algorithms and especially the reinforce 
learning are commonly used for training octopus-like 
manipulators. In particular, the reinforce learning is used to train 
octopus-like manipulator arm to relocate objects from the start 
to the goal position [58]. 
The complexity of the learning depends only on the number 
of degrees of freedom, and not on the size of the robotics [59]. 
There are several technical solutions that are inspired by 
octopus suckers even though they did not gain as much 
popularity as those inspired by the complete octopus arm. The 
idea is develop artificial suckers that can attach to different 
surfaces. The first development of artificial suckers was 
presented in [60]. [23] reports about improvements especially 
and a sensory unit was added, for achieving better sensing of the 
proximity and tactile interactions.  
Besides the octopus-like suction cups octopus-inspired 
sensor sticks [61] were developed. The group of researchers 
developed graphene-based adhesive bio-sensor that looks like 
artificial skin. It sticks to dry or wet human skin. The inspiration 
was taken of octopus suckers and how they work in air and water 
environment. However, soft robotics arm are usually developed 
without suckers, probably in order not to overload the 
development. 
C. Skin, mimicry 
Some works are focused on skin genome researching [62], 
[63]. These researches help to understand the internal process of 
appearance changing. These works discovered that eyes and skin 
have the same structure [64] and can detect light intensity, and 
change the colour according to light changings [65]. The results 
of the genome studies enables the creation of artificial skin and 
skin-cells with all appropriate features [66], [67], [68]. 
The main topic of investigation and development is to mimic 
the ability of cephalopods skin. The scientist are focused on 
developing an artificial skin with the ability to change colour 
regarding to surroundings. Based on the results of octopus skin 
and researching its genome the artificial skin was developed 
[66]. It can mimic the touch effect and provides similar 
behaviour and patterns as octopus skin does. 
Another example of skin developments is described in [69]. 
There a high-performance system consisting of arrays of 
actuators and photodetectors is reported. The developed skin has 
a 
multilayer 
architecture 
with 
embedded 
artificial 
chromatophores. Its flexible design allows to attach the unit 
itself to some object to provide camouflage. 
A 3D printed octopus-inspired camouflage robot was 
developed by researchers from Rutgers University [70]. The 
robot is covered with ´smart gel´ including artificial 
chromatophores. The gel composition turns light into heat 
energy and controls the size of artificial chromatophores sacs.  
IV. 
IDEA FOR FURTHER WORKS 
According to the above overview, it becomes clear that the 
most of the researches were done in the field of biology. The 
second largest group of papers deals with investigation in the 
field of robotics focusing on octopus-like arm development. 
Soft-robots are candidates for performing complex tasks in an 
unknown environment if they are resilient. Only a small part of 
all reviewed works are somehow related to resilience or AI. That 
means this part is the less explored and can become a good area 
for new investigations. 
AI is the main mean to achieve self-adaptability which is 
kind of the ground truth when it comes to achieve resilience of a 
controller 
(brain) 
mechanical system
(body) 
sensory system 
(suckers, skin, eyes)
environment

system. The idea for further works and researches is an 
application of artificial intelligence methods to octopus-inspired 
soft-robots locomotion. Soft-robots usually are used in unknown 
area. Hence, they need to be resilient enough to adapt in the 
unknown environment. So the aim is to make a soft-robotics arm 
to move by itself without remote control. The decisions how and 
in which direction to move shall be taken based on the data 
obtained from the sensors exploring the surroundings. 
Information provided in biological papers points out that 
octopus movements can be predicted. That´s why the idea of 
autonomous movements generated by AI methods and machine 
learning techniques seems rather possible.  
Octopus-inspired soft-robotics arms can be used in different 
fields. They can be helpful in the surgeries or in the rescue 
operations. They can squeeze in narrow holes that make them a 
useful tool. The sensors can check various parameters and 
provide information about the surrounding area. Based on this 
information autonomous movements of soft-robotics arm can be 
generated. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Octopuses are one of the most interesting species. They are 
interesting not only for biological researches, but also for 
technical development. Their external and internal structures are 
unique and can be used as models in different developments, 
first of all in robotics. Artificial intelligence is a powerful tool, 
suitable for a lot of cases. Using artificial intelligence in robotics 
is already common practice, but both of these areas are 
continuously improving. Our idea aims at combining these 
areas. Octopus like soft-robots are already a wide spread concept 
of development. AI methods are rapidly developing, changing 
and improving, what makes them flexible and useful. They are 
used in very different areas, improving the speed and quality of 
work. Our idea is to use AI methods in soft-robotics to increase 
their independence of human decisions and their resilience in 
unexplored environments.
