Design of Emergent and Adaptive Virtual
Players in a War RTS Game
Jos´e A. Garc´ıa Guti´errez, Carlos Cotta, and Antonio J. Fern´andez Leiva
Dept. Lenguajes y Ciencias de la Computaci´on, ETSI Inform´atica,
Campus de Teatinos, Universidad de M´alaga,
29071 M´alaga – Spain

Abstract. Basically, in (one-player) war Real Time Strategy (wRTS)
games a human player controls, in real time, an army consisting of a num-
ber of soldiers and her aim is to destroy the opponent’s assets where the
opponent is a virtual (i.e., non-human player controlled) player that usu-
ally consists of a pre-programmed decision-making script. These scripts
have usually associated some well-known problems (e.g., predictability,
non-rationality, repetitive behaviors, and sensation of artiﬁcial stupidity
among others). This paper describes a method for the automatic gener-
ation of virtual players that adapt to the player skills; this is done by
building initially a model of the player behavior in real time during the
game, and further evolving the virtual player via this model in-between
two games. The paper also shows preliminary results obtained on a one-
player wRTS game constructed speciﬁcally for experimentation.
1
Introduction and related work
In an era in which computing power has boosted the graphical quality of
videogames, players have turned their attention to other aspects of the game. In
particular, they mostly request opponents exhibiting intelligent behavior. How-
ever, intelligence does not generally equate to playing proﬁciency but rather to
interesting behaviors [1]. This issue is speciﬁcally relevant in real-time strategy
(RTS) games that often employ two kinds of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [2]: one
represented by a virtual player (VP, or non-player character – NPC) making
decisions on a set of units (i.e., warriors, machines, etc.), and another one cor-
responding to the small units (usually with little or no intelligence). The design
of these AIs is a complex task, and the reality in the industry is that in most of
the RTS games, the NPC is basically controlled by a ﬁxed script that has been
previously programmed based on the experience of the designer/programmer.
This script often comprises hundreds of rules, in the form if the game is in
state S then Unit U should execute action A, to control the behavior of
the components (i.e., units) under its control. This arises known problems: for
instance, for players, the opponent behavior guided by ﬁxed scripts can become
predictable for the experienced player. Also, for AI programmers, the design of
arXiv:1201.3117v1  [cs.NE]  15 Jan 2012

virtual players (VPs) can be frustrating because the games are becoming more
and more complex with hundreds of diﬀerent situations/states and therefore it
is not easy to predict all the possible situations that could potentially happen
and even more diﬃcult to decide which is the most appropriate actions to take
in such situations. As consequence, many RTS games contain ’holes’ in the sense
that the game stagnates or behaves incorrectly under very speciﬁc conditions
(these problems rely on the category of ’artiﬁcial stupidity’ [1]). Thus the reality
of the simulation is drastically reduced and so too the interest of the player;
In addition, there are very interesting research problems in developing AI for
Real-Time Strategy (RTS) games including planning in an uncertain world with
incomplete information, learning, opponent modeling, and spatial and temporal
reasoning [3]. This AI design is usually very hard due to the complexity of
the search space (states describe large playing scenarios with hundreds of units
simultaneously acting). Particular problems are caused by the large search spaces
(environments consisting of many thousands of possible positions for each of
hundreds, possibly thousands, of units) and the parallel nature of the problem -
unlike traditional games, any number of moves may be made simultaneously [4].
Qualitative spatial reasoning (QSR) techniques can be used to reduce complex
spatial states (e.g., using abstract representations of the space [5]). Regarding
evolutionary techniques, a number of biologically-inspired algorithms and multi-
agent based methods have already been applied to handle many of the mentioned
problems in the implementation of RTS games [6–13].
Even in the case of designing a very good script for VPs, the designer has to
confront another well known problem: the VP behavior is usually ﬁxed and rarely
adapts to the level (i.e., skills) of the player. In fact the player can lose interest
in the game because either she is able to beat all the opponents in each level, or
the virtual player always beat her. In this sense, the design of interesting (e.g.,
non-predictable) NPCs is not the only challenge though. It also has to adapt to
the human player, since she might lose interest in the game otherwise (i.e., if the
NPCs are too easy or too hard to beat).
There are many beneﬁts attempting to build adaptive learning AI systems
which may exist at multiple levels of the game hierarchy, and which evolve over
time. This paper precisely deals with the issue of generating behaviors for the
virtual player that evolve in accordance with the player’s increasing abilities.
This behavior emerges according to the player skill, and this emergent feature
can make a RTS game more entertaining and less predictable in the sense that
emergent behavior is not explicitly programmed but simply happens [14]. The
attainment of adjustable and emergent virtual players consists here of a process
of two stages that are iteratively executed in sequence: (1) a behavior model
of the human player is created in real time during the execution of a game,
and further the virtual player is evolved oﬀ-line (i.e., in between two games)
via evolutionary algorithms till a state that it can compete with the player (not
necessarily to beat her but to keep her interest in the game). This approach has
been applied on a RTS game constructed speciﬁcally for experimentation, and
we report here our experience.

2
The Game
Here we describe the basic elements that compose our wRTS game.
Scenario. It will also be called indistinctly region or world and consists of a
two-dimensional non-toroidal heterogeneous hostile and dynamic grid-world. The
world is heterogeneous because the terrain is not uniform, hostile because there
exist a virtual army whose mission is to destroy the human player-controlled
army, and dynamic because the game conditions change depending on the actions
taken by units of both armies. Regarding the heterogeneity of the terrain, each
grid in the region can have one of the three following values: passable (each uni
can traverse this grid), impassable (no unit can traverse it), and semi-impassable
(there is a penalization of 1 point of energy - see below -to traverse it).
Army. There are two armies (also called indistinctly teams, represented by
spiders and ladybirds) with a number of units (also called indistinctly soldiers or
agents) and a ﬂag to be defended. One army is controlled by the human player
whereas the other one is guided by some kind of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI).
Given a unit u placed in a position (xu, yu) in the grid, its visual range (VRu)
embraces any position (x, y) that is placed to a maximum distance φ, that is to
say, VRu = {(x, y) |
p
(xu −x)2 + (yu −y)2 ≤φ}. Initially, each agent only
knows the grids that belongs to its visual range. In fact, during the game the
scenario is not completely known for an army and only those regions that were
already visualized by its agents are known. The global information that each
army (independently if this is controlled by the AI or the player) has is the sum
of all the information of their constituent soldiers. Note that (human or virtual)
players only know the rival ﬂag position if this has been detected in a grid by
some of its agents previously. Also, each unit interacts with the environment by
executing a number of actions (see below) and has certain level of health and
energy that decreases with these interactions. The initial values for the health
and energy of each soldier are 100 and 1000 respectively.
Fights. Full body combat can be executed at the soldier level by assigning a
random value (in the interval [0,1]) to each unit involved in a ﬁght with a rival
soldier; the energy level of the unit with lowest value decreases 1 unit. A unit
dies when its energy is zero. All the combats between soldiers are executed in
sequence in one turn of the game.
Decision-making. Along the game, the role of players is to make decisions
with respect to the actions that the units of their respective associated armies
should take. More speciﬁcally, both the virtual and human player can select a
set of agents and further assign it a speciﬁc order that basically consists of a
common action that each unit in this set has to execute.
Actions. The game is executed in turns; every turn, each soldier executes the
last order received by its player. Six actions are possible in this game:
– Move forward enemy: if applied to unit u, then this has to move towards the
closer rival soldier according to VRu, otherwise (i.e., if no rival soldier exists
in VRu) agent u has to move in direction to the region where there are more
enemies according to the global information of the army.

– Group/Run away: the soldier has to group with other team mates placed
inside its visual range; if there are not mates in this range, then the agent
has to move towards the position where its ﬂag is placed.
– Move forward objective: the agent advances towards the opponent’s ﬂag
position if this is known, otherwise it moves randomly.
– No operation: execute no operation.
– Explore: the soldier moves towards a non-explored-yet region of the map.
– Protect ﬂag: The soldier has to move towards the position of its own ﬂag; if
it is already near to it, unit just should scout the zone.
Perceptions. Each unit knows its speciﬁc situation in the game from the
perceptions that receives in its visual range. In our game, the agent state is
determined by its health (measured in three range values: low, medium and
high), and the following boolean perceptions:
1. Advantage state? (Sa): “the unit is into a handicap situation”. This percep-
tion is true if, according to the information in its visual range, the number
of mate soldiers is higher than the number of rival units, and false otherwise.
2. Under attack? (Ua): this perception is true of the soldier is involved in a full
body combat with another opponent unit, and false otherwise.
3. Objective visible? (Ov): the opponent’s ﬂag is visible in its visual range.
Game objective. The army that ﬁrst captures the rival ﬂag is the winner;
if this situation is never reached after a number of turns, then the winner is
the player whose army inﬂicts a higher damage to its rival army and where the
damage is measured as number of dead units.
2.1
Notes on speciﬁc issues
Observe that ‘ﬁghting’ is not a speciﬁc action to be executed by the army units.
This should not be surprising because ‘ﬁghting’ is not usually controlled by
players in standard RTS games as this action should often is executed at the
unit level and not at the army level; in our game this action is automatically
executed when a unit and a rival soldier meet in any grid of the scenario.
Also, note that ﬁve of the six possible actions that units can execute require
to make movements in the game world. This basically means that some kind
of pathﬁnding should be processed to do the movement realistic. Classical al-
gorithms such as A∗were not good candidates for this task since, as already
indicated, most of the scenario is not known for the army units. A practical so-
lution was to let units make a good-enough movement depending on its scenario
knowledge; several cases were covered: Concave obstacles: the unit moves by
considering diﬀerent angles with respect to its position in the scenario; Convex
obstacles: the unit moves by following the obstacle contour in a speciﬁc direction;
and Bridges and narrow passages: a simple ant-colony algorithm was executed.
Due to space limitations we will not explain them in details as this is beyond
the objective of this paper. In any case, Figures 1(a),(b) and (c) show illustrative
examples of the cases, Figure 1(d) illustrates the classical behavior of our ant

colony algorithms, and Figure 1(e) displays a screenshot of our wRTS game1
titled aracnia. Note also that a description of the technical issues of the game
(e.g., implementation of basic actions, graphical considerations, input/output
interface, scene rendering and memory management, among others) is beyond
the scope of this paper. In the following we will focus on the process of designing
virtual players.
(a) Concave obstacles
(b) Convex obstacles
(c) bridges and passages
(d) Ant-colony
(e)
Game
Fig. 1. (a)-(c) Movement examples; (d) illustration of classical execution of ant-colony
algorithm used for pathﬁnding; (e) game screenshot (black cells represent non-explored
regions yet, blue cells impassable grids, and green cells passable regions in the scenario.
3
Virtual player design
Here we describe our proposal to design adaptive virtual players in our wRTS.
3.1
General issues
Our aim is to generate controllers governing automatically (i.e., without hu-
man intervention) the behavior of an entire team (i.e., a set of autonomous
agents/soldiers). An army controller can be viewed as a set of rules that will
control the reactions of its agents according to the current state of play. De-
pending on its situation, the agent executes a particular action that may modify
1 A
prototype
version
of
this
game
can
be
unloaded
from
http://www.lcc.uma.es/∼afdez/aracnia.

Algorithm 1: PMEA (VP)
1 VP ←RBP;
// Rule-based expert system
2 for i ∈N℘do
3
PlayerModel ←PlayGameOn(VP);
// Player modeling (PM)
4
VP ←EA(PlayerModel,VP);
// Evolutionary optimization (EA)
5 end for
6 return VP;
the state of the agent itself. The global team strategy emerges as the result of
the sum of the speciﬁc behavior of all the agents.
However, the deﬁnition of speciﬁc strategies for each agent is complex, re-
quires a profound knowledge of the required behavior of each agent, and results
in predictable behavior. Moreover, devising independent controllers for each unit
in a RTS game is costly; in fact this is not realistic as requires a high computation
eﬀort that surely decreases the quality of the real-time rendering of the game.
One solution consists of designing global team strategies; however, again this is
very complex as the programmer has to cope with too many possibilities that
arise from the diﬀerent interactions among all the agents of both armies. We have
opted by a more realistic process: all the soldiers will be managed by the same
controller, and in any instant of the game, the team behavior will be the result
of summing all the action taken by each of its constituent units. This means that
we have to produce just one controller to devise a global team strategy. Note
however that this does not mean all the agents execute the same action because
the action to be executed by a soldier will depend on its particular situation in
the match.
3.2
A two phases process
The procedure described in the following has the aim of creating a virtual player
whose behavior auto-evolves according to the skills that human player exhibits
along the game. Algorithm 1 displays the general schema of the process: initially
(in the ﬁrst game), the virtual player (VP) is constructed as an expert system
(i.e., a rule-based prototype (RBP)) that comprises tens of rules trying to cover
all the possible situations in which an agent might be involved. This system was
the result of a number of trials designed from the experiences of the authors
playing wRTS games. Then, let Nh be {1, . . . , h} henceforth, and assume the
human player will play a number of ℘games, the procedure consists of two phases
that are sequentially executed. Firstly, a player modeling phase is conducted;
this step is described in Section 3.3 and basically consists of building a model
of the behavior that human player exhibits during the game (i.e., on-line). The
second phase, described in Section 3.4, is devoted to construct the virtual player
by evolving a strategy controlling the functioning of a virtual army unit via
an evolutionary algorithm (EA). In the following we describe in details both
phases. Firstly, we discuss how the virtual player is internally encoded as this is
important to understand the functioning of the whole schema.
Representation: the virtual player contains a NPC army strategy, and its
internal encoding corresponds with both the rule-based expert system and any

Fig. 2. Example of an arbitrary encoding (left), and extended answer matrix (right).
individual in the EA population. In the following we will refer to ‘individual’
in a general sense. Every individual represents a team strategy, that is to say,
a common set of actions that each army unit has to execute under its speciﬁc
situation in the environment. An individual is represented as a vector v of k cells
where k is the number of diﬀerent situations in which the agent can be in the
game, and v[i] (for 0 ≤i < k) contains the action to be taken in situation i. In
other words, assuming m perceptions, where the perception pj (for 0 ≤j ≤m−1)
can have kj possible values, then k = k0 ∗k1 ∗. . . ∗km−1 and the cell:
v[em−1+em−2∗km−1+em−3∗(km−1∗km−2)+em−4∗(km−1∗km−2∗km−3)+. . . . . . ]
contains the action to be executed by a speciﬁc unit when its perceptions
p0, p1, . . . , pm−1 have the values e0, e1, . . . , em−1 respectively. As indicated in
Section 2, the state of a unit in our wRTS game is determined by three boolean
perceptions and its energy level (with 3 diﬀerent values) so that the encoding of
an individual consists of a vector with 24 genes; this vector will be called answer
matrix, and each cell in the vector will contain an action. Remember that 6 pos-
sible actions can be executed in our wRTS and thus the search space (i.e., the
number of diﬀerent strategies that can be generated from this representation)
is 624. Figure 2(left) displays an example of a possible encoding. The optimal
solution (if it exists) would be that strategy which always select the best action
to be executed for the agents under all possible environmental conditions. In
fact, this vast search space makes this problem impracticable for exact methods
and justiﬁes the use of evolutionary algorithms.
3.3
On-line phase: User modeling
The player behavior will be modeled as a ruled-based strategy encoded as ex-
plained above. This process requires collecting, during the execution of the game
(i.e., in real time) the actions that human player executes, recording additionally
the speciﬁc conditions under which these are performed. At the end of this pro-
cess we generate an extended answer matrix (v+) that is an answer matrix (i.e.,

Algorithm 2: EA(PModel, VP))
// PModel = Player Model, VP =
Virtual Player
1 for i ∈Npopsize−1 do
2
popi ←Random-Solution();
3 end for
4 poppopsize ←VP;
5 i ←0;
6 while i < MaxGenerations do
7
Rank-Population (pop); // sort population according to fitness
8
parent1 ←Select (pop); // roulette wheel
9
parent2 ←Select (pop);
10
if Rand[0, 1] < pX then // recombination is done
11
(child1, child2) ←Recombine (parent1, parent2);
12
else
13
(child1, child2) ←(parent1, parent2);
14
end if
15
child1 ←Mutate (child1, pM); // pM = mutation probability
16
child2 ←Mutate (child2, pM);
17
fitness1 ←PlayGameOff(P Model, child1);
18
fitness2 ←PlayGameOff(P Model, child2);
19
pop ←replace(pop, child1, child2); // (popsize + 2) replacement
20
i ←i + 1;
21 end while
22 return best solution in pop;
an individual encoding v) where each cell v+[i] (for 0 ≤i < k) represents now
a vector of 6 positions (one per action) and v+[i][a] (for some action a ∈[1, 6])
contains the probability that human player executes action a under the environ-
ment conditions (i.e., the state) associated to cell v[i]. Figure 2(right) displays
an example that shows the probability of executing each of the 6 possible actions
in a speciﬁc situation of the unit (i.e., the soldier has medium energy, is in an
advantage state, is not suﬀering an attack, and knows where the opponent ﬂag is
placed). This extended answer matrix is ﬁnally used to design the virtual player
as follows: VP[i] = argmaxa∈[1,6]{v+[i][a]}, for all possible situations i.
3.4
Oﬀ-line phase: evolutionary optimization
Algorithm 2 shows the basic schema of our EA. The initial population is ran-
domly generated except one individual that is charged with the virtual player
(lines 1-4). Then a classical process of evolution (lines 6-21) is performed and the
best solution in the population is ﬁnally returned (draws are broken randomly).
Evaluating the ﬁtness of an individual x requires the simulation (oﬀ-line) of
the game between the player model and the virtual player strategy encoded in
x. The ﬁtness function depends on the statistical data collected at the end of
the simulation. The higher the number of statistical data to be collected, the
higher the computational cost will be. A priori, a good policy is to consider
a limited number of data. Four data were used in our experiments during oﬀ-
line evaluation: A: Number of deaths in the human player army; B: number of
deaths in virtual player army; C: number of movements; and D: victory degree
(i.e., 1 if virtual player wins and 2 otherwise). Fitness function was then deﬁned
as fitness(x) = 10000∗(A−B)
C∗D
; higher the ﬁtness value, better the strategy. This
ﬁtness was coded to evolve towards aggressive solutions.

4
Experimental analysis
The experiments were performed using two algorithms: our initial expert system
(RBP), and the algorithm PMEA (i.e., player modeling + EA) presented in
Algorithm 1. As to the PMEA, the EA uses popsize = 50, pX = .7, pM = .01,
and MaxGenerations = 125; mutation is executed as usual at the gene level
by changing an action to any other action randomly chosen. Three diﬀerent
scenarios where created for experimentation: (1) A map with size 50 × 50 grids,
48 agents in VP army, and 32 soldiers in the human player (HP) team; (2) a
map 54 × 46, with 43 VP soldiers, and 43 HP units; and (3) a map 50 × 28,
with 48 VP soldiers, and 53 HP units. Algorithm 1 was executed for a value of
℘= 20 (i.e., 20 diﬀerent games were sequentially played), and the RBP was also
executed 20 times; Table 1 shows the results obtained.
Table 1. Results: VPwin = number of virtual player’s victories, HPwin = number of
human player’s victories, HPdeath = average number of deaths in the HP army, VPdeath
= average number of deaths in the VP army, mov = average number of movements,
and time = average time (minutes) dedicated per game
VPwin HPwin HPdeath VPdeath mov time
map50×50
RBP
4
16
6
7
5345 3.56
PMEA
6
14
7
7
4866 3.20
map54×46
RBP
9
11
4
3
7185 4.79
PMEA
7
13
6
7
5685 3.80
map50×28
RBP
3
17
3
2
6946 4.63
PMEA
6
14
7
6
6056 3.78
Even though in two of the three scenarios PMEA behaves better than RBP,
note that no signiﬁcant diﬀerences are shown; this is however an expected re-
sult as we have considered just one player what means that the player models
obtained in-between two games are likely similar and thus their corresponding
virtual players also are. In any case, this demonstrates that our approach is
feasible as it produces virtual players comparable - and sometimes better - to
speciﬁc and specialized pre-programmed scripts.
5
Conclusions
We have described an algorithm to design automatically strategies exhibiting
emergent behaviors that adapt to the user skills in a one-player war real time
strategy game (wRTS); to do so, a model to mimic how the human player acts
in the game is ﬁrst constructed during the game, and further a strategy for a
virtual player is evolved (in between games) via an evolutionary algorithm.
Our proposal was compared with an expert system designed speciﬁcally for
the game. Whereas no signiﬁcance diﬀerences have been highlighted in the ex-
periments, we make note that our approach has evident advantages compared to
classical manufactured scripts (i.e., expert systems) used in videogame industry:

for instance, it avoids the predictability of actions to be executed by the virtual
player and thus guarantees to maintain the interest of the player This is specially
interesting when the game involves more than one player as our approach would
allow to construct virtual players adapted particularly to each of the human
players (and this cannot be obtained with a pre-programmed script).
Further research will cope with multi-player games and thus multi-objective
evolutionary programming techniques should be considered.
Acknowledgements This work is supported by project NEMESIS (TIN-2008-
05941) of the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci´on, and project TIC-6083
of Junta de Andaluc´ıa.
