Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 37 (2010) 1-39
Submitted 07/09; published 01/10
Text Relatedness Based on a Word Thesaurus
George Tsatsaronis

Department of Computer and Information Science
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Iraklis Varlamis

Department of Informatics and Telematics
Harokopio University, Greece
Michalis Vazirgiannis

Department of Informatics
Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
Abstract
The computation of relatedness between two fragments of text in an automated manner requires
taking into account a wide range of factors pertaining to the meaning the two fragments convey,
and the pairwise relations between their words. Without doubt, a measure of relatedness between
text segments must take into account both the lexical and the semantic relatedness between words.
Such a measure that captures well both aspects of text relatedness may help in many tasks, such as
text retrieval, classiﬁcation and clustering. In this paper we present a new approach for measuring
the semantic relatedness between words based on their implicit semantic links. The approach ex-
ploits only a word thesaurus in order to devise implicit semantic links between words. Based on
this approach, we introduce Omiotis, a new measure of semantic relatedness between texts which
capitalizes on the word-to-word semantic relatedness measure (SR) and extends it to measure the
relatedness between texts. We gradually validate our method: we ﬁrst evaluate the performance
of the semantic relatedness measure between individual words, covering word-to-word similar-
ity and relatedness, synonym identiﬁcation and word analogy; then, we proceed with evaluating
the performance of our method in measuring text-to-text semantic relatedness in two tasks, namely
sentence-to-sentence similarity and paraphrase recognition. Experimental evaluation shows that the
proposed method outperforms every lexicon-based method of semantic relatedness in the selected
tasks and the used data sets, and competes well against corpus-based and hybrid approaches.
1. Introduction
Relatedness between texts can be perceived in several different ways. Primarily, one can think of
lexical relatedness or similarity between texts, which can be easily captured by a vectorial represen-
tation of texts (van Rijsbergen, 1979) and a standard similarity measure, like Cosine, Dice (Salton
& McGill, 1983), and Jaccard (1901). Such models have had high impact in information retrieval
over the past decades. Several improvements have been proposed for such techniques towards in-
venting more sophisticated weighting schemes for the text words, like for example TF-IDF and its
variations (Aizawa, 2003). Other directions explore the need to capture the latent semantic rela-
tions between dimensions (words) in the created vector space model, by using techniques of latent
semantic analysis (Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998). Another aspect of text relatedness, probably
of equal importance, is the semantic relatedness between two text segments. For example, the sen-
tences ”The shares of the company dropped 14 cents”, and ”The business institution’s stock slumped
14 cents” have an obvious semantic relatedness, which traditional measures of text similarity fail
c⃝2010 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
to recognize. The motivation of this work is to show that a measure of relatedness between texts,
which takes into account both the lexical and the semantic relatedness of word elements, performs
better than the traditional lexical matching models, and can handle cases like the one above.
In this paper we propose Omiotis1, a new measure of semantic relatedness between texts, which
extends SR, a measure of semantic relatedness between words. The word-to-word relatedness mea-
sure, in its turn, is based on the construction of semantic links between individual words, according
to a word thesaurus, which in our case is WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Each pair of words is po-
tentially connected via one or more semantic paths, each one comprising one or more semantic
relations (edges) that connect intermediate thesaurus concepts (nodes). For weighting the semantic
path we consider three key factors: (a) the semantic path length, (b) the intermediate nodes’ speci-
ﬁcity denoted by the node depth in the thesaurus’ hierarchy, and (c) the types of the semantic edges
that compose the path. This triptych allows our measure to perform well in complex linguistic tasks,
that require more than simple similarity, such as the SAT Analogy Test2 that is demonstrated in the
experiments. To the best of our knowledge, Omiotis is the ﬁrst measure of semantic relatedness
between texts that considers in tandem all three factors for measuring the pairwise word-to-word
semantic relatedness scores. Omiotis integrates the semantic relatedness in word level with words’
statistical information in the text level to provide the ﬁnal semantic relatedness score between texts.
The contributions of this work can be summarized in the following: 1) a new measure for com-
puting semantic relatedness between words, namely SR, which exploits all of the semantic informa-
tion a thesaurus can offer, including semantic relations crossing parts of speech (POS), while taking
into account the relation weights and the depth of the thesaurus’ nodes; 2) a new measure for com-
puting semantic relatedness between texts, namely Omiotis, that does not require the use of external
corpora or learning methods, supervised or unsupervised, 3) thorough experimental evaluation on
benchmark data sets for measuring the performance on word-to-word similarity and relatedness
tasks, as well as on word analogy; in addition, experimental evaluation on two text related tasks
(sentence-to-sentence similarity and paraphrase recognition) for measuring the performance of our
text-to-text relatedness measure. Additional contributions of this work are: a) the use of all seman-
tic relations offered by WordNet, which increases the chances of ﬁnding a semantic path between
any two words, b) the availability of pre-computed semantic relatedness scores between every pair
of WordNet senses, which accelerates computation of semantic relatedness between texts and fa-
cilitates the incorporation of semantic relatedness in several applications (Tsatsaronis, Varlamis,
Nørv˚ag, & Vazirgiannis, 2009; Tsatsaronis & Panagiotopoulou, 2009).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses preliminary concepts regarding
word thesauri, semantic network construction, and semantic relatedness or similarity measures, and
summarizes related work on these ﬁelds. Section 3 presents the key contributions of our work.
Section 4 provides the experimental evaluation and the analysis of the results. Finally, Section 5
presents our conclusions and the next steps of our work.
2. Preliminaries and Related Work
Our approach capitalizes on a word thesaurus in order to deﬁne a measure of semantic relatedness
between words, and expands this measure to compute text relatedness using both semantic and
1. Omiotis is the Greek word for relatedness or similarity.
2. http://www.aclweb.org/aclwiki/index.php?title=SAT_Analogy_Questions
2

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
lexical information. In order to facilitate the understanding of our methodology we elaborate on
preliminary concepts in this section and present related research approaches.
2.1 Word Thesauri and their use in Text Applications
Word thesauri, like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) or Roget’s International Thesaurus (Morris & Hirst,
1991), constitute the knowledge base for several text-related research tasks. WordNet has been
used successfully as a knowledge base in the construction of Generalized Vector Space Models
(GVSM) and semantic kernels for document similarity with application to text classiﬁcation, such
as the works of Mavroeidis, Tsatsaronis, Vazirgiannis, Theobald and Weikum (2005), and Basili,
Cammisa and Moschitti (2005), and text retrieval, such as the works of Voorhees (1993), Stokoe,
Oakes and Tait (2003), and our previous work regarding the deﬁnition of a new GVSM that uses
word-to-word semantic relatedness (Tsatsaronis & Panagiotopoulou, 2009). Furthermore, the idea
of using a thesaurus as a knowledge base in text retrieval has also been proven successful in the case
of cross language information retrieval, like for example in the case of the CLIR system introduced
by Clough and Stevenson (2004). Finally, the exploitation of word thesauri in linguistic tasks,
such as Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) (Ide & Veronis, 1998) has yielded interesting results
(Mihalcea & Moldovan, 1999; Tsatsaronis, Vazirgiannis, & Androutsopoulos, 2007; Tsatsaronis,
Varlamis, & Vazirgiannis, 2008).
The application of a text relatedness measure to text classiﬁcation and retrieval tasks should
ﬁrst consider the impact of lexical ambiguity and WSD in the overall performance in these tasks.
Sanderson (1994, 2008) concludes that ambiguity in words can take many forms, but new test col-
lections are needed to realize the true importance of resolving ambiguity and embedding semantic
relatedness and sense disambiguation in the text retrieval task. In the analysis of Barzilay and El-
hadad (1997), and Barzilay, Elhadad and McKeown (2002) the impact of WSD in the performance
of text summarization tasks is addressed by considering all possible interpretations of the lexical
chains created from text. Similar to this methodology, we tackle word ambiguity by taking into ac-
count every possible type of semantic information that the thesaurus can offer, for any given sense
of a text word.
From the aforementioned approaches, it is clear that the use of a word thesaurus can offer much
potential in the design of models that capture the semantic relatedness between texts, and conse-
quently, it may improve the performance of existing retrieval and classiﬁcation models under certain
circumstances that are discussed in the respective research works (Mavroeidis et al., 2005; Basili
et al., 2005; Stokoe et al., 2003; Clough & Stevenson, 2004). The word thesaurus employed in the
development of Omiotis is WordNet. Its lexical database contains English nouns, verbs, adjectives
and adverbs, organized in sets of synonym senses (synsets). Hereafter, the terms senses, synsets and
concepts are used interchangeably. Synsets are connected with various links that represent semantic
relations between them (i.e., hypernymy / hyponymy, meronymy / holonymy, synonymy / antonymy,
entailment / causality, troponymy, domain / domain terms, derivationally related forms, coordinate
terms, attributes, stem adjectives, etc.). Several relations cross parts of speech, like the domain
terms relation, which connects senses pertaining to the same domain (e.g., light, as a noun mean-
ing electromagnetic radiation producing a visual sensation, belongs to the domain of physics). To
the best of our knowledge, the proposed approach is the ﬁrst that utilizes all of the aforementioned
semantic relations that exist in WordNet for the construction of a semantic relatedness measure.
3

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
2.2 Creating Semantic Networks from Word Thesauri
Omiotis is based on the creation of semantic paths between words in a text using the thesaurus’
concepts and relations. Early approaches in this ﬁeld, used gloss words from the respective word
deﬁnitions in order to build semantic networks from text (Veronis & Ide, 1990). The idea of rep-
resenting text as a semantic network was initially introduced by Quilian (1969). The expansion
of WordNet with semantic relations that cross parts of speech has added more possibilities of se-
mantic network construction from text. More recent approaches to semantic network construction
from word thesauri, by Mihalcea, Tarau and Figa (2004) and Navigli (2008), utilize a wide range
of WordNet semantic relations instead of the gloss words. These methods outperformed previous
methods that used semantic networks in the all words WSD tasks of Senseval 2 and 3 for the En-
glish language (Palmer, Fellbaum, & Cotton, 2001; Snyder & Palmer, 2004). In this work we adopt
the semantic network construction method that we introduced in the past (Tsatsaronis et al., 2007).
The method utilizes all of the available semantic relations in WordNet. In the WSD task, the re-
spective method outperformed or matched previous methods that used semantic networks in the all
words WSD tasks of Senseval 2 and 3 for the English language, and this was largely due to the rich
representation that the semantic networks offered. Section 3.1 introduces our semantic relatedness
measure.
2.3 Measures of Semantic Relatedness
Semantic relatedness between words or concepts has been exploited, in the past, in text summa-
rization (Barzilay et al., 2002), text retrieval (Stokoe et al., 2003; Smeaton, Kelledy, & O’Donnell,
1995; Richardson & Smeaton, 1995) and WSD (Patwardhan, Banerjee, & Pedersen, 2003) tasks.
Semantic relatedness measures can be widely classiﬁed to dictionary-based3, corpus-based and hy-
brid.
Among dictionary-based measures, the measure of Agirre and Rigau (1995) was one of the ﬁrst
measures developed to compute semantic relatedness between two or more concepts (i.e., for a set
of concepts). Their measure was based on the density and depth of concepts in the set and on the
length of the shortest path that connects them. However, they assume that all edges in the path are
equally important.
The measure proposed by Leacock, Miller and Chodorow (1998) for computing the semantic
similarity between a pair of concepts takes into account the length of the shortest path connecting
them, measured as the number of nodes participating in the path, and the maximum depth of the
taxonomy. The measure for two concepts s1 and s2 can be computed as follows:
Sim(s1, s2) = −loglength
2 · D
(1)
where length is the length of the shortest path connecting s1 and s2 and D is the maximum depth of
the taxonomy used.
Regarding hybrid measures, Resnik’s (1995, 1999) measure for pairs of concepts is based on the
Information Content (IC) of the deepest concept that can subsume both (least common subsumer),
and can be considered as a hybrid measure, since it combines both the hierarchy of the used the-
saurus, and statistical information for concepts measured in large corpora. More speciﬁcally, the
3. Also found in the bibliography as knowledge-based, thesaurus-based, or lexicon-based.
4

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
semantic similarity for a given pair of concepts s1 and s2, which have s0 as their least common
subsumer (i.e., least common ancestor), is deﬁned in the following equation:
Sim(s1, s2) = IC(s0)
(2)
where the Information Content (IC) of a concept (i.e., s0) is deﬁned as:
IC(s0) = −logP(s0)
(3)
and P(s0) is the probability of occurrence of the concept s0 in a large corpus.
The measure proposed by Jiang and Conrath (1997), is also based on the concept of IC. Given
two concepts s1 and s2, and their least common subsumer s0, their semantic similarity is deﬁned as
follows:
Sim(s1, s2) =
1
IC(s1) + IC(s2) −2 · IC(s0)
(4)
The measure of Lin (1998) is also based on IC. Given, again, s1, s2, and s0, as before, the
similarity between s1 and s2 is deﬁned as follows:
Sim(s1, s2) =
2 · IC(s0)
IC(s1) + IC(s2)
(5)
Hirst and St-Onge (1998) reexamine the idea of constructing lexical chains between words,
based on their synsets and the respective semantic edges that connect them in WordNet. The initial
idea of lexical chains was ﬁrst introduced by Morris and Hirst (1991), who deﬁned the lexical
cohesion of a passage, based on the cohesion of the lexical chains between the passage’s elements,
which acted as an indicator for the continuity of the passage’s lexical meaning.
We encourage the reader to consult the analysis of Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) for a detailed
discussion on most of the aforementioned measures, as well as for more measures proposed prior to
the aforementioned. While all these measures use only the noun hierarchy (except from the measure
of Hirst and St-Onge), the implementation of several of those measures provided by Patwardhan,
Banerjee and Pedersen (2003) in the publicly available WordNet::Similarity package can also utilize
the verb hierarchy. Still, the relations that cross parts of speech are not considered, as well as other
factors discussed in detail in Section 3. In contrast, our measure deﬁnes the semantic relatedness
between any two concepts, independently of their Part of Speech (POS), utilizing all of the available
semantic links offered by WordNet.
More recent works of interest on semantic relatedness, include: the measures of Jarmasz and
Szpakowicz (2003), who use Roget’s thesaurus to compute semantic similarity, by replicating a
number of WordNet-based approaches, the LSA-based measure of Finkelstein et al. (2002), who
perform Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer et al., 1998) to capture text relatedness and can be
considered as a corpus-based method, the measure of Patwardhan and Pedersen (2006), who uti-
lize the gloss words found from the words’ deﬁnitions to create WordNet-based context vectors,
the methods of Strube and Ponzetto (2006, 2007a), Gabrilovich and Markovitch (2007), and Milne
and Witten (2008) who use Wikipedia to compute semantic relatedness and can also be considered
as corpus-based approaches, and the method of Mihalcea, Corley and Strappavara (2006), which
is a hybrid method that combines knowledge-based and corpus-based measures of text relatedness.
Other recent hybrid measures of semantic similarity are: the measure proposed by Li et al. (2006),
who use information from WordNet and corpus statistics collected from the Brown Corpus (Kucera,
5

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Francis, & Caroll, 1967) to compute similarity between very short texts, and the measure for text dis-
tance proposed by Tsang (2008), that uses both distributional similarity and ontological/knowledge
information to compute the distance between text fragments. Distributional similarity is also used
in a supervised combination with WordNet-based approaches (Agirre, Alfonseca, Hall, Kravalova,
Pasca, & Soroa, 2009), to produce a supervised measure of semantic relatedness. Li et al. (2006)
have created a new data set for their experimental evaluation, which we also use in Section 4 to
evaluate our Omiotis measure and compare against their approach.
In the following section we formally deﬁne Omiotis and provide its details, from the creation of
the semantic links to the computation of relatedness between words and texts. We give evidence on
the measure’s complexity and justify our design choices. Finally, we discuss potential applications
of the measure on text related tasks.
3. Measuring Word-to-Word and Text-to-Text Semantic Relatedness
This section presents the details of Omiotis, our measure of text semantic relatedness. The measure
capitalizes on the idea of semantic relatedness between WordNet senses, extends it to compute
relatedness between words and ﬁnally between texts. Since the deﬁnition of semantic relatedness
ranges from pairs of keyword senses to pairs of texts, Omiotis is deﬁned in a way that captures
relatedness in every granularity. As a result, it can be applied in a wide range of linguistic and
text related tasks such as WSD, word similarity and word analogy, text similarity, and keyword
ranking. The key points of the proposed measure are: (a) it constructs semantic links between
all word senses in WordNet and pre-computes a relatedness score between every pair of WordNet
senses, (b) it computes the semantic relatedness for a pair of words by taking into account the
relatedness of their corresponding WordNet senses, and (c) it computes a semantic relatedness score
for any two given text segments by extending word-to-word relatedness. Depending on the task, the
computation of semantic relatedness can be modiﬁed to take into account all or some of the senses
of each word, all or some of the words in each text, or to apply additional weights depending on
the word importance or sense importance in context. This allows Omiotis to be adapted in various
text related tasks, without modifying the main process of computing relatedness. In Section 3.1
that follows, we formally deﬁne our semantic relatedness measure and in Section 3.2 we provide a
detailed justiﬁcation of our design decisions.
3.1 Construct Semantic Links between Words
The ﬁrst step in measuring the semantic relatedness between two text fragments, is to ﬁnd the
implicit semantic links between the words of the two fragments. Thus, we present a deﬁnition of
semantic relatedness for a pair of thesaurus concepts, which takes into account the semantic path
connecting the concepts, and expands it to measure the relatedness between words. In order to solve
the problem of constructing semantic paths between words, we base our approach on our previous
method on how to construct semantic networks between words (Tsatsaronis et al., 2007).
3.1.1 SEMANTIC NETWORK CONSTRUCTION FROM WORD THESAURI
Figure 1 gives an example of the construction of a semantic network for two words ti and tj. For
simplicity reasons, we assume the construction of a semantic path between senses S.i.2 and S.j.1
only (Initial Phase), though we could do the same for every possible combination of the two words’
6

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
...

S.i.1

= Word Node

Index:

= Sense Node

= Semantic Link

t
i

t
j

Initial Phase

S.i.7

S.j.1

S.j.5

...

S.i.2

S.j.1

...

Network Expansion

Synonym

...

Hypernym

...

Antonym

Holonym

Meronym

S.i.2

S.j.2

Hyponym

Figure 1: Constructing semantic networks from word thesauri.
senses. Initially, the two sense nodes are expanded using all the semantic links offered by WordNet.
The semantic links of the senses, as found in the thesaurus, become the edges and the pointed senses
the nodes of the network (Network Expansion). The expansion process is repeated recursively until
the shortest 4 path between S.i.2 and S.j.1 is found. When no path is found from S.i.2 to S.j.1 then
the senses and consequently the words are not semantically related.
3.1.2 SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS BETWEEN A PAIR OF CONCEPTS
The semantic relatedness for a pair of concepts is measured over the constructed semantic network.
It considers the path length, captured by compactness, and the path depth, captured by semantic
path elaboration, which are deﬁned in the following. A measure for WSD based on the idea of
compactness was initially proposed by Mavroeidis et al. (2005). The original measure used only
nouns and the hypernym relation, and is extended in the current work to support all of WordNet’s
relations and the noun, verb and adjective parts of speech. Here we deﬁne a new compactness
measure (Deﬁnition 1) as the core of the Omiotis measure.
Deﬁnition 1 Given a word thesaurus O, a weighting scheme for the edges that assigns a weight
w ∈(0, 1) for each edge, a pair of senses S = (s1, s2), and a path P of length l connecting the two
senses, the semantic compactness of S (SCM(S, O, P)) is deﬁned as: SCM(S, O, P) = Ql
i=1 wi,
where w1, w2, ..., wl are the path’s edges’ weights. If s1 = s2 then SCM(S, O, P) = 1. If there is
no path between s1 and s2 then SCM(S, O, P) = 0.
Note that compactness takes the path length into account and is bound in [0, 1]. Higher compactness
between senses implies higher semantic relatedness. The intuition behind edge types’ weighting is
that certain types provide stronger semantic connections than others. Considering that the lexicog-
raphers of WordNet tend to use some relation types more often than others (we assume that the most
used relation types are stronger than the types less used), a straightforward solution is to deﬁne edge
types’ weights in proportion to their frequency of occurrence in WordNet 2.0. The weights assigned
to each type using this solution are shown in Table 1 and are in accordance to those found by Song
et al. (2004). The table shows the probability of occurrence in WordNet 2.0 for every possible edge
type in the thesaurus, in descending order of probability values. A detailed analysis of the choices
we made in Deﬁnition 1 and in the deﬁnitions that follow is performed in Section 3.2.
The depth of nodes that belong to the path also affects term relatedness. A standard means of
measuring depth in a word thesaurus is the hypernym/hyponym hierarchical relation for the noun
and adjective POS and hypernym/troponym for the verb POS. For the adverb POS the related stem
4. The details are presented in Algorithm 1.
7

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
WordNet 2.0 Edge Type
Probability of Occurrence
hypernym/hyponym
0.61
nominalization
0.147
category domain
0.094
part meronym/holonym
0.0367
region domain
0.0238
similar
0.02
usage domain
0.016
member meronym/holonym
0.014
antonym
0.0105
verb group
0.01
also see
0.0091
attribute
0.00414
entailment
0.00195
cause
0.00158
substance meronym/holonym
0.00089
derived
0.0003
participle of
3.4E −06
Table 1: Probability of occurrence for every edge type in WordNet 2.0.
adjective sense can be used to measure its depth. A path with shallow sense nodes is more general
compared to a path with deep nodes. This parameter of semantic relatedness between terms is
captured by the measure of semantic path elaboration introduced in the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2 Given a word thesaurus O , a pair of senses S = (s1, s2), where s1,s2 ∈O and
s1 ̸= s2, and a path P =< p1, p2, ..., pl > of length l, where either s1 = p1 and s2 = pl or
s1 = pl and s2 = p1, the semantic path elaboration of the path (SPE(S, O, P)) is deﬁned as:
SPE(S, O, P) = Ql
i=1
2didi+1
di+di+1 ·
1
dmax , where di is the depth of sense pi according to O, and dmax
the maximum depth of O. If s1 = s2, then d1 = d2 = d and SPE(S, O, P) =
d
dmax . If there is no
path from s1 to s2 then SPE(S, O, P) = 0.
It is obvious in Deﬁnition 2 that a path of length l comprises l+1 nodes, thus when i = l, di+1 is
the last node in the path. Essentially, SPE is the harmonic mean of the two depths normalized to the
maximum thesaurus depth. The harmonic mean is preferred over the average of depths, since it of-
fers a lower upper bound and gives a more realistic estimation of the path’s depth. Compactness and
Semantic Path Elaboration measures capture the two most important parameters of measuring se-
mantic relatedness between terms (Budanitsky & Hirst, 2006), namely path length and senses depth
in the used thesaurus. We combine these two measures following the deﬁnition of the Semantic
Relatedness between two terms:
Deﬁnition 3 Given a word thesaurus O, and a pair of senses S = (s1, s2) the semantic relatedness
of S (SR(S, O)) is deﬁned as maxP {SCM(S, O, P) · SPE(S, O, P)}.
8

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Algorithm 1 Maximum-Semantic-Relatedness(G, u, v, w)
1: INPUT: A directed weighted graph G, two nodes u, v and a weighting scheme w : E →(0..1).
2: OUTPUT: The path from u to v with the maximum product of the edges weights.
Initialize-Single-Source(G, u)
3: for all vertices v ∈VG do
4:
d[v] = −∞
5:
π[v] = NULL
6: end for
7: d[u] = 1
Relax(u, v, w)
8: if d[v] < d[u] · w(u, v) then
9:
d[v] = d[u] · w(u, v)
10:
π[v] = u
11: end if
Maximum-Relatedness(G, u, v, w)
12: Initialize-Single-Source(G, u)
13: S = ∅
14: Q = VG
15: while v ∈Q do
16:
s = Extract from Q the vertex with the maximum d
17:
S = S ∪s
18:
for all vertices k ∈Adjacency List of s do
19:
Relax(s, k, w)
20:
end for
21: end while
22: return the path following all the ancestors π of v back to u
Given a word thesaurus, there can be more than one semantic path connecting two senses. The
senses’ compactness can take different values for all the different paths. In these cases, we use the
path that maximizes the semantic relatedness. For its computation we introduce Algorithm 1, which
is a modiﬁcation of Dijkstra’s algorithm (Cormen, Leiserson, & Rivest, 1990) for ﬁnding the short-
est path between two nodes in a weighted directed graph. In the algorithm, G is the representation
of the directed weighted graph given as input (e.g., using adjacency lists), and VG is the set of all
the vertices of G. Also, two more sets are used; S, which contains all the vertices for which the
maximum semantic relatedness has been computed from the source vertex (i.e., from u), and Q,
which contains all the vertices for which the algorithm has not computed yet the maximum related-
ness from the source vertex. Furthermore, three tables are used; d, which, for any vertex v stores the
maximum semantic relatedness found at any given time of the algorithm execution from the source
vertex, i.e., u in d[v]; π, which for any vertex v stores its predecessor in π[v]; and w, which stores
the edge weights of the graph (e.g., w[k, m] stores the edge weight of the edge that starts from k
and goes to m).
9

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
The algorithm comprises three functions: (a) Initialize-Single-Source(G, u), which initializes
tables d and π, for every vertex v of the graph. More precisely, it sets d[v] = −∞, since the se-
mantic relatedness from the source is unknown at the beginning, and because the algorithm seeks
for the maximum semantic relatedness this is initially set to the minimum value (i.e., −∞). It
also sets π[v] = NULL, since at the beginning of the algorithm execution we are not aware
yet of the predecessor of any vertex v following the path from the source vertex u to v that re-
sults to the maximum semantic relatedness; (b) Relax(u, v, w), which given two vertices, u and v
that are directly connected with an edge of weight w[u, v], it updates the value d[v], in case that
if we follow the edge (u, v) this results to a higher semantic relatedness for vertex v from the
source, compared to the value we have computed up to that time of the algorithm execution; and
(c) Maximum-Relatedness(G, u, v, w), which uses the aforementioned functions and executes the
Dijkstra’s algorithm. The proof of the algorithm’s correctness follows in the next theorem.
Theorem 1 Given a word thesaurus O, an edges weighting function w : E →(0, 1), where a
higher value declares a stronger edge, and a pair of senses S(ss, sf) declaring source (ss) and des-
tination (sf) vertices, then the SCM(S, O, P) · SPE(S, O, P) is maximized for the path returned
by Algorithm 1, by using the weighting scheme w′
ij = wij ·
2·di·dj
dmax·(di+dj), where w′
ij is the new weight
of the edge connecting senses si and sj.
Proof 1 We will show that for each vertex sf ∈VG, d[sf] is the maximum product of edges’ weight
through the selected path, starting from ss, at the time when sf is inserted into S. From now on,
the notation δ(ss, sf) will represent this product. Path p connects a vertex in S, namely ss, to a
vertex in VG −S, namely sf. Consider the ﬁrst vertex sy along p such that sy ∈VG −S and let
sx be y’s predecessor. Now, path p can be decomposed as ss →sx →sy →sf. We claim that
d[sy] = δ(ss, sy) when sf is inserted into S. Observe that sx ∈S. Then, because sf is chosen
as the ﬁrst vertex for which d[sf] ̸= δ(ss, sf) when it is inserted into S, we had d[sx] = δ(ss, sx)
when sx was inserted into S.
Because sy occurs before sf on the path from ss to sf and all edge weights are nonnegative
and in (0, 1) we have δ(ss, sy) ≥δ(ss, sf), and thus d[sy] = δ(ss, sy) ≥δ(ss, sf) ≥d[sf]. But
both sy and sf were in V −S when sf was chosen, so we have d[sf] ≥d[sy]. Thus, d[sy] =
δ(ss, sy) = δ(ss, sf) = d[sf]. Consequently, d[sf] = δ(ss, sf) which contradicts our choice of sf.
We conclude that at the time each vertex sf is inserted into S, d[sf] = δ(ss, sf).
Next, to prove that the returned maximum product is the SCM(S, O, P) · SPE(S, O, P), let
the path between ss and sf with the maximum edge weight product have k edges. Then, Algorithm 1
returns the maximum Qk
i=1 w′
i(i+1) = ws2·
2·ds·d2
dmax·(ds+d2) ·w23·
2·d2·d3
dmax·(d2+d3) ·...·wkf ·
2·dk·df
dmax·(dk+df) =
Qk
i=1 wi(i+1) · Qk
i=1
2didi+1
di+di+1 ·
1
dmax = SCM(S, O, P) · SPE(S, O, P).
3.1.3 SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS FOR A PAIR OF TERMS
Based on Deﬁnition 3, which measures the semantic relatedness between a pair of senses S, we can
deﬁne the semantic relatedness between a pair of terms T(t1, t2) as follows.
Deﬁnition 4 Let a word thesaurus O, let T = (t1, t2) be a pair of terms for which there are entries
in O, let X1 be the set of senses of t1 and X2 be the set of senses of t2 in O. Let S1, S2, ..., S|X1|·|X2|
be the set of pairs of senses, Sk = (si, sj), with si ∈X1 and sj ∈X2. Now the semantic relatedness
of T (SR(T, S, O)) is deﬁned as:
10

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
maxSk{maxP {SCM(Sk, O, P) · SPE(Sk, O, P)}} = maxSk{SR(Sk, O)}
for all k = 1..|X1| · |X2|. Semantic relatedness between two terms t1, t2 where t1 ≡t2 ≡t and
t /∈O is deﬁned as 1. Semantic relatedness between t1, t2 when t1 ∈O and t2 /∈O, or vice versa,
is considered 0.
For the remaining of the paper, the SR(T, S, O) for a pair of terms will be denoted as SR(T), to
ease readability.
3.2 Analysis of the SR Measure
In this section we present the rationale behind the Deﬁnitions 1, 2, and 3, by providing theoretical
and/or experimental evidence for the decisions made on the design of the measure. We illustrate
the advantages and disadvantages of the different alternatives using simple examples and argue for
our decisions. Finally, we discuss on the advantages of SR against previous measures of semantic
relatedness.
The list of decisions made for the design of our semantic relatedness measure comprises: a)
use of senses in all POS, instead of noun senses only, b) use of all semantic edge types found in
WordNet, instead of the IS-A relation only, c) use of edge weights, and d) use of senses’ depth as
a scaling factor. It is important to mention that measures of semantic relatedness differ from the
measures of semantic similarity, which traditionally use hierarchical relations only and ignore all
other type of semantic relations. In addition, both concepts differentiate from semantic distance, in
the sense that the latter is a metric.
3.2.1 USE ALL POS INFORMATION
Firstly, we shall argue on the fact that the use of all POS in designing a semantic relatedness mea-
sure is important, and can increase the coverage of such a measure. The rationale supporting this
decision is fairly simple. Current data sets for evaluating semantic relatedness or even semantic sim-
ilarity measures are restricted to nouns, like for example the Rubenstein and Goodenough 65 word
pairs (1965), the Miller and Charles 30 word pairs (1991), and the Word-Similarity-353 collection
(Finkelstein et al., 2002). Thus, the experimental evaluation in those data sets cannot pinpoint the
caveat of omitting the remaining parts of speech. However, text similarity tasks and their benchmark
data sets comprise more than nouns. Throughout the following analysis, the reader must consider
that the resulting measure of semantic relatedness among words is destined to be embedded in a
text-to-text semantic relatedness, as shown in the next section.
The following two sentences are a paraphrase example taken from the Microsoft Paraphrase
Corpus (Dolan, Quirk, & Brockett, 2004) and show the importance of using other POS as well,
such as verbs:
“The charges of espionage and aiding the enemy can carry the death penalty.”
“If convicted of the spying charges he could face the death penalty.”
Words that appear in WordNet are written in bold and stopwords have been omitted for simplicity5.
The two sentences have many nouns in common (charges, death, penalty), but there are also pairs
of words between these two sentences that can contribute the evidence that these two sentences are
5. The stopwords list that we used is available at http://www.db-net.aueb.gr/gbt/resources/stopwords.txt
11

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
a paraphrase. For example espionage and spying have an obvious semantic relatedness, as well
as enemy and spying. Also, convicted and charges, as well as convicted and penalty. This type
of evidence would have been disregarded by any measure of semantic relatedness or similarity that
uses only the noun POS hierarchy of WordNet. Examples of such measures are: the measure of
Sussna (1993), Wu and Palmer (1994), Jiang and Conrath (1997), Resnik (1995, 1999), and the
WordNet-based component of the measure proposed by Finkelstein et al. (2002). From this point
of view, the decision to use all POS information expands the potential matches found by the mea-
sure and allows the use of the measure in more complicated tasks, like paraphrase recognition, text
retrieval, and text classiﬁcation.
3.2.2 USE EVERY TYPE OF SEMANTIC RELATIONS
The decision to use all parts of speech in the construction of the semantic graphs, as it was in-
troduced in our previous work (Tsatsaronis et al., 2007), imposes the involvement of all semantic
relations instead of merely taxonomic (IS-A) ones. Moreover, this decision was based on evidence
from related literature. The work of Smeaton et al. (1995) provides experimental evidence that mea-
suring semantic similarity by incorporating non-hierarchical link types (i.e. part meronym/holonym,
member meronym/holonym, substance meronym/holonym) improves much the performance of such
a measure. The experimental evaluation was conducted by adopting a small variation of the Resnik’s
measure (1995).
Hirst and St-Onge (1998) reported that they have discovered several limitations and missing
connections in the set of WordNet relations during the construction of lexical chains from sentences
for the detection and correction of malapropisms. They provided the following example using the
pair of words in bold to report this caveat:
“School administrators say these same taxpayers expect the schools to provide child care and
school lunches, to integrate immigrants into the community, to offer special classes for adult
students,.”
The intrinsic connection between the nouns child care and school, which both exist in WordNet,
cannot be discovered by considering only hierarchical edge types. This connection is depicted in
Figure 2, which shows the path in WordNet. Our rich semantic representation is able to detect such
connections and address problems of the aforementioned type.
3.2.3 USE WEIGHTS ON EDGES
The work of Resnik (1999) reports that simple edge counting, which implicitly assumes that links
in the taxonomy represent uniform distances, is problematic and is not the best semantic distance
measure for WordNet. In a similar direction lie the ﬁndings of Sussna (1993), who has performed
thorough experimental evaluation by varying edge weights in order to measure semantic distance
between concepts. Sussna’s ﬁndings, revealed that weights on semantic edges are a non-negligible
factor in the application of his measure for WSD, and that the best results were reported when an
edge weighting scheme was used, instead of assigning each edge the same weight. For all these
reasons, we decided to assign a weight on every edge type, and we chose the simple probability
of occurrence for each edge type in WordNet, as our edge weighting scheme (see Table 1). This
very important factor is absent in several similarity measures proposed in the past, such as in the
measures of Leacock et al. (1998), Jarmasz and Szpakowicz (2003) and Banerjee and Pedersen
(2003), which are outperformed in experimental evaluation by our measure.
12

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
child care

(Noun)

service

(Noun)

Hypernym

aid

(Noun)

Hypernym

activity

(Noun)

Hypernym

Hyponym

education

(Noun)

educate

(Verb)

Nominalization

Hyponym

school

(Verb)

school

(Noun)

Nominalization

Figure 2: Semantic path from child care to school following WordNet edges.
Part Meronym

car

(Noun)

accelerator

(Noun)

pedal

(Noun)

Hyponym

lever

(Noun)

Hyponym

bar

(Noun)

Hyponym

Hyponym

implement

(Noun)

Hyponym

instrumentality

(Noun)

Hypernym

wheeled

vehicle

(Noun)

container

(Noun)

Hypernym

Hypernym

Category Domain

NWPL Path

PR Path

car

(Noun)

autobus

(Noun)

Hyponym

conveyance

(Noun)

Hypernym

motor vehicle

(Noun)

self-propelled

vehicle

(Noun)

Hypernym

Hypernym

Hypernym

wheeled

vehicle

(Noun)

Hypernym

vehicle

(Noun)

public

transport

(Noun)

Hyponym

passenger

(Noun)

Category Domain

Figure 3: Product Relatedness (PR) and Normalized Weighted Path Length (NWPL) paths for pairs:
car and accelerator (left), car and autobus (right).
3.2.4 USE DEPTH SCALING FACTOR
Our decision to incorporate the depth scaling factor (SPE in Deﬁnition 2) in the edge weighting
mechanism has been inspired by the thorough experimental evaluation conducted by Sussna (1993),
13

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
which has provided evidence on the importance of the edge weighting factor in semantic network
based measures. According to our experiments on the Miller and Charles data set the Spearman
correlation with human judgements was much lower (7 percentage points) when omitting the depth
scaling factor than when adopting the SPE factor (see Deﬁnition 3).
3.2.5 JUSTIFICATION OF SR DEFINITIONS
According to Deﬁnition 1, the semantic compactness for a pair of concepts is the product of depth-
scaled weights of the edges connecting the two concepts. The use of product instead of sum or
normalized sum of edges’ weights is explained in the following.
Since there might be several paths connecting the two concepts, Deﬁnition 3 clearly selects
the path that maximizes the product of semantic compactness (SC) and semantic path elabora-
tion (SPE). For simplicity, we ignore the effect of the depth scaling factor (SPE in Deﬁnition 2)
and consequently, our aim is to ﬁnd the path that maximizes Ql
i=1 ei, where e1, e2, ..., el are the
(non depth-scaled) weights of edges in the path connecting two given concepts. Let us name this
less elaborate version of our semantic relatedness measure after product relatedness (PR), where
PR(S, O) = maxP {SCM(S, O, P)}. An alternative would have been to deﬁne semantic com-
pactness as the normalized sum of the weights in the path, which is:
Pl
i=1 ei
l
. In this case, the
semantic relatedness would be measured on the path that maximizes the latter formula, since by
nature, semantic relatedness always seeks to ﬁnd the path that maximizes the connectivity between
two concepts. Let us name this alternative after normalized weighted path length (NWPL).
In the example of Figure 3, we show how PR and NWPL compute the semantic relatedness for
the term pair car and accelerator (left) and car and autobus (right). The path that maximizes the
respective formulas of PR and NWPL using Algorithm 1 and edge weights in Table 1, is illustrated in
Figure 3 using black and white arrows respectively. For the pair car and accelerator the sum-based
formula, normalized against the path length, selects a very large path in this example, with a ﬁnal
computed relatedness of 0.61, which is the weight of the hypernym/hyponym edges. PR ﬁnds that
the path maximizing the product is the immediate part meronym relation from car to accelerator,
with a computed relatedness of 0.0367, which is the weight of the part meronym edges. The main
problem arising with NWPL is the fact that it cannot distinguish among the relatedness between
any pair of concepts in the hypernym/hyponym hierarchy of WordNet. In this example, NWPL
computes the same relatedness (0.61) between every possible concept pair shown in the top ﬁgure.
In contrast, PR is able to distinguish most of these pairs in terms of relatedness. More precisely, this
behavior of PR is due to the fact that it embeds the notion of the path length, since the computed
relatedness decays by a factor in the range (0, 1) for every hop made following any type of semantic
relation. Another example, that also shows the importance of considering all WordNet relations, is
the one shown on the right part of Figure 3, where NWPL and PR paths have been computed for the
term pair car and autobus. Again, NWPL selects a very large path, and does not incline from the
hypernym/hyponym tree.
Clearly, NWPL would rather traverse through a huge path of hypernym/hyponym edges, than
following any other less important edge type, which would decrease its average path importance.
This behavior creates serious drawbacks: (a) lack of ability to distinguish relatedness among any
pair of concepts in the same hierarchy, and (b) large increase of the actual computational cost of
Algorithm 1, due to the fact that it will tend not to incline from the hypernym/hyponym hierarchy,
even if there is a direct semantic edge (other than hypernym/hyponym) connecting the two concepts,
14

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
like shown in Figure 3. Furthermore, by conducting experiments with NWPL in the 30 word pairs
of Miller and Charles, we discovered that in almost 40% of the cases, NWPL produces the same
value of semantic relatedness, equal to 0.61, being unable to distinguish them and creating many
ties. Thus, PR is a better option to use in our measure, as the semantic compactness factor.
Last, but not least, regarding the overall design of SR, we should mention that the proposed mea-
sure is solely based on the use of WordNet, in contrast to measures of semantic relatedness that use
large corpora, such as Wikipedia. Although, such measures, like the ones proposed by Gabrilovich
and Markovitch (2007), and Ponzetto and Strube (2007a), provide a larger coverage regarding con-
cepts that do not reside in WordNet, they require the processing of a very large corpora (Wikipedia),
which also changes very fast and very frequently. Experimental evaluation in Section 4 shows that
our measure competes well against the aforementioned word-to-word relatedness measures in the
used data sets. In the following section, we introduce Omiotis, the extension of SR for measuring
text-to-text relatedness.
3.3 Omiotis
To quantify the degree to which two text segments semantically relate to each other, we build upon
the SR measure, which we signiﬁcantly extend in order to account not only for the terms’ semantic
relatedness but also for their lexical similarity. This is because texts may contain overly-specialized
terms (e.g., an algorithm’s name) that are not represented in WordNet. Therefore, relying entirely on
the term semantics for identifying the degree to which texts relate to each other would hamper the
performance of our approach. On the other hand, semantics serve as complement to our relevance
estimations given that different text terms might refer to (nearly-) identical concepts.
To quantify the lexical similarity between two texts, e.g., text A and B, we begin with the esti-
mation of the terms’ importance weights as these are determined by the standard TF-IDF weighting
scheme (Salton, Buckley, & Yu, 1982).
Thereafter, we estimate the lexical relevance, denoted as λa,b between terms a ∈A and b ∈B
based on the harmonic mean of the respective terms’ TF-IDF values, given by:
λa,b = 2 · TF IDF(a, A) · TF IDF(b, B)
TF IDF(a, A) + TF IDF(b, B)
(6)
Harmonic mean is preferred instead of average, since it provides a more tight upper bound (Li,
2008). This decision is based on the fact that TF IDF(a, A) and TF IDF(b, B) are two different
quantities measuring the qualitative strength of a and b in the respective texts.
Having computed the lexical relevance between text terms a and b, we estimate their semantic
relatedness, i.e. SR(a, b) as described previously. Based on the estimated lexical relevance and
semantic relatedness between pairs of text terms, our next step is to ﬁnd for every word a in text A
the corresponding word b in text B that maximizes the product of semantic relatedness and lexical
similarity values as given by Equation 7.
b∗= arg max
b∈B
(λa,b · SR(a, b))
(7)
Where b∗corresponds to that term in text B, which entails the maximum lexical similarity and
semantic relatedness with term a from text A.6 In a similar manner, we deﬁne a∗, which corresponds
6. The function argmax selects the case from the examined ones, that maximizes the input formula of the function.
15

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
to that term in text A, which entails the maximum lexical similarity and semantic relatedness with
term b from text B.
a∗= arg max
a∈A
(λa,b · SR(a, b))
(8)
Consequently, we aggregate the lexical and semantic relevance scores for all terms in text A,
with reference to their best match in text B denoted as shown in Equation 9.
ζ(A, B) = 1
|A|
ÃX
a∈A
λa,b∗· SR(a, b∗)
!
(9)
We do the same for the opposite direction (i.e. from the words of B to the words of A) to cover
the cases where the two texts do not have an equal number of terms.
Finally, we derive the degree of relevance between texts A and B by combining the values
estimated for their terms that entail the maximum lexical and semantic relevance to one another,
given by:
Omiotis(A, B) = [ζ(A, B) + ζ(B, A)]
2
(10)
Algorithm 2 summarizes the computation of Omiotis. Its computation entails a series of steps,
the complexity of which is discussed in Section 3.5.
3.4 Applications of Semantic Relatedness
In this section we describe the methodology of incorporating semantic relatedness between pairs of
words or pairs of text segments, into several applications.
3.4.1 WORD-TO-WORD SIMILARITY
Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) obtained synonymy judgements from 51 human subjects on 65
pairs of words, in an effort to investigate the relationship between similarity of context and similar-
ity of meaning (synonymy). Since then, the idea of evaluating computational measures of semantic
relatedness by comparing against human judgments on a given set of word pairs, has been widely
used, and even more data sets were developed. The proposed measure of semantic relatedness
between words (SR), introduced in Deﬁnition 4, can be used directly in such a task, in order to
evaluate the basis of Omiotis measure, which is the measurement of word-to-word semantic related-
ness. The application is straightforward: Let n be all pairs of words in the used word similarity data
set. Then, the semantic relatedness for every pair is computed, using SR(T, S, O) as deﬁned in 4.
The computed values are sorted in a descending order, and the produced ranking of similarities is
compared against the ”gold standard” ranking of humans, using Spearman correlation. The scores
can be used to compute Pearson’s product moment correlation. Additional measures of semantic
relatedness can be compared against each other by examining the respective correlation values with
human judgements.
3.4.2 SAT ANALOGY TESTS
The problem of identifying similarities in word analogies among pairs of words is a difﬁcult problem
and it has been standardized as a test for assessing the human ability for language understanding,
16

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Algorithm 2 Omiotis(A,B, Sem, Lex )
1: INPUT: Two texts A and B, comprising m and n terms each (a and b are terms from A and B
respectively),
a semantic relatedness measure Sem : SR(a, b) →(0..1),
a weighting scheme of term importance in a text Lex : TF IDF(a, A) →(0..1)
2: OUTPUT: Find the pair of terms that maximizes the product of Sem and Lex values.
Compute-Zeta(A,B)
3: sum(A) := 0
4: for all terms a ∈A do
5:
b∗:= NULL
6:
TempZeta := 0
7:
for all terms b ∈B do
8:
λa,b = 2·Lex(a,A)·Lex(b,B)
Lex(a,A)+Lex(b,B)
9:
if TempZeta < λa,b · Sem(a, b) then
10:
TempZeta = λi,j · Sem(a, b)
11:
b∗= b
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
sum(A) := sum(A) + TempZeta
15: end for
16: Zeta(A, B) := sum(A)/|A|
Compute-Omiotis(A,B)
17: Omiotis(A, B) := Zeta(A,B)+Zeta(B,A)
2
under the scope of the well known SAT analogy tests (Scholastic Aptitude Tests). SAT tests are
used as admission tests by universities and colleges in the United States. The participants’ aim is to
locate out of the ﬁve given word pairs the one that presents the most similar analogy to the target
pair.
Although it is difﬁcult for machines to model the human cognition of word analogy, several
approaches exist in the bibliography that attempt to tackle this problem. Previous approaches can be
widely categorized into: corpus-based, lexicon-based and hybrid. Some examples of corpus-based
are the approaches of Turney (2008b) and Bicici and Yuret (2006). Examples of lexicon-based
approaches, are those of Veale (2004) and the application of the lexicon-based measure by Hirst
and St-Onge (1998) in SAT, that can be found in the work of Turney (2006). Hybrid approaches are
applied in SAT, through the application of the measures of Resnik (1995) and Lin (1998) that can
also be found in the work of Turney (2006).
In order for the reader to understand the difﬁculty of answering SAT questions, we must point
out that the average US college applicant scores 57% (Turney & Littman, 2005), while the top
corpus-based approach scores 56.1% (Turney, 2006), the top lexicon-based scores 42% (Veale,
2004) and the top hybrid scores 33.2% (Resnik, 1995).
17

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Another way of categorizing the approaches that measure semantic similarity in analogy tasks
is to distinguish among attributional and relational similarity measures (Gentner, 1983).7 Represen-
tative approaches of the ﬁrst category are lexicon-based approaches, while paradigms of relational
similarity measures can be found in approaches based on Latent Relational Analysis (LRA) (Turney,
2006). It is of great interest to point out that LRA-based approaches, like the LRME algorithm pro-
posed recently by Turney (2008a), are superior to attributional similarity approaches in discovering
word analogies. This fact is also supported by the experimental ﬁndings of Turney (2006). Without
doubt, relational similarity approaches may perform better in the SAT analogy task, but still, as
shown later in the experiments we conducted in other applications, like paraphrase recognition, the
lexicon-based measures can outperform LRA-based approaches in such tasks.
Semantic relatedness (SR) between words, as applied in Omiotis, can be exploited to solve the
word analogy task. The aim of word analogy is, given a pair of words w1 and w2, to identify the
series of semantic relations that lead from w1 to w2 (semantic path). In the SAT test, the target pair
(w1,w2) and candidate word pairs (w1k,w2k), with k usually being from 1 to 5, are processed in order
to ﬁnd each pair’s analogy. The aim is to locate the pair k, which exposes maximum similarity to w1
and w2. A straightforward method to choose among the 5 candidate pairs is to employ two criteria:
At ﬁrst, the k analogies to the analogy of the target pair can be compared, and then the candidate that
shows by far the most similar analogy can be selected. However, when the most similar analogy is
not obvious, all the 6 pairs may be examined together in order for the slightest differences that lead
to the correct answer to be discovered. We attempt to model human cognition of this task using SR
in a two fold manner: (a) we measure SR to capture the horizontal analogy between the given pair
and the possible candidate pairs, and (b) we measure SR to capture the vertical analogy between
the given pair and the possible candidate pairs. These two aspects are covered by the following
Equations 11 to 13. To capture the horizontal analogy between a pair of words and a candidate pair,
we measure the difference of the SR score between the two words respectively as shown:
s1(w1k, w2k) = 1 −|SR(w1, w2) −SR(w1k, w2k)|
(11)
Essentially, s1 expresses the horizontal analogy of the candidate pair (w1k, w2k) with the given
pair (w1, w2). Similarly, we capture the notion of the vertical analogy between the two pairs by
computing the difference of the SR scores among the two pairs’ words, as follows:
s2(w1k, w2k) = 1 −|SR(w1, w1k) −SR(w2, w2k)|
(12)
Finally, we rank candidates depending on the combined vertical and horizontal analogy they have
with the given pair, according to the following equation:
s(w1k, w2k) = s1(w1k, w2k) + s2(w1k, w2k)
2
(13)
Eventually, we select the candidate pair with the maximum combined score, taking into account
both aspects (horizontal and vertical) of analogy between the given and the candidate pairs.
The intuition behind the selection of the these two scores for handling the SAT test, is the
following. The order of the words in the pairs (both target and candidates) is not random. Usually,
given a pair (w1, w2), and the candidate pairs (w1k, w2k) the test is solved if one can successfully
7. Two objects, X and Y, are attributionally similar when the attributes of X are similar to the attributes of Y. Two pairs, A:B and C:D,
are relationally similar when the relations between A and B are similar to the relations between C and D.
18

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Stem:
 wallet
: 
money

Choices:

(a)

safe
: 
lock

(b)

suitcase
: 
clothing

(c)

camera
: 
film

(d)

setting
: 
jewel

(e)

car
: 
engine

S1: 0.2605

S2: 6.75E-04

S1: 0.4795

S2: 0.015

S1: 0.1805

S2: 7.87E-05

S1: 0.3764

S2: 8.99E-05

S1: 0.1506

S2: 0.0029

Winner based on S1 (Horizontal Analogy): b

Winner based on S2 (Vertical Analogy): b

Winner based on combined S: b

Correct Answer: b

Figure 4: Example of computing the Semantic Relatedness measure (SR) in a given Scholastic Ap-
titude Test (SAT) question.
ﬁnd the analogy: w1k is to w2k what w1 is to w2. From this perspective, s1 and s2 try to ﬁnd the
candidate pair that best aligns with the target pair. Figure 4 illustrates these two types of analogies
(horizontal and vertical) for an example SAT question.
In order to motivate more our selection of s1 and s2 for answering SAT questions, we will
discuss in more detail how these two quantities pertain to the concepts of strength and type of
the relations between a pair of SAT words. Turney (2006) describes a method for comparing the
relations between candidate word pairs and the stem word pair, in which he utilizes the type of
the relation connecting the words in each pair and ﬁnally selects the pair that best matches the
type of the relation connecting the words in the stem pair. Though we do not explicitly examine
the label of the edges connecting the words in each pair, implicitly we do so by computing SR
between them. Since our weighting of the WordNet edges is ﬁne grained, and distinguishes every
type of semantic relation in WordNet, instead of labels, we are using edge weights. SR deﬁnition
can provide a ﬁne grained distinguishment between two pairs of words, depending on the types of
the edges connecting the words respectively, which is expressed by their weights, and also taking
into account other factors, like the depth of the nodes comprising their connecting path inside the
thesaurus. Besides s1, which attempts to capture the aforementioned properties between word pairs,
s2 attempts the same between the words of the same order among two word pairs (i.e., the ﬁrst word
from the ﬁrst pair, with the second word from the second pair). This forms an attempt to capture
how aligned are two word pairs, according to their SR values between their words.
3.4.3 PARAPHRASE RECOGNITION AND SENTENCE-TO-SENTENCE SIMILARITY
Performance of applications relying on natural language processing may suffer from the fact that
the processed documents might contain lexically different, yet semantically related, text segments.
The task of recognizing synonym text segments, which is better known as paraphrase recognition,
or detection, is challenging and difﬁcult to solve, as shown in the work of Pasca (2005). The task
itself is important for many text related applications, like summarization (Hirao, Fukusima, Oku-
19

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
mura, Nobata, & Nanba, 2005), information extraction (Shinyama & Sekine, 2003) and question
answering (Pasca, 2003). We experimentally evaluate the application of Omiotis in the paraphrasing
detection task (Section 4.2), using the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (Dolan et al., 2004).
The application of Omiotis in paraphrase detection is straightforward: given a pair of text segments,
we compute the Omiotis score between them, using Equation 10 and Algorithm 2. Higher values
of Omiotis for a given pair denote stronger semantic relation between the examined text segments.
The task is now reduced to deﬁne a threshold, above which an Omiotis value can be considered as
a determining sign of a paraphrasing pair. In the experimental evaluation of Omiotis, we explain in
detail how we have selected this threshold for the paraphrase recognition task.
In a similar manner, by using Equation 10 and Algorithm 2, the semantic relatedness scores for
pairs of sentences can be computed. For this task, we are using the data set of Li et al. (2006) to
evaluate Omiotis, comprising 30 sentence pairs, for which human scores are provided. In Section 4
we describe in detail the experimental set up.
3.5 Complexity and Implementation Issues
The computation of Omiotis entails a series of steps, the complexity of which is strongly related to its
base measure of Semantic Relatedness (SR). Primarily, given two words, w1 and w2 the construction
time of the semantic network used to compute SR according to Algorithm 1, has been proven to
be O(2 · kl+1) (Tsatsaronis et al., 2007), where k is the maximum branching factor of the used
thesaurus nodes and l is the maximum semantic path length in the thesaurus. Once the semantic
network is constructed, the complexity of Algorithm 1 is reduced to the standard time complexity
cost of Dijkstra’s algorithm. Using Fibonacci heaps, it is possible to alleviate the computational
burden of Dijkstra and further improve time complexity. In the semantic network, Dijkstra takes
O(nL + mD + nE), where n is the number of nodes in the network, m the number of edges, L is
the time for insert, D the time for decrease-key and E the time for extract-min. If Fibonacci heaps
are used then L = D = O(1) and the cost of extract-min is O(logn), thus signiﬁcantly reducing
the cost of execution. This whole procedure is repeated 2 × n1 × n2 times for the computation of
Omiotis between two documents d1 and d2 having in total n1 and n2 distinct words respectively.
From the aforementioned, it is obvious that the computation of Omiotis is not cheap in general.
For this purpose, and in order to improve the system’s scalability, we have pre-computed and stored
all SR values between every possible pair of synsets in a RDBMS. This is a one-time computation
cost, which dramatically decreases the computational complexity of Omiotis. The database schema
has three entities, namely Node, Edge and Paths. Node contains all WordNet synsets. Edge indexes
all edges of the WordNet graph adding weight information for each edge computed using the SR
measure. Finally, Paths contains all pairs of WordNet synsets that are directly or indirectly con-
nected in the WordNet graph and the computed relatedness. These pairs were found by running a
Breadth First Search (BFS) starting from all WordNet roots for all POS. Table 2 provides statistical
information for the RDBMS which exceeds 220 Gbytes in size. Column 1 indicates the number of
distinct synsets examined, column 2 shows the total number of the edges, and column 3 depicts the
number of the connected synsets (by at least one path following the offered WordNet edges). The
current implementation takes advantage of the database structures (indices, stored procedures etc)
in order to decrease the computational complexity of Omiotis. The following example is indicative
of the complexity of SR computation. The average number of senses per term is between 5 and 7
(depending on the POS). For a pair of terms of known POS, we perform n2
2 (n ≃6) combinations
20

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Distinct Synsets
Total Edges
Connected Synset Pairs
115,424
324,268
5,591,162,361
Table 2: Statistics of the WordNet graph in the implemented database.
and for each pair of synsets we compute the similarity as presented in Deﬁnition 3. When these
similarities are pre-computed, the time required for processing 100 pairs of terms is ≃1 sec, which
makes the computation of Omiotis feasible and scalable. As a proof of concept, we have developed
an on-line version of the SR and the Omiotis measures8, where the user can test the term-to-term
and sentence-to-sentence semantic relatedness measures (Tsatsaronis et al., 2009).
4. Experimental Evaluation
The experimental evaluation of Omiotis is two-fold. First, we test the performance of the word-
to-word semantic relatedness measure (SR), in which Omiotis is based, in three types of tasks: (a)
word-to-word similarity and relatedness, (b) synonym identiﬁcation, and (c) Scholastic Aptitude
Test (SAT). Second, we evaluate the performance of Omiotis in two tasks: (a) sentence-to-sentence
similarity, and (b) the paraphrase recognition task.
4.1 Evaluation of the Semantic Relatedness (SR) Measure
For the evaluation of the proposed semantic relatedness measure between two terms we experi-
mented on three different categories of tests. The ﬁrst category comprises data sets that contain
word pairs, for which human subjects have provided similarity scores or relatedness scores. The
provided scores create a ranking of the word pairs, from the most similar to the most irrelevant. We
evaluate the performance of measures, by computing the correlation between the list of the human
rankings and the list produced by the measures. In this task, we evaluate the performance of SR in
three benchmark data sets, namely the Rubenstein and Goodenough 65 word pairs (1965) (R&G),
and the Miller and Charles 30 word pairs (1991) (M&C), for which humans have provided similar-
ity scores, and, also, in the Word-Similarity-353 collection (Finkelstein et al., 2002) (353-C), which
comprises 353 word pairs, for which humans have provided relatedness scores.
The second category of experiments comprises synonym identiﬁcation tests. In these tests, given
an initial word, the most appropriate synonym word must be identiﬁed among the given options.
In this task we evaluate the performance of SR in the TOEFL data set, comprising 80 multiple
choice synonym questions, and the ESL data set, comprising 50 multiple choice synonym questions
questions.9
The third category of experiments is based on the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) questions. In
SAT, given a pair of words, the most relevant pair among ﬁve other given pairs must be selected. This
task is based on word analogy identiﬁcation. The evaluation data set comprises 374 test questions.
8. Publicly available at http://omiotis.hua.gr
9. http://www.aclweb.org/aclwiki/index.php?title=TOEFL_Synonym_Questions
http://www.aclweb.org/aclwiki/index.php?title=ESL_Synonym_Questions_(State_of_the_art)
21

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Category
Method
R&G
M&C
Spearman’s ρ
Pearson’s r
Spearman’s ρ
Pearson’s r
Lexicon-based
HS
0.745§
0.786§
0.653§
0.744‡
LC
0.785‡
0.838
0.748‡
0.816
JS
N/A
0.818†
N/A
0.878
Corpus-based
GM
0.816†
N/A
0.723‡
N/A
WLM
0.64§
N/A
0.70§
N/A
SP
N/A
0.52§
N/A
0.47§
IS-A SP
N/A
0.70§
N/A
0.69‡
Hybrid
JC
0.709§
0.781§
0.805
0.85
L
0.77‡
0.818†
0.767†
0.829
R
0.7485§
0.778§
0.737‡
0.774†
HR
0.817
N/A
0.904
N/A
SR
0.8614
0.876
0.856
0.864
Table 3: Spearman’s and Pearson’s correlations for the Rubenstein and Goodenough (R&G) and
Miller and Charles (M&C) data sets. Conﬁdence levels: †=0.90, ‡=0.95, §=0.99
4.1.1 EVALUATION ON SEMANTIC SIMILARITY AND RELATEDNESS
For the ﬁrst category of experiments, we compared our measure against ten known measures of
semantic relatedness: Hirst and St-Onge (1998) (HS), Jiang and Conrath (1997) (JC), Leacock
et al. (1998) (LC), Lin (1998) (L), Resnik (1995, 1999) (R), Jarmasz and Szpakowicz (2003) (JS),
Gabrilovich and Markovitch (2007, 2009) (GM), Milne and Witten (2008) (WLM), Finkelstein et al.
(2002) (LSA), Hughes and Ramage (2007) (HR), and Strube and Ponzetto (2006, 2007a) (SP). For
the measure of Strube and Ponzetto we have also included the results of a version of the measure that
is only based on IS-A relations (Ponzetto & Strube, 2007b) (IS-A SP). For each measure, including
our own measure (SR), we have computed both the Spearman rank order correlation coefﬁcient
(ρ) and the Pearson product-moment correlation coefﬁcient (r), with ρ being derived from r, since
for the computation of ρ the relatedness scores are transformed into rankings. Both correlation
coefﬁcients are computed based on the relatedness scores and rankings provided by humans in
all three data sets (the relatedness scores create a ranking of the pairs of words, based on their
similarity). For the measures HS, JC, LC, L and R, the rankings and the relatedness scores of the
word pairs for the R&G and the M&C data sets, are given in the work of Budanitsky and Hirst
(2006). For the JS measure, the r value is given in the work of Jarmasz and Szpakowicz (2003)
for the R&G and the M&C data sets, and the ρ value is given in the work of Gabrilovich and
Markovitch (2007). For the GM measure the ρ values are given in the work of Gabrilovich and
Markovitch (2007). For the WLM measure the ρ values are given in the work of Milne and Witten
(2008). For the LSA method the ρ value is given in the work of Gabrilovich and Markovitch (2007),
only for the 353-C data set. For the HR measure the ρ values are given in the work of Hughes and
Ramage (2007). Finally, for the SP measure the r values are given in the work of Ponzetto and
Strube (2007a), and for the IS-A SP are given in the work of Ponzetto and Strube (2007b).
22

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
In Table 3 we show the values of ρ and r for the R&G and the M&C data sets and for SR
and the compared measures. The human scores for all pairs of words for the two data sets can
be found in the analysis of Budanitsky and Hirst (2006). Note that the M&C data set is a subset
of the R&G data set. In some cases, the computation of ρ or r was not feasible, due to missing
information regarding the detailed rankings or relatedness scores for the respective measures. In
these cases the table has the entry N/A. Also the LSA measure is omitted in this table because ρ
and r were not reported in the literature for these two data sets. We have also conducted a statistical
signiﬁcance test on the difference between SR correlations and the respective correlations of the
compared measures, using Fisher’s z-transformation (Fisher, 1915). For each reported number, the
symbol § indicates that the difference between the correlation produced by SR and the respective
measure is statistically signiﬁcant at the 0.99 conﬁdence level (p < 0.01). The symbol ‡ indicates
the same at the 0.95 conﬁdence level (p < 0.05) and, ﬁnally, the symbol † indicates statistical
signiﬁcance of the correlations’ difference at the 0.90 conﬁdence level (p < 0.10). In cases when
the difference is not statistically signiﬁcant in any of those conﬁdence levels, there is no indicating
symbol.
In Table 4 we show the values of ρ and r for the 353-C data set. The reason we present the results
of the experiments in the 353-C data set in another table than the respective results of the R&B and
M&C data sets is that this collection focuses on the concept of semantic relatedness, rather than on
the concept of semantic similarity (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2007). Relatedness is more general
concept than similarity, as argued in the analysis of Budanitsky and Hirst (2006). Thus, it can be
argued that the humans in the 353-C thought differently when scoring, compared to the case of the
R&B and M&C data sets. The detailed human scores for the 353-C data set are made available with
the collection10. The measures L, JC and HS are omitted, because no information was available for
computing ρ or r values. As a further remark regarding the 353-C collection, we need to add the fact
that there are cases where the inter-judge correlations may fall below 65%, while R&B and M&C
data sets have inter-judge correlations between 0.88 and 0.95. Again, statistical signiﬁcance tests
have been conducted using the Fisher’s z-transformation, regarding the difference of SR correlations
and the correlations of the compared measures. The used symbols that indicate the level of the
statistical signiﬁcance are the same as previously. With regards to the reported correlations for the
R&G and M&C data sets, it is shown that SR performs very well, since in the majority of the cases
SR has higher correlation compared to the other measures of semantic relatedness or similarity
of any category (knowledge-based, corpus-based or hybrid). In the R&G data set SR reports the
highest ρ and r correlations. In the M&C data set SR has the second highest ρ correlation. The
HR measure has the highest ρ correlation, but in the R&G and 353-C SR outperforms HR. The
differences between SR and HR are not statistically signiﬁcant in any of the two examined data sets.
Also, in the M&C data set SR has the second r correlation with the JS reporting the highest, but
JS is outperformed by SR in the R&G and 353-C data sets. In the case of the M&C data set, the
difference between SR and JS is not statistically signiﬁcant, but SR outperforms JS in the R&G and
the 353-C data sets, with statistically signiﬁcant difference in the reported correlations. Another
important conclusion from the results, is the fact that the IS-A SP measure performs better than the
SP measure. This is mainly due to the fact that for the computation of the similarity values in such
data sets, the inclusion of only IS-A relations is much more reasonable (Ponzetto & Strube, 2007b).
The differences in their results (SP and IS-A SP) motivate even more our SR measure, since we
10. http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/˜gabr/resources/data/wordsim353/
23

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Category
Method
353-C
Spearman’s ρ
Pearson’s r
Lexicon-based
LC
N/A
0.34§
JS
0.55‡
N/A
Corpus-based
GM
0.75§
N/A
WLM
0.69‡
N/A
LSA
0.56†
N/A
SP
N/A
0.49§
Hybrid
R
N/A
0.34§
HR
0.552‡
N/A
SR
0.61
0.628
Table 4: Spearman’s and Pearson’s correlations for the 353 word pairs (353-C) data set. Conﬁdence
levels: †=0.90, ‡=0.95, §=0.99
take the best of both worlds, i.e., we weigh IS-A relations high, and fall back to other relations if
necessary.
Regarding the 353-C data set, the results in Table 4 show that SR again performs well, with
the top performers being the Wikipedia-based approaches (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2009; Milne
& Witten, 2008). The difference between them is statistically signiﬁcant, but we should note that
SR outperforms both GM and WLM in the R&G and M&C data sets, with statistically signiﬁcant
difference as well. Partly, this difference in the performance of SR compared to GM and WLM can
be explained as follows: the GM measure considers words in context (Gabrilovich & Markovitch,
2009), and thus inherently performs word sense disambiguation; in contrast, SR takes as input a pair
of words, lacks context, and is based only on the information existing in WordNet, which, especially
for several of the cases in the 353-C data set, creates a disadvantage (e.g., in the word pair Arafat
and Jackson, there are 11 different entries for the second word in WordNet). The same holds for
the WLM measure. Another reason for this difference in performance is the coverage of WordNet.
In several cases, one or both of the two words in the 353-C data set comprising a pair, do not exist
in WordNet (e.g., the football player Maradona). However, as expected, and also shown in the
experimental analysis of Omiotis that follows, when context is considered, the proposed semantic
relatedness measure performs better (the reader may wish to consult Table 9, where for a subset of
the R&G data set that contains the full deﬁnitions of the words, the correlations of Omiotis with the
human judgements are the top found among the compared approaches).
To visualize the performance of our measure in a more comprehensible manner, we also present
in Figure 5 the relatedness values given by humans for all pairs in the R&G and M&C data sets,
in increasing order of value (left side) and the respective values for these pairs produced using SR
(right side). Note that the x-axis in both charts begins from the least related pair of terms, according
to humans, and continues up to the most related pair of terms. The y-axis in the left chart is the
respective humans’ rating for each pair of terms. The right ﬁgure shows SR for each pair. A closer
look on Figure 5 reveals that the values produced by SR (right ﬁgure) follow a pattern similar to that
of the human ratings (left ﬁgure).
24

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
10
20
30
40
50
60
65
Human Rating
Pair Number
HUMAN RATINGS AGAINST HUMAN RANKINGS - R&G Data Set
correlation of human pairs ranking and human ratings
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10
20
30
40
50
60
65
Semantic Relatedness
Pair Number
SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS AGAINST HUMAN RANKINGS - R&G Data Set
correlation of human pairs ranking and semantic relatedness
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
5
10
15
20
25
30
Human Rating
Pair Number
HUMAN RATINGS AGAINST HUMAN RANKINGS - M&C Data Set
correlation of human pairs ranking and human ratings
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
5
10
15
20
25
30
Semantic Relatedness
Pair Number
SEMANTIC RELATEDNESS AGAINST HUMAN RANKINGS - M&C Data Set
correlation of human pairs ranking and semantic relatedness
Figure 5: Correlation between human ratings and Semantic Relatedness measure (SR) in the Ruben-
stein and Goodenough (R&G) and Miller and Charles (M&C) data sets.
4.1.2 EVALUATION ON SYNONYM IDENTIFICATION
For the synonym identiﬁcation task we are using the TOEFL 80 questions data set and the ESL 50
questions data set. For the TOEFL data set we compare with several other methods. More specif-
ically, we examine: the lexicon-based measures of Leacock et al. (1998) (LC), Hirst and St-Onge
(1998) (HS), and Jarmasz and Szpakowicz (2003) (JS); the corpus-based measures of Landauer and
Dumais (1997) (LD), Pado and Lapata (2007) (PL), Turney (2008b) (T), Terra and Clarke (2003)
(TC), and Matveeva et al. (2005) (M); the hybrid measures of Resnik (1995) (R), Lin (1998) (L),
Jiang and Conrath (1997) (JC), and Turney et al. (2003) (PR); and a Web-based method by Ruiz-
Casado et al. (2005) (RC). We also report the results of random guessing (RG) and the performance
of the average college applicant (H). Table 5 shows the results on the 80 TOEFL questions. The
table reports the number of the correct and the respective percentage given by all measures. In order
to test the statistical signiﬁcance of the differences in the measures’ performance, we conducted
Fisher’s Exact Test (Agresti, 1990). As in the previous tables, the symbol § indicates statistically
signiﬁcant difference at the 0.99 conﬁdence level, ‡ at the 0.95 conﬁdence level, and † at the 0.90
conﬁdence level.
The results of Table 5 show that SR ranks second among all reported methods,
with the best method being the hybrid PR (Turney et al., 2003). With regards to its comparison with
the lexicon-based methods, SR reports better results, statistically signiﬁcant at the conﬁdence levels
indicated.
In a similar manner, we have conducted experiments in the ESL 50 questions data set, and
compare our results with: the lexicon-based measures of Leacock et al. (1998) (LC), Hirst and St-
Onge (1998) (HS), and Jarmasz and Szpakowicz (2003) (JS); the corpus-based measures of Turney
(2001) (PMI-IR), and Terra and Clarke (2003) (TC); and the hybrid measures of Resnik (1995) (R),
25

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Category
Method
#Correct Answers
Percentage of Correct Answers
Lexicon-Based
LC
17
0.212§
HS
62
0.775‡
JS
63
0.787†
Corpus-Based
LD
52
0.65§
PL
58
0.725§
T
61
0.762§
TC
65
0.812§
M
69
0.862
Hybrid
R
16
0.2§
L
19
0.237§
JC
20
0.25§
PR
78
0.975‡
Web-Based
RC
66
0.825
Other
RG
20
0.25§
H
52
0.65§
SR
70
0.875
Table 5: Number and percentage of correct answers in the TOEFL 80 questions test. Conﬁdence
levels: †=0.90, ‡=0.95, §=0.99
Category
Method
#Correct Answers
Percentage of Correct Answers
Lexicon-Based
LC
18
0.36§
HS
31
0.62‡
JS
41
0.82
Corpus-Based
PMI-IR
37
0.74
TC
40
0.8
Hybrid
R
16
0.32§
L
18
0.36§
JC
18
0.36§
Other
RG
20
0.25§
SR
41
0.82
Table 6: Number and percentage of correct answers in the ESL 50 questions test. Conﬁdence levels:
‡=0.95, §=0.99
Lin (1998) (L), and Jiang and Conrath (1997) (JC). We report the results, together with random
guessing, in Table 6. The results of Table 6 show that SR ranks ﬁrst, having the same performance
with JS in this data set, both outperforming all of the compared corpus-based methods. These
26

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Category
Method
#Correct Answers
Percentage of Correct Answers
Lexicon-Based
LC
117
0.313‡
HS
120
0.321†
V
161
0.43§
Corpus-Based
LRA
210
0.561§
PMI-IR
131
0.35†
Hybrid
R
124
0.332†
L
102
0.273§
JC
102
0.273§
Web-Based
B
150
0.4‡
Other
RG
75
0.2§
S1
106
0.283
S2
114
0.304
S
128
0.342
NB
142
0.381
UB
196
0.524
Table 7: Number and percentage of correct answers in the 374 Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT)
questions. Conﬁdence levels: †=0.90, ‡=0.95, §=0.99
results are very interesting, since they indicate that lexicon-based methods are very promising in the
synonym identiﬁcation tasks.
4.1.3 EVALUATION ON SAT ANALOGY QUESTIONS
The approach that we choose to evaluate SR in the analogy task is to use the typical benchmark test
set employed in the related bibliography, namely the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT).11 It comprises
of 374 words pairs and for each target pair 5 supplementary pairs of words. The average US college
applicant answered correctly only the 57 percent of the questions, and no machine-based approach
has yet surpassed the performance of the average college applicant.
In Table 7, we present the number of correct answers and the respective percentage (recall) on
the 374 SAT questions, of the following methods: random guessing (RG), Jiang and Conrath (1997)
(JC), Lin (1998) (L), Leacock et al. (1998) (LC), Hirst and St-Onge (1998) (HS), Resnik (1995)
(R), Bollegala et al. (2008) (B), Veale (2004) (V), PMI-IR (Turney, 2001) and LRA (Turney, 2006).
Furthermore, we present the results of s1 (Equation 11), s2 (Equation 12) and s (Equation 13). We
also present, as before, the statistical signiﬁcance of the differences in performance, conducting
Fisher’s exact test.
Towards the direction of combining the answers of s1 and s2 in a different manner than the
naive average, we also report the upper bound performance of such an attempt. This is computed
by simply ﬁnding the union of the correct answers that s1 and s2 may provide. This is reported
in the table as (UB). In an effort to design a learning mechanism that would learn when to select
11. Many thanks to Peter Turney, for providing us with a standard set for experimentation, comprising of 374 SAT questions.
27

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
s1 or s2 answers for each SAT question, with the goal to reach our upper-bound, we designed
and implemented a simple representation of the SAT questions as training instances. For each
SAT question, we created a training instance that has 6 features: the minimum s1 value found for
this question (among the ﬁve computed values for all the possible pairs), the maximum s1 value,
and their difference. We also added the same features regarding s2. We then trained and tested a
Naive Bayes classiﬁer using ten-fold cross validation in the 374 SAT questions. The results of this
experiment are shown in the table as NB (Naive Bayes). Finally, we also present the top results ever
reported in the literature for the speciﬁc data set, which is the LRA method by Turney (2006). This
is reported in the table as (LRA).
The results presented in Table 7 show that S ranks second among the compared lexicon-based
measures with the ﬁrst being the measure of Veale (2004) (V). The method of Bollegala et al. (2008)
(B) achieves higher score than SR, but needs training in SAT questions. At this point we have to
note that the LRA method needs almost 8 days to process the 374 SAT questions (Turney, 2006),
(B) needs around 6 hours (Bollegala et al., 2008), while S needs less than 3 minutes.
Furthermore, the fact that combining s1 and s2 can reach 52.4% shows that S can produce very
promising results, if a classiﬁer learns successfully how to combine them. The NB results, which
are a simple attempt to construct such a learner with few features, shows an important boost in
performance of 4.1%. A proper feature engineering in the task, and more training SAT questions
can potentially yield more promising results, as the gap between 38.1% and the upper bound of
52.4% is still large. In all, these results prove that our lexicon-based relatedness measure has a
comparable performance to the state of the art measures for the SAT task, while it has smaller
execution time than the majority of the methods which outperform it in recall.
4.2 Evaluation of the Omiotis Measure
In order to evaluate the performance of the Omiotis measure, we performed two experiments which
test the ability of the measure to capture the similarity between sentences. The ﬁrst experiment is
based on the data set produced by Li et al. (2006). The second experiment is based on the paraphrase
recognition task, using the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (Dolan et al., 2004).
4.2.1 EVALUATION ON SENTENCE SIMILARITY
The data set produced by Li et al. (2006) comprises 65 sentence pairs (each pair consists of two
sentences that are the respective dictionary word deﬁnitions of the R&G 65 word pairs data set).
The used dictionary was the Collins Cobuild dictionary (Sinclair, 2001). For each sentence pair,
similarity scores have been provided by 32 human participants, ranging from 0.0 (the sentences are
unrelated in meaning), to 4.0 (the sentences are identical in meaning).12.
From the 65 sentence pairs, Li et al. (2006) decided to keep a subset of 30 sentence pairs,
similarly to the process applied by Miller and Charles (1991), in order to retain the sentences whose
human ratings create a more even distribution across the similarity range. Thus, we apply Omiotis
in this same subset of the 65 sentence pairs, described by Li et al. (2006). In this data set, we
compare Omiotis against the STASIS measure of semantic similarity, proposed by Li et al. (2006),
an LSA-based approach described by O’Shea et al. (2008), and the STS measure proposed by Islam
and Inkpen (2008). To the best of our knowledge, this data set has only been used by these three
12. The data set is publicly available at http://www.docm.mmu.ac.uk/STAFF/J.Oshea/
28

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
previous works. In Table 8 we present the sentence pairs used, and the respective scores by humans,
STASIS, LSA, STS, and Omiotis.
Sentence Pair
Human
STASIS
LSA
STS
Omiotis
1.cord:smile
0.01
0.329
0.51
0.06
0.1062
5.autograph:shore
0.005
0.287
0.53
0.11
0.1048
9.asylum:fruit
0.005
0.209
0.505
0.07
0.1046
13.boy:rooster
0.108
0.53
0.535
0.16
0.3028
17.coast:forest
0.063
0.356
0.575
0.26
0.2988
21.boy:sage
0.043
0.512
0.53
0.16
0.243
25.forest:graveyard
0.065
0.546
0.595
0.33
0.2995
29.bird:woodland
0.013
0.335
0.505
0.12
0.1074
33.hill:woodland
0.145
0.59
0.81
0.29
0.4946
37.magician:oracle
0.13
0.438
0.58
0.20
0.1085
41.oracle:sage
0.283
0.428
0.575
0.09
0.1082
47.furnace:stove
0.348
0.721
0.715
0.30
0.2164
48.magician:wizard
0.355
0.641
0.615
0.34
0.5295
49.hill:mound
0.293
0.739
0.54
0.15
0.5701
50.cord:string
0.47
0.685
0.675
0.49
0.5502
51.glass:tumbler
0.138
0.649
0.725
0.28
0.5206
52.grin:smile
0.485
0.493
0.695
0.32
0.5987
53.serf:slave
0.483
0.394
0.83
0.44
0.4965
54.journey:voyage
0.36
0.517
0.61
0.41
0.4255
55.autograph:signature
0.405
0.55
0.7
0.19
0.4287
56.coast:shore
0.588
0.759
0.78
0.47
0.9308
57.forest:woodland
0.628
0.7
0.75
0.26
0.612
58.implement:tool
0.59
0.753
0.83
0.51
0.7392
59.cock:rooster
0.863
1
0.985
0.94
0.9982
60.boy:lad
0.58
0.663
0.83
0.60
0.9309
61.cushion:pillow
0.523
0.662
0.63
0.29
0.3466
62.cemetery:graveyard
0.773
0.729
0.74
0.51
0.7343
63.automobile:car
0.558
0.639
0.87
0.52
0.7889
64.midday:noon
0.955
0.998
1
0.93
0.9291
65.gem: jewel
0.653
0.831
0.86
0.65
0.8194
Table 8: Human, STASIS, LSA, STS and Omiotis scores for the 30 sentence pairs.
In Table 9 we present the results of the comparison, comprising the reporting of the Spearman’s
rank order correlation coefﬁcient ρ and the Pearson’s product moment correlation coefﬁcient r for
STASIS, LSA, STS, and Omiotis. We have also included in the results, a version of Omiotis that
does not take into account the inter-POS relations (i.e., relations that cross parts of speech). This
version of Omiotis is indicated in the table as SimpleOmiotis. The objective of this experiment was
to measure the contribution of the relations that cross parts of speech in the computation of text-to-
29

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
Spearman’s ρ
Pearson’s r
STASIS
0.8126‡
0.8162
LSA
0.8714
0.8384
STS
0.838
0.853
Simple Omiotis
0.6889§
0.7277§
Omiotis
0.8905
0.856
Average Participant
N/A
0.825
Worst Participant
N/A
0.594
Best Participant
N/A
0.921
Table 9: Spearman’s and Pearson’s correlations with human similarity ratings. Conﬁdence levels:
‡=0.95, §=0.99
text semantic relatedness values, though these types of relations have been reported in the previous
bibliography as advantageous (Jarmasz, 2003; Jarmasz & Szpakowicz, 2003), but their individual
contribution had never been measured.
We also show the r correlation between the average participant (mean of individuals with group;
n = 32, leave-one-out resampling and standard deviation 0.072), the worst participant (worst par-
ticipant with group; n = 32, leave-one-out resampling) and the best participant (best participant
with group; n = 32, leave-one-out resampling), taken from the work of O’Shea et al. (2008). In
addition, we have also conducted a z-test regarding the difference between Omiotis correlations and
the compared measures’ correlations. The symbols used in the previous tables indicate the conﬁ-
dence level of the statistical signiﬁcance. Note, also, that the reported correlations (STASIS, LSA,
STS, and Omiotis) individually constitute statistically signiﬁcant positive correlations with the hu-
man scores (r) and rankings (ρ). As the results indicate, Omiotis has the best correlation, according
to ρ and r values, compared to STASIS, LSA, and STS. Furthermore, the contribution of the seman-
tic relations that cross parts of speech is obvious, since the difference between the simple version of
Omiotis that omits them and the deﬁned Omiotis measure is large and statistically signiﬁcant at the
0.99 conﬁdence level. Overall, the results indicate that Omiotis can be applied successfully to the
computation of similarities between small text segments, like sentences.
4.2.2 EVALUATION ON PARAPHRASE RECOGNITION
In order to further evaluate the performance of Omiotis in measuring the semantic relatedness be-
tween small text segments, we conducted additional experiments on the paraphrase recognition task
using the test pairs of the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (Dolan et al., 2004). From the
original data set, containing both training and test pairs, we run experiments only on the 1725 test
pairs of text segments, which have been collected from news sources on the Web over a period of
18 months. For each pair, human subjects have determined whether any of the two texts in the pair
consists a paraphrase of the other (direction is not an issue). The reported inter-judge agreement
between annotators is 83%. The paraphrase recognition task has been widely studied in the past,
since it is very important in many natural language applications, like question answering (Harabagiu
30

TEXT RELATEDNESS BASED ON A WORD THESAURUS
Category
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
Baselines
Random
51.3
68.3
50
57.8
VSM and Cosine
65.4
71.6
79.5
75.3
Corpus-based
PMI-IR
69.9
70.2
95.2
81
LSA
68.4
69.7
95.2
80.5
STS
72.6
74.7
89.1
81.3
Lexicon-based
JC
69.3
72.2
87.1
79
LC
69.5
72.4
87
79
Lesk
69.3
72.4
86.6
78.9
L
69.3
71.6
88.7
79.2
WP
69
70.2
92.1
80
R
69
69
96.4
80.4
Comb.
70.3
69.6
97.7
81.3
Machine learning-based
Wan et al.
75
77
90
83
Zhang and Patrick
71.9
74.3
88.2
80.7
Qiu et al.
72
72.5
93.4
81.6
Finch et al.
74.96
76.58
89.8
82.66
Omiotis
69.97
70.78
93.4
80.52
Table 10: Omiotis and competitive methods performance on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase
Corpus (MSR).
& Hickl, 2006), and text summarization (Madnani, Zajic, Dorr, Fazil Ayan, & Lin, 2007). For this
task we computed Omiotis between the sentences of every pair and marked as paraphrases only
those pairs with Omiotis value greater than a threshold. The threshold was set to 0.2, after tuning in
the training set. We used a simple approach for the tuning, namely forward hill-climbing and beam
search (Guyon, Gunn, Nikravesh, & Zadeh, 2006).
We compare the performance of Omiotis against several other methods of various categories;
more precisely, against: (a) two baseline methods, a random selection method that marks randomly
each pair as being paraphrase of not (Random), and a vector-based similarity measure, using the
cosine similarity measure and TF-IDF weighting for the features (VSM and Cosine) 13, (b) corpus-
based methods; the PMI-IR proposed by Turney (2001), an LSA-based approach introduced by
Mihalcea et al. (2006), and the STS measure proposed by Islam and Inkpen (2008), (c) lexicon-
based methods; Jiang and Conrath (1997) (JC), Leacock et al. (1998) (LC), Lin (1998) (L), Resnik
(1995, 1999) (R), Lesk (1986) (Lesk), Wu and Palmer (1994) (WP), and a metric that combines the
measures of this category, proposed by Mihalcea et al. (2006) (Comb.), and (d) machine-learning
based techniques, which also constitute the state of the art in paraphrase recognition, like the method
of Wan et al. (2006), which trains a classiﬁer with lexical and dependency similarity measures,
the method of Zhang and Patrick (2005), who also build a feature vector with lexical similarities
between the sentence pairs (e.g., edit distance, number of common words), the method of Qiu et al.
13. The features are all words of the used data set.
31

TSATSARONIS, VARLAMIS, & VAZIRGIANNIS
(2006), who use an SVM classiﬁer (Vapnik, 1995) to decide whether or not a set of features for each
sentence that has been created by parsing and semantic role labelling matches or not the respective
set of the second sentence in the pair, and with what importance, and, ﬁnally, the method of Finch
et al. (2005), who also train an SVM classiﬁer based on machine translation evaluation metrics.
The results of the evaluation are shown in Table 10. The results indicate that Omiotis surpasses
all the lexicon-based methods, and matches the combined method of Mihalcea et al. (2006). At
this point we must mention that we also tuned Omiotis with a goal to maximize F-Measure in the
test set, at the cost of dropping precision in favor of recall. This type of tuning reported an F-
Measure of 81.7, which is larger than the F-Measures of the lexicon-based, the corpus-based and
two of the machine learning-based approaches. Even though the reported results used a different
and simpler tuning explained previously, still the results indicate that Omiotis manages very well
in the paraphrase recognition task and produces comparable results with the state of the art. We
believe that it can be used as part of a machine learning-based method, since it is one of the best
choices in lexicon-based methods for paraphrase recognition, and this also constitutes part of our
plan for future work in this application.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we presented a new measure of text semantic relatedness. The major strength of this
measure lies in the formulation of the semantic relatedness between words. Experimental evalua-
tion, proved that our measure approximates human understanding of semantic relatedness between
words better than previous related measures. The combination of path length, nodes’ depth and
edges’ type in a single formula allowed us to apply our semantic relatedness measure to different
text-based tasks with very good performance. More speciﬁcally, the SR measure outperformed over-
all in the used data sets all state of the art measures in word-to-word tasks and the Omiotis measure
performed very well in the sentence similarity and the paraphrase recognition tasks. Although, the
results in the word analogy task are satisfactory, since no special tuning has been performed, we
are conﬁdent that there is still place for improvement. The extensive evaluation of SR and Omiotis
in several applications shows the capabilities of our measures and proves that both can be applied
to several text related tasks. It is on our next plans to apply our relatedness measures to more ap-
plications, such as text classiﬁcation and clustering, keyword and sentence extraction, and query
expansion, and compare with state of the art techniques in each ﬁeld. Finally, we are improving our
supporting infrastructure in order to facilitate large scale tasks such as document clustering and text
retrieval.
