1
Video Surveillance System Incorporating Expert
Decision-making Process: A Case Study on
Detecting Calving Signs in Cattle
Ryosuke Hyodo∗, Susumu Saito∗†, Teppei Nakano∗†, Makoto Akabane∗, Ryoichi Kasuga‡, Tetsuji Ogawa∗
∗Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
† Intelligent Framework Lab, Tokyo, Japan
‡ Farmers Support, Kagoshima, Japan
Abstract—Through a user study in the ﬁeld of livestock
farming, we verify the effectiveness of an XAI framework for
video surveillance systems. The systems can be made inter-
pretable by incorporating experts’ decision-making processes.
AI systems are becoming increasingly common in real-world
applications, especially in ﬁelds related to human decision-
making, and its interpretability is necessary. However, there are
still relatively few standard methods for assessing and addressing
the interpretability of machine learning-based systems in real-
world applications. In this study, we examine the framework of
a video surveillance AI system that presents the reasoning behind
predictions by incorporating experts’ decision-making processes
with rich domain knowledge of the notiﬁcation target. While
general black-box AI systems can only present ﬁnal probability
values, the proposed framework can present information relevant
to experts’ decisions, which is expected to be more helpful for
their decision-making. In our case study, we designed a system
for detecting signs of calving in cattle based on the proposed
framework and evaluated the system through a user study (N=6)
with people involved in livestock farming. A comparison with the
black-box AI system revealed that many participants referred to
the presented reasons for the prediction results, and ﬁve out
of six participants selected the proposed system as the system
they would like to use in the future. It became clear that we
need to design a user interface that considers the reasons for the
prediction results.
Index Terms-XAI, machine learning, user study, precision
livestock farming
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) have been used in areas related to human
decision-making, including the medical ﬁeld [1]. When devel-
oping AI systems, an end-to-end approach is generally con-
sidered to be an indispensable technique due to its simplicity.
However, it has been pointed out that this approach is black-
box in its internal behavior and is not a sufﬁcient system for
supporting human decision-making [2]. Meanwhile, there has
been growing interest in the interpretability of AI systems
as explainable AI (XAI) [3], [4]. Representative technologies
of XAI include visualization techniques such as CAM [5]
and Grad-CAM [6], and post-hoc explanations such as local
interpretable model agnostic explanations (LIME) [7] and
Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) [8]. However, many
developments in AI and ML tend to suffer from a lack
of usability and practical interpretability for real decision-
makers [3], [4], [9].
In recent years, the human-computer interaction (HCI)
community has recognized the importance of human-centered
evaluation, which incorporates user evaluation into the inter-
pretability of AI systems. There has been increasing research
on the user evaluation of these explanatory techniques using
experimental data sets [10], [11], [12]. However, when imple-
menting AI systems for highly specialized tasks in industry, the
aforementioned generic explanatory techniques and the ﬁnd-
ings on general user evaluations using experimental datasets do
not lead to interpretability for experts. Thus, system design and
empirical experiments in highly specialized tasks are essential;
however, there is still a lack of research on XAI frameworks
for industrial use and their validation through user studies [13].
This study examines the framework of a video surveillance
system that can provide relevant explanations for expert judg-
ments by incorporating their decision-making processes into
the neural networks. The experts watch a video and determine
whether there are any abnormalities after considering vari-
ous attributes based on their domain knowledge. We design
a neural network to incorporate this process into anomaly
detection. Speciﬁcally, we extract different features related to
an anomaly based on domain knowledge, and each stream
with extracted features as input determine whether the features
are anomalous. Here, explicitly extracting the features that
experts use to make judgments enables them to be presented
as interpretable information for the experts
The above framework is applied to video-based detection for
calving signs in cattle thorough a user study with livestock
farmers (Fig. 1). Since calf deaths during calving can be
very costly for farmers [14], accurately detecting the signs
of calving is important for livestock management. Although
contact-type sensors, which are attached directly to cattle,
are widely used, a detection system using a camera, which
is a non-contact-type sensor, is valuable in terms of man-
agement efﬁciency and animal welfare. First, to apply the
above framework, we reviewed the literature on animal studies
and conducted farmer interviews to collect domain knowledge
about calving signs. Using our ﬁndings, we designed a system
that explicitly extracts statistical information on the posture,
rotation, and movement of cattle relevant to calving and then
identiﬁes the signs from these features. We designed the
user interface of the notiﬁcation screen using the information
provided by the feature extractor. In the user interface, the fre-
arXiv:2301.03926v1  [cs.HC]  10 Jan 2023

2
quency of posture, amount of rotation, amount of movement,
and the pattern of movement (bird’s eye view) of cattle are
presented to farmers. Compared with the user interface of the
end-to-end system, which only presents the probability values
of calving signs, the presentation of the internal state of the
system is expected to be more interpretable for farmers. The
user interface of the end-to-end system and the proposed sys-
tem were evaluated by people who were involved in livestock
farming (N=6). We anticipate that our ﬁndings will be useful
in developing human-centered explainable AI-based systems
that effectively incorporate experts’ knowledge.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we brieﬂy explain the framework which enables us to under-
stand the reasoning behind predictions. Section III describes
the case study on a calving detection system in livestock
farming based on our framework. In Section IV, we discuss the
ﬁndings from the case study and future work of the proposed
framework. We conclude in Section V with a brief summary.
II. FRAMEWORK
The proposed framework incorporates the users’ decision-
making process into a prediction network and allows for
interpretation on the basis of their domain knowledge. A
typical machine leaning-based system uses an end-to-end
approach with experts’ annotations to model the notiﬁcation
target. In contrast, the proposed framework uses a human-
centric approach and models the notiﬁcation target through
user interviews. This section describes the following four
phases of the design procedure for the proposed framework:
• Interview with an expert
• Designing streams to extract the information that charac-
terizes what is being monitored
• Designing detectors by integrating information from mul-
tiple streams
• Designing the notiﬁcation interface
In the ﬁrst phase, we interview experts on the notiﬁcation
target. In interviews, we ask them to verbalize their decision-
making processes when detecting the target, and determine
the features they focus on in daily operations. Then we divide
those features into more detailed features that can be judged
even by non-experts.
In the next phase, we extract more detailed features from the
ones that experts focus on when they detect the notiﬁcation
target, and then we develop a stream network based on the
extracted features. Dividing the features into more detailed
features that can be judged even by non-experts, enables the
addition of crowd-sourced annotations. This is important in
terms of making the surveillance system sustainable, as it
allows us to increase the amount of training data without
having to rely on experts in the domain.
In the third phase, we develop a network that integrates
multiple stream networks on the basis of different attribute
features. The users are notiﬁed based on the posterior proba-
bility of the network. Here, even if the detection of each stream
network is not necessarily effective, if the predictions of each
stream are complementary, the detection can be improved.
Finally, we design the user interface that is presented to the
users. In addition to the ﬁnal posterior probability of the no-
tiﬁcation target, multiple features extracted from each stream
network can be presented as the reasons for the prediction
results. These features are designed with consideration for the
responses in the user interviews, so they provide information
necessary for users’ decision-making processes.
III. CASE STUDY
In this section, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed
framework for detecting signs of calving in cattle through a
user study with livestock farmers. First, we describe the system
design based on our framework introduced in Section II, and
then we describe the procedure for the user experiments and
the results and ﬁndings.
A. System Design
In this section, we describe the design of our calving detec-
tion system based on the proposed framework. We describe the
domain knowledge of calving signs and the network structure
that explicitly extracts features relevant to calving. Finally, we
explain the user interface that presents the farmers with the
reasons for the prediction results.
1) Calving Signs Observable from Video: This section
presents an overview of the domain knowledge about calving
signs. We interviewed farmers and reviewed the animal sci-
ence literature to identify cattle behaviors related to calving.
Changes in postures and behaviors related to calving have
been extensively investigated in animal science. This part
corresponds to the implementation of the ﬁrst phase of the
proposed framework.
The following are typical posture-based calving signs that
can be observed from images:
• Switching between standing and lying postures: About
two to six hours before calving, the number of posture
changes (e.g., switching between standing and lying)
become more frequent [15], [16], [17] and the time spent
lying increases two hours before calving [17].
• Tail raising: About four to six hours before calving, tail
raising becomes more frequent [17] and the position of
the tail before calving is elevated [18], [19].
The following action-based calving signs were observed in
the video:
• Increase in the number of rotations and turns: Char-
acteristic walking patterns (e.g., rotations and turns) can
be observed four hours before calving and become more
frequent three hours before calving [20].
• Increase in aimless walking time: The duration of
walking on the calving day increases [16], [17]. Aimless
walking time apparently increases about 140 minutes
before calving [19].
2) System Architecture: We designed a multi-stream net-
work [21] that extracts statistical information on posture,
rotation, and movement based on calving signs identiﬁed in
prior studies and integrates the three streams depending on
the situation. This part corresponds to the implementation

3
Fig. 1. User study of livestock farmers.
of the second and third phases of the proposed framework.
Speciﬁcally, each stream identiﬁes calving signs for each 30-
minute input video based on features as follows:
• Posture-based feature: The appearance of a cattle stand-
ing, lying, and raising its tail are captured for each video
frame using ResNet-50 [22] and then accumulated into
the relevant frequencies using temporal pooling tech-
niques.
• Rotation-based feature: Information on body direction
is extracted from each video frame using ResNet-50 and
accumulated into a statistic on the cattle’s rotation by
measuring the changes in the body direction using the
M-measure [23], [24].
• Movement-based feature: The region of the cattle’s
body is detected in each video frame using YOLOv3 [25]
and differences in locations across frames are accumu-
lated into a statistic on the cattle’s movement.
The calving-relevant features are designed to be extracted from
information that can be judged by non-experts, such as posture,
neck and tail positions, and positional coordinates. This makes
it possible to collect data using crowdsourcing, and re-training
the feature extraction mechanism becomes easier.
3) User Interface of Notiﬁcation Screen: In this section,
we describe the design of the user interface of the proposed
system. This part corresponds to the implementation of the
fourth phase of the proposed framework. In addition to the
ﬁnal posterior probability of calving signs, the proposed frame-
work provides the following information related to calving
signs for each frame:
• Posterior probability of cattle’s posture, 1) standing cattle
with tail raised, 2) standing cattle without tail raised, 3)
lying cattle, and 4) can’t tell
• Heatmaps of cattle’s body direction
• Position coordinates of cattle
Displaying these data in an easy-to-understand representation
will help farmers to estimate when cattle start calving.
Fig. 2 shows the user interface designed using the infor-
mation described above. In addition to the monitoring video
and the posterior probability values of the system in this
scene, the interface also displays information on the frequency
of posture, amount of rotation, amount of movement, and
trajectory of the cattle as seen from directly above. The upper
right bar graph shows the posterior probability of calving signs
which the system output using the 30-minute video frames.
Four graphs are presented, each with posterior probabilities
and their mean values based on the statistics on posture,
rotation, and movement. Users can check which information
the system considers to be a calving sign. The statistics on
posture, rotation, and movement are presented at the bottom
of the screen. The circle graph on the left shows the frequency
of these 30-minute postures calculated from the posterior
probability of the posture classiﬁcation obtained by the feature
extractor. This graph can be interpreted as the reasons for the
prediction results of the posture-based stream. The comparison
with the normal state in the amount of rotation (shown in
the center) is calculated from the estimated heatmaps of the
cattle’s body direction obtained from the feature extractor. It
is possible to quantify how much the cattle turn during these
30 minutes compared with their default state, which can then
be interpreted as reasons for the prediction results. In the
prototype user interface, we visualized the time-series changes
in the angle of body direction. After interviewing a farmer,
a bar graph was used to simplify the representation. The
comparison with the normal state in the amount of movement
(shown on the right side) is calculated from the amount of
change in the positional coordinates of the cattle. Compared
with the normal state, the amount of movement of cattle
during this 30-minute can be quantiﬁed and interpreted as
the reasons for the prediction results of the movement-based
stream. Finally, a bird’s eye view of the cattle’s position is
displayed on the right side of the monitoring video, which
shows the trajectory of the cattle’s position as seen from
directly above the room. This allows us to understand the
general movement pattern without continuously watching the
video.
B. User Study
To evaluate the proposed framework, we experimentally
compared it with the end-to-end system were conducted. The
experiment took about 60-90 minutes in total and consisted
of instruction, practice, experiment part 1, part 2, and a post-
experiment survey (Fig. 3). First, the participants watched a

4
Characteristicbehaviorsrelated
topostureandrotationwere
observedbeforecalving.
Fig. 2. User interface of proposed system (System B). User interface presented to participants was in Japanese.
5-minute instructional video on the experiment. Afterwards,
we obtained written informed consent signed by the par-
ticipants before the experiments, and the participants were
granted a gift card of ¥ 5,000 JPY (roughly $50 USD). As
an exercise, the participants responded to two notiﬁcations
from the proposed system and the end-to-end system. In this
section, the participants were instructed to think aloud [26]
and practiced answering questions by actively commenting
on what they saw and thought during the experiment. The
experiment consisted of two parts with a break in between,
and the participants responded to 36 notiﬁcations in total. The
participants were divided into two experimental groups, and
each group was shown the user interface in a pseudo-random
order to account for the sequential effects of the interface
order. After the experiment, a qualitative post-experiment
survey was conducted using Google Forms.
In the experiment, the two user interfaces were presented
to the participants in a pseudo-random order on the basis
of the experimental group. The user interface of the end-to-
end system for comparison is shown in Fig. 4. Compared
with the user interface of the proposed system, the end-
to-end system presents only the posterior probability graph
of the prediction result. For the same 30-minute sequence,
the value of the posterior probability presented in the user
interface of the end-to-end system was the same value as
the average posterior probability of each stream in the user
interface of the proposed system. To avoid bias from the
system names, we designated the end-to-end system as system
A and the proposed system as system B when presenting the
user interfaces to the participants.
The unit of the notiﬁcation was a 30-minute video sequence,
and a total of 18 sequences were prepared. A positive case was
deﬁned as the time from three to zero hours before calving
and a negative case as the time from 24 to 27 hours before
calving. The prepared sequences consisted of six sequences
each of true positives and false positives, and three sequences
each of false negatives and true negatives. In other words, we
assume that the notiﬁcation threshold is signiﬁcantly lowered
and contains a certain number of false positives.
The participants are asked to answer the following two
questions (maximum of four) at the bottom of the interface:
Q1-1 Did you recognize calving signs in this 30-minutes
scene? (-3: Absolutely Not, ... 3: Absolutely Yes)
Q1-2 What are the reasons for your answer? (Verbal an-
swer)
The participants responded to the following prompts in Q1-2:
1) What did you see on the screen?, 2) What did you think?,
and 3) How did you reach your decision? The intention of
this format was to reveal as much of their thought process as
possible. After answering the above questions, if the answer to
Q1-1 was “neither” or “predictive” (0-3), the participant was
asked to answer the following questions as well:
Q2-1 What action would you take after seeing this user
interface? (1: Begin assisting immediately, 2: Start
making arrangements, 3: Do nothing)
Q2-2 What are the reasons for your answer? (Verbal an-
swer)
The candidate answers to Q2-1 are terms referring to common
decision-making behaviors for livestock farmers. The terms
are used in the contact-type sensor, Gyuonkei1, a calving
notiﬁcation sensor widely used in Japan. Here, “Begin assist-
ing immediately” refers to the decision to immediately begin
assisting with calving, and “Start making arrangements” refers
to the preparations made about 24 hours before calving. These
questions are designed to encourage participants to use the
interface for their decision-making. Each participant is asked
1Gyuonkei, http://www.gyuonkei.jp

5
1.Instruction
2.Practice
3.Experiment
(Part1)
4.Experiment
(Part2)
5.Post-experiment
Survey
2 tasks
…
18tasks
18tasks
18 tasks
18tasks
A
…
B
B
B
A
A
B
B
A
A
A
B
…
…
• Consent
• Watch
instructional
video(5min)
A
B
A
B
E2Esystem
Proposed system
GroupⅠ
P2,P3,P5
GroupⅡ
P1,P4,P6
Participants
Break
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of experimental procedure. Order of tasks differed for each experimental group.
to respond to the above questions for a total of 36 notiﬁcations
(2 UIs x 18 sequences). The questions in the post-experiment
survey are as follows:
Q’1
Which AI system would you like to use in the future?
(1. System A, 2. System B)
Q’2
Why did you choose that system? (Orally, if you
prefer.)
Q’3
How useful was the information presented in System
A? (-2. Useless, ..., 2. Useful)
a
Graph of the probability of calving signs.
Q’4
How useful was the information presented in System
B? (-2. Useless, ..., 2. Useful)
a
Graph of the probability of calving signs.
b
Graph of the posture frequency.
c
Graph of the amount of rotation.
d
Graph of the amount of movement.
e
Bird’s eye view (position of the cattle as
seen from directly above).
Q’5
Which
system
provided
more
accurate
predic-
tions?(1. System A, 2. System B, 3. Neither)
Q’6
What are the advantages of the system you chose in
Q’1 over the other? (Orally, if you prefer.)
Q’7
What improvements (if any) would you make to
System B? (Orally, if you prefer.)
Six people who involved in livestock farming participated in
the user experiment. Age, sex, and years of experience in the
livestock industry of the participants are shown in Table I. The
participants belonged to two groups: farmers (P1-4) and people
from an agricultural college (P5-6). Here, P5 is a professor,
and P6 is a student of animal science.
The experiment was administered on a computer, and the
participants accessed the URL to the experiment page provided
in advance. We used a web conference application (Zoom) to
record the participants’ responses. To record the participant’s
speech during their think-aloud, we recorded online on Zoom
and locally as a backup.
C. Results and Findings
Participants judged whether a behavior was a calving sign
from the monitoring video, but the behavior of their responses
TABLE I
DETAILS OF EXPERIMENT PARTICIPANTS. FOUR ARE FARMERS (P1-P4),
AND OTHER TWO STUDIES ARE IN AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE (P5-P6).
ID
Group
Age
Sex
Years of experience
P1
II
30’s
M
10-19
P2
I
50’s
M
20-29
P3
I
20’s
F
5-9
P4
II
40’s
M
20-29
P5
I
40’s
M
20-29
P6
II
10’s
F
0-1
varied depending on the type of the user interface presented.
When the interface of the end-to-end system was presented,
most of the verbal comments were related to the video.
However, when the interface of the proposed system was
presented, some of the comments were related to the statistics.
One participant shared their judgment, referring to a graph
comparing the amount of movement with normal conditions.
P5 stated “I think the cattle is near to calving because the
data shows a lot of movement and an increase in rotation.”.
Given the trend of the responses, we believe that presenting the
internal state of the proposed system was effective for judging
whether a behavior was a calving sign.
The results of the responses to the post-experimental survey
are shown in Fig 5. Five out of six participants selected the
proposed system as the system they would like to use in the
future (Fig. 5, Q’1). They found that the internal state of
the system was helpful in identifying calving signs. P1 said
“It is easier to understand when the amount of movement,
which is usually judged by the senses, is visualized in a
graph.” P2 said “It’s helpful to see detailed information about
the cattle.” P3 said “The presented graphs were helpful in
determining whether a behavior was a calving sign.” , and
P5 said “Because the data is presented in detail, I think less
experienced farmers can make decisions with more certainty.”
In addition, some of the comments ﬁt the hypothesis that
the user interface of the end-to-end system, which is a black-
box, is insufﬁcient for decision-making. P1 stated, “The [end-
to-end system’s] predicted probability alone does not tell us

6
Fig. 4. User interface of end-to-end system (System A). User interface presented to participants was in Japanese.
what we should do. I don’t know what to do with it.”. In
contrast, P4, who was the only one to choose the end-to-end
system in this question, said, “I did not ﬁnd the indicators
in the proposed system to be judgmental because there were
many situations where the information presented differed from
my perceptions.” P4 was a farmer who was asked to assist
in the interviews to collect domain knowledge about calving
signs, and he stated that the information presented was less
accurate than he expected. One shortcoming is that a user
evaluation should have been conducted in the second phase of
the framework design. Because we did not receive sufﬁcient
feedback from experts in this phase, the extracted features
were not always sufﬁciently useful indicators. In addition, it
was suggested that actively presenting the internal state of the
system, including the errors, may cause noise in judgment and
cause participants to distrust the system.
Next, we discuss which information on the user interface
was useful (Fig. 5, Q’3, Q’4). We found that the trend in
the probability of calving signs varied between participants.
Only P4 responded that the probability of the end-to-end
system was more useful, while the other participants found
the proposed system to be more useful or about the same.
We now turn our attention to the results of the user interface
of each statistic on the posture, rotation, and movement of
the proposed system (Fig. 5, Q’4). Two participants from
the agricultural college (P5, P6) responded that the graph of
the posture frequency was useful, while the remaining four
farmers responded that it was generally not useful. This may
be because the farmers could view the raw data to obtain more
accurate information on posture frequency, so there was less
of a need to refer to the information presented by the system.
On the other hand, participants from an agricultural college
with an academic background found it useful to be able to
quantitatively visualize the posture frequency.
A higher percentage of participants found the graph of
the amount of movement to be more useful than the posture
frequency graph because the meta-information, which cannot
be captured from the raw data, is useful for judgment. In fact,
many of the participants said that the comparison with normal
conditions was helpful during their responses. P1 said “Before,
I judged the amount of rotation and movement intuitively, so
it’s easier to see when graphed.” and P6 said “The graph
[of the amount of movement] makes it easier to notice the
degree of change compared with the normal conditions.” The
rotation graph tended to be less useful than the movement
graph because the participants paid attention to the intensity
of the cattle’s movement as one of the criteria for judging
whether it was a calving sign, and the amount of rotation was
not directly related to their judgment. Thus, it is important to
present features in a way that users can easily understand, and
a more abstract expression such as “intensity of movement”
may be more suitable.
In their responses to the last question (Q’7), participants
pointed out issues related to the accuracy of the presented
information and that the user interface made the video smaller
when information is presented. For the former issue, P4 said
“I felt that the graph was not directly linked to the calving
signs.” and P6 said “I was worried when the AI identiﬁed an
indeterminable posture in many cases. I would prefer to judge
it myself in such situations.” For the latter issue, P5 stated,
“Readability. I don’t want the video to be too small.”
IV. DISCUSSION
Black-box AI systems are considered inadequate for sup-
porting human decision-making. One farmer pointed out that
the end-to-end system lacked instructions on what they should
do after seeing the value for the probability of calving signs.
Several farmers pointed out the advantages of our proposed
system, stating that the detailed information would help novice
farmers make correct decisions conﬁdently and the reason
visualization was helpful. In particular, statistical information
including meta-information that cannot be obtained from the
raw data tended to be particularly useful. In contrast, we found
that the reliability of the system is adversely affected when
the presented information is incorrect. This has been reported
in several studies as algorithm aversion [27], [28], which is
a phenomenon in which users stop trusting algorithms after
seeing its mistakes. To present more information to users, the

7
Q’1.WhichAIsystemwouldyouliketouseinthefuture?
Q’3.Howusefulwastheinformation
presentedinend-to-endsystem?
P6
P3,P4
P1,P2,P5
P5,P6
P1,P3
P4
P2
P4
P3
P2
P1
P5,P6
P4
P1,P3
P2, P5,P6
P2
P1,P3,P4,P5,P6
P2
P1
P6
P3,P4
P5
Q’5.WhichAIsystemprovidedmoreaccuratepredictions?
Q’4.Howusefulwastheinformation
presentedinproposedsystem?
Fig. 5. Responses to select questions in post-experiment survey.
proposed framework needs to take into account the accuracy
of the information. In addition, we should have conducted a
user evaluation in the second phase of the framework design
because the extracted features may not have been sufﬁciently
useful indicators for users. In the participants’ feedback, they
noted that the user interface became more complicated as more
information was presented. When considering development for
actual use, it is necessary to consider elderly users as well
as smartphones which may make the screen more difﬁcult to
view. A more sophisticated user interface design is needed,
such as the separation of the summary and detailed analysis
screens. We anticipate that our evaluation of an XAI frame-
work through user studies will contribute to the integration of
XAI in various industrial domains.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a framework for a video
surveillance system that incorporates experts’ decision-making
processes into the architecture such that the reasons for the
prediction results can be interpreted. We evaluated the calving
sign detection systems based on our proposed framework
through a user study with people involved in livestock farming
(N=6). The proposed framework was compared with an end-
to-end system, and ﬁve out of six participants selected the
proposed framework as the system they would like to use in the
future. In addition, the proposed framework is used to present
the internal state of the system, which can be used to help users
make decisions and identify system errors. However, we found
that presenting an inaccurate internal state of the system could
interfere with the user’s judgment and cause them to distrust
the system. In future work, we intend to study the accuracy
of the information presented to users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the farmers who participated in the
experiment and Kagoshima Prefecture Agricultural College.
We also thank Kagoshima Brain Center for fruitful discus-
sions.
