Evorus: A Crowd-powered Conversational Assistant
Built to Automate Itself Over Time
Ting-Hao (Kenneth) Huang, Joseph Chee Chang, and Jeffrey P. Bigham
Language Technologies Institute and Human-Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT
Crowd-powered conversational assistants have been shown to
be more robust than automated systems, but do so at the cost
of higher response latency and monetary costs. A promising
direction is to combine the two approaches for high quality,
low latency, and low cost solutions. In this paper, we introduce
Evorus, a crowd-powered conversational assistant built to auto-
mate itself over time by (i) allowing new chatbots to be easily
integrated to automate more scenarios, (ii) reusing prior crowd
answers, and (iii) learning to automatically approve response
candidates. Our 5-month-long deployment with 80 partici-
pants and 281 conversations shows that Evorus can automate
itself without compromising conversation quality. Crowd-AI
architectures have long been proposed as a way to reduce cost
and latency for crowd-powered systems; Evorus demonstrates
how automation can be introduced successfully in a deployed
system. Its architecture allows future researchers to make fur-
ther innovation on the underlying automated components in
the context of a deployed open domain dialog system.
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous
Author Keywords
crowd-powered system; crowdsourcing; real-time
crowdsourcing; conversational assistant; chatbot
INTRODUCTION
Conversational assistants, such as Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s
Echo, and Microsoft’s Cortana, are becoming increasingly
popular, but are currently limited to speciﬁc speech commands
that have been coded for pre-determined domains. As a re-
sult, substantial effort has been placed on teaching people
how to talk to these assistants, e.g., via books to teach Siri’s

Alexa’s new skills [1]. To address the problem of users not
knowing what scenarios are supported, AI2 recently built an
Alexa skill designed to help people ﬁnd skills they could use,
only to have it rejected by Amazon [8].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173869
Figure 1. Evorus is a crowd-powered conversational assistant that au-
tomates itself over time by (i) learning to include responses from chat-
terbots and task-oriented dialog systems over time, (ii) reusing past re-
sponses, and (iii) gradually reducing the crowd’s role in choosing high-
quality responses by partially automating voting.
Crowd-powered assistants are more robust to diverse domains,
and are able to engage users in rich, multi-turn conversa-
tion. Some systems use professional employees, such as Face-
book M [15], while others use crowd workers, such as Cho-
rus [25]. Despite their advantages, crowd-powered agents re-
main largely impractical for deployment at large scale because
of their monetary cost and response latency [3, 19]. On the
other hand, crowd-powered systems are often touted as a path
to fully automated systems, but transitioning from the crowd
to automation has been limited in practice. The most straight-
forward approach is to use data from prior conversations to
train an automated replacement. This can work in speciﬁc
domains [46], or on so-called “chit-chat” systems [2]. Fully
automating a general conversational assistant this way can be
difﬁcult because of the wide range of domains to cover and the
large amount of data needed within each to train automated
replacements. Such automated systems only become useful
once they can completely take over from the crowd-powered
system. Such abrupt transition points mean substantial upfront
costs must be paid for collecting training examples before any
automation can be tested in an online system.
In this paper, we explore an alternative approach of a crowd-
powered system architecture that supports gradual automation
arXiv:1801.02668v2  [cs.HC]  10 Jan 2018

over time. In our approach, the crowd works with automated
components as they continue to improve, and the architecture
provides narrowly scoped points where automation can be
introduced successfully. For instance, instead of waiting un-
til an automated dialog system is able to respond completely
on its own, one component that we developed recommends
responders from a large set of possible responders that might
be relevant based on the on-going conversation. Those re-
sponses are then among the options available to the crowd to
choose. Another component learns to help select high-quality
responses. Each problem is tightly scoped, and thus potentially
easier for machine learning algorithms to automate.
This paper introduces Evorus, a crowd-powered conversational
agent that provides a well-scoped path from crowd-powered
robustness to automated speed and frugality. Users can con-
verse with Evorus in open domains, and the responses are
chosen from suggestions offered by crowd workers and any
number of automated systems that have been added to Evorus.
Evorus supports increased automation over time in three ways
(Figure 1): (i) allowing third-party developers to easily inte-
grate automated chatterbots or task-oriented dialog systems
to propose response candidates, (ii) reusing crowd-generated
responses from previous conversations as response candidates,
and (iii) learning to automatically select high-quality response
candidates to reduce crowd oversight over time.
In Evorus, existing dialog systems can be incorporated via
simple REST (REpresentational State Transfer) interfaces that
take in the current conversation context, and respond with a
response candidate. Over time, Evorus learns to select a subset
of the automated components that are most likely to generate
high-quality responses for different context. The responses are
then forwarded to crowd workers as candidates. Workers then
choose which of the responses to present to the users. Evorus
sees workers selecting responses from candidates as signals
that enable it to learn to select both automated components
and response candidates in the future. It is important to note
that while Evorus is a functioning and deployed system, we
do not see the current version and its constituent components
to be ﬁnal. Rather, its architecture is designed to allow future
researchers to improve on its performance and the extent to
which it is automated, by working on constituent problems,
which are each challenging in their own right. The structure of
Evorus provides distinct learning points that can be bettered by
other researchers. Others may include additional dialog sys-
tems or chatterbots, and improve upon its learning components,
driven by the collected data and its modular architecture.
We deployed the current version of Evorus over time to better
understand how well it works. During our deployment, auto-
mated response were chose 12.44% of time, Evorus reduced
the crowd voting by 13.81%, and the cost of each non-user
message reduced by 32.76%. In this paper, we explore when
the system was best able to automate itself, and present clear
opportunities for future research to improve on these areas.
This paper makes four primary contributions:
• Evorus Architecture: a crowd-powered conversational as-
sistant that is designed to gradually automate itself over
time by including more responses from existent chatbots
and reduce the oversight needed from the crowd;
• Learning to Choose Chatbots Over Time: we introduced
a learning framework that uses crowd votes and prior ac-
cepted message to estimate the likelihood of each chatbots
when receiving a user message;
• Automatic Voting: we implemented a machine learning
model for automatically reducing the amount of crowd over-
sight needed, evaluated its performance on a dataset of real
conversations, and developed a mathematical framework to
estimate the expected reward of using the model; and
• Deployment: we deployed Evorus for over 5 months with
80 participants and 281 conversations to understand how
the automatic components we developed could gradually
take over from the crowd in a real setting.
RELATED WORK
Our work draws from research on conversational agents, gen-
eral purpose dialog systems and crowd-machine systems.
General Purpose Dialog System: A number of general pur-
pose dialog systems such as IRIS [2] have been proposed.
Wen et al. [43] designed a neural network language gen-
eration model for multi-domain dialog systems.
A deep-
learning-based domain adaptation model was also proposed
recently [11]. Project DialPort [50] introduced a multi-agent
framework that has the capability to include multiple task-
oriented dialog systems to hold a multiple domain conver-
sation. On the other hand, in the ﬁeld of natural language
processing, general response generation technologies were
also developed. Ritter et al. [35] generated responses based on
phrase-based statistical machine translation based on Twitter
data. Li et al. [26] introduced a response generator based
on speaker model that encodes personas with background in-
formation and speaking style. Recently, researchers started
exploring end-to-end joint learning of language understanding
in dialogue systems [6, 48, 27]. However, after decades of
developments, sophisticated artiﬁcial “conversational intelli-
gence” are largely absent in modern digital products.
Crowd-powered Conversational Agents: Building fully-
automated, open-domain conversational assistants is a widely
researched topic in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), but
has thus far remained an open challenge. In response to this,
the Chorus [25] conversational agent is powered by a crowd
of human actors, which enables it to work robustly across
domains [24]. To help users manage information and services
through crowd-powered conversational agents, Guardian takes
as input a Web API and a desired task from the user and the
crowd determines the parameters necessary to complete the
task [20, 18]; IntructableCrowd helps users automate the man-
agement of sensors and tasks in their mobile phones through
a conversational agent [16]; and WearMail enables users to

via smartwatch [39]. Conversational assistants powered by
trained human operators, such as Facebook M [15] and Magic
Assistant [29], have emerged in the recent years.
While most crowd-powered conversational systems function
well in laboratory settings, Chorus was deployed in the real

world [19] and revealed a range of problems such as determin-
ing when to terminate a conversation or protecting workers
from abusive content introduced by end users. Microsoft
Tey [45] introduced an AI-powered agent which encountered
problems when deployed publicly, because some users real-
ized that they could inﬂuence what Tey would say because
it mimicked them. Unlike Tey, Evorus does not learn only
by mimicking users, and paid crowd workers are kept in the
loop to verify responses in order to maintain quality. Our
deployment did not reveal such problems and we believe the
structure of Evorus makes such problems less likely.
Crowd-Machine Hybrid Systems: Crowd and machine hy-
brid systems have enabled us to solve a wide range of tasks
that were difﬁcult for machines or humans to solve alone,
making impacts in areas including crowdsourcing, machine
learning, databases and computer vision [10, 21, 37, 34, 22].
For instance, Flock and Alloy [7, 5] use crowds to suggest
predictive features, label data, and weigh these features with
machine learning techniques to produce coherent categories
and accurate models. The Knowledge Accelerator [12] uses
crowds to synthesize such crowd-machine structures into co-
herent articles. Zensors creates custom computer vision sen-
sors bootstrapped by the crowd [23]. Similarly, CrowdDB [10]
uses human input for providing information that is missing
from the database, for performing computationally difﬁcult
functions, and for matching, ranking, or aggregating results
based on fuzzy criteria. JellyBean [37] introduces a suite of
crowd-vision hybrid counting algorithms that can perform in
independent or hybrid modes returning more accurate counts
that either workers or computer vision could do alone.
EVORUS’ CONVERSATIONAL ASSISTANT FRAMEWORK
Evorus obtains multiple responses from multiple sources, in-
cluding crowd workers and chatbots, and uses a voting mecha-
nism to decide which responses to send to the end-user.
Worker Interface
Evorus’ worker interface contains two major parts (Figure 2):
the chat box in the middle and the fact board on the side. Chat
box’s layout is similar to an online chat room. Crowd workers
can see the messages sent by the user and the responses candi-
dates proposed by workers and bots. The role label on each
message indicates it was sent by the user (blue label,) a worker
(red label,) or a bot (green label.) Workers can click on the
check mark () to upvote on the good responses, click on the
cross mark () to downvote on the bad responses, or type text
to propose their own responses. Beside the chat box, workers
can use the fact board to keep track of important information
of the current conversation. To provide context, chat logs and
the recorded facts from previous conversations with the same
user were also shown to workers.
The score board on the upper right corner displays the current
reward points the worker have earned in this conversation. If
the conversation is over, the worker can click the long button
on the top of the interface to leave and submit this task.
Selecting Responses using Upvotes and Downvotes
Crowd workers and bots can upvote or downvote on a response
candidate. As shown in Figure 2, on the interface, the upvoted
responses turned to light green, and the downvoted responses
turned to gray. Crowd workers automatically upvote their own
candidates whenever they propose new responses. Upon cal-
culating the voting results, we assigned a negative weight to a
downvote while an upvote have a positive weights. We empiri-
cally set the upvote weight at 1 and downvote’s weight at 0.5,
which encourages the system to send more responses to the
user. We inherited the already-working voting threshold from
deployed Chorus [19], which accepts a response candidate
when it accumulates a vote weight that is larger or equal to 0.4
times number of active workers in this conversation. Namely,
Evorus accepts a response candidate and sends it to the user
when Equation (1) holds:
#upvote×Wupvote −#donwvote×Wdownvote
⩾#active_workers×threshold
Wupvote = 1.0,
Wdownvote = 0.5,
threshold = 0.4
(1)
We formally deﬁned the #active_workers in the later subsec-
tion of real-time recruiting. Evorus does not reject a message,
so it does not have a threshold for negative vote weight.
Expiring Unselected Messages to Refresh Context
When Evorus accepts a response, the system turns the accepted
message to a white background, and also expires all other
response candidates that have not been accepted by removing
them from the chat box in the worker interface. This feature
ensures all response candidates displayed on the interface
were proposed based on the latest context. We also created a
“proposed chat history” box on the left side of worker interface,
which automatically records the worker’s latest ﬁve responses.
Workers can copy his/her previously-proposed response and
send it again if the message expired too fast.
A Proposed, Accepted, or Expired Message
In Evorus, non-user messages are in one of three states: [Pro-
posed], [Accepted], or [Expired]. [Proposed] messages are
open to be up/downvoted. These messages were proposed by
either a worker or a bot, has not yet received sufﬁcient votes
to be accepted, and has not yet expired; [Accepted] messages
received sufﬁcient votes before they expired and were sent
to the user; and [Expired] messages did not receive sufﬁcient
votes before they expired. These messages were not sent to
the users, and were removed from the worker interface. A
[Rejected] state does not exist since Evorus does not reject a
message proactively.
Worker’s Reward Point System
To incentivize workers, Evorus grants reward points to work-
ers for their individual actions such as upvoting on a message
or proposing a response candidate, and also for their collective
decisions such as agreeing on accepting a message or propos-
ing a message that were accepted. The score box on the right
top corner of the interface shows the current reward points to
the worker in real-time. Reward points are later converted to
bonus pay for workers. Without compromising output quality,
if some of these crowd actions can be successfully replaced
by automated algorithms, the cost of each conversation can
be reduced. Evorus’ reward point schema was extended from
the Chorus reward schema, which was previously used during

Figure 2. The Evorus worker interface allows workers to propose responses and up/down vote candidate responses. The up/down votes give Evorus
labels to use to train its machine-learning system to automatically gauge the quality of responses. Evorus automatically expires response candidates
upon acceptance of another in order to prevent workers from voting through candidate responses that are good but no longer relevant. Workers can
tell each message is sent by the end-user (blue label), a worker (red label), or a chatbot (green label) by the colored labels.
its year-long deployment [19]. This schema encodes the im-
portance of each action, and thus provides a good guide for
algorithms to estimate the beneﬁt and risk when automating a
crowd action. Moreover, this reward schema will be used to
estimate the expected reward points (and corresponding costs)
an automatic voting bot can save, which we describe later.
Real-time Recruiting & Connecting to Google Hangouts
When a conversation starts, Evorus uses the Ignition model
[17] to recruit workers quickly and economically from Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk, and uses the Hangoutsbot [14] library
to connect with the Google Hangout servers so that users can
use its clients to talk with Evorus on computers or mobile
devices. Each conversation starts with 1 worker and incorpo-
rates 5 workers at most. Workers may reach a conversation at
different times, but typically stay to the end of the conversa-
tion (average duration ≃10 minutes). The #active_workers
in Equation 1 is deﬁned as “the number of crowd workers
who were working on this conversation when the message was
proposed,” which varies as workers arrive (or drop out) at dif-
ferent times. In our deployment, the average #active_workers
of all crowd messages is 3.56 (SD=1.29,) and 77.56% of the
crowd messages had #active_workers >= 3.
EVORUS’ AUTOMATION AND LEARNING FRAMEWORK
Evorus is a conversational assistant that is collaboratively run
by real-time crowdsourcing and artiﬁcial intelligence. The
core concept of Evorus is to have crowd workers work with au-
tomated virtual agents (referred to as “bots”) on the ﬂy to hold
sophisticated conversations with users. To test this, we devel-
oped two types of bots: the automatic response generators, i.e.,
chatbots, and the automatic voting algorithms, i.e., vote bots.
Evorus monitored all ongoing conversations, and periodically
called chatbots and vote bots to participate in active conver-
sations. Both chatbots and vote bots take the entire chat log
as input, and based on the chat log to generate responses or
votes. To coordinate with human workers’ speed, Evorus often
needs to set constraints on the frequency or capability (e.g.,
in which condition can a chatbot propose responses) of bots.
More importantly, Evorus can learn from the crowd feedback
to automate itself over time via three primary mechanisms: (i)
the chatbot selector, (ii) the retrieval-based chatbot that can
reuse old responses, and (iii) the automatic voting bot.
Part I: Learning to Choose Chatbots Over Time
In Evorus, existing dialog systems or chatbots can be incor-
porated by deﬁning a simple REST interface on top of them
that accepts information about the current conversation state,
and responses with a suggested response. When a sufﬁcient
amount of chatbots are included in the bot pool, selecting
the most appropriate chatbots to answer different questions
becomes critical. For instance, a simple “ping-pong” chatbot
that always responds with what it was told can be selected
to reply echo questions such as “Hi” or “How are you?”; a
restaurant recommendation bot can be selected when the user
is looking for food; and a chatbot that was built on a friend’s
chat log can be selected when the user feels lonely [31]. In
this paper, we introduce a learning framework that uses crowd
votes and prior accepted messages to estimate the likelihood
of each chatbot when receiving a user message. The learning
framework naturally assigns a slightly higher likelihood to
newly-added chatbots to collect more data. The beauty of this
design is that any chatbot can contribute, as long as it can
effectively respond to – even a small – set of user messages.
Part II: Reusing Prior Answers
Upon receiving a message from the user, Evorus uses a
retrieval-based approach to ﬁnd the most similar message
in prior conversations and populates its prior response for the
crowd to choose from. By doing so, Evorus is capable to reuse
the answer of prior similar questions to respond to users. The
advantage of using a retrieval-based method is that it naturally

increases its capability of answering questions with the growth
of the collected conversations, without the need of recreation
or retraining of machine-learning models. With the oversight
of the crowd, the retrieval-based approaches also do not need
to be perfect to contribute. As long as it ﬁnd good responses
to a portion of user conversations, the learning framework
described in Part I can gradually learn when to use it.
Part III: Automatic Voting
Closing the loop of automating the entire system, the last piece
is to automate the oversight of the crowd that are necessary
for quality control, i.e., the voting process in Evorus. We
formulated response voting as a classiﬁcation task and tackled
it with a supervised machine-learning approach. A set of
features based on literature, including the word, the speaker,
and the time of the proposed messages are used to develop a
machine-learning model, and the prior collected crowd votes
are used as gold-standard labels. While the overall classiﬁer
performance is efﬁcient in the dataset, a misﬁred vote (a false-
positive) that mistakenly accepts a low-quality response will
not only disturb the conversation, but also waste extra bonus
money to crowd workers who proposed and voted for it. In
this paper we propose a mathematical framework to estimate
expected beneﬁts of using an automatic voting classiﬁer.
In Evorus, both workers and the vote bot can upvote suggested
responses. When a new suggestion is offered, the vote bot is
called. It ﬁrst calculates its conﬁdence score, and, if the con-
ﬁdence is greater than a threshold, which is estimated by our
proposed mathematical framework, the vote bot automatically
upvotes the message. Evorus monitors the latest down/upvotes
and calculates voting results in real-time. When a crowd
message collects sufﬁcient vote weight, Evorus (i) accepts it
and sends it to the user, and (ii) removes all other candidate
messages from the worker interface to refresh context.
In the following three sections, we describe in detail the three
main parts of the Evorus framework.
PART I: LEARNING TO CHOOSE CHATBOTS OVER TIME
Evorus’ chatbot selector learns over time from the crowd’s
feedback to choose the right chatbots to respond to user mes-
sages. Evorus also regularly populates lower-ranking chat-
bots to allow the model to learn about new chatbots and tp
keep the model up-to-date.
Ranking and Sampling Chatbots
Upon receiving a message from a user, Evorus uses both the
text and prior collected data to estimate how likely each chat-
bot is capable of responding the user (i.e., P(bot|message)).
We used a conditional probability, as shown in Equation 2, to
characterize the likelihood of selecting a chatbot (bot) after
receiving a user message.
P(bot|message) = P(bot)×P(message|bot)
≈P(bot)×similarity(message, historybot)
(2)
P(bot) is the prior probability of the chatbot,
and
P(message|bot) is the likelihood of the user message given the
chatbot’s history (i.e., previous user messages that the bot has
successfully responded). While training an n-gram language
model using previous messages to estimate P(message|bot)
is intuitive [13], sufﬁcient data for building such model is
often unavailable for newly-added bots. To generalize, we
used a similarity measure based on distance between word
vectors (similarity(message, historybot)) to approximate this
likelihood. We will explain how we calculate these two com-
ponents in the following subsection.
Equipped with the estimates, Evorus ranks all the chatbots
based on the likelihood values, and always calls the ﬁrst-
ranking chatbot to provide its response. More interestingly,
in addition to the top chatbot, Evorus also randomly selects
a lower-ranking chatbot to provide responses. By doing so,
Evorus is capable to gradually update its estimates of each
bot based on the crowd feedback and learn over time the best
scenario to call each chatbot. Similar strategies, such as the
epsilon-greedy strategy that yields a small portion of proba-
bility for random outcomes and collects feedback, have been
used in models that learn to select crowd workers [40] and
dialogue actions [38]. For the new chatbot, Evorus initially
assigns a starting probability to it to allow the system to collect
data about it, which we describe in the following subsection.
Estimating Likelihood of a Chatbot
We aimed at designing a learning framework that is (i) inex-
pensive to update, since we want the model to be updated
every single time when the system receives a new label, and
(ii) allows new bots to be added easily.
Prior Probability of Chatbots: To generate more reliable
prior estimation for newly-added bots with limited histories,
we used a beta distribution with two shape parameters α and
β (Equation 3) to model the prior probability of each chatbot.
P(bot) ≈
(#accepted messages from bot)+α
(#user messages since bot online)+α +β
(3)
P(bot) can be interpreted as the overall acceptance rate of
the chatbot without conversation contexts. The two shaping
parameters α and β can be viewed as the number of accepted
(positive) and not-accepted (negative) messages that will be as-
signed to each new chatbot to begin with, respectively. Namely,
any new chatbot’s prior probability P(bot) will be initially as-
signed as α/(α +β), and then later be updated over time. The
beta distribution’s α and β are both functions of the mean (µ)
and variance (σ2) of the distribution. In our pilot study, in
which each automatic response requires only one vote to be
accepted, four chatterbots had an average message acceptance
rate of 0.407 (SD=0.028.) Since we increased the required
vote count from 1 to 2 in the ﬁnal deployment, a lower ac-
ceptance rate is expected. We used µ = 0.3 and σ = 0.05 to
estimate the shape parameters, where α = 24.9 and β = 58.1.
Similarity between Messages and Chatbots: To estimate
similarity(message, bot), we ﬁrst used the pre-trained 200-
dimension GloVe word vector representation trained on
Wikipedia and Gigaword [32] to calculate the average word
vector of each message. We then used previous user messages
that were successfully responded by the chatbot as the bot vec-
tor ⃗wbot that represents the chatbot in the word-vector space.
We also calculated the centroid vector of all user messages,
⃗woverall, to represent general user messages. Finally, as shown

in Equation 4, the similarity between a message and a chatbot
is deﬁned as the distance ratio between the vectors.
similarity(message, historybot)
B
dist(⃗wmessage,⃗woverall)
dist(⃗wmessage,⃗wbot)+dist(⃗wmessage,⃗woverall)
(4)
While ⃗wbot can be calculated as the centroid vector of prior
user messages that were successfully responded to by the chat-
bot, in cold-start scenarios, a chatbot will not have sufﬁcient
accepted messages to calculate the vector. We provide two so-
lutions for chatbot developers: First, the developer can provide
a small set of example messages where their chatbots should
be called. For instance, the developer of an Yelp chatbot can
list “Find me a sushi restaurant in Seattle!” as an example.
Evorus will treat these example messages as the user mes-
sages that the chatbot successfully responded to, and use their
centroid vector as the initial ⃗wbot. When more messages are
accepted, they will be added into this set and update the vector.
Second, for some chatbots, especially non-task chatterbots, it
could be difﬁcult to provide a set of examples. Therefore, if
the developer decided not to provide any example messages,
we set the initial dist(⃗wmessage,⃗wbot) = 0 for new chatbots.
PART II: REUSING PRIOR RESPONSES
Evorus uses an information-retrieval-based (IR-based) method
to ﬁnd answers to similar queries in prior conversations to
suggest as responses to new queries. To do so, Evorus ﬁrst
extracts query-response pairs from all the old conversations,
and then performs a similarity-based sorting over these pairs.
Extracting Query-Response Pairs: One advantage Evorus
has is that each accepted response has crowd votes, which can
be used as a direct indicator of the response’s quality. For each
turn of a conversation between one user and Evorus, we ex-
tracted the accepted crowd response which did not receive any
downvotes, along with the user message (query) it responded
to, as a (query, response) pair. Since the deployed Evorus has
not had any prior conversation with users yet, we obtained
conversation data that were collected by the deployed Cho-
rus, which also used crowd voting to select responses, during
May, 2016 to March, 2017 to start with. We further removed
the messages from known malicious workers and users, also
removed all conversations where the users are co-authors or
collaborators of Chorus [19]. At the beginning of the Evorus
deployment, 3,814 user messages were included, and each of
these user message is paired with 1 to 5 crowd responses.
Searching for the Most Similar Query: For the query mes-
sage in each query-response pair, we calculated its average
word vector by using the pre-trained 200-dimension GloVe
word vector representation based on Wikipedia and Giga-
word [32] and stores the vector in the database. When Evorus
receives a user message, the system ﬁrst calculates its average
word vector ⃗wmessage using the same GloVe representation, and
then searches in the database to look for the top k responses
that their corresponding queries’ word vectors had the short-
est Euclidean distances with ⃗wmessage. Finally, for increasing
answer’s diversity, the system randomly selects one from top
k responses to send back to Evorus for the crowd to choose
from. We empirically set k = 2 in our deployment.
PART III: AUTOMATIC VOTING
Evorus uses supervised learning to vote on responses.
Data Preparation: The voting mechanism has been proven
to be useful in selecting good responses and holding conver-
sations in the lab prototype [25] and deployed system [19].
The ﬁnal status (i.e., accepted or not) of a messages is a strong
signal to indicate its quality. However, when we used this data
to develop an AI-powered automated voting algorithm, it is
noteworthy that expired messages were not all of lower quality.
In some cases the proposed response was good and ﬁtted in the
old context well, but the context changed shortly after the mes-
sage was sent; Some messages were automatically accepted
and bypassed the voting process because Evorus does not have
enough active workers, i.e., when 0.4×#active_workers < 1
in Equation 1); Furthermore, since downvotes can cancel out
upvotes, the voting results in Evorus could be inﬂuenced by
race conditions among workers. For instance, when two up-
votes of a message has been sent to the server, Evorus might
decide that this message’ vote weight is sufﬁcient and sent it
to the user, in which a belated downvote would deduct its vote
weight to lower than the threshold. Therefore, the training
data needs to be carefully developed.
Similar to Part II, we used voting data collected during the
Chorus deployment [19] to train the initial machine learning
model for voting. We ﬁrst extracted the expired messages
with one or more downvote(s) as examples of “downvote”, and
extracted the accepted crowd messages with both one or more
upvote(s) and zero downvote as examples of “upvote.” We
excluded the automatically-accepted messages that were sent
when the task did not have sufﬁcient number of active workers
(0.4×#active_workers < 1) From all the messages collected
by the deployed Chorus during September 2016 to March
2017, 1,682 “upvote” messages 674 “downvote” messages
were extracted to from the dataset.
Model & Performance: We then used this dataset to train a
LibLinear [9] classiﬁer. For each message, Evorus extracted
features in message, turn, and conversation levels to capture
the dialogic characteristics [33], and also used GloVe word
vector, which is identical as that of our retrieval-based response
generation, to represent the content. Our approach reached to
a precision of 0.740 and a recall of 0.982 (F1-score = 0.844)
on the “upvote” class in a 10-fold cross-validation experiment.
The feature analysis using the Weka toolkit [47] showed that
the top 3 features were about the historical performance of
the worker who proposed the message, and also 13 out of
20 top features were of a particular dimension of one of the
word vectors. On the other hand, the performance of the
“downvote” class is less effective. Its precision is 0.714 but
recall is only 0.134. This could be caused by the insufﬁcient
amount of training data, since Chorus promoted upvote more
than downvote by design. According to this result, in the
deployed Evorus, the system only automatically upvoted when
the classiﬁer ouput “upvote,” but did not downvote otherwise.
Optimizing Automatic Voting
Automatic voting directly participates in the process of de-
ciding which messages to send. While our machine-learning
model resulted in good performance on our dataset, we would

Figure 3. (A) The precision-recall curve of the LibLinear classiﬁer for
automatic upvoting. (B) Using our model (Equation (5)) to estimate the
precision and recall at different thresholds and their corresponding ex-
pected reward amount saved.
like to use Evorus’ worker reward point schema to ﬁnd the
right conﬁdence threshold for the automatic voting classiﬁer.
If the threshold is set too low, the classiﬁer would vote fre-
quently even when it is not conﬁdent about the prediction,
and thus many low-quality responses would be accepted and
disturb the conversation; if the threshold is set too high, the
classiﬁer would rarely vote, and the system will not gain much
from using it. Liblinear can output the probability estimates
of each class when performing prediction, which we used as
the notion of conﬁdence of the classiﬁer. Thresholding out
the predictions with lower conﬁdences increased the precision
but reduced the recall of the classiﬁer. Figure 3(A) shows the
Precision-Recall curve of Evorus’ upvoting classiﬁer.
Possible Outcomes When the Classiﬁer Upvotes: To ﬁnd
conﬁdence thresholds for Evorus, we introduced the following
heuristics to estimate reward points saved per message by
using the upvoting classiﬁer. Consider the following cases:
1. [Good Vote] The classiﬁer upvoted on a message that
would originally be selected by the crowd. It saves 1 upvote
reward (Rupvote ×1) and 1 agreement reward (Ragreement ×1)
that would originally be granted to one human worker.
2. [Bad Vote] The classiﬁer upvoted on a message that would
originally not be selected by the crowd. In this case, one
of the two following consequences will occur: (i) [Misﬁre]
The message is sent to the user. The system grants agree-
ment rewards to all human workers who upvoted on this
message (Ragreement ×#upvoted_workers) and 1 successful
proposal reward to the worker who proposed the message
(Rproposal × 1); and (ii): [No Difference] The message re-
mains not sent. Even with one extra upvote, this message’s
vote count was still insufﬁcient to get accepted.
Estimating System’s Expected Gain: Given these setups,
the expected reward points E[Rsave] saved per message by
using the classiﬁer can be estimated as follows:
E[Rsave] = TPR×E[Good]−FPR×E[Bad]
(5)
TPR is the true positive rate and FPR is the false positive
rate of the classiﬁer. E[Good] is the expected reward points
saved per [Good Vote] event, and E[Bad] is the expected re-
ward points wasted per [Bad Vote] event.
In Evorus, E[Good] is a constant (Rupvote +Ragreement). Mean-
while, [Bad Vote] event costs reward points only when the
upvoted message is sent ([Misﬁre]). Therefore, E[Bad] is de-
cided by (i) how often one mistaken upvote triggers a misﬁre,
and (ii) how expensive is one misﬁre, as follows:
E[Bad] = P(Misﬁre|Bad)×E[RMisﬁre]
P(Misﬁre|Bad) is the conditional probability of a message
being sent to the user given the classiﬁer has mistakenly up-
voted on it. E[RMisﬁre] is the expected reward points that were
granted to workers in a single [Misﬁre] event.
Our training dataset only used the not-accepted messages with
at least one downvote to form the “Downvote” class, which
were less likely to be misﬁred after adding one extra automatic
vote. For better estimating P(Misﬁre|Bad), we ﬁrst ran the
classiﬁer on all messages that were not included in our training
set, and within all the messages that the classiﬁer decided to
upvote, we then calculated the proportion of messages that
would be sent to the user if one extra upvote were added. The
rate was 0.692, which we used to approximate P(Misﬁre|Bad).
Furthermore, based on Evorus’ mechanism, E[RMisﬁre] can be
calculated as follows :
E[RMisﬁre] = Ragreement ×E[#upvoted_workers]+Rproposal
E[#upvoted_workers] is the expected number of human work-
ers who upvoted on the message in an [Misﬁre] event. Sim-
ilarly, we ran the classiﬁer on the unlabelled data, and cal-
culated the average number of workers who upvoted on the
messages that the classiﬁer decided to upvote on. The num-
ber is 0.569 (SD = 0.731), which we used to approximate
E[#upvoted_workers].
Finally, E[Hit] = 100 + 500 = 600, and E[RBad] = 0.692 ×
(500×0.569+1000) = 888.874. Using Equation (5), we can
estimate the precision and recall at different thresholds and
their corresponding reward amount (Figure 3(B)). According
to the estimation, the best conﬁdence threshold is at 0.65. In
the deployed Evorus we selected a slightly higher precision
and set the threshold at 0.7 (P = 0.823 and R = 0.745.)
DEPLOYMENT STUDY AND RESULTS
Evorus was launched to the public as a Google Hangouts chat-
bot in March 2017. While the end-users were not aware of the
changes of the system from the client side, behind the scenes,
our deployment had 3 phases: (i) Phase 1, (ii) Control Phase,
and (iii) Phase 2. Phase-1 deployment started in March, 2017.
We launched the system with only four chatterbots and one
vote bot, without the learning component described in Part I,
to understand the basics of having virtual bots working with
human workers on the ﬂy. For comparison, in May 2017 we
then temporarily turned off all automation components and
had the system solely run by the crowd till late August 2017,
which we referred to as the Control Phase. Finally, for testing
the capability of learning to select chatbots, we started Phase
2 deployment in early September. The Phase-2 deployment
included several signiﬁcant changes: (i) increasing the fre-
quency of calling chatbots for responses, (ii) increasing the
vote count needed to accept a response from 1 to 2, and (iii)
incorporating the Part I learning.

at several universities and posted on social media sites, such

as Facebook and Twitter. Participants who volunteered to use
our system were asked to sign a consent form ﬁrst, and no
compensation was offered. After the participants submitted

to them to instruct them how to send messages to Evorus via
Google Hangouts. The users can use Evorus as many times as
they want to, for anything, via any devices that are available
to them. Eighty users total talked with Evorus during 281
conversations. The Phase-1 deployment had 34 users talked
to Evorus during 113 conversations, and Phase-2 deployment
(till 17th September, 2017) had 26 users with 39 conversations.
The Control Phase had 42 users with 129 conversations.
Phase 1: Chatterbots & Vote bot
Our Phase-1 deployment explored how chatbots and our vote
bot could work together synchronously with crowd workers.
We implemented four chatterbots (including the IR-based chat-
terbot using Chorus conversation data described in Part II) and
a vote bot. During the Phase-1 deployment, the system only
randomly selects one of four chatterbots to respond every half
a minute, where the learning component described in Part I
will be later included in Phase-2 deployment.
Implementing Four Chatterbots: In our Phase-1 deploy-
ment, we implemented the following four chatterbots.
1. Chorus Bot (shown as Part II): A chatterbot that is pow-
ered by a retrieval-based method to reuse prior conversa-
tions to respond to users, which was described in Part II.
2. Filler Bot: A chatterbot that randomly selects one response
from a set of candidates, regardless of context. We manually
selected 13 common “conversation ﬁller” in the Chorus
dataset (e.g., “Is there anything else I can help you with?”,
or “Thanks”) to form the candidate pool.
3. Interview Bot: A chatterbot that uses a retrieval-based
method, which is identical to Chorus Bot, to ﬁnd the best
response from 27,894 query-response pairs extracted from
767 transcripts of TV celebrity interview [30].
4. Cleverbot: Cleverbot is a third-party AI-powered chatbot
which reuses more than 200 million conversations it had
with users to generate responses [44, 4].
Vote Bot Setup: Currrently, The vote bot only votes on
human-proposed messages, but not messages proposed by
chatbots. In Phase 1, Evorus requires each automatic vote to
have at least one extra human upvote to be accepted. Vote bots
also skipped messages if the same worker proposed identical
content earlier in the conversation but did not get accepted.
We believe that worker’s re-sending is a strong signal of the
poor quality of the message. Vote bots can decide not to vote
if the conﬁdence is too low (Part III.)
Automating Human Labors: During Phase-1 deployment, a
conversation on average contained 9.90 user messages (SD
= 11.69), 13.6 accepted messages proposed by the crowd
workers (SD = 10.44), and 13.58 accepted messages proposed
by automatic chatterbots (SD = 2.81). Thus, automated re-
sponses were chosen 12.44% of the time. As a comparison
(Figure 4(A)), in the Control Phase (42 users and 129 con-
versations), a conversation on average contained 8.73 user
messages (SD = 10.05) and 12.98 accepted crowd messages
Figure 4. Phase-1 Deployment: (A) Average number of accepted mes-
sages per conversation. Automated responses were chosen 12.44% of
the time. (B) Average number of upvotes per accepted non-user message.
Human upvotes were reduced by 13.81% by using automatic voting.
(SD = 11.39). In terms of upvotes, each accepted non-user
message received 1.06 human upvotes (SD = 0.73) and 0.11
automatic upvotes (SD = 0.18) In comparison, in the Control
Phase, each accepted non-user message received 1.23 human
upvotes (SD = 0.70.) Crowd voting was thus reduced by
13.81%. The comparison is shown in Figure 4(B). Moreover,
an accepted non-user message sent by Evorus costed $0.142 in
Phase-1 deployment on average, while it costed $0.211 during
the Control Phase. Namely, with automated chatbots and the
vote bot, the cost of each message is reduced by 32.76%.
We also calculated the acceptance rate of messages proposed
by each chatbot. The Filler Bot, which ignores context and
proposes responses randomly, had the highest acceptance rate,
41.67%. The Chorus Bot’s acceptance rate was 30.99%, that
of the Interview Bot was 33.33%, and that of the Cleverbot
was 30.99%. This might be because Filler Bot’s common-
place responses (e.g., “I don’t know”) were often considered
acceptable by human raters. In Phase 2, where an automatic
response needed 2 human votes to go through, the Chorus
Bot had the highest acceptance rate among all four chatterbots
(Figure 6). While human workers, whose acceptance rate was
72.04% during Phase 1, still outperformed all chatbots by a
large margin, chatbots with low accuracy can still contribute to
the conversation. For instance, the Filler Bot, while being very
simple and ignoring any context, nevertheless, often produces
reasonable responses:
[The user asked information about the wildﬁre and smoke in
Emory university campus.]
user Do you know where they are happening exactly? (The wildﬁres I
mean)
bot Can you provide some more details?
Compared with Filler Bot, Chorus Bot better targets its re-
sponses because it chooses messages based on similarity with
previous human responses:
user Hey how many people like bubble tea here?
bot Ask for their feedback when you talk with them
Conversation Quality: We sampled conversations with ac-
cepted automatic responses and a matching set without auto-
mated contributions. For each, 8 MTurk workers rated [Satis-
faction, Clarity, Responsiveness, Comfort], which was based
on the PARADISE’s objectives for evaluating dialogue per-
formance [42] and the Quality of Communication Experience
metric [28], on a 5-point Likert scale (5 is best.) The original
conversations (N=46) had an average rating of [3.47, 4.04,
3.88, 3.56], while those with automatic responses (N=54) had
[3.57, 3.74, 3.52, 3.66]. The similar results suggest that the
automatic components did not make conversations worse.

Figure 5. (A) An actual conversation of Evorus. Conversations in Evorus tend to combine multiple chatbots and workers together. (B) User question-
naire used in Phase-2 deployment. The average user satisfaction rating of automated and non-automated conversations had no signiﬁcant difference.
Phase 2: Learning to Select Chatbots
Our Phase-2 deployment explored how the learning compo-
nent, described in Part I, can select the right chatbots in context,
and how integrating additional chatbots affects performance.
We implemented two additional utility bots, a Yelp Bot and
a Weather Bot, that can perform information inquiry tasks
for different contexts, in addition to the four chatterbots and
one vote bot from Phase 1. We ﬁrst launched the learning
system with four chatterbots for two days, and then added
the two utility bots for observing the changes of the model.
Furthermore, in order to directly compare user satisfaction
levels, all the automated components (including the chatbots,
the vote bot, and the learning component) were only applied
to 50% of the conversations randomly, and the other half of
the conversations were solely run by the crowd as a baseline.
To efﬁciently collect crowd feedbacks to update our model, we
increased the frequency Evorus called chatbots from randomly
calling one chatbot and one vote bot every 30 seconds (Phase
1) to calling two chatbots (top-1 ranked plus random) and one
vote bot every 10 seconds (Phase 2.) To compensate for the
possible drop in quality caused by higher calling frequency
and randomly selecting one of the two bots, we increased the
required upvote count for accepting an automatic response
from 1 vote to 2 votes. Namely, while Evorus obtained more
automatic responses with a much higher frequency in Phase 2,
it also required more human upvotes to approve each automatic
response at the same time. As a result, among the conversa-
tions that had automation in Phase 2, automated responses
were chosen 13.25% of the time, in which a conversation on
average contained 10.68 user messages (SD = 8.90), 15.74 ac-
cepted messages proposed by the crowd workers (SD = 11.92),
and 2.40 accepted messages proposed by automatic chatter-
bots (SD = 2.40). Each accepted non-user message received
1.90 human upvotes (SD = 1.13) and 0.30 automatic upvotes
(SD = 0.22). We did not compare Phase 2’s results in detail to
that of the Control Phase because the high-frequency setup of
Phase 2 is primarily for experimental exploration.
Implementing Two Utility Bots: In addition to the four chat-
terbots in the Phase-1 deployment, we implemented the fol-
lowing two task-oriented utility bots:
1. Yelp Bot: A chatbot that suggests restaurants near the loca-
tion mentioned by the user powered by the Yelp API [49]. If
the user did not mention any location, it replies with “You’re
looking for a restaurant. What city are you in?”.
2. Weather Bot: A chatbot that reports the current weather
of a mentioned city powered by the WeatherUnderground
API [41]. If the user did not mention any city names, it
replies, “Which city’s weather would you like to know?”
The chatbots’ developer (the ﬁrst author) also provided three
example chat messages for each that should trigger the corre-
sponding chatbot, to initiate the learning process. For example,
“Any restaurant recommendations in NYC?” for the Yelp Bot.
Similar User Satisfaction Level: In Phase 2 we implemented
an exit survey to measure end user satisfaction (Figure 5(B)).
At the end of each conversation, the user had 10 minutes to re-
port their satisfaction using a Likert-scale ranging from 1 (Very
Dissatisﬁed) to 5 (Very Satisﬁed). 13 of 30 users provided
feedback (response rate = 43%). The automated conversations’
average user satisfaction rating was 4.50 (SD=0.5, N=4); the
crowd conversations’ average user satisfaction rating was 4.00
(SD=0.47, N=9), a difference that was not signiﬁcant.
Updating Estimates of Chatbot’s Prior Over Time: While
our deployment is of a medium scale, the dynamics of our like-
lihood model can still be observed. For instance, the estimated
prior probability described in Equation 3 was continuously
updated with the growth of conversation that Evorus had. Our
model assigned a starting probability of 0.3 to each chatbots
(Figure 6). When users started talking with Evorus, crowd
workers provided their feedback by upvoting and downvoting,
and thus changed the estimation over time. When new chat-
bots were added, Evorus intentionally assigned them a higher
prior probabilities to allow quicker crowd feedback.

Figure 6. The estimated prior probability (Equation 3) of each chatbot
was continuously updated with the growth of user messages.
Utility Bots in Cold-Start Scenarios: We would like to un-
derstand if Evorus can select appropriate chatbots to obtain
responses in corresponding context. Since non-task chatter-
bots such as the Cleverbot could be difﬁcult for humans to
judge if it should be called given a message, we focused only
on task-oriented utility bots in the evaluation. For each user
message in the automated conversations in Phase 2, the re-
searchers manually annotated if it is relevant to the topic of
“weather” and “restaurant,” respectively. With the assumption
that each utility bot should be called when its topic comes
up, we compared the human-labelled topic against the top
chatbot that were suggested by Evorus and calculated the pre-
cision, recall, and F1-score. It is noteworthy that we only
evaluated when the appropriate chatbot was called, regardless
of the quality of the responses it generated. As a result, two
newly-added utility bots both had a high precision and a lower
recall. The Weather Bot’s precision was 1.00 and the recall
was 0.47 (F1=0.64); and the Yelp Bot’s precision was 0.67 and
the recall was 0.20 (F1=0.31.) This result shows the nature of
new bots in our learning framework: Evorus uses the expert-
generated small set of examples to calculate the initial vector
of each chatbot, which could result in precise predictions but
with lower coverage. Over time, when Evorus collects more
examples that each bot has successfully responded to and the
recall increases. Moreover, conversations in Evorus tend to
combine multiple chatbots and workers together. For instance,
in the following conversation, the crowd had the user to narrow
down the query, and then the Weather Bot was able to answer
it. An additional detailed example is shown in Figure 5(A).
[The user asked about the weather in Afghanistan.]
crowd What city in Afghanistan?)
[The crowd sends a website about Afghanistan weather.]
user Kabul
bot Friday’s weather forecast for [Kabul, Afghanistan]: Cloudy
with a few showers. High 79F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph.
Chance of rain 30%.
Error Cases: Our bot-selection algorithm starts with high
precision and low recall, and increases recall as it gradually
gathers examples. Therefore, most errors we observed were
false-negatives, where a chatbot should have been triggered
but was not. Other errors came from the chatbot, where the bot
was correctly triggered but its response was invalid. Workers
usually downvoted or ignored these suggestions. In the rare
cases where invalid automatic responses were mistakenly sent
to the user, the crowd often tried to explain how the response
was automatically generated to the user afterward.
user hi! Can you summarize the features of the new iPhone for me?
[Multiple messages list the features of the iPhone X.]
bot There is no iPhone 7.
[The crowd lists more features, and the user says thank you.]
crowd No problem!
crowd Some Auto replies don’t even make sense
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We introduced Evorus, a crowd-powered system conversa-
tional assistant built to automate itself over time. Informed by
two phases of public ﬁeld deployment and testing with real
users, we iteratively designed and reﬁned its ﬂexible frame-
work for open-domain dialog. We imagine a future where
thousands of online service providers can develop their own
chatbots, not only to serve their own users in a task-speciﬁc
context, but also to dynamically integrate their services into
Evorus with the help of the crowd, allowing users to inter-
act freely with thousands of online services via a universal
portal. Supporting this scale offers opportunities for future
research. For example, one direction is to improve the learning
framework to support third-party chatbots that also improves
overtime, or to better balance between the exploitation and
exploration phases (like in a multi-armed bandit problem).
Evorus could also be used to collect valuable fail cases to
enable third-party developers to improve their bots (i.e., when
a bot was triggered, but its proposed response was rejected).
Evorus has three main advantages as compared to previous
approaches. First, it is a working system that can serve as a
scaffold for automation over time. A core advantage of starting
with a working system is that users can talk to Evorus naturally
from day one, ensuring conversation quality while collecting
training data for automation. Second, given the oversight of
the crowd, Evorus has a high tolerance for errors from its
automated components. Even an imperfect automation compo-
nent (e.g., chatbots) can contribute to a conversation without
hurting quality, which yields more space for algorithms to “ex-
plore” different actions (e.g., selecting a chatbot with medium
conﬁdence.) Finally, Evorus allows a mixed group of humans
and bots to collaboratively hold open conversations.
Most automated systems created from crowd work simply use
the crowd for data; Evorus tightly integrates crowds and ma-
chine learning, and provides speciﬁc points where automated
components can be introduced. This architecture allows each
component to be improved, providing a common research
harness on which researchers specializing in different areas
may innovate and compete. For instance, “response genera-
tion” has long been developed in the NLP community; Evorus
provides a natural evaluate it within a larger conversational
system. The ﬂexibility of the Evorus framework potentially
allows for low cost integration between many online service
providers and ﬂuid collaboration between chatbots and hu-
man workers to form a single user-facing identity. Given the
complexity of conversational assistance, Evorus is likely to
be crowd-powered in part for some time, but we expect it to
continue to increasingly rely on automation.
