From Machine Learning to Machine Reasoning
Léon Bottou
2/8/2011
Abstract 
A plausible definition of "reasoning" could be "algebraically manipulating previously acquired 
knowledge in order to answer a new question". This definition covers first-order logical inference 
or probabilistic inference. It also includes much simpler manipulations commonly used to build 
large learning systems. For instance, we can build an optical character recognition system by first 
training a character segmenter, an isolated character recognizer, and a language model, using 
appropriate labelled training sets. Adequately concatenating these modules and fine tuning the 
resulting system can be viewed as an algebraic operation in a space of models. The resulting model 
answers a new question, that is, converting the image of a text page into a computer readable text.
This observation suggests a conceptual continuity between algebraically rich inference systems, 
such  as  logical  or  probabilistic  inference,  and  simple  manipulations,  such  as  the  mere 
concatenation of trainable learning systems. Therefore, instead of trying to bridge the gap between 
machine learning systems and sophisticated "all-purpose" inference mechanisms, we can instead 
algebraically enrich the set of manipulations applicable to training systems, and build reasoning 
capabilities from the ground up.
1. Introduction
Since learning and reasoning are two essential abilities associated with intelligence, machine learning and 
machine reasoning have both received much attention during the short history of computer science. The 
statistical nature of learning is now well understood (e.g., Vapnik, 1995). Statistical machine learning methods 
are now commonplace (NIPS, 1987-2010.) An internet search for “support vector machines” returns more than 
two million web pages. The nature of reasoning has proven more elusive. Although computer algorithms for 
logical inference (Robinson, 1965) share their roots with the foundations of mathematics, converting ordinary 
data into a consistent set of logical expressions has proved very challenging: searching the discrete spaces of 
symbolic formulas often leads to a combinatorial explosion (Lighthill, 1973). Computer algorithms for general 
probabilistic  inference  (Pearl,  1988)  still  suffer  from unfavorable  computational  properties  (Roth,  1996). 
However, there are practical algorithms for many special cases of interest. These algorithms have gained 
considerable popularity in the machine learning community. This practicality comes at the price of reduced 
expressive capabilities: since probabilistic inference is a mathematical construction, it is easily described using 
first order logic; the converse is not true. In particular, expressing causality with first order logic is very simple, 
expressing causality with probabilities is challenging (Pearl, 2000). 
Human reasoning displays neither the limitations of logical inference nor those of probabilistic inference. 
The ability to reason is often confused with the ability to make logical inferences. When we observe a visual 
scene, when we hear a complex sentence, we are able to explain in formal terms the relation of the objects in the 
scene, or the precise meaning of the sentence components. However, there is no evidence that such a formal  
analysis necessarily takes place: we see a scene, we hear a sentence, and we just know what they mean. This 
suggests the existence of a middle layer, already a form of reasoning, but not yet formal or logical. Investigating 
informal reasoning is attractive because we hope to avoid the computational complexity issues associated with 
combinatorial searches in the vast space of discrete logic propositions.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1808

Minsky and Papert (1969) have shown that simple cognitive tasks cannot be implemented using linear threshold 
functions but require multiple layers of computation. Recent advances have uncovered effective strategies to 
train such deep models (Hinton et al., 2006). Deep learning has attracted considerable interest in the machine 
learning community. Regular workshops have been held during the NIPS and ICML conferences since 2007. The 
ability to train deep machine learning models appears to be related to the appropriate definition of unsupervised 
auxiliary tasks that help discovering internal representations in the inner layers of the models (Bengio et al., 
2007; Weston et al., 2008.)  Deep structures had been trained in the past using supervised intermediate tasks 
(e.g., Bottou et al., 1997; LeCun et al., 1998.) The surprise of deep learning is that the same results can be 
achieved using very loosely related auxiliary tasks. Deep learning is therefore intimately related to multi-task 
learning (Caruana, 1997.)  
This document presents an idea that results from a long maturation (Bottou, 2008). Both deep learning and 
multi-task learning show that we can leverage auxiliary tasks to help solving a task of interest. This apparently 
simple idea can be interpreted as a rudimentary form of reasoning. Enriching this algebraic structure then leads 
to higher forms of reasoning. This provides a path to build reasoning abilities into machine learning systems 
from the ground up.
2. Auxiliary tasks
One frequently mentioned problem is the scarcity of labeled data. This assertion is biased because we usually 
build a learning machine to accomplish a valuable task. The corresponding training labels are then expensive and 
therefore scarce. Conversely, labels available in abundance are often associated with tasks that are not very 
valuable.  But this does not make these abundant labels useless: in the vicinity of an interesting and valuable 
task, less valuable tasks provide opportunities to approach the initial problem.
Consider the task of identifying persons from face images. Despite the increasing availability of collaborative 
image tagging schemes (von Ahn, 2006), it certainly remains expensive to collect and label millions of training 
images representing the face of each subject with a good variety of positions and contexts. However, it is easy to 
collect training data for the slightly different task of telling whether two faces in images represent the same 
person or not (Miller, 2006): two faces in the same picture are likely to belong to different persons; two faces in 
successive video frames are likely to belong to the same person. These two tasks have much in common: image 
analysis primitives, feature extraction, part recognizers trained on the auxiliary task can certainly help solving 
the original task.
Figure 1 outlines a transfer learning strategy involving three trainable modules. The preprocessor P computes a 
compact face representation from the image. The comparator D compares the representations associated with 
two images. The classifier C produces the person label associated with an image representation. We first 
assemble two instances of the preprocessor P and one comparator D and train the resulting model using the 
abundant labels for the auxiliary task. Training simply works by minimizing a regularized loss function using 
stochastic gradient descent. Then we assemble another instance of the preprocessor P with the classifier C and 
train the resulting model using a restrained number of labeled examples for the original task. This works because 
the preprocessor P already performs useful tasks and vastly simplifies the job of the classifier C. Alternatively 
we could simultaneously train both assemblages by making sure that all instances of the preprocessor share the 
same parameters. Comparable transfer learning systems have achieved high accuracies on vision benchmarks 
(e.g., Ahmed et al., 2008.)
Figure 1 – Training a face recognizer.
P
P
D
y/n
P
john
C

We  have  designed  a  structurally  more  complex  system  to  address  various  natural  language  processing 
benchmark tasks (Collobert et al., 2007, 2011). The word embedding module W computes a 50-dimensional 
representation for each vocabulary word. Fixed length sequences of words are extracted from a large corpus 
(900M words). Incorrect sequences are created by randomly replacing the central word. The auxiliary task 
consists in producing a score whose magnitude indicates whether a sequence of words is genuine or incorrect. 
An assemblage of several word embedding module W and a ranking module R is trained on this task. The 
benchmark tasks are then trained using smaller corpora of labelled sentences. Each sentence is processed by 
assembling the word embedding components W and routing their outputs, together with ancillary information, to 
classifiers that produce tags for the word(s) of interest (figure 2.)
This system reaches near state-of-the-art performance while running hundreds of times faster than natural 
language processing systems with comparable performance. Many natural language processing systems rely on 
the considerable linguistic knowledge that went into the manual design of task specific input features. The 
system described above learns useful features using an essentially unsupervised task trained on a very large 
corpus. Figure 3 illustrates the quality of the resulting word representation. 
3. Reasoning revisited
Although modular learning systems and their training algorithms have been researched extensively (e.g., Bottou 
and Gallinari, 1991), little attention has been paid to the rules that describe how to assemble trainable modules in 
order to address a particular task. In fact, these composition rules play an extremely important role. The 
dictionary of elementary trainable modules and the composition operators form a simple algebraic system on a 
space of models.  The composition rules describe the algebraic manipulations that let us combine previously 
acquired knowledge – in the form of models previously trained on auxiliary tasks –  in order to create a model 
that addresses a new task. 
I would like at this point to draw a bold parallel: “algebraic manipulation of previously acquired knowledge in 
order to answer a new question” is a plausible definition of the word “reasoning”. There are significant 
differences: conventional reasoning operates on “premises and conclusions”; composition rules operate on 
Figure 3 – Each column shows a query word, its frequency rank in the training corpus, and the ten 
words whose representation is closest to that of the query word (Collobert et al., 2011.)
Figure 2 – Training intermediate word representations for multiple natural language processing tasks.
the cat sat on the mat
W
W
W
W
W
W
pos
ner
chunk
srl
Q
cat sat song the mat
s
W
W
W
W
W
R

“trainable modules”. Yet we can easily argue that the history of mathematics teaches that algebraic structures are 
more significant than the objects on which they operate. In both the face recognition and the natural language 
processing examples, the implicit composition rules derive from the assumption that internal representations that 
can be learned on the auxiliary task and can benefit the task of interest. These internal representations play the 
same role as reasoning abstractions, that is, concepts that cannot be observed directly but are assumed relevant 
for multiple problems.
Composition rules can be described with very different levels of sophistication. Like the face recognition and the 
natural language processing examples, most works discussing multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997) construct ad-
hoc combinations justified by a semantic interpretation of the internal representations.  Works discussing 
structured learning systems (e.g., Bakir et al., 2007) often provide more explicit rules. For instance, graph 
transformer networks (Bottou et al., 1997; LeCun et al., 1998, section IV) construct specific recognition and 
training models for each input image using graph transduction algorithms. The specification of the graph 
transducers then should be viewed as a description of the composition rules (figure 5).
4. Probabilistic Models
The rich algebraic structure of probability theory plays an important role in the appeal of probabilistic models in 
machine learning because it tells how to combine conditional probability distributions and how to interpret these 
combinations. However, in order to construct an algebraic structure of probabilistic models, it is necessary to 
also discuss how probability distributions are parametrized.
Graphical models (Pearl, 1988) describe the factorization of a joint probability distribution into elementary 
conditional distributions with specific conditional independence assumptions. This factorization suggests  to 
individually parametrize these elementary conditional distribution. The probabilistic inference rules then induce 
an algebraic structure on the space of conditional probability distribution models describing relations between 
arbitrary subsets of random variables.
Many refinements have been devised to make the parametrization more explicit. The plate notation (Buntine, 
1994) compactly represents large graphical models with repeated structures that usually share parameters. Figure 
5 shows how treating the parameters like a random variable makes the parametrization even more explicit. More 
Figure 5 – Graph transformer networks for handwritten text field segmentation (LeCun et al, 1998). 
The drawings represent how graph transformations define the recognition and training 
architectures for the same example image.

recent  works  propose  considerably  richer  languages  to  describe  large  graphical  probabilistic  models. 
Probabilistic Relational Models (Friedman et al., 1999) and Relational Dependency Networks (Neville and 
Jensen,  2003)  derive  graphical  probabilistic  models  from  frame-based  knowledge  bases.  Markov  Logic 
Networks (Richardson and Domingos, 2006) derive graphical probabilistic models from the clauses of a first 
order logic knowledge base. Such high order languages for describing probabilistic models are  expressions of 
the composition rules described in the previous section.
5. Reasoning systems
We are clearly drifting away from the statistical approach because we are no longer fitting a simple statistical 
model to the data. In fact, we are dealing with a more complex object composed of (a) an algebraic space of  
models, and (b) composition rules that establish a homomorphic correspondence between the space of models 
and the space of questions of interest. We call such an object a “reasoning system.”
A potentially surprising consequence of this definition is the arbitrary nature of a reasoning system. Just like 
statistical models, reasoning systems vary in expressive power, in predictive abilities, and in computational 
requirements. A few salient examples can illustrate this diversity:
•
First order logic reasoning – Consider a space of models composed of functions that predict the truth 
value of a first logic formula as a function of the potential values of its free variables. Such functions are 
usually represented by collections of fully instantiated predicates. This space of functions is highly 
constrained by the algebraic structure of the first order logic formulas: if we know some of these 
functions, we can apply logical inference to deduct or constrain functions associated with other formulas 
and therefore representing different tasks. First order logic has very high expressive power because the 
bulk of mathematics can formalized as first order logic statements (Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928.) This 
is not sufficient, however, to express the subtleties of natural language: every first order logic formula is 
easily expressed in natural language; the converse is not true. Finally, first order logic typically leads to 
computationally expensive algorithms  because they  often involve combinatorial searches in vast 
discrete spaces.
•
Probabilistic reasoning – Consider the space of models formed by all the conditional probability 
distributions associated with a predefined collection of random variables. These conditional distributions 
are highly constrained by the algebraic properties of the probability theory: if we know a subset of these 
conditional distributions, we can apply Bayesian inference to deduct or constrain additional conditional 
distributions and therefore answer different questions (Pearl, 1988). The continuous nature of probability 
theory provides opportunities to avoid computationally expensive discrete combinatorial searches. These 
improved computational requirements come  at  the  price  of reduced  expressive  capabilities:  since 
probabilistic inference is a mathematical construction, it is easily described using first order logic; the 
converse is not true. Despite this limitation, inference in probabilistic models is a popular machine 
learning topic. 
•
Causal reasoning –  Causality is a well known expressive limitation of probabilistic reasoning. For 
instance, we can establish a correlation between the events “it is raining” and “people carry open 
umbrellas”. This correlation is predictive: if people carry open umbrellas, we can be pretty certain that it 
is raining. But this correlation tells us little about the consequences of an intervention: banning 
umbrellas will not stop the rain. This is a serious limitation because causes and effects play a central role 
Figure 5 – Plates. The left graph simply describes the factorization P(x,y)=P(x).P(y | x). The 
right graph introduces the training set {(xi,yi)} and the model parameters θ using the plate 
notation. Bayesian inference then gives the expression of P(y | x, {(xi,yi)}).
x
y
xi
yi
N
x
y
θ

in our understanding of the world. Pearl (2003) proposes to address this issue by enriching the 
probabilistic machinery with a new construction: whereas  P(X|Y=y) represents the distribution of 
random variable  X given the observation  Y=y, the new construction  P(X|do(Y=y)) represents the 
distribution of X when an intervention enforces the condition Y=y.
•
Newtonian mechanics – Classical mechanics is an extremely successful example of causal reasoning 
system. Consider the motion of point masses in various experimental setups. Newton's laws define the 
abstract concept of a force as the cause explaining any deviation from the uniform motion. The second 
and third laws then describe how to compute the consequences of interventions such as applying a new 
force or transferring a point mass from one experimental setup into another. For instance, a first setup 
could be a weighting device that measures the relative masses of point masses A and B; and a second 
setup could involve the collision of point masses A and B.
•
Spatial  reasoning –  How would  a  visual  scene  change  if  one  changes  the  viewpoint  or  if  one 
manipulates one of the objects in the scene? Such questions clearly obey algebraic constraints that derive 
from the bi-dimensional projection and from the relations between objects. Spatial reasoning does not 
require  the  full  logic  apparatus  but  certainly  benefits  from  the  definition  of  specific  algebraic 
constructions (Aiello et al., 2007.)
•
Social reasoning – Changes of viewpoint also play an important role in social interactions.  Placing 
oneself in somebody else's shoes allows us to understand the beliefs and the intents of other members of 
the  society  and  therefore  plays  an  essential  cognitive  role  (Baron-Cohen,  1997).  It  is  certainly 
challenging, but conceivable, to approach social interactions in terms of such processes. 
•
Non-falsifiable reasoning – History provides countless examples of reasoning systems with questionable 
predictive capabilities. Mythology interprets the world by applying a social reasoning systems to 
abstract deities. Astrology attempts to interpret social phenomena by reasoning about the motion of 
planets. Just like non-falsifiable statistical models, non-falsifiable reasoning systems are unlikely to have 
useful predictive capabilities (Popper, 1959; Vapnik, 1994.) 
There are two ways to face such a universe of reasoning systems. One approach would be to identify a single  
reasoning framework strictly more powerful than all others. Whether such a framework exists and whether it 
leads to computationally feasible algorithms is unknown. Symbolic reasoning (e.g., with first order logic) did not 
fulfill these hopes (Lighthill, 1973). Probabilistic reasoning is more practical but considerably less expressive. 
The second approach is to embrace this diversity as an opportunity to better match the reasoning models to the 
applicative domain of interest: “when solving a given problem, try to avoid solving a more general problem as 
an intermediate step” (Vapnik, 1994). 
It is therefore desirable to map the universe of reasoning systems. What are the potential algebraic structures? 
What  is their  footprint  in  terms  of  expressive  power,  suitability for  specific  applications,  computational 
requirements, and predictive abilities? Unfortunately we cannot expect such theoretical advances on schedule. 
We can, however, nourish our intuitions by empirically exploring the capabilities of algebraic structures designed 
for specific applicative domains.
The replication of essential human cognitive processes such as scene analysis, language understanding, and 
social interactions forms an important class of applications. These processes probably include a form of 
reasoning because we are able, after the facts, to explain our conclusions with logical arguments. However, the 
actual processes usually happen without conscious involvement, suggesting that the full complexity of logic 
reasoning is not required. Which algebraic reasoning primitive are suitable for such applications?
The  following  sections  describe  more  specific  ideas  investigating  reasoning  systems  suitable  for  natural 
language processing and vision tasks. It defines trainable modules that provide the means to represent arbitrary 
hierarchical structures using fixed size representation vectors. The discussion includes preliminary results on 
natural language processing tasks and potential directions for vision tasks. Additional modules working on this 
space or representations are then proposed. The section concludes with the description of conceptual and 
algorithmic issues associated with learning algorithms operating in this space. 

6 Association and dissociation
We have already demonstrated the possibility to learn salient word embeddings using an essentially non 
supervised task (Collobert et. al., 2011). Can we learn salient embeddings for any meaningful segment of a 
sentence? 
A proven way to create a rich algebraic system is to define operations that take their inputs in a certain space and 
produce outputs in the same space. The number of possible concatenations and their potential depth then 
becomes infinite.  We consider again a collection of trainable modules. The word embedding module W 
computes a continuous representation for each word of the dictionary. In preliminary experiments, this is a 
simple lookup table that specifies a vector in a 50-dimensional representation space for each word in the 
dictionary. The coordinates of these vectors are determined by the training algorithm. The association module is 
a trainable function that takes two vectors in the representation space and produces a single vector in the same 
space, which is expected to represent the association of the two input vectors. 
Given a sentence segment composed of n words, figure 6 shows how n-1 applications of the association module 
reduce the sentence segment to a single vector in the representation space. We would like this vector to be a 
representation of the meaning of the sentence. We would also like each intermediate result to represent the 
meaning of the corresponding sentence fragment.
There are  many ways to sequence the applications of the association module, each associated with a particular 
way of bracketing the sentence into meaningful segments. Figure 6, for instance, corresponds to the standard 
bracketing of the sentence “((the cat) (sat (on (the mat))”. In order to determine which bracketing splits the 
sentence into the most meaningful segments, we introduce an additional saliency scoring module R, which takes 
as input a vector in the representation space and produces a score whose magnitude is expected to measure how 
meaningful is the corresponding sentence segment (figure 7).
Applying the saliency scoring module R to all intermediate results and summing all the resulting scores yields a 
global score measuring how meaningful is a particular way to bracket a sentence. The most meaningful way to 
recursively apply the association module can be determined by maximizing this global score. Specific parsing 
algorithms are described later in this document.
The challenge is  to train these modules in order to have them achieve the desired function.
Figure 8 illustrates a non-supervised training technique inspired by Collobert et. al. (2007, 2011). This is again a 
stochastic gradient procedure. During each iteration, a short sentence segment is randomly picked from a large 
text corpus and bracketed as described above (figure 8, left). An arbitrary word is then replaced by a random 
word from the vocabulary. As a consequence certain intermediate results in the representation space are likely to 
Figure 6 – Representing a sentence by recursive application of the association modules.
the
cat
sat
on
the
mat
W
W
A
W
W
W
W
A
A
A
A
Figure 7 – The saliency scoring module R scores the quality of a sentence bracketing.
on
the
mat
W
W
W
A
A
 R
 R
s1
s2

correspond to meaningless sentence fragments. We would like to make the associated scores smaller than the 
scores associated with the genuine sentence segments. This can be expressed by an adequate ranking loss 
function. The parameters of all modules are then adjusted using a simple gradient descent step. Repeating this 
iterative procedure corresponds to the stochastic gradient descent optimization of a well defined loss function. 
However, there is evidence that training works much faster if one starts with short segments and a limited 
vocabulary size.
Preliminary results have been obtained using a similar procedure (Etter, 2009). Sentence segments of length five 
were extracted from a dump of the English Wikipedia (600M words). The vocabulary was restricted to the 1000 
most frequent words initialized with the Collobert (2011) embeddings. The initial sentence segment brackets 
were constructed randomly. In order to investigate how the resulting system maps word sequences into the 
representation space, all two-word sequences of the 500 most common words were constructed and mapped into 
the representation space. Figure 9 shows the closest neighbors in representation space of some of these 
sequences.  This  analysis  was  restricted  to  two-word  sequences  because  the  computational  cost  grows 
exponentially with the sequence length.
Socher et al. (2010) independently trained a similar system in a supervised manner using the WSJ section of the 
annotated Penn TreeBank corpus. Although this is a much smaller corpus (about 1M words), they obtained 
meaningful representations. For instance they report that the phrases “decline to comment” and “would not 
disclose the terms” are close in the induced embedding space. The supervised training approach also provides a 
more objective way to assess the results since one can compare the bracketing performance of the system with 
that of established parsers. They report a bracketing performance that compares with that of statistical parsing 
systems of the 2000s.
There is  much work left to accomplish, including (i) robustly addressing all the numerical aspects of the training 
procedure, (ii) seamlessly training using both supervised and unsupervised corpora, (iii) assessing the value of 
the sentence fragment representations using well known NLP benchmarks, and (iv) finding a better way to 
navigate these sentence fragment representations.  We now introduce a new module to address this last problem.
The dissociation module D is the inverse of the association module, that is, a trainable function that computes 
Figure 8 – Unsupervised training (see text.)
The ranking loss function tries to make the “good” scores higher than the “bad” scores.
 R
sat
song
the
mat
W
W
W
W
A
A
A
 R
 R
good
bad
bad
 R
sat
on
the
mat
W
W
W
W
A
A
A
 R
 R
good
good
good
Figure 9 – Neighbors of two-word sequences in the representation space (from Etter, 
2009). Each column lists the two word sequences whose representation is closest to that of 
the two word sequences shown in the header.

two representation space vectors from a single vector. When its input is a meaningful output of the association 
module, its output should be the two inputs of the association module. Stacking one instance of the association 
module  and  one  instance  of  the  dissociation  module  is  equivalent  to  an  auto-encoder  (figure  10,  left). 
Recursively  applying  the  dissociation  module  provides  convenient  means  for  traversing  the  hierarchical 
representations computed by a stack of association modules (figure 10, right). Such Recursive Auto-Associative 
Memory (RAAM) were proposed as a connectionist representation of infinite recursive structures (Pollack, 
1990). Comparable ideas have been proposed by Hinton (1990).
The domain of definition of the dissociation module is not obvious. Given a vector in representation space, we 
need to know whether it results from the association of two more elementary vectors or whether it should be 
considered as atomic. Sperduti (1994) defines and compares various labelling schemes for this purpose. 
However, it is probably simpler to use the saliency scoring module (figure 7) to specify the domain of definition 
of the dissociation module: only sufficiently meaningful associations can be dissociated.
The definition of the dissociation module implies that the association module is injective: its output uniquely 
defines its inputs. This property is not enforced by the training procedures outlined in the previous subsection. It 
is therefore necessary to simultaneously train both the association and dissociation modules. This can be 
achieved by augmenting the earlier loss function (figure 8) with terms that apply the dissociation module to each 
presumed meaningful intermediate representation and measure how close its outputs are from the inputs of the 
corresponding association module.
The association and dissociation modules are similar to the primitives  cons and  car/cdr,  which are the 
elementary operations to navigate lists and trees in the Lisp computer programming languages. These primitives 
can be used to construct and navigate arbitrary propositional logic expressions. The main difference is the nature 
of the representation space. Instead of a discrete space implemented with pointers and atoms, we are using 
vectors in a continuous representation space. One the one hand, the depth of the structure we can construct is 
limited by numerical precision issues. On the other hand, numerical proximity in the representation space is 
meaningful (see figures 3 and 9). This property reduces the computational cost of search algorithms. This is why 
the multilayer stochastic gradient algorithms are able to discover meaningful intermediate representations in the 
first place.
Once we have constructed the means to represent arbitrary phrases using a continuous representation, we can 
consider training a variety of modules. Consider for instance a trainable module that converts the representation 
of a sentence in the present tense into a sentence in the past tense. We can then parse an initial sentence and  
construct its representation, convert the representation into the representation of the same sentence in the past 
tense, and use the dissociation module to reconstruct the converted sentence. How far we can go with such 
manipulations is an entirely open question.
Association and dissociation modules are not limited to natural language processing tasks. A number of state-of-
the-art systems for scene categorization and object recognition use a combination of strong local features, such 
as SIFT or HOG features, consolidated along a pyramidal structure (e.g, Lazebnik et al., 2006). Similar 
pyramidal structures have long been associated with the visual cortex (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962; Riesenhuber and 
Poggio, 2003). Convolutional neural networks exploit the same idea (e.g., LeCun et al., 1998, 2004). Interpreting 
such pyramidal structures as the recursive application of an association module is relatively straightforward (e.g., 
Lonardi et al., 1994). 
The drawback of pyramidal structures is their fixed geometry. Since local features are aggregated according to a 
Figure 10 – Navigating intermediate representations with the dissociation module.
the
cat
W
W
A
D
the?
cat?
sat
on
the
mat
W
W
W
W
A
A
A
D
D
D

predefined pattern, the upper levels of the pyramid represent data with poor spatial and orientation accuracy. 
This is why pyramidal recognition systems often work poorly as image segmentation tools.  For instance, we 
have designed a large convolutional neural network (Grangier et al., 2009) to identify and label objects in the 
city scenes of the LabelMe corpus (Russel et al., 2008). This system provides good object recognition accuracies 
but coarse segmentations (figure 11.)
The parsing mechanism described for the natural language processing system provides an opportunity to work 
around this limitation. Let us attach intermediate representations to image regions. Initially the image regions are 
the small patches used for the computation of local features. Guided by a scoring module that evaluate the 
saliency  of  each  potential  association,  the  association  module  can  then  opportunistically  aggregate  the 
representations attached to two neighboring regions and produce a new representation attached with the union of 
the input regions. Training such a system could be achieved in both supervised and unsupervised modes, using 
the methods explained in the previous subsection.
Further algebraic constraints can enrich such a vision system. For instance, we could consider modules that 
transform vectors in representation space to account for affine transformations of the initial image. More 
interestingly maybe, we could consider modules that transform the representation vectors to account for changes 
in the position of the viewer. Since such viewpoint changes modify the occlusion patterns (e.g. Hoeim et al., 
2007), such modules provides an interpretation of the three-dimensional geometry of the scene. Since viewpoint 
changes can also reveal or hide entire objects, such modules could conceivably provide a tool for constructing a 
vision system that implements object permanence (Piaget, 1937).
Finally, we can also envision modules that convert image representations into sentence representations and 
conversely. Training such modules would provide the means to associate sentences and images. Given an image, 
we could then parse the image, convert the final image representation into a sentence representation, and apply 
the dissociation module to reconstruct the sentence. Conversely, given a sentence, we could  produce a sketch of 
the associated image by similar means. Much work is needed to specify the semantic nature of such conversions.
7. Universal parser
Let us return to the problem of determining the most meaningful way to apply the association module, which 
was tersely defined as the maximization of the sum of the scores computed by the ranking component for all 
intermediate results. 
Figure 12 illustrates a maximization algorithm template whose main element is a short-term memory (STM) able 
to store a collection of representation vectors. The two possible actions are (1) inserting a new representation 
vector into the short-term memory, and (2) applying the association module A to two representation vectors 
taken from the short-term memory and replacing them by the combined representation vector. Each application 
of the association module is scored using the saliency scoring module R. The algorithm terminates when neither 
action is possible, that is, when the short-term memory contains a single representation vector and there are no 
more representation vectors to insert.
Figure 11 – Sample output of the scene labelling system described in (Grangier et al., 2009). 
This large convolutional network gives good recognition accuracies but very coarse segmentations.

The  main algorithm design choices are the criteria to decide which representation vector (if any) should be 
inserted into the short-term memory, and which representation vectors taken from the short-term memory (if 
any) should be associated.  These design choices then determine which data structure is most appropriate for 
implementing the short-term memory.
For instance, in the case of the English language, nearly all syntactically meaningful sentence segments are 
contiguous sequences of words. It is therefore attractive to implement the short-term memory as a stack and 
construct a shift/reduce parser: the first action (“shift”) then consists in picking the next sentence word and 
pushing its representation on top of the stack; the second action (“reduce”) consists in applying the association 
module to the top two stack elements and replacing them by the resulting representation. The problem then 
reduces to determining which sequence of actions to perform in order to maximize the sum of saliency scores. 
Even in this simple case, the graph of the possible actions grows exponentially with the  length of the sentence. 
Fortunately, heuristic beam search techniques are available to efficiently explore this graph. They can also 
handle more complicated ways to organize the short-term memory, often without dramatically increasing its 
computational complexity. The greedy parsing algorithm is an extreme example which consists in first inserting 
all word representations into the short-term memory, and repeatedly associating the two representation vectors 
with the highest association saliency. Simple experimentation with various compromises can suggest what works 
best for each application.
This parsing algorithm template is consistent with the cognitive psychology view of short-term memory. In 
particular, Miller (1956) argues that the human short-term memory holds seven plus-or-minus two chunks of 
information. Chunks are loosely defined as pieces of information that the subject recognizes as an entity. This 
definition depends on the knowledge of the subject, that is, the contents of her long-term memory. In the case of 
the parsing algorithm template, the long-term memory is represented by the trainable parameters of the 
association module A and the scoring module R.
8. More modules 
The previous sections essentially discuss the association and dissociation modules. They also briefly mention a 
couple additional modules: modules that perform predefined transformations on natural language sentences; 
modules that implement specific visual reasoning primitives; and modules that bridge the representations of 
sentences and the representation of images. These modules enrich the algebraic reasoning structure by endowing 
the space of representation vectors with additional semantics.
•
There is a natural framework for such enhancements in the case of natural language processing. Operator 
grammars  (Harris,  1968)  provide  a  mathematical  description  of  natural  languages  based  on 
transformation  operators:  starting  from  elementary  sentence  forms,  more  complex  sentences  are 
described by the successive application of sentence transformation operators. The structure and the 
meaning of the sentence is  revealed as a side effect of these successive transformations. Since the 
association and dissociation modules provide the means to navigate the sentence structure, we have the 
necessary tools to replicate the sentence transformation operators described by Harris and establish a 
Figure 12 – The short-term memory (STM) holds a collection of representation vectors. 
The two possible actions are (1) inserting a new representation vector into the STM, and 
(2) replacing two vectors from the STM by the output of the association module.
STM
A
Input
1
2
 R
saliency
score

connection with this important body of linguistic work.
•
There is also a natural framework for such enhancements in the case of vision. Modules working on 
representation vectors can model the consequence of various interventions. Viewpoint changes causes 
image rotations, image rescaling, perspective changes, and occlusion changes. We could also envision 
modules modeling the representation space consequences of direct interventions on the scene, such as 
moving an object.
There is also an opportunity to go beyond modules that merely leverage the structure of the representation space. 
As explained earlier, the association and dissociation modules are algebraically equivalent to the Lisp primitives 
car, cdr, and cons, and, like these primitives, provide the means to construct arbitrarily propositional logic 
expressions. Adding variables and quantifiers would provide an implementation of first order logic. Although 
there  are  connectionist  approaches  to  variable  binding  (e.g.,  Smolensky,  1990),  they  cannot  avoid  the 
computational complexity of first-order logic problems. Would it be possible instead to identify capabilities that 
are necessary for the kind of informal and intuitive reasoning that humans carry out with ease?  Here are two  
examples: 
•
Anaphora resolution consists in identifying which components of a tree designate the same entity. This 
amounts to identifying the multiple occurrences of a same variable in a first-order logic expression, or to 
resolving pronouns in the case of natural language sentences. This could be approached by constructing 
an instantiation module that takes the representation vector of a tree and applies a predefined substitution 
to all occurrences of a designated entity in the tree. 
•
Identifying which instantiations make sense could be achieved by a trainable module that returns a high 
score when there is a isKindOf relation between two representation vectors. But such ontologies are 
often context dependent. For instance a cat and a turtle are kinds of pets in the context of a household, 
and  are  members  of  different  families  in  the  context  of  biological  classification.  The  restricted 
entailment scoring module takes the representations of two structurally similar trees and returns a high 
score if the first tree is a valid instantiation of the second one. This score expresses the relation between 
the differing tree branches in the context of the rest of the tree.
9. Representation space
Although the previous subsection present the essential modules as functions operating on a relatively low-
dimensional vectorial space (e.g., 50-dimensional vectors), modules with similar algebraic properties could be 
defined on different representation spaces. Such choices have a considerable impact on the computational and 
practical aspects of the training algorithms. An investigation is therefore necessary. 
•
Our preliminary results were obtained using dense vectors with relatively low dimension, ranging from 
20 to 200 dimensions (e.g., Collobert, 2011). In order to provide sufficient capabilities, the trainable 
functions must often be designed with a nonlinear parametrization. The training algorithms are simple 
extensions of the multilayer network training procedures, using gradient back-propagation and stochastic 
gradient descent. These nonconvex optimization procedures are inherently complex and have often been 
criticized for their  lack of robustness. On the other hand, when properly implemented, they often turn 
out to be the most effective methods available for large-scale machine learning problems. 
•
Sparse vectors in much higher dimensional spaces are attractive because they provide the opportunity to 
rely more on trainable modules with linear parametrization (e.g. Paccanaro and Hinton, 2001, Mairal et 
al., 2010). The training algorithms can then exploit simpler optimization procedures. In order to maintain 
good generalization abilities and good computational performance, sparsity inducing terms must be 
included in the optimization criteria. Such terms also make the optimization more complex, potentially 
negating the benefits of sparse high-dimensional vectors in the first place. 
•
The representation space can also be a space of probability distributions defined on a vector of discrete 
random variables. The learning algorithms must then be expressed as stochastic sampling techniques 
such as Gibbs sampling, MCMC, Contrastive Divergence (Hinton et. al, 2006), or Herding (Welling, 

2009). 
Regardless of the chosen representation space, a well designed GPU implementation can considerably speed-up 
the experimentation cycle. For instance, training the language model of (Collobert et al., 2011) demands three to 
six weeks of computation on a standard processor. Reducing this training time to a couple days changes the 
dynamics of the experimentation.
Conclusions
The research directions outlined in this document are intended as a breakthrough effort towards the practical and 
conceptual understanding of the interplay between machine learning and machine reasoning. Instead of trying to 
bridge the gap between machine learning systems and sophisticated "all-purpose" inference mechanisms, we can 
instead algebraically enrich  the  set of  manipulations applicable to training  systems, and  build reasoning 
capabilities from the ground up. This possibility gives new ways to work around the limitations of both logical 
and probabilistic inference. Is this new path to Artificial Intelligence?
