Block-wise Scrambled Image Recognition Using Adaptation Network
Koki Madono1,2, Masayuki Tanaka2, Masaki Onishi2, Tetsuji Ogawa1,2
1Department of Communications and Computer Engineering, Waseda University
2The National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
Abstract
In this study, a perceptually hidden object-recognition
method is investigated to generate secure images recogniz-
able by humans but not machines. Hence, both the percep-
tual information hiding and the corresponding object recogni-
tion methods should be developed. Block-wise image scram-
bling is introduced to hide perceptual information from a third
party. In addition, an adaptation network is proposed to recog-
nize those scrambled images. Experimental comparisons con-
ducted using CIFAR datasets demonstrated that the proposed
adaptation network performed well in incorporating simple
perceptual information hiding into DNN-based image classi-
ﬁcation.
Introduction
Cloud-based image analysis services, such as Google
Cloud (Alphabet Inc. ) and Microsoft Azure (Microsoft
Corp. ), have become extremely powerful and easy to use.
These systems, however, can be further improved in terms
of privacy issues. For example, when a client transfers an
image to a cloud server, a third party can view the im-
age. It is noteworthy that encrypted communications or se-
cure communications are insufﬁcient because the image data
should be decrypted to analyze at the cloud. Deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs) have been widely used in image pro-
cessing (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Lowe 1999;
He et al. 2015); they are important in cloud-based image
analysis. In general, DNNs require a large number of im-
ages for training. However, it becomes a critical problem
when the cloud-based image analysis is conducted based
on privacy-sensitive images, because the client has to pro-
vide such images to a third party for machine learning. Ho-
momorphic encryption (Lagendijk, Erkin, and Barni 2013;
Lu, Kawasaki, and Sakuma 2016) may address such a prob-
lem. However, it is not feasible from the viewpoints of com-
putational and memory costs. Furthermore, mathematical
operations in homomorphic encryptions are limited.
Table 1 summarizes the accessibility of humans and ma-
chines to perceptual information. Both humans and ma-
chines can access plain images. Although these images are
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Table 1: Accessibility of human and machine to perceptual
information. Difﬁculty of attacks is also listed as well.
plain
scrambled
homographic
image
image
encryption
human
✓
machine
✓
✓
attacker
easy
medium
difﬁcult
easy to use, attackers can easily access them. Meanwhile,
homographic encryptions can hide perceptual information;
however, in general, it is difﬁcult to use as aforementioned.
Therefore, in the present study, a framework for hiding per-
ceptual information from humans while machines continue
accessing the information is developed.
Hence, the present study focuses on block-wise im-
age scrambling as a simple perceptual information hid-
ing method. Several studies regarding block-wise image
scrambling have been conducted, such as learnable encryp-
tion (LE) (Tanaka 2018) and encryption-then-compression
(EtC) (Chuman, Sirichotedumrong, and Kiya 2018). It is
noteworthy that the scrambled images are not exactly en-
crypted although the perceptual information can be hidden.
In addition, existing DNN architectures, which are proven
effective in image recognition (He et al. 2015; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Yamada et al. 2018), do not assume the
scrambled images as inputs, indicating that another compo-
nent is required to recognize such images.
Hence, in this study, the LE algorithm is extended to in-
crease the security level of perceptually hidden images and
introduce the adaptation network for recognizing the scram-
bled images. Experimental veriﬁcation conducted using CI-
FAR datasets (Lowe 1999) demonstrates that images with
block-wise scrambling can be recognized by integrating the
proposed adaptation network with the existing DNN-based
classiﬁer (He et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Yamada et al. 2018). Insights from the present study can
contribute to the generation of images recognizable by hu-
mans but not machines.
arXiv:2001.07761v1  [cs.CV]  21 Jan 2020

Figure 1: Conceptual image of cloud-based image analysis with image scrambling. Client can access the original image and
object class in it. Third party for image analysis can access object class and perceptually hidden images for training image
classiﬁers on cloud.
Figure 2: Processing pipeline of block-wise image scrambling. Image is segmented into blocks with B × B pixels. Block
locations are shufﬂed, pixels in block are shufﬂed independently in every block, and shufﬂed blocks are concatenated.
Perceptual Information Hiding
Perceptual information hiding, in which perceptual infor-
mation is hidden from humans but can be accessed by ma-
chines, is introduced to DNN-based image recognition. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates an assumed cloud-based image recognition,
in which perceptually hidden images are obtained by block-
wise image scrambling and used as inputs to a classiﬁer
on a cloud. During the classiﬁer training, a client uploads
scrambled images together with annotations. A third party
of model developer then trains the model using the uploaded
images. Because naive DNN-based image classiﬁers do not
use scrambled images as inputs, the adaptation network is
introduced to manage such concealed data.
Once the scrambled image classiﬁcation models are
trained, the assumed service can be used while hiding the
perceptual information from a third party. The third party,
however, can analyze the adaptation network to understand
the scrambling process. Therefore, the use of adaptation net-
works is not perfect in perceptual information hiding but still
offers some advantages because effective algorithms for re-
constructing original images from block-wise scrambled im-
ages are still available, to the best of our knowledge.
Block-Wise Image Scrambling
This section describes the processing pipeline of block-wise
image scrambling (Tanaka 2018; Chuman, Sirichotedum-
rong, and Kiya 2018). Figure 2 illustrates the pipeline. In the
developed system, an input image is ﬁrst divided into blocks
with B×B pixels, where the number of yielded blocks is N.
For example, the segmentation of a 32×32 pixel image into
blocks with 4×4 pixels yields 64 blocks. The positions of the
segmented blocks are then shufﬂed (i.e., block shufﬂing). In
addition, pixels in each block are shufﬂed with security keys,
where different keys are applied to every blocks (i.e., block-
wise pixel shufﬂing). Finally, the blocks with the shufﬂed
pixels are concatenated to obtain the resulting scrambled im-
age.
Table 2 summarizes block-wise image scrambling algo-
rithms. The developed block-wise scrambling can be re-
garded as an extension of the existing LE algorithm (Tanaka
2018), Therefore, the developed algorithm is referred to as
the extended learnable encryption (ELE).
Security Evaluation
This subsection discusses the security levels of the block-
wise image scrambling algorithms using the key space,
which refers to the set of all possible permutations of a key.
The LE shufﬂes pixels and negative–positive transforms
with the same key in every block. Each block is split into
four upper bits and four lower bits to generate three to six
channels of blocks. Subsequently, the pixels are randomly
shufﬂed, yielding Nps combinations. The intensity of ran-
domly selected pixels are then reversed, yielding Nnp com-
binations. The key space of the LE is calculated as
O(LE)
=
Nps · Nnp
=
(42 · 6)! · 242·6
=
96! · 296.
(1)
The EtC comprises block rotation followed by inversion
(Nr&i), negative–positive transform (Nnp), color component

Table 2: Summary of block-wise scrambling algorithms. Here, each block has B×B pixels and the number of blocks is N.
plain image
LE (Tanaka 2018)
EtC (Chuman et al. 2018)
ELE
(proposed)
image example
block key
common
different
different
block shufﬂing
✓
✓
pixel shufﬂing,
block rotation & inversion,
pixel shufﬂing,
block-wise pixel operation
negative-positive transform
negative-positive transform,
negative-positive transform
color component shufﬂing
key space
0
(B2 · 6)! · 2B2·6
8N · 2N · 6N · N!
{(B2 · 6)! · 2B2·6}N · N!
shufﬂing (Ncol), and block location shufﬂing (Nbs) with the
same key in every block. The key space of the EtC is calcu-
lated as
O(EtC)
=
Nr&i · Nnp · Ncol · Nbs
=
(4 · 2)64 · 264 · (3!)64 · 64!
=
864 · 264 · 664 · 64!.
(2)
The ELE comprises block-wise pixel shufﬂing with dif-
ferent keys in every block (Ndps) and block location shuf-
ﬂing (Nbs). The key space of the ELE is calculated as
O(ELE)
=
Ndps · Nbs
=
{(42 · 6)! · 242·6}64 · 64!
=
(96! · 296)64 · 64!
(3)
Eventually, the key spaces for the LE, EtC, and ELE are as
follows:
O(ELE) ≫O(EtC) ≫O(LE).
(4)
This indicates that the ELE has a larger key space than the
LE and EtC.
Adaptation Network for Block-Wise
Scrambled Image Recognition
In this section, proposes the adaptation network to recognize
the block-wise scrambled images, considering the process-
ing pipeline of block-wise scrambling as shown in Fig. 2.
The proposed adaptation network comprises three parts:
block-wise sub-networks, a learnable pseudo permutation
matrix, and a pixel shufﬂing layer (Shi et al. 2016). The
schematic diagram of the developed system and detailed in-
formation on network architecture for each component are
illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively.
First, a scrambled image xe is segmented into N blocks
with B × B pixels as {xe1, xe2, · · · , xeN }, where xeb
represents a block (i.e., segmented image). Each block is
transformed by the corresponding block-wise sub-network
f(xeb; θb), which is separately trained for each block. This
process aims at managing ELE-based image scrambling
i.e., block-wise scrambling with different keys. The fea-
ture maps of the block-wise sub-networks are then inte-
grated and the pseudo permutation matrix is applied to the
integrated feature map. This operation corresponds to in-
verse block shufﬂing. Subsequently, the shufﬂed pixels are
aligned on the pixel shufﬂing layer and then used as an in-
put to the classiﬁcation network. In theory, if the permu-
tation matrix for block shufﬂing is known, its inverse ma-
trix can be used to solve block shufﬂing. Such a permutation
matrix, however, is unknown. Instead of estimating the in-
verse permutation matrix, we introduce pseudo permutation
and train the corresponding matrix U such that its elements
can be sparse. Hence, the L1−2 penalty (Lyu et al. 2019;
Esser, Lou, and Xin 2013; Yin et al. 2015) is added to the
loss function for training. In addition, all elements of U
should be non-negative and the sum of each column and that
of each row should be one. Such constraints, however, are
not considered herein.
The feature map of the plain image is expected to be spa-
tially smooth. Additionally, the feature map of the adapta-
tion network should exhibit the same characteristics as those
of the natural image. Therefore, the penalty with respect to
spatial smoothness is added to the loss function.
The resulting loss function for training the adaptation net-
work is written as
L = LCE + λULU + λsLs ,
(5)
where LCE denotes the cross entorpy loss for classiﬁca-
tion (Mannor, Peleg, and Rubinstein 2005), LU denotes the
L1−2 penalty for the pseudo permutation matrix, and Ls de-
notes the spatial smoothness penalty for the feature map of
the adaptation network. Here, λU and λs were empirically
determined as λU = 0.001 and λs = 0.1, respectively.

Figure 3: Network architecture of proposed adaptation network. Scrambled image is segmented into blocks with B ×B pix-
els; feature maps of block-wise sub-networks, {f(xe1; θ1), · · · , f(xeN ; θN)}, are integreted; pseudo permutation matrix is
applied to integrated feature map; and feature map is upscaled by pixel shufﬂe layer (Shi et al. 2016) and then used as input to
classiﬁcation network based on shakedrop. Colored boxes mean trainable processing.
Figure 4: Detailed network architectures used. Block size and kernel size are the same in every block-wise sub-networks.
Pseudo permutation matrix is applied to integrated feature map; Feature map is upscaled by pixel shufﬂe layer (Shi et al. 2016);
and feature map is used as input to classiﬁcation network (Yamada et al. 2018). Colored boxes express trainable processing.
The cross entropy loss LCE is computed as
LCE = −1
M
M
X
m=1
K
X
k=1
tm,k log Ck(exm; θc) ,
(6)
where m and k denote the sample and class indexes, respec-
tively; tm,k denotes the one-hot encoded label; Ck(exm; θc)
denotes the posterior probability for the k-th class of the
classiﬁcation network; exm denotes the feature map of the
adaptation network for the m-th sample; and θc denotes the
parameters of the classiﬁcation network.
The L1−2 penalty for the pseudo permutation matrix LU
is calculated as
LU =
1
N × N





N
X
i=1


N
X
j=1
|ui,j| −


N
X
j=1
u2
i,j


1/2
+
N
X
j=1


N
X
i=1
|ui,j| −
 N
X
i=1
u2
i,j
!1/2



,
(7)
where ui,j denotes the element of the matrix U whose size
is N ×N.
The spatial smoothness penalty of the feature map Ls is
calculated as
Ls = 1
M
M
X
M=1
h
L(H)
s,i + L(V )
s,i
i
L(H)
s,i =
1
H(W −1)C
H
X
h=1
W −1
X
w=1
C
X
c=1
[ex(H)
i
(h, w, c)]2
L(V )
s,i =
1
(H −1)WC
H−1
X
h=1
W
X
w=1
C
X
c=1
[ex(V )
i
(h, w, c)]2 ,
(8)
where H, W, and C denote the height, width, and number
of channels in the feature map, respectively; ex(H)
i
(h, w, c)
and ex(V )
i
(h, w, c) denote the horizontal and vertical forward
difference of the i-th feature at (h, w, c), respectively.

Table 3: Accuracy of scrambled image classiﬁcation.
plain image
LE (Tanaka 2018)
EtC (Chuman et al. 2018)
ELE
Dataset
Adaptation network
(proposed)
cifar-10
No AdaptNet
96.70%
94.94%
85.94%
67.10%
LE-AdaptNet
95.64%
94.49%
80.16%
48.39%
ELE-AdaptNet
85.32%
87.28%
89.09%
83.06%
cifar-100
No AdaptNet
83.59%
78.25%
61.90%
43.05%
LE-AdaptNet
79.13%
75.48%
44.83%
7.19%
ELE-AdaptNet
60.36%
71.30%
71.91%
62.97%
Table 4: Estimates and their posterior probabilities of scrambled image classiﬁcation using different models.
plain image
LE (Tanaka 2018)
EtC (Chuman et al. 2018)
ELE
Adaptation Network
(proposed)
Shakedrop
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
deer(0.65)
LE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
frog(0.99)
deer(0.63)
ELE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
frog(1.00)
Shakedrop
cat(1.00)
cat(1.00)
cat(0.99)
bird(0.28)
LE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
cat(1.00)
cat(0.99)
cat(0.99)
bird(0.34)
ELE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
cat(1.00)
cat(1.00)
cat(1.00)
cat(1.00)
Shakedrop
automobile(1.00)
automobile(1.00)
automobile(0.98)
automobile(0.44)
LE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
automobile(1.00)
automobile(1.00)
automobile(0.99)
dog(0.55)
ELE-AdaptNet + Shakedrop
automobile(0.97)
automobile(0.94)
automobile(1.00)
automobile(0.82)
Experimental Validation
Experimental validation was conducted using CIFAR
datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
scrambled image recognition method 1. Three systems us-
ing the following adaptation networks were compared as fol-
lows:
• No AdaptNet: No adaptation network
• LE-AdaptNet: Adaptation network with block indepen-
dent (shared) sub-networks (Tanaka 2018)
• ELE-AdaptNet: Adaptation network with block depen-
dent sub-networks and block permutation matrix (pro-
posed)
Because the existing LE-AdaptNet (Tanaka 2018) consid-
ers LE-based block-wise image scrambling, it shares the
block-wise network among all blocks and does not require a
pseudo permutation matrix.
1https://github.com/MADONOKOUKI/Block-wise-
Scrambled-Image-Recognition
The plain image and three types of scrambled images
were evaluated as follows:
• plain image (i.e., no scrambling);
• learnable encryption (LE) (Tanaka 2018);
• encryption-then-compression (EtC) (Chuman, Sirichote-
dumrong, and Kiya 2018); and
• extended learnable encryption (ELE) proposed in this
study.
The shakedrop network (Yamada et al. 2018) was ex-
ploited for the classiﬁcation network with the same setting
as that of the original implementation.
Experimental Setup
The datasets used for the evaluation were CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100 (Lowe 1999). All images were converted into
block-wise scrambled images and used as inputs to the adap-
tation network. The data augmentation was performed be-
fore block-wise scrambling. The mini-batch size was 128
during training and testing. The SGD with the Nesterov

was used as the optimizer, where the momentum was 0.9.
The network was trained with 300 epochs of iterations. The
learning rate was scheduled as 0.1 for 0-to-150 epochs, 0.01
for 150-to-225 epochs, and 0.001 for 225-to-300 epochs.
Experimental Results
Table 3 lists the accuracy of recognizing the plain images
and three types of scrambled images, where the boldface
represents the best accuracy. The proposed ELE-AdaptNet
yielded the best accuracy for ELE- and EtC-based im-
age scrambling. For LE-based image scrambling, the LE-
AdaptNet (Tanaka 2018) performed better than the ELE-
AdaptNet because the LE-AdaptNet is specialized to LE-
based image scrambling. However, it is noteworthy that the
LE-based image scrambling is worse in terms of security
than the ELE-based image scrambling, as shown in Table 2.
Either the LE or ELE can be selected as a perceptual in-
formation hiding method, considering the tradeoff between
security level and recognition accuracy. If the security level
is prioritized, the ELE-based approach should be selected.
Table 4 lists examples of the plain and scrambled im-
ages with the best matching object classes and correspond-
ing posterior probabilities in parentheses. For the plain im-
age and LE- and EtC-based scrambled images, the poste-
rior probabilities are conﬁdent, regardless of the adaptation
networks. For ELE-based image scrambling, the proposed
ELE-AdaptNet yielded conﬁdent posterior probabilities,
while the other networks did not perform as intended. This
indicates that the proposed ELE-AdaptNet achieved reli-
able recognition, irrespective of image type. Furthermore,
as the security level of the scrambled image increases, an
adequate adaptation network is required for a reliable recog-
nition.
Conclusion
The block-wise scrambling algorithm was introduced herein
to hide perceptual information. In addition, an adaptation
network was proposed to recognize such scrambled images.
Experimental comparisons implied that the proposed block-
wise scrambling and adaptation network could achieve sim-
ple perceptual information hiding on DNN-based image
analysis.
