Deep reinforcement learning for robotic
manipulation-the state of the art
Smruti Amarjyoti
Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The focus of this work is to enumerate the various approaches and algo-
rithms that center around application of reinforcement learning in robotic ma-
nipulation tasks. Earlier methods utilized specialized policy representations
and human demonstrations to constrict the policy. Such methods worked well
with continuous state and policy space of robots but failed to come up with
generalized policies. Subsequently, high dimensional non-linear function ap-
proximators like neural networks have been used to learn policies from scratch.
Several novel and recent approaches have also embedded control policy with
eﬃcient perceptual representation using deep learning. This has led to the
emergence of a new branch of dynamic robot control system called deep re-
inforcement learning(DRL). This work embodies a survey of the most recent
algorithms, architectures and their implementations in simulations and real
world robotic platforms.
The gamut of DRL architectures are partitioned
into two diﬀerent branches namely, discrete action space algorithms(DAS)
and continuous action space algorithms(CAS). Further, the CAS algorithms
are divided into stochastic continuous action space(SCAS) and deterministic
continuous action space(DCAS) algorithms. Along with elucidating an organ-
isation of the DRL algorithms this work also manifests some of the state of
the art applications of these approaches in robotic manipulation tasks.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a neuropsychological and cognitive science
perspective to animal behavior and sequential decision making.
Recent studies
1
arXiv:1701.08878v1  [cs.RO]  31 Jan 2017

in cognitive science have also demonstrated analogies between the dopaminergic
neurons in brains and temporal diﬀerence (TD) reinforcement learning algorithms.
Other than the nature derived inspiration, several successful implementations of re-
inforcement learning (RL) in controlling dynamic robotic systems for manipulation,
locomotion and autonomous driving [19], [1], [15] have proven the previously theo-
retical concept to be applicable in real time control of physical systems. Many of
these methods use specialized policy structures to represent policies in order to put
a cap on the number of iterations that are needed for optimizing the behaviour.
Though eﬃcient there is a loss of generality in adopting such an approach as it
constricts the policy space to some speciﬁc trajectories [2]. Thus, non-linear func-
tion approximators like neural networks are used to parametrize the policy. This
removes the requirement of using hand engineered policy representations and human
supplied demonstrations to initialized them. Moreover, the use of higher number of
parameters also theoretically ensures learning of complex behaviours that wouldn’t
have been possible with linear man made policies.
Another important development in the ﬁeld of RL has been indirectly borrowed
from enormous successes of deep convolutional neural networks(CNN) [3] in image
feature extraction.
A direct implication of CNNs in reinforcement learning was
the use of image pixels as states instead of joint parameters, which was widely in
practice in RL landscape. Use of such an expressive parametrization also enabled
learning of value function and policies that were previously deemed complicated.
The paper by Riedmiller [5] demonstrated that neural networks can eﬀectively be
used as q-function approximators using neural ﬁtted q-iteration algorithm. Later
introduction of convolutional networks by Mnih et al. [4] turned neural networks
based q learning as a base for DRL. Some of the ideas that were introduced like
mini batch training and concept of target networks were pivotal to the success of
non-linear RL methods. But, the initial algorithms were used to play classic Atari
2600 games with pixels as inputs and discrete actions as policy. The result were
extraordinary with the artiﬁcial agent getting scores that were higher than human
level performance and other model based learning methods. Attempts have been
made to use deep q-learning (DQN) for high dimensional robotics tasks but with a
very little success [6]. This is essentially because of the fact that most of the phys-
ical control tasks have high dimensional action spaces with continuous real valued
action values. This posed a problem for introducing DQNs in manipulation tasks as
they act as value function approximators and an additional iterative optimization
process is necessary to use them for continuous spaces. The algorithms falling under
this class are categorized into a group called discrete action space algorithms(DAS)
as they are eﬃcient only in discrete action domains.
Another approach to parametrization of RL policies is to encode the policy directly
2

and search for optimal solutions in the policy space. These methods known as pol-
icy search methods are popular as it gives an end-to-end connection between the
states and feasible actions in the agent environment. The parameters can then be
perturbed in order to optimize the performance output [7]. The advantage of this
process over the earlier value approximation methods is that the policies are in-
tegrated over both action and state space, thus the search is more comprehensive
than Q-learning. And it also solves the discrete action problem as the output policy,
π(a|s) is a stochastic distribution over the action given a particular state. Thus, the
policy representation provides probabilities over over action in a continuous space [8].
This class of continuous action algorithms are grouped into continuous action space
algorithms(CAS). They include policy gradient and policy iteration algorithms that
encode the policy directly and search over entire policy space. Initially developed
and experimented on low dimensional state spaces, CAS algorithms have been inte-
grated into CNN architecture in algorithms like deep deterministic policy gradients
(DDPG) [21].
The CAS RL algorithms can further be divided into two subcategories, stochastic
continuous action space(SCAS) and deterministic continuous action space(DCAS)
algorithms. The main diﬀerence between both of the methods is basically the sam-
ple complexity. Even though stochastic policy gradient methods provide a better
coverage of the policy search space, they require a large number of training sam-
ples in order to learn the policy eﬀectively [8]. This is quite infeasible in robotic
applications as exploration and policy evaluation comes at a price in such domains.
Several methods like natural policy gradients and trust region policy gradients were
developed in order to make policy search eﬀective by adding additional constraints
on the search process to restrict the agent to explore only promising regions. But,
the discovery of deterministic policy gradients has led to an easier method whose
performance surpasses stochastic policy algorithms as proven empirically by Silver
et al [9].
The most important contribution of this paper is the organisation of the assortment
of DRL algorithms on the basis of their treatment of action spaces and policy repre-
sentations. Present DRL methodologies in literature are classiﬁed into the groups,
DAS, CAS, SCAS and DCAS whose details has been described above. Following sec-
tions include a background of the evolution of reinforcement learning and preliminar-
ies laying a foundation to understand the algorithms and description of some of the
basic algorithms encompassing DRL. Experiments and real time implementations
associated with these methods are also described to give an insight into the practical
complexity of implementing these algorithms on physical robots/simulations.
3

2
Background
2.1
Preliminaries
All of the reinforcement learning methods studied in this paper are basically con-
trol problems in which an agent has to act in a stochastic environment by choosing
action in a sequential manner over several time steps, with an intention to max-
imise the cumulative reward. The problem is modelled as a Markov decision process
(MDP) which comprises of a state space S, an action space A, an initial state dis-
tribution with density p1(s1), a stationary transition dynamics model with density
p(st+1|st, at) that satisﬁes the Markov property p(st+1|s1, a1, ....st, at) = p(st+1|st, at
for any trajectory in the state-action space and a reward function R(st, at) : S×A →
R. A policy can be deﬁned as the mapping of state to action distributions and the
objective of an MDP is to ﬁnd the optimal policy. Generally a policy is stochastic
and is denoted by πθ : S →P(A), where P(A) is the probability distribution of
performing that action and θ ∈Rn is a vector of parameters that deﬁne the policy,
πθ(at, st). A deterministic policy on the other hand is denoted by µ(st) and is a
discrete mapping of S →A.
A agent uses the policy to explore the environment and generate trajectories of
states, rewards and actions, ζ1:t = s1, a1, r1, ...., st, at, rt. The total return or per-
formance is determined by calculating the total discounted reward from time step t
onwards.
Rγ
t =
inf
X
k=t
γk−tR(sk, ak) , where 0 < γ < 1
(1)
Value function of a particular state is deﬁned as the expected total discounted reward
if an agent were to initiate from that particular state and generate trajectories
thereafter.
V π(s) = E[Rγ|S = s; π]
(2)
The action-value function on the other hand is deﬁned as the expected discounted
reward if the agent takes an action a from a state s and follows the policy distribution
thereafter.
Qπ(s, a) = E[Rγ|S = s; A = a; π]
(3)
The agent’s overall goal is to obtain a policy that results in maximisation of cumula-
tive discounted reward form the start state. This is denoted by ﬁnding appropriate
π for the performance objective J(π) = E[Rγ|π].
The density of the state s
′ after transitioning for t time steps from initial state
s is given by p(s→s
′, t, π).
The discounted state distribution is then given by
4

ρπ(s
′) =
R
s
Pinf
t=1 γt−1p1(s)p(s →s
′, t, π)ds. The performance objective can be rep-
resented as a uniﬁed expectation function,
J(πθ) =
Z
S
ρπ(s)
Z
A
πθ(s, a)R(s, a)dads
= Es∈ρπ,a∈πθ[R(s, a)]
(4)
2.2
Evolution of RL
Early reinforcement learning(RL) algorithms for prediction and control were focused
on the process of reﬁnement of optimal policy evaluation techniques and reduction
of computational complexity of the approaches. This led to the emergence of explo-
ration vs exploitation techniques, on-policy and oﬀ-policy approaches, model free
and model based and various PAC(Probable approximate correct) methods. Al-
though the algorithms were feasible computationally and showed convergence to
optimal policies in polynomial time, they posed a major hindrance when applied to
generate policies for high dimensional control scenarios like robotic manipulation.
Two techniques stand out from the newly developed RL methodologies, namely func-
tion approximation and policy search. The philosophy of these two approaches is to
parameterize the action-value function and the policy function. Further, gradient
of the policy value is taken to search for the optimal policy that results in a global
maxima of expected rewards. Moreover, due to the hyper dimensional state-space
and continuous action-space the robot operates in, policy search methods are the
most viable and possible the only method considered suitable for robotics control.
2.3
RL for motor control
Application of RL in robotics have included locomotion, manipulation and au-
tonomous vehicle control [19]. Most of the real world tasks are considered episodic
and it is also hard to specify a concise reward function for a robotic task. This
problem is tackled by the use of a technique called learning by demonstration or ap-
prenticeship learning [22]. One of the methods to solve the uncertain reward problem
is inverse reinforcement learning where the reward function is updated continuously
and an appropriate policy is generated in the end Another eﬀective method to model
the policies is the use of motor policies to represent stochastic policy π(at|st, t), that
is inspired from the works of Kober and Peters [15]. They devised an Expecta-
tion Maximization (EM) based algorithm called Policy Learning by Weighing Ex-
ploration with Returns(PoWER). When learning motor primitives, they turn this
deterministic mean policy into a stochastic policy using additive exploration in or-
der to make model-free reinforcement learning possible. Here, the motor primitives
5

are derived from the concept of Dynamic Motor Primitives (DMPs) that describe
movement as a set of diﬀerential equations such that any external perturbation is
accommodated without losing the motion pattern. Certain other approaches like
guided policy search [10] also introduced more versatile policy representations like
diﬀerential dynamic programming (DDP). These policy have been used for generat-
ing guiding samples to speed up the learning process in non linear policies. This gives
more ﬂexibility and generalization than earlier structured policy approaches. But,
even though such hybrid model based and specialized policy methods work well in
robots, there has always been an interest towards learning policies end-to-end from
visual stimulus. Thus, convolutional architectures have been introduced into the
domain of RL and motor control, known as visuo-motor control policy networks.
2.4
RL for visuo-motor control
Many of the RL methods demonstrated on physical robotic systems have used rel-
atively low-dimensional policy representations, typically with under one hundred
parameters, due to the diﬃculty of eﬃciently optimizing high-dimensional policy
parameter vectors. But the paper by Mnih et al. introduced an eﬀective approach
to combine larger policy parameterizations by combining deep learning and rein-
forcement learning [4]. This concept of generating eﬃcient non-linear representa-
tions is transferred into robotic tasks of grasping and continuous servoing in some
recent research carried out by Levine et al. [14] and Kober et al [?]. End-to-end
learning of visuo-motor policies is made possible with such an approach which in
turn learns the features form the observations that are relevant for the speciﬁc task.
One of the problems that was encountered with neural network learning of policies
was the convergence of some weights to inﬁnity when trained with similar instances
of input observations [20]. Solving of this diﬃculty using experience replay methods
constituting randomization of the episodes gave the necessary boost to RL in real
life control problems. The current state of the art in deep-reinforcement learning
includes the algorithms employed by google deepmind research namely DQN (Deep
Q network) for discrete actions and Deep deterministic policy gradients (DDPG) for
continuous action spaces [16]. DQN is a simple value approximation method while
DDPG uses a underlying actor-critic framework for policy evaluation. Eﬃcacy of
both of these methods have been demonstrated empirically for performing complex
robotic manipulation tasks like door opening and ball catching [21].
6

Figure 1: The DRL topology.
3
DRL topology
The Deep reinforcement learning algorithms prevailing currently are structured ac-
cording to the topology in Fig. 1. The initial problem of planning in continuous
and high dimensional state spaces can be considered solved due to the extensive
use of neural networks with large number of parameters for function/policy mod-
elling. But, the problem at hand now is the mapping of these continuous states to
high-dimensional continuous action spaces. The present concentration in the DRL
community based on this issue and hence, it seems quite apt to organise the various
learning approaches based on this ground. Moreover it also demonstrates the capa-
bilities and limitations of the prevalent algorithms quite clearly.
The methods are divided into two sections namely, Discrete action space(DAS) ap-
proaches and Continuous action space(CAS) approaches. Further, CAS methods
are divided into Stochastic continuous action space(SCAS) and Deterministic con-
tinuous action space(DCAS) methods.
The various algorithms that come under
the purview of DAS are deep q-networks, duelling networks, normalized advantage
function and related function approximation approaches to decision making. CAS
mostly include policy search approaches that parametrize the policy directly and op-
timized it using evaluation and gradient based approaches. CAS is further branched
into SCAS methods where CNN are used to estimate a stochastic policy and DCAS
methods which predicts deterministic policies. Even though this demarcation pro-
vides a near comprehensive description of the DRL methods, it misses out on several
other RL approaches like likelihood ratio maximisation, black box methods, model-
based methods which are not directly related to DRL.
7

4
Discrete action space algorithms (DAS)
4.1
Deep Q-network (DQN)
Figure 2: Deep-Q-network architecture.
The DQN architecture was the ﬁrst successful integration of deep learning with
Q-learning framework [4]. Q-learning forms the base of most of the model-free RL
algorithms. It includes exploration of the environment using a behaviour policy and
learn the Q-function for the possible action-state pairs using the experience that is
gathered from the exploration. The following equation described Q-learning, where
α is the learning rate and the observations that are obtained after exploration be
a, r, s
′, where a is the action taken, r is the rewards received and s
′ is the next
observed state.
Q(s, a)sample = r(s, a) + γ.maxaQ(s
′, a)
Q(s, a) = αQ(s, a)sample + (1 −α)Q(s, a)
(5)
The only diﬀerence between naive Q-learning and DQN is the use of CNN as func-
tion approximators instead of linear approximators. The use of hierarchical networks
enables the use of continuous high dimensional images as states which estimates the
optimal action-value function. RL was considered to be unstable when using non-
linear approximators such as a neural network, which is because of the correlations
present in the sequence of observations and the correlations between the action-
values and the target values. In order to solve this, Mnih et al. devised a method
of asynchronous training of the Q-network called experience replay. Here, the ex-
perience e = {st, at, rt, st+1} is stored in a pool and mini-batches of experiences are
accessed during training uniformly. This is then used to optimize the loss function,
L(θ) = E(s,a,r,s′)[(r + γmaxaQ(s
′, a|θ−) −Q(s, a|θ)2]
(6)
Fig.2 describes the architecture of the Q-network that consists of 3 convolutional
layers, with ﬁlter sizes 32x8x8;stride 4, 64x4x4;stride 4 and 64x3x3;stride 2. The ﬁ-
nal two layers are fully connected layers with 512 neurons and outputs are discrete in
8

(a) 2D baxter arm simulator
(b) System architecture for applying
DQN in robot control.
Figure 3: Visuo-motor learning using DQN
the number of actions considered. The activations chosen are rectiﬁed linear units.
The second important contribution of DQN other than replay buﬀer was the use of
target networks ˆQ(s, a) for generating target values for the network’s loss function.
This helps to reduce oscillations during training and leads to easy convergence. The
target network is updated with the online Q network after a speciﬁc number of time
steps.
Execution of this methods is limited to agents requiring discrete action space but,
some early works have embedded the DQN technique to learn optimal actions from
visual inputs. Zhang et al. have utilized the exact same architecture to learn the
optimal control policies for a baxter robot arm. Instead of controlling the entire
7DOF of the robot arm, only the 4DOF shown in the Fig.3(a) simulation are con-
trolled. The actions are discretized into nine distinct outputs, that include going up,
going down or staying put in denominations of 0.02 rad. After training, the network
was used to control a real robotic arm with marginal success as it was prone to
discrepancies in the input image. Moreover, training in simulation and transferring
the control system to real-time robots proved to be detrimental for safety and per-
formance.
4.2
Double Deep Q-networks
Double deep Q-networks are an improved version of DQN that was ﬁrst introduced
by Hasselet et al. [11].
In Q-learning and DQN, the max operator utilizes the
same values for both behaviour policy and evaluation of actions. This in turn gave
overestimating value estimates. In order to mitigate this, DDQN uses the target as:
yDDQN = r + γQ(s
′, a
′|θ)|θ−)
(7)
9

4.3
Deep duelling network architecture
Figure 4: The top network is a single stream DQN and the bottom network has
dual streams to estimate value and advantage function
Duelling architecture, is a model-free algorithm developed by Wang et al. [12]
draws its inspiration from residual RL and the concept of Advantage learning and
updating by Baird [13]. In advantage learning instead of estimation of action-value
function, an advantage function is calculated which is deﬁned as the rate of increase
of reinforcement when a particular action is taken. The prime importance of ad-
vance learning is that the advantage values have higher variance that leads to easy
convergence. Moreover, the policy doesn’t change discontinuously with changing
values. The duelling architecture maintains both V (s) and A(s, a) with a single
deep model and a simple output operation combines both these output to get back
the Q(s, a) value. As the output is same as DDQN and DQN, this network can be
trained with any value iteration method.
Considering the duelling network described in Fig. 4 where one stream outputs
V (s|θ, β) and other A(s, a|θ, α). θ and α denote the convolutional network param-
eters. The last module is implemented using a forward mapping function:
Q(s, a|θ, α, β) = V (s|θ, β) + (A(s, a|θ, α) −
1
∥A∥
X
a
A(s, a|θ, α))
(8)
The architecture was used to train an artiﬁcial agent learn the 57 games in Atari ar-
cade learning environment from raw pixel observations. The ﬁnal acquired rewards
were compared with that of human performance and DQN networks. Duelling net-
works performed 75% better than the naive Q-networks as reported in the paper [12].
For applications with discrete action robotic tasks duelling architecture can be used
for better performance, though a concrete application is missing from literature.
10

5
Continuous action space algorithms (CAS)
5.1
Normalized advantage functions (NAF)
Gu et al. proposed a model free approach that used Q-learning to plan in continuous
action spaces with deep neural networks, which they refer as Normalized advance
functions (NAF). The idea behind NAF is to describe Q function in a way such
that its maximum, argmaxaQ(st, at) can be obtained easily and analytically during
the Q-learning update. The inherent processes are equivalent to that of Duelling
networks as a separate value function V (s|θ) and advantage term are estimated.
But, the diﬀerence is that the advantage in this case is parametrized as a quadratic
function of non-linear features of the state:
Q(s, a|θ) = A(s, a|θ) + V (s|θ)
(9)
A(s, a|θ) = −1
2(a −µ(s|θ)P(s|θ)(a −µ(s|θ)
(10)
P(s|θ) is a state-dependent, positive deﬁnite square matrix that is parametrized
by L(s|θ)L(s|θ)T, where L is a lower triangular matrix whose entries come from
the linear activations of the neural network. The rest of the network architecture
is similar to that of DQN by Mnih et al. The paper also explored the use of a
hybrid model based method by generating imagination rollouts from ﬁtted dynamics
model. This incorporated the inclusion of synthetic experience data from the ﬁtted
local linear feedback controllers and including them in the replay buﬀer of on-policy
exploration of Q-learning.
The algorithms was tested in several robotic environments as shown in Fig.5. The
Figure 5: Robotic manipulation and locomotion environments in MuJoCo simulator.
environments include the MuJoCo simulator tasks from Todorov et al. that include
3DOF robotic manipulation tasks where an arm gets reward based on the distance
between the end eﬀector and the object to be grasped. It also includes a sex joint
11

2D swimmer and a four legged ant. Policies learnt with this method showed more
precise completion of tasks as compared to deep policy gradient methods [17].
5.2
Stochastic policy gradient
Stochastic policy gradient methods parametrize the policy directly rather than try-
ing to optimize the value functions. These are one of the most popular class of
continuous action RL algorithms. The central idea behind these algorithms is to
adjust the parameters θ of the policy in the direction of the gradient of the perfor-
mance, i.e ∆θJ(πθ). The fundamental theorem underpinning these algorithms is the
policygradienttheorm [18].
∆θJ(πθ) =
Z
S
ρπ(s)
Z
A
∆θπθ(a|s)Q(s, a)dads
= E[∆θlogπθ(a|s)Q(s, a)]
(11)
The interesting aspect of this theorem is that even though the state distribution
depends on the network parameters, the policy gradient doesn’t depend on the
gradient of the distribution. But, one of the issues that these algorithms have to
address is the estimation of the Q(s, a) function as evident from the above equation.
Even though policy gradient algorithms provide an end-to-end method for policy
search, it is rarely used in robot policy optimization tasks. This is because of the high
sample complexity of such algorithms. Policy gradients use on-policy exploration
policy and that results in it needing a large number of training data to learn, that
is infeasible for robots. Above ﬁgure depicts a stochastic policy gradient algorithm
Figure 6: The architecture of CNN grasp predictor used in Levine et al. There are
a total of 17 conv layers with inputs as the stationary image of object cluttered
environment and the online image, the joint conﬁguration is also passed on after the
7th layer.
that is used by Levine et al. [14] for autonomous grasping of objects in cluttered
12

environments.
The input is a monocular image showing objects and robot end
eﬀector and the robot actions in the 7th layer of the deep network. The output is
the probability distribution of the action given the particular state. The network
takes 800,000 labelled images to train which gives a clear indication of the sample
complexity of SCAS methods.
5.3
Stochastic actor-critic methods
Actor-critic methods are widely used architectures that are again based on the Pol-
icy gradient theorem.
As depicted from the policy gradient equation, the term
Q(s, a) is missing from the gradient and needs to be calculated. Hence, the critic
network estimates this Q(s, a) value in order to ﬁnd the derivatives of the actor
network,∆πθ(s).
5.4
Trust Region Policy Optimization
TRPO is a policy optimization algorithm that restricts the search space of the pol-
icy by applying constraints on the output policy distributions.
This is done by
penalizing the network parameters using a KL divergence loss function upon the
parameters, Dmax
KL (θold, θ). Intuitively this constraint doesn’t let large scale changes
to occur in the policy distribution and hence, helps in early convergence of the net-
work. The above ﬁgure depicts the networks that were used to control the swimmer
Figure 7: Networks used to represent policy in TRPO.
and hopper tasks in MuJoCo environments. The input state space consisted of joint
angles and robot kinematics and the rewards were linear functions.
13

5.5
Deterministic policy gradient algorithm
The deterministic policy gradient algorithm (DPG) is derived from its counter-
part stochastic policy gradient algorithm and is dependent of a similar determinis-
tic policy gradient theorem . In continuous action spaces, greedy policy improve-
ment becomes problematic and needs global optimization during policy improvement
step [9]. As a result the it is more computationally tractable to update the policy
parameters in the direction of the gradient of the Q function.
θk+1 = θk + αE[∆θQ(s, µθ(s)]
(12)
Here, µθ(s) is the deterministic policy, α is the learning rate and θ are the policy
parameters. Chain can be applied to the above equation in order to get the policy
gradient equation:
θk+1 = θk + αE[∆θµθ(s)∆aQ(s, µθ(s)]
(13)
The above update rule can be incorporated into a deep neural network architec-
ture where the policy parameters are updated using stochastic gradient ascent. To
realise this an actor-critic method is necessary. The critic estimates the action-value
function while the actor derives its gradients from the critic to update its param-
eters. The gradient of policy parameters is the product of the gradient of Q value
with respect to action and the action with respect to the policy parameters. Fig. 8
shows the deterministic actor critic network.
Figure 8: Deep deterministic policy gradient network.
This is also the basis of DDPG (deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm)
which performs better than any other continuous action algorithm. Methods such
as NAF and DDPG have been used for learning complex robotic manipulation tasks
in real time [16]. The authors trained a 7DOF Jaco arm for reaching and door
14

(a) Real-world door opening task
setup.
(b) Simulation setup for door open-
ing and object reaching task.
Figure 9: Task representation for DDPG and NAF.
opening tasks without any policy initializations and demonstrations.
They used
deep network architectures with a 20 dimensional state space consisting of the joint
angles, velocities and the end eﬀector pose. The reward function for the reaching
task was the distance between the end eﬀector and the object, whereas for door
opening the reward was the sum of distance to the door knob and the degrees of
rotation of the knob. Another signiﬁcant contribution of this paper was the use
of asynchronous leaning by parallelizing the data collection process. It was proved
that using multiple robots reduces the training times by a factor of the number of
robots.
6
Discussion
Algorithmic ideas, theories and implementation details of several deep reinforcement
learning algorithms have been delineated in detail. It can be concluded that for the
purpose of robotic manipulation continuous action domain algorithms are the most
fruitful and applicable. Further, it can be observed that there is a trend towards
exploration of sample eﬃcient and time eﬃcient algorithms, having solved both con-
tinuous state and action space problems. Breakthroughs in these domains will have
signiﬁcant impacts in the ﬁeld of robotics learning.
Also, as demonstrated from current state of the art in DRL, the approaches fail to
handle complex policies. A reason could be that complicated policies require more
samples to learn and even a sophisticated reward function. This observation high-
lights a void in RL in robotics. There is a need to learn highly complicated reward
functions and methods to represent highly skilled behaviours and skills. This are
of Inverse reinforcement learning needs to be paid more attention while learning
policies using DRL. After all, complexity of the reward function is proportional to
the policy complexity.
Reinforcement learning is an evolved form of the cognitive architecture SORE. There
is a need to reconnect the new DRL approaches to its roots in cognitive science. The
15

problems in DRL might ﬁnd extremely useful insights from theories and empirical
evidence from cognitive psychology.
One of the important drawbacks of DRL algorithms and visuo-motor architectures
are the lack of capability of transfer learning. It is diﬃcult to transfer skills and
use the knowledge of already learnt policies to learn even complicated policies. A
mechanism needs to be developed so that policies doesn’t have to be learnt from
scratch, but can be inherited.
Many problems with temporally spread out rewards lead to credit assignment prob-
lem in RL. Thus, the reward structure too needs to be redesigned.
There have
been several works in incorporating intrinsic motivation in reinforcement learning
as a method to induce temporal abstractions in agents [23]. These setups known as
semi-Markovian decision process can be used to learn hierarchical planning actions
by learning step by step about the task at hand, just as a human does.
Another most important aspect of DRL that hasn’t been touched upon in the main
body is an approach known as guided policy search (GPS). This is because of it
incipient stages in DRL currently, but the approach holds signiﬁcant potential in
learning robotic tasks with minimal trials. The central idea behind the algorithm
is to mix model based and model free algorithms and use linear models to generate
samples in order to guide the learning process. This seems like a valid assumption
as humans/animals don’t always learn actions from scratch, but take advantage of
already well developed models of their body and physics.
