Speeding up SOR Solvers for Constraint-based
GUIs with a Warm-Start Strategy
Noreen Jamil, Johannes M¨uller, Christof Lutteroth and Gerald Weber
Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland
Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand

Abstract—Many computer programs have graphical user inter-
faces (GUIs), which need good layout to make efﬁcient use of the
available screen real estate. Most GUIs do not have a ﬁxed layout,
but are resizable and able to adapt themselves. Constraints are
a powerful tool for specifying adaptable GUI layouts: they are
used to specify a layout in a general form, and a constraint solver
is used to ﬁnd a satisfying concrete layout, e.g. for a speciﬁc GUI
size. The constraint solver has to calculate a new layout every
time a GUI is resized or changed, so it needs to be efﬁcient
to ensure a good user experience. One approach for constraint
solvers is based on the Gauss-Seidel algorithm and successive
over-relaxation (SOR).
Our observation is that a solution after resizing or changing is
similar in structure to a previous solution. Thus, our hypothesis is
that we can increase the computational performance of an SOR-
based constraint solver if we reuse the solution of a previous
layout to warm-start the solving of a new layout. In this paper
we report on experiments to test this hypothesis experimentally
for three common use cases: big-step resizing, small-step resizing
and constraint change. In our experiments, we measured the
solving time for randomly generated GUI layout speciﬁcations of
various sizes. For all three cases we found that the performance
is improved if an existing solution is used as a starting solution
for a new layout.
Index
Terms—UI
layout,
warm
start,
successive
over-
relaxation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Various numerical methods have been introduced to solve
linear problems as they appear in engineering, mathematics
and computer science. These methods can be divided into
direct and iterative methods. Direct methods aim to calculate
an exact solution in a ﬁnite number of operations, whereas
iterative methods begin with an initial approximation and
usually produce improved approximations in a theoretically
inﬁnite sequence whose limit is the exact solution [1].
Many linear problems are sparse, i.e. most linear coefﬁcients
in the corresponding matrix are zero so that the number
of non-zero coefﬁcients is O(n) with n being the number
of variables [2]. Iterative methods do not spend processing
time on coefﬁcients that are zero. Direct methods, in con-
trast, usually lead to ﬁll-in, i.e. coefﬁcients change from an
initial zero to a non-zero value during the execution of the
algorithm. In these methods we therefore may weaken the
sparsity property and may have to deal with more coefﬁcients,
which makes the processing time slower. Therefore, iterative
methods are often faster than naive direct methods in such
cases. In this paper, we are concerned with a domain where
sparse problems occur frequently, namely constraint-based
graphical user interface (GUI) layout. Constraint-based layout
models have been studied for quite a while in the research
community [3]–[6] and attracted attention recently because of
a newly introduced layout model in the Cocoa API of Apple’s
Mac OS X1.
A common iterative method is successive over-relaxation
(SOR) [7]. Starting with an initial guess, it repeatedly iterates
through the constraints of a linear speciﬁcation, reﬁning the
solution until a sufﬁcient precision is reached. For each
constraint it chooses a pivot variable, and changes the value
of that variable so that the constraint is satisﬁed. In order to
use SOR for GUI layout, certain considerations and extensions
are necessary.
First, linear problems in GUI layout are often over-
determined and have many inequality constraints, leading to
non-square coefﬁcient matrices. This leads to the problem of
pivot assignment: this is the problem of choosing a pivot vari-
able for each constraint so that the iterative method converges.
The standard SOR algorithms choose for each constraint the
pivot variable on the diagonal of the problem matrix. In over-
determined systems we do not have a main diagonal, therefore
we make use of the pivot assignment algorithms proposed
in [8].
Second, constraint-based GUI speciﬁcations may contain
conﬂicting constraints, rendering a speciﬁcation infeasible. To
deal with conﬂicts, soft constraints need to be supported.
In contrast to the usual hard constraints, which cannot be
violated, soft constraints may be violated as much as necessary
if no other solution can be found. Soft constraints can be
prioritized so that in a conﬂict between two soft constraints
only the soft constraint with the lower priority is violated [9].
Using only soft constraints has the advantage that a prob-
lem is always solvable, which cannot be guaranteed if hard
constraints are used. In this work, we use the soft constraint
algorithms proposed in [8].
A GUI layout speciﬁcation has to be solved whenever the
conditions under which a GUI is displayed or the GUI itself
change. Most GUIs can be resized, e.g. to adapt to different
1Cocoa Auto Layout Guide, 2012, http://developer.apple.com
arXiv:1401.1752v1  [cs.HC]  6 Jan 2014

screen sizes or to let the user choose an appropriate size
dynamically. Sometimes GUIs need to be changed dynami-
cally to adjust to content of different sizes. Each time a GUI
is resized or changed, the existing GUI layout speciﬁcation
is changed and a new speciﬁcation is created. However, the
new speciﬁcation is similar to the previous one because the
widgets and their relations typically stay the same. Usually,
only some size parameters change. For example, Figure 1
shows a GUI that is resized, with the corresponding constraint
speciﬁcations. Only the height constraint at the beginning of
the speciﬁcation is changed.
As a consequence, constraint solvers for GUI layout usually
have to solve speciﬁcations that are similar to the speciﬁcation
that has been solved previously. For that reason, it seems
plausible that the previous solution is a good initial value for
the iterative solving process – something that is known as a
warm-start strategy. This leads us to the following hypothesis:
Using a previous solution of a GUI constraint speciﬁcation to
warm-start an SOR solver reduces the solving time.
We tested the hypothesis by considering three common
use cases where GUIs are changed during runtime. First,
small-step resizing, where the GUI size is changed by a
small amount, e.g. when it is resized by a user dynamically.
Second, big-step resizing, where the GUI size is changed by
a larger amount, e.g. when the GUI size is maximized. And
third, changes of several constraints, e.g. when the sizes of
labels are adjusted for a different language. The solving time
when using SOR with and without a warm-start strategy was
compared for the three use cases, using randomly generated
layout speciﬁcations of different sizes.
Section II sums up related work about constraint solving
and warm-start strategies. Section III puts this research into
context with background information about constraint-based
GUI-layout, SOR, pivot assignment and conﬂict resolution.
Section IV presents the methodology and results of our per-
formance experiment. Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The overall problem, solving linear systems for constraint-
based GUIs, is related to solution procedures for over-
determined linear systems in general and constraint-based
GUIs in particular. Several direct and iterative methods exist,
which can solve over-determined systems in a least-square
sense [10]. Examples are QR-factorization [10], the simplex
algorithm [11], the conjugate gradient method [12] and the
GMRES-method [12]. They are the basis for solvers specif-
ically designed to solve problems of constraint-based GUIs.
Some are based on direct methods, for example HiRise and
HiRise2 [13] but the vast majority of existing solvers is based
on convex optimization approaches and uses slack variables
and an objective function [3], [4], [14]. These methods can
handle simultaneous constraints, i.e. constraints that depend
on each other. In that respect they are superior to local prop-
agation algorithms, such as DeltaBlue [15] and SkyBlue [16],
which cannot do so.
x1
y1
x2
x3
y2
y3
100
50
x1
y1
x2
x3
y2
y3
100
100
               x3 = 100, y3 = 50
Button 1  Hard: x2 - x1 ≥ 40, y2 - y1 ≥ 20
                Soft:  x2 - x1 = x3/2, y2 - y1 = y3/2
Button 2  Hard: x3 - x2 ≥ 40, y2 - y1 ≥ 20
                Soft: x3 - x2 = x3/2, y2 - y1 = y3/2
Button 3  Hard: x3 - x1 ≥ 40, y3 - y2 ≥ 20
                Soft: x3 - x1 = x3, y3 - y2 = y3/2
                x3 = 100, y3 = 100
Button 1  Hard: x2 - x1 ≥ 40, y2 - y1 ≥ 20
                 Soft:  x2 - x1 = x3/2, y2 - y1 = y3/2
Button 2  Hard: x3 - x2 ≥ 40, y2 - y1 ≥ 20
                 Soft: x3 - x2 = x3/2, y2 - y1 = y3/2
Button 3  Hard: x3 - x1 ≥ 40, y3 - y2 ≥ 20
                 Soft: x3 - x1 = x3, y3 - y2 = y3/2
Fig. 1.
A GUI constraint speciﬁcation before and after resizing
Approaches related to warm-start strategies have been
proposed in numerous previous works. Lessard [17] ana-
lyzed computational speed and the effect of warm-starting
for different iterative methods with large systems, including
the multigrid method, the preconditioned conjugate-gradient
method, and several new variants of these methods. Using
a previous estimate for initializing an iterative scheme could
reduce computation time signiﬁcantly. Wright et al. [18] used
a warm-start strategy to speed up gradient projection for sparse
reconstruction (GPSR) and iterative shrinkage/thresholding
(IST) algorithms. Other methods for accelerating convergence
by using warm-start techniques in iterative solution procedures
are described in [19]–[21]. The use of warm-start strategies for
constraint-based GUI layout problems using SOR has not been
explored before.
III. BACKGROUND
To put our study into context, this section gives a short
overview of constraint-based GUIs, SOR, and the extensions
of SOR necessary to solve GUI layout speciﬁcations.
A. User Interface Layout as a Linear Problem
Constraints are a suitable mechanism for specifying the
relationships among objects. They are used in the area of logic
programming, artiﬁcial intelligence and GUI speciﬁcation.
They can be used to describe problems that are difﬁcult to
solve, conveniently decoupling the description of the problems
from their solution. Due to this property, constraints are a
suitable way of specifying GUI layouts, where the objects
are widgets and the relationships between them are spatial
relationships such as alignment and proportions. In addition
to the relationships to other widgets, each widget has its
own set of constraints describing properties such as minimum,
maximum and preferred size.
GUI layouts are often speciﬁed with linear constraints [4].
The positions and sizes of the widgets in a layout translate
to variables. Constraints about alignment and proportions

translate to linear equations, and constraints about minimum
and maximum sizes translate to linear inequalities. There
are constraints for each widget that relate each of its four
boundaries to another part of the layout, or specify boundary
values for the widget’s size, as shown in Figure 1. As a
result, the direct interaction between constraints is limited by
the topology of a layout, resulting in sparsity of the linear
speciﬁcation.
During application runtime, GUIs need to be adapted to
changing conditions such as the available GUI size. This
is done by changing some of the constraints, typically a
small number. For example, the overall size of the GUI is
typically speciﬁed in by constraints: one for the width and
one for the height. When the GUI size changes, only these two
constraints need to be adjusted, as shown in Figure 1. Another
typical situation where constraints need to be changed is when
preferred sizes change. For example, if the language settings
are changed in an application, the preferred sizes of textual
labels have to adjust to the new language.
B. Successive Over-Relaxation (SOR)
Most of the research on iterative methods deals with it-
erative methods for solving linear systems of equalities and
inequalities for sparse square matrices, the most important
method being SOR, also known as linear relaxation. This
section summarizes the most important ﬁndings.
The best-known iterative method for solving linear con-
straints is the Gauss-Seidel method [22]. Given a system of n
equations and n variables of the form
Ax = b
(1)
we can rewrite the equation for the ith term as follows
xi = 1
aii
(bi −
n
X
j=1
aijxj).
(2)
The variable xi, which is brought onto the left side, is called
the pivot variable, and aii is the pivot coefﬁcient or pivot
element chosen for row i. An initial estimate for x is chosen,
which usually does not fulﬁll the equations. The algorithm
reﬁnes the estimate by repeatedly replacing all individual xi
so that the ith eqation becomes fulﬁlled. This is done in round-
robin fashion, and one full run through all n equations is one
iteration, r being the iteration number. We can therefore write
the process as
xr+1
i
= 1
aii
(bi −
i−1
X
j=1
aijxr+1
j
−
n
X
j=i+1
aijxr
j).
(3)
The algorithm iterates until the relative approximate error is
less than a pre-speciﬁed tolerance.
SOR, also known as linear relaxation, is an improvement
of the Gauss-Seidel method [7]. It is used to speed up the
convergence of the Gauss-Seidel method by introducing a
parameter ω, known as relaxation parameter, so that
xr+1
i
= ω
aii
(bi −
i−1
X
j=1
aijxr+1
j
−
n
X
j=i+1
aijxr
j) + (1 −w)xr
i .
(4)
This reduces to the Gauss-Seidel method if ω = 1. It is known
as over-relaxation if ω > 1, and known as under-relaxation if
ω < 1.
Deﬁnition 1. The spectral radius of a matrix is the maximum
of the absolute values of its eigenvalues.
The convergence rate of the SOR method depends on the
spectral radius of the coefﬁcient matrix of the problem. The
smaller the spectral radius is, the faster the SOR method
converges. We usually have well-conditioned coefﬁcient ma-
trices in the GUI layout domain for which the SOR method
converges.
SOR supports linear equalities as well as inequalities. In-
equalities are handled similar to equalities [23], [24]: in each
iteration, inequalities are ignored if they are satisﬁed, and
otherwise treated as if they were equalities.
C. Pivot Assignment
In the case of square coefﬁcient matrices, pivots are selected
on the main diagonal. This is not possible in the over-
determined case. Since the diagonal elements do not lend
themselves naturally as pivot elements if the matrix is non-
square, we need to explicitly select a pivot element for each
constraint. In other words, we need to determine a pivot
assignment.
Deﬁnition 2. A pivot assignment is an assignment of con-
straints to variables.
γ : Constraints →Variables
In previous work, we suggested algorithms which select
a pivot element randomly or according to some criteria [8].
We use our random pivot assignment algorithm for the study
presented in this paper. This algorithm assigns the pivot
variable for each constraint randomly in each iteration, so that
the assignment varies over the iterations.
It is not inherently obvious that randomized assignments
work for the linear relaxation approach, but it is the simplest
approach that may work. Although the random algorithm does
generally not make the optimal assignment with regard to
convergence, it reduces the effect of bad assignments while
allowing for good assignments. In particular, it is guaranteed
that every suitable variable will be chosen as pivot variable at
some point. The general assumption underlying randomized
algorithms is that the effect of good choices outweighs the
effect of bad choices.
In the general case constraint-based GUIs are over-
determined, which can result in conﬂicts between constraints
of the problem. A proper pivot assignment algorithm alone
is not sufﬁcient to deal with such cases. A technique to
handle conﬂicts between constraints, e.g. in the form of soft
constraints, is required.

D. Conﬂict Resolution
To resolve conﬂicts in over-determined systems, soft con-
straints are introduced. A natural way to support soft con-
straints is to assign priorities to all constraints. These priorities
can be deﬁned as a total order on all constraints that speciﬁes
which one of two constraints should be violated in case of a
conﬂict.
In our study we use the constraint insertion algorithm
proposed in previous work [8]. This algorithm tests constraints
incrementally. We start with an empty set E of enabled
constraints. Iterating through the constraints in order of de-
scending priority, we add each constraint tentatively to E
(“enabling” it), and try to solve the resulting speciﬁcation. If a
solution is found, then we proceed to the next constraint. If no
solution is found within a ﬁxed maximum number of iterations,
then the tentatively added constraint is removed again. In that
case, the previous solution is restored and we proceed to the
next constraint.
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this section, we evaluate the use of warm-starting for
GUI layout problems using SOR. We tested speciﬁcally the
effect of warm-starting a constraint solver on the performance
in terms of computation time.
A. Methodology
We conducted the experiments with our implementation of
an SOR solver for GUI layout, which uses random pivot
assignment and constraint insertion as a conﬂict resolution
strategy. We used two versions of that solver: the ﬁrst version
started every solver run with an initial solution x = (0, . . . , 0),
the second version started every solver run with the optimal
solution from the previous run x = x∗
prev.
We evaluated the following three use cases:
1) Small-step resizing: The width and height of the window
was randomly changed by a value in between 0 and 3
pixels.
2) Big-step resizing: The width and height of the GUI
window was randomly changed by a value between 4
and 3000 pixels.
3) Constraint change: 10 per cent of all constraints of a
GUI were randomly changed.
Small-step resizing occurs in practice when a window is
continuously resized by dragging a window border. Big-step
resizing occurs when a GUI is initially loaded on different
screens, when a GUI is switched to or from full-screen mode,
or when the orientation of a screen is changed. Constraint
changes as in use case 3 occur, for example, when several
preferred sizes change as a result of changing the language of
an application.
Layout speciﬁcations were randomly generated using the
parameterized algorithm described in [4]. The problem size
was varied from 0 to 201 areas. For each area 4 constraints
are added, which specify the position of the area in the layout.
Additionally, a speciﬁcation needs 4 constraints to deﬁne the
size of the window. So we started with a problem of 4
Fig. 2.
Small-step resizing performance results
constraints and ended with a problem of 808 constraints. For
each size, 10 random layouts were evaluated. For each of the
three use cases, each of these random layouts was changed 20
times, and the solving time was measured. A linear relaxation
parameter of 0.7 and a tolerance of 0.01 were used for solving.
The measurements were performed on a desktop computer
with Intel i5 3.3GHz processor and 64-bit Windows 7 running
an Oracle Java virtual machine.
Symbol
Explanation
β0
Intercept of the regression model
β1−3
Estimated model parameters
c
Number of constraints
T
Measured time in milliseconds
R2
Coefﬁcient of determination
TABLE I
SYMBOLS
To compare the performance of both versions of the solver
we used a regression model
T = f(c) + ϵ
and examined the estimated model visually and numerically.
See Table I for an explanation of the symbols used.
B. Results
To identify the performance trend of the solvers, we tried
different regression functions f (linear, quadratic, log, cubic).
We found that the best ﬁtting model is the polynomial model
T = β0 + β1c + β2c2 + β3c3 + ϵ.
Key parameters of the regression models are depicted in
Table II. A graphical representation of the measurements and
the models can be found in Figures 2, 3 and 4. The results
suggest a better performance of the solver with the warm-start
strategy for all three use cases.
The variance of the measured runtime differs noticeably for
both approaches. It is smaller for the rather small changes in

TABLE II
REGRESSION MODELS FOR SOLVERS WITH AND WITHOUT WARM-START STRATEGY
Strategy
β0
β1
β2
β3
R2
Small-step resizing with warm start
6.508 · 104***
−8.940 · 102***
23.55***
7.576 · 10−4***
0.999
Small-step resizing without warm start
4.104 · 104***
68.00***
26.05***
5.971 · 10−3***
0.999
Big-step resizing with warm start
3.186 · 104***
−89.32***
13.42***
3.202 · 10−3***
0.996
Big-step resizing without warm start
1.208 · 104***
3.729 · 102***
18.24***
4.921 · 10−3***
0.999
Constraint changes with warm start
1.074 · 105***
−1.289 · 103***
21.88***
−2.721 · 10−4***
0.976
Constraint changes without warm start
1.231 · 105***
−1.648 · 103***
30.17***
−2.837 · 10−4***
0.962
Signiﬁcance codes: *** p < 0.001
Fig. 3.
Big-step resizing performance results
Fig. 4.
Constraint change performance results
small-step resizing, and bigger for the big-step resizing and
constraint change use cases. Especially for constraint change,
this indicates that some problems with a lot of conﬂicts were
generated, which require more iterations and hence a longer
runtime. The measurements indicate that the variance of the
runtime with warm start is smaller than without warm start,
and this might be worth further analysis. It is somewhat
astonishing that the experiments reveal only a relatively small
effect of the warm-start strategy. One reason could be the use
of the random pivot selector. Since it selects pivot elements
randomly, it can select pivot elements which let the solution
deviate strongly from the initial solution before it actually
converges towards the new solution. Another reason can be
that the changes in the speciﬁcation – even though they are
fairly small – drastically change the solution in some cases.
This can be, for example, due to conﬂict resolution. Some
constraints, which were not satisﬁed with the old speciﬁcation,
can become satisﬁable and suddenly have an effect on the
solution after the speciﬁcation was changed. Similarly, small
changes in the speciﬁcation can lead to new conﬂicts and
hence disabling of constraints.
The effects of the warm-start strategy are comparable for all
three use cases, but are the strongest for small-step resizing.
This is convenient, as speed is of particular importance for the
small-step resizing use case. Small-step resizing is typically
done interactively by the user, and for a good user experience
the GUI should react to such resizing in real-time.
V. CONCLUSION
In constraint-based GUIs with dynamic behavior, the speci-
ﬁcation that represents the layout of the GUI is often changed,
e.g. when a window is resized. These changes are usually
small, resulting in speciﬁcations that are very similar. Since
the speciﬁcations are similar, one can expect also the results
to be similar. Therefore, we evaluated the use of a warm-start
strategy to improve the efﬁciency of SOR-based constraint
solvers for GUIs. Three common use cases were evaluated
with randomly generated GUI layouts: small-step resizing, big-
step resizing, and random changes of several constraints.
We found that an SOR-based solver with a warm-start
strategy indeed exhibits a better runtime behavior than a
solver without warm-start strategy. Implementing a warm-
start strategy in such solvers does not introduce additional
computational effort, as existing values are simply reused. It
is therefore advisable to equip SOR-based GUI layout solvers
with a warm-start strategy.
However, we also found that the effect of a warm-start
strategy is weaker than we expected. Possible reasons are the
random pivot assignment and the constraint insertion conﬂict
resolution strategy used in the experiment. Thus, a future work
would be to explore the effect of warm starts also for other
types of pivot selectors and conﬂict resolution strategies.
