Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 72 (2021) 1307-1341
Submitted 01/2021; published 12/2021
Quantum Mathematics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Dominic Widdows

IonQ, Inc., 4505 Campus Drive, College Park, MD 20740, USA
Kirsty Kitto

University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia
Trevor Cohen

University of Washington, Box 358047, 850 Republican St, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
Abstract
In the decade since 2010, successes in artiﬁcial intelligence have been at the forefront of com-
puter science and technology, and vector space models have solidiﬁed a position at the forefront of
artiﬁcial intelligence. At the same time, quantum computers have become much more powerful,
and announcements of major advances are frequently in the news.
The mathematical techniques underlying both these areas have more in common than is some-
times realized. Vector spaces took a position at the axiomatic heart of quantum mechanics in the
1930s, and this adoption was a key motivation for the derivation of logic and probability from the
linear geometry of vector spaces. Quantum interactions between particles are modelled using the
tensor product, which is also used to express objects and operations in artiﬁcial neural networks.
This paper describes some of these common mathematical areas, including examples of how
they are used in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), particularly in automated reasoning and natural lan-
guage processing (NLP). Techniques discussed include vector spaces, scalar products, subspaces
and implication, orthogonal projection and negation, dual vectors, density matrices, positive op-
erators, and tensor products. Application areas include information retrieval, categorization and
implication, modelling word-senses and disambiguation, inference in knowledge bases, decision
making, and semantic composition.
Some of these approaches can potentially be implemented on quantum hardware. Many of the
practical steps in this implementation are in early stages, and some are already realized. Explaining
some of the common mathematical tools can help researchers in both AI and quantum computing
further exploit these overlaps, recognizing and exploring new directions along the way.
1. Introduction
Vector space models have solidiﬁed a position at the forefront of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and are
a common building block for many kinds of systems. From early uses in information retrieval and
image processing, they have spread to semantic modeling in many systems, reaching even greater
prominence during the past decade due to their use in deep learning. However, vector spaces have
a long and illustrious history, and as an analytical technique, vector spaces were established in the
mid-1800s. They also provide the foundation for the underlying mathematical model for quantum
theory.
This paper aims to support readers who are familiar with the use of vectors in AI, and inter-
ested in mathematical concepts from quantum theory, to make use of this promising set of results
and novel techniques in the ﬁeld of AI. Section 2 summarizes the use of vector spaces in AI and
quantum mechanics, including an explanation of how the representation of wavefunctions leads to
the study of vector spaces and linear operators in formal quantum mechanics. Section 3 explains the
quantum model for information retrieval, including the use of the quantum logic of subspaces for
modelling concepts and query operations. Section 4 looks in more detail at models for categories and
hypernyms, motivating the use of density matrices and positive operators from quantum mechanics.
Section 5 surveys vector models for semantic composition, in particular the use of tensor products
©2021 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.
arXiv:2101.04255v6  [cs.AI]  16 Dec 2021

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
Table 1: A term–document matrix
Doc1
Doc2
Doc3
...
Docm
Term1
M11
M12
M13
...
M1m
Term2
M21
M22
M23
...
M2m
Term3
M31
M32
M33
...
M3m
...
...
...
...
...
...
Termn
Mn1
Mn2
Mn3
...
Mnm
and related operators. Section 6 presents some of the early implementations of these methods on
physical quantum hardware, adding fresh vitality to this area of research.
Our hope is that AI practitioners with a grounding in linear algebra will ﬁnd that they already
know much of the mathematics they need to understand large parts of quantum theory, and to
begin exploring ways in which they might apply methods inspired by quantum mathematics to the
generation of new results in AI.
2. Vector Space Models in AI and Quantum Physics
Vectors have their roots in the beginning of Euclidean geometry, with the notion that a straight line
can be drawn between any two points and indeﬁnitely extended (Elements of Geometry, Book I, Ax-
ioms 1 and 2). By the mid-1840s, 3-dimensional vectors and 1-dimensional scalars were thoroughly
explored in Hamilton’s work on quaternions; Cauchy and Hamilton collaborated on the develop-
ment of matrices and linear algebra; and the algebra of vectors or ‘extended quantities’ (German
Ausdehnungslehre) and their products in any number of dimensions is fully-formed in the work of
Grassmann (1862), a summary of which is made available by Fearnley-Sander (1979).
Since then vectors have played a ubiquitous role in scientiﬁc advances across a great range
of ﬁelds, including diﬀerential geometry, electromagnetism, relativity, machine learning: and of
particular interest in this paper, artiﬁcial intelligence and quantum theory.
2.1 Vector Models in AI
The use of vector spaces in AI goes back at least to information retrieval in the 1960’s (Switzer,
1965), the vector model of the SMART retrieval system being a particularly inﬂuential example
dating from this pioneering period (Salton & McGill, 1983). Introductions to the vector model for
information retrieval are given by Widdows (2004, Ch 5) and Manning, Raghavan, and Sch¨utze
(2008, Ch 14). In such a system, a document collection is processed into a large table or matrix M
whose rows represent terms, whose columns represent documents, and where the entry Mij contains
a number measuring the extent to which term i appears in document j (as is depicted in Table 1).
The rows (or columns) in any such matrix can be added together by adding the corresponding
coordinates, and multiplied by a scalar by multiplying each coordinate, so it is immediately apparent
that the rows (or columns) of any such matrix can be thought of as vectors in a vector space, whose
dimension is the number of columns (or rows).
Such a general description is naturally available as a model for many other situations that are
relevant to AI. Common examples include:
• The adjacency matrix of any weighted graph (Bollob´as, 1998, Chapter VIII).
• A collection of grayscale images, each of the same width and height, where a row represents
an image, columns represent individual pixels, and each coordinate represents the shade for
that pixel in that image (G´eron, 2019, Ch 3).
1308

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
• A dataset from a medical study where each row corresponds to an individual patient and
columns correspond to a measurable property or “vital sign” such as height, weight, age, or
blood pressure values. Many statistical learning techniques begin by assuming their inputs can
be modelled in such a fashion (Hastie, Tibshirani, & Friedman, 2001).
• Any collection of data projected into a lower-dimensional space, for example, the ‘best ﬁt’
subspace produced by a decomposition technique such as Singular Value Decomposition. In
the case of textual data, the technique of projecting a term-document matrix onto such a
subspace is referred to as Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer & Dumais, 1997), and today
it has many variants, surveyed from an AI point of view by Turney, Pantel, et al. (2010) and
from a machine learning point of view by G´eron (2019, Ch. 8).
• The activity states of a connectionist network (Hinton, 1990; Smolensky, 1990, Deﬁnition 2.1).
Work on connectionist representations in AI contributed greatly to the development of today’s
powerful neural network models (G´eron, 2019, Ch 10).
• The output of a nonlinear training / learning algorithm, for example, the feature-weights
learned by a neural network. Such models have become increasingly prominent in the last few
years: techniques that use several intervening layers in the network are often referred to as
deep learning, and whether or not a network is deep in this sense, the inputs, outputs, and
learned parameters for intervening layers are typically represented as vectors (G´eron, 2019,
Ch. 10). When applied to textual data the resulting vector models are often referred to as
word embeddings in more recent papers since Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, and Dean (2013).
Thus there are many related techniques for deriving collections of vectors from empirical observa-
tions, and these techniques have become a crucial cornerstone of AI. Key mathematical beneﬁts
include expressing addition of vectors as a pairwise-sum of the corresponding coordinates (for vec-
tors x = (x1, . . . , xn) and y = (y1, . . . , yn), their vector sum x + y = (x1 + y1, . . . , xn + yn)), and
measuring similarity (for example, using a scalar product where x · y = Pn
i=1 xiyi). For a beginner’s
introduction to measuring similarity and distance, and the relationship between scalar products,
cosine similarity, and Euclidean distance, see Widdows (2004, Ch 4, 5).
The graded way similarity can be expressed in vector models contrasts with classical Boolean
logic: for example, the introduction of cosine-similarity between query vectors and document vectors
as a continuous (hence graded) measure of relevance in information retrieval enabled systems to
return the most relevant documents ranked in order. This property became vital once document
collections became large enough that simply marking documents as ‘relevant’ or ‘not relevant’ left
too many ‘relevant’ documents for a user to read.
The use of vector sums for generating graded probabilities in this manner has been termed
‘superposition’ in physics. It enables a combination that is ‘some of each’, which contrasts with both
Boolean set intersection which is sometimes too speciﬁc, and Boolean set union which is sometimes
too general. Historically, this modeling requirement was recognized very early in the development
of quantum theory, where the same vector sum technique is used to eﬀectively represent particles
that can be measured in more than one way (this usage is explained in more detail in Section 2.3).
The adoption of similar methods in AI is more recent, but stems from a similar motivation, as
expressed for example by Smolensky (1986):
In the subsymbolic paradigm, the semantically interpretable entities are activation pat-
terns, and these combine by superposition: activation patterns superimpose upon each
other, the way that wave-like structures do in physical systems. This diﬀerence is another
manifestation of moving the formalization from the discrete to the continuous . . .
The core motivation for using vector spaces in AI still has its roots in the beneﬁts of using
continuous representations to complement and sometimes improve upon discrete Boolean models.
1309

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
These representations can then be put to good use in problems involving classiﬁcation (Manning
et al., 2008, Ch 14), (G´eron, 2019, Ch 3-5) and logical reasoning (Widdows & Cohen, 2015). Machine
learning techniques for building such representations have improved considerably, with the use of
deep neural networks, sequence modelling, transformers and attention-based techniques (for a survey,
see G´eron (2019, Ch 16)). Vector models are used throughout AI and related ﬁelds, all the way from
pioneering work in information retrieval to today’s neural network language models. So it makes
sense to ask whether vector methods derived from other areas of science are useful for learning and
reasoning with such models.
2.2 Why Quantum Theory?
Quantum physics appears often and prominently in the science and technology news. Two popular
quantum physics topics are immediately relevant to AI: ﬁrstly, the suggestion that natural intelli-
gence may involve quantum physics directly, put forth most famously by Penrose (1999); secondly,
the increasing technological progress being made in quantum computing, described by e.g., Rieﬀel
and Polak (2014), Bernhardt (2019). The popular appeal of quantum physics and computing is easy
to appreciate: it challenges established norms; it is at forefront of innovation; it is real yet mysterious
(Aaronson, 2013).
It is commonly said that quantum theory applies only to particularly small physical systems,
because many of the discrete quantization and interference eﬀects explained by quantum mechanics
are not signiﬁcantly observable at large scale. However, the mathematics developed as part of vector
models in quantum theory can also be used to describe larger human-scale phenomena, such as
individuals or groups making decisions or searching for information. One of the pioneers and leaders
in this area has been the physicist Diederik Aerts (see Aerts, Durt, Grib, Van Bogaert, and Zapatrin
(1993) and onwards).
The techniques and models proposed by Aerts and others are sometimes
called quantum-inspired, quantum-like, or generalized quantum models (Khrennikov, 2010). This
makes a case that quantum mathematics is worth investigating in situations outside the traditional
microscopic domain of quantum physics, without answering the challenging ontological questions
that arise when asking how quantum physics might aﬀect larger systems.
In this context, the
main argument in favor of quantum mathematical models is utilitarian: many solutions to known
problems have been improved in a number of diﬀerent ways.
Books and papers discussing the
application of quantum mathematics are available in several ﬁelds including: information retrieval
(Melucci, 2015); machine learning (Wittek, 2014); cognitive science (Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012);
and economics (Khrennikov, 2010).
Within AI itself, the book by Wichert (2020) provides a graduate-level text on quantum comput-
ing and AI, grounded in computational theory, physics, and quantum algorithms. In contrast, this
paper provides a much more thorough introduction to tensors and their uses. Potential quantum
approaches in AI are well-surveyed in the article by Ying (2010), which gives a thorough introduction
to qubits and quantum gates. In comparison, our work here focusses upon two decade’s hindsight
and progress in the use of vector models and related mathematics including subspaces, projections,
and tensor products which has ﬂourished in AI.
Simultaneously, the increasing power of quantum computers has turned quantum mechanics from
a fascinating mystery to an increasingly practical opportunity, and quantum advantages such as the
promise of exponential memory savings are bound to attract the attention of researchers in AI. Some
recent advances in AI and quantum computing are presented in Section 6.
A question remains: Why does the mathematics of quantum theory appear to support these types
of scenarios? Many diﬀerent explanations are possible depending upon the philosophical stance that
one adopts, but for now we will remain agnostic.
We will return to this important question in
Section 7.6, with more insights from the mathematics of quantum theory to support our proposed
answer to this question. For now we will continue with a brief introduction to the topic of quantum
theory itself.
1310

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
2.3 Formal Quantum Mechanics
To appreciate the appeal of quantum-inspired techniques in vector space models we must work to
bridge a gap between the physical results of quantum theory (as predicted by quantum mechanics),
and its mathematical formulation (in terms of state vectors and operators on Hilbert space). In
the process, we hope to show that topics considered to be philosophically challenging in quantum
physics, such as non-locality, quantum disjunction, and entanglement, are mathematically quite
straightforward. Many of them rely upon simple operations such as projecting lines onto planes,
ﬁnding the plane spanned by two lines, and multiplying vectors to generate square matrices which
can be added together. The mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics mainly uses standard
linear algebra, which means that many of its techniques are already familiar to those working in AI.
An excellent introduction is provided by Isham (1995) and of course Dirac (1930). Of particular
note, the formalism of quantum theory requires us to move from a model of reality that assumes
localised particles, to one that assumes waves to be fundamental, and these can be represented as
vectors using Fourier series.
Quantum theory was invented to describe the behavior of subatomic particles, and has success-
fully explained and predicted many behaviors that could not be adequately accounted for by late
19th century classical conceptualizations. These classical models understood the universe as made
up of particles, imagined to consist of Euclidean ‘points’ (that is, things that have no spatial extent
of their own, and can be located anywhere in a continuous space), and vibrating waves such as light.1
In the early decades of the 20th century, particle-like behavior was observed in light using experi-
ments that increased our understanding of the polarization and interference of photons (Dirac, 1930,
Ch 1). More experiments revealed that matter exhibited wave-like as well as particle-like behaviour.
A new theory was needed, one in which both ‘matter’ such as atoms, electrons, and protons, and
‘radiation’ such as light exhibited both wave-like properties (such as interference) and particle-like
properties (such as coming in discrete chunks).
2.4 Waves as Vectors Using Fourier Series
Mathematically, any wave can be represented as a function. For example, a standing wave on a
string of length L is represented as a function f : x ∈[0, L] →R, and a dynamic (moving) wave
is represented as a function of two variables f : (x ∈[0, L], t ∈R) →R. Real functions can be
multiplied by any real number, and added together pairwise, and with these natural deﬁnitions, the
standard vector space axioms are satisﬁed: thus the set of all such real functions forms a vector
space. Functions to the reals are vectors.
Moreover, piecewise smooth functions of one variable can be represented as weighted sums of
their basic constituents. Such representations were introduced by Joseph Fourier (1768–1830), who
demonstrated that under certain continuity conditions a real function f over the interval [0, 2π] can
be uniquely represented as a sum of harmonic functions,
f(x) =
∞
X
0
ak sin(kx) + bk cos(kx).
This sum is called the Fourier series of f, and the ak and bk are called its Fourier coeﬃcients. The
example in Figure 1 shows the ﬁrst few harmonic functions that sum up to form closer and closer
approximations to a square wave, the expansion in this case being P
n=1,3,5,... sin(nx)/n.
1. This is an accepted if a somewhat simpliﬁed view of physics before 1900. For example, Sir Isaac Newton postulated
the existence of distinct corpuscles of light, and both Democritus and Plato postulated the existence of particles
with some sort of shape or spatial extent.
1311

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
Sum
sin(x)
sin(3x)/3
Sum
sin(x)
sin(3x)/3
sin(5x)/5
sin(7x)/7
Figure 1: Fourier series approximations for a square wave, showing contributions from the ﬁrst two
and a the ﬁrst four nonzero harmonics.
In vector space terms,2 the sine and cosine functions form a basis for the vector space of real
functions, and the coeﬃcients ak, bk are the coordinates of the vector f in this basis. For example,
in the case of the square wave of Figure 1, the ak coordinates are (0, 1, 0, 1
3, 0, 1
5, 0, 1
7, . . .) and the
bk coordinates are all zero. To represent an arbitrary function with perfect precision, an inﬁnite
number of such coordinates may be needed, so the vector space is inﬁnite dimensional in principle.
Inﬁnite dimensions are needed in quantum mechanics to represent potential values of the position
and momentum operators (Khrennikov, 2010, Ch 2), but in quantum computing, the most typical
vector space building block is the 2-dimensional complex vector space C2 which is used to represent
the state of a single qubit (Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, §1.2) (Ying, 2010, §2).
The vector space of piecewise smooth functions has a natural scalar product: for two real func-
tions f and g deﬁned over the interval [a, b], we deﬁne their scalar product to be
R b
a f(x)g(x) dx.
(This scalar product is often called the inner product and is typically written ⟨f, g⟩in functional
analysis.)
Crucially for the Fourier theory, for all natural numbers n, m, the inner product
R 2π
0
sin(nx) sin(mx) dx evaluates to 0, unless n = m in which case it evaluates to 1.
The same
result holds for products of cosine functions, and all products of a sine and a cosine function. Thus
these sine and cosine functions form not only a basis, but an orthonormal basis for the vector space
of smooth real functions. (An orthonormal basis is one where each basic vector has unit length and
each pair of distinct basis vectors are orthogonal to one another. Note that in machine learning,
‘one-hot encodings’ form a kind of orthonormal basis (G´eron, 2019, Ch 2).
Representing functions using coordinates via Fourier series expansion is only one option. Many
other such expansions were later found, for single-variable functions over the real numbers, and also
for functions over other spaces such as the sphere, the so-called spherical harmonic functions. The
basis of spherical harmonic functions is crucial to the solution of the Schr¨odinger equation for the
hydrogen atom, and in fact each possible energy level for an electron corresponds to a particular
spherical harmonic function. Because of this, the number and distribution of spherical harmonic
functions accounts directly for the structure of the periodic table of elements in chemistry (Dirac,
1930, §39), but they are not just limited to physical systems.
Interestingly, this mathematical
formalism has been fruitfully used in the rendering of images, a point that was ﬁrst recognised by
Sloan, Kautz, and Snyder (2002). Spherical harmonics can be seen as a way to encode information
over a sphere, in general, beyond their historical origins in solving partial diﬀerential equations in
mathematical physics.
2. Introductions to vector spaces — basis vectors, coordinates, dimensions, and linear dependence — can be found
in texts on linear algebra (Strang, 1993), quantum computing (Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, Ch 2), natural language
processing (Widdows, 2004, Ch 5), and in many online tutorials.
1312

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
Figure 2: Projection using the outer product of the x axis with itself, |x⟩⟨x|.
By the end of the 19th century this rich mathematical theory was fully mature, before quantum
physics was developed. Functions, series, limits, conditions for convergence, and the uses of diﬀerent
bases of functions to represent diﬀerent physical systems (typically arising from solutions to partial
diﬀerential equations) were well-understood. Around this time David Hilbert added to the earlier
vector spaces of Hermann Grassmann (1862), working speciﬁcally with vector spaces with a well-
deﬁned scalar product and where every convergent sequence has a limit. Such a space is today called
a Hilbert space.
Later, Paul Dirac (1930) introduced the bra-ket notation, designed especially for calculations
involving wavefunctions of quantum systems represented as vectors in such a Hilbert space.
In
Dirac notation, the wavefunction ψ is written as a ‘ket’ vector |ψ⟩, and then the scalar product of
|φ⟩and |ψ⟩is written as ⟨φ|ψ⟩. The object ⟨φ| in this expression has its own interpretation as a
covector or dual vector, called a ‘bra’ vector in Dirac notation: for any vector space V over the
ﬁeld F, the dual space V ∗is the space of F-linear mappings from V to F, whereupon it is easy to
show that V ∗is isomorphic to V , and a particular scalar product (written as a bilinear form ⟨u, v⟩)
induces one such isomorphism by the identity u →⟨u, ⟩(Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, §2.1.4). One of
the key reasons for using Hilbert space as the setting for quantum mechanics is that the existence
of such a scalar product makes it possible to switch between the ket vector |ψ⟩and the bra covector
⟨ψ| whenever this is convenient, and the similarity between the angle bracket notation for bilinear
forms and the bra-ket notation makes this elegantly obvious. Introductions to Dirac notation are
given by Nielsen and Chuang (2002, Ch 2), Van Rijsbergen (2004, p. 104), Bernhardt (2019, Ch 2),
and the original presentation in Dirac (1930) is still very readable.
Figure 2 shows the projection of a ket vector |z⟩onto the x-axis whose ket vector is |x⟩. The
projection operator is constructed as |x⟩⟨x|, which represents the outer product of the vector |x⟩
with itself. For |x⟩, this outer product is a diagonal matrix with zero values except for a 1 in the top
leftmost quadrant. Multiplying |z⟩by this matrix results in its projection onto the x axis, Px(|z⟩).
Of note, the length of this projected vector is
√
2/2, which is also the scalar product between |z⟩and
|x⟩, or ⟨z|x⟩(as well as the cosine of the angle between these unit length vectors). This projection can
be interpreted probabilistically — the length of the projection on |x⟩gives the probability amplitude
of observing the superposition z in state x. Squaring this probability amplitude gives the probability
itself, in this case 0.5.
It should also be noted that elements of the dual space V ∗are linear operators on V and vectors
in their own right: and elements of V are also linear operators on V ∗. Matrices present another
1313

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
such example. An m × n real matrix can be used to represent a linear mapping from Rn to Rm
using matrix multiplication. At the same time, it is easy to see that that matrix addition adds the
coordinates of two m × n matrices just like vector addition, and that the set of all m × n is also a
vector space — matrices are both vectors and operators on vectors.
Another crucial deﬁnition related to dual vectors and linear operators is that of the adjoint
operator. The adjoint of a linear operator A is the operator A† such that ⟨A†(φ)|ψ⟩= ⟨φ|A(ψ)⟩for
all |φ⟩, |ψ⟩. The deﬁnition of a Hilbert space guarantees that adjoints exist and are unique, and that
(A†)† = A (Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, §2.1.6).
2.5 Observation and Uncertainty
Experimental measurements on quantum systems are represented in quantum theory using an ob-
servable, which is a linear operator A that acts on the vector |φ⟩to give a vector |Aφ⟩. If this
observation is performed twice in quick succession, the same state is always observed, so |Aφ⟩is
invariant under the action of A. Such a situation occurs mathematically for states represented by
eigenvectors of the operator A, which are those vectors for which A |ψk⟩= λk |ψk⟩(i.e. vectors that
do not change their orientation when the operator is applied), where λk is the kth eigenvalue of A.
The probability of observing the system |φ⟩in the eigenstate |ψk⟩is given empirically by | ⟨φ|ψk⟩|2.
As well as being probability amplitudes, in geometric terms the scalar products {⟨φ|ψi⟩} are also
the coordinates for the vector |φ⟩when it is expanded in the basis given by the eigenvectors {|ψi⟩}.
So to understand the way A operates on |φ⟩, it is enough to write the vector |φ⟩as an expansion
P λi |ψi⟩, where λi = ⟨φ|ψi⟩. Such an expansion works only if the operator A has a suitable spec-
trum of eigenvectors with real eigenvalues (they must be real if their squares are to be interpreted
as probabilities). It follows from linear algebra that A must be self-adjoint, that is, A = A† or more
explicitly, ⟨Aψ|φ⟩= ⟨ψ|Aφ⟩for all |φ⟩, |ψ⟩. In terms of coordinates and matrices, an operator is
self-adjoint if and only if it is represented by a matrix that is equal to its conjugate transpose: that
is, aji = ¯aij for all i, j. Such a matrix is called Hermitian.
Other results in quantum mechanics can now be derived relatively easily. For example, a quan-
tum superposition arises whenever two (or more) state vectors are added together, a scenario that
commonly occurs in many vector space AI models. Similarly, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
follows from the fact that linear operators do not usually commute with one another (as is well-known
from matrix multiplication, AB and BA are not usually the same), and the size of the uncertainty
is bounded by the commutator AB −BA. This follows directly from the mathematical representa-
tion, which as we have seen, follows from the basic requirement that the system be represented in
a way that is amenable to linear superposition (hence the use of vectors), and that observations be
represented in such a way that performing the same observation twice in succession gives the same
answer.
Understanding the relationship between such mathematical implications and behaviors in the
physical world is one of the key areas of research in quantum foundations. For example, on the
Uncertainty Principle itself, Van Rijsbergen (2004, p. 114) pointed out “It is surprising that such
a famous principle in physics is implied by the choice of mathematical representation for state and
observable in Hilbert space.” While the philosophical status of this implication may still be debated,
the claim that a change of basis leads to diﬀerent and unpredictable measurements has gone from a
paradox in the 1930s, to the design of encryption protocols such as BB84 in the 1980s (Bernhardt,
2019, Ch 3), to commercial oﬀerings of quantum key distribution today. Other properties such as
nonlocality and entanglement will be introduced and discussed mathematically in this paper: as
described by authors including Coecke and Kissinger (2017), although some of these mathematical
consequences were ﬁrst perceived as awkward diﬃculties for realistic physics, they have now become
cornerstones of how quantum computers work in practice.
1314

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
3. The Quantum Formulation of Information Retrieval
Information retrieval was pioneering in the use of vector spaces for representing language and infor-
mation, and the ﬁrst area related to AI and computational linguistics to be described thoroughly
from a quantum theoretical point of view (by Van Rijsbergen (2004)). Because of this head start,
information retrieval and related word vector representations are a prominent source of examples in
this paper. This section introduces these applications of vectors and quantum theory to information
retrieval, explaining the way that cosine similarity can be seen as a projection operator, and how
projection operators have been used to model other logical operations including conditionals, nega-
tion and disjunction in the logic of subspaces and projections which is still called ‘quantum logic’
following Birkhoﬀand von Neumann (1936).
The vector space model for information retrieval (summarized by Salton and McGill (1983) and
Manning et al. (2008, Ch 6)) stands out as one of the ﬁrst AI models that was given a distinctly
quantum theoretical formulation, developed by Van Rijsbergen (2004) and Widdows (2004, Ch 7).
Van Rijsbergen realized that the Hilbert-space formulation of quantum mechanics and the vector
space model for information retrieval have much in common, and are in many ways identical. This
paved the way for much work in understanding and exploiting commonalities between quantum
mechanics and information retrieval. A thorough summary of progress in the subsequent decade is
given by Melucci (2015).
Van Rijsbergen (2004) began to join these areas using the simple observation that if we use the
Euclidean norm to measure distance, then the vector spaces used in information retrieval are all
trivially Hilbert spaces (since they are ﬁnite-dimensional, they are also complete). Typically, vector-
based information retrieval systems use the cosine measure to give similarities between queries and
documents, which gives the same ranking as using Euclidean distance with normalized vectors (as
explained in detail by Widdows (2004, §5.5)), so while the strictly metric properties of Euclidean
space are often not emphasized when calculating similarity, they are present mathematically. Given
a query vector q and a document vector d (both of unit length), the cosine similarity q · d is also the
length of the projection of d onto q. Using Dirac’s bra-ket notation, this can easily be written as
⟨q|d⟩.
This theory was then developed using the non-commutative behavior of projection operators
to model the interaction of a document being relevant to a particular query, and about a partic-
ular topic. It can be exploited to model conditional logic and implication for IR in vector spaces
(Van Rijsbergen, 2004, Ch 5). Thus there are ways to adapt conditional operators to vector space
models. Importantly, much of the work involved can proceed (and historically has proceeded) quite
independently of quantum mechanics. Powerful logical operations in Hilbert spaces are available,
and whether or not they are inherently ‘quantum’ is partly a historical question. Here, we will argue
that they are useful either way, but we will return to this this question in Section 7.6.
3.1 An Intuitive Primer: Quantum Logic as Vector Subspaces and Projections
Recognizing that similarity is implemented as a kind of projection operator takes the parallel between
QM and IR further, because the observables in a quantum system are often represented as projection
operators in a Hilbert space. The logical structure of such projections was discovered and analyzed
in a seminal paper called The Logic of Quantum Mechanics (Birkhoﬀ& von Neumann, 1936), and
has since been called just ‘quantum logic’, or sometimes the ‘standard logic’ on a Hilbert space
(Varadarajan, 1985, Ch 1). Geometrically speaking, the key to understanding the contrast between
quantum logic and Boolean logic is to see that Boolean logic is modelled by subsets, whereas quantum
logic is modelled by subspaces, that is, subsets that are themselves vector spaces. For example, in
3-dimensional space, any arbitrary collection of points can be considered a subset, but only the
lines and planes are subspaces. Note also that with a scalar product, each subspace P can also
be used to deﬁne the operation of orthogonal projection onto that subspace, and if |p1⟩, . . . , |pn⟩is
an orthonormal basis for P, this projection takes the particularly simple form πP = Pn
i=1 |pi⟩⟨pi|
1315

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
0
C
p
p
A
B
C
A
B
Figure 3: Vector Subspaces contrasted with Venn Diagrams of Sets. On the left, a Euclidean picture
of the quantum logic of subspaces, and on the right, a Venn diagram picture of Boolean
logic of sets.
(Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, §2.1.6). The ‘similarity’ between a vector |a⟩and the subspace P can then
be deﬁned as the magnitude of πP (|v⟩), and when P is one-dimensional and |a⟩has length one, this
recovers the familiar deﬁnition of cosine similarity between two vectors.
A sketch highlighting some of the diﬀerences between Boolean and quantum logic is given in
Figure 3. In the realm of quantum logic (depicted left), we can see that if a point p can be written
as λA + µB for some λ and µ, it is considered part of the disjunction A ∨B even if p is itself in
neither A or B. The negation C is not the entire rest of the space, but is strictly the orthogonal
complement C⊥. This is a big contrast with Boolean logic — in the familiar Venn diagram on the
right hand side of Figure 3, if the point p is in neither A nor B, then by deﬁnition it is part of
C = ¬(A ∨B). In quantum logic, if p = λA + µB + νC and none of these coeﬃcients are zero,
then we cannot say either that p ∈A ∨B or that p ∈C = ¬(A ∨B), but instead p has some of
each. The conjunction operator behaves the same way in both quantum and classical logic (because
the intersection of two subspaces is itself a subspace, for example, the intersection of two planes
is typically a line), but disjunction and negation behave very diﬀerently. Finally, in the quantum
scenario we ﬁnd that if the set A, B, C forms an orthonormal basis, then the coeﬃcients λ, µ, and
ν correspond precisely to the probability amplitudes for observing p in one of these basis states in
quantum mechanics (Isham, 1995, Ch 2).
3.1.1 Subspace Disjunction
In quantum logic, the disjunction of two one-dimensional subspaces (lines through the origin) is the
plane that spans them both. In Figure 3 (left), the example is that the disjunction of the lines OA
and OB is the plane OAB, and the notation is usually simpliﬁed by leaving out the origin O and
saying that the disjunction of the lines A and B is the plane A ∨B. Note that this includes points
that are not in either of the initial lines (these points correspond to a superposition in quantum
mechanics.) In logical terms, we say that quantum logic is non-distributive, because it fails to satisfy
the distributive law P ∧(Q ∨R) = (P ∨Q) ∧(P ∨R).
More intuitively, the quantum disjunction interpolates (and sometimes extrapolates) from its
inputs. A conversational example that contrasts such inclusion might be:
It’s 70 or 80 miles from Oxford to Birmingham and buses leave at 9am or 11am.
1316

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
Without even thinking about it, an adult reader will assume that the actual distance (about 74
miles) is expressed perfectly well by the phrase “70 or 80 miles”, but will not assume that there is
also a 10am bus departure. In the ﬁrst case, the combination is continuous, whereas in the second
case, it is discrete, and while Boolean logic gives a better model for the latter, the former is more
eﬀectively modelled by quantum disjunction. (This is just an illustrative example, and several other
approaches such as fuzzy logic can be motivated in a similar way.) The notion that an object can
be modelled in a space that combines A and B without it being part of either A or part of B is
a feature of quantum systems and their non-separability that we will encounter again later (and
more strikingly) with tensor product representations and quantum entanglement. With subspaces,
this aﬀects the way that categories or natural kinds might be modelled in an IR system, a point
discussed more fully by Van Rijsbergen (2004, Ch. 2) and Melucci (2015, §3.3).
3.1.2 Subspace Negation
The negation of a subspace in quantum logic is not just its set complement, but its orthogonal
complement: for example, for a plane in 3-dimensions, the orthogonal complement is the linear
subspace normal to the plane. For example, in Figure 3, the orthogonal complement to the plane
A ∨B is the line C that is perpendicular to both A and B and passes through the origin. Negating
a concept therefore involves projecting a vector onto this normal subspace, which can move it over
large parts of the space, so in this sense quantum negation is a non-local operation.
3.1.3 Subspace Conditionals Following Van Rijsbergen
The material conditional A →B of classical logic is modelled by the inclusion A ⊆B in set theory,
and the direct quantum analogy of this is the subspace inclusion A ≤B, which means that A is
contained in B and A and B are both subspaces. In terms of the corresponding projection operators,
A ≤B if and only if πBπA = πA, which is to say that if we have already projected onto A, projecting
onto B does nothing.
In information retrieval, however, Van Rijsbergen (2004, Ch 5) is trying to describe the relation-
ship between a query and a relevant document, modelled by the document ‘implying’ the query —
in the sense that the relevant document contains at least the information in the query and more.
Arguing that typically, a query is not exactly implied by any document, the notion of relevance-as-
implication is qualiﬁed by the Logical Uncertainty Principle of Van Rijsbergen (1986):
Given any two sentences x and y; a measure of the uncertainty of y →x relative to a
given data set, is determined by the minimal extent to which we have to add information
to the data set, to establish the truth of y →x.
Van Rijsbergen (2004, Ch 5) argues that a conditional operator that meets this criterion is (the
projection onto) the subspace A⊥∨(A∧B). This corresponds to the notion that an object supports
the claim “birds ﬂy” if it is a bird that ﬂies or if it is not a bird at all.
(The fact that pigs
don’t ﬂy doesn’t provide positive evidence that birds ﬂy, but at least it does not refute the claim!)
Van Rijsbergen’s exploration is logical rather than empirical: the conditional is shown to satisfy
logical compatibility properties explored by earlier authors, and in the 2004 work, applications in
information retrieval such as relevance feedback and clustering were proposed but not demonstrated.
Nonetheless, this work sets the stage for later developments, including the use of error terms in
the classiﬁcation experiments of Bankova, Coecke, Lewis, and Marsden (2019) and Lewis (2019)
discussed below in Section 4.3.
3.2 Application 1: Orthogonal Negation
It turns out that these relatively simple observations can be applied directly to vector models for
language.
For example, suppose a corpus contains several uses of the word suit in the sense of
1317

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
lawsuit, and several in the sense of garment. It follows that the vector learned from training for suit
will involve a superposition of these senses, so
suit = suitlawsuit + suitgarment.
(1)
Now, suppose a user is searching for documents about suit in the sense of garment. An eﬀective
way to meet this need is to project the query vector from the term suit onto the subspace orthogonal
to lawsuit. This technique was explored in detail with various term-retrieval measures by Widdows
and Peters (2003), which demonstrated that the immediate advantage of projection over Boolean
negation in IR experiments was that it removed not only documents containing the unwanted term
lawsuit, but other documents that use terms related to lawsuit. This form of vector negation reduced
the occurrence of synonyms and neighbours of the negated terms by as much as 76% compared with
standard Boolean methods — a practical outcome of the non-local nature of the negation operator.
Its eﬀectiveness in improving document retrieval was demonstrated by Basile, Caputo, and Semeraro
(2011), with relative increases of up to 10.8% in Mean Average Precision (MAP) over a standard
baseline obtained when using a re-ranking strategy involving rendering the vector average of 5
relevant documents orthogonal to that of a single irrelevant counterpart, and much greater increases
when incorporating more relevance judgments (e.g. relative increase of 66.46% with feedback from
40 relevant and 40 irrelevant documents). The application of a projection operator to remove or
emphasize aspects of a mixed semantic vector representation follows naturally from the fact that
such vectors are generated as superpositions of vectors that represent occurrence in a (usually sense-
speciﬁc) context. For a more thorough exposition of these points, see Widdows (2004, Ch 7) and
Melucci (2015).
Although negation is something of a niche operation in search engines, this example helps us
to start motivating an answer to the question: “What can quantum models do for artiﬁcial intelli-
gence?” In the case of modelling negation, quantum logic from the 1930’s has provided a direct and
computationally simple technique for performing logical operations in a vector model search engine.
Building more thoroughly on the same foundation, Garg, Ikbal, Srivastava, Vishwakarma, Karanam,
and Subramaniam (2019) have recently used the rules of quantum logic (including negation) to de-
ﬁne objective functions for optimizing the representation of ontologies and relationships between
concepts as vector space embeddings. So from this point of view, quantum theory has motivated
and guided these successes. However, it is partly a historical accident that the logic of projections
and subspaces is called quantum logic at all: the meet, join, and orthogonal complement opera-
tions on a vector space were all discussed back in the 1860’s by Grassmann (1862), and the logical
structure could easily have been explored independently of its application to quantum mechanics by
Birkhoﬀand von Neumann in the 1930’s. So perhaps the right question is not “Can quantum logic
be applied to IR?” (it can), but “Would it be better to refer to ‘vector logic’ rather than ‘quantum
logic’ throughout the literature?”
The interpretation of products between vectors as subspaces is also a key part of geometric
algebra, which can be used a fundamental model for modelling several physical and computational
operators (Dorst, Fontijne, & Mann, 2010). One further complication here is that there are other
logical systems with vectors, including those of Mizraji et al. (1994), Westphal and Hardy (2005),
and Clarke (2012). The question of which vector logic works most eﬀectively for information retrieval
or other word embedding systems and applications is a research area that is likely to yield many
interesting new results, but which has not to date attracted as much attention as it deserves.
3.3 Application 2: Modeling Term Dependencies for Information Retrieval
Another example of the utility of quantum models for information retrieval was provided by Sordoni,
Nie, and Bengio (2013), who investigated whether an extension of the standard unigram / bag-of-
words language model to accommodate dependencies between terms in the context of frequently
occurring multiword expressions such as climate change can improve retrieval performance. The
1318

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
issue of term dependencies is a longstanding problem in information retrieval. When constructing
a probabilistic or geometric representation of a document, the question arises as to how to address
the compositional nature of frequently occurring short phrases. A simple approach would involve
treating the phrase climate change as a unit — as though it were a single word. However, information
about the occurrence of the component terms climate and change would then be lost. Furthermore,
this approach provides no clarity about how best to weight such composite terms, which occur with
less frequency than their unigram components.
To address these issues, Sordoni and colleagues developed a Quantum Language Model (QLM),
a generalization of prior language modeling approaches that provides the means to model term
dependencies without severing the connection between the probability of observing a multiword
expression and the probabilities of observing its component terms. Here, we will provide a brief
account of the model and the accompanying empirical results. We refer the interested reader to
Sordoni et al. (2013) for further implementation details such as the selection of phrases to model,
smoothing and the estimation of model parameters.
Language modeling approaches to information retrieval can be represented geometrically by
mapping each term in the vocabulary to an independent basis vector (familiar to readers with a
machine learning background as a ‘one hot encoding’ (G´eron, 2019, Ch 2)). Projection operators
for each term can then be deﬁned to recover the probability of observing a particular term in the
context of a set of language model parameters learned from a document. Projection operators for
single words are diagonal matrices with a single non-zero value corresponding to the basis vector of
the term concerned.
With the QLM, multiword expressions are represented as a weighted superposition of the basis
vectors corresponding to their component terms:
−−−−−−−−−−−→
climate change = α × −−−−−→
climate + β × −−−−→
change
which are normalized to length one. The projections onto these vectors lead to oﬀ-diagonal entries
in the corresponding matrices, so the term dependency cannot be represented as just a weighted
sum of the ‘one-hot’ diagonal elements. The coeﬃcients chosen for this weighting encode the extent
to which observation of the composite phrase indicates the presence of each component term. This
is intuitively appealing, and provides the means to heuristically weight the relative importance of
the terms within a phrase such that, for example, documents containing the term ‘climate’ in isola-
tion are more likely to be retrieved in response to the query ‘climate change’ than those containing
the term ‘change’ alone. Given a unit of text, model parameters are learned using an approxima-
tion algorithm that attempts to ﬁnd the parameters that maximize the probability of the observed
document or query. Relevance ranking is performed on the basis of the divergence between param-
eters learned from queries and documents. Evaluation of the QLM was conducted using selection
of 450 queries drawn from across four information retrieval evaluation sets. The best performance
for each of the four sets was obtained by a variant of the QLM, outperforming a unigram language
model baseline, with statistically signiﬁcant improvements over then state-of-the-art approaches us-
ing Markov Random Fields (MRF) (Metzler & Croft, 2005) for the two larger web-based sets with
relative increases in MAP for the best-performing QLM as compared with the best-performing MRF
of 5.5% and 5.2%.
In summary, using quantum theoretic ideas directly in the traditional vector model for infor-
mation retrieval has provided several concrete opportunities, including an account of conditionals
and implications, negation and disjunction, and term dependencies, some of which have improved
performance in retrieval experiments.
1319

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
4. Categories, Hypernyms and Implication: More Advanced Structures
in Vector Spaces
Having presented examples of how vector spaces can provide a rich set of tools for problems relevant
to AI and ML, it is now time to move onto more advanced vector space structures — what insights
do they provide? Representing categories and hypernym relationships will help us to motivate the
use of structures in vector spaces that are more complex than the individual points referenced by
vectors that we explored in the previous section.
4.1 Negation and ‘Parts’ of Vectors
The example above that uses negation to remove unwanted meanings of ambiguous words carries an
important conceptual lesson: a single vector can represent multiple meanings in a high dimensional
space, and speciﬁc ones can sometimes be recovered explicitly using a method such as orthogonal
projection to a subspace.
This runs counter to a common belief expressed in the literature, that one point can represent
only one thing. As an example of this line of thinking, consider Neelakantan, Shankar, Passos, and
McCallum (2014) who start their widely cited paper with this statement:
There is rising interest in vector-space word embeddings and their use in NLP, espe-
cially given recent methods for their fast estimation at very large scale. Nearly all this
work, however, assumes a single vector per word type — ignoring polysemy and thus
jeopardizing their usefulness for downstream tasks.
The eﬀectiveness of vector negation for uncovering diﬀerent word senses in a single vector demon-
strates a ﬂaw in the claim that a single vector per word ignores polysemy, even though the clustering
results described by Neelakantan et al. (2014) are still valuable. Mathematically, this claim would
be equivalent to the claim that a single vector per particle cannot represent a superposition of
pure states, a statement which quantum mechanics has shown to be ﬂawed in the quantum realm.
Nonetheless, other authors have echoed this claim, including for example Camacho-Collados and
Pilehvar (2018):
The prevailing objective of representing each word type as a single point in the semantic
space has a major limitation: it ignores the fact that words can have multiple meanings
and conﬂates all these meanings into a single representation.
The assumption that a vector is equivalent to a point and therefore cannot represent something
with internal structure or ingredients goes back to the beginning: “A point is that which has no
parts” is Book I, Deﬁnition I of Euclid’s Elements. However, even in Euclidean space, a vector can
also be thought of as an arrow or straight path from the origin to a particular point. This straight
path certainly can have ‘parts’; in particular, each coordinate represents a length along a particular
axis (in Fourier analysis, a basic harmonic function; in quantum mechanics, a basis state, etc.).
The notion that vectors have parts is much more obvious in quantum theory, because as intro-
duced in Section 2.3, the vectors in quantum mechanics are functions: and of course, a function
can have many diﬀerent parts. Fourier analysis itself is a particularly canonical way of breaking a
function down into a sum of diﬀerent parts. From this point of view, the mistaken belief that a
vector can only represent one thing would be unlikely ever to have arisen. Vectors can represent
many types of things in many ways, and high-dimensional vectors in particular can accurately rep-
resent many ingredients in such a way that the ingredients can be clearly recognized and sometimes
recovered from the combined representation. The mathematical foundations behind this claim are
analyzed more thoroughly by Kanerva (2009) and Widdows and Cohen (2015).
Despite its mistaken foundations, work motivated by this understanding of vector models has
provided useful results. The perspective of Neelakantan et al. (2014) that we criticised above still
1320

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
created word vectors by clustering contexts of word occurrences (as pioneered by Sch¨utze (1998))
and built a representation for each sense. Similarly, the survey of disambiguation techniques by
Camacho-Collados and Pilehvar (2018), and the smoothed Gaussian representations of Vilnis and
McCallum (2015) have both provided valuable contributions to the ﬁeld. Still, the stated mathemat-
ical motivation for such work is not well-founded, and a quantum perspective on the mathematics
naturally avoids this mistake, and provides a richer formulation that can potentially be leveraged to
achieve novel results.
4.2 Subspaces, Disjunctions, and Generalization
Even though a single vector can represent several senses of a polysemous word, it is important to
realise that individual vectors cannot mathematically represent everything that can be expressed
in a vector space. The case of linear subspaces, described in Section 3, is an obvious example. A
k-dimensional subspace in an n-dimensional space typically requires at least min(k, n −k) vectors
to describe it. The n −k representation itself provides an interesting insight: it is useful when
k > n
2 , which makes it more convenient to express a subspace in terms of a normal projection to
the subspace. This technique is most commonly encountered in 3 dimensions where the normal to a
plane is just a line (for example see again Figure 3, where the normal C could also be used to deﬁne
the plane A ∨B, because p ∈A ∨B if and only if p · C = 0).
The link between disjunctions and categories or other ‘natural kinds’ is that a more general cate-
gory like mammal arises as a disjunction of examples like cat, dog, mouse, elephant (Van Rijsbergen,
2004, Ch 3). In lattice theory, a disjunction is a ‘least common ancestor’, characterized by being the
most speciﬁc element available that subsumes (implies) all of the constituents (Widdows, 2004, Ch
8). Since subspaces are the natural representation of disjunctions in quantum logic, it is tempting to
assume they are a good representation for categories of word vectors. This intuition has worked in
some cases: for example, a combined representation built using quantum subspace disjunction with
limited numbers of inputs has been shown to perform well at the task of geometrically-mediated
analogical inference, generally recovering more therapeutic relationships between drugs and types of
cancer than comparable superposition-based approaches (Cohen, Widdows, Vine, Schvaneveldt, &
Rindﬂesch, 2012) and in information retrieval, subspaces have been shown to be particularly eﬀec-
tive for modelling negated disjunctions — that is, removing many unwanted areas of meaning from a
query vector (Widdows, 2003). However, a mathematical problem arises with positive disjunctions
of many inputs: linear sums of many similar vectors tend to extrapolate and overgeneralize (Bruza,
Widdows, & Woods, 2009). Speciﬁcally, a disjunction of k non-degenerate vectors always leads to
a k-dimensional subspace, however similar or diﬀerent the initial vectors are. For example, back in
Figure 3, A and B would generate the exactly same plane A ∨B whether they are close together or
far apart, so long as they are not identical. This also means that in an n dimensional space, n very
slightly diﬀerent examples would nearly always generate the whole space. So while subspaces have
been shown to work well for some forms of semantic generalization, we should expect this to be an
incomplete and eventually over-general model.
4.3 Density Matrices, Positive Operators, and Hyponymy
Quantum mechanics is already familiar with the problem that individual vectors and even subspaces
cannot represent everything we encounter in practice. A single particle in a superposition of pure
states can be represented as a single vector, but an ensemble of particles cannot. Instead, ensembles
are modelled using a density matrix or density operator, which takes the form
ρ =
X
j
Pj |Ψj⟩⟨Ψj| .
1321

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
In quantum mechanics, a system of particles that can be expressed as a density matrix but not a
state vector is called a mixed state. The motivation for generalizing from states to density matrices
is discussed in detail by Isham (1995, Ch 6), and Van Rijsbergen (2004, Ch 6). Mathematically,
the formalism is general enough to represent all the relevant probability distributions, which an
individual state vector |Ψ⟩with corresponding density operator ρ = |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| cannot.
Density matrices are positive operators, in the sense that ⟨Ψ|ρ|Ψ⟩≥0 for all vectors Ψ. This can
be used to induce an ordering on density operators, deﬁning A ⊑B ⇐⇒B −A is positive. This is
called the L¨owner ordering, and when the operators are restricted to projection onto subspaces, the
L¨owner ordering becomes equivalent to the quantum logic introduced in Section 3.1. The L¨owner
ordering is used by Bankova et al. (2019) and Lewis (2019) to represent graded hyponymy (where,
for example, dog may be said to be a strict hyponym of mammal but a graded hyponym of pet,
because not all dogs are pets). In cases where A and B are incomparable in this ordering, the
systems proposed in these papers work by ﬁnding positive operators D and E (an error term) such
that A + D = B + E. This avoids the problem with subspaces whereby any part of A that is not
part of B adds whole new dimensions: instead, if A is nearly subsumed by B, the error term E will
be correspondingly small. The smaller E, the more strict the hyponymic relationship. In further
work, Lewis (2020) extends this system to produce a graded form of negation, which can be applied
to more situations than the orthogonal negation of Widdows (2003).
This example is critical, and illustrates the main point of this section: while vectors are powerful
representations and can represent many ingredients at once, they cannot represent (for example) all
the probability distributions necessary for quantum mechanics. Exploring the ways these shortcom-
ings have been addressed within quantum theory suggests potentially fruitful research avenues for
those using vectors to model concepts in language.
5. Products of Vectors and Semantic Composition
The summary of categorization and negation in the previous section highlights one of the key places
where quantum techniques are useful in AI. They provide us with a range of operators for exploring,
manipulating, and generating representations of concepts using semantic vector models. Some of
these are familiar, some are novel, and all open up potential new avenues for research in AI. In this
section we draw attention to the problem of semantic composition. There are many ways to compose
vectors — so far in this paper we have discussed the vector sum, and various operators related to
subspaces and projections. More complicated structures are available, and semantic composition is
often represented in vector models using the tensor product and its oﬀshoots.
5.1 Tensor Products and Entanglement
The tensor product is one of the most signiﬁcant methods used for composing vectors. After exploring
addition and subtraction, the next product structure on vectors deﬁned by Grassmann (1862, Ch 2)
is the forerunner of today’s tensor product in coordinate form: if a = P arer and b = P bses, then
their product [ab] is deﬁned as P arbs[eres]. By varying the rules for interpreting and identifying
the basic terms [eres], Grassmann showed that such product structures can be used to represent
the inner (scalar) product and combinatorial (exterior) product. Note that the order matters here:
unlike the sum of two vectors or the product of real or complex numbers, this product between
two vectors is not commutative. This makes it more complicated, but also opens opportunities. For
example, generating a document vector as a weighted sum of term-vectors is surprisingly eﬀective for
information retrieval, but a commutative sum that fails to take word-order into account is unsuitable
for building a number of important applications (e.g. a conversational agent or any other dialogue
system).
We have already noted that vectors can represent operators as well as states — starting with
the (co)vectors in the dual space V ∗that act as linear maps from V to its ground ﬁeld (the ground
1322

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
ﬁeld being the number system used for coordinates, most commonly the real or complex numbers).
Given this, Grassmann’s product operator can be used to represent a bilinear map from V × V to
the ground ﬁeld — for α, β ∈V ∗and u, v ∈V , we deﬁne [αβ](u × v) = α(u)β(v), and it is easy to
see that this map is linear in all of its arguments. In Dirac notation, a product ⟨φiφ2| of the bra
vectors ⟨φ1| and ⟨φ2| would map the product of two ket vectors |ψiψ2⟩to ⟨φ1|ψ1⟩⟨φ2|ψ2⟩.
Today the space of all possible linear combinations of products of basis vectors of two Hilbert
spaces is called their tensor product, written using the symbol ⊗, so that the tensor product of vector
spaces U and V is written U ⊗V . It is deﬁned more formally as an equivalence class of mappings
whereby (for example) if E(A, B) →U is a bilinear map from (the Cartesian product of) A and B
to U, then this corresponds to a unique linear mapping from A ⊗B to U, and it turns out that all
bilinear maps from A × B to U can be represented in this manner. Linear mappings from one space
to another have a similar correspondence: the space L(A, B) of linear transformations from A to B
is naturally isomorphic to A∗⊗B (Lang, 2002, Ch. 16).
In a given coordinate basis, the tensor product of two vectors can be represented as a matrix
with the same coordinates as their outer product. Just as the inner product or scalar product of two
column vectors u, v can be written as uT v, their outer product can be written uvT . An example
with vectors in R3 is the following:
u =


1
0
−2


v =


2
−1
3


uT v = 2 + 0 −6 = −4
uvT =


2
−1
3
0
0
0
−4
2
−6


While this is intuitive and familiar, the mental identiﬁcation of tensors with matrices does lead to
gaps. For example, the notation uT v for the scalar product in coordinate matrix form encourages us
to think of row vectors as dual to column vectors, but matrix multiplication alone does not enable
us to map a (n, 1) column vector to a (1, n) column vector. (Remember that matrices of size (p, q)
can only be multiplied on the right by matrices of size (q, r), resulting in a matrix of size (p, r): so a
matrix of size (n, 1) can only be multiplied on the right to give a matrix of size (1, n) if n = 1, with a
similar argument holding for left-multiplication.) So if we were to identify tensors with such matrix
representations, we would be tricked into believing that tensors cannot be used to map vectors to
covectors, which is not the case.
More generally, tensors form an algebra of multilinear maps. If V is a vector space and V ∗is
its dual, then the tensor space V ⊗. . . ⊗V ⊗V ∗⊗. . . ⊗V ∗consists of multilinear functions from
V ∗× . . . × V ∗× V × . . . × V to the ground ﬁeld. (The ∗-symbols are deliberately switched between
the ﬁrst and the second expression: the elements of V ∗act on elements of V , and vice versa.) Such
a product with p copies of V and q copies of V ∗is called a tensor of type (p, q), and the number
p + q is sometimes called the rank or the arity of the tensor. For example, the density matrices of
Section 4.3, being the product of a bra and a ket vector, are tensors of type (1, 1) and rank 2.
Tensor algebra has been used extensively in many ﬁelds before computer science. For example,
it has been in use in diﬀerential geometry since the early 1900’s, partly because so many geometric
concepts can be expressed easily using tensors, including vector ﬁelds, diﬀerential forms, metrics,
volume integrals, complex structures and Hamiltonian dynamics. Because of this, some of the most
readable and thorough introductions to tensor algebra are from standard texts in diﬀerential ge-
ometry (for example, Willmore (1959, Ch 5, 6), Bishop and Goldberg (1968, Ch 2)). Continuum
mechanics, which models the behavior of materials and liquids as a continuous mass, also makes
extensive use of tensor algebra to extend Hooke’s law to high dimensions in the modelling of liquids,
elasticity of materials, and other important phenomena (via the stress-strain tensor — see Spencer
(2004), which includes a good introduction to matrix and tensor algebra for mechanics). Finally,
as we have seen, in quantum mechanics the tensor product naturally arises when we move towards
representing composite systems. More recently, in machine learning, tensors have made a sustained
contribution through the introduction of systems such as TensorFlow for training neural networks
1323

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
(G´eron, 2019, Ch 12). Tensor products are also used to describe the very general notion of ‘pro-
cesses happening simultaneously’ in physics, sometimes generalizing the notion of tensor product to
mathematical settings beyond linear algebra (Coecke & Kissinger, 2017; Heunen & Vicary, 2019).
In summary, tensors have become an invaluable part of practical mathematics in many ﬁelds.
However, this very multidisciplinarity can result in confusion around terminology. For example, a
matrix can be used to represent a rank-2 tensor, but then the deﬁnition of the term rank is diﬀerent
from the traditional deﬁnition in linear algebra, where the rank of a matrix is the number of linearly
independent rows and columns (a key theorem in linear algebra guarantees that the row rank and
the column rank are the same, so it makes sense just to talk about the rank of a matrix (J¨anich,
1994, Ch 5)). This notion of rank also generalizes to tensor algebra, and the rank of a tensor is also
used to mean the number of linearly-independent generators for the tensor. In some ﬁelds (including
machine learning), the diﬀerence between vector spaces and their duals does not yet play nearly as
important a role as it does in diﬀerential geometry, and so this diﬀerence is often glossed over, and
instead of talking about tensors of type (p, q), only the tensor rank r = p + q is discussed.
In
particular, it is often said that the rank-2 tensors are equivalent to matrices, which we have seen is
an algebraically incomplete representation (in the example above, a linear mapping from vectors to
covectors can be represented as a rank-2 tensor of type (1, 1), but no matrix can be found that maps
column vectors to row vectors using multiplication). This teaching may change gradually, because
used carefully, the distinction between vectors and covectors can be a beneﬁt in machine learning as
well. For example, Turney (2012) used precisely this approach to make a useful distinction between
domain and functional similarities in distributional semantics.
5.2 Tensor Products and Entanglement in Quantum Mechanics
In quantum mechanics, superposition becomes incomplete for describing the state of systems as soon
as we consider composites involving more than one particle. Consider, for example, particles with
wavefunctions |φ⟩and |ψ⟩, each represented as a superposition Pm
1 ai |φi⟩and Pn
1 bj |ψj⟩, where
|φi⟩and |ψj⟩are the eigenstates for some observables A and B. In cases where the particles can
be observed simultaneously, the result of measuring A and B together can be any combination of
|φi⟩, |ψj⟩, and there are mn such possibilities. Therefore the combined system of |φi⟩and |ψj⟩can
consist of any linear combination of these eigenstates, so it follows that the Hilbert space of possible
states for this system has mn dimensions. This deceptively natural conclusion should be contrasted
with the classical situation, where the state space for the combined system would be the Cartesian
product of the state spaces for the individual systems, having dimension m + n. For a step-by-step
example with spin states of 2- and 3-dimensional particles, see Isham (1995, §8.4). The combined
state where measuring A results in |φi⟩and B results in |ψj⟩is written as |φiψj⟩, and the state that
represents the combination of the superpositions P ai |φi⟩and P bj |ψj⟩is P aabj |φiψj⟩, which is
exactly the same as Grassmann’s deﬁnition of the product of two vectors above, just rewritten in
Dirac notation.
The mathematical behavior of tensor products is directly responsible for the famous phenomenon
of quantum entanglement. Entanglement is perhaps easiest to introduce via its opposite phenomenon;
separability. A composite state is considered separable if it is possible to write it as a tensor product
of two distinct states (i.e. as |φ⟩⊗|ψ⟩for some |φ⟩and |ψ⟩), in which case it is generally considered
to be non-interacting. In contrast, an entangled state cannot be decomposed in this manner.
How does this come about?
Mathematically, the answer is most obvious if we consider the
dimensions involved. If U is of dimension m and V of dimension n, their tensor product U ⊗V has
dimension mn, which of course is typically greater than m+n. Immediately it follows that not every
element of U ⊗V can be written as some individual product u ⊗v, because there are only m + n
degrees of freedom for choosing the u and v. In order to generate any element of U ⊗V , we may need
to superpose many diﬀerent individual products of the form u ⊗v, just as in the example system
above where the product state must be written as a linear combination of states like |φi⟩⊗|ψj⟩.
1324

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
A typical way of explaining the diﬀerence algebraically is that u ⊗v is not a standard element of
U ⊗V , but it is a standard generator or basis vector for U ⊗V . In matrix algebra, this corresponds
to the result that any rank-1 matrix (in the sense of matrix rank above!) can be written as the outer
product of a single row vector and a single column vector.
With superposition and quantum disjunction, we saw earlier that a quantum system might be
represented as the sum of its parts without being identical with or contained in any of those parts.
The tensor products allows for even richer combinations where the product is not contained in any
of the ingredients, and cannot even be broken down into a combination of one simple ingredient
from each part. A vector u in the subspace A + B can at least be represented as the sum a + b for
some a ∈A, b ∈B, and this decomposition is easily obtained using projection operators. On the
other hand, a tensor u ∈A⊗B cannot even be decomposed like this: at its most general, it must be
written as a linear combination of the form u = P ai ⊗bi (and the minimum possible i is the tensor
generalization of the rank of a matrix). While quantum logic can be described as non-distributive
and non-local, tensor products and entanglement demonstrate non-separability (Coecke & Kissinger,
2017, §4.1.1).
The concept of entangled quantum systems lies at the center of some of the most interpretation-
ally fraught aspects of quantum mechanics (Isham, 1995; Greenstein & Zajonc, 1997). For example,
if a system of two particles is entangled, but then one of its constituent particles is measured and
thus observed to be in an eigenstate, what does this mean for the combined system and for the other
particle? While physical implications of entanglement are conceptually challenging, the concept is
well-enshrined in modern physics: creating and observing entanglement between qubits (quantum
bits) is one of the key necessary and challenging processes in quantum computing, a point that we
will return to in Section 6. First however, it is worth highlighting some of the ways in which this
theoretical phenomenon has been exploited in language models in AI.
5.3 Explicit Composition with Vectors and Tensors in AI
The use of tensor products in AI is often traced to the work of Smolensky (1990), and its uses have
become much more widespread more recently. During the later decades of the 20th century, vector
models were often described as “bag of words” models because of the commutative nature of the
vector sum operation they applied. This choice of operator meant that the same representation
could be used for a collection of words in a document, irrespective of the order in which the words
appear. By contrast, discrete logical models used in formal semantics have for many decades been
quite explicit about the ways words should be combined, but were often notably silent about what
those words mean in themselves (see Widdows (2008), Baroni, Bernardi, Zamparelli, et al. (2014)
for surveys of this methodological diﬀerence between traditions).
This history of two modelling
frameworks led to an unnecessary and unfortunate gap: there are many interesting product opera-
tions such as the tensor product between vectors that are well-established in linear algebra, but for
years there were relatively little awareness of these alternatives in language research. Since the early
2000’s, this situation has changed markedly.
In a pioneering case for AI, tensor products were introduced at least as early as the work of
Smolensky (1990), where the tensor product was used to bind a variable to its value, and the
term ‘binding’ for products of vectors has been used in various language and cognitive models
involving vectors since the work of Kanerva (2009). In the ﬁrst decade of the current century, the
use of tensor algebra for combining word vectors was explored using a quantum formalism by Aerts
and Czachor (2004), whereby a sentence (w1, . . . , wn) would be represented as the tensor product
w1 ⊗. . . ⊗wn. Taking this in explicitly linguistic directions, product operations on vectors were
introduced to model grammatical and semantic composition (Clark & Pulman, 2007; Widdows,
2008). Particularly interesting examples included the work of Mitchell and Lapata (2010) on noun
composition, and Baroni and Zamparelli (2010) on adjective-noun combinations. Turney (2012)
used a combination of two vector spaces (a large-window space capturing domain similarities, and
1325

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
a narrow-window function space capturing functional similarities) to combine relational similarity
with two-word compositional behavior.
Inspired by Smolensky’s work on binding operators, the model of Clark and Pulman (2007)
used the tensor product as a means to generate vector representations of phrases, noting that
one desirable property of the tensor product in this context is that it does not commute, so the
product Djokovic ⊗beat ⊗Murray is not equal to the product Murray ⊗beat ⊗Djokovic. Another
useful mathematical property is that the inner product of two tensors is equal to the product
of the inner products of their related constituents, e.g. (beat ⊗Murray) · (defeated ⊗Andy) =
(beat · defeated) × (Andy · Murray). This means that the similarity between a pair of phrase tensors
can be calculated without the need to explicitly represent them (which would require n2 dimensions
for n dimensional vectors), and, with normalized vectors, this is the product of the cosine similarities
between the component vectors for terms that occupy the identical position in the sentence structure.
However, the grammatical structure of related sentences may not be identical, and as such their
composite representations cannot be easily compared with this method.
A solution to overcome this limitation of the tensor product approach was proposed by Coecke,
Sadrzadeh, and Clark (2010). They made use of category theory (Lawvere & Schanuel, 2009) to
demonstrate that vector spaces and certain types of grammar (exempliﬁed in this work by pre-
group grammars (Lambek, 2001)) fall under the same category type, compact closed categories (see
Appendix 8. This realization provided a means to map between the grammatical and the vector
representation, and thus demonstrated that the rules for grammatical composition can be applied to
a compositional model in vector space. The mathematical roots of this work are directly related to
quantum mechanics due to the work of Abramsky and Coecke (2009), which developed Categorical
Quantum Mechanics, an axiomatic presentation of quantum theory using compact closed categories,
which makes the relationship with the grammatical work of Lambek particularly clear. (An online
appendix is provided for readers unfamiliar with category theory.) This point will be revisited in
Section 6 because it is especially relevant to implementation on quantum computers. Since its in-
troduction by Coecke et al. (2010), the Distributional Compositional Categorical model has become
known as DisCoCat.
Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh (2011) provided an implementation and evaluation of this approach,
deriving word representations from the British National Corpus. To do so, diﬀerent rules of composi-
tion were assigned to words with diﬀerent grammatical types in accordance with the categorical type
of their pregroup, with ‘atomic’ types such as nouns represented by distributional term-by-context-
term vectors, and ‘adjoint’ types generated compositionally. For example, verb representations were
generated as the sum of the tensor products of the noun vectors corresponding to their subject
and object across every occurrence in the corpus (intransitive verbs and adjectives can also be ac-
commodated). Vector representations of sentences can then be compared: for example, the vector
representation of the sentence “Djokovic beat Murray” is composed by pointwise multiplication of
the tensor representing the verb “beat” and the tensor composed from the vectors for “Djokovic”
and “Murray”: (Djokovic ⊗Murray) ⊙beat. The model was evaluated for its ability to estimate the
similarities between short phrases, and correlated with human judgment of similarity as well as, and
better than, the best available models on datasets concerning verb-noun and subject-verb-object
relationships. The authors report Spearman correlations of 0.17 and 0.21 for the verb-noun and
subject-verb-object sets respectively with the compositional model, as compared with 0.17 for both
sets with the multiplicative model of Mitchell and Lapata (2008).
In methodologically similar work, words such as verbs and adjectives that take arguments have
been represented as tensor products in matrix form. For example, Baroni and Zamparelli (2010)
used this approach to model the action of adjectives upon nouns, and Socher, Huval, Manning, and
Ng (2012) took it to the logical destination of representing each internal node in a parse tree as a
matrix operator acting upon its input arguments. This area has become known as Compositional
Distributional Semantics, summarized by Baroni et al. (2014), and work in this area has continued,
an example being the work of Sadrzadeh, Kartsaklis, and Balkır (2018) on sentence entailment in
1326

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
this framework, where an F1-score of 0.86 is reported on recognizing semantic entailments like “robin
ﬂies |= bird moves”.
As with vector logics, the tensor product as used in quantum mechanics is only one of the com-
position operations that can be used with vectors, albeit an important one. One implication of using
the tensor product is the inevitable explosion in dimensionality that arises: a tensor product takes
two n-dimensional vectors and makes an n2-dimensional tensor, which is a problem for scalability
on classical hardware, and creates products that are not obviously comparable with their inputs.
Various algebraic structures, sometimes known as Vector Symbolic Architectures (Levy & Gayler,
2008), have been used to address this problem. They make use of circular correlation and circular
convolution, to roll the tensor product coordinates back into coordinates in the initial space. The use
of these structures for reasoning in continuous models has been described by Widdows and Cohen
(2015).
Entanglement has also been used in compositional modelling for language concepts, motivated
partly by the study of entanglement for word-association in cognitive models (Bruza, Kitto, &
McEvoy, 2008; Aerts & Sozzo, 2011). For example, Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh (2014) explore the
entangled representation of transitive verbs using tensors in the categorical framework of Coecke
et al. (2010). In an explicit use of entangled superpositions for reasoning and inference, predication-
based semantic analysis was developed by Cohen et al. (2012), and makes use of vector binding
operations to represent a concept A occurring in a relation of the form R(A, B) as the sum of the
products r ⊗b for each relation in which it occurs. (For example, with the relational triple ‘aspirin
TREATS headache’, the concept vector for aspirin gets incremented with the bound product vector
TREATS ⊗headache.) In this framework, concepts become represented as superpositions of products
of pairs, and these cannot be expressed as any product of single ingredients r and b. This uses some
of the same mathematics that in quantum mechanics leads to entanglement, including the use of
complex vectors as a ground ﬁeld in some implementations (Cohen et al., 2012; Cohen & Widdows,
2015). (In an alternative approach to modelling relations using complex numbers, the work of Garg
et al. (2019) explicitly uses the complexiﬁed representation A + iB to form pairs, and axioms of
quantum logic to formulate the compositional representation of relations.)
From the point of view of language and relationships, the notion of a general relation being derived
from several varied examples makes intuitive sense. Each of the pairs (Leto, Artemis ), (Henry VIII,
Elizabeth I ), (Lord Byron, Ada Lovelace ), (Darth Vader, Princess Leia ), (Debbie Reynolds, Carrie
Fisher ), is an example of a parent-child relationship, and all of these could be combined into a
thorough and very varied notion of parenthood. Because of this variety, it would be surprising if
there was any one ‘prototypical parent’ and ‘prototypical child’ that combines to make the relation
of ‘prototypical parenthood’. Thankfully, the mathematical structures used for tensor products that
give rise to entanglement enable us to represent a relation that is a rich combination of diﬀerent
example pairs, even for relations where no single pair of prototypical ingredients exists (Widdows &
Cohen, 2015, §5).
5.4 Implicit Composition in Deep Neural Networks
Something the methods described in the previous section have in common is that they encode some
explicit syntactic structure: a role / value binding, or a relationship in a grammatical parse tree.
This raises the question: can models go beyond the bag-of-words drawbacks and encode more order-
dependent language structures without using this traditional syntactic machinery? A recent and
comprehensive survey of this topic is provided by Hupkes, Dankers, Mul, and Bruni (2020).
During the same years that compositional distributional semantics has been developed, neural
networks have made great strides in artiﬁcial intelligence, particular the use of networks with several
intervening layers, hence the term ‘deep learning’ (LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015). In some cases,
work on deep learning and compositional semantics has been explicitly combined: for example,
Socher et al. (2012) describe Recursive Neural Networks used for training. These should not be
1327

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
confused with the the simpler and more standard Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), in which the
output of a single neuron depends on its inputs and its previous state. RNNs have been used for
many sequence-modelling tasks, as have their more sophisticated cousins, LSTMs (Long Short-Term
Memory cells, where prior state may be stored for longer and updated based on learned importance)
(G´eron, 2019, Ch. 15).
Later, attention-based networks have been introduced, where the attention mechanism is designed
to learn when pairs of inputs depend crucially on one another, a capability that has demonstrably
improved machine translation by making sure that the translated output represents all of the given
input even when their word-orders do not correspond exactly (Vaswani, Shazeer, Parmar, Uszkoreit,
Jones, Gomez, Kaiser, & Polosukhin, 2017). This has led to rapid advances in the ﬁeld, including the
contextualized BERT (Devlin, Chang, Lee, & Toutanova, 2018) and ELMo (Peters, Neumann, Iyyer,
Gardner, Clark, Lee, & Zettlemoyer, 2018) models. For example, the ELMo model reports good
results on traditional NLP tasks including question answering, coreference resolution, semantic role
labelling, and part-of-speech tagging, and the authors attribute this success to the model’s diﬀerent
neural-network layers implicitly representing several diﬀerent kinds of linguistic structure.
The
survey and experiments of Hupkes et al. (2020) evaluate three such neural networks on a range of
tasks related to composition, concluding that each network has strengths and weaknesses, that the
results are a stepping stone rather than and endpoint, and that developing consensus around how
such tasks should be designed, tested and shared is a crucial task in itself.
Even without the cost of encoding order information, Iyyer, Manjunatha, Boyd-Graber, and
Daum´e III (2015) demonstrated a deep averaging network, showing that network depth could in come
cases compensate for the lack of syntactic sophistication in unordered models — with considerable
computational savings. At the time of writing, this has developed into a very open research question:
do neural networks need extra linguistic information as inputs to properly understand language, or
can they actually recover such information as a byproduct of training on raw text input? Does a
complete NLP system need components for tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, syntactic parsing,
named entity recognition, and so on, or can some or all of these be replaced by a single vector
language model?
If so, how do we describe the way meaningful units are composed into larger
meaningful structures in such a model?
Tensor networks are one of the possible mathematical answers to this question. Their use in
libraries such as TensorFlow has become ubiquitous (see (G´eron, 2019) and numerous papers and
packages referenced therein), though as cautioned above, users should be wary of the equivalence
between the use of matrices and multidimensional arrays and tensor algebra that is often assumed in
software documentation. More explicit evidence is presented by work that continues to build upon
Smolensky’s introduction of tensors to AI: for example McCoy, Linzen, Dunbar, and Smolensky
(2020) present evidence that the sequence-composition eﬀects of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
can be approximated by Tensor Product Decomposition Networks, at least in cases where using this
structure provides measurable beneﬁts over bag-of-words models (see also McCoy, Linzen, Dunbar,
and Smolensky (2018) for a more detailed presentation). It has also been shown that Tensor Product
Networks can encode grammatical structure more eﬀectively than LSTMs for generating image
captions (Huang, Smolensky, He, Deng, & Wu, 2017), achieving for example a BLEU-4 score of
0.305 compared the CNN-LSTM’s result of 0.292. Tensor product networks have also been used to
construct an attention mechanism from which grammatical structure can be recovered by unbinding
role-ﬁller tensor compositions (Huang, Deng, Wu, Liu, & He, 2019). Explicitly quantum networks for
natural language processing are described by Wiebe, Bocharov, Smolensky, Troyer, and Svore (2019).
The range of challenges and application opportunities in AI for compositional vector representations
is by now much-studied and valued, and quantum-inspired tensor networks already successfully
combine and extend many of the mathematical features that are core to AI today.
1328

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
6. Physical Implementations on Quantum Computers
Quantum computing has regularly made the front page of scientiﬁc news from 2019 to 2021. This
section gives a glimpse of opportunities this opens for quantum mathematics in AI.
With AI based on classical computation, vectors and matrices are already ubiquitous. While
the algebra and geometry behind them contains many riches that overlap with quantum mechanics,
studying this overlap in detail is an investment that many researchers might consider esoteric and
risky — there are more mainstream state-of-the-art ways to make dramatic progress in AI and
machine learning without learning quantum theory and tensor algebra. But what if there was a
platform for computation where vectors could be represented in exponentially smaller memory, and
instead of being an operation with quadratic cost, the tensor product was just the most suitable
mathematical representation of a natural system? Quantum computers may soon provide this.
As outlined in Section 5.2, the tensor product arises naturally in quantum mechanics. Com-
putations using quantum circuits can be used to manipulate tensor products (for example, from
separable to entangled states (Bernhardt, 2019, Ch 4)), but no ‘work’ is required to compute the
tensor product of a 2-qubit system in the ﬁrst place: the wavefunction or state of a 2-qubit system is
represented as the tensor product of the individual qubit systems, irrespective of any computational
operation we perform on these qubits (Ying, 2010, §2).
Perhaps the biggest computational promise that follows from the tensor product is the potential
for representing exponentially more information. A classical register of n physical bits can represent n
bits of information (choices between 0 and 1). In quantum computing, these combinations correspond
to basis vectors — if the state vector of a qubit is represented as a vector in C2 with basis vectors
{|0⟩, |1⟩}, then a register with n qubits is represented as a state vector in Nn
1 C2, which has dimension
2n. Instead of a state of the whole system, each of those 2n combinations represents a basis vector
for a coordinate, and if each of these coordinates can be accessed, the capacity of the memory grows
exponentially instead of linearly in the number of qubits in the register! In AI applications, it is
easy to see the appeal of this — an embedding vector of 256 dimensions using a 4-byte ﬂoating
point number for each coordinate requires 1KB of RAM, which can in theory be represented by a
tensor product of 8 qubits. Of course, there are huge challenges with this idea, starting with the
physical fact that we could never observe such continuous coordinates directly, only their probabilistic
quantization to a pure state upon measurement. Nonetheless, the promise of exponential quantum
memory has led to ingenious research ideas (particularly the ‘bucket-brigade’ qRAM protocol of
(Giovannetti, Lloyd, & Maccone, 2008)), and the idea is even presented in an early-reader board
book for children (Ferrie, 2018). There are still practical physical challenges and theoretical caveats
to any premature claims that ‘quantum algorithms give exponential improvements’ (Aaronson, 2015).
Still, if the promise of exponential qRAM is obvious and compelling enough to excite the youngest
readers, it is hard to imagine that no breakthroughs will happen in the next few decades.
Still, by the end of 2019, most of the papers published on quantum algorithms were, from a
physical point-of-view, advanced thought-experiments or simulations: they present mathematical
techniques or simulated results on classical hardware, not experimental results from quantum com-
puters. Shor’s quantum algorithm for prime factorization was published in 1994 (Bernhardt, 2019,
Ch 9), but at the time of writing, the largest integer factorized on a quantum computer appears
to be 291,311 (Li, Dattani, Chen, Liu, Wang, Tanburn, Chen, Peng, & Du, 2017). There are very
particular problems that can already be solved much faster on a quantum computer than a clas-
sical computer, including the problem used by (Arute, Arya, Babbush, Bacon, Bardin, Barends,
Biswas, Boixo, Brandao, Buell, et al., 2019) which was to simulate and predict the output of a
pseudo-random quantum circuit. However, this task was proposed in order to demonstrate quantum
advantages, rather than for some existing use-case, a critique expounded by Zhong, Wang, Deng,
Chen, Peng, Luo, Qin, Wu, Ding, Hu, et al. (2020).
There are several research developments that are poised to take advantage of quantum computers
in AI, in areas including deep learning in particular (Wiebe, Kapoor, & Svore, 2014), machine
1329

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
learning in general (Biamonte, Wittek, Pancotti, Rebentrost, Wiebe, & Lloyd, 2017), and language
processing including parsing (Wiebe et al., 2019), but it remains normal for such papers to develop
algorithms and sometimes results on real datasets without actually implementing them on quantum
machines. Even papers that describe physical implementation in detail including those in quantum
optical neural networks (Steinbrecher, Olson, Englund, & Carolan, 2019) and single photon image
classiﬁcation (Fischbacher & Sbaiz, 2020) report results on high-end classical hardware and proposals
for quantum hardware. This is not a negative criticism, just a description of the research frontier: in
celestial mechanics, the orbit of a satellite was studied and predicted for centuries before spacecraft
could actually be launched.
In 2020 and 2021, this has been changing: AI experiments on quantum hardware have been
successfully carried out. The single-photon classiﬁcation experiment of Wang, Xiao, Yi, Ran, and
Xue (2020) uses a quantum-mechanical platform with a single qubit. For comparison, the simulated
work of Fischbacher and Sbaiz (2020) classiﬁes all ten digits, whereas Wang et al. (2020) build a
classiﬁer that only distinguishes zeros and ones: this exempliﬁes the sort of tradeoﬀresearchers
have made in using real-but-limited quantum computing resources. In the work recently reported
by Abbas, Sutter, Zoufal, Lucchi, Figalli, and Woerner (2021), an actual quantum neural network
is trained and shown to learn faster and more eﬀectively than a classical network (as measured by
Fisher information and eﬀective dimension), showing as much as a 250% improvement over classical
training using the ibmq montreal 27-qubit hardware.
In natural language processing on quantum computers, the most dramatic development so far
is perhaps the demonstration of a working Quantum NLP system on one of IBM’s quantum de-
vices (Meichanetzidis, De Felice, Toumi, Coecke, Gogioso, & Chiappori, 2020; Coecke, de Felice,
Meichanetzidis, & Toumi, 2020). Mathematically speaking, this work has several key ingredients.
A key part is the use of compact closed categories as an axiomatic model for quantum mechanics
(Abramsky & Coecke, 2009), which enables the DisCoCat model from Coecke et al. (2010) to use
the same mathematical language. Diagrammatic calculus, developed over some years and explained
thoroughly by Coecke and Kissinger (2017), enables quantum structures for sentences that combine
their syntactic structure (in terms of combinations) and semantic content (in terms of vectors) to
be represented together. And the paper of Meichanetzidis et al. (2020) explains in detail how this
enables a quantum compiler to break these expressions down into quantum gates, compiled into
quantum circuits and run on a quantum computer. The sentences used to train the model are still
simple toy examples such as ‘Alice loves Bob’ and ‘Bob who is cute loves Alice who is rich’ — as
with prime factorization and image recognition, the implementation using qubits in quantum com-
puters does not yet rival the scale of NLP on classical hardware — but the ﬁrst implementation of
a compositional NLP system on quantum hardware has been accomplished successfully, and given
the level of investment in both quantum computing and NLP, more will follow.
7. Other Areas Related to AI and Quantum Theory
This ﬁnal section refers brieﬂy to other areas related to both AI and quantum theory that, to avoid
excessive length, have not been emphasized in this paper, but which are likely to be important
avenues for future work. Many more papers can be found on this stream of topics than we are able
to list here. We encourage interested readers to investigate the references provided in this section
for further links to other papers and more detailed avenues.
7.1 Quantum Search and Automated Problem Solving
Quantum search is a large algorithmic topic in itself. In this context, we mean ‘search’ in the sense of
‘database search’ or ‘tree search’, rather than the search engines of information retrieval: quantum
search algorithms are typically designed to ﬁnd a particular element that solves a given problem in
computationally faster time than classical algorithms (Nielsen & Chuang, 2002, Ch 6). A canonical
1330

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
example of such a speedup is Grover’s search algorithm, which locates a unique element out of n
choices in √n time (Bernhardt, 2019, Ch 9). The details are not covered here, though the process
itself is a hallmark example of a quantum oracle that manipulates bases step-by-step in such a way
that the states of the non-solutions cancel one another out and the state of the solution eventually
‘sticks out’ after at most √n repetitions.
Grover’s search algorithm has been used as a building block for approaching other higher-level
problems. These include various forms of tree search (Tarrataca & Wichert, 2011b) and challenges
that can be formulated as symbol manipulation problems, such as a block puzzle (Tarrataca &
Wichert, 2011a). For an overview see Wichert (2020, Ch 10–12). It is worth noting that core data
structure operations such as tree search have been investigated for basic hardware components such
as qRAM (Giovannetti et al., 2008) while they are also being developed for higher-level problem
solving in quantum AI: for example, Arunachalam, Gheorghiu, Jochym-O’Connor, Mosca, and Srini-
vasan (2015) analyse the importance of reducing the number of lookup operations in the ‘bucket
brigade’ qRAM protocol error-rates (demonstrating in the process some of the great diﬃculties in
implementing a real qRAM).
This evolution is historically diﬀerent from the development of classical computing, in which basic
data structures were reliably and readily available decades before the heyday of machine learning.
(This is not to say that there are no more developments to be made in classical data structures, but
that the machine learning practitioner often has no reason to wonder whether a dictionary lookup is
from a binary search tree vs. a hashmap — they ‘just work’.) By contrast, in quantum computing,
these innovations are happening at the same time and facing similar challenges — quantum heuristics
are sometimes needed not only to expedite computation, but to give more reliable results, because
reducing the number of operations reduces errors. While such details might be seen as frustratingly
low-level in most of machine learning today, this is an area where quantum computing and quantum
AI may cross-fertilize each other’s early development.
7.2 Quantum Probability and Cognition
The geometric and algebraic structures of quantum theory aﬀect probability as well as logic. In
quantum theory, the probability of ﬁnding a system in state |ψ⟩to be in the pure basis state
|λi⟩is equal to | ⟨λi|ψ⟩|2, which is called the Born rule. For normalized unit vectors, the scalar
product ⟨λi|ψ⟩is well-known to be the cosine of the angle between the two vectors — so in quantum
theory, probability is geometrically related to angles between vectors. This contrasts with so-called
classical probability where probabilities are obtained from ratios between volumes (Isham, 1995, Ch
2)(Khrennikov, 2010, Ch 2). Quantum probability behaves diﬀerently from classical probability: for
example, conditional probability depends on the spectrum of the observable in question (Khrennikov,
2010, p. 35), and the fact that a measurement of one of the variables was performed beforehand
(Isham, 1995, p. 165).
Quantum probability has been used to explain and accurately model order-eﬀects on attitudes,
where asking people the same questions in a diﬀerent order has been shown to give diﬀerent answers
(Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012, Ch 3), resulting in various disjunction eﬀects in decision making. For
example, preferences made with more information have been shown to be diﬀerent from those made
with less information, irrespective of what information has been learned in the meantime, a violation
of the Sure Thing Principle (Pothos & Busemeyer, 2013). In semantics, such models have been used
to model compositional behavior including nonseparability in the human lexical representations
(Bruza, Kitto, Ramm, & Sitbon, 2015).
The aﬀordances of quantum probabilities in cognitive modelling have been exploited by some
authors to support more human-like models of automated reasoning and decision making.
For
example, Kitto and Boschetti (2013) made use of the structural nature of quantum probability in
an agent based model capable of representing phenomena such as cognitive dissonance and attitude
change in a social context. Similarly, a stream of work in developing quantum-like Bayesian network
1331

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
models (Moreira, Tiwari, Pandey, Bruza, & Wichert, 2020) has resulted in sophisticated methods
for modelling the evolution of the beliefs of a decision maker.
7.3 Quantum Probability and Language Modelling
A key part of the language modeling work of Sordoni et al. (2013) was the use of oﬀ-diagonal
elements in a matrix to model the joint probability of bigrams (where the on-diagonal elements model
unigram probabilities). The mathematics of this particular construction is presented intuitively and
explored thoroughly in the statistical algebra of Bradley (2020). This leads to a surprising and clear
correspondence between Formal Concept Analysis (Ganter & Wille, 1999), in which objects and
attributes are represented in a lattice, and quantum probability. The basic construction is to take
the cross table (the matrix showing which objects possess which attributes), and multiply it by its
transpose, which gives a matrix whose oﬀ-diagonal elements capture the overlaps between objects.
This conditional dependence information is reﬂected in the partial trace, which is a basis-dependent
mapping from the product space V ⋆⊗V back to V . Bradley (2020) argues that the partial trace is
the quantum analogy of the classical process of marginalizing a joint distribution — but whereas in
classical probability, marginal probabilities retain no information about the overlaps in the original
joint distribution, in the quantum case, some of this information is preserved. This richness may lead
to quantum probability becoming a more common tool of choice for language and concept models.
7.4 Real and Complex Numbers in AI
One place where physics, classical logic, and machine learning use quite diﬀerent fundamental math-
ematical building blocks is in the choice of number ﬁeld. Machine learning and AI tend to use real
vectors because the basic features are measurements; classical logic and computer science have used
binary numbers thanks largely to the enormous inﬂuence of George Boole (1854, Ch 2); whereas
physics most prevalently uses complex vectors, not just in quantum mechanics but also in electro-
dynamics.
So far, the reasons for not using complex and binary numbers in machine learning seem to be
twofold (and reasonable): there are no widespread and immediately intuitive interpretations for
them; and the ﬁeld is progressing very quickly without them. However, there are computational
beneﬁts to using complex numbers.
For example, the convolution operator, sometimes used for
vector binding, is just the addition of phase angles, and is thus O(n) rather than the O(n log n) of
the real convolution operation optimized using Fast Fourier Transforms (see Plate (2003)). And in
several experiments on automatic inference, we have ourselves found that using binary and complex
vectors sometimes yields much better results than their real-valued counterparts, for reasons not yet
properly understood (Widdows & Cohen, 2015). There are a few machine learning papers on using
complex numbers and even quaternions and octonions in machine learning, for example Trabelsi,
Bilaniuk, Zhang, Serdyuk, Subramanian, Santos, Mehri, Rostamzadeh, Bengio, and Pal (2018). As
quantum computing becomes more mainstream, we should expect the use of complex numbers to
become more widespread.
7.5 Complex Time Evolution
Imaginary and complex numbers are particularly important in quantum mechanics for representing
the momentum operator ˆp = −iℏ∂
∂x and the resulting Hamiltonian in the Schr¨odinger wave equa-
tion. This technique has roots in harmonic analysis, particularly with the simple form of the plane
wavefunction Ψ(x, t) = Aei(kx−ωt). Harmonic functions can be written in this way thanks to the
identity eiθ = cos θ + i sin θ, and the technique for representing time evolution could potentially be
applied to situations where harmonic functions are used to model word position as attention moves
along a sentence (Vaswani et al., 2017).
1332

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
7.6 Again, Why Quantum Theory?
Throughout this paper we have introduced and surveyed several areas where mathematics used in
quantum theory is also fruitful in AI. However, we are yet to answer the questions “What is quantum
mathematics?” and “Why is it important in AI?”, delaying them to this point. This has enabled us
to demonstrate the many and diverse ways in which mathematics has been abstracted from quantum
theory and applied to AI. But there is no clear characterization of what precisely makes mathematics
‘quantum’.
This is well-illustrated by contrast with the other great pillar of 20th century physics, general
relativity. The mathematics of general relativity can be deﬁned crisply as the diﬀerential geometry of
Lorentzian manifolds, which are smooth 4-manifolds with a pseudo-Riemannian metric of signature
(1, 3) — that is, there must be 4 dimensions, and the metric must treat three of them interchangeably
(the spacelike dimensions) and one with the opposite sign (the timelike dimension), giving a local
distance metric that takes the form dt2 −dx2 −dy2 −dz2 (choosing units so that the speed of light
is 1).
After years of searching, we are conﬁdent that there is no similarly clear characterization of
quantum mathematics. That disjunctions are non-distributive or products non-separable have been
proposed, but can be rejected on the grounds that such mathematical structures are prominent in
many other areas, and many quantum models do not explicitly use these properties.
So the question “What makes mathematics distinctly quantum?” remains a matter for discus-
sion. In our opinion, quantum mathematics as a whole is the mathematics of self-adjoint operators
in complex Hilbert space. In theory, complex numbers are needed to guarantee that roots of polyno-
mials exist, which guarantees that eigenvalues and eigenvectors exist. The self-adjoint requirement
guarantees that these eigenvalues are real numbers, which is necessary for them to represent physical
properties. This mathematical argument is standard: in this case, we are following particularly the
narrative of Coecke and Kissinger (2017, Ch 6), a similar presentation is given by Van Rijsbergen
(2004), and indeed Dirac (1930, Ch 1, 2).
Much of this mathematical apparatus is general, and has been used in a wide array of ﬁelds
beyond quantum theory. In this paper we have demonstrated a number of these overlaps with AI.
However, with this point comes an important caveat: most AI applications are only using a part
of quantum mathematics, since few use complex numbers. For example, the information retrieval
applications discussed in Section 3 are explained explicitly in terms of quantum logic (in the case
of Widdows and Peters (2003)) and quantum probability (in the case of Sordoni et al. (2013)), but
use only real numbers throughout. Rather than a criticism, this could become a recommendation:
quantum-inspired AI systems should systematically consider and investigate the use of complex
numbers.
Instead of embodying a distinct piece of mathematics, the motivation for developing quantum-
inspired models in AI and related areas has sometimes been the obvious shortcomings of so-called
‘classical’ models. Quantum theory acknowledges that the future is not wholly predictable, that
combined systems cannot always be separated into atomic parts, and that the order in which obser-
vations are made sometimes aﬀects the outcome. These points are often obscured by the oft-repeated
claim “classical physics is the physics of everyday life”, even though quantum physics is more like
daily life in these respects (points discussed in more detail by Busemeyer and Bruza (2012) and
Widdows and Bruza (2007)). As these areas have been explored in detail, with hindsight it is easy
to understand why quantum structures were seen as promising alternatives to reductionist symbolic
determinism: and once this approach is considered, mathematical overlaps between quantum me-
chanics and other application areas are easy to ﬁnd. Without the advent of quantum computing,
these overlaps may have been considered a mathematical curiosity: a good motivation perhaps for
individual system designs so long as they perform well in practice. But now with quantum comput-
ing coming of age, the importance of quantum mathematics in computer science is set to increase,
because it will be key to answering the question “What’s the most eﬀective way to implement this?”
1333

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
8. Conclusion
Quantum theory and artiﬁcial intelligence use much of the same mathematics, and the importance
of the overlapping areas has grown with the ubiquitous use of vectors in AI. As well as simple
superposition and similarity operations, quantum theory oﬀers well-studied formulations of logical
inference, concept combination, and probability, many of which have been demonstrated to give good
results on various AI tasks, including examples from natural language processing, image processing,
reasoning and inference. The mathematics used in these applications is often well-developed thanks
to its use in other ﬁelds, and in particular, Grassmannian and tensor algebra oﬀers more in terms
of duality and symmetry than is typically used in AI. Some of these algebraic operations are costly
on classical hardware, but much cheaper or even free in quantum computation, which in 2021 is
rapidly becoming more practical. The authors hope that this paper helps AI researchers familiar
with vectors and their uses to turn more often to quantum theory as a rich source of mathematical
motivation for advances today, and to approach the advent of quantum computing with conﬁdence
and excitement.
Appendix: Category Theory for Quantum AI
Category theory is one of the less familiar branches of mathematics to many researchers in AI, and
this appendix is designed as a very brief supplement. Interested readers are referred particularly to
the survey article of Selinger (2010) and the graduate text of Heunen and Vicary (2019) for a proper
explanation.
Much of modern mathematics can be thought of as the study of objects with some deﬁned
structure, along with maps that preserve this structures. Standard examples well-known by the
middle of the 20th century include sets and maps, groups and homomorphisms, topological spaces
and continuous maps, diﬀerentiable manifolds and diﬀerentiable maps, and of course, vector spaces
and linear maps.
The abstract notion of a category was developed in the 20th century to reason about such
structures in a common fashion. A category consists of a collection of objects, and for every pair
of objects A and B, a collection of morphisms from A to B. Morphisms must be composable in
sequence in an associative manner (so that f ◦(g ◦h) = (f ◦g) ◦h), and there must be an identity
morphism id so that id ◦f = f ◦id = f.
In many categories, the morphisms are some kind of function. These include Set, the category of
sets and maps, and Vect, the category of vector spaces and linear maps. There are also important
cases where the morphisms are not functions, including the category of sets and relations, which
is often called Rel. A relation between two sets A and B is a subset of their Cartesian product
A × B, intuitively a ‘many to many correspondence’, and relations can also be composed in a way
that satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a category (Heunen & Vicary, 2019, §0.1.3). Because of the potential
for one-to-many correspondences, if we think of ‘applying a morphism’ as ‘evolving in time’, the
category Rel can be used as a model for ‘nondeterministic classical physics’, because a single state
representing the present can evolve into more than one possible state representing the future.
Following the pattern of abstract algebra, further deﬁnitions are introduced and their properties
and consequences explored. Some of these (here described intuitively but not precisely) are as follows.
A functor is itself a mapping between two categories that maps objects to objects and morphisms to
morphisms in a regular composable fashion. The opposite or dual category Cop has the same objects
as C but ‘reversed’ morphisms: if we deﬁne the set of morphisms from A to B in the category C as
C(A, B), then the set of morphisms from B to A in Cop is deﬁned by Cop(B, A) = C(A, B). This is
simple but initially confusing, especially with the most obvious category Set of sets and functions
— how can a function from A to B be considered a morphism from B to A? In this surprising
case, the answer is just ‘the deﬁnition satisﬁes identity and associativity, so it forms a category’.
However, with the categories of Rel of sets and relations, and FVect of (ﬁnite dimensional) vector
1334

Quantum Mathematics in Artificial Intelligence
spaces and linear maps, the notion of dual categories becomes much more concrete, as the objects
and morphisms themselves have duals, not only the category as a whole. Much of the power in
categorical quantum mechanics arises from the use of category theory to explore the properties and
consequences of duality in these settings.
A closed category is one where the morphisms themselves have the structure of objects in the
category. For example, the mappings from a ﬁnite set A to a ﬁnite set B themselves form a ﬁnite set
(an element of B is selected for each element of A, so the number of such possibilities is |B||A|), so
ﬁnite sets are a closed category. A monoidal category is one where objects from the same category can
be composed with one another ‘in parallel’ using an operator written ⊗(as well as morphisms being
composed ‘in sequence’), and there needs to be an identity object I that satisﬁes basic compatibility
conditions with the identity morphism. This gives the objects of the category the structure of a
monoid, which is a group without the requirement of each element having an inverse. In a monoidal
category, an object A may have a dual object A⋆, with canonical morphisms from I to A⋆⊗A and
vice versa. If these morphisms contract to the identity in given ways, the category is called compact.
A dagger category is one where each morphism f : A →B has a corresponding dagger morphism
f † : B →A, with algebraic properties generalized from those of the adjoint operator in linear
algebra.
Dagger categories were used by Abramsky and Coecke (2004) for describing quantum
information protocols, using the term strongly compact closed categories. The term ‘dagger category’
was introduced as part of a more general exploration of their mathematical properties by Selinger
(2007).
The connection of notation and terminology with linear algebra is quite deliberate: ﬁnite di-
mensional complex vector spaces form a monoidal category whose monoidal product is the tensor
product, and whose dual objects are the dual vector spaces. Hence the notation A⋆for the dual of
A, and A ⊗B for the monoidal category product, are just the same deﬁnitions as given in linear
algebra.
The relationship with quantum mechanics, called categorical quantum mechanics, is due partic-
ularly to Abramsky and Coecke (2009), and has become part of the mathematical backbone of work
on understanding quantum processes by Coecke and Kissinger (2017) and in related works. Cate-
gorical quantum mechanics seeks to describe quantum mechanics and quantum processes in terms
of mathematical properties like those outlined above.
This contributes to quantum mathematics in two ways. First, the results of quantum mechanics
can be linked even more directly to key mathematical concepts. For example, Heunen and Vicary
(2019, Ch. 4) uses the constrasting monoidal structures of the categories Set and FHilb (ﬁnite
dimensional Hilbert Spaces and bounded linear maps) to explain why we should expect that state can
be uniformly copied in classical computing but not in quantum computing; and they relate categorical
properties to aspects of entanglement and quantum teleportation throughout. Second, understanding
such phenomena at a more abstract mathematical level can lead to applications in other areas and
cross-fertilization. For example, the category of sets and relations (more general than the category
of sets and maps, because a relation can be many-to-many) sometimes behaves much more like
the category of vector spaces than that of sets, particularly in relation to entanglement, which the
statistical algebra of Bradley (2020) uses to describe concepts in a formal concept lattice. And of
particular importance, the use of category theory links the pregroup grammars of Lambek calculus to
the composed vector representations of Coecke et al. (2010), the algebraic representation of pronouns
(Sadrzadeh, Clark, & Coecke, 2013, 2014), and the gate-based quantum circuit implementation of
Meichanetzidis et al. (2020).
Here, for example, the notion of monoidal products and duals is
used to give a categorical model for a linguistic notion such as “a transitive verb operates on two
nounphrases” and a vector notion such as “a type (0, 2) tensor operates on two type (1, 0) vectors”,
in such a way that the verb and noun representations can be implemented on a quantum computer.
While category theory can sound very abstract and technical, it gives clearer insights into why
apparently similar systems sometimes behave diﬀerently, and why some apparently very diﬀerent
systems share common structures. Today especially, it provides an ideal opportunity for mathe-
1335

Widdows, Kitto, & Cohen
maticians with a background in algebra to contribute to technologies for computing, security, and
communication.
