LogicAsker: Evaluating and Improving the Logical Reasoning Ability of
Large Language Models
Yuxuan Wan1∗, Wenxuan Wang1∗, Yiliu Yang1, Youliang Yuan2,
Jen-tse Huang1, Pinjia He2, Wenxiang Jiao3†, Michael R. Lyu1
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3Tencent AI Lab, China

Abstract
We introduce LogicAsker, a novel approach
for evaluating and enhancing the logical rea-
soning capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) such as ChatGPT and GPT-4. Despite
LLMs’ prowess in tasks like writing assistance,
code generation, and machine translation, as-
sessing their ability to reason has been chal-
lenging. Traditional evaluations often prioritize
accuracy on downstream tasks over direct as-
sessments of reasoning processes. LogicAsker
addresses this gap by employing a set of atomic
reasoning skills grounded in propositional and
predicate logic to systematically examine and
improve the reasoning prowess of LLMs. Our
methodology reveals significant gaps in LLMs’
learning of logical rules, with identified reason-
ing failures ranging from 29% to 90% across
different models. Moreover, we leverage these
findings to construct targeted demonstration ex-
amples and fine-tune data, notably enhancing
logical reasoning in models like GPT-4o by up
to 5%. To our knowledge, this is the first effort
to utilize test case outcomes to effectively refine
LLMs’ formal reasoning capabilities. We make
our code, data, and results publicly available1
to facilitate further research and replication of
our findings.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as OpenAI’s
GPT series have significantly impacted natural lan-
guage processing, excelling in a variety of tasks
including text generation, machine translation, and
code generation (Gao et al., 2022, 2023a; Jiao et al.,
2023).
Reasoning, defined as the cognitive process
of using logic to draw conclusions from given
facts (Wei et al., 2022b,a), is crucial for complex
interactions that go beyond text generation. Ac-
curately assessing this ability in LLMs is essen-
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Wenxiang Jiao is the corresponding author.
1https://github.com/yxwan123/LogicAsker
tial, yet challenging, as models may correctly per-
form tasks merely relying on shortcuts such as pat-
tern recognition without truly engaging in logical
reasoning (Huang and Chang, 2022; Huang et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023a). Consider the following
inference example: Either it is raining, or
Tom will play football; if it rains, then
the floor will be wet; the floor is dry;
therefore, Tom will play football. We may
encounter the following challenges: 1) It’s unclear
if a correct LLM response is due to reasoning or
simple heuristics like word correlations (e.g., “dry
floor” is more likely to correlate with “playing foot-
ball”). 2) If an LLM fails, pinpointing the specific
breakdown in reasoning is difficult (i.e., inferring
not raining from the floor being dry or inferring
playing football from not raining). 3) Current sys-
tems lack comprehensive test cases that encompass
various formal reasoning types beyond implica-
tion, such as logical equivalence (e.g., A and B are
true; therefore, B and A are true. 4) Evaluating
an LLM’s reasoning on such cases offers limited
insight into enhancing its reasoning capabilities.
To better handle these challenges, a well-
performing testing framework should be able to
define a set of skills that a) directly correspond to
the reasoning process, b) cannot be further divided,
c) cover all formal logical reasoning scenarios, and
d) can identify LLMs’ weaknesses and facilitate
improving LLMs’ performance. Property a) en-
sures that the task cannot be accomplished by other
approaches, such as inferring from the correlations
of words, and the evaluation result directly reflects
the model’s reasoning ability. Property b) and c)
ensure that the set of skills is fundamental and com-
prehensive, which can provide helpful insights to
accomplish Property d).
We introduce LogicAsker, an automatic frame-
work designed to evaluate and enhance LLMs’ for-
mal reasoning skills using Minimum Functional-
ity Tests (MFTs) (Ribeiro et al., 2020), akin to
arXiv:2401.00757v3  [cs.SE]  8 Oct 2024

Figure 1: Overview of the LogicAsker framework.
software engineering’s unit tests, which utilize
straightforward examples to assess specific behav-
iors. These tests help identify when models rely
on shortcuts rather than genuinely mastering a
skill (Ribeiro et al., 2020). Specifically, LogicAs-
ker builds a set of atomic skills from foundational
principles of propositional and predicate logic, two
fundamental systems used to formalize reasoning
procedures (Partee et al., 1990), together with com-
mon logical fallacies (Hurley and Watson, 2020).
Based on the skill set, LogicAsker generates rea-
soning questions by translating standard logic ex-
pressions into natural language, assesses LLMs’
accuracy per skill, pinpoints weaknesses, and cre-
ates in-context-learning (Brown et al., 2020) ex-
amples and fine-tuning data to bolster reasoning
abilities. In addition, for each skill, LogicAsker
uses diverse vocabulary to frame various natural
language queries, computing average performance
to minimize biases from word correlations.
Table 1 demonstrates that LogicAsker comple-
ments existing frameworks by providing a compre-
hensive evaluation scope and utilizing outcomes
to enhance LLMs’ reasoning capabilities, while
other datasets often face data leakage and are scope-
limited. LogicAsker serves as an extensive diagnos-
tic tool for LLMs’ formal reasoning, significantly
exceeding the coverage of comparable tools and
enabling detailed assessments across diverse rea-
soning rules such as inferences, quantifiers, and
fallacies. Scaling up the scope presents significant
challenges due to the complexity of designing algo-
rithms capable of processing various logical rules
and translating them into natural language. Despite
these complexities, LogicAsker uniquely integrates
all formal logical rules and common fallacies, facil-
itating robust testing and refinement of reasoning
capabilities.
We
evaluated
LogicAsker’s
performance
through extensive testing on six state-of-the-art
(SOTA) LLMs (Hugging Face, 2024), including
four
closed-source
LLMs
(GPT-4o,
GPT-4,
ChatGPT, and Gemini-1.5) and two open-source
LLMs (Llama3 and Mixtral). Our findings reveal
that LogicAsker’s test cases effectively pinpoint
logical reasoning failures across these models, with
error rates (i.e., 1 −accuracy) between 29% and
90%. These test cases also facilitate the creation of
in-context learning examples and fine-tuning data,
thereby enhancing logical reasoning capabilities.
For instance, applying LogicAsker’s cases to
GPT-4o improved its reasoning accuracy from 92%
to 97%. All resources are released for reproduction
and further research2.
We summarize the main contributions of this
work as follows:
• We are the first work that formally defines a com-
prehensive set of 34 atomic and 208 extended
skills necessary for LLMs to execute formal
reasoning based on propositional and predicate
logic.
• We develop LogicAsker, a fully automatic tool
that utilizes atomic skills to generate test cases
to assess and enhance LLMs’ reasoning abilities,
marking a first in utilizing test results to directly
improve LLM performance.
• We conduct a thorough empirical evaluation of
the logical reasoning abilities of six SOTA LLMs.
2https://github.com/yxwan123/LogicAsker

We demonstrate that the test results by LogicAs-
ker can be used to effectively evaluate and im-
prove the performance of LLMs.
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Formal Analysis of Reasoning Abilities
“Reasoning” can be characterized into formal rea-
soning and informal reasoning. The former is a
systematic and logical process that follows a set of
rules and principles, and the reasoning within these
systems will provide valid results as long as one
follows the defined rules (e.g., all A are B, all B are
C; therefore, all A are C). The latter is a less struc-
tured approach that relies on intuition, experience,
and common sense to draw conclusions and solve
problems (Huang and Chang, 2022; Bronkhorst
et al., 2020) (e.g., Hong Kong residents have a high
life expectancy; this is probably because they have
healthy living habits). Generally, formal reasoning
is more structured and reliable, whereas informal
reasoning is more adaptable and open-ended but
may be less reliable. In this paper, we focus on the
formal reasoning process to systematically analyze
LLMs’ reasoning abilities.
To formalize reasoning procedures, two funda-
mental systems are usually adopted, namely, propo-
sitional logic and predicate logic. The former one
deals with propositions or statements that can be
either true or false, and utilizes logical operators
including ∧(and), ∨(or), ¬ (not), →(inference),
and ↔(bidirectional) to connect these statements.
The latter one, in contrast, extends propositional
logic to deal with more complex statements that
involve variables, quantifiers, and predicates. Both
propositional logic and predicate logic contain vari-
ous rules for the reasoning process. These rules can
be categorized into equivalence rules and inference
rules. Equivalent rules summarize the basic expres-
sions that are equivalent in terms of truth value (e.g.,
¬(P ∧Q) ⇔(¬P) ∨(¬Q)). Inference rules sum-
marize the basic valid inference rules (e.g., from
the premises: A →B, and A, we can infer B ).
We refer to (Partee et al., 1990) for a more de-
tailed explanation. Table 7-9 in Appendix A list
common inference rules in predicate logic and
propositional logic. Besides inference rules, for-
mal logic systems can also express common logical
fallacies, i.e., arguments that may sound convinc-
ing but are based on faulty logic and are, therefore,
invalid. We list the common logical fallacies in
Table 10.
2.2
Minimum Functionality Test
In this paper, we adopted the concept of Minimum
Functionality Tests (MFTs), introduced in (Ribeiro
et al., 2020), to evaluate the reasoning ability of
LLMs. MFTs are analogous to unit tests in soft-
ware engineering, where a collection of simple ex-
amples is used to check a specific behavior within
a capability. These tests involve creating small and
focused datasets that are particularly effective in
detecting whether models resort to shortcuts to han-
dle complex inputs, rather than truly mastering the
capability.
To apply MFTs in evaluating the reasoning abil-
ity of LLMs, we treated each formal logical rule
as an independent task and generated abundant test
cases for each task. Each test case was designed
to trigger logical failures in the LLMs, allowing us
to assess the strengths and weaknesses of LLMs in
the logical reasoning process, and providing a solid
foundation for further analysis and improvement.
3
LogicAsker
In this section, we introduce the design and imple-
mentation of LogicAsker, a novel tool to trigger
logical reasoning failures in large language models.
Figure 1 overviews the workflow of LogicAsker,
which consists of three main modules: test case
generation, weakness identification and in-context
learning (ICL) demonstration. In particular, the
test case generation module utilizes atomic skills
defined on the two formal logic systems and an
inference synthesis approach to generate questions
as test cases. Then, the generated cases are fed
into the LLMs to reveal weaknesses and provide in-
sights into the LLMs by the weakness identification
process. Finally, LogicAsker utilizes these insights
to construct ICL demonstrations to improve the
reasoning abilities of the LLMs.
3.1
Reasoning Skills
Atomic skills. As described in Section 2.1, propo-
sitional and predicate logic are two fundamental
systems that formalize the reasoning process. The
inference rules and equivalence laws in these two
systems are atomic and can cover all correct reason-
ing scenarios; therefore, we define these 34 rules
as the set of atomic skills an LLM should possess
to perform formal reasoning.
Extended skills. Predicate logic extends propo-
sitional logic to deal with more complex statements
that involve variables, quantifiers, and predicates.

Table 1: Comparison with previous works.
Fully Au-
tomatic
Atomic
Skills
Formal
Rules
Include
Fallacies
Identify
Weakness
Improve
LLMs
LLMs∗
Tested
Example
Testbed
CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019)
×
×
×
×
✓
×
-
BERT
LogiQA (Liu et al., 2020)
×
×
×
×
×
×
-
BERT
RECLOR (Yu et al., 2020)
×
×
×
×
✓
×
2
GPT2
Soft Reasoner (Clark et al., 2020)
✓
×
1
×
✓
×
-
RoBERTa
LogicNLI (Tian et al., 2021)
×
×
7
×
✓
×
-
BERT
FOLIO (Han et al., 2022)
×
×
×
×
×
×
4
GPT3
LogicInference (Ontañón et al., 2022)
✓
×
19
×
×
×
-
T5
ProntoQA-OOD (Saparov et al., 2023)
✓
×
6
×
✓
×
4
GPT3.5
LogicAsker (Ours)
✓
✓
34
✓
✓
✓
6
GPT4
* We consider language models with more than 1 billion parameters as LLMs.
Figure 2: Test case generation procedure.
In this regard, besides the unique equivalence and
inference laws in predicate logic, we add quanti-
fiers and variables to every rule in propositional
logic to form the predicate version of the laws. Us-
ing this approach, we expand the set of 34 atomic
skills into a set of 208 extended skills. In Appendix
B, we provide some concrete examples of these
extended rules.
3.2
Test Case Generation
To generate logical questions, LogicAsker first
adopts a rule-based method to generate logical ex-
pressions systematically based on reasoning skills
and then translates the logical expressions into nat-
ural language. Figure 2 provides an overview of
the procedure.
Logic expression generation. To better control
the process of logic expression generation, we first
define the length of an inference problem by the
number of syllogisms it involves. We use the in-
ference rules described in Section 2.1 to generate
inference expressions with length one. When a
longer inference (> 1) is specified, we start with a
base expression E0 := P1 ∧P2 →C1 with length
one and expand the inference chain. Specifically,
we substitute the premises (either or both) of the
first inference with the conclusion of some other
syllogism and append the premises of those syllo-
gisms into the list of all premises. For example, we
can find another syllogism E1 := P3 ∧P4 →P2
with P2 as the conclusion and then obtain a new
expression Enew := P1 ∧P3 ∧P4 →C1 with the
inference length of two. We can obtain inference
expressions of any length by recursively expanding
the inference chain as above. During the genera-
tion process, one can specify the desired rules and
length to allow complete control over expected test
cases.
In addition to the correct inference expression
created above, we generate three kinds of false in-
ference expressions: contradiction, unrelated, and
fallacy. A contradiction is generated by negating
the conclusion of a correct inference expression and
an unrelated is generated by replacing the conclu-
sion of a valid inference expression with an irrele-
vant statement. For example, for E0 := P1 ∧P2 →
C1, a contradiction is Ec := P1 ∧P2 →¬C1, an
unrelated can be Eu := P1 ∧P2 →U1. We create
a fallacy by directly using the fallacy rules listed
in Section 2.1 for an inference length of one. For
a fallacy with a more extended length, we select a
fallacy rule as the base expression and expand the
inference chain using correct rules, ensuring the
expression’s incorrectness.

Natural language translation.
Partially in-
spired by (Ontañón et al., 2022), translating a
clause into natural language involves a series of
patterns that depend on the structure of the clause.
Simple propositions are transformed into one of the
template patterns, such as “subject verb-action”,
“subject predicate”, or “impersonal-action” with a
predefined set of subjects, verbs, predicates, and
impersonal actions that can be chosen randomly
without repetition. For predicate clauses that in-
volve constants or variables, we employ templates
“subject verb-action”, “subject predicate” to trans-
late them. Furthermore, each clause can be ren-
dered in various modes, such as the present, past,
or negated forms. Additionally, connectives like
"or," "and," "implies," and "if and only if" also
adhere to their designated patterns. For quantified
clauses, we adopt patterns like "for all x, X", "there
is at least one x for which X", and "some Xs are
Y ,". To facilitate the generation process, we cu-
rate extensive lists of potential subjects, including
common names in English, and compile plausible
predicates, actions, and impersonal actions. Com-
pared to Ontanon et al. (Ontañón et al., 2022), our
method provides a more natural and less ambigu-
ous translation. We provide a detailed illustration
of the translation process in Appendix C.
3.3
Weakness Identification
To measure the reasoning abilities of the LLMs, we
calculate the accuracy of LLMs’ answers Acc =
Ncorrect
Ntotal . Where Ntotal denotes the total number of
responses, and Ncorrect denotes the number of re-
sponses that are correct. In particular, since all
generated queries are formulated as yes-or-no ques-
tions, LogicAsker adopts an automatic approach
that searches for pre-defined keywords (e.g., "yes"
and "no") in sentences to identify correct answers.
To reveal the weaknesses of LLMs, we gen-
erate n test cases for each leaf node in the rule
tree depicted in Figure 1. Then, we calculated the
response accuracy of an LLM of each leaf node.
Based on the result, we can identify the weaknesses
of LLMs by listing the leaf nodes that receive the
lowest accuracy. In addition, by grouping the ac-
curacy by different attributes in the rule tree, we
can gain insights into the strengths and weaknesses
of LLMs on these attributes (e.g., performance on
predicate logic vs. propositional logic).
Table 2: Conversational LLMs used in the evaluation.
Name
Rank
GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024c)
1
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024b)
4
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2024a)
37
Gemini-1.5 (Google, 2024)
10
Llama3-70b (Meta Platforms, 2024)
12
Mixtral-8x7b (Mistral AI, 2024)
42
3.4
Improving LLMs
In-context learning (ICL) is a paradigm that en-
ables LLMs to learn tasks with examples in the
form of demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020). It
leverages task instructions and a few demonstra-
tion examples to convey the task semantics, which
are then combined with query questions to create
inputs for the language model to make predictions.
ICL has demonstrated impressive performance in
various natural language processing and code in-
telligence. However, the performance of ICL is
known to rely on high-quality demonstrations (Gao
et al., 2023b) strongly. To fully unleash the po-
tential of ICL, LogicAsker utilizes the weak skills
of each LLM to construct both correct and incor-
rect examples with expected answers and explana-
tions as demonstrations to facilitate the reasoning
of LLMs. The generation process follows a similar
approach to the test case generation described in
§ 3.2, with the difference being that we append a
brief explanation and the correct answer at the end
of each case. We show an instance of the demon-
stration example in Appendix D.
Fine-tuning is another widely used tech-
nique to enhance model performance on specific
tasks (Moslem et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2021). This
process involves taking a pre-trained model and
further training it on a smaller, task-specific dataset.
The rationale behind fine-tuning is to leverage the
learned features and knowledge of the pre-trained
model, adapting it to particular nuances and charac-
teristics of a targeted domain or task. In this paper,
we directly utilize the data generated by LogicAs-
ker to fine-tune LLMs to improve their reasoning
ability.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
We apply LogicAsker to test six state-of-the-art
(SOTA) LLMs, including four close-source and

Figure 3: Overall accuracy.
two open-source models. Table 2 lists brief infor-
mation on these systems. All of them are ranked
within the top 50 in the LMSYS Chatbot Arena
Leaderboard 3 according to the assessment results
in June 2024. We leave details of how we access
the model, the parameters used, and the prompt we
used in Appendix E.
We conduct two iterations of experiments for a
comprehensive assessment. In the first iteration, we
follow the setting in § 3.3 and set n = 25, resulting
in 5,200 cases. Statistics of the sampled data are
described in Appendix F. The second iteration is
based on the first one, which focuses on the iden-
tified weaknesses of each LLM, i.e., the ten leaf
nodes in Figure 1 with the lowest accuracy. We
generated 25 additional test cases for each weak-
ness. These 250 test cases comprise our “weakness
dataset, ” which will be utilized for further evalua-
tion in § 4.5.
4.2
Effectiveness of LogicAsker
We demonstrate the effectiveness of LogicAsker
through the overall performance of LLMs on the
test cases. The overall performance of LLMs in the
first and second iteration is shown in Figure 3. The
result reveals that our framework can effectively
expose logical failures in the first iteration, with
LLM’s accuracy ranging from 78%-98%. When
focusing on the weak skills of LLMs in the second
iteration, we further reduce the accuracy to 10%-
71% for the LLMs. What’s surprising is that most
of these LLMs show accuracy even lower than ran-
dom guesses (i.e., 50% here) when confronted with
logical questions involving specific logical rules.
This contradicts their remarkable performance in
various LLM benchmarks, for example, achieving
top 50 ranks on the LLM Arena Leaderboard. It
suggests that existing benchmark datasets are not
comprehensive enough to assess the generalization
ability of LLMs in reasoning.
3https://huggingface.co/spaces/lmsys/
chatbot-arena-leaderboard
Figure 4: Propositional and predicate logic accuracy.
Figure 5: Accuracy of different rule categories.
4.3
Insights into Reasoning Abilities
We conducted a comprehensive analysis to gain
insights from the failures exposed by LogicAsker,
obtaining three key observations from the evalua-
tion:
Most LLMs are better at easier logical skills.
We compared the performance of LLMs on propo-
sitional logic and predicate logic, the former of
which is simper in form while the latter involves
more complex quantifier manipulations. Figure 4
illustrates the difference between the accuracy ob-
tained for the two logic systems. Notably, we ob-
served that most LLMs are better at propositional
logic, implying their limited ability in complex rea-
soning scenarios.
Most LLMs are weak in recognizing logical
fallacies. Figure 5 presents the accuracy of LLMs
under different skill categories. Interestingly, we
discovered that among three types of skills, recog-
nizing fallacies has the lowest accuracy for most
LLMs, with GPT-4 and Mixtral-8x7B being the
exceptions. It suggests that current LLMs are over-
confident even in fallacies, which may be learned
from the mistakes in pretraining data.
Case study: GPT-4 did not learn all logic rules
well. To provide a direct impression of what skills
LLMs cannot perform well, we list three atomic
rules in which GPT-4 has the lowest accuracy in
Table 3. While GPT-4 has an average accuracy of
98% over all skills, it only achieves 60% - 68%
accuracy on these skills, indicating that it cannot
perform these atomic skills smoothly.
We also discovered that longer inference chains

Table 3: Weakness of GPT-4
Rule
Type
Example
Accuracy
Existential resolution
Incorrect
For all v, v will not play squash or v will go running. There is at least
one v for which v will play squash or v will play tennis. Therefore,
there is at least one v for which v will go running.
0.60
Universal resolution
Correct
For all x, x will climb a mountain or x is a police officer. For all x, x
will not climb a mountain or x is rich. Therefore, for all x, x is a police
officer or x is rich.
0.60
Law of quantifier movement
Correct
For all x, if Joseph sleeps, then x is a janitor. Therefore, if Joseph
sleeps, then for all x, x is a janitor.
0.68
Table 4: Human evaluation results on the quality of test
cases.
Invalid Cases
a
b
c
Total
Count
10
8
0
18
Percentage
1.92%
1.54%
0.00%
3.46%
are more challenging for LLMs, the details are pro-
vided in Appendix G. These insights provide a valu-
able understanding of the strengths and weaknesses
of each LLM when handling logical questions, al-
lowing us to uncover specific areas that require
improvement and potential avenues for enhancing
overall performance. We provide a full breakdown
list of the LLMs’ performance on various skills in
Appendix H.
4.4
The Quality of Test Cases
Since the test cases are automatically generated, we
conduct a human evaluation to measure the qual-
ity of the generated test cases by LogicAsker. To
achieve this, we randomly sampled 10% (520) of
the test cases generated during the first iteration of
the experiment in 4.2 and conduct manual inspec-
tion. Two annotators with bachelor’s degrees were
recruited to answer the questions manually. Each
test case was annotated as either valid or invalid
based on the following three questions: a) Is the
question grammatically correct? b) Is the question
understandable and has only one interpretation? c)
Can the target answer be derived from the ques-
tion? A test case is considered valid only when
both annotator’s answer to the above questions are
positive. The results of the annotation are presented
in Table 4. This result is statistically sufficient to
prove that the probability of LogicAsker generat-
ing understandable and solvable logical questions
is larger than or equal to 0.94 (with p-value 0.05),
indicating that the test cases generated by Logi-
cAsker are highly reliable and valid.
4.5
LogicAsker to Improve Reasoning
In this section, we explore the potential of Logi-
cAsker in further improving the reasoning ability
of LLMs through in-context learning (ICL) and
fine-tuning.
We first employ LogicAsker to generate ICL
demonstrations tailored to address the weaknesses
dataset uncovered in the experiments in § 4.2. For
each inference problem, we generated ICL demon-
strations that provide both the expected answer and
an explanation as described in § 3. We evaluate the
effectiveness of the ICL demonstrations generated
by LogicAsker by comparing the following prompt-
ing strategies: a) Zero-Shot: We provide only task
instructions without any ICL demonstrations. b)
Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thouhgt (CoT): We use the in-
struction "Please think step-by-step" (Kojima et al.,
2022) to elicit the zero-shot reasoning ability of
the LLMs. c) Random ICL Demonstrations: In
addition to the task instruction, we also include
four ICL demonstrations selected randomly from
the available rules with balanced answer labels,
i.e., two correct and two incorrect. d) Weakness
ICL Demonstration: Instead of random demonstra-
tions, we include four ICL demonstrations using
the weakness rules identified in § 4.2 with balanced
answer labels.
We perform testing with the 5.2k sampled data
on all models and list the result in Table 5. In gen-
eral, the weakness ICL demonstrations are more
effective than those random ICL demonstrations,
and both ICL methods bring more performance
gain than CoT, indicating that the test cases gen-
erated by LogicAsker can improve reasoning.
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of Logi-
cAsker, we fine-tune ChatGPT on 5.2k separately
generated data on all skills and 2.8k separately
generated data on weaknesses of ChatGPT, respec-
tively. We test the two fine-tuned model on both
LogicAsker and another dataset, LogiQA, a chal-
lenging dataset for machine reading comprehension

Table 5: Performance of ICL demonstrations by Logi-
cAsker (%).
Model
Zero-Shot
CoT
ICL
ICL(Weak)
GPT-4
97.75
96.60
97.98
99.48
GPT-4o
91.92
92.94
95.77
97.23
Gemini
92.06
93.62
96.13
96.67
Llama-3
91.02
94.54
94.83
93.35
Mixtral
86.77
86.23
76.40
82.02
ChatGPT
77.62
78.19
82.90
81.04
Average
89.52
90.35
90.67
91.63
with logical reasoning (Liu et al., 2020). We use
the "test" split of LogiQA which contains 651 test
data. The results are presented in Table 6. We can
observe that models fine-tuned on LogicAsker can
effectively enhance the models’ reasoning ability
on both datasets, suggesting the generalizability
of LogicAsker. These findings demonstrate the
effectiveness of LogicAsker in improving the
reasoning ability of LLMs.
Table 6: ChatGPT performance on LogiQA and Logi-
cAsker after fine-tuning (%).
Vanilla
FT (All)
FT (Weak)
LogicAsker
77.62
99.50
97.83
LogiQA
40.55
41.01
41.78
5
Discussion
A surprising result from our experiments is the
lower performance of CoT prompting in some
LLMs, such as GPT-4, despite the widespread be-
lief in CoT’s ability to enhance logical reasoning.
One possible explanation lies in the fundamen-
tal difference between how CoT operates and the
structure of LogicAsker’s test cases. CoT functions
by breaking down complex reasoning tasks into
intermediate, manageable steps, guiding the model
toward a final conclusion through a series of natural
language reasoning steps. However, LogicAsker
tests focus on assessing LLMs’ mastery of the most
basic, indivisible reasoning skills. These fundamen-
tal reasoning skills are the building blocks for more
complex reasoning processes like CoT. Since these
basic skills cannot be further subdivided into in-
termediate steps, the benefits of CoT are limited
when applied to LogicAsker’s simpler test cases.
In contrast, improving an LLM’s understanding of
these core skills can enhance its performance on
more complex tasks where CoT is applicable, as
demonstrated by ChatGPT’s improved results on
the LogiQA dataset (see Table 6).
Further analysis of failure cases reveals another
intriguing observation. In certain CoT-prompted
scenarios, GPT-4 tends to rely on common sense
rather than logical deduction. Given that Logi-
cAsker’s data is synthetic and not aligned with
common-sense reasoning, this tendency leads to
performance degradation. This is illustrated by
the following example, where CoT prompts GPT-4
to incorrectly infer weather conditions based on
premises, while a zero-shot approach provides a
more accurate deduction by sticking to strict logical
interpretation:
Q: Consider the following premises: If Linda
were sad, then it is sunny, and if it is sunny, then
Linda is sad. Can we infer the following from
them? Answer yes or no: It is not overcast.
Ans (Zero-shot): From these premises, we can
infer that Linda is sad and it is sunny are equiva-
lent; ... This means that Linda is sad if and only
if it is sunny. However, without additional infor-
mation about whether Linda is actually sad or not,
we cannot definitively conclude the state of the
weather (overcast or not). Therefore, based on the
information given and without knowing whether
Linda is sad, the answer is no.
Ans (CoT): ... The statement “It is sunny” di-
rectly contradicts the possibility of it being over-
cast at the same time, assuming a typical under-
standing of weather where sunny conditions and
overcast conditions are mutually exclusive. ...
Therefore, if either is true, it must be sunny, and
thus it cannot be overcast. ... Since the premises
lead us to conclude that it is sunny, we can infer
that it is not overcast. Final answer: yes.
This observation underscores the effectiveness
of LogicAsker in revealing situations where mod-
els default to heuristics or memorized knowledge
rather than true logical reasoning. While CoT has
been shown to improve logical reasoning in general
tasks, LogicAsker’s framework exposes when mod-
els fail to genuinely reason and instead fall back
on familiar or remembered patterns. This insight
suggests that strengthening LLMs’ mastery of ba-
sic reasoning skills is a necessary foundation for
improving performance on tasks that benefit from
CoT strategies.
6
Related Work
Significant advancements in NLP reasoning have
been achieved through methods such as Chain-of-
Thoughts (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022b),
which enables models to generate reasoning steps
with minimal training. Enhancing this, the Pro-
gram of Thoughts (PoT) prompting (Chen et al.,
2022) leverages external interpreters like Python to

handle complex mathematical problems. Further
augmenting reasoning validity, the Logic Agent
framework transforms LLMs into logic agents that
can dynamically apply propositional logic rules
to convert natural language inputs into structured
logic forms (Liu et al., 2024).
Recent studies have focused on evaluating the
reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) by measuring their performance across
various reasoning tasks. These include arithmetic
(Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Amini
et al., 2019; Patel et al., 2021; Miao et al., 2020;
Ling et al., 2017; Roy and Roth, 2016), common-
sense (Talmor et al., 2019; Geva et al., 2021; Clark
et al., 2018), symbolic (Wei et al., 2022b), and
table reasoning (Nan et al., 2021), as well as un-
derstanding words, dates, and causal relationships
(Srivastava et al., 2022), and generalization (Lake
and Baroni, 2017; Anil et al., 2022). Despite these
efforts, it remains uncertain whether LLMs truly
reason or rely on simple heuristics, since most as-
sessments focus only on accuracy and do not thor-
oughly evaluate the reasoning processes.
Efforts to develop metrics for more formal rea-
soning analysis in LLMs include creating datasets
with first-order logic problems (Han et al., 2022),
generating test cases using a single predicate in-
ference rule (Saparov and He, 2022), building
instruction-tuning dataset designed for CoT reason-
ing with GPT-4 (Liu et al., 2023b), and employing
propositional logic with randomized methods (On-
tañón et al., 2022). These methods, however, often
lack generalizability or focus on limited deduction
rules. Saparov et al. (Saparov et al., 2023) intro-
duced a comprehensive approach by using all de-
duction rules in propositional logic to assess LLMs’
deductive reasoning across complex proofs. Our re-
search expands further, incorporating all rules and
equivalent laws in both propositional and predicate
logic, aiming to enhance understanding of each
rule’s impact on LLM performance and using these
insights for improvement.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we present LogicAsker, an automated
tool designed to comprehensively evaluate and im-
prove the formal reasoning abilities of LLMs under
a set of atomic skills.
Our research demonstrated the efficacy of Logi-
cAsker in identifying logical reasoning failures in a
diverse set of widely deployed LLMs, we achieved
a substantial error detection rate in revealing rea-
soning flaws in these models, ranging from 29% to
90%. Additionally, we utilized the test cases from
LogicAsker to design in-context learning demon-
strations, which effectively enhance the logical rea-
soning capabilities of LLMs, e.g., improving from
92% to 97% for GPT-4o.
By providing insights into the strengths and
weaknesses of LLMs in reasoning, we are able
to improve the reliability and trustworthiness of
these models. The release of all the code and data
aims to facilitate replication and encourage further
research in this crucial area.
Limitations
This paper identifies two primary limitations that
highlight areas for future research:
• Although our ICL (In-Context Learning) method
significantly enhances the logical reasoning capa-
bilities of large language models (LLMs), there
remains a performance gap compared to human-
level reasoning. Further refinements and innova-
tions in model training and architecture may be
necessary to bridge this gap.
• Our method is currently applicable only to LLMs
that possess robust in-context learning capabil-
ities. LLMs lacking this feature may not ben-
efit from our approach. Future studies could
explore fine-tuning methods to extend the ap-
plicability of our improvements across a broader
spectrum of LLMs, potentially enhancing models
with weaker or no inherent in-context learning
abilities.
