arXiv:1005.0901v1  [astro-ph.CO]  6 May 2010
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION IN APJ LETTER
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 11/10/09
DEPENDENCE OF THE OPTICAL/UV VARIABILITY ON THE EMISSION LINE PROPERTIES AND EDDINGTON
RATIO IN ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI
Y. L. AI1,2,3, W. YUAN1,2, H. Y. ZHOU4,5, T. G. WANG4,5, X.-B. DONG4,5, J. G. WANG1,2,3, H. L. LU4,5
accepted for publication in ApJ Letter
ABSTRACT
The dependence of the long-term optical/UV variability on the spectral and the fundamental physical pa-
rameters for radio-quiet active galactic nuclei (AGNs) is investigated. The multi-epoch repeated photometric
scanning data in the Stripe-82 region of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) are exploited for two comparative
AGN samples (mostly quasars) selected therein, a broad-line Seyfert 1 (BLS1) type sample and a narrow-line
Seyfert1 (NLS1) type AGN sample within redshifts 0.3–0.8. Their spectral parameters are derived from the
SDSS spectroscopic data. It is found that on rest-frame timescales of several years the NLS1-type AGNs show
systematically smaller variability compared to the BLS1-type. In fact, the variability amplitude is found to
correlate, though only moderately, with the Eigenvector1 parameters, i.e., the smaller the Hβ linewidth, the
weaker the [O III] and the stronger the Fe II emission, the smaller the variability amplitude is. Moreover, an
interesting inverse correlation is found between the variability and the Eddington ratio, which is perhaps more
fundamental. The previously known dependence of the variability on luminosity is not signiﬁcant, and that on
black hole mass—as claimed in recent papers and also present in our data—fades out when controlling for the
Eddington ratio in the correlation analysis, though these may be partly due to the limited ranges of luminosity
and black hole mass of our samples. Our result strongly supports that an accretion disk is likely to play a major
role in producing the opitcal/UV variability.
Subject headings: galaxies: active — galaxies: Seyfert — quasars: general — techniques: photometric
1. INTRODUCTION
Variation of optical/UV emission on timescales from
hours to years is one of the deﬁning characteristics of Ac-
tive Galactic Nuclei (AGNs).
Numerous previous stud-
ies of AGN/quasar ensembles have shown that the variabil-
ity amplitude is dependent on wavelength (e.g., Cutri et al.
1985; di Clemente et al. 1996; Helfand et al. 2001), lumi-
nosity (e.g., Hook et al. 1994; Giveon et al. 1999; Hawkins
2000), time lag (e.g., de Vries et al. 2005) and redshift (e.g.,
Vanden Berk et al. 2004), and yet has a large scatter. While it
is generally believed that the optical/UV light is emitted from
an optically thick accretion disk powered by a central massive
black hole, the physical processes that produce its variability
as observed are not understood yet. Interestingly, recent pro-
gresses link the variability with some fundamental parameters
of AGN. A correlation of variability with MBH was reported
by Wold et al. (2007). Moreover, Wilhite et al. (2008) found
correlations of the variability with both luminosity (inversely)
and MBH, based on which the authors speculated that variabil-
ity is inversely related to the Eddington ratio (Lbol/LEdd).
Prominent line emission in the optical/UV band is an-
other deﬁning feature of AGNs. A set of strong correlations
has been revealed to link the emission line properties, i.e.
a narrow Hβ line associated with strong optical Fe II, weak
[O III] (Boroson & Green 1992).
These correlations form
the so-called eigenvector 1 (E 1) of AGN, which is sugges-

1 National Astronomical Observatories/Yunnan Observatory, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, P.O. BOX 110, P.R.China
2 Key Laboratory for the Structure and Evolution of Celestial Objects,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
3 Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19A Yuquan
Road, P.O. Box 3908, Beijing 100039, China
4 Center for Astrophysics, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, P.R.China
5 Joint Institute of Galaxies and Cosmology, SHAO and USTC
tively driven by some underlying, more fundamental physi-
cal parameters, most likely the Eddington ratio (Sulentic et al.
2000; Boroson 2002; Dong et al. 2009).
However, the relationship between the above two AGN
characteristics—the optical/UV variability and the emission
line properties (or E1)—is poorly explored observationally
so far. The same is true for the relation between the vari-
ability and the Eddington ratio.
In this Letter, we report
our investigation on this issue, as the ﬁrst result of our com-
prehensive studies of AGN variability by making use of the
valuable multi-epoch repeated photometric scanning of the
Stripe-82 region in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS).
One virtue of our study improving upon previous ones is
the inclusion of AGNs with optical spectra characteristic of
narrow-line Seyfert 1 (NLS1), in addition to typical broad-
line AGNs (BLAGN) of the broad-line Seyfert1 (BLS1) type,
whose variability has been extensively studied. The NLS1-
type AGNs extend to the extremes in the E1 space and to high
Lbol/LEdd values. We use the Λ-dominated cosmology with
H0 = 70 kms−1Mpc−1, Ωm = 0.3, and ΩΛ = 0.7.
2. SAMPLES AND DATA ANALYSIS
Our comprehensive study of AGN optical/UV variabil-
ity (Ai et al. 2010) is carried out based on two comparative
BLAGN samples, a BLS1-type sample and a NLS1-type sam-
ple, selected from the SDSS Data Release 3 in the Stripe-82
region. The procedure of optical spectral analysis for select-
ing BLAGNs has been described in detail in our previous pa-
pers (Zhou et al. 2006; Dong et al. 2008), and the NLS1-type
sample is taken from Zhou et al. (2006). The sample selection
and photometric data analysis, including photometric calibra-
tion and measurement of variability, are described in detail in
Ai et al. (2010), and is only brieﬂy summarized here.
The sample selection criteria are: (a) located within the
Stripe-82 region (RA > 310◦or < 59◦and -1.25◦< Dec
< 1.25◦); (b) redshift z <0.8 (Hβ present in spectra) and the

2
Y. L. Ai, et al.
broad component of Hβ or Hα detected at > 10σ; (c) classi-
ﬁed as ‘star’ in all of the ﬁve bands by the SDSS photometric
pipeline so as to eliminate the contamination from host galaxy
starlight; (d) non-radio-loud, so as to eliminate possible con-
tamination from jet emission (Yuan et al. 2008); (e) a BLS1-
and NLS1-type dividing line as the broad Hα/Hβ FWHM
= 2,200 kms−1, following Zhou et al. (2006, see also Gelbord
et al. 2009). All of our NLS1-type objects also meet the con-
ventional [O III]/Hβ< 3 criterion for NLS1s (see Zhou et al.
2006, for details).
The above selections result in 58 NLS1-type and 217 BLS1-
type AGNs. Furthermore, since we aim at a comparative study
of the BLS1- and NLS1-type, we require the two samples
to have statistically compatible distributions on the redshift–
luminosity (z −Mi) plane. As the BLS1-type AGNs largely
outnumber the NLS1-type ones, a subsample of the former is
then extracted to mimic the z−Mi distribution of the latter. We
try to retain the NLS1-type sample (with only a few outliers
discarded), and prune the BLS1 sample by randomly select-
ing its objects falling within sub-regions divided on the z−Mi
plane, with a BLS1/NLS1 ratio consistent with 2:1. This re-
sults in two ﬁnal working samples, 55 NLS1- and 108 BLS1-
type AGNs, which are statistically compatible on the redshift–
luminosity plane [Figure1; the 2-D Kolmogorov-Smirnovtest
(Press et al. 1992) yields a chance probability of 0.43 that they
have the same z−Mi distributions].
The two working samples consist of mostly quasars with
Mi < −23 mag and z ≃0.3–0.8. They can be considered as op-
tically and homogeneously selected, with reliably measured
continuum and emission line parameters (see Zhou et al.
2006; Dong et al. 2008). Their physical parameters span al-
most the whole range of BLAGNs with FWHM(Hβ) ≃1000–
8000 kms−1, black hole mass MBH=106.5 −109 M⊙, lumi-
nosity (i−band) Mi = −22 ∼−26, and the Eddington ratio
Lbol/LEdd=0.01–1.
The Stripe-82 region was repeatedly scanned during the
SDSS-I phase (2000-2005) under generally photometric con-
ditions and the data were well calibrated (Lupton et al. 2002).
This region was also scanned repeatedly over the course
of three 3-month campaigns in successive three years in
2005–2007 known as the SDSS Supernova Survey (SN
survey).
In this work we use the photometric data ob-
tained during the SDSS–I phase from Data Release 5 (DR5,
Adelman-McCarthy et al. 2007) and the SN survey during
2005. We use the PSF magnitudes.
Observations in the SN survey were sometimes performed
in non-photometric conditions. At the time when this work
was started only the un-calibrated source catalogs were avail-
able.
Thus we need to calibrate out possible photometric
‘zero-point’ offsets in the SN data against the DR5 magni-
tudes, using stars in the same ﬁelds as ‘standards’. The pho-
tometric calibration is performed ﬁeld-by-ﬁeld for each of the
SN survey ﬁelds (100 arcmin2 patches) in which our sam-
ple objects locate. ‘Standard stars’ with good measurements
(high quality photometry) are selected following the recom-
mendations of the SDSS instructions6. The differential mag-
nitudes of the calibrating stars (50∼200 in numbers) between
the SN survey and DR5 observations (∆m = mSN −mDR5) are
calculated, and their weighted mean is set to zero, ⟨∆m⟩= 0.
In this way the zero-point offsets of the SN survey photom-
etry are determined, which have (systematic) uncertainties
6 http://www.sdss.org/dr7/products/catalogs/ﬂags.html
<0.01mag relative to the reference DR5 data for all the ﬁelds.
The total systematic errors of the calibrated SN survey pho-
tometry are thus the quadratic sum of the above item and those
of the DR5 photometry (Ivezi´c, et al. 2004). The overall (sys-
tematic and statistical) photometric errors of the calibrated SN
survey magnitudes have a median of ≈0.03 mag for the g, r,
and i bands, and ≈0.04 mag for the u and z bands, which
are comparable to those in the DR5 data. The reliability of
our photometric calibration can be demonstrated by examin-
ing the calibrated SN survey data of the 14 Landolt photomet-
ric standard stars (Landolt 1992) locating in Stripe-82; none
of them is found to show detectable variability.
For each of the objects there are typically ∼27 observations
(14 from the SN survey during 2005) spanning ∼5 years (see
Figure2 for an example lightcurve). The optical variability is
commonly measured by the variance of observed magnitudes,
with the contribution due to measurement errors subtracted;
the intrinsic amplitude σm is given by the square root of this
variance (e.g. Vanden Berk et al. 2004; Sesar et al. 2007). We
adopt a formalism similar to that used in Sesar et al. (2007),
Σ =
v
u
u
t 1
n −1
N
X
i=1
(mi −⟨m⟩)2 ,
(1)
where ⟨m⟩is the weighted mean, and
σm =

(Σ2 −ξ2)1/2, if Σ > ξ,
0,
otherwise.
(2)
Here the contribution to the variance due to measurement er-
rors ξ is estimated directly from the errors of observed indi-
vidual magnitudes ξi (including both the statistical and sys-
tematic errors), as
ξ2 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
ξ2
i ,
(3)
rather than that in Sesar et al. (2007) where a ﬁtted error re-
lation from a large sample was used. Such an estimation of
ξ was also used in Rodriguez-Pascual et al. (1997), though in
the ﬂux rather than magnitude domain.
We approximate the derived amplitude σm for a ﬁlter band
as that at its effective wavelength λ0. For an object of redshift
z, λ0 corresponds to a wavelength λ = λ0/(1+z) in the object’s
rest frame. Thus for each object the variability σm at ﬁve rest
wavelengths are sampled which correspond to the ﬁve SDSS
bands.
3. RESULTS
We ﬁnd that the long-term variability with amplitudes σm
greater than ≈0.05 mag (approximately the minimum am-
plitude detectable in this work) is ubiquitous in our AGNs.
The previously known strong dependence of the amplitude on
(rest-frame) wavelength is also detected. To eliminate this ef-
fect in the following analysis, we divide the whole rest wave-
length range sampled here, 1900–7100Å, into ﬁve bins of
equal bin-size in logλ (see Table 1), and treat the variabil-
ity in each bin separately. In a few objects where more than
one measurement falling into one wavelength bin, the aver-
aged σm values is used for that bin. We ﬁnd that, although the
wavelength dependence is negligible within a wavelength bin,
large scatters of variability clearly remain (see Figure 3). Of
particular interest, we ﬁnd that NLS1-type AGNs have sys-
tematically lower variability than BLS1-type AGNs in all the

optical/UV variability
3
ﬁve wavelength bins, which are moderately signiﬁcant (using
the Student’s t-test for the sample means yields probability
levels of 0.001–0.01). A question is: what causes the large di-
versity of the variability, or what controls the variability am-
plitude? It is well known that large scatters in some of the
AGN observables can be reduced when the set of Eigenvec-
tor 1 correlations are considered, in which AGNs lie continu-
ously with NLS1-type clustering at one end. Below we extend
these correlations to including variability amplitude.
3.1. Correlations with the E1 parameters
Correlations are tested between the variability amplitude
σm and several well known E1 parameters, namely, Hβ
FWHM, the relative strength of the [O III] and Fe II emis-
sion lines. The latter two are measured by the intensity ra-
tios to Hβ, i.e. R5007 ≡[O III]λ5007/Hβ (where the total ﬂux
of Hβ is used) and R4570≡Fe IIλλ4434 −4684/Hβb (where
Fe II λλ4434 −4684 denotes the Fe II multiplets ﬂux inte-
grated over 4434–4684Å, and Hβb the ﬂux of the broad com-
ponent of Hβ). The non-parametric Spearman rank statistic
is used. The correlations are tested for the combined BLS1-
and NLS1-type AGN sample as well as for each sample sepa-
rately. The results are summarized in Table 1, with the Spear-
man’s coefﬁcient rs and the two-tailed probability for the null
hypothesis of no correlation. Figure 3 shows the data in one
of the wavelength bins as examples.
For the combined AGN sample in all the wavelength bins,
there exist moderate yet interesting correlations between the
variability and the three E1 parameters, which are statistically
signiﬁcant. The smaller the Hβ linewidth is, the weaker the
[O III] and the stronger the Fe II emission, and the smaller
the variability amplitude. Among them, the strongest correla-
tions are those with the Fe II strength R4570 (rs ∼−0.4), fol-
lowed by those with FWHM(Hβ), while those with R5007 are
the weakest. Some of the correlations still remain signiﬁcant
even when the two samples are considered separately.
It is thus clear that the large scatter in the optical/UV vari-
ability as observed can, at least to some extent, be attributed
to the distribution of AGN across the E1 parameter space. Our
ﬁnding of the lower ensemble variability of NLS1- compared
to BLS1-type AGNs is just a manifestation of these correla-
tions, for the former have smaller linewidths by deﬁnition and
generally weaker [O III] and stronger Fe II emission than the
latter. Given such signiﬁcant and interesting correlations, we
suggest that the E1 correlations may be extended to those in-
volving the variability in the optical/UV band.
3.2. Link with the Eddington ratio, luminosity and black hole
mass
There have been suggestions that the underlying driver
of the E1 correlations is most likely the Eddington ratio
(Boroson & Green 1992; Sulentic et al. 2000; Boroson 2002).
Here we test the dependence of the variability on Lbol/LEdd
explicitly. We also examine the variability dependence on
luminosity and MBH, as claimed in previous studies. MBH
are estimated using the scaling relation given in Greene & Ho
(2005) from the broad Hβ FWHM and the 5100 Å luminosity
(L5100), which are taken from or measured in the same way as
in Zhou et al. (2006). To calculate Lbol/LEdd the bolometric
luminosities are estimated as Lbol = 9L5100 (Elvis et al. 1994).
The results of the correlation tests are listed in Table 1, and
the data in the 2500-3300Å bin are demonstrated in Figure 4
as an example.
Of particular interest, the strongest correlation is an inverse
correlation of the variability with Lbol/LEdd (rs∼−0.4), which
is the case for all the wavelength bins. The correlation is
present in not only the combined BLS1- and NLS1-type AGN
sample but also the individual samples separately, although
it is only marginal in the NLS1-type sample alone (possibly
due to its narrow Lbol/LEdd range). These correlations are as
strong as the above σm–R4570 correlation. In addition, the
combined two samples also show a positive correlation be-
tween the variability and black hole mass, though it is con-
siderably weaker compared to that with Lbol/LEdd. For lu-
minosity (L5100 used here), however, there is essentially no
signiﬁcant correlation found in all the wavelength bins ex-
cept 2500–3300Å, in which a weak inverse correlation may
be marginally present (P ∼0.01).
Since Lbol/LEdd appears to correlate with MBH in our sam-
ples (as commonly found in optically selected AGN samples
with a limited luminosity range), one or both of their corre-
lations with the variability may not be as signiﬁcant as it ap-
pears to be, or one may even be spurious and induced from
the other. We try to eliminate this possible effect of the third
variant using the partial Spearman correlation test (see the last
two columns in Table 1 for results). We ﬁrst re-examine the
correlation between σm and MBH by taking into account their
respective correlations with Lbol/LEdd. It turns out that, in all
the wavelength bins, the correlations with MBH vanish when
the dependence on Lbol/LEdd is taken into account. However,
the same treatment for the σm–Lbol/LEdd relation, with the ef-
fect of MBH eliminated, still yields signiﬁcant, though some-
what reduced, inverse correlations in three wavelength bins.
We thus conclude that the σm–Lbol/LEdd correlation is gen-
uine, regardless of the σm–MBH correlation. The latter, as ap-
parently seen in the data and previously reported (Wold et al.
2007; Wilhite et al. 2008), is consistent with being induced
from the former.
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
It is intriguing that the optical/UV variability is closely re-
lated to the AGN E1 parameters. This can be understood in
light of the same interesting correlations with the Eddington
ratio, also found here, provided that Lbol/LEdd is indeed the
underlying driver of the E1 correlations. Since the variability–
Lbol/LEdd correlation is signiﬁcant enough for the BLS1-type
sample alone without including NLS1-type, our result does
not rely on the MBH (thus Lbol/LEdd) estimation for NLS1-type
AGNs, which is still somewhat controversial. The fact that
the correlations of the variability with the E1 parameters and
Lbol/LEdd are as strong as those among the E1 parameters and
Lbol/LEdd themselves suggests that the E1 correlations may be
extended to those involving the optical/UV variability.
The correlation between the variability and MBH, though
also present in our data, turns out to be insigniﬁcant when
Lbol/LEdd is taken into account. We thus suggest that such
a correlation, as claimed in recent studies (Wold et al. 2007;
Wilhite et al. 2008), might be spurious and induced from
the variability-Lbol/LEdd relation.
The previously known
variability–luminosity inverse correlation is found to be in-
signiﬁcant or at most weak in our data. This may be partly
due to the fact that our analysis is capable of recovering AGNs
(some are NLS1-type) with small variability in the low lu-
minosity regime (see Figure 4) which were largely missed in
previous work for various reasons. However, our morphol-
ogy and redshift cuts restrict both the luminosity and MBH
ranges of our samples, which are important for comparisons

4
Y. L. Ai, et al.
with previous work. For example, Vanden Berk et al. (2004)
have shown that a factor of 100 change in luminosity corre-
sponds to a factor of 4 change in variability. Thus it cannot
be ruled out that the lack of signiﬁcant dependence on either
luminosity or MBH may be due to their limited ranges in our
samples.
The ensemble weaker variability of NLS1- compared to
BLS1-type AGNs, as evidently found here and also suggested
by Klimek et al. (2004) based on a small sample, is simply a
natural consequence of the correlations with the E1 parame-
ters and the Eddington ratio. The dependence on Lbol/LEdd
can be understood qualitatively in terms of decreasing vari-
ability with increasing radius of the accretion disk, indepen-
dent of the actual physical processes that drives the variabil-
ity.
Such radius-dependent variability is suggested by the
fact that the variability amplitude increases as wavelength de-
creases (e.g. Vanden Berk et al. 2004) in the context of ther-
mal disk model. As the accretion rate ˙m (in units of the Ed-
dington rate) increases, the continuum emission region that
dominates a given waveband moves outward to a larger ra-
dius r (in units of the Schwarzschild radius) because of λ ∝
T −1 ∝(M/ ˙m)1/4r3/4; and hence decreasing variability is ex-
pected. We note that such a trend of optical variability seems
at odds with that in the X-ray band (Papadakis 2004), though
in the X-ray case more convincing results are needed. The
different behavior may result from the different mechanisms
and emitting regions of the radiation, as well as different vari-
ability mechanisms, in the two bands (see e.g. Uttley 2006).
Our ﬁnding of the strong correlations of the variability
with the E1 parameters and Lbol/LEdd imposes interesting con-
straints to AGN variability models. Foremost, this indicates
that the optical/UV variability must be intrinsic to AGN ac-
tivity; any external scenarios, such as gravitational microlens-
ing (Hawkins 2000), multiple supernovae and star collisions
(Cid Fernandes et al. 2000), can be ruled out as the domi-
nant process. For intrinsic variability models, it is not clear
whether the mechanism causing variability is some minor,
secondary effect or related to the main energy generation pro-
cess, as discussed in Gaskell (2008). Our result favors the
latter since the Eddington ratio is directly related to the mass
accretion rate of AGN at a given accretion efﬁciency. The
correlation with Lbol/LEdd as found here suggests that the ac-
cretion disk most likely plays a critical role in producing the
observed opitcal/UV variability, since the disk structure is de-
pending on the mass accretion rate. For instance, the model
proposed by Li & Cao (2008) that the variability is caused
by change of accretion rates can reproduce qualitatively the
observed inverse variability–Lbol/LEdd relation (Li S., private
communication).
We thank the referees for helpful comments and sugges-
tions. W.Y. thanks S. Li and B. Czerny for useful discus-
sions. This work is supported by Chinese NSF grants NSF-
10533050, the National Basic Research Program of (973
Program 2009CB824800, 2007CB815405). Funding for the
SDSS and SDSS-II was provided by the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Sci-
ence Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Japanese Mon-
bukagakusho, the Max Planck Society, and the Higher Edu-
cation Funding Council for England. The SDSS Web Site is
http://www.sdss.org/.
