Improving the Scalability of Optimal Bayesian Network Learning with
External-Memory Frontier Breadth-First Branch and Bound Search
Brandon Malone and Changhe Yuan and Eric A. Hansen and Susan Bridges
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762

Abstract
Previous work has shown that the problem of
learning the optimal structure of a Bayesian net-
work can be formulated as a shortest path ﬁnd-
ing problem in a graph and solved using A*
search. In this paper, we improve the scalabil-
ity of this approach by developing a memory-
efﬁcient heuristic search algorithm for learning
the structure of a Bayesian network. Instead of
using A*, we propose a frontier breadth-ﬁrst
branch and bound search that leverages the lay-
ered structure of the search graph of this prob-
lem so that no more than two layers of the graph,
plus solution reconstruction information, need to
be stored in memory at a time. To further improve
scalability, the algorithm stores most of the graph
in external memory, such as hard disk, when it
does not ﬁt in RAM. Experimental results show
that the resulting algorithm solves signiﬁcantly
larger problems than the current state of the art.
1
INTRODUCTION
Bayesian networks are a common machine learning tech-
nique used to represent relationships among variables in
data sets. When these relationships are not known a priori,
the structure of the network must be learned. A common
learning approach entails searching for a structure which
optimizes a particular scoring function (Cooper and Her-
skovits 1992; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995).
Because of the difﬁculty of the problem, early approaches
focused on approximation techniques to learn “good” net-
works (Cooper and Herskovits 1992; Heckerman, Geiger,
and Chickering 1995; Heckerman 1998; Friedman, Nach-
man, and Peer 1999; Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis
2006). Unfortunately, these algorithms are unable to guar-
antee anything about the quality of the learned networks.
Exact dynamic programming algorithms have been devel-
oped to learn provably optimal Bayesian network struc-
tures (Ott, Imoto, and Miyano 2004; Koivisto and Sood
2004; Singh and Moore 2005; Silander and Myllymaki
2006). These algorithms identify optimal small subnet-
works and add optimal leaves to ﬁnd large optimal net-
works until ﬁnding the optimal network including all vari-
ables. Unfortunately, all of these algorithms must store an
exponential number of subnetworks and associated infor-
mation in memory. Parviainen and Koivisto (2009) recently
proposed a divide-and-conquer algorithm in which fewer
subnetworks are stored in memory at once at the expense
of longer running time. Theoretical results suggest that this
algorithm is slower than dynamic programming when an
exponential number of processors is not available.
Yuan et al. (2011) developed an A* heuristic search formu-
lation based on the dynamic programming recurrences to
learn optimal network structures. The algorithm formulates
the learning problem as a shortest-path ﬁnding problem in
a search graph. Each path in the graph corresponds to an
ordering of the variables, and each edge on the path has a
cost that corresponds to the choice of an optimal parent set
for one variable out of the variables that appear earlier on
the path. Together, all the edges on a path encode an opti-
mal directed acyclic graph that is consistent with the path.
The solution to the shortest-path ﬁnding problem then cor-
responds to an optimal Bayesian network structure. The A*
algorithm also uses a consistent heuristic function to prune
provably suboptimal solutions during the search so as to
improve its efﬁciency.
de Campos et al. (2009) proposed a systematic search al-
gorithm to identify optimal network structures. The algo-
rithm begins by calculating optimal parent sets for all vari-
ables. These sets are represented as a directed graph that
may have cycles. Cycles are then repeatedly broken by re-
moving one edge at a time. The algorithm terminates with
an optimal Bayesian network. However, this algorithm is
shown to often learn the optimal structure slower than the
dynamic programming algorithm (de Campos, Zeng, and Ji
2009).
Optimal networks have also been learned using linear pro-
gramming (Jaakkola et al. 2010). This technique reformu-

lates the structure learning problem as a linear program. An
exponential number of constraints are used to deﬁne a con-
vex hull in which each vertex corresponds to a DAG. Co-
ordinate descent is used to identify the vertex which cor-
responds to the optimal DAG structure. Furthermore, the
dual of their formulation provides an upper bound which
can help guide the descent algorithm. This algorithm was
shown to have similar or slightly better runtime perfor-
mance as dynamic programming (Jaakkola et al. 2010).
This paper describes a novel frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch
and bound algorithm using delayed duplicate detection for
learning optimal Bayesian network structures. The basic
idea is to formulate the learning task as a graph search prob-
lem. The search graph decomposes into natural layers and
allows searching one layer at a time. This algorithm im-
proves the scalability of learning optimal Bayesian network
structures in three ways. First, the frontier search approach
allows us to reduce the memory complexity by working
with only a single layer of search graphs at a time during
the search. In particular, we store one layer of each search
graph, the scores required for that layer and information for
solution reconstruction from every previous layer. Other in-
formation is deleted. In comparison, previous dynamic pro-
gramming algorithms have to store an entire exponentially-
sized graph in memory. Second, branch and bound tech-
niques allow us to safely prune unpromising search nodes
from the search graphs, while dynamic programming al-
gorithms have to evaluate the whole search space. Finally,
we use a delayed duplicate detection method to ensure that,
given enough hard disk space, optimal network structures
can be learned regardless of the amount of RAM. Previ-
ous algorithms fail if an exponential amount of RAM is not
available.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 provides an overview of the task of Bayesian net-
work learning. Section 3 and 4 introduce two formulations
for solving the learning task: dynamic programming and
graph search. Section 5 discusses the details of the external-
memory frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch and bound algorithm
we propose in this paper. Section 6 compares the algorithm
against several existing approaches on a set of benchmark
machine learning datasets. Finally, Section 7 concludes the
paper.
2
BACKGROUND
A Bayesian network consists of a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) structure and a set of parameters. The vertices
of the graph each correspond to a random variable
V
=
{X1, ..., Xn}. All parents of Xi are referred
to as PAi. A variable is conditionally independent of
its non-descendants given its parents. The parameters of
the network specify a conditional probability distribution,
P(Xi|PAi) for each Xi.
Given a dataset D = {D1, ..., DN}, where Di is an instan-
tiation of all the variables in V, the optimal structure is the
DAG over all of the variables which best ﬁts D (Hecker-
man 1998). A scoring function measures the ﬁt of a net-
work structure to D. For example, the minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) scoring function (Rissanen 1978) uses
one term to reward structures with low entropy and another
to penalize complex structures. Optimal structures mini-
mize the score. Let ri be the number of states of the variable
Xi, let Npai be the number of data records consistent with
PAi = pai, and let Nxi,pai be the number of data records
consistent with PAi = pai and Xi = xi. The MDL score
for a structure G is deﬁned as follows (Tian 2000),
MDL(G) =
X
i
MDL(Xi|PAi),
(1)
where
MDL(Xi|PAi)
=
H(Xi|PAi) + log N
2
K(Xi|PAi),
H(Xi|PAi)
=
−
X
xi,pai
Nxi,pai log Nxi,pai
Npai
,
(2)
K(Xi|PAi)
=
(ri −1)
Y
Xl∈P Ai
rl.
MDL is decomposable (Heckerman 1998), so the score for
a structure is simply the sum of the score for each vari-
able. Our algorithm can be adapted to use any decompos-
able function. Some sets of parents cannot form an optimal
parent for any variable, as described in the following theo-
rems from Tian (2000) and de Campos et al. (2009).
Theorem 1. In an optimal Bayesian network based on
the MDL scoring function, each variable has at most
log( 2N
log N ) parents, where N is the number of data points.
Theorem
2.
Let
U
⊂
V
and
X
/∈
U.
If
BestMDL(X, U) < BestMDL(X, V), V cannot be the
optimal parent set for X.
3
DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING
Learning an optimal Bayesian network structure is NP-
Hard (Chickering 1996). Dynamic programming algo-
rithms learn optimal network structures in O(n2n) time
and memory (Ott, Imoto, and Miyano 2004; Koivisto and
Sood 2004; Singh and Moore 2005; Silander and Mylly-
maki 2006). Because a network structure is a DAG, the op-
timal structure can be divided into an optimal leaf vertex
and its parents as well as an optimal subnetwork for the rest
of the variables. This subnetwork is also a DAG, so it can
recursively be divided until the subnetwork is only a single

vertex. At that point, the optimal parents have been found
for all variables in the network and the optimal structure
can be constructed. It has been shown (Silander and Mylly-
maki 2006) that a more efﬁcient algorithm begins with a 0-
variable subnetwork and exhaustively adds optimal leaves.
For the MDL scoring function and variables V, this recur-
rence can be expressed as follows (Ott, Imoto, and Miyano
2004),
MDL(V)
=
min
X∈V{MDL(V \ {X}) +
BestMDL(X, V \ {X})},
where
BestMDL(X, V \ {X}) =
min
P AX⊆V\{X} MDL(X|PAX).
As this recurrence suggests, all dynamic programming al-
gorithms must perform three steps. First, they must calcu-
late the score of each variable given all subsets of the other
variables as parents. There are n2n−1 of these scores. Then,
BestMDL must be calculated. For a variable X and set
of possible parents V, this function returns the subset of
those parents which minimizes the score for X as well as
that score. There are n2n−1 of these optimal parent sets.
Finally, the optimal subnetworks must be learned. These
subnetworks use BestMDL to learn the optimal leaf for
every possible subnetwork, including the optimal network
with all of the variables. There are 2n optimal subnetworks.
4
GRAPH SEARCH FORMULATION
We ﬁrst formulate each phase of the dynamic programming
algorithm as a separate search problem, including calculat-
ing parent scores, identifying the optimal parent sets, and
learning the optimal subnetworks.
We use an AD-tree-like search to calculate all of the par-
ent scores. An AD-tree (Moore and Lee 1998) is an unbal-
anced tree which contains AD-nodes and varying nodes.
The tree is used to collect count statistics from a dataset.
An AD-node stores the number of records consistent with
the variable instantiation of the node, while a varying node
assigns a value to a variable. As shown in Equation 2, the
entropy component of a score can be calculated based on
variable instantiation counts. Each AD-node has an instan-
tiation of a set of variables U and the count of records con-
sistent with that instantiation. That count is a value of pai
for all X ∈V \ U. Furthermore, it is a value of xi, pai
for all X ∈U with parents U \ {X}. We can use a depth-
ﬁrst traversal of the AD-tree to compute the scores. Theo-
rem 1 states that only small parent sets can possibly be op-
timal parents when using the MDL score. All nodes below
the depth speciﬁed in the theorem are pruned. The scores
which are not pruned are written to disk for retrieval when
Figure 1: Parent graph for variable X1
Figure 2: An order graph of four variables
identifying optimal parent sets. We call this data structure
a score cache. Each entry in the score cache contains one
value of MDL(X|PA).
A parent graph is a lattice in which each node stores one
value of BestMDL for different candidate sets of vari-
ables. The score cache is used to quickly look up the scores
for candidate parent sets. Figure 1 shows the construction
of the parent graph for variable X1 as a lattice. All 2n−1
subsets of all other variables are present in the graph. Each
node contains one value for BestMDL of X1 and the set
of candidate parents shown. That is, each node stores the
subset of parents from the given candidate set which min-
imizes the score of X1, as well as that score. The lattice
divides the nodes into layers. We call the ﬁrst layer of the
graph, the layer with the single node for {} in Figure 1,
layer 0. A node in layer l has l predecessors, all in layer
l −1, and considers candidate parent sets of size l. Layer
l has C(n −1, l) nodes, where C(n, k) is the binomial co-
efﬁcient. Each variable has a separate parent graph. The
complete set of parent graphs stores n2n−1 parent sets.
An order graph is also a lattice. Each node contains
MDL(V) and the associated optimal subnetwor for one

subset of variables. Figure 2 displays an order graph for
four variables. Its lattice structure is similar to that of
the parent graphs; because it contains subsets of all vari-
ables, though, the order graph has 2n nodes. The top-
most node in layer 0 containing no variables is the start
node. The bottom-most node containing all variables is the
goal node. A directed path in the order graph from the
start node to any other node induces an ordering on the
variables in the path with new variables appearing later
in the ordering. For example, the path traversing nodes
{}, {X1}, {X1, X2}, {X1, X2, X3} stands for the variable
ordering X1, X2, X3. All variables which precede a vari-
able in the ordering are candidate parents of that variable.
Each edge on the path has a cost equal to BestMDL for
the new variable in the child node given the variables in
the parent node as candidate parents. The parent graphs are
used to quickly retrieve these costs. For example, the edge
between {X1, X2} and {X1, X2, X3} has a cost equal to
BestMDL(X3, {X1, X2}). Each node contains a subset
of variables, the cost of the best path from the start node
to that node, a leaf variable and its optimal parent set. The
shortest paths from the start node to all the other nodes cor-
respond to the optimal subnetworks, so the shortest path
to the goal node corresponds to the optimal Bayesian net-
work. The lattice again divides the nodes into layers. Nodes
in layer l contain optimal subnetworks of l variables. Layer
l has C(n, l) nodes.
5
AN EXTERNAL-MEMORY FRONTIER
BREADTH-FIRST BRANCH AND
BOUND ALGORITHM
Finding an optimal Bayesian network structure can be con-
sidered a search through the order graph. This formulation
allows the application of any graph search algorithm, such
as A* (Yuan, Malone, and Wu 2011), to ﬁnd the best path
from the start node to the goal node. In particular, such a
formulation allows us to treat the order and parent graphs as
implicit search graphs. That is, we do not have to keep the
entire graphs in memory at once. Dynamic programming
can be considered as a breadth-ﬁrst search through this
graph (Malone, Yuan, and Hansen 2011). Previous results
show that the scalability of existing algorithms for learn-
ing optimal Bayesian networks is typically limited by the
amount of RAM available. To eliminate the constraint of
limited RAM, we introduce a frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch
and bound algorithm with delayed duplicate detection to
do the search by adapting the breadth-ﬁrst heuristic search
algorithm proposed by Zhou and Hansen (2003; 2006). It is
also similar to the frontier search described by Korf (2005).
Breadth-ﬁrst heuristic search expands a search space in or-
der of layers of increasing g-cost with each layer compris-
ing all nodes with a same g-cost. As each node is generated,
a heuristic function is used to calculate a lower bound for
Algorithm 1 A Frontier BFBnB Search Algorithm
procedure EXPANDORDERGRAPH(l, isP resent, upper, lb, maxSize)
for each MDLl(U) ∈MDLl do
for each X ∈V \ U do
s ←MDLl(U) + BMDLl(X|U) −lb(X)
if s > upper then continue
isP resent(U ∪{X}) ←true
if s < MDLl+1(U ∪{X}) then
MDLl+1(U ∪{X}) ←s
MDLP l+1(U ∪{X}) ←BMDLP l(X|U)
end if
if |MDLl+1| > maxSize then
writeTempFile(MDLl+1, MDLP l+1)
end if
end for
end for
writeTempFile(MDLl+1, MDLP l+1)
MDLl+1, MDLP l+1 ←mergeTempFiles
delete MDLl
end procedure
procedure EXPANDPARENTGRAPH(l, p, isP resent, maxSize)
for each BestMDLl(p|U) ∈BestMDLl(p do
for each X ∈V \ U and X ̸= p do
S ←U ∪{X}
if !isP resent(S) then continue
if MDL(p|S) < BMDLl+1(p|S) then
BMDLl+1(p|S) ←MDL(p|S)
BMDLP l+1(p|S) ←S
end if
if BMDLl(p|U) < BMDLl+1(p|S) then
BMDLl+1(p|S) ←BMDLl(p|U)
BMDLP l+1(p|S) ←BMDLP l(p|U)
end if
if |BMDLl+1(p)| > maxSize then
writeTempFile(BMDLl+1(p), BMDLSl+1(p))
end if
end for
end for
writeTempFile(BMDLl+1(p), BMDLP l+1(p))
BMDLl+1, BMDLP l+1(p) ←mergeTempFiles
delete BMDLl, BMDLP l(p)
end procedure
procedure EXPANDADNODE(i, U, Du, d)
For j = i + 1 →n do expandVaryNode(j, U, Du, d)
end procedure
procedure EXPANDVARYNODE(i, U, Du, d)
for j = 0 →ri do
updateScores(U ∪{Xi}, DXi=j,u)
if d > 0 then expandADNode(i, U ∪{Xi}, DXi=j,u, d −1)
end for
end procedure
procedure UPDATESCORES(U, Du)
for X ∈V \ U do
if MDL(X|U) is null then MDL(X|U) ←K(X|U)
MDL(X|U) ←MDL(X|U) + Nu ∗log Nu
end for
for X ∈U do
if MDL(X|U \ {X}) is null MDL(X|U \ {X}) ←K(X|U \ {X})
MDL(X|U \ {X}) ←MDL(X|U \ {X}) −Nu ∗log Nu
end for
end procedure
procedure MAIN(D, upper, maxSize)
maxP arents ←log
2N
log N
expandADNode(−1, {}, D, maxP arents)
lb ←getBestScores
writeScoresToDisk
isP resent ←{}
for l = 1 →n do
for p = 1 →n do
expandParentGraph(l, p, isP resent, maxSize)
end for
expandOrderGraph(l, isP resent, upper, lb, maxSize)
end for
optimalStructure ←reconstructSolution
end procedure

that node. If the lower bound is worse than a given upper
bound on the optimal solution, the node is pruned; other-
wise, the node is added to the open list for further search.
After the search, a divide-and-conquer method is used to
reconstruct the optimal solution.
Algorithm 1 gives the pseudocode for our BFBnB search
algorithm for learning optimal Bayesian networks. The al-
gorithm is very similar to the breadth-ﬁrst heuristic search
algorithm but has several subtle and important differences.
First, the layers in our search graphs (the parent and order
graphs) do not correspond to the g-costs of nodes; rather,
layer l corresponds to variable sets (candidate parent sets
or optimal subnetworks) of size l. For the order graph,
though, we can calculate both a g- and h-cost for prun-
ing, as described in Section 5.1. We also describe how to
propagate this pruning from the order graph to the parent
graphs. Another difference is that our search problem is a
nested search of order and parent graphs. The layered par-
ent and order graph searches have to be carefully orches-
trated to ensure the correct nodes can be accessed easily at
the correct time, as described in Section 5.2. This further
requires the parent scores are stored in particular order, as
described in Section 5.3. Yet another difference is that we
use a variant of delayed duplicate detection (Korf 2008) in
which a hash table is used to detect as many duplicates in
RAM as possible before resorting to external memory, as
described in Section 5.4. Finally, we store a portion of each
order graph node to reconstruct the optimal network struc-
ture after the search, as described in Section 5.5.
5.1
BRANCH AND BOUND
We need a heuristic function f(U) = g(U) + h(U) that
estimates the cost of the best path from the start node to
a goal node using order node U. The g cost is simply the
sum of the edge costs of the best path from the start node to
U. The h cost provides a lower bound on the cost from U
to the goal node. We use the following heuristic function h
from Yuan et al. (2011).
Deﬁnition 1.
h(U) =
X
X∈V\U
BestMDL(X, V\{X}).
(3)
This heuristic function relaxes the acyclic constraint on the
remaining variables in V \ U and allows them to choose
parents from all of the variables in V. The following the-
orem from Yuan et al. (2011) proves that the function is
consistent. Consistent heuristics are guaranteed to be ad-
missible.
Theorem 3. h is consistent.
In
order
to
calculate
this
bound,
we
must
know
BestMDL(X, V\{X}). Fortunately, these scores are cal-
culated during the ﬁrst phase of the algorithm. Because
the score cache contains every score which could possi-
bly be optimal for all variables, it is guaranteed to have
the optimal score for all variables given any set of parents,
which is BestMDL(X, V \ {X}). Thus, we can iden-
tify these scores while calculating the scores when expand-
ing the AD-tree and store them in an array for reuse. The
pseudocode uses the function getBestScores to ﬁnd these
scores and the array lb to store them.
We can apply BFBnB to prune nodes in the order graph
using the lower bound function in Equation 3; however,
pruning is not directly applicable to the parent graphs. An
optimal parent score BestMDL(X, U) is only necessary
if a node for U is in the order graph. Consequently, if U
is pruned from the order graph, then the nodes for U are
also pruned from the parent graphs. The pseudocode uses
isPresent to track which nodes were not pruned.
We also need an upper bound score on the optimal Bayesian
network for pruning. A search node U whose heuristic
value f(U) is higher than the upper bound is immedi-
ately pruned. Numerous fast, approximate methods exist
for learning a locally optimal Bayesian network. We use
a greedy beam search algorithm based on a local search
algorithm described by Heckerman (1998) to quickly ﬁnd
the upper bound. A more sophisticated algorithm could be
used to ﬁnd a better bound and improve pruning. The input
argument upper is this bound in the pseudocode.
5.2
COORDINATING THE GRAPH SEARCHES
The parent and order graph searches must be carefully co-
ordinated to ensure that the parent graphs contain the nec-
essary nodes to expand nodes in the order graph. In par-
ticular, expanding a node U in layer l in the order graph
requires BestMDL(X, U), which is stored in the node U
of the parent graph for X. Hence, before expanding layer
|U| in the order graph, that layer of the parent graphs must
already exist. Therefore, the algorithm alternates between
expanding layers of the parent graphs and order graph.
Expanding a node U in the parent graph amounts to gen-
erating successor nodes with candidate parents U ∪{X}
for all X in V \ U. For each successor S = U ∪{X},
the hash table for the next layer is ﬁrst checked to see if
S has already been generated. If not, the score of using all
of S as parents of X is retrieved from the score cache and
compared to the score of using the parents speciﬁed in U.
If using all of the variables has a better score, then an entry
is added to the hash table indicating that, for possible par-
ents S, using all of them is best. Otherwise, according to
Theorem 2, the hash table stores a mapping from S to the
parents in U. Similarly, if S has already been generated,
the score of the existing best parent set for S is compared
to the score using the parents in U. If the score of the par-
ents in U is better, then the hash table mapping is updated
accordingly. Once a layer of the parent graph is expanded,

the whole layer can be discarded as it is no longer needed.
The pseudocode uses BMDLl to store the optimal scores
and BMDLP l to store the optimal parents.
Expanding a node U in the order graph amounts to gen-
erating successor nodes U ∪{X} for all X in V \ U. To
calculate the score of successor S = U∪{X}, the score of
the existing node U is added to BestMDL(X, U), which
is retrieved from parent graph node U for variable X. The
optimal parent set out of U is also recorded. This is equiva-
lent to trying X as the leaf and U as the subnetwork. Next,
the hash table for the next layer is consulted. If it contains
an entry for S, then a node for this set of variables has
already been generated using another variable as the leaf.
The score of that node is compared to the score for S. If
the score for S is better, or the hash table did not contain
an entry for S, then the mapping in the hash table is up-
dated. Unlike the parent graph, however, a portion of each
order graph node is used to reconstruct the optimal network
at the end of the search, as described in Section 5.5. This
information is written to disk, while the other information
is deleted. The pseudocode uses MDLl to store the score
for each subnetwork and MDLP l to store the associated
parent information.
Additional care is needed to ensure that parent and order
graph nodes for a particular layer are accessed in a regular,
structured pattern. We arrange the nodes in the parent and
order graphs in queues such that when node U is removed
from the order graph queue, the head of each parent graph
queue for all X in V \ U is U. So all of the successors of
U can be generated by combining it with the head of each
of those parent graph queues. Once the parent graph nodes
are used, they can be removed, and the queues will be ready
to expand the next node in the order graph queue. Because
the nodes are removed from the heads of the queues, these
invariants hold throughout the expansion of the layer. Reg-
ulating such access patterns improves the scalability of the
algorithm because these queues can be stored on disk and
accessed sequentially to reduce the requirement of RAM.
The regular accesses also reduce disk seek time. The pseu-
docode assumes the nodes are written to disk in this order
to easily retrieve the next necessary node.
The lexicographic ordering (Knuth 2009) of nodes
within each layer is one possible ordering that en-
sures the queues remain synchronized. For example,
the lexicographic ordering of 4 variables of size 2
is {{X1, X2}, {X1, X3}, {X2, X3}, {X1, X4}, {X2, X4},
{X3, X4}}. The order graph queue for layer 2 of a dataset
with 4 variables should be arranged in that order. The par-
ent graph queue for variable X should have the same se-
quence, but without subsets containing X. In the exam-
ple, the parent graph queue for variable X1 should be
{{X2, X3}, {X2, X4}, {X3, X4}}. As described in more
detail in Section 5.4, the nodes of the graphs must be sorted
to detect duplicates; the lexicographic order ensures that
there is no additional work required to arrange the nodes
when writing them to disk.
5.3
ORDERING THE SCORES ON DISK
For large datasets, the score cache can grow quite large.
We write it to disk to reduce RAM usage. Each score
MDL(X, U) is used once, when node U is ﬁrst generated
in the parent graph for X. As described in Section 5.2, the
parent graph nodes are expanded in lexicographic order;
however, they are not generated in that order. The score
MDL(X, U), U = {Y1 . . . Yl} is needed when expand-
ing node U \ {Yl} in the parent graph for X. Therefore,
the scores must be written to disk in that order. The pseu-
docode uses the writeScoresT oDisk function to sort and
write the scores to disk in this order.
A ﬁle is created for each variable for each layer to store
these sorted scores. The ﬁle for a particular layer can be
deleted after expanding that layer in the appropriate parent
graph.
5.4
DUPLICATE DETECTION
Duplicate nodes are generated during the graph searches.
Duplicates in the parent and order graphs correspond to
nodes which consider the same sets of variables (candi-
date parent sets and optimal subnetworks, respectively).
Because the successors of a node always consider exactly
one more variable in both the parent and order graphs, the
successors of a node in layer l are always in layer l + 1.
Therefore, when a node is generated, it could only be a du-
plicate of a node in the open list for layer l + 1. In both the
parent and order graphs, the duplicate with the best score
should be kept.
For large datasets, it is possible that even one layer of the
parent or order graph is too large to ﬁt in RAM. We use
a variant of the delayed duplicate detection (DDD) (Korf
2008) in our algorithm to utilize external memory to solve
such large learning problems. In DDD, search nodes are
written to a ﬁle on disk as they are generated. After expand-
ing a layer, an external-memory sorting algorithm is used to
detect and remove duplicate nodes in the ﬁle. The nodes in
the ﬁle are then expanded to generate the next layer of the
search. Consequently, the search uses a minimal amount of
RAM; however, all generated nodes are written to disk, so
much work is done reading and writing duplicates.
Rather than immediately writing all generated nodes to
disk, we instead detect duplicates in RAM as usual with a
hash table. Once the open list reaches a user-deﬁned maxi-
mum size, its contents are sorted and written to a temporary
ﬁle on disk. The open list is then cleared. At the end of each
layer, the remaining contents of the open list and the tem-
porary ﬁles are sorted and merged into a single ﬁle which
contains the sorted list of nodes from that layer. For rea-

sons described in Section 5.2, the lexicographic ordering
of nodes within a layer is used when sorting. The hash ta-
ble reduces the number of nodes written to and read from
disk by detecting as many duplicates as possible in RAM.
The pseudocode uses maxSize as the user-deﬁned maxi-
mum size. The function writeT empFile sorts, writes to
disk and clears the open list provided as its argument.
The scores and optimal parent sets are written together on
disk. The function mergeT empFiles performs an exter-
nal memory merge to detect duplicates in the temp ﬁles.
For the parent graphs, both the scores and optimal parent
sets are kept in a single ﬁle; however, as described in Sec-
tion 5.5, the parent information of the order graph must be
stored for the entire search, while the score information can
be deleted after use. Therefore, two separate ﬁles are used
to allow the information to easily be deleted.
5.5
RECONSTRUCTING THE OPTIMAL
NETWORK STRUCTURE
In order to trace back the optimal path and reconstruct the
optimal network structure, we write a portion of each node
of the order graph to a disk ﬁle once it is expanded dur-
ing the order graph search. For each order graph node we
write the subset of variables, the leaf variable and its op-
timal parents. Solution reconstruction works as follows.
The ﬁnal leaf variable X and its optimal parent set are
retrieved from the goal node. Because the goal node con-
siders all variables, its predecessor in the optimal path is
U = V \ {X}. This predecessor is retrieved from the ﬁle
for layer |U|. That node has the optimal leaf and parent
set for that subnetwork. Recursively, the optimal leaves and
parent sets are retrieved until reconstructing the entire net-
work structure. We use this approach instead of the stan-
dard divide-and-conquer solution reconstruction because,
as shown in Section 6, it requires relatively little memory.
Furthermore, divide-and-conquer would require regenera-
tion of the parent graphs, which is quite expensive in terms
of time and memory. The pseudocode uses the function
reconstructSolution to extract this information from the
MDLP l ﬁles.
5.6
ADVANTAGES OF OUR ALGORITHM
Our frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch and bound algorithm has
several advantages over previous algorithms for learning
optimal Bayesian networks.
First, our top-down search of the AD-tree for calculating
scores ensures we never need to calculate scores or counts
of large variable sets. The AD-tree method is in contrast to
the bottom-up method used by other algorithms (Silander
and Myllymaki 2006). Bottom-up methods must always
compute the scores, or at least the counts, of large parent
sets in order to correctly calculate the counts required for
the smaller ones. Since our algorithm neither calculates nor
stores these counts and scores, it both runs more quickly
and uses less memory.
Second, the layered search strategy reduces the memory re-
quirements by working with one layer of the parent and
order graphs at a time. Other information can be either dis-
carded immediately or stored in hard disk ﬁles for later
use, e.g., the information needed to reconstruct the opti-
mal network structure. Previous formulations, such as P-
Caches (Singh and Moore 2005) and arrays (Silander and
Myllymaki 2006), could not take advantage of this struc-
ture. Singh and Moore propose a depth-ﬁrst search through
the P-Caches, while Silander and Myllymaki’s approach
identiﬁes the sets according to their lexicographic ordering.
(We use the lexicographic order within each layer, not over
all of the variables.) These approaches can identify neither
optimal parent sets nor optimal subnetworks one layer at a
time. Thus, they must both keep all of the optimal parent
sets and subnetworks in memory.
Third, we prune the order graph using an admissible heuris-
tic function; this further reduces the memory complexity of
the algorithm. Pruning unpromising nodes from the order
graph not only reduces the amount of computation but also
reduces the memory requirement. Furthermore, the sav-
ings in running time and memory also propagate to parent
graphs. Dynamic programming algorithms always evaluate
the full order graph.
The duplicate detection method we use lifts the require-
ment that open lists ﬁt in RAM to detect duplicates. Be-
cause our algorithm does not resort to delayed duplicate
detection until RAM is full, our algorithm can still take
advantage of large amounts of RAM. By writing nodes to
disk, we can learn optimal Bayesian networks even when
single layers of the search graphs do not ﬁt in RAM.
Our algorithm also has advantages over other learning for-
mulations. In contrast to the A* algorithm of Yuan et
al.( 2011), we only keep one layer of the order graph in
memory at a time. The open and closed lists of A* keep
all generated nodes in memory to perform duplicate detec-
tion. Unlike the systematic search algorithm of de Campos
et al. (de Campos, Zeng, and Ji 2009), we always search
in the space of DAGs, which is smaller than the space of
directed graphs in which that algorithm searches. The LP
algorithm (Jaakkola et al. 2010) uses the same mechanism
to identify optimal parent sets as DP; therefore, it cannot
complete when all optimal parent sets do not ﬁt in mem-
ory.
6
EXPERIMENTS
We compared a Java implementation of the external-
memory frontier BFBnB search with DDD (BFBnB) to
an efﬁcient version (Silander and Myllymaki 2006) of dy-
namic programming which uses external memory written

Dataset
Timing Results (s)
Space Results (bytes)
dataset
n
N
DP
BFBnB
A*
SS
DP
BFBnB
wine
14
178
1
0
0
171
1.16E+07
2.72E+05
adult
14
30,162
1
18
11
OT
1.16E+07
1.36E+06
zoo
17
101
1
1
0
OT
4.81E+07
2.30E+06
houseVotes
17
435
7
5
3
5,824
4.81E+07
4.39E+06
letter
17
20,000
29
87
116
OT
4.81E+07
9.12E+06
statlog
19
752
23
9
12
OT
1.82E+08
1.82E+07
hepatitis
20
126
27
9
6
202
3.79E+08
2.73E+07
segment
20
2,310
44
28
42
2,482
3.79E+08
3.67E+07
meta
22
528
52
57
41
OT
1.67E+09
1.55E+08
imports
22
205
123
54
55
3,723
1.67E+09
1.52E+08
horseColic
23
300
468
93
117
1,410
3.48E+09
2.41E+08
spect (heart)
23
267
413
131
139
OT
3.48E+09
3.06E+08
mushroom
23
8,124
438
372
508
OT
3.48E+09
3.14E+08
parkinsons
23
195
297
103
130
OT
3.48E+09
2.63E+08
sensorReadings
25
5,456
12,747
3,061
OM
OT
1.51E+10
1.30E+09
autos
26
159
2,737
1,184
OM
OT
3.15E+10
2.19E+09
horseColic (full)
28
300
30,064
4,251
OM
OT
1.36E+11
1.09E+10
steelPlatesFaults
28
1,941
78,487
9,252
OM
OT
1.36E+11
1.09E+10
ﬂag
29
194
41,733
12,935
OM
OT
2.81E+11
1.55E+10
wdbc
31
569
OD
93,682
OM
OT
OD
6.86E+10
epigenetic
33
72,228
OD
570,760
OM
OT
OD
2.74E+11
Table 1: A comparison of the running time (in seconds) for Silander and Myllymaki’s dynamic programming implementa-
tion (DP), Yuan et al.’s A* algorithm (A*), de Campos et al.’s systematic search algorithm (SS) and our external-memory
frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch and bound algorithm (BFBnB). The run times are given for all algorithms. Maximum external
memory usage is given for DP and BFBnB. For reference, 1E+09 is 1 gigabyte. ‘n’ is the number of variables. ‘N’ is the
number of records. ‘OT’ means failure to ﬁnd optimal solutions due to running for more than 2 hours (7,200 seconds, less
than 25 variables) or 24 hours (86,400 seconds, 25 - 29 variables) and not producing a provably optimal solution. ‘OM’
means failure to ﬁnd optimal solutions due to running out of RAM (16GB). ‘OD’ means failure to ﬁnd optimal solutions
due to running out of hard disk space (500GB).
in C downloaded from http:/b-course.hiit.ﬁ/bene. We re-
fer to it as DP. Previous results (Silander and Myllymaki
2006) have shown DP is more efﬁcient than other dy-
namic programming implementations. We also compared
to Yuan et al.’s A* implementation (2011) (A*) and de
Campos et al.’s branch and bound systematic search algo-
rithm (de Campos, Zeng, and Ji 2009) (SS) downloaded
from http://www.ecse.rpi.edu/ cvrl/structlearning.html. We
did not include comparison to the DP implementation of
Malone et al. (2011) (MDP) because the codebase is simi-
lar; however, MDP does not incorporate pruning or delayed
duplicate detection. The running times of BFBnB and MDP
are similar on datasets which both complete, but, due to
duplicate detection, MDP fails when an entire layer of the
order graph does not ﬁt in RAM.
Benchmark datasets from the UCI repository (Frank
and Asuncion 2010) were used to test the algorithms.
We also constructed a biological dataset consisting of
ChIP-Seq data for epigenetic features downloaded from
http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lmi/epigenomes/hgtcell.html
and
http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lmi/epigenomes/
hgtcellacetylation.aspx.
The
experimental
datasets
were
normalized
using
linear
regression
us-
ing
the
IgG
control
dataset
downloaded
from
http://home.gwu.edu/∼wpeng/Software.htm. The largest
datasets in the comparison have up to 33 variables and
over 70,000 records. Continuous and discrete variables
with more than four states were discretized into two
states around the mean. Records with missing values were
removed.
DP and SS do not calculate the MDL score for a network;
however, they can calculate BIC. The score uses an equiva-
lent calculation as MDL, so the algorithms always learned
equivalent networks. The experiments were performed on a
3.07 GHz Intel i7 with 16GB of RAM, 500GB of hard disk
space and running Ubuntu version 10.10. On datasets with
less than 25 variables, all algorithms were given a maxi-
mum runtime of 2 hours (7,200 seconds). On datasets with
25 to 29 variables, all algorithms were given a maximum
runtime of 24 hours (86,400 seconds).

We empirically evaluated the algorithms for both space and
time requirements. For the algorithms which used exter-
nal memory (BFBnB and DP), we compared the maximum
hard disk usage. We also compared the running times of the
algorithms. The results are given in Table 1.
Previous results found that memory is the main bottleneck
restricting the size of learnable networks (Parviainen and
Koivisto 2009). As the results show, algorithms which at-
tempt to store entire parent or order graphs in RAM, such
as A* and SS, are limited to smaller sets of variables. BF-
BnB’s duplicate detection strategy allows it to write parital
search layers to hard disk when the layers are too large to
ﬁt in RAM, so it can learn optimal Bayesian network struc-
tures regardless of the amount of RAM. Consequently, hard
disk space is its only memory limitation. The inexpensive
cost of hard disks coupled with distributed ﬁle systems can
potentially erase the effect of memory on the scalability of
the algorithm.
For the datasets which it could solve, A* was sometimes
faster than the other algorithms. This is unsurprising since
it uses only RAM; however, it is unable to solve the larger
datasets that cannot ﬁt entirely in RAM. Even on many of
the smaller datasets, though, A* runs more slowly than BF-
BnB because it has the overhead cost to keep its open list
in sorted order.
BFBnB not only takes an order of magnitude less external
memory, but runs several times faster than the DP algo-
rithm on most of the datasets. DP is faster on the adult,
letter and meta datasets. These datasets have a small num-
ber of variables and a large number of records. The large
number of records limits the pruning of the AD-tree from
Theorem 1 and increases the runtime of BFBnB. However,
BFBnB runs faster on both mushroom (8,000 records) and
sensorReadings (5,000 records). Therefore, as the number
of variables increases, the number of records impacts the
runtime less.
The SS algorithm ran much more slowly than the other al-
gorithms. It searches in the space of directed graphs rather
than DAGs. These results suggest that search in the space
of DAGs is more efﬁcient than the space of directed graphs.
To demonstrate that our algorithm is applicable to larger
datasets, we also tested it using the wdbc dataset (31 vari-
ables, 569 records) and a biological dataset (33 variables,
72,228 records), epigenetic. We learned the optimal net-
work for wdbc in 93,682 seconds (about 26 hours) and the
optimal network for epigenetic in 570,760 seconds (about 6
days). We also attempted to use DP, but its hard disk usage
exceeded the 500GB of free hard disk space on the server.
Figure 3 shows the total memory consumption of our al-
gorithm for wdbc. Very little memory is used before layer
9, and after layer 22, the memory consumption does not
change much because the layer sizes decrease. As the ﬁg-
ure shows, both of the middle layers use nearly 70 giga-
Figure 3: Hard disk usage for the wdbc dataset
bytes of disk space. Most of this space is consumed by the
parent graphs, so it is is freed after each layer. Assuming
that the running time and size of the middle layers dou-
ble for each additional variable, which is a rough pattern
from Table 1, our algorithm could learn a 36-variable net-
work in about 50 days using approximately 2 terabytes of
hard disk space and a single processor. This suggests that
our method should scale to larger networks better than the
method of Parviainen and Koivisto (2009). They observe
that their implementation would take 4 weeks on 100 pro-
cessors to learn a 31-variable network, and, even with cod-
ing improvements and massive parallelization, only net-
works up to 34 variables would be possible.
7
CONCLUSION
Learning optimal Bayesian network structures has been
thought of in terms of dynamic programming; however,
such a formulation naively requires O(n2n) memory. Other
formulations have been shown to have similar or slower
runtimes or require other exponential resources, such as
processors. This paper formulates the structure learning
problem as a frontier breadth-ﬁrst branch and bound search.
The layered search technique allows us to work with one
layer of the score cache, parent and order graphs at a time.
Consequently, we delete layers of the parent graphs af-
ter expanding them and store only a portion of each or-
der graph node to hard disk ﬁles to reduce the memory
complexity. The delayed duplicate detection strategy fur-
ther improves the scalability of the algorithm by writing
partial layers to disk rather than requiring an entire layer ﬁt
in RAM at once. Additionally, a heuristic function allows
parts of the order graph to be ignored entirely; this also re-
duces memory complexity and improves scalability.
Experimental results demonstrate that this algorithm out-
performs the previous best implementation of dynamic pro-
gramming for learning optimal Bayesian networks. Our al-
gorithm not only runs faster than the existing approach, but
also takes much less space. The LP formulation exhibits
similar runtime behavior as DP, so our algorithm should

similarly outperform it. It also scales to more variables than
A*. Additionally, by searching in the space of DAGs in-
stead of the space of directed graphs with cycles, it proves
the optimality of the learned network more quickly than SS.
Future work will investigate better upper bounds and
heuristic functions to further increase the size of learnable
optimal networks. Also, like existing methods (Parviainen
and Koivisto 2009; Silander and Myllymaki 2006), our al-
gorithm can beneﬁt from parallel computing. In addition,
distributed computing can scale up our algorithm to even
larger learning problems. Networks learned from our al-
gorithm could also be used as a “gold standard” in study-
ing the assumptions of approximate structure learning al-
gorithms.
