Poster Proceedings of ACDM 2004 
Engineers’ House, Bristol,  UK 
 
 
DETECTING DANGER: APPLYING A NOVEL IMMUNOLOGICAL CONCEPT TO 
INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 
 
Julie Greensmith, Uwe Aickelin & Jamie Twycross 
ASAP Group, School Of Computer Science, 
University Of Nottingham, UK. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In recent years computer systems have become 
increasingly complex 
and consequently 
the 
challenge of protecting these systems has become 
increasingly  difficult.  Various  techniques  have 
been implemented to counteract the misuse of 
computer systems in the form of firewalls, anti- 
virus  software  and  intrusion  detection  systems. 
The complexity of networks and dynamic nature 
of computer systems leaves current methods with 
significant room for improvement. 
 
Computer  scientists 
have  recently  
drawn 
inspiration from mechanisms found in biological 
systems and, in the context of computer security, 
have focused on the human immune system (HIS). 
The human immune system provides an example 
of a robust, distributed system that provides a high 
level of protection from constant attacks. By 
examining the precise mechanisms of the human 
immune system, it is hoped the paradigm will 
improve the 
performance of real intrusion 
detection systems. 
 
This paper presents an introduction to recent 
developments in the field of immunology. It 
discusses 
the 
incorporation 
of 
a 
novel 
immunological paradigm, Danger Theory, and how 
this concept is inspiring artificial immune systems 
(AIS). Applications within the context of computer 
security are outlined drawing direct reference to the 
underlying principles of Danger Theory and finally, 
the current state of intrusion detection systems is 
discussed and improvements suggested. 
 
DANGER THEORY 
AND THE HUMAN 
IMMUNE SYSTEM 
 
Since 1959, the central dogma of immunology has 
stated that the human immune system reacts to 
entities that are not part of the organism. Therefore 
the   decision   to   react   is  a  result   of  the  HIS 
classifying its own cells as self and everything else 
as nonself [5]. The HIS performs the classification 
by recognising proteins found on the surface of 
foreign cells (known as antigens). Foreign cells are 
different to cells present in the host (known as self- 
antigens) in structure and shape. 
 
There are numerous instances however where this 
classification fails. For example, the intestinal tract 
is exposed to many different bacteria and food, 
neither of which are classically defined as `self', but 
neither of which produce an immune response. In 
addition, the model of self-nonself discrimination 
cannot explain the phenomena of auto-immune 
diseases. In the example of multiple sclerosis, the 
HIS attacks certain cells that it classifies as `self’. 
In 1994, Polly Matzinger [4] postulated that in this 
instance, the HIS was not reacting to self or nonself 
but was due to a protection mechanism of sensing 
danger.   The manner in which danger is detected 
forms the basis of the Danger Theory. 
 
The Danger Theory does not deny the existence of 
self-nonself  discrimination  but  rather  states  there 
are other contributory factors involved in the 
initiation of an immune response. It is now believed 
that the HIS responds to certain danger signals 
produced as a result of cellular necrosis; the 
unexpected stress and/or death of a cell. 
 
Cell death is a natural process that occurs within the 
body as a result of homeostatic regulation. This 
process  however  comes  from  a  pre-programmed 
and highly controlled mechanism, known as 
apoptosis. The Danger Theory proposes that the 
mechanisms behind cell death can cause different 
biochemical   reactions   that   in   turn   can   cause 
different  danger  signals.  It  is believed  that  these 
signals may facilitate an immune response. This 
controversial 
paradigm 
shift 
within 
the 
immunology community may offer a potential 
explanation for many scenarios where the self- 
nonself model fails. 
 
ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEMS 
 
Most biologically inspired  artificial 
immune 
systems based on the HIS have relied on the self- 
nonself   model.   Algorithms   derived   using   this 
model have been largely successful [2]. Artificial 
immune systems have been developed for a wide 
range of applications from data mining to 
information 
security. 
In 
many 
cases, 
the 
applications have produced results comparable to, 
or better than, other standard techniques. 
 
For  example,  the  negative  selection  of  immune 
cells in the thymus for self-nonself recognition was 
applied in the Lisys system and used as a network 
intrusion detection tool [3]. This system classified 
normal   user   behaviour   as   self   and   all   other 

Poster Proceedings of ACDM 2004 
Engineers’ House, Bristol,  UK 
 
behaviour as nonself. However, this approach did 
not scale as well as expected for use in a large, 
dynamic environment. One explanation for the poor 
behaviour may be that certain processes, essential 
for immune functionality, were not incorporated. 
 
THE APPLICATION OF DANGER THEORY 
TO INTRUSION DETECTION 
 
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are designed to 
detect events that occur in a computer system that 
may compromise its integrity or confidentiality [7]. 
IDS are frequently sub-divided into two categories: 
misuse detection and anomaly detection. Misuse 
detection techniques examine both network and 
system activity for known instances of misuse 
through the use of signature matching algorithms. 
This technique is effective at detecting attacks that 
are  already  known.  However,  novel  attacks  are 
often missed giving rise to false negatives. 
 
Anomaly detection systems rely on constructing a 
model   of   user   behaviour   that   is   considered 
‘normal’. This is achieved by using a combination 
of   statistical   or   machine   learning   methods   to 
examine   network   traffic   or   system   calls   and 
processes. The detection of novel attacks is more 
successful using the anomaly detection approach as 
any behaviour not defined as normal is classified as 
an  intrusion.  However,  ‘normal’  behaviour  in  a 
large, dynamic system is not well defined and 
changes   over   time.   This   often   results   in   a 
significant number of false alarms known as false 
positives. The reduction of false positives is a key 
challenge that the Danger Theory may be able to 
address. 
 
It is proposed that the incorporation of the Danger 
Theory  into intrusion  detection  techniques  would 
produce a system able to respond effectively to 
known threats and novel attacks, and also reduce 
the amount of false positives common in anomaly 
detection systems. [6]. The Danger Theory 
proposes that the HIS detects danger signals and 
responds based on the correlation of these signals. 
A similar concept could be used in IDS. It would 
rely on being able to produce a system capable of 
classifying behaviour as apoptotic or necrotic. 
Apoptotic behaviour could be defined as low level, 
noisy alerts, which on their own do not form any 
significant   misbehaviour,   but  are often 
the 
prerequisite for an attack. Necrotic alerts could be 
produced   for   a   more   serious   attack   where 
significant system damage was taking place [1]. 
Other danger signals relating to the physical system 
itself may also be incorporated into this model. The 
potential for improvement in this area and the 
successful correlation of such alerts will perhaps 
provide both improved intrusion detection systems 
and artificial immune systems. 
CONCLUSION 
 
In the field of developing artificial immune systems 
for computer security, Danger Theory may provide 
significant 
improvements 
to current intrusion 
detection techniques. Work is currently being 
performed into exactly how danger signals can be 
identified in the HIS. It is hoped the results of this 
research will yield a clearer view on what danger 
signals are in vivo, how they can be translated for 
detecting danger within computer systems in silico, 
to implement more effective computer security 
systems.
