A Neural Question Answering System for Basic
Questions about Subroutines
Aakash Bansal∗, Zachary Eberhart∗, Lingfei Wu† and Collin McMillan∗
∗Dept. of Computer Science, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA

†IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Abstract—A question answering (QA) system is a type of
conversational AI that generates natural language answers to
questions posed by human users. QA systems often form the
backbone of interactive dialogue systems, and have been studied
extensively for a wide variety of tasks ranging from restaurant
recommendations to medical diagnostics. Dramatic progress has
been made in recent years, especially from the use of encoder-
decoder neural architectures trained with big data input. In
this paper, we take initial steps to bringing state-of-the-art
neural QA technologies to Software Engineering applications
by designing a context-based QA system for basic questions
about subroutines. We curate a training dataset of 10.9 million
question/context/answer tuples based on rules we extract from
recent empirical studies. Then, we train a custom neural QA
model with this dataset and evaluate the model in a study with
professional programmers. We demonstrate the strengths and
weaknesses of the system, and lay the groundwork for its use in
eventual dialogue systems for software engineering.
Index Terms—neural networks, question/answer dialogue
I. INTRODUCTION
A question answering (QA) system is a type of conversa-
tional AI that focuses on generating natural language answers
to questions posed by human users. QA is deﬁned as single-
turn dialogue, in that there are only two participants in the
conversation (the human and the machine) and each participant
speaks for only one turn (the human asks a question which
the machine answers). In practice, a complete conversational
machine agent would discuss several topics over an arbitrary
number of turns, detect when a question has been asked, and
the use a QA system to generate an answer to the question.
Thus, QA systems are key components necessary for building
usable conversational agents.
In general, QA systems generate an answer given a context
about which the question is being asked. For example, Yin et
al. [1] describe an approach that parses a knowledge base
of facts about famous people to generate English answers
about birthdates, political ofﬁces held, awards received, etc.
Malinowski et al. [2] present a system that answers questions
about images, such as which objects are red or green in the
image. Weston et al. [3] provide a dataset of twenty tasks for
training QA systems (the so-called bAbI tasks) ranging from
positional reasoning to path ﬁnding, for which the context is a
knowledge base of facts about objects and how they relate to
each other (e.g. Context: 1. Lily handed the baby to Philip. 2.
Philip walked outside. Question: Where is the baby? Answer:
Outside with Philip.).
As the above examples show and as chronicled in several
survey papers [4]–[6], scientiﬁc literature from the areas of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and AI is replete with
QA systems designed to answer questions about a context.
The overall structure of these approaches is fairly consistent:
A large dataset is collected including question, answers, and
related contexts. Then a model is trained and tested using
the dataset. Typically, an encoder-decoder neural network is
employed, in which the model learns to connect features
in the questions to features in the context via an attention
mechanism. However, there are always numerous domain-
speciﬁc customizations required to model the context (as a
general rule, the question and answer can be modeled using
language features such as from a recurrent neural network).
For example, Malinowski’s work connecting words in ques-
tions to features in images uses a typical RNN-based model
of questions and answers, but depends on a custom model for
extracting those features from the images [2]. In short, the
key difﬁculty in implementing QA systems boils down to: 1)
obtaining a proper dataset, and 2) designing a suitable domain-
speciﬁc model of the context. How to design such a system
for source code is an active research question.
In this paper, we present a QA system for answering “basic”
programmer questions about subroutines in programs (the
subroutines are the context about which questions are asked).
A “basic” question is a question about a small detail of a
method, such as “what are the parameters to the method
convertWavToMp3?” We use basic question because: 1) Eber-
hart et al. [7] found that programmers ask these questions
about Java methods during actual programming tasks and
isolated ﬁve types of these questions, and 2) the “basic”
questions provide an excellent stepping-stone problem towards
larger problems later. We built question and answer templates
and paraphrases based on Eberhart et al.’s basic question
types to construct a dataset for 1.56m Java methods. We then
designed a QA system based on a neural encoder-decoder
model.
We evaluated our work in two ways. First, we used au-
tomated metrics over a large testing set of around 67k Java
methods, to estimate how our approach would generalize.
Second, we performed an experiment with 20 human experts,
arXiv:2101.03999v1  [cs.SE]  11 Jan 2021

to determine how well our model responds to actual human
input for a subset of 100 randomly picked methods out of the
67k test set. We explore evidence of how our model learns to
recognize pertinent facts in source code and generate English
responses (in the spirit of explainable AI [8], [9]).
II. PROBLEM, SIGNIFICANCE, SCOPE
This paper is intended as a stepping stone towards a full-
ﬂedged QA system for software engineers. Current technology
in the NLP/AI domain is designed to answer questions from a
given context, as described above. The scope of this paper
is to demonstrate how to adapt these technologies so that
information about source code can be learned from large
datasets, and that information used to answer questions about
source code. It is not reasonable to expect to build a QA system
capable of answering arbitrary questions about programming
in a single paper. Existing peer-reviewed literature has not
even demonstrated that context-based QA systems can learn
from source code to interpret and answer natural language
questions. This paper is a proof-of-concept in that direction.
We understand that programmers probably would not use
a QA system alone for basic informational questions about
source code. After all, the return type, parameter list, etc., of
a function is readily available from reading the source code
or summarizing documentation. However, it is important to
recognize that a QA system is usually not intended to be used
on its own. Instead, a QA system for these questions is a key
component in the big picture of conversational AI systems for
programmers. Robillard, with thirteen leading co-authors in
the area of program comprehension, make the case clearly in
a paper summarizing the outcomes of a relevant workshop in
2017 [10]: they “advocate for a new vision for satisfying the
information needs of developers” which they call on-demand
developer documentation. The idea is that we as a research
ﬁeld should move towards machine responses to programmer
information needs that are customized to that programmers’
software context and individual questions. But to get to that
point, we (the research community) need to solve a few smaller
problems that are currently barriers to continued progress. This
argument mirrors those made repeatedly in the AI research
community generally [11], [12], that smaller problems must
be solved and used as a wedge against larger ones, towards
the long-term goal of a meaningful conversational AI.
A QA system for basic programming information about
subroutines is one of those wedge problems in program com-
prehension. A successful system would not only answer the
narrow problem at hand, but offer insights into issues of how to
model and extract features from source code, how to interpret
programmer information needs, and how to understand the
vocabulary that programmers use that is different from general
word use. Our paper demonstrates how a neural network
can be used to recognize question type, ﬁnd the answer
in code and comments, and answer with a human readable
grammatically correct format. Hence, the efﬁciency of this
system is measured not only in accuracy of the information
retrieved but the ability to recognize previously unseen human
user questions and ﬁnd as well as return correctly formatted
answers from context. In the long run, our plan is to include
this work as part of a larger interactive dialogue system for
helping programmers read and understand source code. (Some
citations omitted to comply with double-blind review policy.)
III. BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
This section covers background technologies and closely-
related work in both NLP/AI and SE research venues.
A. Interactive Dialogue Systems
The anatomy of an interactive dialogue system is neatly
articulated in a recent book by Rieser and Lemon [13] and
summarized in Figure 1 below. There are essentially four com-
ponents. First, a knowledge base is created to hold information
relevant to the conversation, such as images about which
questions are asked [2], [14], or maps about which directions
may be obtained [15]–[17], or restaurants which may be
recommended [18]. Second, a natural language understanding
component is responsible for converting incoming text into
an internal representation of what was said. Often this starts
with labeling the text with a dialogue act type [19]–[23] (e.g.,
as a question, a followup statement, a positive or negative
comment). But it also includes extracting relevant information
necessary to form a response. E.g., whether a user wants to
know about the return type or parameter list of a subroutine.
The third component is dialogue strategy management.
This component decides how to respond as well as how to
extract information necessary to make the response. It uses
the knowledge base to help make this decision and searches
the knowledge base for information relevant to the response.
Note that the notion of “strategy” refers to the decision-making
process that the machine follows, and is distinct from the
natural language in the conversation [24]. For example, if
presented with a comment about the weather, some agents
would respond with a summary of the predicted weather, some
would respond with a suggestion to take an umbrella, while
still others would ask a question about the user’s preference
for summer or fall. But the decision about how to respond is
not related to the words actually used to render a response.
Fourth, natural language generation techniques lie along a
spectrum, one extreme of which is a templated, rule-based
Fig. 1: Stereotyped dialogue system described by Rieser and
Lemon [13]. In this paper, the knowledge base consists of
the source code of subroutines, while the understanding and
generation components are learned via a neural net from
a dataset we create. We predeﬁne the strategy based on
experimental ﬁndings reported by Eberhart et al. [7].

approach [25] while the other extreme is a purely data-driven
(usually deep learning-based) approach [26]. An example of a
hybrid system is one in which canned responses are used to
train a neural net (which allows more ﬂexible combinations of
the responses), or data-driven selection from a set of candidate
template responses. For a time, there was a belief that language
understanding, strategy, and generation could be combined into
a single module based on deep learning, but that belief is in
strong decline for most applications [11], [16], [24].
QA systems ﬁt into this anatomy of interactive dialogue
systems in two ways. First, a conversational system in an
ongoing discussion with a user may include several subsystems
to handle different situations, and pass control to a QA
subsystem as needed. Second, a QA system itself generally
follows the same design. The strategy component tends to be
simpler than most systems due to the assumption that a single
question from a user will elicit a single answer. However, a
QA system may need to cope with different types of questions
and extract information from various artifacts – both decisions
that fall into the category of strategy. In practice, the strategy
tends to be encoded into the model via dataset design, rather
than manual modiﬁcation of the model.
Research into dialogue systems for software engineering is
generally either foundational / dataset generation and analysis,
or implementations of experimental dialogue systems. Key
foundational and dataset analysis work includes Maalej et.
al [27], Eberhart et al. [7], and several others [19], [28]–
[33]. A recent survey discusses dialogue systems in SE [34],
which includes several experimental systems [35]–[38]. These
systems are related to this paper in the sense that they are
prototypes of dialogue systems for SE problems, but are not
directly comparable because they solve very speciﬁc problems
and are based on scrutiny of highly-specialized domain knowl-
edge. While one may perform quite well in one situation, it
may be unsuitable for others; for instance, OpenAPI Bot [39]
is capable of answering programmer questions about API com-
ponents, but requires well-documented API speciﬁcations in a
particular format. A robust QA system that relies on AI may
be better able to generalize to a broader range of software and
documentation formats by automatically identifying relevant
features in development artifacts. This specialization is typical
of dialogue systems in all domains [13], so the way to evaluate
an approach is to compare implementation alternatives rather
than different dialogue systems [40], [41].
B. Neural Encoder-Decoder
The encoder-decoder model is the current state-of-the-art
for QA systems, as described in several surveys [5], [6], [26],
[42]. To pick one very recent and related paper that exempliﬁes
how dialogue systems based on the encoder-decoder model
work, consider Lin et al. [43]. The paper presents a memory
model to augment the encoder of a typical encoder-decoder
design, and compares it to other encoder-decoder models over
publicly-available datasets. This paper is similar, but instead
of a model tuned for general conversations, we propose an
encoder model for this speciﬁc SE problem to gain domain
speciﬁc knowledge.
The encoder-decoder design has been clearly described in
several papers, and we discuss details in our approach section.
In general, the design includes an encoder, which receives
a natural language input from the user and the knowledge
base. The encoder outputs a vector representation of the input,
usually via a recurrent neural network (RNN). The decoder
receives the example desired output during training, and learns
to generate that output from the corresponding input. During
inference, the model outputs one word at a time, and uses the
output predicted “so far” to help predict the next word.
The encoder-decoder design ballooned in popularity after
Bahdanau et al. [44] introduced an “attentional” variant that
allows the decoder’s vector representation to focus on sections
of the encoder’s representation during training, i.e. to create
a dictionary of words in one language in the decoder to
another language in the encoder. Speciﬁc designs such as the
famed seq2seq model have motivated thousands of papers,
well beyond what we can describe in this section. Thus we
direct readers to several surveys [45]–[48]. Within software
engineering literature, the encoder-decoder design is seeing
increased use for tasks such as code completion [49], code
summarization [50], [51], and automated repair [52].
IV. APPROACH
Our approach aligns with the related work described in
the previous section: the overall architecture is based on the
dialogue system design in Figure 1, and the implementation is
based on a neural encoder-decoder model. The key novelty in
the model is the representation of the knowledge base. The key
novelty in the overall architecture is the crafting of our dataset
to train the neural model. These set up a novel evaluation, that
shows how these models work in a QA system for program
comprehension of functions. In the long run, we plan for this
QA system to be a component of a much larger dialogue
agent to be designed in a future paper. An overview of the
components of our dialogue system follows:
Dialogue Strategy Management Recall that dialogue strat-
egy management involves decisions both on 1) how to respond,
and 2) how to extract the information necessary to make a
response. For (1), we craft a dataset that includes eight types
of questions that we found in recently-released simulation
experiments with programmers. While those experiments were
performed by another study, we completed the analysis of the
eight questions for this paper. The dataset design represents
our manual effort in designing the strategy the system should
follow, but the strategy itself will be learned during training
and encoded in a neural model. For (2), we use an attention
mechanism in our neural model between the input question
and the knowledge base, to learn which components of the
knowledge base pertain to speciﬁc questions. Details of our
dataset design are in Section IV-A. Details of the attention
mechanism and neural model are in Section IV-C.
Knowledge Base The knowledge base consists of the source
code of the subroutines. We use a collection of Java methods

provided by Linstead et al. [53] and further processed by
LeClair et al. [54]. In total, the knowledge base includes 2.1m
Java methods from over 10k projects. These java methods are
ﬁltered for non-tokenized characters and fed as raw source
code and questions-answer pairs to a 3 input seq2seq model.
Natural Language Understanding / Generation We use
recurrent neural networks with word embedding vector spaces
to implement the encoder and decoder. The encoder is es-
sentially the component that implements the natural language
understanding, and the decoder implements the language gen-
eration. This structure is closely in line with a vast majority
of recent data-driven QA systems (see Section III-B).
A. Dataset Preparation
We prepared a dataset to train the neural model described
in section 4.3. This section describes how we structure our
dataset to represent knowledge about how programmers ask
questions and how to respond. Note that we do not explicitly
write rules into our dialogue strategy management; this dataset
contains those rules implicitly, from which the neural model
learns later. To be clear, we do not merely feed the network
all data collected empirically and expect the model to learn
proper behavior, and justify overall posture towards dataset
design: the decisions for creating the dataset are the decisions
that will be encoded as dialogue strategy management.
We build the rules for generating our dataset based on
empirical data made available to us pre-release. Eberhart et
al. [7] conducted an experiment in which 30 programmers
solved programming challenges with the help of a simulated
interactive dialogue agent (a “Wizard of Oz” study design).
The authors then annotated each question with one of twelve
types of API information needs (these API info needs were
determined in an earlier TSE paper by Maalej and Robil-
lard [27]). Eberhart et al. found that over 90% of questions
had three information needs: functionality, patterns, or
basic. In the long run, a dialogue agent will need to handle
all of these. But the scope of that challenge is far too much
for one paper. As an early attempt at the problem, we focus on
basic questions which tend to be more self-contained, have
concrete single-turn answers, and are overall easier to answer.
A basic question is one in which a programmer asks
for key information about the components of code. The
“components” were almost always subroutines rather than
classes etc. The “key information” included things like the
return type, the function parameters, or a high level description
(such as a summary comment from JavaDocs). Approximately
20% of the questions asked by programmers in the study by
Eberhart et al. [7] were basic questions.
We (independent of the analysis by Eberhart et al.) ex-
amined questions that were labeled basic. The authors cre-
ated eight categories of basic question. The procedure was
an open coding process in which the authors labeled each
question with a speciﬁc information need from a subroutine.
The authors worked together to resolve disagreements, rather
than work independently and compute an agreement metric,
in order to improve reliability of the data1.
In the end we had eight types of basic question. An
important distinction is that six of the questions involved
known subroutines i.e. the programmer already knew the
correct method For example, what the return type of method
X is. Three of the questions involved unknown subroutines
i.e. the programmer did not know the correct method. For
example, which method takes an int as a parameter and returns
a string. We call questions with a known subroutine “type K”
and questions with an unknown subroutine “type U.”
Type K questions (subroutine known):
1) What is the return type of method?
2) What are the parameters of method?
3) Give me the deﬁnition of method.
4) What is the signature of method.
5) What does method do?
6) Can method, short task description?
Type U questions (subroutine unknown):
7) How do I short task description?
8) What method uses parameter type P and returns type R?
The scope of our QA system only includes type K
questions. Type K questions involve a question, answer, and
known context, which is in line with what QA models in NLP
are equipped to solve (though, those models have not been
adapted to source code). Type U questions involve a search
process for the correct subroutine, which would include code
search and even dialogue between machine and programmer
to decide on the correct subroutine. These search tasks are
extensive research problems with standalone research papers.
Therefore, we conﬁne ourselves to the problem of answering
basic questions about known subroutines. Integrating code
search, grounding dialogue, etc., is an area for our future work,
to build on this paper.
B. Dataset Generation
The next step is to generate a dataset with the isolated
question types. To do so, we obtained a large repository of
Java methods, then generated example questions and answers
for each question type using heuristics to automatically extract
information from the methods. The repository of Java methods
is a set of 2.1m methods already ﬁltered for duplicates and
other errors, and paired with summary descriptions, provided
at NAACL’19 [54]. We further ﬁltered out methods with du-
plicate and non-descriptive comments, leaving 1.5m methods.
To generate text for questions (1-4) we extracted informa-
tion from raw code for each method e.g. the return type.
For question (5), we used the summary description formatted
grammatically. For question type (6), we used the summary
description and method name in the question and the answer
was simply “yes” or “no.” For question type (6) only, we
included a positive and a negative example to maintain a
balanced dataset. This negative example consisted of a random
1Agreement metrics quantify reliability, but do not resolve disagreements.
Because we ultimately had to make decisions to create a dataset, we elected
to resolve disagreements at the cost of a reliability metric, as suggested by
Craggs and McGee [55].

summary description from another method (of a different
name, to avoid picking an overloaded method name) in the
same project paired with the method.
To limit the vocabulary size, we replaced some information
with tokens that direct the output interface to copy the infor-
mation from the context directly, rather than learn to predict
the information as part of the model. In particular, we use a
<funcode> token to stand in for a method’s deﬁnition, rather
than require the system to copy method code one token at a
time. This allows the user to have the same experience while
reducing the vocabulary that the model has to learn.
The ﬁnal step was to paraphrase each question and answer.
The Type K questions listed in Section 4.1 are archetypal ex-
amples of user queries expressing speciﬁc information needs;
in practice, a programmer would not use exactly that language
when forming a query. To account for this variability, we wrote
15-25 paraphrased layouts of each question, and randomly
chose one of them when generating questions and answers.
In lieu of real programmer-helper QA dataset, we aim for the
neural network to learn from paraphrases enough to recognize
most, if not all the variations of these questions asked by the
participants. All replacements and paraphrases are available
via our online appendix (see Section VII).
To summarize, our procedure is:
for each of the 1.56m methods M do
for each question type T do
1. randomly select paraphrase template for T
2. generate question and answer using template
3. preprocess code of M to serve as context
4. create 3-tuple: (question, answer, context)
if T == 6 then
5. randomly select summary of different
method
6. create 3-tuple: (question, “no”, context)
The result of our dataset generation is a set of 10.88
million 3-tuples. Each 3-tuple contains a question, an answer,
and a context Java method. For each of the 1.56m Java
methods, we generated 7 type K questions and answers (one
for question types 1-5, two for question 6). To best improve
reproducibility, we maintained the training/validation/test -
90/5/5 splits that ensure no contamination between projects
or methods, provided by LeClair et al. [54].
C. Neural Model
Why Neural Networks? Neural models enable ﬂexible
natural language understanding and generation in few steps,
without the need for manually-written rules to extract in-
formation from context. A traditional alternative to a neural
model is a simple approach based on classiﬁcation of incoming
questions and rules to extract information. However, this
seemingly-obvious alternative is not in line with recent work
from the NLP research area for context-based Q/A systems.
As Wiese et al. [56] point out, recent advances in neural
models have led to “impressive performance gains over more
traditional systems.”
In contrast, our model falls clearly in line with related work
from the NLP research area on context-based Q/A systems (see
Section III-B). From an ML perspective, one novel aspect to
this paper is that we show how the neural model can learn
features in the source code when given only that code as a
context, and questions/answers about the context. This is im-
portant novelty, along the lines of Wiese et al. [56] when they
showed how neural Q/A models can learn from biomedical text
data versus other highly speciﬁc areas e.g. technical support
conversations [57] or even religious texts [58]. The point is
that domain adaptations are considered important contributions
and are not merely applying technology X to data Y. Neural
networks add ﬂexibility and variance to both the inputs they
can handle in a study like ours as well as the responses that
will be evaluated subjectively by programmers.
Overview At a high level, our neural model is similar to
context-based Q/A systems described in related work (see
Section III-B). These systems use a question and context as
encoder input and an answer as decoder input (for training).
The model learns to predict answers one word at a time.
Our model follows this same basic structure; the question and
answer are generated for each function, and the context is the
source code of the function.
Our approach is based on the model released by LeClair et
al. [50] at ICSE 2019. We chose that model because: 1) it
was designed to accommodate source code as input instead of
only text, 2) a thorough reproducibility package is available,
and 3) it does not rely on preprocessing of data into semantic
formats or graphs like other state of the art models such as
[59], [60], [61]. That model was designed to generate natural
language descriptions of source code (so-called “source code
summarization”). The inputs to the model’s encoder were
preprocessed source code, a ﬂattened abstract syntax tree. The
input for training for the decoder was the example summary.
Our modiﬁcations, in brief, are to make the model’s encoder
inputs the raw source code (not preprocessed), to add an input
for the user query/question to the encoder, and to change the
decoder’s training input to example answers to the questions.
We used raw source code instead of preprocessed source code
Fig. 2: The neural model and data pipeline.

because we are interested in the model’s ability to learn where
code features are such as the return type, parameters, etc.,
unlike LeClair et al. who were more interested in extracting
text features such as identiﬁer names. Their preprocessing
steps removed information that we found to be critical in
helping the model learn features about code. This is critical
for future applications of a VA to fetch information from any
raw source code found online without delay or dependencies.
Details We provide the Keras implementation of our model
to maximize clarity and reproducibility, following the example
of LeClair et al. [50], via our online appendix (Section VII).
The relevant model code is in ﬁle qamodel.py.
D. Training Procedures
Our training procedure is based on the “teacher forcing”
technique [62]–[64] in which the model receives only correct
examples from the training set and is not exposed to its own
errors. Recall that an encoder-decoder architecture typically
predicts output sequences one item at a time. For example,
given a question “what is the return type of function X?”, the
model would generate an answer by predicting the ﬁrst word
of the answer:
[ question ] + [ code ]
=> [ "the" ]
Then it would use the ﬁrst word prediction as a new input
to the decoder, to predict the second word, and so on:
[ question ] + [ code ] + [ "the" ]
=> [ "method" ]
[ question ] + [ code ] + [ "the method" ]
=> [ "returns" ]
[ question ] + [ code ] + [ "the method returns" ]
=> [ "a" ]
[ question ] + [ code ] + [ "the method returns a" ]
=> [ "long" ]
Yet this is how the model behaves during inference. To train
the model, following the teacher forcing procedure, we provide
the model each example one word at a time. So, in the above
example, we would provide the model with “the” followed by
the reference output “method”, then “the method” with the
reference output “returns”, and so on. If the model makes an
incorrect prediction, we use back propagation to correct the
model, and then substitute the correct reference output for the
next step – the model is not permitted to use its own erroneous
prediction as the next input.
V. EVALUATION
We conduct an experiment with human users to evaluate our
QA system. Note that our ultimate intent for this QA system
is to serve as a component of a much larger conversational AI
(see Sections II and III-A). Therefore, our experimental setup
is a controlled environment in which we test speciﬁc inputs
and outputs generated by human users. We are not attempting
to evaluate the system “in the wild” because the system is
not intended to be used standalone, and because the larger
conversational AI system does not yet exist.
A. Research Questions
Our research objective is to determine the degree to which
our QA system is able to answer the eight questions about
subroutines we determined in Section IV-A. We ask the
following Research Questions (RQs) towards this objective:
RQ1
How well does our QA system perform in terms of
relevance, accuracy, completeness, and conciseness?
RQ2
How does the performance vary across the six ques-
tion types for which we designed the system?
RQ3
What features in the context are the most important
for the model to use when answering a question?
The rationale behind RQ1 is that good responses by any QA
system should score well across these degrees: relevance, ac-
curacy, completeness, and conciseness. Relevance, to observe
if the model recognized the question and tried to get requested
information For example, if asked Q1 and the return type is
int, but the answer given by the model is “The return type
is double”, this is inaccurate but relevant. Accuracy, because
independent of any other factors the response should not
contain false information. Completeness, because responses
should contain all information needed to answer the question.
Conciseness, because responses should contain only the neces-
sary information needed. All participants were given examples
of situations where it may be confusing to rate these scores
to particularly differentiate between relevance and accuracy.
We derived these four degrees of text generation quality from
related SE literature on code description generation [65], [66].
The rationale behind RQ2 is that the system may perform well
for some questions but not others. In particular, it may perform
well at extracting information such as the return type of a
subroutine, but struggle for other questions such as returning
a description of a subroutine. We ask RQ3 for insights into the
model’s behavior. Neural models tend to be highly effective for
text comprehension and generation tasks, but are notorious for
producing black box responses that are difﬁcult to understand.
B. Methodology
Our methodology for answering RQ1 and RQ2 is to conduct
a user study in which human programmers ask questions
to a QA system and evaluate the responses. To limit the
scope of the experiment, we control the study conditions so
that the programmers only ask questions related to the six
Type K questions highlighted in Section IV-A. We recruited
professional programmers from United States and Europe via
an online job platform (demographics of study population
are in the next section). We also created a web interface
for the programmers to communicate with the QA system.
A screenshot of this interface is in Figure 3. The interface
then prompts the programmers to rate the responses on a 0-4
scale ranging from Strongly Agree, Agree, Neutral, Disagree,
or Strongly Disagree for the quality prompts shown in Table I.
Rationale Our study design is similar to previous experi-
ments by Sridhara et al. [65] and McBurney et al. [66]. We
used similar wording of our prompts to study participants and
the same four options. The only difference we made was to
add another option for Neutral in case the model returns a

TABLE I: Quality prompts for the user study, corresponding
to the quality criteria (relevance, accuracy, completeness, and
conciseness). The responses for P1-P4 are “Strongly Agree”,
“Agree”, “Neutral”, “Disagree”, and “Strongly Disagree.”
P1
Independent of other factors, the response is relevant to my
question, even if the information it contains is inaccurate.
P2
The response is accurate, even if it is not relevant to my
question.
P3
The response is missing important information, and that can
hinder my understanding.
P4
The response contains a lot of unnecessary information.
P5
Do you have any general comments about the response?
nonsensical reply (which can happen for our neural model but
was very unlikely in the templated systems of code comment
generation in those previous studies). We added the Neutral
option as a middle ground, to avoid forcing participants to
make decisions on possible nonsensical responses.
Another similarity is that we ﬁnd ourselves in the same
situation as Sridhara et al. [67] in their ASE paper: no baseline
exists for comparison. Even cross domain studies that could be
used as baseline use real data, hence they are not comparable
to our study with a synthesized dataset. To our knowledge,
no QA system has been designed to answer these speciﬁc
questions in a natural language format. Different tools do exist
for some questions. For example, question (5) could be thought
of as a code summarization question, while questions (1-4)
could be answered by just reading the subroutine itself. Yet
recall that we are not seeking an “in the wild” evaluation – we
need to evaluate the input and output of the model in situ with
the natural language understanding and generation components
of the approach. Therefore, we follow the example of these
earlier papers and focus on a deeper analysis of the responses
across multiple quality criteria, instead of comparing metrics
across competing approaches (since they do not yet exist).
Note also that we do not use BLEU scores or other
automated metrics. A human study is vital for two reasons.
First, we need to evaluate speciﬁc subjective qualities rather
than similarity to a ground truth. Second, the ground truth in
our dataset (i.e. the answer component of the question, context,
answer tuples, see Section IV-A) is generated by us. We use
it as training data, but it would not be appropriate to use as
testing data since it would include our own biases.
Experiment Procedure In the experiment, we gave each
programmer a “quiz” to ﬁll out with the assistance of the
QA system (see Figure 3). Each page of the quiz gave the
name of a particular Java method. Only the method name
was shown, not the method body. For each method, three
Type K questions (see Section IV-A) were chosen randomly.
Below the method name, there were three prompts, derived
from the chosen Type K questions. We phrased the prompts
as imperative statements (e.g. “Provide the return type of this
function”) to avoid priming the programmers with a particular
question format. We instructed programmers to use their own
words to ask for information from the QA system. We asked
programmers not to copy questions, but we allowed them to
copy answers from the QA system for the quiz. A programmer
could ask the QA system as many queries as he or she wanted.
After answering the question prompts for a particular
method, programmers were brought to a new page that asked
them to rate each of their interactions with the QA system for
that method. For each interaction (consisting of a user query
and the QA system’s response), we asked the programmers to
answer the ﬁve quality prompts listed in Table I. When they
were done, they could press a button to bring up the next
method, and a new set of prompts.
In short, we used a quiz format to encourage programmers
to ask the QA system certain types of questions n their
own words. They then rated the responses using the quality
prompts, so we could determine whether they obtained the
correct information in the end. Materials relating to the quiz
design may be found in our online appendix (Section VII).
For clarity in the experimental results section, we use the
following vocabulary: 1) a “question”, Q1-6, is one of the six
Type K question types we use in our experiment and described
in Section IV-A, 2) a “query” is text typed by the user into the
experiment interface until the return key, hitting the return key
triggers the interface to send the text to the prediction model
and receive an answer back, and 3) a “quality prompt”, P1-5,
is one of the requests we make of users to rate the model’s
answer. The users see three questions per function. They may
write as many queries as they wish. Then they respond to ﬁve
quality prompts for the answer to each query.
C. Participants
We recruited 20 participants for our experiment. These
participants had professional experience ranging from three
to 15 years. Programmers were compensated at a ﬂat rate of
US$60/hr, market rate in our region, regardless of performance
speed. Each programmer spent a total of 40 minutes on as
many quiz pages as they could.
D. Subject Java Methods
We used a total of 100 Java methods in our experiment.
We sourced these methods from the test split – the model had
not seen them during training. We picked randomly so that no
programmer saw the same method more than once and each
Fig. 3: The interface that programmers used to communicate
with the QA system during our experiment.

method was shown to at least three programmers. But given
the vicissitudes of any study with humans (fatigue, differing
speeds), not all methods ended with three ratings.
E. Threats to Validity
Like any paper, this experiment carries threats to the validity
of its conclusions. One threat is mainly external as deﬁned by
Yin [68] and not internal or case reliability due to uniform
process and objective analysis using a neural net. The number
of functions that we could ask any one person to evaluate is
limited. We chose a random selection from a large, curated
dataset ensuring each function was seen by more than one
person, but it is still possible that a different selection would
result in a different result. Similarly, a different set of program-
mers might give different answers. We attempted to mitigate
this risk by asking over 20 participants.
One threat to construct validity
[68] is the experimental
instructions explained by the administrator, which we attempt
to mitigate by using a scripted description by the single
administrator. Technical reliability is a risk outside of study
design, we mitigate varying results from the model itself by
ensuring consistent random seeds and experimental conditions
(available via our online appendix), however random factors in
GPU performance or software could lead to different results.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section describes the results of the experiment: our
answers to our RQs and supporting evidence.
TABLE II: Sequential interaction of one participant.We no-
ticed incorrect response with out-of-vocab words like “what’s”
user query
what does it return?
model output
the return type for this method is void
user query
does it set the domain name?
model output
yes
user query
what’s its purpose?
model output
no
user query
what does it do?
model output
this method sets the domain name
A. RQ1: Overall Performance
Overall, the model tends to generate reasonable responses.
Table II shows an interaction, the model responds correctly
when words are in vocabulary but for out-of-vocab query.
Figure 5 gives an overview. The ﬁgure is a histogram of all
user answers to the quality prompts from Table I. Recall that
1=“Strongly Agree”, 2=“Agree”, 3=“Neutral”, 4=“Disagree”,
and 5=“Strongly Disagree” to the prompt text. Prompts 1 and
2 are worded positively (so agreement is better) while prompts
3 and 4 are worded negatively (so disagreement is better). For
example, for P1 about relevance, a vast majority of responses
TABLE III: Performance statistics of participants in the ex-
periment. Each participant worked for 40 minutes. We asked
three questions for each method. Participants worked at their
own speeds and were allowed to ask multiple queries.
Mean
Min
Max
Methods Evaluated per Participant
19
7
38
Queries per Participant
70
37
117
Queries per Method
3.8
2
10
Queries until “Correct” Response
1.2
1
8
received a score of Strongly Agree or Agree. For P3, a vast
majority of responses indicated disagreement i.e. important
information was not missing. Also note that only a few of
responses were rated as neutral; in general, responses were
clear enough for participants to form an opinion. Most of the
responses rated as neutral were gibberish model output.
Two caveats should be understood. First, different partic-
ipants worked at different rates, so some participants are
represented more in the data than others. Table III quantiﬁes
these differences. Most participants evaluated between 15 and
20 methods, but there were a few outliers as is natural in
samples of human populations (mean speed of 19 methods
per 40 minute study is about 2 minutes per method, while 38
is a rate of about 1 minute/method). Nonetheless we found
the number of queries required to answer each question to be
quite stable, with one query usually sufﬁcing and two or more
queries being quite rare. The time required by each participant
was dependent on their reading, typing and rating speed, more
than the number of queries asked.
Second, the responses to each quality prompt are indepen-
dent of other prompts. So it is possible that a response receives
a good score for P2 and a poor score for P1 (see Section
5.1). To study this caveat, we derived a binary metric we
call “correctness” by combining P1 and P2 scores. A response
receives a 1 if and only if both P1 and P2 scores are [1,2] – i.e.
a response is only “correct” if the participant strongly agrees
or agrees that it is both relevant and accurate. We found that
79% of responses were “correct” and that it usually took only
one query to receive a correct response.
We found that a key factor in the 21% of incorrect responses
to be the vocabulary size. As mentioned in Section IV-C, GPU
memory limitations restrict both the input and output vocab
size, despite our attempts to extend these by using GPUs with
16gb VRAM and low training batch sizes. This limit affected
our results. A vast majority of the responses that were relevant
but not accurate were ones with UNK tokens in the answer(
i.e. model could ﬁnd the answer correctly but the UNK token
was an important part of the answer). Likewise, responses
that were accurate but not relevant almost always had UNK
tokens in the question (i.e. the participant wrote a query with
out-of-vocab words in it) – these UNK tokens likely caused
the model to misunderstand the question and give an accurate
response that was nonetheless irrelevant such as in Table II.
As with all human studies, unexpected or incorrect queries i.e.
human error can also drive results as we allowed participants to
interact with the models relatively freely after short guidelines.
B. RQ2: Variation among Question Types
We observe a small degree of variation among the question
types in our experiment. Recall from Section IV-A that we
have a variety of question templates that we derived from six
different question types corresponding to six key information
needs programmers have. (In the experiment, we conﬁned par-
ticipants to these information needs, but we had no restriction
on the language that they could use to render a question.)

(a) P1 Relevance
(b) P2 Accuracy
(c) P3 Completeness
(d) P4 Concision
Fig. 4: Boxplots of answers to quality prompts (relevance, accuracy, completeness, and concision) for each of the question
types from Section IV-A. For P1 and P2 lower score is better however, for P3 and P4 higher scores are better as those questions
are posed negatively. Performance is highest for Q1 and Q4 and worst for Q5: ratings of relevance and completeness tend to
be worse for Q5 than for other question types.
Recall that the rationale of this RQ is that the model may be
better at understanding some information needs than others.
Figure 4 contains boxplots of the answers for each quality
prompt, divided across each question type. For example,
column Q2 of Figure 4(a) shows that for Question 2, the
mean of all responses to queries is about 2 (the red line), the
interquartile range is 1 to 2. The way to interpret this is that,
among all queries written for Q2, participants either Strongly
Fig. 5: Histograms of the user responses to the quality prompts
in Table I. Recall that P1 and P2 are asked in a positive tone
(so 1-2 scores are better) while P3 and P4 are in a negative
tone (so 4-5 are better). Participants tended to ﬁnd the model’s
responses to be of good quality.
Agreed or Agreed that the query was relevant about half of
the time. Note that outliers are excluded for readability, but
we did have at least one instance of each score.
In general, the model performs well for Q1 and Q4. For
both, the responses are dominated by optimal scores (1 for
relevance and completeness, 5 for accuracy and concision).
This result implies that the model is successfully learning to
recognize when participants were asking for those information
needs, and also learns to extract that information from the
source code and give a natural language response. Q1 and Q4
correspond to the return type and signature of the method.
The model performed worse for Q2 and Q3, in which the
model identiﬁes the method parameters and deﬁnition. These
information needs may be more difﬁcult to learn because they
vary more in size and vocabulary. The return type (Q1) can
always be found in the same place at the start of the method
signature, it is generally one word long, and the vocabulary is
limited to type names. The parameter list can also always be
found in the same place, but it varies in length and includes
identiﬁer names that may be speciﬁc to that method.
The model performs the least well on Q5, especially in
terms of relevance and completeness. This result may be
expected, however, since the model is expected to provide a
short description of the method’s behavior. We give the model
a short description in the context, and the model does learn to
use this in its response. But the size, quality, and vocabulary of
the description vary considerably, as the source is JavaDocs,
making the model prone to using incorrect words.
The responses to Q6 are a special case since they are always

either “yes” or “no,” making it easy for the model to score well
in terms of e.g. relevance. Still, the model is sometimes wrong,
which is reﬂected in column Q6 of Figure 4(b).
user query
Give me the return type
model output
the return type for this method is vertex
context
<st> returns the next vertex of a
polygon nl public vertex nextvertex (
vertex v ) { int ind = vertices .
indexof ( v ) ; return ( vertex ) ( ind
== -1 ? null : vertices . get ( ( ind
+ 1 ) % vertices . size () ) ) ; } <et>
<st>
1
the
2
return
3
type
4
for
5
this
6
method
7
is
8
y
predicting
next word
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
Example 1: Participant asks for the return type of the method.
A heatmap of the attention network shows how the model
attends to the correct position of ”vertex” in the context
(position 11) to predict the last word in the output.
C. RQ3: Effects of Context Features
We provide evidence of the effects of the features in the
context via an example of the model’s behavior. “Explainable
AI” is a controversial topic, with much agreement that it is
necessary but little consensus on the best strategies – neural
networks in particular have a reputation for producing results
that are hard to explain [8], [9]. However, one source of
evidence is the attention network. The attention mechanisms in
most encoder-decoder models are responsible for connecting
pieces of the decoder inputs to pieces of the encoder inputs.
Frequently attention provides clues as to why the model makes
a particular decision. E.g., in NMT the German word “hund”
will receive high attention to the English word “dog”, while
in computer vision the word “dog” may receive high attention
to the area in an image where a dog appears.
In our approach, the attention mechanism connects output
words to words in the input context sequence. Consider Ex-
ample 1. The user study participant writes a query requesting
the return type. The heatmap shows the state of the attention
network just prior to predicting the word “vertex” (layer
code_attn from Section IV-C, recall from Section IV-D that
the model predicts output one word at a time). This example is
typical of almost all queries about the return type: the model
has learned where to ﬁnd the return type in code. It is not
always in position 11, but the model has learned to look for
the signature, and where to look in the signature for the return
type. Note that the model is not attending to earlier uses of
the word vertex in the method description, since that wording
may change. Likewise, it is not attending to the word vertex
in after the actual return in the code, since that is a variable
name which may not be the actual return type.
We include several more examples in our online appendix
cited below. The behavior is quite consistent: for queries about
e.g. parameters, the model attends to the parameters area of
the signature, and outputs the relevant information.
VII. CONCLUSION
We presented a QA system for programmer questions
about subroutines. We designed a neural model based on the
encoder-decoder structure that can extract information about
Java methods directly from raw source code. Our system
distinguishes between and answers questions for six differ-
ent information needs derived from recent related work on
dialogue systems for programmers. In an experiment with 20
professional programmers, we show that our approach is able
to reliably answer these question types.
Throughout our paper, we note that this QA system is
not intended for use on its own. Instead, it would serve
as a component of a hypothetical much larger interactive
dialogue system. Virtual agents are anticipated for many tasks
including as assistants for software engineering. However, it
is unreasonable to expect to create such a system in one
step – research into subsystems and supporting components is
required ﬁrst. This paper ﬁlls that role towards virtual agents
for SE tasks. Important next steps include both designing other
subsystems and expanding the number of question types that
this QA system is able to handle.
To promote continued research, we release all our data,
approach source code, and a working interactive demonstration
via our online appendix:
https://github.com/paqs2020/paqs2020
