Long Timescale Credit Assignment in Neural
Networks with External Memory
Steven S. Hansen
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94303

1
Introduction
Neural networks with external memories (NNEM),such as the Neural Turing Machine [1] and
Memory Networks [2], have often been compared to the human hippocampus in their ability to
maintain episodic information over long timescales [3]. But so far, these networks have only been
trained on tasks requiring memory storage comparable to a few minutes, whereas the hippocampus
stores information on the order of years. It is well known that this sort of long-term episodic storage
is vital for overcoming the problem of catastrophic interference [4], which is central to the challenge
of continual learning.
While some of this discrepancy can be attributed to the short-term nature of current benchmark tasks,
a major bottleneck comes form the reliance on using back-propagation-through-time to learn the em-
bedding function that maps the high-dimensional observations onto lower dimensional representations
suitable for storage in the external memory. This is problematic because memories might be used an
extremely long time after the embedding function was called, and back-propagation-through-time
would require us to hold onto the forward activations of this function for the entire duration if we
want to back-propagate through it.
Considering that in a continual learning setup, an external memory store on the order of hundreds of
thousands, or even millions, of separate embeddings could be needed, storing all of the intermediate
embedding activations is woefully intractable. A naive solution would be to simply store all of
the memories in observation space in addition to embedding space and recompute the embeddings
as needed for credit assignment, but a signiﬁcant computational burden would result from these
redundant forward-passes. More importantly, the high dimensionality of the observation space would
make storing these additional memories take an unreasonable amount of memory. Indeed, Blundell et
al [5] noted that even in the relatively modest Atari domain, storing a few million observations in
pixel-space would require upwards of 300 gigabytes1.
2
Methods
2.1
Long Timescale Credit Assignment in NNEMs
Credit assignment in traditional recurrent neural networks usually involves back-propagating through
a long chain of tied weight matrices. The length of this chain scales linearly with the number of
time-steps as the same network is run at each time-step. This creates many problems, such as
vanishing gradients, that have been well studied [7]. In contrast, a NNEM’s architecture recurrent
1While their work utilizes a long timescale external memory, it does not address the problems raised here,
as the embedding function was not optimized for usage in an external memory. Rather, it was either a random
projection or pre-trained on a separate objective. Indeed, the low performance of the latter suggests that
end-to-end optimization might be necessary for adaptive embedding functions to be worthwhile in this context.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.
arXiv:1701.03866v1  [cs.AI]  14 Jan 2017

activity doesn’t involve a long chain of activity (though some architectures such as the NTM do utilize
a traditional recurrent architecture as a controller). Rather, the externally stored embedding vectors
are used at each time-step, but no messages are passed from previous time-steps. This means that
vanishing gradients aren’t a problem, as all of the necessary gradient paths are short. However, these
paths are extremely numerous (one per embedding vector in memory) and reused for a very long time
(until it leaves the memory). Thus, the forward-pass information of each memory must be stored for
the entire duration of the memory. This is problematic as this additional storage far surpasses that of
the actual memories, to the extent that large memories on infeasible to back-propagate through in
high dimensional settings.
Figure 1: The computational graphes of a NNEM with differing credit assignment mechanisms.
Forward-pass information is shown in black, true gradients in red, and approximate gradients in blue.
A) The standard method for back-propagating through an external memory. Note that the left half of
this graph must be frozen until the memory leaves. B) Synthetic gradient model, M, assigns credit
upon ﬁrst entering the memory, and then itself learning from the older memories’ gradient. C) Exact
gradient reinstatement. The dashed memories are online recalculations. D) Approximate gradient
reinstatement. The memories used for inference and credit assignment are different.
2

2.2
Synthetic Gradients
Synthetic gradients are a recent technique created to deal with situation whether a part of a network
is ‘blocked’ from further usage [6], such as in the case previously discussed whereby information
must be stored until all gradient calculations are complete. Their way around this problem is to treat
gradient signal as just another function to be approximated. Namely, a function mapping from an
activation vector, and any contextual information, onto to the error gradient w.r.t. that activation
vector. This auxiliary network can be used to calculate an estimate of the gradient before the true
gradient is available. This synthetic gradient producing network can be trained in a purely supervised
manner by comparing its estimates to the true gradient.
As shown in Figure 1B, we can apply this approach to NNEMs by updating the embedding network
with a synthetic gradient immediately after the embedding vector is calculated. True gradient signals
are available for all of the previously embedded memories, and these can be used to train the synthetic
gradient network.
2.3
Reinstatement for Credit Assignment
One way to get around the need to hold onto forward-pass information is to recalculate the forward-
pass whenever gradient information is available. However, as previously mentioned, even the
observations are too large to store in our domain of interest, which prevents a direct reinstatement of
a forward pass from occurring. Instead, we rely on a learned autoencoder to reinstate the observation,
and then use the embedding network to recalculate the forward-pass. Since the recalculated embed-
ding vector is unlikely to perfectly match the one stored in memory, it is non-obvious how to utilize
error gradient w.r.t. the vector in memory.
There are two distinct possibilities: ignore the mismatch and directly use the memory’s gradient, or
use the fresh embedding instead of the memory during inference. These two methods are illustrated
in Figure 1C and D, and while they aren’t mutually exclusive, they are treated as such for the purposes
of this paper, to aid in interpreting the initial results. The latter option is a true gradient signal whereas
the former is only an approximation, but it relies on having a good enough reconstruction to not harm
the inference process.
3
Results
To test our model, we used the standard MNIST benchmark, the objective of which is to correctly
classify images of numerals by the integer they represent. While this task is trivial for modern
networks with the appropriate architecture, we use it here as it represents one of the simplest tasks that
could, under certain conditions, still encounter the credit assignment problem previously described.
Since our aim is to tractably train embedding functions within a network with an external memory,
we constructed a simple NNEM consisting of an embedding network and an external store that
holds the embeddings of the 5000 most recently encountered images along with their correct labels.
Classiﬁcations are made by taking the cosine similarity between the embedding of the current image
and all of the embeddings in memory, and using the normalized result to weight class labels associated
with the memorized embeddings. As our focus is on weight updates derived from the memorized
embeddings, we stop the gradient going into the embedding function coming from the current image,
as these are sufﬁcient for good performance in this simpliﬁed setting. In addition, we found that
completely unsupervised learning of an autoencoder was sufﬁcient to yield decent performance. Since
we’re primarily interested in getting the supervised signal to travel through the stored embeddings,
we only allow the reconstruction error to modify the decoder’s weights, as the decoder isn’t used for
inference like the encoder/embedding function is.
The results are shown in Figure2. All conditions utilize the same network architecture2 and hyper-
parameters, different only in their mechanism for credit assignment. The reinstatement method
with exact gradients performed the best, but requires the most additional computation. Synthetic
gradient performance is perhaps lower than expected, but it is possible that this is due to the network
architecture. The surrounding memories affect the gradient of any individual memory, but these can’t
2a single hidden layer for each piece of the network, with dimension 256. ADAM was used for optimization
with a learning rate of 1e-4 elsewhere
3

Figure 2: Performance results averaged across 10 runs. Exact gradient reinstatement is shown in blue,
approximate gradient reinstatement is shown in green, and synthetic gradients are shown in red. All
accuracy results are from a seperate validation set.
be an input to the synethic gradient network, as future memories aren’t observable. The approximate
gradient version of the reinstatement method was the most prone to divergence, which makes sense
given the approximation involved.
4
Future Directions
The absolute performance on this MNIST task isn’t useful in itself, as the performance was purposely
sabotaged to isolate the novel mechanisms under discussion. However, while the relative performance
changes demonstrate the promise of reinstatement based credit assignment, the contrived domain
necessitates further work to conﬁrm these results on large scale problems. One possibility would
be tackle reinforcement learning problems like Atari, using a variant of the model-free episodic
control network [5] modiﬁed such that the embedding function is learned on-line. While the exact
modiﬁcations needed to make that setting compatible with this approach to credit assignment is
outside the scope of this paper, it is clear that this domain is one of the few present in the current
literature that calls for a long term episodic store.
In a more complex environment, additional nuances emerge which might improve credit assignment
performance. Given the reliance on accurate decoding for proper reinstatement, pre-training the
autoencoder ofﬂine might be crucial. Vanilla autoencoders also tend to overﬁt, which might slow
performance when used to assign credit to new examples. Variational autoencoders have been shown
to be more robust [8] and also provide uncertainty estimates that could be useful when deciding which
embeddings to discard. A hybrid approach utilizing synthetic gradients and both forms of AE based
credit assignment might also be worthwhile, as these approaches appear to have complementary
weaknesses.
While the focus has been on credit assignment, adaptive long-term episodic memories raise other
concerns, such as the fact that stored embedding go ‘stale’ rapidly, as the embedding function’s
parameters change. If the rate of change is slow enough, then operating the memories as a queue
(ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out) should limit the impact this has on performance. But in many setups, embeddings
are discarded as a function of their usage [5] such that frequently needed embeddings are kept around
long enough for staleness to become problematic. While only speculative, an autoencoder could also
be used to ‘freshen’ these embeddings by re-encoding them using the current parameters.
4
