On Time-Indexing as Inductive Bias in Deep RL for
Sequential Manipulation Tasks
M. Nomaan Qureshi, Ben Eisner, David Held
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract—While solving complex manipulation tasks, manipu-
lation policies often need to learn a set of diverse skills to accom-
plish these tasks. The set of skills is often quite multimodal - each
one may have a quite distinct distribution of actions and states.
Standard deep policy-learning algorithms often model policies as
deep neural networks with a single output head (deterministic
or stochastic). This structure requires the network to learn to
switch between modes internally, which can lead to lower sample
efficiency and poor performance. In this paper we explore a
simple structure which is conducive to skill learning required
for so many of the manipulation tasks. Specifically, we propose
a policy architecture that sequentially executes different action
heads for fixed durations, enabling the learning of primitive skills
such as reaching and grasping. Our empirical evaluation on the
Metaworld tasks reveals that this simple structure outperforms
standard policy learning methods, highlighting its potential for
improved skill acquisition.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fig. 1. A visual representation of our policy. The action heads are sequentially
executed for a fixed amount of time. This gives policy a structure conducive
for skill learning. The policy can utilise these heads to learn primitive skills
as reach, grasp etc.
Consider a robotic manipulation task that involves stacking
a book on a shelf. To achieve this objective, a robot must
undertake a series of steps, such as reaching for the book,
grasping it, identifying a suitable location for placement, and
finally placing the book on the shelf. Although the location
of the book and the relative positioning of the book and
shelf may vary, the fundamental skills required to perform
the task remain constant. These skills can be sequentially
executed to accomplish the desired outcome. In the context of
quasi-static manipulation tasks, a specific sequence of skills,
when performed consecutively, can lead to successful task
completion. How can we induce a similar structure to the
modern neural-network based policies?
In the context of the previously mentioned example, it is evi-
dent that the requisite skills for executing the various sub-tasks
are substantially different. For instance, the action distribution
for the motor program necessary for grasping an object likely
differs substantially from that required for reaching an object.
In standard policy learning, a single neural-network based
policy is tasked with learning both of these skills (and learning
to switch between them), without any access to structures that
explicitly encode the multi-modal nature of task space.Ideally,
policies would be able to emergently learn to decompose tasks
at different levels of abstraction, and factor the task learning
into unique skills.
One common approach is to try and jointly learn a set
of subskills, as well as a selection function which selects a
specific subskill to execute at the current time step [5]. This
poses a fundamental bootstrapping issue: as the skills change
and improve, the selection function must change and improve
as well, which can lead to unstable training. An important
observation of many optimal policies for manipulation tasks is
that skills tend to be executed in sequence, without backtrack-
ing. Therefore, time itself can serve as a useful indicator for
skill selection. For instance, while executing a stacking task,
it is reasonable to assume that the robot will undertake the
’reach’ skill at the start of the task, and subsequently perform
the ’stack’ skill towards the end of the task. Our intuition here
is that selecting the ’skill’ according to which time-step we
are currently at can be used as a good strategy for selecting
the skill to execute.
In this paper we investigate how we can provide a neural
network policy with a structure which is more conducive
with skill learning. We particularly present a policy which
switches the skills according to time and show that even
this simple structure leads to better learning of manipulation
tasks. Through these preliminary results we want to emphasise
further research in this area.
arXiv:2401.01993v1  [cs.RO]  3 Jan 2024

...
actions
selection
function
approximator
Explicit Time Conditioned Policy
Fig. 2.
A visual representation of the proposed algorithm depicting the time-indexed policy structure. The policy consists of multiple action heads that are
sequentially activated for fixed durations. Each head corresponds to a specific skill or action, enabling the policy to learn specialized skills and integrate them
to perform complex tasks.
II. RELATED WORK
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) [5, 1] represents
a compelling area of investigation wherein skills are abstracted
and organized into multiple hierarchical levels. Nonetheless,
the application of HRL to complex environments presents
major challenges, primarily stemming from the intricacy asso-
ciated with concurrently learning policies at distinct hierarchi-
cal levels. In contrast, our method prescribes a simple time-
indexed sequence, dodging the issue of learning hierarchies.
Another set of methods have recently explored learning skills
from unstructured demonstration data [4, 3]. However we
focus on providing policy structure while learning online.
Our inituition is similar to [2], however, we investigate the
effect of simply using neural heads instead of classical motion
primitives.
III. PRELIMINARIES
We consider the standard reinforcement learning setting,
where an agent observes state st, chooses action at sampled
from πθ(st), and receives reward rt. The agent’s objective is
to maximize cumulative rewards in an episode.
Jπ(s0) = Eat∼πθ(st),s0∼p0[Pt=T
t=1 γtr(st, at)]
(1)
IV. METHOD
Contemporary deep reinforcement learning algorithms fre-
quently represent policies with neural networks which are
conditioned on the state of the environment. In this work, we
seek to add a small transformation to the observation space,
namely the time-step t. There are two ways to condition the
policy on the input. One simple way is to just append t to the
current state st to get a new state nt. The action at is now
generated using the equation
nt = {st, t}
at = πθ(nt)
(2)
However this still places the responsibility on the policy to de-
duce the relation between time-step and the action. Moreover
it doesn’t provide the policy with any specific structure.
In our method we propose to explicitly condition the output
selection of the policy on the t. Our function approximator fθ
takes in the state st and outputs k different possible actions
(at,0, at,1, .., at,k).
(at0, at1, .., atk) = fθ(st)
(3)
At any given time-step t, we choose the action atj:
j = ⌊t/T · k⌋
(4)
where T represents the maximum episode length. Intuitively,
this means that the policy will output k actions, and the
current time-step of the episode us used to select which action
to execute. For example, if our maximum episode length
T = 100 and number of heads k = 20, so for the time-
steps t = {1..5}, action from the first head, that is at0 will
be used to collect the transitions (st, at0, rt, st+1). For time-
steps t = {6..10}, the actions from the second head at1 will be
used to collect the transitions (st, at1, rt, st+1) and so on. Each
action head gets a fixed amount of time in which its action
is applied on the environment. The heads are sequentially
selected and remain active for a fixed amount of time. Fig.
2 visually describes our algorithm.
The provides the policy with a structure which explicitly
learns a sequence of skills to execute. Because the sequencing
is explicit, each head of the network can learna distinct skill
mode without having to learn to switch between them.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Environments
We
evaluate
the
effectiveness
of
this
simple
policy
change on four manipulation tasks from the MetaWorld
environments[6], including several sequential manipulation
tasks. The tasks are :
• assembly-v2: In this task, the robot must assemble a
simple structure using a set of parts.
• bin-picking-v2: In this task, the robot must pick
objects from a bin and place them in anther bin.
• box-close-v2: In this task, the robot must close a box
by picking and placing its lid on top of the robot.
• push-v2: In this task, the robot must push an object to
a target location

Fig. 3.
Primary Results : The figure illustrates the comparative performance of our algorithm against the standard implementation of Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) on four different tasks. The plot showcases the average reward achieved as a function of the number of training steps. Our algorithm
consistently outperforms the standard PPO across all tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness in discovering improved solutions and yielding higher rewards over
time.
B. Main results
Because our method is a simple modification of a neural net-
work architecture, it can be integrated into most standard on-
policy and off-policy RL algorithms such as Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC). Within this
sub-section, a comparative evaluation is conducted, contrasting
the performance of our algorithm with the standard imple-
mentation of PPO across the aforementioned tasks. Figure 3
presents a visual depiction of the average reward attained as
a function of the number of training steps. Remarkably, our
algorithm consistently outperforms the standard PPO approach
across all four tasks.
Specifically,
in
tasks
such
as
push-v2
and
box-close-v2, our algorithm significantly outperforms
standard PPO, demonstrating the efficacy of explicit skill
switching. Furthermore, in the case of bin-picking-v2,
where the standard PPO fails to successfully solve the
task, our multi-headed variant demonstrates efficient policy
training. Finally, for the assembly-v2 task, the multi-
headed algorithm exhibits enhanced stability during training
across multiple randomized seeds when contrasted with its
standard counterpart. These empirical findings underscore the
advantage of employing our algorithm in achieving superior
performance in policy learning scenarios.
Finally, in Fig. 5 we compare our method with a policy
which is provided directly as an input. We find that this
formulation yields no benefit, as it adds no additional structure
to the policy and suffers from the same multimodal modeling
issue as a standard network.
VI. CONCLUSION
We present a simple inductive bias for use in reinforce-
ment learning for robotic manipulation tasks by explicitly
conditioning the policy on the current time step. We conduct
empirical evaluations on various tasks, we have demonstrated
improved performance of our algorithm over baselines in
several sequential manipulation tasks. We anticipate that this
research will inspire further exploration and development of
structured policy designs for enhanced skill acquisition in
robotic manipulation.

Fig. 4.
This figure shows the trajectory taken by the policy while attempting the assembly-v2 task. Each color represents the heads getting executed at
different time-steps. We can see that the policy uses the different action heads to compose skills. For example the first two action heads (orange and green)
are used to compose the reaching skill. The next two heads (red and purple) are then used to compose grasping skill and so on.
Fig. 5.
A comparison of using time to index policy heads (MultiHead) and
including time in the observation.
