arXiv:1701.03578v1  [cs.CL]  13 Jan 2017
Efﬁcient Transfer Learning Schemes for Personalized Language Modeling
using Recurrent Neural Network
Seunghyun Yoon1,2, Hyeongu Yun1, Yuna Kim2, Gyu-tae Park2 and Kyomin Jung1,3
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2Software R&D Center, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea
3Automation and Systems Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient transfer leaning meth-
ods for training a personalized language model using a re-
current neural network with long short-term memory archi-
tecture. With our proposed fast transfer learning schemes, a
general language model is updated to a personalized language
model with a small amount of user data and a limited com-
puting resource. These methods are especially useful for a
mobile device environment while the data is prevented from
transferring out of the device for privacy purposes. Through
experiments on dialogue data in a drama, it is veriﬁed that
our transfer learning methods have successfully generated the
personalized language model, whose output is more similar to
the personal language style in both qualitative and quantita-
tive aspects.
Introduction
Recently there has been a considerable interest in language
modeling due to various academic and commercial de-
mands. Academically, many studies have investigated this
domain such as machine translation, chat-bot, message gen-
eration, image tagging and other language-related areas.
Commercially, it can be used as a core technology for pro-
viding a new application on consumer products or services.
For instance, an automatic message-reply prediction service
can be launched in mobile devices, thus helping a user to
send a reply message when he/she is not provided with a
proper input interface.
To model the language of human dialogue, a recurrent
neural network (RNN) structure is known to show the state
of the arts performance with its ability to learn a sequen-
tial pattern of the data (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
Among the RNN structures, a Long Short-Term Memory
RNN (LSTM-RNN) and its variants are successfully used
for language modeling tasks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997; Cho et al. 2014). However, as a kind of deep learning
technique, the LSTM-RNN and the RNN structure requires
both a large number of data and huge computing power to
train the model properly. Hence any attempts for applying
the RNN structure to personalized language modeling are
mainly constrained by the following two limitations. First,
personal mobile devices contain private message data among
close acquaintances, so users seldom agree to transfer their
log out of the devices. This causes a limitation of gathering
the whole user data to common computing spaces, where
high-performance machines are available. Second, in rela-
tively small computing machines, i.e., smart phone, it is not
always-guaranteed to have enough resources to train a deep
model within the devices.
To resolve these limitations, we propose fast transfer
learning schemes. It trains a base model with a large dataset
and copies its ﬁrst n-many layers to the ﬁrst n-many layers
of a target model. Then the target model is ﬁne-tuned with
relatively small target data. Several learning schemes such
as freezing a certain layer or adding a surplus layer are pro-
posed for achieving the result. In experiments, we trained a
general language model with huge corpus such as an Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT) data1 and
a movie script data by using powerful computing machines,
and then transferred the model to target environment for up-
dating to be a personalized language model. With this ap-
proach, the ﬁnal model can mimic target user’s language
style with proper syntax.
In the experiments, we trained the general language model
with literary-style data and applied the transfer learning with
spoken-style data. Then we evaluated the model output for
sentence completion task in a qualitative and a quantita-
tive manner. The test result showed that the model learned
the style of the target language properly. Another test was
conducted by training the general language model with the
script of the drama, “Friends,” and by applying transfer
learning with main character corpora from the script to gen-
erate the personalized language model. The message-reply
prediction task was evaluated with this model. The test result
shows higher similarity between the output of the personal-
ized language model and the same user dialogue than the
one between the output of the personalized language model
and other users’ dialogues.
The contributions of this paper are as follows. First, we
propose efﬁcient transfer learning schemes for personalized
language modeling, which is the ﬁrst research on transfer
learning for RNN based language models with privacy pre-
serving. Second, we show the applicability of our research
to the target scenario in the short message reply application
by training the model in the similar environment to that of
1Available
from
“http://www.statmt.org/wmt14/translation-
task.html#download/”

the mobile device, and highlight its test results.
Architecture for Personalized Language Model
As we are focusing on a personalized language modeling
with the preservation of user data, we generate two types
of language models. First is a sentence completion language
model, which can complete sentences with a given n-many
sequence of words. Second is a message-reply prediction
language model, which can generate a response sentence
for a given message. The output of both models implies
user characteristics such as preferable vocabulary, sentence
length, and other language-related patterns.
To achieve this result, we trained the language model with
a large amount of general data in powerful computing en-
vironments, and then applied the transfer learning in rela-
tively small computing environments. We assume that this
method would be applied to mobile devices. As we are tak-
ing the preservation of privacy into consideration, the trans-
ferred model is retrained within the local environments such
as mobile devices, and no personal data is sent out of the
devices. This could have been accomplished using the pro-
posed transfer learning schemes in RNN-LSTM architec-
ture.
Sentence Completion Language Model
A sentence completion model completes a sentence with the
given word sequence X = {x1, x2, . . . , xT }, where xN
is a word (N = 1, 2, . . . , T ). The model can predict the
next word xN+1 with given word sequence x1:N. By repeat-
ing the prediction until the output word reaches the end-of-
sentence signal, “< eos >,” the whole sentence can be gen-
erated.
The model is similar to that of (Graves 2013), and we put
the 1,000-dimension word-embedding layer right after the
input layer. Then 3 deep LSTM layers with 100 LSTM cells
each and without peephole connection are used for learning
the sequential pattern of the sentences.
The output probability to the input sequence X and the
training objective are
p(Y |X) =
T
Y
t=1
p(yt|x1:t−1)
L = −1
|T |
T
X
t=1
xt+1 log p(yt|x1:t−1),
(1)
where X is a word sequence in the sentence, Y is a model
output sequence Y = {y1, y2, . . . , yT }
Message-Reply Prediction Language Model
A message-reply prediction model generates a response sen-
tence for a given message. It is similar to the sentence
completion language model except that the message sen-
tence is encoded and used as a context information when
the model generates a response word sequence. Our ap-
proach is inspired by the sequence-to-sequence learning re-
search (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) that is success-
fully applied to a machine translation task. The message
word sequence X = {x1, x2, . . . , xT } is fed into the model,
and the last hidden state is used as context information cT .
With this context information, the next sequence word is
predicted similarly to that in the sentence completion lan-
guage model case. During implementation, we used 1,000-
dimension word embedding and 3-deep LSTM layers with
100 LSTM cells in each layer. The output probability and
the training objective are
p(Y |X) =
T ′
Y
t=1
p(yt|cT , y1:t−1)
L = −1
|T ′||
T ′
X
t=1
zt log p(yt|cT , y1:t−1),
(2)
where X is a word sequence in the message sentence, Z
is a target word sequence in the response sentence Z =
{z1, z2, . . . , zT ′}, Y is a model output sequence Y
=
{y1, y2, . . . , yT ′}, cT is the encoding vector for the message
sentence.
Fast Transfer Learning Schemes
To generate a personalized language model with a small
amount of user data and limited computing resources, trans-
fer learning is essential. In the private data preservation sce-
nario, we investigate three fast transfer learning schemes.
Each scheme is described below:
• Scheme 1, relearn the whole layer: As a baseline, we re-
train the whole model with private data only and compare
the result with the two other schemes below. Because of
the retraining of the LSTM layers in their entirety, this
scheme requires more computing power than the other
two schemes.
• Scheme 2, surplus layer: After the training of the model
with general data, a surplus layer is inserted between the
output layer and the last of the deep LSTM layers. Then,
with private data, we update only the parameters of the
surplus layer in the transfer learning phase. We assume
that a user’s parlance could be modeled by learning addi-
tional features in the user’s private data.
• Scheme 3, ﬁxed ﬁrst n layers: After training the model
with general data, we ﬁx the parameters in the ﬁrst n
LSTM layers (layer 1 and layer 2 in our experiments) and
train remaining parameters in the transfer learning phase.
We assume that the user’s parlance is a subset of the gen-
eral pattern and the last layer plays the key role in deter-
mining this pattern.
Measures
The perplexity is one of the popular measures for a lan-
guage model. It measures how well the language model pre-
dicts a sample. However, it is not good at measuring how
well the output of the language model matches a target lan-
guage style. Another measure, the BLEU score algorithm
(Papineni et al. 2002), has been widely used for the auto-
matic evaluation of the model output. However, it cannot be
applied directly to measuring a quality of the personalized

character 1
character 2
character 3
character 4
character 5
character 6
character 1
5.5667
5.7957
5.7814
5.7781
5.7026
5.8147
character 2
6.1770
5.6097
5.8256
5.8254
5.7397
5.8562
character 3
6.1741
5.8702
5.6057
5.8056
5.7101
5.8623
character 4
6.1990
5.8672
5.8240
5.5726
5.7102
5.8689
character 5
6.1948
5.8592
5.8176
5.7898
5.5099
5.8460
character 6
6.1782
5.8415
5.8279
5.8132
5.7120
5.6171
Table 1: Quantitative measure result of dialogues among main characters. Character 1 to character 6 are Chandler, Joey, Mon-
ica, Phoebe, Rachel, and Ross, respectively. A lower value indicates that the two sets compared have similar distributions and
are, thus, similar in style.
model output because it considers the similarity between
one language and the target language. Other research was
conducted on proving authorship and fraud in literature, for
instance, Jane Austen’s left-over novel with partially com-
pleted (Morton 1978). This research counted the occurrence
of several words in the literature, compared their relative fre-
quencies with those of the words in the target literature, and
concluded that the target literature was a forgery. This ap-
proach could be applied to a text evaluation where a large
amount of data is available and certain words are used more
frequently. In spoken language, such as in the message-reply
case, however, whole word distribution must be considered
instead of considering the occurrence of several words, be-
cause the data is usually not enough than the literature case.
So, we use a simple and efﬁcient metric to measure the sim-
ilarity between the user style and the output of the personal-
ized model.
An output of a personalized language model can be mea-
sured by calculating the cross entropy between the word dis-
tribution of the model output and that of the target data.
Word distribution can be acquired by normalizing a word
histogram which is calculated based on word counts in the
target corpus. Equation (3) shows the metric formulation.
Y1 = g(fLM(Mi)), Y2 = g(Ti)
measure = Cross Entropy(Y1, Y2),
(3)
where Mi is a message ∈
Dtest, Ti is a corpus
∈
Dtarget, fLM is a language model, g(·) calculates
word distribution with given corpus, CrossEntropy(p, q) is
−P
x p(x) log q(x).
The characteristics of a user speech can mainly be dis-
tinguished by the word dictionary. Thus, this metric tries to
measure the differences of the word dictionary among the
comparing set. Table 1 shows the quantitative measure re-
sults from the dialogue set of the main characters in drama
data from “Friends,” a famous American television sitcom.
In the ﬁgures, “character 1” to “character 6” are the main
characters of the drama (Chandler, Joey, Monica, Phoebe,
Rachel, and Ross, respectively). The dialogues were mea-
sured against one another by using the cross entropy met-
ric. As shown in the table, the lower cross entropy value
among the same character’s dialogue was calculated, and
the higher value was calculated among the different charac-
ter’s dialogues as expected. This result demonstrates that the
cross entropy metric can be used to measure the similarities
among the members of the set.
Datasets
• WMT14 ENG Corpus: The WMT’14 dataset includes
several corpora. We only use an English part of the 109
French-English corpus. The dataset was crawled data
from the bilingual web pages of the international orga-
nizations (Callison-Burch et al. 2011). Thus, it contains
high quality formal written language data. It consists of
21,000,000 sentences.
• English Bible Corpus: The English bible corpus is an-
other type of written language data. It is useful data that
differs from the WMT’14 dataset not only in the frequent
vocabulary type but also in the average sentence length. It
consists of 31,102 sentences.
• Drama Corpus: To collect spoken language data, we use
drama data from “Friends” from opensubtitles2. We ex-
tracted 69,000 sentences from dialogues, which we used
to train a sentence completion language model. For the
message-reply prediction language model, pairwise data
is required. Among the extracted data, two consecutive
sentences of different characters are linked into a single
sentence to generate pairwise data.
• Main Character Corpora: From the drama corpus, we
extract main character corpora to model personal users.
For example, the Chanlder (one of the main characters in
“Friends”) corpus consisted of 8,406 lines and the Rachel
(another major character in “Friends”) corpus consisted
of 9,194 lines. The former data could represent a male
adult, and the latter data could represent a female adult.
We assume that those amounts of data could be gathered
in a user device for the personalizing language model.
Experiments
We mainly conduct two types of experiments. The ﬁrst one
is a sentence completion experiment, and the other one is
a message-reply prediction experiment. In the former case,
we train a general language model with literary-style data
and apply a proposed transfer learning scheme with spoken-
style data to achieve a personalized language model. With
this setting, the difference between general and personalized
language models can be measured in a quantitative and a
qualitative manner. For the latter case, we use dialogue-style
data such as drama scripts to train a general language model.
From the drama scripts, some characters’ data are taken
2Available from “http://www.opensubtitles.org/”

General language model
it is possible, however, that investments are only being upgraded in one or more labour conclusions.
Personal language model 1
scheme 1
it is possible, however, we all offered to break this time you have tools.
scheme 2
it is possible, however, hes not bad enough than rachels feeling.
scheme 3
it is possible, however, theyre right. you cant wait this.
Personal language model 2
scheme 1
it is possible, however, ye are able to cut off the cross, and remain in the ﬁre, where they likewise eat shall ye be
among them; and ye shall ﬁght against your brethren them taken abroad in our lord.
scheme 2
it is possible, however, this mountain in the eleventh offering of the doctrine of god; and all the earth shall be
there without help.
scheme 3
it is possible, however, the wilderness shall eat his drink.
Table 2: Sample model output of general language model and personalized language model. The general language model used
WMT’14 data, personalized language model 1 used “Friends” drama data, and personalized language model 2 used the English
bible data. Scheme 1 to scheme 3 are relearn whole, surplus layer and ﬁxed-n layer, respectively. The output was generated
with the given input sequence, “It is possible, however”
apart and are used to train the personalized language model.
With this setting, the output of the personalized model is
compared to the original dialogue of the same character.
Literary-Style to Spoken-Style Sentence
Completion
We train a general language model of literary-style with the
WMT’14 corpus. We then apply a transfer learning scheme
with “Friends” drama data for the model to learn the spoken-
style language. Training the general language model took
about 10 days then we spent another 4 hours training the
personalized language model in each scheme. A “titan-X
GPU” and a “GeForce GT 730 GPU” were used for these
experiments. The latter GPU is one of the low-end GPU se-
ries of which computing power was similar to that of latest
mobile GPUs such as “Qualcomm Adreno 530” in “Sam-
sung Galaxy S7” or “NVIDIA Tegra K1” in “Google Nexus
9”. For a vocabulary setting, we construct our dictionary as
50,002 words, including “< eos >” to mark ends of sen-
tence and “**unknown**” to replace unconsidered vocabu-
lary in the data. The out-of-vocabulary rate is about 3.5%.
The “general language model” in Table 2 shows the
sample output of the general language model trained with
document-style data, and the “personal language model 1”
in Table 2 shows the sample output of the personalized
language model trained with human-dialogue-style data.
Scheme 1 to scheme 3 are relearn-whole, surplus layer, and
ﬁxed-n layer, respectively. Given input word sequence for
the test was, “It is possible, however.” As can be seen in the
table, both outputs differ in length and style. The sentence
completed using the general language model tends to be
longer than that of obtained using the personalized language
model. This result indicates that the personalized language
model is properly trained with the spoken language charac-
teristics because human dialogue is usually briefer than the
language in ofﬁcial documents.
We also apply the transfer learning schemes with some of
the English bible data. The same general language model,
which involved previously training with the WMT’14 cor-
pus for 10 days, is used. English bible data is added and em-
ployed in training for another 4 hours using proposed trans-
fer learning schemes.
The “personalized language model 2” in Table 2 shows
the sample output of the personalized language model
trained with another style of document data, English bible
data. As shown in Table 2, the output of the personalized lan-
guage model contains more bible-like vocabulary and sen-
tence styles.
General-Style to Personal-Style Message-Reply
Prediction
We simulate the message-reply prediction scenario using the
drama corpus. The script of the drama, “Friends,” is used to
train a general language model, and two main character cor-
pora are used to generate a personalized language model. For
this message-reply prediction experiment, we use a vocabu-
lary size of 18,107, and the out-of-vocabulary rate is about
3.5%. In the message-reply prediction case, pairwise data is
generated by extracting the drama corpus of each charac-
ter and concatenating two consecutive sentences of different
characters to form one single message-reply sentence data.
We insert the word “< eos >” between the message and re-
ply to mark the border separating them. This pairwise data is
used for the training, and only the message part of the pair-
wise data is used for the message-reply prediction. During
implementation, it took about a day to train the general lan-
guage model with the “Friends” corpus and another 4 hours
to train the personalized language model with two main
character corpora. The “titan-X GPU” and the “GeForce
GT 730 GPU” was used for these experiments. Validation
messages-reply sentences of 1,281 are randomly sampled
from the “Friends” corpus for tracking validation curve and
another 753 test messages are prepared for predicting the re-
sponses. These data remained unseen from training phase.
The word distributions of the model output from the test
messages and the target corpus data are calculated to mea-
sure their similarity.
Figure 1 shows the validation curve while training. Per-
plexity values from various model output are plotted. The
perplexity of baseline model, “scheme 1”, decreases until

epoch
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
perplexity
45
50
55
60
65
70
scheme_1
scheme_2
scheme_3
train only 1st layer
train only 2nd layer
Figure 1: Validation curve for each schemes. Scheme 1 is
re-learn whole, scheme 2 is surplus layer and scheme 3 is
ﬁxed-n layer (train 3rd layer only).
around epoch 10, and then it starts to increase because model
is over-ﬁtted to training data. The proposed “scheme 2”
and “scheme 3”, however, show continuous decreasing ten-
dency and reach lower perplexity values compared to that of
the baseline model. It is interesting that proposed methods
achieve lower perplexity than baseline while saving com-
puting power with reduced parameters.
Table 3 shows the performances of various models mea-
sured with the same validation dataset used in Figure
1. An unpruned n-gram language models using modiﬁed
Kneser-Ney smoothing are used for performance compar-
isons (Chen and Goodman 1996). The n-gram models were
trained by using KenLM software package (Heaﬁeld et al.
2013). The chandler n-gram model was trained with “Chan-
dler” corpus and the friends n-gram model was trained with
“Friends” corpus. The proposed scheme 1 to scheme 3 were
trained with “Chandler” corpus from “Friends” general lan-
guage model. We see that our proposed schemes outperform
the n-gram models (n=3 and 5).
To check the inﬂuence of training data size (number
of sentences) in personalized language model, we trained
the general language model (trained with “Friends” cor-
pus, message-reply prediction model) with different sizes
of personal (“chandler” and “rachel”) dataset. The proposed
scheme 2 method was used for this test. Table 4 shows eval-
uation results of the trained models. Dataset ’0’ means the
model is not trained with personal dataset. The perplexity
shows lower value as we use more dataset in training, and it
outperforms “friends 5-gram” model from the 2,000 dataset
cases.
Table 5 indicates the cross entropy measure between the
output of “scheme 1” to “scheme 3” model and that of the
target corpus, the “friends” drama corpus, the “chandler”
corpus, and the “bible” corpus. It shows the similarity be-
tween the personalized model output and the target corpus as
the number of training epoch increasing. The general model
was pre-trained with the “Friends” corpus and the “Chan-
dler” corpus was used training personalized model. Each
Model is selected from various training epoch (0, 10, 20
model
perplexity
chandler 3-gram
77.93
chandler 5-gram
76.85
friends 3-gram
68.55
friends 5-gram
56.69
scheme 1 (base line)
48.17
scheme 2
46.02
scheme 3
47.45
Table 3: Performances of models measured with the same
validation dataset used in Figure 1. The chandler n-gram
model was trained with “Chandler” corpus and the friends
n-gram model was trained with “Friends” corpus. The
scheme 1 model is over-ﬁtted to training data (see Figure
1), and the lowest value is 48.17.
dataset
0
1000
2000
4000
6000
perplexity
68.38
58.93
52.94
48.37
47.07
Table 4: Performances of models with different number of
sentences in training dataset (lower is better). “Friends” cor-
pus was used pre-training the general model, and “Chan-
dler” and “Rachel” corpus was used training the personal-
ized model with the proposed scheme 2 method. Dataset ’0’
means the model is not trained with personal dataset.
and 40) and schemes, and test messages of 753 are used
for the reply generation with the selected model used. As
the table shows, the cross entropy measure has the highest
value when the target corpus is the “bible” as expected be-
cause it is written in different style than dialogues in drama
script. For the drama script case, the cross entropy measured
with the “chandler” corpus shows the lowest value among
schemes. This result reveals that the personalized language
model is trained properly from the general language model.
Thus it is more similar in style to the target data corpus
than the general language model. The “epoch 0” case means
the initial model state trained from general language cor-
pus, “friends” corpus. Thus cross entropy with “friends” tar-
get corpus shows lower value than that of “chandler” and
“bible” target corpus cases.
Related Work
Researchers have proposed language models using RNN,
which learns the probability of next sequence data at the
character or word level (Sutskever, Martens, and Hinton
2011; Graves 2013). The proposed language models were
tested on web corpora (i.e. Wikipedia, news articles) and
qualitative examples showed their applicability. (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) proposed a sequence-to-sequence
learning algorithm with RNN and long short-term memory
(LSTM) architecture (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997),
and (Cho et al. 2014) proposed RNN encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture. Those studies were applied to the machine trans-
lation problem.
Recently, the RNN machine translation approach was ex-
tended to the short message generation problem (Sordoni et
al. 2015). Considering the message and response as a trans-

target corpus
model scheme
epoch
0
10
20
40
friends
1
6.1222
6.5880
6.6049
6.6900
2
6.8388
6.6090
6.6312
3
6.6667
6.6974
6.5097
chandler
1
6.9857
6.0496
6.0292
6.0398
2
6.3374
6.0862
6.1048
3
6.0419
6.0499
5.9429
bible
1
7.8622
8.4750
8.2865
8.4472
2
8.5955
8.3145
8.3594
3
8.4471
8.3803
8.3028
Table 5: Cross entropy measure between the language model output and the training data corpus, the “Friends” drama corpus,
the“Chandler” corpus and the “Bible” corpus. Scheme 1 to scheme 3 are relearn whole, surplus layer and ﬁxed-n layer, respec-
tively. The “epoch 0” case means the initial model state trained from general language corpus, “friends” corpus. Thus cross
entropy with “friends” target corpus shows lower value than that of “chandler” and “bible” target corpus cases. The lower value
indicates that the language model output is similar in style to the compared target corpus
lation problem, the Neural Responding Machine achieved
40% accuracy for both contextually and syntactically proper
response generations with twitter-like micro-blogging data
(Shang, Lu, and Li 2015). Those studies were similar to our
research in the sense that both target message-reply predic-
tion language model using RNN. Our research, however, dif-
fers in that it updates a general language model to a person-
alized language model with user data separately, whereas the
previous research trained a language model with the data, as
a whole, in same place.
In the commercial sphere, Google recently released a
smart-reply service that could generate a response to a

(Google 2015). There was another trial on the generation of
responses in technical troubleshooting discourses (Vinyals
and Le 2015). This research also required complete data in
one place and did not provide a personalized model.
Moreover, many researchers have conducted studies on
transfer learning. (Bengio et al. 2011; Bengio 2012) sug-
gested that a base-trained model with general data could
be transferred to another domain. Recently, (Yosinski et al.
2014) showed, through experiments, that the lower layers
tended to have general features whereas the higher layer
tended to have speciﬁc features. However, none of this re-
search was applied to an RNN language model.
To adapt a neural network model to an embedded system
with limited resources, (Kim et al. 2015) (Han et al. 2015)
reduced the size of the model by pruning the unnecessary
connections within it. It repeatedly tried to reduce the model
size without accuracy degradation. This research inspired us
to a considerable extent. It applied a neural model to mo-
bile devices. However, the research focused on reducing the
model size using a powerful machine and releasing the ﬁnal
model to an embedded system, whereas ours investigated
how to train a model within mobile devices so that private
user data could be kept.
Conclusion
We propose an efﬁcient method for training a personalized
model using the LSTM-RNN model. To preserve users’ pri-
vacy, we suggest various transfer learning schemes so that
the personalized language model can be generated within
the user’s local environment. The proposed schemes “sur-
plus layer’ and “ﬁxed-n layer’ shows higher generalization
performance whereas it trains only reduced number of pa-
rameters than baseline model. The quantitative and qualita-
tive test result indicate that the output of the model is similar
to that of the user’s style.
It is certain that our proposed method reveals the appli-
cability of the RNN-based language model in a user de-
vice with the preservation of privacy. Furthermore, with our
method the personalized language model can be generated
with a smaller amount of user data than the huge amount
of training data that is usually required in the traditional
deep neural network discipline. In the future work, we aim
to visualize the deep neural network and to investigate the
speciﬁc relationship among users’ language styles and the
LSTM cells in the network. This approach seems likely to
uncover enhanced learning schemes that require less data
than was previously necessary.
