Biological Inspiration  for 
Artificial  Immune Systems 
 
 
Jamie Twycross and Uwe Aickelin 
 
School of Computer Science,  University of Nottingham, UK 

 
 
 
Abstract. Artificial immune  systems (AISs) to date have generally  been 
inspired  by naive biological  metaphors. This has limited the effectiveness 
of these  systems.  In  this  position  paper  two  ways  in which  AISs could 
be made  more biologically  realistic are discussed.  We propose  that AISs 
should  draw  their inspiration from organisms which  possess  only innate 
immune  systems, and  that AISs should  employ  systemic models  of the 
immune  system to structure their overall design. An outline of plant and 
invertebrate immune  systems is presented, and  a number of contempo- 
rary  systemic models are reviewed.  The implications for interdisciplinary 
research that more biologically-realistic AISs could have is also discussed. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
The field of Artificial Immune  Systems began in the early 1990s with a number 
of independent groups  conducting research  which  used  the biological immune 
system as inspiration for solutions to problems in non-biological domains.  Since 
that time artificial immune  system (AIS)  research  has produced  a considerable 
body of knowledge and a number  of general purpose  algorithms. AISs based on 
these algorithms have been applied  to many  benchmark and  a number  of real- 
world problems.  Currently however, the field is at an impasse [1, 2]. While there 
have been some success stories on realworld problems, there is still little to differ- 
entiate the performance  of AISs with other state-of-the-art methods. We concur 
with Timmis [2] that this is due to a limited application to challenging problems, 
a lack of theoretical advances,  and the use of naive biological metaphors. In this 
position paper we focus on biological metaphors and discuss the areas of biology 
that we believe should be important in inspiring future AISs. Our intention is to 
draw  the attention of AIS researchers  to these  areas  and  to provide  references 
to key papers  which we have found useful in understanding the biology. 
This  paper  argues that AISs can be made  more biologically realistic in two 
ways. In the first place, we believe that AIS researchers  should consider drawing 
inspiration  from simpler  biological systems  than humans.  A serious evaluation 
of the validity and usefulness of building  AISs inspired  by the adaptive immune 
system  needs  to take  place.  The  vast  ma jority  of life survives  and  flourishes 
without an adaptive immune  system. The  innate immune  system mechanisms 
employed  by  the ma jority  of organisms  provide  robust  maintenance  of organ- 
ism  integrity  and  protection  against  pathogens.  While  complex,  these  purely 

innate immune  systems are relatively simpler  in organisational terms than im- 
mune  systems  which combine  both  innate  and  adaptive arms.  Recent  research 
has  also shown  that innate immune  systems exhibit properties such  as speci- 
ficity, diversity and  memory,  previously  only associated with adaptive immune 
systems. Innate immune  systems can  and  do do everything adaptive immune 
systems do, including adapt to rapidly  evolving pathogens, albeit using different 
mechanisms  [3]. It seems only sensible to start with simpler  innate-based AISs 
before building  adaptive immune  mechanisms  into AISs. 
Secondly,  AISs need  to be based  around  more  contemporary and  sophisti- 
cated  systemic  models  of the immune  system  than those  currently  employed. 
As shown by these contemporary models, the view of the immune  system as a 
protective system driven by adaptive immune system mechanisms of self/nonself 
discrimination is at odds with current immunological  thinking on how the im- 
mune system behaves as a complete system. While self/nonself discrimination is 
a characteristic observed in both innate and adaptive immune  systems, it is not 
the purpose  of the immune  system.  Yet,  as a survey  of past ICARIS  proceed- 
ings [4] reveals, the ma jority of AISs built so far have been built for the purpose 
of discriminating self from nonself. This is not just arguing  over semantics, but 
goes to the heart of the engineering philosophy  used to build AISs. 
Even if we must build AISs which incorporate adaptive immune system mech- 
anisms, it makes little sense to build them based only the adaptive immune  sys- 
tem. There  is no organism  in existence with only an adaptive immune  system. 
Organisms  which do possess an adaptive  immune  system  also have innate  im- 
mune  systems. There  seems to us to be a very good reason for this. While  the 
adaptive immune  system provides  the organism  with a diverse set of receptors 
which can recognise almost any molecule, it provides very little control over this 
recognition. The  control of the adaptive immune  system is firmly in the hands 
of the innate immune  system [5]. Building  AISs which model only adaptive im- 
mune system mechanisms  is like building  a car without a steering wheel - it will 
certainly go somewhere, but you have very little control as to where this is! 
In the first part of this paper we discuss current understanding of the immune 
systems of plants and  invertebrates with the idea  that these organisms  could 
provide  simpler  biological systems from which to draw  inspiration for AISs. In 
the second part of this paper  we discuss systemic models of the human  immune 
system. In particular, in light of the first part of this paper  and the importance 
of the innate immune  system, we focus on systemic models which are concerned 
with  how the innate  and  adaptive  immune  systems  are integrated.  The  paper 
ends with a brief discussion of the implications for interdisciplinary research that 
more biologically-realistic AISs could have. 
 
 
2 Non-human immune systems 
 
The ma jority of AISs to date have been inspired by vertebrate adaptive immune 
system mechanisms.  This focus of AIS research on the adaptive immune  system 
is in some ways similar to Artificial Intelligence’s early focus on the human  mind 

and symbolic information processing. Only more recently has the focus of AI been 
expanded  by the acknowledgement of intelligence in the wider sense of adaptive 
behaviour  of organisms  other than humans.  We firmly believe that the field of 
AISs also needs to reassess its sources of biological inspiration and focus on the 
immune  systems possessed by the ma jority of life on this planet. The  adaptive 
immune  system  may  be interesting  and  useful, but is in no way a prerequisite 
for a successful immune  system,  just as playing  chess is interesting  and  useful 
but is in  no  way  a  hallmark  of intelligent behaviour.  By  studying plant and 
invertebrate immune  systems, differences and commonalities that exist between 
immune  systems can  also be uncovered.  This  could  well help  identify general 
principles  of immune  systems which could be of use to AIS researchers. 
 
 
2.1 Plant immune systems 
 
Plants do not have specialised defender  cells and  rely on innate immunity pro- 
vided  by  each  cell in  the plant. Upon  infection  with  a  pathogen,  plant cells 
are induced  to produce  a range of antimicrobial products which help neutralise 
pathogens. Pathogens which survive  usually  trigger a hypersensitive cell death 
response  (HR),  which  causes  host  cells at the site  of infection  to die.  Both 
HR and production of antimicrobial products need to be tightly controlled and 
plants have  evolved  intricate systems to do this. Inducible  plant immunity is 
provided  by  two different but interacting systems. The  first system is based 
around  pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) on the surface of plant cells. These 
PRRs  are  activated by  molecules  produced  by  pathogens called  pathogen- or 
microbial-associate molecular  proteins (PAMPs or MAMPs).  The  second  sys- 
tem, which  acts intracellularly, is based  around  a set of polymorphic  proteins 
called nucleotide-binding site plus leucine-rich repeat (NB-LRR) proteins. These 
NB-LRR  proteins are coded for in the genome of the plant by specific disease 
resistance (R)  genes [6]. 
Inducible  immunity in  plants is currently viewed  as a  four-phase  process. 
Phase  1 is initiated by the recognition of PAMPs  or MAMPs  by PRRs  and  in- 
duces a set  of responses  known as PAMP-triggered immunity  (PTI). In Phase 
2, pathogens which succeed in overcoming the initial PTI  response produce  ef- 
fector molecules (also known as virulence  factors) which enhance  the spread  of 
the pathogen and  can also suppress  PTI  responses.  Phase  2 results in effector- 
triggered susceptibility of the host to the pathogen. In Phase  3, effectors pro- 
duced by the pathogen are recognised by NB-LRR  proteins encoded by R genes 
and  initiate effector-triggered immunity (ETI). The  specific effector which  is 
recognised is termed an avirulence  (Avr)  protein. ETI  responses  are amplified 
versions  of PTI  responses  and  usually  result  in the death  of the infected  host 
cell. In Phase  4 both host and pathogen undergo  a process of selection in which 
pathogen variants which do not produce  the triggering Avr protein but instead 
produce  other effectors are selected for. At the same time host R genes which 
produce  NB-LRR  proteins  which  recognise the new effectors  are  selected  for, 
once again resulting in ETI  [6, 7]. 

While direct recognition of Avr proteins by NB-LRR  proteins has been ob- 
served, indirect recognition of Avr proteins also occurs. In indirect recognition, 
NB-LRR  proteins  are  activated  by  products  of the action  of Avr  proteins  on 
the host.  The  ‘guard hypothesis’ has  been  proposed  as  a  conceptual  frame- 
work to explain indirect recognition. Pathogen Avr proteins target specific host 
molecules in order to increase the spread of the pathogen. Host NB-LRR proteins 
guard  these  molecules  and  are  activated  by  changes  in  their  guardees  caused 
by  pathogens.  NB-LRR  proteins  either  constitutively  bind  to their  guardees 
and  disengage and  are activated when pathogen Avr proteins interact with the 
guardee. Alternatively, NB-LRR proteins are activated by the molecular complex 
produced  when the Avr protein binds with the guardee  [6, 7]. 
As well as the protective mechanisms targeted at pathogens such as bacteria, 
viruses and fungi just described,  plants also possess an array  of mechanisms  de- 
signed to protect them against herbivores  such as insects and  mammals.  These 
mechanisms  are triggered by wounding  of the plant by herbivores  which causes 
the production  of both  direct  and  indirect  defences  which  are  often  tailored 
to the attacking herbivore.  Direct defences include  the release of antidigestive 
proteins which reduce  the performance  of the herbivore  by interfering with its 
digestive enzymes, and  the release of antinutritive enzymes which decrease the 
nutritional value  of the plant. Indirect defence mechanisms  result in the pro- 
duction of volatile organic compounds  (VOCs).  These  VOCs  attract herbivore 
predators and parasites, and allow top-down control of herbivore populations [8]. 
Lastly, plants possess systems that are unique among recognition systems in 
that they produce  responses that are the converse of immune  responses. Recog- 
nition of self (the same  plant) produces  a  response,  and  nonself  (a  different 
plant) does not  produce  a response  [9]. Hermaphroditic  plants  which produce 
both pollen and pistel have developed recognition systems to prevent inbreeding, 
that is, fertilisation of the plant by itself. These self-incompatibility (SI) systems 
allow plant species to maintain genetic diversity. SI systems depend  upon a set 
of highly polymorphic  genes called the S locus which code for both an S-locus 
receptor protein kinase (SRK)  and  an S-locus cysteine-rich (SCR)  ligand.  The 
SRK receptor is present on the pistel, while the SCR ligand appears  on pollen. 
Binding  of SCR  to SRK  from the same  S locus i.e. the same  plant, activates 
the SRK receptor and  leads to the arrest of fertilisation, whereas SCR derived 
from S loci of different plants does not activate the SRK  receptor and  allows 
pollination to proceed [10]. 
 
 
2.2 Vertebrate and invertebrate immune systems 
 
Around 97% of all animal species are invertebrates and have no adaptive immune 
system. Yet their immune systems have evolved to help make them the most pro- 
lific animals on the planet. Invertebrate immune systems are “not homogeneous, 
not  simple,  not  well understood ” [11]. Studies of invertebrate immune  systems 
have demonstrated that, while only possessing innate immune systems, their im- 
mune systems still exhibit phenomena  such as specificity, diversity and memory 
which  were previously  only associated  with  the adaptive  immune  system.  For 

example,  in mosquitoes, Down  syndrome  cell adhesion  molecule  (Dscam)  has 
been identified as having  characteristics similar to human  immunoglobulin and 
is able  to produce  a  diverse  set of over 30,000 proteins which  enable  specific 
recognition of bacteria. Diversity of Dscam proteins is produced  in a similar way 
to vertebrate immunoglobulin through somatic rearrangement of Dscam  gene 
segments  [12, 13]. Invertebrates have also been shown to exhibit  specific mem- 
ory, that is, enhanced  protection against the same pathogen upon  reinfection. 
Long-lasting upregulation of regulatory pathways and production of stable pro- 
teins such as fibrogen-related proteins (FREPs) in snails have been proposed as 
mechanisms  of specific memory in invertebrates [14, 15]. 
Evolution has taken different routes to achieve functionally similar systems. 
In other words, both invertebrate and vertebrate immune  systems have evolved 
different  mechanisms  which  provide  antigen-specific memory  and  protection. 
Immunoglobulin-based adaptive immune  systems have been identified in almost 
all jawed vertebrates, but not in jawless vertebrates or invertebrates [16]. Lam- 
preys  and  hagfish,  both  jawless vertebrates,  do not  produce  immunoglobulin, 
but instead generate their own diverse set of proteins called variable lymphocyte 
receptors (VLRs)  in response to invading  microbes.  Lampreys  can generate up 
to 100 trillion unique  VLRs. VLRs are made  up of proteins called leucine-rich 
repeat (LRR)  modules, and their diversity is generated by a process of somatic 
rearrangement of LRR modules which surround a single VLR gene [17, 18]. This 
process of protein rearrangement contrasts with the generation of T cell receptors 
by somatic recombination of multiple VDJ gene segments in jawed vertebrates. 
For a review of immune system mechanisms  from an evolutionary perspective in 
invertebrates, protochordates, and jawed and jawless vertebrates see [3]. 
Thus,  while both jawed and jawless vertebrates possess an adaptive immune 
system, the underlying  components and processes of their systems have evolved 
in  different ways.  And  while invertebrates have  no  adaptive immune  system, 
they have evolved innate immune systems which provide similar functionality to 
vertebrate adaptive immune systems. The end result is the same - the production 
of a diverse set of proteins that provide  the host with a mechanism  of specific 
recognition, diversity and memory. The commonalities between Dscam, VLR and 
immunoglobulin molecules  could  provide  important insights into the essential 
properties which AISs need to reproduce  in their artificial T cell receptors. The 
differing somatic and germline rearrangement mechanisms  which are involved in 
the generation of Dscam, VLR and immunoglobulin diversity could, for example, 
provide inspiration for new AIS gene library  algorithms. 
 
 
3 
Systemic  models of the human immune system 
 
Systemic immunological  models explore how systemic properties such as immu- 
nity and tolerance are generated by the immune system as a whole. The immune 
system is at this level a system, an assemblage  of different interacting entities 
which comprise a whole. Essentially, systemic models seek to answer  questions 
about  what  the immune  system  does  and  how  it  does  it. Obviously,  an  un- 

derstanding of such models is essential for computer scientists seeking to build 
AISs which exhibit similar systemic properties to the biological immune system. 
However, the ma jority of AISs to date have been based on the assumption that 
the overall  purpose  of the immune  system  is to protect  the host,  and  that it 
does so by mechanisms  based  around  self/nonself discrimination. Adoption of 
more sophisticated and realistic contemporary models is necessary if AISs are to 
prove successful at solving hard realworld problems.  These models are discussed 
further in relation to AISs in [19, 20]. 
Over the course of several decades immunologists have developed a number 
of systemic models  of immunity. For  a historical overview and  comparison  of 
some of these  models see [21, 22]. Many  of the more contemporary models are 
discussed  by  their  protagonists  in the internet-based  “The  Great  Debate:  The 
web debate on self-nonself ” [23], in which, over a period of five days, leading im- 

similarities and differences. These models have reflected and guided experimen- 
tal research. Sakaguchi [24] characterises immunological research in terms of two 
ancient Greek mottos of Delphi: “Gnothi  Seauton ” (know thyself ) and  “Meden 
Agan ” (nothing  in excess).  He contends  that while ‘know  thyself ’  has  been  a 
favourite slogan of immunologist for many  years,  the important of ‘nothing in 
excess’ has received relatively little attention. The latter truth, manifested in im- 
mune  homeostasis and  self-tolerance, is however, a vital principle  of immunity. 
In this  section,  we briefly overview these  various  systemic  models and  present 
a categorisation in terms of the way these models view the relationship of the 
immune  system to the body and to itself. In essence, models can be categorised 
as to whether they  see the immune  system as a protector or maintainer of the 
body  or of itself.  One  common  feature  of contemporary  models  is the central 
role they give to the innate immune  system as controller of the immune  system. 
 
 
3.1 Self/nonself discrimination 
 
It has been long been observed that when pathogens, destructive microorganisms 
such as viruses  or bacteria,  enter  the body,  the immune  system  removes them 
and  returns the body  to a  healthy state. Naturally then, the purpose  of the 
immune  system  is often  seen as that of a  protector  or defender  of the body. 
Since the immune  system reacts to pathogens (nonself in immunological  terms) 
but not  to the body  (self ),  it  also seems logical to conclude  that the immune 
system provides  this protection by discriminating self from nonself. Defence by 
self/nonself discrimination has formed the basis of the ma jority of immunological 
models since the middle of the last century, and this view of the immune system 
is still widely accepted by immunologists today [25]. 
Earlier models of immunity were based around the idea that host constituents 
(self ) are ignored  by the immune  system,  while other  elements  (nonself ), such 
as pathogens,  foreign substances  or altered  self, are reacted  to. In these  mod- 
els, tolerance  is largely  viewed  as  immune  system  silence or  nonreactivity  to 
self. Models such as Burnet’s Clonal  Selection Theory  [26] and  the Associative 
Recognition  Model of Bretscher  and  Cohn  [27] rest  on a historical mechanism 

in which  immature receptor-bearing cells of the adaptive immune  system are 
exposed  to a wide range  of non-pathogenic  material  early  in the development 
of the organism.  If this non-pathogenic material is recognised  above  a certain 
level, this leads to the destruction of the cell and its receptors. This results in a 
set of mature cells whose receptors only recognise antigen which are not histori- 
cally part of the organism. This recognition leads to the initiation of an immune 
response and the destruction of the pathogen to which the antigen belongs. 
 
 
3.2 Infection and danger 
 
Other models,  based  on divisions of antigen other than self/nonself, have  also 
been  developed.  For  these models,  the immune  system does not partition the 
antigenic universe  into two groups  of self and  nonself  molecules.  Self/nonself 
discrimination has  been  criticised for being  applied  to the mechanisms  which 
produce  overall  immune  system behaviour.  It has  been  observed  [28] that re- 
ferring  to self/nonself discrimination of antigen by T  cells is a category error. 
While the immune  system as a whole appears  to recognise self from nonself (a 
systemic property) this does not imply that individual  T cells recognise self anti- 
gen. This  is making  the mistake of attributing the property of a system to its 
elements. While preserving the protective purpose of the immune system, models 
such as the Infectious Nonself Model and Danger  Model have moved away from 
self/nonself discrimination as the driving force behind  immunity. 
The Infectious Nonself Model of Janeway [29] like earlier  models, views the 
purpose  of the immune  system as protecting the body.  However, the Infectious 
Nonself Model proposes  that instead of categorising antigen into self and  non- 
self, the immune  system categorises antigen into the classes of infectious nonself 
and noninfectious self. Moreover, instead of the adaptive immune  system based 
historical process of negative selection, detection of pathogens by innate immune 
system cells is seen as the principal  controller of the immune  system. Janeway 
proposes that innate immune system antigen presenting cells (APCs), especially 
dendritic cells, are the principal  controllers of the immune  system. In a similar 
way to plant cells as discussed in Section 2.1, APCs  express a groups of recep- 
tors called  pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) which  respond  to pathogen- 
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Janeway defines PAMPs  as “conserved 
molecular  patterns that  are  essential  products  of microbial  physiology ...  unique 
to microbes  ...  [and]  not  produced  by the  host  ...  [which] are  recognized  by re- 
ceptors  of the  innate  immune  system  ...  [and  which] induce  the  expression  of 
costimulatory molecules  on  the  cell [APC]  surface,  which is necessary  for  the 
activation of naive  T  cells ” [30]. Activation  of PRRs  by PAMPs  initiates  and 
modulates an immune  response, and the activation of different subsets of PRRs 
tailors the immune  response to different classes of pathogens. 
The  Danger  Model of Matzinger [31, 32] is similar  to the Infectious Nonself 
Model, viewing the immune  system as a protector, and the innate immune  sys- 
tem as having  a central role in the generation of protection. It also agrees that 
APCs have PRR  receptors which when bound  to certain molecules, activate the 
APC, allowing it to express antigen in a stimulatory fashion. However, instead of 

being specific for material associated with pathogens, these receptors are specific 
for molecules, termed danger  signals, produced  when the tissue of the organism 
is damaged  or stressed. Matzinger defines danger  signals as “a set of molecules 
elaborated  or released  by stressed  or damaged cells, for which resting  APCs  have 
receptors, and to which resting  APCs  respond  by becoming activated  and upregu- 
lating costimulatory capacity ” [33]. Danger signals are released by cells when they 
undergo  necrosis, unprogrammed death, but not when they undergo  apoptosis, 
cell death which occurs as part of the normal  functioning of the organism. 
Although both models appear  similar, their explanations of the origin of the 
material  which  activates  APCs,  and  hence  is responsible  for the activation  of 
an immune  response,  lead to important differences. By proposing  host damage 
as the main  regulator of the immune  system the Danger  Model  expands  the 
definition of the innate immune  system to include  the tissue cells of the host 
itself. In fact, these tissue cells are the cells that control innate immunity, and 
the class of immune  response is not determined by the pathogen but rather by 
these tissue cells themselves. A key similarity between these models is the shift 
in control of the immune system from the T and B cells of the adaptive immune 
system to the cells of the innate immune  system. 
 
 
3.3 Maintenance  and homeostasis 
 
Notions of dangerous and harmless are, however, themselves problematic. Philoso- 
phers such as Canguilhem  [34] and Haraway [35] have observed how the concepts 
of pathological and normal  are just as metaphorical and observer-dependant as 
those of self and nonself. Is the pathological an overexpression  of the normal  (a 
hyperreaction) or is it a radically  different state from the normal?  What exactly 
does the normal or average state mean? How have wider social and scientific no- 
tions of self and  nonself influenced the way the immune  system is understood? 
Other models have emerged which challenge the view of the immune  system as a 
purely defensive and discriminatory system, and widen its functions to include 
host-maintenance and self-assertion or homeostasis. 
Models  such  as  these  generally  reject  the notion  that recognition  equals 
pathogenicity.  Instead,  there  is constant  recognition  and  reaction  by  the im- 
mune  system, which leads to a tolerogenic or immunogenic  response.  In these 
models, in place of a defender,  the immune  system is viewed as a maintenance 
or homeostatic system, maintaining the body or itself respectively. Resistance to 
change, for example produced  by a pathogen, results in behaviour  that appears 
to protect the body and recognise the pathogen. But it is the maintenance of the 
body in a particular state that is really the driving force behind  this behaviour. 
Some models  go further and  assert not only that the purpose  of the immune 
system is maintenance, but that it is self-maintenance or self-assertion, and not 
body maintenance. These models view the immune system as a homeostatic sys- 
tem, an open system which regulates its internal environment and  maintains a 
state of dynamic  equilibrium  in the face of changes in its environment. 
Cohen’s  cognitive paradigm  [36, 37] describes  the immune  system as a cog- 
nitive  systems  in which a dialogue  is constantly  taking  place between  immune 

cells and the body. Interactions between, for example, APCs  and T cells can be 
described  in terms  of APCs  communicating  sentences  describing  the nature of 
an antigen to T cells. The subject of the sentence is the antigen. The predicate 
is a complex set of costimulatory molecules and cytokines produced  by the sur- 
rounding  tissue, or by APCs  in response  to signalling through germline  innate 
receptors. The  immune  meaning  of an antigen is defined as how the T cells re- 
sponds to this sentence, with the context of the antigenic subject provided by the 
predicate. Through  continuous dialogue between immune  cells and the host, the 
immune  system generates an internal image of self, which Cohen terms the im- 
munological  homunculus. Andrews  and  Timmis  discuss the cognitive paradigm 
in relation to AISs further in [38]. 
The  Morphostasis  Model of Cunliffe [39, 40] is based  on the idea  that the 
function of the immune system is tissue homeostasis. All cells in the body are able 
to sense when their normal function is disrupted, for example through co-option 
by a virus. When this occurs, cells signal this abnormality to neighbouring  cells 
and  sometimes apoptose. However, many  pathogens have developed the ability 
to prevent their target cells from apoptosing. Phagocytic innate immune system 
cells such as macrophages  and  neutrophils play a key role in the Morphostasis 
Model. Phagocytes are able to sense changes in the normal  functioning of cells 
and remove these cells. In this model the role of the adaptive immune  system is 
to accelerate the identification and clearance of non-healthy cells by phagocytes. 
The  Integrity  Model  of Dembic  [41, 42] is similar  to the Morphostasis  Model 
in that it characterises the immune  system as maintaining the body  through 
surveillance  of the state of tissue. In the Integrity Model innate immune  system 
dendritic cells scan tissue and detect changes in signal levels produced  by tissue 
cells. This induces dendritic cells to initiate an adaptive immune system response. 
 
 
4 Conclusion 
 
In this paper we have argued for the need for AISs which are based on much more 
biologically-realistic models. We argued  that, instead of building  AISs based on 
the extremely complex human adaptive immune system, AISs should draw inspi- 
ration from relatively simpler organisms which possess only innate immune  sys- 
tems. In the first half of this paper we outlined current biological understanding 
of plant and invertebrate immune  systems. The innate immune systems of these 
organisms are capable of self/nonself discrimination, and also exhibit properties 
such  as specificity, diversity and  memory  which  until recently have  only been 
associated with adaptive immune  systems. Low-level biological  models  of the 
mechanisms  which give rise to these properties could provide important sources 
of inspiration for future AIS algorithms. If AISs are however to employ adaptive 
immune  system mechanisms,  then we argued that they also need to incorporate 
innate immune  system mechanisms,  which control the adaptive immune  system 
in biological organisms. In the second half of this paper we outlined a number  of 
systemic models of the human  immune  system which deal with how the innate 
and adaptive immune systems are integrated. These models provide AIS design- 

ers with  a concrete  framework  for incorporating  innate  and  adaptive  immune 
mechanisms  into their artificial systems. 
 
As well as producing more effective AISs, building AISs based on more 
biologically-realistic models  could  have  important consequences  for biological 
research.  For  a number  of years  we have  had  the opportunity  to work closely 
with immunologists. During  this time we have been keen to develop interdisci- 
plinary  relationships which have benefited these immunologist as much as they 
have benefited  us. Realistically  however, this  has proved  very difficult,  and  we 
feel that we, and the field of AISs in general, have had very little impact on im- 
munological research  and  thinking. Part of the reason for this is that the naive 
models employed by AISs have borne little resemblance to the models of immune 
system mechanisms  employed  by immunologists. Perhaps a more fundamental 
reason for this state of affairs is that the focus of immunological and AIS research 
often  differ. Immunology  has  been  largely  focussed on elucidating  the cellular 
and  molecular  basis  of the immune  system  using  a reductionist  methodology. 
The  field of AISs on the other hand  is often concerned  with building  complete 
systems and  adopts a more holistic methodology. An exception to this within 
Immunology is Systems Immunology, which studies how entities and mechanisms 
interact at different system levels to determine immune  system behaviour,  and 
whose domain  includes systemic models of the immune  system. Here we believe 
that AISs, by building artificial systems based on more biologically-realistic sys- 
temic models of the immune system, could have a significant impact. Such AISs, 
when applied  to complex realworld  problems,  could provide  important experi- 
mental  systems  which could be more easily manipulated  and  from which data 
could be more easily gathered  than biological systems.  These  AISs could then 
be used to validate systemic immune  system models. In this way, AIS research 
could have a real impact on Immunology. 
 
AIS research  to date has  largely  been  concerned  with engineering,  that is, 
building useful machines or systems which solve practical problems.  Whether or 
not the immune-inspired principles  used  reflect any  fundamental properties of 
biological immune  systems is of little consequence.  If they are useful in achiev- 
ing the practical ends of the engineer then they have served their purpose  well. 
This engineering approach, in our opinion, while being productive in developing 
solutions to practical problems,  has further limited the interdisciplinary impact 
of AIS research. What is needed to address this limitation is an expansion of the 
scope of AIS research to address fundamental questions in Immunology  and the 
organisation of complex systems. This can only be done if, on the one hand, more 
biologically-realistic models are adopted and  studied specifically to understand 
the dynamics  of these models,  and  whether they capture the dynamics  of the 
biological systems they seek to describe. On the other hand,  insights from com- 
puter science into complex systems and  techniques for modelling  such systems 
could help immunologists to develop better biological models. Perhaps what we 
will see in the future is AISs grow into a field which takes its biology as seriously 
as its engineering. In this case, a more appropriate definition of the field would be 
Artificial Immunology  - the construction and study of immune-systems-as-they- 

could-be in an effort to understand immune-systems-as-they-are and to enhance 
the construction of immune  systems for artificial organisms.
