271 
Faithful Approximations of Belief Functions 
David Harmanec 
Medical Computing Laboratory 
Department of Computer Science 
School of Computing 
National University of Singapore 
Lower Kent Ridge Road 
Singapore 119260 
Abstract 
A conceptual foundation for approximation 
of belief functions is proposed and investi­
gated. It is based on the requirements of 
consistency and closeness. An optimal ap­
proximation is studied. Unfortunately, the 
computation of the optimal approximation 
turns out to be intractable. Hence, various 
heuristic methods are proposed and exper­
imantally evaluated both in terms of their 
accuracy and in terms of the speed of com­
putation. These methods are compared to 
the earlier proposed approximations of belief 
functions. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
It is now widely accepted fact that many situations 
involving uncertainty cannot be very well represented 
within classical probability framework. 
Ignorance, 
lack of time, or a small sample size are just a few of 
the reasons making it hard, if not impossible, to obtain 
reliable point probabilities. One may then ask why the 
various theories of imprecise probabilities are so rarely 
applied to solve practical problems compared to the 
classical probability theory. I believe, the explanation 
lies in the fact that, in general, using imprecise proba­
bilities has the computational complexity exponential 
in the size of the set of possible alternatives consid­
ered while using classical probabilities is only linear 
in the size of the universal set. Hence, the price for 
better accuracy or reliability seems too high. A pos­
sible solution of this dilemma is to use a subclass of 
imprecise probabilities that is expressive enough and 
at the same time inferences within this subclass are 
computationally tractable. 
One possible candidate for such a class is the class 
of belief functions with the number of focal elements 
limited by a small constant (e.g., twice the size of the 
outcome space). Most algorithms involving belief func­
tions (or their various transformations) have compu­
tational complexity polynomial in the number of focal 
elements. However, some algorithms may produce a 
belief function with a larger number of focal elements 
than the number of focal elements of its input belief 
function(s). Moreover, the original belief function may 
itself have more focal elements than the prescribed 
limit. To solve this problem we need a method that 
would efficiently produce ideally the best, or at least 
a good, approximation of a given general belief func­
tion. Addressing the development of such methods is 
the topic of the current paper. 
This work is by no means the first attempt to develop 
an approximation method for belief functions. Previ­
ous work can be divided into two streams. One type 
of proposal was to approximate a given belief function 
by either a probability or possibility measure [3, 4, 17]. 
While it might be useful method for utilizing some of 
the existing techniques from probability and possibil­
ity theories on input in the form of belief function(s), 
it hardly qualifies as a general approximation method. 
The reason is that the structure of both probability 
and possibility measures is very simple and hence too 
restrictive from the point of view of belief functions. In 
general, it is possible to allow a more general structure 
of the approximating belief function while preserving 
the same computational complexity. Approximating 
belief functions by probability measures also intro­
duces "information" that is not present in the original 
belief function 1. The other direction of the research on 
approximation of belief functions focused on the devel­
opment of a general approximation method. However, 
the proposals found in the literature [16, 1, 2] are not 
based on a well-founded approach to approximation. 
They are evaluated only on the basis of computer ex­
periments using questionable measure( s) of goodness 
1 Although it is possible to preserve the amount of infor­
mation carried by both the belief function and the proba­
bility measure [5]. 

272 
Harmanec 
of approximation. I discuss these proposals in detail in 
Section 4.1. I should also mention that Monte-Carlo 
techniques have been applied to reasoning with belief 
functions (8]. 
Another approach to reduction of computational com­
plexity found in the literature is to use a factorization 
of belief functions over a hypertree of sets of variables 
and a local computation algorithm to reason with the 
belief functions (7, I3, 10]. This approach is indepen­
dent of using approximations and could be used in 
combination with it. 
2 
PRELIMINARIES 
Let X = { x1, x2, ... , xn} denote a finite and non­
empty universal set, usually referred to as a frame of 
discernment in the Dempster-Shafer theory [I2), and 
let P (X) denote the power set of X. 
A function Bel 
: P (X) -+ [0, I], which satisfies 
Bel (0) = 0, Bel (X) = I, and 
Bel(A1 U ... U AN) 2  :::>-I)'fl+l Bel (n;e1A;), 
where the summation goes over all 0 of I ª {I, ... , N} 
for all positive integers N and all {A;} ;:1  P (X), is 
called a belief function. 
A function PI : P (X) -t [0, I] is called a plausibility 
function if it satisfies PI (0) = 0, Pl (X) = I, and 
Pl (A1 n ... nAN) :S L:> -I)Ill+l Pl (U;e1A;) 
where the summation goes over all 0 of I ª {I, ... , N} 
for all positive integers Nand all {A;};:1 s; P (X). 
A basic probability assignment is a function m : 
P (X) 
-t 
[0, I] such that m (0) 
= 
0 and 
L:Ae"P(X) m (A) = I. A subset A of X such that 
m (A) > 0 is called a focal element of m. 
It is well known [I2) that there are one-to-one corre­
spondences between belief functions, plausibility func­
tions and basic probability assignments. Due to these 
correspondences we can freely use any of them in our 
argumentation. Moreover, any notion associated with 
any of the functions rn, Bel or Pl naturally translates 
to the remaining two by these correspondences. For 
example, we can talk about focal elements of a belief 
function meaning focal elements of its associated basic 
probability assignment. 
In the algorithms in this paper, a basic probability 
assignment m is represented as a set of pairs of all 
focal elements of m and their corresponding value of 
basic probability assignment, i.e., 
rn = {(A, m (A)) 10 #A<; X, rn (A) > 0} . 
If a particular set B is not in any pair in rn then 
m (B) = 0. 
3 
OPTIMAL APPROXIMATION 
In this section, I look into the problem of finding an 
"optimal" or "best" approximation for a given belief 
function. A belief function has to satisfy two basic re­
quirements to be considered an approximation. First, 
it has to be a "simple" belief function. 2 In this pa­
per, a belief function is considered simple, if it has 
at most k focal elements, where k is a small positive 
integer. k is intentionally left unspecified as a param­
eter to the approximation method(s). Second, it has 
to be faithful. For an approximation to be faithful, 
the inferences made with it should be, in some sense, 
consistent with the inferences made with the original 
belief function. For an approximation to be considered 
best, it has to be the approximation that is the closest 
to the original. The next two subsections make these 
notions more precise. 
3.1 
CONSISTENCY OF BELIEF 
FUNCTIONS 
The faithfulness of the approximation is made precise 
by the notion of consistency. 
Definition 1 Let Bel and Bel' denote two belief func­
tions on X. 
We say that Bel' is (weakly) consis­
tent with Bel if and only if Bel (A) 2 Bel' (A) for 
all A<; X. 
The definition states that Bel' is consistent with 
Bel if it does not ascribe a larger belief than Bel 
to any subset of X, i.e., Bel is more precise -
the interval [Bel' (A), Pl' (A)] contains the interval 
[Bel (A), Pl (A)] for each A<; X. It appears very nat­
ural to ask that an approximation is consistent with 
the original belief function, no matter what interpreta­
tion of belief functions is used. Some authors (e.g.,[4]) 
use the name (weak) inclusion instead of consistence 
for the same property. I prefer the name consistence 
as it is not tied to the random set interpretation of 
belief functions. 
Although the notion of consistence is very natural, it 
does not offer a guidance how to actually compute an 
approximation of a given belief function. The notion 
of strong consistency, though admittedly less intuitive, 
offers such a guidance. 
21 could consider "approximations" by arbitrarily com­
plex belief functions, but as I am interested in reducing 
computational complexity, I explicitly exclude complex be­
lief functions from the class of approximations. 

Definition 2 Let Bel, Bel' denote two belief function 
on X and let m, m
' denote their corresponding basic 
probability assignments. Moreover, let A1, A2, . . .  , Ap 
(p 2: 1) denote all focal elements of m and let 
B1, B2, •
•
.
 , Bq (q 2 1) denote all focal elements of 
m'
. We say that Bel' is strongly consistent with Bel 
if and only if there is a collection of numbers Wij, 
i = 1, 2, ... , p, j = 1, 2, ... .  ,q, such that 
p 
L Wij = m' (Bi), for all j, 
i=l 
q 
L Wij = m (Ai), for all i, 
j=l 
and Bj i. Ai ==> Wii = 0. 
A belief function Bel' is strongly consistent with an­
other belief function Bel if the basic probability as­
signment value of every focal element of Bel' is a sum 
of fractions of basic probability assignment values of 
some focal elements of Bel that are its subsets. In 
other words, (some fractions of) basic probability val­
ues of focal elements of the "original" belief function 
are moved to a superset in the "approximation". As 
expected, the strong consistence implies consistence; 
the inverse does not hold in general (3]. 
Now we can define precisely what is meant by "ap­
proximation" in this paper. 
Definition 3 A belief function Bel' is called (strong) 
k-approximation of a given belief function Bel if Bel' 
is (strongly) consistent with Bel and Bel' has at most 
k focal elements. 
3.2 
MEASURE OF CLOSENESS 
To measure the "closeness" of an approximation, I use 
the function DFeel defined by 
DFBel (Bel') = L (Bel (A) -Bel' (A)) 
AEP(X) 
for any belief function Bel' on X consistent with Bel. 
To obtain the best approximation we need to minimize 
this function over all (strong) k-approximations of Bel. 
That is, we try to minimize the sum of differences of 
a given belief function and the "approximating" belief 
function. 
3.3 
AN ALGORITHM FOR COMPUTING 
AN OPTIMAL APPROXIMATION 
In the rest of the paper, I investigate only strong k­
approximations of a given belief function. However, 
Faithful Approximations of Belief Functions 
273 
if the following conjecture holds, finding optimal k­
approximation is the same thing as finding optimal 
strong k-approximation. 
Conjecture 1 Let Bel denote a belief function on X. 
Any belief function Bel' that is consistent with Bel and 
minimizes DFeel among all the belief functions con­
sistent with Bel is also strongly consistent with Bel. 
Our goal is to find optimal strong k-approximation of 
a given belief function Bel. In general, there may be 
many optimal strong k-approximations. We want to 
find at least one. The theorem below suggests where 
to start looking. 
Theorem 1 Let Bel denote a belief function on X 
and let Bel' denote a strong k-approximation of Bel. 
Then there exists a strong k-approximation Bel" of 
Bel such that its focal elements are also focal elements 
of Bel', (under the notation of Definition 2} w)el'' E 
{0, m (A;)} and DFeel (Bel') 2: DFeel (Bel"). 
As a consequence of the above theorem, we only need 
to explore the partitions of the set of focal elements of 
the original belief function into k parts to find the opti­
mal strong k-approximation. The following algorithm 
is a formalization of this idea. 
Algorithm 1 (Optimal approximation) 
Input: a basic probability assignment 
M = {(Bi, m (B;)) I i = 1, 2, ... ,s}, number of 
focal elements for the approximation k 
Output: optimal approximation of M 
if s 5 k then 
return M 
else 
Find the first partition K = { H, P2, ... , Pk} 
of{1, 2, ... , s} 
OPT= { (UiEP, Bi, iEP, 
m (Bi)) I PtE K, l = 
1, 2, ... , k} 
while there is an unexamined partition 
of { 1, 2, ... , s} do 
Find the next partition K = { P1, P2, ... , Pk} 
of {1, 2, . .. , s} 
W M = { (UieP, BJ, JEP, 
m (BJ )) I f} E 
K, l = 1, 2, . . .  ,k} 
if DF (W M) < DF (OPT) then 
OPT=WM 
end if 
end while 
return OPT 
end if 
Unfortunately, going through all possible partitions is 
not computationally tractable. 

274 
Harmanec 
4 
HEURISTIC APPROXIMATIONS 
As seen in the previous section, it is not computa­
tionally feasible to find an optimal approximation of a 
given belief function. As usual in such a situation, one 
needs to turn to a heuristic method that does not guar­
antee optimal results but empirically provides good ap­
proximations. In this section, I propose several such 
heuristic methods. I also overview and discuss pro­
posals from the literature for heuristic approximation 
methods. The experimental evaluation of these meth­
ods is the topic of the next section. 
4.1 
PREVIOUS WORK 
This subsection is an overview of the previous propos­
als for approximations of belief functions. As all the 
proposals are heuristic methods, I discuss them within 
a section on heuristic algorithms. 
Voorbraak [17) proposed Bayesian approximation of 
belief functions that approximates given belief func­
tion by a probability measure. It is well known [12) 
that a probability measure is a special type of be­
lief function with only singleton focal elements. For a 
given basic probability assignment m the basic prob­
ability assignment m' of the Bayesian approximation 
of misgiven by 
m'(A) = { 
LB!ACBm(B) 
!:C!C(;;X m(C)·JCJ' 
0, 
IAI = 1 
otherwise. 
Obviously the Bayesian approximation has at most lXI 
focal elements. Unfortunately, the Bayesian approxi­
mation is generally not consistent with the original 
belief function, which is one of our fundamental re­
quirements.3 Bayesian approximation commutes with 
the Dempster rule of combination, which is its distin­
guishing characteristic. 
In my opinion, the most well founded approximation 
method found in the literature is the consonant ap­
proximation of a belief function proposed by Dubois 
and Prade [4). Their goal is to find a maximal conso­
nant strongly consistent belief function that maximizes 
imprecision (i.e., the expression I; m (A) · I AI). This 
is an NP-hard problem so they proposed a heuristic 
algorithm as a computationally tractable approxima­
tion. Like the Bayesian approximation, the consonant 
approximation has at most lXI focal elements. As 
mentioned above, the consonant approximation is a 
faithful approximation. Its main limitation is its re­
striction to consonant belief functions. See Section 5 
3This is true for any "approximation" by a probability 
measure, which also excludes using Smet's pignistic proba­
bility as an approximation (14]. 
for quantitative comparison with other faithful heuris­
tic methods. 
Lowrance et al [9) appear to be the first to pro­
pose a general method, called summarization, for ap­
proximating belief functions. Let m denote a given 
basic probability assignment with s focal elements 
A1, A2, ... , A, ordered in such a way that m (A;) 2 
m(Ai+1) for all i E {1,2, . . .  ,s 
- 1}
. Then the sum­
marization approximation m' is given by 
{ m(A), 
A=A;,iE{1, ... ,k-1} 
m' (A)= 
l:j=k m (Ai) A = Uj=k Ai 
0, 
otherwise 
(1) 
This approximation is also strongly consistent with the 
original belief function. 
The first systematic study of approximations of belief 
functions was done by Tessem [16). He also proposed 
a new method called k-l-x approximation. The k-l-x 
approximation works by preserving the original focal 
elements with the highest basic probability assignment 
values and renormalizing the values. Unfortunately, 
the resulting belief function is not, in general, consis­
tent with the original belief function. Tessem uses the 
maximum difference over all subsets of X between the 
pignistic probability [14] corresponding to the original 
and approximating belief function as the measure of 
closeness (or error measure in his terminology). The 
use of this measure is questionable. There are other 
possible 'representations' of a belief function by a prob­
ability measure (e.g., maximum entropy probability) 
and one can also use the belief function directly in 
decision making [6, 11, 15, 18]. 
Bauer [1, 2] did a second, and, to my knowledge, last 
systematic study of approximations of belief functions. 
He also proposed a new approximation method, called 
Dl. The Dl approximation works by keeping k- 1 
focal elements from the original basic probability as­
signment and distributing the mass from the rest of 
the focal elements to these or to X. The distri bu­
tion is done either to the minimal supersets if any, 
or to minimal non-disjoint sets with larger cardinality 
if any (according to the proportion of their intersec­
tion with the distributed focal element), or to X as 
the last resort. Again, the Dl approximation method 
does not always produce a belief function that is con­
sistent with the original belief function. Bauer uses 
the main Tessem's error measure as well as two new 
ones. These measures suffer from the same drawbacks 
as the main Tessem 's error measure as they are also 
based on the pignistic probability. Moreover, the moti­
vation of these measures is dubious. The author seems 
to suggest that the user would make the decision on 
the basis of the highest pignistic probability. How-

ever, this is not the standard decision making set up, 
when the user has a choice of actions and makes a 
decision based on utility expectations with respect to 
probabilities (belief functions) conditional on taking a 
particular action . 
4.2 
PAIR APPROXIMATION 
The first heuristic approximation method is a varia­
tion of the standard one-step-look-ahead (or greedy) 
heuristic. It reduces the number of focal elements 
of the current basic probability assignment by one at 
each step (starting from the original) until the desired 
number k of focal elements is reached. The reduction 
is done by merging the two focal elements, merging 
of which results in the smallest DFBel, where Bel is 
the belief function corresponding to the current basic 
probability assignment. The following result is used in 
the selection. 
Proposition 1 Let m denote a basic probability as­
signment on X and A, B denote two different focal 
elements of m. Let m' denote a basic probability as­
signment obtained from m by merging A and B, i.e., 
{ 0, 
m'(C)= 
m(A)+m(B) 
m(C) 
Then 
CE{A, B} 
C=AUB 
otherwise 
DFBel (Bel') = m (A) · 2IX -AI + m (B) · 2IX -BI (2) 
_ (m(A) +m(B)) ·21X-AuBI, 
where Bel and Bel' denote, respectively, the belief 
function corresponding to m and m'. 
Let C P (A, B) denote the expression on the left hand 
side of (2). The algorithm is presented below. 
Algorithm 2 (Pair approximation) 
Input: 
a basic probability assignment 
M = {(B;, m(B,)) I i = 1,2, ... , s}, number of 
focal elements for the approximation k 
Output: Pair approximation of M 
if s:::; k then 
return M 
else 
WM=M 
for (A, m(A)) E WM do 
c´M= 
minBI(B,m(B))E{WM -{ (A,m(A))}} C P (A, B) 
end for 
while \W M\ > k do 
B 
· 
CWM 
= argmmAI(A,m{A))EWM A 
C= 
arg min AI (A,m(A))E{W M -{ (B ,m(B))}} 0 P (A, B) 
Faithful Approximations of Belief Functions 
275 
WM=(WM-
{(B, m(B)) , (O, m(C)) ,(BU O, m(B UC))})U 
{(B U C, m (B) +m (C)+ m (B U C))} 
recompute C´ M 
end while 
return WM 
end if 
4.3 
SINGLE APPROXIMATION 
The Pair approximation is still quite computationally 
complex. It has the worst case computational com­
plexity 0 (s3). This is due to the fact that the cost 
of merging is associated with pairs of focal elements. 
To reduce the complexity one could try to associate 
a "cost" with the individual focal elements instead of 
their pairs, and, at each step, merge the two focal ele­
ments with the lowest "cost" . This is what the Single 
approximation is doing. Here, the amount of increase 
of DF by merging a focal element with X is taken as 
the "cost". From (2) we have 
CS (A)= m (A)· 21X-AI + m (X)· 21X-XI 
-(m (A)+ m (X)). 21X-AuXJ 
= m (A) · ( 2IX -AI - 1) . 
The algorithm is presented below. 
Algorithm 3 (Single approximation) 
Input: 
a basic probability assignment 
M = {(B,, m (B;)) I i = 1,2, ... , s}, number of 
focal elements for the approximation k 
Output: Single approximation of M 
if s:::; k then 
return M 
else 
WM=M 
while IW Ml > k do 
B = argminAI(A,m(A))EWM OS (A) 
C= 
argminAI(A,m(A))E{WM-{(B,m(B))}} OS (A) 
WM=(WM-
{(B, m (B)}, (C, m (C)}, (B u O, m  (B u C)}})u 
{(B u C, m (B) +m (C)+ m (B u C))} 
end while 
return WM 
end if 
4.4 
RATIO APPROXIMATION 
The choice of X as the foci of the merging in the Sin­
gle approximation is somewhat arbitrary. The Ratio 
approximation goes to the other extreme and com­
putes the "cost" based on the assumption of merging 
with a superset containing just one extra focal element. 

276 
Harmanec 
Again, from (2) we have 
CR' (A)= m (A)· 2/X-A/ + m (AU {a}) . 2/X-AU{<>}I 
_ (m (A)+ m (X)), 2JX-AuAu{a}J 
2/X/-1 
= m (A)· 2iAI' 
As we are interested only in the comparison of the 
values of C R' and C R' (A) < C R' (B) if and only if 
liP <  !) , it is simpler to use 
CR(A) = m(A) 
2/A/ 
instead of CR'. The algorithm of the Ratio approxi­
mation is the same as the algorithm of the Single ap­
proximation with C R replacing C S. 
Obviously, one could interpolate between the two ex­
tremes presented by the Single and Ratio approxima­
tions and select a superset with any number of focal 
elements between IAI + 1 and lXI as the basis of the 
heuristic "cost". One could even try to select it on 
the basis of the average size of focal elements in the 
original. Or, alternatively, one could try to drop using 
supersets at all. However, I have not pursued these 
ideas further (yet). 
4.5 
LUMP APPROXIMATION 
If even the speed of the Single or Ratio approxima­
tions is not acceptable, one can use similar idea to 
that of the summarization method given by (1) and 
merge all lXI + 1- k focal elements with the smallest 
"cost" in one step instead of doing it iteratively. I call 
the resulting method the Lump approximation. Let 
m denote a given basic probability assignment with s 
focal elements A1, A2, . . .  , A, ordered in such a way 
that CS (Ai) 2 CS (Ai+l) (or CR(A;) 2 CR(Ai+l) 
or any other "cost")4 for all i E {1, 2, ... , s- 1 }. Then 
the Lump approximation m' is given by 
4.6 
ITERATIVE APPROXIMATION 
The last method I considered is a variation on the 
"greatest descent" theme. The method starts from a 
random partition of s focal elements into k parts. The 
partition corresponds to a belief function consistent 
with the original belief function the same way as in the 
case of the optimal approximation. It then iteratively 
4In my experiments I used C S as the "cost" in the Lump 
approximation. 
improves (hence the name Iterative approximation) its 
current approximation by looking at the neighboring 
partition until no improvement is possible or the spec­
ified time or number of iterations is exceeded. 5 A par­
tition is neighboring if it can be obtained from the 
given partition by moving one element from one part 
to a different part. The exact algorithm follows. 
Algorithm 4 (Iterative approximation) 
Input: 
a basic probability assignment 
M = {(B;,m (B;)) I i = 1, 2, ... , s }, number of 
focal elements for the approximation k, 
max.running time Time, max. number of 
iterations Numlt 
Output: Pair approximation of M 
if s:::; k then 
return M 
else 
Find a random partition B!C = { P1, P2, . . .  , Pk} 
of {1, 2, ... ,s} 
BM = {(UjEP, Bi, L:iEP, m (Bj)) I P1 E 
B!C, l = 1, 2, . .. , k} 
Numlt = 1 
while Time and Numlt is not exceeded do 
KM=BM 
!C!C = B!C 
for pE{1,2, . .. , k}, qE{1, 2, ... ,k},p#q, 
IPpl > 1 do 
for AEPp do 
K. = ({P1, P2, . . .  , Pk}- {Pp, Pq}) U 
{Pp- {A}, Pq u {A}} 
WM= 
{(UjEP,Bi,L:jEP,m(Bj)) I P1 E!C, l= 
1,2, ... , k} 
if DF (W M) < DF (BM) then 
BM=WM 
B!C = K. 
end if 
end for 
end for 
if DF(KM)=DF(BM) then 
returnBM 
end if 
Numlt = Numlt + 1 
end while 
returnBM 
end if 
5 
EXPERIMENTS 
In this section I report on the experiments I conducted 
to evaluate the accuracy and speed of the computation 
51 did not limit the time or the number of iterations in 
the experiments. 

of the heuristic approximation methods I am propos­
ing in this paper as well as the Consonant and Sum­
marization approximations (the only earlier proposals 
that are faithful). The experimental framework was 
implemented in C++. Most of the experiments were 
conducted on a Sun Ultra 1 workstation running So­
laris 2.5, but some were also run on a 166Mhz Pentium 
MMX PC running Windows 95 to eliminate the pos­
sibility of dependency of the results on the computing 
platform. 
In each run of an experiment, I have randomly gen­
erated 1000 basic probability assignments of a given 
specification and computed the various heuristic ap­
proximations recording their average scaled D F from 
the original as well as the average actual time it took 
to compute them. The minimum and maximum D F 
of a consistent belief function depends on the original 
belief function. To get comparable results, I computed 
the optimal approximation and scaled the DF values 
of the individual heuristic approximation methods be­
tween the D F of the optimal approximation and the 
DF of the vacuous belief function (which is trivially 
consistent) for each original belief function. A huge 
limitation of this approach is the need to compute the 
optimal approximation. This can be done only for be­
lief functions with very small number of focal elements. 
I was able to do it for belief functions with up to 15 fo­
cal elements. In another set of experiments I scaled the 
D F values only by the D F of the vacuous belief func­
tion. Unlike Tessem (16] and Bauer (1, 2], I generated 
the basic probability assignments uniformly random as 
I see no compelling reason to do otherwise. To be able 
to compare the other approximation methods with the 
Consonant approximation, I used k = lXI in all the ex­
periments, as this requirement is hard-wired into the 
Consonant approximation. I did the experiments for 
lXI E {3 , 4, . . .  , 8} and for a particular fixed lXI I gen­
erated originals with lXI + 1, lXI + 2, ... , 2IXI -1 focal 
elements. The experiments seem to suggest that the 
Summarization approximation method is the fastest 
one to compute but the least (or second least) accu­
rate. The Pair method is the most accurate but the 
second slowest after the Iterative method. The Itera­
tive method is the only clearly dominated method as 
for larger number of focal elements it both takes the 
longest time to compute6 and still is the least (or sec­
ond least) accurate. A sam pie of typical results of the 
experiments can be found at Figure 1 and Table 1. 
60f course, this could be improved by restricting the 
number of iterations or allocated time. 
But that would 
mean further reducing the accuracy of the method. 
Faithful Approximations of Belief Functions 
277 
0.35 
0.3 
0.25 
0.2 
0.!5 
Sununar. 
-
Conson. 
#-$­
Single · 
··­
LUiql 
... 
Ratio 
----­
Pair 
- - - · -
Iter. 
------
... __ _ 
Figure 1: Sample Average Scaled DF of Approxima­
tions (lXI = 4) 
6 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, I propose a foundation for approxima­
tions of belief functions. Besides simplicity, consis­
tency with the original and closeness to the original 
are viewed as basic requirements of an approximation. 
An algorithm for computing optimal approximation is 
developed. As the algorithm is not computationally 
feasible, I suggest several heuristic methods that can 
be used in practical situations. I also report the results 
of an experimental evaluation of several heuristic ap­
proximation methods both suggested in this paper and 
found in the literature. The results show that the Pair 
approximation is on average the closest to the original 
from the methods considered and the Summarization 
approximation of Lowrance et a! (9] takes the shortest 
time to compute. Somewhat surprisingly and contrary 
to the previous studies (16, 1, 2] the Consonant approx­
imation of Dubois and Prade (4] does not perform as 
badly as one might expect. It is my hope that the re­
sults presented here will help to make belief functions 
a practical alternative to precise probability as a tool 
for dealing with uncertainty.
