Arguments about Highly Reliable Agent Designs
as a Useful Path to Artiﬁcial Intelligence Safety
Issa Rice
David Manheim
January 11, 2022
Abstract
Several diﬀerent approaches exist for ensuring the safety of future
Transformative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (TAI) or Artiﬁcial Superintelligence
(ASI) systems [Yampolskiy, 2018, Bostrom, 2014], and proponents of dif-
ferent approaches have made diﬀerent and debated claims about the im-
portance or usefulness of their work in the near term, and for future
systems. Highly Reliable Agent Designs (HRAD) is one of the most con-
troversial and ambitious approaches, championed by the Machine Intel-
ligence Research Institute [Soares and Fallenstein, 2017], among others,
and various arguments have been made about whether and how it reduces
risks from future AI systems.
In order to reduce confusion in the debate about AI safety, here we
build on a previous discussion by Rice [2020] which collects and presents
four central arguments which are used to justify HRAD as a path towards
safety of AI systems. We have titled the arguments (1) incidental utility,
(2) deconfusion, (3) precise speciﬁcation, and (4) prediction. Each of these
makes diﬀerent, partly conﬂicting claims about how future AI systems can
be risky. We have explained the assumptions and claims based on a review
of published and informal literature, along with consultation with experts
who have stated positions on the topic. Finally, we have brieﬂy outlined
arguments against each approach and against the agenda overall.
1
arXiv:2201.02950v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2022

1
Introduction
To set the scene for the topic of this paper—the Highly Reliable Agent Designs
(HRAD) research agenda—we ﬁrst provide a broad outline of work that is hap-
pening in the ﬁeld of AI safety, to situate HRAD research within the ﬁeld. In
this paper, we use the term AI safety as an umbrella term referring to all of the
work that goes into making AI systems do what humans want and work at least
safely, and we use AI risk as the problem that AI safety is working to solve.
AI safety includes both technical and non-technical (e.g. governance1) work,
as well as both work that focuses on near-term accidents and work that at-
tempts to scale to future smarter-than-human systems including all the way
to superintelligent AI. (Note that the sub-ﬁeld we are discussing focuses more
on risks from smarter-than-human AI compared to near-term risks.) The term
AI-safety also encompasses technical approaches that attempt to ensure that
humans retain the ability to control such systems or to restrict the capabilities
of such systems (AI control),2 as well as approaches that aim to align systems
with human values—that is, the technical problem of ﬁguring out how to design,
train, inspect, and test highly capable AI systems such that they produce all
and only the outcomes their creators want (AI alignment).3 We summarize the
above distinctions in Figure 1.
AI safety
Technical work
Work that attempts
to scale to
superintelligence level
AI control
AI boxing Leakprooﬁng
AI alignment
Interpretability HRAD
Iterated
ampliﬁcation
Value learning
Near-term safety
Making self-driving
cars crash less
Non-technical work
Governance AI strategy
Figure 1: Mapping the approaches to AI safety
One of the approaches to AI alignment, the Highly Reliable Agent Designs
(HRAD) agenda, is the topic of this paper. Parts of the HRAD approach to
1For examples of work in scalable or AI-assisted governance, see work such as Evans et al.
[2021] and certain parts of Dafoe [2018].
2See discussion of leakprooﬁng in Chalmers [2009], discussion of “capability control meth-
ods” in Bostrom [2014], and an update and expansion of the former by Yampolskiy [2016].
3What we here refer to as “[technical] work that attempts to scale to superintelligence” has
also (especially historically) been referred to as “AI control” or “the control problem”, and
while this captures the concern that “out of control” systems are dangerous, it is potentially
misleading in implying that some person or group will constrain or manipulate future smarter
than human systems—a problematic outcome not necessary if one instead focuses on AI
alignment.
2

alignment has been most recently and comprehensively described in Embedded
Agency. [Demski and Garrabrant, 2019] This agenda was proposed by, and is
mainly pursued by, researchers at the Machine Intelligence Research Institute
(MIRI). According to one proponent, “the HRAD agenda aims to gain a deeper,
more general, and less brittle understanding of intelligence and optimization, by
analyzing dilemmas where traditional formal models of agents break down. In
particular, HRAD problems share a common theme of trying to generalize for-
mal agent models to settings where the agent is embedded in its environment
and must reason about itself like it reasons about other physical systems—e.g.,
by trying to remove traditional simplifying assumptions like ‘the agent knows
every deductive consequence of its beliefs’ and ‘the only ways the agent and envi-
ronment can aﬀect each other is through simple, stable, known, crisply speciﬁed
input and output channels’.” [Bensinger, 2021] The hope is that understanding
“agency” better will help to obtain guarantees of alignment, or will otherwise
assist in aligning AI systems by making us less confused (called deconfusion,
which will be explored more fully in Sections 3.2 and 4.3). [Soares and Fallen-
stein, 2017, Soares, 2018] The speciﬁc way in which HRAD helps with alignment
has been vague, and clarifying this is the subject of the rest of the paper: each
of the “cases” described below will give a model, either one that some proponent
of HRAD research has given about how HRAD research leads to more aligned
AI systems, or one that a critic of HRAD research has given when critiquing
the agenda.
Various arguments for how HRAD will help to align AI systems have been
discussed and critiqued privately or on online forums, but the discussions have
occurred in diﬀerent venues—and no single resource lists the arguments or the
reasoning behind them. Not only that, but existing discourse is not clear about
what the disagreements are. Partly as a result, researchers seem to disagree
about the mechanism by which HRAD could plausibly reduce risks of misalign-
ment. Until it is clearer what HRAD is, and depending on that, why it is useful
or necessary, discussions about why to pursue or not pursue it remain vague
even in extant private or forum discussions.
The goal of this paper is therefore to clearly articulate the diﬀerent argu-
ments for HRAD research which have so far been put forward, and implicitly
what the agenda is required to accomplish in order for it to be successful. Below,
we will attempt to explain the precise reasons given for how HRAD research will
help with alignment, and disambiguate each of these arguments from others—
which is especially important since they have been confused, and sound similar
unless the argument is explained precisely.
1.1
Arguments for HRAD
The arguments or “cases” we will cover in this paper are: (1) incidental utility,
which says that HRAD research increases our understanding of some topics
relevant to AI safety, so produces some value (without trying to claim that
HRAD research is the most important agenda to be pursuing); (2) deconfusion,
which says that becoming less confused about agency will help to align AI
3

systems and that without becoming less confused there is no hope of aligning
AI systems; (3) precise speciﬁcation (a subset of deconfusion), which says that
it is possible to come up with a (more) precise theory of rationality or agency
which will help to align AI systems, and that without such a theory there is no
hope of aligning AI systems; and (4) prediction (also a subset of deconfusion),
which says that it is possible to come up with a precise theory of rationality
that allows us to analyze and predict arbitrary AI systems, which will help to
align AI systems, and that without such a theory there is no hope of aligning
AI systems.
These arguments are not mutually exclusive, and in fact each argument rests
on a number of sometimes shared and sometimes conﬂicting assumptions. For
this reason, the assumptions and relevant evidence are each examined to present
a clearer understanding of why this agenda is being pursued by its proponents.
1.2
Uniqueness of the research area
Speciﬁc research topics in the HRAD agenda include embedded or realistic world
models, decision theory, logical uncertainty, robust delegation, and subsystem
alignment. [Soares and Fallenstein, 2017, Demski and Garrabrant, 2019] Some
of these topics are active research areas in philosophy, mathematics, and com-
puter science. This is especially the case with decision theory, which is an active
research area in academic philosophy. However while the relevant parts of aca-
demic decision theory are typically more focused on comparing causal decision
theory and evidential decision theory, HRAD work is almost entirely focused on
functional decision theory, which is a new kind of decision theory. [Yudkowsky
and Soares, 2018]
More critically, the goals of the research are, if not precisely applied, at
least clearly directed towards solving a set of concrete potential problems. This
means that the work is somewhat interdisciplinary, and has not been embraced
or fully evaluated by any of the academic disciplines it relates to. The types of
work which have been done include formalisms for logical induction [Garrabrant
et al., 2016], which addresses several problems in philosophical epistemology and
probability, and L¨obian cooperation [LaVictoire et al., 2014, Critch, 2019], which
addresses issues in computational program analysis and game theory.
2
Background, terminology, and jargon
In discussions considering HRAD, a number of novel or non-standard terms or
distinctions have been proposed, and these will be used in the paper to better lay
out the arguments made. For this reason, we introduce several key conceptual
terms, speciﬁcally: (1) levels of abstraction and precise versus imprecise theory;
(2) levels of indirection; and (3) building agents from the ground up versus
understanding the behavior of rational agents and predicting roughly what they
will do. Because the jargon has developed over time to discuss these ideas, each
distinction relates to and builds on the previous ones.
4

2.1
Abstractions, and precise versus imprecise theory
Abstraction is a way to do decomposition [of a computer
program] productively by changing the level of detail to be
considered. When we abstract from a problem we agree to
ignore certain details in an eﬀort to convert the original
problem to a simpler one.
— Liskov et al. [1986]
All non-trivial abstractions, to some degree, are leaky.
— Spolsky [2002]
Abstraction, as deﬁned in the above quote by Liskov, is a key conceptual tool
in a variety of domains. One key potential drawback of abstraction in computer
science, highlighted by Spolsky above, is that even abstractions which work in a
given context can be limited, and limiting. An abstraction is a simpliﬁcation of
some part of reality which enables analysis or manipulation. When the abstrac-
tion is used for prediction, it’s roughly equivalent to a theory, or a model—and
Spolsky’s point reduces to George Box’s earlier claim, “All models are wrong,
some are useful.” But usefulness is a matter of degree. Given that, we can
distinguish between a precise and imprecise, or more and less precise, theory:
• A precise theory is one which can scale to two or more levels of abstrac-
tion/indirection.
• An imprecise theory is one which can scale to at most one level of abstrac-
tion/indirection.
More intuitively, a precise theory is more mathematical, rigorous, and exact,
like those found in pure mathematics and physics, and an imprecise theory is
more akin to an analogy which is locally useful, and is still predictive, but cannot
be used to build higher level models.4
2.2
Levels of indirection
Distinct from levels of abstraction is a concept we call “levels of indirection”
which is used to consider the theory of change for AI safety. Rohin Shah has
called this “multiple levels of inference”, and discussed it in terms of necessary
assumptions. [Shah, 2020a,b]
4A perhaps useful example is found in economics, where microeconomics and macroeco-
nomics were built largely in parallel before a movement in the mid-20th century to build
microeconomic foundations of macroeconomics. To the extent that it was successful, the abil-
ity to move from personal preferences and utility functions, to theory of trade and markets,
to general equilibria, to aggregate questions of supply and demand, and ﬁnally to macroeco-
nomic phenomena like inﬂation, international growth, recessions, and business cycles would
be a precise theory.
5

If a theory of change has many assumptions, each of which needs to be true,
it is weaker than one which relies on fewer assumptions. [Dewar et al., 1993]
Similarly, for theories, each leaky abstraction is also an assumption that the
abstraction does not neglect a critical factor. And for building systems, relying
on less precise theories creates additional assumptions needed for the theory to
apply and the system to work.
2.3
Building versus Predicting
The distinction between building agents from the ground up versus understand-
ing the behavior of rational agents and predicting roughly what they will do
is due to Demski [2020]. The distinction was only outlined brieﬂy, so we have
elaborated on this distinction. For that reason, what we describe may be a
slightly diﬀerent distinction than originally intended.
• Building agents from the ground up means having a theory of optimally
pursuing goals, i.e. rationality, that is precise enough to allow us to build
human-level or smarter AI systems in a satisfying way. Here, “satisfy-
ing way” is somewhat complicated to explain, but is some combination of
traits like the human operators having a good idea of how the AI system
is reasoning internally (unlike e.g. current mainstream machine learning
models, which tend to be uninterpretable) and where someone with secu-
rity mindset [Yudkowsky, 2017] can be conﬁdent that it is aligned. Im-
portantly, we do not require that the AI system be built using whatever
methods happen to be mainstream, but instead allow it to be built using
the precise theory.
• Understanding the behavior of rational agents and predicting roughly what
they will do means having a theory of rationality that is so precise that one
can take as input an arbitrary agent and can predict roughly how it will
act. This prediction ability must hold even when the agent is implemented
in incomprehensible ways like blackbox machine learning models. See also
Appendix B.
The distinction between a theory suﬃcient to build aligned AGI and one
suﬃcient to understand all AI systems is similar to the distinction between the
existential quantiﬁer (∃, “there exists”) and the universal quantiﬁer (∀, “for
all”). In the former case, we “only” need a model suﬃcient for at least one safe
AI system. To make this distinction more formal, we can consider the predicate
P(x) standing for “We can understand and predict how the agent or advanced
AI system x will act in a satisfying way.” Then “building agents from the ground
up” can be seen as the claim that we can invent a theory such that there exists
some x for which P(x) is true. The more ambitious goal of “understanding the
behavior of rational agents and predicting roughly what they will do” requires
that we can invent a theory such that for all x, the statement P(x) is true.
In other words, the former only claims we can build some advanced AI
system using the precise theory that we understand well, whereas the latter
6

says we have to deal with whatever kind of advanced AI system that ends up
being developed, including using methods we do not understand well (i.e. where
the internal reasoning of the system is not clear to us).
3
Arguments for each case for HRAD Research
In this section, we explain each of the “cases” for HRAD research, that is,
diﬀerent arguments for doing this kind of research, and gives citations to the
people making these arguments. We ﬁrst present the arguments themselves,
without trying to represent the debates—but arguments against each case will
be given in Section 4. These argument are, in brief:
Incidental Utility: There is value to HRAD work for alignment, but it is not
directly enabling aligned AI.
Deconfusion: HRAD work is essential to ensure we actually know what prob-
lem we are solving with alignment, but is not itself going to lead to align-
ment.
Precise Speciﬁcation: HRAD work will allow us to ﬁnd at least one aligned
AGI system.
Prediction: HRAD work will be able to tell us how to align an arbitrary AI
system, and/or whether it is possible to do so.
Except for the ﬁrst case (incidental utility), each of the cases for HRAD
research are defending the claim that HRAD research is the most important kind
of AI safety research to be doing, and furthermore, that without it alignment
of smarter-than-human AI systems is impossible.
The proponents of HRAD in general have sometimes used more than one
argument/case, or have been ambiguous about which case they are making.
Given that ambiguity, there is uncertainty not just about whether the pro-
HRAD versus anti-HRAD stance is correct within a single case, but also about
which case represents the main reason to pursue and/or prioritize this research
agenda.
3.1
Incidental utility
The incidental utility case for HRAD states that HRAD research produces value
for AI safety, without reference to other technical research agendas (i.e. without
claiming that HRAD is better than other agendas,) and without claiming that
not doing enough HRAD research will lead to misalignment in AI systems. As
such, this case is easier to defend, but it is also less interesting because it does
not prioritize among the diﬀerent technical AI safety research agendas (which
is critical when trying to allocate resources to the diﬀerent research agendas).
As an example of someone who has made the incidental utility case for
HRAD, Wei Dai has argued that decision theory research is useful for “[b]etter
7

understanding potential AI safety failure modes that are due to ﬂawed decision
procedures implemented in or by AI” [Dai, 2019a] without trying to compare
this kind of research to other kinds of research. [Dai, 2019b]
3.2
Deconfusion
In the context of AI safety research, the term deconfusion was introduced at the
Machine Intelligence Research Institute. Throughout the history of math and
science, people went from being totally confused on topics like inﬁnity, electro-
magnetism, and how humans and animals came to exist, to coming up with a
theory about how to reason coherently about these concepts and answer these
questions. The claim the deconfusion case makes builds on this history, and sug-
gests that this same process will happen with concepts that currently confuse us
about how the mind, agents, counterfactual reasoning, logical uncertainty, and
other concepts relevant to AI research work. Furthermore, they claim that it is
possible to make progress on becoming less confused by focusing on this directly.
Once we become less confused about minds and agency, we will have some hope
of aligning advanced AI systems, because being less confused will help to avoid,
detect, and ﬁx safety issues; help to predict or explain safety issues; help to
conceptually clarify the AI alignment problem; and help us be satisﬁed that
any AI system we build is doing what we want. In fact, proponents analogize,
not having such an understanding would be like trying to build a rocket to go
to the Moon without having invented calculus, much less orbital mechanics and
Newtonian physics. [Yudkowsky, 2018]
For this case, it is not necessary that the ﬁnal product of HRAD research be
a precise theory. Even if the ﬁnal theory is imprecise or there is no ﬁnal theory,
if we are merely much less confused than we are now, that may still be good
enough to help us develop methods to ensure AI systems are aligned.
A number of researchers and other staﬀat MIRI have made arguments quite
like the deconfusion case, including Yudkowsky [2016], Bensinger [2018], Demski
[2018], and Soares [2017, 2018]. We give quotes in Appendix A.
3.3
Precise speciﬁcation
The precise speciﬁcation case states that the goal of HRAD research is to pro-
duce a theory of agency/rationality that is so precise that it allows us to build
an agent from the ground up, i.e. to precisely specify how an agent will work.
For this case, deconfusion is still important (or in other words, we expect
that being able to build an agent from the ground up will lead to becoming far
less confused about agency), so this case is a special case of the deconfusion case.
However, for this case we seek not just any kind of deconfusion, but speciﬁcally
deconfusion which is accompanied by a precise theory of rationality.
As with the deconfusion case, once we become less confused about minds
and agency, we will have some hope of aligning advanced AI systems. This is
because being less confused will help to avoid, detect, and ﬁx safety issues; help
to predict or explain safety issues; help to conceptually clarify the AI alignment
8

problem; and help us be satisﬁed that any AI system we build is doing what we
want.
At least one researcher at MIRI, namely Abram Demski, has argued that
precise speciﬁcation is possible (without necessarily claiming that he is working
toward this goal). He has stated in part that he expects that “at some point
we will be able to build agents from the ground up”. [Demski, 2020] Demski
also refers to a quote from another researcher at MIRI, Eliezer Yudkowsky, who
once wrote “Such understanding as I have of rationality, I acquired in the course
of wrestling with the challenge of artiﬁcial general intelligence (an endeavor
which, to actually succeed, would require suﬃcient mastery of rationality to
build a complete working rationalist out of toothpicks and rubber bands).”
[Yudkowsky, 2006] Yudkowsky’s quote is talking about AI research in general
(rather than speciﬁcally AI safety), so it is not the same thing as the precise
speciﬁcation case, but it is still pointing to the same kind of output that the
precise speciﬁcation case is seeking.
Among the critics of HRAD research within AI safety, some of them seem to
be critiquing the precise speciﬁcation case. [Shah, 2020a,b] We will cover these
critiques in Section 4.
3.4
Prediction
The prediction case states that the goal of HRAD research is to produce a
theory of agency/rationality that is so precise that it directly allows us to take
arbitrary agents and predict how they will work, and that having such a theory
is important to understanding AI systems and solving the alignment problem.
Thus, like with the precise speciﬁcation case, the prediction case is a special
case of the deconfusion case.
However unlike the precise speciﬁcation case,
here we require that the precise theory be able to predict arbitrary agents,
which seems like a much more demanding requirement (as explained in Section
2.3, precise speciﬁcation is like existential quantiﬁcation and prediction is like
universal quantiﬁcation). Also, rather than using the precise theory to become
less confused, and then using that insight to help with alignment (as with the
precise speciﬁcation case), with the prediction case we directly make use of the
precise theory to help us align AI systems. This distinction between precise
speciﬁcation and prediction was ﬁrst made by Abram Demski. [Demski, 2020]
See also Appendix B for further clariﬁcation of what prediction means.
As with the deconfusion and precise speciﬁcation cases, once we become less
confused about minds and agency, we will have some hope of aligning advanced
AI systems. This is because being less confused will help to avoid, detect, and
ﬁx safety issues; help to predict or explain safety issues; help to conceptually
clarify the AI alignment problem; and help us be satisﬁed that any AI system
we build is doing what we want.
Although there seem to be no MIRI researchers who have made the pre-
diction case for HRAD research, some critics of HRAD research seem to be
ascribing this view to proponents of HRAD research, e.g. Dewey [2017]; we will
discuss these critiques in Section 4. In addition, at least one AI safety researcher,
9

namely John Wentworth, has explicitly stated that he is working toward this
prediction goal, and believes that the prediction case for HRAD is “both suﬃ-
cient and true” (though not necessary) to defend HRAD research as the highest
priority for AI alignment research. [Wentworth, 2020]
4
Arguments against HRAD
In this section, we go over each of the cases for HRAD research and discuss
the criticisms that have been made for the case. We also brieﬂy cover some
general skepticism of AI alignment, which is relevant to all of the cases for
HRAD research as well as other approaches. We describe each of the arguments
in some detail, but do not try to resolve the debate.
4.1
Skepticism about AI alignment in general
All of the cases for HRAD are unconvincing if the AI alignment “problem” in
general is not a problem: why work on trying to make AI systems safe if we
don’t expect misaligned AI to cause trouble? We might expect working on AI
safety to be useless or harmful for a long list of reasons, but here we consider two
common objections: human-level or superhuman-level AI being impossible, and
alignment being easy enough to happen by default.5 [Yampolskiy, 2021] The
arguments for why the risk of superhuman AI is plausible or even inevitable,
have been discussed in the literature [Bostrom, 2014, Amodei et al., 2016], and
updated discussion of the arguments for the importance of such work has been
discussed more recently by Ngo [2019], and we will not review them here. Some
objections to those arguments exist, and we will mention three.
First, if human-level or greater AI is impossible, the alignment problem will
presumably be much easier (as we only need to align weak systems like existing
AI systems) or non-existent (because AI systems would not be capable of causing
catastrophe, so we would only be dealing with more minor accidents).
Second, if AI is “aligned by default” (i.e. automatically aligned or very easy
to align so that it happens by default), then clearly no separate investment into
safety is necessary.
Finally, one prominent critic of AI existential risk who has argued along the
above lines is the psychologist and linguist Steven Pinker. Pinker’s reasoning is
that if humans are competent enough to be able to design advanced AI systems,
then they would also be competent enough to have tested it; and that any
AI which is intelligent enough to cause catastrophe would also be intelligent
enough to understand nuances in the goals it was instructed to perform. [Pinker,
2018a,b]
5A wider range of objections are encapsulated by these two arguments than one might at
ﬁrst suppose. For instance, an argument like “the AI won’t have a body so it can’t hurt us”
is a claim that not connecting the AI to a robotic body suﬃces as a solution to AI safety, so
it is a special case of AI safety being easy.
10

We will not attempt to recapitulate the general arguments further.
The
remaining objections to HRAD work in Section 4 take the alignment problem
as given, so the rest of the section will be conditional on AI safety mattering.
4.2
Skepticism about HRAD in general, and response to
incidental utility
Now we cover objections to HRAD research more speciﬁcally. We ﬁrst cover
general arguments against HRAD research that don’t ﬁt in under any of the
cases or that apply equally well to all or most of the cases. Since the incidental
utility case is so “weak” (in the sense that it is easier to defend), this also
means that many of these general arguments against HRAD will end up being
a response to the incidental utility case as well.
Thus, we won’t cover the
arguments against incidental utility separately in a later section.
One way to object to HRAD research is to present a diﬀerent technical AI
safety agenda and claim that it is better. (This won’t apply to the incidental
utility case since that case is not trying to compare HRAD to other research
agendas, but does apply to all the other cases.) Indeed, besides HRAD there
already exist several other technical agendas in AI safety. If some combination
of these agendas is easier to pursue and is suﬃcient to ensure alignment of
highly capable AI systems, then HRAD is redundant (modulo portfolio approach
arguments; see the Conclusion for more about the portfolio approach). The
cases for these other agendas diﬀer based on the agenda, and explaining cases
for these other agendas is outside the scope of this paper.
Another argument against HRAD in general (which also applies to the in-
cidental utility case) is that HRAD research may be net harmful if it advances
AI capabilities (leading to shorter AI timelines, meaning less time to work on
alignment), or if it advances capabilities relative to alignment. Wei Dai has
made this argument a few times [Dai, 2015, 2011, 2012c], even giving it as a
reason he personally has stopped doing decision theory research. [Dai, 2012a,b]
4.3
Response to deconfusion
There are several ways that AI safety researchers have responded to the decon-
fusion case.
The ﬁrst is to argue that other research agendas, such as the agendas work-
ing on machine learning safety (ML safety), also involve some deconfusion, and
there might be other kinds of deconfusion work too (such as work in cogni-
tive psychology), so HRAD might not be the best path toward becoming less
confused about concepts like minds, agency, and logical uncertainty. [Ngo, 2020]
Another argument made against deconfusion is that there are too many levels
of indirection. If the goal of HRAD is deconfusion without a precise theory
as ﬁnal product, it is unhelpful because having merely an imprecise theory is
insuﬃcient for helping with alignment. [Shah, 2020a]
Finally, there are other arguments against deconfusion that apply to more
restricted cases where a precise theory is sought; these will be covered in the
11

following two sections.
4.4
Response to precise speciﬁcation
There are two ways that the precise speciﬁcation case has been dismissed. The
ﬁrst is to reject the existence of a precise theory of rationality. For instance,
AI safety researcher Rohin Shah argues that “MIRI’s theories will always be
the relatively-imprecise theories that can’t scale to ‘2+ levels above’.” [Shah,
2020a,b] Paul Christiano, another AI safety researcher, seems to also make this
rejection: in a post by Jessica Taylor summarizing his views, one of the intuitions
listed (intuition 18) is “There are reasons to expect the details of reasoning well
to be ‘messy’.” [Taylor, 2017] Here, “messy” reasoning is in contrast to the kind
of theoretically elegant reasoning that a precise theory of rationality would oﬀer,
and evidently the claim is that because good reasoning is inherently messy, a
precise theory cannot be found.
The second way to reject precise speciﬁcation is to argue that even having
a precise theory of rationality is insuﬃcient to help align AI systems.
This
seems to be Open Philanthropy program oﬃcer Daniel Dewey’s criticism of
HRAD. For instance, he writes “AIXI and Solomonoﬀinduction are particularly
strong examples of work that is very close to HRAD, but don’t seem to have
been applicable to real AI systems” and “It seems plausible that the kinds of
axiomatic descriptions that HRAD work could produce would be too taxing to
be usefully applied to any practical AI system”. [Dewey, 2017] Implicit in this
argument is that if AGI and/or ASI is built before HRAD is successful, the work
will be irrelevant.
4.5
Response to prediction
The arguments against this case are essentially identical to the arguments
against the previous (precise speciﬁcation) case, i.e. one can reject the exis-
tence of a precise theory for understanding the behavior of arbitrary rational
agents, or one can argue that even having such a precise theory is insuﬃcient
to help with alignment.
Since the distinction between the precise speciﬁcation case and the prediction
case is recent, there don’t seem to be arguments in the literature speciﬁcally
against one of precise speciﬁcation or prediction; instead, the existing arguments
are against precise theories in general.
For example, Dewey [2017] could be
interpreted to be arguing against either case.
Conclusion
In this paper, we explained the HRAD agenda for AI alignment. We outlined
four arguments for why HRAD is either worth working on alongside other ap-
proaches, or should be a top priority for technical AI alignment research. We
12

also covered arguments against each of these four cases, as well as arguments
against AI safety and HRAD in general.
Figure 2: Logical Implications for Arguments Presented6
HRAD Agenda is Promising
AND
AI safety
matters
ML safety agenda is
unlikely to succeed
OR
Imprecise theory
of rationality can
help align AGI
(“deconfusion”)
OR
Precise theory of
rationality can help
align AGI (“precise
speciﬁcation”)
Precise theory of
rationality can predict
behavior of arbitrary
agents (“prediction”)
Despite the arguments and disagreements noted, however, there seems to be
agreement across the majority of people involved in these discussions that there
is value in multiple approaches, and a portfolio of approaches to AI safety is
widely agreed to be valuable.7 This remains true even if we are uncertain that
AI poses a risk in the future, unless we are strongly conﬁdent we can rely on
the arguments that AI will be aligned by default. While the disagreements both
within AI safety and between A safety proponents and skeptics are not likely to
6The case for HRAD can be summarized as a Boolean expression the ﬁgure illustrates:
(AI safety matters) and
(machine learning safety agenda not promising) and (
(even an imprecise theory of rationality helps to align AGI) or
((a precise theory of rationality can be found) and
(a precise theory of rationality can be used to help align AGI)) or
(a precise theory to predict behavior of arbitrary agent can be found) )
We don’t mention the incidental utility case here as it is arguing for a diﬀerent conclusion
about the importance of HRAD.
7See Krakovna [2017] for one example and elaboration.
13

be resolved quickly, we hope that clarifying these arguments will lead to better
understanding of the motives and approaches among machine learning and AI
researchers generally, and more productive disagreements within the narrower
ﬁeld of AI safety.
