UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
599 
Model-Based Hierarchical Clustering 
Shivakumar Vaithyanathan and Byron Dom 
IBM Almaden Research Center 
650 Harry Rd. 
San Jose, CA 95120-6099 
Abstract 
We present an approach to model-based hi­
erarchical clustering by formulating an ob­
jective function based on a Bayesian anal­
ysis. This model organizes the data into a 
cluster hierarchy while specifying a complex 
feature-set partitioning that is a key compo­
nent of our model. Features can have either a 
unique distribution in every cluster or a com­
mon distribution over some (or even all) of 
the clusters. The cluster subsets over which 
these features have such a common distribu­
tion correspond to the nodes (clusters) of the 
tree representing the hierarchy. We apply 
this general model to the problem of docu­
ment clustering for which we use a multino­
mial likelihood function and Dirichlet priors. 
Our algorithm consists of a two-stage pro­
cess wherein we first perform a flat clustering 
followed by a modified hierarchical agglom­
erative merging process that includes deter­
mining the features that will have common 
distributions over the merged clusters. The 
regularization induced by using the marginal 
likelihood automatically determines the op­
timal model structure including number of 
clusters, the depth of the tree and the subset 
of features to be modeled as having a com­
mon distribution at each node. We present 
experimental results on both synthetic data 
and a real document collection. 
1 
Introduction 
Recent years have seen significant interest in model­
based clustering, in which it is assumed that the data 
is generated by a mixture of underlying probability 
distributions where each of the components can be in­
terpreted as a cluster. A complete description of such 
model-based clustering can be found in [1]. Extensions 
to these generative models incorporating hierarchical 
agglomerative algorithms have also been studied[6]. 
These algorithms operate by merging clusters such 
that the resulting likelihood is maximized. Efficient 
algorithms for model-based hierarchical clustering of 
special cases of Gaussian generative models are de­
scribed in Fraley [6]. In addition a model-based HAC 
algorithm based on a multinomial mixture model has 
been developed[9]. In the rest of the paper our refer­
ences to HAC will be to the version of HAC used in a 
likelihood setting as described above. In particular we 
will be concentrating on multinomial mixture models. 
Other hierarchical clustering algorithms in the litera­
ture include [8], which describes a scheme to charac­
terize text collections hierarchically based on a deter­
ministic annealing algorithm. In this model, besides 
the latent variables used for clustering the documents 
at the base of the hierarchy, additional latent vari­
ables are used to define intermediate nodes. These 
additional latent variables (called abstraction nodes) 
model the conditional probabilities of the words. Reg­
ularization is achieved by maximizing the likelihood 
on a separate validation data set. As will be seen, our 
model differs considerably from the work described in 
[8]. First, only a part of the feature set is modeled at 
the intermediate nodes in the hierarchy (the choice of 
these features is a part of the model selection). This 
can dramatically reduce the number of adjustable pa­
rameters in the model, especially in the context of 
very high-dimensional data. Second, regularization is 
achieved by integrating over the parameter values in 
a Bayesian fashion. This allows the model to utilize 
the entire data-set in the model building (i.e. no held­
out validation set is required). Further, the two-stage 
algorithm described in this paper uses only the suffi­
cient statistics computed in the first stage during the 
merging process and therefore can be computationally 
less expensive. 
The probabilistic model developed in this paper orga-

600 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
nizes the data elements into a natural hierarchy. The 
nodes at the different levels of the hierarchy are deter­
mined by modeling features that are common across 
the children of a particular node. These common 
features are modeled as having the same distribution 
across the clusters, based on the idea that some fea­
tures, while having such a common distribution across 
some clusters, can be useful in discriminating among 
other clusters. We call these common features "noise" 
features at that node and the discriminatory features 
"useful". Such an analysis leads to a natural hierarchi­
cal model and lends itself nicely to some real problems 
like automatic taxonomy generation from a large col­
lection of documents. A more formal definition of these 
noise and useful features is provided in subsequent sec­
tions. In passing we note that document clustering is 
a rich area with several approaches such as [12, 5] 
The next section describes this hierarchical model and 
also derives the objective function, based on marginal 
likelihood, that describes such a model. In Section 3 
we describe some approximate schemes to solve this 
objective function. Section 4 discusses the experimen­
tal set-up, results and evaluation. Finally Section 5 
describes some future work in this area. 
2 
Models for Unsupervised Learning 
In previous work[14, 13] we addressed the problem of 
fiat (non-hierarchical) partitional (each data element 
belongs to one and only one cluster) clustering. Here 
we first describe that model in general terms and then 
extend it to the case of hierarchical, partitional clus­
tering. 
2.1 
Model for Flat Partitional Clustering 
A key aspect of this previous model is the partition­
ing of the features into two sets (with associated sub­
spaces) - "noise" (N) and "useful" (U), with the fol­
lowing definitions. 
noise features have the same statistical distribution 
across all clusters. Thus they would be useless as 
discriminators between clusters. 
useful features, on the other hand, have a different 
distribution for each cluster and are therefore po­
tentially useful for discrimination. 
Our previous model has only these two feature types, 
precluding the possibility of features having the same 
distribution in some, but not all, of the clusters. Hav­
ing said this, we must add that it is only true in a 
certain sense. In principle two features could have 
identical observed statistics in two clusters, resulting 
in identical parameter estimates. Despite these identi­
cal values, however, the two are treated as distinct and 
thus each have their own Bayesian prior distribution 
and will be "charged" as two distributions for regular­
ization purposes. This issue will be discussed at length 
in the sequel. 
This flat-clustering model (for the probability of the 
data D conditioned on the model structure 0) can be 
written (in general terms) as: 
P(DIO) 
where 
P(DNIO) II Pk(DfiO), 
kE'l! 
(1) 
D is the complete data set in the full feature repre­
sentation. 
n represents the model structure, which is specified 
by: (1) the partition of the complete feature set 
into N and U, (2) the number of clusters and, (3) 
the assignment of the individual data items {di} 
to clusters. 
DN represents D projected onto the noise subspace 
N. 
'11 is the set of clusters, indexed by k. 
Df represents the data elements associated with clus­
ter k, Dk, projected onto the useful subspace U. 
Pk is the specific probability model associated with 
cluster k. 
In [14, 13] we applied the general model form of (1) 
to the problem of document clustering, using multino­
mial distributions and the Bayesian1 marginal likeli­
hood (computed using Dirichlet distributions as pri­
ors) was the resulting objective function P(DIO). In 
this paper we use the same models for document clus­
tering, but we defer that discussion until after we have 
developed the general form (corresponding to ( 1)) for 
the hierarchical model. 
2.2 
Model for Hierarchical Partitional 
Clustering 
We now extend the flat-clustering model to the case of 
a cluster hierarchy (represented by a tree), in which all 
nodes correspond to clusters and all nodes except the 
leaves are further decomposed into other clusters and 
so on recursively until the leaf clusters are reached. 
A simple example of such a cluster hierarchy is di­
agrammed in Figure 1. We note here that a model 
similar to ours has been discussed in [7]. 
1 See [3] for an in-depth treatment of the Bayesian sta­
tistical paradigm. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
601 
Figure 1: Diagram of a simple taxonomy showing 
feature-set partitions 
To do this extension we will need to first extend the 
notation used in (1). The various symbols for sets, 
functions, parameters and so on will be indexed by 
the hierarchy node to which they apply. Thus: 
• U, N # Uk, Nk, which are the useful and noise 
features associated with hierarchy node k. Some 
further definition is required for these. This is dis­
cussed below. The index value k = 0 corresponds 
to the root node which contains all of D ( a.k.a. 
Do). 
• '1! " '1! k, the children of node k. 
Our hierarchical model also extends the noise/useful 
concept to the more general case alluded to above. 
That is, the case where certain features can have a 
common distribution over some proper subset of all the 
clusters. In our model not all cluster subsets are candi­
dates for such common distributions. Such a common 
feature distribution is associated with a node in the 
hierarchy and applies only to that node and all its de­
scendants (i.e. the entire sub-tree beneath that node). 
The associated features are represented by Nk. Note 
that if node j is an ancestor of node k, then Nj 
 Nk. 
Let p( k) be the parent of k; we define: 
(2) 
The complement of Nk is denoted by Uk, the "useful" 
features at node k. 
uk + ilk 
= Np(k)· 
(3) 
To construct the hierarchical model corresponding to 
(1) we substitute the extended notation yielding: 
P(DJO) 
= P(Dg0 JO) II Pk(Df0 JO), 
( 4) 
kE'¥o 
Then we recursively expand the Pk(Dfo JO) terms: 
Pk(DfoJO) = P(Df"JO) II P(Df"JO). 
(5) 
LE'¥lo 
For any non-leaf node j in the hierarchy, we expand 
similarly: 
Pk(Dhp(k) JO) = P(Df" JO) II P(Df" JO), 
(6) 
LE'¥lo 
The completely expanded form for P(DJO) for the en­
tire hierarchy, obtained by recursively applying (6) un­
til leaves are reached, will be quite complicated for 
complex cluster hierarchies and all the more so once 
specific forms are substituted for the Pk 's. 
2.3 
Marginal Likelihood of the Hierarchy 
The final forms we use for P(DJO) and its various com­
ponents (e.g. P(Dip(k<) JO)) will be Bayesian marginal 
likelihoods. That is, they will be based on an under­
lying distribution, for example the multinomial, which 
we use to address the application of document cluster­
ing, and an associated prior distribution (Dirichlet in 
the case of multinomials). 
Most distributions are characterized by a set of real­
valued parameters, which we represent by e. In the 
Bayesian paradigm these are treated as random vari­
ables with their own distribution, referred to as a 
"prior", which we represent by 7r(eJO). A single com­
ponent distribution is specified by values of n and e. 
The marginal likelihood is formed by integrating the 
joint distribution P(D,eJn) = P(DJe,0)7r(eJn) over 
the domain of e: 
P(Din) 
= J P(DJe, n)7r(eJn)de 
Thus, in our model, the various terms in (1) through 
(6) will be expanded this way following the recursive 
hierarchical partitioning of the feature set described 
in Subsection 2.2. This expansion is complete at the 
leaves of the hierarchy. 
2.4 
A Multinomial-Based Model for 
Hierarchical Document Clustering 
To use this general approach to construct a model for 
a hierarchical partition of a set of documents, we start 
by treating a document as a "bag of words" (as is com­
mon practice) thus ignoring any information about the 
sequence of terms other than how many times each 
term appears. These term counts are the features we 
use. This treatment is often referred to in information 
retrieval parlance as the "vector-space" model. We 

602 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
further assume that the probabilities of occurrence of 
all terms are independent of how many times the terms 
themselves or any other terms occur in the same or any 
other document. Despite the obvious incorrectness of 
this assumption, for text, it is also commonly made 
and has produced quite satisfactory results. The im­
plication of these assumptions is that the statistical 
distribution of these terms counts is the multinomial. 
2.4.1 
Model for a Single Cluster 
The probability of observing a single document d com­
posed of words from an M-term lexicon with term 
counts {tj li = 1, 2, . . .  , M} is: 
(7) 
where ({::) is a multinomial coefficient, n = Z:J'!,1 tj 
and (Jj is the probability of a word being the /h term 
of the lexicon. We identify the set { (Jj} with e of Sub­
section 2.3. The probability of a collection D of v 
independent documents {dili = 1, 2, . . .  ,v} from the 
same population (e.g. a single cluster) is described by 
a product of terms like (7): 
p(Die) 
= IT ( ti. ) IT e;;,j 
i=l { >,J} j=l 
(8) 
where the notation of (7) has been augmented in the 
obvious way with the document index i. 
To obtain the marginal likelihood for this collection 
of documents we integrate the product of (8) and the 
prior over the domain of {Oj}, which is the simplex 
in JR.M defined by Vj(Jj E [0, 1] and the normalization 
constraint I:J'!,1 (Jj = 1. As stated above our choice of 
prior is the Dirichlet distribution[3]: 
where o:0 = 2::1 O:i and the {o:i} are referred to as 
hyperparameters. This integration results in the fol­
lowing expression, which is a product of terms that 
are instances of what is known as the Multinomial­
Dirichlet distribution[2]. The marginal likelihood can 
be written as below: 
(10) 
where tj = I:=l ti,j, n = 2::1 tj. In the document 
clustering experiments we describe in Section 4, we 
set the o:'s in the prior of (10) to 1, which results in a 
uniform prior. 
2.4.2 
Model for a Flat Set of Clusters 
Applying these multinomial and Dirichlet models to 
a set of clusters with the (U, N) feature-set partition 
yields the following expression[14]. 
P(Difl) 
where: 
tU and tN are the total useful and noise term counts 
respectively for D. 
Tm is the total count for noise term m in D. 
IDkl is the total number of documents in cluster k. 
Tk,j is the total count of useful term j in cluster k. 
The -y's, (3's, o-'s and o:'s are the hyperparameters 
associated with these various counts. 
A complete derivation of (11) is provided in [14]. In 
writing (11) we have implicitly made the following as­
sumptions: (1) The noise and useful features are con­
ditionally independent, and (2) All parameter sets are 
independent. 
2.4.3 
Model for a Hierarchical Partition of a 
set of Documents 
Equation (11) is the representation for a flat set of 
clusters. Our cluster-hierarchy model (fully expanded 
in the sense of ( 4) through ( 6)) will be significantly 
more complicated, containing a term like (10) for each 
noise distribution- P(Dt/0 lfl) and {P(Dflo lfl)}- and 
one such term for the useful feature distribution for 
each leaf cluster f.: P(Dj*> lfl). As above we assume 
uniform priors for all parameter spaces. 
3 
Optimization Algorithm 
The task for our optimization algorithm is that of find­
ing the model structure 0 ::= arg maxn P(Difl) that 
maximizes equation (4), where the {Pk} are fully re­
cursively expanded and model forms appropriate to 
the application are substituted - e.g. multinomials in 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
603 
our document-clustering application. This is an ex­
tremely difficult task even when we have closed-form 
expressions for the integrals, as we do in the case of 
multinomials. This is due to the enormous number 
of cluster hierarchies possible for v objects. We use 
a reasonably efficient (albeit possibly suboptimal) ap­
proach consisting of the following two phase approach 
(explained in more detail below). 
1. Perform a flat clustering where the number of 
clusters and the noise feature space is determined 
by optimizing equation (11). 
2. Form a hierarchy from these clusters using 
a modified hierarchical agglomerative clustering 
(MHA C) algorithm. 
3.1 
Flat Clustering Algorithm 
We perform flat clustering using the algorithm de­
scribed in detail in [14, 13]. 
We review it briefly 
here. This algorithm finds the maximum-marginal­
likelihood solution (0) of equation (1), using the 
models of Subsection 2.4, the EM algorithm and 
a distributional-clustering heuristic to reduce the 
feature-partition (U, N) search space. The Bayesian 
marginal-likelihood provides a regularization criterion 
that allows the "natural" number of clusters to be de­
termined automatically. 
3.2 
Modified Hierarchical Agglomerative 
Clustering Algorithm 
Associated with the set of clusters obtained in this flat 
clustering scheme is a partition of the feature set into 
two subsets - N and U. This partition is part of the 
optimal model structure 0 for equation (1). The fea­
tures in N are global noise features in the sense of 
having a common distribution over all clusters. Our 
hierarchy model embodies a model structure n that 
also includes the possibility of features that have com­
mon distributions over proper sub-sets of clusters. To 
find the associated hierarchy and associated feature­
set partitions we use a modified version of the hier­
archical agglomerative clustering algorithm, which we 
denote by MHAC. 
The HAC algorithm starts with singleton clusters (i.e., 
each data point is present in its own cluster) and is thus 
a computationally very expensive algorithm. As noted 
in [10], the lower parts of the dendrogram, created 
thus, provide no useful information. To overcome this 
problem Posse [10] , generated an initial set of clus­
ters using a minimum spanning tree which was then 
postprocessed using a series of heuristics. The resul­
tant set of clusters is then used as input to the regular 
HAC algorithm. This is different than our approach 
where we generate the initial set of clusters using the 
EM algorithm and then merge them using the MHAC 
algorithm. 
In MHAC we perform cluster merges that provide an 
increase in the marginal likelihood of the hierarchy 
(MLH) of equation (4). A merge of clusters is per­
formed by first finding a feature sub-set that can be 
modeled as noise features for the pair of clusters un­
der consideration. These noise features are modeled 
using a single set of parameters for these two clusters 
under consideration potentially increasing the MLH. 
The algorithm stops when none of the merges results 
in an increase in the MLH. The complete algorithm 
using both EM and the MHAC algorithm is as shown 
below. 
Repeat the following steps until only one cluster 
left or no increase in MLH 
Identify two clusters, merging of which pro­
vides the largest increase in MLH 
For clusters i and j compute the increase 
in MLH by identifying features that can 
be made noise 
Merge the clusters identified in the above step 
Compute sufficient statistics of the new 
cluster (sum of the sufficient statistics of 
the two clusters) 
In the MHAC algorithm, we need to perform a search 
over the feature space to obtain a local set of noise 
features. To optimally accomplish the search over the 
feature space to obtain a local subset we would have to 
search over all possible 2N'i combinations of the avail­
able features. Since this is computationally intractable 
we resort to a greedy algorithm that evaluates one fea­
ture at a time and stops when the addition of a new 
feature does not provide an increase in marginal likeli­
hood. To accomplish this we beķn by firĸt sorting the 
features in increasing order of l!!.e where e is the max­
imum likelihood estimate of the parameter for feature 
j and t!!.[i is the difference in [i between the clus­
ters being considered2. The algorithm keeps adding 
one feature at a time from this sorted list until the 
marginal likelihood starts decreasing. 
It is worthwhile to note several important aspects 
about the MHAC algorithm. We begin with the initial 
value of MLH obtained as a result of the flat clustering 
algorithm 3. We do not re-compute the complete MLH 
after every merge operation since all we are interested 
is the change in MLH. 
2The rationale behind this heuristic is that features that 
have very similar ML estimates in both the clusters would 
be the best candidates for modeling as a single distribution 
8Note that this is equivalent to a hierarchy with a root 
and as many children as clusters from the fiat cluster 

604 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
To compute this change in MLH we make use of the fol­
lowing theorem (proved in the Appendix), which states 
that this difference is dependent only on the sufficient 
statistics (i.e. cluster-wise term counts) of the two 
clusters and can be locally computed without access­
ing the actual data (document-wise term counts) in the 
clusters. This fact was also exploited in the maximum 
likelihood implementation by (9]. 
Theorem 1 For the models used in this work (multi­
nomials with Dirichlet priors{M-D}}, when merging 
two clusters, the change in LML is determined by only 
the projections of those clusters onto the subspaces 
spanned by the features that are chosen (as part of the 
merging process) to be common (i.e. noise} between 
those clusters. Thus the difference in LML between the 
two independent clusters {1 and 2} and their merged 
cluster {1,2} is given by: 
(12) 
Substituting our M-D models into (12) gives the ex­
pression for the difference in MLH: 
(13) 
where we are using notation similar to that of ( 11) with 
the simple generalization that tr denotes the total 
count of feature-subset-V terms in cluster k. Also the 
cardinality of the set Nc1,2) is represented by INc1,2)l· 
4 
Experiments 
In this section we describe the design of the exper­
iments we use to evaluate our approach, using both 
synthetic and real-world data. 
4.1 
Data Sets 
4.1.1 
Synthetic Data 
We generated two synthetic data sets under the as­
sumptions made in developing the model and objective 
function. To this end we defined two structures (shown 
in Figures 2 and 3) and for each structure we defined 
noise features at each intermediate node along with 
the associated parameters, as described in Section 2. 
Figure 2: "Structure 1": A cluster hierarchy used in 
synthetic-data experiments. 
Figure 3: "Structure 2": A cluster hierarchy used in 
synthetic-data experiments. 
In addition to generating data from a distribution that 
matched our model assumptions, we placed the follow­
ing constraints to further limit the number of experi­
ments. 
• All data points (objects) are associated only with 
the terminal nodes4 i.e. none are associated only 
with internal nodes. 
• The total number of features is 50. 
• The noise features for the intermediate levels 
(the {NĹc} of (2) and (3)) were generated un-
4Note that our objective function is capable of dealing 
with the situation where data exists in intermediate nodes 
- but we have ignored that aspect in this paper. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
605 
der the constraint that the total probability as­
sociated with useful features for each terminal 
node/cluster is at least 0.5. 
Given these probabilities we sampled different num­
bers of data points (given in Tables 1 and 2) from this 
distribution for each of the structures shown in Figures 
2 and 3. 
4.1.2 
Real-World Data - The TREC 
Document Collection 
We have also applied our models and algorithms to a 
real world data set consisting of a collection of doc­
uments. 
An important practical problem today is 
the automatic creation of meaningful taxonomies from 
large collections of documents. The document collec­
tion we used was from the first 50 topics from the 
TREC collection. Each of these 50 topics, which form 
the leaf nodes in the taxonomy, is a member of one of 
9 domains - and these domains form the next higher 
level of the taxonomy. 
4.2 
Description of Experiments 
For all the data sets we used the MHAC algorithm to 
find our best estimate of 0. The first step is the ap­
plication of the EM algorithm5. For data from both 
structures we clustered the data sets into different 
numbers of clusters between 3 and 7 inclusive. For 
each of these numbers of clusters we ran the EM al­
gorithm for 3 different initial seeds (these seeds were 
generated according to the method suggested in [9]). 
The optimum number of clusters is then selected based 
on the clustering that gave the highest marginal like­
lihood. These clusters are then used by the MHAC 
algorithm and the hierarchy is built starting at the 
bottom. 
From these experiments we are interested in evaluating 
the algorithm's ability to do the following 
1. Discover the right number of leaf clusters with the 
right assignments of data to clusters. 
2. Uncover the hierarchical structure that was Im­
posed. 
3. Discover the appropriate noise features at each 
level of the hierarchical structure 
4. Compute the Normalized mutual information 
5Note that we did not generate any noise features at 
the root node (i.e. No = 0) thus precluding the search for 
noise features at this stage. For more information on such 
searches the reader is referred to work described in [14] 
(NMI)6 between the discovered hierarchy and the 
original (expert) hierarchy both at the leaves and 
at the intermediate level. NMI= 1 corresponds to 
perfect agreement between class and cluster labels 
whereas NMI=O corresponds to no correlation. 
Evaluating the taxonomy generated by our approach 
for the real-world data is difficult. The TREC taxon­
omy that we chose has only two levels. The MHAC 
algorithm creates a hierarchy by merging the clusters 
two at a time and creating a dendrogram. To create 
an appropriate second level of 9 clusters, to correspond 
with the TREC taxonomy, we need to cut the dendro­
gram. To compute the following NMI measures we cut 
the MHAC generated dendrogram at the appropriate 
place. 7 
NMI between the discovered hierarchy and the expert 
taxonomy at each of the two levels. 
NMI between the discovered hierarchy and the expert 
taxonomy at each of the two levels using a simple 
version of MHAC where we merge two clusters 
based on the least decrease in marginal likelihood 
4.3 
Experimental Results 
4.3.1 
Results on Synthetic Data 
The results of our experiments on synthetic data are 
shown in Tables 1 and 2. These tables present informa­
tion about the number of features that were modeled 
as noise features at each level, the NMI at the leaves 
and the intermediate nodes and the number of merges 
the MHAC algorithm uncovered. For the EM algo­
rithm we ran the synthetic data for different values of 
clusters ranging from 3 to 7 (for both the data sets) 
and for each number of clusters we ran the algorithm 
from 3 different starting points and chose the run with 
the highest marginal likelihood. For both the synthetic 
structures the EM algorithm found the right number 
of clusters. The NMI at the leaf is the normalized mu­
tual information between the true assignment of data 
to clusters and the assignment of data to clusters as 
found by the EM algorithm. This value is referred to 
as NMI (leaf) in table 1. The NMI at the leaf is com­
puted in the following manner. Consider the data-set 
1. The 4 leaf clusters were used by the MHAC al­
gorithm to perform merges and find the intermediate 
nodes. Noting that MHAC performs merges as long as 
the MHAC increases or no merges can be performed, 
we find in table 1 that with a sample size of 25000 the 
MHAC algorithm was able to perform only a single 
6 A complete description of this approach is provided in 
[14]. 
7Note here that the MHAC algorithm performs merges 

606 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
merge. All other sample sizes resulted in the maximum 
possible 2 merges. After the two merges we compute 
the NMI between the discovered intermediate clusters 
and the original assignment of data to the two inter­
mediate clusters. This is referred to as NMI (inter) in 
table 1. A similar analysis, only with a maximum of 3 
merges, is performed for data-set 2. 
MHAC 
SlZe 
Node 5 
Node 6 
NMI 
NMI 
actual 
actual 
(leaf) 
(inter) 
(found) 
(found) 
25000 
15 (0) 
21 (7) 
0.7950 
NA 
50000 
15 (4) 
21 (7) 
0.795 
1.00 
75000 
15 (3) 
21 (9) 
0.7998 
0.99 
100000 
15 ( 4) 
21 (9) 
0.7967 
1.00 
Table 1: Results for the synthetic data corresponding 
to Figure 2. 
MHAC 
SlZe 
Node 6 
Node 7 
Node 8 
NMI 
NMI 
act. 
act. 
act. 
(leaf) 
(int.) 
(fnd) 
(fnd) 
(fnd) 
25000 
24 (0) 
20 (0) 
15 (0) 
0.94 
0.63 
50000 
24 (13) 
20 (8) 
15 (6) 
0.94 
1.00 
75000 
24 (16) 
20 (9) 
15 (6) 
0.94 
1.00 
100000 
24 (14) 
20 (9) 
15 (6) 
0.94 
1.00 
Table 2: Results for the synthetic data corresponding 
to Figure 3. 
4.3.2 
Results on a Real Document Collection 
For the real-world data set we first performed a fea­
ture extraction step where the features were extracted 
as described in [4, 11]. The feature selection was per­
formed using a distributional clustering algorithm as 
described in [14]. After feature selection we were left 
with a total of 14772 tokens. To enable appropriate 
comparison against the TREC taxonomy we clustered 
the 16801 documents into 50 clusters for 3 different 
starting points (initial partitions) and chose the run 
that gave us the highest marginal likelihood). These 
50 clusters were then merged using two versions of the 
MHAC algorithm, one with feature selection (MHAC­
FS) and one without feature selection (MHAC-noFS). 
The version without feature selection simply merged 
clusters based on the least decrease in marginal likeli­
hood. The results of these experiments (see Table 3) 
are discussed in the following subsection. 
Level 
NMI 
NMI 
MHAC-FS 
MHAC-noFS 
Level 2 
0.513 
0.513 
Level 1 
0.300 
0.280 
Table 3: 
4.4 
Discussion 
As seen from Tables 1 and 2 the EM+MHAC algo­
rithm was able to find the structure more easily in 
the first data set as opposed to the second. Impor­
tantly, EM found the right number of clusters in both 
the structures and for all sets of samples. This can 
be partly explained by the fact that the probability 
associated with useful features at the leaf nodes was 
forced to be greater than 0.5. If the number of use­
ful features at the leaf level is very small, it can be 
difficult for EM to recover the correct number of leaf 
nodes and we may have to resort to other approxima­
tions. We have not pursued this set of experiments 
here however. The NMI is greater at the intermediate 
level indicating that the confusion in assignments of 
data at the leaf nodes, by EM, was possibly caused by 
the noise features at the intermediate level. Another 
important factor is that the NMI at the second level for 
structure 2 is perfect for all sample sizes greater than 
25000. Unlike the case of the first structure, where 
the MHAC-FS algorithm only found a single merge 
(all other merges did not result in an increase in the 
MLT), in the structure 2 for 25000 samples the algo­
rithm performed wrong merges. This is reflected in 
the drastic drop in the value of NMI for this data set 
(shown in Table 2). 
With the real-world data set we note that the MHAC­
FS provides a slight improvement over MHAC-noFS. 
An added advantage of the MHAC-FS algorithm is 
that the model also provides us with a list of com­
mon features at each intermediate node which, for the 
application of taxonomies, can be used as labels to 
describe the intermediate nodes. 
We also conducted an informal user study where users 
were given 20 randomly chosen documents from the 
original collection of 16801 documents. One set of 
users were required to classify these documents into 
the hierarchy generated by EM+MHAC (completely 
automaticly) while another set were asked to classify 
the same documents into the expert hierarchy (the 
TREC hierarchy). Users were evaluated both on the 
number of misclassifications and on the amount of time 
taken to classify the documents. Users on an average 
took 15 minutes more to classify documents into the 
hierarchy generated using EM+MHAC with a 7.5% 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
607 
lower accuracy in classification. The total time taken 
to classify 20 documents into the TREC taxonomy was 
45 minutes. 
5 
Summary and Future Work 
In this paper we have introduced a new model for ar­
ranging objects in a natural hierarchy. The key idea 
that is exploited is the fact that certain features may 
have a common distribution across some clusters while 
having different distribution in others. This model 
has several applications including the important prob­
lem of automatic taxonomy generation. The objective 
function associated with our model is based on a rig­
orous Bayesian analysis and we have derived a closed­
form for the Bayesian marginal likelihood of the hier­
archy under certain assumptions. We then provide a 
novel algorithm to find an approximate solution to this 
objective function. This algorithm works in two stages 
- in the first stage a flat set of partitions is generated 
and then a modified version of the HAC algorithm is 
used to model the intermediate nodes and the features 
that are common across its children. We have then 
applied this model to two synthetic datasets and to 
one real world data-set. 
Despite our encouraging results, several research pos­
sibilities remain open both in the model and the al­
gorithms. Extensions to the hierarchical model to 
include more complicated structures such as directed 
acyclic graphs (DAGs) need to be investigated. Fur­
ther, all of our experiments use a uniform prior for 1r(Ķ) 
- other priors need to be investigated. In the algorithm 
several issues need to be addressed. For example there 
is the need to overcome the MHAC limitation of merg­
ing two clusters - i.e., noise features are modeled across 
multiple children (> 2). We plan to investigate these 
extensions in our future work. 
Acknowledgement: The authors would like to thank 
Yael Ravin and Roy Byrd for free use of Textract and 
all the timely help provided.
