1
On the Real-World Adversarial Robustness of
Real-Time Semantic Segmentation Models for
Autonomous Driving
Giulio Rossolini, Federico Nesti, Gianluca D’Amico, Saasha Nair,
Alessandro Biondi, and Giorgio Buttazzo, Fellow, IEEE
Department of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy

Abstract—The existence of real-world adversarial examples
(commonly in the form of patches) poses a serious threat for
the use of deep learning models in safety-critical computer
vision tasks such as visual perception in autonomous driving.
This paper presents an extensive evaluation of the robustness of
semantic segmentation models when attacked with different types
of adversarial patches, including digital, simulated, and physical
ones. A novel loss function is proposed to improve the capabilities
of attackers in inducing a misclassiﬁcation of pixels. Also, a
novel attack strategy is presented to improve the Expectation
Over Transformation method for placing a patch in the scene.
Finally, a state-of-the-art method for detecting adversarial patch
is ﬁrst extended to cope with semantic segmentation models,
then improved to obtain real-time performance, and eventually
evaluated in real-world scenarios. Experimental results reveal
that, even though the adversarial effect is visible with both digital
and real-world attacks, its impact is often spatially conﬁned to
areas of the image around the patch. This opens to further
questions about the spatial robustness of real-time semantic
segmentation models.
Index Terms—Semantic Segmentation, real-world, adversarial
attacks, adversarial examples, physical-world, autonomous driv-
ing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks reached super-human performance
in many computer vision tasks. However, their results are
typically threatened by a large set of inputs known as ad-
versarial examples [1]. The existence of adversarial examples
is an empirical proof of the poor robustness of deep learning
models. Most of the previous literature on adversarial exam-
ples focused on image classiﬁcation and object detection tasks,
whereas fewer works have been devoted to the assessment of
the adversarial robustness of semantic segmentation models.
Semantic segmentation (SS) plays a key role in the visual
perception pipeline used in autonomous driving. Evaluating
the robustness of SS models is therefore crucial, especially
when they are used in safety-critical systems processing real-
world images. To this end, this paper proposes a general attack
pipeline that can be used to craft adversarial patches against
SS models. The proposed pipeline enables the use of multiple
patches to perform the attack in various locations of the image,
which can be crafted by following both targeted and untargeted
attack schemes. Because of the timing constraints that must
G. Rossolini and F. Nesti contributed equally to the work.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1: Examples of effective patch-based attacks to scenes from (a)
Cityscapes [2], (b) the CARLA Simulator [3], (c) a real-world envi-
ronment. On the left-hand side, the ﬁgure shows three input images
having adversarial patches, which are applied digitally, virtually, and
physically. On the right-hand side, it reports the corresponding SS
predictions obtained with DDRNet, BiSeNet, and ICNet, respectively.
be typically satisﬁed in self-driving applications, the focus is
put on real-time SS models.
Multi-patch attacks are a threat that should seriously be
considered in the design of robust computer vision models
for autonomous driving: urban areas are typically ﬁlled with
advertisement billboards, or road signs, each of which could
become a potential attackable surface. Furthermore, we found
that a double-patch attack is more effective than a single-patch
attack, given that the effects of multiple adversarial patches can
be combined.
Particular attention is devoted to real-world attacks. Real-
world datasets such as Cityscapes and custom real-world
images are hence considered for evaluating the approaches
studied in this paper. Furthermore, to enable a scalable testing
based on scenes with patches placed as similar as possible as
in the real world, we used the CARLA simulator [3] to provide
a realistic, fully-controllable environment, where billboards
arXiv:2201.01850v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2022

2
can be used as attackable surfaces. The geometric information
from CARLA is used to design and perform a novel attack,
named scene-speciﬁc attack, which improves the Expection
Over Transformation (EOT) formulation [4] with an accurate
patch placement strategy.
Figure 1 shows a few examples of successful attacks on
images from the Cityscapes dataset, on CARLA-generated
images, and in the real world.
This work also points out the limitations of the standard
cross-entropy loss function, as adopted by many other ad-
versarial attacks, in attacking regions of the image that are
geometrically far from the patch. Based on this observation,
a novel loss function formulation is proposed and thoroughly
tested against the standard cross-entropy. Experimental results
show that our new formulation is much more effective than
the cross-entropy loss in attacking the tested SS models.
Finally, a state-of-the-art adversarial patch detection method
is extended for real-time SS models and tested in real-world
scenarios.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
• it proposes a general attack pipeline that enables multi-
patch attacks with both targeted and untargeted schemes
against SS models;
• it proposes a novel loss function formulation that im-
proves the capabilities of attackers with respect to the
use of the standard cross-entropy loss;
• it presents an extensive evaluation of patch-based attacks
against a set of real-time SS models using (i) real-world
images from the Cityscapes dataset, (ii) synthetic images
from the CARLA simulator, and (iii) other real-world
images that where taken in our city;
• it extends a state-of-the-art attack detection method to be
used in real-time with SS models;
• it presents an extensive set of experiments aimed at
validating the proposed attack and defense approaches
in real-world scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II introduces the related work, Section III presents the
proposed methods and algorithms, Section IV discusses the
experimental results, and Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The literature related to the topics addressed in this work
is vast. Therefore, it has been categorized into (i) Real-time
SS models, (ii) Adversarial studies on SS, (iii) Real-world
adversarial examples, and (iv) Defenses against adversarial
patches.
a) Real-Time SS Models: Early works on SS architec-
tures, such as the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [5] and
the UNet [6], were extended with methods that exploit spa-
tial and context information of images: dilated convolutions,
pyramid pooling modules, transformers and very deep layers,
etc. [7], [8], [9], [10].
Although such models show high accuracy, they require
powerful hardware platforms and imply large execution times
when processing high-resolution images [11], making them
not suited for real-time vision applications like autonomous
driving. To overcome this issue, several works [11], [12],
[13], [14], [15] have recently proposed lightweight models
that show acceptable accuracy on high-resolution images while
taking into account real-time requirements. Among the vast
number of available models, we restricted our attention to three
popular real-time models: ICNet, DDRNet, and BiSeNet (see
Section IV for the experimental settings and the supplementary
materials for additional details).
The reason for selecting these models is to evaluate the
robustness of several distinct approaches. As it is well-
known in the literature, the majority of real-time semantic
segmentation models leverage two or more parallel paths for
extracting context and spatial information [16], [12]. However,
the internal operations they adopt are different and some of
them can be more prone to adversarial attacks. ICNet is one
of the ﬁrst real-time SS models that merges multiple paths
with Cascade Features Fusion Units [11]. Although nowadays
several models reach faster performance, ICNet is considered
an important milestone that is still taken as a reference in
recent studies (e.g., [17], [18]). BiSeNet and DDRNet are
instead state-of-the-art models, with smaller inference time
with respect to ICNet, both based on splitting the extraction of
context and spatial information between two parallel network
branches. However, the former exploits self-attention modules,
while the latter involves multiple residual points between the
two branches.
b) Adversarial studies on SS: Previous works [19], [20],
[21], [22], [23], [17], [24], [25] proved that both targeted and
untargeted pixel-based perturbations easily fool SS models by
extending well-known adversarial strategies (e.g., [26], [27])
from image classiﬁcation. Consequently, Nakka et al. [28]
presented an interesting study on the robustness of SS models
on autonomous driving datasets by showing that it is possible
to perturb a precise area of pixels to change the SS prediction
corresponding to speciﬁc objects placed in the whole image.
However, although the robustness of these convolutional
architectures appears fragile at a ﬁrst glance, the above works
do not take two important aspects into consideration. First,
they evaluated the adversarial effect against non-real-time
networks only. From our point of view, this leads to unrealistic
assessments, since real-time architectures usually do not rely
on the rich sequence of modules used by the evaluated net-
works, which could be practically prone to adversarial attacks
[28]. Second, and most importantly, they did not consider real-
world adversarial objects, which might represent a real threat
for driving scenarios.
Differently from the strategies adopted by previous works,
we believe that evaluating the robustness of a model for
autonomous driving requires: (i) a precise selection of the
tested models, and (ii) considering real-world adversarial
examples. In fact, digital adversarial perturbations are not
reproducible in the real-world, since they can be used to
attack an autonomous driving perception pipeline only when
the attacker has control on the digital representation of the
image. If this is assumed, more effective system-level attacks
may be used, hence reducing the relevance of adversarial
attacks to SS models. Therefore, this work considers real-

3
world adversarial examples as malicious objects that, once
placed into a physical environment, are capable of externally
injecting their adversarial effect.
c) Real-world Adversarial Examples: Consistently with
the latter observation, multiple works studied real-world ad-
versarial examples for DNNs. Kurakin et al. [29] introduced a
strategy for crafting physical-world adversarial pictures against
image classiﬁcation models, without the ability to manipulate
the digital representation of inputs. That work opened to a
new class of adversarial examples called real-world adversarial
examples (RWAEs). Athalye et al. [4] improved the robustness
of RWAEs by proposing the Expectation Over Transformation
(EOT) algorithm, which accounts for transformations typical
of real-world scenarios (acquisition noise, changes in the point
of view, etc.) during the optimization process. This allows
crafting objects that retain the adversarial property when
capturing images from different points of views.
Consequently, the EOT formulation opened to the develop-
ment of adversarial patches [30], which are robust, localized,
image-agnostic perturbations that fool neural networks when
placed in the input scene.
Although extensive prior work presented physical attacks
for image classiﬁcation [30], [31], [32], object detection [33],
[34], [35], [36], optical ﬂow [37], LiDAR object detection
[38], and depth estimation [39], only a few focused on
autonomous driving tasks. One reason might be that testing
the adversarial robustness in autonomous driving context is
more challenging, as it requires a certain control on the driving
environments. Other works [36], [34] have shown autonomous
driving simulators, and CARLA [3] in particular, to be a viable
solution in alleviating this issue by crafting and evaluating
adversarial situations in virtual 3D environments.
Please note that all the works mentioned above investigated
the effect of adversarial objects on tasks different from SS.
The ﬁrst study addressing the evaluation of the robustness
of real-time SS models against real-world adversarial attacks
was proposed in [40], where both the Cityscapes dataset [2]
and CARLA were used to investigate the effect of adversarial
patches in the real world. However, no experiments were
reported to evaluate the robustness of SS models against
multi-patch scenarios and targeted attacks. Also, no defense
strategies were proposed to mitigate adversarial vulnerability
at runtime. The present paper ﬁlls these gaps by presenting
novel attack objectives, additional experiments in multi-patch
scenarios, and a real-time adversarial detection mechanism.
d) Defense mechanisms against adversarial patches:
The literature presents a wide set of defense mechanisms
against adversarial attacks. While the methods used to detect
generic adversarial examples are the vast majority [1], [41],
other works addressed the problem of detecting patches.
Some works [42], [43], [44], [45] exploit gradient-masking
or adversarial training strategies to increase the robustness of
the model against adversarial patches. Although such mecha-
nisms help reduce the adversarial effect induced by patches,
they do not provide any strategy to detect attacked images that
are still dangerous for the tested models. As such, this class
of defense methods is not considered for comparison.
Methods that detect images attacked with adversarial
patches are based on masking and occlusion strategies [46],
[47], [48], [49], [50] and run-time statistical analysis [51],
[52]. Although both these two approaches achieve high detec-
tion performance, most of them introduce signiﬁcant latency
during the model inference and hence are not suitable for real-
time applications. Furthermore, please note that most of the
works mentioned in this section are designed to operate on
image classiﬁcation and object detection models, and only
some of them can be adapted to SS architectures.
To the best of our knowledge, the only method that can
be directly extended to cope with SS and is capable of
providing real-time performance in detecting images affected
by adversarial patches is HyperNeuron (HN) [51]. HN is based
on detecting the over-activation of internal neurons, which is
a symptom of the presence of an adversarial patch.
In the present paper, we propose an extension of the HN
algorithm that further improves the detection performance in
the SS domain. First, a feature compression step is introduced
to reduce the number of features to be processed at run time.
This is of crucial importance when dealing with SS models,
where the features space may have high dimensions. Second,
the selection of over-activated features is simpliﬁed by using
a threshold computed off-line rather than expensive operations
performed at run-time. Based on these ideas, Section III
presents a novel method that achieves similar performance
to HN, but with signiﬁcantly lower latency, making it more
suitable for real-time applications.
e) This work: This work provides a comprehensive study
of the robustness of real-time SS models applied to au-
tonomous driving scenarios. This is accomplished by deﬁning
and evaluating several real-world adversarial patch attacks,
a novel loss function formulation, and a real-time patch
detection mechanism. Such an extensive evaluation is missing
in the literature, and could represent a promising milestone for
studying and evaluating the robustness of semantic segmenta-
tion models for autonomous driving.
III. PATCH-BASED ATTACK PIPELINE
This section presents the adopted notation, the attack
pipeline used to generate real-time adversarial attack to SS
models, the proposed loss function formulation, and the Fast
Patch Detection Algorithm.
A. Preliminaries
We consider input images with height H, width W, and
C channels, denoted as x ∈[0, 1]H×W ×C. An SS model
discriminating between Nc classes is thus represented by a
function f : x 7→[0, 1](H·W )×Nc, which gives the predicted
class-probability scores associated with each image pixel i.
More speciﬁcally, the predicted probability score for pixel i
corresponding to class j is denoted by f j
i (x) ∈[0, 1].
The predicted SS of each pixel i, denoted by SSi(x), is then
computed by extracting the class with the highest probability
score of the pixel, i.e., SSi(x) = argmaxj∈{1,...,Nc}f j
i (x).
The complete semantic segmentation prediction SS(x) is then
the collection {SSi(x), i = 1, ..., H × W}.

4
The ground truth for the SS of x is deﬁned as y ∈NH×W ,
and assigns the correct class (in {1, ..., Nc}) to each pixel.
An adversarial patch of height ˜H and width ˜W is denoted
by δ ∈[0, 1] ˜
H× ˜
W ×C, where ˜H < H and ˜W < W.
In a multi-patch setting, we consider a set of patches ∆=
{δk : k = 1, ..., Np}, where Np is the number of patches used
for the attack.
B. General Attack Pipeline
All the patch-based attacks considered in this paper are
generated with the pipeline illustrated in Figure 2.
Inspired by the universal (i.e., image-agnostic) attacks [53]
and the EOT-based attacks [4], the objective is to ﬁnd an
optimal patch set ∆∗by optimizing a certain loss function
L for all the patched images in expectation, according to the
distribution of transformations used to apply the patch set ∆
on the image set X.
In particular, we deﬁne:
• A set of appearance-changing transformations Γa:
each element of Γa is a composition of illumination
changes (brightness and contrast) and noise addition
(uniform or Gaussian). This set of transformations is ran-
domly sampled and the selected transformation is directly
applied to the patches ∆. The typical parameters of these
transformations are randomized during the optimization
to make the patches robust to illumination changes and
acquisition noise.
• A patch placement function η that deﬁnes which portion
of the original image x is occupied by the patches. The
function η can have different deﬁnitions depending on the
chosen attack. Section III-D provides details of the patch
placement function.
• A patch application function g(x, ∆, Γa, η) that re-
places the area(s) of the image x speciﬁed by η with
transformed versions of the patches in ∆obtained by a
transformation randomly selected from Γa, hence return-
ing the patched image ˜x.
• A loss function L, which is the objective function to
be optimized. L consists of a weighted sum of multiple
loss sub-functions. The adversarial effect is obtained
through the optimization of the adversarial loss Ladv
(detailed in Section III-E). To ensure that the patch
transfers well to the real world, two additional losses are
considered to account for the physical realizability of the
patch: smoothness loss LS and non-printability score LN.
Please, refer to the supplementary material for details.
The optimization problem can therefore be written as
∆∗= argmin
∆
Ex∈X,ζa∈Γa,η L(f(˜x), y)
(1)
whereas its practical iterative implementation at step t is:
δk,t+1 = clip[0,1]
 
δk,t + ϵ ·
X
x∈X
∇δk,tL(f(˜x), y)
!
,
(2)
where ˜x = g(x, ∆, Γa, η), k = {1, ..., Np}, and ϵ represents
the step size.
The following subsections detail the optimization objectives,
the patch placement functions considered for the EOT-based
and scene-speciﬁc attacks, and the loss functions used.
C. Untargeted and Targeted attacks
The attacker’s objective is encoded in the performed opti-
mization to craft adversarial patches. The attacker might want
to maximize the prediction error of the network, regardless
of the output classes (untargeted attack), or force the network
prediction towards a speciﬁc output (targeted attack).
The objective of an untargeted attack is then to maximize
the loss function Ladv(f(˜x), y), deﬁned later in Section III-E,
where y is the ground-truth label. Hence, in Equation (2),
L(f(˜x), y) = −Ladv(f(˜x), y) (the additional losses for phys-
ical realizability of patches are neglected for simplicity).
Conversely, to perform a targeted attack, the attacker has to
ﬁrst specify the desired prediction of the network. There are
many ways to deﬁne a target for this problem (for instance,
providing the label of a completely different scene), but we
focus to a case that is more interesting for real-world applica-
tions: forcing the network to make a speciﬁc class “disappear”
from its prediction. This can be done by uniformly changing
the pixels belonging to class cattacked into the ones of another
class ctarget, or by applying the nearest neighbor algorithm [28]
to provide a more realistic target label, as illustrated in Figure
3. The nearest neighbor algorithm associates to each pixel
belonging to cattacked the class of the closest pixel of a different
class.
We deﬁne our target label as yt = τ(y, cattacked, ctarget),
where cattacked might indicate either a speciﬁc class, or the
nearest neighbor approach (speciﬁed as a pseudo-class NN).
The targeted attack is then performed by considering, in
Equation (2), L(f(˜x), y) = Ladv(f(˜x), yt).
Both targeted and untargeted attacks are evaluated in Section
IV.
D. EOT-based and Scene-speciﬁc attack
The patch placement within the image might follow two
different approaches: (i) randomizing the patch position, scale
and rotation at each iteration (i.e., using the EOT method), or
(ii) using accurate projective transformations.
While the ﬁrst is a general-purpose method for real-world
adversarial patch generation (hereby, refered to as “EOT-based
attack”), the latter, named scene-speciﬁc attack, exploits the
geometrical information provided by the CARLA simulator
to compute camera extrinsic and intrinsic matrices, and the
pose of the attackable surface (a billboard). This enables the
computation of precise camera-to-billboard 3D rototranslation
(details in the supplementary materials) that is used to warp
the patch according to the actual point of view of the camera
in each image of the dataset.
Formally, the function η in Equation (2) is a composition
of randomized translation, rotation, and scaling for the EOT-
based attack, or a precise projective transformation for the
scene-speciﬁc attack.
This novel method presents two main advantages: it gener-
ates stronger attacks (since the placement is more accurate),

5
Fig. 2: Scheme of the proposed approach for crafting both the EOT-based and the scene-speciﬁc patches.
Fig. 3: Illustration of how the original label (left) can be modiﬁed
to attack the class pedestrian: by changing pedestrian with road
class (middle), or by using the nearest neighbor approach (right).
The boundary of the pedestrian are kept in the original color for
illustrative purposes.
and it does not require randomization of the patch placement
(saving time during optimization).
To apply this method, a digital representation of the tar-
get scene is required to extract geometrical data. Although
CARLA can import cities via OpenStreetMaps1, some amount
of manual effort is required to model 3D meshes and include
objects in the virtual world. Such objects must be carefully
designed to ensure that patches will transfer well to the real
world. The transfer issues between CARLA and the real world
will be investigated in a future work. Section IV provides a
comparison of this method against the EOT-based attack.
E. Proposed loss function
The pixel-wise cross-entropy (CE) loss, denoted by LCE,
has been shown to work well for untargeted digital attacks by
adding a perturbation r to pixels values [24] [19]. In this case,
the loss is Ladv(f(x+r), y) =
1
|N| ·P
i∈N LCE(fi(x+r), yi),
where fi(x + r) ∈[0, 1]Nc is the output of the model for
each pixel (i.e., a probability distribution over the Nc classes),
and N = {1, ..., H × W} is the entire set of pixels in ˜x.
This formulation can be changed to generate stronger attacks
against SS models.
If ˜
Nk = {1, ..., ˜Hk× ˜Wk} ⊆N denotes the pixels belonging
to a patch δk only, the totality of the pixels belonging to the
patches can be deﬁned as ˜
N =
Np
S
k=1
˜
Nk.
1https://www.openstreetmap.org/
Then, the subset of pixels that do not belong to any patch
and are still predicted correctly by the model is denoted by:
Υ = {i ∈N \ ˜
N
|
SSi(˜x) = yi}.
(3)
Using Υ, the previous pixel-wise CE loss computed on N \
˜
N can be split into two terms:
L˜x
M =
X
i∈Υ
LCE(fi(˜x), yi),
L˜x
M =
X
i/∈Υ
LCE(fi(˜x), yi) .
(4)
where L˜x
M describes the cumulative CE for the misclassiﬁed
pixels, while L˜x
M refers to the remaining ones.
Note that both L˜x
M and L˜x
M do not include pixels of the
patch to focus the attack on image areas away from the patch.
Using these separate loss terms, we prevent that the contri-
butions of the correctly classiﬁed pixels gets obscured by the
other term. Therefore, the gradient of the overall adversarial
loss is redeﬁned as follows:
∇δkLadv(f(˜x), y) = γ ·
∇δkL˜x
M
||∇δkL˜x
M||2
+(1−γ)·
∇δkL˜x
M
||∇δkL˜x
M)||2
,
(5)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is a balancing factor that determines whether
the optimization should focus on decreasing the number of
correctly classiﬁed pixels or improving the adversarial strength
for the currently misclassiﬁed pixels, and k = {1, ..., Np}.
In other words, γ balances between the importance of LM
and LM at each iteration t of the optimization problem in
Equation (2) depending on the number of pixels that are not
yet misclassiﬁed.
To provide an automatic tuning of γ at each iteration,
an adaptive value of γ =
|Υ|
|N \ ˜
N | is proposed. The idea is
to initially focus on boosting the number of misclassiﬁed
pixels. As this number increases, the focus of the loss function
gradually shifts toward improving the adversarial strength of
the patch on the misclassiﬁed pixels.
Section IV provides an extensive analysis of the proposed
loss function by comparing multiple values of γ with the
standard pixel-wise CE measured both on N \ ˜
N and N

6
(which is used by [24]), suggesting that our formulation is
indeed more general and effective for this kind of attacks.
F. Fast Patch Detection Algorithm
This section describes the Fast Patch Detection Algorithm
(FPDA) designed to recognize SS predictions affected by
adversarial patches. Inspired by the HN method [51], the
basic idea of the proposed approach relies on identifying
and counting the presence of over-activated internal features,
commonly caused by adversarial attacks to induce erroneous
predictions in deep learning models.
Before introducing the FPDA algorithm, some additional
notation is required. As other deep learning models, SS models
are composed of a sequence of layers (ℓ0, ℓ1, ..., ℓL), from the
input layer to the output layer, respectively.
Given an SS model f evaluated on an input image x,
vℓ
cℓ,iℓ,jℓ(x) represents the activation value of a neuron at layer
ℓ, having position (cℓ, iℓ, jℓ) ∈{1, ..., Cℓ} × {1, ..., Hℓ} ×
{1, ..., Wℓ}, where Cℓ, Hℓand Wℓdenote the number of
channels, height, and width of the features at layer ℓ.
The pseudo-code of FPDA is reported in Algorithm 1.
The function getActivation(f, x, ℓ) (line 1) returns all
the neuron activations at the layer ℓ, denoted by Aℓ
=
{vℓ
cℓ,iℓ,jℓ(x),
∀cℓ, iℓ, jℓ}. Since the number of neurons at
layer ℓmight be large for SS models, making the next algorith-
mic steps computationally expensive and therefore not suited
for real-time applications, a features-compression is performed
at line 2, returning Cℓ= {maxcℓ∈Cℓ|vℓ
cℓ,iℓ,jℓ(x)|,
∀iℓ, jℓ}.
This operation preserves the properties of the over-activated
neurons by using the max operator.
Algorithm 1: Fast Patch Detection Algorithm.
Input: f, x, ℓ, µℓ, σℓ, θν, ϱ
Output: Detection ﬂag
1 Aℓ= getActivation(f, x, ℓ)
2 Cℓ= { maxcℓ∈Cℓ|vℓ
cℓ,iℓ,jℓ(x)| ),
vℓ
cℓ,iℓ,jℓ(x) ∈Aℓ}
3 ˆCℓ= (Cℓ−µℓ)/σℓ
4 Sℓ= ˆCℓ.where( ˆCℓ> θν)
5 score = P Sℓ
6 if score > ϱ then
7
Return True
8 end
9 Return False
Then, Cℓis normalized (line 3) using the mean µℓand
standard deviation σℓ, which are computed ofﬂine from a
dataset of clean images (i.e., no patched inputs). Here, ˆCℓ
denotes the normalized features.
To ﬁlter out all the common activations resulting from clean
inputs, a subset of ˆCℓis selected (line 4), including only those
neurons with an activation larger than a selection-threshold
θν and thus deemed as unsafe. The threshold θν is determined
ofﬂine as the ν-percentile value computed on the normalized
features ˆCℓof the previously deﬁned clean dataset.
Finally, a score value is obtained (line 5) as the sum of
these over-activated features. Such a score is then compared
(line 6) with a decision-threshold ϱ in order to decide whether
the prediction f(x) is safe or not (i.e., whether x is genuine or
includes an adversarial patch). Threshold ϱ is tuned ofﬂine on
a second dataset, composed of both clean and patched images.
The performance of the proposed algorithm depends on ν, ϱ,
and the two datasets used to extract µℓ, σℓ, θν, and ϱ. These
parameters and the related tuning strategies are discussed in
details in Section IV.
It is useful to highlight the main differences between the
proposed method and HN. Although both achieve similar de-
tection performance, our approach has a signiﬁcantly smaller
computation time thanks to the features-compression step
described above. Furthermore, while the features-selection step
of HN is performed at run-time on the layer activations, our
approach exploits an off-line computation of a threshold θν,
computed on a given clean dataset, to reduce the run time
detection latency.
Section IV presents exhaustive experiments aimed at as-
sessing the detectability of patched images and the real-time
performance of the algorithm. A comparison with the original
HN formulation is also provided. Finally, a comprehensive
analysis against defense-aware attacks is shown to illustrate
the strengths and weaknesses of FPDA.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
This section presents the set of experiments carried out to
evaluate the performance of the proposed attack and defense
approaches.
First, the experimental setup is described, including the
networks, the datasets, the hyperparameters, the performance
metrics, and the hardware involved. Then, the results of the
untargeted (single- and double-patch) and targeted attacks are
presented on Cityscapes; the effect of untargeted single- and
double-patch attacks are reported for the CARLA-generated
images; ﬁnally, the detection results of FPDA are showed.
A. Experimental Setup
All the experiments were performed using PyTorch [54] and
a set of 8 NVIDIA-A100 GPUs, while the CARLA simulator
was run on a system powered by an Intel Core i7 with 12GB
RAM and a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU.
The optimizer of choice was Adam [55], with learning rate
empirically set to 0.5. The effect of the adversarial patches
on the SS models was evaluated using the mean Intersection-
over-Union (mIoU) and mean Accuracy (mAcc) [56] on the
subset of the image pixels not belonging to the patch.
The code is available at this link: https://github.com/retis-ai/
SemSegAdvPatch.
a) Datasets: Several datasets were used for the experi-
ments.
The Cityscapes dataset [2] is one of the most common
dataset of driving images for semantic segmentation. It is
composed of 2975 and 500 high resolution images (1024 ×
2048) for training and validation, respectively. This dataset
was used to perform single- and multi-patch attacks, both
with untargeted and targeted formulation. These patches were
optimized on 250 images randomly sampled from the training

7
model
mIoU / mAcc
cityscapes
CARLA (val - scene1 - scene2 -scene3)
ICNet
0.78 / 0.85
0.70 / 0.84 - 0.53 / 0.70 - 0.64 / 0.74 - 0.62 / 0.74
BiSeNet
0.69 / 0.78
0.47 / 0.69 - 0.47 / 0.69 - 0.61 / 0.74 - 0.47 / 0.73
DDRNet
0.78 / 0.85
0.72 / 0.88 - 0.54 / 0.74 - 0.62 / 0.76 - 0.64 / 0.78
TABLE I: mIoU and mAcc of the tested models on Cityscapes (pre-
trained) and our CARLA dataset (ﬁne-tuned).
set, while the entire validation set was used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the resulting universal patches.
Other datasets were created using the CARLA simulator by
modifying the built-in Town01 map to insert some billboards
that served as attackable surfaces. In particular, two different
versions of three scenes (denoted by ‘scene1’, ‘scene2’, and
‘scene3’) were considered: one for single-patch attacks (i.e.,
one billboard close to the road), and one for double-patch
attacks (i.e., two billboards). To mimic the setting used in
Cityscapes, RGB images of size 1024×2048, along with their
corresponding SS tags, were collected by placing a camera on-
board the ego vehicle.
For each CARLA scene (three single-patch and three multi-
patch), a dataset of 150 images was collected (with no patch
attached) for patch optimization. These datasets contain infor-
mation about the position and orientation of both the camera
and the billboard, to allow computing the roto-translations and
projection matrices for different points of view in the scene.
Details can be found in the supplementary material.
Once optimized, the resulting patch is imported in CARLA
and applied on the target billboard. Additional 100 images per
scene were collected and used for the performance evaluation
of the attack. Please note that, since these datasets already
include a patch, the metrics are evaluated on the entire image,
and therefore produce lower mIoU and mAcc values in the
random case with respect to the Cityscapes dataset.
To obtain an acceptable performance of the selected net-
works on such CARLA datasets, it was necessary to ﬁne-
tune them. To this purpose, a training and a validation dataset
(denoted by ‘val’) were also collected. Additional details on
the ﬁne-tuning process are reported in the supplementary
material.
Finally, an additional custom dataset of real-world images
was collected to optimize the real-world patch that was even-
tually printed. This dataset is detailed in Section IV-G.
b) Models: Three real-time SS models suited for au-
tonomous driving applications were used to evaluate the adver-
sarial attacks investigated in this paper, namely DDRNet [12],
BiSeNet [13], and ICNet [11].
The three models were tested in two settings: one with
Cityscapes, using the pre-trained weights provided by the
authors of the models, and one on CARLA, where the models
were reﬁned with our ﬁne-tuning procedure (further details are
reported in the supplementary material). Table I summarizes
the performance of these models.
B. Effects of Untargeted Attacks on Cityscapes
In this subsection, the untargeted attack is evaluated on the
Cityscapes dataset using both single- and double-patch attacks.
Three patch sizes were used to test the effect of small, medium,
and large patches. In particular, the sizes considered for the
single-patch attack are 150 × 300, 200 × 400 and 300 × 600
pixels, while, for the double-patch attacks, we used 106 ×
212, 141 × 282, and 212 × 424 pixels. This setting allowed to
make a fair comparison between the double and single-patch
formulations, since the overall area covered in each type of
attack is roughly the same.
Transformation Γa includes only Gaussian noise with stan-
dard deviation 5% of the image range, whereas the patch place-
ment function η includes random scaling (80%−120% of the
initial patch size) and random translation deﬁned as follows:
if (cx, cy) is the center of the image, the position of the patch
is randomized within the range (cx ± ˜r · ˜W/2 , cy ± ˜r · ˜H/2),
where ˜r ∈[0, 1] is random variable with a uniform distribution.
The translation range was kept limited, rather than considering
the full image space, to ensure better optimization stability
and faster convergence. The same transformation settings were
used for the double-patch attack, with the only difference that
the center (cx, cy) corresponding to each of the two patches
are the center of the left and right halves of the image. The
patches were optimized over 200 epochs.
As shown in Table II, the double-patch formulation
achieves, in general, higher attack performance with respect to
the single patch version. In particular, for DDRNet and ICNet,
the double-patch attack gets a lower mIoU in all the tested
sizes. Different considerations arise for BiSeNet, where the
small and medium sizes achieve better results on the single-
patch attack, suggesting that the individual patch dimension
are more relevant than the number of patches involved.
Figure 4 shows the adversarial effect produced by the
proposed attacks, illustrated for the single- (300 × 600) and
double-patch formulation (212×424), with respect to random
patches.
C. Effects of Targeted Attacks on Cityscapes
While the objective of an untargeted attack is to induce the
maximum error in the network’s prediction regardless of the
classes that are predicted, a targeted attack must follow a much
more constrained optimization process.
In particular, by pushing the network’s prediction towards
the target label yt, we are asking the patch not only to change
the prediction on the pixels originally belonging to the class
cattacked to the class ctarget (which is already more complex than
an untargeted attack), but also to keep all the other pixels
untouched.
This resulted to be a very difﬁcult task, especially when
considering image-agnostic attacks: the patch should general-
ize the targeted attack for an entire set of images that might
differ largely on the distribution of the attacked class (e.g.,
pedestrians have different location and appearances in different
images).
Previous work [28] on targeted localized adversarial pertur-
bations for SS models only deal with image-speciﬁc (i.e., non
image-agnostic) attacks: this means that the perturbations are
tested on the same single image they are optimized on.
We provide a similar analysis to understand whether there
are classes that can be easily attacked with a real-world attack,
further validating our loss function formulation when attacking
particular classes of interest for the real-world case.

8
Model
mIoU - mAcc (rand / EOT)
150 × 300
200 × 400
300 × 600
double - 106 × 212
double - 141 × 282
double - 212 × 424
ICNet
0.76 / 0.62
0.84 / 0.72
0.75 / 0.55
0.83 / 0.66
0.75 / 0.43
0.82 / 0.48
0.74 / 0.49
0.83 / 0.57
0.72 / 0.38
0.81 / 0.47
0.68 / 0.21
0.77 / 0.30
BiSeNet
0.67 / 0.48
0.76 / 0.63
0.67 / 0.32
0.75 / 0.46
0.65 / 0.22
0.74 / 0.34
0.64 / 0.50
0.72 / 0.64
0.63 / 0.45
0.71 / 0.57
0.60 / 0.20
0.68 / 0.30
DDRNet
0.77 / 0.70
0.84 / 0.79
0.77 / 0.63
0.84 / 0.74
0.76 / 0.53
0.83 / 0.60
0.75 / 0.60
0.82 / 0.71
0.73 / 0.55
0.81/ 0.62
0.72 / 0.35
0.79 / 0.43
TABLE II: Adversarial patch results in mIoU and mAcc (calculated out of patches areas) extracted from the validation set of Cityscapes.
Each cell reports the mIoU obtained from a random patch (no optimization) and the EOT optimization. The white rows refer to single patch
attacks, while the grey rows refer to double patches having the same areas of the single conﬁguration.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 4: Images of the Cityscapes validation set and their semantic segmentations obtained from DDRNet with no patch (a) random patch
(300 × 600) (b), adversarial patch (c), double random patches (212 × 424) (d) and double adversarial patches (e).
Attack
ICNet
BiSeNet
DDRNet
road →sidewalk
0.96 / 0.81
0.96 / 0.07
0.97 / 0.00
sidewalk →NN
0.77 / 0.12
0.78 / 0.47
0.84 / 0.08
pedestrian →NN
0.48 / 0.19
0.56 / 0.30
0.65 / 0.26
car →NN
0.86 / 0.45
0.86 / 0.44
0.90 / 0.30
TABLE III: Summary of the effectiveness of some image-speciﬁc
attacks for different networks. Each cell reports the IoU of the
attacked class at the start and at the end of the optimization process.
IoU values are averaged on 100 different attacks.
Table III reports the effects of some image-speciﬁc patch
attacks of interest for the real-world case. We decided to
perform a double-patch attack with a total area of 600×300,
since it is the strongest attack we tested. In fact, we empirically
found that it is very difﬁcult to carry out these targeted attacks
with a single patch. The table shows the IoU of the attacked
class at the beginning and at the end of the optimization
process. IoU values are averaged on 100 different attacks.
Different networks show different strengths and weaknesses:
in particular, DDRNet and BiSeNet are easily attackable with a
road→sidewalk attack, while ICNet is not. Conversely, ICNet
suffers the sidewalk→NN attack, while BiSeNet does not.
This table also gives us an indication of whether it might be
possible to perform universal attacks. In fact, if an average
image-speciﬁc attack is not completely successful (i.e., IoU ≈
0 on the attacked class), there is no hope that the attack will
extend to an entire set of images.
We empirically assessed this argument by performing uni-
versal targeted attacks for the attacks deﬁned above. Table IV
presents the IoU of the attacked class for each attack and each
network. Please note that these values are only indicative of
the performance of the attack: in fact, since we are evaluating
image-agnostic attacks, we are applying the same patch to
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5: Effect of targeted adversarial patches: (a) an image-speciﬁc
road→sidewalk attack on DDRNet, (b) an image-speciﬁc side-
walk→NN attack on ICNet, (c) a universal road→sidewalk attack
against DDRNet. First column is the original image, middle column
is the prediction with random patches, right column is the prediction
with adversarial patches.
each image of the validation set, which surely differ for the
distribution of the pixels belonging to each class.
These experiments lead to the conclusion that each network
shows robustness for different classes. The only universal
targeted attack that shows good performance is road →
sidewalk on DDRNet. The others tested attacks resulted less
effective. Some of the attacks performed during the evaluation
are illustrated in Figure 5.
D. Effects of Untargeted Attacks on CARLA
In this subsection, the scene-speciﬁc attack is evaluated
against the EOT-based attack using single- and double-patch
attacks in CARLA.

9
Attack
ICNet
BiSeNet
DDRNet
road →sidewalk
0.98 / 0.94
0.98 / 0.37
0.98 / 0.12
sidewalk →NN
0.84 / 0.71
0.85 / 0.83
0.90 / 0.52
pedestrian →NN
0.76 / 0.73
0.85 / 0.70
0.89 / 0.88
TABLE IV: Summary of the effectiveness of the selected universal
targeted attacks. Each cell reports the IoU of the attacked class at the
start and at the end of the optimization process.
As explained in Section III-D, additional information on
the relative pose of the camera and the billboards are extracted
from CARLA together with the corresponding images and then
used to apply accurate patch warping transformations during
the optimization process, to account for different points of
view of the same urban scene.
Based on preliminary experiments on the effect of the
number of pixels and on the real-world dimension of the
patch (described in the supplementary material), we decided to
use patches of 150×300 pixels (corresponding to a real-world
dimension of 3.75m×7.5m). For all the following experiments,
Γa includes contrast and brightness changes (both randomized
within ±10% of the image range) and Gaussian noise (with
standard deviation equal to 10% of the image range).
Since this paper investigates the effect of real-world ad-
versarial patches, the mIoU and mAcc scores are evaluated
on an additional dataset for each tested network: this time,
the patch is not digitally projected, but rather is imported in
CARLA and applied to a virtual billboard as a decal object.
Hence, the resulting dataset includes images of the billboards
with an adversarial patch already applied and rendered with
the same level of graphic detail. This allows simulating real-
world adversarial examples in CARLA.
The third column of Table I reports the performance of
the tested networks on the considered scenes (with no patch),
while Table V reports the corresponding adversarial effect in
terms of mIoU and mAcc scores for both single- and double-
patch attacks.
Note that, for each setting reported in Table V, the scene-
speciﬁc attack outperforms the standard EOT formulation. For
single-patch attacks, the performance of the two approaches
is comparable and their adversarial effect is marginal. While
for the Cityscapes dataset we considered double-patch and
single-patch attacks with the same total patch area, in this
case, double-patch attacks use total areas two times larger than
those for single-patch attacks (i.e., we used two patches with
the same size 3.75m×7.5m). This choice was due to the poor
performance of single-patch attacks. In the double-patch case,
the performance of the attack largely improves, as well as the
difference between the performance of the scene-speciﬁc and
the EOT-based attacks.
It is worth observing that the performance of the tested net-
works on CARLA scenes is much worse than the one related to
Cityscapes: this is partly due to the differences in evaluating
the performance of the networks for the Cityscapes dataset
and for the CARLA-generated datasets. For Cityscapes, the
area corresponding to the patch is not considered during
the evaluation: this helps ignore parts of the image that are
wrongly predicted as occluded by the patch. Conversely, for
CARLA-generated images, we decided to take into account
also the patch area, since the patch is already present in the
3D virtual scene from CARLA.
Figure 6 shows the effect of some representative attacks on
CARLA images.
E. Evaluating the proposed loss function formulation and
parameters
The proposed loss function formulation presented in Sec-
tion III-E was evaluated against the standard cross-entropy loss
for several values of γ and for the different attacks considered
in the paper.
Figure 7 shows the evolution of the mIoU score during
the optimization process for the untargeted EOT-based attack
on Cityscapes and the scene-speciﬁc attack on CARLA. In
both cases, for each tested value of γ, our loss formulation
outperforms the standard cross-entropy, both in terms of attack
performance and convergence rate.
Figure 8 shows the optimization process of the image-
speciﬁc targeted attack pedestrian→NN (the values are av-
eraged on 100 different attacks). The plot at the top shows the
IoU of the attacked class against the original labels, while the
one at the bottom shows the IoU of the class road against the
target labels.
As it is shown in the latter plot, the IoU of the class that is
not under attack grows because the target label includes pixels
of the class road (or other classes) that replaced the attacked
class, and the prediction is forced to mimic the target label.
Please note that, in the targeted case, the tested γ values are
the ones that perform best, i.e., those < 0.5. This is opposed to
the untargeted case, since the attack is formulated to minimize
the loss, and not to maximize it.
Also in the targeted case, our loss formulation outperforms
the standard cross-entropy loss.
F. Detecting robust adversarial patches
This section provides a set of experiments aimed at inves-
tigating the detection and timing performance of the FPDA,
described in Section III-F.
1) Tuning the thresholds: The Cityscapes dataset is used
to set the algorithm’s parameters µℓ, σℓ, ν-percentile. In par-
ticular, a set of features Cℓextracted from 1000 images of
the original training set are used to compute µℓand σℓ. Then,
after the normalization, the corresponding features ˆCℓare used
to compute the ν-percentile (where ν is set to 0.999 for
both HN and FPDA) and so θν. A second dataset (composed
of other 1000 clean images from the training set, plus the
corresponding adversarial images) is used to compute the
decision threshold ϱ.
The detection algorithm requires specifying a given layer
ℓ. The choice of the layer has been the subject of many
preliminary experiments. The real-time SS models considered
in this paper fuse information extracted from different parallel
branches. The selected layer ℓis chosen as the ﬁrst layer
that joins all the model’s branches. In fact, it is reasonable
to detect anomalies in the ﬁrst fusion point: it might be
possible to create adversarial patches capable of bypassing

10
Model
mIoU | mAcc (rand / EOT / scene-speciﬁc)
Scene1
Scene2
Scene3
ICNet
0.51 / 0.49 / 0.48
0.60 / 0.56 / 0.54
0.64 / 0.61 / 0.61
0.74 / 0.73 / 0.73
0.63 / 0.59 / 0.59
0.76 / 0.73 / 0.74
0.43 / 0.43 / 0.39
0.56 / 0.55 / 0.50
0.58 / 0.57 / 0.55
0.66 / 0.67 / 0.67
0.64 / 0.61 / 0.54
0.76 / 0.73 / 0.68
BiSeNet
0.44 / 0.36 / 0.31
0.63 / 0.55 / 0.49
0.60 / 0.58 / 0.58
0.76 / 0.74 / 0.74
0.47 / 0.46 / 0.45
0.74 / 0.73 / 0.73
0.39 / 0.37 / 0.23
0.88 / 0.54 / 0.53
0.55 / 0.54 / 0.53
0.75 / 0.72 / 0.70
0.44 / 0.43 / 0.42
0.74 / 0.67 / 0.62
DDRNet
0.51 / 0.46 / 0.46
0.70 / 0.69 / 0.69
0.62 / 0.52 / 0.49
0.76 / 0.71 / 0.66
0.65 / 0.58 / 0.59
0.78 / 0.76 / 0.76
0.48 / 0.48 / 0.39
0.67 / 0.66 / 0.66
0.58 / 0.57 / 0.47
0.75 / 0.74 / 0.69
0.66 / 0.66 / 0.58
0.79 / 0.78 / 0.76
TABLE V: Adversarial patch results on the three scene CARLA datasets. The Table reports the mIoU and mAcc obtained with random,
EOT-based and scene-speciﬁc patches. For each network, the ﬁrst row indicates results for single-patch attacks, whereas the second row
reports results for double-patch attacks.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 6: Semantic segmentations obtained with BiSeNet on CARLA scene-1 with no patch (a), single random patch (b), single scene-speciﬁc
patch (c) , double random patches (d), and double scene-speciﬁc patches (e).
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epochs
0.500
0.525
0.550
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
0.675
mIoU
EOT Cityscapes
LCE on N \ ˜
N
LCE on N
Adaptive γ
γ = 1.0
γ = 0.95
γ = 0.9
γ = 0.8
γ = 0.7
γ = 0.6
γ = 0.5
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epochs
0.48
0.49
0.50
0.51
0.52
0.53
Scene Speciﬁc CARLA
Fig. 7: Comparison of adversarial patch optimizations (200 × 400) on ICNet and Cityscapes using different loss functions: two versions of
the standard pixel-wise cross-entropy and our formulation with multiple values of γ. LCE on N is the original version used by [24], while
LCE on N \ ˜
N is an improved version based on the rationale presented in Section III-E.
the detection mechanism placed within some branches of the
model by exploiting the vulnerabilities of others. Moreover,
we empirically found it to be the point with the best detection
performance.
2) On the validity of the method: Figure 9 reports the
distribution of clean and patched images extracted from the
validation set of Cityscapes as a function of the score com-
puted by the proposed method with the BiSeNet model. The
same kind of patches analyzed in Section IV-B are used
(150 × 300, 200 × 400, 300 × 600).
As shown in the Figure 9, the distribution of the clean
images is much closer to zero than all the other adversarial
distributions. In particular, the larger the adversarial patch (and
consequently more effective), the higher the score computed
by Algorithm 1. The area of score values colored in grey
highlights the set inside which any selected threshold ϱ is
able to detect all the adversarial images without introducing
false negatives (i.e., no clean image is detected as unsafe).
3) Timing analysis: As already mentioned in Section III-F,
the proposed method allows processing large-sized layer acti-
vations without affecting the timing performance of the model.
Figure 10 plots the additional inference time averaged over
8000 iterations: the y-axis reports the relative execution time
fraction introduced by Algorithm 1 with respect to the nominal
inference time required by the model. As it can be noted from
the ﬁgure, the proposed method adds a small latency, whereas
HN presents larger additional execution times: from 20% with
the ICNet model to 50% with BiSeNet.
While it is fair to remark that HN is not conceived for
semantic segmentation models (where the number of features
to take into account is usually larger than common image
classiﬁcation models), the proposed approach solves this
issue by processing a large number of features in negligible
additional time.

11
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
IoU
γ = 0.1/0.2/0.3
γ = 0.4
LCE on N \ ˜N and LCE on N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200
Epochs
0.982
0.984
0.986
0.988
0.990
0.992
0.994
IoU
Fig. 8: Summary of the optimization process for an image-speciﬁc
pedestrian→NN attack. The IoU values at each epoch are averaged
over 100 different attacks. Top image shows the IoU of the class
pedestrian, whereas bottom image shows the IoU of the class road.
For each value of γ tested, our loss formulation outperforms the
standard cross-entropy loss.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Features Activation Score
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
>200
# of inputs
Patched inputs - 300 × 150
Patched inputs - 400 × 200
Patched inputs - 600 × 300
Clear inputs
Fig. 9: Distribution of the clean and patched images as a function
of the features over-activation score computed by the Algorithm 1
with BiSeNet. The grey area highlights the set of ϱ thresholds that
achieve a perfect detection accuracy with the tested images.
BiseNet
DDRNet
ICNet
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.00
Additional Inference Time
HN (GPU version)
FPDA
Fig. 10: Additional inference time computed as the ratio between
the execution time of the detection algorithm and the original model
inference time.
4) Defense-aware attack: Although the adversarial patches
crafted as explained in the previous sections are easily de-
tectable, it is important to assess the goodness of the FPDA
against ad-hoc attacks that exploit the knowledge of the
applied defense. To this purpose, an extension of the attack
formulation proposed in this paper was concevied to craft
untargeted adversarial patches with the intention of also de-
ceiving the FPDA.
Since the FPDA is based on the detection of over-activated
features, we crafted patches that are adversarial (i.e., capable
of misclassifying a large number of pixels predicted in SS
outcomes), while, at the same time, are able to keep the
activated features within the range of the original distribution
(i.e., minimizing the over-activations). This is accomplished by
solving the iterative optimization method discussed in Section
III but using a loss function L(f(˜x), y) that includes both the
adversarial loss function Ladv(f(˜x), y) (in short L˜x
adv) and an
additional activation loss L˜x
ˆ
Cℓ. The former is the loss function
introduced in Section III, while the latter is a new loss function
that returns a cost proportional to the squared over-activation
of the normalized features ˆCℓ(computed by performing the
ﬁrst operations of Algorithm 1 on ˜x), i.e, L˜x
ˆ
Cℓ= || ˆCℓ||2
2.
Therefore, the gradient of L(f(˜x), y) used during the opti-
mization method was redeﬁned as:
∇δkL(f(˜x), y) = β ·
∇δkL˜x
adv
||∇δkL˜x
adv||2
−(1 −β) ·
∇δkL˜x
ˆ
Cℓ
||∇δkL˜x
ˆ
Cℓ)||2
,
(6)
where β is a parameter introduced to balance the importance
of Ladv and L ˆ
Cℓ, and k = {1, ..., Np}. In particular, when
β = 1.0, the resulting patch will be optimized to minimize the
activated features. Conversely, moving β to lower values re-
duces the previous effect and increases the adversarial strength.
The
following
experiments
investigate
the
relation
between
detectability
and
adversarial
effect.
To
this
end,
several
adversarial
patches
(300x600
and
200x400
pixels)
are
crafted
using
several
values
of
β
∈
{0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0}.
In
particular, given an adversarial patch crafted with a certain
β, the detectability is evaluated by performing an ROC
analysis with 1000 images of the Cityscapes train set and
the corresponding attacked ones. Thus, such a subset is used
to study the True Positive Rate and False Positive Rate as a
function of the decision threshold ϱ. On the other side, the
adversarial effect is evaluated using the mIoU computed on
the Cityscapes validation set. Lower values indicate a more
effective adversarial attack.
Figure 11a shows a comparison between the detection
accuracy, speciﬁed through the AUC values (extracted from
each ROC curve) and the adversarial effect obtained with
each tested version of β. Clearly, for low values of β (when
the optimization is mainly focused on keeping the activated
features small), the detectability of all the tested methods is
very poor. However, these patches have a low adversarial effect
since the obtained mIoUs are close to the ones computed with
random patches. Increasing the value of β, the adversarial
effect of the patches increases but, at the same time, also

12
their detectability grows. These results remark that it exists an
intrinsic relation between the adversarial effect and the over-
activation of features, such that highly effective patches are
more prone to be detected by the proposed strategy, as also
observed by previous works [51].
Figure 11b illustrates another important result, showing all
the ROC curves computed for the 300 × 600 patches (their
AUC score is the one shown in Figure 11a). By looking at
these curves, it is to possible to ﬁgure out the True Positive
Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) with respect to a
ﬁxed threshold ϱ. The threshold ϱ is set as the optimal value
(cut-off point) of the ROC analysis performed with β = 0.8,
where the AUC achieves 1.0, meaning that safe and unsafe
samples can be perfectly classiﬁed for that β value.
As highlighted by the plot’s legend, only the most dangerous
patches are detected correctly (those with β ≥0.8). Also, and
most importantly, all the ROC points have an FPR equal to
0.0, meaning that clean images are always classiﬁed as safe.
The above experiments were also performed on the BiSeNet
and DDRNet models, showing similar results (see the supple-
mentary material).
G. Adversarial patches in the real world
This section evaluates the effectiveness of the proposed
attack pipeline and the detection algorithm in the real world.
1) Effect of a real-world patch: To prove the effectiveness
of the attack pipeline proposed in Section III, we used a
custom dataset to craft an adversarial real-world patch using
the EOT-based formulation. The dataset is composed of 1000
images that were collected by mounting an action camera on
the dashboard of a real car, using a setup similar to the one
of the Cityscapes dataset, and then driving the car through the
streets of our city. The patch was optimized for 200 epochs
on the original pre-trained version of ICNet (since it showed
good performance also on our personal real-world dataset).
Figure 12a shows a sequence of frames recorded while moving
in the direction of the adversarial patch, printed as a 1m×2m
poster.
Although the presence of the optimized patch alters a
signiﬁcant area of the predicted SS, while the random patch
does not (see the supplementary material), portions of the
image far from its position are not affected. Furthermore, the
attack performance increases as we move close to the patch.
Additional analyses are provided in the supplementary mate-
rial, while the complete video is available on the published
repository.
It is worth remarking that testing adversarial patches
for autonomous driving in the real world poses a series of
difﬁculties that heavily limited the tests. First, it is not easy to
ﬁnd a urban corner that shows good performance and is not
crowded with moving vehicles (which might be dangerous).
Second, the patch must be printed in the highest resolution
possible on a large rigid surface, which might get expensive.
2) Detectability of a real-world patch: Figure 12b reports
the over-activation score corresponding to each frame shown
in Figure 12a. The red dashed line represents the threshold ϱ,
used to distinguish between safe and unsafe predictions. In or-
der to provide a clear visualization of the spatial effect caused
by the printed adversarial patch (second row in Figure 12a),
we also report the SS obtained from the same images where
the adversarial patch was masked with white pixels (third row
in Figure 12a) and also their corresponding scores (light blue)
in Figure 12b.
Since the mIoU does not properly encode the adver-
sarial effectiveness on individual images, we show a dif-
ferent metric that we call adversarial effect, computed as
1 −
1
|N \ ˜
N |
P
i∈N \ ˜
N (yi == SSi(x)). The adversarial effect
measures the average pixel dissimilarity between the predicted
SS and a ground truth y. Given the absence of proper ground
truth labels y, we use the SS predicted from the white-masked
images. As done in Section IV-B, when evaluating the effect
of patches on Cityscapes, we did not consider those pixels
corresponding to the masked areas (which approximate the
patch placement in the real world).
In this real-world experiment, the tuning of ϱ was performed
on the same 1000 images of the Cityscapes dataset with
an adversarial patch having β = 0.8 and 300 × 600 (the
same patch used to compute the threshold in Figure 11b).
However, it is worth noting that transferring patches in a real-
world environment reduces the activation level of the perturbed
features (as well as their adversarial effect). To this purpose,
the threshold ϱ should be decreased. This can be obtained by
considering an FPR equal to 0.01 as a reasonable compromise
(i.e., 1% of clean images in the calibration set are wrongly
classiﬁed as unsafe). This helps shift the threshold to a lower
value, more likely to be closer to the over-activation score
implied by patches transferred in the real world.
As it can be noted from Figure 12b, frames 22 and 24 are
above the threshold ϱ (red line) meaning that the detection
mechanism works also in a real world scenario. Moreover,
their masked counterparts achieve a lower score, clearly below
threshold ϱ, which stems to reason that high over-activations
are mainly caused by the presence of the printed adversar-
ial patch. Conversely, earlier frames are classiﬁed as safe,
meaning that the internal features do not have a considerable
number of over-activated values. In fact, in these latter frames
the patch has a lower adversarial effect, which is under 0.15,
meaning that less than 15% of out of patch pixels are classiﬁed
differently from the masked versions. Therefore, the corre-
sponding safe classiﬁcations could be acceptable However,
also some notable adversarial effects could overcome the
defense mechanism, as, for instance, for frame 18, which
has several areas affected by the patch effect. Improving the
performance of the detection mechanism, while also providing
deeper analysis on its transferability on real-world critical
situations, is left as future work.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented an extensive study of the real-world
adversarial robustness of real-time semantic segmentation
models for autonomous driving. Two attack objectives (tar-
geted and untargeted) were presented and tested using single-
and double-patch conﬁgurations. The investigations was car-
ried out by testing benchmarks with increasing realisticness,

13
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
 
    AUC in ROC
Adv. Patch 400 × 200 - HN
Adv. Patch 400 × 200 - FPDA
Adv. Patch 600 × 300 - HN
Adv. Patch 600 × 300- FPDA
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
mIOU
Adv. Patch effect - 400 × 200
Adv. Patch effect - 600 × 300 
Random patch effect - 600 × 300 / 400 × 200
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True Positive Rate
= 0.0
= 0.1
= 0.2
= 0.3
= 0.4
= 0.5
= 0.6
= 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0
random
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
=  [0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6]
=  [0.7]
=  [0.8, 0.9, 1.0]
(b)
Fig. 11: Figure (a) reports a comparison between the detectability and adversarial effect of mulitple patches crafted changing the β parameter;
Figure (b) plots the ROC curves corresponding to all the previous tested adversarial patches and highlights their TFPs/FPRs corresponding
to an unique threshold selected with β = 0.8. These results were obtained with the ICNet model.
(a)
Frame 14
Frame 15
Frame 18
Frame 22
Frame 24
500
1000
1500
2000
Over-activation score
selection threshold
score with adversarial patch
score with white patch
0.02
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
Adversarial effect
frame adversarial effect
(b)
Fig. 12: Real-world evaluation on ICNet of the attack method and the defense algorithm. In inset (a), the ﬁrst row contains the original
images with the printed adversarial patch, while the second row contains their obtained semantic segmentations. The third row instead shows
the outcomes obtained by masking the patch areas of the previous inputs with white pixels. Inset (b) shows the over-activation score of
the corresponding frames for the SS predictions in rows 2 and 3, and which of them are detected by using a proper selection threshold.
Also, the adversarial effect is shown for each frame, which is extracted by comparing the original attacked images with the corresponding
white-masked version.

14
using the Cityscapes data set, the CARLA simulator, and
ﬁnally real-world scenarios.
All the proposed formulations leveraged a novel loss func-
tion introduced in the paper to improve the state-of-the-art
methods for optimizing adversarial patches. The proposed loss
function proved to be a more general and efﬁcient alternative
to the classic cross-entropy function for this kind of problems.
Furthermore, a new method called scene-speciﬁc attack was
introduced and tested on the CARLA simulator, showing that
it improves the EOT formulation for a more realistic and
effective patch placement.
Finally, a novel real-time detection algorithm (FPDA) was
presented and evaluated with a large set of experiments,
proving its capability of identifying those SS models that can
be affected by dangerous adversarial patches on the Cityscapes
data set and in a realistic driving scenario. The extensive exper-
imentation performed in this paper showed how real-time SS
models present a certain robustness to real-world adversarial
attacks, especially when considering the spatial distribution
of the error induced by the adversarial patch. Moreover, it
showed that the proposed FPDA detection algorithm is able
to drastically reduce the threat associated with adversarial
patches, as the adversarial effect is strictly related to neurons
over-activations.
As a future work, we aim at deepening several analyses
in this ﬁeld. Since many variables of a realistic driving
environment are not controllable (e.g., weather, geometric
information, external objects), assessing the robustness of a
model directly in the real world appears to be practically infea-
sible. As such, future work aims at studying the transferability
of robust assessments derived from virtual scenarios (e.g.,
CARLA simulator) to real-world environments. Furthermore,
the experiments conducted on the detection mechanisms high-
light a strong relationship between the area attacked from an
adversarial patch and the over-activation of internal features.
This suggests the need for a deeper investigation on the spatial
robustness of SS models.
