This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible
Notice
1
Technology Trends for Massive MIMO towards 6G
Yiming Huo, Senior Member, IEEE, Xingqin Lin, Senior Member, IEEE, Boya Di, Member, IEEE, Hongliang
Zhang, Member, IEEE, Francisco Javier Lorca Hernando, Ahmet Serdar Tan, Shahid Mumtaz, Senior
Member, IEEE, ¨Ozlem Tu˘gfe Demir, Member, IEEE, and Kun Chen-Hu, Member, IEEE
Abstract—At the dawn of the next-generation wireless systems
and networks, massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
has been envisioned as one of the enabling technologies. With the
continued success of being applied in the 5G and beyond, the mas-
sive MIMO technology has demonstrated its advantageousness,
integrability, and extendibility. Moreover, several evolutionary
features and revolutionizing trends for massive MIMO have
gradually emerged in recent years, which are expected to reshape
the future 6G wireless systems and networks. Speciﬁcally, the
functions and performance of future massive MIMO systems will
be enabled and enhanced via combining other innovative tech-
nologies, architectures, and strategies such as intelligent omni-
surfaces (IOSs)/intelligent reﬂecting surfaces (IRSs), artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI), THz communications, cell free architecture.
Also, more diverse vertical applications based on massive MIMO
will emerge and prosper, such as wireless localization and sens-
ing, vehicular communications, non-terrestrial communications,
remote sensing, inter-planetary communications.
Index Terms—6G, Massive MIMO, Intelligent Omni-Surface
(IOS), Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface (IRS), Cell Free, Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, Vehicular Communications, THz Communica-
tions, Non-Terrestrial Communications, Remote Sensing, Inter-
Planetary Communications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) has been
one of the essential technologies in 5G wireless communi-
cations and recently experiencing unprecedented growth in
development and deployment. With fast technological inno-
vations and enormous commercial needs, mass MIMO is
expected to evolve further and reshape future telecommuni-
cations and related areas more broadly and deeply.
Support for massive MIMO is intrinsic in 5G New Radio
(NR) standards [1]. As the ﬁrst release of 5G NR, Release 15
includes the fundamental features to support massive MIMO
in different deployment scenarios, including reciprocity-based
operation for time division duplex (TDD) systems, high-
resolution channel state information (CSI) feedback for multi-
Yiming Huo is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-

Xingqin
Lin
is
with
NVIDIA,
Santa
Clara,
CA
95050,
USA

Boya Di, and Hongliang Zhang are with the School of Electronics,

Francisco Javier Lorca Hernando, and Ahmet Serdar Tan are with Inter-

Shahid Mumtaz is with the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸˜oes, Aveiro, Portugal

¨Ozlem Tu˘gfe Demir is with the Department of Computer Science, KTH

Kun Chen-Hu is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communica-

user MIMO (MU-MIMO), and advanced beam management
for high-frequency band operation with analog beamforming,
among others. After Release 15, 3GPP speciﬁed further en-
hancements of massive MIMO in Release 16. Representa-
tive massive MIMO enhancements in Release 16 are CSI
feedback overhead reduction through spatial and frequency
domain compression, beam management signaling overhead
and latency reduction, and non-coherent joint transmission
from multiple transmit and receive points (TRPs).
3GPP continued massive MIMO evolution in Release 17.
CSI feedback overhead was further reduced by exploiting
angle-delay reciprocity. A uniﬁed transmission conﬁguration
indicator (TCI) framework was introduced to enhance multi-
beam operation. Multi-TRP support was also improved with
the introduction of inter-cell multi-TRP enhancements and
multi-TRP-speciﬁc beam management features. Release 18 is
the start of work on 5G Advanced, and its scope includes
further massive MIMO evolution. Potential directions under
investigation in 3GPP are uplink MIMO enhancements (e.g.,
the use of eight transmission antennas in the uplink and multi-
panel uplink transmission), an extension of the uniﬁed TCI
framework from single TRP to multi-TRP scenarios, a larger
number of orthogonal demodulation reference signal (DMRS)
ports for MU-MIMO, and CSI reporting enhancements for user
equipment (UE) with medium and high velocities.
With fast standardization and promising commercialization,
massive MIMO becomes the critical underlying technology
for 5G and beyond, and is expected to combine other en-
abling technologies and expand to more new verticals. This
article presents and analyzes several technology trends for
massive MIMO evolving on the path to 6G. For example,
one of the critical observations is the recent intense attention
paid to intelligent surfaces [2] which hold great potential to
enable energy/cost-efﬁcient massive MIMO. Furthermore, the
intelligent reﬂecting surface (IRS) enabled massive MIMO
can facilitate joint communications, localization and sensing
functions that extensively enable new use cases and strengthen
the wireless system performances in 6G.
This article’s ﬁrst two sections are dedicated to IRS physical
fundamentals for massive MIMO and IRS-enabled massive
MIMO for localization and sensing, respectively. Immediately
afterward, we provide a survey on ultra-massive MIMO at
THz frequencies since adopting small wavelengths, and wide
bandwidth brings unprecedented challenges in almost every
aspect of the wireless system design. Then, we investigate the
cell-free massive MIMO technology which improves spectral
and energy efﬁciency. Next, the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
for massive MIMO is surveyed and discussed, followed by
a review and discussion of massive MIMO-OFDM for high-
arXiv:2301.01703v2  [cs.IT]  5 Jan 2023

2
Incident signal
Refracted 
signal
MU 1
Z
X
Y
IOS element m
(m)
(m)
Source
MU 2
Reflected 
signal
1(m)
(m)
1
User 1
User 2
Fig. 1. Transmission model of an intelligent surface element.
speed applications. As the last vertical of future massive
MIMO towards 6G, non-terrestrial networks (NTNs) com-
munications has been one direction in standardization since
2017 [3]. Thus, we present a detailed review, discussion, and
analysis of current and futuristic non-terrestrial applications
and architectures on top of massive MIMO before concluding
this article.
II. IOS/IRS PHYSICAL FUNDAMENTALS FOR MASSIVE
MIMO
Driven by the explosive growth in wireless data trafﬁc,
there is pressing need for innovative communication paradigms
supporting high data rates in the future 6G. Massive MIMO
has attracted heated attention exploiting the implicit random-
ness of the wireless environment. However, traditional massive
MIMO relies on the large-scale phase arrays, which induce
high hardware cost and power consumption due to the energy-
consuming phase shifters, especially when the number of
antennas grows. This limits their scalability to support massive
MIMO in practice.
Recently, intelligent metasurface, as a new type of ultra-
thin two-dimensional metamaterial inlaid with sub-wavelength
scatters, has provided a novel technology to enable massive
MIMO in a cost-efﬁcient way. Capable of reﬂecting and/or
refracting the incident signals simultaneously, the surface can
actively shape uncontrollable wireless environments into a
desirable form via ﬂexible phase shift reconﬁguration [4].
Since such reconﬁguration of each element is usually achieved
via one or two PIN diodes controlled by the biased voltage,
it only involves little hardware and power costs compared to
the traditional phase arrays. Thus, the surface can be easily
extended to a large scale, providing a practical method for
realizing massive MIMO.
A general transmission model of one surface element is
shown in Fig.1. After the incident signal arrives at the surface,
part of it is reﬂected and the rest is refracted towards the other
side. By deﬁning the reﬂection-refraction ratio as ϵ, we have
the reﬂected and refracted signals in Fig.1. Three different
types of surfaces can then be classiﬁed below:
• When ϵ = 0, the surface only reﬂects the incident signal,
leading to an intelligent reﬂecting surface. It can be
attached to the wall, serving as a reﬂective relay for
coverage.
• When ϵ →∞, the surface only refracts the incident
signal, serving as an reconﬁgurable refractive surface
(RRS). It can replace the antenna array at the base station
for transmission and reception.
• When 0 < ϵ < ∞, the surface can reﬂect and refract
the incident signal simultaneously, named as intelligent
omni-directional surface (IOS). Compared to IRS, it
can achieve full-dimensional wireless communications
despite users’s locations with respect to the surface.
Both IOS and IRS have been considered as efﬁcient methods
to achieve massive MIMO due to their mature implementation.
Especially, the recently developing IOS technique has also
brought new challenges to the ﬁeld:
• The refracted and reﬂected signals of IOS are coupled
with each other, determined simultaneously by the states
of PIN diodes. Such a coupling effect makes it unknown
whether IOS has the same impact on EM waves when
the signal impinges on different sides of the IOS, i.e.,
whether the channel reciprocity still holds for the IOS-
aided transmissions.
• Besides, to fully exploit the refract-and-reﬂect character-
istic of IOS, it is also necessary to explore the optimal
position and orientation of the IOS given the BS and user
distribution to extend the coverage on both sides of the
IOS.
• In addition, a beamforming scheme should be reconsid-
ered and tailored for the IOS-aided transmission since the
reﬂected and refracted beams towards different users are
dependent with each other [5].
III. LOCALIZATION AND SENSING USING IOS/IRS
ENABLED MASSIVE MIMO
In future 6G, wireless localization and sensing functions
will be built-in for various applications, e.g., navigation, trans-
portation, and healthcare. As a result, it is highly demanding
to provide services with ﬁne-resolution sensing and high
localization accuracy. To realize this vision, massive MIMO
can be a promising solution as the beam width can be reduced
with a larger antenna array, leading to a high spatial reso-
lution. However, the wireless environments in these systems
are becoming complicated, for example, line-of-sight (LoS)
links might be blocked by buildings or objects, degrading
the accuracy of sensing and localization. Fortunately, the
development of the IOS can provide favorable propagation
conditions to improve sensing and localization accuracy [6].
On the one hand, the IOS can provide additional paths toward
targets, extending the coverage. On the other hand, with the
capability of manipulating propagation conditions, the signals
from different objects or targets can be customized so that they
are easier to be distinguished, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Nevertheless, the integration of the IOS in a wireless sens-
ing/localization system is not trivial, which generally brings
the following challenges:
• It will be a challenge to optimize the conﬁgurations
relating to the IOS. Different from the designs of the IOS

3
Tx
Body Sensing
Additional paths
Rx
Smartphone 
positioning
1
2
3
4
5
Configurations
Customized 
signal strength
Fig. 2. Illustration for wireless localization and sensing using IOS enabled
massive MIMO systems.
for the communication purposes, the optimizations here
aim to maximize the sensing/localization performance,
necessitating new designs. For example, the metric could
be deﬁned as the distance between two signal patterns
(each corresponding to a conﬁguration of the IOS) from
different targets/positions so that the receiver could rec-
ognize two targets/positions with less efforts, leading
to a higher accuracy. Moreover, as the number of IOS
elements could be large, it will cause prohibitively high
delay to enumerate all the conﬁgurations. Therefore,
it will be important to select an appropriate number
of conﬁgurations to achieve the trade-off between the
latency and accuracy.
• The coupling of decision function with the optimization
of the IOS makes it hard to ﬁnd the optimal function.
To be speciﬁc, the receiver needs a decision function
to transform the received signals into the information of
targets/positions. As the received signals can be adjusted
by the IOS, the selection of decision function is also
inﬂuenced by the conﬁgurations of the IOS. Therefore,
a joint optimization will be necessary to improve the
performance [6].
• In addition to the above signal processing challenges,
practical implementation is another challenge. Where to
deploy the IOS and how to determine its size should be
carefully addressed, which should also take the topology
of the environment into consideration.
To sum up, massive MIMO technology will be expected to
provide multi-functional services integrating communication,
localization, and sensing. The IOS, which could customize the
propagation environments, is believed to be an add-on enabler
for future massive MIMO to facilitate such an integration.
IV. ULTRA-MASSIVE MIMO AT THZ FREQUENCIES
According to ITU-R (International Telecommunication
Union Radiocommunication Sector), THz frequencies are
those in the range 0.1 THz – 10 THz. The lowest frequency
region between 0.1 THz and 0.3 THz with the highest po-
tential is usually called the sub-THz regime. THz and sub-
THz signals serve as a bridge between radio and optical
frequencies. Their wavelengths in the millimeter and sub-
millimeter region make them excellent candidates to fulﬁll the
6G promise of extremely high-capacity communications, good
situational awareness, and ultra-high resolution environmental
sensing. Such small wavelengths come at the price of high
uncertainty in the channel characteristics, leading to unreliable,
intermittent radio links that suffer from one or several of the
following impairments:
• High path losses, molecular absorption, and blockage.
The high free-space path loss motivated by the small
antenna aperture areas at these frequencies, together with
the molecular absorption, blockage, diffuse scattering,
and extra attenuation caused by rain, snow, or fog, lead to
highly intermittent links. Link reliability must therefore
be improved with the use of ultra-narrow beamforming.
• Low energy efﬁciency. RF output power degrades 20 dB
per decade for a given Power Ampliﬁer (PA) technology.
This compromises the link budget and reinforces the need
of large-scale transceivers with high numbers of antennas.
• Large-scale transceivers. The high beamforming gain
needed to improve link reliability demands large-scale
transceivers with a high number of antennas (usually,
more than 1024). The sharpened, ultra-narrow beams that
they produce pose signiﬁcant challenges to mobility and
beam tracking.
• Phase noise. At sub-THz/THz frequencies, CP-OFDM
performance can be severely degraded by the inter-carrier
interference (ICI) resulting from phase noise. Increasing
the subcarrier spacing can mitigate its impact, but the
correspondingly shorter symbol duration introduces a
penalty in coverage and impairs the ability to mitigate
large delay spreads.
• Channel sparsity. Ultra-narrow beams, together with ray-
like wave propagation, lead to channels that exhibit small
numbers of spatial degrees of freedom and ranks limited
to one LoS component and a few multipath components,
which challenges MIMO operation.
• Spherical
wave
and
near-ﬁeld
effects.
Large-scale
transceivers exhibit signiﬁcant spherical wave and near-
ﬁeld effects from the electrically large antenna structures
that they equip, which introduces complexity to MIMO
precoding strategies.
• Beam squint. The narrowband response of phase shifters
in planar arrays introduces a frequency-dependent beam
misalignment called beam squint. Losses from beam
misalignments can be alleviated by using beam broad-
ening techniques, at the cost of reduced coverage; and
avoided with true time delay (TTD) units, at the cost of
complexity.
There is abundant research on transceiver architectures and
network solutions aimed to ameliorate some of the above is-
sues, especially those motivated by the propagation challenges
at sub-THz/THz. Among the network solutions, the aforemen-
tioned IRS/RIS equipped with very large numbers of small
antenna elements are receiving considerable attention, because
of their ability to tailor the characteristics of the reﬂected
and refracted beams [2], [7]. IRS/RIS at sub-THz/THz exploit

4
ray deﬂections to overcome blocking and path loss; can take
beneﬁt of the near-ﬁeld effects by focusing beams to improve
beamforming and 3D imaging; and can enhance the multipath
richness of the channel to reinforce the spatial multiplexing
capabilities at sub-THz/THz frequencies.
V. CELL-FREE MASSIVE MIMO
Cell-free massive MIMO is envisioned as a promising
technology for beyond 5G systems due to the highly improved
spectral and energy efﬁciency it would provide. As a natural
consequence, not only the academia but also the industry has a
great interest in cell-free massive MIMO, which is also named
“distributed MIMO” or “distributed massive MIMO” by in-
dustrial researchers [8]. It aims to guarantee almost uniformly
great service to every user equipment in the coverage area by
beneﬁting from joint transmission/reception and densely de-
ployed low-cost access points with increased macro diversity.
The physical-layer aspects such as receiver combining design,
transmit precoding design, and power allocation algorithms in
line with a futuristic scalable system design have now been
well-established. For a scalable (in terms of signal processing
complexity and fronthaul signaling load) cell-free massive
MIMO system, an access point can only serve a ﬁnite number
of user equipments. One service-oriented design option is the
user-centric formation of the access points serving each user
equipment according to their needs. As illustrated in Fig. 3,
each user equipment is served by multiple access points with
the preferable channel conditions, which are the ones in the
colored shaded circular regions.
The centralized computational processing unit and the fron-
thaul links between it and access points are two major layers
in a practical cell-free massive MIMO operation envisioned
to be built in 6G communication systems. When edge clouds
are placed between the access points and the center cloud, as
shown in Fig. 3, the midhaul transport and the collaborative
processing unit consisting of the edge and center cloud are
the additional components in a cell-free network. Hence, the
imperfections, limitations, and energy consumption should be
analyzed from an end-to-end (from radio edge to the center
cloud) perspective. Conducting an end-to-end study of a low-
cost and energy-efﬁcient cell-free massive MIMO implemen-
tation is critical to accelerating its practical deployment in 6G.
The network architecture of a cell-free massive MIMO
system with access points connecting to central processing
units via fronthaul links is entirely in line with the wave of
cloudiﬁcation in mobile communications networks. Hence, it
is expected from the very beginning to envision prospective
cell-free networks on top of a cloud radio access network
(C-RAN). Virtualized C-RAN enables centralizing the digital
units of the access points in an edge or central cloud with vir-
tualization and computing resource-sharing capabilities. Going
beyond virtualized C-RAN, the implementation options of
cell-free massive MIMO have been discussed on top of open
radio access networks (O-RAN) aiming for an intelligent,
virtualized, and fully interoperable 6G architecture [9].
Fronthaul/midhaul transport technology is one of the vital
components in the low-cost deployment of cell-free massive
User Equipments
Access Points
Edge Cloud
Center Cloud
Midhaul 
Fronthaul
Fig. 3. The C-RAN architecture with cell-free massive MIMO functionality.
MIMO onto the legacy network. In a large-scale cell-free mas-
sive MIMO system, deploying a dedicated optical ﬁber link
between each access point and the edge or central cloud would
be highly costly and infeasible. The so-called “radio stripes”-
based fronthaul architecture developed by Ericsson reduces the
cabling cost by sequentially integrating the access points into
the shared fronthaul lines. When access points are distributed
in a large area, other low-cost fronthaul transport technologies
such as millimeter wave and terahertz wireless can both
provide huge bandwidth and avoid costly wired ﬁber links.
One other option is combined ﬁber-wireless fronthaul/midhaul
transport to balance a trade-off between link quality and cost.
In the latter method, the short-distance fronthaul links can
be deployed wirelessly between each access point and its
respective edge cloud. On the other hand, the midhaul transport
from the edge to the center can beneﬁt from extra-reliable ﬁber
connections. Mitigating hardware impairments that naturally
appear as a result of low-cost transceivers deployed at the
access points and wireless fronthaul nodes is another critical
aspect of the cell-free massive MIMO deployment on the
legacy network.
In recent years, energy-saving techniques by mobile oper-
ators have gained more importance in reducing the environ-
mental footprint and designing next-generation mobile com-
munication systems in a green and sustainable way. Several
works considered access point switching on/off methods in
this research direction to save energy in a cell-free massive
MIMO system. In addition, the virtualization and sharing of
cloud and fronthaul/midhaul resources are crucial for mini-
mizing total end-to-end energy consumption. At the end of the
day, one should consider the limitations, energy consumption
models, and the energy-saving mechanisms of digital units
and processors in the edge and center cloud for the complete
treatment of energy efﬁciency in a cell-free massive MIMO
system.
VI. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR MASSIVE MIMO
Massive MIMO technology powered by artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) can be applied to Industry 5.0. This technology
can realize highly reliable real-time transmission of industrial

5
6G and other information with reliable human-computer in-
teraction (HCI). Massive MIMO is a core technology of 5G.
Still, the increase in the number of antennas has brought new
challenges, signiﬁcantly the rapid growth in the cost of channel
estimation and feedback. Moreover, the accuracy of channel
estimation and prediction needs to be improved. The applica-
tion of AI technology is expected to solve the above problems.
However, the above up-and-coming technologies have some
issues. On the one hand, from the industry perspective, the
main challenges are:
• It is not easy to effectively control the difference between
the training data set and the actual channel. The lack of
generalization of AI algorithms may lead to a decline in
system performance.
• Wireless AI data and applications have their unique
characteristics. However, how to organically integrate the
classic AI algorithms in image and voice processing with
wireless data is still unclear.
• One of the characteristics of the Massive MIMO com-
munication system applied to Industry 5.0 is that the
communication scenarios are complex and changeable
(indoor, outdoor, etc.), and the business forms are diverse.
Therefore, making the wireless AI solution applicable
to various communication scenarios and business forms
under limited computing power is a signiﬁcant challenge
that the industry needs to overcome.
On the other hand, there are several interesting trends from
the research perspective. First, applying machine learning into
resource allocation has the potential to achieve low complexity
implementation and decrease operational costs for massive
MIMO. This strategy can improve spectral efﬁciency and
energy efﬁciency, increase the number of users, and decrease
energy consumption as well as the time delay. Second, using
machine learning or deep learning for signal detection in mas-
sive MIMO has the potential to mitigate the high complexity
issues seen in the conventional linear and non-linear detection
methods. Third, AI can play a potential role in interference
management for massive MIMO, such as determining and
predicting the number of interference sources and strengths,
and further mitigating the interference. Last but not least,
with Massive MIMO expanding to more verticals, developing
and deploying suitable segmented AI strategies for speciﬁc
applications is critical.
VII. MASSIVE MIMO-OFDM FOR HIGH-SPEED
APPLICATIONS
For massive MIMO, a very large number of antennas is used
to either to reduce the multi-user interference (MUI), when
spatially multiplexing several users, or to compensate the path
loss when higher frequencies than microwave are used, such
as the millimeter-waves (mm-Waves). Usually, a coherent de-
modulation scheme (CDS) is used in order to exploit MIMO-
OFDM (orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing), where
the channel estimation and the pre/post-equalization processes
are complex and time-consuming operations, which require a
considerable pilot overhead and increase the latency of the
system. Moreover, new challenging scenarios are considered
Fig. 4.
Massive MIMO for high-speed applications, a design example of
hybrid demodulation scheme.
in 5G and beyond, such as high mobility scenarios (e.g.,
vehicular communications). The performance of the traditional
CDS is even worse since reference signals cannot effectively
track the fast variations of the channel with an affordable
overhead.
As an alternative solution, non-coherent demodulation
schemes (NCDS) based on differential modulation combined
with massive MIMO-OFDM have been proposed [10]. It is
shown that even in the absence of reference signals, they can
signiﬁcantly outperform the CDS with a reduced complexity in
high-speed scenarios, where no reference signals are required.
In order to successfully implement the NCDS with the MIMO-
OFDM system, some relevant details should be noted as
follows. First, the high number of antennas is a key aspect to
successfully deploy the NCDS. In the uplink, these antennas
are used as spatial combiner capable of reducing the noise
and self-interference produced by the differential modulation.
In the downlink, beamforming is combined with NCDS in
order to increase the coverage and spatially multiplex the
different users. Then, the differential modulation should be
mapped in the two-dimensional time-frequency resource grid
of the OFDM symbol. Different schemes are proposed: time
domain, frequency domain and hybrid domain, where the
latter exhibits the best performance since it can minimize
required signaling to a single pilot symbol for each transmitted
burst. Last, on top of the MIMO-OFDM system, multiple
users can be multiplexed in the constellation domain, which
is an additional dimension to the existing spatial, time and
frequency dimensions. At the transmitter, each user is choosing
its own individual constellation, while at the receiver, the
received joint constellation is a superposition of all individual
constellations of each user. The overall performance in terms
of bit error rate (BER) depends on the design of the received
joint constellation, all chosen individual constellation and the
mapped bits of each symbol. This non-convex optimization
problem is solved using evolutionary computation, which is a
subﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, capable of solving this kind
of mathematical problems.
Finally, in those low or medium-mobility scenarios, a hy-
brid demodulation scheme (HDS) is proposed in [11], which
consists of replacing the traditional reference signals in CDS
by a new differentially encoded data stream that can be non-
coherently detected. The latter can be demodulated without
the knowledge of the channel state information and subse-
quently used for the channel estimation. An design example

6
is illustrated in Fig. 4. Consequently, HDS can exploit both
the beneﬁts of a CDS and NCDS to increase the spectral
efﬁciency. It is outlined that the channel estimation is almost
as good as CDS, while the BER performance and throughput
are improved for different channel conditions with a very small
complexity increase.
VIII. MASSIVE MIMO FOR NON-TERRESTRIAL
COMMUNICATIONS
With 5G standardization phase 1 & 2 ﬁnalized in 3GPP
release 15 & 16, the ﬁrst half of 2022 has witnessed the
third installment of the global 5G standard reaching the system
design completion in 3GPP release 17 deemed as a continued
expansion to 5G new devices and applications. In particular,
3GPP release 17 has introduced the 5G NR support for satellite
communications which is one critical family member of the
non-terrestrial networks (NTN). In fact, the concept of the
NTN encompasses any network involving ﬂying objects in
either the air or space, and the NTN family therein includes
satellite communication networks, high-altitude platform sys-
tems (HAPS) (including airplanes, balloons, and airships), and
air-to-ground networks [3].
As the focus of 3GPP NTN work, the satellite communi-
cation networks enable advanced features such as ubiquitous
connectivity and coverage for remote/rural areas. Moreover,
they include two distinct aspects, one focusing on satellite
backhaul communications for application scenarios such as
customer-premises equipment (CPE) and direct low data rate
services for handhelds, while another one aims at adapting
eMTC (enhanced Machine Type Communication) and NB-
IoT (Narrowband Internet-of-Things) operation to satellite
communications. Recent years have witnessed the unprece-
dented interest and prosperity in the Low Earth orbit (LEO)
satellites enabled broadband access and services [12]. Among
several major commercial players in the arena, namely Starlink
(SpaceX), Kuiper (Amazon), OneWeb, Boeing, and Telestat,
Starlink leads in terms of scale and dimension of satellite
megaconstellation and number of service subscribers.
There are several essential catalysts for accelerating the fast-
booming spaceborne broadband access [12], such as the launch
cost decrease, private capitals, wide deployment of AI and
cloud/edge computing, and high-performance satellite wireless
and networking technologies. From wireless communications
and a particular massive MIMO perspective, an overview of
trends and challenges is presented as follows.
• Deploying and operating expanding satellite constella-
tions below 2,000 km brings potential challenges of han-
dling competition and facilitating coexistence. In order to
minimize the propagation delay, many LEO megaconstel-
lation builders may want to deploy satellites in orbits as
low as possible, while the ITU adapts the “First Come,
First Served” approach in the ITU cooperative system to
access orbit/spectrum resources. With the space in the
LEO becoming more crowded and collision incidents be-
ing reported [12], regulations, strategies, and technologies
are required to cope with increasing space trafﬁc and han-
dle safe deorbiting/disposal of satellites/spacecraft. With
Fig. 5. Illustration of massive MIMO for non-terrestrial networks (NTNs).
the escape velocity being at 7.8 km/s, tracking, localizing
the satellites/spacecraft and further enabling collision-
avoidance can be difﬁcult even with contemporary AI-
assisted sensing and detecting technologies.
• Moreover, spectrum management is another critical as-
pect since the generally limited spectrum resource poses
severe challenges. To facilitate 5G NR for NTN, 3GPP
release 17 has investigated supporting satellites backhaul
communication for CPEs and direct link to handhelds for
low data rate services using sub-7 GHz S-band, while
using frequency higher than 10 GHz will be studied in
3GPP release 18. In the meantime, the ﬁrst-generation
system of Starlink, or Gen1, has mainly used Ku-band
and Ka-band for different types of links and transmission
directions, and its second-generation (Gen2) will add
V-band into it. Either sub-7 GHz S-band or Ku/Ka/V-
band, to some extent, will overlap with some spectrum
of ongoing 5G and future 6G systems, and/or other
systems operating in these bands. Consequently, there
can be interference and co-existence challenges among
different systems and networks. In fact, both SpaceX
and OneWeb have expressed concerns about the possible
interference experienced by the non-geostationary orbit
(NGSO) satellite internet if the terrestrial 5G uses 12
GHz band. Furthermore, supporting more satellite direct
links to the user equipment (UE) using sub-7 GHz S-band
also makes this interference challenge more pronounced.
More studies of spectral resources (e.g. higher frequency
bands) and spectrum management for spaceborne massive
MIMO are expected.
• Furthermore, there are various types of interferences that
could emerge both within the same space network and
among different space networks. For example, the in-
band/out-band interference (or emission) can happen for
user terminals (UTs) and ground stations of the same
megaconstellation. When it comes to the situation of mul-
tiple space networks, satellite transmission of one mega-

7
constellation could cause interference to the reception by
UTs and ground stations belonging to other megaconstel-
lations. Also, the UTs/ground stations transmission could
interfere with the satellite(s) in different constellations.
Conventionally, co-existing space networks need to share
frequency allocations (both uplink and downlink) with
each other to mitigate the interference, which is based on
the coordination. However, more high-performance inter-
ference mitigation technologies are required for coping
with more complicated situations in the future.
• From a big-picture viewpoint, one the one hand, there
is a trend that NGSO megaconstellations will support
or efﬁciently co-work with GEO (geosynchronous Earth
orbit) networks, HAPS, air-to-ground networks, drone
networks, etc. Enabling such a greater NTN eco-system
can bring more challenges of handling co-existence and
competition. On the other hand, the space-enabled net-
works and massive MIMO will be expanded to and
beyond the near-Earth space (NES) which is the space
from the layers of the neutral terrestrial atmosphere (160-
200 km) up to the lunar orbit (around 384,400 km). For
example, NOKIA Bell Labs will deploy the ﬁrst LTE
network on the Moon for NASA’s Artemis program. In
the proposed Solar Communication and Defense Net-
works (SCADN) concept [13], a massive MIMO sensing
and communications framework based on an internet of
a large number of spacecraft/satellites across the entire
solar system enables early detection and mitigation of
potential threats (e.g. asteroid/comet) to Earth and extra-
terrestrial human bases, and also provides infrastructure
facility to wireless connectivity within the solar system
before/when human presence establishes on other celes-
tial bodies. The very large propagation distances (between
Earth and another celestial bodies) and delays pose severe
challenges to the wireless sensing and communications,
which requires more innovative solutions such as artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, machine/deep learning, edge computing,
edge AI, distributed and federated learning, etc.
To sum up, the massive MIMO technology has been
fast extending the communicating and sensing capabilities
of humanity beyond the terrain and even Earth, which will
undoubtedly facilitate a more prosperous space era for all
mankind.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
This article presents a comprehensive overview of promising
technology trends for massive MIMO on the evolving path
to 6G. First, we conduct an overview of massive MIMO’s
recent standardization and research progress. Then we focus
on IRS/IOS technologies that can enable/cost-efﬁcient mas-
sive MIMO communications. Furthermore, we envision the
challenges of using IRS/IOS for facilitating and enhancing
the localization and sensing capabilities in massive MIMO.
Next, we investigate the ultra-massive MIMO at THz frequen-
cies and unveil several impairments that affect the system
design. Then we present and analyze the cell-free massive
MIMO architecture which can boost the spectral and energy
efﬁciency of wireless systems and networks. In addition, the
challenges and trends of AI for massive MIMO are discussed
in depth. Meanwhile, future massive MIMO will enable and
strengthen more critical vertical applications. Therefore, the
massive MIMO-OFDM-enabled high-speed communications
is surveyed and presented with some designed examples.
Finally, we carefully present and analyze the current and
future trends of massive MIMO communications for non-
terrestrial networks, particularly near-Earth space and inter-
planetary applications.
