arXiv:1901.05719v2  [cs.IT]  30 Oct 2019
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
1
AI Coding: Learning to Construct Error Correction
Codes
Lingchen Huang, Member, IEEE, Huazi Zhang, Member, IEEE, Rong Li, Member, IEEE,
Yiqun Ge, Member, IEEE, Jun Wang, Member, IEEE,
Abstract—In
this
paper,
we
investigate
an
artiﬁcial-
intelligence (AI) driven approach to design error correction
codes (ECC). Classic error-correction code design based upon
coding-theoretic principles typically strives to optimize some
performance-related code property such as minimum Hamming
distance, decoding threshold, or subchannel reliability ordering.
In contrast, AI-driven approaches, such as reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) and genetic algorithms, rely primarily on optimization
methods to learn the parameters of an optimal code within a cer-
tain code family. We employ a constructor-evaluator framework,
in which the code constructor can be realized by various AI
algorithms and the code evaluator provides code performance
metric measurements. The code constructor keeps improving
the code construction to maximize code performance that is
evaluated by the code evaluator. As examples, we focus on RL
and genetic algorithms to construct linear block codes and polar
codes. The results show that comparable code performance can
be achieved with respect to the existing codes. It is noteworthy
that our method can provide superior performances to classic
constructions in certain cases (e.g., list decoding for polar codes).
Index Terms—Machine learning, Code construction, Artiﬁcial
intelligence, Linear block codes, Polar codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Error correction codes (ECC) have been widely used
in communication systems for the data transmission over
unreliable or noisy channels. In [1], Shannon provided the
deﬁnition of channel capacity and proved the channel coding
theorem,
“All rates below capacity C are achievable, that
is, for arbitrary small ǫ > 0 and rate R < C, there
exists a coding system with maximum probability of
error
λ ≤ǫ
(1)
for sufﬁciently large code length n. Conversely, if
λ →0, then R ≤C.”
Following Shannon’s work, great effort has been continu-
ously devoted to designing ECC and their decoding algo-
rithms to achieve or approach the channel capacity.
Speciﬁcally, with a code rate smaller than channel capacity,
code construction and decoding algorithms are designed to
L. Huang, H. Zhang, R. Li and J. Wang are with the Hangzhou
Research
Center,
Huawei
Technologies,
Hangzhou,
China.
Y.
Ge
is with the Ottawa Research Center, Huawei Technologies, Ottawa,
Canada.

{huanglingchen,
zhanghuazi,
lirongone.li,
yiqun.ge,

Code 
Performance
Coding 
Theory
Code 
Construction
AI 
Techniques
Fig. 1: Error correction code design logic
improve its code performance. Equivalently, given a target er-
ror rate, we optimize code design to maximize the achievable
code rate, i.e. to approach the channel capacity.
A. Code design based on coding theory
Classical code construction design is built upon coding
theory, in which code performance is analytically derived
in terms of various types of code properties. To tune these
properties is to control the code performance so that code de-
sign problems are translated into code property optimization
problems.
Hamming distance is an important code property for linear
block codes of all lengths. For short codes, it is the domi-
nant factor in performance, when maximum-likelihood (ML)
decoding is feasible. For long codes, it is also important for
performance in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regime.
A linear block code can be deﬁned by a generator matrix G
or the corresponding parity check matrix H over ﬁnite ﬁelds.
Directed by the knowledge of ﬁnite ﬁeld algebra, the distance
proﬁle of linear block codes can be optimized, and in par-
ticular, the minimum distance. Examples include Hamming
codes, Golay codes, Reed-Muller (RM) codes, quadratic
residue (QR) codes, Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH)
codes, Reed-Solomon (RS) codes, etc.
Similar to the Hamming distance proﬁle, free distance,
another code property, is targeted for convolutional codes.
Convolutional codes [2] are characterized by code rate and
the memory order of the encoder. By increasing the memory
order and selecting proper polynomials, larger free distance
can be obtained at the expense of encoding and decoding

2
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
complexity. Turbo codes [3], by concatenating convolutional
codes in parallel, are the ﬁrst capacity-approaching codes
under iterative decoding.
In addition to the distance proﬁle, code properties of
decoding threshold and girth are adopted for the design
of low density parity check (LDPC) codes. First investi-
gated in 1962 [4], they are deﬁned by low density parity
check matrices, or equivalently, Tanner graphs. Three decades
later, LDPC codes were re-discovered [5] and shown to
approach the capacity with belief propagation (BP) decoding
on sparse Tanner graphs. Code structures, such as cyclic
and quasi-cyclic (QC) [6], not only provide minimum dis-
tance guarantee but also simplify hardware implementation.
The most relevant code property, however, is the decoding
threshold [7]. Assuming BP decoding on a cycle-free Tanner
graph, it can accurately predict the asymptotic performance.
The decoding threshold can be obtained by the extrinsic
information transfer (EXIT) chart [8] technique, as well as
density evolution (DE) [7], [9] and its Gaussian approxima-
tion (GA) [10], as a function of the check node and variable
node degree distributions of the parity check matrix. Thus,
the degree distributions of a code ensemble can be optimized.
In addition, the girth, deﬁned as the minimum cycle length
in the Tanner graph, is maximized to maximally satisfy the
cycle-free assumption.
The code property of synthesized subchannel reliabilities
can be targeted for the design of polar codes [11], the ﬁrst
class of capacity-achieving codes with successive cancel-
lation (SC) decoding. For polar codes, physical channels
are synthesized to N polarized subchannels, with the K
most reliable ones selected to carry information bits. As N
increases, subchannels polarize to either purely noiseless or
completely noisy, where the fraction of noiseless subchannels
approaches the channel capacity [11]. For binary erasure
channel (BEC), subchannel reliabilities can be efﬁciently
calculated by Bhattacharyya parameters. For general binary-
input memoryless channels, DE was applied to calculate
subchannel reliabilities [12], [13], and then improved in [14]
and analyzed in [15] in terms of complexity. For AWGN
channels, GA was proposed [16] to further reduce complexity
with negligible performance loss. Recently, a polarization
weight (PW) method [17], [18] was proposed to generate
a universal reliability order for all code rates, lengths and
channel conditions. Such a channel-independent design prin-
ciple is adopted by 5G in the form of a length-1024 reliability
sequence [19].
As concluded in Fig. 1 (left branch), the classical code
design philosophy relies on coding theory (e.g., ﬁnite ﬁeld
theory, information theory) as a bridge between code perfor-
mance and code construction.
B. Code design based on AI
Recently, AI techniques have been widely applied to
many industry and research domains, thanks to advances
in algorithms, an abundance of data, and improvements in
computational capabilities.
In communication systems, AI-driven transceivers have
been studied. By treating an end-to-end communication sys-
tem as an autoencoder, people proposed to optimize an entire
transceiver jointly given a channel model without any expert
knowledge about channel coding and modulation [20]. In
addition, for AWGN channel with feedback, recurrent neural
network (RNN) was used to jointly optimize the encoding
and decoding [21]. By regarding a channel decoder as a
classiﬁer, it was reported that a one-shot NN-based decoding
could approach maximum a posteriori (MAP) performance
for short codes [22]. It was also observed that for structured
codes, the NN-based decoder can be generalized to some
untrained codewords, even though no knowledge about the
code structure is explicitly taught. However, this NN-based
decoder is a classiﬁer in nature, and its complexity is pro-
portional to the number of codewords to be classiﬁed. As
the code space expands exponentially with the code length,
the NN-based decoder may not satisfy the stringent latency
constraint in physical layer.
In contrast, our work focuses on using AI techniques to
help design codes rather than to directly encode and decode
signals. Code design can be done ofﬂine where the latency
constraint is signiﬁcantly relaxed. Moreover, we can continue
to use legacy encoding and decoding algorithms as they admit
efﬁcient and ﬂexible hardware or software implementations.
As shown in Fig. 1 (right branch), we explore the alterna-
tive AI techniques for code construction, in addition to the
expert knowledge from coding theory. There are numerous
AI algorithms out there, which could not be all covered in
this paper. We will focus on reinforcement learning (RL) and
genetic algorithm as representatives. Nevertheless, we work
within a general framework that may accommodate various
AI algorithms.
Speciﬁcally, we hope to answer the following two ques-
tions:
• Q1: Can AI algorithms independently learn a code
construction (or part of it) within a given general en-
coding/decoding framework?
• Q2: Can the learned codes achieve comparable or bet-
ter error correction performance with respect to those
derived in classic coding theory?
For the ﬁrst question, we try to utilize AI techniques
to learn linear code constructions. By code construction
we mean the degree of freedom we have in determining
a set of codes beyond the minimum constraints required
to specify a general scope of codes. The input to AI is
restricted to the code performance metric measured by an
evaluator (viewed as a black box) that implements off-the-
shelf decoders under a speciﬁc channel condition. Therefore,
AI knows neither the internal mechanism of the decoders
nor the code properties so that code construction beyond the
encoding/decoding constraints is learned without the expert
knowledge in coding theory.
For the second question, we demonstrate that AI-driven
techniques provide solutions that perform better when expert
knowledge fails to guarantee optimal code performance.
These cases include (i) a target decoder is impractical, or (ii)

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
3
the relation between code performance and code properties is
not theoretically analyzable (incomplete or inaccurate). For
example, although the minimum distance of short linear block
codes can be optimized, the resulting optimality of code
performance is only guaranteed under maximum likelihood
(ML) decoding at high SNRs. In reality, ML decoders may
be impractical to implement, and a high SNR may not
always be available. As for polar codes, existing theoretical
analysis mainly focuses on SC decoders. To the best of our
knowledge, the widely deployed successive cancellation list
(SCL) decoders still lack a rigorous performance analysis,
even though there have been some heuristic constructions
optimized for SCL [23], [24], and its variants CRC-aided
SCL (CA-SCL) [19] and parity-check SCL [25]–[27]. In
the absence of theoretical guarantee, the open question is
whether the current code constructions are optimal (for a
speciﬁc decoder)? We will address these cases and show that
AI techniques can deliver comparable or better performances.
It is worth noting that a recent approach [28] also focuses
on using AI techniques for code design rather than decoding.
In their work, the off-the-shelf polar decoder is embedded
in the code optimization loop. Only the code construction
was optimized while the encoding and decoding methods
remain the same, which allows efﬁcient implementation of
legacy encoding and decoding algorithms. Speciﬁcally, the
proposed code optimization method is based on the genetic
algorithm, where code constructions evolve via evolutionary
transformations based on their error performance.
In this paper, we employ a general constructor-evaluator
framework to design error correction codes. AI techniques are
investigated under this framework. The performance of con-
structed codes are compared with the state-of-the-art classical
ones, and the results are discussed. The structure of this paper
is as follows. Section II introduces the constructor-evaluator
framework. By instance, the constructor is implemented by
RL and genetic algorithms. The evaluator implements the
decoder and channel conditions of interest and provides per-
formance metric measurements for given code constructions.
Section III shows examples of designing linear block codes
and polar codes under the proposed framework. Section IV
concludes the paper and discusses some future works.
II. CODE CONSTRUCTION BASED ON LEARNING
A. The constructor-evaluator framework
We advocate a code design framework, as shown in Fig. 2.
The framework consists of two parts, i.e. a code constructor
and a code evaluator. The code constructor iteratively learns
a series of valid code constructions based on the perfor-
mance metric feedback from the code evaluator. The code
evaluator provides an accurate performance metric calcula-
tion/estimation for a code construction under the decoder
and channel condition of interest. The code construction
keeps improving through the iterative interactions between
the constructor and evaluator until the performance metric
converges.
The constructor-evaluator framework in Fig. 2 is quite
general. The code constructor knows neither the internal
Evaluator
Constructor
code 
construction
performance 
measure
Fig. 2: Constructor-evaluator framework
mechanism nor the channel condition adopted by the code
evaluator but requests the code evaluator to feed back an
accurate performance metric of its current code construc-
tion under the evaluator-deﬁned environment, by which the
exploration of possible code construction opens for a wide
range of decoding algorithms and channel conditions. Similar
ideas have been proposed in existing works. For example,
the differential evolution algorithm was used to optimize
the degree distribution of LDPC codes under both erasure
channel [29] and AWGN channel [7]. The algorithm also
treats the optimization problem as a black box, and merely
relies on the cost function (e.g., decoding threshold) as
feedback.
In most cases, the code constructor is trained ofﬂine, be-
cause both coded bits and decoding results can be efﬁciently
generated and training computation is not an issue in an of-
ﬂine simulator. Once constructed e.g., the performance metric
converges, the resultant codes can be directly implemented in
a low-complexity practical system with legacy encoding and
decoding algorithms, which is applicable from the industry’s
point of view.
Note that the constructed codes are closely related to the
code evaluator because of performance metric. Different code
evaluators, e.g. with different decoding parameters, channel
condition assumptions, or decoding algorithms, may result
in different code constructions in the end. During training
procedure, we choose some realistic decoding algorithms
and channel condition. In theory, an online training is a
natural extension by collecting performance metric samples
from a real-world decoder and continuing to improve code
construction.
B. Constructor
The code constructor generates code constructions based
on performance metrics feedback from the code evaluator.
To ﬁt the code design problem into the AI algorithms, a
code construction is deﬁned under the constraints of code
representations. For example,
• Binary matrix: the generator matrix for any linear block
codes, or the parity-check matrix for LDPC codes. This
is the most general form of deﬁnition.
• Binary vector: a more succinct form of deﬁnition for
some codes, including the generator polynomials for

4
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
convolutional codes, or whether a synthesized subchan-
nel is frozen for polar codes.
• Nested representation: deﬁning a set of codes in a
set of nested matrices or vectors. This bears practical
importance due to low implementation complexity and
rate compatibility. Examples include LTE-RM codes and
5G Polar codes.
According to the code representations and how the con-
struction improvement procedure is modeled, there are sev-
eral approaches to implement the constructor:
1) Reinforcement learning approach: RL approach can be
used, because we model construction procedure as a Markov
decision process (MDP). An MDP is deﬁned by a 4-tuple (S,
A, Pa, R):
• S is the state space,
• A is the action space,
• Pa(s, s′) = Pr(st+1 = s′|st = s, at = a) is the
probability that action a in state s at time t will lead to
state s′ at time t + 1,
• R is the immediate reward feedback by code evaluator
after transitioning from state s to state s′, triggered by
action a.
Code construction can be viewed as a decision process
in general. For the binary matrix and binary vector code
representations, the decisions correspond to which positions
are 0 or 1. For the nested code representation, the decisions
correspond to how to evolve from a set of subcodes to
their supercodes (or vice versa). In our setting, a state s
corresponds to a (valid) code construction, and an action
a that leads to the state transition (s →s′) corresponds
to a modiﬁcation to the previous construction s. The state
transition (s →s′) herein is deterministic by the action a and
the previous state s. The reward function is the performance
metric measurement with respect to the decoder and channel
condition of interest. In the end, a desired code construction
can be obtained from the ﬁnal state of the MDP.
There are several classical algorithms to solve MDP that
are model-free, i.e., they do not require the model of the code
evaluator. These include:
• Q-learning [30]: given the architecture of a code con-
struction, its potential code construction schemes corre-
spond to a ﬁnite set of discrete states and action spaces.
In Q-learning, a table Q(s, a) is maintained and updated
to record an expected total reward metric to take action
a at state s. At learning stage, an ǫ-greedy approach is
often used to diverge the exploration in the state and
action space. When a state transition (s, a, s′, R) has
been explored, the table Q(s, a) can be updated by:
∆Q(s, a) = αQ·[R+γ·maxa′Q(s′, a′)−Q(s, a)], (2)
where αQ is learning rate, γ is reward discount factor,
and R is reward from the evaluator. After sufﬁcient
exploration, the table Q(s, a) is then used to guide the
MDP to maximize the total reward.
• Policy Gradient (PG) [31]: if the architecture of a
code construction translates into an immense set of
states and actions, we consider continuous state and
action space. PG deﬁnes a differentiable policy function
πθP G(s, a), parameterized by θP G, to select the action
at each state. The policy function πθP G(s, a) outputs a
probability desity/mass function of taking each action a
at state s according to the policy πθP G. Then the next
state s′ is determined and the reward R is evaluated
by the code evaluator. When a complete episode
(s0, a0, R0, s1, a1, R1, · · · , st, at, Rt, · · · , sT −1, aT −1, RT −1)
is explored, where t is the time stamp and T is the
time horizon length, the policy function is updated:
∆θP G = αP G ·
T −1
X
t=0
[∇θP G log πθP G(st, at) ·
T −1
X
t′=t
Rt′].
(3)
After sufﬁcient exploration, the policy function πθP G
can be used to lead the MDP to maximize the total
reward.
• Advantage Actor Critic (A2C) [32]: A2C merges the
idea of state value function into PG to take advantage
of stepwise update, and speeds up the convergence. In
addition to the policy (actor) function πθA(s, a), A2C
deﬁnes a differentiable value (critic) function VθC(s).
The interaction between A2C and the code evaluator is
similar to that of PG. For A2C, the policy (actor) update
can be more frequent, i.e. in stepwise manner, since the
cumulative reward from st, PT −1
t′=t R, is estimated by
the critic function. At each state translation exploration
(s, a, s′, R), the advantage value is calculated:
Adv(s, s′, R) = R + γ · VθC(s′) −VθC(s).
(4)
Then the actor function πθA can be adjusted by:
∆θA = αA · Adv(s, s′, R) · ∇θA log πθA(s, a).
(5)
The critic function VθC can be updated by:
∆θC = αC · Adv(s, s′, R) · ∇θCVθC(s).
(6)
By viewing code construction as a decision process, its
inﬂuence on code performance can be modeled (or approx-
imated) as differentiable functions that can be realized by
neural networks. A code construction (to be optimized) is
embedded in the coefﬁcients of the neural networks. Due
to the excellent function approximation capability of neural
networks, these coefﬁcients can be learned through optimiza-
tions techniques such as gradient descent.
2) Genetic algorithm approach: we observe that a code
construction can usually be decomposed into many discrete
decisions. For the binary matrix and binary vector code rep-
resentations, the decisions on which positions are 0 or 1 can
be made individually. These decisions may collaboratively
contribute to the overall code performance. They resemble
the “chromosomes” of a code construction, where a set of
good decisions is likely to produce good code constructions.
The process of reﬁning these decisions can be deﬁned in
iterative steps, where each step produces a better construction
based on several candidate constructions. Genetic algorithm
is well-suited for this purpose.

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
5
Below, we brieﬂy describe how a genetic algorithm can be
applied to the code design.
1) A number of code constructions {C1, C2, · · · } are ran-
domly generated, deﬁned as initial population.
2) A subset of (good) code constructions are selected as
parents, e.g., Cp1, Cp2.
3) New constructions (offspring) are produced from
crossover among parents, e.g., {Cp1, Cp2} →Co1.
4) Offsprings go through a random mutation to introduce
new features, e.g., Co1 →Cm1.
5) Finally, good offspring replace bad ones in the popu-
lation, and the process repeats.
The above operations are deﬁned in the context of error
correction codes. Regarding code deﬁnition C, it may boil
down to a set of chromosomes (binary vectors and matrices)
accordingly.
Crossover is deﬁned as taking part of the chromosomes
from each parent, and combining them into an offspring. This
step resembles “reproduction” in biological terms, in which
offspring are expected to inherit some good properties from
their parents. Subsequently, mutation randomly alters some of
the chromosomes to encourage exploration during evolution.
A ﬁtness function is deﬁned to indicate whether the newly
produced offspring are good or bad. In this work, the ﬁtness
is deﬁned as the code performance.
C. Evaluator
The evaluator provides performance metric measurements
for code constructions. If the performance metric of the
decoder is analyzable, it can be directly calculated. In most
cases, the error correction performance estimation in terms of
block error rate (BLER) can be performed based on sampling
techniques, such as Monte-Carlo (MC) method. To ensure
that the estimation is accurate and thereby does not mislead
the constructor, sufﬁcient MC sampling (simulation) should
be performed to control the estimation conﬁdence level. If the
designed code is to work within a range of BLER level, the
performance metric measurements can merge error correction
performance at several SNR points. Measuring more than
one SNR points provides a better control over the slope
of BLER curve, at the cost of longer evaluation time. In
addition, power consumption and implementation complexity
for the encoding and the corresponding decoding also can be
factored into the performance metric measurements.
Intuitively, the evaluator can be stationary. The decoding
algorithm, including the parameters and the channel statistics
can be static. Then the code design is preferred to be realized
ofﬂine, and is not very sensitive to the code design time
consumption. On the other hand, the evaluator can be non-
stationary. For example, the channel statistics can be time-
varying. Then online design may be required. In this case,
a feedback link is required for performance measurement of
each code construction. The communication cost and code
design time consumption should be considered as well.
III. LEARNING CODE REPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we present several code design examples
in which the code constructions are automatically gener-
ated by the constructor-evaluator framework. Speciﬁcally,
we propose three types of AI algorithms to learn the code
constructions under the three deﬁnitions mentioned in II-B:
• Binary matrix →policy gradient: we provide an
example of short linear block codes.
• Binary vector →genetic algorithm: we focus on polar
codes with a ﬁxed length and rate.
• Nested representation →A2C algorithm: we design
nested polar codes within a range of code rates with the
proposed scheme.
Although we provide three speciﬁc code examples, the AI
algorithms are generic. That means all codes deﬁned by the
above three representations can be learned by the proposed
methods.
We use the following hardware platform and software
environment. For the reinforcement learning approach (in-
cluding policy gradient and A2C), we use one Telsa V100
GPU and one 28-thread Xeon Gold CPU to accomplish
learning within the Tensorﬂow framework. For the genetic
algorithm approach, the program is written in Matlab and
C/C++ language and runs on a server that contains 4 Intel
Xeon(R) E5-4627v2 (16M Cache, 3.30 GHz) CPUs with 12
cores and 256 GB RAM. For all the AI algorithms, we did not
pay extra attention to the optimization of hyperparameters, as
they seem not to affect the results very much. For a proof of
concept, binary codes and AWGN channel are considered in
this work. Codewords are encoded from randomly generated
information bits. It is shown that these learned codes can
achieve at least as good error correction performance as the
state-of-the-art codes.
A. Binary matrix: linear block codes
The deﬁnition of a linear block code of dimension K
and length N is a binary generator matrix G in a standard
form (i.e. G = [I, P] where I is an identity matrix of size
K × K and P is a matrix of size K × (N −K)). For the
decoder, a class of most-reliable-basis (MRB) reprocessing
based decoding can achieve near-ML performance. The class
of decoders uses the reliability measures at the decoder
input to determine an information set consisting of the
K most reliable independent positions. One efﬁcient MRB
reprocessing based decoder is the ordered statistic decoding
(OSD) [33]. By incorporating box and match algorithm
(BMA) into OSD [34], the computational complexity can
be reduced at the cost of additional memory for a realistic
implementation. Therefore, our code evaluator deploys BMA
decoder in this example.
The linear block code construction is modeled by a single-
step MDP with a PG algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3. The
state, action and reward are introduced in section II-B1, and
detailed as follows.
• The input state s0 is a code construction deﬁned a
binary generator matrix of size K × N. To impose a

6
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
BMA decoding
code 
construction
performance 
measure
RL Policy function
initial 
construction
designed 
construction
Fig. 3: Framework of learning linear block codes by policy
gradient.
standard form of generator matrix, the input state is
always set as s0 = [IK, 0], where IK is an identity
matrix of size K × K and the parity part P = 0 is an
all-zero matrix of size K × (N −K).
• A Gaussian policy function πθP G is implemented by a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) neural network, deﬁned by
NeuralNet(θP G), with two hidden layers and sigmoid
output nonlinearity:
– The hidden layer width is 2K(N −K), a function
of code dimension and code length. Here, we set it
as twice the size of the neural network output.
– The coefﬁcients in the neural network are deﬁned
by θP G.
– The output of the neural network is a real-valued
matrix µ of size K × (N −K), which deﬁnes
the policy function πθP G. It is used to determine
the parity part P of the generator matrix, to be
described shortly.
• An action a is sampled from the Gaussian policy
function πθP G as follows. Speciﬁcally, a is a real-valued
matrix of size K × (N −K), where each ai,j is drawn
from Gaussian distribution with mean µi,j and variance
σ2 = 0.1. Then, the action a is quantized to a binary-
valued matrix P. The probability of taking this action
a is recorded as π′
θP G(s0, a).
• The output state s1 is updated by [IK, P], which is the
generator matrix of the constructed codes.
• The reward R is deﬁned as −EsN0, the required EsN0
to achieve BLER=10−2 under BMA decoding. It is also
the feedback to the policy function.
– The BLER performance of code s1 is deﬁned by
BMA(s1, EsN0, BMAo, BMAs), where EsN0
is the SNR point, BMAo is the order, BMAs is
the control band size. See details in [34].
The PG algorithm for linear block code construction is also
described in Algorithm 1, with parameters listed in Table I.
To optimize the policy function, the coefﬁcients θP G in
Algorithm 1 Policy gradient based linear block codes design
// Initialization:
Randomly initialize the policy function πθP G;
Set initial state s0 = [IK, 0];
// Loop:
while 1 do
(s1, π′
θP G(s0, a)) ←Constructor(s0)
R ←Evaluator(s1)
∆θP G ←SGD(πθP G, π′
θP G(s0, a), R)
θP G ←(θP G + ∆θP G)
end while
// Constructor:
function (s1, π′
θP G(s0, a)) = Constructor(s0)
µ ←NeuralNet(θP G)
for i = {1, · · · , K} do
for j = {1, · · · , N −K} do
ai,j ∼N(µi,j, σ2), where σ2 = 0.1;
Pi,j = (ai,j > 0.5) ? 1 : 0;
end for
end for
s1 ←[IK, P];
π′
θP G(s0, a) ←fN (a|µ, σ2);
return s1, π′
θP G(s0, a)
end function
// Evaluator:
function R = Evaluator(s1)
Obtain
EsN0
such
that
BLER
=
0.01
←
BMA(s1, EsN0, BMAo, BMAs);
R = −EsN0;
return R
end function
TABLE I: Policy Gradient algorithm parameters
Parameters
values
Policy function hidden layer number
2
Policy function hidden layers width
2K(N −K)
Batch size
1024
Learning rate
10−5
Reward
−EsN0
Decoder
BMA
the neural network are trained by mini-batch based stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) according to (3). Here, we directly
implement a method called “AdamOptimizer”, which is
integrated in Tensorﬂow, to update θP G. For each policy
function update step, after exploring a batch of action-reward
pairs, the rewards are ﬁrst normalized before equation (3) is
applied. Such processing reduces gradient estimation noise
and enables a faster convergence speed. Fig. 4 shows the
evolution of average EsN0 w.r.t. the BLER of 10−2 per
iteration during the learning procedure. We observe that the
average EsN0 improves in a stair-like manner. This is because
the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)-based PG algorithm
tends to pull the mean of the normal distribution, from
which the action is sampled, towards a local optimal point.
In the vicinity of this local optimal point, explorations are
conducted randomly, which accounts for the performance

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
7
Iteration
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
average EsN0 at BLER=1E-2
3.18
3.2
3.22
3.24
3.26
3.28
3.3
3.32
stair like
~0.11dB
Fig. 4: Evolution of the average reward per batch
Es/N0 (dB)
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
BLER
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
RM(32,16,8) BMA(1,5)
Learned (32,16,7) BMA(1,5)
RM(64,22,16) BMA(1,10)
Learned (64,22,12) BMA(1,10)
Fig. 5: Performance comparison between learned linear block
codes and RM codes
ﬂuctuations as if it has converged. Due to the high dimension
of the action space, a small-probability exploration would be
helpful to avoid local optimum.
The error correction performance comparison between the
learned code constructions, RM codes and extended BCH
(eBCH) codes are plotted. In Fig. 5, the learned linear block
codes show similar performance to RM codes for cases of
(N = 32, K = 16) and (N = 64, K = 22). In Fig. 6,
the learned linear block codes show similar performance to
eBCH codes for cases of (N = 32, K = 16) and (N =
64, K = 36).
It is interesting that for the case of N = 32, K = 16,
though the minimum code distance of the learned code
(D = 7) is smaller than that of RM code or eBCH code
(D = 8), there is no obvious performance difference within
the practical SNR range (BLER within 10−4 ∼10−1). In
this SNR range for the considered case, the error correction
performance of linear block codes is determined by the code
distance spectrum, not only the minimum distance.
Alternatively, the design of linear block codes also can be
modeled as a multi-step MDP. For example, from an initial
state, an action can be deﬁned as determining one column (or
row) of matrix P per step, or sequentially ﬂipping each entry
of matrix P per step. Furthermore, Monte Carlo tree search
Es/N0 (dB)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
BLER
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
eBCH(32,16,8) BMA(1,5)
Learned (32,16,7) BMA(1,5)
eBCH(64,36,12) BMA(1,8)
Learned (64,36,7) BMA(1,8)
Fig. 6: Performance comparison between learned linear block
codes and eBCH codes
(MCTS) can be incorporated into reinforcement learning to
potentially enhance code performance [35].
B. Binary vector: polar codes with a ﬁxed length and rate
Polar codes can be deﬁned by c = uG [36]. A code
construction is deﬁned by a binary vector s of length N, in
which 1 denotes an information subchannel and 0 denotes
a frozen subchannel. Denote by I, the support of s, the
set of information subchannel indices. The K information
bits are assigned to subchannels with indices in I, i.e., uI.
The remaining N −K subchannels, constituting the frozen
set F, are selected for frozen bits (zero-valued by default).
The generator matrix consists of the K rows, indicated by
I, of the polar transformation matrix G = F⊗n, where
F =

1
0
1
1

is the kernel and ⊗denotes Kronecker power,
and c is the codeword.
For the decoders, both SC and SCL type decoders are
considered. An SC decoder recursively computes the transi-
tion probabilities of polarized subchannels, and sequentially
develops a “path”, i.e., hard decisions up to the current (i-th)
information bits ˆu ≜ˆu1, ˆu2, · · · , ˆui. At ﬁnite code length,
an SCL decoder brings signiﬁcant performance gain, which
is brieﬂy described below.
1) run L instances of SC in parallel, keep L paths;
2) extend the L paths (with both 0, 1 decisions) to obtain
2L paths, and evaluate their path metrics (PMs);
3) preserve the L most likely paths with smallest PMs.
Upon reaching the last bit, only one path is selected as
decoding output. We consider two types of SCL decoders,
characterized as follows.
• SCL-PM: select the ﬁrst path, i.e., with smallest PM;
• SCL-Genie: select the correct path, as long as it is
among the L surviving paths.
In practice, SCL-Genie can be implemented by CA-SCL [37],
[38], which selects the path that passes the CRC check. With
a moderate number of CRC bits (e.g., 24), CA-SCL yields
almost identical performance to SCL-Genie.

8
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
...
initial 
population
offsprings
...
...
...
crossover
mutation
selection
SC/SCL
decoding
Genetic algorithm
performance
measure
code
construction
Fig. 7: Framework of learning polar codes by genetic algo-
rithm.
Genetic algorithm is applied to construct polar codes for
various types of decoders. We observe that the information
subchannels in a code construction play the same role of
chromosomes in genetic algorithm, because they both in-
dividually and collaboratively contribute to the ﬁtness of
a candidate solution. The key insight is that good code
constructions are constituted by good subchannels. Therefore,
a pair of good parent code constructions is likely to produce
good offspring code constructions. This suggests that a
genetic algorithm may ultimately converge to a good code
construction. The framework is shown in Fig. 7, and the
algorithm is detailed below.
During the initialization of the genetic algorithm, the
population (code constructions) are randomly generated.
Speciﬁcally, the information subchannel set I is randomly
and uniformly selected from {1, · · · , N} for each code con-
struction without given prior knowledge about existing polar
code construction techniques such as Bhattacharyya [11] and
DE/GA [14], [16]. The purpose is to test whether the genetic
algorithm can learn a good code construction without this
expert knowledge.
A population of M code constructions are randomly
initialized and sorted according to ascending BLER per-
formance BLERIi ≜BLER1 × BLER2, which is de-
ﬁned as the product of BLERs at two SNR points. Typi-
cally, M should be sufﬁciently large to store all the good
chromosomes (subchannel indices) to ensure an efﬁcient
convergence. A polar decoder, denoted by BLERx
←
PolarDecoder(Ii, SNRx), returns the BLER performance
of the constructed codes at a speciﬁed SNR point. At least
1000 block error events are collected to ensure an accurate
estimate.
After initialization, the algorithm enters a loop consisting
of four steps, as shown in Fig. 8.
1) Select parents Ip1, Ip2 from population. The i-th code
construction is selected according to a probability dis-
tribution e−αi/ PM
j=1 e−αj (normalized), where α is
called the sample focus. Speciﬁcally, the correspond-
ing cumulative distribution function cdf is sampled
uniformly at random to determine the index p to be
selected. This is implemented in Matlab with a com-
mand: [∼,p]=histc(rand,cdf). In this way, a
better code construction will be selected with a higher
probability. Two distinct code constructions, denoted
by their information subchannel sets Ip1 and Ip2, are
selected as parents. By adjusting the parameter α,
we can tradeoff between exploitation (a larger α) and
exploration (a smaller α).
2) Merge subchannels from parents by Imerge = Ip1 ∪
Ip2. Note that |Ip1| = |Ip2| = K and their union
set contains more than K subchannels. This ensures
that an offspring code construction contains the sub-
channels from both parents. In fact, it implements the
“crossover” function described in Section II-B2.
3) Mutate the code construction by including a few
mutated
subchannels
Imutate
from
Imerge
=
{1, · · · , N}\Imerge, that is, the remaining subchan-
nels. Speciﬁcally, ⌊β × |Imerge|⌉indices are randomly
and uniformly selected from Imerge, where β is called
the mutation rate. Finally, the K information subchan-
nels of the offspring Io are randomly and uniformly
selected from Imerge∪Imutate. Note that the offspring
may or may not contain the mutated subchannels
depending on whether those in Imutate are ﬁnally
selected into Io. The mutation rate β provides a way
to control exploration. The larger β is, the more likely
a mutated subchannel is included in the offspring.
4) Insert the offspring Io back to population according
to ascending BLER performance. If its BLER perfor-
mance is worse than all existing ones in the population,
it is simply discarded.
The while loop can be terminated after a maximum number
of iterations Tmax is reached, or a desired performance is
obtained by the best code construction in the population. The
algorithm is described in Algorithm 2.
We compare the learned code constructions with the base-
line schemes below:
• IDE/GA, a close-to-optimal construction under SC de-
coding that is obtained via GA [16]: we search for a
design SNR (starting from -20dB, increasing with step
size 0.25dB) to obtain a construction that requires the
lowest SNR to achieve BLER=10−2.
• IP W , an SNR-independent construction obtained by
PW [17], [18].
• IRM−P olar, a heuristic construction [23] that yields
better performance under SCL-PM decoder. The only
difference from [23] is that we use PW [17], [18] as the
reliability metric to make the design SNR-independent.
We use them as baselines, and observe the learning process
through two metrics: (1) the BLER performance of the
learned codes at two SNR points, which corresponds to the
required SNRs to achieve BLER=10−1 and 10−2 for the
baseline scheme (2) the difference between the learned infor-
mation subchannels Ilearned and those of baseline schemes.

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
9
I. Select
α = 0.03
α = 0.01
Selection probability
Population (ordered by ascending BLER)
Exploration
Exploitation
II. Merge
III. Mutate
Parents
1
Select with 
probability β
Randomly select 
K subchannels
M
p1
p2
Select the i-th polar 
construction with 
probability ĝ e-αi
IV. Insert
BLER performance
1
M
j
Population (ordered by ascending BLER)
Evaluate Io and insert back to population 
Subchannels of parent p1
Subchannels of parent p2
Merged subchannels
Ip1
Ip2
Imerge=Ip1ĤIp1
`Imerge={1,Օ,N}\Imerge
`Imerge
Imerge
Imutate
Io
Io
Fig. 8: Genetic algorithm for polar code construction in four steps.
TABLE II: Convergence time for learning process
N
K
design EsN0 (dB)
nchoosek(N, K)
# iterations
16
8
4.50
12870
126
32
16
4.00
6.0 × 109
623
64
32
3.75
1.8 × 1019
2100
128
64
3.50
2.4 × 1037
5342
256
128
3.25
5.8 × 1075
19760
512
256
3.00
4.7 × 10152
56190
To demonstrate the effectiveness of genetic algorithm,
we record the ﬁrst time (iteration number) a code con-
struction converges to the existing optimal construction, i.e.,
Ilearned = IDE/GA under SC decoding. The results for
different code lengths are shown in Table II. Note that a
brute-force search would check all nchoosek(N, K) possible
candidates, which is prohibitively costly as shown in Table II.
By contrast, a reasonable converging time is observed with
the genetic algorithm at medium code length. There is no
big difference in terms of learning efﬁciency between the
SC and SCL decoders. For SC decoder, there exists already
an explicit optimum way of constructing polar codes and
the learned construction could not outperform that. However,
the optimal code constructions for both SCL-PM and SCL-
Genie are still open problems. The above results imply that
we can apply genetic algorithm to SCL decoders to obtain
good performance within a reasonable time.
We ﬁrst consider SCL-PM with L = 8. The learning
process for N = 128, K = 64 is shown in Fig. 9. Note that
DE/GA is derived assuming an SC decoder. We adopt RM-
Polar [23] to obtain the baseline performance. In this case,
the minimum distance is 16 for RM-Polar and 8 for DE/GA
and PW. In this case, the PW construction coincides with
DE/GA, i.e., IP W = IDE/GA. In the upper subﬁgure, the
performance (product of BLERs measured at EsN0=[1.74,
2.76]dB) of the learned codes quickly converges and out-
performs that of the RM-polar codes at iteration 3100. In
the lower subﬁgure, unlike the case of the SC decoder, the
difference between Ilearned and IDE/GA (design EsN0 at
3.5dB) stops to decrease after reaching 8. The learned codes
outperform DE/GA by 0.8 dB and RM-polar by 0.2 dB at
BLER=10−3, as shown in Fig. 10. These results demonstrate
that, in the current absence of an optimal coding-theoretic
solution, learning algorithms can potentially play important
roles in code construction.
The same observation holds for SCL-Genie, where the
optimum construction is also unknown. The BLER curves
for N = 256, K = 128 under SCL-Genie with L = 8
is shown in Fig. 11. We aim at DE/GA (design EsN0 at
3.25dB) and PW constructions as the baseline schemes since
they perform better than RM-Polar under SCL-Genie. In
this case, the minimum distance is 16 for RM-Polar and 8
for DE/GA and PW. In the genetic algorithm, the evaluator
measures performance as product of BLERs at EsN0=[1.17,
1.88]dB. As seen, the learned codes perform better than those
generated by DE/GA and PW, with a slightly better slope.

10
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
Algorithm 2 Genetic algorithm based polar code design
// Parameters:
population size M = 1000, sample focus α = 0.03,
mutation rate β = 0.01, SNR1 and SNR2;
// Initialization:
for i = {1, 2, · · · , M} do
Ii ←randomly and uniformly select K indices from
{1, · · · , N}
BLERIi ←BLER1 × BLER2, where BLERx ←
PolarDecoder(Ii, SNRx)
end for
Sort
{I1, · · · , IM}
such
that
BLERIi
<
BLERIj,
∀i < j;
t = 0
while t < Tmax do
t ←t + 1
// Select:
for k = {1, 2} do
cdf ←pdf= e−αi/ PM
j=1 e−αj
Uniformly
sample
the
cdf
to
determine
pk:
[∼,pk]=histc(rand,cdf)
Ipk ←select Ipk from {I1, · · · , IM}
end for
// Merge:
Imerge = Ip1 ∪Ip2
// Mutate:
Imerge = {1, · · · , N}\Imerge
Imutate
←randomly and uniformly select ⌊β ×
|Imerge|⌉indices from Imerge
Io ←randomly and uniformly select K indices from
Imerge ∪Imutate
// Insert:
{I1, · · · , IM, IM+1}
=
{I1, · · · , IM} ∪Io where
IM+1 = Io
BLERIo ←BLER1 × BLER2, where BLERx ←
PolarDecoder(Io, SNRx)
Sort
{I1, · · · , IM+1}
such
that
BLERIi
<
BLERIj,
∀1 ≤i < j ≤M + 1
end while
// Output:
I1 and BLERI1
However, the performance gain (0.06 dB between learned
codes and DE/GA) is much smaller than the case with SCL-
PM.
It is of interest to observe the difference between the
learned information subchannels and those selected by
DE/GA. In Fig. 12, the subchannel differences between the
learned construction and DE/GA under various code lengths
and rates are plotted, where the positive positions are Ilearned
and negative ones are IDE/GA (design EsN0 are labeled in
each subﬁgure). The evaluator is SCL-Genie with L = 8. The
ﬁrst observation is that all the learned constructions prefer
subchannels with smaller indices. A close look would reveal
that the learned construction may violate the universal partial
order (UPO) [39], [40]. For the case of N = 128, K = 64
Iteration
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
prod(BLER1,BLER2)
10-4
10-2
100
N=128, K=64, Evaluator={SCL-PM}
BLER (learned)
BLER (RM-Polar)
Iteration
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
Subchannel difference
0
20
40
60
Difference to DE/GA
Difference to PW
Fig. 9: Evolution of learned polar code constructions (infor-
mation subchannels) and BLER performance under SCL-PM
(L = 8) decoder. The performance is deﬁned as the product
of BLERs measured at EsN0=[1.74, 2.76]dB. The DE/GA is
constructed with design EsN0 at 3.5dB. In this case, the PW
construction coincides with DE/GA.
Es/N0 (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
BLER
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
N=128, K=64, Evaluator={SCL-PM}, QPSK/AWGN
PW
DE/GA
RM-Polar
Learned
Fig. 10: BLER comparison between learned polar code
constructions (information subchannels) and {DE/GA, PW,
RM-Polar} under SCL-PM (L = 8) decoder. The DE/GA is
constructed with design EsN0 at 3.5dB.
(the genetic algorithm evaluates performance as product of
BLERs at EsN0=[0.94, 1.89]dB.), the only difference is that
Ilearned preferred the 15-th subchannel over the 43-th. It
is easy to verify that this choice violates the UPO because
15 = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1] and 43 = [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1] in binary
form. Note that UPO applies in theory to the SC decoder,
rather than the SCL decoder.
In this subsection, we demonstrate that good polar codes
can be learned for SC, SCL-PM and SCL-Genie decoders
using genetic algorithm. For SCL decoders, the learned
codes may even outperform existing ones. Note that a recent
independent work [28] proposed very similar approaches to
this subsection. The main difference is that prior knowl-
edge such as Bhattacharyya construction [11] and RM-Polar

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
11
Es/N0 (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
BLER
10-3
10-2
10-1
N=256, K=128, Evaluator={SCL-Genie}, QPSK/AWGN
PW
DE/GA
RM-Polar
Learned
2.262.282.32.322.342.36
×10-3
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Learned
Human
knowledge
Fig. 11: BLER comparison between learned polar code
constructions (information subchannels) and {DE/GA, PW}
under SCL-Genie (L = 8) decoder. The DE/GA is con-
structed with design EsN0 at 3.25dB.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
N=64
K=16
-1
0
1
Evaluator={SCL-Genie}, L=8
Learned
DE/GA at 0.50dB
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
N=64
K=32
-1
0
1
Learned
DE/GA at 3.75dB
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
N=128
K=64
-1
0
1
Learned
DE/GA at 3.50dB
Subchannel Index
0
50
100
150
200
250
N=256
K=128
-1
0
1
Learned
DE/GA at 3.25dB
15
43
Fig. 12: Difference of information subchannels between
learned constructions (Ilearned) and DE/GA (IDE/GA, de-
sign EsN0 labeled in each subﬁgure) under SCL-Genie
(L = 8) decoder.
construction [23] is utilized by [28] during the population
initialization to speed up the learning process, while no
such knowledge was exploited in our work. The detailed
differences are summarized below:
• The initialization of learning algorithms is different. The
work [28] initializes the (code constructions) popula-
tion based on the Bhattacharyya construction obtained
for BECs with various erasure probabilities, and RM-
Polar construction. In this way, the convergence time is
signiﬁcantly reduced. In our experiment, we randomly
initialize the population to test whether the genetic
algorithm can learn a good code construction without
these prior knowledge. One of our motivation is to
answer Q1 in section I-B.
• The new population is generated in a different way.
In [28], the T best members in the population is
always secured in the next-iteration population, the
next nchoosek(T, 2) members are generated through
crossover of the T best members, and the ﬁnal T
members are generated by mutation. In this work, we
select a pair of parents according to certain sample
probability (a better member is selected with higher
probability), which provides a ﬂexible tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation.
• The crossover operation is not exactly the same. In
[28], the offspring takes half of the subchannels from
each of the parents. In our work, the subchannels of
both parents are ﬁrst merged, followed a mutation step
that includes a few mutated subchannels. The resulting
offspring randomly takes K subchannels from among
these subchannels.
• The cost function of [28] is the error-rate at a single
SNR point, whereas our work allows to choose a set of
SNR points for potential beneﬁt of controlling the slope
of error rate.
• The work [28] also tried belief propagation decoder,
whereas we focus on the SC-based decoders due to their
superior performances.
C. Nested representation: polar codes within a range of code
rates
We evaluate another type of polar code constructions with
nested property, which bears practical signiﬁcance due to its
description and implementation simplicity. Polar codes for
code length N and dimension range [Kl, Kh] are deﬁned as
a reliability ordered sequence of length N. The corresponding
polar code can be determined by reading out the ﬁrst (or last)
K entries from the ordered sequence to form the information
position set.
The code design procedure is modeled by a multi-step
MDP. Speciﬁcally for each design step, with a given (N, K)
polar code (current state), a new subchannel (action) is
selected, to get the (N, K + 1) polar code (an updated
state). The reliability ordered sequence is constructed by
sequentially appending the actions to the end of initial polar
code construction.
Note that the optimal constructions for (N, K) polar codes
and (N, K + 1) polar codes may not be nested, i.e., the
information set of (N, K) polar codes may not be a subset of
the information set of (N, K + 1) polar codes. As a result,
the optimal constructions for different (N, K) polar codes
with do not necessarily constitute a nested sequence. In other
words, the performance of some (N, K) codes needs to be
compromised for the nested property. Therefore, during the
construction of the reliability ordered sequence, a tradeoff
exists between the short-term reward (from the next state
construction) and long-term reward (from the construction of
a state that is a few steps away). The problem of maximizing
the total reward, which consists of both short-term reward
and long-term reward, can be naturally solved by the A2C
algorithm.

12
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019
TABLE III: A2C algorithm parameters
Parameters
Values
Actor function hidden layer number
2
Actor function hidden layer width
4N
Critic function hidden layer number
2
Critic function hidden layer width
4N
Batch size
32
Actor learning rate
1.0 × 10−3
Critic learning rate
2.0 × 10−3
Reward discount factor
0.2
Reward
log(BLER)
Decoder
SCL-PM and SCL-Genie with L = 8
The framework is shown in Fig. 13. The state, action
and reward are introduced in section II-B1, and detailed as
follows.
• The input state st is a code construction deﬁned a
binary vector of length N, in which 1 denotes an infor-
mation subchannel and 0 denotes a frozen subchannel.
Denote by Ist, the support of st, the set of information
subchannel indices.
• Both the actor function πθA(st) and critic function
VθC(st) are implemented by MLP neural networks,
deﬁned by NeuralNet(θA) and NeuralNet(θC), with
two hidden layers and sigmoid output nonlinearity:
– The input to both of the actor and critic functions
is the state st (code construction).
– The hidden layer width is 4N.
– The coefﬁcients in the neural network are deﬁned
by θA and θC, respectively.
– The output of NeuralNet(θA) is a probability
mass function πθA(st) of all possible action at ∈
{1, · · · , N} taken at state st.
– The output of NeuralNet(θC) is a state value
estimation VθC(st) for the state st.
• An action at denotes the next information subchannel
position to be selected, which is sampled according to
the probability mass function πθA(st).
• The output state st+1 is updated by setting the at-th
position in st to 1, i.e., st+1 ←st[at] = 1.
• The reward Rt is deﬁned as log(BLER) at a given
SNR point. It is also the feedback to the A2C function
block.
– The BLER performance of code construction st+1
is evaluated by the SCL decoding (either SCL-PM
or SCL-Genie decoding).
The A2C based polar code reliability ordered sequence
design is also described in Algorithm 3, with parameters
listed in Table III.
To optimize the A2C function block, the coefﬁcients θC
and θA in the neural networks are trained by mini-batch based
SGD according to (6) and (5), respectively. Speciﬁcally, the
next state st+1 and the reward Rt are feed back to A2C func-
tion block. Note that the advantage value Adv(st, st+1, R)
in (6) and (5) is calculated according to (4), which requires
critic function and the current reward. The “AdamOptimizer”
in Tensorﬂow is applied to update θC and θA.
SCL decoding
code 
construction
performance 
measure
Advantage
Actor function
Critic function
A2C function
Fig. 13: Framework of learning polar codes by advantage
actor critic algorithm.
Algorithm 3 A2C based polar code reliability ordered se-
quence design
Initialize the coefﬁcients θA and θC randomly;
while 1 do
s0 = zeros(1, N);
s0 ←s0[N −1, N −2, · · · , N −Kl + 1] = 1;
for t = 0 to (Kh −Kl) do
VθC ←NeuralNet(θC)
πθA ←NeuralNet(θA)
at ∼πθA(st);
st+1 ←st[at] = 1;
Ist+1 ←support(st+1);
BLER ←PolarDecoder(Ist+1, EsN0);
Rt = log(BLER);
∆θC ←SGD(VθC, st, st+1, Rt);
θC ←(θC + ∆θC)
∆θA ←SGD(πθA, st, at, st+1, Rt);
θA ←(θA + ∆θA)
end for
Sequence
is
{N −1, N −2, · · · , N −Kl +
1, a0, a1, · · · , aKh−Kl}.
end while
As an example, a reliability ordered sequence of length
N = 64 and dimension range K ∈[4, 63] is constructed
by A2C. To ensure a fair comparison, the design EsN0
for the DE/GA polar codes are always optimized to obtain
a construction that requires the lowest SNR to achieve
BLER=10−2. The constructed codes are tested under the
required SNRs to achieve BLER=10−2 for the optimized
DE/GA construction with the same K.
In the ﬁrst experiment, the code performance evaluator
deploys SCL-PM with L = 8. Fig. 14 compares the relative
SNR to achieve a target BLER level of 10−2. A better overall
performance can be observed for the learned polar codes,
with the largest gain over 0.5 dB over DE/GA. There is

HUANG et al.: AI CODING: LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT ERROR CORRECTION CODES
13
Code Dimension (information length K)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
relative EsN0 at BLER=1E-2
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
N=64, Evaluator={SCL-PM}, L=8
EsN0 (Learned - DE/GA)
Loss to DE/GA
Gain over DE/GA
Fig. 14: Relative performance between polar codes con-
structed by reinforcement learning and DE/GA under SCL-
PM
Code Dimension (information length K)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Relative EsN0 at BLER=1E-2
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
N=64, Evaluator={SCL-Genie}, L=8
EsN0 (Learned - DE/GA)
Gain over DE/GA
Loss to DE/GA
Fig. 15: Relative performance between polar codes con-
structed by reinforcement learning and DE/GA under SCL-
Genie
almost no loss cases.
In the second experiment, the code performance evaluator
deploys SCL-Genie with L = 8. Fig. 15 compares the SNR
required to achieve a target BLER level of 10−2. A slightly
better overall performance can be observed for the learned
polar codes, with the largest gain of 0.16 dB at K = 15 over
DE/GA, and the largest loss of 0.09 dB at K = 58.
Some discussions on why good nested polar codes can be
learned using A2C algorithm are as follows. Compared with
the ﬁxed (N, K) case, the nested code constraint makes the
optimization complicated for classical coding theory. Because
there is no theory to optimize the overall performance within
a range of code rates. The problem of selecting subchannels
in a nested manner is essentially a multi-step decision prob-
lem. It naturally ﬁts into the multi-step MDP model and the
problem can be solved by existing RL algorithms.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we tried to design error correction codes
with AI techniques. We employed a constructor-evaluator
framework, in which the code constructor is realized by AI al-
gorithms whose target function depends on only performance
metric feedback from the code evaluator. The implementation
of the code constructor is illustrated (e.g., by reinforcement
learning and genetic evolution) and the ﬂexibility of the code
evaluator is analyzed.
We have provided three detailed AI-driven code construc-
tion algorithms for three types of code representations. In
essence, the framework is able to iteratively reﬁne code
construction without being taught explicit knowledge in
coding theory. For proof of concept, we show that, for linear
block codes and polar codes in our examples, the learned
codes can achieve a comparable performance to the state-of-
the-art ones. For certain cases, the learned codes may even
outperform existing ones.
For future works, both the constructor and evaluator design
need to be explored to either solve more general problems or
further improve the efﬁciency. Some code construction prob-
lems that were intractable under classical coding theoretic
approaches may be revisited using AI approaches. Moreover,
more realistic settings such as online code construction
should be studied.
