Diﬀusion Model based Semi-supervised Learning
on Brain Hemorrhage Images for Eﬃcient
Midline Shift Quantiﬁcation
Shizhan Gong1, Cheng Chen1, Yuqi Gong1, Nga Yan Chan2, Wenao Ma1,
Calvin Hoi-Kwan Mak3, Jill Abrigo2, Qi Dou1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong, China
Abstract. Brain midline shift (MLS) is one of the most critical factors
to be considered for clinical diagnosis and treatment decision-making for
intracranial hemorrhage. Existing computational methods on MLS quan-
tiﬁcation not only require intensive labeling in millimeter-level measure-
ment but also suﬀer from poor performance due to their dependence on
speciﬁc landmarks or simpliﬁed anatomical assumptions. In this paper,
we propose a novel semi-supervised framework to accurately measure the
scale of MLS from head CT scans. We formulate the MLS measurement
task as a deformation estimation problem and solve it using a few MLS
slices with sparse labels. Meanwhile, with the help of diﬀusion models,
we are able to use a great number of unlabeled MLS data and 2793 non-
MLS cases for representation learning and regularization. The extracted
representation reﬂects how the image is diﬀerent from a non-MLS image
and regularization serves an important role in the sparse-to-dense reﬁne-
ment of the deformation ﬁeld. Our experiment on a real clinical brain
hemorrhage dataset has achieved state-of-the-art performance and can
generate interpretable deformation ﬁelds.
Keywords: Computer-aided diagnosis · Semi-supervised learning · Dif-
fusion models · Intracranial hemorrhage
1
Introduction
Intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) refers to brain bleeding within the skull, a se-
rious medical emergency that would cause severe disability or even death [1].
A characteristic symptom of severe ICH is brain midline shift (MLS), which
is the lateral displacement of midline cerebral structures (see Fig. 1). MLS is
an important and quantiﬁable indicator of the severity of mass eﬀects and the
urgency of intervention [2,3,9]. For instance, the 5 millimeters (mm) threshold
of MLS is frequently used to determine whether immediate intervention and
close monitoring is required [4]. MLS quantiﬁcation demands high accuracy and
arXiv:2301.00409v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2023

2
S.Z. Gong et al.
posterior falx 
anterior falx 
(a) No MLS
falx 
mls
(b) MLS on falx
septum
pellucidum
mls
(c) MLS on septum
pellucidum
The third 
ventricle 
mls
(d) MLS on the
third ventricle
Fig. 1: Examples of head CT scans to illustrate how radiologists measure MLS.
Dash red line connecting the anterior falx and posterior falx denotes a hypothet-
ical normal midline. Blue circles denote the shifted landmarks. Perpendicular
red lines from the shifted landmarks to normal midline are measured as MLS
scale.
eﬃciency, which is diﬃcult to achieve with manual quantiﬁcation, especially in
emergencies, due to the variability in shift regions, unclear landmark boundaries,
and non-standard scanning pose. An automated MLS quantiﬁcation algorithm
that can immediately and accurately quantify MLS is highly desirable to identify
urgent patients for timely treatment.
To measure MLS, clinicians usually ﬁrst identify a few CT slices with large
shifts and then measure and identify the maximum deviation of landmarks such
as the septum pellucidum, third ventricle, or falx from their normal counterpart
as the ﬁnal MLS distance (see examples in Fig. 1). Such a clinical fashion of
MLS quantiﬁcation can be diﬃcult to be translated into a well-deﬁned automa-
tion process. Currently, there are only limited studies on automated MLS quan-
tiﬁcation, using diﬀerent strategies and varied labeling requirements. Nguyen
et al. proposed a landmark-based method that relies on anatomical markers to
determine the location of the deformed midline [9]. However, this method can
only apply to cases where MLS appears on these speciﬁc marker regions. Liao et
al. adopted a symmetric-based method to seek a curve connecting all deformed
structures [10], which is diﬃcult to generalize due to over-simpliﬁed anatom-
ical assumptions and sensitivity to patients’ scan poses. A few recent works
try to overcome these limitations by using stronger supervision with dense la-
beling. Some studies formulated MLS quantiﬁcation as a midline segmentation
task [5,6,7], by delineating the intact midline as labels to supervise the train-
ing of segmentation models. Another study designed a hemisphere segmentation
task to quantify MLS [8], which requires pixel-wise annotation for each slice.
However, obtaining such dense annotations is very costly and time-consuming,
while may not be necessary for MLS quantiﬁcation.
To tackle these limitations, we propose to ﬁt MLS quantiﬁcation into a de-
formation prediction problem by using semi-supervised learning (SSL) with only
limited annotations. Our framework avoids the strong dependency on speciﬁc

Diﬀusion model based ICH midline shift quantiﬁcation
3
landmarks or over-simpliﬁed assumptions in previous methods while not increas-
ing the labeling eﬀorts. We aim to use only sparse and weak labels as ground
truth supervisions, which are just one shifted landmark and its normal counter-
part on a limited number of slices provided by radiologists, but we try to fully
exploit the unlabeled slices and non-MLS data to impose extra regularization
for the sparse-to-dense extension. Existing SSL methods typically use a partially
trained model with labeled data to generate pseudo labels for unlabeled data,
assuming that labeled and unlabeled data are generally similar. These meth-
ods can be sub-optimal in our case as labeled slices of MLS usually present the
largest deformation while unlabeled slices contain only minor or no deformation.
Instead, we propose our SSL strategy by generating a corresponding non-MLS
image for each unlabeled MLS slice with generative models and regularizing
that the deformation ﬁeld should warp the generated non-MLS images into the
original MLS ones. However, as we only have volume-wise labels for MLS and
non-MLS classiﬁcation, it can be diﬃcult to train a slice-wise discriminator as
required by many generative models such as GANs [12]. Fortunately, the recently
proposed diﬀusion models [15], which prove to have strong power in both dis-
tribution learning and image generation without dependency on discriminators,
can be a potentially good solution.
In this work, we propose a novel semi-supervised learning framework based
on diﬀusion models to quantify the brain MLS from head CT images with defor-
mation prediction. Our method eﬀectively exploits supervision and regulariza-
tion from all types of available data including MLS images with sparse ground
truth labels, MLS images without labels, and non-MLS images. We validate our
method on a real clinical head CT dataset, showing eﬀectiveness of each proposed
component. Our contributions include: (1) innovating an eﬀective deformation
strategy for brain MLS quantiﬁcation, (2) incorporating diﬀusion models as a
representation learner to extract features reﬂecting where and how an MLS im-
age diﬀers from a non-MLS image, and (3) proposing a diﬀusion model-based
semi-supervised framework that can eﬀectively leverage massive unlabelled data
to improve the model performance.
2
Methods
Fig. 2 illustrates our diﬀusion model-based semi-supervised learning framework
for MLS quantiﬁcation via deformation prediction. In Sec. 2.1, we introduce our
deformation prediction by using only sparse supervision. In Sec. 2.2, we propose
to incorporate non-MLS data for representation learning. In Sec. 2.3, we describe
how to utilize unlabeled MLS images for sparse-to-dense regularization.
2.1
MLS Quantiﬁcation through Deformation Estimation
Our proposed deformation strategy for brain MLS quantiﬁcation aims to ﬁnd
an optimal deformation ﬁeld φ so that an MLS image can be regarded as a

4
S.Z. Gong et al.
◼Semi-supervised framework
𝑥𝑢
𝑥𝑙
Deformation 
estimation
Image 
generation
𝜙(𝑥′𝑢)
Weak label
Deformation network
Conditional 
diffusion 
network 𝐺𝜃𝑐
Unconditional 
diffusion 
network 𝐺𝜃𝑢
Ƹ𝜖𝜃𝑐−Ƹ𝜖𝜃𝑢
𝑥𝑡
𝑥0
◼Deformation estimation
𝜙
◼Image generation
Denoising with 
𝜆𝐺𝜃𝑐−(1 −𝜆)𝐺𝜃𝑢
𝑥0
𝑥𝐿
𝑥0
,
𝑙𝑚𝑠𝑒+ 𝑙𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑙
𝑙ℎ𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟
+ 𝑙𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ
⊕⊕
𝜖
𝜖
warp
𝜙𝑙
𝜙𝑢
𝑥′𝑢
Fig. 2: The pipeline of our proposed semi-supervised deformation strategy for
MLS quantiﬁcation. The labeled image xl is supervised by sparse labels and the
unlabeled image xu is self-supervised with generated negative image.
hypothetically non-MLS image warped with this deformation ﬁeld. The defor-
mation ﬁeld can be parameterized by a function with high complexity so that
it does not explicitly rely on a single landmark or over-simpliﬁed symmetric as-
sumptions, which naturally overcomes the limitations of existing methods. We
apply a learning-based framework to parameterize the deformation ﬁeld with a
U-Net shape neural network. The output of the network is the stationary veloc-
ity ﬁeld v. The diﬀeomorphic deformation ﬁeld φ is then calculated through the
integration of the velocity ﬁeld, similarly to VoxelMorph [11] for image regis-
tration. The learning process is supervised by sparse deformation ground truth.
For each labeled slice, we have the ground truth y = (y1, y2), which is a two-
dimensional vector directing from shifted landmark point toward its presumably
normal location (the red arrow in Fig. 2). The predicted deformation ˆy is bi-
linearly interpolated at the shifted landmark point from the deformation ﬁeld,
which is also a two-dimensional vector. To alleviate the inﬂuence of a few ex-
tremely large deformation points and increase model’s robustness, we use Huber
loss to measure the similarity between the predicted deformation and the label:
lhuber(yd, ˆyd) =



|yd −ˆyd|,
|yd −ˆyd| ≥c,
(yd −ˆyd)2 + c2
2c
,
|yd −ˆyd| < c.
(1)
where d ∈{1, 2}. The hyperparameter c deﬁnes the range for absolute error or
squared error. We also encourage a smooth deformation ﬁeld with a diﬀusion
regularizer on the spatial gradients of deformation φ to avoid a discontinuous

Diﬀusion model based ICH midline shift quantiﬁcation
5
deformation ﬁeld:
lsmooth =
X
j
X
k
∥φjk −φ(j−1)k∥2 + ∥φjk −φj(k−1)∥2,
(2)
As the deformation can be extremely large in our case, and meanwhile to force a
smooth transition between the deformation peak and its adjacent pixels, we use
a coarse-to-ﬁne manner, where velocity ﬁelds are generated through upsampling
with skip connection to progressively aggregate features of diﬀerent scales.
2.2
Learning Negative Patterns from Non-MLS Images
In order to learn a deformation ﬁeld to warp a non-MLS image into MLS one,
ideally we would need a pair of non-MLS and MLS images for network train-
ing, which however does not exist in practice. Lacking such information makes
the network diﬃcult to learn. A naive solution is to generate a corresponding
non-MLS image. However, generated images entail some randomness and can
often lack important details. Depending too much on such fake inputs can lead
to poor robustness. Inspired by the score-matching interpretation of diﬀusion
models [17], we propose to learn the non-MLS distribution from massive amount
of negative cases. Given an MLS image, we can evaluate which parts of the im-
age make it diﬀerent from a non-MLS image. This deviation can serve as latent
features that help the deformation network with deformation prediction.
Diﬀusion models, especially DDPM [14], deﬁne a forward diﬀusion process as
the Markov process progressively adding random Gaussian noise to a given image
and then trying to approximate the reverse process by a Gaussian distribution.
The forward process can be simpliﬁed by a one-step sampling: xt = √αtx0 +
√1 −αtϵ, where αt := Qt
s=0 1 −βt, and βt are predeﬁned variance schedule.
ϵ is sampled from N(0, I). The mean µθ(xt, t) and variance Σθ(xt, t) of the
reverse process can be parameterized by neural networks. A popular choice is
to re-parameterize µθ(xt, t) so that ˆϵθ(xt, t) instead of µθ(xt, t) is estimated by
neural networks to approximate the noise ϵ. Moreover, the output of the diﬀusion
network ϵ(xt, t) is actually a scaled score function ∇log p(xt) as it moves the
corrupted image towards the opposite direction of the corruption. [18].
As a result, through pre-training one unconditional diﬀusion model trained
with all data (denoted as U) and one conditional diﬀusion model trained with
only non-MLS data (denoted as C), the subtraction of two outputs
ˆϵθU (xt, t) −ˆϵθC(xt, t) ∝∇log p(xt|n) −∇log p(xt) = ∇log p(n|xt),
(3)
can be regarded as the gradient of class prediction (n = 1 for non-MLS and 0
otherwise) w.r.t to the input image, which reﬂects how the input images devi-
ate from a non-MLS image. This latent contains information regarding how to
transform the MLS positive image into a non-MLS one and therefore is helpful
for training the deformation network. Moreover, this feature representation ex-
hibits less ﬂuctuation toward the randomness of the additive noise because the
stochastic parts are eliminated through subtraction. It is more stable than the

6
S.Z. Gong et al.
predicted noise or generated MSL negative images. For training, we randomly
sample t from 0 to the diﬀusion steps Ttrain, while for inference we ﬁx it to be a
certain value. We examine the eﬀects of this value in Section 3.4.
2.3
Semi-Supervised Deformation Regularization
Deformation estimation is a dense prediction problem, while we only have sparse
supervision. This can lead to ﬂickering and poor generalizability if the deforma-
tion lacks certain regularization. On the other hand, we have a signiﬁcant amount
of unlabeled data from the MLS volumes that is potentially helpful. Therefore,
we propose to include these unlabeled data during training in a semi-supervised
manner, so that unlabeled data can provide extra regularization for training or
produce additional training examples based on noisy pseudo labels. Many exist-
ing semi-supervised methods seek to use the prediction for unlabeled data given
by the same or a twin network as pseudo-labels and then supervise the model or
impose some regularization with these pseudo-labels. However, these methods
hold a strong assumption that labeled and unlabeled data are drawn from the
same distribution, which is not true in our case because most labeled data are
with large deformation while unlabeled data are with minor or no deformation.
Therefore, we want to ﬁnd another type of pseudo-label to bypass the distribu-
tion assumption. As the deformation ﬁeld is assumed to warp a hypothetically
normal image into an MLS one, we generate hypothetically non-MLS images x′
0
using pre-trained diﬀusion models through classiﬁer-free guidance [16]:
ˆϵ(xt, t) = γˆϵθC(xt, t) + (1 −γ)ˆϵθU (xt, t),
(4)
where γ is a hyper-parameter controlling the strength of the condition. We com-
pare x′
0 warped with the deformation ﬁeld φ(x′
0) and calculate its similarity with
the original x0 through MSE loss. As it can be diﬃcult for the generated image
to be fully faithful to the original image because the generative process entails a
lot of random sampling, this lmse can only serve as noisy supervision. Therefore,
instead of generating x′
0 ahead of deformation network training, we generate it
in an ad-hoc way so that the noisy eﬀects can be counteracted.
The ﬁnal MLS measurement is estimated by calculating the length of the
maximum displacement vector from the predicted deformation ﬁeld, so it is
more sensitive to over-estimation. And our results also show most of the errors
come from over-estimation. As for unlabelled slices, we still have the prior that
its MLS cannot be larger than the MLS of that speciﬁc volume δ, we propose to
incorporate an additional ceiling loss to punish the over-estimation:
lceil =
X
j
X
k
max(0, ||φjk|| −δ).
(5)
Overall, the loss term is a combination of supervised loss and unsupervised loss,
with a weight term controlling the relative importance of each loss term:
l = lhuber + w1lsmooth + u(i)(lmse + w2lceil),
(6)

Diﬀusion model based ICH midline shift quantiﬁcation
7
where w1 and w2 are two ﬁxed weight terms and u(i) is a time-varying weight
term that is expected to gradually increase as the training iteration i progresses
so that the training can converge quickly through strong supervision ﬁrst and
then reﬁne and enhance generalizability via unsupervised loss.
3
Experiments and Results
3.1
Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
We retrospectively collected anonymous thick-slice, non-contrast head CT of pa-
tients who were admitted with head trauma or stroke symptoms and diagnosed
with various subtypes of intracranial hemorrhage, including epidural hemor-
rhage, subdural hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, intraventricular hem-
orrhage, and intraparenchymal hemorrhage, between July 2019 and December
2019 in the Prince of Wales Hospital, a public hospital under the Hospital Au-
thority of Hong Kong. The ethics approval was obtained from the Joint Chinese
University of Hong Kong-New Territories East Cluster Clinical Research ethics
committee. The eligible patients comprised 2793 CT volumes, among them 124
are MLS positive cases. The MLS ranges between 2.24mm and 20.12mm, with
mean value of 8.34mm and medium value of 8.73mm. The annotation was per-
formed by two trained physicians and veriﬁed by one experienced radiologist
(with over 10 years of clinical experience on ICH). The labeling process followed
a real clinical measurement pipeline, where the shifted landmark, anterior falx
point, and posterior falx point were pointed out, and the length of the vertical
line from the landmark to the line connecting the anterior falx point and the
posterior falx point was the measured MLS value. For each volume, a few slices
with large deformation were separately measured and annotated while the shift
of the largest one served as the case-level label. On average, 4 out of 30 slices
of each volume were labeled. We discarded the ﬁrst 8 and the last 5 slices as
they are mainly structures irrelevant to MLS. For pre-processing, we adjusted
the pixel size of all images to 0.86mm and then cropped or padded the resulting
images to the resolution of 256 × 256 pixels. The HU window was set to 0 and
80. We applied intensity clipping (0.5 and 99.5 percentiles) and min-max nor-
malization (between -1 and 1) to each image. Random rotation between −15◦
and 15◦was used for data augmentation.
3.2
Implementation Details
For the diﬀusion network, we use the network architecture designed in DDPM [15]
and set the noise level from 10−4 to 2 × 10−2 by linearly scheduling with
Ttrain = 1000. For non-MLS image generation, we apply the Denoising Diﬀu-
sion Implicit Model (DDIM) [13] with 50 steps and set the noise scale to 15 to
shorten the generative time. We set the hyper-parameters as α = 1, β = 1, c = 3
and γ = 2. u(i) is set from 1 to 10 with the linear schedule. The diﬀusion models
are trained by the AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−4,

8
S.Z. Gong et al.
Table 1: Comparison of diﬀerent methods with 5-fold cross-validation.
Methods
Training data
Volume-wise
Slice-wise
Labeled
Unlabeled
MAE↓
(mm)
RMSE↓
(mm)
MAE↓
(mm)
RMSE↓
(mm)
Regression
✓
3.91
4.90
3.56
4.16
Deformation
✓
3.80
4.47
2.51
3.17
Mean-Teacher [19]
✓
✓
2.89
3.67
2.43
3.22
CPS [20]
✓
✓
2.72
3.42
2.38
3.15
Ours
✓
✓
2.43
3.17
2.25
3.09
batch size 4, for 2 × 105 iterations. We up-sample the MLS positive data by 10×
when training the unconditional diﬀusion model. The deformation network is
trained by the AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1×10−4, batch
size 16, for 100 epochs. All models are implemented with PyTorch 1.12.1 using
one Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.
3.3
Quantiﬁcation Accuracy and Deformation Quality
We evaluate the performance of our quantiﬁcation strategy through mean abso-
lute error (MAE) and root mean square error (RMSE). For volume-wise evalua-
tion, we measure the maximum deformation of each slice of the whole volume and
select the largest one as the ﬁnal result. We also report the slice-wise evaluation,
which is calculated based on labeled slices. This error can reﬂect how the models
perform on slices with relatively large deformation. Since existing MLS estima-
tion methods require diﬀerent types of labels from ours, it is diﬃcult to directly
compare with those methods. We therefore ﬁrst compare our deformation-based
strategy with a regression-based strategy, which uses DenseNet-121 [21] to di-
rectly predict the slice-wise MLS. We also compare our proposed semi-supervised
learning approach with two popular semi-supervised learning methods, that are
Mean-Teacher [19] and Cross Pseudo Supervision (CPS) [20], which are imple-
mented into our deformation framework. The results are given in Table 1, which
are based on 5-fold cross-validations.
From the results, we can see that when only using labeled MLS slices for
model learning, our deformation strategy already shows better performance than
the regression model. This may attribute to that our deformation model learns
the knowledge of both MLS values and locations while a regression model only
captures the MLS value information. This diﬀerence can be further enlarged if
we consider slice-wise performance. Moreover, all three semi-supervised learn-
ing methods, i.e., Mean-Teacher, CPS, and ours, consistently improve the per-
formance of deformation prediction, showing the beneﬁts and importance of

Diﬀusion model based ICH midline shift quantiﬁcation
9
true:
pred:
11.00
11.43
true:
pred:
5.43
6.02
true:
pred:
6.23
6.78
true:
pred:
7.48
8.87
(a) Examples of predicted deformation on MLS images
true:
pred:
0.00
1.60
true:
pred:
0.00
1.75
true:
pred:
0.00
1.87
true:
pred:
0.00
1.69
(b) Examples of predicted deformation on non-MLS images
Fig. 3: Predicted deformation on (a) MLS images. (b) non-MLS images. The
regions with the largest deformation are highlighted. Slice-wise predicted MSL
and ground truth are provided.
incorporating unlabeled data into model learning. Our semi-supervised learn-
ing method based on diﬀusion models achieves better quantiﬁcation results
than Mean-Teacher and CPS, signiﬁcantly reducing the volume-wise MAE from
3.80mm to 2.43mm. An interesting observation is that the unlabeled data con-
tribute more to the volume-wise evaluation than the slice-wise evaluation. By
inspecting the prediction, we ﬁnd that the deformation prediction trained with
labeled data tends to overestimate the deformation of slices with little or no
deformation, which makes the volume-wise prediction error-prone. As most un-
labeled data are slices with minor shifts, incorporating these data for semi-
supervised learning can impose constraints to avoid large deformation, which
greatly improves the model’s robustness.
We also visualize the predicted deformation ﬁeld of several sample cases.
From Fig. 3 (a), we can see the model can well posit the location where the
maximum shift appears and push it to its hypothetically normal counterpart.
The largest deformation happens exactly at the site with the maximum shift. To
validate the robustness of our model, we also select several patients diagnosed
with no MLS and plot the predicted deformation of these samples. As can be
seen in Fig. 3 (b), our method is able to provide a reasonable prediction for
non-MLS images by outputting much smaller values than that for MLS images.
Our model’s predictions for non-MLS images are not exactly zero are caused on
one hand by that even for a completely healthy person, the midline cannot be
perfectly aligned due to multiple factors such as scan pose, on the other hand, our

10
S.Z. Gong et al.
Methods
MAE↓
(mm)
RMSE↓
(mm)
Fully-supervised
3.61
4.47
+ Representation
3.22
3.69
Semi-supervised
2.61
3.24
+ Representation
2.45
3.05
Table 2: Eﬀects of the representation.
0
200
400
600
800
t
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
Effects of noise level t
MAE
RMSE
Fig. 4: Eﬀects of the noise level.
models tend to overestimate the shift because we are calculating the maximum
deformation as ﬁnal measurement.
3.4
Ablation Study
We conduct several ablation experiments to study the eﬀects of several compo-
nents in our proposed framework on the model performance. The volume-wise
results reported are trained on four folders and tested on one folder.
Eﬀects for representation learning. We ﬁrst conduct ablation studies to
verify that the latent feature extracted from the two diﬀusion models is truly
useful for deformation prediction. To this end, we select two deformation models,
one trained with only labeled data and the other using semi-supervised learning,
and compare their performance with and without the extracted representation
as input. The results are given in Table 2. As expected, incorporating the rep-
resentation can improve the model performance in both cases.
The noise level is an important component of diﬀusion models. Only with a
proper noise level, can the model accurately estimate the deviation of the image
toward the negative sample space. Therefore, we do inference with multiple noise
levels and compare its eﬀect on model performance. The results are shown in
Fig. 4. Our model is very robust towards this hyper-parameter. As long as t is
not too small, the model gives very similar performances. The best performance
appears in the middle when t = 600. This is reasonable as small noise fails to
corrupt the original image thus degenerating the performance of score estimation
while large noise may obscure too many details of the original image.
Quantity of unlabeled images. To verify the usefulness of unlabeled images,
we conduct ablation studies on the number of unlabeled images used. For each
experiment, we randomly sample 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% volumes, and we
incorporate unlabeled slices of these volumes for semi-supervised training. For
the rest volumes, we are only using the labeled slices. We also do one experiment
that completely removes the uses of unlabeled images. For each experiment, the
pre-trained diﬀusion models are the same, which uses all the data. In other
words, these unlabeled images somehow still contribute to the model training.
The results are shown in Fig. 5 (a). As can be seen, the model performance
and robustness can be enhanced as we incorporate more unlabeled images. This

Diﬀusion model based ICH midline shift quantiﬁcation
11
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5: Results of our ablation experiments in terms of: (a) proportion of unla-
beled data used, and (b) proportion of negative data used.
provides strong evidence for our claim that our model truly learns valuable
information from unlabeled data.
Quantity of non-MLS images. To further measure the beneﬁts of includ-
ing non-MLS cases, we conduct another ablation study on the proportion of
non-MLS cases. Non-MLS cases are used to train diﬀusion models. As currently,
the amount of non-MLS cases is much higher than MLS cases, we upsample the
MLS cases so that their quantities are approximately the same when training the
unconditional diﬀusion model. For ablation, we ﬁrst downsample the non-MLS
data so that their quantity is 1×, 5×, and 10× that of the MLS cases, and then
upsample the MLS cases to make them balanced. From the results in Fig. 5 (b),
we ﬁnd model performance improves with more non-MLS cases incorporated. In-
creasing non-MLS cases can help train diﬀusion models and further improve the
quality of generated images and extracted feature representations. However, this
eﬀect will soon be saturated as the amount of MLS cases is relatively small. This
can be a bottleneck for eﬀectively using the non-MLS cases as it is challenging
to train unconditional diﬀusion models with such imbalanced datasets.
4
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a novel framework based on deformation ﬁeld esti-
mation to automatically measure the brain MLS. The labels we are using are
sparse which can greatly alleviate the labeling workload. We also propose a
semi-supervised learning strategy based on diﬀusion models which signiﬁcantly
improves the model performance. Experiments on a clinic dataset show our meth-
ods can achieve satisfying performance. We also verify that using unlabeled data
and non-MLS cases can truly help improve the model’s performance.
Our methods have several limitations. First, the model performance highly
relies on pre-trained diﬀusion models. Training diﬀusion models with extremely
imbalanced data requires great eﬀort. Second, the measurement results exhibit
randomness due to noise corruption. Finally, the measurement results are prone
to overestimation. Our future work will ﬁgure out solutions for these limitations.

12
S.Z. Gong et al.
