SOCIAL MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF WATER
CRISIS
A PREPRINT
Rupak Sarkar

Hirak Sarkar

Sayantan Mahinder

Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh∗

January 7, 2020
ABSTRACT
Attribution of natural disasters/collective misfortune is a widely-studied political science problem.
However, such studies are typically survey-centric or rely on a handful of experts to weigh in on the
matter. In this paper, we explore how can we use social media data and an AI-driven approach to
complement traditional surveys and automatically extract attribution factors. We focus on the most-
recent Chennai water crisis which started off as a regional issue but rapidly escalated into a discussion
topic with global importance following alarming water-crisis statistics. Speciﬁcally, we present a
novel prediction task of attribution tie detection which identiﬁes the factors held responsible for the
crisis (e.g., poor city planning, exploding population etc.). On a challenging data set constructed
from YouTube comments (72,098 comments posted by 43,859 users on 623 relevant videos to the
crisis), we present a neural classiﬁer to extract attribution ties that achieved a reasonable performance
(Accuracy: 81.34% on attribution detection and 71.19% on attribution resolution).
Keywords Chennai water crisis · Attribution ties detection · Deep learning
1
Introduction
Water crisis is one of the pressing environmental challenges the current world is facing at present. More than a billion
people do not have access to clean drinking water and nearly two million children die from water borne diseases [46].
Groundwater, traditionally one of the main sources of water supply across the world, has taken a severe blow as
one-third of the world’s most extensive groundwater systems are under severe stress [30]. The forecasts look even more
grim; nearly two-thirds of the world population could be water stressed by 2025 [37]. While the crisis has reached an
alarming level far and wide, India is listed as one of the major at-risk countries projected to have massive water scarcity
in the coming decade [32, 28].
In social science, apportioning attribution for a collective crisis or misfortune still remains a challenge in spite of
presence of a large body of political science literature on retrospective voting(see, e.g., [7, 24]) or psychological
literature on attribution (see, e.g., [38, 36]). Moreover, in prior social science literature (see, e.g., [9, 15]), attribution has
primarily relied on traditional surveys. In this paper, we explore the viability of inferring attribution ties through large
scale analysis of relevant social media discussions in the context of the Chennai water crisis. The Chennai water crisis
has been a long-standing local crisis which rapidly escalated into an international talking point [44] within the last few
months revealing alarming statistics of the water crisis in India looming in near future. To the best of our knowledge,
we present the ﬁrst large scale social media analysis of this crisis via a substantial corpus of 72,098 YouTube comments
∗Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh is the corresponding author.
arXiv:2001.01697v1  [cs.CY]  6 Jan 2020

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
posted by 43,859 users on 623 relevant videos. Our focus on YouTube is motivated by its global reach and popularity in
the Indian subcontinent2.
A thorough analysis of public opinions on a vital resource crisis such as water crisis serves multiple purposes. As
discussed in [40], in the context of water management in developing countries, particularly in India, bridging existing
communication gaps between policy-makers and the real stakeholders (people of the concerned region) can make
assessing the ground realities on success/usefulness of the chosen policies (e.g., administration putting a cap on
industrial water usage), quality of policy implementations (e.g., the administration passes a bill on better city planning,
but no new construction is adhering to the revised guidelines), or existence of better alternatives (e.g., instead of
regulating what crops can be grown, an infrastructural overhaul to promote drip irrigation may have long-term beneﬁts)
substantially easier.
We argue that apart from complimenting traditional surveys, inferring attribution ties from a large scale analysis of
social media discussions has additional beneﬁts. Unlike surveys, social media analyses are vastly cheaper, have faster
turnaround time, can be conducted repeatedly at different spatiotemporal granularities and aggregate a larger number of
opinions than traditional surveys can usually afford. For instance, the most-recent PEW survey [27] focused on India
was conducted in 2018 on 2,521 users. In contrast, our data set aggregates opinions of 43,859 users.
Our Machine Learning contribution in this work is a novel task of detecting and extracting attribution ties. Consider the
following example: [an increased population doesn’t help but the drought would still be there
if the population hadn’t increased]. In this comment, both natural calamities and a growing population
have been attributed as possible causes of the water crisis (more examples are listed in Table 1). Our paper’s main
contribution is a neural classiﬁer that automatically detects such attribution ties. On a challenging real-world data set,
our method achieved considerable accuracy in detecting presence of attribution (81.34%) and identifying the attributing
factor (71.19%).
While aggregating opinions from social media discussions have several advantages, navigating through noisy media
generated in a region of the globe with high linguistic diversity and vast number of non-native English speakers with a
broad range of English proﬁciency poses a multitude of Natural Language Processing challenges (described in details
in Section 3.2). Moreover, unlike surveys, social media comments are not always focused on the topic of discussion or
a predeﬁned goal that the survey is planned to achieve. Besides, as surveys are mostly question-answer based, there is
a natural structure in the response to identify the answer from the question. Hence, both obtaining a cleaner data set
focused on the topic of study and developing ML framework to extract the answers are non-trivial tasks. In addition to
our ML framework to detect attribution ties, we have employed several recent advances on NLP and proposed novel
data-pruning strategies to tackle these challenges.
Attribution factor
Comment
Overpopulation
This is a population problem. The earth does not have the resources to support
this many people, its reaching its carrying capacity.
Climate change
coastline cities like Mumbai and Chennai is going to sink under water after sea
rise due to global warming while we ﬁght for water
Deforestation
plant trees dumb ass trees will hold water as well as soil you have no trees at all
that is why you have not water
Government
|
Public
water
wastage
not only government but all the the civilian sorry equally responsible for or the
water crisis i live in Delhi and it is not a single day when i have not encounter
water wastage
Table 1: Examples of attribution ties in our data set. Multiple factors are separated by |.
2
Related Work
Water crisis has received sustained research focus in a diverse set of ﬁelds including food policy research [10], earth
science [29], social science [8], and water research [35, 18, 43] and encompassing a broad range of dimensions including
the socio-hydrological [40], ethical [8] and cultural and foreign policy [41] aspects of the crisis. Our work drew on
these lines of research to compile a list of possible factors (listed in Table 3) the crisis can be attributed to. However, the
focus of our work is different from these lines of research as we seek to tackle the NLP challenges associated with
analyzing attributions from noisy social media data. Our work shares similar motivations to a recently-reported work on
the Flint water crisis [21]. Similar to our work, [21] constructed a substantial tweet corpus and analyzed attributions for
2https://www.hindustantimes.com/tech/youtube-now-has-265-million-users-in-india/
story-j5njXtLHZCQ0PCwb57s40O.html
2

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
the Flint water crisis. Our work is different from [21] for the following two reasons. First, our data set is linguistically
more challenging (challenges are outlined in details in Section 3.2) as a vast majority of the content creators are
non-native speakers of English. Second, we propose an automated method to detect attributions. In contrast, [21]
formed hypotheses on the nature of the attributions and then accepted or rejected those hypotheses based on randomly
sampled data labelled by annotators.
The vast literature of political science and psychological literature do not rely on automatic methods (e.g., [7, 24, 38, 36]).
Studying attributions can be viewed as a speciﬁc case of relation extraction task [17] or cause-effect analysis [11].
In terms of motivation, our work is closely related with automatic extraction of blame ties [14]. Similar to [14], we
seek to extract causal ties between a natural resource crisis and different possible factors. However, our work differs
in the following key ways. First, [14] focused on three major US newspapers to construct their blame data set. In
contrast, our focus is on social media content produced in a part of the globe where the vast majority are non-native
speakers of English. Consequently, the generated texts suffer from unique challenges (described in 3.2) atypical to
published content in high-circulation newspapers. Second, unlike fact-based presentations in news outlets, social media
discussions encompass a diverse set of expressions ranging from stating pure fact or statistics to crude disgust and
subtle sarcasm. Finally, and most importantly, [14] used a set of entities that are easy to detect in a sentence due to their
crisp word boundaries, whereas attribution topics can be expressed in several ways. For example, both the following
comments attribute deforestation to the water crisis but have very different ways of expressing it -
1. [we must protect our forests plant more trees]
2. [just rewind and see how many trees have vanished over the years to accomodate
more space for buildings and malls]
3
Data Set
3.1
YouTube Video Comments
Using the publicly available YouTube’s Search API, we queried YouTube with the following search queries: [Chennai
water crisis] and [India water crisis]. The choice of our ﬁrst query is self-explanatory. In order to capture
the coverage of the broader focus on the country wide water crisis as the crisis unfolded and received global attention,
we considered our second query.
For each query, we constructed our video set, V, by adding 350 recommended videos. Upon removal of duplicate videos
and videos without a single comment, V is pruned to contain 623 unique videos. For each video in V, we extracted
posted comments using the publicly available YouTube Data API. Our overall comment data set, Dall, consists of 72,098
comments.
Since India is a country with vast linguistic diversity (22 languages recognized by the constitution among 460 languages),
we observed the comments were written in a mixture of various languages either written in their native script or using
Roman script. Using a polyglot embedding based language identiﬁcation technique [22] that has been successfully used
in another multilingual corpus generated in this part of the globe [23], we extracted comments written in English. Our
ﬁltered set of English comments, D, consists of 41,791 English comments.
3.2
Data Set Challenges
While recent innovations in NLP research are increasingly capable of analyzing challenging data sets [12, 20, 39], much
of the NLP research to date focuses on clean corpora where the content generators have sufﬁcient proﬁciency in the
language. In our case, the vast majority of the contributors are non-native English speakers often employing a telegraphic
and colloquial style typical of social media. We outline some of these technical challenges with representative examples
next.
3.2.1
The Non-native Speaker Aspect
Spelling errors: We noticed a considerable amount of phonetic spelling errors (e.g., [check the expedinjar level
in India and other countries] originally intended to express expenditure).
Code-switching: Code-switching [42] is the phenomenon where two or more languages are mixed (e.g., [i know
bro i from maharashtra bohot buri condition hai yahapar] translates to i know bro i from maharashtra
very bad condition over here). Our annotators observed English-Tamil, English-Hindi, and English-Bengali code-mixed
comments on our data set that made linguistic analysis more difﬁcult.
Out of vocabulary words: Several comments also used shorthand-typing dropping vowels or using non-standard
abbreviations (e.g., [plz make vdo in rainwater harvesting]) typical to noisy social media texts, hence gener-
3

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
(17.6%)
(16.3%)
(9.6%)
(9.5%)
(8.2%)
water
india
change
india
muslim
save
country
climate
pakistan
indian
need
population
global
river
india
drink
people
human
china
religion
river
indian
nature
kashmir
hindu
waste
problem
animal
shit
like
Table 2: Most relevant tokens for ﬁve major topics discovered in our comments corpus C using [4].
(a) D
(b) Dpruned
Figure 1: Word cloud visualizations of D and Dpruned.
ating out of vocabulary words. Our data set had only 28.9% intersection of words with GloVe [25] vocabulary.
Grammatical errors: Since many users are non-native speakers of English, several comments suffered from
grammatical disﬂuencies (e.g., [this not happen everyear because of heat wave in south india this
happen]) making our analysis challenging.
3.2.2
Topical Focus
Linguistic diversity and large presence of non-native speakers of English add several challenges unique to this part of
the globe. However, given the geopolitical diversity of India and a multi-layered discussion on the issue with parallel
threads on contemporaneous other major events, created an even bigger challenge in obtaining the subset of comments
with topical focus.
To obtain a broad overview of the topics and to demonstrate considerable presence of topics unrelated to the water
crisis, we next present our topic modeling results. We considered three topic modelling algorithms: LDA [4] and two of
it’s most popular variants, MALLET3 and Biterm Topic Model (BTM) [48] which was used in analyzing a recent social
phenomenon [5]. As shown in Table 2 (MALLET and BTM produced qualitatively similar results), the main topics of
discussion relevant to the crisis involved call to save water (topic 1), overpopulation as a major problem (topic 2), and
climate change (topic 3).
As demonstrated in our topic modeling results, a considerable fraction of overall discussion is focused on peripheral
topics unrelated to the water crisis (topic 4 and topic 5). Presence of topics surrounding India and Pakistan is not
surprising since a major sociopolitical issue of India in 2019 was the Pulwama terror attack in Kashmir (14 Feb, 2019)
which resulted in heightened tensions between India and Pakistan4 with the two countries coming almost at the brink
of declaring a full-ﬂedged war [22]. We further conducted a human evaluation of randomly selected 200 comments
and found that manual inspection aligns with our topic-modelling results. A small fraction of communal comments
observed by our annotators align with previous ﬁnding reported in [34, 33].
3.3
Data Pruning
Since the peripheral discussions unrelated to the water crisis are not meaningful for our current analysis, in what follows,
we describe an embedding-based pruning method to narrow down the data set with comments likelier to be relevant to
the water crisis.
3http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/topics.php
4https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47302467
4

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
topographical disadvantage, weather, climate change, global warming, industrial development, petroleum
industry, water intensive industries, oil sands development expansion of urban areas, conversion of
lands for human usage, urban waste, corruption, mismanagement, contamination, industrial wastewater,
industrial waste draining, cyanobacteria, bacteria, overpopulation, population shift, excessive demand,
irresponsible irrigation, water intensive irrigation, irrigation water demand, irrigated agriculture, water
intensive agriculture, inefﬁcient irrigation, water withdrawals, irresponsible water pumping, public
water wastage, excessive usage, indifference of policy makers, lack of funding , funding cuts, lack of
study, loss of water bodies, depletion of ground water, permanent removal from water cycle groundwater
exploitation, strain on natural resources, deforestation, nutrient loss in soil, eutrophication, drought, ﬂood,
damming, impoundment, human activity, water intensive protein rich diet, consumption by livestock,
inefﬁcient distribution system
Table 3: List of factors obtained from existing water crisis literature.
First, we ground our analysis through constructing a list of potential factors scientists typically identify as possible
reasons to a water scarcity. Starting from 1990s, water crisis has received sustained attention from the water research,
urban planning, political science and environmental science community. Our list (presented in Table 3) is based on
relevant literature (i) focusing on the global water crisis (ii) targeted analysis on a wide range of geographic regions,
and (iii) the speciﬁc water crisis in Chennai and broadly in India [35, 10, 29, 8, 16, 31, 18, 43].
Let F denote the set of factors presented in Table 3. Let a comment d be represented as a sequence of sentences
s1, . . . , sn. For each si, we compute the embedding-based cosine similarity between ⟨si, f⟩, f ∈F (denoted
as Cosine(⟨si, f⟩)). We used GloVe [25], a widely-used embedding in this preprocessing step. We used the 300
dimensional GloVe model trained on 840 billion tokens of the CommonCrawl corpus, having a vocabulary size of
2.2 million. While calculating the embedding of a sentence, we removed stopwords and out of vocabulary words and
computed a tf-idf weighted mean of the remaining words. For a given comment/attribution factor pair, ⟨d, f⟩, the
similarity score, sim(⟨d, f⟩) is deﬁned as sim(⟨d, f⟩) = maxi (Cosine(⟨si, f⟩))) We removed all the comments that -
1. Do not fall in the top 20 percentile of the nearest comments of any attribution factor.
2. Have a cosine similarity less than 0.7 across all factors.
Our pruned comment set, Dpruned, consists of 2,282 comments (9,004 sentences). A word cloud visualization (see,
Figure 1) reveals that our pruning method lends more prominence to water speciﬁc tokens as tokens unrelated to the
crisis (e.g., Pakistan) receives less prominence in the pruned data set. We randomly sampled 1,250 comments from
Dpruned (5,004 sentences), and 1,000 comments from D (3,284 sentences) for annotation. The percentages of comments
having at least one attribution from D and Dpruned were 20.3% and 88.14% respectively. This way our embedding-based
pruning method helped us collect almost four times more positive attribution data.
Combining the samples from D and Dpruned, we obtained 2250 comments. This constitute the data set that we used in
our prediction task. Since a comment may consist of multiple sentences with different sentence attributing to different
factors, our annotators labeled at the granularity of a sentence. After annotating we found 1173 comments has at least
one attribution from the set of 2,250 comments.5 Also at the sentence level, we obtained 2,330 positives among 8,288
total number of sentences. Since many factors listed in Table 3 are semantically close, we further deﬁne 20 broad
attribution categories listed in Table 4.
3.4
Characterizing the Annotated Data
We had three in-house annotators proﬁcient in Hindi, English, Bengali and Dutch. The annotation was done in two
separate phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the annotators only labeled if a sentence contained an attribution. The Fleiss’ κ
measure of this task was high (0.87) indicating strong inter-rater agreement. For the second phase of the annotation
task, our annotators had to specify the attribution factor. In this step, the annotators were allowed to discuss among
themselves.
Our annotators were instructed to label any comment with attribution and map them to the factors listed in Table 3.
While the list presented in Table 3 is comprehensive covering a broad range of countries and geographical regions,
given India’s multi-layered socio-political diversity, we anticipated some of the attribution factors may not be present
in the compiled list. In such cases, we instructed the annotators to mark the comment as attributed and describe the
category in a simple English phrase of not more than four words. For instance, religion was a category discovered
5In order to avoid double-counting the duplicate comments present in the sampled 1000 comments from D, we replaced them
with randomly sampled unlabeled comments to ensure the total number of labeled unique comments is 2,250.
5

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
Broad Category
Sub-categories
Overpopulation
overpopulation, excessive demand, population shift
Urbanization
urbanization, expansion of urban areas, land conversion, urban
waste
Pollution
pollution, contamination, industrial waste water, industrial draining
Climate Change
climate change, global warming, weather
Agriculture
agricultural use, water intensive irrigation, inefﬁcient irrigation,
water intensive crops
Water Withdrawals
water withdrawals, irresponsible water pumping
Government Inaction
government inaction, indifference of policy makers, lack of proper
funding
Deforestation
deforestation, nutrient loss in soil
Natural Calamities
drought, ﬂood
Damming
damming, impoundments
Public Water Wastage
public water wastage, excessive usage
Industrial Development
industrial development, petroleum industry, water intensive indus-
tries, oil sands development
Corruption
corruption, mismanagement
Lack of infrastructure
lack of infrastructure, inefﬁcient distribution system
Religion
religion, hindu caste system, islam
Lack of Awareness
lack of awareness, lack of study
Lack of Harvesting
lack of rainwater harvesting, lack of water preservation
Loss of Water Bodies
loss of water bodies, groundwater exploitation, loss of water tables
Human activity
human activity, water intensive protein rich diet, consumption by
livestock
Groundwater exploitation
groundwater exploitation, strain on natural resources
Table 4: 20 broad categories of attribution factors.
Figure 2: Breakdown of comments with attribution.
by our annotators as a small fraction of comments blamed the Muslim community for overpopulation and the Hindu
community for contaminating the Ganges.
Figure 2 presents a visualization of our comments annotated as positives. We found that overpopulation, climate change,
deforestation, public water wastage, pollution and government inaction were recurrent themes in the discussion. We
now align one of the major talking points with Government policies to showcase how our analysis may provide useful
data points to policy research. On a manual inspection of the pollution sub-category, we found that many comments
expressed concern over open defecation and subsequent contamination of nearby water bodies. The Clean India
6

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
BERT
it’s
intricately
<EOS>
BERT
BERT
over
population
<EOS>
BERT
BERT
BERT
CONCATENATION
LINEAR LAYER
ATTTENTION
Contextual 
Embedding
One Hot 
Words
intricately linked to the massive indian population
over population
TOPIC
SENTENCE
E(f)
E(d)
↵1
↵2
A(d, f)
Figure 3: The pipeline for training the attribution model
Mission6 (Swachh Bharat Mission) [3, 2] aiming to improve sanitation for millions of Indians and overall cleanliness
can be viewed as a policy aligned with the aggregated public opinion in our data set.
4
Model
4.1
Task
Our prediction task is twofold: (1) attribution detection and (2) attribution resolution. The detection task involves
predicting if a sentence contains any attribution or not. The resolution task involves correctly identifying the factor that
is being attributed.
4.2
Model Architecture
Our model architecture is illustrated in Figure 3. We aim to learn the underlying ties between a comment d ∈D and
the set of attributing factors f ∈F. However, instead of modeling the problem as a multi-class classiﬁcation over F,
we modeled over a generic set of topics which is not completely known a priori. Given a set of (d, f) pair where we
know an attribution exists, we want to learn the different ways people comment when they attribute f in a comment d.
In order to model this generalized notion of attribution, we aim to design an attribution function A: (D, F) 7→[0, 1]
that will estimate the attribution relationship in a (d, f) pair. As mentioned in previous section, we constructed our
training data of (d, f) pairs with of binary label [0, 1] to denote if an attribution f is present in comment d. The size of
our labelled data is extremely small to train a full-ﬂedged contextual embedding model that can capture the topical
relationship between d and f. Hence, we used pre-trained contextual embeddings like ElMo [26] and BERT [6] to
establish the relationship. Our intuition is the following: pre-trained word embeddings in a sentence capture both the
semantic of the topic discussed so far as well as the context in which the topic is used. The semantic information can be
used to identify the relevance of the factor f in hand and the contextual information can help in identifying the use
of the factor as an attribution. This intuition simpliﬁes our learning task such that we only have to learn the factor
attribution without learning the contextual representation for similarity.
The model architecture is demonstrated in Figure 3. Let’s assume d = {wi} where wi are the words in comment
d and similarly f = {wj}. Using the above intuition, for a (d, f) pair we ﬁrst get the word embeddings {e(wi)}
and {e(wj)}, respectively using BERT or ElMo. As the attribution factors constitute only few words, we set the mean
embedding meanj∈|f|{e(wj)} as the representation of the factor E(f). Next, using this representation E(f), we
determine an attribution-factor-weighted representation of comment E(d) using cross-attention between the attribution
factor representation E(f) and the word embeddings of e(wi) from d. The exact formulation is as below-
E(f) = meanj∈|f|{e(wj)}
(1)
E(d) =
X
i∈|d|
αie(wi) where
(2)
6https://swachhbharatmission.gov.in/sbmcms/index.htm
7

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
αi = Cosine(e(wi), E(f))
(3)
The concatenation of the E(d) and E(f) is used as the ﬁnal representation of the (d, f) pair E(d, f) = [E(d) : E(f)].
This is passed through a linear layer with dropouts to model the attribution function A and is trained with Binary Cross
Entropy loss (BCELoss) using binary labels.
A(d, f) = σ(W ∗E(d, f) + B)
(4)
Here W and B are learnable parameters and σ(.) is the sigmoid function.
5
Experimental Setup
5.1
Model Training
We divided our dataset into 80% training and 20% holdout. Further we divided the training set into 90:10 to train and
model selection respectively. We used Huggingface’s transformer API [47] to build our model. We initialized our
model with pre-trained weights from BERT (‘bert-base-uncased’) and trained our classiﬁer with ﬁne-tuning all the 12
transformer layers for two to three epochs. We used Adam optimizer [13] with a learning rate of 2e-5 and trained with
batch size of 4. We start our model from pre-trained ElMo and BERT models and ﬁne-tuned them along with learning
the linear layer. As our training set had class imbalance, we tried to use different weights for positive samples but it
didn’t yield better result.
5.2
Performance Measures
Since a high prediction accuracy in a task with class imbalance can be trivially achieved by predicting the majority class,
we considered precision, recall and F1 score along with accuracy. For the attribution detection task, we used a threshold
on the topmost attributing factor to determine if the sentence has any attribution from the provided set of factors. The
threshold is tuned on the validation set mentioned in previous section. For the attribution resolution task, we used a set
membership test to assign a binary outcome to a sample’s prediction task. Consider Fi denotes the ground truth set of
attribution factors for a sentence si, and our classiﬁer predicts attribution factor fi for si. The binary outcome of the
prediction task is I(fi ∈Fi) where I is the indicator function. Fi is mostly a singleton (77% of attributed sentences
have only one attribution).
5.3
Baseline
We used a GloVe [25] embedding based similarity measure to establish a baseline for this task. As the attribution factors
can be very diverse, we chose an embedding based method. Our baseline is inspired by the observation presented in [1],
that weighted word embeddings produces high quality sentence representations. We used an idf (inverse document
frequency) weighted sum of GloVe embedding for all the words in a sentence to get a sentence representation. Next,
we used the same method for the attribution factors and computed cosine similarity to establish the relationship of the
factor and the sentence.
6
Results
Our models’ performance is summarized in Table 5. MBERT, MElMo denote our neural classiﬁer based on BERT and
ElMo embeddings, respectively. MGloVe denotes our baseline.
Since this is a task with class imbalance, precision, recall and F1 score are the more useful metrics than accuracy. We
found that, on the detection task, both MBERT and MElMo performed comparably. However, on the resolution task,
MBERT substantially outperformed MElMo.
Since many of the attribution factors were semantically close (e.g., loss of water bodies, water withdrawal), we
considered a more relaxed resolution criteria. In this criteria, we consider a resolution is correct if the model’s top three
predictions feature the ground truth. As expected, in this new metric, the performance of all algorithms improved with
MBERT still leading the pack. We acknowledge that our models’ performance could be further improved with more
sophisticated models or tuning the parameters. We are publicly releasing our data set so that the community can treat
our models as baselines and to encourage further research in this domain.
We next focus on some of the examples correctly resolved by MBERT. As shown in Table 7, our MBERT model was able
to correctly identify attributions in sentences even in presence of certain degree of grammar disﬂuencies and an absence
8

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
Detection
Resolution
Resolution
+ top 3
MBERT
Precision
64.53
48.94
56.10
Recall
75.72
39.88
53.18
Accuracy
81.34
71.19
74.96
F1
69.68
43.95
54.60
MElMo
Precision
54.69
21.09
31.36
Recall
80.92
17.92
30.64
Accuracy
75.61
57.77
61.37
F1
65.27
19.38
30.99
MGloVe
Precision
37.60
8.08
13.72
Recall
83.24
12.14
21.97
Accuracy
56.14
36.01
38.79
F1
51.80
9.70
16.89
Table 5: Performance comparison of our models and baselines. For a given task and a performance measure, the best
model’s performance is highlighted in bold.
Contamination | Industrial devel-
opment
dam dont drink or consume water folks for dam whats go in must come out
Public water wastage | Govern-
ment inaction
govt is not taking necessary steps to save groundwater for future
Contamination | Government inac-
tion
the government should be ashamed for dumping sewage into the rivers
Public water wastage | Groundwa-
ter exploitation
we all should preserve ground water as most as we can do
Overpopulation | Lack of aware-
ness
machello very true it makes more sense to have more children children are are
blessing from god there is no point talking sense to people with this mentality
am so they would be very happy if all those children just dropped dead.
Table 6: Example comments that our classiﬁer misclassiﬁed. Missclassiﬁed attribution factor is color-coded with red,
ground truth is color-coded with blue.
of the exact attribution factor per se. For instance, our model correctly resolved [stop have 9 kids family]
to overpopulation or [we cut trees to build flat malls multi stored buildings] to deforestation even
through the speciﬁc root terms of the attribution factors were not present in the sentences. However, our model
struggled when certain words are misspelled in a way that it got confused the incorrectly spelled work with another
attribution factor (e.g., damn was incorrectly spelled as dam). When the attribution factors are mixed up in a confusing
way (e.g., [govt is not taking necessary steps to save groundwater for future]), our model failed
to detect the subtleties. We also found cases where MBERT was able to identify the correct answers in the relaxed setting
of top 3. For example, [we all should preserve ground water as most as we can do] was incorrectly
attributed to Public water wastage instead of Ground water exploitation but the correct result was present in top 3
attributed results. We even saw in case of multiple attribution in a single sentence the model was able to identify most of
the factors in top 3. Like for the sentence, [the problem with india is their population growth corrupt
government plus climate] the model was able to detect Climate change, Overpopulation and Lack of awareness
as the top three attributing factors.
7
Conclusions
Given the preponderance of Indian population with respect to the global population (1.3 billion out of 7.7 billion),
estimating awareness to climate change, growing strain on natural resources, population explosion etc. would be
crucial to understand and implement better policies and any improvement in public life has the potential of positively
affecting population size of global import. However, we have noticed there is a considerable gap in the NLP literature in
analyzing crises generated in the Indian sub-continent through the lens of social media, and we suspect that limitation
of NLP methods to tackle the linguistic diversity and several other challenges discussed in this paper could be a possible
reason for this gap. In this paper, we provide an end-to-end blue-print of analyzing social media discussions on possibly,
one of the most important crises of the future: water.
Apart from analyzing the crisis at hand, presenting promising results in a novel detection task of attribution ties,
and publicly releasing a data set in this unique domain, we consider our work ﬁts in to the central ACL theme:
9

Social Media Attributions in the Context of Water Crisis
A PREPRINT
Overpopulation
stop have 9 kids family.
Climate change
also you should consider the extreme heat and lack of rain which creates its own
sanitary problems
Deforestation
we cut trees to build ﬂat malls multi stored buildings
Agriculture
why is india not following the natural farming method this will save water and
reduce suicides
Contamination
i doubt there is one drop of clean water in india with all the human and industrial
waste
Table 7: Example comments that our classiﬁer correctly resolved.
Taking Stock of Where We’ve Been and Where We’re Going in a sense that we have employed an array of recent
NLP advances [6, 22, 25, 26, 48] to tackle a problem in a region of the globe where several events with geopolitical
consequences are currently taking place [22, 19, 45].
