Multiobjective Coverage Path Planning: Enabling
Automated Inspection of Complex, Real-World
Structures
K.O. Ellefsena,d,, H.A. Lepiksonb, J.C. Albieza,c
aBrazilian Institute of Robotics, SENAI CIMATEC, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil
bSENAI Institute for Innovation in Automation, SENAI CIMATEC, Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil
cRobotics Innovation Center, DFKI GmbH, Bremen, Germany
dDepartment of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
Abstract
An important open problem in robotic planning is the autonomous gen-
eration of 3D inspection paths – that is, planning the best path to move a
robot along in order to inspect a target structure. We recently suggested a new
method for planning paths allowing the inspection of complex 3D structures,
given a triangular mesh model of the structure. The method diﬀers from pre-
vious approaches in its emphasis on generating and considering also plans that
result in imperfect coverage of the inspection target. In many practical tasks,
one would accept imperfections in coverage if this results in a substantially more
energy eﬃcient inspection path. The key idea is using a multiobjective evolu-
tionary algorithm to optimize the energy usage and coverage of inspection plans
simultaneously – and the result is a set of plans exploring the diﬀerent ways to
balance the two objectives. We here test our method on a set of inspection tar-
gets with large variation in size and complexity, and compare its performance
with two state-of-the-art methods for complete coverage path planning. The
results strengthen our conﬁdence in the ability of our method to generate good
inspection plans for diﬀerent types of targets. The method’s advantage is most
clearly seen for real-world inspection targets, since traditional complete cover-
age methods have no good way of generating plans for structures with hidden
parts. Multiobjective evolution, by optimizing energy usage and coverage to-
gether ensures a good balance between the two – both when 100% coverage is
feasible, and when large parts of the object are hidden.
Keywords:
Coverage Path Planning, Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithm,
Robotic Inspection

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
January 23, 2019
arXiv:1901.07272v1  [cs.AI]  22 Jan 2019

1. Introduction
Recent years’ advances in robotic autonomy have resulted in an increased
demand for the ability to autonomously plan and schedule complex missions.
This paper addresses one challenging mission type, which is that of inspecting
3D structures. Currently, such inspection is typically planned and performed
manually, but recent work has addressed ways to perform inspection planning
autonomously, in domains ranging from ship hull inspection with an AUV (au-
tonomous underwater vehicle) [28] to inspection of bridges with a wheeled
robot [32] and the inspection of buildings and ﬁelds with UAVs (unmanned
aerial vehicles) [4].
In a recent paper [14], we proposed an inspection path planning algorithm for
an AUV designed for inspection of subsea oilﬁeld infrastructure. The demands
presented by this type of inspection mission highlight limitations to previous
inspection path planners, in particular with regards to their ability to handle
complex structures with occluded or hidden parts.
Previous work on planning inspection paths has typically made the assump-
tion that the inspection mission has to achieve 100% sensor coverage of a given
structure. In our application, as in many practical inspection planning prob-
lems, a 100% covering plan is not necessarily desirable: If the energy diﬀerence
between a well-covering plan and a perfectly covering plan is too large, we may
prefer the former. In fact, 100% coverage may not even be feasible in situations
where structures have occluded or hidden parts – further emphasizing the need
for partial coverage inspection plans. This led us to suggest a radically diﬀer-
ent inspection path planner, which considers coverage of the inspection target
an objective rather than a constraint. Initial results suggested that this multi-
objective inspection path planner could ﬂexibly handle structures with hidden
elements [14].
In this paper, we expand on our preliminary results [14] by comparing the
multiobjective inspection path planner to state-of-the-art methods for coverage
path planning. Since these methods originally assume that a 100% coverage is
desired, we implemented generalized versions, where we relax the constraint on
complete coverage. This allows us to compare the methods on structures with
hidden parts, and to get an idea of the diversity in the plans each method can
produce.
We compare the methods on structures with very diﬀerent levels of com-
plexity, to better understand the strengths and weaknesses of each one. The
results from this comparison strengthen our conﬁdence in the ﬂexibility and
robustness of our multiobjective inspection path planning algorithm. It gener-
ates high-quality plans across a large variety of shapes and coverage levels, and
consistently produces plans with better or similar energy-eﬃciency compared to
competing approaches.
2

Figure 1: The FlatFish AUV is the target platform for the inspection plans. The
ﬁgure shows it during ocean trials.
2. Application Target
The work presented here is done in co-operation with the project FlatFish,
which aims to develop a subsea-resident AUV for inspection of oﬀshore infras-
tructure. The FlatFish AUV, currently being developed in a cooperation be-
tween the Brazilian Institute of Robotics, Shell and DFKI, Germany, is shown
in Figure 1. We refer the reader to [1] for details on the AUV, and [12] for in-
formation about the algorithm used to gather data and reconstruct inspection
targets.
Underwater structures like oil and gas production systems or the foundations
of buildings, piers and oﬀ-shore wind facilities, have to be regularly inspected
to evaluate the state of the structure and to plan future interventions for repair
and maintenance. Being able to inspect the subsea part of an asset regularly
and/or on demand plays a key role for subsea asset integrity assurance (SIA)
and integrity management. The key information gathered from inspections en-
compasses the general structural integrity and close visual data (also known
as close visual inspection, CVI). These inspections are currently performed by
remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) or, if water depth and availability allow it,
by divers. Due to the fact that inspections of this kind require a special support
vessel, they are time-consuming, expensive, need to be planned a long time in
advance and rely on good weather conditions and seasonal constraints (e.g. not
during hurricane season or winter storms).
Current research in subsea robotics focuses strongly on using autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) for inspections [24, 34, 39]. The idea of this ap-
proach is to have a subsea resident AUV with a docking station in the oﬀshore
asset and let the robot perform inspections on the infrastructure whenever it is
needed. Besides the obvious technical challenges like robust navigation or subsea
docking, creating an eﬃcient plan for structure inspection is very important.
The inspection plan must cover all interesting parts of the structure with
the AUVs sensors and must be as energy eﬃcient as possible since the AUV
runs on internal battery power.
The 3D model of all the inspection targets
3

within the ﬁeld is known, either from the time of deployment or from previous
inspection runs. The goal for the inspection planner therefore is to ﬁnd the
optimal trajectory around a known target.
3. Background
3.1. Coverage Path Planning
Planning a path that inspects a three-dimensional object is an example of
a coverage path planning (CPP) problem: The task of ﬁnding a path covering
an area of interest, while avoiding any obstacles [23].
In general, the CPP
problem is NP-Hard, meaning an optimal solution (in terms of path length or
energy usage) is unrealistic for anything but toy problems.
Therefore, most
CPP solvers seek a good, but not optimal, solution.
CPP methods can be classiﬁed as continuous or discrete, depending on the
way the robot covers structures [19]. The former assumes continuous sensing
or deposition – implying, for inspection missions, that information is gathered
as the robot moves along the path. Discrete CPP, on the other hand, makes
the assumption that information is gathered at speciﬁc locations, for instance
in the case of a robot that needs to stabilize for a moment in a position before
gathering data.
Most previous work in coverage path planning (see [23] for a recent review)
considers how to make a robot’s body cover a 2-dimensional area (as needed in for
instance vacuum cleaning and harvesting robots). On the other hand, robotic
inspection missions like the one considered in this paper require us to “cover” a
3-dimensional object with the robot’s ﬁeld of view. Advanced methods for 3D
coverage path planning have received attention only in recent years, and the
most relevant work in this direction is described below.
3.1.1. Complete coverage path planning for 3D targets
Common to all previous methods on planning 3D inspection paths is to focus
on the complete coverage problem, meaning they aim to generate the best path
covering 100% of the inspection target. While time constraints are common
in robotic planning problems [30], these complete coverage solvers make the
assumption that we would like to cover the entire target structure – with no
strict upper time limit.
Most previous methods [4–7, 16–18, 27, 28, 40] reduce the problem’s com-
plexity by making the simplifying assumption that we are dealing with discrete
inspection: Inspection where data is gathered when the robot is standing still
– on vertices of the path plan, rather than edges [19]. This allows them to
divide the planning problem in two: 1) planning the location of viewpoints and
2) planning the order of visiting them. How these two steps are achieved vary
greatly between the approaches, but common to them all is that they ﬁrst ﬁnd
a set of viewpoints that together give a complete coverage of the inspection
target, and thereafter ﬁnd a tour that visits these viewpoints eﬃciently.
4

Methods for discrete coverage path planning have demonstrated good per-
formance, even handling obstacles and occluding elements gracefully [18]. How-
ever, their simplifying assumption that we can optimize viewpoints and the
paths between them separately may be a problem whenever there are depen-
dencies between the two goals of viewpoint planning and path planning [37].
This is the case, for instance, in a cluttered environment where some viewpoints
are not reachable from all other viewpoints, and when dealing with continuous
inspection. To handle such dependencies, planners need to optimize viewpoints
and paths together. Methods for continuous coverage path planning have been
suggested using a genetic algorithm [32], sampling-based motion planning [37]
and sampling-based path planning [15]. These methods generate plans tailored
to robots that perform inspections while moving.
An alternative to time-consuming optimization techniques is to generate a
continuous coverage path rapidly through geometrical calculations [22]. Cover-
age plans for 3D structures can be generated by “slicing” the structure at evenly
spaced depth levels, and circling around each slice at a ﬁxed distance [2, 8, 22].
While such circling-based plans may not be optimal for certain structures (for
instance, this method cannot optimize the robot’s trajectory so that it can view
occluded objects), this method has the advantages of being simple and having
a very low computational complexity.
3.1.2. Multiobjective coverage path planning
Several authors have suggested ways to use multiobjective optimization in
path planning – most frequently to balance energy usage and risk [35, 41, 45].
However, to our knowledge multiobjective optimization for planning inspection
paths has not been explored until our recently published paper [14].
The traditional approach to planning inspection paths for 3D objects as-
sumes the constraint of requiring a complete coverage, in addition to other
constraints related to the robot’s potential movements, such as not allowing
plans coming too close to obstacles.
Our multiobjective coverage path plan-
ning method instead treats maximizing inspection coverage and minimizing the
number of collisions as additional factors to optimize (Figure 2) – in contrast
to previous methods which typically only optimize plans’ energy usage.
The key implications of this reformulation of the inspection planning problem
are 1) That inspection plans can be optimized also for complex structures where
100% coverage is not possible and 2) That a large family of optimal inspection
plans can be generated, ranging from short inspections of the most important
structural features to long inspection missions covering most or all of the struc-
ture surface. Section 4.3 contains more details about how our multiobjective
inspection path planning is implemented.
3.2. Multiobjective Evolutionary Optimization
This section describes the methods we apply from the ﬁeld of multiobjective
evolutionary optimization (MOEA) in order to generate inspection path plans,
and to compare the performance of diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the optimizer.
5

Complete Coverage
Path Planning
Multiobjective Coverage 
Path Planning
●100% Coverage
●No Collisions
Constraints
●Minimize 
Energy Usage
Objective
●Minimize Energy Usage
●Maximize Coverage
●Minimize Number of Collisions
Objectives
Figure 2: The key idea of our inspection path planning approach. Unlike previous
methods, we consider structure coverage as an objective instead of a constraint. The method
also allows us to turn other typical constraints, such as avoiding collisions, into objectives –
allowing plans with collisions and/or low coverage to serve as “stepping stones” on the way
to optimized, collision-free plans.
3.2.1. Applied evolutionary algorithms
Multiobjective Evolutionary Optimization is a rapidly developing ﬁeld, with
a large selection of candidate algorithms (see [11] for a recent review). Our
main focus here is on the algorithm NSGA-II (Non-dominated Sorting Genetic
Algorithm, version II) [10], since it is known to perform well on problems with
few (2-3) objectives [29], and since it is one of the most popular MOEAs –
and therefore available in many Evolutionary Algorithm frameworks.
As an
additional control, to increase the conﬁdence in our results, we also carried out
the main experiment with the more recent MOEA/D algorithm [44]. MOEA/D
belongs to a diﬀerent class of MOEA than NSGA-II, and this control therefore
helps ascertain whether or not the results from NSGA-II can generalize to other
MOEAs. Below follow brief descriptions of the two applied algorithms.
NSGA-II uses the the concept of Pareto dominance when comparing and
selecting solutions. Solution A dominates solution B if the following two re-
quirements are fulﬁlled: 1) A is not outperformed by B on any objective, and
2) A performs better than B with regards to some objective. NSGA-II also
maintains a high level of diversity in the population of solutions, by giving an
increased preference to solutions that have objective values far from those of the
remaining population. Together, the search for non-dominated and diversiﬁed
solutions may produce a good approximation of the true Pareto front, which
represents the set of solutions with optimal trade-oﬀs between the diﬀerent ob-
jectives. In the case of inspection path planning, the Pareto front contains those
solutions that strike the optimal balance between energy costs and inspection
coverage – those that “get the most coverage for their spent energy”. See [10]
for a more detailed and formal description of NSGA-II.
MOEA/D also attempts to ﬁnd an approximation of the Pareto front, but
has a very diﬀerent way of doing so: Instead of relying on Pareto dominance,
MOEA/D decomposes the multiobjective optimization problem into several dif-
ferent single-objective problems. Throughout evolution, the population is com-
6

posed of the best solutions so far to each of these subproblems. Since similar
subproblems will often have similar solutions, recombination mainly takes place
between neighboring solutions, that is, solutions solving similar subproblems.
The neighborhood size is therefore an important parameter in this algorithm,
aﬀecting its ability to properly explore the search landscape.
If the decom-
position of the multiobjective problem has resulted in an even distribution of
subproblems, evolution can explore many diﬀerent ways to balance the objec-
tives simultaneously, resulting in a good approximation of the Pareto front.
See [44] for more details on MOEA/D.
Common for both NSGA-II and MOEA/D is that we do not have to formalize
our preferences between the diﬀerent objectives. Rather, we select the solution
that best matches our preferences a posteriori, after the ﬁnal solutions have
been generated [31].
The user of the inspection planner can thus select the
plan best matching the requirements of the current mission from a population
of optimized candidate plans.
3.2.2. Measuring optimization performance
Since the objectives we wish to optimize, energy usage and coverage degree,
are in conﬂict, we cannot measure the performance of optimization by looking
at either in isolation: Optimizing coverage is easy if we have inﬁnite energy
resources, and optimizing energy is easy if we do not have to cover anything.
Instead, we rely on the hypervolume indicator [3, 46], a popular measure of the
performance of multiobjective evolutionary algorithms. It gives a population
of solutions a value reﬂecting how closely this population matches the true
Pareto front, by calculating the size of the space spanned by this population
(Figure 3). The hypervolume is measured relative to a reference point, which
is by many authors recommended to be selected by taking the worst possible
value for each objective, and increasing it slightly [3] – a technique we have
adopted in our measurements. We used the hypervolume indicator to measure
the optimization progress over generations of evolution, as well as for comparing
diﬀerent experimental treatments.
Another technique we apply to compare diﬀerent experimental treatments
is to study their attainment surfaces and diﬀerence in empirical attainment
functions [20, 25]. Attainment surfaces summarize the performance of several
runs of a multiobjective optimization algorithm, by indicating which parts of
the objective space were reached (or attained) by that algorithm. Here, we plot
best, worst and median attainment surfaces. Together, the three indicate the
entire area of the objective space reached by any run of the algorithm, and
its median performance. Finally, measuring diﬀerence in attainment functions
facilitate the comparison between diﬀerent algorithms, or diﬀerent settings of
an algorithm, by indicating which areas of the objective space were attained by
one algorithm, but not by another. We refer the reader to [33] for more details
on how to measure and visualize attainment functions.
7

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Optimized Solution
Reference Point
Objective A
Objective B
Hypervolume
Figure 3: Calculating the hypervolume spanned by a set of optimized solutions.
This performance indicator measures the quality of a population of solutions resulting from
multiobjective optimization as the hypervolume they span relative to a reference point. In
the special case of having exactly two objectives, the hypervolume is an area.
4. Methods
The main goal of this paper is validating our previously published multiob-
jective coverage path planning algorithm [14] by comparing it to other state-of-
the-art methods. Since none of the previous methods for 3D coverage path plan-
ning are fully suitable for this comparison (they all generate complete coverage
plans), we implemented generalized versions of two state-of-the-art inspection
planning techniques.
The generalizations are needed to enable the planners
to handle the generation of plans with imperfect coverage – allowing a more
relevant comparison with our method.
The two methods we compare our algorithm with are circularly sweeping
plans, which is part of several diﬀerent algorithms for continuous coverage path
planning for 3D objects [2, 8, 22], and sampling-based coverage path planning,
which was explored in a series of papers by Englot and Hover, both for continu-
ous [15] and discrete [16–18] 3D coverage path planning. We consider these the
two most relevant methods for this comparison, since they have both been sug-
gested in recent papers on inspection path planning, they are able to generate
continuous inspection plans, and it is possible to generalize them to generate
plans without complete coverage.
The remainder of this chapter describes the three techniques and how we
compared them. Since the details of the algorithms are already published else-
where, we focus on the modiﬁcations we made to enable comparison of the
methods – in particular those enabling the previous methods to generate plans
with incomplete coverage.
4.1. Comparing Inspection Path Planners
Figure 4 shows the procedure for comparing the three inspection path plan-
ners. They all accept 3D mesh models as inputs, and generate a path consisting
8

Inspection Target
Generate Plan
Measure Energy
and Coverage
Performance:
(coverage, energy)
Figure 4: How we test the planners.
Each planner receives an inspection target, and
generates an inspection plan for it. Energy and coverage of each plan is estimated, and the plan
is plotted as shown in the middle. The black line is the plan path, and the inspection target
is colored to show which parts were successfully inspected (red/dark) and not (cyan/light).
of a sequence of waypoints and orientations. Orientations describe the heading
of the robot when moving between consecutive waypoints. Each generated plan
is tested for its energy usage (Section 4.1.1) and coverage of the inspection tar-
get (Section 4.1.2), before plans resulting from the three diﬀerent methods are
compared.
4.1.1. Energy usage estimation
The estimation of energy usage is necessary in two parts of this work: 1) when
comparing the results of diﬀerent planning techniques, and 2) when assigning
ﬁtness values to individuals in the evolutionary optimization of inspection plans.
The energy usage of a plan is estimated by the following formula:
X
⃗e∈Edges(plan)
(wtrans · ||⃗e||) + (wrot · (1 −cos(θ⃗e−1,⃗e)))
(1)
where wtrans and wrot are constants regulating how much we emphasize
translations and rotations in the energy calculation, and θ⃗e−1,⃗e is the angle
between edge i−1 and edge i (the ﬁrst edge has θ = 0). For each edge in a plan,
the energy usage is thus calculated as the sum of the translation energy spent
along that edge, and the rotational energy required to move in the direction
of the edge. The latter is estimated as being proportional to the diﬀerence in
direction between the current and previous edge. The weights applied in our
experiment were wtrans = 0.1 and wrot = 1, emphasizing the cost of direction
changes in the underwater environment.
This energy estimate was applied due to its simplicity in implementation
and low complexity in computation, facilitating the generation of plans and
comparison of algorithms. In practice, when applying the plan optimization
methods discussed here in real-world trials, it will probably be better to pay the
extra cost of computing more accurate energy estimates, to get a plan as closely
tailored as possible to a speciﬁc AUV’s performance. Energy usage estimation is
an external method in all the optimization techniques discussed herein, making
it straightforward to exchange the calculation we apply with any other function
taking an inspection path as input and returning a number representing an
9

energy estimate. Obtaining a more exact energy estimate calibrated to a speciﬁc
AUV could be done by following the method proposed in [9].
The sampling-based planner and the circling-based planner never generate
plans where edges collide with the inspection target (collision here deﬁned as
any part of the edge being closer to the inspection target than a safety buﬀer
of 1.5 m). The EA-based inspection planner can, however generate plans with
collisions: We chose to penalize rather than discard evolved plans with collisions
because good plans with a few collisions may serve as stepping-stones for the
search towards good plans without collisions.
Any edges that come too close to the inspection target are penalized by in-
creasing their energy usage. It is important that this penalty is large enough to
avoid rewarding plans for taking shortcuts through the inspection target. We
chose to set the penalty to be equal to twice the length of the longest side of the
inspection target. This value reﬂects the fact that the collision could be avoided
by post-processing the plan to traverse around the sides of the inspection target
rather than pass through it. Any inspection information gathered while travers-
ing a colliding edge is disregarded. In practice, we see this penalty leading to
the ﬁnal, evolved solutions avoiding collisions – and for the “seeded” evolution-
ary runs (Section 4.3.1) we never observed an optimized plan intersecting the
inspection target.
4.1.2. Coverage estimation
Coverage estimation takes as input an inspection path or a single edge, a
3D model of the structure to be inspected and a list of each of the robot’s
cameras (including their relevant parameters, such as heading relative to the
robot, opening angles and range) that will be used to inspect the structure, and
estimates which geometric primitives will be observed by the path or edge.
Coverage estimation is used both to compare the planning methods and in-
ternally in the methods during plan generation. In the sampling-based planning
method and the evolutionary plan optimization, it is necessary to estimate the
set of primitives observed by each considered edge. This is done by simulating
camera “snapshots” at several locations along the edge, with the robot orienta-
tion deﬁned for that edge, and maintaining a set of all observed primitives.
When estimating the coverage of an entire plan, the algorithm iterates
through each edge in the plan, estimating all geometric primitives visible along
the edge as described above. After iterating over all edges in the plan, we have
a set estimating all geometric primitives seen while carrying out the plan. The
total area of these primitives is calculated and compared with the area of all
primitives in the 3D model of the inspection target with the following formula:
coverage score = 1.0 −(covered area/total area)
(2)
coverage score thus ranges from 0 (complete coverage) to 1 (no coverage).
We chose 0 as the optimum, to frame coverage optimization as a minimization-
problem, in line with the optimization of energy usage. Further details of how
we calculate the coverage score (including pseudocode) are found in [14].
10

Figure 5: Degrees of freedom of the FlatFish AUV. The AUV actively controls ﬁve of
the six degrees of freedom, and roll is passively stabilized. Image from [38].
4.1.3. Common assumptions and parameters
Assumptions used to evaluate coverage and energy usage are adapted to our
vehicle and mission type – especially with regards to the FlatFish AUV’s camera
setup and degrees of freedom [1]. The FlatFish AUV operates in ﬁve of the six
Euclidean degrees of freedom actively (Figure 5). The buoyancy and weight
distribution on FlatFish is designed to have an optimal metacentric height,
which passively stabilizes the AUV on the roll axis. Pitch is controlled by the
two diving thrusters, and controlled to be zero all the time when moving slowly
to minimize thruster eﬀort. The active degrees of freedom used by FlatFish
during inspection are therefore heave, sway, surge and yaw.
For all the compared methods, it is assumed that the robot inspects while
moving (that is, on edges in the generated plan), and that the robot’s orien-
tation 1) always lies in the x-y plane (no rotation in pitch or roll) and 2) is
perpendicular to the movement direction in the x-y plane (this results in the
largest covered volume, since our robot’s horizontally facing camera is in front).
In the case of a move along the z-axis, the robot is assumed to point towards
the center of the inspection target.
It is further assumed that the robot has two cameras to utilize in inspection,
one pointing straight forward, and the other straight down. The two cameras
gather information simultaneously. The parameters of the simulated cameras
are shown in Table 1.
A ﬁnal assumption, which simpliﬁes plan evaluation, is that all non-occluded
structures in the ﬁeld of view of the AUV are equally visible. We make this
assumption since 1) The stand-oﬀdistance to the structure is always too small
to cause any signiﬁcant inﬂuence of attenuation of our on-board lights and lasers,
and 2) The focus here is on oﬀ-line planning – unpredictable changes in currents,
11

Parameter
Value
Vertical and Horizontal Pixels
1024
Near Plane Distance
0.1m
Far Plane Distance
10m
Vertical Field of View
46◦
Horizontal Field of View
46◦
Table 1: Parameters of the simulated cameras.
visibility and accessibility will occur, but adaptation to these will need to be
handled on-line.
4.2. Discretization
The MOEA-planner and the circling-paths planner both rely on the same
discretization of the space around inspection targets into candidate waypoints.
In both cases, a sequence of these candidate waypoints constitutes the inspection
plan.
The generation of candidate waypoints takes three parameters: pad, which
deﬁnes how much “padding” to add around the structure’s bounding box (and
thus, the maximum distance waypoints can have from the structure), buffer,
which deﬁnes the minimum distance between the structure and candidate way-
points, and wp interval, which deﬁnes the spacing between candidate way-
points. The eﬀect of these parameters is illustrated in Figure 6. Note that we
do not pad the structure below it’s minimum z-value, since our inspection tar-
gets are mainly ﬂoor-mounted structures. This constraint of never generating
waypoints below a structure was imposed on all three compared methods.
The spacing between waypoints, was calculated as a function of the volume
of the structure’s bounding box as follows:
wp interval =
3p
padded bb vol/volume scaling
(3)
where padded bb vol is the volume of the bounding box around the struc-
ture plus padding (in other words, the total volume inside which we will add
candidate waypoints), and volume scaling is a constant factor that controls the
proportion of the padded bb vol that each candidate waypoint occupies. This
calculation of wp interval maintains the complexity of the search relatively in-
dependent of the structure volume. Table 5 shows that it generates a similar
number of candidate waypoints for our three structures, despite their great dif-
ferences in volume.
The values we chose for the parameters pad, buffer and volume scaling are
given in Table 2. For any given application, these values need to be informed
by the search complexity one is willing to accept, and the parameters of the
inspection robot.
12

Inspection 
Target
pad
buffer
wp_interval
Figure 6: Generating candidate waypoints for a structure. The ﬁgure illustrates the
eﬀect of the parameters pad, buffer and wp interval. Note that, to avoid a cluttered illus-
tration, this example has a far coarser discretization than that which was used during the
experiments documented here.
Parameter
Value
pad
4.0m
buffer
2.0m
volume scaling
1000
Table 2: Parameters of the discretization into candidate waypoints.
13

4.3. Multiobjective Inspection Path Optimization
We recently proposed a way to use multiobjective evolutionary computation
to generate inspection path plans exhibiting good balance between energy and
coverage [14]. Algorithm 1 shows a high-level overview of the method.
Algorithm 1 MultiobjectiveInspectionPlanning(structure, seeds)
1: wp candidates ←CandidateWaypoints(structure)
2: population ←∅
3: while population < pop size do
4:
if Rand() < pseeded then
5:
population ←population + DrawElems(seeds, 1)
6:
else
7:
n ←RandInt(min init size, max init size)
8:
rand ind ←DrawElems(wp candidates, n)
9:
population ←population + rand ind
10:
end if
11: end while
12: FitnessEvaluate(population)
13: for gen ∈[0 : num generations] do
14:
selected ←TournamentSelect(population, pop size)
15:
offspring ←CrossoverAndMutate(selected, pcrossover, pmutation)
16:
FitnessEvaluate(offspring)
17:
population ←NSGASelect(population + offspring, pop size)
18: end for
19: return population
This algorithm applies the widely used multiobjective optimizer NSGA-II
(Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm, version II) [10] in order to evolve
an initial population of plans into increasingly well performing inspection path
plans.
It was implemented using the Python-framework DEAP [21] for dis-
tributed evolutionary algorithms. The values of key parameters in our experi-
ments are given in Table 3. The table also indicates the maximum number of
ﬁtness evaluation, including evaluating initial solutions and all the generations
of evolution. Note, however, that much fewer evaluations will be used in prac-
tice, since individuals that are not changed through mutation or crossover will
not need to be reevaluated. Since our main goal is to compare multiobjective to
single-objective inspection path planning, we did not carry out extensive tuning
or sensitivity analysis when settling on these parameters. However, we encour-
age further studies to investigate how multiobjective inspection path plans vary
with these and other parameters.
The optimization starts by generating the set of candidate waypoints as
described in Section 4.2, and assigning each waypoint a unique ID. An inspection
plan is represented as sequence of viewpoint IDs of any length. By modifying
this sequence through crossover and mutation, the evolutionary optimization
selects which waypoints to include in an inspection plan and in which order
14

Parameter
Value
pop size
40
num generations
400
pmutation
0.1
pcrossover
0.1
pseeded Seeded Runs
0.35
pseeded Unseeded Runs
0.0
Max. Num. of Fitness Evaluations
16, 040
Table 3: Parameters of the evolutionary algorithm.
they will be visited. Since this algorithm is already described in [14], we will
not re-iterate the details. However, we ﬁnd it appropriate to discuss the way
we initialize plans, since we will explore the eﬀects of two diﬀerent forms of
initialization in Section 5.
4.3.1. Initializing the optimization
Individuals in the initial population of path plans are generated through
random sampling, or from a previously generated set of seed plans, which are
plans that are simple to generate, but still contain some information on the
beneﬁcial features of an inspection path. Initializing evolutionary algorithms
with seed solutions has previously demonstrated the potential to improve per-
formance [13, 26]. As seeds for the inspection path planning, we used the circling
plans generated as described in Section 4.4, since these are good plans that are
simple to generate. For each structure, we created a pool of seeds, consisting of
all circling plans for that structure.
A common problem in evolutionary algorithms is progress halting or slowing
down due to a lack of diversity in the population of candidate solutions [36].
Therefore, to ensure a proper level of diversity in the initial population, we
always generated a signiﬁcant amount of its individuals randomly. Initial solu-
tions were sampled (with replacement) from the pool of seeds with probability
pseeded, and otherwise generated randomly. To investigate the eﬀect of seeding
on the evolutionary optimization, we regulated this probability as shown in Ta-
ble 3 – performing 1) runs where all initial individuals are random (unseeded
runs), and 2) runs where a signiﬁcant proportion (on average 35%) of initial
individuals are seeded.
4.3.2. MOEA/D
The main comparison between multiobjective and traditional inspection
path planners applied the NSGA-II algorithm, as described above. However,
to increase our conﬁdence that the ﬁndings are general to multiobjective opti-
mization algorithms, and not due to speciﬁc features of the NSGA-II algorithm,
we also generated inspection plans with the MOEA/D algorithm, which belongs
to a diﬀerent class of MOEA than NSGA-II.
15

Parameter
Value
Target number
3073 (sphere)
of evaluations
2966 (SSIV)
3194 (manifold)
Neighborhood size
10
δ
0.8
Scalarizing function
Tchebycheﬀ
Table 4: The parameters for MOEA/D. The parameters not listed here applied the same
values as NSGA-II (Table 3). See main text for explanation of the parameters.
For MOEA/D, we applied the same parameters as for NSGA-II when pos-
sible, and otherwise relied on default parameters from the applied MOEA/D
implementation (from the Platypus framework for evolutionary computation1).
These default values are presented in Table 4. Note that since a generation of
NSGA-II and a generation of MOEA/D may involve very diﬀerent amounts of
computation, we speciﬁed the target number of evaluations here, rather than
the number of generations, for a more accurate comparison. The target num-
ber of evaluations was set to the median number of evaluations from the initial
NSGA-II runs on each inspection target. 20 independent runs of each algorithm
(MOEA/D and NSGA-II) were performed, each run terminating in the same
generation that the target number of evaluations was reached.
For the MOEA/D speciﬁc parameters, δ is the probability of selecting in-
dividuals for mating only from an individual’s neighborhood. Correspondingly,
with probability (1-δ), all individuals are considered for the current round of
mating.
Scalarizing function indicates the function used to decompose the
multiobjective optimization problem into N diﬀerent single-objective problems.
See [44] for more details about the MOEA/D algorithm and its parameters.
4.4. Generalized Circling Sweeps
Ideas related to covering a 3D object by following several circling trajectories
at a ﬁxed distance from its sides are present in several algorithms [2, 8, 22].
While the details diﬀer, the common idea is moving around the target structure
at a ﬁxed distance at a single depth level, before moving to the next depth (the
distance between which depends on the ﬁeld of view of the vehicle’s sensors),
making a new sweep around the edges of the target, and so on. By carefully
choosing the spacing between such depth-levels, complete coverage of the sides of
a 3D structure can be guaranteed, as long as no obstacles or occluding elements
are present.
To enable comparison with our method, we here generalize this technique to
explore diﬀerent balances between energy usage and coverage. The generaliza-
tion consists in, instead of carefully selecting depth-levels, testing many diﬀerent
depth-deltas (∆z), measuring the coverage and energy usage of each resulting
1http://platypus.readthedocs.io
16

plan. In the extreme case of a maximum ∆z, only a single circling around the
target is performed, whereas on the other end of the spectrum, we ﬁnd plans cir-
cling the target enough to cover its sides completely, not considering occluding
elements.
4.4.1. Method details
To facilitate development and comparisons, the circling sweeps were, like
the sampling-based plans and the multiobjective plans, generated as a sequence
of waypoints. This also facilitated the use of such plans as seeds for evolved
solutions (Section 4.3.1).
Algorithm 2 CircleEachLevel(structure, wp candidates)
1: all level circles ←∅
2: z levels ←UniqueZLevels(wp candidates)
3: for z ∈z levels do
4:
edge wps ←GetNeighborWaypoints(structure, wp candidates)
5:
traced edge ←MooreNeighborTracing(edge wps)
6:
pruned edge ←PruneEdge(traced edge)
7:
all level circles ←all level circles + pruned edge
8: end for
9: return all level circles
The algorithm has two parts: 1) Generating paths sweeping around each can-
didate depth level of the inspection target, and 2) Generating several complete
plans by combining diﬀerent sweeps from part 1. The ﬁrst part (Algorithm 2)
is initiated with the relevant 3D model and the set of potential waypoints, gen-
erated as described in Section 4.2. Since this set of waypoints is generated by
sampling in regular intervals along the x-, y- and z-axes, we can easily iden-
tify a small set of unique z-levels (z vals in Algorithm 2). For each level, a
plan is generated, tracing the edges of the structure at that level. This is done
by ﬁrst identifying all candidate waypoints at that level within a given distance
from the inspection target (GetNeighborWaypoints), before tracing around the
outside of this set of neighbors using the Moore Neighbor Tracing algorithm.
Finally, the traced edge is simpliﬁed by removing all waypoints directly between
other consecutive waypoints (PruneEdge) – thus reducing the number of way-
points while keeping the plan identical. The resulting sequence of waypoints
(pruned edge) performs a single loop around the structure.
When Algorithm 2 terminates, one circling sub-plan has been generated for
each depth level. The second part of the method is generating a population
of complete edge tracing plans, circling around the target diﬀerent numbers of
times. This is done by iterating over a variable, ∆z, from 1 to the total number
of z-levels, and ensuring consecutive loops are ∆z levels apart in each ﬁnal plan.
In addition, the complete plans are centered around the target along the z-axis,
ensuring the circling plans cover the structure in an energy-eﬃcient way. An
example of the eﬀect of varying ∆z can be seen in Figure 11a, which presents
17

circling plans for ∆z equal to 1 (left), 2 (middle) and 7 (right).
4.5. Generalized Sampling-based Coverage Path
Englot and Hover published a series of papers centered around the idea of
generating inspection plans by sampling in robot conﬁguration space [15–18].
The dimensionality of this space varies depending on the number of degrees
of freedom of our robot. Since we in our comparison have standardized the
way of assigning robot orientations (Section 4.1.3), a conﬁguration is simply a
position in 3D space. The paper on sampling-based inspection path planning
of most relevance in this comparison is [15], which is the only one that focuses
on continuous inspection, that is, inspections where data is gathered while the
robot is moving.
Part 1 of the algorithm generates a dense graph of nodes (representing robot
conﬁgurations) and edges (representing straight paths between waypoints), by
sampling robot conﬁgurations pseudo-randomly and adding edges between them
and their nearest neighbor conﬁgurations, until each geometric primitive is ob-
served by the robot along some edge. In part 2, a minimum-cost closed walk
along the graph which covers 100% of the geometric primitives is approximated,
by use of integer programming.
The main change in modifying this method to allow sub-100% covering in-
spection plans was to allow the stopping criterion of the sampling in part 1 to be
a user-deﬁned fraction, f, instead of 100% coverage, and to relax the constraint
of complete coverage on the integer programming problem formulated in part
2.
4.5.1. Graph generation
Algorithm 3 describes part 1 of the generalized sampling-based algorithm,
which notably diﬀers from Algorithm 1 in [15] in taking an argument f, which is
the fraction of the structure the plan needs to cover. Identically to the original
algorithm, the generalized version also takes as input a starting conﬁguration
(q0), and an inspection target (structure).
Algorithm 3 BuildInspectionGraph(q0, structure, f)
1: g.init(q0)
2: observed primitives ←∅
3: while observed primitives.size()/structure.size() < f do
4:
if observed primitives.size()/structure.size() < (f −ϵ) then
5:
AddToGraph(g)
6:
else
7:
AddMissingV iew(g)
8:
end if
9: end while
Algorithm 3 builds a graph of candidate waypoints and edges between them,
until at least a fraction f of the total area of the inspection target can be
18

observed by traversing the complete set of edges. Initially, waypoints are added
by pseudo-random sampling, and edges by connecting sampled waypoints to
their closest neighbors (AddToGraph – see details in [15]). However, when only
a small fraction ϵ of the structure remains to reach the coverage goal, a more
focused search (AddMissingV iew) begins for the best robot conﬁgurations to
cover these remaining primitives.
While its goal is the same, our implementation of AddMissingV iew diﬀers
from that in [15] in one important aspect. The original AddMissingV iew selects
the ﬁrst primitive that has not yet been observed by any edge in g, calculates a
robot conﬁguration that permits the robot’s sensor to observe this primitive and
builds an edge that includes this conﬁguration. Then, the process is repeated
for the next unobserved primitive.
In our case, generating an edge covering each missing primitive is not possi-
ble, since many primitives in our models are not visible from anywhere around
the structure. Therefore, we implemented a diﬀerent way to gather the ﬁnal ϵ
fraction of primitives: We select a random unobserved primitive, and sample a
random valid edge near it. If the edge gathers any new observation, and can
be connected to the rest of the graph, it is added to the graph. Whether or
not a new edge was added, a diﬀerent random unobserved primitive is chosen,
and the process repeated. This ensures the process does not get stuck trying to
ﬁnd a viewpoint for a primitive that is impossible to observe due to occluding
elements.
4.5.2. Path-ﬁnding
When Algorithm 3 terminates, we have a graph with the necessary edges to
cover a fraction f of the inspection target’s geometric primitives. The second
part of the method ﬁnds the optimal way to traverse this graph, by formulating
an integer programming problem with the requirement that any primitive cov-
ered by any of the sampled edges (ObservedPrimitives in Algorithm 3) must
be covered by the ﬁnal plan. This is a relaxation of the integer programming
problem in [15], which had the requirement that all primitives on the structure
must be covered by the ﬁnal plan. Since the integer programming problem is
otherwise identical to that formulated in [15], it will not be repeated here.
4.6. Test Models
Our multiobjective inspection planner was tested against the previous tech-
niques on three diﬀerent 3D models: 1) A simple sphere, 2) A relatively small
subsea isolation valve (SSIV) and 3) A large, complicated subsea manifold (Fig-
ure 7). These were chosen to test the algorithms on problems with a variety
of sizes and complexity levels: The sphere allows 100% coverage, and has pre-
viously been used to test complete coverage planning [15], whereas complete
coverage is impossible for the two other structures. Table 5 shows further de-
tails about the 3D models.
19

(a) Sphere
(b) Subsea isolation valve
(c) Large subsea manifold
Figure 7: The inspection targets. These were chosen since they represent three diﬀerent
levels of complexity. Complete coverage inspection is only possible for the sphere.
Structure
Triangles
Dimensions
Candidate Waypoints
f max
Sphere
960
Radius 10m
1492
1.0
SSIV
26707
4m × 3.2m × 2.6m
1604
0.78
Manifold
88153
117m × 17m × 11m
1489
0.84
Table 5: Details about the inspection targets. All are 3D mesh models, made up of a large
number of triangles. Their sizes vary greatly, but a similar number of candidate waypoints are
generated for all by automatically scaling the distance between neighbor waypoints. f max
is the maximum f-value given to the generalized sampling-based planner for each structure
(Section 4.7).
4.7. Experimental Setup
To have a robust basis for comparison of the methods, we performed 20
independent runs of the EA-planner and the sampling-based planner. The evo-
lutionary algorithm is inherently random, both due to its random initial pop-
ulation and random mutation and crossover events.
By initializing diﬀerent
runs with diﬀerent seeds to the random number generator, we therefore easily
achieved independently evolved populations.
The sampling-based planner, however, samples pseudo-randomly using a
Sobol sequence, which produces the same sequence of robot conﬁgurations each
time it is run on the same structure [15]. The method also relies on a starting
conﬁguration (q0 in Algorithm 3). To mitigate eﬀects of a choosing a particu-
larly good or bad starting conﬁguration, we performed 20 runs of this algorithm
with diﬀerent random starting positions (all required to be outside the bounding
box of the target, but no further than 10m away). The circling plan generator
has no random elements, and was therefore run only once.
Due to the generalizations mentioned earlier in this chapter, a single run of
each algorithm generates a population of results with diﬀerent balances between
coverage and energy usage. In the case of the EA, this population is simply its
evolutionary population. In the case of the circling-based planner, the popula-
tion consists of all the diﬀerent plans with diﬀerent values of ∆z (Section 4.4).
For the sampling-based planner, a varied population of results was generated
by running the algorithm with 11 diﬀerent values of the coverage threshold f (Al-
gorithm 3), evenly distributed in the interval [f min, f max]. In other words,
20

we generated 10 “reduced coverage plans” (f < f max) for every “maximum
coverage plan” (f = f max). This was repeated 20 times, resulting in a total
of 220 sampling-based plans generated for each inspection target. The coverage
threshold represents the fraction of the inspection target’s area that we require
the generated plan to cover, and regulating it naturally generates a population
of plans with variation in coverage degree and energy usage. For all the struc-
tures, we chose a value of f min = 0.1, meaning the “least strict” requirement
sent to the sampling-based planner was to cover 10% of each structure.
Since we do not know the theoretical maximum coverage for our two complex
structures (for the sphere, the maximum is 100%), we found an upper limit
for the coverage threshold by gradually increasing f, and observing where the
sampling-based planner begins having trouble. Giving a too large f-value to
the sampling-based planner will lead to a prohibitively large inspection graph
g (Algorithm 3) - resulting in the integer programming problem deﬁned on the
graph becoming too complex. The inspection paths generated for the largest f-
values (e.g. the leftmost plan in Figure 11b) indicate that the values we selected
for f max are near the maximal value the planner can handle.
5. Results and Discussion
When comparing the performance of diﬀerent single-objective optimization
methods, one can rely on traditional statistical measurements on the single ob-
jective. Comparing multiobjective optimization methods is more complicated,
but for multiobjective evolutionary optimization, methods such as comparing
hypervolumes [3, 46] or attainment surfaces [20, 25] are emerging as common
techniques.
However, we are in the unusual situation of wanting to compare the perfor-
mance of traditional single-objective optimization methods with our multiob-
jective inspection path planner. We found the most suitable way to analyze the
results to be visualizing the energy usage and coverage of all generated plans in
a single plot, and further analyzing the diﬀerences between the planners by vi-
sually inspecting the generated plans. Figure 8 summarizes the results of all ex-
periments, while Figures 9, 10 and 11 show representative example plans, along
with the parameters used to generate them. Note that the diﬀerent MOEA-
plans were all generated by the same parameters (as outlined in Section 4.3),
whereas the other planners require changing parameters to adjust the coverage
degree.
The sphere is the only of the three inspection targets that allows for com-
plete coverage inspection planning, and all three methods generated complete
coverage inspection plans for this structure (leftmost plans in Figure 9). The
sampling-based planner produced the most eﬃcient complete coverage plan,
with an energy usage of 35.2, with the most eﬃcient MOEA plan following
close behind with a best complete coverage plan at 38.7. The best complete
coverage plan generated by the circling planner was far less eﬃcient, with an
energy usage of 65.5. These scores all fall in the very leftmost column of Fig-
ure 8a, which plots the scores of all generated inspection plans for the sphere.
21

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Coverage Score
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
EA-NoSeed
EA-Seeded
(a) Inspection target: Sphere
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coverage Score
0
10
20
30
40
50
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
EA-NoSeed
EA-Seeded
(b) Inspection target: SSIV
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Coverage Score
0
50
100
150
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
EA-NoSeed
EA-Seeded
(c) Inspection target: Large manifold
Figure 8: Scores of all inspection plans resulting from evolutionary optimization
(NSGA-II), sampling and circling on the three inspection targets. We remind the
reader that the optimum for both objectives is 0. To better compare the results, Figures b and
c are cropped to exclude the unreasonably long plans sometimes generated by sampling-based
planning. Complete versions can be seen in the Supplementary Material.
22

(a) Circling plans – scores (0.0, 119.3), (0.04, 38.7) and (0.56, 13.2), plans resulting
from ∆z = 1, 3 and 9, respectively.
(b) Sampling plans – scores (0.0, 45.1), (0.17, 49.3) and (0.45, 31.2), plans resulting
from f = 1.0, 0.8 and 0.4, respectively.
(c) Seeded MOEA plans – scores (0.0, 47.9), (0.04, 25.0) and (0.39, 9.8).
Figure 9: Sample plans for inspecting the sphere. The entire set of plans from a single
run of each algorithm is given in the Supplementary Material.
23

Studying the incomplete coverage plans, we can observe the MOEA generat-
ing a well-diversiﬁed set of plans for diﬀerent balances between energy usage and
coverage (Figure 8). By optimizing energy and coverage together the evolution-
ary algorithm has reached solutions achieving more coverage for their energy
eﬀort than the two other planning methods. In particular, the performance of
the sampling-based planner suﬀers when dealing with incomplete coverage. It
typically generates plans with far higher energy usage than the other methods
when dealing with incomplete coverage (Figure 8).
For practical inspection missions, we are often interested in slightly reducing
coverage if that can yield large reductions in the energy cost. A strength of the
multiobjective inspection planner is that it, by generating a large and diversiﬁed
population of plans, allows just this. Looking at Figures 9c and 10c, we see how
evolved plans can achieve large energy savings with only small reductions in
coverage. Circling-based plans (Figures 9a and Figures 10a) also allow such
energy savings to some degree, but their strict shape makes them unable cover
the structures as energy-eﬃciently as the MOEA-plans (Figure 8).
With regards to the practical execution of plans, vehicle constraints will nat-
urally aﬀect the applicability of each planning method – for instance, the cost
of turns will aﬀect how important it is for a plan to be smooth. In general,
the circling plans will probably be the simplest to carry out due to their highly
regular structures (Figures 9a, 10a and 11a). The MOEA-plans (in particular
the seeded ones) also generally demonstrate quite clean and smooth paths (Fig-
ures 9c, 10c and 11c). The sampling-based plans, however, have sharp turns
and very irregular structures (Figures 9b, 10b and 11b).
5.1. The Eﬀect of Seeding
The eﬀect of seeding on the optimization of inspection path plans was stud-
ied by running the NSGA-II algorithm 20 times with parts of its population
initiated from the seeds, and 20 times with only random initial individuals.
Throughout each evolutionary run, we gathered the energy and coverage scores
of all individuals, so that we could plot their hypervolume score as evolution
proceeded. Figure 12 shows median hypervolumes throughout the evolutionary
optimization for each of the three inspection targets.
The seeded evolutionary runs have a signiﬁcantly higher hypervolume score
throughout evolution – indicating that seeding produces plans that display a
more optimal balance between energy and coverage. We can also see this in the
ﬁnal evolved populations in Figure 8: Seeded runs result in scores closer to the
optimum. The improvement produced by seeding is naturally greatest in early
generations, and non-seeded runs seem to be close to catching up towards the
end of the evolutionary run. One of the beneﬁcial eﬀects of seeding is therefore
to produce good plans faster.
Another way to analyze the performance diﬀerence between seeded and non-
seeded evolutionary runs is to study their diﬀerence in empirical attainment
functions [20, 25]. Figure 13 shows the attainment surfaces of seeded and non-
seeded runs of the evolutionary algorithm on the three structures. Upper and
24

(a) Circling plans – scores (0.22, 50.1), (0.23, 29.6), (0.34, 8.3), plans resulting from
∆z = 1, 2 and 5, respectively.
(b) Sampling plans – scores (0.20, 71.3), (0.31, 30.8), (0.39, 31.9), plans resulting from
f = 0.78, 0.64 and 0.38, respectively.
(c) Seeded MOEA plans – scores (0.22, 23.6), (0.23, 14.4), (0.25, 8.6)
Figure 10: Sample plans for inspecting the SSIV. The entire set of plans from a single
run of each algorithm is presented in the Supplementary Material.
25

(a) Circling plans – scores (0.20, 168.8), (0.26, 103.5), (0.59, 13.3),
plans resulting from ∆z = 1, 2 and 7, respectively.
(b) Sampling plans – scores (0.15, 657), (0.28, 106), (0.60, 60.2),
plans resulting from f = 0.84, 0.69 and 0.32, respectively.
(c) Seeded MOEA plans – scores (0.20, 71.5), (0.27, 44.0), (0.41,
18.2).
Figure 11: Sample plans for inspecting the oil manifold. The entire set of plans from
a single run of each algorithm is presented in the Supplementary Material.
26

0
100
200
300
400
Generation
60
70
80
90
100
110
Hypervolume
Seeded
Not Seeded
p<0.01
(a) Inspection target: Sphere.
0
100
200
300
400
Generation
30
32
34
36
38
Hypervolume
Seeded
Not Seeded
p<0.01
(b) Inspection target: SSIV.
0
100
200
300
400
Generation
80
90
100
110
120
130
Hypervolume
Seeded
Not Seeded
p<0.01
(c) Inspection target: Large manifold.
Figure 12: Hypervolume Comparisons plans generated by NSGA-II with and with-
out seeding. Plots show median values over 20 runs, along with standard deviations. Stars
under each plot indicate signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the two treatments.
27

lower attainment surfaces indicate the best and worst areas attained in objec-
tive space by any evolutionary run, whereas the dotted line shows the median
attainment surface for each treatment (seeded or non-seeded). The shaded areas
indicate where there is a diﬀerence between the attainment functions of the two
treatments. The left ﬁgures show diﬀerences in favor of seeded runs, that is,
areas in objective space that were attained more often by seeded than by non-
seeded runs. Right ﬁgures show diﬀerences in favor of non-seeded runs. These
plots conﬁrm the tendency we saw in Figure 8: Seeded runs reach solutions of a
higher quality than those reached by non-seeded runs. We can also see another
interesting trend here: The advantage of seeded runs is highest for the longest
plans (those with a high energy usage). The seeds contain a good selection of
long plans circling the structure several times, which may be the reason why
seeded runs are especially good at ﬁnding long plans.
A ﬁnal beneﬁt of seeding is that it produces plans with a more regular, more
easily interpretable structure. Even when plans have the same performance,
those resulting from seeded runs have a very diﬀerent structure (Figure 14).
The cleaner structure of seeded plans is likely to be very useful in practice, as it
makes it easier to interpret the plan, and thus to select among candidate plans.
5.2. Runtime
The circling planner naturally performs best with regards to runtime, since
it performs no optimization. As outlined in Section 4.4, all circling paths for
a single inspection target are generated simultaneously. All circling plans were
generated in 56, 49 and 81 seconds for the sphere, SSIV and manifold, respec-
tively.
The runtime of the sampling-based planner depends on the desired cover-
age degree, f. Naturally, a higher-coverage plan takes longer to generate, as it
requires the sampling of more edges, and the solution of a larger integer pro-
gramming problem. Figure 15 shows the runtime of the sampling-based planner
as a function of f on the three inspection targets. For the circle, where com-
plete coverage is possible, the increase in runtime for higher-coverage plans is
not too dramatic, but for the two more complex structures (and especially the
large manifold), we see extreme increases in runtime when nearing the highest
possible levels of coverage.
The evolutionary algorithm generally has a higher runtime than the two
other methods (Table 6).
The plots of hypervolume, however (Figure
12),
indicates that high-quality plans were available also early in the evolutionary
run (especially for seeded runs), suggesting that when necessary, the runtime
of this algorithm can be reduced signiﬁcantly for only small reductions in plan
quality.
The seeded EA-runs tend to have a higher runtime than un-seeded
ones, but the diﬀerence is only signiﬁcant (p < 0.05 according to the Mann-
Whitney U test) on the sphere. Probably this is because the seeded runs start
with a population of longer plans, and therefore have to spend more time in
total evaluating plan coverage.
All runtime measurements were made on an LG A410 laptop with 8 GB
DDR3 RAM, Intel Core i5 CPU, and a GeForce 310M GPU, Running 64-bit
28

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
20
40
60
80
120
Energy Used
Seeded
[0.8, 1.0]
[0.6, 0.8)
[0.4, 0.6)
[0.2, 0.4)
[0.0, 0.2)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
20
40
60
80
120
Energy Used
NoSeed
(a) Inspection target: Sphere
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
10
20
30
40
50
Energy Used
Seeded
[0.8, 1.0]
[0.6, 0.8)
[0.4, 0.6)
[0.2, 0.4)
[0.0, 0.2)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
10
20
30
40
50
Energy Used
NoSeed
(b) Inspection target: SSIV
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
50
100
150
Energy Used
Seeded
[0.8, 1.0]
[0.6, 0.8)
[0.4, 0.6)
[0.2, 0.4)
[0.0, 0.2)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Coverage Score
0
50
100
150
Energy Used
NoSeed
(c) Inspection target: Large manifold
Figure 13: Diﬀerences between empirical attainment functions (EAFs) from seeded
and non-seeded evolutionary optimization. Dashed lines show median attainment sur-
face, solid lines show overall best and worst attainment surfaces (over seeded and un-seeded
runs). Gray shading indicates magnitude of diﬀerence in attainment function. See text for
details. Plots made with the EAF Graphical Tools Package [33]
29

(a) Plan evolved without seeding – scores
(0.23, 71.9).
(b) Plan evolved with seeding – scores
(0.21, 73.2).
Figure 14: The results on evolved plan structure of seeding. When seeding (right),
evolved plans retain much of the clean structures of the seed plans, whereas evolutionary runs
without seeding (left) have a more irregular structure.
Structure
Seeded EA
Un-seeded EA
Sphere
Runtime
701.3 [681.13, 797.9]
595 [577.9, 649.0]
Evaluations
3043.5 [3007.0, 3080.0]
3072.5 [3035.0, 3122.5]
Manifold
Runtime
1053.5 [1013.5, 1073.9]
999.2 [901.4, 1087.9]
Evaluations
3156.5 [3115.0, 3174.0]
3194.0 [3168.0, 3248.5]
SSIV
Runtime
479.3 [307.2, 491.4]
481.4 [472.9, 487.6]
Evaluations
2964.0 [2929.5, 3009.5]
2966.0 [2959.0, 3017.0]
Table 6: Runtimes and evaluation counts for the evolutionary algorithm. Median
runtimes (in seconds) and number of ﬁtness evaluations for the seeded and un-seeded NSGA-
II runs on all three structures. Brackets show 95% bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals of the
median.
30

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Required Coverage Degree
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Plan Generation Time (s)
(a) Inspection target: Sphere
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Required Coverage Degree
0
20
40
60
80
100
Plan Generation Time (s)
(b) Inspection target: SSIV
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Required Coverage Degree
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Plan Generation Time (s)
(c) Inspection target: Large manifold
Figure 15: Runtime of the generalized sampling-based coverage planning as func-
tion of required coverage degree.
Boxes display median and ﬁrst and third quartiles
across 20 runs, whiskers indicate 1.5 × IQR (interquartile range).
31

Structure
NSGA-II Hypervolume
MOEA/D Hypervolume
p-value
Sphere
108.4 [107.3, 109.3]
108.0 [107.2, 108.4]
0.11
SSIV
38.2 [38.1, 38.3]
37.8 [37.7, 37.9]
< 0.001
Manifold
126.0 [125.4, 126.7]
124.8 [124.2, 125.6]
0.006
Table 7: The hypervolumes spanned by NSGA-II and MOEA/D. Median and boot-
strapped conﬁdence intervals from 20 runs are shown for each treatment. p-values indicate
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the spanned hypervolumes, calculated by the Mann-Whitney
U algorithm.
Ubuntu 14.04
5.3. MOEA/D
The experiments on evolving inspection plans described above applied the
NSGA-II algorithm. However, to increase our conﬁdence that the ﬁndings are
valid for MOEAs in general, and not speciﬁc to that algorithm, we performed
additional tests with the MOEA/D algorithm, which is from a diﬀerent class of
MOEA (Section 3.2.1). The results (Figure 16) demonstrate that also MOEA/D
ﬁnds good balances between coverage and energy, and outcompetes the tradi-
tional methods on complex structures. NSGA-II is however better at distribut-
ing plans evenly along the Pareto front for these inspection targets. This has
resulted in a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the hypervolume spanned by the two algo-
rithms on the real-world inspection targets (Table 7).
As explained in Section 4.3.2, two key parameters aﬀecting the way MOEA/D
searches for inspection plans is the neighborhood size and δ, the probability of
selecting individuals for mating only from an individual’s neighborhood. Ex-
ploring how diﬀerent values for these parameters aﬀect the plans generated for
the SSIV inspection target demonstrates that for this problem, expanding the
neighborhood considered during mating can increase performance (Figure 17).
The paper originally proposing MOEA/D already demonstrated that the algo-
rithm performs worse with very small neighborhood sizes [44]. However, while
that paper found a neighborhood size of 10 to be large enough, we here see the
largest possible neighborhood sizes (and correspondingly smallest δ values) re-
sult in the best performance. This may indicate that for the inspection planning
problem, also very diﬀerent solutions (in the sense that they are solving very
diﬀerent MOEA/D subproblems) may beneﬁt from sharing information.
A closer analysis of the MOEA/D results with the maximal neighborhood
size (Figure 18), reveals that the increased neighborhood size has not resulted
in a better distribution of solutions along the Pareto front. The increased hy-
pervolume is instead explained by an increased performance of solutions in an
intermediate region along the two objectives. This indicates that NSGA-II and
MOEA/D have diﬀerent strengths with regards to optimizing inspection plans:
While NSGA-II produces a more diverse selection of plans, MOEA/D generates
plans performing very well within a more restricted region of the objective space.
Further exploring the strengths and weaknesses of diﬀerent classes of multiob-
32

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Coverage Score
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
NSGA-II
MOEA/D
(a) Inspection target: Sphere
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coverage Score
0
10
20
30
40
50
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
NSGA-II
MOEA/D
(b) Inspection target: SSIV
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Coverage Score
0
50
100
150
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
NSGA-II
MOEA/D
(c) Inspection target: Large manifold
Figure 16: Comparison of the two multi-objective evolutionary algorithms NSGA-
II and MOEA/D. Both were run 20 times to generate these results.
Results from the
sampling and circling-based planners are repeated from Figure 8 for comparison. All plans in
this ﬁgure were produced without seeding.
33

1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
Neighborhood Size
36.5
37.0
37.5
38.0
38.5
Hypervolume
(a) The eﬀect of varying the neighborhood size.
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
δ
37.2
37.4
37.6
37.8
38.0
38.2
38.4
Hypervolume
(b) The eﬀect of varying δ.
Figure 17: The eﬀect of the MOEA/D speciﬁc neighborhood-parameters on perfor-
mance. In MOEA/D, mating is restricted to an individual’s neighborhood with probability δ
– otherwise all other individuals are considered for mating. All parameter values were tested
on the SSIV inspection target, with 20 independent repetitions.
34

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coverage Score
0
10
20
30
40
50
Energy Used
Sampling
Circling
NSGA-II
MOEA/D
Figure 18: MOEA/D performance with the maximal neighborhood size of 40. Re-
sults are from the SSIV inspection target, the other algorithm scores are repeated from ﬁg-
ure 16b.
jective optimization algorithms in generating inspection plans is an important
direction for future work.
5.4. Discussion
We want to emphasize that this comparison of coverage path planning tech-
niques does not prove that multiobjective inspection planning outperforms the
concepts of sampling-based or circling-based planning. There exist extensions
and speciﬁc implementations of both concepts [17, 18, 22] that may perform
better. We could however not compare directly with those, since they were not
made available by the authors, and since we needed generalized versions of these
algorithms to make a complete comparison. Still, the results presented above
give an indication of the strengths and weaknesses of each coverage path plan-
ning concept. These are summarized in Table 8, and discussed in more detail
below.
The circling-based planner has the advantages of being fast, easy to imple-
ment and understand, and producing the most regular plan structures, which
may lead to simpler and more reliable mission execution. However, its simplicity
also makes it inﬂexible: The method cannot optimize plans to ﬁt a speciﬁc in-
spection target. This may be a problem for complex structures, where circling
behaviors do not produce a suﬃcient coverage, for instance due to occluding
elements blocking the robot’s view of important elements.
The advantage of the sampling-based method is seen when 100% coverage is
required: Of the three methods tested, this one found the most energy eﬃcient
way to cover 100% of the sphere. Further, it is the only one oﬀering a coverage
guarantee: When run with a required coverage degree of f, it does not stop until
a fraction f of the structure is covered. Of course, this guarantee only works if a
coverage of f is actually achievable for that structure. The disadvantages of the
method are that it does not produce eﬃcient plans for the complex structures
where complete coverage is not possible, and that the generated plans have a
35

Method
Strengths
Weaknesses
Circling
• Fast and simple method
• Most regular plan structure
• Least ﬂexible
• No optimization
Sampling
• Oﬀers coverage guarantees
• Eﬃcient complete coverage plan-
ner
• Irregular plan structure
• Does not handle structures with
hidden parts well
MOEA
• Good performance on structures
with hidden parts
• Automatically balances coverage
and energy
• The most time consuming method
• No coverage guarantees
Table 8: The strengths and weaknesses of each of the compared coverage path
planning methods. See text for further discussion.
very complex and irregular structure. This can be a challenge for robotic con-
trol, mission execution and data interpretation. However, the researchers who
developed this procedure have since developed procedures to make sampling-
based plans more regular [17], which may mitigate this disadvantage.
The evolved inspection plans on the other hand, retain much of the regular
circling structure when using circling plans as seeds, while additionally improv-
ing the plans to be more energy eﬃcient and more adapted to the inspection
target. They also demonstrate good performance structures with hidden or oc-
cluded parts, and automatically balance coverage and energy – since the two
objectives are optimized together. The main disadvantage of evolving inspection
plans is the longer runtime. Evolving inspection plans clearly needs to happen
before deployment – and a diﬀerent process is required to adapt the plans online,
if unexpected situations occur.
6. Conclusion
Through a comparison with two state-of-the-art coverage path planning tech-
niques, we have validated the ability of our recently suggested multiobjective
coverage path planning method to generate good inspection path plans. While
our method is also found to generate good complete coverage path plans for
a simple structure, its advantage is seen most clearly when generating plans
for complex real-world structures. For such structures, a completely covering
36

inspection path is often impossible, and we demonstrated how traditional com-
plete coverage path planning methods struggle to generate good plans for these
– also when we relax the complete coverage constraint on these planners.
Multiobjective coverage path planning is inherently diﬀerent from previous
methods, allowing plans to gracefully adapt to the amount of occlusion and
complexity in the inspection target.
Optimizing energy usage and coverage
together ensures a good balance between the two both when 100% coverage is
available, and when large parts of the object are hidden. The performance of the
algorithm on the three very diﬀerent inspection targets increases our conﬁdence
that multiobjective optimization is a general and ﬂexible approach – enabling
inspection path planning on many structures that traditional methods do not
support, since they constrain search to complete coverage plans.
Our technique oﬀers a starting point for automatic inspection path plan-
ning on complex real-world structures, and there is much interesting work to
be done in developing this approach for the autonomous inspection missions
of the future. While the applied methods prove that multiobjective optimiza-
tion can generate good inspection plans for complex structures, further studies
are required to systematically assess the best way to apply such techniques.
These studies include testing diﬀerent multiobjective optimization algorithms,
as well as studying the impact of key parameters. Such systematic studies have
recently illuminated the performance of evolutionary algorithms in underwa-
ter path planning [42, 43], and we consider them an important step in further
studies of inspection path planning.
The method is so far only used oﬄine, and future work will also need to
study how to best update evolved plans on-line.
The evolved population of
inspection paths may provide a good starting point for online adjustments, as it
maintains a diverse set of solutions with diﬀerent ways to handle the problem.
Another interesting direction for future work is introducing more knowledge in
the evolutionary algorithm (for instance by hybridizing it with a local search).
This paper demonstrated the beneﬁts of inserting knowledge in the form of
initial seed solutions – suggesting that an even more knowledge-intensive search
may give additional performance beneﬁts.
7. Acknowledgments
Work by Kai Olav Ellefsen was funded by Brazilian National Research
Council (CNPq) through a “Young Talent Attraction” scholarship [grant num-
ber 314886/2014-1], and also partially supported by The Research Council of
Norway as a part of the Engineering Predictability with Embodied Cognition
(EPEC) project, under grant agreement 240862. The ongoing development of
the FlatFish AUV is ﬁnanced by Shell, ANP and Embrapii. We also thank the
members of the Brazilian Institute of Robotics for their support, Brendan Englot

37

8. Vitae
Kai Olav Ellefsen is a postdoctoral researcher at the Brazilian Institute of
Robotics at SENAI CIMATEC (Salvador, Brazil) where he has been part of
the FlatFish AUV project since 2014. He holds a Masters degree (2010, winner
of the Norwegian Artiﬁcial Intelligence Society Best Master Thesis Award) and
Ph. D. (2014) from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His
research interests cover many topics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, including evolu-
tionary algorithms, artiﬁcial neural networks, adaptation and learning.
Herman Lepikson is director of the SENAI Institute for Innovation in Au-
tomation and Associate Professor at UFBA (Federal University, Bahia State).
He holds a Doctor degree in Engineering from the Federal University of Santa
Catarina in Manufacturing Systems; MBA in Engineering Economics from PUC-
MG, and Mechanical Engineering from UFBA. He is a DT2 researcher of CNPq
(Brazil’s National Research Council). His research work is in the areas of man-
ufacturing integration, advanced manufacturing and mechatronic systems de-
sign. He is a permanent Professor of the Graduate Programs in Mechatronics
and Industrial Engineering at UFBA, in which he advises master and doctorate
students.
38

Jan Albiez received his PhD 2007 in the area of biological inspired walking
machines, after working for 6 years as researcher in Robotics at FZI in Karl-
sruhe, Germany. In 2006 he started at the newly founded robotic branch of
DFKI in Bremen, Germany, where he was responsible for developing the area
of underwater robotics, acted as project leader for major research projects and
set up all of RIC’s testing environments. In 2014 he went to SENAI CIMATEC
in Salvador, Brasil where he started as technical project leader of the FlatFish
AUV project and trained a 20 person team in robotics.
9. Bibliography
