Engineering AI Systems: A Research Agenda
Jan Bosch
Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden

Helena Holmstrm Olsson
Computer Science and Media Technology
Malm University
Malm, Sweden

Ivica Crnkovic
Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden

Abstract—Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
(ML) are increasingly broadly adopted in industry, However,
based on well over a dozen case studies, we have learned
that deploying industry-strength, production quality ML models
in systems proves to be challenging. Companies experience
challenges related to data quality, design methods and processes,
performance of models as well as deployment and compliance. We
learned that a new, structured engineering approach is required
to construct and evolve systems that contain ML/DL components.
In this paper, we provide a conceptualization of the typical
evolution patterns that companies experience when employing
ML as well as an overview of the key problems experienced by
the companies that we have studied. The main contribution of
the paper is a research agenda for AI engineering that provides
an overview of the key engineering challenges surrounding ML
solutions and an overview of open items that need to be addressed
by the research community at large.
Index Terms—Machine Learning, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, De-
sign, Software Engineering
I. INTRODUCTION
The prominence of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and specif-
ically machine- and deep-learning (ML/DL) solutions has
grown exponentially [1], [2]. Because of the Big Data era,
more data is available than ever before and this data can be
used for training ML/DL solutions. In parallel, progress in
high-performance parallel hardware such as GPUs and FPGAs
allows for training solutions of scales unfathomable even a
decade ago. These two concurrent technology developments
are at the heart of the rapid adoption of ML/DL solutions.
Virtually every company has an AI initiative ongoing and
the number of experiments and prototypes in industry is phe-
nomenal. Although earlier the province of large Software-as-a-
Service (SaaS) companies, our research shows a democratiza-
tion of AI and broad adoption across the entire industry, rang-
ing from startups to large cyber-physical systems companies.
ML solutions are deployed in telecommunications, healthcare,
automotive, internet-of-things (IoT) as well as numerous other
industries and we expect an exponential growth in the number
of deployments across society.
Unfortunately, our research [3]–[5] shows that the transition
from prototype to production-quality deployment of ML mod-
els proves to be challenging for many companies. Though not
recognized by many, the engineering challenges surrounding
This research is in part supported by Software Center and by CHAIR
(Chalmers AI Research Center).
ML prove to be signiﬁcant. In our research, we have studied
well over a dozen cases and identiﬁed the problems that these
companies experience as they adopt ML. These problems are
concerned with a range of topics including data quality, design
methods and processes, performance of models as well as
deployment and compliance.
To the best of our knowledge, no papers exist that provide
a systematic overview of the research challenges associated
with the emerging ﬁeld of AI engineering (which we deﬁne
as an extension of Software Engineering with new processes
and technologies needed for development and evolution of
AI systems, i.e. systems that include AI components(. In this
paper we provide a research agenda that has been derived
from the research that we have conducted to date. The goal of
this research agenda is to provide inspiration for the software
engineering research community to start addressing the AI
engineering challenges.
The purpose and contribution of this paper is threefold.
First, we provide a conceptualization of the typical evolution
patterns concerned with adoption of AI that companies expe-
rience. Second, we provide an overview of the engineering
challenges surrounding ML solutions. Third, we provide a
research agenda and overview of open items that need to be
addressed by the research community at large.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the
next section, we present the method underlying the research
in this paper. In section III, we present on overview of the
problems that we identiﬁed in our earlier research as well as a
model capturing the evolution pattern of companies adopting
AI solutions. Subsequently, we present our research agenda in
section IV. Finally, we conclude the paper in section V.
II. RESEARCH METHOD
In the context of Software Center1, we work with more
than a dozen large international Cyber-physical systems (CPS)
and embedded systems (ES) companies, including Ericsson,
Tetra Pak, Siemens, Bosch, Volvo Cars, Boeing and several
others around, among other topics, the adoption of ML/DL
technologies. In addition, we frequently have the opportunity
to study and collaborate with companies also outside of
Software Center that operate as SaaS companies in a variety
of business domains.
1https://www.software-center.se/
arXiv:2001.07522v2  [cs.LG]  3 Jun 2020

Fig. 1. Roles and cases that were selected as the basis for this study
Due to the limited length of this paper, we do not provide
a full overview of all these case companies and our learning
from each of these, nor the detailed research methods and
activities that were employed in our various research activities.
Instead, and for the purpose of this publication, we have
selected a set of 16 primary cases as the foundation for the
challenges we identify and the research agenda we outline.
However, it should be noted that the work reported on in this
paper is based also on learning from more than 20 companies
from around the world, though with a focus on the software-
intensive embedded systems industry in Europe, mostly Nordic
countries. With this as our basis, we believe that the challenges
we identify, and the research agenda we outline, reﬂect the
key engineering challenges that companies in a variety of
domains experience when employing and integrating ML/DL
components in their systems. Below, we present the research
approach adopted in this work and the cases we selected as
the basis for this paper.
A. Research approach and selected cases
The goal of this research is to provide an understanding
of the typical evolution patterns that companies experience,
and the challenges they face, when adopting and integrating
ML/DL components in their systems. Based on this under-
standing, we develop a research agenda in which we identify
the open research questions that need to be addressed by the
research community.
In alignment with this research goal, our research builds
on multiple-case study research [6], [7] with semi-structured
interviews and observations as the primary techniques for data
collection. The ﬁndings we present in this paper build on a
total number of 16 cases representing startups as well as large
multinational companies in domains such as e.g. real estate,
weather forecasting, fraud detection, sentiment analysis and
failure prediction. Each case represents a software-intensive
system that incorporates ML and DL components and involves
challenges ranging from data management and data quality
to creation, training and deployment of ML/DL models. For
data collection, we used semi-structured interviews with data
scientists, data analysts, AI research engineers, UX lead, ML
engineers and technical leaders. The research approach as well
as the roles and cases that were selected as the basis for this
study are outlined in Figure 1.
For analysis and coding of the empirical data, we adopted a
thematic data analysis approach [8]. Following this approach,
all cases were documented and we carefully reﬂected on our
learnings and the implications of these. During analysis of
our empirical ﬁndings, the interview transcripts were read
carefully by the researchers to identify recurring elements and
concepts, i.e. challenges experienced by practitioners in the
cases we selected for this study [6], [9].
The details of the case studies, as well as a number of
additional cases that were not selected for this particular paper,
can be found in our previously published research [3]–[5].
In our previous research, we identiﬁed the challenges that
practitioners experience when building ML/DL systems and
we concluded that there is a signiﬁcant need for future research
on this topic. In this paper, and to advance our previous
identiﬁcation of challenges, we map the challenges to a set
of strategic focus areas that we recognize in industry. Further-
more, we outline a research agenda for AI engineering research
to help the research community structure and conceptualize the
problem space. As recommended by [10], the generalizations
made based on case study research should be viewed as
tendencies rather than predictions and as insights valuable for
contexts with similar characteristics. With the opportunity to
work closely with more than a dozen large CPS and SaaS
companies, we believe that the insights we provide on the
challenges these companies experience when building ML/DL
systems will be valuable also outside the speciﬁc context of
these companies. In addition, and as the main contribution of
this paper, we believe that the research agenda we present
based on the key engineering challenges surrounding ML/DL
systems will provide support and structure for the research
community at large.
III. THE CHALLENGE OF AI ENGINEERING
Engineering AI systems is often portrayed as the creation
of a ML/DL model, and deploying it. In practice, however, the
ML/DL model is only a small part of the overall system and
signiﬁcant additional functionality is required to ensure that
the ML/DL model can operate in a reliable and predictable
fashion with proper engineering of data pipelines, monitor-
ing and logging, etc. [2], [11]. To capture these aspects of
AI engineering we deﬁned the Holistic DevOps (HoliDev)
model [12] [4], where we distinguish between requirements-
driven development, outcome-driven development (e.g. A/B
testing) and AI-driven development.
A. AI adoption in practice
The challenge of AI engineering is that the results of each
of the aforementioned types of development end up in the
same system and are subject to monitoring of their behaviour
as well as continuous deployment. In industrial deployments
that we have studied, also AI models are constantly improved,
retrained and redeployed and consequently follow the same
DevOps process as the other software components.
In a transformation to AI-driven development, companies,
over time, tend to develop more skills, capabilities and needs
2

Fig. 2. The AI adoption evolution model
in the ML/DL space and consequently they evolve through
several stages. In the AI Evolution model shown in ﬁgure 2
we illustrate how companies, based on our research [5, 6],
develop over time. The maturity of companies concerning AI
evolves through ﬁve stages:
• Experimentation and prototyping: This stage is purely
exploratory and the results are not deployed in a pro-
duction environment. Consequently, AI engineering chal-
lenges are not present in this stage.
• Non-critical deployment: In this stage, a ML/DL model
is deployed as part of a product or system in a non-critical
capacity, meaning that if the model fails to perform, the
overall product or system is still functional and delivers
value to customers.
• Critical deployment: Once the conﬁdence in the ML/DL
models increases, key decision makers become sufﬁ-
ciently comfortable with deploying these models in a
critical context, meaning that the product or system fails
if the ML/DL model does not perform correctly.
• Cascading deployment: With the increasing use of
ML/DL models, the next step is to start to use the output
of one model as the input for the next model in the chain.
In this case, monitoring and ensuring correct functioning
of the system becomes more difﬁcult as the issues may be
emergent, rather than directly associated with a speciﬁc
ML/DL model.
• Autonomous ML/DL components: In the ﬁnal stage,
ML/DL models monitor their own behaviour, automat-
ically initiate retraining and are able to ﬂag when the
model observes that, despite retraining using the latest
data, it does not provide acceptable accuracy.
Each step requires increased activities of AI engineering
- a set of methods and tools that originated from software
engineering in a system life cycle, and procedures, technolo-
gies and tools from data science and AI. While the ﬁrst
step, which is today state of the practice, typically covers the
end-to-end ML development cycle (data acquisition, feature
engineering, training and evaluation, and deployment), the next
steps require the existing approaches from software engineer-
ing (e.g. system testing) as well as completely new methods
that will need to become an integrated part of software and AI
engineering (e.g. continuous training, or version management
of code and data).
B. AI engineering strategic focus
During our research, we have worked with a variety of
companies and selected 16 cases for the purpose of this
research. As part of our research, we have identiﬁed over
30 problems that are a concern in multiple cases that we
have studied. We have presented some of these in earlier
publications, speciﬁcally [3]–[5], so we will not discuss each
identiﬁed problem in detail. Instead, we provide an overview in
ﬁgure 2 and present a categorization of the identiﬁed problems
in four strategic focus areas, relating to the typical phases of
a ML project. These four areas are the following:
• Data quality management: One of the key challenges in
successful AI projects is to establish data sets and streams
that are of sufﬁcient quality for training and inference.
Speciﬁcally, data sets tend to be unbalanced, have a high
degree of heterogeneity, lack labels, tend to drift over
time, contain implicit dependencies and generally require
vast amounts of pre-processing effort before they are
usable.
• Design methods and processes: Although creating an
ML model is relatively easy, doing so at scale and in
a repeatable fashion proves to be challenging. Specif-
ically, managing a multitude of experiments, detecting
and resolving implicit dependencies and feedback loops,
inability of tracing data dependency, estimating effort,
cultural differences between developer roles, specifying
desired outcome and tooling prove to be difﬁcult to
accomplish efﬁciently and effectively.
• Model performance: The performance of ML/DL mod-
els depends on various factors, both for accuracy and for
general quality attributes. Some of the speciﬁc problems
that we have identiﬁed include a skew between training
data and the data served during operation, lack of support
for quality attributes, over-ﬁtting of models and scaleable
data pipelines for training and serving.
• Deployment & compliance: Finally, one area that is
highly underestimated is the deployment of models. Here,
companies struggle with a multitude of problems, includ-
ing monitoring and logging of models, testing of mod-
els, troubleshooting, resource limitations and signiﬁcant
amounts of glue code to get the system up and running.
IV. AI ENGINEERING: A RESEARCH AGENDA
The subject of AI and the notion of engineering practices for
building AI systems is a multi-faceted and complex problem.
Consequently, few, if any, models exist that seek to create a
structure and conceptualization of the problem space. Here we
provide a structured view on the challenge of AI engineering
and we provide a research agenda. These challenges are orga-
nized into two main categories, i.e. generic AI engineering and
domain speciﬁc AI engineering. Within generic AI engineering
(AI Eng), we categorize the challenges into to three main
areas, i.e. architecture, development and process. For domain
speciﬁc AI engineering (D AI Eng), we have identiﬁed one
set of challenges for each domain that we have studied in the
case study companies.
3

Fig. 3. Overview of cases and identiﬁed problems
As a second dimension, we follow the strategic focus
areas that are related directly to the four main phases of a
typical ML/DL project, i.e. data quality management (related
to assembling data sets), design methods and processes (related
to creating and evolving ML/DL models), model performance
(related to training and evaluating) and ﬁnally deployment and
conformance, related to the deploy phase. In ﬁgure 4, the
model is presented graphically. In the remainder of the section,
we discuss the key research challenges in more detail.
As the data science activities shown in ﬁgure 4 are the
regular AI/data science activities, we will discuss these only
brieﬂy:
• Assemble data sets: The ﬁrst activity in virtually any
ML/DL project is to assemble the data sets that can be
used for training and evaluation and to evaluate these in
order to understand the relevant features in the data.
• Create & evolve ML/DL model: After analysing the
data sets, the next step is to experiment with different ML
algorithms or DL models and to select the most promising
one for further development.
• Train & evaluate: Once the model has been developed,
the next step is to train and validate the model using the
data.
• Deploy: Once the model has been trained and is shown
to have sufﬁcient accuracy, recall and/or other relevant
metrics, the model is deployed in a system where it
typically is connected to one or more data streams for
the purpose of inference.
The data science process above has many additional aspects
and is typically conducted in an iterative manner. In ﬁgure 4,
we show two of these iterations, i.e. between training and
modeling and between deployment and the assembling of
new data sets. However, as this paper is concerned with AI
engineering and not with the speciﬁc data science aspects, we
do not discuss these aspects in more detail.
A. AI Engineering: Architecture
In the context of AI engineering, architecture is concerned
with structuring the overall system and decomposing it into
its main components. Constructing systems including ML/DL
components require components and solutions not found in
traditional systems and that need to address novel concerns.
Below we describe the primary research challenges that we
have identiﬁed in our research.
• Data versioning & dependency management: The
quality of the data used for training is absolutely central
for achieving high performance of models. Especially in
a DevOps environment, data generated by one version
of the software is not necessarily compatible with the
software generated by the subsequent version. Conse-
quently versioning of data needs to be carefully man-
aged. In addition, systems typically generate multiple
streams of data that have dependencies on each other.
As data pipelines tend to be less robust than software
pipelines [5], it is important to provide solutions for
the management of data quality. This can be concerned
with simple checks for data being in range or even
being present or more advanced checks to ensure that the
average for a window of data stays constant over time or
that the statistical distribution of the data remains similar.
As ML/DL models are heavily data dependent, the data
pipelines needed for feeding the models as well as the
data generated by the models need to be set up. This
can be particularly challenging when different types of
data and different sources of data are used; in addition
to questions of availability, accuracy, synchronisation and
normalisation, signiﬁcant problems related to security and
privacy appear.
• Federated learning infrastructure: Most of the cases
that we studied concern systems where ML models
are deployed in each instance of the system. Several
4

Fig. 4. Research agenda for AI engineering
approaches exist for managing training, evaluation and
deployment in such contexts, but one central infrastruc-
ture component is the support for federated learning. As
it often is infeasible to move all data to a central location
for training a global model, solutions are needed for
federated learning and the sharing of model parameters
such as neural network weights as well as selected data
sets that, for instance, represent cases not well handled
by the central model. Federated learning requires an
infrastructure to achieve the required quality attributes
and to efﬁciently and securely share models and data.
• Storage and computing infrastructure: Although many
assume that all ML/DL deployments operate in the cloud,
our interaction with industry shows that many companies
build up internal storage and computing infrastructure
because of legal constraints, cost or quality attributes.
Developing these infrastructures, for example for the
development of autonomous driving solutions, is a major
engineering and research challenge. Typically collection
and storing of data is organized centrally on the enterprise
level, while development of AI solutions is distributed
over several development teams.
• Deployment infrastructure: Independent of the use of
centralized or federated learning approaches, models still
need to be deployed in systems in the ﬁeld. As most
case study companies have adopted or plan to soon adopt
DevOps, it is important for a deployment infrastructure to
reliably deploy subsequent versions of models, measure
their performance, raise warnings and initiate rollbacks
in the case of anomalous behaviour. This infrastructure
is by necessity of a distributed nature as it requires
functionality both centrally as well as in each system
that is part of the DevOps approach. Deployment of
MD/DL models may require substantial change in the
overall architecture of the system.
B. AI Engineering: Development
Building and deploying successful ML/DL components and
systems requires more than data science alone. In this section
we focus on the development of systems including ML/DL
components. This is important because also ML/DL models,
in most cases that we have studied, are subject to the same
DevOps activities as the other software in systems, meaning
that models evolve, are retrained and deployed on continuous
basis. Based on our case study research, we present the four
primary research challenges concerning development in AI
engineering below.
• DataOps: Although considered a buzzword by some,
DataOps raises the concern of managing everything data
with the same structured and systematic approach as that
we manage software with in a traditional DevOps context.
As typical companies ask their data scientists to spend
north of 95% of their time on cleaning, pre-processing
and managing data, there is a signiﬁcant opportunity
to reduce this overhead by generating, distributing and
storing data smarter in the development process. DataOps
requires high levels of automation, which requires align-
ment and standardization in order to achieve continuous
value delivery.
• Reuse of pre-developed models: Most companies prefer
to employ models developed by others or that have been
developed earlier inside the company. However, reuse of
existing ML/DL models is not trivial as the separation
between the generic and speciﬁc parts of the model are
not always easy to separate, in particular when the run-
time context is different from that used in training phase.
• Quality attributes: In data science, the key challenge is
to achieve high accuracy, recall or other metrics directly
related to the ML performance of the machine learning
model. In an AI engineering context, however, several
other quality attributes become relevant including the
computation performance, in terms of the number of
inferences per time unit the system can manage, the
5

real-time properties, robustness of the system in case
of data outside the scope of training set, etc. Ensuring
satisfactory adherence to the quality requirements on the
ML components in the system is a research challenge that
is far from resolved.
• Integration of models & components: As we dis-
cussed earlier in the paper, ML/DL models need to be
integrated with the remainder of the system containing
regular software components. However, it is not always
trivial to connect the data-driven ML/DL models with
the computation-driven software components. Also, tra-
ditional testing and evaluation of the models must be
integrated in such a way that software methods and data-
science evaluation methods are combined seamlessly.
Depending on the criticality of the ML/DL model for
the overall performance of the system, the validation
activities need to be more elaborate and strict.
C. AI Engineering: Process
Although the notion of process has gone out of vogue with
the emergence of agile, it is hard to argue that no process
is required to align the efforts of large groups of people
without prohibitively high coordination cost. The context of
AI engineering is no different, but there are surprisingly few
design methods, processes and approaches available for the
development and evolution of ML/DL models. Experienced
data scientists do not need these, but with the rapidly growing
need for AI engineers, many less experienced data scientists
and software engineers are asked to build these models. These
professionals would very much beneﬁt from more methodolog-
ical and process support. We have identiﬁed four main process
related challenges that require signiﬁcant research efforts to
resolve in a constructive and efﬁcient way. Below we describe
each of these in more detail.
• Automated labelling: As the data sets that a company
starts with are limited sources for training and validation,
ideally we want to collect the data sets for training evolv-
ing models during operation in deployment. Although it is
easy to collect the input data, the labels used in supervised
learning are often much harder to add. Consequently, we
need solutions for, preferably, automated labelling of data
so that we have a constant stream of recent data for
training and validation purposes during evolution.
• Manage multiple models: The ﬁrst concern that often
surfaces in teams working on ML/DL models is that it
is difﬁcult to keep track of all the models that are being
considered during the development phase. We discussed
parts of this challenge in [2].
• A/B testing of models: During evolution, the improved
model is deployed for operation. However, experience
shows that models that perform better in training do not
necessarily perform better in operations. Consequently,
we need solutions, often variants of A/B testing, to ensure
that the new model also performs better in deployment.
• Monitoring & logging: Once the model is deployed
and used in operation, it is important to monitor its
performance and to log events speciﬁc to the performance
of the model. As ML/DL models tend to lack on the ex-
plainability front, the monitoring and logging is required
to build conﬁdence in the accuracy of the models and to
detect situations where the performance of a model starts
to deteriorate or is insufﬁcient from the start.
D. Domain-speciﬁc AI Eng: Cyber physical systems
In the remainder of this section, we present the unique
research topics for three application domains in which ML/DL
technologies are being deployed, i.e. cyber physical systems,
safety critical systems and autonomously improving systems.
Our research shows that each domain brings with it a set of
unique activities and research challenges associated with AI
engineering topics.
Although the recent emergence of ML/DL models in in-
dustry started in the online SaaS world, this has been rapidly
followed by increasing interest in the software-intensive em-
bedded systems industry. The main difference with cloud
based deployments is that the ML/DL models are deployed
in embedded systems out in the ﬁeld such as base stations,
cars, radars, sensors and the like.
Cyber physical systems are often organized around three
computing platforms, i.e. the edge device where the data for
ML/DL is collected, an on-premise server of some kind and the
infrastructure in the cloud. Each of these platforms has its own
characteristics in terms of real-time performance, security and
privacy, computational and storage resources, communications
cost, etc.
The consequence is that data management, training, val-
idation and inference associated with ML/DL models has
a tendency to become federated as it requires these three
computing platforms as most capabilities that customers care
about will cross-cut all three platforms. This leads to a set
of unique research challenges for this domain that we discuss
below.
• Federated/distributed storage of data: Parallel to the
model, the data used for training and inference needs to
be managed in a distributed and federated fashion. Local
storage on device instances minimizes communication
cost, but tends to increase the bill-of-materials for each
device and these architectural drivers need to be managed.
• Federated/distributed model creation: Due to the pres-
ence of multiple computing platforms, the architect or
data scientist needs to distribute the ML/DL model
over these computing platforms, resulting in a federated
model. This is an open research area related to the system
and data lifecycles, performance, availability, security,
computation, etc.
• Transfer learning: Especially for companies that have
thousands or millions of devices deployed in the ﬁeld,
the challenge is the balancing between centralized and
decentralized learning. The most promising approach is
to distribute centrally trained models and to allow each
individual device to apply its local learnings to the cen-
6

trally trained model using transfer learning approaches.
However, more research is needed.
• Deploy on heterogeneous hardware: Finally, because
of both cost and computational efﬁciency, embedded
systems often use dedicated hardware solutions such as
ASICs and FPGAs. Additionally, MD/DL models require
huge amounts of parallel computation, both during train-
ing and implementation, realised in e.g. GPUs. These exe-
cution platforms use different development environments,
programming languages, and execution paradigms. Em-
bedded systems tend to have constraints on computational
and storage resources as well as power consumption.
Deploying ML/DL models on these types of hardware
frequently requires engineering effort from the team as
there are no generic solutions available.
One challenge that is not yet one of the primary ones but that
has appeared on the horizon is mass-customization of ML/DL
models. As some CPS companies have many instances of their
products in the ﬁeld, the ML/DL models deployed in these
instances should, ideally, adjust their behaviour to the speciﬁcs
of the users using the instance, i.e. mass-customization. How-
ever, there are few solutions available for combining both
continuous deployment of centrally trained models with the
customization of each product instance.
E. Domain-speciﬁc AI Eng: Safety-critical systems
A special class of cyber physical systems are safety-critical
systems, i.e. those systems whose failure or malfunction may
result in signiﬁcant bodily, environmental or ﬁnancial harm.
The community struggles with balancing two forces. On the
one hand, we seek to avoid harm by taking conservative
approaches and introducing new technologies only after care-
ful evaluation. On the other hand, the slow introduction of
new technologies may easily cause harm in that the new
technologies can help avoid safety issues that were not possible
to avoid with conventional technologies only.
One of these new technologies is, of course, ML/DL. In
the automotive industry, among others, the use of ML/DL
allows for advanced driver support functions as well as fully
autonomous driving. The open challenge is establishing the
safety of these systems. In our research, we have deﬁned the
four primary research challenges speciﬁc for safety-critical AI-
based systems.
• Data trail: One of the key challenges in safety critical
systems is that the collection of safety-related evidence
before the deployment of systems and the creation of
a data trail during operations in order to ensure safe
operation of the system. In the context of ML/DL models,
this requires maintaining a clear trail of the data that
was used for training as well as the inferences that the
model provided during operation. Little research exists
that addresses this challenge for AI components and
consequently this is a signiﬁcant research challenge.
• Explainable models: As it is virtually impossible to
test a system to safety, the community often uses var-
ious approaches to certify systems. This is performed
by assessors who need to understand the functionality
of the system. This requires that ML/DL models are
explainable, which today is unsolvable or at least a non-
trivial problem for most models.
• Validation of safety-critical systems: The basic enabler
for deployment of ML/DL models in safety critical
systems is the validation of these systems. Validation
concerns both the correct behaviour in situations where
application should act, but we also need to show that
the system will not engage in situations where it is not
necessary or even dangerous to do so. Validation of
safety-critical systems starts from requirements of jus-
tiﬁable prediction and of deterministic system behavior,
while ML/DL solutions are based on statistical models,
so in principle non-deterministic behavior. In practice,
the ML/DL models can be more accurate and reliable,
but justiﬁcation of these models requires new approaches,
methods, and standards in the validation process.
• Reproducibility: For a variety of factors, a ML/DL
model may end up looking different when it is given a
different seed, order of training data, infrastructure it is
deployed on, etc. Especially for safety critical systems, it
is critical that we can reproduce the model in a predictable
manner, independent of the aforementioned factors.
F. Domain-speciﬁc AI Eng: Autonomously improving systems
There is an emerging category of systems that uses ML/DL
models with the intent of continuously improving the per-
formance of the system autonomously. In practice, there are
humans involved in the improvement of the system, but the
system employs mechanisms for experimentation and im-
provement that do not require human involvement.
The primary way for systems to achieve this is through the
use of ML/DL models that analyse the data, train using it and
then provide interference. This requires forms of automated
experimentation where the system itself generates alternatives
and, for example, deploys these alternatives in A/B testing or
similar contexts and measures the impact of these changes.
There are four research challenges challenges that need to be
addressed for autonomously improving systems:
• Data generation for machine learning: Traditional
ML/DL model development requires data scientists to
spend signiﬁcant amounts of time to convert available
data sets that often are intended for human consumption
into data sets that are usable for machine learning. In au-
tonomously improving systems, the data that is generated
by the system needs to be machine interpretable without
any human help. How to accomplish this, though, is an
open research question.
• Automated experimentation: Although the notion of
automated experimentation is conceptually easy to un-
derstand, actually realizing systems that can operate in
this fashion is largely an open research challenge where
little work is available.
• Online evaluation: As autonomously improving systems
generate alternatives for evaluation at run-time, these
7

alternatives need to be deployed and evaluated during the
regular operation of the system. This requires solutions
for dynamically adjusting the behavior of the system
to select, for a small percentage of the cases, the new
alternative for evaluation as well as to keep track of
statistical validity of the test results associated with each
alternative.
• Exploration vs exploitation: In autonomously improv-
ing systems, the system autonomously experiments with
different responses to the environment in which it op-
erates with the intent of improving its performance. The
challenge is that some or even many of these experiments
will result in worse performance than the current default
response. This is referred to as regret in optimization
theory. The challenge is that it is impossible to ﬁnd better
ways of doing things without trying out these new ways,
but especially in embedded systems there is a limit to
how poor the alternative can be. This means that we
need research to help assess the worst case outcomes for
each experiment with the intent of balancing the cost of
exploration with the cost too much exploitation.
G. Other domain speciﬁc systems
We described the domain speciﬁc research challenges for
building ML/DL systems for speciﬁc types of systems. There
of course are other domains that likely have speciﬁc research
challenges as well. These challenges might be the same as for
non AI-based systems, but new methods must be developed
to meet these challenges (for example develop new methods
to ensure system reliability, availability, security, reusability,
or other non-functional properties). However, in many cases
introducing ML/DL solutions cause new challenges such as
quality of data, real-time data access, increase in efforts in the
development life cycle as well as challenges in combination
of security, functionality and privacy, etc.
V. CONCLUSION
Artiﬁcial intelligence, and speciﬁcally machine- and deep-
learning, has, over the last decade, proven to have the potential
to deliver enormous value to industry and society. This has
resulted in most companies experimenting and prototyping
with a host of AI initiatives. Unfortunately, our research [3]–
[5] shows that the transition from prototype to industry-
strength, production-quality deployment of ML models proves
to be very challenging for many companies. The engineering
challenges surrounding this prove to be signiﬁcant [11], even
if many researchers and companies fail to recognize this.
To the best of our knowledge, no papers exist that provide
a systematic overview of the research challenges associated
with the emerging ﬁeld of AI engineering. In this paper, we
provide a conceptualization of the typical evolution patterns
that companies experience when adopting ML, present an
overview of the problems that companies experience based on
well over a dozen cases that we have studied and we provide
a research agenda that has been derived from the research that
we have conducted to date and that needs to be addressed by
the research community at large. The goal of this research
agenda is to provide inspiration for the software engineering
research community to start addressing the AI engineering
challenges.
AI and ML have the potential to greatly beneﬁt industry
and society at large. For us to capture the value, however, we
need to be able to engineer solutions that deliver production-
quality deployments. This requires research to address the AI
engineering challenges that we present in this paper. In future
work, we aim to address several of these research challenges in
our research and our collaboration with industry. In particular
collaboration with industry in real industrial settings is crucial
since ML methods build upon empirical methods and directly
depend on the amount and types of data. For this reason, we
frequently organize events in the Nordics and at international
conferences to create awareness for the identiﬁed challenges
and to encourage other researchers to join us in addressing
these.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research in this paper has been supported by Software
Center, the Chalmers Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center
(CHAIR) and Vinnova.
