SensAI+Expanse
Emotional Valence Prediction Studies with Cognition and Memory Integration
Nuno A. C. Henriques
BioISI
Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal

Helder Coelho
BioISI
Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal

Leonel Garcia-Marques
CICPSI
Faculdade de Psicologia
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal

Abstract—The humans are affective and cognitive beings
relying on memories for their individual and social identities.
Also, human dyadic bonds require some common beliefs, such
as empathetic behaviour for better interaction. In this sense, re-
search studies involving human-agent interaction should resource
on affect, cognition, and memory integration. The developed arti-
ﬁcial agent system (SensAI+Expanse) includes machine learning
algorithms, heuristics, and memory as cognition aids towards
emotional valence prediction on the interacting human. Further,
an adaptive empathy score is always present in order to engage
the human in a recognisable interaction outcome. The developed
system encompass a mobile device embodied interacting agent
(SensAI) plus its Cloud-expanded (Expanse) cognition and mem-
ory resources. The agent is resilient on collecting data, adapts
its cognitive processes to each human individual in a learning
best effort for proper contextualised prediction. The current
study make use of an achieved adaptive process. Also, the use of
individual prediction models with speciﬁc options of the learning
algorithm and evaluation metric from a previous research study.
The accomplished solution includes a highly performant pre-
diction ability, an efﬁcient energy use, and feature importance
explanation for predicted probabilities. Results of the present
study show evidence of signiﬁcant emotional valence behaviour
differences between some age ranges and gender combinations.
Therefore, this work contributes with an artiﬁcial intelligent
agent able to assist on cognitive science studies, as presented.
This ability is about affective disturbances by means of predicting
human emotional valence contextualised in space and time.
Moreover, contributes with learning processes and heuristics ﬁt to
the task including economy of cognition and memory to cope with
the environment. Finally, these contributions include an achieved
age and gender neutrality on predicting emotional valence states
in context and with very good performance for each individual.
Keywords—emotional valence prediction; context; cognition;
memory; human-agent interaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
The human agents may be seen like self-consciousness,
emotion-driven, cognitive beings with a bond between the
evolutionary way of emotions and their supporting physical
structure, as proposed in [1]. In a sense, an agent’s behaviour
depends on its affective states besides cognition to cope with
the environment. Thus, the ability to predict some dimension
of those affects would undoubtedly be of great value towards
better adaptation and interaction with others. Furthermore, an
artiﬁcial agent, like in humans, may be conceived with a
decision process inﬂuenced by facts, reason, memories [2]
and emotional pressure for the basic needs to the entity’s
homeostasis [3]. Additionally, using the concept of empa-
thy [4][5] as a starting point for two-agent bonding may bring
better dyadic interaction and communication. Therefore, an
artiﬁcial agent adjusting empathetically towards the interacting
human current behaviour and affective state may be conceived
[6][7]. Further, Human-Agent Interaction (HAI) should be
open to each entity own perception, such as the perceived
human affective states in a multimodal approach [8][9]. Ac-
cordingly, the use of a wearable or mobile device, such as
a smartphone seems suitable for the task of collecting data
towards affect sensing and reasoning. Twenty years ago, the
American College of Medical Informatics (ACMI) has already
approached the subject during the 1998 Scientiﬁc Symposium:
“Monitor the developments in emerging wearable computers
and sensors — possibly even implantable ones — for their
potential contribution to a personal health record and status
monitoring” [10]. Currently, the mobile device as a sensing
tool for behavioural research is thriving with active discussions
[11][12] including exploration on correlates between sensors’
data and depressive symptom severity [13].
This paper describes the SensAI+Expanse system ability
to predict human emotional valence states in geospatial and
temporal context without evidence of any bias regarding
demographics, such as age and gender. This prediction ability
is supported by cognition and memory integration in learn-
ing mechanisms within an adaptive process. Further, human
population in current study comprise distinct behaviour, age,
gender, and place of origin. Meaning, the need for proper
adaptation on reasoning about each individual and respective
collected data in order to assure demographics neutrality.
Accordingly, the system developed for the affective studies en-
compasses an integration of cognition and memory resources
distributed between a smartphone embodied agent (SensAI)
and its Cloud-expanded (Expanse) continuity. SensAI collects
data from multimode sources, such as (a) device sensors (e.g.,
Global Positioning System (GPS)); (b) current timestamp in
arXiv:2001.09746v3  [cs.CY]  10 Mar 2020

user calendar time zone; and (c) human text writings from
in-application diary and social network posts (e.g., Twitter).
These written texts in (c) will be subjected to a rule-based
lexical processing [14] in order to obtain a valence value,
i.e., instantaneous sentiment analysis on demand with efﬁcient
energy use. The human reports emotional valence ground truth
by means of three available buttons regarding positive, neutral,
and negative sentiment classes. Simultaneously, an empathy
score progress bar is visible during this interaction (Figure 1)
and may change on events, such as the human reporting
frequency. The score decays over time and it is designed to
be the human-agent current value of empathy. Complementary,
the available algorithms and heuristics included in Expanse are
used by a pipeline process in order to reason about the data
set of each human individual. These machine learning ser-
vices comprise (a) unsupervised algorithms, such as location
clustering parameters auto discovery; and (b) supervised ones,
such as learning hyperparameters auto tuning. Regarding the
learning model and evaluation metric, the choice is based on a
previous study [15] where Extreme Gradient Boosting and F1
score achieved good results for several data sets. As depicted
in Figure 2, the prediction performance of the agent achieved
a score greater than 0.9 for almost two thirds of the population
(31 eligible out of 49 from a total of 57), one third distributed
between 0.7 (exclusive) and 0.9, with only one subject scoring
slightly less than 0.7 (0.68).
Figure 1. Empathy score notiﬁcation and emotional valence report buttons.
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(0.5, 0.6]
(0.6, 0.7]
(0.7, 0.8]
(0.8, 0.9]
(0.9, 1.0]
Score range
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of entities
(eligible population=31)
Entities prediction performance
F1 score
Extreme Gradient Boosting
F1 score
Figure 2. Prediction performance on all individuals by F1 score range.
This ﬁrst section introduced the current investigation pur-
pose and the work done so far. Next, Section II brieﬂy de-
scribes the cognitive and memory mechanisms in place for the
developed system reasoning capabilities on emotional valence
prediction. Section III describes the research study including
the followed method and the achieved results. Section IV
discloses the scope restrictions of this and similar studies
using smartphone sensing. Finally, Section V summarises the
outcomes and presents a future perspective.
II. COGNITION AND MEMORY IN SENSAI+EXPANSE
In order to enable SensAI+Expanse as a trustable research
tool for affective studies, this section brieﬂy describes the
achieved cognition and memory integration in the developed
system. In a sense, this agent is more than an instrument
by means of some bio-inspired concepts on its design and
implementation. Regarding natural brains, to some extent may
be seen as mainly about cognitive processing and memory
use towards learning in order to adapt and survive. All
this, of course, besides identity, social and cultural aspects.
Moreover, emotions in humans are of great importance by
helping on decision-making and also with the persistence of
episodic memories, amongst other useful regulations [16][17].
Simultaneously, “Forgetting to remember” [18] is required to
sustain adequate processing and storage when coping with
the information stream that ﬂows through perception sen-
sors. Thus, the concept of cognitive economy is introduced
comprising some exclusions from memory to foster savings
by means of (a) sustaining last collected data value without
change from a sensor during a well-deﬁned time interval (e.g.,
15 minutes); and (b) discarding data below relevant thresholds
(e.g., location changed less than 10 meters). The resulting
information gaps in (a) are ﬁlled a posteriori in Expanse
cognition. This reconstruction is done strictly with the same
time interval values used by SensAI thus avoiding any data
bias.
As already referred, adaptive mechanisms including cogni-
tive and memory ones are described in a previous paper [15].
Although, there are some of this Automated Machine Learning
(AutoML) process aspects relevant to emphasise once more.
Regarding system communication, SensAI and its Expanse
are connected through an end-to-end secure Web service. The
data ﬂows mainly from the mobile device sensors collected by
SensAI to the Expanse storage for posterior processing in a
pipeline. SensAI has in-device reasoning and memory abilities
yet the Expanse does the heavy work by means of several
adaptive mechanisms regarding collected data from human
behaviour. In the end, the system functions as a distributed,
fault-tolerant, mobile and Cloud-based artiﬁcial intelligent
agent. It may be used as a robust, continuously, online research
tool for gathering and processing human emotional valence
data towards contextualised predictions, and also affective
studies.
A. SensAI
The mobile device agent is embodied, encompassing sev-
eral functions as a whole, towards proper interaction, data
collecting, reasoning, and storage. The ground truth values
for emotional valence prediction are reported by humans. The
main interface includes three emoticon in buttons representing

the available discrete valence classes of negative, neutral, and
positive, as in the persistent notiﬁcation (Figure 1). Further,
this mechanism is robust to interaction bias, such as high-
frequency repeated button (emoticon) clicks. Also, to cases
of mistaken valence reported and promptly corrected by an
additional hit on a different class. Moreover, a simple yet
effective heuristic of accounting only for the last hit during a
deﬁned short time interval is in place. All these happenings are
properly contextualised by collecting the location and moment
of the event. SensAI is focused mainly on:
Smooth HAI towards engaged empathetic relationship, rea-
soning about current emotional valence state of the hu-
man, and keeping all interaction very much passive only
with seldom actions. The empathetic engagement relies
on a score to be perceived by the human as the HAI
empathy level. This metric is sensible to the frequency of
human reporting. It decays over time (e.g., 24-hour cycle)
and the decay rate may change with other actions, such
as pausing the data collection. The agent writes some pe-
riodic messages using the in-application diary with useful
information, such as the detected activity (e.g., running)
and the current computed emotional valence value. All
these actions, speciﬁcally empathy level notiﬁcations, are
kept silent, only notifying when the human is interacting.
Additionally, displays summary data such as physical
activity by means of six recognised classes (e.g., walking)
in a main dashboard. Also, a sentiment chart is available
with interactive zoom and pan along the local memory
chronological limit (e.g., 28 days) of sentiments reported
and detected (e.g., Twitter status).
Efﬁcient data collection as much as possible and allowed
in a relatively low energy consumption. Accordingly, a
practical data acquisition rhythm, such as active = 2s,
inactive = 8s, f = 1/5Hz, and D = 20% is devised
and implemented in order to acquire relevant data without
too much power drain (below two-digit percentage points
on average for several assessments). This rhythm and
other thresholds (e.g., 100ms minimum interval between
sensor fetches) may be subjected to automatic adaptation
within environment changes. Regarding the sentiment
analysis [14] of written texts, a custom heuristic is imple-
mented [15] integrating language detection, translation,
and emoticon processing. All in a best effort to get the
sentiment value along with the language (English and
Portuguese supported). This process adapts to the cases
of mixed languages, emoticon-only text, and no language
detected but emoticon available to extraction on analysing
these short messages. Additionally, a display with the
statistics about all sensors collected events is available. It
includes sensor event count in local memory and already
Cloud synced, last data sync, and percentage of collecting
activity relative to application existence.
Environment adaptation in order to keep local resources
healthy and survive to sudden contingencies, such as ap-
plication crashes. An homeostasis-based implementation
runs periodic checks, such as database health and data
feed. It will take proper actions, such as recovering the
data collection from sensors, and even a local database
maintenance. The agent does a system registration at
ﬁrst start to deal with device boot and application up-
grade special states. Also, guarantees the reviving by the
Android operating system in cases of unexpected crash
and removal from the running state. Regarding Cloud
data syncing, it is robust to failures using a mechanism
inspired in the relational database management system
transaction. Only synced data will be marked for removal
after local cache persistence threshold. Moreover, if no
suitable data connection is available then it will adapt by
increasing veriﬁcation frequency for further try to sync.
All these mechanisms of local cache and Cloud sync
are paramount to keep healthy memory consumption and
guarantee proper data collection.
B. SensAI Expanse
The Expanse comprises Cloud-expanded resources for the
SensAI agent. These are able to supplement the smartphone
restricted local memory, processing, and power. In a sense,
it augments the agent cognition and memory. Regarding per-
sistence, there is storage available for data since ﬁrst value
collected until the present. All data is secured and stored
anonymously. Because of an efﬁcient data collection, fewer
data stored represents more after proper processing. There is
a step during the machine learning pipeline where a trans-
formation acts on cleaning and reconstructing collected data.
This includes upsampling data within the actual thresholds
previously used to save resources in the mobile device. More-
over, processing all eligible data through the available myriad
of heuristics and other algorithms towards AutoML requires
(a) an adaptation to the multiple human behaviours revealed
in the data set; and (b) Bayesian efﬁcient auto discovery on
parameters.
The developed custom pipeline for SensAI learning uses
various heuristics and other algorithms towards AutoML.
These include data classes (negative, neutral, positive) im-
balance (reports count) degree check from [19]. And also, a
custom heuristic for class veriﬁcation and learning process
adaptation in cases, such as no reports for one (or even two)
classes. After all these reasoning, the achieved entities are
the ones eligible for the machine learning ﬁnal step towards
emotional valence prediction in context. Regarding location,
the learn process make use of the unsupervised HDBSCAN al-
gorithm clustering coordinates which accurately drops outliers.
For each individual case, the relevant steps may be summarised
as (a) calling HDBSCAN on provided min_samples (using
[1, 10, 100]) in order to ﬁnd the best min_cluster_size
parameter; and before each call to the elected supervised multi-
class classiﬁcation algorithm Extreme Gradient Boosting (b)
an auto search is run for the best cross validation K splits
(K-fold) regarding the algorithm minimum count of accepted
classes. Next, Bayesian optimisation is used for hyperparam-

eter auto tuning with cross validation for each speciﬁc model.
Finally, the model ﬁt for each human current data is achieved
and performance metrics are computed. The actual knowledge
from the learning process is stored efﬁciently with a very small
memory footprint. The system prediction ability is ready to
serve answers about contextualised emotional valence for each
individual.
III. STUDY
This section encompasses the outcomes and method used in
a research study running on a long-term interaction between
SensAI and a population of human individuals in the ﬁeld
(anonymous participants outside the laboratory).
A. Method
The participants in this study are neither targeted nor re-
cruited from anywhere. Instead, the goal to avoid a laboratory
known [20] frequent bias of sampling only from Western, Edu-
cated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) societies
is accomplished by collecting data in the wild and worldwide.
Smartphone sensing [21] is in place by means of an Android
application. Moreover, privacy is enforced by removing all
identiﬁable data before storing in Expanse. Furthermore, text
in the Diary activity is kept local and will be destroyed by
SensAI uninstallation. The user is informed on ﬁrst install
and by using the help option. A total of 57 participants (ten
countries and four continents) installed SensAI, eight were
discarded for not sharing age and gender thus 49 remained
eligible for analysis before machine learning pipeline further
restrictions. Moreover, some ten-year age range classes re-
vealed to be under-represented hence a dichotomy approach is
in place using age median (M = 34). Therefore, a reasonable
distribution of all genders by the two age ranges, [10, 34) vs.
[34, 70), is attained despite some gender disproportion in each
range. The age range count relative difference from [10, 34) to
[34, 70) is only 4.2% (one individual) as presented in Table I.
TABLE I. ELIGIBLE POPULATION FOR ANALYSIS
Age range
[10, 34)
[34, 70)
Female
9
9
Male
15
16
Total
24
25
B. Results
Regarding the emotional valence states reported by the
humans, there is evidence of valence proportion differences
between some groups. In order to assess the statistical signiﬁ-
cance of this evidence depicted in Figure 3, the Mann-Whitney
U test is used. The results presented in Table II show that the
null hypothesis (H0: two sets of measurements are drawn from
the same distribution) can be rejected for all but two tests, i.e.,
evidence of signiﬁcant differences on three comparisons of two
groups each as described next:
[10, 34) vs. [34, 70) show differences between two age ranges
mainly driven by the female gender.
[10, 34) female vs. [34, 70) female evidence a difference in
behaviour where the older age group reported signiﬁ-
cantly less negative and neutral emotional valence and
an order of magnitude more positive reports.
[34, 70) female vs. [34, 70) male evidence the overwhelming
positive reports by female versus male in this age range
group.
Female
Male
[10, 34)
Female
Male
[34, 70)
Age range and gender
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Valence
Emotional valence report
Percentage by age range dichotomy (median=34) and gender
(population=49)
negative
neutral
positive
Figure 3. Emotional valence reports percentage by age range and gender.
TABLE II. AGE AND GENDER GROUPS COMPARISON (FIGURE 3):
MANN-WHITNEY U TEST RESULTS
Age range and gender
p value
H0 (α = 0.05)
[10, 34) vs. [34, 70)
1.161 × 10−30
rejected
[10, 34) female vs. [34, 70) female
5.539 × 10−14
rejected
[10, 34) male vs. [34, 70) male
1.561 × 10−1
not rejected
[10, 34) female vs. [10, 34) male
3.938 × 10−1
not rejected
[34, 70) female vs. [34, 70) male
7.027 × 10−67
rejected
Regarding the system prediction performance, a previous
study [15] revealed Extreme Gradient Boosting with F1 score
as the best option on average for the population individuals,
as already depicted in Figure 2. The sample is reduced
to 31 eligible individuals due to valence classes imbalance
restrictions further applied in the machine learning pipeline
process. Regarding these entities, the high scores achieved
were independent of age and gender, no pattern whatsoever
was revealed. Further, inspection of the feature importance
contribution to the prediction revealed that most of the popu-
lation is more sensible to the time dimension than the location.
Speciﬁcally, weekday (moment_dow) is the most, 64.5%
of the cases, inﬂuential for emotional valence predictions
followed by hour (moment_hour) with 25.8%, and location
(mgrs_...) with 9.7%. This ranking is obtained using SHap-
ley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) on all entities prediction
model for the feature ranked ﬁrst on each entity. Meaning
that for almost all entities the moment, weekday and hour, is
decisive to obtain a prediction whereas for a few (e.g., entity
5 as depicted in Figure 4) some locations strongly compete
for emotional valence prediction.

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
mean(|SHAP value|) (average impact on model output magnitude)
mgrs_1000_29SMC8584
mgrs_1000_29SMC8788
mgrs_1000_29SMC8589
mgrs_1000_29SMC8485
mgrs_1000_29SMC8580
moment_day_quarter
mgrs_1000_29SMC8587
moment_hour
moment_dow
mgrs_1000_29SMC8689
Feature (N=10) overall influence for entity 5
Figure 4. Feature overall inﬂuence for entity 5.
Regarding the common behaviour, entity 24 is a typical
individual where the time dimension prevails on emotional
valence prediction. In this case, Sunday is a weekday where
all locations are expected to have positive value predictions.
Accordingly, Figure 5 shows the expected positive emotional
valence on a Sunday in the future at 8:00 a.m. for the top
seven locations (most inﬂuential).
Figure 5. Entity 24: Sunday valence probability for the top 7 locations.
Regarding the same top seven locations and hour of the
day, Figure 6 depicts a quite different day from the previous
Sunday. The computed probabilities are in order with the
expected for a business day for this entity at 8:00 a.m.
The map areas of emotional valence prediction measure
1000 m square side due to reasonable cell size for same place
sentiment and a feasible number of cells able to use as features
in the learning process. Moreover, world map is divided into
Figure 6. Entity 24: Tuesday valence probability for the top 7 locations.
cells following the Military Grid Reference System (MGRS).
These maps are obtained with a developed prototype (Jupyter
notebook and Python) for prediction analysis online using the
last AutoML results for each entity. The tool is interactive
including zoom and more information on hover each location.
IV. LIMITATIONS
Every scientiﬁc study has limitations. In order to clarify
under which conditions the results should be interpreted,
the identiﬁed limitations of the present work are (a) no
prior health information about the users that may impact the
engagement effect including prediction result bias; (b) inter-
acting with a non-anthropomorphic versus human-like agent
[22] may impact the emotional valence state reported; and
(c) affective reactivity and regulation gender differences on
emotional response to context are not considered as proposed
in [23]. Although, gender and age neutrality is achieved
by SensAI+Expanse results on predicting emotional valence
states. Moreover, there is no evidence of any bias in the
prediction scores achieved regarding the individual gender.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper described the SensAI+Expanse system ability to
predict emotional valence states (a) in spatial and temporal
context; (b) with very good performance; and (c) age and
gender neutral on revealing some individuals’ idiosyncrasies.
Moreover, this smartphone sensing-based system is robust
to unexpected behaviours from humans, Cloud, and mobile
demanding environments. The SensAI agent ﬁrst adapts to the
operating system restrictions on mobile resources use, such

as keeping battery consumption below two-digit percentage
points on average. Then, it uses a myriad of heuristics and
other algorithms in order to achieve the best possible predic-
tion whichever human behaviour encounters within the col-
lected data. The outcomes presented show evidence, restricted
to population and data samples in this study, of differences in
behaviour amongst some combinations of age ranges versus
gender. Regardless, SensAI+Expanse was able to adapt and
learn to predict emotional valence states with very good scores
for every individual on average (Figure 2). Thus, SensAI
is able to reveal idiosyncratic factors on human’s emotional
valence changes without any bias regarding age and gender.
Moreover, adding features to the learning process may reveal
distinct factors not yet discovered, such as inﬂuence of phys-
ical activity (e.g., riding a bike). The accelerometer data may
be used to correlate physical activity with valence (positive)
state [24]. This course of action may be taken as future work.
Therefore, SensAI+Expanse contributes as a novel platform
for affective and cognitive studies about human emotional
valence changes in context. Further, it may complement and
eventually supersede laboratory usually long-list self-appraisal
questionnaires. Moreover, it reinforces smartphone sensing
contribution as a tool for personalised health studies, such as
emotional disturbances accompanied by healthcare profession-
als. Furthermore, all the source code is published as free soft-
ware under the Apache License 2.0. Future work may include
prior health information from each human. Thus, adapting
interaction and learning process towards better predictions.
Furthermore, SensAI may enable classifying options (e.g.,
Likert scale) at some speciﬁc events for the human to grade
the agent behaviour hence tailoring future actions. This course
of action may diminish the identiﬁed limitations described in
the previous section and contribute to better studies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
N.A.C.H. thanks Jorge M. C. Gomes for the precious
contributions. This work is partially supported by Universi-
dade de Lisboa [PhD support grant May 2016–April 2019].
Partially supported by Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e Tecnolo-
gia [UID/MULTI/04046/2019 Research Unit grant from FCT,
Portugal (to BioISI)]. This work used the European Grid
Infrastructure (EGI) with the support of NCG-INGRID-PT.
