Examining the effects of emotional valence and arousal on takeover 
performance in conditionally automated driving 
 
Na Du 
Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan 
 
 
Feng Zhou 
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn 
 
 
Elizabeth M. Pulver 
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company 
 
 
Dawn M. Tilbury 
Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan 
 
 
Lionel P. Robert 
School of Information, University of Michigan 
 
 
Anuj K. Pradhan 
Industrial and Mechanical Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amhest 
 
 
X. Jessie Yang 
Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan 
 
Manuscript type: Research Article 
Running head: Emotions affect takeover performance 
Word count: 4500 
Corresponding  author:  X. Jessie Yang, 1205 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48015, 

Acknowledgment: This work was supported by University of Michigan Mcity and in 
part by the National Science Foundation. The views expressed are those of the authors 
and do not reflect the official policy or position of State FarmO
R . 

2 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In conditionally automated driving, drivers have difficulty in takeover transitions 
as they become increasingly decoupled from the operational level of driving. Factors 
influencing takeover performance, such as takeover lead time and the engagement of 
non-driving related tasks, have been studied in the past. However, despite the  
important role emotions play in human-machine interaction and in manual driving, 
little is known about how emotions influence drivers’ takeover performance. This study, 
therefore, examined the effects of emotional valence and arousal on drivers’ takeover 
timeliness and quality in conditionally automated driving. We conducted a driving 
simulation experiment with 32 participants. Movie clips were played for emotion 
induction. Participants with different levels of emotional valence and arousal were 
required to take over control from automated driving, and their takeover time and 
quality were analyzed. Results indicate that positive valence led to better takeover 
quality in the form of a smaller maximum resulting acceleration and a smaller maximum 
resulting jerk. However, high arousal did not yield an advantage in takeover time. This 
study contributes to the literature by demonstrating how emotional valence and arousal 
affect takeover performance. The benefits of positive emotions carry over from manual 
driving to conditionally automated driving while the benefits of arousal do not. 
 
Keywords: SAE level 3, conditional automation, takeover transition, 
human-automation interaction, human-robot interaction 

3 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
According to the SAE standard (Society of Automotive Engineers, 2018), vehicles 
of Level 3 conditional automation and above are equipped with automated driving 
features. While people are still speculating if and when SAE Level 5 full automation 
will be ready (Sparrow & Howard, 2017), automated driving features at SAE Level 3, 
such as the Audi Traffic Jam Chauffeur, are expected to be introduced into the market 
(Bishop, 2019; Taylor, 2017). 
With SAE Level 3 automation, drivers will no longer be required to actively 
monitor the driving environment and can engage in non-driving-related tasks (NDRTs). 
When the automated vehicle (AV) reaches its operational limits, however, drivers will 
have to take over control of the vehicle at a moment’s notice. This transition of control 
represents the transfer of the longitudinal and lateral control responsibilities from the 
automated vehicle to the human driver, and usually involves the driver terminating 
NDRTs, moving eyes/hands/feet back to the road/steering wheel/pedals, and resuming 
control of the vehicle. Research indicates that drivers have difficulty in takeover 
transitions as they become increasingly decoupled from the operational level of driving 
(Ayoub, Zhou, Bao, & Yang, 2019; Eriksson & Stanton, 2017; Gold, Körber, Lechner, & 
Bengler, 2016; Petersen, Robert, Yang, & Tilbury, 2019; Zhou, Yang, & Zhang, 2019). 
In response to this known difficulty, research has been conducted to investigate factors 
affecting takeover performance, including the external driving environment (e.g., road 
elements, traffic situations, and weather conditions), types of NDRTs (e.g. reading, 
typing), individual characteristics (e.g., training, prior experience with automation,  
trust in automation, age), and design of human-machine interface (e.g., multi-modal 
display) (Eriksson & Stanton, 2017; Gold et al., 2016; Helldin, Falkman, Riveiro, & 
Davidsson, 2013; Körber, Gold, Lechner, & Bengler, 2016; Wan & Wu, 2018). 
However, despite the important role emotion plays in human-machine interaction 
(Picard, 2003; Stickney, 2009) and in manual driving (Abdu, Shinar, & Meiran, 2012; 
Chan & Singhal, 2013; Jeon, 2017; Pêcher, Lemercier, & Cellier, 2009; Trick, 
Brandigampola, & Enns, 2012), little is known about how emotions influence drivers’ 

4 
 
 
 
takeover performance. The present study, therefore, aims to fill the research gap and 
examine the effect of emotional valence and arousal on takeover performance in 
conditionally automated driving. 
 
Emotion as a two-dimensional construct 
 
According to Russell (1980), emotion has at least two dimensions. The first 
dimension is valence, or how negative or positive a stimulus is. For example, watching a 
baby smiling is more positive than seeing a patient dying. The second dimension is 
arousal, or how sleepy or exciting a stimulus is. For example, listening to rock bands is 
associated with higher arousal than listening to meditation music. The two dimensions 
can be mapped in a two-dimensional space and the combinations of different values of 
valence and arousal are associated with different discrete emotions. For example, the 
upper left corner of the two-dimensional space represents emotions of negative valence 
and high arousal, such as anger; the lower right corner of the space represents emotions 
of positive valence and low arousal, such as calmness. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 .  The circumplex model of emotion (Russell, 1980) 
 
While it may be more straightforward for individuals to report discrete emotions 
they are experiencing, the dimensional view of emotion provides a more fundamental 
explanation of the relationships between emotions and behaviors (Barrett, 1998). The 

5 
 
 
 
dimensional view is also supported by studies in neuroscience. With evidence of neural 
activities in the brain, valence and arousal appear to influence cognitive processes and 
human behaviors via distinct mechanisms (Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2004; Kensinger, 
2004). In line with this theoretical background, the current study manipulated and 
examined the effects of emotional valence and arousal systematically, instead of focusing 
on certain discrete emotions. 
 
Emotions in Manual and Automated Driving 
 
The literature on how emotions affect human-machine interaction has grown 
significantly in the past two decades (Ahn, 2010; Picard, 2003; Stickney, 2009). One of 
the most important effects of emotions lies in its ability to capture attention. People 
tend to pay more attention to stimuli and thoughts that are more relevant to their 
current emotional states (Bower & Forgas, 2000). In addition, emotion has also been 
shown to influence memory (i.e., Emotional stimuli are generally remembered better 
than unemotional events (Reeves, Newhagen, Maibach, Basil, & Kurz, 1991; Thorson & 
Friestad, 1989)), cognitive style and performance (Rusting, 1998), and judgement and 
decision making (Peters, Västfjäll, Gärling, & Slovic, 2006). 
Manual driving is a complex task involving attention, information processing, and 
action-based judgment. Drivers can become emotional on the road when they interact 
with external environments and other road users, which may lead to enormous 
consequences (Jeon, 2017). Some studies placed an emphasis on the effects of specific 
emotions on manual driving, in particular, the effects of anger. Anger, as one of the 
most commonly experienced emotions during driving, has received a substantial amount 
of research attention. A recent survey study by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety 
found that nearly 80 percent of drivers expressed anger, aggression or road rage at least 
once in the previous year, which are significant contributors to fatal crashes (AAA 
Foundation for Traffic Safety, 2016). An analysis of naturalistic driving data showed 
that drivers in elevated emotional states, including anger, sadness, crying, and/or 
emotional agitation have an increased risk of a crash by 9.8 times (Dingus et al., 2016). 

6 
 
 
 
Moreover, experimental studies indicate that anger leads to risky and aggressive 
behaviors, such as speeding and traffic rule violation (Abdu et al., 2012; Deffenbacher, 
Deffenbacher, Lynch, & Richards, 2003; Hu, Zhu, Gao, & Zheng, 2018; Jeon, Walker, & 
Yim, 2014; Underwood, Chapman, Wright, & Crundall, 1999). For example, Abdu et 
al. (2012) conducted a driving simulator study with 15 licensed drivers and found that 
angry drivers crossed more yellow traffic lights and tended to drive faster. Similarly, 
Jeon et al. (2014) found that anger led to a significantly lower perceived safety and 
degraded driving performance (i.e., larger deviations from the center line and more 
violations of traffic rules). 
Moreover, researchers went beyond specific emotions and systematically explored 
the effects of positive/negative valence, and high/low arousal on manual driving 
performance (Chan & Singhal, 2013; Hancock, Hancock, & Janelle, 2012; Pêcher et al., 
2009; Trick et al., 2012; Ünal, de Waard, Epstude, & Steg, 2013). Chan and Singhal 
(2013) investigated the effects of emotional valence on driving. In their study, 
participants were responsible for longitudinal and lateral control of the vehicle. At the 
same time, they were asked to view words of positive, negative and neutral valence on 
roadside billboards, and later to recall as many words as possible. Results revealed that 
drivers recalled more negative words than positive words, suggesting that negative 
stimuli distracted drivers’ attention more severely. In another study, participants drove 
and viewed emotional images concurrently. Viewing positive images led to better lateral 
control but also slower speeds when compared to negative images (Hancock et al., 
2012). The positive association between better vehicle control and positive valence was 
also reported in the studies of Trick et al. (2012) and Groeger (2013). Interestingly, 
using another emotion induction method, Pêcher et al. (2009) asked drivers to listen to 
music and found that happy music (positive valence) resulted in an unexpected large 
decrement of speed and a deteriorated lateral control in comparison with sad music 
(negative valence). The reason for the inconsistent findings could be due to the 
differences in participants’ emotion induction methods (Steinhauser et al., 2018) and 
participants’ base emotions and personal experience. 

7 
 
 
 
In addition, Trick et al. (2012) manipulated both emotional valence and arousal in 
an experiment where participants were exposed to a variety of images that were either 
positive or negative in valence and either high or low in arousal.  After viewing the 
images, participants needed to brake in reaction to the sudden deceleration of a lead 
vehicle.  Results showed that higher arousal led to faster hazard response if the hazard 
was presented shortly after viewing an image.  Similarly, Navarro, Osiurak, and  
Reynaud (2018) and Ünal et al. (2013) conducted experiments to manipulate drivers’ 
emotional arousal using musical tempo.  Results showed that in a car following task, 
arousing musical background improved drivers’ responsiveness to the speed changes of 
the followed vehicle compared to relaxing music. 
Research in manual driving suggests the associations between positive valence and 
better vehicle control, and between higher arousal and faster hazard response. Despite 
the large amount of research on manual driving, few studies have examined how 
emotions influence driving performance in conditionally automated driving. In addition, 
those few studies are primarily focused on algorithm development to automatically 
detect drivers’ emotional states by analyzing their physiological data. For example, 
Izquierdo-Reyes, Ramirez-Mendoza, Bustamante-Bello, Pons-Rovira, and 
Gonzalez-Vargas (2018) developed an algorithm using drivers’ faces and 
electroencephalogram (EEG) data as features for classifier training. The results showed 
that a K Nearest Neighbors algorithm was able to recognize nine different emotions 
(neutral, anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise, amusement, and anxiety) with an 
accuracy of approximately 97%. 
Although emotion is likely to play an important role in takeover transitions 
relating to drivers’ perception of the surrounding world, cognitive processing and 
decision making upon the takeover request, no studies have been conducted on this 
topic to our knowledge. 

8 
 
 
 
The Present Study 
 
This study aimed to examine how emotions affect drivers’ takeover performance in 
conditionally automated driving. With level 3 automation, drivers could potentially 
perform NDRTs when the automation mode is activated (Society of Automotive 
Engineers, 2018). However, they need to resume control of the vehicle within seconds if 
the vehicle reaches its performance limit. After receiving a takeover request (TOR), 
drivers need to quickly shift their attention to the road, process and comprehend the 
traffic situation, and select and execute an appropriate action. Given the drivers’ tasks 
in takeover transitions, we have the following hypotheses. 
We base our first hypothesis on the “broaden-and build” theory (Fredrickson & 
Branigan, 2005; Rowe, Hirsh, & Anderson, 2006), that positive emotions prompt 
individuals to broaden their focus of attention to the global aspects of an event and 
their thought-action repositories, whereas negative emotions narrow them. In takeover 
transitions, the broadened attention and thought-action repositories aid drivers in 
traffic situation comprehension and action selection, and hence enhance the takeover 
quality. Therefore, we hypothesize: 
H1: positive emotions will enhance takeover quality in terms of driving smoothness, 
ride comfort, and collision risk. 
Research in manual driving showed that high arousal led to faster response time in 
hazard detection (Navarro et al., 2018; Trick et al., 2012; Ünal et al., 2013). Notably in 
manual driving, drivers allocated and managed their attention between the driving task 
and the NDRTs without any alerts or alarms. In conditionally automated driving, upon 
receiving a takeover request (TOR), drivers are required to immediately switch their 
attention from the NDRTs to the driving task, and drivers can respond to a TOR 
reflexively (Zeeb, Buchner, & Schrauf, 2016). Thus, we hypothesize: 
H2: The advantage of high arousal in faster response time will be reduced or even 
diminished in takeover transitions. 
To test the hypotheses, we conducted a human-subject experiment with 32 drivers 
using a fixed-based driving simulator. Participants drove a vehicle with Level 3 

9 
 
 
 
automation and watched movie clips for emotion induction. Each of them experienced 
four takeover events and their takeover time and quality were recorded and analyzed. 
 
METHOD 
 
This research complied with the American Psychological Association code of ethics 
and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Michigan. 
 
Participants 
 
A total of 32 university students (average age = 21.4 years, SD = 2.9; 17 females 
and 15 males) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision participated in the 
experiment. Participants were screened for valid US driver license status and 
susceptibility to simulator sickness. The study lasted 60 to 75 minutes, and each 
participant was compensated with $30 upon completion of the experiment. 
 
Apparatus and Stimuli 
 
The study was conducted using a fixed-based desktop driving simulator. The 
simulator ran the SimCreator driving simulation engine from Realtime Technologies Inc. 
(RTI, Michigan, USA) (Figure 2). To present the driving environment to participants, 
forward road scenes were displayed on a 32-inch computer monitor about 2.5 feet in 
front of the driver. A rear-view image was also displayed in a separate window on the 
forward screen. The simulated vehicle was controlled by a Logitech steering wheel and 
pedal system connected via USB interface to the SimCreator components. 
In this study, the automation features of the driving simulator were programmed 
to simulate an SAE Level 3 AV, wherein the AV performed the longitudinal and lateral 
vehicle control, navigated, and responded to traffic control devices and other traffic 
elements, and the driver was not required to actively monitor the driving environment. 
However, there were unexpected events that the AV could not handle and would request 
the driver to take over control of the vehicle. 

10 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . Illustration of driving simulator in the experiment 
 
Experimental Design 
 
The experiment used a within-subjects design in order to minimize effects of 
extraneous variables and to increase statistical power. We induced different values of 
emotional valence and arousal within each participant, covering the four quadrants of 
the valence-arousal space (Figure 1). 
As shown in Table 1, eight 4-minute movie clips were selected for emotion 
induction based on prior literature (Ekman, Freisen, & Ancoli, 1980; Gross & Levenson, 
1997; Lisetti & Nasoz, 2004; Uhrig et al., 2016). To minimize the ordering effect, the 
sequence of the emotion induction conditions was counterbalanced using a Latin square 
design. Among all the participants, 10 participants had previously watched 1 out of the 
8 movies and 5 participants watched 2 out of the 8 movies before the study. Based on 
participants’ comments in the post-experiment debriefing sessions, they were actively 
engaged in watching the movie clips. 
Drivers were ensured that there was no need to monitor the driving environment 
when the AV was in the automation mode, and they could focus on watching the videos 
until a TOR was issued. The TOR was in both auditory and visual format: an audible 
spoken phrase “takeover” and an icon representing a pair of red hands on a red steering 
wheel (Kuehn, Vogelpohl, & Vollrath, 2017) (Figure 2). The sound volume and visual 
intensity were the same for all the participants throughout the experiment. Each 
participant confirmed in the practice drives that the TOR could be heard clearly while 

11 
 
 
 
TABLE 1: Descriptions of movie clips used for emotion induction 
 
 
Emotion 
Movie 
Scene 
Citation 
 
 
 
Sad 
 
 
Angry 
 
 
Happy 
 
 
Calm 
The Champ 
Death of the Champ 
Lisetti and Nasoz (2004) 
Finding Neverland 
Death of the boy’s mother 
Uhrig et al. (2016) 
Schindler’s list 
Woman engineer being shot 
Lisetti and Nasoz (2004) 
Cry Freedom 
Innocent people being shot 
Gross and Levenson (1997) 
Bruce Almighty 
Man getting power from the God 
Uhrig et al. (2016) 
Big Fish 
Boy expressing love to the girl 
Uhrig et al. (2016) 
ScreenPeace screensaver with city scenes 
Gross and Levenson (1997) 
Beautiful trees and flowers in the world 
Ekman et al. (1980) 
 
the participant was watching the movie clips. The speedometer, the AV mode indicator 
and the TOR symbol were displayed in real time at the lower center of the screen. 
Each participant went through four takeover events. The takeover events were 
designed based on prior literature (Koo, Shin, Steinert, & Leifer, 2016; Miller et al., 
2016; Rezvani et al., 2016) (Table 2). In the AV mode, the vehicle always drove in the 
right lane. The TOR was issued when the AV was 4 seconds away from the 
construction zone/bicyclist/police vehicle/swerving vehicle. Participants were expected 
to change to the left lane during the takeover transitions. 
TABLE 2:  Descriptions of takeover events 
 
 
Environment 
Event descriptions 
 
 
Urban 
Construction zone ahead 
Urban 
Bicyclist in the lane ahead 
Rural 
Police vehicle on shoulder 
Rural 
Swerving vehicle ahead 
 
 
 
 
Measures 
 
We measured participants’ subjective ratings of emotional valence and arousal, as 
well as objective measures of their takeover performance. 
The Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) instrument was used to assess participants’ 
emotional valence (1 = extremely negative, 9 = extremely positive) and arousal (1 = 

12 
 
 
 
lowest arousal, 9 = highest arousal) based on their emotions induced by the movie clips 
(Bradley & Lang, 1994). 
 
 
 
Figure 3 .  The Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) (Bradley & Lang, 1994) 
Takeover performance was assessed in the timing and quality aspects. Takeover 
time was calculated as the time between the TOR and the start of the maneuver. The 
start of the maneuver is defined as a 2-degree change in steering wheel angle or a 10% 
depress of pedals, whichever is first (Gold et al., 2016). Takeover quality was assessed 
by three representative driving measures in the obstacles ahead scenarios: maximum 
resulting acceleration, maximum resulting jerk, minimum time to collision (TTCmin) 
within the time window between the TOR and the end of the lane changing behavior 
(i.e. the center of the vehicle reached the boundary of the other lane). Consistent with 
prior research (Hergeth, Lorenz, & Krems, 2017), maximum resulting acceleration is 
calculated as 
max accelerationresulting = max acceleration2 
+ acceleration2 
. A smaller 
t 
longitudinal 
lateral 
acceleration represents a smoother and safer reaction to TORs. In addition, we 
calculated the maximum resulting jerk as 
max jerkresulting = max  jerk2 
+ jerk2 
. Jerk is the derivative of 
t 
longitudinal 
lateral 
acceleration and has been utilized to evaluate shift quality, ride comfort (Huang & 
Wang, 2004) and driving aggressiveness (Bagdadi & Várhelyi, 2011, 2013; Feng et al., 
2017). Similarly, a smaller jerk represents higher takeover quality. TTC is a time-based 
safety indicator for detecting rear-end collision risk and is defined as the time taken for 
two objects to collide if maintaining their present speeds and trajectories (Hayward, 
1972). 
Five crashes occurred in the study. Under such situations, minimum TTC was 

13 
 
 
 
treated as “not applicable”, and other driving dynamic variables were calculated using 
the time window between the TOR and the time when drivers re-engaged the 
automation mode. 
 
Experimental procedure 
 
Once participants arrived at the lab, they signed an informed consent and filled a 
demographic form. Next, participants received a 5-minute training, where they 
practiced how to change lanes and engage/disengage the automated driving mode via 
pressing a button on the steering wheel. They were asked to comply with all the traffic 
laws when they drove manually and the speed limit was 35 mph. Participants also 
experienced an unexpected takeover event in the practice while watching a 1-minute 
movie clip of Zen Garden. The movie clip was played on a tablet located on the right 
side of the driver’s seat. The takeover event was the scenario where the traffic lights at 
an intersection did not work, and required the driver to observe the surroundings and 
drive manually. Participants were asked to re-engage the AV once they had negotiated 
the drive. 
After the training session, participants completed two drive courses, each 
containing two takeover events. As shown in Figure 4, each course began with the 
command to activate the automated driving mode. Then there was an emotion 
induction phase when participants were asked to watch two 4-minute movie clips aimed 
at inducing the same emotion. Close to the end of the movie clips, a takeover request 
was issued, and participants were required to take over control of the vehicle 
immediately. Once participants negotiated the drive, they could hand over the control 
back to the AV. After participant re-engaged the AV mode, they were asked to recall 
the scenes in the movie clips and complete the SAM survey to indicate their emotional 
valence and arousal when watching the movie clips. 

14 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 . Sequence of takeover events in the experiment 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Data from one participant was excluded from analysis as the participant did not 
follow the instructions from the experimenter. All hypotheses were tested using data 
from the remaining 31 participants. The SAM Likert scales from 1 to 9 (low arousal: 
1-4, high arousal: 6-9; negative valence: 1-4; positive valence: 6-9) were normalized to a 
scale from -1 to 1 (Miranda Correa, Abadi, Sebe, & Patras, 2018). Data points with 0 
valence or 0 arousal were deleted. Figure 5 shows the distribution of valence and arousal 
values in the four quadrants: positive valence high arousal, negative valence high 
arousal, negative valence low arousal, and positive valence low arousal, respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 5 . Raw data of subjective ratings in the valence-arousal plane 
 
We used a mixed linear model to analyze the relationship between valence, arousal 

15 
 
3 
 
 
and takeover performance (timeliness and quality). Results are reported as significant 
for α < .05. Table 3 summarizes the mean and standard error (SE) values of the 
dependent measures. 
TABLE 3: Mean and Standard Error (SE) values of dependent measures 
 
 
Negative Valence 
Positive Valance 
 
 
 
Takeover time (s) 
2 
Max resulting acceleration (m/s ) 
Max resulting jerk (m/s ) 
TTCmin   (s) 
 
 
 
Takeover time. No significant effect was found for either valence 
(F (1, 57) = .04, p = .84) or arousal (F (1, 76) = .32, p = .57), and the interaction effect 
was not significant (F (1, 63) = .47, p = .50). 
Takeover quality.  With regard to the maximum resulting acceleration, there  
was a significant effect of valence (F (1, 56) = 4.26, p = .04). Positive valence led to a 
smaller maximum resulting acceleration (Figure 6). In addition, there was a trend that 
high arousal led to a smaller maximum resulting acceleration (F (1, 77) = 3.24, p = .08). 
The interaction effect of valence and arousal on maximum resulting acceleration was not 
significant (F (1, 64) = .79, p = .38). 
Low arousal High arousal Low arousal High arousal 
1.88 ± .09 
6.56 ± .75 
113 ± 18 
.98 ± .15 
1.69 ± .07 
6.14 ± .81 
115 ± 21 
.77 ± .15 
1.79 ± .07 
5.85 ± .62 
94 ± 17 
.72 ± .12 
1.88 ± .16 
3.95 ± .79 
42 ± 16 
.67 ± .15 

16 
 
2 
3 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 . Maximum resulting acceleration (m/s ) 
 
There was a significant effect of valence on maximum resulting jerk 
(F (1, 55) = 6.47, p = .01), with positive valence leading to a smaller maximum resulting 
jerk (Figure 7). The main effect of arousal (F (1, 73) = 1.84, p = .18) and the interaction 
effect were non-significant (F (1, 61) = 1.71, p = .20). 
 
 
Figure 7 . Maximum resulting acceleration (m/s ) 
 
There were no significant effects of valence (F (1, 57) = 1.19, p = .28) and arousal 

17 
 
 
 
(F (1, 75) = .67, p = .42) on TTCmin. The interaction effect was not significant 
(F (1, 65) = .31, p = .58). 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Drivers’ tasks in manual driving and conditionally automated driving (Level 3 
AV) are fundamentally different. In manual driving, drivers continuously perform 
lateral and longitudinal control. Therefore, prior studies in manual driving mainly 
treated the NDRTs as distractions. With conditionally automated driving, however, 
drivers largely perform a single task (i.e. either the driving task or the NDRT) at any 
one time. When the automation mode is on, drivers can perform any NDRT at their 
own discretion. After receiving a TOR, drivers are expected to relinquish the NDRT 
and resume the driving task immediately. The distinction between manual driving and 
conditionally automated driving suggests findings in manual driving cannot be directly 
applied to takeover transitions. In the present study, we hypothesized that positive 
valence will lead to better takeover quality but the benefit of high arousal on response 
time would be reduced. 
Our first hypothesis was built on the “broad-and-build“ theory (Fredrickson & 
Branigan, 2005; Rowe et al., 2006) stating that positive emotions prompt individuals to 
broaden their focus of attention and their thought-action repositories. The broader span 
of attention enables drivers to perceive and process different stimuli in the traffic 
situation and avoid tunnel vision. Larger thought-action repositories allow drivers to 
identify a more appropriate action given a specific traffic situation. Our findings largely 
support the first hypothesis, that positive valence led to better takeover performance, 
reflected by a smaller maximum resulting acceleration and a smaller maximum resulting 
jerk. Smaller maximum resulting acceleration and maximum resulting jerk are 
associated with a higher level of safety (Hergeth et al., 2017), shift quality, and ride 
comfort (Huang & Wang, 2004), and lower driving aggressiveness (Bagdadi & Várhelyi, 
2011, 2013; Feng et al., 2017). The results are in line with some studies examining the 
effects of valence in manual driving, where positive valence led to better vehicle control 

18 
 
 
 
(Chan & Singhal, 2013; Groeger, 2013; Hancock et al., 2012; Trick et al., 2012), 
suggesting that the benefits of positive valence can be carried over from manual driving 
to automated driving. However, we failed to find any difference in TTCmin, and the 
reason could be explained as follows. Time to collision represents the time taken for two 
objects to collide with each other and is an indicator of collision risk. With a negative 
emotion, drivers’ attentional focus and thought-action repositories are narrowed. 
Therefore, they might employ immediate survival-oriented behaviors and brake 
abruptly, leading to a potentially larger TTCmin. 
In the present study, we adopted three metrics aimed to assess driving 
smoothness, ride comfort and collision risk. However, we notice the wide range of 
metrics used to measure takeover quality in prior literature, including crash rates, 
different statistics of velocity, acceleration, jerk, and TTC (Please refer to McDonald et 
al. (2019) for the detailed list). This wide range of metrics makes it difficult to 
summarize findings in prior literature. There is an urgent need to examine if possible 
and how to propose a standard sets of metrics for measuring takeover quality. 
We also hypothesized that the advantage of high arousal in response time should 
be reduced or even diminished in takeover transitions, which is supported by the 
non-significant effect of arousal on takeover time. Prior research in manual driving 
showed that high arousal led to faster response time in hazard detection (Navarro et al., 
2018; Trick et al., 2012; Ünal et al., 2013). In takeover transitions, however, TORs serve 
as an attention management tool. Upon receiving a TOR, drivers are required to attend 
to the driving task. Moreover, in our study drivers were engaged in a hands-free task 
(i.e. watching movies) before the TOR was issued. Without the need to physically end 
the task and put down the NDRT device, drivers could immediately switch their 
attention from the tablet to the driving scene. Our results showed that this process 
took less than 2 seconds, no matter in which emotional state drivers were. Recent 
studies comparing different types of NDRTs on takeover quality and timeliness showed 
that the types of NDRTs only influenced the takeover quality and not takeover time 
(Bueno et al., 2016; Gold et al., 2016; Körber et al., 2016; Zeeb et al., 2016; Zeeb, 

19 
 
 
 
Härtel, Buchner, & Schrauf, 2017), providing further support for our findings. 
To our surprise, the results suggest a trend that high arousal led to a smaller 
maximum resulting acceleration and thus better takeover quality. This implies that the 
benefits of high arousal in mobilizing attentional resources and effort for immediate 
actions could be reflected in takeover quality. Further research is needed to elucidate 
this effect. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Drivers have difficulty in takeover transitions as they become increasingly 
decoupled from the operational level of driving. In response to this challenge, 
researchers have started to look into factors that could influence drivers’ takeover 
performance. Despite the important role emotion plays in human-machine interaction 
and in manual driving, little is known about how emotion affects takeover performance 
in conditionally automated driving. By systematically manipulating drivers’ emotional 
states, the current study extended earlier research by demonstrating how valence and 
arousal influence takeover time and quality. The benefits of positive emotions carry over 
from manual driving to conditionally automated driving while the benefits of arousal do 
not. Moreover, our study provides empirical evidence that with regard to emotions we 
cannot simply apply the findings in manual driving to automated driving. 
Our findings have implications on the design of in-vehicle emotion regulation 
systems. Advances in machine learning enable accurate detection of drivers’ emotional 
states in real-time (Izquierdo-Reyes et al., 2018; Picard, 2003). For example, if the 
system detects that a driver is a negative emotional state, strategies such as reappraisal 
and distraction (Naragon-Gainey, McMahon, & Chacko, 2017) can be used to help the 
driver manage his or her negative emotion, resulting in better takeover performance. 
Also, the AV could even delay or avoid handing over control. 
The present study has several limitations that should be taken into consideration. 
First, we only examined one type of takeover event wherein the drivers perceived 
certain hazards and were expected to change lanes. Further research could be extended 

20 
 
 
 
to other types of takeover events such as lane markings disappearing. Second, the study 
was conducted in a fixed-based desktop driving simulator with limited fidelity. Future 
studies can investigate the effects of emotional valence and arousal in a higher fidelity 
laboratory environment or a naturalistic driving environment. Third, drivers’ emotional 
valence and arousal values were queried after a takeover event occurred. Although we 
followed a standard practice and asked the drivers to recall the movie clips, and based 
on which to indicate their emotional states prior to the takeover event, experiencing the 
event per se might influence drivers’ perceptions of the movie clips. Further research 
could employ physiological measures of emotion, which could indicate drivers’ emotional 
states non-intrusively before a takeover event. Meanwhile, eye-tracking metrics such as 
gaze behaviors could be recorded and analyzed in order to better understand drivers’ 
attention allocation during conditionally automated driving. 

21
