Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
Applications of Gaussian Mutation for Self Adaptation in
Evolutionary Genetic Algorithms
Okezue Bell1,2

2Moravian Academy Upper School
Abstract
In recent years, optimization problems have become increasingly more prevalent due to the need for more
powerful computational methods. With the more recent advent of technology such as artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, new metaheuristics are needed that enhance the capabilities of classical algorithms. More recently,
researchers have been looking at Charles Darwin’s theory of natural selection and evolution as a means
of enhancing current approaches using machine learning. In 1960, the ﬁrst genetic algorithm was devel-
oped by John H. Holland and his students (Holland, 1975). We explore the mathematical intuition and
implications of the genetic algorithm in developing systems capable of evolving using Gaussian mutation.
Keywords: Evolution, Gaussian Mutation, Genetic Algorithm
1. GAUSSIAN MUTATIONS IN GENETIC ALGORITHMS
• Introduction to genetic algorithms
• Self-adaptation
• The Gaussian mutation operator
• Implementation of gaussian mutation results
• Conclusion
2. INTRODUCTION TO GENETIC ALGORITHMS
A genetic algorithm is a type of stochastic search algorithm that functions off of the fundamental principles of natural selection.
Essentially, the algorithm works off of given string structures, typically organisms, which gradually evolve, and their ﬁtness is
characterized by survival and reproduction. The genetic algorithm sustains the survival of the ﬁttest rule, where there is a random-
ized information exchange but with a structured method (Gholizadeh, 2013). With every succeeding generation, new strings are
created and the ﬁttest strings from the previous generations are used as a reference. The ”winners” are considered the individuals
whose genes enable them to survive and reproduce. With each successive selection, more resources are retained. The algorithm
is capable of simulating this process and uses it to calculate the optimum of objective functions, thus making the algorithm suit-
able for solving optimization problems. In summary, the genetic algorithm (GA) uses neuro-evolutionary concepts and artiﬁcial
intelligence to design better neural networks (Roetzel et al., 2020).
When most of the algorithm’s intricacies are removed, it essentially takes in a set of something and evolves it to its optimal
state. Figure 1 shows the abbreviated process for a cluster of carbon atoms being evolved to organize in the lowest energy carbon
structure (Figure 1).
GAs have been applied to a variety of ﬁelds, including inverse kinematic problems (IKPs) for advanced robotic designs for
transhumeral prosthetics (ˇStevo et al., 2019) and tumor tracking in combination with intermittent Kalman predictors (IKPs) by
using genetic algorithms to solve combinatorial optimization problems to conclude the measurements of tumor motion (Aspeel et
al., 2019). Currently, the popular usage of GAs falls in the category of generating an ANN capable of determining a very precise
solution for an inﬁnite set of possibilities, more speciﬁcally a search or optimization problem. Genetic algorithms are considered a
subset of artiﬁcial intelligence and are a part of the broader scope of evolutionary computing (Eiben, 2003).
1
arXiv:2201.00285v2  [cs.NE]  5 Jan 2022

Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
FIGURE 1: The GAs process of determining the buckminsterfullerene as the lowest energy conﬁguration of 60 carbon atoms. It has a
carbon population and knows it wants to solve for the lowest energy structure. It then generates a bunch of random conﬁgurations,
which are then analyzed for their ﬁtness based on their energy levels. The best ones mate and create a new generation, and this
process repeats until an ultralow energy level generation is created (the buckminsterfullerene structure). It took scientists over 3
years to solve this, while the GA can complete this process in about 4 hours (self-made).
3. SELF-ADAPTATION
What is currently considered one of the most exciting ﬁelds of research for evolutionary computing and genetic algorithms (Hin-
terding et al., 2005) is the concept of self-adaptation in GAs, especially for numeric functions. Self-adaptation is the property of
a genetic algorithm to adapt its algorithm to a speciﬁc problem when calculating the solution for it. This can be done for one or
more facets of evolution, and approaches for self-adapting for both mutation strength and population size, for example, have been
successful on initial testing (Hinterding et al., 2005). The mutation genetic operator introduces genetic diversity with the genetic
algorithm population of chromosomes. It can be likened to biological mutation. There are many types of mutation operators, in-
cluding bit string, boundary, and Gaussian, most of which deal with the introduction of a random value to a speciﬁc gene, which
inﬂuences the expression of the offspring.
The Gaussian mutation operator has proven to be an optimal and popular choice for self-adaptation in genetic algorithms (Li-
hui Zhang Ph.D. et all., 2015). In Gaussian mutation, a random unit Gaussian distribution value is added to a selected gene by the
operator. The value is thus added to each element of the gene carrier’s vector, which causes the development of a new offspring
(Figure 2). Aside from Gaussian mutation, there are other popular operators, including the one-point crossover reproduction op-
FIGURE 2: Gaussian Mutation of the a) parent to form the b) offspring, causing variance (Dorronsoro, 2004).
erator (Figure 3), and the bit-ﬂipping mutation operator (Figure 4). However, Gaussian mutation operators are still widely used in
FIGURE 3: One point crossover of parents a) and b) to form the c) and d) offspring from reproduction. A subsequence of the parents,
represented as strings, is swapped to create two new offspring (Dorronsoro, 2005).
FIGURE 4: The bit ﬂipping mutation of the a) parent to form the b) offspring. A singular binary bit in the original parent string is
ﬂipped to create a new string for a different offspring (Dorronsoro, 2005).
genetic algorithms, especially in a variety of object-oriented programming languages and their use of Gaussian distribution values.
2

Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
FIGURE 5: A selection of Normal Distribution Probability Density Functions (PDFs). Both the mean, µ, and variance, σ2, are varied.
The red curve on the graph represents the standard normal distribution. The key is given on the graph (Inductive Load, 2008).
This is because of the Gaussian curve’s (Figure 5) usage in probability density functions and standard deviation. Usage of Gaussian
values is promising for mutation simulations, and when introducing new information to the population of the GA.
4. THE GAUSSIAN MUTATION OPERATOR
Take x ∈[a, b] as a real variable. The Gaussian mutation operator Mg changes the variable x to
Mg(x) := min(max(N(x, σ), a), b)
The operator also leverages the Gauss error function. Recall that all solutions in the genetic algorithms are the chromosomes. These
chromosomes go through mutation (random gene alterations), crossover (swapping genetic material), and selection (only the ﬁttest
survive). Mutation operators use a single parent chromosome and induce mutation on some of the selected genes. The offspring
when using the Gaussian mutation operator is given by
x
′
i =
√
2σ(bi −ai)er f −1(u
′i)
, where x
′
i is the offspring, σ is a ﬁxed parameter for all variables, and [ai, bi] represents the range of random gene xi. er f −1 represents
the inverse of er f, which is the Gauss error function, deﬁned by er f (y) =
2
√π
R y
0 e−t2 dt. The inverse Gauss error function is applied
to a calculation ui,, which is a random value ui within the range of (0, 1), which is inside of a formula that gives ui, (”Mutation
Algorithms for Real-Valued Parameters (GA)”, 2018). This formula can be deﬁned using IFTTT (if this then that) notation.
With evolutionary programming, the manipulation of parameters is done through self-adaptation. This learning format allows
the GA to constantly tweak the strategy parameters when it’s iterating through different generations to ﬁnd the optimum, essen-
tially searching for the value of the parameters themselves to increase their performance levels. Parametric optimization values
are subject to change; their ﬂuctuations depend on the solved function. With Gaussian mutation, convergence is completed much
more efﬁciently, and domain searching and solution tuning are much better (Hartﬁeld, 2010), thereby increasing the performance
of the GA.
The Gaussian mutation’s shape can also be controlled by applying a parameter to it. This mutation operator is called the q-
Gaussian mutation, where the shape of the mutation distribution is controlled via a real parameter q (Tin´os et all., 2011). The
q-Gaussian, therefore, operates on a different distribution than the traditional Gaussian mutation. This is known as the q-analog of
the normal curve, and its distribution is symmetrical at about 0. Figure 6 shows its probability density function.
q-Gaussians allow the mutation distribution shape of the GA self-adaptive, which makes them effective in solving dynamic
optimization problems (Yang et al., 2010), where the variable values are subject to change over time.
3

Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
FIGURE 6: Probability density plots of q-Gaussian distributions. This maps the probability density function of the q-Gaussian
distribution itself (IkamusumeFan, 2014).
5. IMPLEMENTATION OF GAUSSIAN MUTATION RESULTS
The implementation of Gaussian mutation has been successful in solving a variety of optimization problem types. A notable
instance of this is in An Improved Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm Using the Heuristical Normal Distribution and Direction-Based Crossover,
where a multi-offspring improved real-coded genetic algorithm (MOIRCGA) using the Gaussian distribution (in combination with
direction-based crossover was proven to solve constrained optimization problems. The MOIRCGA ﬁnished with supremacy over
a real-coded genetic algorithm (RCGA) not leveraging Gaussian distribution to ﬁnd a globally optimal solution to the problem
(Wang et al., 2019), in part due to its much faster conversion speed than the RCGA (Figure 7).
FIGURE 7: Optimization results for the MOIRCGA as compared to the RCGA in the An Improved Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm
Using the Heuristical Normal Distribution and Direction-Based Crossover Experiment (Wang et al., 2019). The MOIRCGA was
superior to the RCGA and some of the other benchmarked algorithms.
Within this experiment, the algorithms were tested and compared with other literature, and the problem was used in the parameter
optimization of the Cantilever Beam design with a discrete cross-sectional area to determine the validity of the MOIRGCA, and
sixteen test functions were evaluated as well. The experimentation concludes with, ”optimization results show that the function
value obtained with MOIRCGA is superior to that obtained with RCGA” (Wang et al., 2019).
4

Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
Within this experiment, the algorithms were tested and compared with other literature, and the problem was used in the param-
eter optimization of the Cantilever Beam design with a discrete cross-sectional area to determine the validity of the MOIRGCA, and
sixteen test functions were evaluated as well. The experimentation concludes with, ”optimization results show that the function
value obtained with MOIRCGA is superior to that obtained with RCGA” (Wang et al., 2019).
5.1. Robotic appendages.
Genetic algorithms have been cited as one of the most useful forms of artiﬁcial intelligence (Cheng, 2011). The algorithms have
extensive implications in robotics, especially within movement or functionality (Davidor, 1991). The robotics inverse kinemat-
ics problem (IKP) describes ”ﬁnding a vector of joint variables which produce [the] desired end-effector location” (DeMers
et al., 1997). The problem has an inﬁnite amount of solutions, making it difﬁcult to solve using classical computation. How-
ever, genetic algorithms have been presented to create the best robotic arm (Sekaj et al., 2014) based on trajectory control. In
Optimization of Robotic Arm Trajectory Using Genetic Algorithm, a genetic algorithm that could optimize for energy consumption, op-
erating time, rotation changes, and trajectory was proposed for the industrial robot ABB IRB 6400FHD (ˇStevo et all., 2014). In
Genetic Algorithm Based Approach for Autonomous Mobile Robot Path Planning, a GA with an improved crossover operator was sug-
gested to be applied to a path planning problem for a computer vision autonomous robot for movement and navigation.
5.2. Molecular geometry.
In the introductory section of this independent study, an example of determining carbon fullerenes as the low-
est energy conﬁguration of sixty carbon atom clusters. This example for a genetic algorithm was extracted from
Molecular Geometry Optimization with a Genetic Algorithm, in which a genetic algorithm was used to determine the lowest energy
geometry for carbon compounds, ranging up to C60. The experiment, however, wasn’t limited, as their method was capable of de-
termining the lowest energy structure of an atomic cluster in any arbitrary model potential. Original solution candidates generated
were used as a reference for ﬁtness to generate a new generation of solutions to produce lower energy solutions. The genetic model
itself was cited to be more accurate than the simulated annealing, and was stated to have ”dramatically outperformed” it, and de-
creased the computational time of concluding carbon fullerenes by over 200% when compared to a human biochemist (Deaven et
al., 1995). In First-Principles Molecular Structure Search with a Genetic Algorithm, a genetic algorithm was built using Conda’s RDKit
library in Python to accelerate computational chemistry. The algorithm focused on identifying low-energy conformers for a given
molecule using ﬁrst principle searches (Supady et al., 2015). The algorithm was successful (Figure 8) in doing so.
FIGURE 8: ”Evaluation of the results for the subset of the Astex Diverse Set. (A) The relative energy of all found conformers
as a function of the RMSD to the reference ligand (blue circles). The green squares depict the reference ligand structures after
DFT optimization. (B) An overlay between the reference ligand (green) and the best match (blue) is presented together with the
corresponding RMSD value” (Supady et al., 2015).
5.3. Sentiment Lexicon Optimization.
Another use of genetic algorithms is in analyzing emotions, also known as opinion mining or sentiment analysis. In ALGA: Adap-
tive lexicon learning using genetic algorithm for sentiment analysis of microblogs, the common problem in sentiment analysis,
”improving polarity classiﬁcation of sentiments in microblogs by building adaptive sentiment lexicons” (Keshvarz et al., 2017),
was solved using a novel genetic algorithm. In the six datasets through which it was tested, the algorithm achieved over 80% ac-
5

Journal of Machine Learning in Fundamental Sciences
JMLFS-ID, 2022
curacy. In summary, the algorithm was able to build the most accurate collection of words, and how their semantics relate to their
sentiment orientation (Keshvarz et al., 2017).
6. CONCLUSION
