Dynamic programming in inﬂuence diagrams with decision circuits
Ross D. Shachter
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Debarun Bhattacharjya
Business Analytics and Math Sciences
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

Abstract
Decision circuits perform eﬃcient evaluation
of inﬂuence diagrams, building on the ad-
vances in arithmetic circuits for belief net-
work inference [Darwiche, 2003; Bhattachar-
jya and Shachter, 2007]. We show how even
more compact decision circuits can be con-
structed for dynamic programming in inﬂu-
ence diagrams with separable value functions
and conditionally independent subproblems.
Once a decision circuit has been constructed
based on the diagram’s “global” graphical
structure, it can be compiled to exploit “lo-
cal” structure for eﬃcient evaluation and sen-
sitivity analysis.
1
INTRODUCTION
Inﬂuence diagrams [Howard and Matheson, 1984] are
popular graphical models for representing, evaluating
and analyzing a single rational decision maker’s de-
cision problem. We can exploit any separable value
functions in inﬂuence diagrams for more eﬃcient eval-
uation [Tatman and Shachter, 1990; Luque and Diez,
2009]. Decision circuits are graphical representations
for eﬃcient evaluation and sensitivity analysis on in-
ﬂuence diagrams with a single value node [Bhattachar-
jya and Shachter, 2007, 2008, 2010]. In this paper, we
show how they can be applied to inﬂuence diagrams
with multiple value functions using join tree methods
[Shachter and Peot, 1992; Dittmer and Jensen, 1994].
Arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2003] are graphical rep-
resentations for probabilistic inference and sensitivity
analysis in Bayesian belief networks. Decision circuits
are a natural extension to arithmetic circuits for eval-
uating sequential decision problems represented as in-
ﬂuence diagrams.
Global structure refers to the topology of the graph,
the size and the treewidth for a given task. Techniques
have been developed to exploit global structure in the
construction of arithmetic circuits applying logic [Dar-
wiche, 2002; Chavira and Darwiche, 2005; Chavira,
2007] and join trees [Park and Darwiche, 2004]. We
apply join tree methods, as well, but the arithmetic cir-
cuit approaches do not deal with the additional vertex
elimination order restrictions in decision problems and
complex accounting for separable value functions. To
address these issues, we introduce a “branching oper-
ator” for decision circuits, use directed chordal graphs
to develop our join tree structure, and introduce deci-
sion circuit backbones as a compact representation for
symmetric decision circuits.
Local structure in belief networks refers to the speciﬁc
numbers, particularly zeros, in the conditional proba-
bility tables (CPTs). Like arithmetic circuits, decision
circuits are compiled so that subsequent evaluation
and analysis can be more eﬃcient.
This is particu-
larly useful for real-time decision making.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
review inﬂuence diagrams and introduce some exam-
ples.
In Section 3 we review decision circuits, and
introduce a new type of decision circuit operator for
branching. In Section 4 we show how to construct a
decision circuit for an inﬂuence diagram with multiple
value nodes, based on directed chordal graphs and in-
troducing an intermediate structure we call a “decision
circuit backbone.” In Section 5 we discuss methods to
compile the decision circuit, taking advantage of local
structure. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6
with some suggestions for future research.
2
INFLUENCE DIAGRAMS
In this section we review inﬂuence diagrams and intro-
duce the notation and two examples that we will refer
to throughout the paper.
An inﬂuence diagram is a directed acyclic graphical

model. The nodes correspond to the variables, uncer-
tainties drawn as ovals, decisions drawn as rectangles,
and values drawn as rounded rectangles. We denote
variables by upper-case letters (X) and their possible
states by lower-case letters (x).
A bold-faced letter
(U) indicates a set of variables. We refer interchange-
ably to a node and its corresponding variable, refer-
ring to them simply as uncertainties, decisions, and
values. If X is a node with parents U, then XU is
called the family of X. The parents of an uncertain
or value node condition its probability distribution or
expected value, while the parents of a decision node
will be observed before the decision will be made.
Consider the inﬂuence diagram shown in Figure 1a
from Dittmer and Jensen [1997]. There are three de-
cisions, D1, D2, and D3, one value, V , and four un-
certainties, A, B, C, and E. The distribution for B is
unconditional, while all of the other distributions are
conditional. No other variables will be observed before
decision D1 is made, but when D3 is made D1, C, D2,
E, and A will have been observed.
Uncertain descendants of decisions are said to be re-
sponsive because their outcome can be aﬀected by the
decisions. The only non-responsive uncertainty is B,
and thus it is the only uncertainty which could be ob-
served in advance [Heckerman and Shachter, 1995].
Such evidence can incorporate any data already col-
lected or determine the value of clairvoyance. We also
allow evidence to indicate which alternatives are avail-
able and which value variables are to be accumulated.
We assume that value nodes have no children and that
when there are multiple values the total value is their
sum [Tatman and Shachter, 1990]. (The methods in
this paper could also be applied to multilinear value
models with nested sums and products.) Consider the
inﬂuence diagram shown in Figure 2a from Jensen et
al [1994].
There are four decisions in this example
and four values, and the decisions are made so as to
maximize the sum of the values. There are three non-
responsive uncertainties, A, B, and C.
In addition to the structure of the inﬂuence diagram,
we need the possible states for each of the uncer-
tainties and the decisions.
For each uncertainty X
with parents U there is a distribution θx|u = P{X =
x|U = u}. For each value V with parents U, we treat
v as a placeholder in θv|u = E{V |U = u}, which we
assume is positive without any loss of generality. (As
a result, if one of the alternatives for a decision is un-
available it will yield zero value and be dominated by
any available alternative.)
We allow evidence e about uncertain variables E, and
augmented evidence e′, which also includes the value
distributions, {θx|u}, and any evidence about values
and decisions. For any uncertainty or decision X, λx =
0 if we assert that X ̸= x and λx = 1 otherwise. In the
case of value variable V , we allow any λv ≥0 to weight
or discount its contribution, with λv = 0 if we want to
ignore the value variable V in making our decisions.
We can recognize which of the available observations
are requisite for each of the decisions. In the example
shown in Figure 1a, even though D1, C, D2, E, and A
are all known at the time of decision D3, A is suﬃcient
to make the best decision. This can be determined for
each decision, in reverse order, by ﬁnding the observa-
tions relevant to the value descendants of the decision
[Shachter, 1998, 1999].
We assume that the inﬂuence diagram is a single com-
ponent. If not, the problem can be solved separately
for each component. We also assume that there are no
nodes in the diagram which could be simply removed.
For example, some non-responsive uncertainties might
become relevant if they were observed.
For each of the diagrams, a moral graph, similar to the
ones in Shachter [1999], is shown in Figures 1b and
2b. Moral graphs are obtained by including only the
requisite observations as parents of the decisions and
adding undirected edges (as dashed lines), if necessary,
between any two nodes with a common child. These
extra edges will ensure that each node’s family can be
represented in the constructed decision circuit, so that
the distribution can be incorporated.
The standard exact approaches to evaluating inﬂuence
diagrams incorporate an implicit or explicit variable
elimination order. If requisite observations for a de-
cision precede the decision while responsive uncertain
and value variables follow it in the order, the order is
said to be consistent with the inﬂuence diagram. In
section 4 we will construct a decision circuit based on
any given target variable elimination order consistent
with the inﬂuence diagram.
3
DECISION CIRCUITS
Decision circuits are modiﬁed arithmetic circuits [Dar-
wiche, 2003] for eﬃcient evaluation and analysis of in-
ﬂuence diagrams. In particular, they have a maximiza-
tion operator in addition to sum and product opera-
tors [Bhattacharjya and Shachter, 2007], and they per-
form evaluation with an upward sweep through the cir-
cuit and diﬀerentiation with a subsequent downward
sweep. In this paper, we also introduce a branching
operator to deal with conditionally independent sub-
problems and additive value functions. The branch-
ing operator requires that we evaluate two functions
simultaneously as we sweep upward through the deci-
sion circuit, one for the expected value weighted by the

D1
D3
D2
A
B
C
E
V
c)
D1
D3
D2
A
B
C
E
V
b)
D1
D3
D2
A
B
C
E
V
a)
Figure 1: Original inﬂuence diagram, moral graph, and directed chordal graph for the Dittmer and Jensen [1997] example
with elimination order D1, C, D2, E, A, B, D3, V.
A
E
I
B
F
J
C
G
K
D
H
L
D1
D3
D2
D4
V1
V2
V3
V4
c)
A
E
I
B
F
J
C
G
K
D
H
L
D1
D3
D2
D4
V1
V2
V3
V4
A
E
I
B
F
J
C
G
K
D
H
L
D1
D3
D2
D4
V1
V2
V3
V4
b)
a)
Figure 2: Original inﬂuence diagram, moral graph, and directed chordal graph for the Jensen et al [1994] example with
elimination order B, D1, D, C, A, E, D2, G, D4, I, L, F, D3, H, K, J, V1, V2, V3, V4.
probability of the evidence and another with only the
probability of the evidence. On the downward pass,
we need to evaluate three sets of partial derivatives.
A sequential decision problem can be represented as
a dynamic programming function g(e′) computing the
maximal expected value weighted by the probability
of the evidence about any of the variables, including
the value variables.
Similarly, we can represent the
probability of the evidence as g(e), where evidence e is
the evidence about just the uncertain variables, so the
maximal expected value is given by g(e′)/g(e). The
function g(e′) is our objective for making decisions and
g(e) normalizes it to units of expected value.
We derive in the next section the functions below for
the inﬂuence diagram shown in Figure 1a:
g(e) =
P
c λcθc|d1
P
e λeθe|c,d2
P
a
P
b λaθa|b,eλbθb
g(e′) =
maxd1 λd1
P
c λcθc|d1 maxd2 λd2
P
e λeθe|c,d2
P
a[P
b λaθa|b,eλbθb][maxd3 λd3λvθv|a,d3].
A decision circuit is a graphical representation of a dy-
namic programming function. It is a directed acyclic
graph with leaves 0, 1, {θx|u}, and {λx}. The non-leaf
nodes are operators, sum, product, max, and branch-
ing, on the node’s children. There is a single root node,
corresponding to our functions, g(e′) and g(e). The
size of a decision circuit is the number of arcs it con-
tains. We have not displayed the decision circuit for
the diagram in Figure 1a because it is too large. Even
if each variable had only two possibilities, the circuit
would have 122 nodes and 138 arcs. Although a deci-
sion circuit is an eﬃcient representation for analyzing
the problem, it is not well suited for communication,
and therefore we introduce decision circuit backbones
in the next section as a more compact and readable
intermediate representation.
The decision circuit is not a tree, because nodes can
have multiple parents to exploit conditional indepen-
dence [Darwiche, 2000]. For example, in the compu-
tation of g above, c and d2 play no role after θe|c,d2
is introduced, and the rest of the expression can be
computed for any possible (c, d2). This would be im-
plemented in a decision circuit by having all possible
(c, d2) as parents of the A sum node for a particular
e, an example of coalescence, discussed in Section 5.
The functions g(e) and g(e′) are computed together by
evaluating the circuit in an upward pass, starting just
above the leaves and ending at the root, only visiting
a node after all of its (non-leaf) children have been
visited and then performing the node’s operation. For
each intermediate node x there are two values, gx(ex)
and gx(e′x), where ex represents the evidence in the
leaves below x. For each of the functions, the value of a
sum node is the sum of the corresponding values of its
children. The value of a product node is their product,
although to compute gx(ex) we ignore any λd, λv, and
θv|u children. (The lists of which children contribute
to both gx(ex) and gx(e′x) and which contribute only

to gx(e′x) can be created at compile time.)
The gx(e′x) value of a max node x is the largest cor-
responding value of its children, remembering which
child y yielded the maximum, and breaking ties arbi-
trarily. The gx(ex) value of a max node x can be taken
from any of its children when e includes only non-
responsive evidence, since they should all be equal,
and we therefore suggest using gy(ey).
3.1
A New Branching Operator
We add a branching node to the decision circuit to
combine conditionally independent subproblems with
their own additive value functions and disjoint evi-
dence. The branching node x works diﬀerently for the
two functions: gx(ex) = g1(e1)g2(e2) and gx(e′x) =
g1(e′1)g2(e2) + g1(e1)g2(e′2), the cross-product of the
two child branches [Shachter and Peot, 1992; Dittmer
and Jensen, 1994]. This distinction is necessary to nor-
malize the diﬀerent values of gi(e′) before summing, so
that the combined gx(e′x) function incorporates all ev-
idence from both branch 1 and branch 2. (This can be
generalized to more than two branches, but it is more
eﬃcient to create a binary tree of branching nodes.)
The partial derivatives of g(e) and g(e′) can then be
computed by diﬀerentiating the circuit in a downward
pass, starting at the root node and ending at the leaves,
only visiting a node after all of its parents have been
visited. For each node x there are three partial deriva-
tives:
∂g(e)
∂gx(ex),
∂g(e′)
∂gx(ex), and
∂g(e′)
∂gx(e′x). There are three
derivatives because g(e) can be computed solely from
the local probability functions as in an arithmetic cir-
cuit, but we use both local functions to compute g(e′)
with the branching operator.
For the downward diﬀerentiation pass, because the
root is not a branching node we can initialize the root
derivatives to ∂g(e)
∂g(e) = 1, ∂g(e′)
∂g(e) = 0, and ∂g(e′)
∂g(e′) = 1.
Each of the derivatives at all other nodes are sums
over their parents, applying the chain rule.
Each
child of a sum node inherits its parent’s correspond-
ing derivatives; each child of a product node inher-
its its parent’s corresponding derivatives multiplied by
its siblings’ corresponding values; and the maximizing
child of a max node inherits its parent’s correspond-
ing derivatives. The ﬁrst child of a branching node x
inherits g2(e2) ∂g(e)
∂gx(ex) toward
∂g(e)
∂g1(ex), g2(e2) ∂g(e′)
∂gx(ex) +
g2(e′2) ∂g(e′)
∂gx(e′x) toward
∂g(e′)
∂g1(ex), and g2(e2) ∂g(e′)
∂gx(e′x) to-
ward
∂g(e′)
∂g1(e′x), with symmetric expressions for the sec-
ond child.
The upward and downward passes are also referred to
as sweeps. Thus we can evaluate the decision problem
with one sweep and compute all of the derivatives with
another. Consequently the time complexity for these
operations is linear in the size of the circuit.
4
BUILDING DECISION CIRCUITS
FROM INFLUENCE DIAGRAMS
In this section we show how to build a decision circuit
that exploits the global structure of an inﬂuence dia-
gram, given a target variable elimination order. After
constructing a directed chordal graph from the moral
graph using the target order, we build a “decision cir-
cuit backbone” to specify the decision circuit.
4.1
Directed chordal graphs
The theory of chordal graphs and junction trees is well
developed and we build on these results [Golumbic,
1980; Tarjan and Yannakakis, 1984; Shachter et al,
1990].
We deﬁne an acyclic directed graph to be
chordal if there is an arc between any two nodes with
a common child.
A directed chordal graph can al-
ways be obtained from an undirected chordal graph
by directing its edges according to one of its “perfect”
orderings, and the undirected graph corresponding to
a directed chordal graph is always chordal.
A particularly useful result is that given a total order-
ing there is a unique minimal directed chordal graph,
based on the minimal chordal graph ﬁll-in procedure
applied to the moral graph.
The directed chordal
graph is said to be consistent with the original inﬂu-
ence diagram if the value nodes have no children, and
the parents of each decision node include all of the req-
uisite observations and only nodes observed before the
decision is made [Nielsen and Jensen, 1999; Shachter,
1999]. When the target order is consistent with the
original inﬂuence diagram, the ﬁll-in procedure is guar-
anteed to produce a consistent directed chordal graph.
Proposition 1 (Minimal Directed Chordal Graph).
Given any inﬂuence diagram and a consistent target
order, there is a unique minimal directed chordal graph
consistent with the order.
To construct it from the
moral graph, use the order to direct all edges, and vis-
iting each node in reverse order, add a directed arc, if
necessary, between each pair of its parents.
In Figures 1c and 2c we show directed chordal graphs
based on the consistent target orders given in the cap-
tions. We want to create a tree structure, similar to
a junction tree, for the decision circuit backbone, and
we use the longest paths in the chordal graphs, com-
prising the bolded arcs. We can do this based on the
following result.
Theorem 1 (Directed Chordal Graph Properties).
Given a single component directed chordal graph, there
is exactly one root node.

There is exactly one longest path to each node X from
the root and that path contains all of X’s ancestors.
The arcs on the longest paths form a tree and all of
the children of any node X are contiguous with X in
the tree.
Proof. There is a path containing all of the ancestors
of any node X, or two of its ancestors would have a
common child but not an arc between them and the
graph would not be chordal. That path is the longest
path to X. There can be only one root node in the
graph because each non-root node has exactly one root
ancestor. The longest paths form a tree because the
ancestors of each node are totally ordered. Finally, if
any node X is a parent of Y , the node preceding Y in
the longest path is either X or a child of X, because X
and that node are both parents of Y in a chordal graph.
(This is equivalent to the “join tree property”.)
4.2
Decision circuit backbones
A decision circuit backbone is a compact representa-
tion for a decision circuit showing the branching as
well as sum, product, and max operators. It is com-
pact because it represents a generic path through a
symmetric decision circuit. At any time in the con-
struction process, there is a set of variables W which
have been introduced and are still available, and for
each w there is a corresponding operator node in the
decision circuit. An uncertainty X is introduced via
“+X|W”, representing a sum over x for each possible
w. Similarly, a decision variable X is introduced via
“max X|W”, representing a max over x for each pos-
sible w. On the other hand, no variable is introduced
via “∗X|W”, representing a product with θx|u and λx
over x for each possible w, and it is necessary that the
entire family of X, including X, be contained within
W. Branches in the circuit represent conditionally in-
dependent sub-models to be combined, each with its
own contribution to the total value.
To construct a decision circuit backbone from a di-
rected chordal graph:
1. use the structure of the longest path tree, branch-
ing when the tree branches, and adding entries for
each node in the chordal graph:
• for uncertainty X with parents W in the
chordal graph, enter “+X|W”;
• for
decision
X
with
parents
W,
enter
“max X|W”, followed by “∗X|W”; and
• for value V with parents W, enter “∗V |W”,
and for any terminal branch that doesn’t end
with a value, append “∗zero value”
max D3 | A
* V | A, D3
* D3 | D3, A
max D1
* C | C, D1
max D2 | C
* E | E, C, D2
+ A | E
* D1 | D1
+ C | D1
* D2 | D2, C
+ E | C, D2
+ B | A, E
* A, B | A, B, E
*zero value
Figure 3: Branching decision circuit backbone for the in-
ﬂuence diagram and target order shown in Figure 1.
2. for each chance node X, ﬁnd an entry in the back-
bone where W contains the node’s family and in-
sert “∗X|W” below it. (The moralizing step guar-
anteed that there will be at least one such entry,
and, as a heuristic, we suggest the highest such
entry in the backbone.)
The decision circuit backbone corresponding to the
chordal graph in Figure 1c is shown in Figure 3, and
the backbone corresponding to the chordal graph in
Figure 2c is shown in Figure 4. Note that product en-
tries for multiple uncertainties can be combined into
one entry, such as “∗A, B|A, B, E” in Figure 3.
4.3
Constructing the decision circuit
In this section we construct the decision circuit from
the decision circuit backbone. The backbone organizes
all of the information needed for the process.
We describe the construction of the decision circuit
starting at the root node with W = {}. During the
process there will be an operator node created for each
possible w. The sum entry “+X|W” and max entry
“max X|W” create a sum (or max) operator node for
each possible w with a child corresponding to each pos-
sible x. The product entry “∗X|W” creates a product
operator for each possible w with three children: the
next operator as one child, and θx|u and λx as the
other children (where u ⊆w are the parents of X in
the original inﬂuence diagram).
For example, the decision circuit for the example in
Figure 1 and backbone in Figure 3 corresponds to the
following system, equivalent to the one in Section 3:
g(e) =
P
c λcθc|d1
P
e λeθe|c,d2
P
a[g1(e1)g2(e2)]

*zero value
* V1 | D1
+ C | B, D
+ E | C, D
max D2 | E
+ G | E, D2
max D4 | G, D2
* I | I, G,D2,D4
+ L | I, D4
* V4 | D3
* V2 | L
* L | L, I, D4
+ I | G,D2,D4
* D4 | D4, G, D2
* G | G, E, D2
* D2 | D2, E
* E | E, C, D
+ H | F, D3
+ K | H, D3
+ J | H, K
* K | K, H, D3
* J | J, H, K
* V3 | J, K
* H | H, F, D3
* D | D, B, D1
+ D | B, D1
* B | B
* D1 | D1, B
+B
max D1 | B
+ A | B, C
* A, C | A, C, B
+ F | D
* D3 | D3, F
max D3 | F
* F | F, D
Figure 4: Branching decision circuit backbone for the in-
ﬂuence diagram and target order shown in Figure 2.
g(e′) =
maxd1 λd1
P
c λcθc|d1
maxd2 λd2
P
e λeθe|c,d2
P
a[g1(e′1)g2(e2) + g1(e1)g2(e′2)]
g1(e1) =
P
b λaθa|b,eλbθb(1)
g1(e′
1) =
0
g2(e2) =
1
g2(e′
2) =
maxd3 λd3λvθv|a,d3
Given non-responsive evidence e, sweep upward in the
constructed decision circuit to compute g(e) and g(e′).
For any strategy s, g(e) = P{e|s} = P{e}, and
g(e′) =
maxs E{P
V λvV |s, e}P{e|s}
=
g(e) maxs
P
V λvE{V |s, e}.
This approach builds on Darwiche [2000, 2003] and
Bhattacharjya and Shachter [2007] and leads to the
following result. Because the time and space complex-
ity are governed by the size of the decision circuit,
we can relate the complexity to the structure of the
directed chordal graph determined by the original in-
ﬂuence diagram and target variable elimination order.
The tree-width of the inﬂuence diagram evaluation is
exactly the number of nodes in the largest family in the
directed chordal graph. (By contrast, the construction
Table 1: Comparative size of linear and branching de-
cision circuits for diﬀerent versions of the inﬂuence dia-
grams shown in Figures 1 and 2, and the oil wildcatter
problem in Raiﬀa [1968].
Example
Linear
Branching
Figure 1, binary
138
138
Figure 1, 3 states
396
387
Figure 1, 4 states
860
828
Figure 2, binary
1,668
512
Figure 2, 3 states
13,755
1,812
Figure 2, 4 states
64,576
4,664
Oil Wildcatter
1,746
1,320
of the decision circuit backbone is only on the order of
the number of edges in that directed chordal graph.)
Theorem 2 (Decision Circuit Evaluation). Given an
inﬂuence diagram and consistent target variable elimi-
nation order, the decision circuit constructed from the
directed chordal graph and decision circuit backbone
will correctly compute P{e} = g(e) and maximal ex-
pected value g(e′)/g(e) for the diagram.
The time and space complexity for this computation
and for the computation of all of the partial deriva-
tives of both functions with respect to the inﬂuence di-
agram parameters is of the order of O(nst), where t is
the treewidth (in our case, the size of the largest fam-
ily in the directed chordal graph), n is the number of
variables in the inﬂuence diagram, and s is the largest
number of states for any variable. Alternatively, the
time and space complexity is of the order of O(nS)
where S is the largest number of states in any family
in the directed chordal graph.
4.4
Comparing Branching and Linear
Decision Circuits
In this section, we compare the new branching method
presented in this paper with the linear method pre-
sented in Bhattacharjya and Shachter [2007], counting
the number of arcs in the decision circuits for each
approach.
We consider three inﬂuence diagram ex-
amples, the diagrams shown in Figure 1 [Dittmer and
Jensen, 1997] and Figure 2 [Jensen, et al, 1994], and
the oil wildcatter drilling problem [Raiﬀa, 1968]. For
the ﬁrst two we construct circuits assuming all vari-
ables are binary and also assuming all variables have
either three or four states. The target variable elimi-
nation orders (shown in the captions in Figure 1 and
Figure 2) were chosen to minimize the size of the lin-
ear decision circuit with the multiple values combined
into a single value. The results are shown in Table 1.
For the inﬂuence diagram shown in Figure 1 with a

single value node and only a small opportunity for
branching, the overhead of branching cancels out the
beneﬁt when there are only two states, and most of the
beneﬁt when there are more states. However, in the
other two problems where there are multiple additive
values, the beneﬁt is much more substantial than the
overhead, and that beneﬁt dramatically increases with
the number of states.
5
DECISION CIRCUITS AND
LOCAL STRUCTURE
In this section, we discuss some types of local structure
in inﬂuence diagrams and how we can exploit it to
compile more compact decision circuits.
Inﬂuence diagrams naturally represent symmetric de-
cision situations at the graphical level, while any asym-
metry is represented at the local level within the dis-
tributions. Bielza and Shenoy [1999] compare how dif-
ferent graphical models deal with asymmetry.
It is natural for real world decision problems to exhibit
asymmetry, with many zeros in CPTs. To exploit local
structure when compiling a decision circuit, it matters
whether a particular parameter might change. For ex-
ample, if we want a particular zero to always stay zero,
even during sensitivity analysis, we call it a hard zero.
The presence of hard zeros and ones allows us to prune
the decision circuit, eliminating nodes and arcs [Bhat-
tacharjya, 2008]. Situations where we can prune an
intermediate node (neither a leaf nor a root) or an arc
include: a node with a hard 0 child, a product node
with a hard 1 child, a node with only one child, and a
node whose incoming arcs have all been pruned.
Another way to create more compact decision circuits
is with coalescence, giving a node multiple parents.
Coalescence has usually been hand-crafted for deci-
sion trees, as it has been diﬃcult to automate [Bielza
and Shenoy, 1999]. Conditional independence is a rich
source of coalescence in decision circuits at the global
level [Darwiche, 2000], as is the branching we exploit
in this paper. When there is no coalescence in the cir-
cuit, the circuit resembles a full tree, exponential in
the number of variables. In general, the size of the
decision circuit is exponential in the size of the largest
family in the directed chordal graph, and conditional
independence and branching in the global structure
can be exploited to limit the circuit size.
Coalescence can be employed at the local level when-
ever the same symbolic sub-circuit can be re-used
[Chavira, 2007]. This can be most easily recognized
at the lowest level. For example, if a product node for
x|u is created for λxθx|u, it can be reused whenever
U ⊂W in “∗X|W”.
6
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH
In this paper we have shown how signiﬁcantly smaller
and more eﬃcient decision circuits can be built than
with the linear vertex elimination method in Bhat-
tacharjya and Shachter [2007]. Given a target variable
elimination order, we are able to exploit separate value
nodes and conditionally independent subproblems to
construct a branching structure over subproblems. We
introduce a branching operator and a decision circuit
backbone as a compact graphical representation for a
symmetric decision circuit. We show how the inﬂuence
diagram and target order determine a directed chordal
graph to guide the construction process. The resulting
circuit can be compiled, exploiting the local structure.
The promise of decision circuits is that by compil-
ing the fundamental operations used in junction tree
methods exploiting conditional independence and sep-
arable values with local operations exploiting asym-
metry, we should be able to outperform other exact
methods. The advances in this paper help us realize
some of those beneﬁts.
Once we have a compiled decision circuit, it can eﬃ-
ciently address a variety of queries in real time, and
perform a full sensitivity analysis [Bhattacharjya and
Shachter, 2008, 2010]. We are not only able to com-
pute the optimal policy as we manipulate the input pa-
rameters, but also the derivative of our objective with
respect to all of those parameters. Because the com-
piled circuit accepts evidence, we can compute quan-
tities such as the value of clairvoyance that can not
be determined from the derivatives, taking full advan-
tage of any separable value function in our inﬂuence
diagram.
We can easily incorporate a few enhancements. First,
we can recognize circumstances under which some al-
ternatives might not be available [Smith et al, 1993].
Second, we could introduce product branching in ad-
dition to our (additive) branching to allow value func-
tions with nested sums and products as in Tatman
and Shachter [1990].
The corresponding operator is
just the existing product operator. Finally, instead of
computing both g(e′) and g(e) using the same circuit,
we could build a simpler arithmetic circuit to compute
g(e), reducing compute time, and creating even more
opportunities for pruning during compilation.
