Finding the different patterns in buildings data using bag of words representation with 
clustering  
Usman Habib,  Gerhard Zucker 
Energy Department, Sustainable Buildings and Cities 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology  
Vienna, Austria 

 
 
Abstract—The understanding of the buildings operation has 
become a challenging task due to the large amount of data 
recorded in energy efficient buildings. Still, today the experts use 
visual tools for analyzing the data. In order to make the task 
realistic, a method has been proposed in this paper to 
automatically detect the different patterns in buildings. The 
K-Means clustering is used to automatically identify the ON 
(operational) cycles of the chiller. In the next step the ON cycles 
are transformed to symbolic representation by using Symbolic 
Aggregate Approximation (SAX) method. Then the SAX symbols 
are converted to bag of words representation for hierarchical 
clustering. Moreover, the proposed technique is applied to real 
life data of adsorption chiller. Additionally, the results from the 
proposed method and dynamic time warping (DTW) approach 
are also discussed and compared.  
Keywords— Building energy performance; Fault detection and 
diagnosis (FDD); clustering; symbolic aggregate approximation 
(SAX);  Bag of words representation (BoWR); hierarchical 
clustering; Dynamic time warping (DTW); Coefficient of 
Performance (COP) 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
A lot of raw data is recorded during the monitoring of the 
energy efficient buildings [1]. In order to find the different 
aspect of the buildings performance the data is analyzed at later 
stages. The experts in the field usually analyze the data using 
different visualization tools [2]. The huge amount of data 
recorded makes it difficult for the experts to have a detailed 
performance analysis of buildings, thus making it hard to 
capture the different patterns, hence may lead to faults in the 
different components of building, reducing the energy 
efficiency. 
 The use of different data mining techniques can help in 
finding the different patterns in the buildings data, particularly 
clustering [3]–[5]. The automatic extraction of different 
patterns in large data set reduces the burden on experts in 
finding the different patterns in the data manually and helps in 
detailed analysis of the data. Therefore, the process of finding 
different patterns in the data can be feasible and less labor 
extensive [3], [4], [6]. 
In this paper an approach for automatically finding the 
different patterns in the building components operation has 
been proposed. In order to validate the outcomes, the proposed 
method has been applied to a data of adsorption chiller and 
compared to another approach called dynamic time warping 
(DTW). In first the ON/OFF cycle of the chiller is detected 
using the K-Means clustering algorithm, as the behavior of the 
chiller varies in these two different states. The patterns during 
the ON (operational) cycle is of greater importance for finding 
the performance of chillers and faults detection and diagnosis 
(FDD), therefore the data having ON cycle is considered in the 
proposed approach. Moreover, neglecting the OFF cycle will 
reduce the amount of data as well. The normalized ON cycles 
are discretized by using symbolic aggregate approximation 
(SAX). These discretized values are symbols or words. After 
transformation of the ON cycles to words, a histogram for each 
ON cycle is created called as bag of words representation 
(BoWR). Then the BoWR of ON cycles are clustered using 
hierarchical clustering. Furthermore, the results of the BoWR 
method with hierarchical clustering and DTW with hierarchical 
clustering are compared using cophenetic correlation. The 
cophenetic correlation demonstrates that the cluster tree have a 
strong correlation with the distances between objects in the 
distance vector [7].  
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II the relevant 
research work is discussed. Section III describes the system 
design while Section IV explains the methodology of the 
proposed method. Section V explains the results and outcomes 
applied to real life data. Finally, the conclusion and future 
directions is given in Section VI.    
II. STATE OF THE ART 
The advancement in sensors technology has made it 
feasible to record huge amount of data in commercial 
buildings. The huge amount of data storage makes it manually 
impossible to analyze it in detail. There are different tools used 
by experts in the field to visualize the data, which will further 
require manual analysis for performance of buildings. This 
process can be time extensive and there is always a chance to 
overlook some areas of interest [2]. 
There are different procedures available for faults detection 
and diagnosis (FDD) in buildings components e.g. HVAC 
(Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning). Although, use of 
the earlier knowledge about the system can help in finding 
some of the faults with the first hand principles but still need 
more sophisticated techniques to find the different aspects of 
buildings performance. Black box models are available that are 
heavily dependent on the behavior or process of the system, 
which is generally captured from the historical data [8], [9]. 
Furthermore, the different machine learning algorithms can be 
used to detect faults in buildings by using the installed 
electricity consumption meter [10], [11]. Additionally, there 
are some parameters that can be useful for the prediction of 
electricity consumption for each of the HVAC component. 

These parameters can be calculated by using multivariate 
analysis [12]. 
The key feature of data driven techniques in buildings is the 
focus on extracting knowledge from recorded data without 
detailed involvement of an expert. There are several popular 
unsupervised learning for extracting information. Such as, 
clustering can be used for finding the similar daily performance 
[3], [13], detecting the abnormal performance [14], and 
enhancing the performance optimization algorithms [15]. 
Moreover, wavelet transformations and clustering can be used 
in large scale for the classification of electrical demand profiles 
of buildings [16].  
The data recorded for buildings are usually saved as time 
series data. There are different methods available for 
representing the time series data, thus will help in finding the 
similarity between the data having same behavior. The 
similarities can be found by using simple Euclidean distance 
between two time series data, but the problem will be even a 
slighter shift of data can lead to erroneous results [6]. There is 
another method called dynamic time warping (DTW) which 
overcomes the problem by using dynamic programming 
technique with defining the best alignment in data [17]. In [6] 
the comparison of algorithms (Euclidean, DTW, wavelets) with 
hierarchical cluster for finding different time series is done. 
They have also suggested the bag of patterns representation 
(BoPR) approach used for finding similarities in the time series 
data.  
The bag of words model is used in several fields for 
classification [18]. The bag of words model can also be used 
with clustering to enhance the algorithm for finding the 
similarities between the time series data [6].  
The time series data can be represented with a symbolic 
representation by using Symbolic Aggregate Approximation 
(SAX). The use of SAX improve the speed and usability of 
several analysis techniques. SAX is a category of Piecewise 
Aggregate Approximation (PAA) representation and is used 
extensively in various applications [19]. 
There are several clustering algorithms available, which can 
be used for finding the different states of buildings energy. For 
example, clustering can be used to detect the state of machine 
for ON/OFF cycle as data vary in these two different states. 
The [20] used the X-Means clustering algorithm for 
automatically detecting the system states (ON/OFF), to 
examine the operational data of adsorption. The ON/OFF state 
information can also be used for finding outliers in the data   
[21]–[23]. 
III. SYSTEM DESIGN 
This section describes the system that has been used for the 
proposed method in this paper. The brief description of 
adsorption chiller is given along with data description used for 
the analysis of the paper. 
A. Adsorption Chillers 
For proof of concept anticipated in this paper, the data is 
taken from a solar cooling system with an adsorption chiller as 
defined in Figure 1. The naming conventions used in Figure 1 
are according to the Task 38 of IEA solar heating and cooling 
program [24].  
Figure 1: Adsorption chiller 
The adsorption chiller operation can be described in the 
following steps [25] 
1. The process of water evaporation is done in the lower 
chamber called evaporator, makes the water cool in 
Low Temperature (LT) cycle. 
2. The evaporated water is adsorbed in the middle 
chamber, using silica-gel. 
3. The adsorbed water is de-adsorbed with a certain heat 
provided from the Hot water (HT) cycle. 
4. The de-adsorbed water is condensed and taken back to 
the evaporator. 
B. Data Description 
The parameters under consideration are described in Table I 
given below. The naming convention of  IEA Task 38 for solar 
and cooling is followed [24]. 
TABLE I : PARAMETERS DESCRIPTION 
Sensors 
Description 
E6 
High Temperature (HT) electricity consumption meter. 
E7 
Medium Temperature (MT) electricity consumption meter. 
E8 
Low Temperature (LT) electricity consumption meter. 
Q6a_m3h 
HT cycle Flow (water) reading  
Q12_m3h 
MT cycle Flow (water) reading 
Q7_m3h 
LT cycle Flow (water) reading 
T_HTre 
HT cycle temperature on return side.  
T_HTsu 
HT cycle temperature on supply side. 
T_MTre 
MT cycle temperature on return side.  
T_MTsu 
MT cycle temperature on supply side. 
T_LTre 
LT cycle temperature on return side.  
T_LTsu 
LT cycle temperature on supply side. 
Q6a_KW 
HT cycle Energy consumption reading 
Q12_KW 
MT cycle Energy consumption reading 
Q7_KW 
LT cycle Energy consumption reading 

The data for the year 2010 is used for the proof of concept 
suggested in this paper, as can be seen in Figure 2. It is clear 
from Figure 2 that the cooling operation is recorded mostly 
during summer season. It is significant to notice that even 
during the summer season; there are days where little or no 
data is recorded due to communication line failures or some 
other unknown faults. 
 
Figure 2: Data availability 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
This section discuss the methodology proposed in this 
paper. The first step followed in the analysis of data is always 
the preprocessing and finding outliers. The data used has 
already been processed, therefore it can be used without the 
preprocessing step. 
A. ON State (Operational) detection using K-Means 
clustering 
Generally the solar chillers are mostly in functional state 
during the summers. As the data varies a lot in the two states 
(ON/OFF) of chiller, therefore we can cluster the data in two 
clusters. The K-Means clustering with two cluster and 
Euclidean distance setting is used to detect the ON and OFF 
state. After the detection of ON/OFF state at each point of time, 
the consecutive ON state are marked as one ON cycle. The 
same process is done for all consecutive ON/OFF states. The 
ON status is of more importance than OFF cycle, for finding 
the performance of the chiller. 
B. Symbolic Aggregate Approximation (SAX) tranformation  
After the detection of ON cycles, the ON cycle’s data will 
be in the form as defined by the Eq.1. 
                         ܥ௜ൌሼܵଵ, ܵଶ, ܵଷ, … … … … … ܵேሽ              (Eq. 1) 
Where Ci is the ith ON cycle and Sk is the sensor value at 
time tick k. The data is normalized using Z-Score 
normalization before transformation to SAX symbols as given 
by the following Eq.2. 
 
 
 
ܼ (ܥ௜) ൌ
(ௌೖିఓ)
ఙ 
                      (Eq. 2) 
Here Sk is the sensor data, μ represents the mean and σ is 
the standard deviation of the data. 
The normalized ON cycle data, ܼ (ܥ௜), is first broken down 
into m non-overlapping subsequences. This process is called as 
chunking, and the period length P is based on the application 
where it is used [3]. For this paper, P is chosen as 4 minutes 
due to the recording time interval of 4 minutes. The x-axis in 
Figure 3 represents the P as 4 minutes interval. Each piece is 
then further distributed into Q equal sized segments, e.g. 
alphabets a, b, c and d in Figure 3 are represented with 
different color regions. The symbol to each data point is 
assigned according the breakpoints. The number of break 
points taken for this research is 20, as with greater number of 
break point, the approximation will be quite near to the real 
data. 
Figure 3: SAX Transformation of ON Cycle 
C. Bag of Words Representation (BoWR)  
The SAX transformation will transform the time series data 
in the symbols. The bag of words representation can be 
explained by following Eq.3. 
              ܥ௜ൌሼܸଵ, ܸଶ, ܸଷ, … … … … … ܸ௄ሽ                    (Eq. 3)       
Here K is the number of splits and Ci is the vocabulary of the 
ith cycle, Whereas V is the word patterns of vocabulary given 
by Eq.4. 
 
 
V୨ൌCount (V୨)      
                  (Eq. 4) 
Here Count() Function returns the total number of a given word 
in the vocabulary in a cycle. In order to handle the ON cycles 
with different time length the Eq.4 has been modified as Eq.5 
given below, where N is the number of time ticks in ON cycle. 
                             V୨ൌ
C୭୳୬୲ (Vౠ)
N
 
                                  (Eq. 5) 
The Table 2 shows the example of how the bag of words 
representation will denote each ON cycle. The benefit of using 
BoWR method is that it will reduce the dimensions of data as 
well. 

TABLE 2: SAX VOCABULARY 
D. Key Steps in Methodology 
The main steps of the methodology are as
1. As the data is preprocessed, therefo
next steps. The first step in t
(operational) cycles in data by 
algorithm. 
2. Transform the ON cycle’s data 
using SAX transformation method. 
3.  Create BoWR of the symbols of ea
4. Cluster the BoWR using hierarchi
finding the different performance of
V. RESULTS 
The methodology is applied to real life d
the different results are discussed as following
A. ON Cycle Detection with K-Means Algor
The results of the K-Means clustering can
4. The Figure 4 validates the ON/OFF status
clustering algorithm. The dashed line (red) in
the ON/OFF cycles of the chiller. It can be 
behaviour of the temperatures at the LT, MT
reacting according to the detected ON/OFF
rectangle shows one ON cycle of the 
21-07-2010 and 22-07-2010. It is clear from
during the detected ON cycle, the LT temp
showing the cooling operation. Whereas, at 
temperatures increase in the HT and MT cy
This simultaneously change in temperature
that the chiller is in operational mode, wh
detected by the proposed method of K-Means
Figure 4: K-Means Clustering for Finding ON
Time Series On 
Cycles (Ci) data 
 
 
Cycle 
No 
SAX Vocabular
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G
C1 
0 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
C2 
1 
9 
7 
4 
5 
3 
…. 
… …. 
… 
… 
… 
… 
…
CN 
… …. 
… 
… 
… 
… 
…
s following 
ore the focus is on 
to find the ON 
using K-Means 
to symbolic data 
ch ON cycle. 
ical clustering for 
f chiller.  
data. In this section 
g 
rithm 
n be seen in Figure 
 through K-Means 
n the figure shows 
observed from the 
T and HT cycle are 
F state. The dotted 
chiller between 
m the Figure 4 that 
peratures decreases 
the same time the 
ycle of the chiller. 
, is a clear signal 
hich has also been 
s clustering. 
 
N/OFF cycle 
The Figure 5 shows the dif
next steps. The ON cycles are
different in performance of ch
Carnot coefficient of performa
given in Eq.6, whereas the ther
(ܥ݋ܲ௧௛௘௥௠) can be calculate
ܧ݂݂݅ܿ݅݁݊ܿݕ  for chiller is calc
Eq.8.  
          ܥܱܲ௖௔௥௡௢௧ൌ ቀ
்_ு்ೞೠ ି்_ெ
்_ு்ೞೠ
                                      ܥ݋ܲ௧௛௘௥
                                       ܧ݂݂݅ܿ݅݁݊
In Figure 5, the cycle 1, 2
efficiency which is above 5
efficiency between 30% and 50
the low efficiency of lower tha
low efficiency can be the sho
Figure 5 cycles 6 and 7 (dash 
chiller efficiency, while, cycle
the cycles with average efficie
good efficiency. 
Figure 5: O
B. Symbolic Aggregate Transf
Words Representation    
For SAX model the chunk 
data is recorded at an interva
points for chunks is taken 
representation (BoWR) can be 
represented by the histograms
Figure 7. The green colour is 
cycles, whereas, blue denotes 
colour histograms is reflecting 
be observed from the Figure 7 t
and are similar to each other a
can be noticed for the average 
bag of word representation hel
cycles.  
ry 
G 
H 
I 
… 
0 
0 
1 
… 
1 
5 
2 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
fferent ON cycles considered for 
e different in length as well as 
hillers at these time stamps. The 
ance (ܥܱܲ௖௔௥௡௢௧)) [26] is used as 
rmal coefficient of performance 
ed using Eq.7.  The average 
culated for each cycle by using 
ெ்ೞೠቁכ ቀ
்_௅்ೝ೐
்_ெ்ೞೠି்_௅்ೝ೐ቁ     (Eq. 6) 
 
௥௠ൌ
ொ଻_௄ௐ
ொ଺௔_௄ௐ                      (Eq. 7) 
 
݊ܿݕൌ
஼ை௉೎ೌೝ೙೚೟
஼௢௉೟೓೐ೝ೘                (Eq. 8) 
 and 3 have the best chiller 
50%. Cycle 4 and 5 having 
0% whereas, cycle 6 and 7 have 
an 30%. One of the reasons for 
orter period of cooling load. In 
lines) are representing the low 
es 4 and 5 (dot lines) represent 
ency and cycles 1, 2 and 3 have 
 
N Cycle Plot 
formation (SAX) and Bag or 
size is taken as 4 minutes as the 
al of 4 minutes. The breaking 
as 20. The bag of words 
seen in Figure 7. The BoWR is 
s in the second column of the 
used for good chiller efficiency 
the average efficiency and red 
the bad efficiency cycles. It can 
that green histograms are in mid 
s compared to others. The same 
and bad efficiency cycles. This 
lps the clustering to identify the 

C. Hierarchical Clustering 
The hierarchical clustering is applied with Dynamic time 
warping and proposed method of bag of words representation 
(BoWR) method. Figure 6  shows the results of clustering with 
DTW and Figure 7 is describing the results with BoWR. Both 
methods have classified the cycles correctly. The first 
advantage of BoWR over DTW is the dimension reduction, as 
each cycle is represented with significantly less data. Secondly, 
for comparing the clustering performance with both methods 
the cophenetic coefficients [7] has been calculated for 
hierarchical 
clustering. 
The 
cophenetic 
correlation 
demonstrates that the cluster tree have a strong correlation with 
the distances between objects in the distance vector. Table 3 
shows the cophenetic coefficients with different hierarchical 
clustering methods for BoWR and DTW techniques. The 
BoWR has strong correlation with distance with all other 
objects in all clustering method. The best results for BoWR are 
attained with ‘Average’ method for hierarchical clustering. 
TABLE 3: COPHENETIC COEFFICIENTS 
No. 
Clustering Methods 
BoWR 
DTW 
1 
Average 
0.9897 
0.0375 
2 
Centroid 
0.9851 
0.037 
3 
Complete 
0.9753 
0.035 
4 
Median 
0.9803 
0.0363 
5 
Single 
0.9848 
0.0414 
6 
Ward 
0.9835 
0.0363 
7 
Weighted 
0.9888 
0.0368 
VI. CONCLUSION 
A bag of word representation (BoWR) method with 
hierarchical clustering is proposed in this paper for finding the 
different patterns in the chiller performance. First a K-Means 
clustering is used to find the ON (operational) cycles of the 
chiller. These ON cycles are represented with symbols by using 
symbolic 
aggregate 
approximation 
(SAX) 
method. 
Furthermore, the symbolic representation is transformed to 
BoWR, which is provided to hierarchical clustering for 
detection of bad, average and good Carnot coefficient of 
performance (COP).  
The Dynamic time warping (DTW) is also implemented 
with hierarchical clustering and results are compared with the 
proposed method. The important points during comparison are 
following: 
• 
The cophenetic coefficients have shown that the 
BoWR has produced better results as compared to 
DTW.  
• 
The other benefit of using BoWR is the reduction in 
dimension as a large amount of ON cycle is 
represented with less details. 
In future, the current research can be used in the field of 
automatic detection and diagnostics of faults (FDD) in 
buildings, as the current research helps in finding the different 
performance patterns. This would help the experts in the field 
to look only for those areas where the performance is bad. The 
further research is needed to find intelligent way of diagnosing 
the faults 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly funded by the Austrian Funding 
Agency in the funding programme e!MISSION within the 
project “extrACT”, project number 838688. 
 
 
Figure 6: Clustering of ON cycle data with Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) 
 
ON Cycles
Cycle 7
Cycle 6
Cycle 5
Cycle 4
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 1

 
Figure 7: Clustering of ON cycles with bag of words Representation method
