arXiv:1702.08400v3  [cs.CV]  13 May 2017
Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Kuniaki Saito 1 Yoshitaka Ushiku 1 Tatsuya Harada 1
Abstract
Deep-layered models trained on a large number
of labeled samples boost the accuracy of many
tasks. It is important to apply such models to dif-
ferent domains because collecting many labeled
samples in various domains is expensive. In un-
supervised domain adaptation, one needs to train
a classiﬁer that works well on a target domain
when provided with labeled source samples and
unlabeled target samples. Although many meth-
ods aim to match the distributions of source and
target samples, simply matching the distribution
cannot ensure accuracy on the target domain. To
learn discriminative representations for the target
domain, we assume that artiﬁcially labeling tar-
get samples can result in a good representation.
Tri-training leverages three classiﬁers equally to
give pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples, but the
method does not assume labeling samples gener-
ated from a different domain. In this paper, we
propose an asymmetric tri-training method for
unsupervised domain adaptation, where we as-
sign pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples and train
neural networks as if they are true labels. In our
work, we use three networks asymmetrically. By
asymmetric, we mean that two networks are used
to label unlabeled target samples and one net-
work is trained by the samples to obtain target-
discriminative representations. We evaluate our
method on digit recognition and sentiment anal-
ysis datasets.
Our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark
digit recognition datasets of domain adaptation.
1. Introduction
With the development of deep neural networks in-
cluding
deep
convolutional
neural
networks
(CNN)
1The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspon-

Tatsuya Harada

(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the recognition abilities of im-
ages and languages have improved dramatically. Train-
ing deep-layered networks with a large number of la-
beled samples enables us to correctly categorize samples
in diverse domains. In addition, the transfer learning of
CNN is utilized in many studies. For object detection or
segmentation, we can transfer the knowledge of a CNN
trained with a large-scale dataset by ﬁne-tuning it on a
relatively small dataset (Girshick et al., 2014; Long et al.,
2015a). Moreover, features from a CNN trained on Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009) are useful for multimodal learn-
ing tasks including image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015)
and visual question answering (Antol et al., 2015).
One of the problems of neural networks is that although
they perform well on the samples generated from the same
distribution as the training samples, they may ﬁnd it difﬁ-
cult to correctly recognize samples from different distribu-
tions at the test time. One example is images collected from
the Internet, which may come in abundance and be fully la-
beled. They have a distribution different from the images
taken from a camera. Thus, a classiﬁer that performs well
on various domains is important for practical use. To real-
ize this, it is necessary to learn domain-invariantly discrim-
inative representations. However, acquiring such represen-
tations is not easy because it is often difﬁcult to collect a
large number of labeled samples and because samples from
different domains have domain-speciﬁc characteristics.
In unsupervised domain adaptation, we try to train a clas-
siﬁer that works well on a target domain on the condi-
tion that we are provided labeled source samples and un-
labeled target samples during training. Most of the pre-
vious deep domain adaptation methods have been pro-
posed mainly under the assumption that the adaptation
can be realized by matching the distribution of features
from different domains.
These methods aimed to ob-
tain domain-invariant features by minimizing the diver-
gence between domains as well as a category loss on
the source domain (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014; Long et al.,
2015b; 2016).
However, as shown in (Ben-David et al.,
2010), theoretically, if a classiﬁer that works well on both
the source and the target domains does not exist, we can-
not expect a discriminative classiﬁer for the target domain.
That is, even if the distributions are matched on the non-
discriminative representations, the classiﬁer may not work

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
!"#$$%&%'()*
!"#$$%&%'(+*
,#-'"'./$01(2'/$#34"'$*
!"#$$%&%'()*
!"#$$%&%'(+*
56"#-'"'./7#(8'7/$#34"'$*
!"#$$/9*
!"#$$/9*
!"#$$%&%'(/7*
:$'1.0;"#-'"'./7#(8'7/$#34"'$*
Figure 1. Outline of our model. We assign pseudo-labels to unla-
beled target samples based on the predictions from two classiﬁers
trained on source samples.
well on the target domain. Since directly learning discrimi-
native representations for the target domain, in the absence
of target labels, is considered very difﬁcult, we propose
to assign pseudo-labels to target samples and train target-
speciﬁc networks as if they were true labels.
Co-training and tri-training (Zhou & Li, 2005) leverage
multiple classiﬁers to artiﬁcially label unlabeled samples
and retrain the classiﬁers. However, the methods do not
assume labeling samples from different domains. Since
our goal is to classify unlabeled target samples that have
different characteristics from labeled source samples, we
propose asymmetric tri-training for unsupervised domain
adaptation. By asymmetric, we mean that we assign differ-
ent roles to three classiﬁers.
In this paper, we propose a novel tri-training method for
unsupervised domain adaptation, where we assign pseudo-
labels to unlabeled samples and train neural networks uti-
lizing the samples. As described in Fig. 1, two networks
are used to label unlabeled target samples and the remain-
ing network is trained by the pseudo-labeled target sam-
ples. Our method does not need any special implementa-
tions. We evaluate our method on the digit classiﬁcation
task, trafﬁc sign classiﬁcation task and sentiment analysis
task using the Amazon Review dataset, and demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance in nearly all experiments. In
particular, in the adaptation scenario, MNIST→SVHN, our
method outperformed other methods by more than 10%.
2. Related Work
As many methods have been proposed to tackle various
tasks in domain adaptation, we present details of the re-
search most closely related to our paper.
A number of previous methods attempted to realize adap-
tation by utilizing the measurement of divergence between
different domains (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014; Long et al.,
2015b; Li et al., 2016). The methods are based on the the-
ory proposed in (Ben-David et al., 2010), which states that
the expected loss for a target domain is bounded by three
terms: (i) expected loss for the source domain; (ii) domain
divergence between source and target; and (iii) the mini-
mum value of a shared expected loss. The shared expected
loss means the sum of the loss on the source and target do-
main. As the third term, which is usually considered to be
very low, cannot be evaluated when labeled target samples
are absent, most methods try to minimize the ﬁrst term and
the second term. With regards to training deep architec-
tures, the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) or a loss
of domain classiﬁer network is utilized to measure the di-
vergence corresponding to the second term (Gretton et al.,
2012; Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014; Long et al., 2015b; 2016;
Bousmalis et al., 2016). However, the third term is very im-
portant in training CNN, which simultaneously extract rep-
resentations and recognize them. The third term can easily
be large when the representations are not discriminative for
the target domain. Therefore, we focus on how to learn
target-discriminative representations considering the third
term. In (Long et al., 2016) the focus was on the point we
have stated and a target-speciﬁc classiﬁer was constructed
using a residual network structure. Different from their
method, we constructed a target-speciﬁc network by pro-
viding artiﬁcially labeled target samples.
Several transductive methods use similarity of features
to provide labels for unlabeled samples (Rohrbach et al.,
2013; Khamis & Lampert, 2014).
For unsupervised do-
main adaptation, in (Sener et al., 2016), a method was
proposed to learn labeling metrics by using the k-nearest
neighbors between unlabeled target samples and labeled
source samples. In contrast to this method, our method
explicitly and simply backpropagates the category loss for
target samples based on pseudo-labeled samples. Our ap-
proach does not require any special modules.
Many methods proposed to give pseudo-labels to unlabeled
samples by utilizing the predictions of a classiﬁer and re-
training it including the pseudo-labeled samples, which is
called self-training. The underlying assumption of self-
training is that one’s own high-conﬁdence predictions are
correct (Zhu, 2005). As the predictions are mostly cor-
rect, utilizing samples with high conﬁdence will further
improve the performance of the classiﬁer. Co-training uti-
lizes two classiﬁers, which have different views on one
sample, to provide pseudo-labels (Blum & Mitchell, 1998;
Tanha et al., 2011). Then, the unlabeled samples are added
to training set if at least one classiﬁer is conﬁdent about
the predictions. The generalization ability of co-training is
theoretically ensured (Balcan et al., 2004; Dasgupta et al.,
2001) under some assumptions and applied to various tasks
(Wan, 2009; Levin et al., 2003). In (Chen et al., 2011), the
idea of co-training was incorporated into domain adap-
tation.
Tri-training can be regarded as the extension of
co-training (Zhou & Li, 2005). Similar to co-training, tri-
training uses the output of three different classiﬁers to give
pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples. Tri-training does not
require partitioning features into different views; instead,
tri-training initializes each classiﬁer differently. However,

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
!"!
!#!
!$!
%&!$'!
()*+,
*+,
(--.-/01234-/56!+4/,
*+-.-!/41708+594+47-$52:4$-/56!+4/,
"#$%&!
;!
<"!
<#!
<$!
=>!
%&!#'!?>!
%&!"'!?>!
%&!#'!=>!
%&!"'!=>!
'(!
'(!

?-.-%594+-A02-/01234-/56!+4!
<!
B9C43$DE4-A02-35$4:02?-+0//!
()*+,
<"!'<#-.-%594+DF:-F4$G02H/!
<$-.-*52:4$-/!43DID3-F4$G02H!
<-.-(J5247-F4$G02H!
Figure 2. The proposed method includes a shared feature extrac-
tor (F), classiﬁers for labeled samples (F1, F2), which learn from
labeled source samples, and newly labeled target samples. In ad-
dition, a target-speciﬁc classiﬁer (Ft) learns from pseudo-labeled
target samples. Our method ﬁrst trains networks from only la-
beled source samples, then labels the target samples based on the
output of F1, F2. We train all architectures using them as if they
are correctly labeled samples.
tri-training does not assume that the unlabeled samples fol-
low the different distributions from the ones which labeled
samples are generated from. Therefore, we develop a tri-
training method suitable for domain adaptation by using
three classiﬁers asymmetrically.
In (Lee, 2013), the effect of pseudo-labels in a neural net-
work was investigated. They argued that the effect of train-
ing a classiﬁer with pseudo-labels is equivalent to entropy
regularization, thus leading to a low-density separation be-
tween classes. In addition, in our experiment, we observe
that target samples are separated in hidden features.
3. Method
In this section, we provide details of the proposed model
for domain adaptation.
We aim to construct a target-
speciﬁc network by utilizing pseudo-labeled target sam-
ples. Simultaneously, we expect two labeling networks to
acquire target-discriminative representations and gradually
increase accuracy on the target domain.
We show our proposed network structure in Fig. 2. Here F
denotes the network which outputs shared features among
three networks, F1 and F2 classify features generated from
F. Their predictions are utilized to give pseudo-labels. The
classiﬁer Ft classiﬁes features generated from F, which is
a target-speciﬁc network. Here F1, F2 learn from source
and pseudo-labeled target samples and Ft learns only from
pseudo-labeled target samples.
The shared network F
learns from all gradients from F1, F2, Ft. Without such
a shared network, another option for the network architec-
ture we can think of is training three networks separately,
but this is inefﬁcient in terms of training and implemen-
tation. Furthermore, by building a shared network F, F1
and F2 can also harness the target-discriminative represen-
tations learned by the feedback from Ft.
The set of source samples is deﬁned as

(xi, yi)
	ms
i=1 ∼S,
the unlabeled target set is

(xi)
	mt
i=1 ∼T , and the pseudo-
labeled target set is

(xi, ˆyi)
	nt
i=1 ∼Tl.
3.1. Loss for Multiview Features Network
In the existing works (Chen et al., 2011) on co-training for
domain adaptation, given features are divided into separate
parts and considered to be different views.
As we aim to label target samples with high accuracy, we
expect F1, F2 to classify samples based on different view-
points. Therefore, we make a constraint for the weight of
F1, F2 to make their inputs different to each other. We add
the term |W1
T W2| to the cost function, where W1, W2 de-
note fully connected layers’ weights of F1 and F2 which
are ﬁrst applied to the feature F(xi). Each network will
learn from different features with this constraint. The ob-
jective for learning F1, F2 is deﬁned as
E(θF , θF1, θF2) = 1
n
n
X
i=1

Ly(F1 ◦F(xi)), yi)
+ Ly(F2 ◦(F(xi)), yi)

+ λ|W1
T W2|
(1)
where Ly denotes the standard softmax cross-entropy loss
function. We decided the trade-off parameter λ based on
validation split.
3.2. Learning Procedure and Labeling Method
Pseudo-labeled
target
samples
will
provide
target-
discriminative information to the network. However, since
they certainly contain false labels, we have to pick up
reliable pseudo-labels. Our labeling and learning method
is aimed at realizing this.
The entire procedure of training the network is shown in
Algorithm 1. First, we train the entire network with source
training set S. Here F1, F2 are optimized by Eq. (1) and
Ft is trained on standard category loss. After training on
S, to provide pseudo-labels, we use predictions of F1 and
F2, namely y1, y2 obtained from xk. When C1, C2 denote
the class which has the maximum predicted probability for
y1, y2, we assign a pseudo-label to xk if the following two
conditions are satisﬁed. First, we require C1 = C2 to give
pseudo-labels, which means two different classiﬁers agree
with the prediction. The second requirement is that the
maximizing probability of y1 or y2 exceeds the threshold
parameter, which we set as 0.9 or 0.95 in the experiment.
We suppose that unless one of two classiﬁers is conﬁdent
of the prediction, the prediction is not reliable. If the two
requirements are satisﬁed,
 xk, ˆyk = C1 = C2

is added to
Tl. To prevent the overﬁtting to pseudo-labels, we resample
the candidate for labeling samples in each step. We set the

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Algorithm 1 iter denotes the iteration of training. The
function Labeling means the method of labeling. We as-
sign pseudo-labels to samples when the predictions of
F1 and F2 agree and at least one of them is conﬁdent of
their predictions.
Input: data
S =

(xi, ti)
	m
i=1, T =

(xj)
	n
j=1
Tl = ∅
for j = 1 to iter do
Train F, F1, F2, Ft with mini-batch from training set
S
end for
Nt = Ninit
Tl = Labeling(F, F1, F2,T , Nt)
L = S ∪Tl
for k steps do
for j = 1 to iter do
Train F, F1, F2 with mini-batch from training set L
Train F, Ft with mini-batch from training set Tl
end for
Tl = ∅, Nt = k/20 ∗n
Tl = Labeling(F, F1, F2,T , Nt)
L = S ∪Tl
end for
number of the initial candidates Ninit as 5,000. We gradu-
ally increase the number of the candidates Nt = k/20 ∗n,
where n denotes the number of all target samples and k
denotes the number of steps, and we set the maximum
number of pseudo-labeled candidates as 40,000. After the
pseudo-labeled training set Tl is composed, F, F1, F2 are
updated by the objective Eq. (1) on the labeled training
set L = S ∪Tl. Then, F, Ft are simply optimized by the
category loss for Tl.
Discriminative representations will be learned by con-
structing a target-speciﬁc network trained only on target
samples. However, if only noisy pseudo-labeled samples
are used for training, the network may not learn useful
representations. Then, we use both source samples and
pseudo-labeled samples for training F, F1, F2 to ensure the
accuracy.
Also, as the learning proceeds, F will learn
target-discriminative representations, resulting in an im-
provement in accuracy in F1, F2. This cycle will gradually
enhance the accuracy in the target domain.
3.3. Batch Normalization for Domain Adaptation
Batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), which
whitens the output of the hidden layer in a CNN, is an ef-
fective technique to accelerate training speed and enhance
the accuracy of the model. In addition, in domain adap-
tation, whitening the hidden layer’s output is effective for
improving the performance, which make the distribution in
different domains similar (Sun et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016).
Input samples of F1, F2 include both pseudo-labeled tar-
get samples and source samples. Introducing BN will be
useful for matching the distribution and improves the per-
formance. We add the BN layer in the last layer in F.
4. Analysis
In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis to our ap-
proach. First, we provide an insight into existing theory,
then we introduce a simple expansion of the theory related
to our method.
In (Ben-David et al., 2010), an equation was introduced
showing that the upper bound of the expected error in the
target domain depends on three terms, which include the
divergence between different domains and the error of an
ideal joint hypothesis. The divergence between source and
target domain, H∆H-distance, is deﬁned as follows:
dH∆H(S, T )
= 2
sup
(h,h′)∈H2
 E
x∼S [h(x) ̸= h′(x)] −E
x∼T [h(x) ̸= h′(x)]

This distance is frequently used to measure the adaptability
between different domains.
The
ideal
joint
hypothesis
is
deﬁned
as
h∗
=
arg min
h∈H
 RS(h∗) + RT (h∗)

, and its corresponding error
is C = RS(h∗) + RT (h∗), where R denotes the expected
error on each hypothesis. The theorem is as follows.
Theorem 1. (Ben-David et al., 2010)
Let H be the hypothesis class. Given two different domains
S, T , we have
∀h ∈H, RT (h) ≤RS(h) + 1
2dH∆H(S, T ) + C
This theorem means that the expected error on the tar-
get domain is upper bounded by three terms, the expected
error on the source domain, the domain divergence mea-
sured by the disagreement of the hypothesis, and the er-
ror of the ideal joint hypothesis.
In the existing work
(Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014; Long et al., 2015b), C was dis-
regarded because it was considered to be negligibly small.
If we are provided with ﬁxed features, we do not need to
consider the term because the term is also ﬁxed. However,
if we assume that xs ∼S, xt ∼T are obtained from the
last fully connected layer of deep models, we note that C is
determined by the output of the layer, and further note the
necessity of considering this term.
We consider the pseudo-labeled target samples set Tl =

(xi, ˆyi)
	mt
i=1 given false labels at the ratio of ρ. The shared
error of h∗on S, Tl is denoted as C′. Then, the following
inequality holds:
∀h ∈H, RT (h) ≤RS(h) + 1
2dH∆H(S, T ) + C

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
≤RS(h) + 1
2dH∆H(S, T ) + C′ + ρ
We show a simple derivation of the inequality in the Sup-
plementary material. In Theorem 1, we cannot measure C
in the absence of labeled target samples. We can approx-
imately evaluate and minimize it by using pseudo-labels.
Furthermore, when we consider the second term on the
right-hand side, our method is expected to reduce this term.
This term intuitively denotes the discrepancy between dif-
ferent domains in the disagreement of two classiﬁers. If
we regard certain h and h′ as F1 and F2, respectively,
E
x∼Sx [h(x) ̸= h′(x)] should be very low because training
is based on the same labeled samples. Moreover, for the
same reason,
E
x∼Tx [h(x) ̸= h′(x)] is expected to be low,
although we use the training set Tl instead of genuine la-
beled target samples. Thus, our method will consider both
the second and the third term in Theorem 1.
5. Experiment and Evaluation
We perform extensive evaluations of our method on image
datasets and a sentiment analysis dataset. We evaluate the
accuracy of target-speciﬁc networks in all experiments.
Visual Domain Adaptation For visual domain adap-
tation,
we
perform
our
evaluation
on
the
digits
datasets and trafﬁc signs datasets.
Digits datasets
include
MNIST
(LeCun et al.,
1998),
MNIST-M
(Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014), Street View House Num-
bers (SVHN) (Netzer et al., 2011), and Synthetic Digits
(SYN DIGITS) (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014). We further
evaluate our method on trafﬁc sign datasets including
Synthetic Trafﬁc Signs (SYN SIGNS) (Moiseev et al.,
2013) and German Trafﬁc Signs Recognition Benchmark
(Stallkamp et al., 2011) (GTSRB). In total, ﬁve adaptation
scenarios are evaluated in this experiment. As the datasets
used for evaluation are varied in previous works, we
extensively evaluate our method on the ﬁve scenarios.
We do not evaluate our method on Ofﬁce (Saenko et al.,
2010), which is the most commonly used dataset for visual
domain adaptation. As pointed out by (Bousmalis et al.,
2016), some labels in that dataset are noisy and some im-
ages contain other classes’ objects. Furthermore, many pre-
vious studies have evaluated the ﬁne-tuning of pretrained
networks using ImageNet. This protocol assumes the ex-
istence of another source domain. In our work, we want
to evaluate the situation where we have access to only one
source domain and one target domain.
Adaptation in Amazon Reviews To investigate the be-
havior on language datasets, we also evaluated our method
on the Amazon Reviews dataset (Blitzer et al., 2006) with
the same preprocessing as used by (Chen et al., 2011;
Ganin et al., 2016). The dataset contains reviews on four
types of products: books, DVDs, electronics, and kitchen
appliances. We evaluate our method on 12 domain adapta-
tion scenarios. The results are shown in Table 1.
Baseline Methods We compare our method with ﬁve
methods for unsupervised domain adaptation includ-
ing state-of-the art methods in visual domain adapta-
tion; Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Long et al.,
2015b), Domain Adversarial Neural Network (DANN)
(Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014), Deep Reconstruction Clas-
siﬁcation Network (DRCN) (Ghifary et al., 2016), Do-
main Separation Networks (DSN) (Bousmalis et al., 2016),
and k-Nearest Neighbor based adaptation (kNN-Ad)
(Sener et al., 2016).
We cite the results of MMD from
(Bousmalis et al., 2016).
In addition, we compare our
method with CNN trained only on source samples. We
compare our method with Variational Fair AutoEncoder
(VFAE) (Louizos et al., 2015) and DANN (Ganin et al.,
2016) in the Amazon Reviews experiment.
5.1. Implementation Detail
In experiments on image datasets, we employ the archi-
tecture of CNN used in (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014). For
a fair comparison, we separate the network at the hidden
layer from which (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014) constructed
discriminator networks. Therefore, when considering one
classiﬁer, for example, F1 ◦F, the architecture is identi-
cal to previous work. We also follow (Ganin & Lempitsky,
2014) in the other protocols. We set the threshold value for
the labeling method as 0.95 in MNIST→SVHN. In other
scenarios, we set it as 0.9. We use MomentumSGD for op-
timization and set the momentum as 0.9, while the learn-
ing rate is determined on validation splits and uses either
[0.01, 0.05]. λ is set 0.01 in all scenarios. In our Supple-
mentary material, we provide details of the network archi-
tecture and hyper-parameters.
For experiments on the Amazon Reviews dataset, we use
a similar architecture to that used in (Ganin et al., 2016):
with sigmoid activated, one dense hidden layer with 50 hid-
den units, and softmax output. We extend the architecture
to our method similarly in the architecture of CNN. λ is set
as 0.001 based on the validation. Since the input is sparse,
we use Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011) for optimization. We
repeat this evaluation 10 times and report mean accuracy.
5.2. Experimental Result
In Tables 1 and 3, we show the main results of the experi-
ments. When training only on source samples, the effect of
the BN is not clear as in Tables 1. However, in all image
recognition experiments, the effect of BN in our method is
clear; at the same time, the effect of our method is also clear
when we do not use BN in the network architecture. The ef-
fect of the weight constraint is obvious in MNIST→SVHN.

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
SOURCE
MNIST
SVHN
MNIST
SYN DIGITS
SYN SIGNS
METHOD
TARGET
MNIST-M
MNIST
SVHN
SVHN
GTSRB
Source Only w/o BN
59.1(56.6)
68.1(59.2)
37.2(30.5)
84.1(86.7)
79.2(79.0)
Source Only with BN
57.1
70.1
34.9
85.5
75.7
MMD (Long et al., 2015b)
76.9
71.1
-
88.0
91.1
DANN (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014)
81.5
71.1
35.7
90.3
88.7
DRCN (Ghifary et al., 2016)
-
82.0
40.1
-
-
DSN (Bousmalis et al., 2016)
83.2
82.7
-
91.2
93.1
kNN-Ad (Sener et al., 2016)
86.7
78.8
40.3
-
-
Ours w/o BN
85.3
79.8
39.8
93.1
96.2
Ours w/o weight constraint (λ = 0)
94.2
86.2
49.7
92.4
94.0
Ours
94.0
85.0
52.8
92.9
96.2
Table 1. Results of the visual domain adaptation experiment on digits and trafﬁc signs dataset. In every setting, our method outperforms
other method by a large margin. In source only results, we show the results reported in (Bousmalis et al., 2016) and (Ghifary et al., 2016)
in parentheses.
MNIST→MNIST-M: last pooling layer
(a) Non-adapted
(b) Adapted
MNIST→SVHN: last shared hidden layer
(c) Non-adapted
(d) Adapted
Figure 3. We conﬁrm the effect our method by visualization of the learned representations by using t-distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE) (Maaten & Hinton, 2008). Red points are target samples and blue points are source samples. The samples are all
from testing samples. (a), (c) The case where we only use source samples for training. (b), (d) The case of adaptation by our method.
In both scenarios, MNIST→SVHN and MNIST→MNIST-M, we can see that the target samples are more dispersed through adaptation.
MNIST→MNIST-M First, we evaluate the adaptation sce-
nario between the hand-written digits dataset MNIST and
its transformed dataset MNIST-M. MNIST-M is composed
by merging the clip of the background from BSDS500
datasets (Arbelaez et al., 2011). A patch is randomly taken
from the images in BSDS500, merged to MNIST digits.
Even with this simple domain shift, the adaptation perfor-
mance of CNN is much worse than the case where it was
trained on target samples. From 59,001 target training sam-
ples, we randomly select 1,000 labeled target samples as a
validation split and tuned hyper-parameters.
Our method outperforms the other existing method by
about 7%. Visualization of features in the last pooling layer
is shown in Fig. 3(a)(b). We can observe that the red target
samples are more dispersed when adaptation is achieved.
We show the comparison of the accuracy between the ac-
tual labeling accuracy on target samples during training and
the test accuracy in Fig. 4. The test accuracy is very low at
ﬁrst, but as the steps increase, the accuracy becomes closer
to that of the labeling accuracy. In this adaptation, we can
clearly see that the actual labeling accuracy gradually im-
proves with the accuracy of the network.
SVHN↔MNIST We increase the gap between distribu-
tions in this experiment. We evaluate adaptation between
SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011) and MNIST in a ten-class clas-
siﬁcation problem. SVHN and MNIST have distinct ap-
pearance, thus this adaptation is a challenging scenario es-
pecially in MNIST→SVHN. SVHN is colored and some
images contain multiple digits.
Therefore, a classiﬁer
trained on SVHN is expected to perform well on MNIST,
but the reverse is not true. MNIST does not include any
samples containing multiple digits and most samples are

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Accuracy
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of samples
!10 4
Accuracy of labeling method
Accuracy of learned network
Number of labeled samples
(a) MNIST→MNIST-M
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Accuracy
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of samples
!10 4
Accuracy of labeling method
Accuracy of learned network
Number of labeled samples
(b) SVHN→MNIST
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Accuracy
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of samples
!10 4
Accuracy of labeling method
Accuracy of learned network
Number of labeled samples
(c) MNIST→SVHN
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
Accuracy
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of samples
!10 4
Accuracy of labeling method
Accuracy of learned network
Number of labeled samples
(d) SYNDIGITS→SVHN
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Accuracy
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of samples
!10 4
Accuracy of labeling method
Accuracy of learned network
Number of labeled samples
(e) SYNSIGNS→GTSRB
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of steps
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Accuracy
Accuracy of Target Network
Accuracy of Network1
Accuracy of Network2
(f) Comparision of accuracy of three net-
work on SVHN→MNIST
(g) A-distance in MNIST→MNIST-
M
Figure 4. (a) ∼(e): Comparison of the actual accuracy of pseudo-labels and learned network accuracy during training. The blue curve
is the pseudo-label accuracy and the red curve is the learned network accuracy. Note that the labeling accuracy is computed using (the
number of correctly labeled samples)/(the number of labeled samples). The green curve is the number of labeled target samples in
each step. (f): Comparison of the accuracy of three networks in our model. Three networks almost simultaneously improve accuracy.
(g): Comparison of the A-distance of different methods. Our model slightly reduced the divergence of the domain compared with
source-only trained CNN.
centered in images, thus adaptation from MNIST to SVHN
is rather difﬁcult. In both settings, we use 1,000 labeled
target samples to ﬁnd the optimal hyperparameters.
We evaluate our method on both adaptation scenarios and
achieved state-of-the-art performance on both datasets. In
particular, for the adaptation MNIST→SVHN, we outper-
formed other methods by more than 10%. In Fig. 3(c)(d),
we visualize the representations in MNIST→SVHN. Al-
though the distributions seem to be separated between do-
mains, the red SVHN samples become more discrimina-
tive using our method compared with non-adapted embed-
ding. We also show the comparison between actual label-
ing method accuracy and testing accuracy in Fig. 4(b)(c).
In this ﬁgure, we can see that the labeling accuracy rapidly
drops in the initial adaptation stage. On the other hand,
testing accuracy continues to improve, and ﬁnally exceeds
the labeling accuracy. There are two questions about this
interesting phenomenon. The ﬁrst question is why does the
labeling method continue to decrease despite the increase
in the test accuracy? Target samples given pseudo-labels
always include mistakenly labeled samples whereas those
given no labels are ignored in our method. Therefore, the
error will be reinforced in the target samples that are in-
cluded in training set. The second question is why does the
test accuracy continue to increase despite the lower label-
ing accuracy? The assumed reasons are that the network al-
ready acquires target discriminative representations in this
phase and they can improve the accuracy using source sam-
ples and correctly labeled target samples.
In Fig. 4(f), we also show the comparison of accuracy of
the three networks F1, F2, Ft in SVHN→MNIST. The ac-
curacy of three networks is nearly the same in every step.
The same thing is observed in other scenarios. From this
result, we can state that the target-discriminative represen-
tations are shared in all three networks.
SYN DIGITS→SVHN In this experiment, we aimed to
address a common adaptation scenario from synthetic im-
ages to real images.
The datasets of synthetic num-
bers (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014) consist of 500,000 images
generated from Windows fonts by varying the text, posi-
tioning, orientation, background and stroke colors, and the
amount of blur. We use 479,400 source samples and 73,257
target samples for training, and 26,032 target samples for
testing. We use 1,000 SVHN samples as a validation set.
Our method also outperforms other methods in this experi-
ment. In this experiment, the effect of BN is not clear com-
pared with other scenarios. The domain gap is considered
small in this scenario as the performance of the source-only
classiﬁer shows. In Fig. 4(d), although the labeling ac-
curacy is dropping, the accuracy of the learned network’s
prediction is improving as in MNIST↔SVHN.
SYN SIGNS→GTSRB This setting is similar to the pre-

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Gradient stop branch
Ft
F1, F2
None
MNIST→MNIST-M
56.4
95.4
94.0
MNIST→SVHN
47.7
47.5
52.8
SYN SIGNS→GTRB
96.5
93.1
96.2
Table 2. Results of Gradient stop experiment. When stopping gra-
dients from Ft, we do not use backward gradients from Ft to F,
and F learns only from F1, F2. When stopping gradients from
F1, F2, we do not use backward gradients from F1, F2 to F, and
F learns from Ft. None denotes our proposed method, we back-
ward all gradients from all branches to F. In these three adapta-
tion scenarios, our method shows stable performance.
vious setting, adaptation from synthetic images to real im-
ages, but we have a larger number of classes, namely 43
classes instead of 10.
We use the SYN SIGNS dataset
(Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014) for the source dataset and
the GTSRB dataset (Stallkamp et al., 2011) for the target
dataset, which consist of real trafﬁc sign images. We se-
lect randomly 31,367 samples for target training samples
and evaluate accuracy on the rest of the samples. A total of
3,000 labeled target samples are used for validation.
In this scenario, our method outperforms other methods.
This result shows that our method is effective for the adap-
tation from synthesized images to real images, which have
diverse classes.
In Fig.
4(e), the same tendency as in
MNIST↔SVHN is observed in this adaptation scenario.
Gradient Stop Experiment We evaluate the effect of the
target-speciﬁc network in our method. We stop the gradient
from upper layer networks F1, F2, and Ft to examine the
effect of Ft. Table 2 shows three scenarios including the
case where we stop the gradient from F1, F2, and Ft. In all
scenarios, when we backward all gradients from F1, F2, Ft,
we obtain clear performance improvements.
In the experiment MNIST→MNIST-M, we can assume that
only the backpropagation from F1, F2 cannot construct dis-
criminative representations for target samples and conﬁrm
the effect of Ft. For the adaptation MNIST→SVHN, the
best performance is realized when F receives all gradients
from upper networks. Backwarding all gradients will en-
sure both target-speciﬁc discriminative representations in
difﬁcult adaptations. In SYN SIGNS→GTSRB, backward-
ing only from Ft produces the worst performance because
these domains are similar and noisy pseudo-labeled target
samples worsen the performance.
A-distance
From
the
theoretical
results
in
(Ben-David et al., 2010),
A-distance is usually used
as a measure of domain discrepancy.
The way of es-
timating empirical A-distance is simple, in which we
train a classiﬁer to classify a domain from each domains’
feature.
Then, the approximate distance is calculated
Source→Target
VFAE
DANN
Our method
books→dvd
79.9
78.4
80.7
books→electronics
79.2
73.3
79.8
books→kitchen
81.6
77.9
82.5
dvd→books
75.5
72.3
73.2
dvd→electronics
78.6
75.4
77.0
dvd→kitchen
82.2
78.3
82.5
electronics→books
72.7
71.1
73.2
electronics→dvd
76.5
73.8
72.9
electronics→kitchen
85.0
85.4
86.9
kitchen→books
72.0
70.9
72.5
kitchen→dvd
73.3
74.0
74.9
kitchen→electronics
83.8
84.3
84.6
Table 3. Amazon Reviews experimental results.
The accuracy
(%) of the proposed method is shown with the result of VFAE
(Louizos et al., 2015) and DANN (Ganin et al., 2016).
as ˆdA = 2(1 −2ǫ), where ǫ is the generalization error
of the classiﬁer. In Fig. 4(g), we show the A-distance
calculated from each CNN features. We used linear SVM
to calculate the distance. From this graph, we can see that
our method certainly reduces the A-distance compared
with the CNN trained on only source samples. In addition,
when comparing DANN and our method, although DANN
reduces A-distance much more than our method, our
method shows superior performance. This indicates that
minimizing the domain discrepancy is not necessarily an
appropriate way to achieve better performance.
Amazon Reviews Reviews are encoded in 5,000 dimen-
sional vectors of bag-of-words unigrams and bigrams with
binary labels. Negative labels are attached to the samples
if they are ranked with 1–3 stars. Positive labels are at-
tached if they are ranked with 4 or 5 stars. We have 2,000
labeled source samples and 2,000 unlabeled target samples
for training, and between 3,000 and 6,000 samples for test-
ing. We use 200 of labeled target samples for validation.
From the results in Table 3, our method performs better
than VFAE (Louizos et al., 2015) and DANN (Ganin et al.,
2016) in nine settings out of twelve. Our method is effec-
tive in learning a shallow network on different domains.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel asymmetric
tri-training method for unsupervised domain adaptation,
which is simply implemented.
We aimed to learn dis-
criminative representations by utilizing pseudo-labels as-
signed to unlabeled target samples. We utilized three clas-
siﬁers, two networks assign pseudo-labels to unlabeled tar-
get samples and the remaining network learns from them.

Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
We evaluated our method both on domain adaptation on a
visual recognition task and a sentiment analysis task, out-
performing other methods. In particular, our method out-
performed the other methods by more than 10% in the
MNIST→SVHN adaptation task.
7. Acknowledgement
This work was funded by ImPACT Program of Council for
Science, Technology and Innovation (Cabinet Ofﬁce, Gov-
ernment of Japan) and supported by CREST, JST.
