JOURNAL OF COMPUTING, VOLUME 2, ISSUE 6, JUNE 2010, ISSN 2151-9617 
HTTPS://SITES.GOOGLE.COM/SITE/JOURNALOFCOMPUTING/ 
WWW.JOURNALOFCOMPUTING.ORG 
66 
 
Human Disease Diagnosis Using a Fuzzy 
Expert System 
Mir Anamul Hasan, Khaja Md. Sher-E-Alam and Ahsan Raja Chowdhury 
Abstract—Human disease diagnosis is a complicated process and requires high level of expertise. Any attempt of developing a 
web-based expert system dealing with human disease diagnosis has to overcome various difficulties. This paper describes a 
project work aiming to develop a web-based fuzzy expert system for diagnosing human diseases. Now a days fuzzy systems 
are being used successfully in an increasing number of application areas; they use linguistic rules to describe systems. This 
research project focuses on the research and development of a web-based clinical tool designed to improve the quality of the 
exchange of health information between health care professionals and patients. Practitioners can also use this web-based tool 
to corroborate diagnosis. The proposed system is experimented on various scenarios in order to evaluate it’s performance. In all 
the cases, proposed system exhibits satisfactory results. 
Index Terms— Expert System, Fuzzy Expert System, Online Diagnosis System, Human Disease Diagnosis, Knowledge based 
System, knowledge based Fuzzy Expert System.  
——————————      —————————— 
1 INTRODUCTION
NLINE diagnosis is becoming popular day by day. 
In today's world people are so busy, that they hard-
ly have enough time to visit a doctor. So they can 
use the service of this online diagnosis system residing 
home or office and have an idea about the disease. After 
that they can consult the specialist doctor if it is necessary 
or serious. This research presents a novel method for on-
line diagnosis. In this method, based on the selection of 
the problem area/ problem, the expert system gives some 
symptom from which the user needs to select symptoms. 
Based on the selection of symptoms, the user is again 
asked some questions. According to the answer selection, 
the fuzzy expert system diagnosis diseases based on it's 
knowledge, add catalyst factor (if any), do ranking and 
gives the result in fuzzy form. As fuzzy expert system 
deals with uncertainty and vague terms, it is generously 
accepted in different sphere of life [1].  
Rest of the paper is organized as follows- Section 2 high-
lights the background study. Proposed System is pre-
sented in Section 3 and evaluation of the proposed system 
is shown in Section 4. Chapter 5 concludes the paper. 
2 BACKGROUND STUDY 
Knowledge is a theoretical or practical understanding of a 
subject or a domain. In other words, Knowledge is the 
sum of what is currently known [2]. Diagnosis system is a 
system which can diagnose diseases through checking out 
the symptoms. A knowledge based online diagnosis sys-
tem is developed for diagnosis of diseases based on the 
knowledge given by doctors in the system. 
      A computer Program Capable of performing at a hu-
man-expert level in a narrow problem domain area is 
called an expert system [2]. Management of uncertainty is 
an intrinsically important issue in the design of expert 
systems because much of the information in the know-
ledge base of a typical expert system is imprecise, incom-
plete or not totally reliable [3]. 
      An expert system that uses fuzzy logic instead of Boo-
lean logic is known as Fuzzy expert system.  
      A fuzzy expert system is a collection of fuzzy rules 
and membership functions that are used to reason about 
data. Using fuzzy expert system expert knowledge can be 
represented that use vague and ambiguous terms in com-
puter. 
      Fuzzy logic is a set of mathematical principles for 
knowledge representation based on degrees of member-
ship rather than the crisp membership of classical binary 
logic. Unlike two-valued Boolean logic, fuzzy logic is 
multi valued. Fuzzy logic is a logic that describes fuzzi-
ness. As fuzzy logic attempts to model human's sense of 
words, decision making and common sense, it is leading 
to more human intelligent machines [4]. 
      Fuzzy logic was introduced in the 1930 by Jan Luka-
siewicz; a Polish Philosopher (extended the truth values 
between 0 to 1). Later, 1937 Max Black defines first sam-
ple fuzzy set. In 1965, Lotfi Zadeh rediscovered fuzziness, 
identified and explored it [2]. 
      The National Research Council, Canada has devel-
oped an online diagnosis system. Initially, they used 
acute leukaemia disease data to illustrate the efficacy of 
the diagnostic tool. More recently, they developed a new 
fuzzy classification method called PROAFTN [5] to assist 
medical diagnosis. Results obtained using the PROAFTN 
method on acute leukaemia diagnosis are promising. The 
challenge herein is to provide secure, remote access, to 
———————————————— 
 Mir Anamul Hasan is with the Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
(CSE), University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 Khaja Md. Sher‐E‐Alam is with the Dept. of CSE., University of Dhaka, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 Ahsan  Raja  Chowdhury  is  with  the  Dept.  of  CSE,  University  of  Dhaka, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 
 
O

JOURNAL OF COMPUTING, VOLUME 2, ISSUE 6, JUNE 2010, ISSN 2151-9617 
HTTPS://SITES.GOOGLE.COM/SITE/JOURNALOFCOMPUTING/ 
WWW.JOURNALOFCOMPUTING.ORG 
67 
 
decision support tools and a standard framework for the 
exchange of health information, over inexpensive Internet 
communication pathways using web-based technolo-
gies.Informantion related to this can be found from the 
website of National Research Council Canada [5]. 
      YourDiagnosis [6] is developed by an expert panel of 
very experienced doctors in Australia. They are part of a 
large medical and hospital group called Macquarie 
Health Corporation Ltd. Macquarie Health Corporation 
Ltd. also owns Macquarie Hospital Services and Macqua-
rie Medical Systems. Macquarie Hospital Services has 
owned and operated private hospitals since 1976. 
      Easy Diagnosis [7] is a online diagnosis system. This 
expert system software provides a list and clinical de-
scription of the most likely conditions based on an analy-
sis of patient's particular symptoms. EasyDiagnosis fo-
cuses on the most common medical complaints that ac-
count for the majority of physician visits and hospitaliza-
tions. 
      Wrong Diagnosis [8] which is part of Health Grades 
network and WebMD [9] whose slogan is “Better Infor-
mation, Better Health" are another two efficient online 
diagnosis tools. 
      There are many online diagnosis tool in the web, but 
proposed system is the most user friendly (easy to use), 
precise, at the same time accurate. In the web, some sys-
tems are so boring -needs to give lots of information, give 
answers to lots of question which is quite monotonous. In 
most of the other online diagnosis websites, the sequence 
of questions is fixed. 
       But in the proposed system one needs to give minim-
al information, questions will be asked after filtering at 
every step based on your responses and at every step the 
problem domain will become narrower to reach a perfect 
diagnosis. 
 
3 PROPOSED FUZZY EXPERT SYSTEM FOR HUMAN 
DISEASE DIAGNOSIS 
Different diagnosis strategies have been studied. Differ-
ent e-health websites have been browsed. Papers and ar-
ticles on e-health management have been read and differ-
ent diagnosis tools have been used. Noted down impor-
tant information like which information they are collect-
ing from the user/ patients and which approach they are 
following in diagnosis. 
Then information (symptom, signs etc.) of different dis-
eases have been collected for particular category as sam-
ple [8, 9, 10]. Made a comparative analysis to identify 
which symptoms are major symptoms for particular dis-
eases i.e. that symptom must be present, their acuity level 
etc. 
Then met with few doctors with different level of exper-
tise in their field. Asked them about those diseases and 
their symptoms, which factors they consider while they 
diagnosis diseases, what approach they follow.  
After studying and making a comparative analysis of 
what is gotten by consulting with different doctors about 
which factors they consider while they diagnosis diseases, 
what approach they follow, it is found that they are al-
most same. Then a uniform structure is made and a ma-
thematical equivalence (equation (3.1)) is formed, which 
will be used to diagnosis by the fuzzy expert system.  
After that implementation of the expert system is done 
and tested it thoroughly to check whether the desired 
result is coming or not. After necessary corrections, when 
it seems ok with respect to the desired goal, then con-
sulted with the doctors again and explained about the 
software implementation and showed it to them and they 
acknowledged it, gave some suggestions(to add catalyst 
factor which is some sort of personal information/ pa-
tient’s history information), according to which the sys-
tem is revised. 
Probability of diseases is measured using equation (3.1) 
whose value depends on the user feedback while diag-
nosing. 
Probabilitydisease =                                                                                     
 
...……....    (3.1)      
where- 
 
i,j= counter of different symptoms 
Si = is ith symptom selected or not 
Wi = weight of ith symptom 
(Smajor)j = jth major symptom which is not selected by the 
user 
(Wmajor)j = weight of jth major symptom 
Maxth = maximum threshold of disease 
Minth = minimum threshold of disease 
∑SiWi = total weight of a disease based on the selected 
symptom 
∑(Smajor)j(Wmajor)j = total weight of unselected major symp-
toms of a disease 
Cf = catalyst factor based on patient's history/personal 
information 
 
The proposed expert system assist user to diagnosis dis-
eases, he/she might have, in a fuzzy way. Based on the 
selection of the problem area/problem, the expert system 
gives some symptom from which the user needs to select 
symptoms, based on the selection of symptoms the user is 
asked some questions, according to the answer selection 
the fuzzy expert system diagnosis diseases based on it's 
knowledge, add catalyst factor (if any) and do ranking 
and gives result in fuzzy form. 
Fig. 1. represents the flow diagram of the proposed sys-
tem.  
 
Maxth - Minth 
(ΣSi*Wi - Σ(Smajor)j(Wmax)j) - Minth 
+ 
ΣCf
100 %
*

JOURNAL OF COMPUTING, VOLUME 2, ISSUE 6, JUNE 2010, ISSN 2151-9617 
HTTPS://SITES.GOOGLE.COM/SITE/JOURNALOFCOMPUTING/ 
WWW.JOURNALOFCOMPUTING.ORG  
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
A computer Program Capable of performing at a human-
expert level in a narrow problem domain area is called an 
expert system [1]. Basic characteristics of expert systems 
are [1]: 
 
Use knowledge rather than data 
 
Knowledge is encoded & maintained as an entity 
separate from the control program 
 
Capable of explaining how a particular conclu-
sion is reached and why requested information is 
needed 
 
Use symbolic representation and perform infe-
rence through symbolic computation 
 
Now if the characteristics of the proposed system are ob-
served, it is seen that, it performs in a narrow problem 
domain area (only diagnosis diseases) at a human expert 
level (like doctors). It uses knowledge to make diagnosis 
decision; the knowledge is given by some expert doctors. 
It can also explain how a particular decision made, that is 
why the  proposed  system is an expert system.  As it is  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using knowledge base in making decision, so it is also 
knowledge based expert system. The proposed know-
ledge base online diagnosis system also corresponds to 
fuzzy expert system as it simulates the fuzzy inference-
process which is depicted in Fig. 2.  
 
Let the user select chest as his/her problem area. Assume 
there are 3 diseases under category chest-Pneumonia, 
Bronchitis and Asthma. Then all the symptoms under 
chest category will be shown to the user by the expert 
system which are given in column one of Table 5.1. Then 
the user will select symptoms applicable to him/ her. Af-
ter that the user will need to answer some question given 
by the expert system on selected symptoms. Based on the 
given answer (presented inside parenthesis of column 
one of Table 1) and answer of history question (if any- 
suppose in this case, the user need to answer two history 
question, in this particular case the catalyst factor is 4 and 
they belongs to Asthma) which is termed as catalyst fac-
tor, the expert system computes the probabilities of prob-
able diseases and filter them before showing. The total 
diagnosis scenario is depicted in Table 1.  
 
Fig. 1. Flow Diagram of the Proposed System.

JOURNAL OF COMPUTING, VOLUME 2, ISSUE 6, JUNE 2010, ISSN 2151-9617 
HTTPS://SITES.GOOGLE.COM/SITE/JOURNALOFCOMPUTING/ 
WWW.JOURNALOFCOMPUTING.ORG 
69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1 
Units for Magentic Properties 
 
 
 
In case of Asthma: ∑SiWi=2.6, ∑ (Smajor)j(Wmajor)j = 0, 
Maxth=3.3, Minth=0.2 and Cf = 4 
According to the Equation 3.1, 
ProbabilityAsthma = 
            = 81.419% 
In case of Bronchitis:  ∑SiWi=2.6, ∑(Smajor)j(Wmajor)j = 0, 
Maxth=4.5, Minth=0.8 and Cf = 0 
According to the Equation 3.1, 
Prob.Bronchitis = 
 
 
 
 
       
                     =48.648% 
In case of Asthma: ∑SiWi=0.9, ∑(Smajor)j(Wmajor)j = 0, 
Maxth=3.6, Minth=0.4 and Cf = 0 
According to the Equation 3.1, 
Prob.Pneumonia  = 
 
 
 
 
        
         =15.625% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rule: 
IF  
    Probabilitydisease(temp) is Max AND 
    Catalyst Factors(Cf) are Present 
THEN        Probabilitydisease = Probabilitydisease(temp)+ Σ Cf  
ELSE         Probabilitydisease = Probabilitydisease(temp) 
      The following chart (Fig. 3) gives a quick overview of 
the confidence level of the proposed system with real 
time diagnosis. The bar on right for every disease indi-
cates the confidence level of our system without having 
observation on any pathological test results. And the bar 
on left shows the full confidence of diagnosis in real time 
with observing all necessary pathological tests. In our 
system the confidence level decreases with the increase of 
number of pathological tests needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Confidence level of the proposed system. 
+ 4
100 %
*
3.3-0.2 
2.6 - 0 – 0.2 
+ 0
100 %
*
4.5-0.2 
2.6 - 0 – 0.8 
+ 0
100 %
*
3.6-0.4 
0.9 - 0 – 0.4 
Fig. 2. Fuzziness of the proposed expert system.

JOURNAL OF COMPUTING, VOLUME 2, ISSUE 6, JUNE 2010, ISSN 2151-9617 
HTTPS://SITES.GOOGLE.COM/SITE/JOURNALOFCOMPUTING/ 
WWW.JOURNALOFCOMPUTING.ORG  
70
 
4 CONCLUSION 
E‐applications  play  a  dominant  role  in  the  realm  of 
overwhelming  Internet  technology.  Knowledge  based 
applications are the features of latest online technolo‐
gy.  Proposed  knowledge  based  online  diagnosis  sys‐
tem  can  play  a  vital  role  for  the  users  of  the  system. 
The  system  facilitates  the  users  to  determine  his/  her 
probable diseases very quickly with the aid of a know‐
ledge based expert system. As the knowledge base is 
created based on the feedback from expert and special‐
ist doctors, users can also rely on it. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to 
Prof. Dr. Md. Hasanuzzaman, Dr. Abdur Rahman, Dr. 
Hasibul Hasan Parag and Dr. Salauddin Ahmed for their 
collaboration.
