Explaining Imitation Learning through Frames
Boyuan Zheng1 , Jianlong Zhou1 , Chunjie Liu , Yiqiao Li1 and Fang Chen1
1University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
As one of the prevalent methods to achieve au-
tomation systems, Imitation Learning (IL) presents
a promising performance in a wide range of do-
mains. However, despite the considerable improve-
ment in policy performance, the corresponding re-
search on the explainability of IL models is still
limited. Inspired by the recent approaches in ex-
plainable artiﬁcial intelligence methods, we pro-
posed a model-agnostic explaining framework for
IL models called R2RISE. R2RISE aims to explain
the overall policy performance with respect to the
frames in demonstrations. It iteratively retrains the
black-box IL model from the randomized masked
demonstrations and uses the conventional evalua-
tion outcome environment returns as the coefﬁcient
to build an importance map. We also conducted ex-
periments to investigate three major questions con-
cerning frames’ importance equality, the effective-
ness of the importance map, and connections be-
tween importance maps from different IL models.
The result shows that R2RISE successfully distin-
guishes important frames from the demonstrations.
1
Introduction
Recent advances in Imitation Learning (IL), which leverages
external demonstration to reproduce the desired behaviours,
demonstrate a promising performance in ﬁelds like 3D game-
play [Scheller et al., 2020], robotics [Yu et al., 2018], and au-
tomatic driving [Codevilla et al., 2019]. Most of the research
on IL keep applying more complex Deep Neural Network
(DNN) models, such as convolutional neural network (CNN)
and generative adversarial network (GAN), to achieve greater
performance under various condition while paying less atten-
tion to explaining what information the trained agents learned
from the external demonstration. In this case, despite the suc-
cess, IL methods are becoming increasingly unexplainable,
and this problem remains an open challenge in both IL and
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI).
Currently, the number of existing research that combines
XAI and IL is still limited, and they could be roughly catego-
rized into two approaches to achieve better explainability, i.e.,
leveraging white-box models and analyzing the pixel-wise
explainability via existing computer vision techniques. As
for leveraging white-box models, most existing research sub-
stitutes the prevalent neural network architecture with other
white-box models with intrinsic interpretability. For example,
Leech [2019] proposed a learning framework that aggregates
IL and logical automata to represent problems as compact ﬁ-
nite state automata with human-interpretable logic states. Be-
wley et al. [2020] modelled the behaviour policy of a trained
black-box agent in the form of a decision tree by analyzing
its input-output statistics. Zhang et al. [2021] leveraged a hi-
erarchical structure to explain the model’s decision-making.
On the other hand, the research related to analyzing the pixel-
wise explainability aims at the CNN structures in IL models
that are widely used to capture features from image input.
Referring to existing research in XAI and computer vision,
the explainability of the model is commonly represented as
heatmaps and analyzing the model’s decision-making process
from the heatmaps. For example, Pan et al. [2020] proposed
a model-speciﬁc method called xGAIL that is based on Gen-
erative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) [Ho and Er-
mon, 2016] and obtains local and global explanations for the
passenger-seeking problem.
In fact, before xGAIL was proposed, the research commu-
nity of IL investigated features in image inputs, but they did
not highlight the signiﬁcance of explainability. For example,
Brown et al. [2019] used attention maps of the input image
frames to validate the effectiveness of the learning process.
De Haan et al.
[2019a] pointed out that the IL agent could
learn wrong causal correlations between expert behaviours
and irrelevant features in the input. These methods, including
xGAIL, demonstrate what features in a single frame are sig-
niﬁcant for models to learn the desired behaviours. However,
the above-mentioned methods fail to evaluate the importance
of frames. Do the input image frames have identical impor-
tance? If not, how to distinguish frames’ importance?
To tackle these problems, we attempt to explain the in-
put demonstrations as a whole by proposing a novel explain-
ing method called R2RISE, which iteratively masks random
frames in the demonstrations and evaluates the performance
of the agents trained by the masked inputs. The intuition is
that the input demonstrations are regarded as a single im-
age, and frames in the demonstrations are regarded as pix-
els. In this case, existing XAI and computer vision meth-
ods could be directly applied to investigate the importance of
arXiv:2301.01088v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2023

Figure 1: A diagrammatic representation of a single iteration of R2RISE. The input demonstrations are subject to element-wise multiplication
(denotes as J) with a random mask which creates a masked demonstration, with greyed frames indicating those which are masked. Sub-
sequently, the masked demonstration is used to train a black box IL model. The trained model interacts with the test environment to obtain
returns, the mean of which is element-wise multiplied with the initial mask and accumulated to the existing importance map.
frames instead of features in a single frame. R2RISE com-
bines the existing methods RISE [Petsiuk et al., 2018] and
ROAR [Hooker et al., 2019], and achieves model-agnostic
explanations for IL models with various architectures.
Our main contribution is summarized as follows: 1) We
proposed a model-agnostic method to explain IL models; 2)
We extended a novel perspective to explain IL with respect
to the whole input dataset instead of a speciﬁc frame; 3) We
investigated the connection between agents’ overall perfor-
mance and demonstration frames;
2
Preliminaries
To better illustrate our approach, we ﬁrst introduce the related
existing literature in the ﬁeld of XAI: RISE [Petsiuk et al.,
2018] and ROAR [Hooker et al., 2019]. We then review an
insightful method xGAIL [Pan et al., 2020] that aggregates
XAI with speciﬁc IL model GAIL [Ho and Ermon, 2016],
and discuss its limitations.
2.1
Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation
(RISE)
Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation (RISE) is one
of the state-of-the-art XAI methods proposed by Petsiuk et
al.
[2018] that explains black-box models. The attractive
characteristics of RISE are its simplicity and generality. Un-
like other popular XAI approaches, which calculate the gra-
dient of image classiﬁcation outputs, RISE probes the target
model by randomly masking the input image and recording
the probability result with respect to the target class. This
process is repeated multiple times, and the recorded proba-
bilities for each pixel are linearly combined to generate an
importance map. This allows for the extraction of the most
inﬂuential region in the input image for the target decision.
RISE is also signiﬁcant for explaining IL, as IL typically re-
quires multiple demonstrations to train the model, which can
be regarded as a single image. In this case, RISE can be used
to explain which frames are important for policy training.
2.2
RemOve And Retrain (ROAR)
RemOve And Retrain (ROAR) was proposed by Hooker et al.
[2019], and its name concisely summarizes the working pro-
cess of ROAR. By substituting some pixels estimated to be
important with ﬁxed uninformative values and then retrain-
ing a new model, ROAR achieves to evaluate feature impor-
tance for a wide range of models. The motivation of ROAR
is that if the model demonstrates more sharp degradation in
performance because of the removal, then we could conclude
the proposed model is more accurate. The authors also ar-
gued that the retraining process is essential as machine learn-
ing models commonly assume that the training and test dis-
tribution is similar, and repeating the training several times
could ensure a low variance in performance. The intuition of
ROAR is valuable for explaining IL models, as training a sin-
gle model to determine the importance of frames is risky, and
the research community commonly uses ensemble methods to
deal with the distribution shift. Retraining serval models un-
der the same removal rate could improve the reliability of the
importance along the demonstration trajectories. More im-
portantly, since the conventional evaluation of IL problems
is different from the classical CNN-involved XAI tasks, the
performance of the trained IL model is represented as returns
from the dynamic environment. It is improper to train the
model once and feed image observations with ﬁxed masks
under such an environment.
2.3
Explainable Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (xGAIL)
Pan et al.
[2020] made the ﬁrst attempt to explain one of
the state-of-the-art models Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) [Ho and Ermon, 2016], and validated their
method xGAIL on a passenger seeking problem. xGAIL was
designed for problems that rely on spatial-temporal data, and
both local and global explanations were obtained separately
from a well-trained GAIL model. However, xGAIL’s gen-
erality is severely limited to a speciﬁc problem and model.
In addition, xGAIL, in fact, transforms the IL problem into

an image classiﬁcation problem by extracting and analyzing
limited frames from abundant inputs. This could cause the ab-
sence of an overall explanation for the model’s performance
and generate explanations with bias as most of the informa-
tion in the demonstration was ﬁltered by the frame extraction
process.
3
R2RISE
To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, we proposed
a model-agnostic explanation method for imitation learning
called R2RISE. R2RISE combines the merits of RISE and
ROAR, and investigates the frames’ importance with respect
to the policy’s overall performance.
We ﬁrst review how RISE formulates the problem and
distinguishes pixels’ importance for the image classiﬁcation
problem.
For a given image I with the size of H × W,
RISE creates a random binary mask m with the same size
of I, and does an element-wise multiplication between im-
age I and mask m (denoted as I J m). The masked image
then feeds into the black-box model (denoted as f(I J m)).
The importance of pixels is deﬁned as the expected score
over all possible masks M = {m0, m1, ..., mi} conditioned
on the event that pixel is observed (denoted as M(λ) = 1,
if the pixel is masked, then M(λ) = 0), i.e. SI,f(λ) =
EM[f(I J m)|M(λ) = 1]. By rewriting the above equa-
tion as a summation over mask m and empirically estimating
it using Monte Carlo sampling, the saliency map can be com-
puted as a weighted sum of random masks and normalized by
the expectation of M:
SI,f(λ) ≈
1
E[M] · N
N
X
i=1
f(I
K
mi) · mi(λ).
(1)
Since RISE does not need any assumptions and informa-
tion from the target model, RISE could be used to explain
black-box models. The intuition behind RISE is that when
f(I J m) is high, it indicates that the mask observes impor-
tant pixels. With similar intuition, Hooker et al. [2019] pro-
posed ROAR to evaluate a feature importance. An ordered set
of feature importance is estimated, and then they replace the
top l fraction of the ordered set with the corresponding chan-
nel mean, where l is the pre-deﬁned percentage of degrada-
tion level l = [0, 10, ..., 100]. The major difference between
RISE and ROAR is that ROAR retrains the model on the re-
placed dataset, while RISE only trains the model once.
Like most imitation learning methods, we assume the test-
ing data has a similar distribution as training data, and the
input demonstrations Dn are optimal. This could ensure eval-
uation fairness for a wide range of IL models. The demonstra-
tions Dn consist of multiple trajectories, and each trajectory
could be represented as either a sequence of state-action pairs
or observations. In this work, we represent the trajectory as
a sequence of state-action pairs, i.e. Dn = {τ1, τ2, ..., τn},
where τi∈[1,n] = {(s1, a1), (s2, a2), ..., (st, at)}. The black-
box imitation learning model trains a policy (denoted as
πDn(a|s)) on the input demonstrations Dn, then interacts
with the environment and obtains returns R from the test-
ing environment. For the ﬁnite horizon T, the expected return
could be represented as the accumulation of the return at each
time step, i.e.
R(πDn) = E[
T
X
t=0
rt|πDn].
(2)
The discussion we have so far motivated us to propose a
frame-wise explanation method for IL called R2RISE. By re-
garding the demonstrations D as a single image, where the
number of demonstrations is the image height H, and the
length of the demonstration is the image width T , we could
investigate the frame-wise importance based on the similar
intuition of RISE. However, RISE could not be directly ap-
plied to IL since applying a ﬁxed mask on a dynamic envi-
ronment frame by frame is unreasonable, and IL methods are
commonly evaluated by the interactions with the environment
instead of feeding the policy network with another dataset.
In this case, we aggregate ROAR with RISE and propose
R2RISE. It hypothesises that the importance of each frame
is not identical and iteratively removes random frames based
on the predeﬁned degradation level. The modiﬁed dataset
Dn = D J mi is used to retrain an IL model.
The re-
trained IL model then constantly interacts with the environ-
ment to obtain the accumulative return, and R2RISE ﬁnally
compute the linear combination of the returns to obtain the
saliency map (See Figure 1). Assuming the number of gener-
ated masks is N, and the return of each mask is the average
return from J rounds of interaction with the environment, the
computation of the saliency map is similar to equation (1).
To cater to the setting of IL, we substitute the f(I J m) in
equation (1) with equation (2):
SDn,f(λ) ≈
1
E[M] · N
N
X
i=1
R(πDi) · mi(λ)
(3)
=
1
E[M] · N
N
X
i=1
E[
T
X
t=0
rt|πDi] · mi(λ)
(4)
=
1
E[M] · N · J
N
X
i=1
J
X
j=0
T
X
t=0
rt · mi(λ)
(5)
where Di = D J mi, and
mi(λ) =
0,
if the pixel is masked,
1,
if the pixel is observed.
As the formula presented, R2RISE also does not require any
information from the IL models, such that R2RISE could be
used as a model-agnostic method to explain IL.
To evaluate the effectiveness of R2RISE, we test two di-
verse IL methods: Behavioural Cloning (BC) [Bain and Sam-
mut, 1999] and Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
(GAIL) [Ho and Ermon, 2016]. BC directly maps the states
to actions from the input demonstration, and the control pol-
icy is obtained via supervised learning; GAIL, on the other
hand, learns the policy through an iterative adversarial pro-
cess between the generator G and discriminator D, where G
is generating fake data distribution and D is differentiating
the fake data distribution with the given expert distribution

(a)
Importance
maps
generated
by
R2RISE.
(b) Important frames in BeamRider and Breakout.
Figure 2: Importance maps and the corresponding extracted sample frames that are recognized as important.
Algorithm 1 R2RISE
Input: demonstrations D, target IL model f
Parameter:
degradation level l, number of randomized
masks N
Output: an importance map SD,f
1: Initialize masks M based on degradation level l and num-
ber of randomized masks N.
2: Initialize blank importance map SI,f with the same
shape as D.
3: for mi in M do
4:
Randomly initializes the model f.
5:
Obtain masked demonstrations Dn = D J mi.
6:
Train model f with the masked demonstrations Dn
and obtain policy πDn.
7:
Evaluate policy πDn by interacting with environment
and obtain average return ¯R.
8:
Update importance map via element-wise addition,
SD,f ←SDn,f
L( ¯R J mi)
9: end for
10: return importance map SI,f
[Zheng et al., 2022]. The ways BC and GAIL learn the pol-
icy are far different, and we wish to validate the generality of
R2RISE from the diverse model selection.
4
Experiment
In this section, we conduct a series of experiments and ad-
dress the following questions: (1) Is the importance between
frames identical? (2) Can R2RISE distinguish the importance
between frames? (3) Are there connections between the im-
portance map obtained from different IL models?
4.1
Setup
We implement experiments with GPU NVIDIA Quadro RTX
5000, and two diverse IL models, BC and GAIL, are evalu-
ated on two OpenAI Gym Atari tasks: Breakout and Beam-
rider [Brockman et al., 2016].
Similar to recent IL methods, we leverage the proximal
policy optimization (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2017] algorithm
from the OpenAI baselines [Dhariwal et al., 2017], utiliz-
ing default parameters and reward function, to generate ex-
pert demonstrations.
The PPO training process is check-
pointed every 20 steps, and the observations with the size of
84 × 84 × 3 and actions between the PPO agents and the task
environment are recorded as ”trajectories.” These trajectories,
generated from checkpoint 1400, serve as expert demonstra-
tions. To avoid the “causal confusion” problem (models build
wrong causal relationships with irrelevant patterns) [De Haan
et al., 2019b] and ensure the fairness of our evaluation, we
mask the indicators (such as scoring broad) in frames and en-
sure the same demonstrations as input for different IL models.
Regarding the parameter setting, we generate 20 trajec-
tories with a ﬁxed length of 1000 for each IL model. Five
random seeds and ﬁve levels of percentage degradations l =
[10, 30, 50, 70, 90] are pre-deﬁned for evaluation. To assess
each given random seed and percentage degradation, we pro-
pose to retrain 100 models with 100 randomized masks. Each
mask contains 20*100 grids, which means that every single
trajectory is cut into 100 snippets, and each snippet assigns
the same importance to 10 frames. The retrained model is
tested from 20 trials, and the average return of the trials, mul-
tiplied element-wise with the random mask, is added to the
ﬁnal importance map.
4.2
Is the importance between frames identical?
Remember that we hypothesize that the importance of frames
is different, so we validate this hypothesis by applying sev-
eral randomized masks on the same demonstration and com-
paring the performance of the trained model. If the outcomes
present noticeable deviations, then it can be inferred that the
contribution between frames varies. To further this idea, we

Figure 3: Deviations in policy performance of 10 models trained by
10 different randomized masks.
divide each trajectory into ten segments of equal length and
randomly assign either a value of 0 or 1 to each segment.
Regions assigned 0 are removed, and then the preprocessed
demonstrations are used as input to train the relevant models.
This process iterates ten times, and we get Figure 3. Here, the
x-axis is the number of attempts, the y-axis is the environment
returns, and the error bars indicate the standard deviation of
the policy performance.
From Figure 3, we can observe the performances deviate
from model to model. The best model achieves far better per-
formance than the worst one, which indicates that the impor-
tance of frames is not identical. Similarly, the importance
maps generated by R2RISE also suggest disparities between
frames (see Figure 2a). The x-axis is the trajectory’s length,
the y-axis represents the trajectories, and the grayscale de-
notes the importance. The whiter the grid is, the more impor-
tant the grid is. Figure 2b shows the extracted frames that are
recognized as the most important components in the demon-
strations. For the task of BeamRider, models would put more
weight on destroying enemy ﬂights, whereas for the task of
Breakout, models pay more attention to the rebounding pro-
cess of the upper blocks, sidewalls, and paddle, which resem-
bles the strategy we might use for these games.
4.3
Can R2RISE distinguish the importance
between frames?
This section investigates the effectiveness of R2RISE. Ac-
cording to the abovementioned hypothesis validation, we ob-
tain a map indicating the importance of frames. However,
the quality of the generated maps needs to be properly eval-
uated. In this case, we use similar causal metrics in [Petsiuk
et al., 2018], insertion and deletion, where the availability of
the ’cause’ will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the model’s decision-
making and performance. Under the scenario of image clas-
siﬁcation tasks, deleting the causal pixels will lead to a sharp
drop in accuracy if the model gets well explained. In our
experiment, we leverage similar intuition and expect the re-
moval of the important frames would lead to a worse perfor-
(a) Policy performance changes in BeamRider.
(b) Policy performance changes in Breakout.
Figure 4: Validations of the effectiveness of R2RISE. The lines and
the error bars represent the mean performance and standard devi-
ation of the model trained from a certain percentage of the most
important (or least important) frames.
mance while limiting the amount of input data to be the same.
To achieve this, we transform the generated importance map
into a mask by setting up a threshold and replacing the map
with either 1s or 0s, depending on the threshold.
Figure 4 shows the changes in policy performance using
different percentages of the most important (or least impor-
tant) frames. The x-axis is the percentage of data used to
train the model, and the y-axis is the environment returns.
The solid lines are the average returns from 20 trials using
the same transformed mask and demonstrations, the error bar
is the standard deviation of the 20 trials. From Figure 4, we
can observe that the models trained with the most important
frames perform well when the input data is relatively lim-
ited for both tasks, which meets our expectations. For task
BeamRider (see Figure 4a), the model with important frames
always performs better than the model trained with the least
important frames. The performance deviation at the begin-
ning of the ﬁgure is relatively small, we think the reason is
that the model is more sensitive to the amount of data than to
the availability of the important frames. From the end of this
ﬁgure, it can be seen that the performance deviation increases,
which indicates that the missing top important frames signiﬁ-
cantly limit the upper bound of the model’s performance. For
task Breakout (see Figure 4b), it can be seen that the model
with important frames signiﬁcantly outperforms the model
without important frames until more than 60% of the total
demonstrations are fed. When more than 60% of the data is
given, the model’s performance starts to ﬂuctuate. We sus-
pect this is due to the fact that 50% of the initial input is
sufﬁcient to train the policy, and with more ordinary or re-

(a) Deviation between the importance maps in BeamRider.
(b) Deviation between the importance maps in Breakout.
Figure 5: Deviation between the importance maps of BC and GAIL.
dundant frames added to the dataset, the policy performance
is negatively inﬂuenced.
4.4
Are there connections between the importance
map obtained from different IL models?
In addition to exploring the explainability within a single IL
model, we also attempt to examine the connections between
IL models. In this section, we investigate the question: does
the importance map obtained by one model have connections
to another model? To this end, we propose two approaches to
explore intrinsic connections. The ﬁrst attempt directly com-
pares the importance maps by projecting the values into the
same range and calculating element-wise deviation (see Fig-
ure 5). The larger the deviation is, the whiter the output image
should be. From Figure 5, we can observe that most grids are
close to black, which indicates the assigned importance for
these grids are similar. The second attempt involves generat-
ing a mask from an importance map generated by one model
and applying that mask to the same demonstrations to train
another model. The underlying assumption is that if there
are connections between models’ importance maps, the im-
portant frames identiﬁed by one model should work well on
another model, leading to improved performance compared
to those without the frames. Figure 6 displays the average
returns of GAIL using three types of masks: the blue, orange
and grey lines correspond to models trained with masks ex-
tracted from the importance map obtained using BC, GAIL
and random, respectively. It can be seen in Figure 6 that
the model trained with BC’s mask demonstrates similar pol-
icy performance to the model trained with GAIL’s mask, and
both models outperform the model using a randomized mask
under the same training epoch.
This conﬁrms our expec-
tation that the importance frames recognized by BC could
also be employed to train model GAIL with considerable per-
formance. This could prove useful when the target model
is time-consuming, and one could use a more time-efﬁcient
method like BC to obtain an alternative importance map.
Figure 6: Average reward learning curves of GAIL trained with dif-
ferent masks. The blue, orange and grey lines are trained with the
masks extracted from the importance map obtained using BC, GAIL
and random, respectively.
5
Limitations
Several intriguing challenges await further exploration. Al-
though we were able to extract promising explanations
through a large number of masks and validations of the ob-
tained policy, the robustness of the framework could be fur-
ther improved through ensemble methods. As the framework
currently relies on a single trial to train the model, ensem-
bling IL models could reduce performance variance for each
given mask. In addition to robustness, computation inten-
siveness is another limitation. The time taken to obtain a sat-
isfactory explanation is closely linked to the time spent on
training the target model once. If the target model requires
days to train, it would not be practical to retrain hundreds of
times. Improving time efﬁciency while preserving the model-
agnostic property remains an open challenge for R2RISE. In-
vestigating the relationship between global explanations and
the frames that are recognized as important is another inter-
esting future direction. Although we observed similar pat-
terns in the extracted frames from different trials and models,
it is still unsafe to claim these patterns could be the global
explanations for a speciﬁc task. Further research is needed to
provide theoretical proof for the connections.
6
Conclusion
This paper introduced a model-agnostic explaining frame-
work for imitation learning called R2RISE. R2RISE distin-
guishes the frames’ importance in relation to the overall pol-
icy performance. It iteratively applies numerous randomized
masks on the demonstrations and retrains the black-box IL
model based on the masked demonstration. Evaluation of the
obtained policy is conducted in a manner similar to most IL
methods, where the policy is evaluated by the accumulated re-
turns from the environment, and we leverage the accumulated
returns as a coefﬁcient to multiply with the mask to obtain the
importance map of the frames. Experiments have shown that
R2RISE can successfully distinguish important frames from
the demonstrations, thus providing insight into which frames
contribute to better performance.
