UAI2001 
DAVIS 
105 
Using Bayesian Networks to Identify the Causal Effect of Speeding in 
Individual Vehicle/Pedestrian Collisions 
Gary A. Davis 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Minnesota 
Minneapolis, MN 55455 
Abstract 
Estimating individual probabilities of causation 
generally requires prior knowledge of causal 
mechanisms. For traffic accidents such knowledge 
is often available and supports the discipline of 
accident reconstruction. In this paper structural 
knowledge is combined with Bayesian network 
methods to calculate the probability of necessity 
due 
to 
speeding 
for 
each 
of 
a 
set 
of 
vehicle/pedestrian collisions. Gibbs sampling is 
used to carry out the computations. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Selecting a speed limit involves balancing the mobility of 
motorists against the external costs that mobility imposes 
on other road users. In setting speed limits, current traffic 
engineering practice gives preference to the 85th percentile 
of the vehicle speed distribution, and so for streets where 
the 85th percentile speed exceeds the current posted speed 
limit it can be argued that the posted speed limit is too low. 
Where this is the case, one measure of the external cost 
imposed by motorists' choice of speed is the number of 
vehicle/pedestrian 
accidents 
that 
would 
have 
been 
prevented had the prevailing speed limit been obeyed. This 
measure is especially important for local and residential 
streets, where pedestrians are naturally to be expected. To 
predict the 
accident reduction resulting from 
a safety 
countermeasure, 
traffic engineers usually 
apply an 
externally estimated accident reduction factor (RF) to an 
observed or predicted accident count. RFs 
are in turn 
generally estimated as 
where rB and rA respectively denote accident rates estimated 
before and after the application of the countermeasure. 
Unfortunately, external estimates from studies that are well­
enough designed to support causal interpretations tend to 
be rare (Davis 2000), and for pedestrian accidents on local 
streets even questionable estimates are not available (TRB 
1998). Interpreting the accident rates as probabilities, an RF 
estimated from a well-designed study can then be interpreted 
as what Pearl calls a "probability of necessity," computed 
assuming minimal knowledge of how accidents actually 
occur (2000, p. 292). By representing traffic accidents using 
structural models, an alternative estimate of the effect of 
speeding, specific to the accident history of a given area, 
can be had by computing the probability that speeding was 
necessary for the occurrence of each accident in that area. 
To show this, we can begin with Rubin's potential response 
model 
(Holland 
1986). 
Let j=l, .. ,N 
index 
a 
set 
of 
vehicle/pedestrian 
conflicts, 
which 
include 
actually 
occurring collisions as well as all instances where a driver 
had to brake in order to avoid hitting a pedestrian. For each 
conflict define the potential response variables 
hl1 = 
I, if pedestrianj was actually stuck, 
0, if pedestrian j was not struck. 
h2J = 
I, if pedestrian j would have been struck under 
strict adherence to posted speed limits, 
0, if pedestrian j would not have been stuck under 
strict adherence. 

106 
DAVIS 
UAI2001 
Assuming that enforcement of the speed limit causes 
obedience to the limit, the change in accident frequency that 
would result if speed limits had been enforced is 
+= :L (h11-h2)+ :L<hl1-h2) 
(j:hli=l} 
{j:hl.i=O) 
with the first sum on the right hand side giving accidents 
prevented by enforcement while the second sum gives 
accidents caused by enforcement. If drivers who were 
normally traveling at or below the speed limit would not have 
increased their speeds under strict enforcement, 
the 
mechanics of vehicle braking implies that the monotonicity 
condition hl1 ˆ h21 is plausible, and the total accidents 
caused by enforcement is zero. If accident investigations 
have produced data relevant to the conditions of each 
accident, 
by coupling these data with prior knowledge 
about accident mechanisms it may be possible to compute 
individual probabilities of necessity, P[h2;=0 I hlt=l, yj], 
where yj denotes the data available for accidentj. This leads 
to an estimate of the accident reduction 
Ê = B 
l'Th!. -h2 ·I h! 
= !,y .) "' 
B P[h2. =Oi hl, =I, Y,] 
.£.. 
.L,..il 
1 
J 
J 
J 
L... 
} 
. 
. 
V-l l1co=l! 
():.lll,=lf 
Issues concerning individual accident causation frequently 
arise in legal contexts, where a jury must assess "cause in 
fact" (Robertson 1997), and so it is not surprising that over 
the past 60 
years the 
discipline of traffic accident 
reconstruction has developed primarily to assist the legal 
system in resolving such issues. The definition of cause 
generally accepted in accident reconstruction work has been 
given by Baker ( 1975), who first defines a causal factor as" ... 
any circumstance contributing to a result without which the 
result could not have occurred," (p. 274) and then defines 
the cause of an accident as the complete combination of 
factors which, if reproduced, would result in another 
identical accident (p. 284). This is arguably a deterministic 
view of accident occurrence, coupled with a counterfactual 
notion of causality. In accident reconstruction, physical 
models describing the behavior of entities involved in the 
accident are combined with information collected at the 
accident scene in order to infer the prior conditions leading 
to 
the 
accident. 
Causal 
assessment 
in 
accident 
reconstruction then often involves determining if, other 
things being equal, changes in some prior condition would 
have prevented the accident. Such assessments become 
more difficult when the variables appearing in an accident 
reconstruction are underdetermined 
by the available 
measurements and constraints. For example, the kinematic 
equation s=v212a can be used to estimate a vehicle's initial 
speed v from a measured skidmark s, but only if one knows 
the vehicle's braking deceleration a. If the value for a 
variable is uncertain, a method for assessing the effect of 
this uncertainty on the final conclusion is needed, and this 
has often been accomplished by re-doing the reconstruction 
for a range of possible variable values. However, if one is 
willing to grant that uncertainty can be described using 
probability measures (Lindley 1987), more powerful methods 
are available. In particular, Brach ( 1994) has illustrated how 
statistical differentials can be used to compute the variance 
of a reconstruction estimate, while Wood and O'Riordain 
(1994) have presented what was in effect a Bayesian Monte 
Carlo approach for determining posterior distributions for an 
accident's initial conditions. Davis (1999) subsequently 
showed how Gibbs sampling could be used to compute a 
posterior distribution for the 
initial conditions of a 
vehicle/pedestrian accident, given measurements made at 
the accident scene. To date though no one has attempted to 
assess the uncertainty attached to causal or counterfactual 
claims. 
Uncertainty assessment in accident reconstruction can be 
seen as a special case of a method for causal analysis that 
has been formalized by Pearl and his associates (Balke and 
Pearl 1994; 
Pearl 2000). To apply Pearl's 
method to the 
pedestrian accident problem an 
analyst would have to 
specify a probabilistic causal model consisting of (a) sets of 
exogenous and endogenous variables, (b) a set of structural 
equations expressing each endogenous variable as a 
function of exogenous and/or other endogenous variables, 
and (c) a probability distribution over the exogenous 
variables. A directed acyclic graph (DAG) can be used to 
summarize the qualitative dependency structure among the 
model variables, producing a Bayesian network. Pearl's 
Theorem 
7.1.7 (2000, p. 206) then describes how the 
probability of a counterfactual claim, given evidence, can be 
evaluated. Balke and Pearl (1994) have also shown how 
technical difficulties arising from the need to describe or 
store a posterior distribution can be circumvented by 
applying updating methods to a DAG model that has been 
augmented to include nodes representing counterfactual 
outcomes. 
2 STRUCTURAL MODEL 
We will consider pedestrian/vehicle collisions consistent 
with the following scenario, illustrated in Figure I. The driver 
of a vehicle traveling at a speed of v notices an impending 
collision with a pedestrian when the front of the vehicle is a 
distance x 
from the potential point of impact. After a 
perception/reaction time of tP the driver locks the brakes, 
and the vehicle decelerates at a constant rate jg, where g 
denotes gravitational acceleration. After a transition time of 
t, the tires begin making skid marks and the vehicle comes 

UAI2001 
DAVIS 
to a stop, leaving a skidmark of length s !. Before stopping, 
the vehicle strikes the pedestrian at a speed of vi, the 
pedestrian is thrown into the air and comes to rest a distance 
of d from the point of impact. The pedestrian is injured, and 
the severity of injury can be classed as slight, serious, or 
fatal. In addition, if the pedestrian was struck after the 
vehicle began skidding, it may be possible to measure a 
distance s2 running from the point of impact to the end of 
the skidmark. The basic inference problem is to characterize 
the posterior uncertainty in causal variables such as v, vi 
and x given some subset of the measurements d, s I, s2, and 
the pedestrian's injury severity. Figure 2 displays a DAG 
summarizing the conditional dependence structure of the 
collision model. 
To 
complete 
the 
model 
it is necessary 
to 
specify 
deterministic or stochastic relations for the arrows appearing 
in Figure 2, and prior distributions for the background 
variables x, v, tr, 15 and f From the above description it 
follows that the impact speed is given by 
Vl=V,if X<Vtp 
vi= 0, if x > vt 
P + v2 /(2/g) 
vi= v2 - 2fg(x- vtP ),otherwise 
The theoretical length of the skidmark is computed as the 
difference between the total braking distance and the 
distance traversed during the transition phase, 
theoretic skidmark = v2 /(2fg)-(vt5-jgr; /2) 
Garrot and Guenther ( 1982), describing results from a series 
of controlled braking tests, reported 
that the standard 
deviation of measured skidmarks tended to increase as the 
initial speed increased, and that the average coefficient of 
variation for the difference between the measured and 
theoretical skid lengths was approximately equal to 0.11. In 
the reconstructions described below the measured skidmark, 
denoted by sf, was 
assumed to be a lognormal random 
variable with underlying normal mean equal to the natural 
log of the theoretical length, and underlying normal variance 
equal to 0.0 I, giving a coefficient of variation for the 
measurement error in the skidmarks of about 0.1 0. The 
measured second skid, s2, was also assumed to be lognormal 
with underlying normal mean equal to the natural log of the 
theoretical value and underlying variance equal to 0.01. 
Next, measured throw distances and impact speeds from 55 
crash tests between cars and adult pedestrian dummies, 
tabulated in (Eubanks and Hill 1998), were 
used to fit a 
linear model relating the natural log of the measured throw to 
107 
the natural log of the measured speed. The residuals from 
this fit passed a test for being normally distributed, and the 
fitted model took the form 
log( d)= b0 + b1 log( vi) + e 
where d = throw distance (meters), vi = vehicle speed at 
impact (km/h), e =normal random variable with mean equal 
to zero and estimated variance equal to 0.06. Least-squares 
estimates of the regression coefficients (together with the 
corresponding standard errors) were b0=-3.43 (0.30) and 
bl=1.6l (0.09). 
To model the relationship between impact speed vi and 
degree of injury severity an ordered logistic regression 
model was fit to data 
published in Q\shton 1980). The 
published data consisted of cross-tabulations of accidents, 
for three different pedestrian age groups, of vehicle impact 
speed versus pedestrian injury severity. The form of the 
fitted model was: 
P[slight injury I v1] = L(b ·vi -a1) 
?[serious injury I vi]= L(b·vi-a2)-L(b · vi-a1) 
?[fatal injury I vz] = 1- L(b ·vi- a2) 
where L(.) denotes the logit function. Weighted exogenous 
sampling maximum likelihood (WESML) was used to 
estimate model parameters, and a more detailed development 
of this model can be found in Davis (200 1 ).The WESML 
estimates of the model parameters for adult pedestrians 
(ages 15-59), when the impact speed is in km/h, were a1=t.07 
(0.73), a2=7.21 (1.01) and b=0.095 (0.02). Approximate 
standard errors are given in parentheses after each estimate. 
Finally, the Bayesian network requires prior distributions for 
the background variables x, v, tP, t5 and/ Although prior 
distributions avoid the apparent arbitrariness of using fixed 
nominal values, they bring with them the problem of how to 
select these distributions in some reasonable manner. In 
deterministic sensitivity analyses it is often possible to 
identify defensible prior ranges for background variables 
(Niederer 1991 ), and Wood and O'Riordain argue that, in the 
absence of more specific information, uniform distributions 
restricted to these ranges offer a plausible extension of 
deterministic sensitivity methods ( 1994, p. 137). Following 
Wood and O'Riordian's suggestion, the reconstructions 
described in this paper used uniform prior distributions. 
Specifically, the range for fwas [0.45,1.0), and was taken 
from Fricke (1990, p. 62-14), where the lower bound 
corresponds to a dry, travel- polished asphalt pavement and 
the upper bound to a dry, new concrete pavement. The 
range for the perception/reaction time, lr, was [0.5 seconds 

108 
DAVIS 
UA12001 
, 2.5 seconds], which brackets the values obtained by 
Fambro et al. (1998) in surprise braking tests, and the 
midpoint of which ( 1.5 seconds) equals a commonly chosen 
nominal value (Stewart-Morris 1995). 
For the braking 
transient time, Neptune et al. (1995) reported values ranging 
between 0.1 and 0.35 seconds for a well-tuned braking 
system, while Reed and Keskin (1989) reported values in the 
range of 0.4-0.5 seconds, so the chosen range was [0.1 
seconds, 0.5 seconds]. The strategy for the initial distance 
and initial speed was to use ranges wide enough so that no 
reasonable possibility was excluded a priori. The range for v 
was [5 meters/second, 50 meters/second], and the range for 
x 
was [0 meters, 200 meters). Finally, uncertainty in the 
parameters for the throw distance and injury severity models 
was incorporated by treating the actual parameter values as 
normal 
random variables, with means and standard 
deviations equal to the estimates presented earlier. In Figure 
2 the nodes labeledp1 and p1 represent these parameters. 
3 APPLICATION 
To estimate the accident reduction due to speed limit 
adherence 
one 
requires 
values 
for 
the 
individual 
probabilities of necessity, where Yi denotes measurements of 
some subset of sl, s2, d and the injury severity. These can 
be computed by (i) updating the distributions for x, tP' t, and 
fusing the datayi, (ii) setting the initial speed equal to the 
speed limit, and (iii) computing the probability that vi=O 
(since 
h2=0 if and only if vi=O) using the updated 
distributions for x, tp, t., and /together with the condition 
that vis set to the speed limit. For DAG models which have 
causal interpretations, Balke and Pearl (1994) describe how, 
by appropriately 
augmenting the 
DAG with additional 
nodes representing counterfactual variables, 
Bayesian 
network methods can be used to compute counterfactual 
probabilities. Figure 2 also shows the augmented DAG for 
the pedestrian collision model, where v* and vi* denote the 
counterfactual variables. 
The application of this approach will be illustrated using 
data collected by Kloeden et al. (1997), where 
accident 
reconstruction methods were used to estimate the speeds of 
accident-involved vehicles as part of a study seeking to 
relate speed to accident risk. All the investigated accidents 
occurred on roads with a 60 kmlh speed limit, but a sample of 
speeds from vehicles not involved in accidents showed an 
average speed of about 60 km/h, with an 85% percentile 
speed of about 80 km!h. Current traffic engineering practice 
would consider raising the speed limit to 80 krnlh. The 
question at hand then is how many vehicle/pedestrian 
accidents would have been prevented had all vehicles 
obeyed the 60 km/h speed limit? 
The sample of investigated accidents included eight 
vehicle/pedestrian collisions satisfying the conditions of 
the model described in Section 2, being frontal impacts by 
a single vehicle, with evidence of pre-impact braking. 
Information on each of the investigated accidents was 
published in volume 2 of 
Kloeden et al., from which 
measurements of sl, s2 and d, along the degree of injury 
suffered by the pedestrian, were obtained. Using the Gibbs 
sampling program BUGS (Gilks et al. 1994), posterior 
distributions were estimated, with the collision model 
described 
in 
Section 
2 
augmented 
to 
include 
the 
counterfactual variables v* and vi*, and with v* set equal to 
60 kmlh. A 5000 iteration bumin was followed by
· 
50000 
iterations with every I Oth iteration being saved for analysis. 
Three separate Gibbs sampling chains were generated from 
different initial values 
and 
random number 
seeds, 
convergence was checked using the Gelman and Rubin test, 
and sample size was checked using the Raftery and Lewis 
test, as implemented in CODA (Best et al. 1995). 
Figure 3 shows posterior means and 95% credible intervals 
for the vehicle initial speeds v, 
obtained from the Gibbs 
sampler, along with estimates made using two deterministic 
methods. Method I refers to estimates 
computed by 
applying the midpoints of the uniform priors to the braking 
model described in Section 2. Method 2 refers to the 
estimates given by Kloeden et al., which were computed 
using a somewhat different braking model and nominal input 
values. Overall, it appears that as long as one can find 
reasonable values for unmeasured input variables, the 
deterministic methods give reasonable approximations to the 
posterior mean speeds. It also appears that a reasonable 
prior uncertainty concerning input variables can induce a 
nontrivial degree of uncertainty in the resulting speed 
estimates. 
Table I. Gibbs Sampler and Deterministic Estimates. 
Gibbs SampHng 
Deterministic vi* 
Collision 
P[v>60) 
P[vi*=O] 
Method 1 
Method 2 
1 
0.71 
0.45 
30 
30 
2 
0.90 
0.76 
0 
0 
3 
0.87 
0.65 
0 
8 
4 
0.64 
0.43 
26 
30 
5 
0.63 
0.55 
14 
14 
6 
0.42 
0.29 
21 
21 
7 
0.91 
0.63 
0 
11 
8 
0.09 
0.03 
29 
29 
Table I shows the probability that each vehicle was initially 
exceeding the speed limit, along with assessments as to 
whether or not the vehicle would have stopped in time had 

---; 
UAI2001 
DAVIS 
it been travelling at the speed limit. Looking at the results 
from the Gibbs sampler, it appears 
that the vehicles in 
collisions 2, 3 and 7 were probably speeding and these 
accidents would probably have been prevented had the 
vehicle been traveling at 60 km/h. The vehicle in collision 8 
was probably not speeding and the accident would probably 
not have been prevented by speed limit enforcement. For the 
remaining four cases the effect of speeding is uncertain. 
Looking at the two rightmost columns of Table I we see that 
deterministic method 1 predicts a reduction of three 
accidents due to speed limit adherence while method 2 
predicts a reduction of only one accident. The P[vi*=O] 
column of Table I gives the individual probabilities of 
necessity for each of the accidents, and summing the entries 
in this column gives an estimate of3.8 accidents prevented 
by speed limit adherence. This can be interpreted as a 
measure of the accident reduction potential of speed limit 
enforcement. 
4 CONCLUSION 
Investigation and reconstruction of traffic accidents is often 
done to support criminal and civil legal proceedings and, to 
a lesser extent, to support traffic safety research. In all cases 
though, the ultimate objective is to use the evidence from an 
accident to identify or exclude possible causal factors, as 
rationally and objectively as is possible. 
Unlike more 
standard problems in causal inference, the underlying causal 
structure of a reconstruction problem can often be identified, 
but uncertainty arises because the initial conditions of the 
accident 
cannot 
be 
measured, 
and 
are 
usually 
underdetermined by the available evidence. To a greater or 
lesser extent then, the reconstructionist must supplement 
the evidence with prior knowledge concerning the values 
taken on by unmeasured variables, and uncertainties in this 
prior knowledge induce uncertainties in the estimates and 
conclusions produced by the reconstruction. At present 
there is no comprehensive or commonly accepted method for 
rationally accounting 
for 
this uncertainty, but 
three 
characteristics of this knowledge domain suggest that 
Bayesian network methods should be applicable. These are: 
(I) (local) Laplacean determinism, (2) a counterfactual view 
of causality, and (3) the use of probability measures to 
assess uncertainty. Results developed by 
Pearl and his 
associates can then be used to rigorously pose and answer 
selected 
counterfactual questions about an 
accident. 
Because reconstruction models often contain continuous 
variables and deterministic relationships, the exact updating 
methods developed for finite Bayesian networks are not at 
present 
well-suited to accident 
reconstruction, 
but 
approximations using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods 
are more promising. 
109 
AcknowJedgements/Disclaimer 
This research was supported by Minnesota's Local Road 
Research 
Board 
and 
the 
Minnesota 
Department 
of 
Transportation. However, all views expressed here are solely 
the responsibility of the author, and do not necessarily 
represent the positions of either of these agencies.
