Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–14 (2002)
Printed 23 October 2018
(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)
The Star Formation Rate Distribution Function of the
Local Universe
M. S. Bothwell1⋆, R. C. Kennicutt1, B. D. Johnson1, Y. Wu2, J. C. Lee3,
D. Dale4, C. Engelbracht5, D. Calzetti6, E. Skillman7
1 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 0HA
2 Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125
3 Carnegie Observatories of Washington, Pasadena, CA, USA
4 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071
5 Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721
6 Department of Astronomy, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
7 Department of Astronomy, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, 116 Church Street S.E., Minneapolis,
MN 55455, USA
Accepted xxxx. Received xxxx in original form xxxx
ABSTRACT
We present total infrared (IR) and ultraviolet (UV) luminosity functions derived from
large representative samples of galaxies at z ∼0, selected at IR and UV wavelengths
from the IRAS IIFSCz catalogue, and the GALEX AIS respectively. We augment
these with deep Spitzer and GALEX imaging of galaxies in the 11 Mpc Local Volume
Legacy Survey (LVL), allowing us to extend these luminosity functions to lower lu-
minosities (∼106L⊙), and providing good constraints on the slope of the luminosity
function at the extreme faint end for the ﬁrst time. Using conventional star formation
prescriptions, we generate from our data the SFR distribution function for the local
Universe. We ﬁnd that it has a Schechter form, that the faint-end slope has a constant
value (to the limits of our data) of α = −1.51 ± 0.08, and the ‘characteristic’ SFR ψ∗
is 9.2 M⊙yr−1. We also show the distribution function of the SFR volume density;
we then use this to calculate a value for the total SFR volume density at z ∼0 of
0.025±0.0016 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3, of which ∼20% is occurring in starbursts. Decompos-
ing the total star formation by infrared luminosity, it can be seen that 9 ± 1% is due
to LIRGs, and 0.7 ± 0.2% is occuring in ULIRGs. By comparing UV and IR emission
for galaxies in our sample, we also calculate the fraction of star formation occurring
in dust obscured environments, and examine the distribution of dusty star formation:
we ﬁnd a very shallow slope at the highly extincted end, which may be attributable
to line of sight orientation eﬀects as well as conventional internal extinction.
Key words:
galaxies: star formation – galaxies: evolution – galaxies: luminosity
function – cosmology: observations
1
INTRODUCTION
Measuring the distribution of star formation rates (SFRs)
at z = 0 provides a fundamental observational reference
point for galaxy evolution models, being a directly testable
result of the hierarchical galaxy formation process. As such,
obtaining good constraints on the local star formation rate
distribution function is an integral part of calibrating and
constraining cosmological models concerning the growth and
buildup of structure in the Universe.

In an ideal world, it would be possible to directly mea-
sure the bolometric output of all galaxies in some large
volume-limited sample, thus measuring - without biases -
the true underlying distribution of star formation and lumi-
nosity. In reality, however, there are two major constraints
to be overcome in order to approach the bias-free distri-
bution functions. Firstly, for large samples the bolometric
output and star formation rate must be extrapolated from
one or more luminosity components, typically Hα, UV, or
IR, which necessarily involves some uncertainty (particularly
for extrapolations based on a single continuum wavelength
- see, for example, Calzetti et al. 2000). Secondly, the sam-
arXiv:1104.0929v2  [astro-ph.CO]  8 Apr 2011

2
M. S. Bothwell et al.
ple’s selection function plays a large part in determining the
behaviour of the derived distribution, with samples selected
in the UV and IR probing very diﬀerent populations with
very diﬀerent underlying star formation behaviour and dust
content (e.g. Buat et al. 2005, Iglesias-P´aramo et al. 2006).
The behaviour of dust is also of great interest, as extinction,
correlating strongly with star formation, plays a major role
in the derived star formation properties of a sample.
Measuring the luminosity function and the SFR distri-
bution function has been an important goal for many years,
with much work being dedicated towards successfully esti-
mating the local luminosity function (Takeuchi et al. 2003,
Schiminovich et al. 2005, Wyder et al. 2005, Wang & Rowan-
Robinson 2010), the star formation rate distribution (e.g.
Barkana 2002, Martin et al. 2005, Martin et al. 2007), and
the closely related total star formation rate volume den-
sity (Gallego et al. 1995, Tresse & Maddox 1998, Hopkins
2004). These studies, often based on the large homogenous
IRAS and GALEX survey datasets, have provided good con-
straints at the bright, highly star forming end of the distri-
bution. However, the behaviour of the faint end slope is still
somewhat unexplored, with most studies suﬀering signiﬁ-
cant incompleteness at low luminosities ( <∼108−9 L⊙) and
SFRs ( <∼10−1 M⊙yr−1). These less well-explored popula-
tions at the faint end, being numerically dominant, provide
a vital insight into the hierarchical galaxy formation process.
It is a well established result that the low-mass slope of
the predicted Dark Matter (DM) mass function is steeper
than the observed faint-end slope of the luminosity function
(LF): this discrepancy is often framed as the well known
‘missing satellite problem’ (Klypin et al. 1999; Moore et al.
1999). The faint-end slope of the luminosity function is a way
of quantifying the number of faint galaxies, and while models
adopting a Press-Schechter formalism predict a steep faint-
end slope of α ∼−1.8 (Press & Schechter 1974; Boylan-
Kolchin et al. 2009), observational results suggest a signif-
icantly shallower value (Marinoni et al. 1999; Liske et al.
2003).
However, the form of the observed LF is several steps
removed from the DM mass function, being the end result of
many non-linear baryonic processes. A multitude of physical
processes dictate how DM haloes collect and retain their
gas, setting the form of the Hi mass function which, through
star formation, produces the luminosity function. Measuring
and comparing the distribution functions pertaining to these
baryonic processes (i.e. the the hydrogen mass function, the
star formation rate function, and the luminosity function)
has the potential to shed light on the possible reasons that
baryons are under-abundant in low mass dark matter haloes,
causing the shallow slope and ‘missing satellites’.
To attempt to obtain good constraints on the extreme
faint end, we use data from the Local Volume Legacy sur-
vey, a volume-limited dataset of galaxies within 11 Mpc with
deep multi-band Spitzer, optical, and GALEX imaging. Be-
ing volume limited, this survey provides an excellent and
unbiased database from which to calculate IR and UV lu-
minosities and star formation rates, which can be combined
with the same parameters from the larger datasets. For the
ﬁrst time, therefore, we are able to augment our large sur-
vey datasets with deep imaging of this statistically complete
sample of local galaxies, and extend the local luminosity
and star formation rate distributions functions 1-2 orders of
magnitude deeper.
In this paper, we present statistically complete SFR dis-
tribution functions and luminosity functions which extend
1-2 orders of magnitude deeper than previous studies. The
data provide the ﬁrst ever SFR distribution study complete
at both the bright and extreme faint ends, and give an unbi-
ased view of the distribution of star formation and structure
at z ∼0. We use our samples to accurately constrain the true
value - and breakdown - of the star formation rate volume
density in the z = 0 Universe. In order to investigate the role
of extinction (which correlates strongly with SFR), we also
use IR and UV photometry to analyse the behaviour of dust
obscured star formation (measured via the ratio LIR/LFUV),
and present ‘extinction distribution functions’, analogous to
the luminosity function.
Throughout this paper we assume a concordance Λ-
CDM cosmology with parameters (H0,
Ωm,
ΩΛ)
=
(72 kms−1 Mpc−1, 0.27, 0.73). The Local Volume sample,
for which peculiar motions overwhelm the Hubble ﬂow, has
distances based on a number of direct distance estimators
wherever possible (see §2.2.2).
2
METHODOLOGY
2.1
Sample Selection
As mentioned in §1 above, for any observationally-deﬁned
sample the nature of the selection function will go a long
way to determining the physical properties of the sample.
Any non-volume-limited sample used to calculate a lumi-
nosity function must be strictly ﬂux limited at some wave-
length, so that when weightings are applied (for example
volume weightings, as per the 1/Vmax method) the result-
ing function, Φ(L), becomes statistically representative of
the underlying population as a whole (an inconsistent ﬂux
limit would lead to bias through inconsistent volume correc-
tions).
The wavelength at which this limit is imposed will to a
large extent determine the properties of the sample. An IR-
selected sample (selected at 60µm for example) which is then
crossed with a UV database will contain more dusty, ob-
scured systems than an initially FUV-selected sample which
is subsequently cross matched with an IR database. Buat
et al. (2007) demonstrated that the bolometric luminosity
functions for IR and UV selected samples diverged for lumi-
nous systems (Lbol > 5 × 1010 L⊙), with a signiﬁcant pro-
portion of the massive, luminous systems detected strongly
at 60µm being non-detected in the FUV due to their ex-
treme dust attenuation. At the low-luminosity end, samples
suﬀer from the opposite bias; late-type, metal poor, star
forming galaxies may lack suﬃcient dust to re-process the
UV photons into IR emission, and as a result can be weak-
or non-detections at 60µm despite having measurable levels
of ongoing star formation (Dale et al. 2009; Calzetti et al.
2010).
Clearly, deﬁning a sample in terms of selection at a
single wavelength and extrapolating global properties will
lead to an inaccurate view of the behaviour of star forma-
tion and extinction in the overall population. In this pa-
per, we therefore use separate datasets selected at 60µm and

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
3
GALEX FUV - hereafter, these will be referred to as the ‘IR-
selected’ and ‘UV-selected’ samples respectively. These dual
samples can then be combined, and the resultant dataset
encapsulates the full range of star forming behaviour, en-
suring that both obscured and unobscured star formation
are represented.
2.1.1
IR-selected sample
For our IR-selected sample, we make use of the Imperial
IRAS Faint Source Catalogue redshift database (IIFSCz)
compiled from the IRAS Faint Source Catalogue (FSC) by
Wang & Rowan-Robinson (2009). This is a large (61% of
the sky) database consisting of 60,303 galaxies selected at
60µm. For our analysis, we require that all galaxies have red-
shifts, and we include both spectroscopic and photometric
redshifts in our compilation (Wang & Rowan-Robinson 2009
discuss in detail the accuracy of their photometric redshifts,
derived using neural network ﬁtting, concluding that they
are accurate to 1.5-2.3%) A total of 44,622 galaxies in the
IIFSCz have a secure redshift identiﬁcation. We then cross
matched this subsample against the GALEX AIS, resulting
in a total of 25,768 galaxies observed with both IR and UV:
this comprises our IR-selected sample. Naturally, some of
the galaxies observed with GALEX were not detected due
to a low UV ﬂux. We distinguished between GALEX non-
detections (i.e. upper limits) and galaxies never observed
with GALEX by crossmatching with a 0.6◦search radius,
equivalent to the size of a GALEX tile.
To ensure that redshift evolution eﬀects played no sig-
niﬁcant part in the luminosity distribution, we applied a
z < 0.1 cut to our sample (which will slightly reduce the
number density of the most luminous systems, which are
under-represented in the local Universe). We also applied
a 60µm ﬂux limit of 0.36 Jy, which was then used to de-
ﬁne the value of Vmax for each galaxy in the IR sample -
this limit corresponds to the 90% completeness limit of the
IRAS FSC, and is higher than the formal 60µm ﬂux limit of
the FSC of 0.2 Jy . We also applied a minimum redshift cut
of z = 0.005 (∼20 Mpc), to remove any galaxies for which
peculiar motion would overwhelm the Hubble ﬂow, leading
to highly uncertain distances based upon recession velocity
alone.
This last cut in eﬀect removes IR-faint (LIR ⩽109 L⊙)
galaxies from the sample; the volume-limited LVL sample
samples this region of luminosity space well however, so
no information is lost overall. This near ﬁeld cut also has
the eﬀect of eliminating much of the GALEX ‘shredding’
problem whereby nearby extended sources are resolved as
multiple objects, resulting in artiﬁcially lowered UV ﬂuxes
(see, e.g, Salim et al. 2007). By comparing the UV ﬂuxes
of our IR-selected sample with those of Buat et al. (2007),
who used their own photometric extraction technique, we
estimate that at most ∼5% of our galaxies suﬀer from pho-
tometric extraction issues (such as shredding). Constructing
luminosity functions consisting solely of the subset of galax-
ies common to both samples (302 members), we ﬁnd that the
UV LF produced by our ﬂuxes is essentially identical to that
built from independently-obtained UV ﬂuxes. As such, we
proceed with the assumption that our UV ﬂuxes are robust.
The ﬁnal IR sample, after applying all the above cuts,
consists of 10,252 galaxies.
To conﬁrm that working with this subsample of the
IIFSCz does not bias our results, we constructed the
(monochromatic) 60µm luminosity function for our subsam-
ple, and compared them to the equivalent LFs of Wang &
Rowan-Robinson (2010) which were constructed using the
complete sample; the LF derived from our subsample does
not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those derived from the parent
sample (see Fig. 1 for the LF of our original, ‘unadulterated’
IR sample). The main diﬀerence is a sharper cut-oﬀat the
most luminous end of the luminosity function for our sample,
which is attributable to the high-z cut - the parent sample,
having no such cut, includes many ULIRGs and HyLIRGs
(systems with LIR > 1012 L⊙and 1013 L⊙respectively),
which are very rare in the z ∼0 Universe.
2.1.2
UV-selected sample
The UV-selected sample was taken from the paper by Buat
et al. (2007), who assembled a UV-selected sample of galax-
ies to assess the relative contributions of obscured and un-
obscured star formation in the local Universe. To brieﬂy
summarise, their sample was selected by applying a UV cut
of FUV = 17.5 mag to the GALEX All-Sky Imaging Survey
(AIS) catalogue, and cross-matching with the IRAS PSCz
in areas uncontaminated by foreground (i.e. galactic) cirrus
emission. The resulting eﬀective area is 2210 deg2 - while
smaller than the large area covered by the IIFSCz (which,
at 61% of the sky, covers over an order of magnitude more
sky area), this is still substantial and will avoid the cluster-
ing biases and sensitivity to small-scale inhomogeneities that
are the weakness of ‘pencil beam’-type surveys. Distances for
the UV sample galaxies were obtained from NED.
The same distance cuts as the IR-selected sample were
applied (0.005 < z < 0.1). The low- and high-z cut-oﬀs
remove 8 and 4 galaxies respectively from the parent sample
of 606 – our UV-selected sample therefore consists of 595
galaxies.
2.1.3
The Local Volume sample
To augment our IR- and UV-selected samples in the low lu-
minosity regime, we use data on a complete sample of nearby
galaxies collected by the GALEX 11HUGS (11 Mpc Hα UV
Galaxy Survey) and Spitzer LVL (Local Volume Legacy)
programs. The sample is dominated by dwarf galaxies, and is
thus ideal for studying the nature of systems with low SFRs,
low metallicities and low dust contents. UV, and mid- to far-
IR ﬂux catalogs are published in Lee et al. (2010) and Dale
et al. (2010), respectively. Details on the sample selection,
observations, photometry are provided in those papers, and
in Kennicutt et al. (2008), who describe the overall parent
11 Mpc sample and Hα imaging survey. A brief summary of
the dataset is given here.
The total parent Local Volume sample contains 436 ob-
jects. Galaxies are compiled from existing catalogs (as de-
scribed in Kennicutt et al. 2008), and the selection is divided
into two components. The primary component of the sample
aims to be as complete as possible in its inclusion of known
nearby star-forming galaxies within given limits. It consists
of spirals and irregulars brighter than B = 15 mag within 11
Mpc that avoid the Galactic plane (|b| >20o). These bounds

4
M. S. Bothwell et al.
represent the ranges within which the original surveys that
provided the bulk of our knowledge on the Local Volume
galaxy population have been shown to be relatively com-
plete, while still spanning a large enough volume to probe a
representative cross section of star formation properties. The
secondary component of the sample consists of galaxies that
are within 11 Mpc and have available Hα ﬂux measurements,
but fall outside one of the limits on brightness, Galactic lati-
tude, or morphological type. It is a composite of targets that
were either observed by Kennicutt et al. (2008) as telescope
time allowed, or had Hα ﬂuxes published in the literature.
Subsequent statistical tests, as functions of B-band appar-
ent magnitudes and HI ﬂuxes (compiled from the literature),
show that the subset of galaxies with |b| > 20◦is relatively
complete to MB <∼−15 and MHI > 2 × 108 M⊙at the edge
of the 11 Mpc volume Lee et al. (2009).
Subsequent GALEX UV imaging primarily targeted the
|b| > 30◦, B < 15.5 subset of the sample. The more restric-
tive latitude limit was imposed to avoid excessive Galactic
extinction and ﬁelds with bright foreground stars and/or
high background levels for which observations would be
prohibited due to GALEX’s brightness safety restrictions.
Deep, single orbit (∼1500 sec) imaging was obtained for
each galaxy, following the strategy of the GALEX Nearby
Galaxy Survey (Gil de Paz et al. 2007). GALEX observa-
tions for a signiﬁcant fraction of the remaining galaxies be-
yond these limits were also taken by other GI programs.
Overall, GALEX data are available for ∼90% of the 436
galaxy sample.
Finally, Spitzer IRAC mid-infrared and MIPS far-
infrared imaging was also obtained for the |b| > 30◦, B <
15.5 subset of the sample through the Local Volume Legacy
program. This sub-sample with both UV and IR coverage
contains 257 galaxies and is used in the following analysis.
The resulting dataset provides an unprecedented multi-
wavelength view of star formation in the nearby Universe.
In particular, the multi-band Spitzer IR observations allow
for bolometric luminosities to be calculated (using the algo-
rithms provided by Dale & Helou 2002) in a manner consis-
tent with the IRAS ﬂuxes available for our larger datasets.
2.2
Constructing the Luminosity Functions
2.2.1
1/Vmax method
The ‘classic’ way of constructing a luminosity function is
based on the estimator
Φ(L)dL =
X
i
dL
Vmax(Li, Slim
ν
)
Where Vmax is the volume enclosed by the maximum
distance at which galaxy i would be observable, given the
ﬂux limits of the survey (Slim
ν
- deﬁned by the IR and UV
respectively for the IR- and UV-selected samples, and the
B-band for the LVL sample) and the galaxy’s luminosity -
this ‘maximum volume’ is then used to weight each galaxies’
contribution to the ﬁnal function Φ(L). This inverse volume
weighting is designed to counteract the Malmquist-type bias
which would be encountered by a pure number counting ex-
ercise: the volume probed by a ﬂux limited survey varies as a
function of luminosity, and as such faint galaxies (which are
only seen nearby) are under-represented; conversely, bright
galaxies seen out to large distances are over-represented.
Weighting by 1/Vmax eliminates this eﬀect, and reconstructs
the true underlying luminosity distribution. This particular
form of the weighting (as opposed to ﬁrst binning into lu-
minosity bins, then applying a mean Vmax to all galaxies
within the bin) reduces error resulting from binning of the
data - in essence, each galaxy is assigned its own bin of width
dL.
The 1/Vmax method has the great advantage of being a
non-parametric estimator, as it does not assume any form of
Φ(L). However, it does suﬀer from two weaknesses: ﬁrstly,
binning in luminosity space is sometimes required, which
necessarily involves some loss of information, and the result-
ing form of Φ(L) can be somewhat sensitive to the particular
binning used. Secondly, and more seriously, it is highly sensi-
tive to local density enhancements (see Efstathiou et al. 1988
for a detailed discussion). The Local Volume represents a
signiﬁcant overdensity compared to the cosmic mean, which
will manifest in a ﬂux limited survey as an enhancement at
the faint end of the luminosity function. Karachentsev et al.
(2004) compared the B-band luminosity density in the local
8 Mpc and ﬁnd that it is 1.7-2.0 times the global luminosity
density (as derived from both the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
and the Millennium Galaxy Catalogue). We therefore cor-
rect the local density downwards by a factor 1.85 ± 0.15,
and incorporate this uncertainty in the error on the derived
faint end slope. This is consistent with the values found by
Lee et al. (2009) and Lee et al. (2010) by comparing the
LVL and the the ﬁeld Hi mass function (the Local Volume
is over-dense by a factor of 1.4), the B-band LF (a factor of
2.3) and the UV LF (a factor of 2).
2.2.2
Maximum likelihood method
The weakness to density ﬂuctuations can be overcome by
adopting a parametric estimator, which assumes the form of
the luminosity function is universal (with the precise shape
being determined by some free parameters), which allows the
density to be factored out. One such statistic is the ‘max-
imum likelihood’ method, as described by (e.g.) Efstathiou
et al. (1988) and Yahil et al. (1991).
We take a Schechter (1976) function to be the assumed
form of the luminosity function:
Φ(L)dL = Φ∗ L
L∗
α
e−(L/L∗)d
 L
L∗

.
When ﬁtting this to data using a maximum likelihood
method, the free parameters are obtained by maximising
the value of ∆with respect to α and L∗,
∆=
X
i
log Fi,
where
Fi = Φi
Ψ = (Li/L∗)αe−(Li/L∗)
Γ(α + 1, Llim/L∗) ,
and where Ψ = R
Φ(L)dL is the cumulative luminosity func-
tion (equal to Γ, the normal incomplete gamma function for
a Schechter LF), and Llim is the minimum luminosity at
which the sample is complete. Essentially, a grid of Schechter
functions with varying parameters is explored, and each is

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
5
assigned a ‘likelihood’ using the data. Our adopted function
is taken to be the function which maximises the ‘likelihood’.
While this method has the aforementioned advantage
that it is insensitive to local density ﬂuctuations, it has the
disadvantage of being similarly insensitive to the absolute
normalisation of the luminosity function (note that Φ∗can-
cels out in the expression for Fi). This can be recovered using
number counting, as the integral under the derived best ﬁt
function is just the number of galaxies:
N(> Llim) =
Z ∞
Llim
Φ(L′)dL = Φ∗Γ(α + 1, Llim/L∗).
The uncertainty on the parameters of the luminosity
function - derived using either method - can be diﬃcult to
estimate. A major source of potential error, particularly at
the faint end, is uncertainty on the distance. Kennicutt et al.
(2008) discuss the distance estimates for the Local Volume
galaxies in detail: direct distance estimators are used wher-
ever possible (Cepheids, red giant branch, Tully-Fisher re-
lation, supernovae), and when a distance from one of these
methods is not available distances are estimated from the
Hubble velocity, corrected for a local group dipole eﬀect as
derived by Karachentsev & Makarov (1996). The uncertain-
ties on the distance (both random, and systematic to the
ﬂow model) are typically 7 −15%.
The eﬀect of this distance uncertainty (and the eﬀect
of the photometric ﬂux uncertainty) will be to shift galaxies
into neighbouring bins of luminosity (or SFR). As a result,
the errors on the various luminosity function parameters are
highly correlated, and have a complex dependence on the
errors in the raw data. We deal with these errors using a
Monte Carlo resampling method, by creating a large num-
ber of realisations of the luminosity function drawn - with
replacement - from the parent sample. Parameters with well
deﬁned errors (i.e. ﬂux) were allowed to vary randomly ac-
cording to a Gaussian likelihood function deﬁned by the 1σ
parameter error, and the standard deviation in the resultant
luminosity functions in each bin was taken to be an estimate
of the error.
3
ANALYSIS
3.1
Removing the AGN contribution
Obscured Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN), are a potential
source of contamination for our sample, if we want to in-
terpret the emission in terms of pure star formation. Uni-
ﬁed models of AGN assume a dusty torus - which emits
strongly in the IR - surrounding a central engine; this bright
IR emission can be falsely interpreted as originating from
dust heated by star forming regions, which leads to an over-
estimation of the star formation rate of the galaxy. If we
are to accurately estimate the star formation rate density of
the volume containing our sample, it is important to remove
such sources of possible contamination.
AGN number amongst the most extreme objects in the
Universe, and, when active, have prodigious bolometric out-
puts. The eﬀect of AGN subtraction will, therefore, be to
reduce the very upper end of the luminosity function, while
leaving the behaviour at L < 10∼10−11 L⊙relatively un-
changed (see e.g. Yuan et al. 2010; Hopkins et al. 2010).
108
1010
1012
1014
Ltir [LO
 · ]
10−10
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
ϕ(L)  [Mpc−3 dex−1]
Total IR
Wu et al., IR (extrapolated)
Wu et al., AGN component
Rush et al., AGN component
Figure 1. IR LF for our original IR-selected sample (red trian-
gles), plotted with an extrapolated IR LF from Wu et al. (purple
line). The AGN contribution to Wu et al.’s LF is shown as a green
line. Plotted as black crosses is a previous estimate of the AGN
contribution to the IR LF, from Rush et al. (1993). For reference,
the canonical IRAS IR LF (Takeuchi et al. 2003) is plotted as
a dotted black line. Note that our original IR-selected sample is
shown here before any cuts, and is therefore identical to the LF
of Wang and Rowen-Robinson (2010).
At the upper end, star formation occurs almost entirely in
highly extincted, dusty environments (Calzetti et al. 2010
and references therein), where IR is by far the best SFR
tracer: we therefore consider the eﬀect of AGN contamina-
tion on our IR-selected sample only, as the UV-selected and
LVL datasets will have a negligible AGN contribution (Salim
et al. 2007).
It is diﬃcult to perfectly remove all AGN on a galaxy-
by-galaxy basis without detailed spectroscopy being avail-
able for the entire sample, using which the AGN component
can be separated from the star forming component (see e.g.
Fu et al. 2010). In the absence of spectral data for our entire
sample, a better method is to remove the AGN component
statistically from the sample as a whole. This requires a
knowledge of the global behaviour of the AGN population,
in the form of an AGN luminosity function which can then
be subtracted from our original ‘total’ luminosity function,
leaving only the star forming component.
To this end, we use the data in the work by Wu
et al. (2011), a spectroscopic study of a subset of the
24um selected 5mJy Unbiased Spitzer Extragalactic Survey
(5MUSES) sample Wu et al. (2010). This subset focused on
galaxies with z < 0.3 from 5MUSES, with < z >∼0.12. The
226 objects in this subsample were analysed with mid- and
far-IR photometry (allowing a full characterisation of their
IR SED), and mid-IR spectroscopy - allowing each source’s
luminosity to be decomposed into AGN and star-forming
components. For the purpose of this analysis, we will exam-
ine the IR luminosity function of their sample and use the
relations given in their work to derive the contribution to
the IR LF from AGN. We then take this fractional AGN
contribution (as a function of IR luminosity) and subtract

6
M. S. Bothwell et al.
it from our data, leaving us with IR data for our galaxies
which can be interpreted in terms of pure star formation.
Figure 1 shows the luminosity function for our IR-
selected sample. Also plotted is the total IR luminosity
function for the galaxies reported in Wu et al. (2010), de-
rived by taking their 15µm LF and transforming into an
IR LF using the average luminosity conversion given. The
AGN component of their IR LF is also shown. As expected,
their SED ﬁtting shows that the bolometric IR luminos-
ity for AGN sources has a larger contribution from shorter
wavelengths than for star forming sources: they calculate
log(L14µm/LIR) = −1.19 ± 0.10 for star forming sources,
but just −0.57 ± 0.19 for AGN dominated systems.
Being IR selected, Wu et al.’s sample has the advan-
tage of having similar properties to our own, and therefore
we expect that the AGN contribution, calculated as a func-
tion of IR luminosity, will be applicable to our data. The
good agreement between the two IR LFs – our own and Wu
et al.’s – conﬁrms this, and suggests that the AGN fraction
derived from their sample is indeed applicable to our own.
We attribute the slight bright-end discrepancy between the
functions to small number uncertainty at the upper end of
their sample - Wu et al.’s complete sample consists of 330
galaxies, and will sample the rarer IR-bright galaxies poorly.
As a qualitative check, we compare the AGN contribution
derived here to a previous result, the AGN luminosity func-
tion at 12µm as calculated by Rush et al. (1993).
As discussed above, the AGN contribution to the star
formation distribution only becomes signiﬁcant at the bright
end (>∼1012L⊙), with the contribution from AGN be-
ing < 10% for non-LIRGs, with star formation rates be-
low ∼15 M⊙yr−1. Both measures of AGN activity agree
well, with a small (factor of ∼2) discrepancy at the low
(< 1011L⊙) end - the low value of Φ(AGN) at these lumi-
nosities renders this diﬀerence relatively unimportant. We
do note, however, that the 5MUSES sample has spectral
AGN estimators which are more accurate than the photo-
metric estimators of the older work, and it is to this that we
attribute the diﬀerence.
All luminosity functions, star formation distributions,
and related values calculated hereafter have had the above
AGN LF contribution subtracted as per the estimate from
Wu et al., and are therefore interpretable in terms of pure
star formation.
3.2
Luminosity functions
All
galaxies
in
our
datasets
have
been
ob-
served
with
multiple
bands
in
the
IR:
either
with
Spitzer
(at
24µm/70µm/160µm),
or
IRAS
(12µm/25µm/60µm/100µm).
As
such,
very
accurate
estimates - to better than 1% for most galaxies - of their
bolometric IR ﬂux (deﬁned as the integrated ﬂux from
8µm-1000µm) can be made, using the three-component
prescriptions provided by Dale & Helou (2002).
Fig. 2 shows the TIR luminosity function for both the
large IR sample (red triangles) and the LVL data (green
squares). As we are interested in measuring the true un-
derlying distributions, rather than just the local density en-
hancement, the number densities for the LVL data in Fig. 2
(and for all LVL volume densities hereafter) have been ad-
justed downwards by a factor of 1.85 as discussed above. The
106
108
1010
1012
Ltir [LO
 · ]
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
ϕ(L)  [Mpc−3 dex−1]
IR−selected sample
Local Volume
Figure 2. The bolometric IR luminosity function for the IR sam-
ple. 1/Vmax-derived points are shown for the IR-selected sample
(red triangles) and the Local Volume galaxies (green squares).
The black line is a least squares Schechter ﬁt to these points, the
blue line is the maximum likelihood Schechter function ﬁt. Er-
rors (1σ) were calculated using Monte Carlo bootstrapping. The
dashed black line is the ‘canonical’ IRAS LF, from Takeuchi et
al. (2003).
106
108
1010
1012
LFUV [LO
 · ]
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
ϕ(L)  [Mpc−3 dex−1]
UV−selected sample
Local Volume
Figure 3. The FUV luminosity function for the UV sample.
1/Vmax-derived points are shown for the UV-selected sample
(blue triangles) and the Local Volume galaxies (green squares).
The black line is a least squares Schechter ﬁt to these points, the
blue line is the maximum likelihood Schechter function ﬁt. Errors
(1σ) were calculated using Monte Carlo bootstrapping. The black
dashed line is the UV LF from Wyder et al. (2005).
data points were derived using the 1/Vmax method, and the
black line is the best ﬁtting Schechter function, obtained us-
ing standard least squares ﬁtting. The blue ﬁt to the data is
the Schechter function obtained using maximum likelihood
ﬁtting, as discussed above. The two methods agree on all
counts, with the exception of a small discrepancy in the faint
end slope (1.41±0.09 for the 1/Vmax method, 1.53±0.08 for
maximum likelihood). Power law ﬁts to the IR data, once

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
7
the AGN component was removed, were generally poor - in
all cases, a Schechter function was able to ﬁt the data more
closely.
For comparison, the luminosity function for IRAS IR-
selected galaxies from Takeuchi et al. (2003) (corrected
slightly for our cosmological parameters) has been overplot-
ted as a dashed line. There is a discrepancy at the high end,
caused by both AGN removal (c.f. our original sample shown
in Fig 1) and the redshift cut (taking z < 0.1 reduces the
number of rare bright objects). Indeed, Takeuchi et al. at-
tribute the ‘bright end bump’ seen in both our samples to
the increasingly dominant AGN contribution at luminosities
LIR > 5.0 × 1011L⊙(the point at which their power law LF
diverges from our Schechter LF), which we have removed as
per §3.1. Apart from this diﬀerence, the LF of the parent
sample is essentially identical to our UV-matched subsam-
ple, suggesting that we have not introduced undue bias by
insisting on a UV observation for inclusion in the sample
(see §3.2.1 below).
Fig. 3 shows the FUV luminosity function for the
large UV sample (blue triangles) and the LVL data (green
squares). The ﬁtted black and blue curves are again, respec-
tively, the least-squares ﬁt to the 1/Vmax data points, and
the maximum likelihood ﬁt. Being the sample from Buat
et al. (2007), the UV LF is identical to theirs. The dashed
line is the ﬁeld FUV LF from GALEX, presented by Wyder
et al. (2005) (again corrected for the more recent cosmol-
ogy). Again, the close similarity between our sample and
the canonical ‘ﬁeld’ LF suggested that our data do provide
a representative sample of star forming galaxies in the lo-
cal Universe. We note however that there is a discrepancy
with the LF of Wyder et al. (2005) at the UV-bright end.
Again, the two LF derivation methods produce similar ﬁts
- the faint end slope is 1.23 ± 0.09 for the 1/Vmax method,
1.31 ± 0.09 for maximum likelihood).
3.2.1
Non-detections, upper limits, and incompleteness
considerations
The construction of all the luminosity functions and star
formation distribution functions was carried out both by
removing all galaxies with only upper ﬂux limits (UV ﬂux
limits in the IR-selected sample, and vice-versa), and by
treating the upper ﬂux limit as a detection equal to the
limiting ﬂux magnitude - as in Martin et al. (2005), the
results in all cases do not depend on whether the galaxies
are included, so we opted to include them.
This insensitivity to the inclusion of non-detections does
not extend to the distribution of obscured star formation,
as traced by the ratio LIR/LFUV. This parameter is highly
sensitive to low ﬂux values, such as those assumed from an
upper limit (being a ratio, low UV ﬂuxes lead to high values
of LIR/LFUV ), and is discussed more in §3.5.
We also have to consider the eﬀect of sample incom-
pleteness on the form of our star formation rate function.
The large IR and UV datasets will suﬀer incompleteness
starting at ∼0.1 M⊙yr−1 (note the downturns the the
IR and UV samples shown in Figs. 2 and 3 starting at
∼108L⊙). This is, however, the star formation rate at which
the LVL data are highly complete, and hence our resultant
function will remain statistically robust here.
At the faintest end of our function, however, we run
into LVL incompleteness which cannot be ignored. Lee
et al. (2009) calculate the LVL dataset to be complete to
log SFR = −2.5 M⊙yr−1 based on the resultant Hα ﬂux
limits of the sample. Below this level, too, small number
statistics lead to derived star formation rates being some-
what uncertain. We do not truncate our sample below this
SFR, but it must be noted that values of Φ calculated at
the faint end are inherently uncertain, and for reference we
mark this regime on our star formation function shown in
Fig. 4. We note, however, that calculations of the faint end
slope do not depend on this uncertain regime, and all derived
parameters do not change if we ﬁt only to the statistically
complete data.
It is worth noting that the volumes probed by our ﬁeld
IR and UV datasets are large enough to avoid bias due to
large scale structure. We can deﬁne a ‘correlation volume’,
derived from the correlation length, which is an estimate of
the absolute minimum volume you need to probe in order
to be reasonably free of bias due to structure. We estimate
this to be 500 Mpc3 (approximating the correlation radius
as 5 Mpc; Zehavi et al. 2005). For a ﬂux limited survey, the
volume probed will vary as a function of luminosity; at a
luminosity of 108 L⊙– the lower limit of our ﬁeld data –
our IR and UV datasets respectively probe volumes of 20
and 80 times this minimum ‘correlation volume’.
3.3
The distribution of star formation
For each galaxy in our sample, we derived a star formation
rate as follows. The IRX, deﬁned as
IRX = log

L(TIR)
L(FUV)obs

is used as a measure of the internal dust absorption. This
then can be used to accurately estimate the UV attenuation;
it is known that the value of IRX is a good tracer of UV
attenuation, and – importantly – remains robust indepen-
dent of the details behind the extinction, such as geometry
and dust properties (see Meurer et al. 1999). Conversions
between IRX and A(FUV) in the literature are given by
Calzetti et al. (2000); Kong et al. (2004); Buat et al. (2005);
and Cortese et al. (2008). For the purposes of this paper, we
use the IRX–A(FUV) relation derived by Burgarella et al.
(2005) :
A(FUV ) = −0.028x3 + 0.392x2 + 1.094x + 0.546,
where x is the IRX deﬁned above.
Once the observed UV luminosity has been corrected for
dust attenuation using the above expression, we converted
to a star formation rate as per the method described by
Iglesias-P´aramo et al. (2006):
log SFR [M⊙yr−1] = log(LFUV,corr [L⊙]) −9.51
This calibration uses a Salpeter IMF from 0.1 to 100
M⊙, was derived speciﬁcally for the GALEX bands, and is
similar to other estimators in the literature. For comparison
the Kennicutt (1998) conversion factor:
SFR [M⊙yr−1] = 1.4 × 10−28 Lν [ergs s−1 Hz−1]
when converted from a monochromatic UV luminosity -
taking the eﬀective central wavelength of the GALEX

8
M. S. Bothwell et al.
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
log ψ [MO
 · /yr ]
10−10
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
log ϕ(ψ)  [Mpc−3 dex−1]
Figure 4. The star formation rate distribution function for the
resultant combined sample, as described in §3.3. The black line
is a least squares Schechter function ﬁt to these points, the blue
line is the maximum likelihood Schechter function ﬁt. The vertical
dashed line is drawn at log SFR = −2.5 M⊙yr−1, the level at
which incompleteness becomes signiﬁcant. The green log-normal
function indicates the SFR function given by Martin et al. (2005).
Errors (1σ) were calculated using Monte Carlo bootstrapping.
FUV ﬁlter to be 1532 ˚A - gives log SFR [M⊙yr−1] =
log(LFUV,corr [L⊙]) −9.56: ∼12% lower than our value.
We adopt the former conversion, as it was derived speciﬁ-
cally for the GALEX ﬁlters by Iglesias-P´aramo et al. (2006).
We note that this method does carry some implicit assump-
tions, such as a constant star formation history, and a lack of
stochasticity in populating the upper (UV-emitting) regions
of the IMF. As noted above, for the purpose of calculating
SFRs we include non detections, by assigning a ﬂux equal
to the detection limit – the overall results do not change if
we instead discard all non-detected galaxies.
We then generated a ‘resultant’ sample from our large
UV and IR datasets using the ‘incoherent combination of
domain independent samples’ method (as described by Avni
& Bahcall 1980). Using this method, both samples can be
considered together: the combined sample is split into two
‘domains’, deﬁned by 1 : [SIR > Slim
IR and SUV > Slim
UV ], and
2: [SIR < Slim
IR and SUV > Slim
UV ]. Any duplicates must be
dealt with, as each galaxy is clearly just a single probe of
the population. The duplicate is removed, and the remain-
ing galaxy is assigned whichever value of Vmax (i.e. based
on either the IR or UV limit) is larger - this is because for
the object to be included, it is suﬃcient that it satisﬁes the
weaker selection criteria. Objects in the ﬁrst domain then
have Vmax values calculated as normal. Objects in the sec-
ond domain, being constrained by having an IR ﬂux below
the limit of the IR-selected sample (and thus only appearing
in the UV selected sample), have a reduced region of param-
eter space to exist in, and have their values of Vmax deﬁned
by (Vmax,IR - Vmax,UV).
We cannot apply the same technique to combine with
the Local Volume data, as the LVL sample is designed to
be volume limited and therefore has a less cleanly-deﬁned
selection function; where the samples overlap with LVL, we
simply weight the two datasets inversely by their bootstrap-
derived errors. The ﬁnal, combined sample consists of 10,704
galaxies (257 from the LVL, 562 from the UV, and 10,141
from the IR, where duplicate galaxies have been removed as
explained above).
The star formation rate function is shown in 4. The
purple data points are Vmax-derived points for the com-
bined sample as described above. We use least squares ﬁt-
ting to ﬁt a standard Schechter function to the points: the
best ﬁtting parameters are found to be (Φ∗= 0.00015 ±
0.0003 Mpc−3, ψ∗= 9.0±0.3 M⊙yr−1, α = −1.48±0.07).
This Schechter function is shown in Fig. 4 as a black line.
We also used the maximum likelihood method de-
scribed above to ﬁnd the best-ﬁtting Schechter function
to the combined sample; the best ﬁtting parameters (are
found to be (Φ∗= 0.00016 ± 0.0004 Mpc−3, ψ∗= 9.2 ±
0.3 M⊙yr−1, α = −1.51 ± 0.08), and this is plotted on Fig.
4 as a blue line. The two methods of calculating the star
formation rate function match closely, suggesting that the
Vmax points are not overly biased by the presence of clus-
tering. Hereafter, we adopt the parameters of the maximum
likelihood-derived function.
The faint end slope of -1.51 continues monotonically al-
most to the limits of the data, until the low galaxy numbers
available at SFRs < 10−3 M⊙yr−1 lead to the degradation
of the relation due to noise. This is in contrast to previous
extrapolations (e.g. Martin et al. 2005) which predicted a
lognormal form for the star formation rate distribution func-
tion, with a maximum value of Φ(ψ) at ψ ∼10−2 M⊙yr−1
and a gradual decline thereafter.
This result is particularly interesting in the light of the-
oretical predictions of structure formation. There has been
a long-running conﬂict between the small-scale predictions
for Dark Matter haloes, and the observational results of the
galaxies that dwell inside them (Klypin et al. 1999). Galaxy
formation models predict a scale-invariant form for Dark
Matter, which clusters hierarchically even on the smallest
scales; this manifests as a steep faint end slope to the mass
function, of α ∼−1.8. Observations of galaxy luminosity
functions, however, have found a dearth of small scale ob-
jects at the bottom of the luminosity function, indicating a
much shallower faint end slope. Either the predictions for
the Dark Matter mass function are incorrect, or the com-
plex non-linear processes involved in galaxy formation con-
spire to suppress the formation of baryonic structures on the
smallest scales.
One suggestion has been that the lack of satellite-scale
galaxies results from star formation being systematically
suppressed on the smallest scales (i.e. Bullock et al. 2000;
Robertson et al. 2005); the form of our SFR distribution
function, however, is consistent with the idea that this is
not the case: a monotonically increasing faint-end slope to
the SFR distribution function suggests that any process sup-
pressing star formation must be operating in a scale-free
manner with respect to halo mass.
3.4
The star formation rate volume density
Using the distribution of star formation rate, it is possible
to calculate the distribution of star formation rate volume
density. We deﬁne the distribution function of star formation
rate density:

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
9
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
log ψ [MO
 • /yr ]
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
 ψ ϕ(ψ)  [MO
 • yr -1 Mpc-3 dex-1]
Figure 5. The star formation rate volume density distribution
function, for the resultant combined sample as in Fig. 4. The
purple histogram shows the Vmax-derived data as above, and the
black ﬁt to the data is the convolved Schechter function ψ Φ(ψ),
with the maximum-likelihood ﬁt parameters as above.
ψ Φ(ψ) = ψ Φ∗

ψ
ψ∗
α
e−(ψ/ψ∗)d

ψ
ψ∗

.
Fig. 5 shows the distribution of star formation rate vol-
ume density, for the ‘combined’ sample shown in Fig. 4,
along with the convolved Schechter ﬁt for the parameters
given above.
We can therefore integrate ψ Φ(ψ) to give the total star
formation rate volume density in the local Universe,
ρSFR =
Z ∞
0
dψ ψ Φ(ψ),
which for the parameters of the Schechter ﬁt to our
data (Φ∗
=
0.00016 ± 0.0004
Mpc−3,
ψ∗
=
9.2 ±
0.3 M⊙yr−1, α = −1.51 ± 0.08) gives ρSFR = (25 ± 1.7) ×
10−3 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3.
This is in good agreement with most recent deriva-
tions of this result: see Table 1 for a compilation of re-
cent results. There is a relatively large spread in the de-
rived values of the SFR volume density - greater than a
factor of two, beyond the errors quoted on the individ-
ual measurements. This is discussed brieﬂy by Serjeant
et al. (2002) (who derive their own 1.4 GHz-based value of
(21±5)×10−3 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3), who attribute the discrep-
ancy to a systematic underestimation of the extinction using
the Balmer decrement in some emission line-based studies.
The total value of ρSFR can also be decomposed into
‘UV’ and ‘IR’ components, by integrating the value of
ψ Φ(ψ) derived from each component individually. Doing
so leads to values of ρSFR(IR) = 0.011 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3,
and ρSFR(UV) = 0.012 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3. The LVL con-
tribution is 0.0007 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3. This is 47%, 50%,
3% of the total for the IR, UV, and LVL components re-
spectively. This result - that about half of the energy from
the total cosmic star formation budget is re-processed by
dust - is well known, and is in line with previous stud-
ies. Takeuchi et al. (2005) found that of their derived to-
tal SFR volume density (19 × 10−3 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3), 56%
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
log ψ [MO
 · /yr ]
0.01
0.10
1.00
f (ρSFR, ψi < ψ)
Figure 6. The cumulative fraction of star formation rate volume
density.
was from dust-reprocessed emission.1 For consistency (and
because our statistical AGN removal involves some uncer-
tainty), we have checked the value of ρSFR calculated from
the sample without the statistical correction for AGN con-
tamination (as per §3.1). As the correction is only signiﬁ-
cant at the upper end (beyond ψ∗), the value only changes
slightly: without any AGN correction applied, we calculate
ρSFR = (26 ± 2.2) × 10−3 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3.
We may also compute the fraction of the local cosmic
star formation rate density occurring in starburst environ-
ments. For the purposes of such an analysis, we deﬁne a
starburst as a system forming stars at ⩾10 M⊙yr−1. Us-
ing the star formation rate density distribution, we can thus
integrate from 10 M⊙yr−1 to inﬁnity:
fburst =
1
ρSFR
Z ∞
ψburst
dψ ψ Φ(ψ)
For
our
data,
this
value
is
0.0049 ± 0.00039
M⊙yr−1 Mpc−3, or 20.4% of the total star formation rate
volume density; by our (admittedly somewhat crude) deﬁ-
nition, one ﬁfth of the star formation in the local Universe
is provided by starbursts. This is consistent with the values
found by Brinchmann et al. (2004) using speciﬁc star for-
mation rates from SDSS. Interestingly, Lee et al. (2009) also
ﬁnd that 20% of star formation in the dwarf galaxy popula-
tion is concentrated in high Hα equivalent width systems.
There are many interesting values that can be derived
from the distribution shown in Fig. 5, including the starburst
fraction (discussed above), the ‘dividing’ SFR at which 50%
of the star formation is happening both above and below,
and so on. Rather than providng a list of values for various
integration limits, it is more enlightening to consider the
behaviour of the cumulative fraction of star formation rate
volume density, which is shown in Fig. 6. This shows SFR,
plotted against the fraction of the total star formation vol-
ume density coming from SFRs lower than that SFR. The
1 See also Lagache et al. (2005), and references therein.

10
M. S. Bothwell et al.
Table 1. Derivations from the literature of the star formation rate volume
density in the local Universe.
Reference
SFR tracer
< z >
SFRD
(10−3 M⊙yr−1 Mpc−1)
Gallego et al. (2002)
[OII]
0.025
9.3 ± 3
Sullivan et al. (2000)
[OII]
0.15
23 ± 3
Hogg et al. (1998)
[OII]
0.20
11 ± 4
Gallego et al. (1995)
Hα
0.022
12 ± 5
Tresse & Maddox (1998)
Hα
0.2
25 ± 4
Sullivan et al. (2000)
Hα
0.15
14 ± 3
P´erez-Gonz´alez et al. (2003)
Hα
0.025
25 ± 4
Ly et al. (2007)
Hα
0.08
13 ± 4
Hanish et al. (2006)
Hα
0.01
16+2
−4
Brinchmann et al. (2004)
Hα
0.15
29 ± 5
Dale et al. (2010)
Hα
0.16
10+6
−4
Westra et al. (2010)
Hα
0.05
6 ± 2
Westra et al. (2010)
Hα
0.15
12 ± 3
Serjeant et al. (2002)
1.4 GHz
0.005
21 ± 5
Condon (1989)
1.4 GHz
0.005
21 ± 0.5
Sullivan et al. (2000)
FUV
0.150
39 ± 5
Martin et al. (2005)
FUV+IR
0.02
21 ± 2
This work
FUV+IR
0.05
25 ± 1.6
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
log ψ [MO
 • /yr ]
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
log LTIR [LO
 •]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
−6
−5.5
−5
−4.5
−4
−3.5
−3
log ψ ϕ(ψ)
Figure 7. The star formation rate volume density function
ψ Φ(ψ) (as in Fig. 5) further expanded in a second dimension
(along the ordinate) to show the breakdown with TIR luminos-
ity. The colour-coded ‘z’ axis represents ψ Φ(ψ). Horizontal lines
are drawn at log(L)={11, 12}, the respective deﬁned minimum
luminosities for LIRGs and ULIRGs. The dotted line shows the
L(FIR)-SFR scaling given by Iglesias-P´aramo et al. (2006)
data show a power-law increase in star formation rate vol-
ume density fraction, over 5 orders of magnitude until the
truncation at ∼20 M⊙yr−1. From this it can be seen that
the ‘50%’ divide occurs at ∼3 M⊙yr−1, about the SFR of
the Milky Way (e.g. Misiriotis et al. 2006).
It is also interesting to consider the contribution to
the total star formation rate volume density from LIRGs
and ULIRGs. These IR-bright galaxies (deﬁned as having
LIR > 1011 L⊙and > 1012 L⊙respectively) are rare in the
local Universe, but become more and more important with
lookback time, becoming an increasingly dominant compo-
nent of the total star formation rate volume density at higher
redshifts (Schiminovich et al. 2005; Magnelli et al. 2009;
Goto et al. 2010).
Fig. 7 shows the star formation rate distribution func-
tion shown in Fig. 5, expanded along a second dimension
with TIR luminosity (the colour-coded ‘z’ axis corresponds
to the value of ψ Φ(ψ)). Horizontal lines have been drawn
at the two characteristic luminosity cuts for LIRGs and
ULIRGs, to illustrate the total contribution to the local
SFRD coming from those galaxies. By integrating the SFRD
function above and below the cutoﬀlines, we can estimate
the contribution to the total from both LIRGs and ULIRGs;
9 ± 1% of total star formation is occurring in LIRGs, while
just 0.6 ± 0.2% is occurring in ULIRGs. This is in good
agreement with literature values - Goto et al. (2010), for ex-
ample, reach similarly small estimates of 7 ± 1% for LIRGs,
and 0.4 ± 0.1% for ULIRGs. As discussed above, the dom-
inant object type driving the total star formation in the
local Universe are normal, secularly evolving galaxies with
star formation rates comparable to the Milky Way - de-
spite their prodigious star formation rates, the sparsity of
LIRGs/ULIRGs means that they do not contribute signiﬁ-
cantly.
Due to the (U)LIRGs’ bright IR luminosities, the de-
rived LIRG/ULIRG fractions are highly sensitive to the na-
ture of the AGN correction used, which strongly aﬀects the
behaviour of the LF at the bright end. If we do not correct
for AGN contamination as per §3.1, the fractional contri-
bution to the total SFRD from LIRGs and ULIRGs respec-
tively is 14 ± 2% and 1.5 ± 0.4%. It should be noted, then,
that our original derived (U)LIRG contributions are highly
dependent on the AGN correction.

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
11
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
IRX
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
log ϕ(IRX)  [Mpc−3 dex−1]
0.01
0.1
1
3
5
A(FUV)
UV−selected sample
IR−selected sample
Local Volume
Figure 8. The distribution function of IRX for the three samples.
The red, blue, and green lines are, respectively, the IR-selected,
UV-selected, and LVL datasets. The solid black line is the best-
ﬁtting modiﬁed Schechter ﬁt (see text), and the dotted black line
shows the same parameters converted into a standard Schechter
ﬁt by setting the high-end slope β = 1. It can be seen that a
normal Schechter function is a poor ﬁt to the data. The equivalent
FUV attenuation has been shown on the upper x-axis, calculated
as detailed in the text.
3.5
Dust obscured star formation
It is possible to examine the distribution function of extinc-
tion, in much the same way as we have previously examined
the distribution function of luminosity and star formation.
This will examine the global behaviour of dust obscured
star formation, as a function of the amount of obscuration.
We use as our measure of ‘extinction’ or ‘dust obscuration’
the ratio of IR to observed UV luminosities, IRX, as de-
scribed above in §3.3. Having a strong positive correlation
with both luminosity and star formation rate (Wang & Heck-
man 1996; Hopkins et al. 2001a; Buat et al. 2005; Takeuchi
et al. 2010) the IRX distribution function should resemble
the Schechter-like distribution functions derived elsewhere
in this work.
Fig. 8 shows the distribution functions of IRX for the
three samples included in this work. The three samples have
been shown separately, as a ‘resultant’ sample, constructed
by combining the diﬀerent samples with diﬀerent selection
functions has little physical interpretation in this case; the
distribution of IRX, and the diﬀerence between the samples,
sheds light on FIR and FUV selection eﬀects (Xu et al. 2006)
as much as it does the underlying physical properties of the
galaxies in question.
It is important to note here that, in contrast to the work
with luminosity and SFR described above, the choice to in-
clude/exclude non-detections signiﬁcantly alters the shape
of the IRX distribution function, simply because the IRX is
deﬁned as a ratio of luminosities. So, while a non-detection in
the UV has little eﬀect in terms of the SFR function (it sim-
ply implies that the bolometric output is predominantly in
the IR, and the UV is negligible), it has the result of making
the value of IRX formally inﬁnite. If non-detections are as-
sumed to have ﬂux equal to the limiting ﬂux (as above), the
IRX distribution function becomes essentially meaningless,
as it is driven entirely by the extreme upper/lower limit val-
ues of IRX assigned semi-arbitrarily to the non-detections.
We therefore chose to exclude non-detections for the purpose
of this IRX analysis. The number of galaxies thus excluded
from the IR and UV samples is, respectively, 1784 and 73.
As a result of excluding the non-detections, the distribution
functions shown in Fig. 8 can be interpreted as lower bounds
on the IRX distribution functions.
All three samples exhibit broadly similar behaviour in
their value of Φ(IRX): a decrease in Φ towards higher val-
ues of IRX (analogous to the decrease in Φ(L) for rare high-
luminosity systems), and a second dip at the lowest values of
IRX probed. With the exception of an overdensity at IRX=1
in the LVL sample, the three samples do share a common
Schechter-like ‘envelope’, though the individual samples do
diﬀer. The UV and LVL samples fall oﬀsteeply between
an IRX of 1 and 2. In contrast, the high-IRX end (com-
prised entirely of the IR-selected sample) is much shallower
than would be expected from a standard Schechter function,
however, and is best ﬁt with a modiﬁed Schechter function,
which has been adapted following Hopkins et al. (2010) to
leave the high-IRX end slope β as a free parameter:
Φ(X)dX = Φ∗ X
X∗
α
exp[−(X/X∗)β]d
 X
X∗

,
where a high end slope β < 1 allows for a shallower fall-oﬀ
at high IRX than a standard Schechter function (β = 1).
This is plotted on Fig. 8 as a solid black line (the stan-
dard Schechter ﬁt using the same parameters is, for compar-
ison, shown as a dotted line). This has a low-end slope of
α = −1.51±0.11, and a high-end slope β = 0.63±0.09. This
is signiﬁcantly shallower than 1, which would be expected
given the previously-noted strong correlation between lumi-
nosity/SFR and IRX, and deserves further examination.
It is clear from Fig. 8 that the IR-selected sample con-
tains more high-IRX objects than the UV-selected sample.
This is to be expected: galaxies having a high IRX (i.e. being
IR-bright, UV-faint) are more likely to be over-represented
in an IR-selected sample compared to a UV-selected sam-
ple, if only because the eﬀective volume probed in the IR
is far larger than in the UV for such an object. (The con-
verse is true too, of course; low-IRX things which are UV
bright and IR faint have larger eﬀective volumes probed by
a UV survey, so we would expect a UV survey to contain
disproportionately many low-IRX galaxies).
Using NED, we looked up the high-IRX galaxies in our
sample, which make up the top of the distribution. The
galaxies inhabiting this extended shallow ‘tail’ to the distri-
bution are, predominantly, high-inclination discs (see Fig. 9
for a selection). We suggest that this bias towards inclined
galaxies (which would have boosted IRXs due to the greater
amount of material obscuring the star forming disc/bulge)
is a possible explanation for the shallowness of the distri-
bution. If this is the case, then the shallow high-end slope
seems to be driven by inclination (and its associated ra-
diative transfer eﬀects) as much as inherent, angle-averaged
extinction.
This deviation from a Schechter function is, to some
extent, expected. Press-Schechter formalism describes the
distribution of DM halo masses – parameters that are well
correlated with halo mass should have a Schechter-like scale

12
M. S. Bothwell et al.
Figure
9. A selection of the high-IRX galaxies from the
IR-selected sample, showing their unusual/edge-on morphol-
ogy and prominent dust lanes. Clockwise from the top left:
IRAS F14299+3631; F01221+0944; F21596-1909; F14263+2555;
F13228+1837; F11290-3001. Images obtained from NASA NED.
distribution. As the parameter in question becomes further
removed from the underlying halo mass, there is less reason
to expect that a Schechter function will be a good model
of the parameter distribution. The additional complication
of complex, inclination-dependent radiative transfer eﬀects
would cause the IRX distribution to take a non-Schechter
form.
It is again possible to break down the star formation
rate volume density distribution (shown in Fig. 5) with IRX,
to see at which extinction level the contribution is greatest.
This is shown in Fig. 10. The SFR volume density function
is decomposed into bins of IRX along the y axis, while the
colour-coded ‘z’ axis corresponds to ψ Φ(ψ). The peak in
the SFRD function which occurs at ψ ∼3 M⊙yr−1, occurs
at IRX ∼1.4 in this breakdown. While the SFRD function
decreases sharply towards higher SFRs, however, the decline
towards higher values of IRX is much more shallow, with a
non-trivial fraction of the total SFRD coming from highly
extincted systems. 13 ± 1% of the total star formation rate
volume density comes from systems with IRX> 2, dusty
systems with a factor of 100 diﬀerence between their IR and
UV luminosities.
4
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented an analysis of the IR- and UV-selected
luminosity functions for galaxies in the z ∼0 Universe. We
make use of large survey datasets (> 10, 000 galaxies) from
the IRAS and GALEX satellites to provide us with good
number statistics; we also utilise the Local Volume Legacy
survey to extend the ﬁeld relations 1-2 orders of magnitude
deeper than before, probing the faintest visible star forming
galaxies. Our main conclusions are as follows:
• The distribution function of star formation in the local
Universe has a faint end slope of α = −1.51 ± 0.07. This
appears to be constant and monotonic as far back as the
data allow us to go, down to the faintest dwarf galaxies
with star formation rates < 0.001 M⊙yr−1.
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
log ψ [MO
 • /yr ]
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
IRX
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
−6
−5.5
−5
−4.5
−4
−3.5
−3
log ψ ϕ(ψ)
Figure 10. The star formation rate volume density function as a
function of SFR (Fig. 5), further expanded in a second dimension
(along the ordinate) to show the breakdown with IRX. The ‘z’
axis represents ψ Φ(ψ). The dotted line shows the IRX-SFR rela-
tionship derived from the LIR vs. E(B – V) relationship given by
Hopkins et al. (2001). E(B – V) was converted into AFUV using
the Cardelli (1989) extinction law with RV = 3.1, which gives
AFUV = 8.0 E(B – V). IRX and ψ were obtained from AFUV and
LIR as above.
• The star formation rate volume density of the local (z ∼
0) Universe is found to be 0.025 ± 0.0016 M⊙yr−1Mpc−3.
The distribution function of star formation rate volume
density shows that this value is predominantly driven by
modest star forming galaxies, with star formation rates
of ∼3 M⊙yr−1, similar to the Milky Way. ‘Starburst’
galaxies, with SFRs ⩾10 M⊙yr−1, contribute 20% to the
local cosmic star formation rate density.
• In contrast to the high-z Universe, LIRGs and ULIRGs
play only a modest role in determining the total star
formation rate volume density, contributing 9 ± 1% and
0.7 ± 0.2% respectively.
• The distribution function of ratio LIR/LFUV, ‘IRX’,
behaves somewhat diﬀerently to that of star formation,
despite the strong correlation. The low-IRX slope is compa-
rable, but the high-IRX slope is signiﬁcantly shallower, and
is very poorly ﬁt by a standard Schechter function. This
is partly attributable to the addition of geometric eﬀects
(whereby edge-on galaxies have inﬂated extinctions relative
to their face-on counterparts), and vary the bright end
slope β to the data provides a good ﬁt for β = 0.63 ± 0.09.
• Breaking down ψ Φ(ψ) with IRX, it can be seen that
the peak of SFRD occurs at IRX ∼1.4. Extremely dusty
systems contribute a minor but signiﬁcant fraction to the
total SFRD, with 13 ± 1% coming from dusty galaxies with
IRX> 2.

The z ∼0 star formation distribution function
13
