Topological and Semantic Graph-based Author 
Disambiguation on DBLP Data in Neo4j 
 
 
 
 
Valentina Franzoni§†, Michele Lepri°, Alfredo Milani† 
 
 
§ Department of Computer, Control, and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy 
† Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Perugia, Italy 

° Engineers Professional Association of Perugia, Italy 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this work, we introduce a novel method for 
entity 
resolution 
author 
disambiguation 
in 
bibliographic 
networks. Such a method is based on a 2-steps network traversal 
using topological similarity measures for rating candidate nodes. 
Topological similarity is widely used in the Link Prediction 
application domain to assess the likelihood of an unknown link. A 
similarity function can be a good approximation for equality, 
therefore can be used to disambiguate, basing on the hypothesis 
that authors with many common co-authors are similar. 
Our method has experimented on a graph-based representation 
of 
the 
public 
DBLP 
Computer 
Science 
database. 
The results obtained are extremely encouraging regarding 
Precision, Accuracy, and Specificity. Further good aspects are 
the locality of the method for disambiguation assessment which 
avoids the need to know the global network, and the exploitation 
of only a few data, e.g. author name and paper title (i.e., co-
authorship data).  
 
Keywords—disambiguation; 
entity 
resolution; 
semantic 
networks; topological similarity; link prediction; bibliometrics; 
graph-based database; Neo4j; NoSQL Database; co-authorship 
network; social network analysis 
 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The diffusion of online social networks with ubiquitous 
access and redundant data can be a challenge for using 
additional information in order to prevent ambiguity. Entity 
Resolution (ER is the task of identifying and linking different 
manifestations of real-world objects, compensating for the 
lack of data quality, such as incorrect or missing data or 
attributes change over time. ER is essential for several 
applications, starting with simple de-duplication tasks. For 
instance, for a company or for a political party, which rely on 
a database of people who declared their interest in a 
product/service/activity or were automatically added to the 
list, to promote or send an advertisement to a de-duplicated set 
of people could be an economic advantage. More complex 
applications include, among others, recommender systems, 
social network analysis, and digital library management for 
research bibliometrics. In the latter, authors and other 
inventory metadata should be unambiguously identified and 
referred to the organisation/topic/journal context related to 
their production. 
Disambiguation is a solution to the Entity Resolution 
problem, recognising and clustering such different object 
manifestations in groups corresponding to the same object, i.e. 
identifying 
which representation objects are different 
phenotypes of the same real object. Disambiguation is, in fact, 
the task of identifying entities referring to the same object in a 
set of candidates [1], [2]. 
Link Prediction (LP) [3] is a method establishing the 
strength of ties in a graph, e.g. a social network [4] or a 
bibliographic database. The more the strength, the more robust 
the ties among potential collaborators, e.g. co-authors. 
Topological similarity is a suitable candidate method for 
link prediction. We hypothesise that authors with many 
common co-authors are similar [5], [6]. In fact, if anyone 
looks at himself as if he was another person, it is easy to guess 
that a proper evaluation function for similarity will give a high 
evaluation to such two ambiguous candidates (i.e., him as an 
observer and him as observed).  
In this project we propose a new approach for link 
prediction 
using 
topological 
(e.g. 
Adamic, 
Common 
Neighbours) and semantic similarity (e.g. Confidence, PMI 
and PMING). We aim to predict future links or infer existing 
unknown links from a social network on Neo4j as a graph-
based database. The workflow for the experimentation, 
performed on DBLP, includes the following phases: import 
DBLP in Neo4j, import information about links (e.g. 
authorship, publication), import useful metadata (e.g. year of 
publication), link prediction through graph-based data query, 
result evaluation. The main idea is that it is useful for link 

prediction to use a graph-based database in order to quickly 
perform queries on the links on common-neighbours, in a 
much more efficient way than on SQL-based databases, or 
even edges lists, especially for long paths.  
Furthermore, our experiments apply, to bibliometric 
analysis, previous models for semantic similarity and link 
prediction, stating that it is possible to generalize semantic 
similarity under the assumption that similar concepts co-occur 
in documents/databases indexed by a search engine, and that 
the 
information 
on 
common-neighbours 
of 
common-
neighbours (up to a maximum path length of three) are 
effective and efficient for link prediction. Both semantic and 
topological similarity measures make profit from suboptimal 
results of computations, where approximations to evaluate 
frequencies and probabilities can be used to calculate semantic 
proximity or distance. Which measure to use, and how to 
optimize the extraction and the utility of the extracted 
information, are open issues to which we contribute with our 
results. 
In the following sections, we will define and explain the 
Entity Resolution problems of data quality, consider 
topological similarity for link prediction as a potential 
disambiguation method and expose our experiments in the 
realm of bibliographic data using DBLP [7] in Neo4j [8]. We 
will use a 2-steps traversal disambiguation with topological-
similarity-based link prediction, then discuss the results of our 
preliminary experimentation phase and present conclusions 
about the proposed approach. 
 
II. 
DATA QUALITY AND DISAMBIGUATION 
 
 
Widely recognised properties for data quality include the 
following [9]: 
• 
Relevance. Data meet the needs for which they are 
collected.  
• 
Accuracy. Data cannot be protected against every 
error, but the grade of accuracy of the primary 
variables of interest can be defined and evaluated.  
• 
Timeliness. Concerns about how current does the 
information need to be, in order to make predictions.  
• 
Comparability. Defines if it is appropriate to compare 
several databases to facilitate data use in modeling 
statistical estimators.  
• 
Coherence. Data are logically interconnected and 
consistent.  
• 
Completeness. No records are missing; no records 
have missing elements.  
 
Unfortunately, many organisational data do not meet these 
requisites. In the case of bibliometric research data, poor data 
quality can be due to situations such as: 
• 
Incorrect data: values are recorded incorrectly in the 
data entry phase, e.g. typographical or spelling 
mistakes, or information is incorrect, e.g. the wrong 
postal code in a postal address.  
• 
Missing data: values are not recorded, e.g. missing 
university department and address information, when 
only the name of the academy is given.  
• 
Attributes change over time, e.g. an author changing 
affiliation, or an institute changing the name, as 
happened in last five years in Italian universities, 
where faculties were eliminated as institution level, 
and departments changed names and sometimes 
merged.  
• 
Irrelevant data: relevant information is submerged in 
poorly structured data, e.g. poor or diverse data 
formatting.  
• 
Imprecise data: information is not recorded at the 
desired level of granularity, making a wrong use of a 
proper format, e.g. name and surname inverted, 
wrong level on the specificity of the affiliation (for 
example confusing laboratory or research group, a 
department with faculty or university).  
 
Furthermore, acronyms, abbreviations, and data truncation, 
among others for space limitations, can vary from publication 
to publication. Translations can also introduce issues, e.g. 
original name versus English name, or different translations of 
the same institutional name. Although most authors indicate 
their affiliation with an English name, translation from the 
original entity name may not be univocal, and therefore 
difficulties may arise to credit the same institution for 
publications in which it was indicated with different names.  
 
An excellent approach to the solution will include prevention, 
detection and repair of disambiguation [10]–[12]. Henk Moed  
[13] assesses that the best disambiguation method is the 
human manual one. 
 
III. 
TOPOLOGICAL SIMILARITY FOR LINK PREDICTION 
 
Common Neighbours-based (CN) rankings (e.g. Jaccard, 
Adamic-Adar) [14], [15] represent a class of similarity 
measures for link prediction, which efﬁciently assess the 
likelihood of a new link based on the neighbours frontier of 
the already existing nodes [16]. The CN similarity measures 
are more performant than others (e.g. preferential attachment, 
path-based distances [17]–[21]) in link prediction [22], [23], 
but they present the drawback of returning a large 0-tail: a 
zero-rank value is given to all the links of pair of nodes, which 
have no common neighbours. Even if the rating is equal to 0, 
such links may be potentially suitable for link prediction [24], 
[25]. 
Let a training network G=(V,A) at time t, with N nodes and 
undirected arcs AVxV, and let a given test network 
G’=(V,A’), where G’ is an extension of G at time t+k and 
AA’. The classic link prediction problem is to rank with a 
function r(G) the set of potential links Apot which could appear 

in G’, such that the new links Anew are ranked ﬁrst. A perfect 
rank function (Kendall 1938) would return all the Anew links in 
the ﬁrst |Anew| ranking positions: 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
We provide here the definition of three common-
neighbours-based similarity measures : the simple Common 
Neighbours (CN), the Adamic-Adar (AA), and the Pointwise 
Mutual Information (PMI) [26]. 
Given two papers p1 and p2 of authors a1 and a2: 
• 
1=CN(a1,a2) is a simple query in Cypher, the 
Neo4j query language, which counts the number 
of elements in the path like the following: 
match 
p=(a1:Author)-[*..2]-(a2:Author) 
where 
a1.AuthorName="a1.name" 
and 
a2.AuthorName="a2.name" 
return p as path;                 (2) 
• 
2=PMI(j1,j2)=log[p(j1,j2)(p(j1)p(j2)]            (3) 
• 
3=AA(a1,a2)=Sum(1/log[degCN(a1,a2)])      (4)    
 
Note that (3) is originally a semantic similarity measure [27], 
[28] of which we provided a novel topological definition in a 
graph. 
 
IV. 
TWO-STEPS TRAVERSAL DISAMBIGUATION 
 
Assume to start from a bipartite graph authors-papers-
authors (see Fig.1), where authors may be ambiguous or 
partially disambiguated: this is the typical situation of a 
bibliographic database like the public DBLP Computer 
Science database when a new article is indexed. There can be 
specific information indicating an author identifier or, more 
likely, such information is not present. In particular, DBLP is 
extremely poor of information about the content of the papers. 
The hypothesis is to have two authors a1 and a2 of two 
different papers p1 and p2: we aim to evaluate through each 
paper the similarity of the two authors, i.e. the likelihood that 
a1 and a2 are the same person (i.e., a1==a2). This problem is 
present only if a1 and a2 have similar names, or the same 
name or abbreviation, i.e. a1.fullName==a2.fullName or 
a1.abbreviatedName|Surname==a2.abbreviatedName|Surna
me. 
The two-steps traversal consists of 3 phases: 
• 
Phase 1: starting from the node a1, evaluate her 
co-authors a11...a1n for her paper p1. 
• 
Phase 2: from the node a2, evaluate her co-
authors a21...a2n for her paper p2. 
• 
Phase 3: the similarity measure  is applied to p1 
and p2, i.e. to the occurrences of authors and co-
authors of p1 and p2. 
 
 
 
 
I. 
EXPERIMENTAL PHASE 
Please note that, for the nature of the similarity measures 
presented in section III, paper nodes without common 
neighbours will have similarity equal to 0, for the 
phenomenon of the 0-tail [24]. 
Moreover, concerning classical Link Prediction (LP), the 
similarity of the two ambiguous candidates a1 and a2 is not 
directly calculated with (a1,a2), but applying the measure to 
the papers of a1 e a2. The two-steps traversal consists in 
navigating the path author-paper-author two times. 
It is noticeable that the two-steps evaluation requires only 
local visits to the graph between a1 and a2, being very 
efficient. 
All the i topological similarity measures for LP have been 
slightly modified so that the function excludes the initial 
authors from the neighbour count of p1 and p2.  
 
For our experiments, we chose the graph-based database 
Neo4j as a proper NoSQL database for quick path traversal 
queries. The main program has been developed in C# using 
Neo4j APIs. As a dataset, a dump of the online Computer 
Science Database DBLP has been imported in Neo4j. 
As an ambiguous author name, we chose to use the 
Chinese name Chen LI. LI is among the most frequent 
surnames in China, and Chen Li is among the most ambiguous 
names in DBLP, present with 24 versions, 23 of which are 
disambiguated with an identifier (see Fig.2), and 1 is a big 
furball of ambiguous LIs.  The total amount of papers written 
by all the Chen LIs in DBLP is 72295. 
 
author 
paper 
Fig.  1: Two-steps disambiguation: 
two-steps(a1,a2)=(p1,p2), where p1 is a paper of a1 
and p2 is a paper of a2, and  is a similarity measure 
a1 
a2 
p2 
p1 

 
Fig.  2: A subset of the Chen LIs in DBLP 
 
The disambiguation classification of DBLP has been used 
as a Ground Truth, while our algorithm does not include any 
knowledge about the identifiers of the Chen LIs. 
Noticeable that the database also presents a particular case of a 
paper co-authored by two different Chen LIs, one of whom is 
ambiguous and the other disambiguated, providing a further 
detail in the Ground Truth. 
In our experiments, all the pairs of papers written by Chen 
LI have been evaluated, producing a similarity assessment for 
each pair of candidate Chen LIs. The similarity measures i 
applied are 1=Common Neighbours (CN), 3=Adamic-Adar 
(AA), and 2=Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI), which are 
among the most performant for Link Prediction. 
A rating of the pairs of authors have been obtained, where 
the value of  is considered positive (i.e. a1==a2) if greater 
than a threshold . In the baseline experiment, =0. 
Comparing the resulting classification with the DBLP Ground 
Truth (i.e. disambiguated Chen LIs with identifiers), we 
verified the classes of True Positive (TP), False Positive (FP), 
True Negative (TN), and False Negative (FN) and from the 
count of such classes, we calculated the evaluation metrics of 
Precision, Accuracy, Specificity and Sensitivity. 
 
II. 
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
 
 
Experimental results are very good for Precision, Accuracy 
and Sensitivity. The experimented similarity measures all have 
good results: AA and CN have excellent performances, while 
PMI shown to be less performant, still obtaining Precision 
around 70% and Accuracy around 80%. 
It is noticeable that the negative rate includes the 0-tail, for 
the cases where two papers of the same author do not have 
common co-authors: in such cases, the value of the similarity 
measures based on common neighbours is equal to 0, therefore 
affecting the false negative classification. The 0-tail is 
particularly visible in the evaluation of Sensitivity, i.e. Recall, 
i.e. 
True 
Positive 
rate=TP/(TP+FN), 
where 
the 
FN 
classification 
influences 
the 
total 
value. 
On the other hand, the positive classification is exact and 
performant (Specificity, i.e. True Negative rate=TN/(TN+FP) 
is greater than 0.95% for all the similarity measures), because 
of a low FP count. The only errors are on the papers in 
common for the Chen LIs who co-authored the same paper. 
The result of the direct application of our approach leads to 
partitioning the ambiguous set of candidate authors in clusters 
of common authors. In order to avoid such partitions, a 
solution may be to apply a transitive closure of the relation “is 
the same author” obtained by the disambiguation method or 
to use a significative third category of data (i.e. metadata, e.g., 
affiliation, publication, year) to reduce the false negatives.  
 
VI 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
We introduced a novel local method in bibliometrics for 
authors disambiguation, applying topological similarity 
measures on a graph-based database in its implementation on 
DBLP data on Neo4j. Among the definition of the used 
topological similarity measures, 
we included a new 
topological definition of the Pointwise Mutual Information, 
initially a semantic similarity measure. 
Experiments have shown very encouraging results: a 
deepening study is in course.
