arXiv:1005.2815v1  [cs.AI]  17 May 2010
Evolving Genes to Balance a Pole
Miguel Nicolau1, Marc Schoenauer1, and Wolfgang Banzhaf2
1 INRIA Saclay - ˆIle-de-France
LRI- Universit´e Paris-Sud, Paris, France

2 Memorial University
Newfoundland, Canada

Abstract. We discuss how to use a Genetic Regulatory Network as an
evolutionary representation to solve a typical GP reinforcement problem,
the pole balancing. The network is a modiﬁed version of an Artiﬁcial
Regulatory Network proposed a few years ago, and the task could be
solved only by ﬁnding a proper way of connecting inputs and outputs
to the network. We show that the representation is able to generalize
well over the problem domain, and discuss the performance of diﬀerent
models of this kind.
1
Introduction
Knowledge of biological systems has come a long way since the inception of the
evolutionary computation ﬁeld [1]. Their remarkable ﬂexibility and adaptivity
seems to suggest that more biologically based representations could be applied
as representations for program evolution, i.e., Genetic Programming (GP). The
objective of this paper is exactly that - to apply a recent biological model as a
basis for some GP representations.
We are interested here in a complexiﬁcation of the genotype-phenotype map-
ping, a process that seems to contribute to a higher evolvability of genomes [2].
A central piece of this mechanism is the regulation of genes by genes, what has
become known as Genetic Regulatory Networks (GRNs).
GRNs are biological interaction networks among the genes in a chromosome
and the proteins they produce: each gene encodes speciﬁc types of protein, and
some of those, termed Transcription Factors, regulate (either enhance or in-
hibit) the expression of other genes, and hence the generation of the protein
those genes encode. The study of such networks of interactions provides many
interdisciplinary research opportunities, and as a result, GRNs have become an
exciting and quickly developing ﬁeld of research [3].
The question of how to use a GRN approach for GP is a challenge that is
being recognized only slowly by GP researchers. While some progress has been
made [4,5], there is yet to be proposed a proper uniﬁcation of the counteracting
tendencies of networks to produce dynamics and continuous signals versus the
boolean logic and operator-operand-based methodology of traditional GP.

In this contribution, we shall study whether and how the Artiﬁcial Gene
Regulatory Model proposed in [6] can be used to achieve the function tradition-
ally implemented by control algorithms, by applying it to a classical benchmark
problem of control engineering, pole balancing.
Along the way, we hope to learn how to use this type of representation
for problems usually solved with less evolvable representations. Our goal is to
arrive at a ﬂexible and at the same time very general representation useful in
GP in general. While we are not there yet, we have made progress notably by
ﬁnding ways to couple input and output to artiﬁcial GRNs, a feature of utmost
importance in Genetic Programming.
This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the GRN model used,
along with an analysis of its behaviour and modiﬁcations done in order to adapt
it to the evolution of solutions for typical GP problems. Section 3 then describes
the problem and the evolutionary algorithm we shall use to solve it. Section
4 describes some of the experiments conducted, and ﬁnally Section 5 draws
conclusions and discusses future work directions.
2
Artiﬁcial Gene Regulatory Model
2.1
Representation and dynamics
The model used in this work [6] is composed of a genome, represented as a
binary string, and mobile proteins, which interact with the genome through
their binary signatures: they do so at regulatory sites, located upstream from
genes. The resulting interaction regulates the expression of the associated gene.
Genes are identiﬁed within the genome by Promoter sites. These consist of
an arbitrarily selected 32 bit bit pattern: the sequence XYZ01010101 identiﬁes a
gene, with X, Y and Z representing each an arbitrary sequence of 8 bits.
If a promoter site is found, the 160 bits (5×32) following it represent the gene
sequence, which encodes a protein. This protein (like all others in the model) is
a 32 bit sequence, resulting from a many-to-one mapping of the gene sequence:
each bit results from a majority rule for each of the ﬁve sets of 32 bits.
Upstream from the promoter site exist two additional 32 bit segments, rep-
resenting the enhancer and inhibitor sites: these regulate the protein production
of the associated gene. The attachment of proteins to these regulatory sites is
what regulates this production. Fig. 1 illustrates the encoding of a gene.
The binding of proteins to the regulatory sites is calculated through the use
of the XOR operation, which returns the degree of match as the number of bits set
to one (that is, the number of complementary bits between both binary strings).
The enhancing and inhibiting signals regulating the production of protein pi
are calculated by the following equation:
ei, hi = 1
N
N
X
j=1
cj exp(β(uj −umax))
(1)

Fig. 1. Bit string encoding of a gene. If a promoter site is found, the gene information
is used to create a protein, whose quantity is regulated by the attachment of proteins
to the enhancer and inhibitor sites.
where N is the total number of proteins, cj is the concentration of protein j,
uj is the number of complementary bits between the (enhancing or inhibitory)
regulating site and protein j, umax is the maximum match observed in the cur-
rent genome, and β is a positive scaling factor. Because of the exponential, only
proteins whose match is close to umax will have an inﬂuence here.
The production of pi is calculated via the following diﬀerential equation:
dci
dt = δ(ei −hi)ci −Φ(1.0)
(2)
where δ is a positive scaling factor (representing a time unit), and Φ(1.0) is a
term that proportionally scales protein production, ensuring that P
i ci = 1.0,
which results in competition between binding sites for proteins.
2.2
Initialisation
Genomes can be initialised either randomly, or by using a duplication and mu-
tation technique [6]: it consists in creating a random 32 bit sequence, followed
by a series of length duplications with a typical low mutation rate associated. It
has been shown [7,8] that evolution through genome duplication and subsequent
divergence (mostly deletion) and specialisation occurs in nature.
In the following, genomes that have been initialized using a sequence of Dupli-
cations and Mutations will be termed “DM-genomes” by contrast to the “random
genomes”.
2.3
Input / Output
Most GP-like problems associate a given set of input values with a set of re-
sponses (or outputs), and then measure the ﬁtness of an individual as the diﬀer-
ence between the responses obtained and the known correct outputs. However,
the model as presented in [6] is a closed world. This Section will now extend it
with I/O capabilities, so that it can be applied to typical GP problems.

Model Input In order to introduce the notation of an input signal, the current
model was extended through the insertion of extra proteins: regulatory proteins
not produced by genes, which are inserted into the model at a given time.
Like the proteins which are produced by the genes in the model, these are
also 32-bit binary strings, and like the other regulatory proteins, they cooperate
in the regulation of the expression of all genes, through the application of Eq. 1.
However, since they are not produced by speciﬁc genes, their concentration is
always the same across time (unless intentionally modiﬁed, see below).
As these are regulatory proteins, their concentration is considered to take up
part of the regulatory process. This means that the diﬀerential equation used
(Eq. 2) to calculate the expression level of TR-genes is changed as follows:
dci
dt = δ(ei −hi)ci −Φ(1.0 −
Nep
X
j=N+1
cj)
(3)
where N + 1, . . . , Nep are the indices of the extra proteins in the model, and
Φ(1.0 −PNep
j=N+1 cj) is a term that proportionally scales protein concentrations,
such that the sum of all protein concentrations (gene expression and extra pro-
teins) adds up to 1.0.
These extra proteins can be associated with problem inputs in two ways:
– The binary signatures of the proteins represent the input values;
– The concentrations of the proteins represent the input values.
Each has its advantages and disadvantages. Setting binary signatures allows
evolution to exploit binary mutation to ﬁnd useful matches between binary sig-
natures, but has a low resolution for continuous domains. Setting quantities is
more adequate to represent continuous domains, but can be hard to tune - a low
extra protein concentration will hardly inﬂuence the regulatory process, whereas
a high concentration might crush the role of TF-genes.
Model Output As mentioned before, each gene in the model encodes a tran-
scription factor, which is used in the regulatory process. In nature, however, these
are only a subset of the proteins expressed by genes. One could have proteins
with diﬀerent roles in the model, and use some as outputs of the model.
Keeping this idea in mind, the model has been adapted, so that diﬀerent
kinds of promoters can be detected, to identify diﬀerent types of gene. This
allows one to give speciﬁc roles to the proteins produced by each type of gene.
In this work, two types of genes were identiﬁed in the model: genes encoding
transcription factors (TF-genes) and genes encoding a product protein (P-genes).
The ﬁrst ones act just like in the original model [6]: their proteins regulate
the production of all genes, regardless of their type. The second ones are only
regulated: their actual output signal is left for interpretation to the objective
function. In order to identify diﬀerent types of genes, the genome is scanned for
diﬀerent promoter sites. Dropping the ambiguous sequence used in the original
model (see Section 2.1), the following binary sequences were used: XYZ00000000

to identify TF-genes, and XYZ11111111 to identify P-genes, as they have both
the same probability of appearing (and no overlapping of their signatures).
Note that a previous approach for extracting an output signal from this model
exists [9], where a random site of the genome is used as a regulation site, but
despite the results achieved, it does not oﬀer the same degree of ﬂexibility as the
technique now presented.
Dynamic analysis Several possibilities exist, when choosing the dynamic equa-
tion to use when calculating the concentration of P-proteins. In order to keep
with the nature of the model, equations based on the calculation of concentration
of TF-proteins were tested; the following equation was used:
ct
i = ct−1
i
+ δ(ei −hi) −Φ(1.0)
(4)
where ct
i is the concentration of the P-protein at time t, ct−1
i
its concentration
at time t −1, ei and hi are calculated as before at time t −1, and Φ(1.0) is a
scaling factor, ensuring the sum of all P-proteins concentrations3 is 1.0.
This equation was chosen as it seems to give P-genes similar dynamics to
TF-genes, for both random genomes and DM-genomes
3
The Problem: Single-Pole Balancing
The potential of using gene regulatory networks as a representation for an Evo-
lutionary Algorithm lies in their possibly rich, non-linear dynamics [9]. A famous
dynamic control benchmark is the pole-balancing problem [10,11], also known
as the inverted pendulum problem. It consists in controlling, along a ﬁnite one
dimensional track, a cart on which a rigid pole is attached. The command is a
bang-bang command: the user can apply a constant force to either side of the
cart. The objective is to keep the pole balanced on top of the cart, while keeping
the cart within the (limited) boundaries of the track.
There are four input variables associated with this problem:
x ∈[−2.4, 2.4] m is the position of the cart, relative to the centre;
θ ∈[−12, 12] ◦is the angle of the pole with the vertical;
˙x ∈[−1, 1] m/s is the velocity of the cart on the track;
˙θ ∈[−1.5, 1.5] ◦/s is the angular velocity of the pole.
The physical simulation of the cart and pole movements is modelled by the
following equations of motion:
¨θ(t) =
g sin θ(t) −cos θ(t)

F (t)+ml ˙θ(t)2 sin θ(t)
mc+m

l

4
3 −m cos2 θ(t)
mc+m

¨x(t) =
F (t)+ml ˙θ(t)2 sin θ(t)
mc+m
−ml ¨
θ(t) cos θ(t)
mc + m
3 Concentrations of TF-proteins and P-proteins are normalised independently.

where g = 9.8 m/s2 is the gravity, l = 0.5 m the half-pole length, F(t) = ±10 N
is the bang-bang command allowed, m = 0.1 kg and mc = 1.0 kg are the masses
of the pole and the cart respectively.
A time step of 0.02s is used throughout the simulations. A failure signal is
associated when either the cart reaches the track boundaries (x = ±2.4m), or
the pole falls (i.e., |θ| > 12◦).
The resulting controller accepts the four inputs, and outputs one of two
answers: push the cart left or right (with constant force F(t) = ±10N).
3.1
Encoding the Problem
The four inputs were encoded using extra proteins, as explained in Section 2.3.
These had the following signatures:
x: 00000000000000000000000000000000
θ: 00000000000000001111111111111111
˙x: 11111111111111110000000000000000
˙θ: 11111111111111111111111111111111
They were chosen such that their signatures are as diﬀerent as possible. Their
concentration dictates their value: each of them had the corresponding value of
the input variable, scaled to the range [0.0, 0.1]. This means that the cumulated
regulatory inﬂuence of these extra proteins ranged from 0% up to 40%.
The GRN was allowed to stabilize ﬁrst, and then tested against a random
cart state, as seen in the literature. This is thus a very noisy ﬁtness function,
as several combinations of the four input variables result in unsolvable states
(i.e. the pole cannot be balanced). Success is dictated by a successful series of
120000 time steps without the cart exiting the ±2.4m track, or the pole falling
beyond the ±12◦range. The (minimising) ﬁtness is thus:
F(x) =
120000
sucessful time steps
The output action extracted from the genome is the concentration of a single
P-protein: a concentration above 0.5 pushes the cart right, and vice-versa. In
the current work, all P-genes that are present in the genome are tested, and the
most successful one is used.
As relevant concentration must be close to 0.5, small genomes were used (the
higher the number of P-genes, the lower the probability of having a 0.5 P-protein
concentration). The genomes were hence initialised with only 7 DM events, with
2% mutation rate, generally leading to very small genomes.
As an alternative to this approach, another technique was used, which con-
sists in extracting the derivative of the chosen P-gene expression: if the derivative
is positive between measuring times (i.e. if the concentration of the P-protein
increased), then the cart is pushed right; otherwise, it is pushed left. If there was
no change in its concentration, then the previous action is repeated.
Another choice lies with the synchronisation between the cart model and
the regulatory model, that is, when to extract the current concentration of the

elected P-protein and feed it to the cart model. As the interval of update for
the cart model is 0.02s, the interval of measurement of the P-gene was set to
2000 time steps. This is however arbitrary, and could become a parameter to
optimise, as it could be set diﬀerently for diﬀerent genomes (some genomes have
slower reactions, others have faster ones).
3.2
The Evolutionary Algorithm
The evolutionary algorithm used to evolve the binary genomes was an evolution-
ary strategy (250+250)−ES: 250 parents give birth to 250 oﬀspring, and the best
250 of all 500 are used as the new parent population; a maximum of 50 iterations
were allowed. The only variation operator used was a simple bit-ﬂip mutation,
set to 1% and adapted by the well-known 1/5 rule of Evolution Strategies [12]:
when the rate of successful mutations is higher than 1/5 (i.e. when more than
20% mutation events result in a reduction of the error measure), the mutation
rate is doubled; it is halved in the opposite case. However, to avoid stagnation
of evolution, if the number of mutation events (i.e. the number of bits ﬂipped
per generation) drops below 250, the mutation rate is doubled.
4
Results and Analysis
Fig. 2 shows the average ﬁtness evolution for 50 independent runs, for both
expression measurement approaches. Both approaches solve the problem quite
fast, but it is obvious that using product tendency gives faster convergence to
an optimal solution. This is an expected result: when using P-protein absolute
values, the concentration of a P-protein has to be fairly close to 50%, in order
to provide a solution. However, when using P-protein tendency, the starting
concentration of the P-protein has no inﬂuence on the behaviour of the cart.
Fig. 2. Mean best individual per generation for the pole-balancing problem, when using
P-protein concentration (left) or tendency (right). All results are averaged across 50
runs; error bars plot variance between runs.

4.1
Generalisation Performance
Whitley et al. [11] proposed a generalisation test to assert whether the discovered
solution is robust. Once a controller is evolved that can balance the pole for
120000 time steps with a random setup, the evolution cycle is stopped, and
this controller is applied to a series of generalisation tests. These consist of
combinations of the four input variables, with their normalised values set to the
following: 0.05, 0.275, 0.50, 0.725, and 0.95. This results in 54 = 625 initial cases.
The generalisation score of the best individual found is thus the number of test
cases out of these 625, for which the controller manages to balance the pole for
1000 time steps.
All 50 runs found solutions for this problem, using either P-protein concen-
trations or P-protein tendencies (for both random and DM-genomes). At the
end of each run, the generalisation test was applied to the best individual in the
population; Table 1 shows the results obtained.
Table 1. Generalisation results. Number of successful attempts to balance the pole for
1000 time steps, out of 625 test cases
Approach
Best Worst Median Mean Std. Dev.
Product
random genomes 422
3
194
202.18
110.01
Percentage
DM-genomes
416
23
237
235.68
107.85
Product
random genomes 359
0
63
85.82
66.99
Tendency
DM-genomes
187
7
77
81.40
48.33
The results obtained show little diﬀerence between random and DM-genomes.
However, there is a big diﬀerence between using P-proteins concentrations or
tendencies, with the former achieving much better results. When using product
tendency, the concentration of P-proteins can easily become 0%: the previous
move is then repeated, and keeps moving the cart leftwards. This creates a disas-
sociation between the product expression and the cart behaviour, which becomes
a handicap when applying the model to some of the harder generalisation tests.
Note that many of the generalisation tests are unsolvable. After an exhaustive
search of all possible bang-bang solutions up to 60 steps of simulation, 168 tests
were found unsolvable (execution time constrains prevented a deeper search).
This means that an ideal controller can only solve 457 (or less) cases. It also
shows that the best result found (422 tests solved), although not as high as one
of the best in the literature (446 solved cases [11]), is still quite close to the
optimum.
Fig. 3 shows a plot of all the generalisation tests that are not solvable at
depth 60, and those that are additionally not solved by the best random and DM-
genome. It shows that cases where θ and ˙θ both take large or small values (i.e. a
large angle in absolute value, together with a large angular velocity increasing
this angle) are unsolvable, and that both genomes additionally fail on cases

that are close to these unsolvable cases. It is interesting to see however how the
unsolved cases of the DM-genome are mostly symmetric in terms of the matrix
of test cases, whereas the random genome is far more unbalanced. This has to
do with the sinusoidal nature of the controllers generated by random genomes,
as can be seen in the next section.
Fig. 3. Generalisation test cases unsolvable at depth 60 (black squares), unsolved by
the best random genome (’X’), by the best DM-genome (’+’), and by both (ﬁlled
circles). Both genomes used P-gene expression levels.
4.2
Pole balancing behaviour of typical networks
Fig. 4 shows example behaviours of the 2 best evolved regulatory models (random
and DM, using P-protein concentrations), applied to 3 diﬀerent generalisation
cases.
It is interesting to observe the diﬀerent approaches to solve the same gener-
alisation test. In particular, one can see how the random genome is quite sinu-
soidal in its approach, whereas the DM-genome generates a much more linear
behaviour.
4.3
Resulting Networks: A typical example
Fig. 5 shows the regulatory networks extracted from the best performing ran-
dom and DM-genomes, at a threshold of 19 (i.e. only connections with a match

x = 0 m
θ = −5.4 ◦
˙x = 0 m/s
˙θ = −1.35 ◦/s
x = −1.08 m
θ = 5.4 ◦
˙x = 0.45 m/s
˙θ = 1.35 ◦/s
Fig. 4. Example progression over time of cart position and pole angle for the best
random genome (left) and the best DM-genome (right), for 2 generalisation tests.
larger than 19 are represented, the other ones having a negligible impact on the
regulation – see Eq. 1). Even with such a low number of genes, one can see that
the regulatory interactions are quite complex. Gene G6 seems to act as a central
regulatory node on the random genome, whereas that role is taken up by G1
in the DM-genome. Note also how few connections exist to the chosen P-genes
(G1 and G3, respectively); however, the extra protein P4 (representing the rate of
change of the pole, ˙θ) is directly connected to these on both genomes. This could
very well be a mechanism for stronger reaction to changes of ˙θ, which has been
shown to greatly inﬂuence the success rate of a balancing attempt (see Fig. 3).
5
Conclusions
One of the main objectives of this paper was to investigate the possibility of
using GRNs as a new representation for program synthesis through Genetic
Programming. Our motivation was that today’s mainstream Evolutionary Com-
putation (EC) approaches are by and large crude simpliﬁcations of the biological
paradigm of natural evolution, not taking into account many advances of biolog-
ical knowledge in the recent past [1]. The artiﬁcial GRN model used [6] presents

Fig. 5. Regulatory networks extracted from best performing random (left) and DM-
genome (right). Hexagon nodes represent TF-genes, double hexagon nodes represent
P-genes, the triple hexagon represents the chosen P-gene, and triangles represent the
4 extra proteins. The networks were drawn using a threshold value of 19.
an interesting balance between biological accuracy and computational potential,
and was proposed as a good basis to introduce more accurate biological basis for
EC.
The results obtained show that there is a clear computational potential within
the model; it should therefore be possible to use other similar models as basis
for EC techniques.
The adaptation of such models to EC is not straightforward. As these are
mostly complex systems, a thorough comprehension of their exact dynamics is
often not possible. The choice of how to encode inputs and outputs is also not a
simple issue, and can greatly inﬂuence their computational potential.
Another key issue is the execution speed. While their biological equivalent
systems are extremely fast, at the moment these computer models are somewhat
slow, and the model used here is no exception. In order to accelerate the regu-
latory reactions, several tricks were used, such as adapting the sampling time of
the diﬀerential equation (the δ parameter), and parallelization by distributing
the evaluation of genomes across a cluster – the resulting average execution time
of a single run was around 25 minutes, when executing the code on 8 recent
machines running in parallel. Of course, a fascinating possibility to overcome
this issue would be to synthesize the resulting GRN into biological medium.

Regarding this problem, some parameters could be optimized (e.g. by evo-
lution). First, the signature and concentration of the extra proteins: a deeper
understanding of their inﬂuence on the regulatory process is necessary; it could
very well be that their inﬂuence is far too strong for the moment.
Second, the synchronisation between the biological and physical models. As
mentioned before, diﬀerent models have diﬀerent reaction times (for example,
stabilization times for genomes of this size may go from a few thousand iterations
up to hundreds of thousands); each genome would therefore need to tune its
synchronisation period individually.
Future work will now focus on extensive testing of the new extended GRN
model on various problem domains. The most promising ones seem to be dynamic
control problems, as these might proﬁt the most from the remarkable dynamic
properties of the model. But the ﬂexibility of this representation allows one to
imagine more GP-like approaches. For example, even though only 2 types of
proteins were used, a lot more could be introduced - and potentially represent
the equivalent of GP functions or terminals. The change of their concentrations
over time could then represent priorities of execution, or even probabilities. Work
is under way to explore these new avenues of investigation.
