Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
YULIYA TUKMACHEVA, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia
IVAN OSELEDETS∗, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia
EVGENY FROLOV, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia
We introduce the novel approach towards fake text reviews detection in collaborative filtering recommender systems. The existing
algorithms concentrate on detecting the fake reviews, generated by language models and ignore the texts, written by dishonest users,
mostly for monetary gains. We propose the contrastive learning-based architecture, which utilizes the user demographic characteristics,
along with the text reviews, as the additional evidence against fakes. This way, we are able to account for two different types of fake
reviews spamming and make the recommendation system more robust to biased reviews.
ACM Reference Format:
Yuliya Tukmacheva, Ivan Oseledets, and Evgeny Frolov. 2022. Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive
Learning. 1, 1 (January 2022), 15 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
The recommender systems are deeply integrated into many popular online commercial platforms at present. These
platforms collect data about both users’ and items’ attributes, as well as accumulate the ratings and feedback of
products and services, to develop algorithms for significant enhancement of users’ experience on the marketplace.
These algorithms are capable of influencing the purchasing behavior of users by (1) offering them the selection of the
most relevant personalized positions, (2) reducing the individual searching costs, and (3) alleviating the information
asymmetry on large commercial platforms with homogeneous sellers and products through feedback mechanisms. Since
recommender systems have the power to affect the marketing decisions of users, they have become an attractive target
for ratings and reviews manipulations, also known as attacks. Specifically, these attacks are aimed at inflating/deflating
the ranks and text reviews of certain product positions or at simply sabotaging the efficiency and credibility of the the
commercial platform in general.
The current study focuses on solving the task of filtering out the deceptive opinions and detecting anomalous
behavior on a platform with text reviews. The emphasis on text reviews can be explained by the fact that texts are
a more informative and a more reliable source of product’s and seller’s quality, than a star-rating system, which is
easy to manipulate (see [19], [14], [27], [28]). The deceptive opinions can be generated in two ways: (1) by hiring
the professional human writers to review the product for monetary gains, and (2) by exploitation of state-of-the-art
(SOTA, here and after) automated language models to imitate the human speech, and this distinction is crucial, since
∗Also with Artificial Intelligence Research Institute.
Authors’ addresses: Yuliya Tukmacheva, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 121205, Moscow, Russia; Ivan Oseledets, Skolkovo Institute of

skoltech.ru.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to

© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2301.03025v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2023

2
Tukmacheva et al.
the existing algorithms do not address this difference and focus merely on filtering out the artificial text reviews [22]
and do not account for the problem of hiring the professional writers. One should not underestimate the size of the
dishonest reviews writers market, since almost 4% of all online reviews are the dishonest opinions of real humans, and
this leads to over $152 billion costs in revenues of online marketplaces12.
The purpose of the current study is to develop the machine classifier, which the recommender platforms can use to: (1)
detect opinion fraud attacks, which are generated by SOTA generative language models, such as the transformer-based
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT)-models (see [21], [5]), and (2) filter out the biased texts of dishonest human
writers, and, hence, ensure the system’s robustness to these two type of attack strategies. Generally, the recommender
systems, especially, the collaborative filtering-based3 ones, face the problem of the cold-start, such that the new users,
who do not have the history of interactions, behavioral traces or defined preferences, cannot be automatically and
adequately distinguished from the newly created profiles. The current study covers the limitations of previous works and
addresses both types of attacks in a cold-start regime. To achieve this, we exploit the user demographic characteristics,
alongside the text reviews, as an additional source of evidence against fake opinions [22], following the premises of
paper of [1], which uses the user attributes to detect the attack on a star-rating system. The logic behind this is the
following: the users with the same attributes are most likely to have the same preferences. Since the demographic
information about users is not a common knowledge and is available to the system’s administrator(s) only, the attackers
would create the user profiles with randomly assigned metadata. This way we assume that the genuine text reviews
are attached to user attributes in latently, so that the fake texts (both written by humans and language models) do not
demonstrate such a connection.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
• The setup of connecting the text reviews with user metadata to filter out the fake text reviews is new and has not
yet been covered by existing works. The idea of exploiting the latent connections between the text reviews and
demographic metadata has not been tested yet, and the recommender systems may use the proposed approach
to filter out the fake text reviews more efficienly than before. Thus, the present research becomes the baseline
for other studies in the following area.
• The current work addresses the problem of detecting both the dishonest users and the usage of generative
language models. The existing algorithms and approaches concentrate exclusively on the detection of artificially
generated texts and ignore the cases of dishonest humans writing the biased texts for monetary gains. The
proposed method accounts for these two types of attacks, making the recommender system more robust and
trustworthy.
• The present research enriches the data base for fraud detection in recommender systems with two data sets.
The first data set is a processed and enlarged Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata, extended with
carefully engineered features obtained from user metadata and supplemented with labels, extracted from proposed
sampling procedure. This data set can further be used to train and test the algorithms for real users’ dishonest
reviews. The second data set is the collection of fake text reviews, generated by the GPT-J-6B model [25] and
augmented with randomly assigned user demographic attributes, which can further be exploited for training and
1https://theprint.in/opinion/almost-4-of-all-online-reviews-are-fake-their-impact-is-costing-us-152-billion/715689/.
2https://www.cs.uic.edu/ liub/FBS/fake-reviews.html.
3The collaborative-filtering-based recommender systems exploit the connections in clusters of users with similar preferences to make automated
recommendations.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
3
testing of the models for artificially generated text reviews detection. The processing and engineering of these
defined data sets is described in more details in Section 3 and Section 3.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 covers the existing papers on fraud detection in recommender
systems and discusses their shortcomings. Section 3 describes the methods and introduces the theoretical framework of
the current research. Section 4 covers the empirical application, reports the estimation results and runs the comparison
experiments. Section 5 discusses the obtained results, reviews the research limitations and concludes.
2
RELATED WORK
The industrial need for robust and effective fake detection algorithms prompts the extensive research in this study
area. One promising direction of the research in attacks detection on recommender systems is devoted to simulation of
attacks in a dynamic Nash reinforcement learning setting (see [9], [17], [24]). This approach implies the simulation
of the attack environment and defining the cost functions of malicious users to deduce their optimal strategy and to
counteract it. However, this method is not valid in the setting of large online marketplaces in which the heterogeneous
attackers with different cost functions and motives may be present. The proposed approach covers this limitation and is
capable of working with heterogeneous malicious agents and does not depend on attackers’ strategy approximation.
Also, the proposed approach is able to cope with the setup in which the same user may be defined as malicious and
reliable, when the real human acts as a spammer for some category of items and as an ordinary customer for another
category. Our model considers each pair of attributes and texts as independent of the previous interactions and is able
to account for such (although, practically rare) situations.
Another group of models for fraudulent profiles detection exploits diverse collection of statistical metrics for
filtering the anomalies. Existing works propose such statistics as (1) deviation from the median value in a suggested
recommendation set of products [14], (2) rating items with extreme rating and sentiment values [27] and (3) ratings
falling within the tight time windows [28]. Nonetheless, the proposed statistics are easy to circumvent and the more
advanced detection metrics should be applied.
There is another direction of research, which utilizes the clustering methods (see [15], [3]). These models try to
determine the highly-connected cliques of users and exploit the clustering methods to determine anomalous profiles.
The SOTA clustering models for fakes filtration are Support Vector Machine-based (SVM) models. In [2] the Support
Vector Machine + Gaussian Mixture Model (SVM-GMM) is introduced, and in [23] the Support Vector Machine +
Principal Component Analysis (SVM-PCA) approach is used. However, the named approaches suffer from the cold start
problem. The proposed approach accounts for each observation as a new one and, thus, detects the fakes in a cold start
regime.
More advanced techniques for attack detection in recommender systems are the latent variable models, which encode
the genuine and fake types of users. In [16], the latent variable model is employed to reveal the user type by solving
the program of maximization the entropy of ratings distribution in a star-rating system. In [26], the latent variable
model relies on counteracting the adversarial poisoning attacks, which is the process of fake profiles generation that is
intended to minimize the empirical risk. The algorithm described in [1] also uses the generative factor model, which
utilizes the user metadata as an additional source of evidence against fake ratings. We use the premises of this model in
the current study, though all of the named variational inference models are developed for star-rating platforms and
ignore the text reviews manipulation. As outlined above, the star-rating system on its own is not very informative
for users, and the text reviews are considered to be a more reliable source of information for customers. Therefore,
Manuscript submitted to ACM

4
Tukmacheva et al.
the approach which is capable of working with text reviews, written both by humans and language models, is more
socially desirable. Thus, the assumptions mentioned in [1] has inspired the usage of user metadata to generate the
model, capable of working with text reviews and of filtering two types of attack strategies. This problem has not yet
been investigated by the existing papers, and, henceforth, there are no baselines to compare the proposed approach
with. The SOTA approach for determining the fakeness of the text review based on the review only has been proposed
in [22]. It introduces the procedure of fake reviews generation, using the GPT-2 model [21], and the fine-tuning of
a Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach (RoBERTa) [18] model to classify the text reviews into real and
fake. We use this model as the benchmark to compare our proposed approach with. This way we can also check if user
metadata indeed helps to determine the fakeness of the review.
3
METHODS
3.1
Fake Reviews Generation Procedure
3.1.1
GPT-J-6B model. To simulate the fake reviews attacks, we intend to use the SOTA unsupervised transformer-based
multitask language models, specifically, the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT here and after) models (see [21],
[5]).
These models are supposed to perform multitask learning, such as machine translation, text summarization and
comprehension, as well as question answering. The current research exploits the GPT-J-6B [25] model, which is a
democratized open-source version of the GPT-3 model [5] , latest generation of the GPT-model, to generate the answer,
following the processed query-answer history.
GPT-J-6B model is an autoregressive model, produced by EleutherAI, for text generation, which is the stacked
set of transformer decoder blocks, each of which is the sequence of masked self-attention layers, encoder-decoder
self-attention layers and feed-forward neural networks. It has 6 billion parameters and has been trained on the large
Pile data collection [11], which is an 800GB text data set for training the language models. Given the text context, the
model aims at predicting the next word in a given sequence. Having been taught on a large scope of text data, the
model demonstrates relatively good performance on different zero-shot down-streaming tasks [10][6], generating the
syntactically concise texts, capable of mimicking the real human speech. GPT-J-6B model relies on transfer learning,
so that no additional training and data set adjustments are necessary to solve the task. Therefore, we can form the
query-answer prompts to be processed by the GPT-J-6B model to obtain the fake reviews on a large scale.
3.1.2
Generation Procedure. Having the collection of the text reviews as the examples of real texts, the malicious users
can exploit the SOTA generative models to simulate the human written speech. We have developed the procedure to
generate fake reviews, based on the real reviews, with the following steps:
(1) Standard preprocessing of the text reviews;
(2) Extracting the keywords of each text review with TextRank4Keywords algorithm;
(3) Choosing a subset of keywords to send to prompt;
(4) Randomly changing the keywords to synonyms/antonyms;
(5) Forming the query-answer prompt to use in GPT-J-6B model for fake review generation;
(6) Sampling the user attributes and randomly match them with fake texts to generate the attackers’ profiles data
set;
(7) Merging the fake data set with a random subset of the original data set to get the balanced data collection for the
fakes classification task.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
5
Step 1. Standard preprocessing of the text reviews, such that the removal of redundant symbols and stopwords is
performed.
Step 2. Then we should shuffle the data set and group it by categories. For each category, iteratively, we take 4
reviews and extract the keywords from each of them with TextRank4Keywords algorithm. The TextRank4Keywords
algorithm is based on PageRank algorithm calculates the weights for websites, representing the web pages as a directed
graph, via the following formula:
𝑆(𝑉𝑖) = (1 −𝑑) + 𝑑·
∑︁
𝑗∈In(𝑣𝑖)
1
|Out(Vj)|𝑆(𝑉𝑗),
where 𝑆(𝑉𝑖) is the weight of 𝑖th node (web page), 𝑑is the damping factor used for nodes with no outgoing connections
(we set 𝑑= 0.85), In(𝑉𝑖) is a set of in-going connection of node 𝑖, Out(𝑉𝑗) is a set of out-going connections of node 𝑗.
To use PageRank for texts, we split each review into sentences and specify the window size 𝑘(we set 𝑘= 4). Thus,
any two-word pairs in a window represent the undirected edge and then calculate the weights of such a graph, using
the formula above. After this, we take 10 most important words in a text review. For simplicity, we specify the POS tags
of words and analyze only the nouns, verbs, adverbs and adjectives.
Step 3. We randomly choose one-fourth of a set of unique keywords from each of 4 processed text reviews in a
category. We will use it as basis words for prompt generation.
Step 4. Since the GPT-based models seem to be sensitive to words used in previous queries, such that for seen words it
returns the example answer, we should change all the words to their random synonyms. Therefore, we change all words
in the subset to their synonyms, if such exist. Also, it is important to note that the attackers intend to inflate/deflate the
rankings of products, so that they would generate the texts with desired sentiment. For this reason, with probability
0.5, we change each of selected key words to their antonyms to account for the case in which all of the reviews are
majorly positive/negative. This way, we would get the reviews with diverse sentiment and enrich the data collection
with different texts.
Step 5. We generate the query-answer prompt in the following way. We take keywords from each review and
consider them as queries. The answers to these queries would be the real text review, corresponding to these keywords.
Then, as a query for the fake review, we send the random subset with synonyms/antonyms and ask the generative
transformer-based model to generate the review.
Step 6. Having the collection of fake review texts, one can match these texts with random user attributes. Since the
information about the distribution of user metadata is not a common knowledge, the attackers just randomly assign the
user characteristics. For this, we randomly sample the user attributes from real metadata and assign them to fake text
reviews.
Step 7. We choose the random subset of the original data set and merge it with the created data set. This way, we get
the balanced data set, twice as long as the fakes data set, which one can use for fakes classification task.
3.2
Sampling Procedure for Human Spammers Detection
Having the data set with real text reviews and corresponding user demographic characteristics, we can modify this
data collection to simulate the human spammers attack. To create the data set for fakes filtration amongst dishonest
Manuscript submitted to ACM

6
Tukmacheva et al.
real users, one should perform the following pipeline, described in Algorithm 1. Before sampling, one should obtain
the embeddings of each text review in the data set, using the multilingual Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT here and after) (cased) [8]. Then, for each text review we calculate the average text embedding
of size (1, 768). Then, one should choose the random observation 𝑘with text review and attributes from User 𝑖. With
probability 2/34 we leave the text review-attributes pair as is and label such pairs as positive. With probability 1/3 we
choose any User 𝑗(𝑗≠𝑖) to match the 𝑘th observation with. Then, among all the reviews written by User 𝑗, we take the
one, which is the most dissimilar to 𝑘th text review (in terms of embeddings comparison). For this, we calculate the dot
product between the embedding vector of 𝑘th review and the matrix 𝑅𝑒𝑣_𝑗of embedding vectors of all reviews written
by User 𝑗. After this we choose the text review 𝑚with maximal dot product and swap the user attributes, such that for
the 𝑘th text review we assign User 𝑗’s metadata and for the 𝑚th text review we assign User 𝑖’s metadata. Such shuffled
pairs we label as negative. This way, we get the balanced data set with half of the user attributes shuffled to ensure that
the connection between the text review and user demographic characteristics is lost (negative pairs) and half of the
data left as is (positive pairs). Then we should train the contrastive learning-based model to distinguish between the
positive and negative pairs of user attributes embeddings and text embeddings, so that the embeddings for the negative
pairs are maximally different and for the positive pairs are maximally close in terms of the Euclidean distance. The
contrastive learning setup for the current task is describes in more details in Chapter 2, Section 2.3.
4The choice of probabilities ensures that, on average, the resulting data set would be balanced.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
7
Algorithm 1 Sampling Procedure for Human Spammers Detection Data Set
Input: shuffled data set with text review embeddings D.
Output: balanced data set with negative and positive pairs.
1: 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥←𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒(0, len(D))
2: for 𝑘←0 to len(D) do
3:
if 𝑘in 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥then
4:
𝑐𝑜𝑖𝑛_𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑝∼Bern(𝑝= 2/3)
5:
if 𝑐𝑜𝑖𝑛_𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑝= 1 then
6:
remove 𝑘from 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥
7:
add label = 0 to 𝑘th row in D
8:
else if 𝑐𝑜𝑖𝑛_𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑝= 0 then
9:
𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟_𝑖←D.𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒[𝑘]
10:
𝑟𝑒𝑣_𝑖𝑘←D.𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤[𝑘]
11:
sample 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟_𝑗from D.𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠\ 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟_𝑖
12:
𝑅𝑒𝑣_𝑗= [D.𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑠[D.𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒== 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟_𝑗][idx if idx in 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥]]
13:
𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑒𝑚𝑏_𝑖𝑑𝑥= argmax (𝑅𝑒𝑣_𝑗× 𝑟𝑒𝑣_𝑖𝑘)
14:
swap text embeddings with indices 𝑘and 𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑒𝑚𝑏_𝑖𝑑𝑥
15:
remove 𝑘from 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥
16:
remove 𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑒𝑚𝑏_𝑖𝑑𝑥from 𝑢𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑖𝑑𝑥
17:
add label = 1 to 𝑘th row in D
18:
add label = 1 to 𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑒𝑚𝑏_𝑖𝑑𝑥th row in D
19:
end if
20:
end if
21: end for
3.2.1
Multilingual BERT (cased). For obtaining the embeddings of the review texts, we use the multilingual BERT
(cased) [8], since the data set contains text reviews written in different languages.
This transformer model is self-supervised and has been trained on the large Wikipedia collection of texts in 104
languages with the masked language modeling objective. The architecture of BERT is similar to GPT-based models and
represents the stacked transformer encoder blocks, consisting of the sequence of self-attention layers and feed-forward
neural networks. This approach implies that the model randomly masks some words in the sentence (replaces them to
the MASK token) and is trained to predict these masked words, and this ensures that the model gives the bidirectional
text representation as the output. We use the pre-trained multilingual BERT (cased) to extract the contextualized
representations of each token (vector embeddings) in the text review. First, we tokenize the sentences in each review,
converting it to a list of words in the review and padding it to the maximal length or 512, and pruning if the sentence is
of length greater than 512. Then, we obtain the indices from the tokenizer output, so that for each token we get its
index in the BERT vocabulary dictionary, and obtain the attention mask, which contains 1s for unpadded tokens and 0s
for padded ones. Next, we send the indices and attention mask to the BERT model to get the contextualized embeddings
for each sentence in the text review. After this, for each text review we compute the average text embedding vector to
use in the contrastive learning setup.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

8
Tukmacheva et al.
3.3
Contrastive Learning Setup
We follow the approach described in [12]. Having the similar (positive) and dissimilar (negative) pairs of vectors as
outputs of the 𝐺𝑊deep neural network, parametrized by 𝑊, 𝐺𝑊(𝑋1) and 𝐺𝑊(𝑋2), we define the interpoint distance
between them as the Euclidean distance (approximation of the “semantic similarity”):
𝐷𝑊(𝑋1,𝑋2) = ||𝐺𝑊(𝑋1) −𝐺𝑊(𝑋2)||2 .
Then, we define the contrastive loss in the following way:
L(𝑊) =
𝑃
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐿

(𝑊, (𝑌,𝑋1,𝑋2)𝑖
,
𝐿

𝑊, (𝑌,𝑋1,𝑋2)𝑖
= (1 −𝑌)𝐿𝑆

𝐷𝑖
𝑊(𝑋1,𝑋2)

+ 𝑌𝐿𝐷

𝐷𝑖
𝑊(𝑋1,𝑋2)

,
where 𝑋1 and 𝑋2 are the vectors in pair, 𝑌= 0 is a target label for similar (positive) pairs, 𝑌= 1 is a target label for
dissimilar (negative) pairs, (𝑌,𝑋1,𝑋2)𝑖is the 𝑖th sample pair, 𝐿𝑆is the partial loss function for positive pairs, 𝐿𝐷is the
partial loss function for negative pairs, and 𝑃is the number of samples.
One should use such functions 𝐿𝑆and 𝐿𝐷, such that minimization of 𝐿with respect to 𝑊results in low values of
distance 𝐷𝑊for positive pairs and high values of 𝐷𝑊for negative pairs. The choice of the corresponding partial loss
functions satisfies this condition:
𝐿𝑆(𝑊,𝑋1,𝑋2) = 1
2 (𝐷𝑊(𝑋1,𝑋2))2
𝐿𝐷(𝑊,𝑋1,𝑋2) = 1
2 (max (0,𝑚−𝐷𝑊(𝑋1,𝑋2)))2 ,
where 𝑚> 0 is the margin, which corresponds to the radius around 𝐺𝑊(·), so that the negative pairs are accounted for
only if they are inside the margin. This can be seen through computation of the gradients of these functions:
𝜕𝐿𝑆
𝜕𝑊= 𝐷𝑊
𝜕𝐷𝑊
𝜕𝑊
𝜕𝐿𝐷
𝜕𝑊=


0, if 𝐷𝑊> 𝑚,
−(𝑚−𝐷𝑊) 𝜕𝐷𝑊
𝜕𝑊, otherwise,
so that low values of 𝐷𝑊generate a gradient to decrease 𝐷𝑊in case of 𝐿𝑆, and the reverse situation is valid for case of
𝐿𝐷because of the negative sign.
The current approach solves the problem of minimization of the defined contrastive loss in the deep neural network
setting, which is covered in the next subsection.
3.3.1
Deep Neural Network Architecture. We use the multilayer perceptron (MLP) architecture, similar to siamese
ones, introduced in [7], [4]. It consists of two branches of function 𝐺with the same parameters set, corresponding to
processing (1) the average text embedding vector (𝑋1) and (2) the embeddings of categorical and numerical features
(𝑋2), as defined in Figure 15. Both of the inputs (𝑋1 and 𝑋2) are passed through the corresponding branches, yielding
the outputs 𝐺1
𝑊(𝑋1) from the first branch and 𝐺2
𝑊(𝑋2) from the second branch, respectively. Then, we calculate the
pairwise distance between both outputs of the branches, which represent the vectors, and then use this distance scalar
value to calculate the partial losses (𝐿𝑆and 𝐿𝐷) and the total contrastive loss 𝐿. Both outputs of the branches represent
5Based on approach described in https://yashuseth.wordpress.com/2018/07/22/pytorch-neural-network-for-tabular-data-with-categorical-embeddings.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
9
the vectors and the label of the pair (𝑌) are then passed to the contrastive loss. The parameters of the network 𝑊are
then updated via Adam optimization algorithm, so that the gradients are calculated through back-propagation of the
contrastive loss value. The total gradient is the sum of contributions of two branches’ outputs.
We also use the regularization tricks, such as the weights initialization, dropouts and batch normalizations, to tackle
the overfitting. The results of experiments with generated data sets are present in Chapter 3.
Fig. 1. Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) architecture, which has been used in the outlined contrastive loss setting.
3.4
fakeRoBERTa Benchmark
As it has been stated above, the problem statement of the current research has not been investigated in the recommender
systems community. Therefore, there are no valid algorithms to compare our model with in terms of quality metrics.
The SOTA approach in the topic of fake reviews detection has been proposed in [22] and creates the fakeRoBERTa
language model to classify text collection into the fake (generated by GPT-2 [8] model, discussed above) and the real
ones. We will use this approach as the benchmark and check if the exploitation of the user metadata helps in the fake
reviews detection.
The authors collect the data set of fake reviews, generated by the GPT-2 model and then fine-tune the RoBERTa model
for the specified classification task. They use different architectures of language models to account for the possibility of
data leakage and classification model’s overfitting to dependent generative model’s language style. The results show
that fakeRoBERTa has the accuracy of 96% and it is the highest performance score amongst compared OpenAI models
on text classification tasks. Also, the authors conduct the crowdsourcing experiment regarding the comparison between
human and computer detection of fake reviews. They have found that human performance is insignificantly better
than the random classification on the generated data set, implying the advances of attacks, employing the generative
language models. However, the authors address the problem of fake generative reviews detection, ignoring the human
spammers, writing the reviews for monetary gains.
This chapter introduces the numerical experiments conducted in the current study. First, it outlines the languages
and programs that have been used in the research. Then, it describes in detail the data set that has been used for training
and validation of the proposed contrastive learning-based approach. After this, it introduces the quality metrics that
has been used for checking the performance of the proposed approach and its comparison with the SOTA RoBERTa
Manuscript submitted to ACM

10
Tukmacheva et al.
benchmark for determining the genuineness of the text review. Finally, the experiment results and the benefits of the
proposed method are provided.
4
NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Data Sets
4.1.1
Data Set for Human Biased Reviews Filtration.
Data set description. The data set that satisfies the setup of the current study should contain both users’ demographic
characteristic and the corresponding text reviews. The only open-source data set available for training and testing the
proposed approach is the Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata6 [13] [20]. This data set from Google is a large
collection (approximately 11.5 million) of text reviews and 5-star ratings from 4.5 million users on 3.1 million local
businesses (48k categories of restaurants, shops, schools, hotels, beauty salons, hospitals, etc) all around five continents.
The data set also contains customers’ demographic characteristics, such as user names and ids, GPS-coordinates of the
current location, coordinates of previous places lived, education and job history (places and positions/majors), and
review timestamps.
We have carefully processed the defined data set and extended it with several engineered features. The final augmented
Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata has the following features:
(1) current country (categorical:
200 categories),
(2) number of places lived (numer-
ical),
(3) education degree (categorical:
5 categories),
(4) number of places studied (nu-
merical),
(5) education major (categorical:
101 categories),
(6) current profession (categorical:
101 categories),
(7) number of previous jobs (nu-
merical),
(8) unemployment (categorical: 2
categories),
(9) retired (categorical: 2 cate-
gories),
(10) local business category (cate-
gorical: 51 categories),
(11) text review length (numerical),
(12) number of unique words in the
review (numerical).
We have also performed the sampling procedure for the contrastive learning setup, described in Chapter 2 and added
the binary label target variable, which takes value 0 if the text-attributes pair is positive and 1, otherwise. This way, we
get half of the data marked as positive pairs, which assumes the latent relation between user metadata and review texts,
and half of the data marked as negative pairs, such that the user attributes are shuffled and assigned to text reviews of
other users in a non-random way. Henceforth, we get the data set, which represents the attack of human spammers,
who write biased text reviews.
4.1.2
Data Set for Generative Language Models Texts Detection. We have also compiled a new data collection of fake
reviews, generated by language models. We have formed the query-answer prompts for the GPT-J-6B model [25], based
on Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata texts, following the procedure described in Chapter 2. According to the
premises of the [1], we assume that the malicious users, who do not have access to the distribution of user attributes,
would fill in the demographic information about themselves in a random way, and, therefore, the connection between
the user attributes and text reviews would be violated in case of fake profiles. Henceforth, to simulate the attack of fake
6https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/ jmcauley/datasets.html#google_local.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
11
profiles, we have randomly sampled the user attributes for each of the fake review text and have obtained the data set,
which simulates the attack of generative language model with fake random user metadata.
4.2
Metrics
In the current research we intend to train the multilayer perceptron (MLP), defined in Chapter 2, to reduce the distance
between outputs of both branches if the input pair has been positive, i.e. there is the match between the user demographic
characteristics and the written text, and increase the distance, otherwise. For this we solve the optimization problem of
the contrastive loss minimization.
Since both of the generated data sets are balanced, we can use the accuracy as the quality metric. Having the trained
model, which pushes aside the attributes embeddings and average text embeddings for negative pairs and brings
together these embeddings for positive pairs, during evaluation we can compare the pairwise distance between model’s
outputted vectors with the threshold. For the current experiments we take the threshold equal to 0.5.
The fakeRoBERTa benchmark also uses the accuracy as a quality metric. It also minimizes the negative likelihood
loss, which is defined as
log P(D|𝜃) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
 𝑦𝑖log ˆ𝑦𝜃,𝑖+ (1 −𝑦𝑖) log  1 −ˆ𝑦𝜃,𝑖
 ,
where D is the data observed, 𝜃denotes the parameters to optimize, and ˆ𝑦𝜃,𝑖is the probability of the 𝑖th observation to
be labeled positive.
4.3
Experiment Results and Comparison with Existing Algorithms
We have compared the performance of the proposed algorithm in two classification settings:
(1) distinguishing between real humans writing the text reviews with their user metadata unchanged (i.e. the
connection between the user demographic characteristics and text review embeddings is left as is), and real
humans writing biased reviews with their user metadata shuffled (i.e. the defined connection is violated), and
(2) distinguishing between the text reviews written by real honest humans and by generative language models.
Honest Users vs Human Spammers. We have used the proposed contrastive learning setup, on one of the generated
data sets (based on the Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata, consisting of 496′320 observations) with half of
the data left as is (positive pairs) and half of the data shuffled (negative pairs), according to the procedure, defined in
Chapter 2. We split data into 80-20% chunks for training and validation sets. We have trained the proposed architecture
for 30 epochs. The results are shown in Table 1 and the training and validation metrics behavior is given on Figure 2.
The accuracy metrics are not very high and display not very stable training performance, but they set a good
baseline for future algorithms to be built upon. These values also set a good research question: whether there is a
strong connection between the texts, written by people, and their demographic attributes. It may be the case that this
connection is too subtle to be grasped by machine models.
Honest Users vs Language Models. We have also utilized the proposed approach for another generated data set, which
consists of 14𝑘real text reviews and user attributes (positive pairs), randomly chosen from the original Google data
set, and 14𝑘artificially generated text reviews with randomly assigned user metadata. We have also split the data into
80-20% training and validation chunks, respectively, and have also trained the model for 30 epochs. The values of the
contrastive losses and accuracy metrics for training and validation data sets can be found in Table 1 and on Figure 3.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

12
Tukmacheva et al.
Table 1. Loss and Accuracy values for training and validation sets on Honest Humans vs Human Spammers and Honest Humans vs
Language Model classification tasks for the proposed approach and the fakeRoBERTA benchmark.
Setup
Humans vs Humans (Con-
trastive Learning)
Humans
vs
Language
Model (Contrastive learn-
ing)
Humans
vs
Language
Model (fakeRoBERTA)
Training Contrastive Loss
1213.82
22393.25
-
Validation Contrastive Loss
1112.41
22466.42
-
Training NLLoss
-
-
1.01
Validation NLLoss
-
-
0.96
Training Accuracy
0.73
0.62
0.49
Validation Accuracy
0.66
0.60
0.5
Fig. 2. Contrastive Loss and Accuracy metrics plots for training (orange) and validation (blue) sets on Honest Humans vs Human
Spammers classification task.
Fig. 3. Contrastive Loss and Accuracy metrics plots for training (orange) and validation (blue) sets on Honest Humans vs Language
Model classification task.
One can observe that both metrics are worse off, compared to Humans vs Humans setup. It may be explained by the
fact that the language model has been trained on real reviews and may have given overfitted text reviews as outputs
and the fact that the training data set is not large enough (only 28𝑘observations).
Comparison with RoBERTa. As it has been outlined before, the approach, proposed in the current study, is novel
and has not any valid benchmarks to compare with. Nonetheless, we are able to conduct comparison of the proposed
algorithm with the SOTA method for fake reviews detection is the fakeRoBERTa [22], which has been trained to
distinguish real reviews from the ones generated by GPT-2 model [8]. We have followed the training pipeline, provided
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Mitigating Human and Computer Opinion Fraud via Contrastive Learning
13
by authors, and have fine-tuned RoBERTa to classify real reviews and the ones, generated by GPT-J-6B [25] on 5 epochs.
The accuracy and negative likelihood loss values are shown in Table 1.
As it can be observed from training results, the performance of fine-tuned fakeRoBERTa is no better than random
guess, so that the generated reviews are very similar to the real ones. It also shows, in comparison to proposed approach,
that the user demographic attributes, indeed, help to distinguish between real and generated text reviews.
Benefits of the Proposed Method. The experimental results show the significant improvement of the proposed
method over the SOTA fakeRoBERTa for fake reviews detection in terms of the accuracy metric. Also, the studied
algorithm shows decent quality for both classification tasks, making it efficient for fakes filtration among humans and
language models. Nonetheless, a deeper linguistic and psychological investigation is needed to determine if the metrics
performance of the proposed algorithm are the result of non-appropriate neural network architecture or the complexity
of the connection between user attributes and written texts, in general. However, the current method discovers a new
approach for fake text review detection and can serve as a good baseline for future algorithms both for human biased
reviews and generative language texts detection.
5
CONCLUSIONS
The current research discovers the novel approach towards fake text reviews detection in the collaborative filtering-based
recommender systems. The proposed method utilizes the user metadata, alongside the text reviews, as the additional
evidence against fake reviews. This way, our method, based on the contrastive learning setup, makes the recommender
platform robust to two kinds of attack strategies: (1) the ones, generated by humans writing biased reviews for monetary
gains, and (2) the ones, generated by language models. The experimental results demonstrate the decent performance
of the proposed algorithm on these two classification tasks, making it superior to the SOTA fakeRoBERTa [22] method,
which processes the texts only. Moreover, we have significantly contributed by generating two data sets, which simulate
both kinds of attacks. The first data set is devoted to Honest Users vs Human Spammers classification task and is
based on the Google Local Business Reviews and Metadata data set, which is further modified by engineering user
demographic characteristics and is pre-processed via proposed sampling procedure. The second data set is a collection
of fake reviews, generated by GPT-J-6B [25] model and augmented with random user metadata, which can be used
for Honest Humans vs Generative Language Models classification task. Overall, the current study proposes a more
universal approach towards fake reviews detection, setting a good baseline for future research.
The current project has faced several research limitations. First of all, the nature of the problem statement implies
the usage of the data set, which contains both the review texts and the user demographic characteristics. The available
open-source recommender systems data sets contain either information about the text reviews or the user metadata,
but not both. The only open-source data set, which satisfies this condition, is the Google Local Business Reviews
and Metadata, which we have conducted our numerical experiments on. However, the experimental results that we
have obtained are valid for this data set and may not be generalisable onto the other recommender system platforms.
Henceforth, there is the need to access the private industrial data sets with both review texts and user attributes to be
at hand to validate our approach on.
Moreover, it has been noted that the problem statement is new for the recommender systems setup and has not been
approached yet. Therefore, there are no valid algorithms to compare the performance of our proposed approach with.
Henceforth, there is the need for further investigation into the matter to develop a more powerful algorithm, having
the proposed one as a benchmark.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

14
Tukmacheva et al.
Another research limitation regards the connection between the review texts and the user demographic data. We
have assumed that the real users’ metadata is latently connected to the text reviews, and that this connection can be
grasped by the deep neural network. It may be the case that the deep neural network architecture used is not very
suitable for this kind of task to grasp this latent connection or that the connection itself is weak and cannot be grasped
by any other model. This limitation should be addressed more specifically through conducting the psychological and
linguistic experiments and checking the strength of connection between users’ demographic characteristics and the
text reviews he/she writes. Also, it may be useful to check the performance of tested approaches on other similar data
sets, as defined above, to check how good the patterns are grasped along different data sets.
