Towards a Cognitive Routing Engine for Software
Deﬁned Networks
Frederic Francois and Erol Gelenbe
Intelligent Systems and Networks
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College, London SW7 2BT, UK

Abstract—Most Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN) trafﬁc engi-
neering applications use excessive and frequent global monitoring
in order to ﬁnd the optimal Quality-of-Service (QoS) paths for
the current state of the network. In this work, we present
the motivations, architecture and initial evaluation of a SDN
application called Cognitive Routing Engine (CRE) which is able
to ﬁnd near-optimal paths for a user-speciﬁed QoS while using a
very small monitoring overhead compared to global monitoring
which is required to guarantee that optimal paths are found.
Smaller monitoring overheads bring the advantage of smaller
response time for the SDN controllers and switches. The initial
evaluation of CRE on a SDN representation of the GEANT
academic network shows that it is possible to ﬁnd near-optimal
paths with a small optimality gap of 1.65% while using 9.5 times
less monitoring.
I. INTRODUCTION
The ossiﬁcation of computer networks due to the use of non-
standardized and closed source protocols between the control
and data plane of commercial Network Forwarding Elements
(NFEs) has led researchers to develop Software Deﬁned Net-
works (SDNs) [1] where open and standardized protocols, such
as OpenFlow (OF) [2], are used to program the data plane of
NFEs. In order to route trafﬁc, SDNs usually make use of
routing applications which runs on top of the SDN controller.
These routing applications make routing decisions based on
network policies and the state of the network but unfortunately,
gathering the state of the network is an expensive activity both
in terms of processing overhead at the controller and NFEs
and control trafﬁc [3]. With this in mind, we develop a new
routing application called Cognitive Routing Engine (CRE)
which signiﬁcantly increases the efﬁciency of the network state
gathering process while obtaining enough information about
the network to calculate the best paths that meet the Quality
of Service (QoS) requirements of the host applications which
use them. The design objectives of CRE are:
• the state of the network should be gathered in an efﬁcient
way, i.e. a minimum number of OF messages should be
exchanged between the SDN controller and the NFEs
during the gathering process since each OF message has
a processing overhead and occupies bandwidth on the
control network of the SDN;
• the optimization of the network monitoring process
should not lead to worse paths being found by the CRE
SDN application;
• the use of CRE should not lead to frequent changes in
the path chosen by CRE for a given trafﬁc ﬂow, i.e.
no frequent oscillations of the path for a given ﬂow by
CRE which can increase the control plane processing and
bandwidth overhead inside SDNs;
• updates to the ﬂow tables of the NFEs must not have
an adverse impact on the trafﬁc being transported by the
NFEs. For e.g., no packet loss and forwarding loops when
ﬂow tables are updated; and
• the implementation of CRE should be compatible with
existing SDN-enabled NFEs so as to enable more net-
work operators to adopt CRE without purchasing new
hardware and software, and avoid lengthy standardization
processes.
II. RELATED WORK
In current literature, most trafﬁc engineering techniques [4]
used in SDN takes the view that SDN provides a global view
of the current network state and topology in a logically central-
ized controller and therefore, optimization can be performed
on the network by running different types of global trafﬁc
engineering algorithms such as constrained shortest path ﬁrst.
In this paper, we take the view that networks can be large and
therefore, it is inefﬁcient to obtain accurate and updated state
information for the whole network at a frequency required for
effective trafﬁc optimization. This view is supported by the
large amount of work that is currently undertaken to reduce
the excessive overhead linked with accurate and frequent
global monitoring the network [3]. Existing work on network
monitoring in SDN can be divided into 2 categories: active and
passive monitoring [3]. Active monitoring involves either the
actual probing of the network by sending special packets [5]
and/or polling the state of the network through OF mechanism,
e.g. retrieving the value of OF counters [2], while passive
monitoring either only observes the existing SDN behaviour to
infer the state of the network, e.g. Packet-In and Flow Removed
OF control messages [6], or calculates the network state based
on the collected sampled packets [7].
The Cognitive Routing Engine developed in this paper is
similar to the routing algorithm that is used in Cognitive
Packet Networks (CPNs) [8]–[11] but with the signiﬁcant and
arXiv:1602.00487v1  [cs.NI]  1 Feb 2016

N1
N3
N2
SDN Controller
CRE
CRAM
NMM
PTM
Link 
Discovery
Other Apps
Network Forwarding Element
Data plane link
Control plane link
Legend
F1,3
H1
H2
Server
5ms
30ms
30ms
5ms
25ms
Fig. 1.
Overall network architecture showing where the Cognitive Routing
Engine is located and how it interacts with other components of the architec-
ture.
important differences that in CPN, each router runs its own
routing and learning algorithm for every source-destination
pair and QoS requirement and, the routers collect the network
state through the use of smart packets and their associated
acknowledgment packets. This is in contrast with CRE which
runs in a logically centralized manner on top of the SDN
controller and uses exclusively OF mechanisms to gather net-
work state. Hence, CRE can be viewed as a SDN-compatible
version of CPN and can be used with the large number of
SDN-enabled switches that has already been deployed. CPN
has been used successful in various settings [12], for e.g.,
trafﬁc engineering [13], routing in wireless [14] and sensor
[15] networks and defence against Denial-of-Service (DoS)
attacks [16].
The main contribution of this paper is a SDN-compatible
CPN application which reduces the amount of network mon-
itoring while maintaining the ability to discover paths which
meet the QoS requirements of host applications.
III. OVERALL ARCHICTECTURE
Fig. 1 shows where the CRE application is located in the
overall SDN architecture and how it interacts with the various
other components of a typical SDN deployment.
A brief description of each component of the overall SDN
architecture is provided as follows:
Network Forwarding Elements (NFE)—are SDN-enabled
packet switches and use OpenFlow v1.3 [2] as the commu-
nication protocol between the control and data plane of the
NFEs in this particular instance.
SDN Controller—a.k.a Network Operating System, is re-
sponsible to send and receive OF messages from the NFEs. In
addition, the SDN controller typically parses the received OF
messages into data structures which can be understood by the
different applications running on top of the controller.
Applications—are pieces of software running on top of the
controller which provides specialized network functions such
Switches
Controller
CRAM NMM
PTM
CRE
New flow F1,3
Packet-in 
Event raised
Request to update paths
Reply with updated network state
Flow-mod OF messages
Request updated network state
Reply with new network state data
1
2
3
Request for new network state data
Request to update paths
Flow-mod OF messages
4
10
5
6
7
8
9
11
Fig. 2.
Message exchange sequence between different components of the
network during an initial ﬂow set-up.
as Network Address Transation (NAT) and ﬁrewall. In this
particular instance, there are 2 applications:
• Link Discovery application—which discovers the data
plane topology of the network by using the standardized
Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) [17]. A link is
deﬁned in this paper as unidirectional.
• CRE application—which efﬁciently ﬁnds and installs new
suitable paths in the network as requested by other SDN
applications. CRE is made of 3 main modules:
– the
Cognitive
Routing
Algorithm
Module
(CRAM)—which uses Random Neural Networks
(RNNs) with Reinforcement Learning (RL) to ﬁnd
network paths which maximize a customizable
objective function and therefore, meet the QoS
requirements of host applications,
– a Network Monitoring Module (NMM)—which efﬁ-
ciently either uses past network measurements and/or
probes and/or poll the network to get the necessary
network state information to update the RNNs in the
CRAM.
– a Path-to-OF Translator Module (PTM)—which is
able to convert the paths found by the CRAM into
the appropriate set of OF messages so that paths are
either created or updated with minimum inconsis-
tency in the network.
IV. MESSAGE EXCHANGE SEQUENCE BETWEEN
DIFFERENT COMPONENTS OF SDN ARCHITECTURE
Fig. 2 provides an example of the sequence of message
exchange between the different components of the SDN ar-
chitecture when a new ﬂow arrives at the network and paths
need to be set up to route the ﬂow through the SDN according
to the network policies set by the network operator. A ﬂow in
the electrical domain is considered by OF as a collection of
packets where the value of a subset of the layer 2 to 4 ﬁelds
are the same and a new ﬂow is one where there is no rule
which matches the ﬂow inside the ﬂow table(s) of the ﬁrst
encountered NFE.
The different steps in Fig. 2 are described below:

• Step 1: A new ﬂow F1,3 arrives at the NFE N1 which
needs to travel to NFE N3.
• Step 2: NFE N1 analyzes the ﬁrst packet of the ﬂow
F1,3 and ﬁnds that there is no rule inside its ﬂow table(s)
which matches the packet. Therefore, N1 encapsulates
the packet into an OF Packet-In message and sends the
message to its master SDN controller since the default
action for a table-miss event was set to forward the packet
to the master controller during the conﬁguration of the
NFE.
• Step 3: The master SDN controller receives the OF
Packet-In message and parses it into a data structure more
suitable for processing by different applications running
on top of the SDN controller. The SDN controller notiﬁes
and sends the data structure to all SDN applications
which have registered with it to receive the OF Packet-In
messages.
• Step 4: Notiﬁed applications decide if they are interested
to perform actions based on the data structure that is sent
by the controller. In this particular scenario, the CRE
application is the only relevant application which will
perform actions due to the new ﬂow F1,3.
• Step 5 & 6: CRE ﬁrst installs a path for ﬂow F1,3
by calculating the shortest path based on hop count
between NFE N1 and N2 by using the network topology
discovered by the Link Discovery application. This allows
packets to be routed in the network fast without waiting
for CRE to collect network measurements and ﬁnd a path
based on RNN which can lead to packet loss. The PTM
module of CRE is responsible to implement the new path
for ﬂow F1,3 in the NFEs by installing the appropriate
OF rules as will be described in Section VII.
Next, CRAM ﬁnds the most suitable links for a given path
request by using RNNs with RL. In order for CRAM to
operate, it needs to gather information about the network
state, which is the responsibility of the NMM in CRE.
The detailed description of how CRAM operates will be
given in the following Section V.
• Step 6, 7 & 8: The NMM receives requests from the
CRAM for certain characteristics of links in the network
so that CRAM can calculate the numeric value of the
objective function of the whole path that it has chosen and
also updates its RNNs so that it chooses better paths in
the future. Currently, NMM can obtain utilization, quality
(based on packet loss and frame errors) and delay of the
links of the network. NMM can retrieve and calculate
link utilization and quality of a given link by using the
OF Port Stats Request messages. On the other hand, OF
doesn’t have any native ability to obtain the necessary
information from the network in order to calculate the
packet delay on a link but the SDN controller can send
probe packets to obtain a good estimate of packet delays
[5]. In addition, NMM is intelligent enough that it does
not always query the network for new data but it can
use its database of recently gathered data to reply to the
requests made by CRAM. This increases the efﬁciency
of the network monitoring process for the whole CRE.
• Step 9: CRAM updates its RNNs through reinforcement
learning based on the data received from the NMM and
will output the best paths found. If paths need to be
updated, they are then passed to the PTM.
• Step 10: The PTM is responsible to implement the paths
in the NFEs by modifying the ﬂow table(s) of the NFEs in
a way which will not lead to packet loss and forwarding
loops in the network. This is explained in detail in Section
VII.
V. CRAM: COGNITIVE ROUTING ALGORITHM MODULE
CRAM is a routing algorithm which is based on Random
Neural Network (RNN) with Reinforcement Learning (RL)
[8]–[11]. For a given ﬂow, a new RNN is created for each NFE
along the path initially found through shortest path routing.
A RNN consists of a network of interconnected neurons
where each neuron represents one active port of the NFE. The
decision of the RNN on which output to use as the next hop
can be either exploratory or exploitation. When the RNN is in
exploratory mode, it chooses the output port randomly while
when the RNN is in exploitation mode, it chooses the neuron
which has the highest potential as will be described in the next
paragraph. Exploratory mode is chosen with a probablity X%,
e.g. 5% [12], of the time and exploitation mode is chosen for
the remaining (1−X)% of the time. If the next hop NFE does
not currently have a representative RNN for this particular
ﬂow, a new RNN is created for it.
Each neuron has a property called potential and the neuron
with the highest potential is selected as the output when the
RNN is in exploitation mode and therefore, the most excited
neuron determines the next hop NFE of the path. The potential,
qi, of neuron i can be calculated by using:
qi =
λ+
i
ri + λ−
i
(1)
where λ+
i
and λ−
i
are respectively the total positive and
negative potential that are transferred from other neurons
connected to neuron i in the RNN. These total potentials are
dependent on both the potential of the neurons themselves and
the weights of the links and can be calculated as:
λ+
i =
X
j∈N
qjw+
j,i + Λ+
i
where j ̸= i
(2)
λ−
i =
X
j∈N
qjw−
j,i + Λ−
i
where j ̸= i
where w+
j,i and w−
j,i are respectively the positive and negative
weight of the link from the other neurons j in the RNN to the
neuron i and N is the set of all neurons in the RNN. Λ+
i and
Λ−
i are the ﬁxed rate at which external positive and negative
spikes arrives at the neuron respectively. ri is a normalization
factor (ﬁring rate in [12]) which is calculated as:
ri =
X
j∈N
[w+
i,j + w−
i,j]
where j ̸= i
(3)

The positive w+
i,j and negative w−
i,j weight of each link
are determined with the help of reinforcement learning. The
current exponential averaged value of the objective function
Osd[t] of a path with source s and destination d is calculated
as follows:
Osd[t] = αOsd[t −1] + (1 −α)(osd[t])
where 0<α<1 (4)
where Osd[t−1] is the previous value of the objective function,
osd[t] is the current value of the objective function and α is the
exponential average parameter which determines the relative
importance of the current value of the objective function
compared to the previous values. If the objective function is
to be minimized, the reward Rsd[t] of the path is calculated as
Rsd[t] =
 Osd[t]
−1. The effect of Rsd[t] on the link weights
in all RNNs along the found path depends on whether Rsd[t]
is greater or less than a threshold γsd[t] with γsd[t] calculated
as follows:
γsd[t] = βγsd[t −1] + (1 −β)Rsd[t]
where 0<β<1
(5)
where β is the exponential average parameter.
If Rsd[t] ≥γsd[t], i.e. the reward of the new path is greater
than the threshold and therefore the RNNs have made the right
decision, the link weights in each RNN is updated as follows:
w+
j,i = w+
j,i+Rsd[t] and w−
j,k = w−
j,k+ Rsd[t]
|N|−2 where j ∈N and
k ̸= i. In the ﬁrst link weight update operation, the positive
link weights from other neurons j to the chosen neuron i are
increased so that the potential qi of neuron i is increased and
the port associated with neuron i is chosen again as output
for the next search if the RNN is in exploitation mode. In the
second link weight update operation, the negative link weights
from neurons j in the RNN to other neurons other than i are
then increased so that their potential is decreased with as end
result the reduction of the probability that their associated ports
will be chosen as output if the RNN is in exploitation mode.
On the other hand, if Rsd[t] ≤γsd[t], i.e. the reward of
the new path is less than the threshold and therefore the
RNNs have made the wrong decision, the link weights in
each RNN is updated as follows: w+
j,i = w+
j,i + Rsd[t]
|N|−2 and
w−
j,k = w−
j,k + Rsd[t] where k ̸= i. In the ﬁrst case, the
positive link weights from neurons j in the RNN to other
neurons other than i are increased so that their potential is
increased and it is more likely that one of them will have its
associated port chosen as the output during the next search
rather than the previously chosen associated port of neuron
i. In the second case, the negative link weights from other
neurons j to the chosen neuron i are increased so that the
potential qi of neuron i is decreased with as end result the
reduction of the probability that the port associated with i
will be chosen as output during the next search.
In order to prevent the link weights W to increase indeﬁ-
nitely, they are re-normalized by ﬁrst calculating the new r∗
i
by using the updated W values in eq. (3) and updating the
link weights as follows: W = W ri
r∗
i .
Furthermore, CRAM keeps a record of the best Z recent
paths found for each path request and the best path out of the
Z paths is used for the actual routing of the trafﬁc ﬂow if the
existing path has been active for longer than minimum time
period to avoid frequent path ﬂuctuations.
VI. NMM: NETWORK MONITORING MODULE
The Network Monitoring Module (NMM) is responsible
for providing to the CRAM and external SDN applications
the characteristics of the links that they request. The link
characteristics that can currently be monitored and calculated
by NMM are: utilization, quality (based on packet loss and
frame errors) and delay. It should be noted that NMM cannot
directly measure these characteristics but can obtain them after
performing operations on measurement information provided
by the NFEs and sending probe packets if necessary. The
NMM is made of the following components:
• Northbound API—allows the NMM to interact with the
CRAM and external SDN applications. The characteris-
tics of links can be requested to the NMM and the NMM
can also receive information from other SDN applica-
tions, for e.g., the links which are active in the network
can be received from the Link Discovery application [17].
• NFEs Database—stores information about the ﬁxed
characteristics of NFEs. During the initial contact be-
tween the NFEs and the SDN controller, the NFEs send
information about their identity and the features that they
support by sending OF Features Reply messages [2] (it
should be noted that the port description in OF v1.3 [2]
is now obtained through the use of OF Port Description
Request/Reply messages). The following information are
stored: NFE Data Plane Identiﬁer (DPID), and the port
number, MAC address and speed (as negotiated between
2 adjacent NFEs) of the different ports of the NFEs.
• Links Database—stores information about the character-
istics of each unidirectional link in the SDN. There are 2
types of characteristics stored about the links: ﬁxed and
non-ﬁxed. Fixed characteristics of the links are: source
NFE DPID s, destination NFE DPID d, source port
number at s, destination port number at d and capacity
b. The non-ﬁxed characteristics are: operational status,
utilization, quality and delay. In addition, each non-ﬁxed
characteristic of the link has an associated timestamp ﬁeld
which stores the time when the characteristic was last
updated.
• Link Delay Monitoring—sends and receives probe pack-
ets in the network in order to measure the delay of a link
in a similar way as in [18]. The detailed procedure will
be described below.
• OF Statistics Gathering—send (resp. receive) OF Port
Stats Requests (resp. Replies) to calculate the utilization
and quality of a link. The detailed procedure will be
described below.
• Southbound API—allows the NMM to interact with
the SDN controller in order to send and receive OF
statistics messages as well as probing packets for delay
measurements.

A. Link Delay Monitoring
A Link Delay Monitoring mechanism based on using only
the features that OF [2] provides so that CRE is compatible
with OF-enabled NFEs which are already deployed in the ﬁeld.
Since the OF protocol as of [2] does not specify that an OF-
compatible NFE can measure and store link delay by itself, it
is necessary to make use of probe packets in order to measure
and calculate the delay of the link between 2 NFEs. The Link
Delay Monitoring mechanism follows the following steps to
calculate the link delay between 2 NFEs Ns and Nd with
source and destination port Ps and Pd respectively:
• Step 1: An OF Echo Request message (with a speciﬁed
transaction id xid) along with an OF Barrier Request
message is sent to NFE Ns and the time TNs it takes for
Ns to reply back with a corresponding OF Echo Reply
(identiﬁed by the xid value) is measured. The same is
done for Nd.
• Step 2: The SDN controller is instructed to send an
OF Packet Out message to NFE Ns where the source
and destination MAC of the packet is set to the MAC
address of the port Ps and port Pd respectively. The MAC
addresses are obtained by using an OF Port Description
Request message in OF v1.3 [2] during the population
of the NFEs Database. The Packet Out message also
contains the single action of outputing the packet on the
port Ps. The Ethernet protocol type of the packet is set to
an arbitrary value, e.g. 0x07c3, so that the SDN controller
can identify the packet as a probe packet. The time Tt
that it takes for the SDN controller to receive the probe
packet from Nd is measured. The delay Dsd between Ns
and Nd is calculated as Dsd = Tt −TNs
2
−
TNd
2
• Step 3: The NMM will instruct the SDN controller to
periodically send probe packets as in step 2 above if the
link continues to be selected by any RNN for probing.
TNs and TNd are periodically measured also since these
may change during the network operation.
B. OF Statistics Gathering
SDN-enabled NFEs have counters [2] which can count
different port characteristics such as sent and received packet
and number of received packet with errors per port. This
information is retrieved on either a per NFE-basis or port-basis
by the SDN controller by sending an OF Port Stats Request
message to the relevant NFE with the port number speciﬁed
if retrieving information on a per-port basis.
To retrieve the following characteristic of a link:
• Utilization—is calculated by ﬁrst obtaining the number
of transmitted bytes A being sent over a links by sending
to the source NFE of the link an OF Port Stats Request
message specifying the port number of the source port of
the link so that only statistics about this port is retrieved
and not for all the ports of the NFE [2]. The utilization
U of a link can be calcutated as:
U = A[t] −A[t −1]
δb
(6)
where δ is the time period between the 2 times at
which the number of transmitted bytes A is polled from
the NFE. δ can be adjusted according to the accuracy
and overhead required, a smaller δ will lead to a more
accurate U but more overhead in terms of processing and
bandwidth used by the control messages.
• Quality—(based on packet loss and frame errors) is
calculated by ﬁrst obtaining the statistics of the source
(s, i) and destination (d, i) ports of the link in the same
manner as above for utilization. The link quality Q can
be calculated by using:
Q =(As,i −ADropped
s,i
−AError
s,i
−Rd,i) + (RDropped
d,i
+
RError
d,i ) + (ADropped
s,i
+ AError
s,i )
(7)
where As,i, ADropped
s,i
and AError
s,i
are respectively the total
no. of packets transmitted, dropped and containing errors
on the transmission pipeline of port i of source NFE s.
Rd,i, RDropped
d,i
and RError
d,i
are respectively the total no. of
packets received, dropped and containing errors on the
reception pipeline of port i of destination NFE d.
C. Optimizing the Network Monitoring Process
The network monitoring process can be optimized through
the following:
• the monitoring information is shared between the differ-
ent RNNs by re-using the monitoring information already
in the monitoring databases if it is recent. This is different
to traditional CPN [11] where each NFE will send smart
packets for each of its RNNs to collect network state.
This allows CRE to have a worst-case/upper bound on
its network monitoring activity that is the same as when
the current global SDN trafﬁc engineering applications
[4] poll every NFEs in the network. Moreover, CRE runs
a global and optimal routing algorithm when it ﬁnds itself
in a scenario where it is monitoring the whole network.
• the NMM will not repeat the network monitoring if last
monitoring was done less than threshold time te ago.
te can be seen as a trade-off between having updated
network state and overhead associated with network mon-
itoring. In addition, te is an adjustable parameter that can
be optimized for e.g., depending on the rate of change of
the link characteristic. If the link characteristic is stable,
then a longer te can be used [19].
• OF statistics are stored in the database and reused if
appropriate and needed. For e.g., 1 RNN may request
the NMM to provide the quality of a link and shortly
after, another RNN may request for the utilization of the
same link. Since OF returns all the port counters after an
OF Port Stats Request message [2], the NMM may have
the updated information already in its database without
having to poll the involved NFE(s) again.
VII. PTM: PATH-TO-OF TRANSLATOR MODULE
The main objective of the Path-to-OF Translator Module
(PTM) is to install and/or update OF ﬂow rules in the network

so that the trafﬁc ﬂow follows the path chosen by CRAM
without any packet loss, forwarding loops and unecessary
Packet-In messages being sent to the SDN controller. PTM
operates in the following manner if the path is made of 2 or
more NFEs:
• New path—OF rules are inserted at the NFEs by starting
with the last NFE of the path to the ﬁrst NFE so that
Packet-In are not triggered by the NFEs for ﬂows for
which CRAM has already calculated a path. For the last
NFE, a rule is added which matches the original ﬂow
with the addition of VLAN ID 1. The actions of the rule
is to remove the VLAN tag and output the packet to the
destination port. Next, the rule with the same match as the
previous rule is added to all intermediate NFEs except the
ﬁrst NFEs of the path. The action of the rule is to output
to the relevant port as selected by CRAM. Finally, for
the ﬁrst NFE of the path, the rule is to match the orginal
ﬂow only with actions being tag the ﬂow packets with
VLAN ID 1 with action of forwarding the ﬂow to the
output port connected to the next NFE of the path.
• Change existing path—OF rules are inserted for all NFEs
except the ﬁrst NFE as the previous case with the
difference that the VLAN ID used is 2 if 1 was previously
used for the ﬂow and 1 if 2 was used. The use of VLAN
tags is used to avoid conﬂict between the old and new
rules for the same ﬂow. The OF rule for the ﬂow in the
ﬁrst switch is modiﬁed so that now it tags the ﬂow packets
with the new VLAN ID and outputs the packet to the port
connected to the next NFE of the new path. Finally, the
old rules in the intermediate and last NFE of the old path
are deleted.
It should be noted that if the source and destination of the
ﬂow is directly connected to the same NFE, CRE does not
need to calculate a path, it just inserts a rule which matches
the ﬂow with the single action of outputing the ﬂow packets
to the port connected to the destination NFE.
In order to automatically remove rules for ﬂows with no
trafﬁc for the last ti seconds, the idle timeout is set to ti for
all the rules inserted in the NFE. The hard timeout is set to
0 so that the network always has a path for a current active
ﬂow even if the controller becomes disconnected.
VIII. EVALUATION
The following evaluations scenarios where carried out using
the SDN emulator Mininet [20] where custom topology can
be deployed with custom delay, bandwidth, packet loss and
queue length for each link.
A. Scenario 1: Delay Detection and Path Switching in illus-
trative network
The aim of scenario 1 is to demonstrate CRE ﬁnding,
monitoring and switching paths in a network where the delay
on links can vary. Scenario 1 uses the topology in Fig. 1 where
the initial link delays are shown in the ﬁgure. When Ping
#1 enters the network with source 1 and destination 2, CRE
ﬁrst installs 2 paths G1,2 = H1 →N1 →N2 →H2 and
0
5
10
15
20
25
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Time, s
Ping Round-Trip Time between H1 and H2, ms
Fig. 3.
Change in Ping Round Trip Time when the delay on links L1,2 and
L2,1 is changed to 200ms in topology of Fig. 1
G2,1 = H2 →N2 →N1 →H1 based on shortest path based
on hop count which also coincidentally gives the paths with
the shortest delay with the Ping Round-Trip Time (RTT) of
120ms, the higher RTT for Ping #1 compared to subsequent
Pings are due to the overhead of notifying the controller of new
ﬂows, calculating paths and inserting rules inside the NFEs.
Then CRE starts to monitor the network based on RNN with
RL. At time 9s in the experiment, the links from/to N1 to/from
N2 L1,2 and L2,1 suffers from increased delay from 25ms to
200ms resulting in the Ping RTT to increase to 420ms. CRE
detects this increase in path delays through its monitoring of
the network, the ﬁrst path that is changed is G2,1 where an
alternative path G2,1 = H2 →N2 →N3 →N1 →H1 is
found which reduces the Ping RTT to 280ms at Ping #18.
Furthermore, the path G1,2 is changed to the G1,2 = H1 →
N1 →N3 →N2 →H2 with the RTT becoming 140ms at
Ping #20. These two new paths found by CRE are the optimal
one for the new network conditions.
B. Scenario 2: CRE convergence and monitoring reduction in
the GEANT operational network
The network topology used is GEANT—a European aca-
demic network which is made up of 23 Point of Presence
(PoP), represented as NFEs in this experiment, and 74 unidi-
rectional links, where the propagation delay of given link is
calculated using the line-of-sight distance between the source
and destination PoP of the link. The experiment objective is to
measure the amount of time and monitoring probes that CRE
takes to discover the best path in the network for a given
Source-Destination (SD) pair compared to an optimal routing
algorithm which probes all the 74 links each time that it probes
the network. The experiments are run for 90s with the network
being loaded around 20s into the experiment. The monitoring
frequency of both CRE and the optimal algorithm is set to 5s

0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
750
850
950
1,050
1,150
1,250
1,350
1,450
1,550
1,650
1,750
Time, s
Ping Round-Trip Time for selected SD pair, ms
Fig. 4.
Change in Ping Round Trip Time for a given Source-Destination pair
when the network is loaded around 20s in the experiment and CRE is active.
TABLE I
CRE CONVERGENCE VS OPTIMAL
Exp. No.
No. of
No. of
CRE addit-
Increase in
Optimal
CRE
ional time
CRE Ping RTT
Monitoring
Monitoring
over Optimal
over Optimal
(s)
(%)
1
370
23
32.6
3.80
2
370
69
39.6
0
3
296
43
44.4
2.03
4
370
21
1.01
0
5
370
31
36.5
2.41
Avg.
355.2
37.4
30.8
1.65
Fig. 4 shows the increase in Ping RTT around 20s when the
network is loaded and the decrease in RTT when CRE ﬁnds
iteratively better paths to route the ﬂow.
Table. I shows that CRE can reduce by up to 9.5 times the
amount of monitoring required to ﬁnd a best path which is
on average only 1.65% worse than the optimal RTT and takes
around 30.8s (with a 5s minimum update frequency) more
time to ﬁnd.
IX. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we show that CRE is able to ﬁnd paths which
are very close to the optimal ones without incurring a large
monitoring overheard. CRE is able to achieve this performance
without requiring any modiﬁcation to already-deployed SDNs
which run OpenFlow.
It is our intention to further improve the evaluation section
of this work by carrying more sophisticated experiments
with different CRE parameters, network topologies, trafﬁc
conditions, QoS metrics and network events such as link and
node failures.
