arXiv:1106.3767v3  [cs.AI]  23 Jul 2011
Rewriting Ontological Queries into Small Nonrecursive
Datalog Programs⋆
Georg Gottlob1 and Thomas Schwentick2

Abstract. We consider the setting of ontological database access, where an A-
box is given in form of a relational database D and where a Boolean conjunctive
query q has to be evaluated against D modulo a T -box Σ formulated in DL-
Lite or Linear Datalog±. It is well-known that (Σ, q) can be rewritten into an
equivalent nonrecursive Datalog program P that can be directly evaluated over
D. However, for Linear Datalog± or for DL-Lite versions that allow for role
inclusion, the rewriting methods described so far result in a nonrecursive Datalog
program P of size exponential in the joint size of Σ and q. This gives rise to
the interesting question of whether such a rewriting necessarily needs to be of
exponential size. In this paper we show that it is actually possible to translate
(Σ, q) into a polynomially sized equivalent nonrecursive Datalog program P.
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
This paper is about query rewriting in the context of ontological database access. Query
rewriting is an important new optimization technique speciﬁc to ontological queries.
The essence of query rewriting, as will be explained in more detail below, is to com-
pile a query and an ontological theory (usually formulated in some description logic or
rule-based language) into a target query language that can be directly executed over a
relational database management system (DBMS). The advantage of such an approach
is obvious. Query rewriting can be used as a preprocessing step for enabling the ex-
ploitation of mature and efﬁcient existing database technology to answer ontological
queries. In particular, after translating an ontological query into SQL, sophisticated
query-optimization strategies can be used to efﬁciently answer it. However, there is
a pitfall here. If the translation inﬂates the query excessively and creates from a rea-
sonably sized ontological query an enormous exponentially sized SQL query (or SQL
DDL program), then the best DBMS may be of little use.
⋆This paper extends a shorter version presented at DL 2011, 24th International Workshop on
Description Logics by mainly expanding Section 3. Further extended and/or improved versions
will be posted as they arise to arXive-CORR at http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.3767

1.2
Main Results
We show that polynomially sized query rewritings into nonrecursive Datalog exist in
speciﬁc settings. Note that nonrecursive Datalog can be efﬁciently translated into SQL
with view deﬁnitions (SQL DDL), which, in turn, can be directly executed over any
standard DBMS. Our results are — for the time being — of theoretical nature and
we do not claim that they will lead to better practical algorithms. This will be studied
via implementations in the next future. Our main result applies to the setting where
ontological constraints are formulated in terms of tuple-generating dependencies (tgds),
and we make heavy use of the well-known chase procedure [17, 14]. For deﬁnitions,
see Section 2. The result after chasing a tgd set Σ over a database D is denoted by
chase(D, Σ).
Consider a set Σ of tgds and a database D over a joint signature R. Let q be a
Boolean conjunctive query (BCQ) issued against (D, Σ). We would like to transform q
into a nonrecursive Datalog query P such that (D, Σ) |= q iff D |= P. We assume here
that P has a special propositional goal goal, and D |= P means that goal is derivable
from P when evaluated over D. Let us deﬁne an important property of classes of tgds.
Deﬁnition 1. Polynomial witness property (PWP). The PWP holds for a class C of
tgds if there exists a polynomial γ such that, for every ﬁnite set Σ ⊆C of tgds and each
BCQ q, the following holds: for each database D, whenever (D, Σ) |= q, then there is
a sequence of at most γ(|Σ|, |q|) chase steps whose atoms already entail q.
Our main technical result, which is more formally stated and proven in Section 3,
is as follows.
Theorem 1. Let Σ be a set of tgds from a class C enjoying the PWP. Then each BCQ
q can be rewritten in polynomial time into a nonrecursive Datalog program P of size
polynomial in the joint size of q and Σ, such that for every database D, (D, Σ) |= q if
and only if D |= P. Moreover, the arity of P is max(a + 1, 3), where a is the maximum
arity of any predicate symbol occurring in Σ, in case a sufﬁciently large linear order
can be accessed in the database, or otherwise by O(max(a + 1, 3) · log m), where m
is the joint size of q and Σ.
1.3
Other Results
From this result, and from already established facts, a good number of further rewritabli-
ity results for other formalisms can be derived. In particular, we can show that conjunc-
tive queries based on other classes of tgds or description logics can be efﬁciently trans-
lated into nonrecursive Datalog. Among these formalisms are: linear tgds, originally
deﬁned in [5] and equivalent to inclusion dependencies, various major versions of the
well-known description logic DL-Lite [9,20], and sticky tgds [8] as well as sticky-join
tgds [6, 7]. We will just give an overview and very short explanations of how each of
these rewritability results follows from our main theorem. A more detailed treatment is
planned for a future version of this paper.

1.4
Structure of the Paper
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we state a few preliminaries
and simplifying assumptions. In Section 3, we give a rather detailed proof sketch of
the main result. Section 4, contains the other results following from the main result. A
brief overview of related work concludes the paper in Section 5.
2
Preliminaries and Assumptions
We assume the reader to be familiar with the terminology of relational databases and
the concepts of conjunctive query (CQ) and Boolean conjunctive query (BCQ). For
simplicity, we restrict our attention to Boolean conjunctive queries q. However, our
results can easily be reformulated for queries with output, see Remark 3 after the proof
of Theorem 1.
Given a relational schema R, a tuple-generating dependency (tgd) σ is a ﬁrst-order
formula of the form ∀X∀Y Φ(X, Y ) →∃Z Ψ(X, Z), where Φ(X, Y ) and Ψ(X, Z)
are conjunctions of atoms over R, called the body and the head of σ, denoted body(σ)
and head(σ), respectively. We usually omit the universal quantiﬁers in tgds. Such σ is
satisﬁed in a database D for R iff, whenever there exists a homomorphism h that maps
the atoms of Φ(X, Y ) to atoms of D, there exists an extension h′ of h that maps the
atoms of Ψ(X, Z) to atoms of D. All sets of tgds are ﬁnite here. We assume in the rest
of the paper that every tgd has exactly one atom and at most one existentially quantiﬁed
variable in its head. A set of tgds is in normal form if the head of each tgd consists
of a single atom. It was shown in [4, Lemma 10] that every set Σ of TGDs can be
transformed into a set Σ′ in normal form of size at most quadratic in |Σ|, such that Σ
and Σ′ are equivalent with respect to query answering. The normal form transformation
shown in [4] can be achieved in logarithmic space. It is, moreover, easy to see that this
very simple transformation preserves the polynomial witness property.
For a database D for R, and a set of tgds Σ on R, the set of models of D and Σ,
denoted mods(D, Σ), is the set of all (possibly inﬁnite) databases B such that (i) D ⊆B
and (ii) every σ ∈Σ is satisﬁed in B. The set of answers for a CQ q to D and Σ, denoted
ans(q, D, Σ), is the set of all tuples a such that a ∈q(B) for all B ∈mods(D, Σ). The
answer for a BCQ q to D and Σ is yes iff the empty tuple is in ans(q, D, Σ), also
denoted as D ∪Σ |= q.
Note that, in general, query answering under tgds is undecidable [2], even when the
schema and tgds are ﬁxed [4]. Query answering is, however, decidable for interesting
classes of tgds, among which are those considered in the present paper.
The chase procedure was introduced to enable checking implication of dependen-
cies [17], and later also for checking query containment [14]. It is a procedure for repair-
ing a database relative to a set of dependencies, so that the result of the chase satisﬁes
the dependencies. By “chase”, we refer both to the chase procedure and to its output.
The chase comes in two ﬂavors: restricted and oblivious, where the restricted chase one
applies tgds only when they are not satisﬁed (to repair them), while the oblivious chase
always applies tgds (if they produce a new result). We focus on the oblivious one, since
it makes proofs technically simpler. The (oblivious) tgd chase rule deﬁned below is the
building block of the chase.

TGD CHASE RULE. Consider a database D for a relational schema R, and a tgd σ
on R of the form Φ(X, Y ) →∃Z Ψ(X, Z). Then, σ is applicable to D if there
exists a homomorphism h that maps the atoms of Φ(X, Y ) to atoms of D. Let σ be
applicable to D, and h1 be a homomorphism that extends h as follows: for each Xi ∈
X, h1(Xi) = h(Xi); for each Zj ∈Z, h1(Zj) = zj, where zj is a fresh null value
(i.e., a Skolem constant) different from all nulls already introduced. The application of
σ on D adds to D the atom h1(Ψ(X, Z)) if not already in D (which is possible when
Z is empty).
The chase algorithm for a database D and a set of tgds Σ consists of an exhaustive
application of the tgd chase rule in a breadth-ﬁrst (level-saturating) fashion, which leads
as result to a (possibly inﬁnite) chase for D and Σ. Formally, the chase of level up
to 0 of D relative to Σ, denoted chase0(D, Σ), is deﬁned as D, assigning to every
atom in D the (derivation) level 0. For every k ≥1, the chase of level up to k of D
relative to Σ, denoted chasek(D, Σ), is constructed as follows: let I1, . . . , In be all
possible images of bodies of tgds in Σ relative to some homomorphism such that (i)
I1, . . . , In ⊆chasek−1(D, Σ) and (ii) the highest level of an atom in some Ii is k −1;
then, perform every corresponding tgd application on chasek−1(D, Σ), choosing the
applied tgds and homomorphisms in a linear and lexicographic order, respectively, and
assigning to every new atom the (derivation) level k. The chase of D relative to Σ,
denoted chase(D, Σ), is thus the limit of chasek(D, Σ) for k →∞.
The (possibly inﬁnite) chase relative to tgds is a universal model, i.e., there exists
a homomorphism from chase(D, Σ) onto every B ∈mods(D, Σ) [11,4]. This result
implies that BCQs q over D and Σ can be evaluated on the chase for D and Σ, i.e.,
D ∪Σ |= q is equivalent to chase(D, Σ) |= q.
A chase sequence of length n based on D and Σ is a sequence of n atoms such that
each atom is either from D or can be derived via a single application of some rule in Σ
from previous atoms in the sequence. If S is such a chase sequence and q a conjunctive
query, we write S |= q if there is a homomorphism from q to the set of atoms of S.
We assume that every database has two constants, 0 and 1, that are available via
the unary predicates Zero and One, respectively. Moreover, each database has a binary
predicate Neq such that Neq(a, b) is true precisely if a and b are distinct values.
We ﬁnally deﬁne N-numerical databases. Let D be a database whose domain does
not contain any natural numbers. We deﬁne DN as the extension of D by adding the
natural numbers 0, 1, . . . , N to its domain, a unary relation Num that contains exactly
the numbers 1, . . . , N, binary order relations Succ and < on 0, 1, . . ., N, expressing
the natural successor and “<” orders on N, respectively. 3
We refer to DN as the
N-numerical extension of D, and, a so extended database as N-numerical database.
We denote the total domain of a numerical database DN by domN(D) and the non-
numerical domain (still) by dom(D). Standard databases can always be considered to
be N-numerical, for some large N by the standard type integer, with the < predicate
(and even arithmetic operations). A number maxint corresponding to N can be deﬁned.
3 Of course, if dom(D) already contains some natural numbers we can add a fresh copy of
{0, 1, . . . , N} instead.

3
Main Result
Our main result is more formally stated as follows:
Theorem 1. Let C be a class of tgds in normal form, enjoying the polynomial wit-
ness property and let γ be the polynomial bounding the number of chase steps (with
γ(n1, n2) ≥max(n1, n2), for all naturals n1, n2). For each set Σ ⊆C of tgds and
each Boolean CQ q, one can compute in polynomial time a nonrecursive Datalog pro-
gram P of polynomial size in |Σ| and |q|, such that, for every database D it holds
D, Σ |= q if and only if D |= P. Furthermore:
(a) For N-numerical databases D, where N ≥γ(|Σ|, |q|), the arity of P is max(a +
1, 3), where a is the maximum arity of any predicate symbol occurring in Σ;
(b) otherwise (for non-numerical databases), the arity of P is O(max(a + 1, 3) ·
log γ(|Σ|, |q|)), where a is as above.
We note that N is polynomially bounded in |Σ| and |q| by the polynomial γ that
only depends on C.
The rest of this section is dedicated to a detailed proof of Theorem 1.
Proof. We ﬁrst describe the construction of a Datalog program P of arity a+k+4,
where k is the maximum number of tuples in any left hand side of a chase rule. We
explain afterwards, how the arity can be reduced to max(a + 1, 3). The program P
checks whether there is a chase sequence S = t1, . . . , tN with respect to D and Σ
and a homomorphism h from q to (the set of atoms of) S. To this end, P consists of
one large rule rgoal of polynomial size in N and some shorter rules that deﬁne auxiliary
relations and will be explained below.
The aim of rgoal is to guess the chase sequence S and the homomorphism q at the
same time. We recall that N does not depend on the size of D but only on |Σ| and
|q| and thus rgoal can well be as long as the chase sequence and q together. One of the
advantages of this approach is that we only have to deal with those null values that
are actually relevant for answering the query. Thus, at most N null values need to be
represented.
One might try to obtain rgoal by just taking one atom Ai for each tuple ti of S and
one atom for each atom of q and somehow test that they are consistent. However, it is
not clear how consistency could possibly be checked in a purely conjunctive fashion.4
There are two ways in which disjunctive reasoning is needed. First, it is not a priori
clear on which previous tuples, tuple ti will depend. Second, it is not a priori clear to
which tuples of S the atoms of q can be mapped.
To overcome these challenges we use the following basic ideas.
(1) We represent the tuples of S (and the required tuples of D) in a symbolic fashion,
utilizing the numerical domain.
(2) We let P compute auxiliary predicates that allow us to express disjunctive relation-
ships between the tuples in S.
4 Furthermore, of course, there are no relations to which the atoms Ai could possible be
matched.

Example 1. We illustrate the proof idea with a very simple running example, shown in
Figure 1.
(a) Σ :
σ1: R1(X, Y ) →∃Z R4(X, Y, Z)
σ2: R2(Y, Z) →∃X R4(X, Y, Z)
σ3: R3(X, Z) →∃Y R4(X, Y, Z)
σ4: R4(X1, Y1, Z1), R4(X2, Y2, Z2) →R5(X1, Z2)
(b) q : R5(X, Y ), R3(Y, X)
(c) D :
R1
a b
c d
R2
e g
R3
g a
g h
Fig. 1. Simple example with (a) a set Σ of tgds, (b) a query q and (c) a database D.
A possible chase sequence in this example is shown in Figure 2(a). The mapping X 7→a
and Y 7→g, maps R5(X, Y ) to t5 and R3(Y, X) to t6, thus satisfying q. Before we de-
(a)
– t1: R1(a, b)
– t2: R4(a, b, ⊥2)
– t3: R2(e, g)
– t4: R4(⊥4, e, g)
– t5: R5(a, g)
– t6: R3(g, a)
(b)
– t1: R1(a, b, a)
– t2: R4(a, b, ⊥2)
– t3: R2(e, g, e)
– t4: R4(⊥4, e, g)
– t5: R5(a, g, a)
– t6: R3(g, a, g)
(c)
i ri fi xi1 xi2 xi3 si ci1 ci2
1 1 0
a
b
a
0
0
0
2 4 1
a
b
2
1
1
1
3 2 0
e
g
e
0
0
0
4 4 1
4
e
g
2
3
3
5 5 1
a
g
a
4
2
4
6 3 0
g
a
g
0
0
0
Fig. 2. (a) Example chase sequence, (b) its extension and (c) its encoding. t2 is obtained by
applying σ1 to t1. Likewise t4 and t5 are obtained by applying σ2 to t3 and σ4 to t2 and t4,
respectively.
scribe the proof idea in more detail, we ﬁx some notation and convenient conventions.
Notation and conventions. Let C be a class of tgds enjoying the PWP, let Σ be a set
of tgds from C, and let q be a BCQ. Let R1, . . . Rm be the predicate symbols occurring
in Σ or in q. We denote the number of tgds in Σ by ℓ.
Let N := γ(|Σ|, |q|) where γ is as in Deﬁnition 1, thus N is polynomial in |Σ| and
|q|. By deﬁnition of N, if (D, Σ) |= q, then q can be witnessed by a chase sequence
Γ of length ≤N. Our assumption that γ(n1, n2) ≥max(n1, n2), for every n1, n2,
guarantees that N is larger than (i) the number of predicate symbols occurring in Σ, (ii)
the cardinality |q| of the query, and (iii) the number of rules in Σ.
For the sake of a simpler presentation, we assume that all relations in Σ have the
same arity a and all rules use the same number k of tuples in their body. The latter
can be easily achieved by repeating tuples, the former by ﬁlling up shorter tuples by
repeating the ﬁrst tuple entry. Furthermore, we only consider chase sequences of length
N. Shorter sequences can be extended by adding tuples from D.
Example 2. Example 1 thus translates as illustrated in Figure 3. The (extended) chase
sequence is shown in Figure 2 (b). The query q is now satisﬁed by the mapping X 7→a,
Y 7→g, U 7→g, V 7→a, thus mapping R5(X, Y, X) to t5 and R3(Y, X, Y ) to t6.

(a) Σ :
σ1: R1(X, Y, X), R1(X, Y, X) →∃Z R4(X, Y, Z)
σ2: R2(Y, Z, Y ), R2(Y, Z, Y ) →∃X R4(X, Y, Z)
σ3: R3(X, Z, X), R3(X, Z, X) →∃Y R4(X, Y, Z)
σ4: R4(X1, Y1, Z1), R4(X2, Y2, Z2) →
R5(X1, Z2, X1)
(b) q : R5(X, Y, U), R3(Y, X, V )
(c) D :
R1
a b a
c d c
R2
e g e
R3
g a g
g h g
Fig. 3. Modiﬁed example with (a) a set Σ of tgds, (b) a query q and (c) a database D.
Proof (continued). On an abstract level, the atoms that make up the ﬁnal rule rgoal
of P can be divided into three groups serving three different purposes. That is, rgoal can
be considered as a conjunction rtuples ∧rchase ∧rquery. Each group is “supported” by a
sub-program of P that deﬁnes relations that are used in rgoal, and we refer to these three
subprograms as Ptuples, Pchase and Pquery, respectively.
– The purpose of rtuples is basically to lay the ground for the other two. It consists of
N atoms that allow to guess the symbolic encoding of a sequence S = t1, . . . , tN.
– The atoms of rchase are designed to verify that S is an actual chase sequence with
respect to D.
– Finally, rquery checks that there is a homomorphism from q to S.
Ptuples and rtuples. We continue with an explanation of the symbolic representation
of tuples underlying rtuples.
The symbolic representation of the tuples ti of the chase sequence S uses numerical
values to encode null values, predicate symbols Ri (by i), tgds σj ∈Σ (by j) and the
number of a tuple ti in the sequence (that is: i).
In particular, the symbolic encoding uses the following numerical parameters.5
– ri to indicate the relation Rri to which the tuple belongs;
– fi to indicate whether ti is from D (fi = 0 ) or yielded by the chase ( fi = 1);
– Furthermore, xi1, . . . , xia represent the attribute values of ti as follows. If the j-
th attribute of ti is a value from dom(D) then xij is intended to be that value,
otherwise it is a null represented by a numeric value.
Since each rule of Σ has at most one existential quantiﬁer in its head, at each chase step,
at most one new null value can be introduced. Thus, we can unambiguously represent
the null value (possibly) introduced in the j-th step of the chase by the number j. In
particular, all null values introduced in a chase sequence (of length N) can indeed be
represented by elements of the numerical domain.
The remaining parameters si and ci1, . . . , cik are used to encode information about
the tgd and the tuples (atoms) in S that are used to generate the current tuple. More
precisely,
– si is intended to be the number of the applied tgd σsi and
– ci1, . . . , cik are the tuple numbers of the k tuples that are used to yield ti.
5 We use the names of the parameters as variable names in rgoal as well.

In the example, e.g., t5 is obtained by applying σ4 to t2 and t4. The encoding of our
running example can be found in Figure 2 (c).
We use a new relational symbol T of arity a + k + 4 not present in the schema of
D for the representation of the tuples from S. Thus, rtuples is just:
T (1, r1, f1, x11, . . . , x1a, s1, c11, . . . , c1k), . . .,
T (N, rN, fN, xN1, . . . , xNa, sN, cN1, . . . , cNk).
The sub-program Ptuples is intended to “ﬁll” T with suitable tuples. The intention
is that T contains all tuples that could be used in a chase sequence in principle. At this
point, there are no restrictions regarding the chase rules. To this end, Ptuples uses two
kinds of rules, one for tuples from D and one for tuples yielded by the chase. For each
relation symbol Rj of D, Ptuples has a rule
T (Z, j, 0, X1, . . ., Xa, 0, 0, . . ., 0) : −Rj(X1, . . . , Xa), Num(Z).
which adds all tuples from Rj to T and makes them accessible for every possible
position (Z) in S.
The following rule adds tuples that can possibly be obtained by chase steps.
T (Z, Y, 1, X1, . . . , Xa, V, U1, . . . , Uk) : −
Num(Z), Num(Y ), DNum(X1), . . . , DNum(Xa),
Num(V ), Num(U1), . . . , Num(Uk),
1 ≤Y ≤m, 1 ≤V ≤ℓ, U1 < Z, . . . , Uk < Z
(1)
Here, the ﬁrst two inequalities make sure that only allowed relation and tgd numbers
are used, the latter inequalities guarantee that to yield a tuple by a chase rule only tuples
with smaller numbers can be used.6 The rule uses one further predicate DNum that has
not yet been deﬁned. Its purpose is to contain all possible values, that is: dom(D)∪Num.
It is (easily) deﬁned by further rules of Ptuples. Note that this leaves the values for the
Xj unconstrained, hence they can carry either domain values or numerical values.
Pchase and rchase. Next, we describe the part of rgoal that checks that S constitutes
and actual chase sequence and the rules of P that specify the corresponding auxiliary
relations.
The following kinds of conditions have to be checked to ensure that the tuples
“guessed” by rtuples constitute a chase sequence.
(1) For every i, the relation Rri of a tuple ti has to match the head of its rule σsi.
– In the example, e.g., r4 has to be 4 as the head of σ2 is an R4-atom.
(2) Likewise, for each i and j the relation number of tuple tcij has to be the relation
number of the j-th atom of σsi.
– In the example, e.g., r2 must be 4, as c5,1 = 2 and the ﬁrst atom of σs5 = σ4 is
an R4-atom.
(3) If the head of σsi contains an existentially quantiﬁed variable, the new null value is
represented by the numerical value i.
6 As the latter constraints are independent from the concrete tgds, we decided to put them here.
They could as well be tested in rchase.

– This is illustrated by t4 in the example: the ﬁrst position of the head of rule 2
has an existentially quantiﬁed variable and thus x4,1 = 4.
(4) If a variable occurs at two different positions in σsi then the corresponding positions
in the tuples used to produce ti carry the same value.
(5) If a variable in the body of σsi also occurs in the head of σsi then the values of the
corresponding positions in the body tuple and in ti are equal.
– Z2 occurs in position 3 of the second atom of the body of σ4 and in position 2
of its head. Therefore, x4,3 and x5,2 have to coincide (where the 4 is determined
by c5,2.
Note that all these conditions depend on the given tgds. Indeed, every tgd from Σ
contributes conditions of each of the ﬁve forms. For the sake of simplicity of presen-
tation, we explain the effect of a tgd through the following example tgd that contains
all relevant features that might arise in a tgd. The generalization to arbitrary tgds is
straightforward but tedious to spell out in full detail. Let us thus assume that σ1 is the
tgd7
R2(X, Y ), R3(Y, Z) →∃V R4(X, V ).
Condition (1) states that if a tuple ti is obtained by applying σ1 it should be a tuple
from R4. In terms of variables this means, that for every i it should hold: if si = 1 then
ri = 4.
This is the ﬁrst occasion where we need some way to express a disjunction in rgoal
(namely: si ̸= 1 ∨ri = 4). We can meet this challenge with the help of an additional
predicate to be speciﬁed in Pchase. More precisely, we let Pchase specify a 4-ary predicate
IfThen(X1, X2, U1, U2) that is intended to contain all tuples fulﬁlling the condition: if
X1 = X2 then U1 = U2. IfThen can be speciﬁed by the following two rules.
IfThen(X, X, U, U) : −DNum(X), DNum(U).
IfThen(X1, X2, U1, U2) : −
DNum(X1), DNum(X2), DNum(U1), DNum(U2), Neq(X1, X2).
Thus, condition (1) can be guaranteed with respect to tgd σ1 for all tuples ti by
adding all atoms of the form IfThen(si, 1, ri, 4) to rchase.
Condition (2) is slightly more complicated. For our example tgd σ1 it says that if a
tuple ti is obtained using σ1 then the ﬁrst tuple used for the chase step should be an
R2-tuple. In terms of variables this can be stated as: if si = 1 and ci1 = j then rj = 2
(and likewise for the second atom of σ1. To express this IF-statement we use a 6-ary
auxiliary predicate IfThen2(X1, X2, Y1, Y2, U1, U2) expressing that if X1 = X2 and
Y1 = Y2 then U1 = U2. It can be speciﬁed in Pchase by the following three rules.
IfThen2(X, X, Y, Y, U, U) : −DNum(X), DNum(Y ), DNum(U).
7 This example tgd is not related to our running example as that does not have a single tgd with
all features.

IfThen2(X1, X2, Y1, Y2, U1, U2) : −
DNum(X1), DNum(X2), DNum(Y1), DNum(Y2), DNum(U1), DNum(U2),
Neq(X1, X2).
IfThen2(X1, X2, Y1, Y2, U1, U2) : −
DNum(X1), DNum(X2), DNum(Y1), DNum(Y2), DNum(U1), DNum(U2),
Neq(Y1, Y2).
For every pair of numbers i, j ≤N, rgoal then has atoms IfThen2(si, 1, ci1, j, rj, 2)
and IfThen2(si, 1, ci2, j, rj, 2).
In a similar fashion
– condition (3) yields one atom IfThen(si, 1, xi2, i), for every i;
– condition (4) yields one atom IfThen3(si, 1, ci1, j1, ci2, j2, xj12, xj21), for every
i, j1, j2 ≤N, where IfThen3 is the 8-ary predicate for IfThen-statements with
three conjuncts that can be deﬁned analogously as IfThen2;
– condition (5) yields one atom IfThen2(si, 1, ci1, j, xj1, xi1) for every i, j ≤N.
Altogether, rchase has O(N 3ℓk) atoms that together guarantee that the variables of
rtuples encode an actual chase sequence.
Pquery and rquery. Finally, we explain how it can be checked that there is a ho-
momorphism from q to S. We explain the issue through the little example query
R3(x, y) ∧R4(y, z). To evaluate this query, rquery makes use of two additional vari-
ables q1 and q2, one for each atom of q. The intention is that these variables bind to the
numbers of the tuples that the atoms are mapped to. We have to make sure two kinds
of conditions. First, the tuples need to have the right relation symbol and second, they
have to obey value equalities induced by the variables of q that occur more than once.
The ﬁrst kind of conditions is checked by adding atoms IfThen(q1, i, ri, 3) and
IfThen(q2, i, ri, 4) to rquery, for every i ≤N. The second kind of conditions can be
checked by atoms IfThen2(q1, i, q2, j, xi2, xj1), for every i, j ≤N.
As we do not need any further auxiliary predicates, Pquery is empty (but we kept it
for symmetry reasons).
This completes the description of P. Note that P is nonrecursive, and has polyno-
mial size in the size of q and Σ. In order to ﬁnish the proof of part (a) of Theorem 1,
we next explain how to reduce the arity of P.
This ﬁnal step of the construction is based on two ideas.
First, by using Boolean variables and some new ternary relations, we can replace
the 6-ary relation IfThen2 (and likewise the 4-ary relation IfThen). More precisely, we
replace every atom IfThen2(X1, X2, Y1, Y2, U1, U2) by a conjunction of the form
IfEq(X1, X2, B1), IfEq(Y1, Y2, B2), IfEq(U1, U2, B3), NotB(B1, B′
1),
NotB(B2, B′
2), OrB(B1,′ , B′
2, B4), OrB(B3, B4, B5), TrueB(B5).
Here, NotB, OrB, are predicates that mimic Boolean gates, e.g., OrB(B3, B4, B5)
holds if B5 is the Boolean Or of B3 and B4, in particular all values have to be from

{0, 1}. TrueB(B5) only holds if B5 = 1. The predicate IfEq(X1, X2, B1) holds if B1 =
1 and X1 = X2 or if B1 = 0 and X1 ̸= X2. The relations IfEq, NotB, OrB, TrueB can
easily be deﬁned in Pchase.
The second idea is that T need not be materialized. We only materialize a relation
T ′ of arity a + 1 which is intended to represent all database tuples. More precisely,
T ′(j, X1, . . . , Xa) shall hold if (X1, . . . , Xa) represents a tuple from relation Rj or if
j = 0. Clearly, T ′ can be deﬁned in Ptuples.
Every tuple T (j, rj, fj, xj1, . . . , xja, sj, cj1, . . . , cjk) in rtuples is then replaced by a
conjunction of atoms with the same semantics. The conjunct T ′(r′
j, xj1, . . . , xja) tests
whether (xj1, . . . , xja) is in Rr′
j. Further atoms ensure that rj = r′
j if fj = 0. Finally,
it is ensured that, if fj = 1 the values are restricted as by the right-hand side of rule 1.
In order to prove part (b), we must get rid of the numeric domain (except for 0
and 1). This is actually very easy. We just replace each numeric value by a logarithmic
number of bits (coded by our 0 and 1 domain elements), and extend the predicate arities
accordingly. As a matter of fact, this requires an increase of arity by a factor of log N =
O(log |q|). It is well-known that a successor predicate and a vectorized < predicate
for such bit-vectors can be expressed by a polynomially-sized nonrecursive Datalog
program, see [10]. The rest is completely analogous to the above proof. This concludes
the proof sketch for Theorem 1.
We would like to conclude this section with some remarks:
Remark 1. Note that the evaluation complexity of the Datalog program obtained
for case (b) is not signiﬁcantly higher than the evaluation complexity of the program P
constructed for case (a). For example, in the most relevant case of bounded arities, both
programs can be evaluated in NPTIME combined complexity over a database D. In
fact, it is well-known that the combined complexity of a Datalog program of bounded
arity is in NPTIME (see [10]). But it is easy to see that if we expand the signature of
such a program (and of the underlying database) by a logarithmic number of Boolean-
valued argument positions (attributes), nothing changes, because the possible values for
such vectorized arguments are still of polynomial size. It is just a matter of coding. In a
similar way, the data complexity in both cases (a) and (b) is the same (PTIME).
Remark 2. It is easy to generalize this result to the setting where q is actually a
union of conjunctive queries (UCQ).
Remark 3. The method easily generalizes to translate non-Boolean queries, i.e.,
queries with output, to polynomially-sized nonrecursive Datalog programs with out-
put. We are here only interested in certain answers consisting of tuples of values
from the original domain dom(D) (see [12]). Assume that the head of q is an atom
R(X1, . . . , Xk) where R is the output relation symbol, and the Xi are variables also
occurring in the body of q. We then obtain a nonrecursive Datalog translation by acting
as in the above proof, except for the following modiﬁcations. Make R(X1, . . . , Xk) the
head of rule rgoal, and add for 1 ≤i ≤an atom adom(Xi) to rquery, where adom is
an auxiliary predicate such that adom(u) is iff u is in the active non-numeric domain
of the database, that is, iff u ∈dom(D) and u effectively occurs in the database. It is
easy to see that the auxiliary predicate adom itself can be achieved via a nonrecursive

Datalog program from D. Clearly, by construction of (the so modiﬁed) program P, the
output of P are then precisely the certain answers of the query q.
Remark 4. The polynomially-sized nonrecursive Datalog program P constructed
in the proof of Theorem 1 can in turn be transformed in polynomial time into an equiv-
alent ﬁrst-order formula. In case of N-numerical databases this follows immediately
from the constant depth of (the predicate dependency graph of) P. Moreover, in case of
non-numerical domains with two distinguished constants, the simulation of a numeri-
cal domain via bit-vectors can be easily expressed by a polynomially sized ﬁrst-order
formula. In summary, Theorem 1 remains valid if we replace “nonrecursive Datalog
program” by “ﬁrst-order formula”. However, for practical purposes nonrecursive Dat-
alog may be the better choice, because the auxiliary relations that need to be computed
only once are already factured out explicitly.
4
Further Results Derived From the Main Theorem
We wish to mention some interesting consequences of Theorem 1 that follow easily
from the above result after combining it with various other known results.
4.1
Linear TGDs
A linear tgd [5] is one that has a single atom in its rule body. The class of linear tgds
is a fundamental one in the Datalog± family. This class contains the class of inclusion
dependencies. It was already shown in [14] for inclusion dependencies that classes of
linear tgds of bounded (predicate) arities enjoy the PWP. That proof carries over to
linear tgds, and we thus can state:
Lemma 1. Classes of linear tgds of bounded arity enjoy the PWP.
By Theorem 1, we then conclude:
Theorem 2. Conjunctive queries under linear tgds of bounded arity are polynomially
rewritable as nonrecursive Datalog programs in the same fashion as for Theorem 1. So
are sets of inclusion dependencies of bounded arity.
4.2
DL-Lite
A pioneering and highly signiﬁcant contribution towards tractable ontological reasoning
was the introduction of the DL-Lite family of description logics (DLs) by Calvanese et
al. [9, 20]. DL-Lite was further studied and developed in [1].
A DL-lite theory (or TBox) Σ = (Σ−, Σ+) consists of a set of negative constraints
Σ−such as key and disjointness constraints, and of a set Σ+ of positive constraints
that resemble tgds. As shown in [9], the negative constraints Σ−can be compiled into a
polymomially sized ﬁrst-order formula (actually a union of conjunctive queries) of the
same arity as Σ−such that for each database and BCQ q, (D, Σ) |= q iff D ̸|= Σ−
and (D, Σ+) |= q. In (the full version of) [5] it was shown that for the main DL-Lite
variants deﬁned in [9], each Σ+ can be immediately translated into an equivalent set of
linear tgds of arity 2. By virtue of this, and the above we obtain the following theorem.

Theorem 3. Let q be a CQ and let Σ = (Σ−, Σ+) be a DL-Lite theory expressed
in one of the following DL-Lite variants: DL-LiteF,⊓, DL-LiteR,⊓, DL-Lite+
A,⊓, DLR-
LiteF,⊓, DLR-LiteR,⊓, or DLR-Lite+
A,⊓. Then Σ+ can be rewritten into a nonrecursive
Datalog program P such that for each database D, (D, Σ+) |= q iff D |= P. Regarding
the arities of P, the same bounds as in Theorem 1 hold.
4.3
Sticky and Sticky Join TGDs
Sticky tgds [6] and sticky-join tgds [6] are special classes of tgds that generalize linear
tgds but allow for a limited form of join (including as special case the cartesian product).
They allow one to express natural ontological relationships not expressible in DLs such
as OWL. We do not deﬁne these classes here, and refer the reader to [8]. By results
of [8], which will also be discussed in more detail in a future extended version of the
present paper, both classes enjoy the Polynomial Witness Property. By Theorem 1, we
thus obtain the following result:
Theorem 4. Conjunctive queries under sticky tgds and sticky-join tgds over a ﬁxed
signature R are rewritable into polynomially sized nonrecursive Datalog programs of
arity bounded as in Theorem 1.
5
Related Work on Query Rewriting
Several techniques for query-rewriting have been developed. An early algorithm, in-
troduced in [9] and implemented in the QuOnto system8, reformulates the given query
into a union of CQs (UCQs) by means of a backward-chaining resolution procedure.
The size of the computed rewriting increases exponentially w.r.t. the number of atoms
in the given query. This is mainly due to the fact that uniﬁcations are derived in a
“blind” way from every uniﬁable pair of atoms, even if the generated rule is superﬂu-
ous. An alternative resolution-based rewriting technique was proposed by Per´ez-Urbina
et al. [19], implemented in the Requiem system9, that produces a UCQs as a rewrit-
ing which is, in general, smaller (but still exponential in the number of atoms of the
query) than the one computed by QuOnto. This is achieved by avoiding many use-
less uniﬁcations, and thus the generation of redundant rules due to such uniﬁcations.
This algorithm works also for more expressive non-ﬁrst-order rewritable DLs. In this
case, the computed rewriting is a (recursive) Datalog query. Following a more gen-
eral approach, Cal`ı et al. [3] proposed a backward-chaining rewriting algorithm for the
ﬁrst-order rewritable Datalog± languages mentioned above. However, this algorithm is
inspired by the original QuOnto algorithm, and inherits all its drawbacks. In [13], a
rewriting technique for linear Datalog± into unions of conjunctive queries is proposed.
This algorithm is an improved version of the one already presented in [3], where fur-
ther superﬂuous uniﬁcations are avoided, and where, in addition, tedundant atoms in the
body of a rule, that are logically implied (w.r.t. the ontological theory) by other atoms
8 http://www.dis.uniroma1.it/ quonto/
9 http://www.comlab.ox.ac.uk/projects/requiem/home.html

in the same rule, are eliminated. This elimination of body-atoms implies the avoidance
of the construction of redundant rules during the rewriting process. However, the size
of the rewriting is still exponential in the number of query atoms.
Of more interest to the present work are rewritings into nonrecursive Datalog.
In [15,16] a polynomial-size rewriting into nonrecursive Datalog is given for the de-
scription logics DL-LiteF
horn and DL-Litehorn. For DL-LiteN
horn, a DL with counting, a
polynomial rewriting involving aggregate functions is proposed. It is, moreover, shown
in (the full version of) [15] that for the description logic DL-LiteF a polynomial-size
pure ﬁrst-order query rewriting is possible. Note that neither of these logics allows for
role inclusion, while our approach covers description logics with role inclusion axioms.
Other results in [15,16] are about combined rewritings where both the query and the
database D have to be rewritten. A recent very interesting paper discussing polynomial
size rewritings is [22]. Among other results, [22] provides complexity-theoretic argu-
ments indicating that without the use of special constants (e.g, 0 and 1, or the numerical
domain), a polynomial rewriting such as ours may not be possible. Rosati et al. [21]
recently proposed a very sophisticated rewriting technique into nonrecursive Datalog,
implemented in the Presto system. This algorithm produces a non-recursive Datalog
program as a rewriting, instead of a UCQs. This allows the “hiding” of the exponential
blow-up inside the rules instead of generating explicitly the disjunctive normal form.
The size of the ﬁnal rewriting is, however, exponential in the number of non-eliminable
existential join variables of the given query; such variables are a subset of the join vari-
ables of the query, and are typically less than the number of atoms in the query. Thus,
the size of the rewriting is exponential in the query size in the worst case. Relevant
further optimizations of this method are given in [18].
Acknowledgment G. Gottlob’s work was funded by the EPSRC Grant EP/H051511/1
ExODA: Integrating Description Logics and Database Technologies for Expressive
Ontology-Based Data Access. We thank the anonymous referees, as well as Roman
Kontchakov, Carsten Lutz, and Michael Zakharyaschev for useful comments on an ear-
lier version of this paper.
