Reduced Basis Decomposition: a Certiﬁed and Fast
Lossy Data Compression Algorithm
Yanlai Chena,1
aDepartment of Mathematics, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, 285 Old Westport
Road, North Dartmouth, MA 02747, USA.
Abstract
Dimension reduction is often needed in the area of data mining. The goal
of these methods is to map the given high-dimensional data into a low-
dimensional space preserving certain properties of the initial data. There
are two kinds of techniques for this purpose.
The ﬁrst, projective meth-
ods, builds an explicit linear projection from the high-dimensional space to
the low-dimensional one. On the other hand, the nonlinear methods utilizes
nonlinear and implicit mapping between the two spaces. In both cases, the
methods considered in literature have usually relied on computationally very
intensive matrix factorizations, frequently the Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD). The computational burden of SVD quickly renders these dimension
reduction methods infeasible thanks to the ever-increasing sizes of the prac-
tical datasets.
In this paper, we present a new decomposition strategy, Reduced Ba-
sis Decomposition (RBD), which is inspired by the Reduced Basis Method
(RBM). Given X the high-dimensional data, the method approximates it by
Y T(≈X) with Y being the low-dimensional surrogate and T the transfor-
mation matrix. Y is obtained through a greedy algorithm thus extremely
eﬃcient. In fact, it is signiﬁcantly faster than SVD with comparable accu-
racy. T can be computed on the ﬂy. Moreover, unlike many compression
algorithms, it easily ﬁnds the mapping for an arbitrary “out-of-sample” vec-
tor and it comes with an “error indicator” certifying the accuracy of the

URL: www.faculty.umassd.edu/yanlai.chen/ (Yanlai Chen )
1This research was partially supported by National Science Foundation grant DMS-
1216928.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
October 6, 2018
arXiv:1503.05947v1  [math.NA]  19 Mar 2015

compression. Numerical results are shown validating these claims.
Keywords:
Data mining, Lossy compression, Reduced basis method, Singular value
decomposition, Greedy algorithm
1. Introduction
Dimension reduction is ubiquitous in many areas ranging from pattern
recognition, clustering, classiﬁcation, to fast numerical simulation of com-
plicated physical phenomena. The fundamental question to address is how
to approximate a n-dimensional space by a d-dimensional one with d ≪n.
Speciﬁcally, we are given a set of high-dimensional data
X = [x1, x2, . . . , xn] ∈Rm×n,
(1)
and the goal is to ﬁnd its low-dimensional approximation
Y = [y1, y2, . . . , yd] ∈Rm×d
(2)
with reasonable accuracy.
There are two types of dimension reduction methods.
The ﬁrst cate-
gory consists of “projective” ones. These are the linear methods that are
global in nature, and that explicitly transform the data matrix X into a
low-dimensional one by Y = TX. The leading examples are the Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) and its variants. The methods in the second
category act locally and are inherently nonlinear. For each sample in the
high-dimensional space (e.g. each column of X), they directly ﬁnd their low-
dimensional approximations by preserving certain locality or aﬃnity between
nearby points.
In this paper, inspired by the reduced basis method (RBM), we propose
a linear method called “Reduced Basis Decomposition (RBD)”. It is much
faster than PCA/SVD-based techniques. Moreover, its low-dimensional vec-
tors are equipped with error estimator indicating how close they are approx-
imating the high-dimensional data. RBM is a relative recent approach to
speed up the numerical simulation of parametric Partial Diﬀerential Equa-
tions (PDEs) [16, 19, 20, 6, 5]. It utilizes an Oﬄine–Online computational
decomposition strategy to produce surrogate solution (of dimension N) in
a time that is of orders of magnitude shorter than what is needed by the
2

underlying numerical solver of dimension N ≫N (called truth solver here-
after). The RBM relies on a projection onto a low dimensional space spanned
by truth approximations at an optimally sampled set of parameter values
[1, 8, 17, 18, 13]. This low-dimensional manifold is generated by a greedy
algorithm making use of a rigorous a posteriori error bounds for the ﬁeld vari-
able and associated functional outputs of interest which also guarantees the
ﬁdelity of the surrogate solution in approximating the truth approximation.
The RBD method acts in a similar fashion. Given the data matrix X as in
(1), it iteratively builds up Y (2) whose column space approximates that of X.
It starts with a randomly selected column of X (or a user input if existent).
At each step where we have k vectors {y1, . . . , yk}, the next vector yk+1
is found by scanning the columns of X and locating the one whose error of
projection into the current space span{y1, . . . , yk} is the largest. This process
is continued until the maximum projection/compression error is small enough
or until the limit on the size of the reduced space is reached. An important
feature is an oﬄine-online decomposition that allows the computation of the
compression error, and thus the cost of locating yk+1, to be independent of
(the potentially large) m.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the back-
ground material, mainly the RBM. Section 3 describes the reduced basis
decomposition algorithm and discuss its properties. Numerical validations
are presented in Section 4, and ﬁnally some concluding remarks are oﬀered
in Section 5.
2. Background
The reduced basis method was developed for use with ﬁnite element meth-
ods to numerically solve PDEs. We assume, for simplicity, that the prob-
lems (usually parametric partial diﬀerential equations (PDE)) to simulate
are written in the weak form: ﬁnd u(µ) in an Hilbert space X such that
a(u(µ), v; µ) = f(v; µ),
∀v ∈X where µ is an input parameter. These simu-
lations need to be performed for many values of µ chosen in a given parameter
set D. In this problem a and f are bilinear and linear forms, respectively,
associated to the PDE (with aN and f N denoting their numerical counter-
parts). We assume that there is a numerical method to solve this problem and
the solution uN, called the “truth approximation” or “snapshot”, is accurate
enough for all µ ∈D.
3

The fundamental observation utilized by RBM is that the parameter de-
pendent solution uN(µ) is not simply an arbitrary member of the inﬁnite-
dimensional space associated with the PDE. Instead, the solution mani-
fold M = {uN(µ), µ ∈D} can typically be well approximated by a low-
dimensional vector space. The idea is then to propose an approximation of
M by W N = span{uN(µ1), . . . , uN(µN)} where, uN(µ1), . . . , uN(µN) are
N (≪N) pre-computed truth approximations corresponding to the param-
eters {µ1, . . . , µN} judiciously selected according to a sampling strategy [13].
For a given µ, we now solve in W N for the reduced solution u(N)(µ). The
online computation is N-independent, thanks to the assumption that the
(bi)linear forms are aﬃne2 and the fact that they can be approximated by
aﬃne (bi)linear forms when they are nonaﬃne [2, 10]. Hence, the online
part is very eﬃcient.
In order to be able to “optimally” ﬁnd the N pa-
rameters and to assure the ﬁdelity of the reduced basis solution u(N)(µ) to
approximate the truth solution uN(µ), we need an a posteriori error estima-
tor ∆N(µ) which involves the residual r(v, µ) = f N(v; µ) −aN(uN(µ), v; µ)
and stability information of the bilinear form [12, 14, 19, 20, 21]. With this
estimator, we can describe brieﬂy the classical greedy algorithm used to
ﬁnd the N parameters µ1, . . . , µN and the space W N. We ﬁrst randomly
select one parameter value and compute the associated truth approximation.
Next, we scan the entire (discrete) parameter space and for each parameter
in this space compute its RB approximation u(N=1) and the error estimator
∆1(µ). The next parameter value we select, µ2, is the one corresponding to
the largest error estimator. We then compute the truth approximation and
thus have a new basis set consisting of two elements. This process is repeated
until the maximum of the error estimators is suﬃciently small.
The reduced basis method typically has exponential convergence with re-
spect to the number of pre-computed solutions [15, 4, 3]. This means that the
number of pre-computed solutions can be small, thus the computational cost
reduced signiﬁcantly, for the reduced basis solution to approximate the ﬁnite
element solution reasonably well. The author and his collaborators showed
[7] that it works well even for a complicated geometric electromagnetic scat-
tering problem that eﬃciently reveals a very sensitive angle dependence (the
object being stealthy with a particular conﬁguration).
2a(w, v; µ)
≡
PQa
q=1 Θq
a(µ) aq(w, v),
∀w, v
∈
XN ,
f(v; µ)
≡
PQf
q=1 Θq
f(µ) f q(v),
∀v ∈XN .
4

3. Reduced basis decomposition
In this section, we detail our proposed methodology by stating the al-
gorithm, studying the error evaluation, and pinpointing the computational
cost.
3.1. The algorithm
At the heart of the method stated in Algorithm 1 is a greedy algorithm
similar to that used by RBM. It builds the reduced space dimension-by-
dimension. At each step, the greedy decision for the best next dimension to
pursue in the space corresponding to the data is made by examining an error
indicator quantifying the discrepancy between the uncompressed data and
the one compressed into the current (reduced) space.
In the context of the RBM, we view each column (or row if we are com-
pressing the row space) of the matrix as the ﬁne solution of certain (virtual)
parametric PDE with the (imaginary) parameter taking a particular value.
Since this solution is explicitly given already by the data, the fact that the
PDE and the parameter are absent does not matter.
Once this common
mechanism satisﬁed by each column (or row) is identiﬁed, the greedy algo-
rithm still relies on an accurate and eﬃcient estimate quantifying the error
between the original data and the compressed one. This will be the topic of
the next subsection.
To state the algorithm, we assume that we are given a data matrix X ∈
Rm×n, the largest dimension dmax < n that the practitioner wants to retain,
and a tolerance ϵR capping the discrepancy between the original and the
compressed data. The output is the set of bases for the compressed data
(a low-dimensional approximation of the original data) Y ∈Rm×d and the
transformation matrix T ∈Rd×n. Here, d ≤dmax is the actual dimension of
the compressed data.
With this output, we can
Compress. We represent any data entry X(:, j), the jth column of X ∈Rm,
by the jth column of T, T(:, j) ∈Rd, with usually d ≪m.
Uncompress. An approximation of the data is reconstructed by
X(:, j) = Y T(:, j).
5

Algorithm 1
Reduced Basis Decomposition
(Y, T) = RBD(X, ϵR, dmax)
1. Set d = 1, Ecur = +∞, and i a random integer between 1 and n.
2.
while d ≤dmax and Ecur > ϵR do
2.1.
v = X(:, i).
2.2.
Apply the modiﬁed Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization to ob-
tain the dth basis of the compressed space
for j = 1 : d −1 do
v = v −(v · ξj) ξj.
end for
if ∥v∥< ϵR then
Y = Y (:, 1 : d −1)
T = T(:, 1 : d −1)
Break;
else
ξd =
v
∥v∥, Y (:, d) = ξd.
T(d, :) = ξ′
dX.
end if
2.3.
Ecur =
max
j∈{1,...,n}∥X(:, j) −Y (:, 1 : d)T(:, j)∥
and
i = argmax
j∈{1,...,n}
∥X(:, j) −Y (:, 1 : d)T(:, j)∥
2.4.
if Ecur ≤ϵR then
Y = Y (:, 1 : d), T = T(1 : d, :).
else
d = d + 1.
end if
end while
Evaluate the compression of out-of-sample data. Given any v ∈Rm×1
that is not equal to any column of X, its compressed representation in
6

Rd×1 is
vC = Y ′v.
3.2. Eﬃcient quantiﬁcation of the error
A critical part to facilitate the greedy algorithm and make the algorithm
realistic is an eﬃcient mechanism measuring (or estimating) the error v −vC
under certain norm, ∥v −vC∥, in Step 2.3 of the algorithm. In this work, we
are using the A−norm deﬁned as follows. For a given symmetric and positive
deﬁnite matrix A ∈Rm×m, the A−norm of a vector v ∈Rm×1 is deﬁned by
∥v∥A :=
√
v′Av.
For v being any column of the data matrix X and vC its low-dimensional
approximation vC = Y ⃗c, it is easy to see that
∥v −vC∥2
A = v′Av −2v′
CAv + v′
CAvC
(3)
= v′Av −2⃗c ′Y ′Av + ⃗c ′Y ′AY ⃗c.
The choice of A reﬂects the criteria of the data compression. Typical
examples are:
1. Identity:
Equal weights are assigned to each component of the data
entry. This makes the quality of compression uniform. In this case, the
evaluation of (3) is greatly simpliﬁed and the algorithm is the fastest
as shown below by the numerical results.
2. General diagonal matrix:
This setting can be used if part of each
data entry needs to be preserved better and other parts can aﬀord less
ﬁdelity.
3. General SPD matrix:
This most general case can be helpful if the
goal is to preserve data across diﬀerent entries anisotropiclly.
The goal is then to evaluate the error through (3) as eﬃciently as possible for
any given ⃗c. This is achieved by employing an oﬄine-online decomposition
strategy where the ⃗c-independent parts are evaluated beforehand (oﬄine)
enabling a quick turnaround time for any given ⃗c encountered online. The
speciﬁcs are given in the next subsection.
7

3.3. Computational cost and implementation aspects
The Oﬄine-Online decomposition of the computations and their complex-
ities are as follows. Here, we use nnz(A) to denote the number of nonzero
entries of a sparse matrix A.
Oﬄine The total cost is of order
(m + nnz(A)) d2
max +
 d3
max + nnz(A)

n.
Oﬄine MGS Every basis needs to orthogonalized against the current
set of bases. The total cost is of order m d2
max.
Oﬄine Calculation of Errors The next basis is located by com-
paring each column with its compressed version into the current
space. To enable that, we encounter the following computational
cost:
Pre-computation of diag(X′AX) (for v′Av in (3)) and AX (for
Av in (3)). The cost is of order nnz(A) n.
Expansion of Y ′AX and Y ′AY . The former takes time of order
nnz(A) dmax m, and the latter of order nnz(A) d2
max.
Oﬄine Searching After these calculations, the comparison between
the original and compressed data is then only dependent on the
size of ⃗c (which is also the number of columns for Y ). The com-
plexity is of order d2
max. It will be repeated for up to n times in
the searching process of step 2.3 of the algorithm for each of the
up to dmax basis elements. The total cost is at the level of n d3
max.
Online Given any (possibly out-of-sample) data v ∈Rm×1, its coeﬃcients
in the compressed space is obtained by evaluating ⃗c = Y ′v. The cost is
of order m dmax. The decoding (Y ⃗c) can be done with the same cost.
The online computation has complexity of order
m dmax.
We remark that, if the actual practice does not requires forming vC
(e.g. clustering and classiﬁcation etc) and so we only work with the
coordinates ⃗c of v in the compressed space, then the online cost will be
independent of m and thus much smaller.
8

4. Numerical Results
In this section, we test the reduced basis decomposition on image com-
pression, and data compression. Lastly, we devise a simple face recognition
algorithm based on RBD and test it on a database of 575 images while com-
paring RBD with 6 other face recognition algorithms. The computation is
done, and thus the speedup numbers reported herein should be understood
as, in Matlab 2014a on a 2011 IMac with a 3.4 GHz Intel Core i7 processor.
4.1. Image Compression and comparison with SVD
We ﬁrst test it on compressing two standard images Lena and Mandrill
in Figure 1. They both have an original resolution of 512 × 512. We take
Figure 1: Original pictures: Lena and Mandrill.
A = I and test the algorithm. For each component of every image, we run the
algorithm with dmax ∈{170, 51, 25} which implies a compression ratio of 33%,
10%, and 5% respectively. The resulting images (formed by multiplying the
corresponding Y and T together) are shown on the 1st and 3rd row of Figures
2. As a comparison, we run SVD and obtain the reconstructed matrices with
the ﬁrst dmax singular values accordingly. The resulting images are on the
second and last row. Clearly, SVD provides the best quality pictures among
all possible algorithms (and thus better than what RBD provides). However,
we see that the RBD pictures are only slightly blurrier. Moreover, it takes
much less time. In fact, we show the comparison in time between SVD and
RBD in Table 1. We see that, when d = 51, RBD is three times faster than
9

SVD and seven times faster when d = 25. Here the SVD time is the shorter
between those taken by svd and svds commands in Matlab.
Picture
RBD
SVD
Lena, d = 170
3.57
1
Lena, d = 51
0.30
1
Lena, d = 25
0.14
1
Mandrill d = 170
3.22
1
Mandrill d = 51
0.31
1
Mandrill d = 25
0.14
1
Table 1: Relative computational time for image compression.
4.2. Data Compression
Here, we test the algorithm on a few artiﬁcially-generated data sets.
Given a function f(x, y), the data denoted by f(D) is constructed by evalu-
ating f on a uniform tensorial grid D := (xi, yj)n
i,j=1.
4.2.1. Exact reconstruction
For tensorial functions such as those listed in Table 2 with their corre-
sponding d values, the RBD method detects the optimal dimension, stops the
greedy algorithm after d steps and decompose the matrix f(D) accordingly,
that is, as an exact product of n × d and d × n matrices.
4.2.2. Approximate reconstruction
Here, we set f(x, y) = 0.6f1(x, y) + 0.1f2(x, y) + 0.01f3(x, y) with:
f1(x, y) = sin(π(x + 2y)) cos(π(2x −y))
f2(x, y) = sin(10π(x −3y)) cos(10π(3x + y))
f3(x, y) = sin(3πx2y) cos(6π
p
|x|
y + 2).
and let D be a 5001 × 5001 uniform grid on [−1, 1] × [−1, 1]. Setting d = 22,
the method extracts 22 columns and decompose f(D) by a product of two
matrices of size 5001 × 22 and 22 × 5001. The compression ratio is larger
10

Figure 2: Lena and Mandrill compressed. d = 170, 51, 25 from left to right. The ﬁrst and
third row are from Reduced Basis Decomposition, and the second and fourth are from
Singular Value Decomposition.
11

Function f(x, y)
Intrinsic dimension
sin(πx) cos(πy)
1
sin(πx) cos(πy) + 0.1 sin(10πx) cos(10πy)
2
sin(πx) cos(πy) + 0.1 sin(10πx) cos(10πy)
+0.01 sin(100πx) cos(100πy)
3
Table 2: Three functions with low intrinsic dimensions that can be compressed by RBD
exactly.
than 110. More importantly, the reconstruction plotted in Figure 3 Left, has
point-wise error below 10−6.
We calculate the point-wise reconstruction error for reduced basis de-
composition eR(d) = ∥f(D) −Y (:, 1 : d)T(1 : d, :)∥. As a comparison, we
calculate the ﬁrst 22 singular values si of f(D), the corresponding singular
vectors (ui, vi), and the reconstruction error eS(d) = ∥f(D) −Pd
i=1 siuiv′
i∥.
These two errors are plotted in Figure 3 Right. We see that RBD matches
SVD in terms of accuracy. We emphasize that what is striking is its eﬃ-
ciency. The RBD code, as implemented by the author3 is 16 times faster
than the svds command in Matlab.
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
15
20
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
10
2
 
 
RBD
SVD
Figure 3: Artiﬁcial dataset: The reconstructed contour plot from compressed data (left),
and the comparison of the history of convergence (RBD vs SVD) as d increases (right).
3www.faculty.umassd.edu/yanlai.chen/RBD
12

Data set
No of classes
No of samples per class
UMIST
20
19–48
Table 3: Data set information.
4.3. Face Recognition
Here, we demonstrate the superior eﬃciency and accuracy of the RBD
method on a classical classiﬁcation task – face recognition. The goal of face
recognition is to recognize subjects based on facial images. It has important
applications in areas ranging from surveillance, authentication, to human-
computer interaction etc.
Figure 4: A snapshot of the UMIST data set.
We use the UMIST database [9] that is publicly available on Roweis’ web
page4. Table 3 summarizes its characteristics: It contains 20 people under
diﬀerent poses. The number of diﬀerent views per subject varies from 19 to
48. We use the cropped version whose snapshot is shown in Figure 4.
As in [11], we randomly choose 10 views from each class to form a training
set. The rest of the samples (375 of them) are used as testing images. We
show the average classiﬁcation error rates in Figure 5 Left. These averages are
computed over 100 random formations of the training and test sets. Shown
in the middle are the results of six traditional dimension reduction techniques
taken from [11]. Clearly, our method has similar performance as the PCA
4http://www.cs.nyu.edu/ roweis/data.html
13

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
Number of basis vectors
Classification error rate (%)
 
 
RBD
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Number of basis vectors
Classification error rate (%)
 
 
PCA
LDA
ONPP
OLPP
NPP
LPP
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Number of basis vectors
T R BD/ T P CA
Figure 5: Comparison of RBD and other face recognition algorithms. Left: classiﬁcation
error for RBD; Middle: classiﬁcation error for six traditional methods [11]; Right: Speedup
factor of RBD over PCA.
method, and outperforms three of the other ﬁve methods. However, RBD
is much faster than PCA and other methods since they all involves solving
eigenproblems [11]. A speedup factor as a function of the number of bases
is plotted in Figure 5 Right which demonstrates a speedup factor of larger
than two for this particular test when we reach the asymptotic region (around
when the number of basis vectors is 25).
5. Concluding remarks
This paper presents and tests an extremely eﬃcient dimension reduction
algorithm for data processing. It is multiple times faster than the SVD/PCA-
based algorithms. What makes this possible is a greedy algorithm that it-
eratively builds up the reduced space of basis vectors. Each time, the next
dimension is located by exploring the errors of compression into the cur-
rent space for all data entries. Thanks to an oﬄine-online decomposition
mechanism, this searching is independent of the size of each entry. Numer-
ical results including one concerning a real world face recognition problem
conﬁrm these ﬁndings.
