The Missing Ones: Key Ingredients Towards 
Effective Ambient Assisted Living Systems 
Hong Sun, Vincenzo De Florio, Ning Gui and Chris Blondia 
PATS Research Group, University of Antwerp, 1 Middelheimlaan, Antwerp, 2020, Belgium. 
Interdisciplinary Institute for Braodband Technology (IBBT),Gaston Crommenlaan 8, Gent, 9050, Belgium  

Abstract. The population of elderly people keeps increasing rapidly, which becomes a predominant aspect of our societies. As 
such, solutions both efficacious and cost-effective need to be sought. Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) is a new approach which 
promises to address the needs from elderly people. In this paper, we claim that human participation is a key ingredient towards 
effective AAL systems, which not only saves social resources, but also has positive relapses on the psychological health of the 
elderly people. Challenges in increasing the human participation in ambient assisted living are discussed in this paper and solu-
tions to meet those challenges are also proposed. We use our proposed mutual assistance community, which is built with ser-
vice oriented approach, as an example to demonstrate how to integrate human tasks in AAL systems. Our preliminary simula-
tion results are presented, which support the effectiveness of human participation. 
Keywords: Ambient Assisted Living, Ambient Intelligence, Mutual Assistance Community. 
1. Introduction 
As well known, the proportion of elderly people 
keeps increasing since the end of last century. The 
European overview report of Ambient Assisted Liv-
ing (AAL) investigated this trend [21] aiming to find 
out an efficient solution to help the elderly people 
independently living. 
AAL aims at extending the time the elderly 
people can live in their home environment by in-
creasing their autonomy and assisting them in carry-
ing out activities of daily lives by the use of intelli-
gent products and the provision of remote services 
including care services. Most efforts towards build-
ing ambient assisted living systems for the elderly 
people are based on developing pervasive devices 
and use Ambient Intelligence [4] to integrate these 
devices together to construct a safety environment. 
Living assistance systems and assistive devices are 
thus developed to facilitate the daily lives of these 
elderly people. Such efforts are close to achieve the 
goal of assisting the elderly people to live indepen-
dently by transferring the dependence from human 
side to assistive devices. However, what we deem as 
their biggest limitation is that although they are to 
achieve such goal, in so doing they also reduce the 
social connections of the assisted people and hinder 
human participation. Although recent researches 
have now noticed the importance of human participa-
tion and intend to increase social connections, there 
is still no effective way to enhance the human partic-
ipation in ambient assisted living systems. 
In this paper, first we review the existing efforts 
of bringing human participation into ambient assisted 
living systems. Then, we observe how the common 
approaches draw a dividing line between those who 
are to be cared of and those who take care. By doing 
so, AAL services based on this axiom confine the 
users to a passive role that discriminate and exclude 
them from the better part of society, which introduces 
frustration and discomfort. We deem avoiding or 
minimizing such frustration and discomfort from the 
user side as the biggest challenge towards the success 
of ambient assisted living systems. Our solution to 
meet such challenge is by changing the roles that 
people played in ambient assisted living systems. 
Instead of classifying people into assisted people and 
caregivers, we propose to construct the ambient as-
sisted living system as a mutual assistance communi-
ty where every subscriber is equally treated as peer 

participant – each with their own diverse abilities and 
capabilities, but all contributing to the common wel-
fare. We expect such change of roles could help to 
bring in more human participation and social interac-
tion in ambient assisted living. We also expect such 
change could help to save the social resources while 
also providing services to the elderly people in an 
effective way. 
Other challenges of bringing human participation, 
especially coping with the dynamical natural of hu-
man services are also discussed in this paper, and we 
conjecture that the dynamic characteristics of the 
service orientated approach provide a satisfactory 
solution to meet such challenges. To substantiate our 
claim and provide a practical example, we introduce 
the mutual assistance community, an architecture 
where services from human side and services from 
machine side are integrated together as web services 
under the management of a service coordination cen-
ter, where a web service matching engine is imple-
mented.  
An example of organizing group activity where 
people join as peer participants is given in this paper. 
A simple simulation model of a mutual assistance 
community is also presented: preliminary results 
suggest the effectiveness and efficiency of bringing 
human participation in ambient assisted living.  
2. Bringing human participation in AAL systems 
Much research were carried out on building intel-
ligent environments around people, which aimed at 
providing assistive services in pervasive environ-
ments, constructing a better environment and provid-
ing people with better lives [7] [13]. Recent research 
efforts also aim at bringing intelligibility in ambient 
environments to model the human behaviours [9], 
thus providing better services to the end users. Ser-
vices provided by those projects are promising to 
help the elderly people to ease their lives and keep 
them safe by monitoring some of their health status. 
However, services provided in those projects are sim-
ilar and lack of diversity. What is more important, the 
scenarios in these projects are still not complete 
enough to meet elderly people’s needs in their daily 
lives and help them maintain satisfactory indepen-
dent lives. 
The Amigo project [6], though not specifically 
designed to assist the elderly people, investigated 
ambient intelligence for the networked home envi-
ronment to provide attractive user services and im-
prove end-user usability. Pervasive devices are ma-
naged in the Amigo project in an adaptive, context-
aware and autonomous way. The scenarios of this 
project proved that systems such as this are able to 
provide their users with customized services. The 
applications are not restricted to the home environ-
ment, but extended to include the work environment 
through mobile devices, and are also able to connect 
family members together. 
As such, the Amigo project is a huge step towards 
general introduction of the networked home and to-
wards Ambient Intelligence as it enhances considera-
bly the usability of a networked home system and 
expands the application domain. The achievements 
made in the Amigo project could be applied to Am-
bient Assisted Living for the elderly people to pro-
vide services based on advanced ICT technology. 
However, as the Amigo project is not specifically 
designed to assist the elderly people living indepen-
dently, still there are unmet challenges to fully ex-
press the potential of adopting those technologies to 
assist the elderly people living independently and 
safely in their houses. What is even more important, 
Amigo services lack of human participation and the 
communication between the assisted people and the 
community is predefined and restricted to their fami-
ly or neighbours. This inherently restricts services 
discovery inside a limited group and may isolate the 
user from the “world outside.” 
 
Fig. 1. Side-effect of over-using assistive devices [15] 
It is our conviction that human participation is es-
sential in building effective ambient assisted living 
systems. The AAL country report of Finland re-
marked that “the (assistive) devices are not useful if 

not combined with services and formal or informal 
support and help” [5]. We share this view and deem 
informal caregivers from relatives, friends and 
neighbouring people as indispensable when con-
structing timely and cost-effectively services to assist 
the elderly people.  The usage of assistive devices 
helps to transfer the dependence from human side to 
machinery side, thus establishing some degree of 
independence. However, the dependence on the as-
sistive devices unconsciously reduces the social con-
nections of the assisted people. We feel that, without 
communication with the outside world, elderly 
people assisted by those assistive devices are only 
safely surviving rather than actively living. Figure 1 
shows the possible side-effect of over-using technol-
ogy without proper human participation. Although 
the effect is exaggerated, the picture reminds us that 
we should be cautious not to leave the elderly people 
only with assistive devices, but also with our sympa-
thy, compassion, communication, and help. 
Luckily, many researchers are now realizing the 
importance to include social intelligence and social 
connection [3]. They have made efforts toward build-
ing social links between the elderly people and their 
families or neighbours to address their needs and 
increase their social connections. However, those 
solutions are still mainly focused on the technical 
aspect and human participation is also very limited. 
We argue that effective and efficient solutions to 
meet the AAL challenges should combine the forces 
from both the technological part and the societal 
ones: 
o 
On one hand, the involvement of human be-
ings could help fully express the potential of 
smart devices, and maintain the social aware-
ness of the elderly people.  
o 
On the other hand, the usage of advanced ICT 
technology could better connect the elderly 
people together, e.g. organizing community 
activities.  
In the following sections, we firstly discuss the 
challenges of developing pervasive home-care ser-
vices exploiting human participation [25], and then 
we propose a possible approach to construct such a 
system. 
3. Challenges of bringing human participation in 
AAL systems 
 The previous sections stated the promising ap-
proaches to help the elderly people living safely and 
independently in their own houses. We also proposed 
to integrate the human services into AAL systems to 
enrich the available services and create a less intru-
sive environment. However, there are still many chal-
lenges towards the implementation of such an envi-
ronment. In this section, we will discuss those we 
deem to be the main challenges, the necessary steps, 
and some possible solutions to effectively deliver 
services which exploit human participation in AAL 
systems. 
3.1. Dynamicity of service availability 
Although informal caregivers may help to reduce 
the needed social resources, and increase the social 
connections, they are also very difficult to be utilized, 
due to their inherently dynamic nature: the availabili-
ties of these services are continuously changing. How 
to manage this dynamicity becomes a big challenge. 
We believe Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
could be a good approach to cope with the above 
mentioned dynamicity. SOA is a flexible, standar-
dized architecture that supports the connection of 
various services, and as such it appears to be an ideal 
tool to tackle the dynamicity problem. The applica-
tion of SOA, such as the OSGi platform [18], can 
also help to establish a framework such that various 
smart devices could be integrated together and could 
be automatically discovered, called, started and 
stopped.  The unified service format will also help 
the processing of service matching. Research efforts 
of using OSGi to build safety home environment are 
also reported in [4]. 
Another attractive feature of SOA can be found in 
recent researches towards integrating people activi-
ties into service frameworks, which culminated in 
two specifications launched in the summer of 2007: 
Web Services Human Task (WS-HumanTask) [27] 
and WS-BPEL Extension for People (BPEL4People) 
[8]. WS-HumanTask targets on the integration of 
human beings in service oriented applications. It pro-
vides a notation, state diagram and API for human 
tasks, as well as a coordination protocol that allows 
interaction with human tasks in a service-oriented 
fashion and at the same time controls tasks’ autono-
my. A people activity could be described as human 
tasks in the WS-HumanTask specification. The 
BPEL4People specification supports a broad range of 
scenarios that involve people within business 
processes, using human tasks defined in the WS-
HumanTask specification. These two specifications 
could help to meet the challenges of integrating hu-
man services in the SOA framework of the proposed 
mutual assistance community. 

3.2. Service mapping 
How to let the computer automatically map the 
available/requested services is a big challenge to-
wards constructing effective AAL systems. 
The foundation for service mapping is service de-
scription. A Semantic Knowledge Base is required to 
precisely describe the advertised services: certain 
ontology libraries describing the domain knowledge 
of the home-care environment should be developed 
with the interdisciplinary collaboration of the re-
searchers in this domain. With such domain know-
ledge, conceptual models for semantic service match-
ing could be applied. OWL-S [19] is currently the 
most used technology in this domain; it is able to 
provide a framework for semantically describing web 
services from several perspectives, e.g., service in-
quiry, invocation, and composition. 
There are several service matching tools devel-
oped for matching OWL-S services, such as OWL-S 
Matcher [26], OWL-S UDDI/Matchmaker [20], and 
OWLS-MX Matchmaker [17]. The main drawback of 
the first two is that the matching process takes a large 
amount of time, while the biggest limitation of the 
latter one is its being memory intensive [11]. In our 
opinion, these tools serve as good starting points to 
investigate AAL web service matching, while we 
believe more elegant and efficient matching engines 
should be developed. We have made some prelimi-
nary tests of service matching in home-care service 
matching – details can be found in Section 4.2. 
3.3. People’s willingness to participate 
People’s willingness to participate in AAL sys-
tems needs to be investigated and encouraged – how 
to encourage people joining e.g. a mutual assistance 
community (see Section 4) is a big challenge. 
In [2] [3], the persuasiveness of ambient intelli-
gence is discussed: in order to achieve human partic-
ipation, AAL system should provide both trust persu-
asion and enough motivation to get people’s accep-
tance. As we pointed out in the previous section, it is 
our conviction that any effective AAL system cannot 
leave aside the contributions coming from society 
itself, in all forms, with the active participation of 
informal caregivers, professionals, and even the el-
derly people themselves. In order to encourage more 
people to make contribution to AAL system, we need 
to understand their drives to provide help to others, 
and stay active in the community. The main drive for 
people to help others is not merely money, but also 
includes moral duty and their social image. One main 
reason that keeps people active in an online commu-
nity is to build up a good image for their avatars and 
win respect from other community residents. An 
AAL system with participation of informal caregiv-
ers could also reward the informal caregiver in this 
way. Social studies to stimulate people to work as 
volunteers should be thoroughly carried out. 
Besides encouraging people to help the ones in 
need as informal caregivers, how to encourage the 
elderly people to join such a community is also a 
challenge. We would ascribe the elderly people’s 
unwillingness to use assisting system from two folds 
– psychological one and technological one. In the rest 
of this section we introduce these two aspects in de-
tails and explain how we made efforts to reduce this 
unwillingness. 
3.3.1. Psychological frustration: 
When people are getting old, a relevant source of 
frustration comes from losing physical strength, but 
what torches them most lies probably in the psycho-
logical sphere: they are becoming passive consumers 
of the societal services rather than active producers. 
In so doing, they also lose their self-esteem. Almost 
all the AAL systems for the elderly people consider 
their users as people who are weak and require to be 
passively assisted by others. For the designers of 
such systems, being able to maintain some degree of 
independence without bringing too much burden to 
our society appears as an already ambitious goal. 
However, those systems neglect the fact that the el-
derly people can still make their contributions to our 
society through their valuable experiences. A home-
care system with human participation could help to 
encourage the elderly people to actively participate in 
group activities as peer participants, and possibly 
even to use their experiences to help the younger 
generations to solve, e.g., some of their work and 
school problems [25]. We expect these activities 
could help the elderly people to find themselves still 
useful and thus enable them to live in more active 
ways. Such possibilities will be discussed in more 
details in the following section. 
3.3.2. Technological frustration: 
Elderly people are usually scared by the applica-
tion of new technology. In order to help them get 
used to the ambient assistive devices, we should con-
struct user friendly interfaces, and also provide ap-
propriate trainings to their users. Developing adap-
tive, natural and multimodal human computer inter-
faces is the main challenge of future interfaces in 
assisted living [16]. It is also suggested to get people 
involved in how to use the assistive devices before 
they really need them [10]. 
In the solution proposed in next section, elderly 
people do not only benefit from keeping connected

 
Fig. 2. Organization of mutual assistance community 
with other people, but also are provided chances to 
make contributions to society, to feel that they are 
still useful, and to live in an active way with self-
esteem. Such benefits could provide our elderly 
people with stimulations to break the technical bar-
rier. 
4. Mutual assistance community – a user-centered 
approach 
4.1. Community organization 
The previous section discussed the challenges of 
developing AAL systems with human participation. 
In this section, we propose to construct a so-called 
“mutual assistance community” to bring services 
from human side into AAL environments. Such a 
system integrates the services from human beings 
with the applications provided by assistive devices, 
and best utilizes the available resources providing 
services to the people in need in an effective way 
[12] [22] [23]. Figure 2 shows the organization of our 
mutual assistance community. Assistive devices are 
deployed to construct a smart house environment 
managed by a local coordinator to build up a safety 
environment around the assisted people.  
As mentioned already, the most important asset 
integrated in our community is indeed the people 
themselves. Our proposed community allows dispa-
rate technologies and people to work together to help 
people who suffer from aging or disabilities. People 
who are able to provide services are encouraged to do 
so and assist the requesting people as informal care-
givers. Elderly people are also encouraged to partici-
pate in the group activities, which not only helps to 
maintain physical and psychological health but also 
reduces the requests of professional medical re-
sources. Professional caregivers (such as doctors, 
specialists etc.) are included in the community to 
provide emergency and professional medical service. 
Commercial vendors are also included, which brings 
convenience to the user and diversifies the service 
type, at the same time laying the foundation for eco-
nomical exploitation and self-sustainability.  
In fact, the importance of the informal caregiver 
is also notified by previous researches: for instance, 
Aware Home [7] points out that technology should 
support networks of formal and informal caregivers, 
and the scenario of Amigo project [6] also shows 
informal caregivers could help to provide first- aid 
help to neighbouring people. However, the link be-
tween the informal caregivers and the elderly people 
are statically fixed there. Our proposed community 
can flexibly connect the needed help and available 
informal caregiver services through web service pub-
lication, matching and binding. The elderly people 
can also use this approach to initialize and join group 
activities, and inter-generational activities could also 
be carried out in this way. During the inter-
generational activities, the younger generation could 
help the elderly people on physical demanding tasks 
as informal caregivers. Though physically weak, the 
elderly people accumulated valuable experiences and 
knowledge during their lives. They may use such

Service
Center
A
B
request
service X
request
service X
N1
N2
Service
Center
A
B
request
service X
request
service X
Traditional
Model
Participant
Model
Connect
 
 
Fig. 3. Organize group activities with “Participant Model” 
knowledge to assist the younger generation. During 
this process, not only the younger generation gets 
their needed answer, the elder generation also finds 
an access to make their contribution to our society. 
The elderly people may find themselves still useful, 
stand with more active living attitude, thus avoiding 
the frustration of feeling useless. 
In our mutual assistance community, we also in-
troduced a so-called “Participant Model” to organize 
group activities. The concept is that elderly people 
may be interested in and should be encouraged to 
take some group activities, e.g. walking in the park 
together, playing chess etc. Traditionally, such re-
quests are satisfied by either informal caregivers or 
nursing people. But in our mutual assistance commu-
nity, the community will try to connect the elderly 
people to take group activities together (as shown in 
Fig. 3). In this way, people are not passively receiv-
ing help, but actively joining those activities as peer 
participants, which not only saves the social re-
sources, but also contributes to their psychological 
health. 
4.2. Service processing structure 
 
Fig. 4. Structure of service organization 
The service structure of our mutual assistance 
community is shown in Fig. 4.  Services from assis-
tive devices and human tasks are processed separate-
ly and integrated together. Services from assistive 
devices are built as OSGi services (bundles), and 
coordinated by the OSGi gateway. Part of these OS-
Gi services will be published directly as web services 
in the gateway, while the others will be firstly 
merged together into composite indicators to abstract 
higher level information and then published as web 
services. We call such services “virtual sensors.” 
On the human side, service processing is straigh-
ter forward. Human services are published as OWL-S 
web services; the availability of the informal caregiv-
ers is registered in the service coordination center 
while the request from the elderly people is also 
posted as service requests. A user could be registered 
as a service consumer and a service provider at the 
same time, based on the type of services. For instance, 
an elderly person could request physical challenging 
services, while providing knowledge or experience-
based advisory services. 
Through the above approach, the available servic-
es and the requested services, no matter if coming 
from the human or machine side, are all represented 
as web services in the service coordination center. In 
our implementation, the process of service match is 
executed by OWL-S Matcher, which is able to reflect 
different matching types, e.g. totally match, subsume 
(one instance is the sub-class of another instance), etc. 
Fig. 5 shows a fragment of the advertised service 
in OWL. The #Entertainment ontology (service type) 
and the #Informal Provider ontology (service provid-
er) are declared in the my_ontology.owl file and spe-
cified as inputs and outputs of the service. This is 
because the OWL-S Matcher could assign different 
matching acceptance for inputs and outputs, and se-
parating the service provider and service type enables 
the service requester to specify different acceptable 
matching degrees for service type and service pro-
vider separately. 

 
Fig. 6. OWL-S Matcher interface and matching result
 
Fig. 5. Fragment of the advertised service in OWL 
Figure 6. shows the interface of the OWL-S 
Matcher. In the window on the left side, user may 
specify different matching degrees (exact match, sub-
sume, etc). In the window on the right side, the 
matching result is displayed. The example shown in 
Fig. 6 shows the matching process between an avail-
able entertainment service provided by informal ca-
regiver and a request for indoor service provided by 
informal caregiver. The service types and providers 
described in web service may only use the ontology 
specified in the ontology library. The matching of the 
service provider yields an exact match, while the 
matching on the service type comes as subsume, as 
the requested one (indoor service) is defined before-
hand as sub class of the entertainment service in the 
ontology library. However, as subsume match in ser-
vice type also meets the requirement of the user – the 
user expected at least a subsume match on the service 
type – the final result for this matching process is 
match.  
5. Scenario and simulations 
To better illustrate the functions of our proposed 
mutual assistance community, we will firstly use a 
scenario to show how the community organizes 
group activities. Afterwards, we will use a simple 
model to mimic the overall performance of a mutual 
assistance community, and present our preliminary 
simulation results. 
5.1. Scenario: participation in group activities 
Mary is 70 years old and lives alone in Antwerp, 
Belgium. In the afternoon of a sunny day, Mary 
would like to have a walk with someone in the Mid-
delheim Park, which is close to her home. Mary de-

 
Fig. 7. Scenario of “Participant Activity” 
cides to use the mutual assistance community to find 
someone who also wants to have a walk in the park. 
She switches on the TV, which is the graphical inter-
face of the mutual assistance community. She navi-
gates the service menu, which is built as an ontology 
tree, and selects the “Group Activity”. A few photos 
will be presented to her, representing group activities 
such as chatting, jogging, walking together, etc. Mary 
chooses the icon corresponding to walking; she types 
in the location she wants to hold this event as “Mid-
delheim Park”. For the service organization, Mary 
chooses to receive service from peer “participants”; 
she specifies the deadline as “today, 8pm”. 
After making such inputs, the service matching 
engine, which located in the service coordination 
center, starts searching for the appropriate services. 
The settings for the search, translated from Mary’s 
actions, are as follows: 
Required Service: Walk with someone. 
Location: Middelheim Park, Antwerp. 
Deadline: 8pm, 1st, August, 2009.  
Service Form: Participant of Group Activities. 
    Unfortunately, there is no matched service for 
Mary’s request; the system sends this result to Mary, 
and keeps her request in the database before the 
deadline expires. A few hours later, Kate submits a 
similar request. The system checks the request from 
Kate, and finds that it matches Mary’s request to in-
itiate a walking activity. Thus an information dialog 
pops onto Mary’s screen: “Kate initiates a walking 
activity in somewhere by 7pm today; if you agree to 
take this group activity with Kate, press the OK but-
ton and we will forward your contact information to 
Kate.”  
Mary agrees to join this activity, she presses 
“OK” on her remote controller, while at the other 
side, Kate also accepts the participation of Mary. 
Their contact information is then displayed on their 
TV screens respectively, they call each other to con-
firm the time and place to meet, and later have a nice 
time walking together in the park. 
In this scenario, Mary and Kate take the group ac-
tivity, walking in park, together. No additional help is 
required to meet their requests, so that social re-
sources are effectively saved, and they also avoid the 
possible frustration of having to be taken care by 
others. Figure 7 illustrates the actions taken in this 
scenario; the displayed numbers indicate the steps of 
the indicated action, the indicator “NA” refers to ser-
vice not available, and the other lines in red indicate 
that the system may find more matches by exploiting 
the hierarchical relationships of the compared objects. 
We are currently working on the graphic user inter-
face to implement the above mentioned scenario. 
5.2. Simulations 
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of mutual 
assistance community, we have set up a simple cell 
grid model to imitate the community behavior. The 
characteristic of a mutual assistance community is 
that services from informal caregivers are highly dy-
namic, i.e. the availability of services is continuously 
changing. Our simulation model reflects such dyna-
micity by constructing an n×n cell grid; each cell in 
this grid represents an individual, and the whole grid 
represents a community. Figure 8 shows the graphic 
interface of the simulation model. The simulation 
model simplifies the categories of the requested ser-

 
Fig. 8. Simulation model of mutual assistance community 
vices and available services, dividing the community 
dwellers into the following categories:  
a) Professional Caregiver: those who are able to 
provide professional medical care. 
b) Informal Caregiver: those who are willing to 
provide help on non-medical services. 
c) Neutral: those who neither need service, nor 
provide it. 
d) Service Requester: those who need services, 
they are further divided into three sub catego-
ries: 
1) Alarm: requests need to be served by pro-
fessional caregiver. 
2) Normal Request: requests could be served 
by either informal or professional caregiver. 
3) Participant: requests to join group activities 
as peer participant. 
    The above mentioned community dwellers are 
represented as cells with different colours in our si-
mulation model in Fig. 8. The community shown in 
Fig. 8 changes in discrete time steps, and each activi-
ty (e.g. receives/provides service) takes a certain 
number of steps to finish. The needed steps to com-
plete an activity depend on the workload of the re-
quested service, which is a randomly generated num-
ber ranging from 5 to 25. On every step, cells who 
are receiving services will decrease their workload 
value by 1. Once their workload value becomes 0, it 
indicates the activity is finished, those who have re-
ceived their services will be set as neutral cell, and 
those who have provided their services become 
available again. Every step, those cells that are inac-
tive (cells not connected with other cells on service 
activities) will change their role with a certain proba-
bility. For instance, an informal caregiver may 
change into neutral, which mimics the event that an 
informal caregiver becomes not available. 
In order to simplify the simulation model, a cell 
in the community may only look up the states of its 
neighbouring cell, and once it may establish a con-
nection with its neighbour to provide or receive ser-
vice, such a connection will be established, and it 
will last certain steps for the service delivery. In the 
upper right side of the simulation model in Fig. 8, the 
rate of different cells, and the probabilities when a 
cell changes its state can be predefined. The simula-
tion results are accumulated, calculated and displayed 
in the lower right part of Fig. 8. 
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Percentage of cells providing help
Satisfaction 
5% Req
10% Req
15% Req
20% Req
25% Req
30% Req
35% Req
40% Req
45% Req
50% Req
55% Req
60% Req
 
Fig. 9. Performance with informal caregiver 

The simulations take into account the averaged 
successful rate to receive a service in time and the 
steps of service delay that a user may experience. 
Our results demonstrate that the presence of informal 
caregivers helps reduce the social resources and pro-
vide daily assistance timely.  Figure 9 shows how 
many client cells can receive timely help through the 
introduction of informal caregivers. The multico-
loured curves represent the different rates of the 
client cells in the initialization state, from 5% in the 
top to 60% in the bottom. The degree of satisfaction 
of the client cells indicates the percentage of the 
client cells that received help from their neighbours 
timely after their requests. A provider can serve only 
one client cell in this simulation. Fig. 9 shows that 
providing a certain number of informal caregivers, 
many of the requests could be provided immediately 
[22].  
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
participant rate
delay
 
Fig. 10. Performance with “Participant Model” 
When the elderly people are actively participating 
group activities, the dependence on social resources 
are further reduced, both the failures and service la-
tencies (i.e., the time difference between service re-
quests and their response, if any) goes down consi-
derably. Fig. 10 shows that when the participant rate is 
15%, the average latency is 16.3 time steps; when the 
participant rate increases to 25%, the averaged latency 
drops to 7.0; and when the participant rate reaches 60%, 
the averaged latency drops to 2.0. The failures of ser-
vice delivery also go down with the increase of partici-
pants; its trend follows the service delay in Fig. 10. 
More details and results of our simulations could be 
found in our previous paper [23].  
The simulations also demonstrate that satisfac-
tions of the people who are requesting services are 
largely depending on the dwellers’ willingness to 
provide help or participating to group activities. 
Another feature is that the size of the community 
does not bring direct effect on the users’ satisfaction, 
however expanding the contact that a user may reach 
with the other users may help to increase users’ satis-
faction rate. The results also suggest that a stable 
community with less changes on people’s roles may 
create higher satisfaction. 
6. Conclusions 
This paper discussed some crucial issues and pre-
requisites for building effective AAL systems for 
elderly people. We have observed the research efforts 
of building pervasive home-care environments with 
advanced Ambient Intelligence, which promises to 
provide safe environments around the elderly people 
in their own houses. However, we also foresee some 
challenges of such solutions: in particular we consid-
er a concrete threat – possible social isolation – due 
to the over-use of technology and lack of communi-
cation between the assisted people and the outside 
community. We believe effective and efficient solu-
tions to assist the elderly people to live both indepen-
dently and actively should leverage on the efforts 
from both technical side and social side. We gladly 
notice that currently more and more efforts are being 
pursued on this direction, not only from the research 
community [3], but also from the government side: 
such efforts focus on the social connections between 
the assisted people and the outside world, such as 
witnessed e.g. by the second call of the European 
AAL programme, which stated the importance of 
helping the elderly people live actively and enjoy 
their life, bridging distances and preventing loneli-
ness and isolation [14].  
We believe human participation to be the key in-
gredient to being able to meet the challenges of 
building an efficient and effective AAL system. In-
deed, human participation makes it possible to alle-
viate the sense of intrusion, to diversify the service 
categories, to explore the potential of the assistive 
devices, and also provides the elderly people with 
chances to keep on serving our society and living 
actively. Unfortunately, although researchers are rea-
lizing more and more the importance of human par-
ticipation, due to implementation difficulties, this key 
ingredient – people, actually – appears to be not 
enough exploited in many of the current solutions.   
Mutual assistance community, where people mu-
tually assist each other, is an example of an architec-
ture for AAL and a possible approach to bring human 
services into AAL systems. Smart devices can still be 
used in such a community to guarantee the safety of 
elderly people. Elderly people can also actively 
maintain their social networks, and regain their self-

esteem. We are convinced that bringing the people – 
the missing ones! – in home-care environment is both 
efficacious and effective in saving the social re-
sources, providing timely services and helping the 
elderly people live in an active and thus more satis-
factory way. 
This paper presented the structure of our proposed 
mutual assistance community as well as some of its 
basic components, e.g. service orchestration. Scena-
rios and simulation results were also provided, which 
demonstrated the effectiveness of human participa-
tion. 
Acknowledgement 
The authors would like to thank IBM for awarding 
the IBM PhD Fellowship to Hong Sun to support his 
research in this domain.
