GLIDE-RL: GROUNDED LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION THROUGH
DEMONSTRATION IN RL
A PREPRINT
Chaitanya Kharyal
Microsoft
Hyderabad, India

Sai Krishna Gottipati
AI Redefined Inc
Montreal, Canada

Tanmay Kumar Sinha
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India

Srijita Das
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada

Matthew E. Taylor
AI Redefined Inc
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada

January 9, 2024
ABSTRACT
One of the final frontiers in the development of complex human - AI collaborative systems is the
ability of AI agents to comprehend the natural language and perform tasks accordingly. However,
training efficient Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents grounded in natural language has been a
long-standing challenge due to the complexity and ambiguity of the language and sparsity of the
rewards, among other factors. Several advances in reinforcement learning, curriculum learning,
continual learning, language models have independently contributed to effective training of grounded
agents in various environments. Leveraging these developments, we present a novel algorithm,
Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL (GLIDE-RL) that introduces a teacher-
instructor-student curriculum learning framework for training an RL agent capable of following
natural language instructions that can generalize to previously unseen language instructions. In this
multi-agent framework, the teacher and the student agents learn simultaneously based on the student’s
current skill level. We further demonstrate the necessity for training the student agent with not just
one, but multiple teacher agents. Experiments on a complex sparse reward environment validates the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.
Keywords Reinforcement Learning · Curriculum Learning · Grounded Language
1
Introduction
Grounded language learning can be defined as the task of learning the meaning of natural language units (e.g., utterances,
phrases, or words) by leveraging the sensory data (e.g., an image) Cirik et al. [2020]. It is a challenging task due to
the inherent complexity, context sensitivity and ambiguity of natural language. This challenge is compounded when
a decision-making agent has to perform a series of actions to complete different tasks expressed in natural language.
Several works in the field of goal-conditioned RL Schaul et al. [2015], Liu et al. [2022] demonstrated the challenges
associated with training goal-based RL agents in very sparse reward settings. These goals may be represented in many
ways: for example, as one-hot vectors, as goal coordinates in a space (e.g., Euclidean), or as a ‘goal image’ the agent
needs to observe. They also share challenges with sparse reward RL tasks: credit assignment and sample efficiency.
Representing goals in natural language can be useful because they are expressive and informative. Moreover, these
goals can explicitly represent context sensitivity which is useful for learning policy in complex domains. However,
representing goals in natural language also adds more complexity and ambiguity — the agent needs to understand that
arXiv:2401.02991v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2024

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
“grab the red ball” is same as “fetch that maroon sphere” and it needs to perform a series of actions before achieving an
informative reward.
The above-mentioned challenges necessitate a framework involving curriculum learning Narvekar et al. [2020] for the
agent to learn anything useful and tame the beast i.e., the challenge of sparse rewards. We thus introduce a teacher agent
that proposes goals to the student agent. Contrary to most other prior approaches, the teacher agent here also acts in the
environment thus ensuring that all the goals it proposes are in fact reachable by another agent within a given time frame
(e.g., episode length). Moreover, if the student fails to reach these goals, it can attempt to learn to clone the teacher’s
trajectory. However, the bigger question remains: How is this setup useful for learning to follow natural language
instructions? To address that, we introduce an instructor agent that attempts to describe the teacher’s trajectory or key
events in natural language and then converts them into the form of an instruction for the goal-conditioned student agent.
This instructor agent can be of any form such as a pre-trained or a trainable video captioning module Kuo et al. [2023],
Xu et al. [2023] or a language model Wang et al. [2023], Du et al. [2023].
In our work, we augment the environment with natural language descriptions of the events that the teacher had triggered
and then convert them into an instruction format. We used a pre-trained language model (ChatGPT-3.5) to convert this
single instruction to multiple synonymous instructions for the student agent to train on. This helped in evaluating and
improving the generalization capabilities of the student agent. These interactions between the agents is summarized in
Figure-1 below.
Figure 1: GLIDE-RL Algorithm has three independently functioning parts: The teacher, The instructor and The student. (1) The
teacher is an agent that acts in the environment to do complex things and gets rewarded based on the performance of the student. (2)
The instructor observes these actions, describes them in the form of events and converts them to the instruction format. (3) The
student is the goal-conditioned agent that strives to reach the goals set by the teacher, as described and instructed by the instructor.
(4) The instructor also checks if the student has triggered the same/similar events in the environment to mark a certain state as
success/failure for the student.
Contributions: The key contributions of this work includes:
1. Introducing a novel algorithm (GLIDE-RL) and the Teacher-Instructor-Student framework for training RL
agents grounded in natural language on sparse reward complex tasks
2. Thorough empirical studies demonstrating the influence of factors like curriculum, behavior cloning, multiple
teachers, type of language model on the performance of the Student agent
3. Demonstrating generalization capabilities of the trained goal-conditioned RL agent across unseen goals and
ambiguous instructions
2
Related Work
Goal conditioned RL: In goal-conditioned RL Schaul et al. [2015], a representation of the goal that the agent needs to
achieve is appended to the state representation such that the value function and policy is computed using this shared
representation. Historical and key developments in the field of goal-conditioned RL are well summarized in Liu et al.
[2022], Colas et al. [2022] In attempts to make the training more efficient, several algorithms were proposed that suggest
improvements over the way the goals were generated and in the overall training process. In Hindsight experience
replay Andrychowicz et al. [2017], the target goal set was expanded with the intermediate goals that the agent actually
achieved while trying to reach the original target goal. Florensa et al. Florensa et al. [2018] used a GAN setup where
2

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
the generator generates goals of appropriate difficulty for the RL agent and the discriminator identifies whether the
generated goals belong to the goal space of intermediate difficulty. Campero et al. Campero et al. [2021] proposed a
teacher-student framework where the teacher generates curriculum of increasingly difficult goals based on the student’s
skill level and the student gets rewarded implicitly on reaching the proposed goals.
Asymmetric Self Play (ASP) Sukhbaatar et al. [2018] is an unsupervised training approach where the teacher agent
proposes increasingly challenging goals for the student to achieve by exploring the environment. The teacher and the
student are both RL agents; where the former gets rewarded for suggesting goals outside the student’s comfort and the
latter gets rewarded for achieving the proposed goal. This was later extended by Plappert et al. OpenAI et al. [2021] for
complex robotics task and Du et al. Du et al. [2022] for more feasible and challenging goals using gameplay between
two teachers and two students. Kharyal et al. Kharyal et al. [2023] extended ASP with multiple teachers that suggested
diverse goals to help the student agent learn faster. All the prior work condition the goals in the same space as that of the
agent. Our work incorporates natural language goals in the goal-conditioned RL agent’s representation in addition to
introducing the Instructor agent; thus taking a step forward towards the ability of humans to convey denser knowledge
to these agents.
Grounded language learning: Recently, there have been a lot of efforts to integrate natural language instructions for
Reinforcement Learning. Luketina et al. Luketina et al. [2019] categorize these directions as language conditional RL
where agent-language interaction is part of the problem formulation and language assisted RL where natural language
is used to guide the training of RL agents. There are a few works where the agent follows instructions provided to it
in the form of a high-level goal or a policy description Bahdanau et al. [2018], Hermann et al. [2017], Chaplot et al.
[2018] in natural language. Oh et al. Oh et al. [2017] proposed an approach to train on a shorter sequence of instructions
and generalize to a longer sequence of instructions (seen and unseen) by learning parameterized skills and using them
to execute the relevant instructions. However, this includes policy pre-training to understand the structure of these
instructions. Goyal et al. Goyal et al. [2019] and Wang et al. Wang et al. [2019] used the agreement between trajectory
and expert provided language instructions for reward shaping in sparse reward tasks. Chan et al. Chan et al. [2019]
combines Hindsight experience replay Andrychowicz et al. [2017] with natural language goal description which is
provided by a teacher based on what the RL agent does in the specific episode. Du et al. Du et al. [2022] takes a step
further and queries pretrained large language models to get context-sensitive and diverse goal descriptions. Our work
is aligned with these advancements in grounded language in RL but differs in the way the goals are generated and
communicated — The Teacher agent acts in the environment to ensure that the goals generated are infact reachable and
within the zone of proximal development Seita et al. [2019] of the language-conditioned agent. Moreover, the Instructor
agent generates a database of synonymous instructions to ensure that the language-conditioned agent generalizes to
unseen instructions.
3
Background
Reinforcement Learning: The teacher and the student agents operate on the framework of a markov decision process
(MDP). An MDP consists of a five-element tuple (S, A, P, R, γ) where S is the set of all possible states, A is the set
of all possible actions, P is the transition probability function, R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor.
At each time step t, the agent is at a state st ∈S and takes an action at ∈A. The environment dynamics map the
state-action pair into a successor state st+1 ∼P(·|st, at), and the agent receives a scalar reward rt ∼R(st, at). In
some environments, the agents might not have access to the full state of the environment. In such cases, a partial
observation ot is used as input to the RL agent. The objective is to find a policy π : S →A that maximizes the expected
discounted return E[Σ∞
t=0γtrt] with γ ∈(0, 1]. The teacher agents are trained using this simple MDP formulation
whereas the student agent is trained in goal-conditioned setting.
Goal conditioned RL deals with training agents to reach the goals determined at the beginning of an episode by the
environment or an external agent (like the teacher agent in our context). In these settings, the agent also takes in the
goal g as input at every time step in addition to the observation ot. All the RL algorithms used in a standard MDP above
can also be used for this goal-conditioned MDP. The goal g in our experiments is a natural language instruction.
Deep Q-Networks: The action space is discrete in our experiments. We thus chose D3QN algorithm Huang et al. [2018]
for all the experiments. It consists of ’double’ van Hasselt et al. [2015] and ’dueling’ Wang et al. [2015] techniques
added to the DQN algorithm Mnih et al. [2015]. Note that both the teacher and student agents have the same action
space in our setting. They primarily differ in their reward structure (which we design to be adversarial in nature). The
input to the student agent also includes the natural language instruction in addition to the usual input observation.
A typical DQN loss Mnih et al. [2015] is given by:
Li (θi) = Es,a,r,s′

yDQN
i
−Q (s, a; θi)
2
(1)
3

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
where, yDQN
i
= r + γ maxa′ Q (s′, a′; θ−) is the temporal difference (TD) target and θ−represents the parameters of
a fixed target network. To avoid the problem of overestimation of Q-values, double DQN van Hasselt et al. [2015] uses
the following TD target:
yDDQN
i
= r + γQ

s′, arg max
a′
Q (s′, a′; θi) ; θ−

(2)
In dueling DQN Wang et al. [2015], two network heads are used, one for value function V (s; θ, β) and one for advantage
function A(s, a′, θ, α). Note that θ are the shared parameters. The Q-function is then estimated as:
Q(s, a; θ, α, β) = V (s; θ, β)+
 
A(s, a; θ, α) −1
|A|
X
a′
A (s, a′; θ, α)
!
(3)
In D3QN Huang et al. [2018], both the double and dueling techniques are combined and has been proven to work well
on a wide range of environments with discrete action spaces. We thus use it as a base agent in all our experiments. Both
the teacher and student agents are instances of the D3QN actor class. We also use the frame stacking technique Mnih
et al. [2015] to assist in learning.
4
Proposed Algorithm
The final objective is to have an RL agent capable of following the natural language instructions in a simulated
environment with sparse reward. In our proposed framework Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration
in RL (GLIDE-RL), this agent is designated as the Student agent.
We have three types of agents: Teacher, Instructor and Student. The teacher and student agents are trained in an
adversarial setup. While the student is a goal-conditioned agent that aims to complete the tasks provided to it as natural
language instructions, teachers are trained to propose tasks/goals by acting in the environment that student agent can’t
achieve — this results in teachers providing a curriculum of incrementally harder goals for the student agent to train on.
We train multiple teacher agents to assist in better generalisation of the student agent by proposing diverse goals. Note
that the Teacher agents by themselves are not capable of describing what they have done or to instruct the agents. It is
the role of the instructor agent to describe what the teacher has done in natural language and then convert it to a form of
instruction for the student agent to act and train upon. Formalizing our problem set-up as below:
Given: A student agent S, a set of teacher agents {T1, T2, · · · , TN} and an instructor agent I
To-do: Learn an optimal goal-conditioned policy πS for the student agent that can follow natural language instructions
generated by I by observing the evolving teacher policies {πT1, πT2, · · · , πTN }
Assumptions: We make the following assumptions (1) All the teacher agents start from scratch with a random policy
and only learn from feedback (reward) related to the student’s performance (2) Instructor agent is capable of describing
the actions of the teacher in natural language and is equipped with a pre-trained LLM to convert these descriptions to
several synonymous instructions.
GLIDE-RL is detailed in Algorithm 1 and illustrated in Figure-1. We denote the n teacher agents as T1, T2,... TN and
the student agent as S. We represent the parameters of the teacher’s networks with θT1, · · · , θTN and that of the student
agent with θS. We denote the parameters of the language model with ϕL and that of the instructor with ϕI.
In every student-teacher rollout, one of the teachers Ti acts in the environment by choosing an action at according to
its policy πTi based on the current observation ot until the end of episode (of predefined length). The state-action (st,
at) pairs that the teacher encountered in its trajectory are then used by the Instructor to describe in natural language
the course of events that the teacher has triggered. In one rollout, the teacher could trigger multiple events Ei. The
instructor first describes these events Ei in natural language (e.g., "you are standing in-front of red ball") and then
converts this description to the form of an instruction (e.g., "go to the red ball").
The instructor then uses a pre-trained language model ϕI to generate m synonymous instructions Ii1, Ii2, ...Iim. The
first subscript i indicates that it’s an instruction corresponding to the event i whereas the second subscript 0, 1, 2, ...m
just denotes the jth synonymous instruction for the same event i. These events then become the goal for the student
agent. Events are fed to the student agent one at a time, in the exact same order E1, E2, .... En as the teacher
has triggered them, in the form of natural language instructions. Thus, in addition to its current observation ot, the
goal-conditioned student agent also takes in randomly sampled task/goal Iij starting with i = 0 and j ∈[0, m]. the
language model ϕL transforms the natural language instruction to an embedding (a tensor) which is then concatenated
with the input observation. This combined input representation is then passed through Deep Neural Network to obtain
the Q-values for every action. The action corresponding to the maximum Q-value is chosen.the language model
4

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
transforms the natural language instruction to an embedding (a tensor) which is then concatenated with the input
observation. At each time step, the student gets 0 reward if it doesn’t finish the task/goal Ei. If it finishes, it gets a
positive reward (this value is hyperparameter tuned) and, from the next time step it takes in task/goal Ei+1 as input in
addition to the observation input ot and strives to achieve the goal Ei+1.
The student continues to act in the environment until it finishes all the goals E1, E2, ... En or until the maximum episode
length. Note that the number of events n a teacher will trigger can vary across rollouts. An important implementation
detail to note is that the done flag is marked as true for the Student after it finishes each individual event Ei. During
the training process, this ensures that the Student is rewarded to focus only on the immediate goal given its current
observation and the goal it is conditioned on.
We then update both the student and teacher networks using the standard D3QN loss described earlier in Equations-2
and 3 of Section-3. We denote this loss with LD3QN. We also employ Behaviour Cloning (BC) loss to train the student
to tackle the sparse reward nature of the problem and assist the student’s learning by using the teachers’ behaviours
similar to OpenAI et al. [2021]. The BC loss we use is defined as follows:
LBC = −E(st,gt,at)∼DBC

log
eπS(at|st,gt)
P
i eπS(i|st,gt)

(4)
Where st, at and gt are the teacher’s state, the action it took in that state, and the first event it triggered after performing
the action respectively;πS is the student’s policy.
DBC is the behavioural cloning replay buffer, constructed to help the Student learn to trigger the events that it failed to
trigger during the roll-out Therefore, we only insert those (event, state, action) tuples that the student is not able to
trigger, thereby not confusing the student about previously learnt goals.
Therefore, the overall loss function for the student becomes:
L = LD3QN + ΓLBC
(5)
Where Γ is the adaptive behavioural loss coefficient which is calculated as follows on every update:
Γt+1 = Γt + (αLRL −LBC)ϵ
(6)
Where α is a predefined constant called BCL ratio and ϵ is the predefined decay rate for Γ. Every teacher and student
agent uses its own rollout data (experience) to update their respective parameters.
The key advantages of this training setup are two-fold — (1) we know by construction, that the events triggered
by a teacher are reachable by the student from the starting state within episode length (2) the teacher provides a valid
demonstration on how the events can be reached, which can be leveraged using the Behavioural Cloning Loss for goals
that the student fails to reach.
Advantage of using multiple teachers is that these teachers learn diverse policies due to the way we structured
the reward function — A teacher gets a negative (positive) reward if the student is able (unable) to reach the goal.
This implies that the teachers are incentivized to set digoals different from each other because the student agent is
being trained to reach the goals that are already set by other teachers and can reach the same goal again if the current
teacher sets the same goal. Therefore, each teacher’s demonstrations are intrinsically influenced by other teachers’
demonstrations.
Environment configuration: While training the agents, we reset the environment to a random configuration at the
beginning of every roll-out. Within a roll-out, environment configuration remains the same. This ensures that the
teacher and student have the same initial conditions which enables a teacher to set a meaningful goal and for the student
to learn useful behaviors from cloning the teacher’s trajectory.
Reward structure: The teacher gets a reward of +y if the student fails to trigger the event Ei and a reward of −x if
the student reaches the event. Additionally, the teacher also gets rewarded −C if it fails to trigger any event throughout
the episode. On the other hand, the student gets rewarded +z if it is able to trigger the goal event and 0 if it fails to do
so. . We experimented with different reward values for each n-teacher setting, where n ∈{1, 2, 4} More details are
shared in Section-5. Note that, while the reward structure is adversarial in nature, it is not a zero-sum setup.
5

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
Algorithm 1: GLIDE-RL Algorithm
Data: N ;
//Number of teacher agents
Data: θT1, · · · , θTN , θS ;
//Parameters for the agents
Data: ϕL, ϕI ;
//Parameters for Language model and Instructor
1 for rollout = 1, 2, · · · do
2
k = rollout//N;
3
teacher = kth teacher;
4
goal = [];
; //run teacher
5
for episode length do
6
state = teacher.act(state);
7
event = Instructor.describe();
8
if event != "" then
9
goal.append(event);
; //run student
10
for episode length do
11
g = language_model(goal[0]);
12
state = student.act(state, g);
13
if Instructor.reached(goal[0]) then
14
goal.pop(0)
15
Distribute rewards;
16
Update agents using RL and BC losses;
RT =







−x
if student reaches Ei
+y
if student does not reach Ei
−C
if the teacher doesn’t trigger any event throughout
the episode
RS =
+z
if student reaches Ei
0
if student does not reach Ei
where {x, y, z, C} > 0 and C > x, y.
Furthermore, to encourage teacher’s exploration, we give it an additional reward for triggering new events. This reward
decays with the number of times the event has been triggered as:
Rex
T (Ei) = 3 ∗0.97fEi
where fEi is the frequency of event Ei triggered by any teacher.
5
Experimental Results
5.1
Experiment Setting - BabyAI
Environment: We use ’BossLevel’ environment, the most complex environment within the babyAI suite Chevalier-
Boisvert et al. [2018] for all our experiments. As shown in the Figure-2, the environment consists of 9 rooms with each
room having the size of 6x6. There are different types of objects: {ball, box, key, door}. Each object can be of any
color: {red, green, blue, grey, purple, yellow}. At the beginning of every episode, the agent along with all objects are
spawned in random positions.
The observation to the agent is a (7 × 7 × 3) image. This image has encoding for the different objects, their colours and
states in different layers. The action is discrete in nature and selects one of the following actions (turn left, turn right,
move forward, pickup, drop, toggle, done).
Test set: For generating the test set, we let a random agent act in the environment for 1000 timesteps (as compared to
the student’s episode length of only 115 timesteps). We let it run for 100 episodes and store all the events triggered
6

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
Figure 2: BabyAI BossLevel environment
by this random agent. We also store the environment’s initial states (including agents initial positions). While testing,
the environment is initialized with these initial states and the goal-conditioned student agent is instructed to trigger
these events in the exact same order as the random agent in all the 100 episodes. One test ’ goal’ includes multiple
events (tasks) and the student’s episode is considered as successful only if it triggers all these events in the exact same
sequence that the random agent had triggered them.
Instructor: To enable better generalization of the student agent, we convert the event description to an instruction and
generate a set of 50 synonymous instructions for each event. An example of a synonymous instruction for the event
"standing infront of the red ball" (described by the environment) can be "lift up the crimson ball". During training, we
randomly sample an instruction from the corresponding synonymous instruction set for each event triggered by a teacher
agent. For the experiments that involve testing the generalization capabilities of the agent, we keep 5 instructions from
each synonymous instruction set, in a holdout test set. These instructions are not used during the training and are only
used as part of the test set.
For converting these natural language instructions into language embeddings, we use off-the-shelf language models.
We experimented with all-distilroberta-v1, all-mpnet-base-v2 and multi-qa-mpnet-base-dot-v1 models provided by the
sentence_transformers package in python. We noticed that all-distilroberta-v1 performed consistently better than other
language models (as observed in hyperparameter sweeps) and used it for all the experimental results reported in this
paper.
Table 1: Hyperparameters used for D3QN for 4-teacher run
Hyperparameter
Value
BCL ratio (α)
0.900
Frame stack
8
gradient clip
0.67
Optimizer
AdamKingma and Ba [2015]
Learning rate
5.13 × 10−5
τ
0.098
Student reward (z)
3
Teacher reward (C)
8
Teacher reward (y)
6
Teacher reward (x)
2
7

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
5.2
Results and Analysis
In this section, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm. The evaluation of our algorithm
aims to answer the following research questions:
R1: How good is the performance of GLIDE-RL on events seen during training?
R2: How effective is our algorithm in understanding synonymous goals/instructions seen during training?
R3: Does the student agent learn better with increasing number of teachers?
R4: Is the student able to generalize to previously unseen goals?
Experiment 1: Ability to succeed on events seen during the training
In this experiment, we aim to test if the student is able to succeed on the synonymous instructions seen during training.
We also attempt to understand the effect of various components like having a curriculum and behaviour cloning loss on
the training.
It is important to note that while these instructions are seen during training, the actions the Student agent needs to
take to finish that instruction are different — the positions of different objects and the agent’s starting position are
generated randomly for the test set and these are not used during training. The sequence of events that the Student must
accomplish are also not seen during the training.
Figure 3: Success rate of different variations on the test set. The plot shows the mean and standard deviation over 5 seeds
We train various agents (and establish baselines) to show the importance of teachers (and the curriculum generated by
these teachers) for the training of the student:
Firstly, we train a student conditioned on one-hot goals (onehot in figure 3). Teachers’ functionality doesn’t change
here. But, for the student, instead of receiving language embeddings from a language model as inputs, it receives
pre-designed one-hot encoding for each event. There is no notion of synonymous goals here, the events triggered by
the Teacher are directly converted to a one-hot encoding and sent to the agent. This baseline gives us an estimate of
the upper bound of success rate achievable. This also establishes that not all the event sequences of the test set can be
completed in just 115 time steps that took the random agent 1000 time steps. Note that we only allow 115 timesteps for
the student agent to ensure that the task remains challenging. Also note that, with one-hot encodings, the agent does not
have any generalization capabilities as the size of the encodings cannot be increased to accommodate the unseen goals.
With the upper bound on the performance (on the test-set) being established, we now train the student conditioned on
the embeddings from the language model (4-teachers in figure 3) Here, we present the student with the synonymous
events while training as described before. The aim of this is to gauge how well can the student perform on the test set as
compared to when trained with one-hot encoding.
8

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
To show the importance of the curriculum generated by the teachers, we train a student with random teacher agents
(4-random-teachers in figure 3), and another one-hot student trained directly on the test set but without any teachers or
curriculum (onehot-testset in figure 3). While the random-teachers don’t learn adversarially with the student, and hence
provide no curriculum, the onehot-testset baseline doesn’t have the notion of teachers. We introduced onehot-testset
baseline to understand how challenging the task is without a curriculum set by the teachers.
Furthermore, to understand the necessity of Behavioral Cloning Loss (BCL), we train another baseline (no-bcl in figure
3). We train this student in the exact same manner as GLIDE-RL, with the exception of not using the BCL while
training.
Figure-3 shows the importance of teachers (and curriculum) in general for the student’s performance as the students
trained without the teachers’ curriculum fail to perform well (measured in terms of success rate), even when trained
directly on the test set. Furthermore, we see that the student with goals conditioned as language embeddings is able to
perform comparable to the one with one-hot goals. Moreover, with the no-bcl baseline, we establish the importance of
the behavioural cloning loss during the training process — without BCL, the student’s performance is as good as the
scenario with random teachers (no curriculum).
Experiment 2: Ability to generalise on synonyms seen during training
Figure 4: Q values of the synonymous events vs distance from the original event. Each blue dot (•) represents one
synonymous event for the original event. The red line represents the trend among the points
Here, we try to reason why the student might be able to accomplish some of the instruction synonyms better than
others. We hypothesise that some synonyms of different instructions (corresponding to different events) overlap in the
embedding space, thus making it difficult for the student to generalise on those events.
To test this hypothesis, we run the trained Student agent on the test set and for each event in the test set, just before the
student triggers the event, we check the maximum Q value in that state corresponding to each of the synonyms. Finally,
we average the Q value for each synonym over the occurrence of the event.
We notice an interesting, yet expected, pattern when we plot Q values of various synonyms for an event versus the
distance from that event in the embedding space (fig: 4). We see that as the distance of a synonymous instruction from
the original instruction (which should be close to the centre of the synonyms cluster in the embedding space because all
the synonyms are written using that as the root event) increases, the Q value decreases.
Experiment 3: Effect of varying the number of teachers
In this experiment, we try to understand how changing the number of teachers affects the success rate of the student.
Similar to previous experiments, each curve in Figure-5 is averaged over 5 seeds. We notice that the success-rate on the
test-set increases as we increase the number of teachers. We believe that this is because of the diversity of the goals being
generated by different teachers as established by Kharyal et al Kharyal et al. [2023] in a similar experimental setup, but
with simpler goal representation (Euclidean coordinates) and on much simpler environments. Further experimentation
with more number of teachers is an avenue for exploration in future work. Given the complexity of the environment,
and considering that the 4-teacher scenario is only slightly better than the 2-teacher scenario, we could hypothesize that
the success-rate would only increase marginally as we increase the number of teachers further.
Experiment 4: Ability to generalise on previously unseen goals
To test the ability of the student agent to generalise on instructions unseen during training, we construct a holdout set of
5 synonymous instructions for each event and hold them out of the training process. Then, we test the student agent
on goals constructed purely using the sequence of events corresponding to these holdout set of instructions denoted
as 4-teacher-holdout in Figure-6. We compare the performance of this agent with the agent that was trained on the
9

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
Figure 5: Success rate on the test set with varying number of teachers. The plot shows mean and standard deviation over 5 seeds
complete instruction set (including the holdout test set denoted as 4-teacher). Both these student agents were trained
with four teachers (as that was the best performing setup as noted in Figure-5).
Figure 6: Success rate of the student on holdout-test-set
We can observe in Figure-6 that 4-teacher-holdout variant slightly lags behind the performance of the agent that was
trained on the complete instruction set (4-teacher) throughout the training process. However, it is important to note that
40 percent success-rate is still a remarkable performance given that the agent has never seen any of the 1) sequence
of events or 2) language instructions or 3) the positions of the agent or objects in the environment during its training
process.
10

GLIDE-RL: Grounded Language Instruction through DEmonstration in RL
A PREPRINT
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we proposed a novel algorithm and framework for training RL agents grounded in natural language and
demonstrated its ability to generalize to unseen language instructions. We have also shown the impact of language
model and the number of teachers on the performance of the student agent. We would like to extend this study to
include the training of the instructor agent as well in more complex environments. Another possible direction is using
actual humans as instructors for the proposed framework. We would also want to explore the different kinds of skills
that the teacher agents learn in the process of challenging the student agent.
