Universidad de Granada
M´aster en Soft Computing y Sistemas Inteligentes
Trabajo de Investigaci´on Tutelada
Genetic Algorithm for Robotic
Telescope Scheduling
Curso acad´emico MMVII / MMVIII
Profesor
Dr. D. Francisco Herrera
Dr. D. Alberto J. Castro-Tirado
Realizado por
Petr Kub´anek
arXiv:1002.0108v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jan 2010

Acknowledgement
I would like to acknowledge ﬁnancial support from Span-
ish Ministry of Education and Science via grant BES-2006-11506. This work
beneﬁts from my experiences gained developing RTS2. RTS2 development was
encouraged and supported by many persons, among them worth noting are Al-
berto Castro-Tirado, Martin Jel´ınek, Ronan Cunniﬀe, Ren´e Hudec and Victor
Reglero. This work will never be produced without kindly help and assistance
of professors Francisco Herrera and Antonio Gonz´ales. And I am gratefull to
Rocio Romero for providing me NSGA II description.

Contents
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Basic deﬁnitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Constrains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Selection of the best schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Genetic algorithms for robotic telescope scheduling . . . . . . . .
2
2
Autonomous robotic observatory
5
2.1
CAHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
OSN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
ESO VLT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
GTC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Formalisation of the observation scheduling problem
7
3.1
Night
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Observing sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Duration of target observation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.6
Observation ﬁtness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.7
Observation time ﬁtness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.8
Observation position ﬁtness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.9
Observation accounting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.10 Observation schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.11 Number of targets observed during night . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Time-dependent objective functions
15
5
Multiobjective scheduling optimisation
17
5.1
Weighted single objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Single objective function, move others objectives to constraints .
17
5.3
Searching Pareto optimal solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II
19
6.1
Chromosome Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Genetic Operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.3
Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.4
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
iii

6.5
Fitness functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Implementation
23
7.1
Simple test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Results
27
9
Conclusion
33
10 Further work
35

Preface
This work was inspired by author experiences with a telescope scheduling. Au-
thor long time goal is to develop and further extend software for an autonomous
observatory. The software shall provide users with all the facilities they need
to take scientiﬁc images of the night sky, cooperate with other autonomous ob-
servatories, and possibly more. It shall provide support for as many devices
coming from as many diﬀerent vendors as possible, yet remains ”plug and play”
to setup and operate.
From thirty thousands feet view, telescope time scheduling looks simple.
Take some entries, select the best one, and observe it as long as possible. If
it is no more worth to observe this particular position, choose another. Do so
every night from dusk to dawn, see results of the night runs, analyse acquired
images and try to advance mankind knowledge of the astronomy, astrophysics
or physics from the acquired images.
However, as we zoom closer to provide more details about scheduling, nice
ﬂat landscape become covered with various obstacles. Start with the deﬁnition
what is the best target – is it the one which is currently rising or the one which
is setting and so telescope will not have possibility to observe it again for some
time. And what about future plans? Is it better to observe star A, and in a
few weeks time star B, or shall the observatory pick star A and B at the same
night?
No wonder that scheduling is one of the major issues of current world class
observatories, both ground and space. Usual approach is to have some time
allocation committee, which pick which observations proposals are worthy to
observe, and then meets every day, week, month or year to discuss which objects
will be observed during the next period. Rules are created for sharing risks
between an observatory and the observation proposal authors – for example it
has to be deﬁned what shall happen if bad weather prevents observations on
a ground observatory, or if data are lost during transmission from a satellite
to the ground. And humans, which are member of time allocation committee,
make sure that all observation constraints are obeyed and that users are happy
with acquired data and do a lot of interesting and useful science based on the
data acquired.
Autonomous observatories are by deﬁnition autonomous. They do not have
any time allocation committee composed of smart people. They are destined
to create observation strategy from inputs which human operators provided to
them and/or from results of the previous observations. This works provides
overview of the various constraints and objective of the observatory, and gives
some solution to the scheduling problem.
The obvious question which can be asked is why we need the schedule at
v

vi
PREFACE
all? Would not it be better to simply pick the best observation, and then the
next one, as mentioned above? Is not this a principle of the queue scheduling,
which is used on most of the human operated observatories today? There are
various hints which gives us answer that this is not a desired operation for the
autonomous operations.
The ﬁrst one comes from possible network scheduling. Network nodes can
of course by scheduled locally. But that will not exploit network advantages.
Network can observe one star simultaneously over period longer then usual dark
period at a single site. For this kind of observations some collaboration among
schedulers is needed. One of the possibility is to let local scheduler collaborate
and create a plan. Second possibility is to have possibility to centrally schedule
network observations. Our experience shows that while ﬁrst option is feasible,
second is more easily controlled and monitored by a human operator.
The second case come from operation of a single instrument. Our experience
shows that it is handy to have a schedule before start of the night to check
what observatory will do during night. The system poses option to create an
observing plan and then to execute it, but plan has to be created somehow.
And as the scheduling process is annoying and can only distract person doing
it from other work, plan creation has to be automated. With human experts
possibly reviewing it and taking actions if they found something strange on the
schedule.

Chapter 1
Introduction
RTS2[9] is an open-source software package for robotic observatory. Apart from
a central server, device drivers and various other functions, it provides service
for target selection - a selector.
Current selector uses a simple single merit function selection to select next
observation from the list of the possible observations. The merit function, which
measure how good is a target for observation, is hard-coded in selector code and
cannot be easily modiﬁed. Moreover, current selector does not allow generation
of an observing plan for a full night. Current design allows only selection of the
next target. After the current target observation is ﬁnished, the target with the
highest current merit function value is selected by the selector. Creating night
schedule for telescope belongs to NP class of problems. Some heuristic might
apply, but the problem will remain hard to solve.
This work describes design and implementation of a selector based on genetic
algorithm. This selector allows generation of the full night plan. It must also
keep an overview of which important targets remain to be observed, and allow to
schedule them appropriately. The algorithm must be extensible for scheduling
of the robotics telescope network. And it must be written so it can be easily
integrated with the current RTS2 code.
1.1
Basic deﬁnitions
Target is an object on the sky telescope users would like to observe. It can have
ﬁxed coordinates (stars,..) or its coordinates can change with time (planets,
solar system minor bodies,..).
For given time and location, target altitude,
zenith distance and azimuth can be easily calculated.
Observation is one visit to the target.
During observation, target can
be observed in diﬀerent colours, using ﬁlters placed in optical path by some
rotating mechanism. If an observation does not satisfy user needs (e.g. does
point to clouds, instrument problems occured during observing run,..) it shall
be rescheduled. Observation usually consists of images acquired with diﬀerent
ﬁlters. For some targets the length of the observation can be modiﬁed, for others
it must remain ﬁxed.
1

2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Constrains
The following constrain might apply to a target:
• target must be visible, e.g. above local horizon
• various constraints based on lunar distance of the target, solar distance,
moon phase (some targets cannot be observed with a full moon, etc..).
• budget constraints – time allocated to target/user can be limited, and
target cannot exceed it
• time – some targets required observation in a given time, some can be
observed anytime they are visible, some targets should be observed only
once per night, week, .., as other observations will not lead to increase in
the scientiﬁc return obtained from the acquired images
• when scheduling a network of autonomous observatories, some observa-
tions can be carried either simultaneously with two or more telescopes,
or observation with one telescope must follow observation with another
telescope
Constraints are formalised in the third chapter.
1.3
Selection of the best schedule
Astronomers would measure an observatory success by a number of the articles
which reference the observatory (possibly weighted by the journal citation in-
dex). Because scheduling does not pose black magic it is unable to predict which
targets observations will contribute to the most interesting discoveries and sci-
entiﬁc papers. So some evaluation function has to be deﬁned which compares
targets. The goal would be to found a sequence with the highest sum of obser-
vation ﬁtness values, while keeping the constrains outlined above. Evaluation
can be based on:
• height of the target during observation (higher is usually better)
• distance of the target from the Moon or any other sky body
• quality of the proposal (some accepted targets may only ﬁll the gap, other
can be ranked as top priority by evaluation committee)
Formalisation of the various ﬁtness measurements is described in the third
chapter.
1.4
Genetic algorithms for robotic telescope schedul-
ing
Aim of this work is to design, develop and tests various genetic algorithm for
scheduling of the robotic observatories. Problem is similar to job shop schedul-
ing, and thus belongs to NP-hard problems. Schedule for one telescope and
scheduling of telescope network will be investigated.

1.4. GENETIC ALGORITHMS FOR ROBOTIC TELESCOPE SCHEDULING3
Problem input consists of targets and their characteristic. Target is location
on the sky which can be visited by telescope to acquire data. Each target have
constrain which specify when it can be observed.
Output is list of targets and their observations times on the telescope or on
the telescope network.

4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

Chapter 2
Autonomous robotic
observatory
Autonomous robotic observatory is a complex environment of computers, net-
works and instruments. Aim of an autonomous robotic observatory is to carry
observations of night sky and record the observations using CCD cameras or
other instruments.
Most of the modern astronomical observatories are controlled by computer.
But degree at which computer is in charge of the observatory varies signiﬁcantly.
One extreme is a computer controlling only the telescope, and oﬀering ob-
server quick way how to enter target coordinates. Observer is then responsible
for scheduling, acting as coordinator synchronising various instruments, record-
ing data and processing them.
Other extreme end of observatory a complete autonomous observatory. Soft-
ware is then responsible for observatory operations, opening and closing of the
roof, assuring that observatory is protected from elements, and reducing data.
Only a few world observatories are operated in a fully autonomous mode,
without night operator overseeing night operations. Full list of observatories
which claims to be robotic is provided at [7]. It should be noted, that RTS2
operates at least 6 telescopes with others coming hopefully in near future. And
at least 2 of those were run in fully autonomous mode over periods of years -
FRAM and Watcher.
Major current projects which operates and further extend fully autonomous
observatories 1 are ”Thinking Telescope/RAPTOR” developed at LANL[17],
AudeLA developed at Observatory de Haute Provance[8] and Las Cumbres Ob-
servatory Global Telescope Network[2] – eStar project[4], which operates Faulkes
Telescopes. It should be noted, that from those only eStar is actively investigat-
ing telescope scheduling[5], and AudeLA is the only other project which provides
observatory control system under open source license.
Majority of the world observatories operates in semi automatic mode. Schedul-
ing is usually done by human in the loop, supported by tools to help him/her
decide the best strategy. Following paragraphs provide review of the current
practice at leading Spanish and European observatories.
1of which author of this work is informed
5

6
CHAPTER 2. AUTONOMOUS ROBOTIC OBSERVATORY
2.1
CAHA
Calar Alto Hispano Aleman (CAHA) observatory currently operates two major
instruments - 3.5m and 2.2m telescope. Both are remotely controlled by night
operators. For troubleshooting, operators are equipped with a torch, two way
radio and a car to drive to the instrument. Some scripting is provided for some
observations, but it is a night assistant who is responsible for operating the
instrument.
Scheduling on 2.2m is done on paper basis, with observer having printed
observing proposal for a night and selecting two or three observations he will be
performing during night. He is then responsibly to enter targets to the schedule
and oversee that observations are performed as expected.
Scheduling of 3.5m is even more complicated. Night staﬀhave printed ob-
serving proposals, pick up the one that will be observed and according to pro-
posal text handle instrument setup and observation synchronisation.
2.2
OSN
Observatory de Sierra Nevada has three major instruments – 1.5m, 0.9m and
0.6m telescope. The 0.6m is controlled by RTS2, so it is designed to be fully
autonomous. The other telescopes are controlled by night observer, who either
carry all observations himself, picking targets from a prepared list, or enter
current target to observatory control system and check that the observations
are performed as expected.
2.3
ESO VLT
European South Observatory Very Large Telescopes are operated in queue
scheduling[15].
Night observers have screen with preselected list of possible
observations. Depending on observing conditions, their experience and mood
they select and oversee progress of the observation they choose to perform.
2.4
GTC
Grand Telescopio de Canarias is now in commissioning phase. So far queue
scheduling is envisioned once telescope will be open for scientiﬁc observations.
Software for telescope operation posses similarities with ESO BOSS[15], men-
tioned above.

Chapter 3
Formalisation of the
observation scheduling
problem
The problem deals with distributing time on a single instrument. Night is time
when observatory is operational and can take observations. Schedule is sequence
of targets which will be observed during night. Each target have position where
it will be observed, observation script which deﬁnes how the observations will
be observed - for example which ﬁlters and exposures combinations will be
used during observation. For each target, various properties are set, and other
properties can be calculated.
In the following paragraphs are deﬁned terms that will be used when dealing
with scheduling problem.
3.1
Night
Night start at some time after sunset and ends at some time before sunrise.
More complicated scheduling scenarios might include use of twilight period,
when observation is possible on certain parts of the sky.
To keep problem
simply it is assumed that night runs from time Ns till time Ne. Night has then
duration Nd = Ne −Ns.
Observatory operation can be disturbed by various factors. Those can be
divided into predictable and unpredictable interruptions. Predictable interrup-
tions are usually caused by maintenance work, which must be performed at
given time at the observatory. Unpredictable is weather, which causes major
observatory downtime, and technical issues with the observatory, which causes
some downtime. Depending on various factors (location, season, ..) weather
usually account for downtime between few percents up to 100%. But observa-
tories are usually not build on sites where back weather account for more then
70% of available night time. Technical downtime is on tuned–up systems less
then 1%.
Unless explicitly speciﬁed, a case of an ideal observatory without any down-
time is considered.
7

8CHAPTER 3. FORMALISATION OF THE OBSERVATION SCHEDULING PROBLEM
3.2
Observing sequence
Observing sequence describes how the observation of a target is carried. It is
a sequence of camera exposures, telescope operations and various modiﬁcations
performed on instruments on light path. For some targets, observing sequence
can be looped. For others, only single observation must be carried.
3.3
Target
Target is a position on sky which can be observed. Target has sky location,
usually expressed in equatorial coordinate system as right ascension and decli-
nation. Each target has assigned observing sequence.
Observing sequence can change depending on various parameters. But that
change will make problem even more complex. Unless explicitly stated, only
case of a single observing sequence for a target is considered.
Targets are included in set TS. Size of target set is equal to |TS|.
3.4
Observation
Observation is a single visit of the telescope of a single target location. Data are
acquired during observation. Observing sequence describes how the data shall
be acquired.
3.5
Duration of target observation
Each target have three major duration values. When combined together they
describe how much night time will be used by a single target observation. Slew
time, Ts, describes how much time will be spend by slewing telescope on target.
Shutter open time, To, gives total time of the exposures taken for a single
observing sequence of target. Total observation time, Tt, gives time spend in
a single observing sequence. If telescopes moves during observing sequence, Tt
contributes to total observing time and not to slew time – slew time is only the
time needed to perform ﬁrst slew to target.
Observing sequence can be repeated l times, where l ≥1. Dark time Td,
time when shutter is closed, is equal to
Td = Ts + l ∗(Tt −To)
Target slew time depends on previous telescope position. For some targets,
observing sequence can be looped and so total observing time can change in mul-
tiplies of observing sequence duration. For others targets, only single observing
run must be performed, and so total observing time cannot change.
Total observation time TT is then calculated as
TT = Ts + l ∗Tt

3.6. OBSERVATION FITNESS
9
3.6
Observation ﬁtness
Observation ﬁtness describes how good is it to observe a target at a given
time. It is important to realize that the position of the target on the sky and
its distance to various disturbing bodies depends on time. Hence observation
ﬁtness depends on time. So the observation ﬁtness can be described as function:
f : time ⇒fittness
where time is time variable and ﬁtness is some arbitrary set which describes
target ﬁtness.
To make further explanation more understandable, we divide the ﬁtness
function into two parts. The ﬁrst depends only on time, second depends on a
target position. Following two paragraphs describes various ﬁtness functions.
The ﬁrst paragraph describes those which depends primarily on time, the second
those which depends on target position.
For algorithms to transform object coordinates to object position at a given
time, and to calculate object position with respect to other bodies, please refer
to [12]. Please see libnova ([11]) for their implementation.
3.7
Observation time ﬁtness
To formalise observation time ﬁtness binary logic is used. It is either interesting
or uninteresting to observe target at a given time. So the ﬁtness function is one
returning either 0 or 1:
ft(t) = 0 ∨1
The ft function can depend on various factors. Even through the author of
this text gain some experience in the area, full list of those factors is beyond
his current knowledge. The ones he can mention are: time from last obser-
vations of the object, brightness of the object which show periodic
brightness variations and special observing circumstances.
Time dependent brightness variability of the objects observed by the as-
tronomers can be separated into three classes: regular time variability in bright-
ness, irregular time variability and brightness variability bellow detection limit
of the instrument. The objects can also show regular time variability with su-
perimposed irregular time variability.
Objects without any signiﬁcant brightness variability have time ﬁtness con-
stant through whole night. Objects which shows regular time variability are
usually worth observing at a certain time in the variability period. Hence those
objects should have time ﬁtness higher when it is worth observing them.
Objects showing irregular time variability can be observed anytime. How-
ever, if instrument or other astronomers detects that the object of interest is
showing some interesting behaviour, usually increase in brightness, they shall
be visited more frequently.
Time from the last observation of an object
This case can be used when astronomer would like to monitor the object be-
haviour in predeﬁned intervals. If he/she is interested in variability of the object

10CHAPTER 3. FORMALISATION OF THE OBSERVATION SCHEDULING PROBLEM
at time scale of tvar seconds, then the observations shall usually be carried every
tvar
2
seconds. So the ft() function will be written in form:
ft(t) = 1 ⇐⇒now −Ts ≥tvar
2
where now is current time and Ts is time of start of the last observation of
the target.
Phase of the object which show periodic brightness variations
Suppose that an object has periodicity Pl seconds.
Suppose that one know
period started at time Ps.
Astronomer is interested in data taken in phase
between Hs and He. Then time ﬁtness function will then become:
ft(t) = 1 ⇐⇒∃h ∈Z : now −Ps −h ∗Pl ∈< Hs, He >
Special observing circumstances
Special observing circumstances are some know circumstances which will occurs
and which will make target observation interesting. For example, consider tran-
sit of some solar system body in of some bright background stars. The transiting
body can be as big as the Moon and as small as some minor solar system body.
If astronomers have precise timing of transit, they can calculate object size and
others interesting parameters.
Of course not all targets shows this dependency. For them, the special time
ﬁtness function fs is equal to 1. For those which have special time dependence,
there is set of times when observation should start. The duration of observation
is governed by observing sequence. To formalise this, we have a set TC of pairs
Ts, Te. Then ﬁtness function fs is deﬁned as:
fs(t) = 1 ⇐⇒∃s ∈TC : t ∈s
3.8
Observation position ﬁtness
Following paragraphs describes some of the time ﬁtness functions, which de-
pends on target position. As was mentioned in introduction to this chapter,
position of the target can be calculated from time and target properties.
First some introduction to how target position can depend on a time is given.
Then various factors which aﬀect target ﬁtness depending on its position are
described.
Objects observed by astronomers are located on the stellar sphere. As earth
rotates, those objects show apparent movement on the sky. Furthermore po-
sition of objects which are close enough to the Earth and moves signiﬁcantly
in respect to the Earth changes with regard to the stellar sphere. For exam-
ple objects in the solar system – planets, dwarf planets and other solar system
bodies – moves on the sky with comparison to more distant background stars.
Satellites on the Earth orbit moves even more quickly then the solar system
bodies.

3.8. OBSERVATION POSITION FITNESS
11
Relation between object position and Moon position
Moon signiﬁcantly increases sky brightness. Increased sky brightness can make
some observations useless, and other more diﬃcult to process. The targets can
have following constraints:
• target cannot be observed if Moon height is above certain limit
• target cannot be observed if Moon phase is in certain interval and Moon
height is above certain limit
• those which can be observed only if their distance to the Moon is above
certain limit and Moon phase is above certain limit
As Moon sky position changes roughly by 13◦in 24 hours, object distance to
the Moon does not changes signiﬁcantly during night. Moon phase, if measured
in range < 9◦, 360◦>, changes by same amount. This show that ﬁtness function
based on moon position, fm, will not show great variance during night if it
depends only on distance of the object to the Moon.
So fm with only two
possible values, 0 or 1, is used. So for a target with duration TT, fm is deﬁned
as:
fm(t) =
(
1
if all moon constraints are valid in time < t, t + TT >
0
otherwise
Object altitude
Object altitude changes during the night as it moves on the sky. For an object
with declination δ and hour angle H, and observing site with latitude latitude
φ, the altitude h of the object is calculated as:
sin(h) = sin(φ) ∗sin(δ) + cos(φ) ∗cos(δ) ∗cos(H)
The minimal altitude of an object attained during 24 hours Adaymin is for
an observer on northern hemisphere calculated as
Adaymin = φ −90◦−δ
The maximal altitude Adaymax is equal to
Adaymax = 90◦−φ + δ
For an observer on southern hemisphere signs in the above formulas before
φ and δ has to be swapped.
As objects can be observed only during night, more important are values
of Anighmin and Anighmax, the maximal and minimal altitudes of the object
during night. Those are calculated as
Anightmin =
(
Adaymin
if tlowertransit ∈< Ns, Ne >
min(ANs, ANe)
otherwise

12CHAPTER 3. FORMALISATION OF THE OBSERVATION SCHEDULING PROBLEM
Anightmax =
(
Adaymax
if tuppertransit ∈< Ns, Ne >
max(ANs, ANe)
otherwise
Those calculations reﬂect fact that minimal or maximal altitude is reached
either during given interval or on one of its edges.
Each target T has low observing altitude TAmin. It is useless to observe
the object bellow this altitude. So if h is target altitude, then position ﬁtness
function is equal to 0 if h ≤TAmin.
If we do not consider changes in weather, which might render target obser-
vation useless, then the best time for target observation is when its altitude is
maximal. To formalise this, height ﬁtness function fh has range ¡0,1¿ and is
calculated as
fh(h) =
(
0
ifh ≤TAmin
h−max(Anightmin,T Amin)
Anightmax−max(Anightmin,T Amin)
otherwise
3.9
Observation accounting
Observatory time is usually shared by multiple groups.
They contribute to
capital and operational costs of the observatory. Based on their contribution
they are allocated some fraction of the observatory time.
The time sums over given period and the fraction left for the observation
is adjusted accordingly. Suppose that we have two groups sharing time on the
telescope, both having equal share (50%) of the telescope time. Then if two
nights are scheduled, and one group receives ﬁrst night for its observations, the
other group shall get remaining full night.
Time allocated to the groups is accounted, and compared with the share
values.
If some shared values drop bellow reasonable number, system must
give higher preference to this group in order to successfully ﬁll requested share
fractions.
To formalise this mechanism consider a accounts. Vector A of length a holds
fraction of time allocated to each account. It is clear that
a
X
k=1
A[k] = 1
Vector OA of length a holds seconds accounted for various groups. Total
time of all observations, OT, can then be calculated as
OT =
a
X
k=1
OA[k]
If OT > 0, current percentage for a given account, OC[k], is calculated as
OC[k] = OA[k]
OT

3.10. OBSERVATION SCHEDULE
13
3.10
Observation schedule
Observation schedule is an ordered sets of targets. For each target, starting
time is provided. After target is selected for observation, telescope is slewed to
target position and observing sequence is executed. Shutter open time and total
observing time can be calculated for observing sequence provided with target.
Schedule is a set of three vectors of length s. Vectors are SS, ST and SL.
Vector SS contains start time of observations. Vector ST contains targets which
are scheduled for observation. And SL contains observation loop counts. For
feasible schedule, following conditions must be fulﬁlled:
∀s−1
k=1SS[k + 1] ≥SS[k] + Ts[ST[k]] + SL[k] ∗Tt[ST[k]]
∀s
k=1SL[k] ≥1
SS[1] ≥Ns
SS[s] ≤Ne
3.11
Number of targets observed during night
Observing schedule should try to visit as much targets during night as possible.
Schedule which contains only observations of two targets visited through whole
night is most probably not better then schedule with three, four or more targets.
That is because due to probability, more visited and observed targets can bring
more opportunities to discover new science and hence write a good paper - and
as mentioned at the beginning, the whole game is at the ultimate end about
publications.
On the other hand, an excess fragmentation of night time is weighted good.
Excess fragmentation will make long–duration observations highly improbable.
Long–duration observations are necessary for planet transits and other science.
The solution may be found in a careful examination of the possible schedules
and picking sometimes ones with fewer targets, but more long–duration runs,
and sometimes go for a large night fragmentation.
It must be also mentioned that big fragmentation naturally allows better
time distribution and hence creating a schedule which will ﬁll accounted time
of various groups. So the system shall aim for a bigger fragmentation in order
to be able to better distribute remaining time.
There should be an objective night fragmentation, expressed in number of
targets visited during night. The better schedule is the one with number of
targets visited closer to this number.

14CHAPTER 3. FORMALISATION OF THE OBSERVATION SCHEDULING PROBLEM

Chapter 4
Time-dependent objective
functions
This section deals with problem of using various, usually time-dependent target
ﬁtness functions to calculate ﬁtness of the whole schedule.
As two diﬀerent schedules can hold diﬀerent number of targets, using sum of
observation ﬁtness included in schedule will be useless. It is also important to
note that observation ﬁtness can be diﬀerent during duration of the observation.
For example value of observation position ﬁtness calculated from object altitude
will change with a daily and other movement of the object on the sky.
The ﬁrst solution to those problems is to use average ﬁtness calculated at
the midpoint of the observation duration, which can be expressed as:
s
X
k=1
f ST [k](SS[k] + Ts[ST[k]] + SL[k] ∗To[ST[k]]
2
)
s
where f T (t) is value of the ﬁtness function for target T at time t, and there
are s targets in the schedule. There are however still some problems associated
with this approach:
• as there are multiple ﬁtness functions, it does not present single objective,
but rather multiple objectives
• ﬁtness value at the various times can diﬀerent signiﬁcantly from ﬁtness
value at the observation middle time
• the functions does not diﬀerentiate between schedules with higher number
of observations and those with fewer observations
To handle diﬀerences due to time used for calculating observing ﬁtness, min-
imum can be used. So the function then becomes:
s
X
k=1
mint∈<SS[k]+Ts[ST [k]],SS[k]+Ts[ST [k]]+SL[k]∗To[ST [k]]>(f ST [k](t))
s
15

16
CHAPTER 4. TIME-DEPENDENT OBJECTIVE FUNCTIONS
This function truly evaluates targets merit functions. Averaging will make
sure that schedules with fewer observations will not be disadvantaged against
schedules with more observations.
Most probably ﬁtness functions shall be evaluated separately. As some ob-
jectives are contradicting it is impossible to construct schedule with only the
best observations at the best times. There will be multiple paths to choose from,
and the whole play is about suﬃcient balance between diﬀerent objectives.

Chapter 5
Multiobjective scheduling
optimisation
Multiobjective scheduling optimisation is discussed in great detail in [1]. Here
are discussed various method to select best schedule in problems with multiple
independent objective functions. The possible solutions are reviewed bellow.
5.1
Weighted single objective function
This is probably the simplest approach.
Objective functions are multiplied
with weighting factors and summed together to form a single objective func-
tion. Scheduling algorithm then search for schedule with highest single objective
function.
The major disadvantage of this approach is necessity of ﬁnding correct weight
factors.
5.2
Single objective function, move others ob-
jectives to constraints
This approach picks the most signiﬁcant objective as the single objective. Other
objectives are then used as schedule constraints.
Major disadvantage of this approach is in specifying correct constraints for
objective functions which are not used as a single objective. When the constraint
range is too narrow, there is a risk of loosing some good solution because they
will slightly not ﬁt inside the range. If the range is too wide, there is a risk of
ﬁnding schedules way from the best one.
5.3
Searching Pareto optimal solutions
Pareto[14] optimality is named after Vilfred Pareto. This method search for all
nondominant solutions. It overcomes disadvantages of both previous approaches
by ﬁnding subsurface in the solution space with the best possible tradeoﬀs be-
17

18
CHAPTER 5. MULTIOBJECTIVE SCHEDULING OPTIMISATION
tween various objective functions. It does not need any weight factor nor cor-
rectly picked constraints.
Genetics algorithms are very good in ﬁnding Pareto optimal subsurface.
As the algorithm always operates with multiple solutions, they can represent
multiple points on Pareto optimal subsurface. So the genetic algorithm naturally
ﬁts in Pareto search.
Following section describes one of the genetics algorithm variants, know as
Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II - NSGA II.

Chapter 6
Nondominated Sorting
Genetic Algorithm II
Scheduler uses Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) devel-
oped by Deb et al.
A short description provided by Deb et.
al.
[3] is the
following:
The step-by-step procedure shows that NSGA-II algorithm is simple and
straightforward. First, a combined population Rt = Pt ∪Qt is formed. The
population Rt is of size 2N. Then, the population Rt is sorted according to non-
domination. Since all previous and current population members are included in
Rt, elitism is ensured. Now, solutions belonging to the best non-dominated set
F1 are of best solutions in the combined population and must be emphasised
more than any other solution in the combined population. If the size of F1
is smaller then N, we deﬁnitely choose all members of the set F1 for the new
population Pt+1. The remaining members of the population Pt+1 are chosen
from subsequent non-dominated fronts in the order of their ranking.
Thus,
solutions from the set F2 are chosen next, followed by solutions from the set F3,
and so on. This procedure is continued until no more sets can be accommodated.
Say that the set Fi is the last non-dominated set beyond which no other set can
be accommodated.
In general, the count of solutions in all sets from F1 to
Fi would be larger than the population size. To choose exactly N population
members, we sort the solutions of the last front Fi using the crowded-comparison
operator ≺n in descending order and choose the best solutions needed to ﬁll all
population slots. The NSGA-II procedure is also shown in Fig. 6.1. The new
population Pt+1 of size N is now used for selection, crossover, and mutation to
create a new population Qt+1 of size N. It is important to note that we use a
binary tournament selection operator but the selection criterion is now based
on the crowded-comparison operator ≺n. Since this operator requires both the
rank and crowded distance of each solution in the population, we calculate these
quantities while forming the population Pt+1, as shown in the above algorithm.
The components of the NSGA-II scheduling structure are described as fol-
lows:
19

20CHAPTER 6. NONDOMINATED SORTING GENETIC ALGORITHM II
Figure 6.1: The NSGA-II algorithm [3].
6.1
Chromosome Representation
RTS2 NSGA-II scheduling encodes only feasible schedules in each chromosome.
Chromosomes are implemented as an array of observing entries. The gene in
chromosome is a record containing starting date, duration and pointer to ticket1.
The initial population consists of a set of random schedules, generated using
random number generator.
The set of all nondominant chromosomes of the
ﬁnal population represents an optimal schedules.
6.2
Genetic Operators
RTS2 NSGA-II scheduling applies crossover and mutation operators with a
given probability over the chromosomes composing the GP population. The
crossover operator consists of the following steps:
• pick a random time Tcrossbetween night start and night end.
• construct beginning of the resulting schedule by using observations from
ﬁrst schedule till Tcross
• add schedules to the resulting schedule from second schedule, starting from
Tcross.
• repair resulting schedule, so it is feasible - adjust schedule starting time,
and schedules duration. If schedule duration cannot be adjusted, remove
shortest schedule.
The mutation operators used in RTS2 NSGA-II scheduling implementation
are those:
• Delete a random selected observation
• Change ticket entry of a random selected observation
1which contains observation details - target, account etc.

6.3. SELECTION
21
• Adjust duration by a random time of a randomly selected observation
After the mutation is performed, resulting schedule is repaired by same al-
gorithm used for repairs after crossover.
6.3
Selection
RTS2 NSGA-II scheduling employs a crowded binary tournament constraint –
dominated selection operator [3]. Assuming that every individual in the popu-
lation has three attributes: number of violated constraints (iviolation, nondomi-
nation rank (irank) and crowding distance (idistance), the crowded constraint –
dominated operator ≺cc is deﬁned as
i ≺cc j ⇐⇒





(jviolation > 0 and iviolation < jviolation)
or (irank < jrank)
or (irank = jrank and idistance > jdistance)
See [16] and [3] for a complete description.
6.4
Constraints
Selection of crowded constraint – dominated selection operator allows easy ad-
dition of new constraints. Constraint functions returns integer values, which
tell how many constraints are violated. The objective of algorithm is to min-
imise this value, so there will be as few constraints as possible. The following
constraints can be used:
• Visibility. Observation violates visibility constraint, if it is not visible
during its scheduled time.
• Schedule time. Observing ticket might provide time during which ob-
servation should be carried. If observation is not carried in the speciﬁed
time interval, it breaks schedule time constraint.
• Unobserved tickets. If time period during a ticket should be observed
intersect with interval being scheduled and it is not selected for observa-
tion, it violates this constraint.
• Number of observations per ticket. Some tickets might provide num-
ber of observation required to be performed of the target. Schedule violates
this consists if more observations of the ticket are schedule.
6.5
Fitness functions
One of the principal advantages of NSGA-II multi-objective algorithm is ability
to easy add new ﬁtness functions. Following ﬁtness functions are used: alti-
tude, observation distance, account, target diversity, observation diversity. The
diversity functions conﬂicts with observation distance - if schedule has better
diversity, it has worse observation distance and vice versa. The implementation
works to maximalize ﬁtness functions and minimalize constraints violations. In

22CHAPTER 6. NONDOMINATED SORTING GENETIC ALGORITHM II
the ﬁtness functions description is provided note if target is to maximalize or
minimalize its value. If not speciﬁed otherwise, it is assumed that if objective
is to minimalize ﬁtness value, inverted value is used in algorithm for maximal-
ization.
• Altitude merit. Altitude merit is calculated as ratio of mid altitude to
maximal possible altitude which target can have during night. For a given
observing ticket it is calculated as:
fh(h) =
(
0
ifh ≤TAmin
h−max(Anightmin,T Amin)
Anightmax−max(Anightmin,T Amin)
otherwise
For ﬁnal schedule merit is used average of those ticket functions. Objective
is to maximalize this value.
• Observation distance merit. This merit is calculated as sum of dis-
tance of the telescope travelled. Its purpose is to minimalize time telescope
will spend moving from one location to the other. For a single observation
it is calculated as:
fd() = angularDistance(Positionprevious
end
, Positioncurrent
start
)
Sum of the individual values is used. Objective is to minimalize this value.
• Account merit. Account merit is calculated as ratio of observed schedule
account use versus requested account use:
AD =
a
X
k=1
|OC[k] −OA[k]|
OA[k]
where AD is sum of proportional diﬀerences of requested and observed
accounting.
Objective of the scheduling algorithm is to ﬁnd schedule with minimal
deviation from requested time share. Time share is accounted usually by
longer intervals, months, semesters or year. So the scheduling algorithm
shall give lower priority on fairness of the selection at the beginning of the
accounting period then at the end of the accounting period.
• Target diversity merit. Target diversity merit is calculated as num-
ber of targets observed in the schedule. Objective is to maximalize this
function.
• Observation diversity merit. Observation diversity merit simply counts
observing entries in the schedule. Objective is to maximalize this function.

Chapter 7
Implementation
Because RTS2[10] is mostly coded in [6], choice of the language in which sched-
uler shall be written was pretty obvious. Coding was done in the Vim[13] editor.
debugging was done using Valgrind and GDB: The GNU Project Debugger.
Code was documented using Doxygen. The design relies as much as possible
on standard template library provided by GNU libstc++. LibNova was used
for various astronomical calculations.
The implementation beneﬁts from object oriented approach.
It provides
classes which holds list of schedules = GA population = Rts2SchedBag, sched-
ules = chromosomes = Rts2Schedule and observation entries = genes =
Rts2SchedObs.
Observation targets are subclasses of Target class, created
by a standard createTarget call.
Rts2SchedBag provides methods for GA
algorithms. Rts2Schedule provides methods for chromosome evaluation.
Interface for testing was written as subclass of the standard Rts2AppDb
class. The interface provides few options, and prints out results in simple space
separated format. The output can be feed directly to GNUPlot plotting pro-
gram. It is expected that scheduling classes will be integrated to RTS2 as a
standard library.
During development iterative life cycle was used. Small parts of the system
were developed, tested and results checked. The following sections document
progress of development.
Development was initially committed to REL 0 8 0 branch. After ﬁrsts suc-
cessful tests of GA code, branch was merged to trunk.
7.1
Simple test
First test was done on a simple genetics algorithm for selecting visible schedules.
Target set consists of ﬂat ﬁeld targets used to obtain calibration observations.
Plot of targets altitude as function of time observed from a site at 36◦north
latitude are show in ﬁgure 7.1. As targets are distributed along the celestial
equator, it is possible to observe each target for 12 hours.
23

24
CHAPTER 7. IMPLEMENTATION
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
23
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
6.00
3.00
2.00
1.50
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.05
1.00
altitude
airmass
Time UT [h]
Figure 7.1: Altitude of targets used for ﬁrst tests as function of time.
Schedule consists of observations with predeﬁned total time. Valid schedule
for this problem is any sequence of targets which ﬁlls requested time.
The algorithm work in the following steps:
• Initial random population is created
• Elite population is chosen.
Only the most ﬁt schedules are drawn for
mating.
• Mating is performed using roulette wheel selection.
Crossing operator
is simple two fold crossing – random number r smaller then number of
observations in a schedule is drawn. Two child are created – one with ﬁrst
r observations from the ﬁrst parent and rest from second parent, the other
with opposite parents chromosomes used.
• Mutation is performed. Random observation entry is picked and replaced
by another random observation entry.
• Population number is increased
• If population number is bellow predeﬁned population maxima, go to step
2.
Only schedule visibility ratio was used as ﬁtness criteria. The results con-
ﬁrmed correctness of genetic algorithm implementation. Results for 30 test runs
are presented in ﬁgures 7.2 and 7.3. It can be clearly seen that:
• it works - the visibility ﬁtness converge towards 1

7.1. SIMPLE TEST
25
• the population converges pretty fast
• as targets are distributed along celestial equator, the average visibility
ﬁtness of a random observation schedule is 0.5.
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
 1.05
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 1400
 1600
Population average visibility ratio
Generation
Figure 7.2: Convergence of the population average visibility ratio.
These tests conﬁrms quick convergence of genetic algorithm.
Quite nice
results was a quick convergence of entire population to global maxima. Those
results provided ﬁrm ground for further improvements.

26
CHAPTER 7. IMPLEMENTATION
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
 1.05
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 1400
 1600
Population maximal visibility ratio
Generation
Figure 7.3: Convergence of the maximal visibility ratio.

Chapter 8
Results
The algorithm clearly identify Pareto optimal fronts. Figures 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3
shows altitude, observation distance and target diversity merits for diﬀerent
populations sizes.
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
Target diversity merit
NSGA-II Rank 1
NSGA-II Rank 2
NSGA-II Rank 3
Altitude merit
Observation distance merit
Target diversity merit
Figure 8.1: Pareto front, population = 1000, generations = 100
Tests against currently used single objective algorithm were carried. Figures
8.4 and 8.5 shows simulated altitude merit and distance merit functions versus
27

28
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
 22
Target diversity merit
NSGA-II Rank 1
NSGA-II Rank 2
NSGA-II Rank 3
Altitude merit
Observation distance merit
Target diversity merit
Figure 8.2: Pareto front, population = 500, generations = 100

29
-2.5-2
-1.5-1
-0.5 0
 0.5 1  0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Target diversity merit
NSGA-II Rank 1
NSGA-II Rank 2
NSGA-II Rank 3
Altitude merit
Observation distance merit
Target diversity merit
Figure 8.3: Pareto front, population = 100, generations = 100

30
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS
observed merit and distance functions. Unfortunately account merit cannot be
calculated, as this merit was recently introduced.
Altitude merit is in proportional units, where 1 means optimal altitude of the
observations. Distance merit is in degrees - there lower value means lower slew
times, and so better schedule. In both graphs, blue dots are diﬀerence between
observed schedule and average of Pareto front schedules. There lower diﬀerence
value means better NSGA-II scheduling simulation then current scheduler.
-1
-0.5
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
05/01/07 07/01/07 09/01/07 11/01/07 01/01/08 03/01/08 05/01/08 07/01/08 09/01/08 11/01/08 01/01/09
Altitude merit
Night date
Observed
Simulated
Difference
Figure 8.4: Altitude merits of a used single merit algorithm versus new NSGA-II
scheduling

31
-150
-100
-50
 0
 50
 100
 150
05/01/07 07/01/07 09/01/07 11/01/07 01/01/08 03/01/08 05/01/08 07/01/08 09/01/08 11/01/08 01/01/09
Distance merit
Night date
Observed
Simulated
Difference
Figure 8.5: Distance merits of a used single merit algorithm versus new NSGA-II
scheduling

32
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS

Chapter 9
Conclusion
In this work was presented a novel approach to telescope scheduling, using
Pareto optimal search genetic algorithm. Having Pareto optimum provides ex-
perienced observers with overview which observations are possible.
Complex autonomouse telescope scheduling is a diﬃcult task. It requires
continuous adjustment of objectives, so the observatory remains productive for
a various science goals. Also new observatory constraints can be introduced.
Presented approach provides an easy and robust way how to add new objectives
and constraints without a need to invest time and eﬀort towards discovering
heuristics and rules which will make scheduling working better.
Scheduling network of the autonomouse observatories is a magnitude more
diﬃcult then scheduling of a single observatory.
Yet the approach outlined
in this work looks promising and provides solid base for a development of an
algorithm for network scheduling.
The software is ready for live use on the telescopes of RTS2 network. It is
expected that it will be used in production during ﬁrst quarter of 2009.
33

34
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION

Chapter 10
Further work
This work presents solid foundations for observatory and network scheduling.
The expected further work is related to further development of the RTS2. This
includes development of the central planning and monitoring facility, which will
enable observers to continuously monitor network performance. This will also
solve various operational issues and enables network scheduling. It is expected
that the network scheduling functionality will be added to network in second
quarter of 2009, at the time when Bootes 3 telescope, located on New Zealand,
will start routine operations.
35

36
CHAPTER 10. FURTHER WORK
