ACTIVE NEURAL LOCALIZATION
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Emilio Parisotto, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT
Localization is the problem of estimating the location of an autonomous agent from
an observation and a map of the environment. Traditional methods of localization,
which ﬁlter the belief based on the observations, are sub-optimal in the number of
steps required, as they do not decide the actions taken by the agent. We propose
“Active Neural Localizer”, a fully differentiable neural network that learns to
localize accurately and efﬁciently. The proposed model incorporates ideas of
traditional ﬁltering-based localization methods, by using a structured belief of
the state with multiplicative interactions to propagate belief, and combines it
with a policy model to localize accurately while minimizing the number of steps
required for localization. Active Neural Localizer is trained end-to-end with
reinforcement learning. We use a variety of simulation environments for our
experiments which include random 2D mazes, random mazes in the Doom game
engine and a photo-realistic environment in the Unreal game engine. The results
on the 2D environments show the effectiveness of the learned policy in an idealistic
setting while results on the 3D environments demonstrate the model’s capability
of learning the policy and perceptual model jointly from raw-pixel based RGB
observations. We also show that a model trained on random textures in the Doom
environment generalizes well to a photo-realistic ofﬁce space environment in the
Unreal engine.
1
INTRODUCTION
Localization is the problem of estimating the position of an autonomous agent given a map of
the environment and agent observations. The ability to localize under uncertainity is required by
autonomous agents to perform various downstream tasks such as planning, exploration and target-
navigation. Localization is considered as one of the most fundamental problems in mobile robotics
(Cox & Wilfong, 1990; Borenstein et al., 1996). Localization is useful in many real-world applications
such as autonomous vehicles, factory robots and delivery drones.
In this paper we tackle the global localization problem where the initial position of the agent is
unknown. Despite the long history of research, global localization is still an open problem, and
there are not many methods developed which can be learnt from data in an end-to-end manner,
instead typically requiring signiﬁcant hand-tuning and feature selection by domain experts. Another
limitation of majority of localization approaches till date is that they are passive, meaning that they
passively estimate the position of the agent from the stream of incoming observations, and do not
have the ability to decide the actions taken by the agent. The ability to decide the actions can result in
faster as well as more accurate localization as the agent can learn to navigate quickly to unambiguous
locations in the environment.
We propose “Active Neural Localizer”, a neural network model capable of active localization
using raw pixel-based observations and a map of the environment. Based on the Bayesian ﬁltering
algorithm for localization (Fox et al., 2003), the proposed model contains a perceptual model to
estimate the likelihood of the agent’s observations, a structured component for representing the belief,
multiplicative interactions to propagate the belief based on observations and a policy model over the
current belief to localize accurately while minimizing the number of steps required for localization.
The entire model is fully differentiable and trained using reinforcement learning, allowing the
perceptual model and the policy model to be learnt simultaneously in an end-to-end fashion. A variety
of 2D and 3D simulation environments are used for testing the proposed model. We show that the
Active Neural Localizer is capable of generalizing to not only unseen maps in the same domain but
1
arXiv:1801.08214v1  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2018

also across domains. We also contribute novel simulation scenarios for future active localization
research.
2
RELATED WORK
Localization has been an active ﬁeld of research since more than two decades. In the context of mobile
autonomous agents, Localization can be refer to two broad classes of problems: Local localization
and Global localization. Local localization methods assume that the initial position of the agent is
known and they aim to track the position as it moves. A large number of localization methods tackle
only the problem of local localization. These include classical methods based on Kalman Filters
(Kalman et al., 1960; Smith et al., 1990) geometry-based visual odometry methods (Nist´er et al., 2006)
and most recently, learning-based visual odometry methods which learn to predict motion between
consecutive frames using recurrent convolutional neural networks (Clark et al., 2017b; Wang et al.,
2017). Local localization techniques often make restrictive assumptions about the agent’s location.
Kalman ﬁlters assume Gaussian distributed initial uncertainty, while the visual odometry-based
methods only predict the relative motion between consecutive frames or with respect to the initial
frame using camera images. Consequently, they are unable to tackle the global localization problem
where the initial position of the agent is unknown. This also results in their inability to handle
localization failures, which consequently leads to the requirement of constant human monitoring and
interventation (Burgard et al., 1998).
Global localization is more challenging than the local localization problem and is also considered as
the basic precondition for truly autonomous agents by Burgard et al. (1998). Among the methods for
global localization, the proposed method is closest to Markov Localization (Fox, 1998). In contrast
to local localization approaches, Markov Localization computes a probability distribution over all
the possible locations in the environment. The probability distribution also known as the belief is
represented using piecewise constant functions (or histograms) over the state space and propagated
using the Markov assumption. Other methods for global localization include Multi-hypothesis
Kalman ﬁlters (Cox & Leonard, 1994; Roumeliotis & Bekey, 2000) which use a mixture of Gaussians
to represent the belief and Monte Carlo Localization (Thrun et al., 2001) which use a set of samples
(or particles) to represent the belief.
All the above localization methods are passive, meaning that they aren’t capable of deciding the
actions to localize more accurately and efﬁciently. There has been very little research on active
localization approaches. Active Markov Localization (Fox et al., 1998) is the active variant of Markov
Localization where the agent chooses actions greedily to maximize the reduction in the entropy of
the belief. Jensfelt & Kristensen (2001) presented the active variant of Multi-hypothesis Kalman
ﬁlters where actions are chosen to optimise the information gathering for localization. Both of
these methods do not learn from data and have very high computational complexity. In contrast,
we demonstrate that the proposed method is several order of magnitudes faster while being more
accurate and is capable of learning from data and generalizing well to unseen environments.
Recent work has also made progress towards end-to-end localization using deep learning models.
Mirowski et al. (2016) showed that a stacked LSTM can do reasonably well at self-localization. The
model consisted of a deep convolutional network which took in at each time step state observations,
reward, agent velocity and previous actions. To improve performance, the model also used several
auxiliary objectives such as depth prediction and loop closure detection. The agent was successful at
navigation tasks within complex 3D mazes. Additionally, the hidden states learned by the models
were shown to be quite accurate at predicting agent position, even though the LSTM was not explicitly
trained to do so. Other works have looked at doing end-to-end relocalization more explicitly. One
such method, called PoseNet (Kendall et al., 2015), used a deep convolutional network to implicitly
represent the scene, mapping a single monocular image to a 3D pose (position and orientation). This
method is limited by the fact that it requires a new PoseNet trained on each scene since the map
is represented implicitly by the convnet weights, and is unable to transfer to scenes not observed
during training. An extension to PoseNet, called VidLoc (Clark et al., 2017a), utilized temporal
information to make more accurate estimates of the poses by passing a Bidirectional LSTM over
each monocular image in a sequence, enabling a trainable smoothing ﬁlter over the pose estimates.
Both these methods lack a straightforward method to utilize past map data to do localization in a new
environment. In contrast, we demonstrate our method is capable of generalizing to new maps that
were not previously seen during training time.
2

3
BACKGROUND: BAYESIAN FILTERING
Bayesian ﬁlters (Fox et al., 2003) are used to probabilistically estimate a dynamic system’s state using
observations from the environment and actions taken by the agent. Let yt be the random variable
representing the state at time t. Let st be the observation received by the agent and at be the action
taken by the agent at time step t. At any point in time, the probability distribution over yt conditioned
over past observations s1:t−1 and actions a1:t−1 is called the belief, Bel(yt) = p(yt|s1:t−1, a1:t−1)
The goal of Bayesian ﬁltering is to estimate the belief sequentially. For the task of localization, yt
represents the location of the agent, although in general it can represent the state of the any object(s)
in the environment. Under the Markov assumption, the belief can be recursively computed using the
following equations:
Bel(yt) =
X
yt−1
p(yt|yt−1, at−1)Bel(yt−1),
Bel(yt) = 1
Z Lik(st)Bel(yt),
where Lik(st) = p(st|yt) is the likelihood of observing st given the location of the agent is yt, and
Z = ΣytLik(st)Bel(yt) is the normalization constant. The likelihood of the observation, Lik(st) is
given by the perceptual model and p(yt|yt−1, at−1), i.e. the probability of landing in a state yt from
yt−1 based on the action, at−1, taken by the agent is speciﬁed by a state transition function, ft. The
belief at time t = 0, Bel(y0), also known as the prior, can be speciﬁed based on prior knowledge
about the location of the agent. For global localization, prior belief is typically uniform over all
possible locations of the agent as the agent position is completely unknown.
4
METHODS
4.1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Let st be the observation received by the agent and at be the action taken by the agent at time step t.
Let yt be a random variable denoting the state of the agent, that includes its x-coordinate, y-coordinate
and orientation. In addition to agent’s past observations and actions, a localization algorithm requires
some information about the map, such as the map design. Let the information about the map be
denoted by M. In the problem of active localization, we have two goals: (1) Similar to the standard
state estimation problem in the Bayesian ﬁlter framework, the goal is to estimate the belief, Bel(yt),
or the probability distribution of yt conditioned over past observations and actions and the information
about the map, Bel(yt) = p(yt|s1:t, a1:t−1, M), (2) We also aim to learn a policy π(at|Bel(yt)) for
localizing accurately and efﬁciently.
4.2
PROPOSED MODEL
Representation of Belief and Likelihood
Let yt be a tuple Ao, Ax, Ay where Ax,Ay and Ao
denote agent’s x-coordinate, y-coordinate and orientation respectively. Let M × N be the map
size, and O be the number of possible orientations of the agent. Then, Ax ∈[1, M], Ay ∈[1, N]
and Ao ∈[1, O]. Belief is represented as an O × M × N tensor, where (i, j, k)th element denotes
the belief of agent being in the corresponding state, Bel(yt = i, j, k). This kind of grid-based
representation of belief is popular among localization methods as if offers several advantages over
topological representations (Burgard et al., 1996; Fox et al., 2003). Let Lik(st) = p(st|yt) be the
likelihood of observing st given the location of the agent is yt, The likelihood of an observation in
a certain state is also represented by an O × M × N tensor, where (i, j, k)th element denotes the
likelihood of the current observation, st given that the agent’s state is yt = i, j, k. We refer to these
tensors as Belief Map and Likelihood Map in the rest of the paper.
Model Architecture
The overall architecture of the proposed model, Active Neural Localizer
(ANL), is shown in Figure 1. It has two main components: the perceptual model and the policy
model. At each timestep t, the perceptual model takes in the agent’s observation, st and outputs
the Likelihood Map Lik(st). The belief is propagated through time by taking an element-wise dot
product with the Likelihood Map at each timestep. Let Bel(yt) be the Belief Map at time t before
observing st. Then the belief, after observing st, denoted by Bel(yt), is calculated as follows:
Bel(yt) = 1
Z Bel(yt) ⊙Lik(st)
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard product, Z = P
yt Lik(st)Bel(yt) is the normalization constant.
3

Figure 1: The architecture of the proposed model. The perceptual model computes the likelihood of the
current observation in all possible locations. The belief of agent’s location is propagated through time by taking
element-wise dot-product with the likelihood. The policy model learns a policy to localize accurately while
minimizing the number of steps required for localization. See text for more details.
The Belief Map, after observing st, is passed through the policy model to obtain the probability of
taking any action, π(at|Bel(yt)). The agent takes an action at sampled from this policy. The Belief
Map at time t + 1 is calculated using the transition function (fT ), which updates the belief at each
location according to the action taken by the agent, i.e. p(yt+1|yt, at). The transition function is
similar to the egomotion model used by Gupta et al. (2017) for mapping and planning. For ‘turn
left’ and ‘turn right’ actions, the transition function just swaps the belief in each orientation. For the
the ‘move forward’ action, the belief values are shifted one unit according to the orientation. If the
next unit is an obstacle, then the value doesn’t shift, indicating a collison (See Appendix B for more
details).
4.3
MODEL COMPONENTS
Perceptual Model
The perceptual model computes the feature representation from the agent’s
observation and the states given in the map information. The likelihood of each state in the map
information is calculated by taking the cosine similarity of the feature representation of the agent’s
observation with the feature representation of the state. Cosine similarity is commonly used for
computing the similarity of representations (Nair & Hinton, 2010; Huang et al., 2013) and has also
been used in the context on localization (Chaplot et al., 2016). The beneﬁts of using cosine similarity
over dot-product have been highlighted by Chunjie et al. (2017).
In the 2D environments, the observation is used to compute a one-hot vector of the same dimension
representing the depth which is used as the feature representation directly. This resultant Likelihood
map has uniform non-zero probabilities for all locations having the observed depth and zero prob-
abilities everywhere else. For the 3D environments, the feature representation of each observation
is obtained using a trainable deep convolutional network (LeCun et al., 1995) (See Appendix B
for architecture details). Figure 2 shows examples of the agent observation and the corresponding
Likelihood Map computed in both 2D and 3D environments. The simulation environments are
described in detail in Section 5.1.
Policy Model
The policy model gives the probablity of the next action given the current belief of the
agent. It is trained using reinforcement learning, speciﬁcally Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
(A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) algorithm (See Appendix A for a brief background on reinforcement
learning). The belief map is stacked with the map design matrix and passed through 2 convolutional
layers followed by a fully-connected layer to predict the policy as well as the value function. The
policy and value losses are computed using the rewards observed by the agent and backpropagated
through the entire model (See Appendix B for architecture details).
4

Figure 2: The map design, agent’s observation and the corresponding likelihood maps in different domains. In
2D domains, agent’s observation is the pixels in front of the agent until the ﬁrst obstacle. In the 3D domain, the
agent’s observation is the image showing the ﬁrst-person view of the world as seen by the agent.
5
EXPERIMENTS
As described in Section 4, agent’s state, yt is a tuple Ao, Ax, Ay where Ax,Ay and Ao denote agent’s
x-coordinate, y-coordinate and orientation respectively. Ax ∈[1, M], Ay ∈[1, N] and Ao ∈[1, O],
where M × N is the map size, and O be the number of possible orientations of the agent. We use a
variety of domains for our experiments. The values of M and N vary accross domains but O = 4 is
ﬁxed. The possible actions in all domains are ‘move forward’, ‘turn left’ and ‘turn right’. The turn
angle is ﬁxed at (360/O = 90). This ensures that the agent is always in one of the 4 orientations,
North, South, East and West. Note that although we use, O = 4 in all our experiments, our method is
deﬁned for any value of O. At each time step, the agent receives an intermediate reward equal to the
maximum probability of being in any state, rt = maxyt(Bel(yt)). This encourages the agent the
reduce the entropy of the Belief Map in order to localize as fast as possible. We observed that the
agent converges to similar performance without introducing the intermediate reward, but it helps in
speeding up training. At the end of the episode, the prediction is the state with the highest probability
in the Belief Map. If the prediction is correct, i.e. y∗= arg maxyt Bel(yt) where y∗is the true state
of the agent, then the agent receives a positive reward of 1. Please refer to Appendix B for more
details about training and hyper-parameters. The metric for evaluation is accuracy (Acc) which refers
to the ratio of the episodes where the agent’s prediction was correct over 1000 episodes. We also
report the total runtime of the method in seconds taken to evaluate 1000 episodes.
5.1
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS
Maze 2D
In the Maze2D environment, maps are represented by a binary matrix, where 0 denotes
an obstacle and 1 denotes free space. The map designs are generated randomly using Kruskal’s
algorithm Kruskal (1956). The agent’s observation in 2D environments is the series of pixels in
front of the agent. For a map size of M × N, the agent’s observation is an array of size max(M, N)
containing pixels values in front of the agent. The view of the agent is obscured by obstacles, so all
pixel values behind the ﬁrst obstacle are treated as 0. The information about the map, M, received by
the agent is the matrix representing the map design. Note that the observation at any state in the map
can be computed using the map design. The top row in Figure 2 shows examples of map design and
agent’s observation in this environment.
The 2D environments provide ideal conditions for Bayesian ﬁltering due to lack of observation or
motion noise. The experiments in the 2D environments are designed to evaluate and quantify the
effectiveness of the policy learning model in ideal conditions. The size of the 2D environments can
also be varied to test the scalability of the policy model. This design is similar to previous experimental
settings such as by Tamar et al. (2016) and Karkus et al. (2017) for learning a target-driven navigation
policy in grid-based 2D environments.
3D Environments
In the 3D environments, the observation is an RGB image of the ﬁrst-person
view of the world as seen by the agent. The x-y coordinates of the agent are continuous variables,
5

Table 1: Results on the 2D Environments. ‘Time’ refers to the number of seconds required to evaluate 1000
episodes with the corresponding method and ‘Acc’ stands for accuracy over 1000 episodes.
Env
Maze2D
All
Map Size
7x7
15x15
21x21
Episode Length
15
30
20
40
30
60
Markov
Localization
Time
12
15
29
31
49
51
31.2
Acc
0.334
0.529
0.351
0.606
0.414
0.661
0.483
Active Markov
Localization (Fast)
Time
29
53
72
165
159
303
130.2
Acc
0.436
0.619
0.468
0.657
0.512
0.735
0.571
Active Markov
Localization (Slow)
Time
1698
3066
3791
8649
8409
13554
6527.8
Acc
0.854
0.938
0.846
0.984
0.845
0.958
0.904
Active Neural
Localization
Time
22
34
44
66
82
124
62.0
Acc
0.936
0.939
0.905
0.939
0.899
0.984
0.934
unlike the discrete grid-based coordinates in the 2D environments. The matrix denoting the belief
of the agent is discretized meaning each pixel in the Belief map corresponds to a range of states in
the environment. At the start of every epsiode, the agent is spawned at a random location in this
continuous range as opposed to a discrete location corresponding to a pixel in the belief map for 2D
environments. This makes localization much more challenging than the 2D envrionments. Apart
from the map design, the agent also receives a set of images of the visuals seen by the agent at a
few locations uniformly placed around the map in all 4 orientations. These images, called memory
images, are required by the agent for global localization. They are not very expensive to obtain in
real-world environments. We use two types of 3D environments:
Maze3D: Maze3D consists of virtual 3D maps built using the Doom Game Engine. We use the
ViZDoom API (Kempka et al., 2016) to interact with the gane engine. The map designs are generated
using Kruskal’s algorithm and Doom maps are created based on these map designs using Action
Code Scripts1. The design of the map is identical to the Maze2D map designs with the difference
that the paths are much thicker than the walls as shown in Figure 2. The texture of each wall, ﬂoor
and ceiling can be controlled which allows us to create maps with different number of ‘landmarks’.
Landmarks are deﬁned to be walls with a unique texture.
Unreal3D: Unreal3D is a photo-realistic simulation environment built using the Unreal Game Engine.
We use the AirSim API (Shah et al., 2017) to interact with the game engine. The environment consists
of a modern ofﬁce space as shown in Figure 2 obtained from the Unreal Engine Marketplace2.
The 3D environments are designed to test the ability of the proposed model to jointly learn the
perceptual model along with the policy model as the agent needs to handle raw pixel based input
while learning a policy. The Doom environment provides a way to test the model in challenging
ambiguous environments by controlling the number of landmarks in the environment, while the
Unreal Environment allows us to evaluate the effectiveness of the model in comparatively more
realistic settings.
5.2
BASELINES
Markov Localization (Fox, 1998) is a passive probabilistic approach based on Bayesian ﬁltering. We
use a geometric variant of Markov localization where the state space is represented by ﬁne-grained,
regularly spaced grid, called position probability grids (Burgard et al., 1996), similar to the state space
in the proposed model. Grid-based state space representations is known to offer several advantages
over topological representations (Burgard et al., 1996; Fox et al., 2003). In the passive localization
approaches actions taken by the agent are random.
Active Markov Localization (AML) (Fox et al., 1998) is the active variant of Markov Localization
where the actions taken by the agent are chosen to maximize the ratio of the ‘utility’ of the action to
the ‘cost’ of the action. The ‘utility’ of an action a at time t is deﬁned as the expected reduction in
the uncertainity of the agent state after taking the action a at time t and making the next observation
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_Code_Script
2https://www.unrealengine.com/marketplace/small-office-prop-pack
6

Figure 3: Different experiments in the 3D Environments. Refer to the text for more details.
at time t + 1: Ut(a) = H(yt) −Ea[H(yt+1)], where H(y) denotes the entropy of the belief:
H(y) = −P
y Bel(y) log Bel(y), and Ea[H(yt+1)] denotes the expected entropy of the agent after
taking the action a and observing yt+1. The ‘cost’ of an action refers to the time needed to perform
the action. In our environment, each action takes a single time step, thus the cost is constant.
We deﬁne a generalized version of the AML algorithm. The utility can be maximized over a sequence
of actions rather than just a single action. Let a∗∈Anl be the action sequence of length nl that
maximizes the utility at time t, a∗= arg maxa Ut(a) (where A denotes the action space). After
computing a∗, the agent need not take all the actions in a∗before maximizing the utility again. This
is because new observations made while taking the actions in a∗might affect the utility of remaining
actions. Let ng ∈{1, 2, ..., nl} be the number of actions taken by the agent, denoting the greediness
of the algorithm. Due to the high computational complexity of calculating utility, the agent performs
random action until belief is concentrated on nm states (ignoring beliefs under a certain threshold).
The complexity of the generalized AML is O(nm(nl −ng)|A|nl). Given sufﬁcient computational
power, the optimal sequence of actions can be calculated with nl equal to the length of the episode,
ng = 1, and nm equal to the size of the state space.
In the original AML algorithm, the utility was maximized over single actions, i.e. nl = 1 which also
makes ng = 1. The value of nm used in their experiments is not reported, however they show an
example with nm = 6. We run AML with all possible combination of values of nl ∈{1, 5, 10, 15},
ng ∈{1, nl} and nm = {5, 10} and deﬁne two versions: (1) Active Markov Localization (Fast):
Generalized AML algorithm using the values of nl, ng, nm that maximize the performance while
keeping the runtime comparable to ANL, and (2) Active Markov Localization (Slow): Generalized
AML algorithm using the values of nl, ng, nm which maximize the performance while keeping the
runtime for 1000 episodes below 24hrs (which is the training time of the proposed model) in each
environment (See Appendix B for more details on the implementation of AML).
The perceptual model for both Markov Localization and Active Markov Localization needs to be
speciﬁed separately. For the 2D environments, the perceptual model uses 1-hot vector representation
of depth. For the 3D Environments, the perceptual model uses a pretrained Resnet-18 (He et al., 2016)
model to calculate the feature representations for the agent observations and the memory images.
5.3
RESULTS
2D Environments
For the Maze2D environment, we run all models on mazes having size 7 × 7,
15 × 15 and 21 × 21 with varying episode lengths. We train all the models on randomly generated
mazes and test on a ﬁxed set of 1000 mazes (different from the mazes used in training). The results
on the Maze2D environment are shown in Table 1. As seen in the table, the proposed model, Active
Neural Localization, outperforms all the baselines on an average. The proposed method achieves a
higher overall accuracy than AML (Slow) while being 100 times faster. Note that the runtime of AML
for 1000 episodes is comparable to the total training time of the proposed model. The long runtime of
AML (Slow) makes it infeasible to be used in real-time in many cases. When AML has comparable
runtime, its performance drops by about 37% (AML (Fast)). We also observe that the difference in
the performance of ANL and baselines is higher for smaller episode lengths. This indicates that ANL
is more efﬁcient (meaning it requires fewer actions to localize) in addition to being more accurate.
3D Environments
All the mazes in the Maze3D environment are of size 70×70 while the ofﬁce
environment environment is of size 70×50. The agent location is a continuous value in this range.
Each cell roughly corresponds to an area of 40cm×40cm in the real world. The set of memory
images correspond to only about 6% of the total states. Likelihood of rest of the states are obtained
by bilinear smoothing. All episodes have a ﬁxed length of 30 actions. Although the size of the Ofﬁce
Map is 70×50, we represent Likelihood and Belief by a 70×70 in order to transfer the model between
7

Table 2: Results on the 3D environments. ‘Time’ refers to the number of seconds required to evaluate 1000
episodes with the corresponding method and ‘Acc’ stands for accuracy over 1000 episodes.
Env
Maze3D
Unreal3D
with lights
All
Domain
adaptation
Evaluation Setting
Unseen Mazes
Seen Textures
Unseen mazes
Unseen textures
With
lights
Without
lights
Maze3D to
Unreal3D
No. of landmarks
10
5
0
10
5
0
Markov Localization
(Resnet)
Time
2415
2470
2358
2580
2509
2489
2513
2541
2484.4
-
Acc
0.716
0.657
0.641
0.702
0.669
0.652
0.517
0.249
0.600
-
Active Markov
Localization (Fast)
Time
14231
12409
11662
15738
12098
11761
11878
5511
11911.0
-
Acc
0.741
0.701
0.669
0.745
0.687
0.689
0.546
0.279
0.632
-
Active Markov
Localization (Slow)
Time
48291
47424
43096
48910
44500
44234
47962
11205
41952.8
-
Acc
0.759
0.749
0.694
0.787
0.730
0.720
0.577
0.302
0.665
-
Active Neural
Localization
Time
297
300
300
300
300
301
2750
2699
905.9
2756
Acc
0.889
0.859
0.852
0.858
0.839
0.871
0.934
0.505
0.826
0.921
both the 3D environments for domain adaptation. We also add a Gaussian noise of 5% standard
deviation to all translations in 3D environments.
In the Maze3D environment, we vary the difﬁculty of the environment by varying the number of
landmarks in the environment. Landmarks are deﬁned to be walls with a unique texture. Each
landmark is present only on a single wall in a single cell in the maze grid. All the other walls have
a common texture making the map very ambiguous. We expect landmarks to make localization
easier as the likelihood maps should have a lower entropy when the agent visits a landmark, which
consequently should reduce the entropy of the Belief Map. We run experiments with 10, 5 and 0
landmarks. The textures of the landmarks are randomized during training. This technique of domain
randomization has shown to be effective in generalizing to unknown maps within the simulation
environment (Lample & Chaplot, 2016) and transferring from simulation to real-world (Tobin et al.,
2017). In each experiment, the agent is trained on a set of 40 mazes and evaluated in two settings: (1)
Unseen mazes with seen textures: the textures of each wall in the test set mazes have been seen in
the training set, however the map design of the test set mazes are unseen and (2) Unseen mazes with
unseen textures: both the textures and the map design are unseen. We test on a set of 20 mazes for
each evaluation setting. Figure 3 shows examples for both the settings.
In the Unreal3D environment, we test the effectiveness of the model in adapting to dynamic lightning
changes. We modiﬁed the the Ofﬁce environment using the Unreal Game Engine Editor to create
two scenarios: (1) Lights: where all the ofﬁce lights are switched on; (2) NoLights: where all the
ofﬁce lights are switched off. Figure 3 shows sample agent observations with and without lights at
the same locations. To test the model’s ability to adapt to dynamic lighting changes, we train the
model on the Ofﬁce map with lights and test it on same map without lights. The memory images
provided to the agent are taken while lights are switched on. Note that this is different as compared to
the experiments on unseen mazes in Maze3D environment, where the agent is given memory images
of the unseen environments.
The results for the 3D environments are shown in Table 2 and an example of the policy execution
is shown in Figure 43. The proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms all baseline models in all
evaluation settings with the lowest runtime. We see similar trends of runtime and accuracy trade-off
between the two version of AML as seen in the 2D results. The absolute performance of AML (Slow)
is rather poor in the 3D environments as compared to Maze2D. This is likely due to the decrease in
value of look-ahead parameter, nl, to 3 and the increase in value of the greediness hyper-parameter,
ng to 3, as compared to nl = 5, ng = 1 in Maze 2D, in order to ensure runtimes under 24hrs.
The ANL model performs better on the realistic Unreal environment as compared to Maze3D
environment, as most scenes in the Unreal environment consists of unique landmarks while Maze3D
environment consists of random mazes with same texture except those of the landmarks. In the
Maze3D environment, the model is able to generalize well to not only unseen map design but also
to unseen textures. However, the model doesn’t generalize well to dynamic lighting changes in
the Unreal3D environment. This highlights a current limitation of RGB image-based localization
approaches as compared to depth-based approaches, as depth sensors are invariant to lighting changes.
3Policy execution videos can be seen at https://tinyurl.com/y8gp3mkh
8

Figure 4: An example of the policy execution and belief propagation in the Maze3D Environment. The rows
shows consecutive time steps in a episode. The columns show Agent’s observation, the belief of its location
before and after making the observation, the map design and agent’s perspective of the world. Agent’s true
location is also marked in the map design (not visible to the agent). Belief maps show the probability of being
at a particular location. Darker shades imply higher probability. The belief of its orientation and agent’s true
orientation are also highlighted by colors. For example, the Red belief map shows the probability of agent facing
east direction at each x-y coordinate. Note that map design is not a part of the Belief Maps, it is overlayed on the
Belief Maps for better visualization. At all time steps, all locations which look similar to agent’s perspective
have high probabilities in the belief map. The example shows the importance deciding actions while localizing.
At t = 3, the agent is uncertain about its location as there are 4 positions with identical perspectives. The agent
executes the optimal set of action to reduce its uncertainity, i.e. move forward and turn left, and successfully
localizes.
9

Domain Adaptation
We also test the ability of the proposed model to adapt between different
simulation environments. The model trained on the Maze3D is directly tested on the Unreal3D Ofﬁce
Map without any ﬁne-tuning. The results in Table 2 show that the model is able to generalize well
to Unreal environment from the Doom Environment. We believe that the policy model generalizes
well because the representation of belief and map design is common in all environments and policy
model is based only on the belief and the map design, while the perceptual model generalizes well
because it has learned to measure the similarity of the current image with the memory images as it
was trained on environments with random textures. This property is similar to siamese networks used
for one-shot image recognition (Koch et al., 2015).
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a fully-differentiable model for active global localization which uses
structured components for Bayes ﬁlter-like belief propagation and learns a policy based on the belief
to localize accurately and efﬁciently. This allows the policy and observation models to be trained
jointly using reinforcement learning. We showed the effectiveness of the proposed model on a
variety of challenging 2D and 3D environments including a realistic map in the Unreal environment.
The results show that our model consistently outperforms the baseline models while being order of
magnitudes faster. We also show that a model trained on random textures in the Doom simulation
environment is able to generalize to photo-realistic Ofﬁce map in the Unreal simulation environment.
While this gives us hope that model can potentially be transferred to real-world environments, we
leave that for future work. The limitation of the model to adapt to dynamic lightning can potentially
be tackled by training the model with dynamic lightning in random mazes in the Doom environment.
There can be several extensions to the proposed model too. The model can be combined with Neural
Map (Parisotto & Salakhutdinov, 2017) to train an end-to-end model for a SLAM-type system and
the architecture can also be utilized for end-to-end planning under uncertainity.
