Detecting Falls with X-Factor Hidden Markov Models
Shehroz S. Khana,∗, Michelle E. Karg,Dana Kuli´cb, Dana Kuli´cb, Jesse Hoeya
aDavid R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Canada
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Waterloo, Canada
Abstract
Identiﬁcation of falls while performing normal activities of daily living (ADL) is im-
portant to ensure personal safety and well-being. However, falling is a short term
activity that occurs rarely and infrequently. This poses a challenge for traditional su-
pervised classiﬁcation algorithms, because there may be very little training data for
falls (or none at all) to build generalizable models for falls. This paper proposes an
approach for the identiﬁcation of falls using a wearable device in the absence of train-
ing data for falls but with plentiful data for normal ADL. We propose three ‘X-Factor’
Hidden Markov Model (XHMMs) approaches. The XHMMs have ‘inﬂated’ output
covariances (observation models). To estimate the inﬂated covariances, we propose a
novel cross validation method to remove ‘outliers’ from the normal ADL that serves as
proxies for the unseen falls and allow learning the XHMMs using only normal activi-
ties. We tested the proposed XHMM approaches on two activity recognition datasets
and show high detection rates for falls in the absence of fall-speciﬁc training data. We
show that the traditional method of choosing threshold based on maximum of negative
of log-likelihood to identify unseen falls is ill-posed for this problem. We also show
that supervised classiﬁcation methods perform poorly when very limited fall data is
available during the training phase.
Keywords: Fall Detection, Hidden Markov Models, X-Factor, Outlier Detection
∗Corresponding author

(Jesse Hoey)
Preprint submitted to Applied Soft Computing
September 18, 2018
arXiv:1504.02141v5  [cs.LG]  20 Jan 2017

1. Introduction
Identiﬁcation of normal Activities of Daily Living (ADL), for e.g., walking, hand
washing, making breakfast, etc., is important to understand a person’s behaviour, goals
and actions [1]. However, in certain situations, a more challenging, useful and inter-
esting research problem is to identify cases when an abnormal activity occurs, as it can
have direct implications on the health and safety of an individual. An important abnor-
mal activity is the occurrence of a fall. However, falls occur rarely, infrequently and
unexpectedly w.r.t. the other normal ADLs and this leads to either little or no training
data for them [2]. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA [3], suggests
that on average, patients incur 2.6 falls per person per year. Recent studies also sug-
gest that even in a long term experimental set up only a few real falls may be captured
[4, 5]. In these situations with highly skewed fall data, a typical supervised activity
recognition system may misclassify ‘fall’ as one of the already existing normal activity
as ‘fall’ may not be included in the classiﬁer training set. An alternative strategy is
to build fall detection speciﬁc classiﬁers that assume abundant training data for falls,
which is hard to obtain in practice. Another challenge is the data collection for falls,
as it may require a person to actually undergo falling which may be harmful, ethically
questionable, and the falling incidences collected in controlled laboratory settings may
not be the true representative of falls in naturalistic settings [6].
The research question we address in this paper is: Can we recognise falls by ob-
serving only normal ADL with no training data for falls in a person independent man-
ner?. We use the HMMs for the present task as they are very well-suited for sequential
data and can model human motions with high accuracy [7]. Typically, an HMM can
be trained on normal activities and the maximum of negative of log-likelihood on the
training data is set as a threshold to identify a fall as an outlier. However, choosing
such a threshold may severely effect classiﬁer’s performance due to spurious artifacts
present in the sensor data and most of the falls may be classiﬁed as normal activities.
In this paper, we use the outlier detection approach to identify falls and present three
X-Factor HMM based approaches for detecting short-term fall events. The ﬁrst and
second method models individual normal activities by separate HMMs or all normal
2

activities together by a single HMM, by explicitly modelling the poses of a movement
by each HMM state. An alternative HMM is constructed whose model parameters are
the averages of the normal activity models, while the averaged covariance matrix is
artiﬁcially ‘inﬂated’ to model unseen falls. In the third method, an HMM is trained
to model the transitions between normal activities, where each hidden state represents
a normal activity, and adds a single hidden state (for unseen falls) with an inﬂated
covariance based on the average of covariances of all the other states. The inﬂation
parameters of the proposed approaches are estimated using a novel cross-validation
approach in which the outliers in the normal data are used as proxies for unseen fall
data. We present another method that leverages these outliers to train a separate HMM
as a proxy model to detect falls. We also compare the performance of one-class SVM
and one-class nearest neighbour approach along with several supervised classiﬁcation
algorithms that use full data for normal activities but the number of falls are gradu-
ally increased in the training set. We show that supervised classiﬁers perform worse
when limited data for falls is available during training. This paper is a comprehensive
extension of the work of Khan et al. [8] in terms of :
• Proposing two new models to detect unseen falls by (i) modelling transitions
among normal activities to train an HMM and adding a new state to model un-
seen falls, and (ii) training a separate HMM on only the outliers in the normal
activities data to model unseen falls.
• Data pre-processing, extraction of signals from raw sensor data, and number and
type of features are different from Khan et al.[8].
• Studying the effect of changing the number of states on the proposed HMM
methods for fall detection.
• Identifying similarity through experiments between the rejected outliers from the
normal activities and the unseen falls.
• Additional experiments evaluating the effect of quantity of fall data available
during the training phase on the performance of the supervised versions of the
proposed fall detection methods and two other supervised classiﬁcation methods.
3

2. Related Work
The research in fall detection spans over two decades with several recent papers
[2, 9, 10] that discuss different methodologies, trends and ensuing challenges using
body worn, ambient or vision based fall detection techniques. Several research works
in fall detection are based on thresholding techniques [11] or supervised classiﬁcation
[2]. One of the major challenges in fall detection is the less availability of fall data [5];
therefore, such techniques are difﬁcult to use in practice. Keeping this view in mind,
we survey techniques that attempt to detect falls by employing generative models, out-
lier/anomaly detection and one-class classiﬁcation [12] based techniques that only use
data from normal activities to build the model and identify a fall as an anomaly or
outlier.
Thome et al. [13] present a Hierarchical HMM (HHMM) approach for fall detec-
tion in video sequences. The HHMMs ﬁrst layer has two states, an upright standing
pose and lying. They study the relationship between angles in the 3D world and their
projection onto the image plane and derive an error angle introduced by the image for-
mation process for a standing posture. Based on this information, they differentiate
other poses as ‘non-standing’ and thus falls can be distinguished from other motions.
A two-layer HMM approach, SensFall [14], is used to identify falls from other normal
activities. In the ﬁrst layer, the HMM classiﬁes an unknown activity as normal verti-
cal activity or ‘other’, while in second stage the ‘other’ activity is classiﬁed as either
normal horizontal activity or as a fall. Tokumitsu et al. [15] present an adaptive sensor
network intrusion detection approach by human activity proﬁling. They use multiple
HMMs for every subject in order to improve the detection accuracy and consider the
fact that a single person can have multiple patterns for the same activity. The data is
collected using infra-red sensors. A new sequence of activity is fed to all the HMMs
and likelihoods are computed. If all the likelihoods calculated from corresponding
HMMs are not greater than pre-determined thresholds, then an anomaly is identiﬁed.
Cheng et al. [16] present a fall detection algorithm based on pattern recognition and
human posture analysis. The data is collected through tri-axial accelerometer embed-
ded in the smartphones and several temporal features are computed. HMM is employed
4

to ﬁlter out noisy character data and to perform dimensionality reduction. One-class
SVM (OSVM) is applied to reduce false positives, followed by a posture analysis to
counteract the missed alarms until a desired accuracy is achieved.
Zhang et al. [17] trained an OSVM from positive samples (falls) and outliers from
non-fall ADL and show that the falls can be detected effectively. Yu et al. [18] pro-
pose to train Fuzzy OSVM on fall activity captured using video cameras and to tune
parameters using fall and some non-fall activities. Their method assigns fuzzy member-
ship to different training samples to reﬂect their importance during classiﬁcation and is
shown to perform better than OSVM. Popescu [19] presents a fall detection technique
that uses acoustic signals of normal activities for training and detects fall sounds from
it. They train OSVM, one-class nearest neighbour (OCNN) classiﬁer and One-class
GMM classiﬁer (that uses a threshold) to train models on normal acoustic signals and
ﬁnd that OSVM performs the best; however, it is outperformed by its supervised coun-
terpart. Medrano et al. [20] propose to identify falls using a smartphone as a novelty
from the normal activities and found that OCNN performs better than OSVM but is
outperformed by supervised SVM.
The supervised and thresholding techniques for fall detection collect artiﬁcial fall
data in a laboratory under non-naturalistic settings; however, such fall data may not
be true representative of actual falls and learning with them may lead to over-ﬁtting.
To overcome the need for a sufﬁcient set of representative ‘fall’ samples, we propose
three ‘X-Factor’ HMM based approaches to identify falls across different people while
learning models only on data from normal activities.
3. Proposed Fall Detection Approaches
The problem we investigate in this paper pertains to activity recognition and the
datasets we use capture the temporal activities performed by humans. The Hidden
Markov Models (HMM) are effective in modelling the temporal dynamics in data se-
quences and consider the history of actions when taking a decision on the current se-
quence. The HMM is a doubly stochastic process for modelling generative sequences
that can be characterized by an underlying process generating an observable sequence.
5

Formally, an HMM consists of the following components [21]:
• N – the number of hidden states in the HMM. The hidden states can be connected
in several ways, for example in left-to-right manner or fully interconnected (er-
godic). the set of states can be denoted as S = {S1, S2, . . . , SN} and the state
at time t as qt.
• M – The number of distinct observation symbols per state that corresponds to
the physical output of the system being modelled. The symbols can be denoted
as V = {v1, v2, . . . , vM}. When the observation is continuous, M = ∞, and
can be approximated using Gaussian or mixture of Gaussian with mean and co-
variance corresponding to each hidden state as the underlying parameters.
• A – The state transition probability distribution A = aij, where aij represents
the probability of state j following state i and is expressed as:
aij = P[qt+1 = Sj|qt = Si]
1 ≤i, j ≤N
(1)
The coefﬁcients of state transition have the following properties:
aij ≥0,
N
X
j=1
aij = 1
The state transition matrix A is independent of time. For the ergodic design
where any state can reach any other state aij > 0 for all i and j, whereas for
other topologies one or more values will have aij = 0.
• B – The observation symbol probability distribution in state j, B = {bj(k)},
where
bj(k) = P[vk
at
t|qt = Sj]
1 ≤j ≤N, 1 ≤k ≤M
(2)
• π – The initial state distribution π = {πi}, where
πi = P[q1 = Si]
1 ≤i ≤N
(3)
6

The complete set of parameters of an HMM can also be compactly represented as
[21]:
λ = (π, A, B)
(4)
A pictorial representation of a 3 state discrete HMM is shown in Figure 1. The
model follows a Markovian assumption, i.e., the current state at time t is independent
of all states t −2, . . . , 1 given the state at t −1 and an independence assumption, i.e.,
the output observation at time t is independent of all the previous observations and
states given the current state.
HMMs are successfully used in detection of human activities with high accuracy
[7]. Mannini and Sabatini [22] compare various single-frame classiﬁers against HMM
based sequential classiﬁer for activity recognition using on-body accelerometers and
report superior performance of the HMM classiﬁers. Typically, two approaches are
commonly applied to model human actions and activities using HMMs [7]:
(i) Modelling Poses: Train an HMM for an activity by explicitly modelling the poses
of a movement by each state, or
(ii) Modelling Activities: Train an HMM for different activities by modelling each
activity by a single state.
Figure 1: Discrete HMM with 3 states and 3 possible outputs
7

We consider both of these approaches to propose ‘X-Factor’ based models to iden-
tify falls when their training data is not available, which is discussed next.
3.1. Pose HMM
The traditional method to detect unseen abnormal activities is to model each nor-
mal activity using an HMM (by modelling the poses of a movement by each state),
compare the likelihood of a test sequence with each of the trained models and if it is
below a pre-deﬁned threshold for all the models then identify it as an anomalous activ-
ity [8]. For fall detection, we model each normal activity i by an ergodic HMM which
evolves through a number of k states. The observations oj(t) in state j are modelled
by a single Gaussian distribution. Each model i is described by the set of parameters,
λi = {πi, Ai, (µij, Σij)}, where πi is the prior, Ai is the transition matrix, and µij and
Σij are the mean and covariance matrix of a single Gaussian distribution, N(µij, Σij),
giving the observation probability Pr(oi|j) for the jth HMM state. This method es-
timates the probability that an observed sequence has been generated by each of the
i models of normal activities. If this probability falls below a threshold Ti for each
HMM, a fall is detected. Typically, an HMM is trained for each normal activity on
the full training data and the individual activity threshold is set as the maximum of the
negative log-likelihood of the training sequences (we call this method as HMM1). If a
new activity’s negative log-likelihood is below each of these thresholds, it is identiﬁed
as a fall.
Quinn et al. [23] present a general framework based on Switched Linear Dynami-
cal Systems for condition monitoring of a premature baby receiving intensive care by
introducing the ‘X-factor’ to deal with unmodelled variation from the normal events
that may not have been seen previously. This is achieved by inﬂating the system noise
covariance of the normal dynamics to determine the regions with highest likelihood
which are far away from normality based on which events can be classiﬁed as ‘not
normal’. We extend this idea to formulate an alternate HMM (we call this approach as
XHMM1) to model unseen fall events. This approach constructs an alternate HMM
to model fall events by averaging the parameters of i HMMs and increasing the aver-
aged covariances by a factor of ξ such that each state’s covariance matrix is expanded.
8

Thus, the parameters of the X-Factor HMM will be λXHMM1 = {¯π, ¯A, ¯µ, ξ ¯Σ)}, where
¯π, ¯A, ¯µ, and ¯Σ are the average of the parameters πi, Ai, µi and Σi of each i HMMs.
Each of the i HMMs is trained on non-fall data obtained after removing outliers from
the normal activities and these outliers serve as the validation set for optimizing the
value of ξ using cross validation (see details in Section 4). For a test sequence, the
log-likelihood is computed for all the HMM models (i HMMs representing i normal
activities and the alternate HMM representing fall events) and the one with the largest
value is designated as its class label.
3.2. Normal Pose HMM
Another method to identify abnormal activities is to model all the normal activities
together using a single HMM and if a test sequence’s likelihood falls below a prede-
ﬁned threshold, it is identiﬁed as anomalous [24]. For fall detection, we group all the
normal activities together and train a single HMM; where normal poses are modelled
by each state. The idea is to learn the ‘normal concept’ from the labelled data. This
method estimates the probability that the observed sequence has been generated by this
common model for all the normal activities and if this probability falls below a thresh-
old T, a fall is detected. Typically the maximum of negative log-likelihood on the
training data is set as a threshold to detect unseen falls (we call this method HMM2).
Similar to XHMM1, we propose to construct an alternative HMM to model the ‘fall’
activities whose parameters (λXHMM2) remain the same as the HMM to model non-
fall activities together (λ) except for the covariance, whose inﬂated value is computed
using cross validation (we call this method (XHMM2); see details in Section 4). For
a test sequence, the log-likelihood is computed for both HMM models (HMM repre-
senting non-fall activities and the alternate HMM representing fall events) and the one
with the larger value is designated as its class label.
The intuition behind XHMM1 and XHMM2 approaches is that if the states
representing non-fall activities are modelled using Gaussian distributions, then the fall
events coming from another distribution can be modelled using a new Gaussian (X-
factor) with larger spread but with the same mean as non-fall activities. The obser-
vations that are closer to the mean retain high likelihood under the original Gaussian
9

distribution for the normal activities, whereas the X-factor will have higher likelihood
for observations that are far away from the normal activities. To simplify the assump-
tions about unseen falls, other extra factors such as the mean and the number of states
are not introduced in the proposed approaches.
3.3. Activity HMM
Smyth [25] addresses the problem of real-time fault monitoring, where it is dif-
ﬁcult to model all the unseen fault states of a system and proposes to add a (j + 1)
novel hidden state (in an HMM) to cover all other possible states not accounted by the
known j states. The novel state’s prior probability is kept same as other known states
and the density of the observable data given the unknown state is deﬁned by using
non-informative Bayesian priors. For detecting falls, we train a single HMM to model
transitions of normal activity sequences, with parameters, λXHMM3 = {π, A, µ, Σ},
where each hidden state represents a normal activity, and add an extra hidden state to
the model; its means and covariances are estimated by averaging the means and covari-
ances of all other states representing the normal activities. The X-factor is introduced
to vary the covariance of this novel state by a factor of ξ, which can be determined us-
ing cross validation (see Section 4). Adding a novel state to the existing HMM means
adding a row and column to A to represent transitions to and from the state captur-
ing unseen fall. However, this information is not available apriori. For fault detection
application, Smyth [25] designs a 3 state HMM and added a novel 4th state to model
unknown anomalies and chooses the probability of remaining in the same state as 0.97
and distributes transition to other states uniformly. We use similar idea to choose proba-
bility of 0.95 to self transitions to fall events and the rest of the probability is uniformly
distributed for transitions from fall events to normal activities. For transitions from
different normal activities to falls, a probability of 0.05 is set (to capture the assump-
tion that falls occur rarely) and the transition probabilities between different normal
activities are scaled such that the total probability per row in the matriix A sums up to
1. Viterbi decoding [21] is employed on a test sequence to ﬁnd the most likely hidden
state that generated it, if it consists of the novel state, the sequence is classiﬁed as a fall
or else a normal activity.
10

3.4. HMMNormOut
As discussed in Section 3.1 and 3.2, some outliers are rejected from each of the
normal activities that may arise due to artifacts in the sensor readings or mislabelling
of training data. These rejected sensor readings from each normal activity are grouped
together and two HMMs are trained, one each for non-fall activities and outlier activ-
ities. We call this approach as HMMNormOut. The HMM model learnt on outliers
activities may not be the true representative for falls but it can model those activities
that are non-falls.
4. Threshold Selection and Proxy Outliers
As discussed in Section 1, falls occur rarely and infrequently compared to normal
activities; therefore, it is difﬁcult to get labelled data for them. This may result in
situations with abundant data for normal activities and none for falls. To detect falls
using traditional HMM approaches (HMM1 and HMM2), typically, a threshold is
set on the likelihood of the data given an HMM trained on this ‘normal’ data. This
threshold is normally chosen as the maximum of negative log-likelihood [24], and can
be interpreted as a slider between raising false alarms or risking missed alarms [15]. A
major drawback of this approach is that it assumes that the data for each normal activity
is correctly labelled and sensor readings are non-spurious. This assumption can be
detrimental for fall detection performance; any abnormal sensor reading or mislabelling
of training data can alter this threshold and adversely effect the performance. For the
proposed approaches, another challenge is to estimate the parameter ξ for XHMM1,
XHMM2 and XHMM3 in the absence of fall data during the training phase.
To address the above mentioned issues and ﬁnding appropriate ξ, we propose to
use the deviant sequences (outliers) within the ‘normal’ data. The idea is that even
though the ‘normal’ data may not contain any falls, it may contain sensor readings that
are spurious, incorrectly labelled or signiﬁcantly different. These outliers can be used
to set ξ that are required for fall detection, thereby serving as a proxy for the fall data
in order to learn the parameter ξ of the three XHMMs. To ﬁnd the outliers, we use the
concept of quartiles of a ranked set of data values that are the three points that divide the
11

data set into four equal groups, where each group comprises of a quarter of the data.
Given the log-likelihoods of sequences of training data for an HMM and the lower
quartile (Q1), the upper quartile (Q3) and the inter-quartile range (IQR = Q3 −Q1),
a point P is qualiﬁed as an outlier if
P > Q3 + ω × IQR
||
P < Q1 −ω × IQR
(5)
where ω represents the percentage of data points that are within the non-extreme limits.
Based on ω, the extreme values of log-likelihood that represent spurious training data
can be removed, that leads to the
1. Creation of a validation set comprising of outliers (proxies for falls), and
2. Computation of parameter ξ for the proposed XHMM approaches.
Figure 2 (a) shows the log-likelihood log Pr(O|λrunning) for 1262 equal length
(1.28 seconds) running activity sequences of the DLR dataset (see Section 5.1). Fig-
ure 2 (b) shows a box plot with the quartiles and the outliers (shown as +) for w = 1.5.
Figure 2 (c) shows the same data as in Figure 2(a) but with the outliers removed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: Log-Likelihoods (a) before and (c) after outlier removal. (b) shows box-plot
of the quartiles for this data and the outliers for w = 1.5
We employ an internal cross-validation to train the three XHMMs using only the
non-fall data. We ﬁrst split the normal data into two sets: ‘non-fall’ data and ‘outlier’
data (see Figure 3). We do this using Equation 5 with a parameter ω that is manually
set and only used for this initial split. For each activity, an HMM is trained on full
12

Figure 3: Cross Validation Scheme
normal data and based on ω, ‘outliers’ are rejected from them and the remaining data
is considered as ‘non-fall’. To optimize the covariance parameter, ξ, we use a K-fold
cross validation: the HMMs are trained on
  K−1
K
th of the ‘non-fall’ data, and tested
on
  1
K
th of the ‘non-fall’ data and on all the ‘outlier’ data. This is done K times and
repeated for different values of ξ. The value of ξ that gives the best averaged perfor-
mance metric (see Section 5.5) over K-folds is chosen as the best parameter. Then,
each classiﬁer is re-trained with this value of parameter on the ‘non-fall’ activities.
5. Experimental Design
5.1. Datasets
The proposed fall detection approaches are evaluated on the following two human
activity recognition datasets.
1. German Aerospace Center (DLR) [26]: This dataset is collected using an Inertial
Measurement Unit with integrated accelerometer, gyroscope and 3D magnetometers
with sampling frequency of 100 Hz. The dataset contains samples taken from 19
people under semi-natural conditions. The sensor was placed on the belt either
on the right/left side of the body or in the right pocket in different orientations.
The dataset contains 7 activities: standing, sitting, lying, walking (up/downstairs,
horizontal), running/jogging, jumping and falling. One subject did not perform fall
activity and its data is omitted from the analysis.
2. MobiFall (MF) [27]: This dataset is collected using a Samsung Galaxy S3 device
equipped with 3D accelerometer and gyroscope. The mobile device was placed
13

in a trouser pocket in random orientations. Mean sampling of 87 Hz is reported
for accelerometer and 200 Hz for the gyroscope. The dataset is collected from 11
subjects; eight normal activities are recorded in this dataset: step-in car, step-out
car, jogging, jumping, sitting, standing, stairs (up and down joined together) and
walking. Four different types of falls are recorded – forward lying, front knees lying,
sideward lying and back sitting chair. Different types of falls are joined together to
make one separate class for falls. Two subjects only performed fall activity and their
data is removed from the analysis.
The DLR dataset is collected in semi-naturalistic settings; therefore, the ratio of
falls to normal activities is quite small ≈0.0032 (26576 normal activities segments
and 84 fall segments), whereas in the MF dataset this ratio is ≈0.0899 (5430 normal
activities and 488 fall segments).
5.2. Data Pre-Processing
For the MF dataset, the gyroscope sensor has a different sampling frequency than
the accelerometer and their time-stamps are also not synchronized; therefore, the gyro-
scope readings are interpolated to synchronize them with the accelerometer readings.
Although the calibration matrix for the DLR data is available to rotate the sensor read-
ings to the world frame, in our experiments we did not use it because it did not improve
the results. For the MF dataset, orientation information is present but incorporating it
led to the deterioration of results. This observation is consistent with the work of de la
Vega et al. [28] that suggest that activities can be detected without considering the ori-
entations. Winter [29] suggests that for the walking activity, 99.7% of the signal power
was contained in the lower seven harmonics (below 6Hz), with evidence of higher-
frequency components extending up to the 20th harmonic. Beyond that frequency, the
signal had the characteristics of ‘noise’, which can arise from different sources, such as
electronic/sensor noise, spatial precision of the digitization process, and human errors.
Therefore, for both the datasets, the sensor noise is removed by using a 1st order Butter-
worth low-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 20Hz. The signals are segmented with
50% overlapping windows, where each window size is 1.28 seconds for DLR dataset
and 3 seconds for MF dataset to simulate a real-time scenario with fast response. The
14

reason that DLR dataset does not have the same windows size as MF dataset is that it
contains short duration fall events. Therefore, when the window size is increased to
3 seconds, fall samples could not be extracted for many subjects and cross-validation
across different subjects (see Section 5.5) may not work as desired.
5.3. Feature Extraction
The literature on feature extraction from motion sensors is very rich [30, 31, 32].
Most of the feature extraction techniques involve computing time domain, frequency
domain, and statistical features from the sensor readings. We extract the following ﬁve
signals from each of the datasets:
1. Three acceleration readings ax, ay, az along the x, y and z directions,
2. Norm of acceleration, anorm =
q
a2x + a2y + a2z and gyroscope, ωnorm =
q
ω2x + ω2y + ω2z,
where ωx, ωy and ωz are the angular velocities in the x, y or z direction.
Considering three separate acceleration signals will be useful in obtaining direction
speciﬁc information, whereas the norm of acceleration and gyroscope will be useful in
extracting orientation-invariant information. One objective of this study is to identify
low-cost features that are highly discriminative in identifying various types of normal
activities. Therefore, we extract 31 standard time and frequency domain features from
these signals (as shown in Table 1 along with their description). Features are computed
for each window for XHMM3. To extract temporal dynamics for HMM1, HMM2,
XHMM1, XHMM2 and HMMNormOut, each window is sub-divided into 16ms
frames and features are computed for each frame.
5.4. HMM Modelling
For all the HMM based fall detection methods discussed in the paper, the obser-
vation model uses single Gaussian distribution, diagonal covariance matrix is used for
each of the HMMs and the upper and lower values are constraint to 100 and 0.01 during
the training. For optimizing the parameters ξ, a 3-fold internal cross validation is used.
For all the HMMs methods except XHMM3, the following procedure is adopted:
15

#Features Type of feature
Reason to Use
f1 – f5
Mean of ax, ay, az, anorm, ωnorm [26]
Average features are used for the detection
of body positions [33]. These feature work
well in identifying various ADL [26]
f6 – f10
Maximum value of ax, ay, az, anorm, ωnorm [26]
These feature work well in identifying var-
ious ADL [26]
f11 – f15
Minimum value of ax, ay, az, anorm, ωnorm [26]
These feature work well in identifying var-
ious ADL [26]
f16 – f20
Standard Deviation of ax, ay, az, anorm, ωnorm
[26]
Variance feature is used for estimating the
intensity of an activity [33]. These feature
work well in identifying various ADL [26]
f21 – f22
IQR of anorm, ωnorm [26]
These feature work well in identifying var-
ious ADL [26]
f23
Normalized Signal Magnitude Area [34]
This is useful to identify dynamic and
static activities, e.g., running or walking
versus lying or standing.
f24
Normalized Average Power Spectral Density of
anorm
This feature is useful for the detection of
cyclic activities, e.g., walking, running, cy-
cling [33].
f25
Spectral Entropy of anorm [33]
This is useful for differentiating between
activities involving locomotion.
f26
DC component after FFT of anorm [35]
The is shown to result in accurate recogni-
tion of certain postures and activities.
f27
Energy, i.e., sum of the squared discrete FFT
component magnitudes of anorm [35]
This is shown to result in accurate recogni-
tion of certain postures and activities.
f28
Normalized Information Entropy of the Discrete
FFT component magnitudes of anorm [35]
This helps in discriminating activities with
different energy values.
f29 – f31
Correlation between ax, ay, az [36]
This helps in differentiating among activ-
ities that involve translation in one dimen-
sion, e.g., walking and jogging from taking
the stairs up and down.
Table 1: Extracted Features and their Description.
16

• Each activity in the HMMs is modelled with 2/4/8 states, where each individual
state represents functional phases of the gait cycle [37] or the ‘key poses’ of each
activity.
• Five representative sequences per activity are manually chosen to initialize the pa-
rameters. Initialization is done by segmenting a single sequence into equal parts
(corresponding to the number of states) and computing µij and Σij for each part and
further smoothing by BW with 3 iterations.
• The transition matrix Ai is ergodic (i.e. every state has transitions to other states)
and initialized such that transition probabilities from one state to another are 0.025,
self-transitions are set accordingly [25], and the actual values are learned by BW
algorithm following initialization.
• The prior probabilities of each state, π, are initialized to be uniformly distributed (to
sum across all states to 1) and further learned during BW.
• The likelihood for a test sequence is computed using the forward algorithm [21] and
the classiﬁcation decisions are taken based on them.
For XHMM3, the parameters µj and Σj and transition matrix are computed from
the annotated data and no additional BW step is used. When a novel state is added,
its parameters are estimated by averaging the means and covariances of all other states
(with covariance further inﬂated using X-Factor) and transition matrix is re-adjusted
(refer to Section 3.3). The prior probabilities of each state is kept uniform. The decision
to detect a fall is taken using the Viterbi algorithm [21], which ﬁnds the most likely
hidden state that produces the given observation.
5.5. Performance Evaluation and Metric
To evaluate the performance of the proposed approaches for fall detection, we per-
form leave-one-subject-out cross validation (LOOCV) [38], where only normal activi-
ties from (N −1) subjects are used for training and the N th subject’s normal activities
and falls are used for testing. This process is repeated N times and the average per-
formance metric is reported. This evaluation is person independent and demonstrates
17

the generalization capabilities as the subject who is being tested is not included in
training the classiﬁers. The different values of ξ used in internal cross validation for
XHMM1, XHMM2 and XHMM3 are [1.5, 5, 10, 100]. The value of ω is set to
1.5 for obtaining outliers from the normal activities.
Conventional performance metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, etc., may
not be very useful when classiﬁers are expected to observe a skewed distribution of
fall events w.r.t. normal activities. We use the geometric mean (gmean) [39] as the
performance metrics because it measures the accuracies separately on each class, i.e., it
combines True Positive Rates (TPR) and True Negative Rates (TNR) and is given by
gmean =
√
TPR ∗TNR. An important property of gmean is that it is independent
of the distribution of positive and negative samples in the test data. We also use two
other performance metrics, fall detection rate (FDR) (or the true positives) and false
alarm rate (FAR) (or the false positives) to better understand the performance of the
proposed fall detection classiﬁers. A fall detection method that gives high gmean, high
FDR and low FAR is considered to be better than others.
6. Results
In this section we present the fall detection results using the DLR and MF datasets.
In the ﬁrst experiment, the models are learned using only the normal activities and
falls are shown during testing phase only. In the second experiment, we assume the
presence of few falls in the training set to build supervised models on both falls and
normal activities and test the performance of these models. In the third experiment, we
test our hypothesis that outliers from normal activities are similar to falls or not.
6.1. Training without fall data
In this experiment, we compare the performance of the fall detection methods dis-
cussed in Section 3. HMM1 and HMM2 are trained on full ‘normal’ data, while
the proposed three XHMMs are trained on ‘non-fall’ data, but they make use of full
‘normal’ data to optimize their respective parameters. We also compare the results with
One-Class SVM (OSVM) [12] and One-class nearest neighbour (OCNN) [40] that are
18

trained on only the full ‘normal’ data. The OSVM method has an built-in mechanism to
reject fraction of positive samples (ν) to help deciding the class boundary in the absence
of data from the negative class. We set this parameter to a default value of ν = 0.5
and implemented OSVM using MATLAB [41]. The OSVM uses a gaussian kernel by
default for one-class learning. For OCNN, we keep the value of k-nearest neighbours
to be 1. For the HMM based methods, except for XHMM3 where the number of
states equals the number of labelled normal activities plus an additional state for mod-
elling falls, the number of states are varied for all other fall detection methods to study
the change in performance by increasing the complexity of the models. The number of
states tested are 2, 4 and 8 for both the data sets. We observe that increasing the number
of states do not signiﬁcantly improve the performance of any methods. Though large
number of states increase the training time for the models signiﬁcantly. For a given
ﬁxed length sequence (for both the DLR and COV datasets), training a 8 state HMM
takes almost two times longer than a 4 state HMM, which in turn takes almost twice to
train a 2 state HMM. We choose 4 states HMM as the optimum for this and subsequent
experiments because it provides a good trade-off between accuracy and running time.
Tables 2 shows the performance of the different fall detection methods in the ab-
sence of training data for falls on both the datasets. We observe that for both the DLR
and MF datasets, HMM1 and HMM2 failed to detect any (or most of the) falls. For
DLR dataset, XHMM3, and XHMM1 show the highest gmean in comparison to
other methods. HMMNormOut performs worse than the three XHMMs but better
than HMMs. XHMM2 has the highest FDR but at the cost of high FAR. Both
OCNN and OSVM perform worse than the proposed XHMM methods. OCNN identi-
ﬁed most of the falls at the cost of large number of false alarms and OSVM missed to
detect most of the falls. For the MF dataset, XHMM2 performs the best, XHMM1
and XHMM3 did not perform well because they classify most falls as step-in car and
sitting. The reason for their poor performance is that the fall signals collected in this
dataset contain sensor readings after the subject has hit the ground. Therefore, the fall
data has some stationary values after the falling action has occurred. After creating
overlapping windows, some of them may contain stationary values that are likely to be
classiﬁed as one of the static activities. OCNN and OSVM perform worse with high
19

falls detection rate but with large false alarms rate.
Method
DLR
MF
gmean
FDR FAR
gmean
FDR FAR
HMM1
0
0
0.001
0.092
0.016
0.005
HMM2
0
0
0.0003
0
0
0.002
XHMM1
0.854
0.822
0.096
0.290
0.094
0.024
XHMM2
0.784
0.965
0.360
0.810
0.978
0.298
XHMM3
0.925
0.893
0.030
0.516
0.285
0.059
HMMNormOut 0.326
0.500
0.731
0.515
0.399
0.244
OCNN
0.380
0.959
0.846
0.308
0.736
0.867
OSV M
0.163
0.117
0.394
0.652
0.879
0.508
Table 2:
Performance of Fall Detection methods (4 states).
For XHMM3
(#states=#labelled activities + 1 state for unseen fall).
HMM Models for Fall Detection
HMM1 full
HMM2 full
XHMM1
XHMM2
XHMM3 HMM NormOut
gmean with Standard Deviation bars
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
(a) DLR dataset
HMM Models for Fall Detection
HMM1 full
HMM2 full
XHMM1
XHMM2
XHMM3 HMM NormOut
gmean with Standard Deviation bars
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b) MF dataset
Figure 4: gmean with error bars across all subjects for DLR and MF datasets
To understand the statistical stability of the proposed methods, we plot the mean
20

values of gmean along with error bars (see Figure 4) representing standard deviation.
Figure 4 shows that for both the DLR and MF dataset, all the proposed XHMM meth-
ods outperform HMM1, HMM2 and HMMNormOut. Due to skewed distribution
of falls in both the datasets, the standard deviation for the gmean could be higher
because a small number of misclassiﬁcations can vary the gmean greatly. This exper-
iment shows that training HMMs on full ‘normal’ data for detecting unseen falls, and
setting a threshold as the maximum of negative log-likelihood on training sequences is
not the right approach and better models can be built when outliers from the ‘normal’
datasets are removed and covariances of the X-Factor based HMMs are optimized.
6.2. Feature Selection
Selecting relevant features from a large set of features extracted from wearable sen-
sors have shown to improve results for activity recognition [42]. A major challenge in
performing feature selection in the proposed problem of fall detection is that the fall
data is not available during the training time; therefore, relevant features are to be se-
lected from the non-fall data. We used the RELIEF-F feature selection method [42]
for our task. RELIEF-F computes a weight for each feature in terms of how well they
distinguish between the data points of the same and different classes that are near to
each other. This method provides a ranking of features in order of their merit for clas-
siﬁcation. We choose the top 10 and top 20 features and train the fall detection models
discussed earlier with these reduced sets of features to study their effect on identify-
ing unseen falls. The top selected features are mostly the mean, maximum, minimum,
standard deviation, correlation, percentile and Signal Magnitude Area (see Table 3).
Tables 4 and 5 show that for both the DLR and MF datasets, reducing the number of
features to 20 from 31 decrease the performance of XHMM1 and XHMM3 but
increase the performance of XHMM2 and HMMNormOut. When the number of
features are reduced to the top 10, the performance of all the classiﬁers deteriorates
for the DLR and MF dataset (except for XHMM3). OCNN and OSV M performs
worse in comparison to the XHMM methods. The degradation of performance can
arise because feature selection is based on the normal activities only, instead of based
on both falls and normal activites. This experiment shows that feature selection can
21

improve the performance of the proposed XHMM methods.
Datasets
Top Ranked Features
Rank 1 −10
Rank 11 −20
DLR
f3,f4,f23,f5,f19,
f7,f8,f15,f22,f30,
f14,f9,f20,f10,f13
f18,f31,f6,f29,f11
MF
f2,f29,f31,f30,f3,
f9,f4,f8,f17,f20,
f11,f19,f13,f22,f7
f18,f5,f6,f23,f12
Table 3: Top 10/20 ranked features. Compare with Table 1
Method
20 Features
10 Features
gmean
FDR FAR
gmean
FDR FAR
HMM1
0
0
0
0.080
0.045
0
HMM2
0
0
0.0001
0
0
0
XHMM1
0.415
0.271
0.018
0.192
0.107
0.042
XHMM2
0.852
0.933
0.213
0.832
0.933
0.248
XHMM3
0.425
0.288
0.063
0.333
0.209
0.079
HMMNormOut 0.786
0.921
0.317
0.771
0.783
0.217
OCNN
0.368
0.926
0.851
0.420
0.879
0.783
OSV M
0.237
0.203
0.501
0.053
0.039
0.553
Table 4: Performance of Fall Detection methods on reduced features for DLR dataset
(Compare with Tables 2)
6.3. Training with fall data
In this experiment, we compare several supervised classiﬁcation algorithms for fall
detection under two scenarios (a) when full data for falls is available, and (b) when
small amount of fall data is available during training and is gradually increased. The
latter experiment simulates a scenario when we may have few fall data to begin with.
We simulate this scenario by supplying a controlled amount of fall data during the train-
ing phase and train the supervised classiﬁers by randomly choosing 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 25,
22

Method
20 Features
10 Features
gmean
FDR FAR
gmean
FDR FAR
HMM1
0.093
0.020
0.007
0
0
0.005
HMM2
0.106
0.022
0.002
0
0
0.005
XHMM1
0.051
0.008
0.004
0.046
0.006
0.005
XHMM2
0.829
0.957
0.239
0.785
0.763
0.185
XHMM3
0.531
0.333
0.110
0.685
0.542
0.109
HMMNormOut 0.759
0.774
0.163
0.566
0.453
0.127
OCNN
0.303
0.686
0.861
0.324
0.695
0.842
OSV M
0.579
0.717
0.516
0.658
0.933
0.508
Table 5: Performance of Fall Detection methods on reduced features for MF dataset
(Compare with Tables 2)
and 50 falls samples from the full fall data. To avoid classiﬁcation bias due to ran-
dom choice of fall data, we run this experiment 10 times (per LOOCV fold) and re-
port the average value of the performance metrics. We use supervised version of the
XHMMs presented earlier. HMM1sup is similar to XHMM1, where each normal
activity is modelled by a separate HMM by utilizing full ‘normal’ data for each activ-
ity; however, due to the presence of fall data a separate HMM is trained for fall events.
HMM2sup is similar to XHMM2, where the full ‘normal’ activities are modelled by
a general HMM and a separate HMM is trained to model falls. HMM3sup is similar
to XHMM3; however, in this case a state representing ‘actual’ fall activity is added
in the HMM and its parameters are computed from the labelled fall data. The other
two supervised classiﬁers we use are Random Forest (RF) and Support Vector Ma-
chine (SV M). The ensemble size in RF is set to 200, where each decision (or split)
in each tree is based on a single, randomly selected feature [5]. For SV M classiﬁer, a
Gaussian kernel is used with width equals to 10.
Table 6 shows the LOOCV results for both the datasets when full training data is
available for falls and all the normal activities. For the MF dataset, the performance
23

(a) DLR dataset
(b) MF dataset
Figure 5: Effect of varying the amount of fall data in supervised learning. Two best
performing X-Factor approaches are shown on the y-axis corresponding to zero training
data (compare with Table 2).
24

Method
DLR
MF
gmean
FDR FAR
gmean
FDR FAR
HMM1sup
0.768
0.719
0.054
0.489
0.259
0.038
HMM2sup
0.601
0.533
0.087
0.925
0.939
0.084
HMM3sup
0.938
0.908
0.021
0.969
0.988
0.045
RF
0.622
0.496
0.001
0.962
0.937
0.012
SV M
0.929
0.885
0.015
0.985
0.994
0.025
Table 6: Supervised Fall Detection with full training data for falls and all normal activ-
ities (Compare with Table 2).
improvements in all the XHMM based classiﬁers in comparison to their counter-
parts that are trained in the absence of falls. For the DLR dataset, performance of
HMM1sup and HMM2sup is worse than when no training data for falls is used,
whereas HMM3sup show improvement with equivalent performance as SV M. The
RF classiﬁer gives intermediate results. Figures 5a and 5b show the performance of
supervised classiﬁers when the number of fall data is gradually increased during the
training phase for the DLR and MF dataset. All the supervised classiﬁers perform
worse when the training data for falls is very small. Figure 5a shows that as the num-
ber of samples in the training data for falls increase, HMM3sup and SV M starts to
perform better than other classiﬁers but provides equivalent performance to XHMM3
(shown by • on the y-axis representing no training data for falls). The performance of
XHMM3, which requires no fall data for training is much better than its supervised
counterpart (HMM3sup) when a small number of training samples for falls is avail-
able. Figure 5b shows that the performance of HMM2sup starts to improve when
some fall data are added in the training set for MF dataset, whereas other classiﬁers
perform worse with limited training samples for falls. XHMM2 and HMM2sup
with small number of training samples for falls show comparable performance. As the
number of fall samples increase in the training set, HMM3sup and SV M outperform
other methods.
25

Both the experiments on the DLR and MF datasets suggest that the performance of
supervised classiﬁers improve as the number of fall samples increase in the training set.
However, when they are trained on very limited fall data, their performance is worse in
comparison to the proposed models that did not observe falls before. The results from
the study of Stone and Skubic [5] show that only 9 actual falls were obtained over a
combined nine years of continuous activity data in a realistic setting, which highlights
the rarity of fall occurrence and consequently the difﬁculty in training supervised clas-
siﬁers on abundant fall data. Moreover, supervised methods cannot handle training the
classiﬁers in the absence of falls, whereas the proposed X-factor approaches can learn
in the absence of training data for falls and identify them with high gmean and FDR.
6.4. Are outliers representative of proxy for falls?
Section 4 assumes that the outlier sequences present in the normal activities can be
used as a proxy for falls to estimate the parameters ξ. We conduct an experiment to
evaluate the validity of this assumption. We use the supervised HMMs (HMM1sup
and HMM2sup), with the only difference that they are trained on ‘non-fall’ activity
(i.e. obtained after removing outliers from the normal data) and falls. During the testing
phase we present the ‘outliers’ to the classiﬁer instead of normal and fall data. The idea
is that some of the outliers that are rejected by the normal activities will be classiﬁed
as falls as they differ from the normal activities or the general non-fall concept due to
inadvertent sensor artifacts.
HMM1sup. When using HMM1sup, for the DLR dataset, the outliers of normal
activities ‘Jumping’ and ‘Running’ are most of the time classiﬁed as ‘Falls’, the outliers
from the activities ‘Walking’ and ‘Lying’ are sometimes classiﬁed as falls, whereas
outliers from ‘Sitting’ and ‘Standing’ are mostly classiﬁed as non-falls. This provides
evidence that some of the short term dynamic activities can have variations and may
not be identiﬁed correctly in their respective classes. Similar experiments on the MF
dataset show that only the step-in car activity’s outliers are classiﬁed as falls and the
rest of the outliers of other ‘non-fall’ activities are classiﬁed as non-falls.
26

HMM2sup. When using HMM2sup, for the MF dataset, the outliers are mostly
classiﬁed as falls and for the DLR dataset, they are classiﬁed as non-falls.
Based on the above experiments, we can conclude that in the absence of fall data
during training, rejected outliers from the normal activities can be used as a proxy
for falls, provided they are very different from the samples of normal activities or the
general concept of normal activity. However, it is to be noted that since these rejected
outliers are not actual falls and only some of them are similar to falls.
7. Conclusions and Future Work
The lack of sufﬁcient data for falls can adversely affect the performance of super-
vised fall detection classiﬁers. Moreover, the supervised classiﬁcation methods cannot
handle the realistic scenario when no training data for falls is available. In this pa-
per, we present three ‘X-factor’ HMM based fall detection approaches that learn only
from the normal activities captured from a body-worn sensor. To tackle the issue of
no training data for falls, we introduced a new cross-validation method based on the
inter-quartile range of log-likelihoods on the training data that rejects spurious data
from the normal activities, treats them as proxies for unseen falls and helps in optimiz-
ing the model parameter. The results showed that two of the XHMM methods show
high detection rates for falls in person and placement of sensor independent manner.
We showed that the traditional method of thresholding with HMM on full normal data
set as maximum of negative log-likelihood to identify unseen falls is not the right ap-
proach for this problem. We also showed that supervised classiﬁers performed poorly
with few training samples for falls, whereas in comparison the proposed methods show
high performance in the absence of training data for falls. An important extension of
the proposed techniques is the realization of an online fall detection system, which can
begin with X-factor models as initial representative model for unseen falls and incre-
mentally adapts its parameters as it starts identifying some falls.
27
