2016 ICSEE International Conference on the Science of Electrical Engineering
Learning an Attention Model in an Artiﬁcial Visual
System
Alon Hazan, Yuval Harel and Ron Meir
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Technion City, Haifa, Israel
Abstract—The Human visual perception of the world is of a
large ﬁxed image that is highly detailed and sharp. However,
receptor density in the retina is not uniform: a small central
region called the fovea is very dense and exhibits high resolution,
whereas a peripheral region around it has much lower spatial
resolution. Thus, contrary to our perception, we are only able
to observe a very small region around the line of sight with
high resolution. The perception of a complete and stable view
is aided by an attention mechanism that directs the eyes to the
numerous points of interest within the scene. The eyes move
between these targets in quick, unconscious movements, known as
“saccades”. Once a target is centered at the fovea, the eyes ﬁxate
for a fraction of a second while the visual system extracts the
necessary information. An artiﬁcial visual system was built based
on a fully recurrent neural network set within a reinforcement
learning protocol, and learned to attend to regions of interest
while solving a classiﬁcation task. The model is consistent with
several experimentally observed phenomena, and suggests novel
predictions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Neuroscientists and cognitive scientists have many tools at
their disposal to study the brain and neural networks in gen-
eral, including Electroencephalography (EEG), Single-Photon
Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT), functional Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and Microelectrode Arrays
(MEA), to name a few. However, the amount of information
and level of control afforded by these tools do not remotely
resemble what is available to an engineer working on an
artiﬁcial neural network. The engineer can manipulate any
neuron at any time, force certain excitations, intervene in
ongoing processes, and collect as much data about the network
as needed, at any level of detail. This wealth of information
has enabled reverse engineering research on artiﬁcial neural
networks, leading to insights into the inner workings of trained
artiﬁcial neural networks. This suggests an indirect approach
to studying the brain: training a biologically plausible neural
network model to exhibit complex behavior observed in real
brains, and reverse engineering the result. In line with this
approach, we designed an artiﬁcial visual system based on
a fully recurrent unlayered neural network that learns to
perform saccadic eye movements. Saccadic eye movements
are quick, unconscious, task-dependent [1] motions following
the demand of attention [2], that direct the eye to new targets
that require the high resolution of the fovea. These targets are
usually detected within the peripheral visual system [3]. Once
a target is centered at the fovea, the eye ﬁxates for a fraction
of a second while the visual system extracts the necessary
information. Most eye movements are proactive rather than
reactive, predict actions in advance and do not merely respond
to visual stimuli [4].
There is good evidence that much of the active vision in
humans results from Reinforcement Learning (RL) [5], as
part of and organism’s attempt to maximize its performance
while interacting with the environment [6]. Accordingly, we
train the artiﬁcial visual system within the RL paradigm. The
network was not explicitly engineered to perform a certain
task, and does not contain an explicit memory component —
rather it has memory only by virtue of its recurrent topology.
Learning takes place in a model-free setting using policy
gradient techniques.
We ﬁnd that the network displays attributes of human
learning such as: (a) decision making and gradual conﬁdence
increase along with accumulated evidence, (b) skill transfer,
namely the ability to use a pre-learned skill in a certain task
in order to improve learning on a related but more difﬁcult
task, (c) selectively attending information relevant for the task
at hand, while ignoring irrelevant objects in the ﬁeld of view.
II. THE ARTIFICIAL VISUAL SYSTEM
We designed an Artiﬁcial Visual System (AVS) with the
task of learning an attention model to control saccadic eye
movements, and subsequent classiﬁcation of digits. We refer to
this task as the attention-classiﬁcation task. The AVS is similar
in many ways to that presented in [7]. It is a simpliﬁed model
of the human visual system, consisting of a small region in
the center with high resolution, analogous to the human fovea,
and two larger concentric regions which are sub-sampled to
lower resolution and are analogous to the peripheral visual
system in humans. The AVS was trained and tested on the
classiﬁcation of handwritten digits from the MNIST data set
[8] . Only a small part of the image is visible to the AVS at any
one time. Speciﬁcally, full resolution is only available at the
fovea, which is 9-by-9 pixels, as in [7], or 5-by-5 pixels (about
69% smaller). The ﬁrst peripheral region is double the size of
the fovea, but sub-sampled with period 2 to match the size of
the fovea in pixels. Similarly, the second peripheral region is
quadruple the size of the fovea but sub-sampled with period
4. For comparison, a typical digit in the MNIST database
978-1-5090-2152-9/16/$31.00 c⃝2016 IEEE
arXiv:1701.07398v1  [cs.CV]  24 Jan 2017

2016 ICSEE International Conference on the Science of Electrical Engineering
occupies about 20-by-20 pixels of the image. The location of
the observation within the image is not available to the AVS
(unlike [7]), and movements of the observation location are not
constrained to image boundaries. Instead, locations outside the
image boundaries are observed as black pixels.
Fig. 1.
Artiﬁcial Visual System design
The AVS consists of inputs (observations) projected upon
the network via input weights Win, a neural network consisting
of N neurons connected by the recurrent weights W, and two
outputs: a classiﬁer yID, responsible for identifying the digit
after the AVS has explored the image, and the attention model
output yAtt, responsible for directing the eye to new locations
based on the information represented in the network state (see
Figure 1). The output yID consists of one neuron for each
possible digit. At the end of the trial, the identity of the highest
valued neuron is interpreted as the network’s classiﬁcation.
The progression of a single trial follows these principal stages:
1) A random digit is selected from the MNIST training
database.
2) A location across the image is randomly selected.
3) The observation (called ‘glimpse’ [7]) from the current
location is projected upon the network through Win,
along with any pre-existing information within the net-
work state through the recurrent weights W.
4) The attention model output yAtt is fed back as a saccade
of the eye, i.e. as the size of movement from the current
location in the horizontal and vertical axes.
5) If a predeﬁned number of glimpses has passed (or by
network decision), compare the classiﬁer output yID to
the true label, otherwise return to stage 3.
6) Reward the AVS if the classiﬁcation was correct, and
continue to the next trial.
The AVS is implemented by a fully recurrent neural network.
Its network topology is similar the Echo State Network (ESN)
[10] in that the recurrent neural connections are drawn ran-
domly and are not constrained to a particular topology such as
in layered feedforward networks, or long short-term memory
networks.
The network state evolves according to
sn+1 = (1 −α) sn + α (W tanh (sn) + Winon+1 + ζn) ,
yn = Wout tanh (sn) + ξn,
(1)
where
• sn ∈RN is the state of network at time step n, each
element representing the state of a single neuron,
• α ∈(0, 1] is the leak rate,
• W ∈RN×N is the internal connections weight matrix,
• Win ∈RNin×N is the input weight matrix,
• o ∈RNin is the observation (network input),
• ζn ∈RN and ξn =
 ξID
n ; ξAtt
n

∈RM are indepen-
dent discrete-time Gaussian white noise processes with
independent components, each having variance σ2
ζ, σ2
ξ
respectively,
• yn =
 yID
n ; yAtt
n

∈RM is the state of the M output
neurons,
• Wout ∈RM×N is the output weight matrix (consisting
of blocks WID, WAtt for the corresponding output com-
ponents).
The gradient of the expected reward J is estimated as in [11],
ˆ∇J = ⟨∇log p (τ) (r (τ) −b)⟩,
where τ = (s0, w1, (on, sn, yAtt
n , yID
n )Ng
n=1) is a random trajec-
tory of Ng glimpses, p (τ) is the probability of trajectory τ,
r (τ) the observed (usually binary) reward, b a ﬁxed baseline
computed as in [11], w1 is the random location of the ﬁrst
glimpse, and ⟨·⟩indicates averaging over trajectories. Viewed
as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP),
we can write the distributions describing the agent:
p (sn+1|sn, on+1) = α−1pζ

α−1 (sn+1 −(1 −α) sn)
−W tanh (sn) −Winon+1

p (yn|sn) = pξ (yn −Wout tanh (sn)) ,
(2)
where pζ, pξ are the probability density functions of ζt, ξt
respectively. The POMDP dynamics are deterministic: the
glimpse position wn evolves as wn+1 = wn + yAtt
n .
For the AVS (1) the probability density of a trajectory τ is
p (τ) = p (s0) p (w1)
Ng
Y
n=1
p (sn+1|sn, on+1) p (yn+1|sn+1) ,
Here only the output probabilities p (yn+1|sn+1) depend on
WOut, and, using (2) and the Gaussian distribution of the
noise, we ﬁnd that the log likelihood gradient with respect
to WOut takes the form
∇WOut log p (τ) =
Ng
X
n=1
σ−1
ξ ξn tanh (sn)T ,
where Ng is the number of glimpses. Stochastic gradient
ascent is performed only for the output weights WOut. Re-
current weights are randomly selected, with spectral radius 1,
and remain ﬁxed throughout training. The log likelihood with
respect to the internal weight matrix W takes a similar form.
However, the recurrent connections were not learned in our
simulations.

2016 ICSEE International Conference on the Science of Electrical Engineering
III. RESULTS
A. Use of memory
Since information accumulated by the neural network over
time is mixed into the state of the network, it is not obvious
that the potential to extract useful historic information can be
exploited within the attention model solution. Training uses
gradient ascent to the local maxima of the estimated expected
reward and therefore may converge to sub-optimal maxima
that do not make use of the full potential of the system. In
order to test the use of memory by the trained network, two
similar AVS were trained on the attention-classiﬁcation task.
In the ﬁrst AVS, recurrent weights were random, whereas the
second AVS was set to ‘forget’ historic information, by setting
the recurrent weights matrix to zero.
Fig. 2.
Exploitation of memory with 81px fovea
Use of memory was found to depend on the size of the
fovea. Fig. 2 shows the performance of the system across
training epochs, for the case of a large (9×9 pixels) fovea.
Initially, the AVS with memory has the advantage as the
attention model is still poor at this stage, leading to relatively
uninformative glimpses, so the use of information from several
glimpses results in better classiﬁcation. However, as the at-
tention mechanism improves the last glimpse becomes highly
informative, so the memoryless network, where information
from the last glimpse is not corrupted by memory of previous
glimpses, has the advantage. In fact, we found that information
from a well-placed glimpse sufﬁces to classify the digit with
over 90% success rate in this case, driving the network to a
solution of ﬁnding a single good glimpse location across the
digit, and classiﬁcation based on that glimpse, without regard
to the rest of the trajectory.
The situation is different with a smaller fovea (5×5 pixels),
where classiﬁcation from a single glimpse becomes harder. As
seen in Figure 3, the AVS with memory outperforms the one
without memory in the small fovea case.
B. Gathering Information
The human visual system acts to maximize the information
relevant to the task [12]. In order to assess whether our
AVS behaves similarly, we have to characterize the relevant
information in the context of our task. Since the network
Fig. 3.
Exploitation of memory with 25px fovea
classiﬁcation yID depends linearly on the network state in the
last time step, we quantify the task-relevant information as the
best linear separation of the network state, between each class
and the other classes. Accordingly, we use Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) [13], which acts to ﬁnd the projection that
minimizes the distance between samples of the same cluster
Sw while at the same time maximizes the distance between
clusters Sb. The distance within each class is measured by the
variance of samples belonging to that class, and Sw is taken to
be the mean of these distances across all classes. The Distance
between classes Sb is deﬁned as the variance of the set of class
centers.
We trained an AVS on the attention-classiﬁcation task with
5 glimpses per digit. After the AVS was trained, it was tested
in two cases. In the ﬁrst case, the system was run as usual and
the network state vector was recorded after the last glimpse of
each digit in the test set. In the second case, the location of the
last glimpse was chosen randomly rather than following the
learned attention model. The results are illustrated in Figure
4, where the state of the network is projected on the ﬁrst two
eigenvectors of S−1
w Sb. Separation is signiﬁcantly better with
the full attention model compared to the one with the random
last glimpse. We conclude that, at the very least, the attention
model acts to maximize task-relevant information in the last
glimpse better than a random walk.
Fig. 4.
Results of Linear Discriminant Analysis of the AVS state at the last
time step. Each dot corresponds to single trial and represents the projection
of the network state on the ﬁrst two eigenvectors of S−1
w Sb. Dots are colored
according to the digit presented to the network. Left: random last glimpse.
Right: full attention model.

2016 ICSEE International Conference on the Science of Electrical Engineering
C. Transfer learning
Biological learning often displays the ability to use a skill
learned on a simple task in order to improve learning of a
harder yet related task, e.g., proﬁciency at tennis is beneﬁcial
when learning racquetball and even seemingly unrelated tasks
such as skiing for example [14]. To test whether transfer
learning is possible in the AVS, we trained it to learn the
attention model and classiﬁcation of 3 digits (out of 10 in the
MNIST database). The resulting solution served as an initial
condition for learning the full task of classifying all 10 digits.
As seen in Fig. 5, not only did the AVS with pre-learned
attention learn much faster, but it also achieved a better result
at the end of training.
Fig. 5.
Transferable Skill
D. Ignoring distractions
The eyes are not directed to the most visually salient points
in the ﬁeld of view, but rather to the ones that are most relevant
for the task at hand [6]. Accordingly, we introduced an highly
salient object into the training images. The object is a square,
approximately the size of a digit but with maximum brightness,
whereas the digits are handwritten and displayed in grayscale.
The object is inserted at a ﬁxed position relative to the digit,
always on the right hand side of the digit. The trained network
successfully avoids unnecessary ﬁxations on the salient object.
In cases where the ﬁrst glimpse falls upon an area where
both the digit and the object are within the peripheral visual
region, the object seems to be completely ignored. Perhaps
more interesting is the case where only the object is visible in
the ﬁrst glimpse, within the peripheral view. In such a case, the
AVS learned to exploit the fact that the digit is always located
on the left of the object and consistently performs saccades to
the left. Thus, not only was the presence of a distracting object
not harmful to performance, but it was actually beneﬁcial.
In Fig. 6, the colored squares represent the foveal view of
5-by-5 pixels at each time step going from blue to red. The left
and middle images show cases where the ﬁrst glimpse only
observes the distracting object within the peripheral view. The
left image shows a case where the ﬁrst glimpse observes both
the distracting object and the digit within the peripheral view.
Fig. 6.
Fixed Distracting Object
Next, we test the network with a distracting object in a
random position around the digit. The observed behavior was
similar when the ﬁrst glimpse happened to fall on a location
where both the object and digit are within the peripheral view:
the AVS ignored the distraction and directed itself towards the
digit. However, in the case where the ﬁrst glimpse falls on
a location where only the distracting object is visible in the
peripheral view, the AVS failed to locate the digit.
Fig. 7.
Free Distracting Object
An example is seen in Fig. 7. The lines are trajectories of
the AVS each starting from a different point on a test grid
and followed until the last glimpse (blue/magenta dot). Green
lines are trajectories that led to a correct classiﬁcation while
red lines are trajectories that led to a false classiﬁcation. When
the AVS happen to fall at a location where the digit is not seen,
it directs its gaze towards the square, which it then chooses
to classify as “1” thus earning 10% expected reward which is
better than nothing.
E. Learning aided by demonstration (guidance)
Learning by demonstration (or learning with guidance)
was implemented in the AVS. Demonstration differs from
supervision in two key ways. First, demonstration is not
continuous, and is applied sparsely in time in order to suggest
new trajectories to the system. Second, demonstration is not
required to provide the best solution to the system, because
the system maintains its freedom to explore and even improve
upon it. Demonstration was achieved by providing the network
with a sparse and naive suggestion for the attention model. For
example, on 10% of trajectories, the system was directed to the
center of the digit on the last glimpse. Such partial direction
resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement of both speed of learning
and the ﬁnal success rate, as can be observed in ﬁgure 8.

2016 ICSEE International Conference on the Science of Electrical Engineering
Demonstration in the AVS system was made possible by
manipulating the exploration noise. The exploration noise is a
Gaussian white noise and as such has probability greater than
zero to accept any value. Since the output of the system at any
given time is a function of that noise, we can force the output
to a speciﬁc value by setting the exploration noise in that
particular time step to be ˜ζn = yatt
n
−WAtt tanh (sn) where
yatt
n
is now the demonstrated output of the attention model
and ˜ζn is the determined exploration noise that will bring the
system to that desired output. As long as the demonstration
is kept sparse enough, it would in practice not break the
assumption that the noise is a Gaussian white noise. The noise
in the system is an essential part of the log likelihood gradient
and therefore the system would not only arrive to the desired
output at that particular time step, but also learn from that
experience.
Fig. 8.
Demonstration
IV. CONCLUSION
We have shown that a simple artiﬁcial visual system,
implemented through a recurrent neural network using policy
gradient reinforcement learning, can be trained to perform
classiﬁcation of objects that are much larger than its central
region of high visual acuity. While receiving only classiﬁcation
based reward, the system develops an active vision solution,
which directs attention towards relevant parts of the image in a
task-dependent way. Importantly, the internal network memory
plays an essential role in maintaining information across
saccades, so that the ﬁnal classiﬁcation is achieved by combing
information from the current visual input and from previous
inputs represented in the network state. Within a generic
active vision system, without any speciﬁcally crafted features,
we have been able to explain several features characteristic
of biological vision: (i) Good classiﬁcation performance us-
ing reinforcement learning based on highly limited central
vision and low resolution peripheral vision, (ii) Gathering
task-relevant information through active search, (iii) Transfer
learning, (iv) Ignoring task-irrelevant distractors, (v) Learning
through guidance. Beyond providing a model for biological
vision, our results suggest possible avenues for cost-effective
image recognition in artiﬁcial vision systems.
The
Matlab
code
will
be
made
available
at:
https://alonhazan.wordpress.com/
