Using Soft Constraints To Learn
Semantic Models Of Descriptions Of Shapes
Sergio Guadarrama, Member, IEEE, and David P. Pancho
Abstract— The contribution of this paper is to provide a
semantic model (using soft constraints) of the words used by
web-users to describe objects in a language game; a game in
which one user describes a selected object of those composing
the scene (see ﬁgure 1), and another user has to guess which
object has been described. The given description needs to be
non ambiguous and accurate enough to allow other users to
guess the described shape correctly.
To build these semantic models the descriptions need to be
analyzed to extract the syntax and words’ classes used (see [1]
for details). We have modeled the meaning of these descriptions
using soft constraints as a way for grounding the meaning.
The descriptions generated by the system took into account
the context of the object to avoid ambiguous descriptions, and
allowed users to guess the described object correctly 72% of
the times.
I. INTRODUCTION
Language can be seen as a system learnt and used by
humans for communicating and learning, which covers a
wide range of their daily activities. It is a social phenomenon
resulting in an evolving system of great complexity. Lan-
guage is inextricably linked to human capability to converse,
learn, reason and make decisions in an environment of
imprecision, uncertainty and lack of information. It is viewed
here as a complex reality to be represented step by step, in
an incremental fashion.
In that respect, the most relevant feature of language is its
“meaning” (its “use” according to Wittgenstein [2]), and that
does not only include the meaning/use of isolated words, but
also the meaning/use of expressions as a whole. In general,
the meaning/use of the words integrating an expression is
only grasped in relation with the other words and within the
meaning/use of the expression as a whole in a context [3].
This work is part of an ongoing project called Smart-Bees.
Smart-Bees is a project which aims to study how machines
can learn and communicate in human-like ways, from a
Computing with Words, Actions and Perceptions (CW-AP)
perspective [4], [5]. Users share a common environment and
play different “language-games”, in this case they share a
blackboard with geometric shapes of different colors, sizes
and positions, and play guessing and describing games. In
the describing game, given an image with one selected object
that users try to describe the selected object to other users in
a non-ambiguous way (see ﬁgure 1). In the guessing game,
on the contrary, given a description and an image users try
to guess which object was described.
Sergio Guadarrama and David P. Pancho are with the European Centre for

This project has its roots in Wittgentstein’s ideas about
Meaning and Language [2], [6], Zadeh’s ideas on Linguistic
Variables, Computing with Words and Generalized Con-
straints [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], Trillas’ ideas on Words and
Fuzzy Sets [12], [13], Roy’s ideas on meaning grounding
[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], and Guadarrama’s works on
Computing with Words, Actions and Perceptions [4], [19],
[20].
To learn semantic models from descriptions of shapes
given by users several steps are needed; to collect descrip-
tions of shapes from web-users; to learn the lexicon and
syntax used in that descriptions; to link that lexicon and
syntax with the features of the shapes to learn the semantics;
to generate new descriptions using the syntax and semantic
learned; to test them with web-users. The ﬁnal goal is to
learn concepts, words and some sort of syntax and semantics,
building a model grounded in the shared perceptions.
Fig. 1
THE GREEN CIRCLE IN THE FRONT
The contribution of this paper is to provide a semantic
model (using soft constraints) of the words used by web-
users to describe objects in a language game; a game in
which one user describes the selected object among those
composing the scene, and another user has to guess which
object has been described (see ﬁgure 1). The given descrip-
tion needs to be non ambiguous and accurate enough to allow
other users to guess the described object correctly.
So far the system has 40 registered users, from 15 different
countries, who had provided 360 descriptions using 150
arXiv:1005.5253v1  [cs.CL]  28 May 2010

different words and had allowed the system to learn some
lexicon (30 words), some syntax (20 patterns), and some
semantics (7 word’s classes grounded) for the shape descrip-
tion task. The method proposed in this paper is performing
quite well obtaining 100% correct spelled words, 88% syn-
tactically correct sentences and 72% of semantically correct
sentences; however users spelled on average correctly 97%
of the words, wrote 93% of syntactically correct sentences
and provided 75% of semantically correct sentences.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II we describe related works and compare them with this
one. In Section III we present our model of the meaning of
words based on soft constraints, in Section IV we present
the learning algorithm to learn the soft constraints from the
data, and in Section V we present how the new descriptions
are generated. Finally Section VI presents the main results
and Section VII the main conclusions of the paper.
II. RELATED WORKS
The experiment presented here has been inspired in
the DESCRIBER system done by Roy in [15], where he
presented a similar problem of learning the descriptions
provided by one user about an scene composed by non-
overlapping squares and rectangles. Nevertheless we have
turned the experiment more realistic in several aspects:
allowing different users to provide descriptions (web-users
not familiar with the experiment), including more kind of
shapes (triangles, circles, ovals) and allowing them to overlap
(making harder the segmentation and the descriptions). Also
it is important to remark that in the previous experiment
the only user was a native English speaker, who provided
very consistent descriptions, without spelling or syntactical
errors and very few ambiguous descriptions, while in own
experiment we have a variety of users from 15 different
countries with only few being non-English native speakers.
In that case the system they proposed was using bi-grams
for the syntax learning and Gaussian mixtures for the se-
mantical learning, obtaining a 81.3% of correct descriptions.
But they have only one user who spelled correctly 100% of
the words, wrote 100% of syntactically correct sentences and
was able to provide 89% of semantically correct sentences,
in comparison with our case that we start with 40 users from
15 different countries who on average spelled correctly 97%
of the words, wrote 93% of syntactically correct sentences,
and were able to provide only 75% of semantically correct
sentences.
The problem of learning grounded words has been studied
in [15], [16], [17], [21], [22], the problem of social learning
have been studied in [23], [24]. The need to extend Fuzzy
Logic to cope with the problems of CW-AP has been recently
remarked in [4], [25], [26], [27], [28].
These previous works may be contrasted with this one in
two aspects. First, we see language learning as an integrated
process where sensory-action learning, social learning and
supervised learning are interleaved and combined. Second,
we start from a multi-user perspective, where different users
and agents interact and share their knowledge.
The main difference of our approach with respect to other
published works is the path taken, that is, the movement
from manipulation of measurements to manipulation of per-
ceptions, and from syntax-based systems to semantics-based
systems. Other approaches underestimate the importance of
imprecision inherent in language [29] and in perception [30]
and have tried to reduce it to simple forms of uncertainty,
instead of dealing with it through a general theory of uncer-
tainty [11].
III. SEMANTIC MODELS OF WORDS USING SOFT
CONSTRAINTS
The meaning of a word is its use in language, and therefore
it is context-dependent. Actually, words are grounded in
actions and perceptions, and its use is learnt in a semi-
supervised environment. Let us summarize the main prob-
lems that have been faced in this work:
• There are several misspelled words, some rare-words,
that need to be corrected or discarded.
• Different users use different words, different syntactic
patterns and in some cases with different meanings.
• The same object can be described in many different
ways, depending on the context and on the intention of
the user.
• Descriptions made should be understandable by other
users, so it should be truthful, precise, context-relevant
and non-ambiguous.
• There are few examples for each word, and not all the
possible combinations are seen.
• Semi-supervised problem, only a small part of the data
can be supervised.
To collect human descriptions of shapes and to test the
results, we have set up an interactive website. The system
learn from the descriptions provided by humans and use
the method described in this paper to produce its own
descriptions.
https://www3.softcomputing.es/smart-bees
These are some examples of simple descriptions given by
users: “the green rectangle”, “big green triangle”, “brown
rectangle”. And these are examples of compound descrip-
tions: “light green rectangle at the bottom”, “pink circle
behind dark green square”, “the shape under the green one”,
“light blue circle in the middle”, “orange circle behind the
yellow circle”, “green small square in the background”, “the
dark orange rectangle behind the triangle”.
In this paper we will focus on the semantic learning,
once the lexicon and syntax have been learnt (see paper
[1] also presented in this conference), and on the generation
of new descriptions and their validation. Using the results
from [1] we transformed the original problem of pairs of
descriptions and shapes into a problem of sets of pairs of
words and shapes. In which each set represents a class of
words extracted by the syntax.
Thus, each shape will be associated with all the words
used in the description, and therefore it will have multiple

labels attached. Given a set of words’ classes associated with
a set of objects, we need to learn when each word of the
class is used based on the features of the shapes (see section
IV). This problem is similar to a multiple labeling problem,
in which for each object and each words’ class we need to
decide which labels are applicable and to which degree.
Given a set of pairs of words (taken as labels) and shapes
(taken as objects) we need to learn why, when and how each
label is used according to the features of the shapes, to the
relations between shapes and to the grammatical rules. To
calculate the degree of matching between a description and
a selected object in a scene is very important, since it will be
used later to calculate the degree of ambiguity, by comparing
it with the matching degrees between the description and the
other shapes forming the scene.
A. Modeling the Meaning of Propositions
As Zadeh suggested in [26] and in [31] every proposition
can be represented by a generalized constraint.
“p” ⇒X is R.
Where X is a relevant variable constrained by R
Example
“John is Tall” ⇒Height(John) is Tall
Where Height(John) is a projection of some attributes of
John. And Tall is a constraint on the values of the attributes
of John.
B. Modeling the Meaning of Descriptions
In our case, given a description of an object ′x′ it can be
represented by a set of constraints. For example:
• “The blue square”
Color(x) is Blue and Shape(x) is Square
• “The big dark green triangle in the background”
Color(x) is Dark Green and Shape(x) is Triangle
and Position(x) is Background
Where Color, Shape and Position are projections of the
features of x, and Blue, Square, Dark Green, Triangle,
Background are constraints on the values of the projected
features.
Thus from the descriptions provided by the users and their
corresponding images, the system learns which projections
are associated with which words, and which constraints
represent their meaning.
C. Learning process
The general phases of the learning process are listed
bellow:
• Learning the Lexicon: in this phase it is needed to
select relevant words and ﬁlter misspelled words (it is
presented in [1])
• Learning the Syntax: in this phase it is required to group
words according to their role in the sentence, and learn
a grammar (it is presented in [1], and brieﬂy shown in
III-D).
• Segmentation of images to extract objects and features,
and pair the segmented objects with descriptions (this
is presented in section IV-A).
• Learning the Semantics: Generate a model for each
word belonging to the cluster in the projected space ac-
cording to the features selected (this phase is presented
in section IV.
• Generation sentences: in this phase syntactically and
semantically correct sentences are generated for new
images (this phase is presented in section V).
• Evaluation of results: Once all the sentences are gener-
ated an evaluation process is performed, in which the
users try to understand the sentences and select the
corresponding object (this phase is presented in section
VI).
Let us recall the results of the lexical and syntax learning
phases from the paper [1]. Words with frequency smaller
that 10 have been ﬁltered, and remained 30 words which
after clustering formed 7 words’ classes (shown in III-D),
and generated a syntax composed by 20 patterns shown in
table I.
D. Classes of words
Class 1 = { THE, A }
Class 2 = { BACKGROUND, FRONT }
Class 3 = { CIRCLE, OVAL, TRIANGLE, RECTANGLE, EL-
LIPSE, SQUARE }
Class 4 = { ON, IN, AT, BEHIND }
Class 5 = { LIGHT, BIG, DARK }
Class 6 = { TOP, BOTTOM, RIGHT, LEFT }
Class 7 = { PINK, BLUE, GREEN, ORANGE, RED, YELLOW,
PURPLE, VIOLET, BROWN }
TABLE I
MOST FREQUENT PATTERNS
Frequency
Pattern
18.89%
7 3
6.94%
1 7 3
6.39%
1 3
5.83%
3
3.89%
7 3 4 1 2
3.33%
5 7 3
3.06%
2 7 3
2.50%
1 7 3 4 1 6
2.22%
7 3 4 1 6
1.66%
7
1.11%
6 3
1.11%
1 7 3 1 7 3
0.83%
1 7
0.83%
1 5 7 3
0.83%
2 5 7 3
0.83%
3 4 1 2
0.83%
3 4 1 6
0.83%
7 3 4 1 3
0.83%
1 3 4 1 6 6
0.83%
5 7 3 4 1 2

IV. LEARNING THE SEMANTICS
The system needs to learn why those speciﬁc words were
used to describe that object in that context (image). For
that we analyzed images to segment and extract objects
and measure their features. We used a scaffolding learning:
starting from simple descriptions before learning compound
descriptions; of the 360 descriptions with all their words in
the lexicon, 75% are simple and 25% are compound.
Words belonging to the same class have different mean-
ings; for example given a class of words = {’BLUE’, ’RED’,
’GREEN’, ’YELLOW’,..} we assume that each word have
a different meaning, and therefore should be represented by
different model, even though, in some cases different words
can be applied to the same object to some extent.
A. Shapes’ segmentation
A fuzzy edge detector was used to ﬁnd the edges of
the shapes, then using a ﬁlling transformation to found the
regions inside the edges, and ﬁnally using a color-based
clustering and an overlapping detection we grouped the
regions into shapes. After obtaining a set of candidate shapes
– comprised by a set of pixels – they were matched with the
selected object and its corresponding description.
For each shape a set of 20 features were measured,
including:
• Average RGB: Red, Green, Blue.
• Average YCbCr: Y is the luma component, and Cb and
Cr are the blue-difference and red-difference chroma
components.
• Bounding Box: Coordinates of the bounding box.
• Height and width.
• Center of gravity: position of the center of gravity.
• Bounding Ellipse: Orientation and size of the bounding
ellipse.
• Major Minor: length of the major and minor axis of the
bounding ellipse.
• Extension: proportion of the bounding box ﬁlled.
• Height to width ratio.
• Area: number of pixels.
• Holes: proportion of holes in the object.
• ...
B. Multi-classiﬁcation problem
It is important to notice that different users describe
differently the same objects, even they used different words
and different syntax. So the training data could contain
different labels for the same object or not label at all. Some
objects have only labels for some of the word’s classes but
nor for all; for example “The blue square” only specify that
the color is blue and the shape is square but say nothing
about the size or position of the object described.
There are also many objects that have not being described
by any user, so we also have many un-labeled objects.
The system learn which projection (relevant features) is
appropriate for each class of words and which constraints
(relevant values) are associated with each word. For every
Fig. 2
FUZZY DECISION TREE FOR CLASS 2 (DEPTH)
class of words we assume that one projection is shared by all
the words in the class. For every word in a class we assume
that it is represented by one constraint over the projection of
the class.
To obtain a robust classiﬁer in despite of the aforemen-
tioned problems we have decided to use fuzzy decision trees
for their robustness and ﬂexibility. And also because they
also do feature selection during the learning process
C. Fuzzy decision Trees
A different set of features could be relevant for each class
of words. So we used fuzzy decision trees [32] to classify
the objects according to their labels and cross validation to
prune the tree and select the most relevant features. In ﬁgure
2 can be seen the fuzzy decision tree of Class 2.
The features selected for each class are the following:
Class
Features
Class 1
–
Class 2
Holes Minor
Class 3
Ext HW-ratio
Class 4
–
Class 5
G
Class 6
X Area
Class 7
Cr Cb
From the features selected we can see that none is related
to Class 1 nor to Class 3, that means that from the current
features their meaning remains unground (or unlearned). This
is due to the fact that those classes are more related to the
syntax that to the semantics, nevertheless the fuzzy decision
tree learns that the most frequent word should be used by
default.
The decision trees for each class are the following:
• Class 1: If true then ’THE’
• Class 2: See ﬁgure 2
• Class 3: See ﬁgure 3
• Class 4: If true then ’IN’
• Class 5: If g ≤0.64 then ’LIGHT’ else ’DARK’
• Class 6: See ﬁgure 4
• Class 7: See ﬁgure 5

Fig. 3
FUZZY DECISION TREE FOR CLASS 3 (SHAPES)
Fig. 4
FUZZY DECISION TREE FOR CLASS 6 (POSITIONS)
Fig. 5
FUZZY DECISION TREE FOR CLASS 7 (COLORS)
D. Fuzzy Labels
Once the fuzzy decision trees are built for each word’s
class we can calculate the degree of matching between every
object and every word obtaining a soft constraint for each
label. For example in the case of class 7 (colors) and class 3
(shapes) we obtain the fuzzy labels plotted in ﬁgures 6 and
7 respectively.
E. Degree of matching of descriptions
The degree of matching between one description and one
object depends on the degree of matching of each word
Fig. 6
FUZZY LABELS FOR CLASS 7 (COLORS)
Fig. 7
FUZZY LABELS FOR CLASS 3 (SHAPES)
composing the description and on an aggregation function
(in our case the minimum).
Once the projections (relevant features) and the soft con-
straints (fuzzy labels) have been learnt for each word’s
class we can transform every description into generalized
constraints using the syntax, as follows:
The
blue
square
class1
class7
class3
–
CrCb(x) is Blue
ExtHWratio(x) is Square
µT he
µBlue
µSquare
From that we can calculate the degree of matching µM
between an object x and a description D by:
µM(x, D) =
\
µlabeli(x) ; ∀labeli ∈pattern(D)
where pattern(D) is the sequence of labels of a given
description, and µlabeli is the fuzzy label representing each
word of the description.

F. Degree of ambiguity
The degree of ambiguity of one description in one scene
depends on the degrees of matching between the description
and the objects of the scene. Because if there are more than
one object with high degree of matching then the description
could refer to various objects and be ambiguous.
In every scene there are several objects, and any given
description can be ambiguous if it is applicable to several of
these objects. We can calculate the degree of ambiguity σA
of a description D in an scene S by:
σA(D, x, S) =
Sup
y̸=x,y∈S
µM(y, D))
where x is the object with highest degree of matching
and µM(y, D) represents the degree of matching between
the description D and the other objects y ̸= x present in
the scene. Thus the higher the degree of matching with the
other objects the higher the degree of ambiguity, because the
description would not be discriminative enough.
V. GENERATING DESCRIPTIONS
For generating descriptions the system will look for short,
truthful and non-ambigous descriptions, and will follow the
next algorithm:
1) Given an scene with one selected object.
2) Segment it, extract the objects and their features.
3) Get the most frequent short syntax pattern.
4) For each word’s class ﬁnd the label with the highest
degree of matching.
5) Build the description and calculate the degree of am-
biguity.
6) If the description is non-ambiguous return the descrip-
tion with the highest degree of matching; else go to
step 3) and look for the next pattern and repeat the
process.
Fig. 8
THE RED RECTANGLE
For example, in the scene seen in ﬁgure 8, the system
segment it and found 7 objects with their 20 features, starting
by most frequent short pattern (1 3 7) it calculates the degree
of matching for each label in Class 1, Class 3 and in Class
7; it ﬁnds that The ∈Class1, Rectangle ∈Class3 and
Red ∈Class7 have the highest degree of matching
D =
‘The red rectangle’
µM(x, D) =
min(µT he(x), µRed(x), µRectangle(x))
=
min(1, 0.68, 0.74) = 0.68
σA(D, x, S) =
Sup
y̸=x,y∈S
µM(y, D)) = 0.11
Nevertheless, in the scene seen in ﬁgure 1, when the
system calculates the degree of matching starting by most
frequent short pattern (1 3 7) it ﬁnds out that the degree of
ambiguity is high.
D =
‘The green circle’
µM(x, D) =
min(µT he(x), µGreen(x), µCircle(x))
=
min(1, 0.78, 0.57) = 0.57
σA(D, x, S) =
Sup
y̸=x,y∈S
µM(y, D)) = 0.53
But it turns out that the ambiguity degree is also high,
thus the system keep trying with other patterns until it ﬁnds
one with lower degree of ambiguity (1 3 7 4 1 2) while
maintaining a high degree of matching, in this case:
D =
‘The green circle in the front’
σM(x, D) =
min(µT he(x), µGreen(x), µCircle(x),
µIn(x), µT he, µF ront(x))
=
min(1, 0.78, 0.57, 1, 1, 0.61) = 0.57
σA(D, x, S) =
Sup
y̸=x,y∈S
µM(y, D)) = 0.07
VI. RESULTS
To compare this work with the previous one [15] and to
check the inﬂuence of the different options considered in the
paper we have deﬁned three methods:
• Method 1: In this case we used the algorithm and
features proposed in this paper but without using the
degree of ambiguity to avoid ambiguous descriptions.
• Method 2: In this case we used the algorithm and
features proposed by Roy in his paper [15].
• Method 3: In this case we used the algorithm and
features proposed in this paper and used the degree of
ambiguity to avoid ambiguous descriptions.
For the scene shown in ﬁgure 1 the descriptions generated
by the three methods are:
• Method 1: GREEN CIRCLE
• Method 2: THE LIGHT GREEN CIRCLE
• Method 3: THE GREEN CIRCLE IN THE FRONT
and for the scene shown in ﬁgure 8 are:
• Method 1: THE RED RECTANGLE
• Method 2: THE PINK RECTANGLE
• Method 3: THE RED RECTANGLE

After generating the descriptions for the 350 scenes using
the three methods we included them in the web-page, so the
users can try to guess which objects are being described.
To warranty the fairness of the experiment the users don’t
know which descriptions are generated automatically by the
system and which ones come from other users. Actually
which description is shown to each user is selected randomly
among all. Counting as correct that descriptions that other
users guessed right we obtained the results showed in ﬁgure
9.
Fig. 9
RANKING USERS ACCORDING TO THEIR PERFORMANCE
In ﬁgure 9 can be seen that the Method 1 is performing
bellow average, it obtains 49% of the descriptions correct,
and it is ranked #39 which means that other 4 users are
performing even worse. The Method 2 is performing a little
bit better obtaining 57% of the descriptions correct (while
below the results presented in the previous work 81.3%) and
it is ranked #35. The Method 3 is performing quite well
obtaining 72% of the descriptions correct (just a little bit
over the average of users) and it is ranked #27.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
So far the system has 40 registered users, from 15 dif-
ferent countries, who had provided 360 descriptions using
150 different words and had allowed the system to learn
some lexicon (30 words), some syntax (20 patterns), and
some semantics (7 word’s classes grounded) for the shape
description task. The best method it is performing quite well
obtaining 100% correct spelled words, 88% syntactically
correct sentences and 72% of semantically correct sentences;
despite the variety of users, who spelled correctly 97% of
the words, wrote 93% of syntactically correct sentences and
provided 75% of semantically correct sentences.
We have provided a semantic model (using soft con-
straints) of the words used by web-users to describe objects
for other users in a describing game. The descriptions
generated took into account the context of the object to
avoid ambiguous descriptions, allowing users to guess the
described object correctly. A future work is to study the
construction of complex phrases, those referring to more than
one object.
With the approach taken in this work the possibility to
study semantic models for speciﬁc words used by speciﬁc
users in speciﬁc contexts is opened. This can be seen as a
step in the development of Computing with Words whose
relevance have been highlighted by Zadeh in [10], [26]
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Foundation for
the Advancement of Soft Computing (ECSC) (Asturias,
Spain), the Spanish Department of Science and Innovation
(MICINN) under program Juan de la Cierva JCI-2008-3531,
and the European Social Fund.
