A Logic Programming Approach to Integration
Network Inference
Daniel Ritter
SAP AG, Technology Development – Process and Network Integration,
Dietmar-Hopp-Allee 16, 69190 Walldorf, Germany

Abstract. The discovery, representation and reconstruction of (tech-
nical) integration networks from Network Mining (NM) raw data is a
diﬃcult problem for enterprises. This is due to large and complex IT
landscapes within and across enterprise boundaries, heterogeneous tech-
nology stacks, and fragmented data. To remain competitive, visibility
into the enterprise and partner IT networks on diﬀerent, interrelated
abstraction levels is desirable.
We present an approach to represent and reconstruct the integration
networks from NM raw data using logic programming based on ﬁrst-order
logic. The raw data expressed as integration network model is represented
as facts, on which rules are applied to reconstruct the network. We have
built a system that is used to apply this approach to real-world enterprise
landscapes and we report on our experience with this system.
Keywords: Datalog, Integration Networks, Knowledge Representation,
Logic Programming, Network Inference, Network Mining
1
Introduction
Enterprises are highly connected to partners and even competitors as part of
value chains consisting of business processes. The business document exchange
is actually implemented by complex, underlying networks of application and mid-
dleware systems, called integration networks. To remain competitive enterprises
have to adapt their business processes in a timely and ﬂexible manner, which
requires visibility and control over the integration network. However, currently
information is locked into systems of an enterprise. To overcome this situation,
a new discipline, called Network Mining (NM), strives to discover and extract
raw data hidden within heterogeneous systems in complex enterprise landscapes
[21,20]. The raw data implicitly contains information about the integration net-
work, i.e. middleware and application. From that, our system reconstructs inte-
gration networks. For the system user, the resulting linked real-world data de-
scribing the ”as-is” network can then be captured in e.g. network-centric BPMN
models [19].
A generalized view of such a network is shown in Fig. 1. When looking at an
enterprise landscape, the systems within the integration network can be classi-
ﬁed into diﬀerent categories based on the integration content and the role they
arXiv:1301.1332v2  [cs.DB]  8 Jan 2013

play. The classiﬁcation provides insight into the capabilities and complexity of
the network and allows to manage business processes, contextualized visual-
ization and operation on the network. These categories span from applications
with embedded integration or even mediation capabilities, like proxies, enterprise
services, composite applications or applications with service adaptation (Cate-
gories I+II), over standalone Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) or middleware in-
stances with ﬂexible pipeline processing, e.g. mapping, routing and connectivity
for legacy systems (Category III+IV), to Business to Business (B2B) gateways
for cross-enterprise document exchange (Categories V+VI) and system manage-
ment solutions, which allow to operate these systems, their software and lifecycle
(Category VII).
Fig. 1. Sample (technical) Integration Network showing logical systems as participants
with embedded integration capabilities and standalone middlewares as well as B2B
gateways
In this paper we present an approach to model and reconstruct integration
networks from discovered raw data using logic programming, more precisely
standard Datalog with recursion and stratiﬁed negation. We describe how infor-
mation in form of NM raw data can be represented independent of their original
domain in a Network Integration Model (NIM) and how user facts can be added.
We have chosen Datalog to represent this model, which we use to develop Dat-
alog programs (i.e. a ﬁnite set of Datalog rules) that express the network. That
means identifying entity equivalences, computing edges and semantic references
as well as dealing with user input. We validated our approach on simulated in-
tegration network data and report our experience with the network inference
Datalog system in real-world enterprise networks as well as possible extensions.
In Section 2 we describe the problem domain and state on design principles
and decisions in Section 3. Section 4 deﬁnes the NIM and Section 5 introduces
the inference algorithm. Section 6 shows experimental results and states on ex-

periences. Section 7 concludes with related work, before we draw conclusions
and outline future research in Section 8.
2
Motivation
Our premise is that relevant data for computing integration networks is hidden
in enterprise system landscapes. However, for that it has to be discovered by
NM from mostly disjoint domains in diﬀerent formats with diﬀerent meaning
[20]. The integration networks derived from the discovered information consist
of nodes and edges on diﬀerent abstraction levels.
The basic entities of the integration network are logical systems (e.g. ten-
ants, applications, integration middleware) and message ﬂows, which are either
direct connectivity or mediated communication/ integration. The actual infor-
mation about these entities as well as their semantics are discovered by Network
Mining (NM) systems [20]. However, the discovered raw data is domain-speciﬁc
and needs to be translated into a domain independent model for network in-
ference, while preserving its semantics. The deﬁnition of a Network Integration
Model (NIM) is the basis for applying network inference algorithms. Since the
raw data comes from disjoint domains, in diﬀerent formats with diﬀerent se-
mantics, inference algorithms have to deal with possibly duplicate, fragmented,
uncertain or incorrect information while computing the network. Fig. 2 schemat-
ically shows some of these challenges. For instance, entity equivalences have to
be identiﬁed and handled. Direct and transitive edges have to be calculated and
semantic relations between nodes have to be inferred. Fig. 2(a) shows systems
SX1 and SX2 discovered from domain X exchanging messages over middle-
ware system MWX1, and systems SY1 and SY2 discovered from domain Y
exchanging messages over middleware system MWY1. Here, SX2 and SY2 de-
note the same system, as well as MWX1 and SY1 are equivalent. Based on
the inferred equivalences, the nodes are partitioned as equivalence relations Eq,
i.e. Eq(MWX1, SY1) and Eq(SX2, SY2), and the edges are computed accord-
ingly (see Fig. 2(b)). Systems or applications run on physical hosts, e.g. H1
from discovery domain Host. The relationships between systems and hosts are
not considered as edges but semantic references within the network. Hosts build
the bridge to the related domain of system management networks, which are
addressed by [18,11]. A new host CS1 is added to the network as user knowl-
edge on which SY1 runs. When merging systems MWX1 and SY1 the semantic
relation is preserved.
3
Design Principles and Decisions
The major design decisions taken were about ﬁnding a representation for an
integration model and a language to express inference algorithms. We needed
to select (1) an approach, which does not require to modify the system when
changing the inference programs or the integration model, (2) a well-understood

(a) Schematic view on NM raw data in
common network representation
(b) Schematic view of reconstructed
network
Fig. 2. Schematic view on the inference challenges
representation for information suitable for the inference approach, and (3) a suf-
ﬁciently powerful inference technique, simple enough to be used by our customers
and partners to deﬁne their own inference programs.
The necessity of (1) is derived from developing the inference programs in the
early prototypes. The domain of the data and the scope of inference evolved -
and it will continue to do so as more data sources are integrated and inference is
reﬁned. Hence the lifecycle of the data model and of the inference programs needs
to be decoupled from that of the system. Since system landscapes and business
networks for large enterprises are very complex and many implementations need
customer-speciﬁc modiﬁcations or extensions both (2) and (3) are required. As
the relational model is a foundation for most business applications and is thus
well-understood by customers, it is a natural choice for (2). Consequently, we
initially considered SQL and its imperative extensions to express inference pro-
grams. However, as network analysis and inference are expressed more naturally
using recursive rules we moved towards logic programming languages like Prolog
or Datalog, choosing Datalog for its simpler semantics.
4
The Integration Network (Inference) Model
The model for representing integration networks as virtual ”as-is” enterprise
landscape covers a representative intersection of entities from the enterprise in-
tegration middleware space [15]. Although this domain has many aspects, which
are even diﬀerently treated in diﬀerent system implementations, we identiﬁed
a common, core meta-model, which we call Network Integration Model (NIM).
The basic NIM entities relevant for the inference are introduced subsequently,
while more entities might be explained later where necessary.

Fig. 3. The basic NIM entities and their relations
The base premise for deﬁning an integration meta-model is to represent the
actual physical hosts in the enterprise landscape as ﬁrst class entities and then
ﬁnd the interfaces provided or called by them during message-based commu-
nication. Since most of the communication actually addresses logical entities
like applications or tenants, called systems, running on the physical hosts, a
System is considered a node of the network. That means, systems represent
(business) application and integration logic. For the communication with other
systems via messages the MessageFlow represents edges in the network. Techni-
cally, messages are exchanged over interfaces, Interface, and channels, containing
e.g. service bindings and operations, which we represent as IncomingConﬁgura-
tion and OutgoingConﬁguration. The inbound and outbound conﬁgurations are
considered separate entities, since they carry important information about the
message ﬂows, thus helping to reconstruct the network’s edges. This notion can
also be found in a common graph traversal algebra to set custom processors or
actions when entering or leaving a node [23]. Fig. 3 shows the basic NIM entities
and their relations.
5
The Network Inference Approach
The algorithm for computing integration networks consists of multiple steps,
which have been identiﬁed for a parallel analysis allowing it to scale across large
datasets of NM raw data. Since the information is represented in the NIM,
the inference mechanism is independent of the speciﬁc integration and system
domains. As discussed in Section 2, unique systems and hosts are identiﬁed
by equivalence algorithms and semantic links between hosts and systems are
computed (step 1). Based on that, incoming and outgoing conﬁgurations are
identiﬁed (step 2) and then used to reconstruct message ﬂows through building
separate call graphs (steps 3,4) which are merged afterwards (step 5). Then
message ﬂows are linked with application and integration content (step 6) and

user knowledge is integrated. With user knowledge, the quality of the inference
mechanism can be improved and information complemented or enriched. Within
the inference programs, all user knowledge literals end with the ”user” postﬁx,
while discovered knowledge ends with ”disc” (i.e. edb relation).
To formalize the network reconstruction, a logic programming approach is
used, in which the algorithms are described by Datalog rules and the discovered
raw data is a set of Datalog facts according to NIM. The diﬀerent processes
of adding newly discovered information and removing outdated is continuous.
For that, each piece of discovered information is annotated with a timestamp.
However, instead of removing outdated information that is referenced by higher
layer information models as in [19], it is kept and marked outdated until it is
not referenced anymore.
Step 1: Identify unique hosts and systems To identify hosts and systems
uniquely through building equivalence classes, the single instances have to be
identiﬁed. While hosts can be identiﬁed by e.g. host name, IP-address, the sys-
tems have no universally applicable identiﬁcation scheme, thus they are usu-
ally identiﬁed using context dependent identiﬁers. For instance, the set of host
identiﬁers can be an IP-address, the DNS name, and a host name. This infor-
mation mainly comes from diﬀerent, disjoint instances of system management
software, mostly from IT service management [18] and virtualization systems
[11]. All identiﬁers are contained in the equivalence class and any reference to
one of them identiﬁes the host. While these equivalence classes are not stable
over time, it is quite likely that at least one of the elements of an equivalence
class does not change if another one changes, thus making the identiﬁcation
more robust. That way, identity can be maintained over long periods of time
in the presence of constant but gradual change. The raw facts from NM are
host disc(host id, URI) and system disc(sys id, URI), which relate a host id or
sys id to an addressable URI. Relations like same host disc(host id1, host id2)
and same sys disc(sys id1, sys id2) connect two host or system identiﬁers, e.g.
which refer to the same physical host or logical system. The semantic relation
runs on disc(sys id, host id) connects a system to the host that it runs on. For
simplicity, homogenous clusters of machines are also considered as one host.
Listing 1.1. Host equivalence exploiting information about system landscape
same sys (? sys id1 , ? sys id2 ) :−
same sys disc (? sys id1 , ? sys id2 ) .
same sys (? sys id1 , ? sys id2 ) :−
same sys (? sys id1 , ? sys id3 ) ,
same sys (? sys id3 , ? sys id2 ) .
same host (? host id1 , ? host id2 ) :−
runs on disc (? sys id1 , ? host id1 ) ,
runs on disc (? sys id2 , ? host id2 ) ,
same sys (? sys id1 , ? sys id2 ) .

Based on that, rules for e.g. same sys and same host are used to infer equiva-
lence classes that allow to write rules that exploit the information about system
landscapes. For instance, more than one system can run on one physical host,
but one system cannot run on more than one host, Listing 1.1.
Step 2: Determine Incoming and Outgoing Calls In current middleware route
conﬁgurations, the senders of incoming calls to the system can be registered but
are mostly unknown. On the other hand, components like the ﬁle adapter and
the Apple Push Notiﬁcation Service (APNS) always contain the sender system
[15]. However, for outgoing calls from the sender system, e.g. via HTTP, SOAP,
receiver or outgoing call conﬁgurations are needed to initiate the message ﬂow
to the receiver. This results in an outgoing and incoming call graph depicted
in Fig. 4(a). The incoming disc(sys id, URI) and outgoing disc(sys id, URI)
facts relate a sys id to a URI of an incoming conﬁguration or an outgoing
conﬁguration for the identiﬁed system.
(a) Outgoing/ incoming
conﬁguration call graph
(b) Call graph extension
Fig. 4. Outgoing and incoming conﬁguration call graphs
Step 3: Determine Message Flows based on Outgoing Calls Since outgoing
calls are made to a particular endpoint, the corresponding call conﬁgurations
contain an identiﬁer for the receiving host or system. These identiﬁers can then
be matched against the identiﬁers that were determined in step 1. If no iden-
tiﬁers are available, these call conﬁgurations are processed in step 4. To relate
outgoing call conﬁgurations to receiver systems recv disc(URI, sys id) relates a
URI to an outgoing conﬁguration to a sys id that identiﬁes a receiving system
or similarily recv host disc(URI, host id) for hosts.

Listing 1.2. Message ﬂow from outgoing conﬁguration
msg flow (? sys id snd , ? s y s i d r e c v ) :−
outgoing disc (? sys id snd , ?RCONF) ,
r e c v d i s c (?RCONF, ? s y s i d r e c v ) .
Listing 1.3. Message ﬂow for host conﬁgurations
msg flow host (? host id send , ? h o s t i d r e c v ) :−
runs on disc (? sys id snd , ? host id send ) ,
outgoing disc (? sys id snd , ?RCONF) ,
r e c v h o s t d i s c (?RCONF, ? h o s t i d r e c v ) .
Then message flow(sys id snd, sys id recv) rules determine the message ﬂows
between systems (Listing 1.2) and
message flow host(host id send, host id recv) between hosts (Listing 1.3). That
results into a an extension of the call graph shown in Fig. 4(b), in which S1
represents a system connected to other systems via incoming and outgoing con-
ﬁgurations.
Step 4: Determine Message Flows based on Incoming Calls Similar to the pre-
vious step, incoming call conﬁgurations are identiﬁed. For that, send disc(URI,
sys id) facts are related via URI to incoming conﬁgurations. Again, this results
in an extension of the call graph.
Step 5: Merge Call Graphs for a System So far unique hosts and systems
are identiﬁed and message ﬂows are determined for a single system. Now, the
identiﬁed incoming and outgoing call conﬁgurations from diﬀerent systems are
matched. This is done by matching compatible protocols, message types, etc.
After new message ﬂows are identiﬁed, the call graph is extended by the merged
information (see Fig. 5). In case some incoming or outgoing call conﬁgurations
do not match to already identiﬁed call conﬁgurations, they are kept in the model
as ”unlinked” conﬁgurations for matching new conﬁgurations.
Step 6: Link Message Flows to Application and Integration Content The
outgoing and incoming call conﬁgurations with hosts and systems result in a
view of the network. However, these message ﬂows only conclude communication
between hosts and systems. The outgoing and incoming call conﬁgurations also
have a link to application and integration content deployed and running on the
systems. This content refers to the particular process or integration steps that
trigger outgoing calls or receive incoming calls. In other words, process models [1]
and middleware routes [15], i.e. integration ﬂow (IFlow) or integration process,
give insight into the details within systems and hosts and could be used to
correlate operational data to trace messages through middleware systems.
Listing 1.4. Identifying IFlows
i f l o w (? sys id snd , ? s y s i d r e c v , ? sys id mw , ? URI) :−
msg flow disc (? sys id snd , ? sys id mw , ? URI) ,
msg flow disc (? sys id mw , ? s y s i d r e c v , ? URI) .

Fig. 5. Call graph extended by merged information from diﬀerent systems
For instance, the IFlow iflow(sendsys id, recvsys id, mwsys id, URI) re-
lates senders to receivers through a middleware system, which can be calculated
e.g. through the rule in Listing 1.4.
6
Results and Experiences
For the evaluation of our approach, we used our Datalog system, which is a basic
Datalog implementation in Java/OSGi based on [25], that allows to evaluate
recursive rules and supports basic data types, comparisons and expressions in
Datalog rules. The raw data comes from our Network Mining prototype, which
discovers information in our testbed and transforms it to NIM Datalog facts.
The testbed consists of two middleware systems, i.e. HXP and H73, of diﬀerent
releases for mediated communication, and have embedded IDoc and WebService
capabilities for direct communication and a System Landscape Directory (SLD)

for system management information. This setup contains real-world conditions
which we found in our customer landscapes, e.g. cross-middleware inference,
combination of embedded and mediated communication, fragmented information
registered in diﬀerent domains.
The results of the experiments are shown, e.g. for systems and message ﬂows
in HXP in Table 1, 2 and for H73 in Table 3, 4. The tables show two aspects
of the system, namely the discovery and the inference quality. For the inference,
the entries for systems and message ﬂows as well as top-level connections are
important. The discovery is mainly depicted by attribute entries for the network
entities and show minor gaps in the discovery process., e.g. in the category
”Correct System Attributes” (see Table 1). For the HXP-PI system, 12 nodes and
Table 1. Inference Result on NM Testbed (Nodes of HXP-PI System)
Category
Absolute Value Percentage
Found expected Systems
12
100%
Correct System Attributes
35
64%
System Attributes with Limitation 20
36%
55 node attributes are expected (see Table 1). In total 13 top-level connections
are expected which group 31 message ﬂows (see Table 2). Furthermore, the top-
level connection have 26 attributes, while the message ﬂows have 372 attributes.
Table 2. Inference Result on NM Testbed (Edges of HXP-PI System)
Category
Absolute Value Percentage
Found Expected Top-Level Connection Groups
13
100%
Correct Top-Level Connection Group Attributes 26
100%
Found Expected MessageFlows
31
100%
Correct MessageFlow Attributes
337
91%
MessageFlow Attributes with Limitation
34
9%
For the cross middleware systems and message ﬂow inference, in total 18
unique, logical systems were inferred from 29 partially duplicate raw facts via
equivalence determination (see Table 1 and 3) and 34 message ﬂows have to be
reconstructed and grouped to 17 top-level connections using incoming and out-
going call graph merge operations. For instance, logical system HXP 105 from
PI-HXP with runs-on host id xxx2474 from SLD was found in the middleware
conﬁguration and SLD system information facts and merged into an equivalence
class (see Table 5). At the same time, the corresponding message ﬂows between
HXP 105 to HXP 106 were reconstructed from PI conﬁguration (conf.) and run-
time (runt.) data connected to the system equivalence sets and merged into an

top-level connection group (see Table 6). The group consists of the message ﬂow
over sender interface FlightSeatAvailQuery to system HXP 106, which checks for
free seats and is followed by a message to the same system over interface BookO-
rderRequest in case of a positive answer to the ﬁrst query. If the booking order
request was successful, system HXP 106 answers over interface FlightBookO-
rderConﬁrm to conﬁrm the request. No unexpected systems or message ﬂows
were found and the complete network structure was reconstructed correctly.
Similarly, the H73-PI system has 3 parties, i.e. B2B contexts, 6 expected
nodes with 31 attributes (for Table 3), 4 top-level connections, grouping 6 ﬂows
(for Table 4), with 8 attributes on the top-level connections and 78 on the mes-
sage ﬂows.
Table 3. Inference Result on NM Testbed (Nodes of H73-PI System)
Category
Absolute Value Percentage
Found expected Parties
3
100%
Found expected System
6
100%
Correct System Attributes 22
71%
Table 4. Inference Result on NM Testbed (Edges of H73-PI System)
Category
Absolute Value Percentage
Found Expected Top-Level Connection Groups
4
100%
Correct Top-Level Connection Group Attributes
8
100%
Top-Level Connection Group Attributes with Limitation 0
0%
Found Expected MessageFlows
6
100%
Correct MessageFlow Attributes
75
96%
MessageFlow Attributes with Limitation
3
4%
The detailed inference results are only shown partially due to the mass of
data discovered. Hence Table 5 shows an excerpt of the results of systems with
the discovered description, the inferred host and the equivalence class denoted
by ”discovered system”. Similarly, an excerpt of the inferred message ﬂows are
shown in Table 6. For that, the top-level connections, i.e. grouped message ﬂows
are listed with their message ﬂows denoted by sender and receiver and the type
of discovered facts from which the data came from (as ”From”). In the excerpt,
all message ﬂows themselves build an equivalence class of same ﬂows found in
runtime logs (runt.) and conﬁguration (conﬁg.).
Due to good results in our testbed, we applied the system to real-world
customer landscapes as shown in Fig. 6. This real-world validation was very suc-
cessful on both counts. Firstly, it proved that the auto-discovery and inference is
indeed feasible and resulted in highly reliable results. Secondly, our system would

be quite helpful in the everyday work of an integration architect, consultant or
integration developer, since it gives an overview of the complete integration net-
work which is currently not possible within the integration middleware tools.
The system reduces the eﬀort to document integration scenarios substantially,
in particularly by a foreseen export of network details into PDF or oﬃce format.
That helps to answer speciﬁc questions about the network, which are currently
still impossible (or diﬃcult) to achieve. For example, when combining conﬁgu-
ration and runtime data it is possible to ﬁnd connections that are not used any
longer or were seldom used in a given period of time. Hence, one of the customers
plan an upgrade project and with such a system a substantial migration time
and eﬀort will be saved.
7
Related Work
Our approach for integration network represention and inference is based on
Datalog, which is a well-researched topic [12,25] that had its revival recently due
to good parallelization capabilities, latest through the work of Hellerstein et al.
[2,14]. Even in the enterprise analytics domain, Datalog was recently applied,
mainly through work of [5,6,7]. However, these approaches address non-network
inference domains for which they deﬁne extensions.
In terms of the meta-model for integration network, [23] represents closest
known related work, in which a path algebra is deﬁned that is used to traverse ar-
bitrary graphs. Similarly we deﬁne nodes and edges with inbound and outbound
connectors, however diﬀerent in terms of meaning and usage.
Table 5. Excerpt of HXP-PI system Inference Result
System (Name) Description
Host
Discovered System
HXP 105
Booking System
HXP on xxx2474
PI as Bus. System
SLD as Bus. System
HXP 106
Lufthansa
HXP on xxx2474
PI as Bus. System
SLD as Bus. System
HXP 107
American Airlines HXP on xxx2474
PI as Bus. System
SLD as Bus. System
...
...
...
...
Interﬂug
Interﬂug
unknown
PI as Bus. Component
...
...
...
...
Singapore
Singapore Airlines unknown
PI as Bus. Component
Table 6. Excerpt of HXP-PI message ﬂow and top-level Inference Result
Top-level Connect.
Group
Interface
Sender
Receiver From
HXP 105< −>HXP 106 BookOrderRequest
HXP 105 HXP 106 Conﬁg.+Runt.
FlightSeatAvailQuery
HXP 105 HXP 106 Conﬁg.+Runt.
FlightBookOrderConﬁrm HXP 106 HXP 105 Conﬁg.+Runt.
...
...
...
...
...

Fig. 6. Real-world customer network in a network-centric BPMN notation [19] inferred
from NM raw data showing network structure and detailed view for one edge
For NM systems in general, related work is conducted in the area of Process
Mining (PM) initiated by [1], which sits between computational intelligence and
data mining. It has similar requirements for data discovery, conformance and
enhancement with respect to NM [20], but does not work with network models
and inference. PM exclusively strives to derive BPM models from process logs.
Hence PM complements NM in the area of business process discovery.
Gaining insight into the network of physical and virtual nodes within enter-
prises is only addressed by the Host entity in NIM, since it is not primarily rel-
evant for visualizing and operating integration networks. This domain is mainly
addressed by the IT service management [18] and virtualization community [11],
which could be considered when introducing physical entities to our meta-model.
The linked (web) data research shares similar approaches and methodologies,
which have so far neglected linked data within enterprises and mainly focused
on RDF-based approaches [9,10]. Applications of Datalog in the area of linked
data [22,8] and semantic web [16] show that it is used in the inference domain,
however not used for network inference.
8
Discussion and Future Work
In this paper we introduce a new domain for information discovery, machine
learning, and network reconstruction, for which we deﬁned a modeling and in-
ference approach to reconstruct integration networks from NM raw data using
Datalog. The network model developed speciﬁcally for the connectivity and in-
tegration domains and covers an intersection of the relevant entities, which we

derived through the analysis of several middleware systems on the market. We
encoded the discovered raw data as Datalog facts to create a domain indepen-
dent knowledge base and applied rule-based inference representing a multi-step
network inference approach. We validated our approach on a simulated integra-
tion network and reported our experiments on applying our system to real-world
enterprise networks. The evaluation shows good results with respect to the chal-
lenges like equivalence class determination, ﬂow- and cross-middleware network
reconstruction as introduced in Section 2. Although the network structure could
be reconstructed very well, the discovery range should be improved to attach
more integration details to the attributes of the network entity instances.
Future work will be conducted in several areas, among them the improve-
ment of the discovery range, the inference of business process models from NM
data and the correlation to integration networks as well as extensions to stan-
dard Datalog to improve the current implementation. For instance, the eﬃcient
compilation of Datalog programs to current hardware [17], distributed systems
[24] or pruning with CHR [4] could guarantee more eﬃcient Datalog processing.
Since not all facts have the same certainty, we will also look into probabilistic
extensions of Datalog like [26,13], which could help to express diﬀerent levels of
certainty with respect to network model instances. The work conducted in [3]
will be considered for time aspects, which could help to prune large, outdated
networks from system landscapes with historical data.
