Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 35 (2009) 623-675
Submitted 10/08; published 08/09
Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning
Problems with Bounded Width
Hector Palacios

Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat, 138
08018 Barcelona, SPAIN
Hector Geﬀner

ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat, 138
08018 Barcelona, SPAIN
Abstract
Conformant planning is the problem of ﬁnding a sequence of actions for achieving a goal
in the presence of uncertainty in the initial state or action eﬀects. The problem has been
approached as a path-ﬁnding problem in belief space where good belief representations and
heuristics are critical for scaling up. In this work, a diﬀerent formulation is introduced for
conformant problems with deterministic actions where they are automatically converted
into classical ones and solved by an oﬀ-the-shelf classical planner. The translation maps
literals L and sets of assumptions t about the initial situation, into new literals KL/t that
represent that L must be true if t is initially true. We lay out a general translation scheme
that is sound and establish the conditions under which the translation is also complete. We
show that the complexity of the complete translation is exponential in a parameter of the
problem called the conformant width, which for most benchmarks is bounded. The planner
based on this translation exhibits good performance in comparison with existing planners,
and is the basis for T0, the best performing planner in the Conformant Track of the 2006
International Planning Competition.
1. Introduction
Conformant planning is a form of planning where a goal is to be achieved when the initial
situation is not fully known and actions may have non-deterministic eﬀects (Goldman &
Boddy, 1996; Smith & Weld, 1998). Conformant planning is computationally harder than
classical planning, as even under polynomial restrictions on plan length, plan veriﬁcation
remains hard (Haslum & Jonsson, 1999; Baral, Kreinovich, & Trejo, 2000; Turner, 2002;
Rintanen, 2004). While few practical problems are purely conformant, the ability to ﬁnd
conformant plans is needed in contingent planning where conformant situations are a special
case and where relaxations into conformant planning yield useful heuristics (Hoﬀmann &
Brafman, 2005).
The problem of conformant planning can be formulated as a path-ﬁnding problem in
belief space where a sequence of actions that map a given initial belief state into a target
belief is sought (Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000). A belief state represents the set of states that
are deemed possible, and actions, whether deterministic or not, map one belief state into
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Palacios & Geffner
another. This formulation, that underlies most current conformant planners (Hoﬀmann &
Brafman, 2006; Bryce, Kambhampati, & Smith, 2006; Cimatti, Roveri, & Bertoli, 2004)
must address two problems: the problem of representing beliefs in a compact way, and the
problem of obtaining eﬀective heuristics over beliefs. The ﬁrst problem has been approached
through logical representations that make use of SAT or OBDD technology, that while
intractable in the worst case, scale up better than plain state representations. The second
problem, on the other hand, has been more complex, with heuristics for searching in belief
space not being as successful so far as the heuristics developed for classical planning (Bonet
& Geﬀner, 2001; Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001).
In this work, we introduce a diﬀerent approach to conformant planning where problems
are automatically compiled into classical problems and solved by a classical planner. The
translation maps sets of literals t about the initial situation and literals L into new literals
KL/t that express that if t is true in the initial situation, L must be true. We lay out ﬁrst a
general translation scheme that is sound and then establish the conditions under which the
translation is also complete. Also, we show that the complexity of the complete translation
is exponential in a parameter of the problem that we call the conformant width, which
for most benchmark domains is bounded, implying that the complete translation in those
cases is polynomial. The planner based on this translation exhibits good performance in
comparison with existing conformant planners and is the basis for T0, the best performing
planner in the Conformant Track of the 2006 International Planning Competition.
The translation-based approach provides a solution to the two problems faced by con-
formant planners that search in belief space: the belief representation and the heuristic over
beliefs. In the translation-based approach, the beliefs are represented by the literals KL/t
that stand for conditionals, a representation that is polynomial and complete for confor-
mant problems with bounded width. In addition, and since belief states are represented as
plain states, the heuristic over beliefs is a classical heuristic. From a computational point
of view, though, there is no explicit search in belief-space: conformant problems P are
converted into classical problems K(P) at the ’knowledge-level’ (Petrick & Bacchus, 2002),
whose solutions, computed by a classical planner, encode the conformant solutions for P.
Our formulation is limited to conformant problems that are deterministic and where
all uncertainty lies in the initial situation. We address nonetheless the issues that must be
handled in order to generalize the translation-based approach to non-deterministic domains
and report empirical results over non-deterministic domains as well.
The paper is organized as follows. We deﬁne ﬁrst the syntax and semantics of conformant
planning problems P (Section 2), and consider a simple sound but incomplete translation
K0 (Section 3). We then consider a more general translation scheme KT,M where T and
M are two parameters, a set of tags t encoding assumptions about the initial situation,
and a set of merges m encoding valid disjunctions of tags (Section 4), and analyze several
instances of this scheme that follow from particular choices of the sets of tags and merges:
a complete but exponential translation KS0 where tags are associated with the possible
initial states of the problem (Section 5), and a polynomial translation Ki for a ﬁxed integer
i ≥0 that is complete for problems with conformant width bounded by i (Section 6).
We provide then an alternative explanation for this compact but complete translation by
showing that in problems with bounded width, the exponential number of possible initial
states S0 includes always a polynomial number of ’critical’ initial states S′
0 such that plans
624

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
that conform with S′
0 conform also with S0 (Section 7). We ﬁnally present the conformant
planner T0 (Section 8), an empirical evaluation of the planner (Section 9), an extension to
non-deterministic actions (Section 10), and a discussion of related work (Section 11). This
is followed by a brief summary (Section 12) and the formal proofs (Appendix).
This work is a revision and extension of the formulation presented by Palacios and
Geﬀner (2007), which in turn is based on ideas ﬁrst sketched also by Palacios and Geﬀner
(2006).
2. The Conformant Problem P
We deﬁne next the syntax and semantics of the conformant planning problems considered.
2.1 Syntax
Conformant planning problems P are represented as tuples of the form P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩
where F stands for the ﬂuent symbols in the problem, I is a set of clauses over F deﬁning
the initial situation, O stands for a set of (ground) operators or actions a, and G is a set of
literals over F deﬁning the goal. Every action a has a precondition Pre(a) given by a set
of ﬂuent literals, and a set of conditional eﬀects C →L where C is a set of ﬂuent literals
and L is a ﬂuent literal.
All actions are assumed to be deterministic and hence all uncertainty lies in the initial
situation. Thus, the language for the conformant problem P excluding the uncertainty in
the initial situation, is Strips extended with conditional eﬀects and negation. Moreover, if
there is no uncertainty in the initial situation, as when all ﬂuents appear in unit clauses in
I, P is equivalent to a classical planning problem.
We refer to the conditional eﬀects C →L of an action a as the rules associated with
a, and sometimes write them as a : C →L. When convenient, we also join several eﬀects
associated with the same action and condition as in a : C →L ∧L′ and write C →L as
true →L when C is empty. Finally, for a literal L, ¬L denotes the complement of L.
2.2 Semantics
A state s is a truth assignment over the ﬂuents F in P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩and a possible initial
state s of P is a state that satisﬁes the clauses in I.
For a state s, we write I(s) to refer to the set of atoms (positive literals) that are true
in s, and write P/s to refer to the classical planning problem P/s = ⟨F, I(s), O, G⟩which
is like the conformant problem P except for the initial state that is ﬁxed to s.
An action sequence π = {a0, a1, . . . , an} is a classical plan for P/s if the action sequence
π is executable in the state s and results in a goal state sG; i.e., if for i = 0, . . . , n, the
preconditions of the action ai are true in si, si+1 is the state that results from doing action
ai in the state si, and all goal literals are true in sn+1.
Finally, an action sequence π is a conformant plan for P iﬀπ is a classical plan for P/s
for every possible initial state s of P.
Conformant planning is computationally harder than classical planning, as plan veriﬁ-
cation remains hard even under polynomial restrictions on plan length (Haslum & Jonsson,
1999; Baral et al., 2000; Turner, 2002; Rintanen, 2004). The most common approach to
625

Palacios & Geffner
conformant planning is based on the belief state formulation (Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000). A
belief state b is the non-empty set of states that are deemed possible in a given situation,
and every action a executable in b, maps b into a new belief state ba. The conformant
planning task becomes a path-ﬁnding problem in a graph where the nodes are belief states
b, the source node b0 is the belief state corresponding to the initial situation, and the target
belief states bG are those where the goals are true.
We assume throughout that I is logically consistent, so that the set of possible initial
states is not empty, and that P itself is consistent, so that the bodies C and C′ of conﬂicting
eﬀects a : C →L and a : C′ →¬L associated with the same action a are mutually exclusive
or mutex. For further details on this; see Part B of the Appendix.
3. A Basic Translation K0
A simple translation of the conformant problem P into a classical problem K(P) can be
obtained by replacing the literals L by literals KL and K¬L aimed at capturing whether
L is known to be true and known to be false respectively.
Deﬁnition 1 (Translation K0). For a conformant planning problem P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩, the
translation K0(P) = ⟨F ′, I′, O′, G′⟩is a classical planning problem with
• F ′ = {KL, K¬L | L ∈F}
• I′ = {KL | L is a unit clause in I}
• G′ = {KL | L ∈G}
• O′ = O but with each precondition L for a ∈O replaced by KL, and each conditional
eﬀect a : C →L replaced by a : KC →KL and a : ¬K¬C →¬K¬L,
where the expressions KC and ¬K¬C for C = L1, L2 . . . are abbreviations of the formulas
KL1, KL2 . . . and ¬K¬L1, ¬K¬L2 . . . respectively.
The intuition behind the translation is simple: ﬁrst, the literal KL is true in the initial
state I′ if L is known to be true in I; otherwise it is false. This removes all uncertainty
from K0(P), making it into a classical planning problem. In addition, for soundness, each
rule a : C →L in P is mapped into two rules: a support rule a : KC →KL, that ensures
that L is known to be true when the condition is known to be true, and a cancellation
rule a : ¬K¬C →¬K¬L that guarantees that K¬L is deleted (prevented to persist) when
action a is applied and C is not known to be false. The use of support and cancellation rules
for encoding the original rules at the ’knowledge-level’ is the only subtlety in the translation.
The translation K0(P) is sound as every classical plan that solves K0(P) is a conformant
plan for P, but is incomplete, as not all conformant plans for P are classical plans for K(P).
The meaning of the KL literals follows a similar pattern: if a plan achieves KL in K0(P),
then the same plan achieves L with certainty in P, yet a plan may achieve L with certainty
in P without making the literal KL true in K0(P).1
Proposition 2 (Soundness of K0(P)). If π is a classical plan for K0(P), then π is a
conformant plan for P.
1. Formal proofs can be found in the appendix.
626

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
As an illustration, consider the conformant problem P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩with F = {p, q, r},
I = {q}, G = {p, r}, and actions O = {a, b} with eﬀects
a : q →r , a : p →¬p , b : q →p .
For this problem, the action sequence π = {a, b} is a conformant plan for P while the action
sequence π′ = {a} is not. Indeed, π is a classical plan for P/s for any possible initial state
s, while π′ is not a classical plan for the possible initial state s′ where p is true (recall that
s is a possible initial state of P if s satisﬁes I so that neither p nor r are assumed to be
initially false in this problem).
From Deﬁnition 1, the translation K0(P) = ⟨F ′, I′, O′, G′⟩is a classical planning problem
with ﬂuents F ′ = {Kp, K¬p, Kq, K¬q, Kr, K¬r}, initial situation I′ = {Kq}, goals G′ =
{Kp, Kr}, and actions O′ = {a, b} with eﬀects
a : Kq →Kr , a : Kp →K¬p , b : Kq →Kp,
that encode supports, and eﬀects
a : ¬K¬q →¬K¬r , a : ¬K¬p →¬Kp , b : ¬K¬q →¬K¬p,
that encode cancellations.
Proposition 2 implies, for example, that π′ = {a}, which is not a conformant plan for
P, cannot be a classical plan for K(P) either. This is easy to verify, as while the support
a : Kq →Kr achieves the goal Kr as Kq is true in I′, the cancellation a : ¬K¬p →¬Kp
associated with the same action, preserves Kp false for the other goal p.
While the translation K0 is not complete, meaning that it fails to capture all confor-
mant plans for P as classical plans, its completeness can be assessed in terms of a weaker
semantics. In the so-called 0-approximation semantics (Baral & Son, 1997), belief states b
are represented by 3-valued states where ﬂuents can be true, false, or unknown. In this in-
complete belief representation, checking whether an action a is applicable in a belief state b,
computing the next belief state ba, and verifying polynomial length plans are all polynomial
time operations. In particular, a literal L is true it the next belief state ba iﬀa) action a
has some eﬀect C →L such that all literals in C are true in b, or b) L is true in b and for all
eﬀects C′ →¬L of action a, the complement of some literal L′ ∈C′ is true in b. An action
sequence π is then a conformant plan for P according to the 0-approximation semantics if
the belief sequence generated by π according to the 0-approximation semantics makes the
action sequence applicable and terminates in a belief state where the goals are true. It is
possible to prove then that:
Proposition 3 (K0(P) and 0-Approximation). An action sequence π is a classical plan for
K0(P) iﬀπ is a conformant plan for P according to the 0-approximation semantics.
This correspondence is not surprising though as both the 0-approximation semantics
and the K0(P) translation throw away the disjunctive information and restrict the plans to
those that make no use of the uncertain knowledge. Indeed, the states s0, s1, . . . generated
by the action sequence π = {a0, a1, . . .} over the classical problem K0(P) encode precisely
627

Palacios & Geffner
the literals that are known to be true according to the 0-approximation; namely, L is true
at time i according to the 0-approximation iﬀthe literal KL is true in the state si.
Proposition 3 does not mean that the basic translation K0 and the 0-approximation
semantics are equivalent but rather that they both rely on equivalent belief representations.
The translation K0 delivers also a way to get valid conformant plans using a classical
planner. The translation-based approach thus addresses both the representational and the
heuristic issues that arise in conformant planning.
As an illustration of Proposition 3, given a conformant problem P with I = {p, r} and
actions a and b with eﬀects a : p →q, a : r →¬v, and b : q →v, the plan π = {a, b} is valid
for achieving the goal G = {q, v} according to both K0(P) and the 0-approximation, while
the plan π = {b} is not valid according to either. At the same time, if the initial situation
is changed to I = {p ∨q}, neither approach sanctions the plan π = {a} for G = {q}, even if
it is a valid conformant plan. For this, some ability to reason with disjunctions is needed.
An extension of the basic translation K0 that allows a limited form of disjunctive reason-
ing is presented by Palacios and Geﬀner (2006). The extension is based on the introduction
of new literals L/Xi used for encoding the conditionals Xi ⊃L. Below, the basic translation
K0 is extended in a diﬀerent manner that ensures both tractability and completeness over
a large class of problems.
4. General Translation Scheme KT,M
The basic translation K0 is extended now into a general translation scheme KT,M where T
and M are two parameters: a set of tags t and a set of merges m. We will show that for
suitable choices of these two parameters, the translation KT,M, unlike the translation K0,
can be both sound and complete.
A tag t ∈T is a set (conjunction) of literals L from P whose truth value in the initial
situation is not known. The tags t are used to introduce a new class of literals KL/t in
the classical problem KT,M(P) that represent the conditional ’if t is true initially, then L is
true’, an assertion that could be written as K(t0 ⊃L) in a temporal modal logic. We use
the notation KL/t rather than L/t as used by Palacios and Geﬀner (2006), because there
is a distinction between ¬KL/t and K¬L/t: roughly ¬KL/t means that the conditional
K(t0 ⊃L) is not true, while K¬L/t means that the conditional K(t0 ⊃¬L) is true.
Likewise, a merge m is a non-empty collection of tags t in T that stands for the Disjunc-
tive Normal Form (DNF) formula W
t∈m t. A merge m is valid when one of the tags t ∈m
must be true in I; i.e., when
I |=
_
t∈m
t
.
A merge m for a literal L in P will translate into a ’merge action’ with a single eﬀect
^
t∈m
KL/t
→
KL
that captures a simple form of reasoning by cases.
While a valid merge can be used for reasoning about any literal L in P, computationally
it is convenient (although not logically necessary) to specify that certain merges are to be
used with some literals L and not with others. Thus, formally, M is a collection of pairs
628

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
(m, L), where m is a merge and L is a literal in P. Such a pair means that m is a merge for
L. We group all the merges m for a literal L in the set ML, and thus, M can be understood
as the collection of such sets ML for all L in P. For simplicity, however, except when it
may cause a confusion, we will keep referring to M as a plain set of merges.
We assume that the collection of tags T always includes a tag t that stands for the
empty collection of literals, that we call the empty tag and denote it as ∅. If t is the empty
tag, we denote KL/t simply as KL.
The translation KT,M(P) is the basic translation K0(P) ’conditioned’ with the tags t in
T and extended with the actions that capture the merges in M:
Deﬁnition 4 (Translation KT,M). Let P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩be a conformant problem, then
KT,M(P) is the classical planning problem KT,M(P) = ⟨F ′, I′, O′, G′⟩with
• F ′ = {KL/t, K¬L/t | L ∈F and t ∈T}
• I′ = {KL/t | I, t |= L}
• G′ = {KL | L ∈G}
• O′ = {a : KC/t →KL/t, a : ¬K¬C/t →¬K¬L/t | a : C →L in P}
∪
{am,L : [V
t∈m KL/t] →KL ∧XL | L ∈P, m ∈ML}
where KL is a precondition of action a in KT,M(P) if L is a precondition of a in P, KC/t
and ¬K¬C/t stand for KL1/t, KL2/t, . . . , and ¬K¬L1/t, ¬K¬L2/t, . . . respectively, when
C = L1, L2, . . ., and XL stands for V
L′ K¬L′ with L′ ranging over the literals L′ mutex
with L in P.
The translation KT,M(P) reduces to the basic translation K0(P) when M is empty and
T contains only the empty tag. The extra eﬀects XL = V
L′ K¬L′ in the merge actions am,L
are needed only to ensure that the translation KT,M(P) is consistent when P is consistent,
and otherwise can be ignored. Indeed, if L and L′ are mutex in a consistent P, the invariant
KL/t ⊃K¬L′/t holds in KT,M(P) for non-empty tags t, and hence a successful merge for
L can always be followed by a successful merge for ¬L′. In the rest of the paper we will
thus assume that both P and KT,M(P) are consistent, and ignore such extra merge eﬀects,
but we will come back to them in Appendix B for proving the consistency of KT,M(P) from
the consistency of P.
For suitable choices of T and M, the translation KT,M(P) will be sound and complete.
Before establishing these results, however, let us make these notions precise.
Deﬁnition 5 (Soundness). A translation KT,M(P) is sound if for any classical plan π that
solves the classical planning problem KT,M(P), the plan π′ that results from π by dropping
the merge actions is a conformant plan for P.
Deﬁnition 6 (Completeness). A translation KT,M(P) is complete if for any conformant
plan π′ that solves the conformant problem P, there is a classical plan π that solves the
classical problem KT,M(P) such that π′ is equal to π with the merge actions removed.
The general translation scheme KT,M is sound provided that all merges are valid and
all tags are consistent (literals in a tag are all true in some possible initial state):
629

Palacios & Geffner
Theorem 7 (Soundness KT,M(P)). The translation KT,M(P) is sound provided that all
merges in M are valid and all tags in T are consistent.
Unless stated otherwise, we will assume that all merges are valid and all tags consistent,
and will call such translations, valid translations.
As a convention for keeping the notation simple, in singleton tags like t = {p}, the curly
brackets are often dropped. Thus, literals KL/t for t = {p} are written as KL/p, while
merges m = {t1, t2} for singleton tags t1 = {p} and t2 = {q}, are written as m = {p, q}.
Example. As an illustration, consider the problem of moving an object from an origin to a
destination using two actions: pick(l), that picks up an object from a location if the hand is
empty and the object is in that location, and drop(l), that drops the object at a location if
the object is being held. For making the problem more interesting, let us also assume that
the action pick(l) drops the object being held at l if the hand is not empty. These are all
conditional eﬀects and there are no action preconditions. Assuming that there is a single
object, these eﬀects can be written as:
pick(l) : ¬hold, at(l) →hold ∧¬at(l)
pick(l) : hold →¬hold ∧at(l)
drop(l) : hold →¬hold ∧at(l) .
Consider now an instance P of this domain, where the hand is initially empty and the
object, initially at either l1 or l2, must be moved to l3; i.e., P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩with
I = {¬hold , at(l1) ∨at(l2) , ¬at(l1) ∨¬at(l2) , ¬at(l3)}
and
G = {at(l3)} .
The action sequence
π1 = {pick(l1), drop(l3), pick(l2), drop(l3)}
is a conformant plan for this problem, where an attempt to pick up the object at location
l1 is followed by a drop at the target location l3, ensuring that the object ends up at l3 if
it was originally at l1. This is then followed by an attempt to pick up the object at l2 and
a drop at l3.
On the other hand, the action sequence π2 that results from π1 by removing the ﬁrst
drop action
π2 = {pick(l1), pick(l2), drop(l3)}
is not a conformant plan, since if the object was originally at l1, it would end up at l2 after
the action pick(l2). In the notation introduced above, π1 is a classical plan for the classical
problem P/s for the two possible initial states s, while π2 is a classical plan for the problem
P/s but only for the state s where the object is initially at l2.
630

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
Consider now the classical problem KT,M(P) = ⟨F ′, I′, O′, G′⟩that is obtained from P
when T = {at(l1), at(l2)}2 and M contains the merge m = {at(l1), at(l2)} for the literals
hold and at(l3). From its deﬁnition, the ﬂuents F ′ in KT,M(P) are of the form KL/t and
K¬L/t for L ∈{at(l), hold}, l ∈{l1, l2}, and t ∈T, while the initial situation I′ is
I′ = {K¬hold, K¬hold/at(l), K¬at(l3), K¬at(l3)/at(l), Kat(l)/at(l), K¬at(l′)/at(l)}
for l, l′ ∈{l1, l2} and l′ ̸= l, and the goal G′ is
G′ = {Kat(l3)} .
The eﬀects associated to the actions pick(l) and drop(l) in O′ are the support rules
pick(l) : K¬hold, Kat(l) →Khold ∧K¬at(l)
pick(l) : Khold →K¬hold ∧Kat(l)
drop(l) : Khold →K¬hold ∧Kat(l)
for each one of the three locations l = li, that condition each rule in O with the empty tag,
along with the support rules:
pick(l) : K¬hold/at(l′), Kat(l)/at(l′) →Khold/at(l′) ∧K¬at(l)/at(l′)
pick(l) : Khold/at(l′) →K¬hold/at(l′) ∧Kat(l)/at(l′)
drop(l) : Khold/at(l′) →K¬hold/at(l′) ∧Kat(l)/at(l′)
that condition each rule in O with the tags at(l′) ∈T, for l′ ∈{l1, l2}. The corresponding
cancellation rules are:
pick(l) : ¬Khold, ¬K¬at(l) →¬K¬hold ∧¬Kat(l)
pick(l) : ¬K¬hold →¬Khold ∧¬K¬at(l)
drop(l) : ¬K¬hold →¬Khold ∧¬K¬at(l)
and
pick(l) : ¬Khold/at(l′), ¬K¬at(l)/at(l′) →¬K¬hold/at(l′) ∧¬Kat(l)/at(l′)
pick(l) : ¬K¬hold/at(l′) →¬Khold/at(l′) ∧¬K¬at(l)/at(l′)
drop(l) : ¬K¬hold/at(l′) →¬Khold/at(l′) ∧¬K¬at(l)/at(l′) .
In addition, the actions in O′ include the merge actions am,hold and am,at(l3) that follow
from the merge m = {at(l1), at(l2)} in M for the literals hold and at(l3):
am,hold : Khold/at(l1), Khold/at(l2) →Khold
am,at(l3) : Kat(l3)/at(l1), Kat(l3)/at(l2) →Kat(l3) .
2. The empty tag is assumed in every T and thus it is not mentioned explicitly.
631

Palacios & Geffner
It can be shown then that the plan
π′
1 = {pick(l1), drop(l3), pick(l2), drop(l3), am,at(l3)}
solves the classical problem KT,M(P) and hence, from Theorem 7, that the plan π1 obtained
from π′
1 by dropping the merge action, is a valid conformant plan for P (shown above). We
can see how some of the literals in KT,M(P) evolve as the actions in π′
1 are executed:
0:
Kat(l1)/at(l1), Kat(l2)/at(l2)
true in I′
1:
Khold/at(l1), Kat(l2)/at(l2)
true after pick(l1)
2:
Kat(l3)/at(l1), Kat(l2)/at(l2)
true after drop(l3)
3:
Kat(l3)/at(l1), Khold/at(l2)
true after pick(l2)
4:
Kat(l3)/at(l1), Kat(l3)/at(l2)
true after drop(l3)
5:
Kat(l3)
true after merge am,at(l3).
We can also verify in the same manner that the action sequence π′
2
π′
2 = {pick(l1), pick(l2), am,hold, drop(l3)}
is not a classical plan for KT,M(P), the reason being that the atom Khold/at(l1) holds after
the ﬁrst pick up action but not after the second. This is due to the cancellation rule:
pick(l2) : ¬K¬hold/at(l1) →¬Khold/at(l1) ∧¬K¬at(l2)/at(l1)
that expresses that under the assumption at(l1) in the initial situation, hold and ¬at(l2)
are not known to be true after the action pick(l2), if under the same assumption, ¬hold
was not known to be true before the action.
5. A Complete Translation: KS0
A complete instance of the translation scheme KT,M can be obtained in a simple manner
by setting the tags to the possible initial states of the problem P and by having a merge
for each precondition and goal literal L that includes all these tags. We call the resulting
’exhaustive’ translation KS0:
Deﬁnition 8 (Translation KS0). For a conformant problem P, the translation KS0(P) is
an instance of the translation KT,M(P) where
• T is set to the union of the empty tag and the set S0 of all possible initial states of P
(understood as the maximal sets of literals that are consistent with I), and
• M is set to contain a single merge m = S0 for each precondition and goal literal L in
P.
The translation KS0 is valid and hence sound, and it is complete due the correspondence
between tags and possible initial states:
Theorem 9 (Completeness of KS0). If π is a conformant plan for P, then there is a
classical plan π′ for KS0(P) such that π is the result of dropping the merge actions from π′.
632

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
#S0
KS0
POND
CFF
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
adder-01
18
> 2h
0,4
26
> 2h
blocks-02
18
0,2
23
0,4
26
> 2h
blocks-03
231
59,2
80
126,8
129
> 2h
bomb-10-1
1k
5,9
19
1
19
0
19
bomb-10-5
1k
11,3
15
3
15
0
15
bomb-10-10
1k
18,3
10
8
10
0
10
bomb-20-1
1M
> 2.1GB
4139
39
0
39
coins-08
1k
20,2
27
2
28
0
28
coins-09
1k
19,9
25
5
26
0
26
coins-10
1k
21,5
31
5
28
0,1
38
coins-11
1M
> 2.1GB
> 2h
1
78
comm-08
512
18,3
61
1
53
0
53
comm-09
1k
77,7
68
1
59
0
59
comm-10
2k
> 2.1GB
1
65
0
65
corners-square-16
4
0,2
102
1131
67
13,1
140
corners-square-24
4
0,7
202
> 2h
321
304
corners-square-28
4
1,2
264
> 2h
> 2h
corners-square-116
4
581,4
3652
> 2h
> 2h
corners-square-120
4
> 2.1GB
> 2h
> 2h
square-center-16
256
13,1
102
1322
61
> 2h
square-center-24
576
> 2.1GB
> 2h
> 2h
log-2-10-10
1k
183,5
85
> 2h
1,6
83
log-3-10-10
59k
> 2h
> 2h
4,7
108
ring-5
1,2k
12,6
17
6
20
4,3
31
ring-6
4,3k
> 2.1GB
33
27
93,6
48
safe-50
50
0,5
50
9
50
29,4
50
safe-70
70
1,4
70
41
70
109,9
70
safe-100
100
6
100
> 2.1GB
1252,4
100
sortnet-07
256
2,9
28
480
25
SNH
sortnet-08
512
9,8
36
> 2h
SNH
sortnet-09
1k
77,7
45
> 2h
SNH
sortnet-10
2k
> 2.1GB
> 2h
SNH
uts-k-08
16
0,6
46
24
47
4,4
46
uts-k-10
20
1,2
58
2219
67
16,5
58
Table 1: KS0 translation fed into FF planner compared with POND and Conformant FF
(CFF) along both times and reported plan lengths. #S0 stands for number of
initial states, ’SNH’ means goal syntax not handled (by CFF). Times reported in
seconds and rounded to the closest decimal.
633

Palacios & Geffner
For problems P whose actions have no preconditions, the argument is simple: if π is
a conformant plan for P then π must be a classical plan for P/s for each possible initial
state s, but then if π achieves the (goal) literal Gi in P/s for each s, π must achieve the
literal KGi/s in KS0(P) for each s as well, so that π followed by the merge action for Gi,
must achieve the literal KGi. In the presence of action preconditions, this argument must
be applied inductively on the plan length, but the idea remains the same (see the proof
in the appendix for details): a correspondence can be established between the evolution of
the ﬂuents L in each problem P/s and the evolution of the ﬂuents KL/s in the problem
KS0(P).
The signiﬁcance of the exhaustive KS0 translation is not only theoretical. There are
plenty of conformant problems that are quite hard for current planners even if they involve
a handful of possible initial states. An example of this is the Square-Center-n task (Cimatti
et al., 2004), where an agent has to reach the center of an empty square grid with certainty,
not knowing its initial location. There are four actions that move the agent one unit in each
direction, except when in the border of the grid, where they have no eﬀects. In the standard
version of the problem, the initial position is fully unknown resulting in n2 possible initial
states, yet the problem remains diﬃcult, and actually beyond the reach of most planners,
for small values of n, even when the uncertainty is reduced to a pair of possible initial states.
The reason is that the agent must locate itself before heading for the goal. The domain
Corners-Square-n in Table 1 is a variation of Square-Center-n where the possible initial
states are the four corners of the grid.
Table 1 shows results for a conformant planner based on the KS0(P) translation that
uses FF (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001) for solving the resulting classical problem, and compares
it with two of the planners that entered the Conformant track of the 2006 Int. Planning
Competition (Bonet & Givan, 2006): POND (Bryce et al., 2006) and Conformant FF
(Hoﬀmann & Brafman, 2006) (the other two planners in the competition were translation-
based: T0, based on the formulation developed in this paper, and K(P), based on an earlier
and more restricted formulation due to Palacios & Geﬀner, 2006). Clearly, the approach
based on the KS0(P) translation does not scale up to problems with many possible initial
states, yet when the number of such states is small, it does quite well.
6. Complete Translations that May be Compact Too
In order to have complete translations that are polynomial, certain assumptions about the
formulas in the initial situation I need to be made. Otherwise, just checking whether a
goal is true in I is intractable by itself, and therefore a polynomial but complete translation
would be impossible (unless P = NP). We will thus assume that I is in prime implicate (PI)
form (Marquis, 2000), meaning that I includes only the inclusion-minimal clauses that it
entails but no tautologies. It is known that checking whether a clause follows logically from
a formula I in PI form reduces to checking whether the clause is subsumed by a clause in
I or is a tautology, and hence is a polynomial operation. The initial situations I in most
benchmarks is in PI form or can easily be cast into PI form as they are normally speciﬁed
by means of a set of non-overlapping oneof(X1, . . . , Xn) expressions that translate into
clauses X1 ∨· · · ∨Xn and binary clauses ¬Xi ∨¬Xj for i ̸= j where any resolvent is a
tautology.
634

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
6.1 Conformant Relevance
The translation KS0(P) is complete but introduces a number of literals KL/t that is expo-
nential in the worst case: one for each possible initial state s0. This raises the question: is
it possible to have complete translations that are not exhaustive in this sense? The answer
is yes and in this section we provide a simple condition that ensures that a translation
KT,M(P) is complete. It makes use of the notion of relevance:3
Deﬁnition 10 (Relevance). The conformant relevance relation L −→L′ in P, read L is
relevant to L′, is deﬁned inductively as
1. L −→L
2. L −→L′ if a : C →L′ is in P with L ∈C for some action a in P
3. L −→L′ if L −→L′′ and L′′ −→L′
4. L −→L′ if L −→¬L′′ and L′′ −→¬L′.
The ﬁrst clause stands for reﬂexivity, the third for transitivity, the second captures condi-
tions that are relevant to the eﬀect, and the fourth, the conditions under which L preempts
conditional eﬀects that may delete L′. If we replace 4 by
4’ L −→L′ if ¬L →¬L′
which is equivalent to 4 in the context of 1–3, the resulting deﬁnition is the one by Son and
Tu (2006), where the notion of relevance is used to generate a limited set of possible ’partial’
initial states over which the 0-approximation is complete (see Section 11 for a discussion on
the relation between tags and partial initial states).
Notice that according to the deﬁnition, a precondition p of an action a is not taken to
be ’relevant’ to an eﬀect q. The reason is that we want the relation L −→L′ to capture the
conditions under which uncertainty about L is relevant to the uncertainty about L′. This is
why we say this is a relation of conformant relevance. Preconditions must be known to be
true in order for an action to be applied, so they do not introduce nor propagate uncertainty
into the eﬀects of an action.
If we let CI stand for the set of clauses representing uncertainty about the initial situa-
tion, namely, the non-unit clauses in I along with the tautologies L∨¬L for complementary
literals L and ¬L not appearing as unit clauses in I, the notion of (conformant) relevance
can be extended to clauses as follows:
Deﬁnition 11 (Relevant Clauses). A clause c ∈CI is relevant to a literal L in P if all
literals L′ ∈c are relevant to L. The set of clauses in CI relevant to L is denoted as CI(L).
Having a representation of the uncertainty in the initial situation that is relevant to a
literal L, it is possible to analyze the completeness of a translation KT,M in terms of the
relation between the merges m for the literals L, on one hand, and the sets of clauses CI(L)
that are relevant to L on the other.
3. While we follow an earlier account (Palacios & Geﬀner, 2007), many of the deﬁnitions and theorems
diﬀer in a number of details (for example, the notion of relevance depends on the rules in P but not on
the clauses in the initial situation). The changes are aimed at making the resulting formulation simpler
and cleaner.
635

Palacios & Geffner
6.2 Covering Translations
It may appear that a translation KT,M would be complete when the merges m for pre-
condition and goal literals L, understood as the DNF formulas W
t∈m t, contain as much
information, and thus are equivalent to the CNF formula CI(L) that captures the fragment
of the initial situation I that is relevant to L. This intuition is partially correct, but misses
one important point; namely that not every DNF formula equivalent to CI(L) will do: the
DNF representation captured by the merges must be ’vivid’ enough. For example, if CI(L)
is the single clause x ∨¬x, completeness requires a tag for x, a tag for ¬x, and a merge
m = {x, ¬x} for L containing the two tags, even if the clause x ∨¬x is a tautology and is
thus equivalent to the DNF formula true.
For deﬁning the types of tags and merges that are required for completeness then,
let us ﬁrst deﬁne the closure S∗of a set of literals S, relative to a conformant problem
P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩, as the set of literals that follow from S and I:
S∗= {L | I, S |= L} .
Let us also say that S is consistent if S∗does not contain a pair of complementary literals.
The type of merges m required for precondition and goal literals L are then those that
do not only imply CI(L) but that satisfy it as well. The notion of satisfaction associates a
consistent set of literals S with the partial truth assignment that is implicit in the closure
S∗of S, and is extended to account for the conditions under which a DNF formula (e.g., a
merge for L) satisﬁes a CNF formula (e.g., CI(L)).
Deﬁnition 12 (Satisfaction).
1. A consistent set of literals S satisﬁes a clause L1∨L2∨
· · · ∨Lm if S∗contains one of the literals Li, i = 1, . . . , m.
2. A consistent set of literals S satisﬁes a collection of clauses C if S satisﬁes each clause
in C.
3. A collection S of consistent sets of literals satisﬁes a collection of clauses C if each set
S in S satisﬁes C.
The type of merges required for completeness are then simply the valid merges m that
satisfy the set of clauses CI(L). We call them covering merges:
Deﬁnition 13 (Covering Merges). A valid merge m in a translation KT,M(P) covers a
literal L if m satisﬁes CI(L).
For example, if CI(L) is given by the clauses that result from a oneof(x1, . . . , xn) ex-
pression, i.e. x1 ∨x2 ∨· · · ∨xn and ¬xi ∨¬xj for all i and j, 1 ≤i, j ≤n, i ̸= j, then the
merge m = {x1, . . . , xn} covers the literal L, as each x∗
i not only includes xi but also ¬xj
for all j ̸= i, and thus x∗
i satisﬁes CI(L).
If for a merge m = {t1, . . . , tn}, we denote by m∗the DNF formula W
ti∈m t∗
i , where each
tag ti is replaced by its closure t∗
i , then it is simple to prove that if m covers the literal L,
m∗entails CI(L). A merge m that covers L is thus a DNF formula that is strong enough
to imply the CNF formula CI(L) (through the closure), weak enough to be entailed by I,
and vivid enough to satisfy CI(L).
636

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
As a further illustration, if CI(L) is given by the tautologies p ∨¬p and q ∨¬q, and
I = CI(L), the merge m1 = {p, ¬p} implies CI(L) but does not satisfy CI(L). Likewise, the
merge m2 = {{p, q}, {¬p, ¬q}} satisﬁes CI(L) but is not entailed by I. Finally, the merge
m3 = {{p, q}, {p, ¬q}, {¬p, q}, {¬p, ¬q}} satisﬁes CI(L) and is entailed by I, and thus is a
valid merge that covers L.
If a valid translation KT,M(P) contains a merge m that covers L for each precondition
and goal literal L in P, we say that the translation covers P or just that it is a covering
translation:
Deﬁnition 14 (Covering Translation). A covering translation is a valid translation
KT,M(P) that includes one merge that covers L, for each precondition and goal literal L
in P.
A central result of the paper is that covering translations are complete:
Theorem 15 (Completeness). Covering translations KT,M(P) are complete; i.e., if π is a
conformant plan for P, then there is a classical plan π′ for KT,M(P) such that π is π′ with
the merge actions removed.
In other words, complete translations KT,M(P) result when the tags and merges in T
and M capture the information in the initial situation that is relevant to each precondition
and goal literal in a suitable manner.
Theorem 15 can be used in two ways: for proving the completeness of a translation, by
checking that the covering condition holds, and for constructing complete translations, by
enforcing the covering condition. In addition, while our interest in this paper is on confor-
mant planning with no optimality guarantees, the theorem is useful for optimal conformant
planning as well, whether the cost of plans is deﬁned as their length (action costs equal to
1) or as the sum of non-uniform action costs. In both cases, the theorem ensures that the
problem of optimal conformant planning gets mapped into a problem of optimal classical
planning provided that the cost of the merge actions in KT,M(P) is made suﬃciently small.
As an illustration of Theorem 15, consider the conformant problem P with initial situa-
tion I = {x1 ∨· · · ∨xm}, goal G = L, and actions ai, i = 1, . . . , m, each with eﬀect xi →L.
The number of possible initial states for this problem is exponential in m, as the disjunction
among the xi’s is not exclusive. So, the translation KS0(P) is complete but exponential in
size. On the other hand, consider the translation KT,M(P) where T = {x1, . . . , xm} and
M contains the single valid merge m = {x1, . . . , xm} for L. It is simple to verify that this
merge covers the goal L (satisﬁes CI(L) = I), and hence that the translation KT,M(P) is
covering, and by Theorem 15, complete, while being polynomial in m.
Notice that testing whether a valid translation KT,M(P) is a covering translation can
be done in polynomial time, as in particular, computing the set of literals t∗from every tag
t in T is a tractable operation provided that I is in PI form; indeed, I, t |= L′ iﬀI |= t ⊃L′
iﬀ¬t ∨L′ is a tautology or is subsumed by a clause in I.
6.3 Translation Kmodels
It is straightforward to show that the exponential translation KS0 considered in Section 3,
where (non-empty) tags stand for the possible initial states, is covering and hence complete
637

Palacios & Geffner
according to Theorem 15. It is possible, however, to take further advantage of Theorem 15
for devising a complete translation that is usually more compact. We call it Kmodels.
Deﬁnition 16. The translation Kmodels(P) is obtained from the general scheme KT,M(P)
by deﬁning
• M to contain one merge m for each precondition and goal literal L given by the models
of CI(L) that are consistent with I,4 and
• T to contain the tags in all such merges along with the empty tag.
The translation Kmodels is equivalent to KS0 when for all the precondition and goal
literals L, CI(L) = I; i.e., when all the clauses in I are relevant to L. Yet, in other cases,
the ﬁrst translation is exponential in the number of variables appearing in one such CI(L)
set (the one with the largest number of such variables), while the second is exponential in
the number of unknown variables in I. For example, if there are n precondition and goal
literals Li, i = 1, . . . , n in P such that for each one, CI(Li) is a unique oneof(xi
1, . . . , xi
m)
expression, the merge for the literal Li in KS0(P) will contain the mn models of the n one-of
expressions in I, while the merge for Li in Kmodels(P) will just contain the m models of
the single oneof(xi
1, . . . , xi
m) expression in CI(Li). The translation Kmodels can thus be
exponentially more compact than the exhaustive KS0 translation while remaining sound
and complete:
Theorem 17. The translation Kmodels(P) is sound and complete.
In the worst case, however, Kmodels is also an exponential translation. We thus consider
next polynomial translations and the conditions under which they are complete.
6.4 Conformant Width
We address now the conditions under which a compact, covering translation can be con-
structed in polynomial time. For this, we deﬁne a structural parameter that we call the
conformant width of a problem P, that in analogy to the notion of width used in graphical
models (Dechter, 2003), will provide an upper bound on the time and space complexity
required for generating a covering translation. More precisely, the complexity of this con-
struction will be exponential in the conformant width of the problem P that cannot exceed
the number of ﬂuents in P but can be much lower.
In principle, we would like to deﬁne the width w(P) as the maximum tag size required
in a translation KT,M(P) to be a covering translation. Such a deﬁnition, however, would
not give us the complexity bounds that we want, as just checking the validity of a merge
with tags of bounded size is an intractable operation, whether the initial situation I is in
prime implicate form or not.5 So we need to deﬁne width in a diﬀerent way. First, let the
cover of a set of clauses be deﬁned as follows:
4. The models of CI(L) are to be understood as conjuntions of literals.
5. The problem of checking whether I entails a DNF formula whose terms may have more than 2 literals
is coNP-hard even if I is equivalent to true. Indeed, if Φ is a 3-CNF formula; Φ is contradictory iﬀits
negation ¬Φ (which is in 3-DNF) is valid, which in turn is true iﬀ¬Φ is implied by I. Actually, for a
general I in prime implicate form, the problem remains coNP-hard even if the terms of the DNF formula
contain at most 2 literals. We thank Pierre Marquis for pointing these results to us.
638

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
Deﬁnition 18 (Cover). The cover c(C) of a set of clauses C, relative to a conformant
problem P with initial situation I, is the collection of all minimal sets of literals S consistent
with I such that S contains a literal of each clause in C.
Two important properties of the cover c(C) of a set of clauses C are that c(C) stands for
a DNF formula that is logically equivalent to the CNF formula C given I, and that c(C) can
be computed in polynomial time if the size of C is bounded by a constant. Moreover, c(C)
not only implies C but satisﬁes C as well. Thus in particular, if C is the collection of clauses
CI(L) that are relevant to the literal L, the cover c(CI(L)) of CI(L) is a valid merge that
covers L. From this and the completeness of covering translations, it follows that a complete
translation KT,M(P) can be constructed in polynomial time if the size |CI(L)| of the sets of
clauses CI(L) for all precondition and goal literals L in P is bounded. Unfortunately, this
condition rarely seems to hold, yet there is a weaker suﬃcient condition that does: namely,
it is often possible to ﬁnd a subset C of clauses that are either in CI(L) or are tautologies
such that c(C) satisﬁes CI(L) and thus covers the literal L. We thus deﬁne the width of
the literal L as the size of the smallest such set (cardinality-wise). For this, we denote by
C∗
I (L) the set of clauses CI(L) extended with tautologies of the form p ∨¬p for ﬂuents p
such that either p or ¬p appears in CI(L) (if both appear in CI(L) then p ∨¬p is in CI(L)
from its deﬁnition).
Deﬁnition 19 (Width of Literal). The conformant width of a literal L in P, written w(L),
is the size of the smallest (cardinality-wise) set of clauses C in C∗
I (L) such that c(C) satisﬁes
CI(L).
A consequence of this deﬁnition is that the width of a literal must lie in the interval
0 ≤w(L) ≤n, where n is the number of ﬂuents in P whose status in the initial situation
is not known. Indeed, if CI(L) is empty, w(L) = 0, while for any set of clauses CI(L), the
cover c(C) of the set C of tautologies in C∗
I (L) must satisfy CI(L), and thus w(L) ≤|C| ≤n.
Similarly, if CI(L) contains a single clause x1 ∨· · · ∨xm or the clauses x1 ∨· · · ∨xm and
¬xi ∨¬xj that correspond to the oneof(x1, . . . , xm) expression, it is simple to prove that
w(L) = 1 with the singleton C = {x1∨· · ·∨xm} generating the cover c(C) = {{x1}, . . . , {xn}}
that satisﬁes CI(L). Finally, if CI(L) contains the two tautologies p∨¬p and q∨¬q, w(L) = 2
as the smallest C in C∗
I (L) whose cover satisﬁes CI(L) is CI(L) itself.
The width of a problem is the width of the precondition or goal literal with maximum
width:
Deﬁnition 20 (Width of Problem). The conformant width of a problem P, written as
w(P), is w(P) = maxL w(L), where L ranges over the precondition and goal literals in P.
We show below that for problems with bounded width, complete translations can be
constructed in polynomial time, and moreover, that almost all existing conformant bench-
marks have bounded width, and more precisely, width equal to 1.
In such a case, the
resulting translations will use tags that are never greater in size than w(P), so that for
problems with width 1, tags will be single literals.
Like for the (tree)width of graphical models, computing the width of a problem P is
exponential in w(P), so the recognition of problems with small width can be carried out
quite eﬃciently:
639

Palacios & Geffner
Proposition 21 (Determining Width). The width w(P) of P can be determined in time
that is exponential in w(P).
In particular, we can test if w(P) = 1 by considering one by one each of the sets C
that includes a single clause from C∗
I (L), verifying whether c(C) satisﬁes CI(L) or not. If
w(P) ̸≤1, then the same veriﬁcation must be carried out by setting C to each set of i
clauses in C∗
I (L) for increasing values of i. For a ﬁxed value of i, there is a polynomial
number of such clause sets C and the veriﬁcation of each one can be done in polynomial
time. Moreover, from the arguments above regarding w(L), w(P) can never exceed the
number of unknown ﬂuents in the problem:
Proposition 22 (Bounds on Width). The width of P is such that 0 ≤w(P) ≤n, where n
is the number of ﬂuents whose value in the initial situation is not known.
6.5 Polynomial Translation Ki
The translation Ki, where the parameter i is a non-negative integer, is an instance of
the general KT,M scheme designed to be sound, polynomial for a ﬁxed i, and complete for
problems with width w(P) ≤i. Thus, for example, the translation K1 is sound, polynomial,
and complete for problems with width 1.
Deﬁnition 23 (Translation Ki). The translation Ki(P) is obtained from the general
scheme KT,M(P) where
• M is set to contain one merge m = c(C) for each precondition and goal literal L in P
if there is a set C of at most i clauses in C∗
I (L) such that m covers L. If no such set
exists, one merge m = c(C) for L is created for each set C of i clauses in C∗
I (L), and
no merges are created for L if C∗
I (L) is empty;
• T is the collection of tags appearing in those merges and the empty tag.
The translation Ki(P) applies to problems P of any width, remaining in all cases expo-
nential in i but polynomial in the number of ﬂuents, actions, and clauses in P. In addition,
the translation Ki(P) is sound, and for problems with width bounded by i, complete.
Theorem 24 (Properties Ki). For a ﬁxed i, the translation Ki(P) is sound, polynomial,
and if w(P) ≤i, covering and complete.
Soundness is the result of the merges being all valid by construction, as the covers c(C)
for any C in C∗
I (L) are entailed by C and hence by I. The complexity is polynomial for a ﬁxed
i, because there is a polynomial number of clause sets C of size i in C∗
I (L), and constructing
the cover c(C) for each one of them, is a polynomial operation. Finally, completeness follows
from the deﬁnition of width: if w(P) ≤i, then there is a set of clauses C in C∗
I (L) with
size |C| no greater than i whose cover satisﬁes CI(L), and thus M in Ki(P) must contain a
merge m = c(C) for L that covers L.
Notice that for i = 0, the translation Ki(P) reduces to the basic K0(P) translation
introduced in Section 3 that has no tags (other than the empty tag) and no merges. Before,
we assessed the completeness of this translation in terms of the 0-approximation semantics.
Theorem 24 provides an alternative interpretation: the translation K0(P) is complete for
640

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
Domain-Parameter
# Unknown Fluents
Width
1
Safe-n combinations
n
1
2
UTS-n locs
n
1
3
Ring-n rooms
4n
1
4
Bomb-in-the-toilet-n bombs
n
1
5
Comm-n signals
n
1
6
Square-Center-n × n grid
2n
1
7
Cube-Center-n × n × n cube
3n
1
8
Grid-n shapes of n keys
n × m
1
9
Logistics n pack m locs
n × m
1
10
Coins-n coins m locs
n × m
1
11
Block-Tower-n Blocks
n × (n −1) + 3n + 1
n × (n −1) + 3n + 1
12
Sortnet-n bits
n
n
13
Adder n pairs of bits
2n
2n
14
Look-and-Grab m objs from n × n locs
n × n × m
m
15
1-dispose m objs from n × n locs
n × n × m
m
Table 2: Width of parameterized domains
problems P with zero width. These are the problems for which the set of clauses CI(L)
relevant to a precondition or goal literal L is empty.
This makes precise the intuition
mentioned above that the K0(P) translation is complete for problems where the uncertain
information in I is not relevant. In such cases, none of the clauses in the initial situation I
make it into the sets of relevant clauses CI(L) for preconditions and goal literals L.
As an illustration of Theorem 24, consider again the conformant problem P with initial
situation I = {x1 ∨· · · ∨xm}, goal G = {L}, and actions ai, i = 1, . . . , m, each with
eﬀect xi →L. For this problem, the singleton set of clauses C = CI(L) = I is such that
c(C) = {{x1}, . . . , {xm}} covers CI(L). Then, since there is no other precondition or goal
literal, K1(P) includes the single merge m = c(C) for L with the singleton tags ti = {xi},
that we write simply as m = {x1, . . . , xm}. The translation K1(P) is polynomial in m,
and since w(P) = 1, by Theorem 24 it is complete. Notice that for this same example, the
translations KS0(P) and Kmodels(P) are identical and exponential in m (the number of
models of I and CI(L)).
6.6 Width of Conformant Benchmarks
The practical value of the notion of width becomes apparent when the width of existing
benchmarks is considered. Table 2 summarizes the width of many of the existing benchmark
domains for conformant planning. The domains all depend on certain parameters n or m
that capture the size of the instances (e.g., size of a grid, number of objects, etc).6 A domain
has a bounded width when its width does not grow with the size of its instances, and has
width equal to i when all of its instances have width i regardless of the parameter values.
As it can be seen from the table, the width of most existing benchmarks is 1. In all
these cases, this means that the sets CI(L) of clauses that are relevant to a precondition or
6. The names of the parameterized domains in the table do not coincide with the names of the instances
as currently used. E.g. Comm-n in IPC5 refers to a Communication instance but not necessarily to an
instance with n signals.
641

Palacios & Geffner
goal literal L contain a single clause (often a tautology p∨¬p or a disjunction x1 ∨. . .∨xm)
or a single oneof(x1, . . . , xm) expression (that translates into the disjunction x1 ∨· · · ∨xm
and clauses ¬xi ∨¬xk). As shown above, w(L), and therefore, w(P), is equal to 1 in theses
cases.
On the other extreme are domains such as Blocks, Sortnet, and Adder, all of which
have maximal widths; i.e., widths that are equivalent to the number of ﬂuents whose sta-
tus in the initial situation is not known. This is because all ﬂuents interact through the
action conditions (not the preconditions). The numbers for Blocks in Table 2, thus follow
from the number of ﬂuents involved; namely, the ﬂuents on(x, y), clear(x), ontable(x), and
holding(x).
Finally, the domains 1-dispose and Look-and-Grab (Palacios & Geﬀner, 2006, 2007)
where m objects with unknown locations in a grid of n by n must be collected by a robot
whose gripper can hold one object at a time, have width equal to m, meaning that the
width of these domains grows with the number of objects but not with the size of the grid.
This is because in this case, the clauses about the possible locations of the m objects are
all relevant to the condition ’hand empty’ of the pick up actions.
Let us point out that the completeness of the translation Ki(P) for problems P with
width w(P) bounded by i, establishes a correspondence between the conformant plans
for P and the classical plans for KT,M(P). For solving P, however, this correspondence
is not needed; it suﬃces for Ki(P) to be solvable; a plan for Ki(P) will then encode a
conformant plan for P, even if Ki(P) does not capture all conformant plans for P. From
this perspective, it makes sense to refer to the smallest value of the i parameter for which
the classical problem Ki(P) is solvable, as the eﬀective width of P, denoted we(P). It turns
out that while we(P) cannot be larger than w(P), it may be much smaller. An interesting
example of this comes from the Sortnet-n domain (Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000). Sortnet-n is
considered a challenging domain in conformant planning with very few planners able to
scale up to even small values of n (the number of entries to be sorted in a sorting network).
The domain has width n, and in the compact encoding used in IPC5, the input vector is
represented by a set of bits, exploiting the fact that sorting vectors of numbers reduces to
sorting vector of bits (0’s and 1’s). The domain cannot be solved by the K1 translation that
FF reports correctly as unsolvable after a brief unsuccessful search. On the other hand,
it is possible to reformulate the domain, replacing the unary high(i) and low(i) predicates
by binary predicates less(i, j) that compare two vector entries. We call this reformulation
Sort-2-n. While the encoding Sort-n is linear in n, the encoding Sort-2-n is quadratic in n,
and in both cases, the problem width is maximum, given by the number of ﬂuents whose
status in the initial situation is unknown. Yet, while the more compact Sort-n encoding is
not solvable by the K1 translation, K1 suﬃces to solve the problem over the expanded Sort-
2-n encoding that actually can also be solved by K0. Thus the eﬀective width of Sort-2-n
is 0. Interestingly, provided the K0 translation of Sort-2-n, instances can be solved with up
to 20 entries. On the other hand, conformant planners such as Conformant-FF and POND
can solve Sort-2-n instances for n no greater than 3.
642

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
7. Tags and Initial States
A deeper understanding of the results above can be obtained by relating tags with possible
initial states. By looking more closely at this relation in the context of covering translations,
we will be able to answer the question of how a polynomial number of contexts (tags) can
play the role of an exponential number of possible initial states in problems with bounded
width.
For this, let us ﬁrst recall a notation introduced in Section 2.2, where for a state s, we
wrote I(s) to refer to the set of atoms encoding s (i.e, p ∈I(s) iﬀp is true in s) and P/s
to refer to the classical planning problem P/s = ⟨F, I(s), O, G⟩that is like the conformant
problem P = ⟨F, I, O, G⟩but with the initial state ﬁxed to s.
Let us now extend this notation and say that an action sequence π conforms with a set
of states S given the conformant problem P iﬀπ is a plan for the classical problem P/s for
each s ∈S. Clearly, a conformant plan for P is nothing else but an action sequence that
conforms with the set S0 of possible initial states of P, yet the notion of ’conforms’ allows
us to abstract away the initial situation I and make precise the notion of a basis:
Deﬁnition 25 (Basis for P). A set of states S′ is a basis for a conformant problem P =
⟨F, I, O, G⟩if S′ is a subset of the set S0 of possible initial states of P and every plan that
conforms with S′ conforms with the set of possible initial states S0.
In words, if S′ is a basis for P, it is not necessary to consider all the states in S0 for
computing the conformant plans for P; it suﬃces to consider just the states in S′. We aim
to show that if the width of P is bounded, then P has a polynomial basis S′ even if S0 has
exponential size. Moreover, the states s in such a basis are in close correspondence with
the tags appearing in a covering translation.
As an illustration, consider a problem P with actions ai, i = 1, . . . , n, and eﬀects
ai : xi →L. Let G = {L} be the goal and I = {x1 ∨· · · ∨xn} the initial situation. The
set S0 of all possible initial states are the truth valuations over the xi atoms where at least
one of these atoms is true. There are 2n −1 such states. On the other hand, one can show
that the set S′
0 of n valuations in which exactly one of these atoms is true provides a basis
for P; i.e., the plans that conform with these n possible initial states, are exactly the plans
that conform with the complete set of 2n −1 possible initial states in S0.
The reduction in the number of possible initial states that must be considered for com-
puting conformant plans results from two monotonicity properties that we formulate using
the notation rel(s, L) to refer to the set of literals L′ that are true in the state s and are
relevant to the literal L:
rel(s, L) = {L′ | L′ ∈s and L′ is relevant to L} .
Proposition 26 (Monotonicity 1). Let s and s′ be two states and let π be an action sequence
applicable in the classical problems P/s and P/s′. Then if π achieves a literal L in P/s′
and rel(s′, L) ⊆rel(s, L), π achieves the literal L in P/s.
Proposition 27 (Monotonicity 2). If S and S′ are two collections of states such that for
every state s in S and every precondition and goal literal L in P, there is a state s′ in S′
such that rel(s′, L) ⊆rel(s, L), then if π is a plan for P that conforms with S′, π is a plan
for P that conforms with S.
643

Palacios & Geffner
From these properties, it follows that
Proposition 28. S′ is a basis for P if for every possible initial state s of P and every
precondition and goal literal L in P, S′ contains a state s′ such that rel(s′, L) ⊆rel(s, L).
This proposition allows us to verify the claim made in the example above that the set S′
0,
that contains a number of states that is linear in n, is a basis for P that has an exponential
number of possible initial states. Indeed, such a problem has no precondition and a single
goal literal L, and for every state s that makes more than one atom xi true (these are the
literals relevant to L), there is a state s′ in S′
0 that makes only one of those atoms true, and
hence for which the relation rel(s′, L) ⊆rel(s, L) holds.
The question that we address now is how to build a basis that complies with the condition
in Proposition 28 given a covering translation KT,M(P). For this, let m = {t1, . . . , tn} be
a merge in M that covers a precondition or goal literal L, and let S[ti, L] denote the set of
possible initial states s of P such that rel(s, L) ⊆t∗
i ; i.e., S[ti, L] contains the possible initial
states of P that make all the literals L′ that are relevant to L false, except for those in the
closure t∗
i of ti. We show ﬁrst that if I is in prime implicate form, S[ti, L] is a non-empty
set:7
Proposition 29. If the initial situation I is in prime implicate form and m = {t1, . . . , tn}
is a valid merge that covers a literal L in P, then the set S[ti, L] of possible initial states s
of P such that rel(s, L) ⊆t∗
i is non-empty.
Let then s[ti, L] stand for an arbitrary state in S[ti, L]. We obtain the following result:
Theorem 30. Let KT,M(P) be a covering translation for a problem P with an initial
situation in PI form, and let S′ stand for the collection of states s[ti, L] where L is a
precondition or goal literal of P and ti is a tag in a merge that covers L. Then S′ is a basis
for P.
This is an important result for three reasons. First, it tells us how to build a basis for P
given the tags ti in a covering translation KT,M(P). Second, it tells us that the size of the
resulting basis is linear in the number of precondition and goal literals L and tags ti. And
third, it makes the role of the tags ti in the covering translation KT,M(P) explicit, providing
an intuition for why it works: each tag ti in a merge that covers a literal L represents one
possible initial state; namely, a state s[ti, L] that makes false all the literals L′ that are
relevant to L except those in t∗
i . If a plan conforms with those critical states, then it will
conform with all the possible initial states by monotonicity (Proposition 27). It follows then
in particular that:
Theorem 31. If P is a conformant planning problem with bounded width, then P admits
a basis of polynomial size.
Namely, conformant problems P with width bounded by a non-negative integer i admit
polynomial translations that are complete, because the plans that conform with the possibly
exponential number of initial states of P correspond with the plans that conform with
7. Recall that we are assuming throughout that the initial situation I is logically consistent and that the
tags t are consistent with I.
644

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
a subset of critical initial states that are polynomial in number (namely, those in the
polynomial basis).
Thus, one complete polynomial translation for such problems is the
Ki translation; another one, is the KS0 translation but with the tags associated with those
critical initial states only rather than with all the initial states.
As an illustration, for the problem P above with actions ai and eﬀects ai : xi →L,
goal G = {L}, and initial situation I = {x1 ∨· · · ∨xn}, the K1(P) translation with tags xi,
i = 1, . . . , n, and the merge m = {x1, . . . , xn} for the goal literal L, is a covering translation.
Theorem 30 then states that a basis S′ for P results from the collection of states si that
make each tag xi true, and all the literals that are relevant to L that are not in x∗
i false (i.e.,
all xk atoms for k ̸= i). This is precisely the basis for P that we had above that includes
the states that make a single atom xi true for i = 1, . . . , n: the plans that conform with this
basis are then exactly the plans that conform with the whole collection of possible initial
states of P. This basis has a size that is polynomial in m though, while the number of
possible initial states of P is exponential in m.
8. The Planner T0
The current version of the conformant planner T0 is based on two instances of the general
translation scheme KT,M(P) whose outputs are fed into the classical planner FF v2.3.8 One
instance is polynomial but not necessarily complete; the other is complete but not necessarily
polynomial. For the incomplete translation, T0 uses K1 that is complete for problems with
width no greater than 1, and as argued above, can result in solvable instances for problems
of larger widths.
For the complete translation, the Kmodels translation is used instead
with a simple optimization: if the K1 translation produces a single merge m that covers L,
then this merge m is used for L instead of the potentially more complex one determined by
Kmodels. This is a mere optimization as the resulting translation remains complete. The
other merges in Kmodels, that result from the models of the set of clauses CI(L) that are
consistent with I, are computed using the SAT solver relsat v2.20 (Bayardo Jr. & Schrag,
1997). In the current default mode in T0, which is the one used in the experiments below,
the two translations K1 and Kmodels are used in sequence: FF is called ﬁrst upon the
output of K1 and if this fails, it is called upon the output of Kmodels. In the experiments
below, we indicate the cases when Kmodels was invoked.
The translations used in T0 accommodate certain simpliﬁcations and two additional
actions that capture other types of deductions. The simpliﬁcations have to do with the fact
that the translations considered are all uniform in the sense that all literals L in P and
all rules C →L are ’conditioned’ by each of the tags t in T. From a practical point of
view, however, this is not needed. The simpliﬁcations address this source of ineﬃciency. In
particular:
• literals KL/t are not created when the closure t∗contains no literal relevant to L.
In such a case, the invariance KL/t ⊃KL holds, and thus, every occurrence of the
literal KL/t in KT,M(P) is replaced by KL.
8. The conformant planner T0 along with all the benchmarks considered in the paper are available at
http://www.ldc.usb.ve/∼hlp/software.
645

Palacios & Geffner
• support rules a : KC/t →KL/t for non-empty tags t are not created when L is not
relevant to a literal L′ with a merge that contains t, as in such a case, the literal
KL/t cannot contribute to establish a precondition or goal. Similarly, cancellation
rules a : ¬K¬C/t →¬K¬L/t for non-empty tags t are not created when ¬L is not
relevant to a literal L′ with a merge that contains t.
• support and cancellation rules a : KC/t →KL/t and a : ¬K¬C/t →¬K¬L/t are
grouped as a : KC/t →KL/t∧¬K¬L/t when for every ﬂuent L′ relevant to L, either
L′ or ¬L′ is entailed by I and t. In such a case, there is no incomplete information
about L given t in the initial situation, and thus the invariant KL/t or K¬L/t holds,
and ¬K¬C/t is equivalent to KC/t.
Two other types of sound deductive rules are included in the translations:
• a rule a : KC →KL is added if a : C, ¬L →L is a rule in P for an action a, and no
rule in P has the form a : C′ →¬L,
• rules K¬L1, . . . , K¬Li−1, K¬Li+1, . . . , K¬Ln →KLi for i = 1, . . . , n are added to a
new unique action with no precondition, when L1 ∨· · · ∨Ln is a static clause in P (a
clause in P is static if true in the initial situation and provably true after any action).
These rules are versions of the action compilation and static disjunctions rules (Palacios &
Geﬀner, 2006, 2007), and they appear to help in certain domains without hurting in others.
The version of T0 reported below does not assume that the initial situation I of P is
in prime implicate form but it rather renders it in PI form by running a version of Tison’s
algorithm (1967), a computation that in none of the benchmarks solved took more than 48
seconds.
The translators in T0 are written in OCaml while the code for parsing the PDDL ﬁles
is written in C++.
9. Experimental Results
We considered instances from three sources: the Conformant-FF distribution, the confor-
mant track of the 2006 International Planning Competition (IPC5), and relevant publica-
tions (Palacios & Geﬀner, 2006, 2007; Cimatti et al., 2004). The instances were run on a
cluster of Linux boxes at 2.33 GHz with 8GB. Each experiment had a cutoﬀof 2h or 2.1GB
of memory. Times for T0 include all the steps, in particular, computation of prime impli-
cates, translation, and search (done by FF). We also include results from the Conformant
Track of the recent 2008 International Planning Competition (IPC6).
Goals that are not sets of literals but sets of clauses are transformed in T0 in a standard
way: each goal clause C : L1 ∨· · · ∨Lm is modeled by a new goal atom GC, and a new
action that can be executed once is added with rules Li →GC, i = 1, . . . , m.9
9. An alternative way to represent such CNF goals is by converting them into DNF ﬁrst and having an
action End map each of its non-mutex terms into a dummy goal LG. This alternative encoding pays
oﬀin some cases, such as in the Adder-01 instance that does not get solved in the default CNF goal
encoding (see below).
646

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
P
K1(P)
PDDL
Problem
#Acts #Atoms #Eﬀects
Time
#Acts #Atoms #Eﬀects
Size
bomb-100-100
10100
404
40200
2
10201
1595
50500
2,9
square-center-96
4
196
760
35,1
7
37248
75054
3,8
sortnet-09
46
68
109
8,3
56
29707
154913
5,1
blocks-03
32
30
152
4
37
11370
35232
0,7
dispose-16-1
1217
1479
2434
163,6
1218
133122
3458
0,3
look-and-grab-8-1-1
352
358
2220
6,9
353
8708
118497
7,8
sgripper-30
487
239
1456
21,5
860
1127
12769
1
Table 3: Translation data for selected instances: #Acts, #Atoms, and #Eﬀects stand for
the number of actions, ﬂuents, and conditional eﬀects. Time is the translation
time in seconds rounded to the closest decimal, and PDDL Size is the size of the
PDDL ﬁle in Megabytes.
Table 3 shows data concerning the translation of a group of selected instances. As it can
be seen, the number of conditional eﬀects grows considerably in all cases, and sometimes
the translation may take several seconds.
Tables 4, 5, 6, 7, and
8, show the plan times and lengths obtained on a number of
benchmarks by T0, POND 2.2 (Bryce et al., 2006), Conformant FF (Hoﬀmann & Brafman,
2006), MBP (Cimatti et al., 2004) and KACMBP (Bertoli & Cimatti, 2002). These last
two planners do not accept problems in the standard syntax (based on PDDL), so only a
limited number of experiments were performed on them. The general picture is that T0
scales up well in most domains, the exceptions being Square-Center and Cube-Center in
Table 5, where KACMBP scales up better, Sortnet in Table 6, where KACMBP and MBP
scale up better; and Adder in Table 6, where POND is the only planner able to solve one
instance.
The problems in Table 4 are encodings from the Conformant-FF repository: Bomb-x-y
refers to the Bomb-in-the-toilet problem with x packages, y toilets, and clogging; Logistics-i-
j-k is a variation of the classical version with uncertainty about initial location of packages;
Ring-n is about closing and locking windows in a ring of n rooms without knowing the
current room; and Safe-n is about opening a safe with n possible combinations. All these
problems have width 1. T0 does clearly best on the last two domains, while in the ﬁrst two
domains, Conformant-FF does well too.
Table 5 reports experiments on four grid domains: Cube-Center-n refers to the problem
of reaching the center of a cube of size n3 from a completely unknown location; Square-
Center-n is similar but involves square with n2 possible locations; Corners-Cube-n and
Corners-Square-n are variations of these problems where the set of possible initial locations
is restricted to the Cube and Square corners respectively. MBP and KACMBP appear to be
eﬀective in these domains, although KACMBP doesn’t scale up well in the corner versions.
T0 solves most of the problems, but in the corner versions, the quality of the plans is poor.
These problems have also width 1.
Table 6 reports experiments over problems from the 2006 International Planning Com-
petition (Bonet & Givan, 2006). The domains Coins, Comm and UTS have all width 1.
The others have max width given by the number of unknown ﬂuents in the initial situation.
647

Palacios & Geffner
T0
POND
CFF
MBP
KACMBP
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
bomb-20-1
0,1
49
4139
39
0
39
> 2h
0
40
bomb-20-5
0,1
35
> 2h
0
35
> 2h
0,2
40
bomb-20-10
0,1
30
> 2h
0
30
> 2h
0,5
40
bomb-20-20
0,1
20
> 2h
0
20
> 2h
2
40
bomb-100-1
0,5
199
–
56,7
199
–
1,9
200
bomb-100-5
0,7
195
–
52,9
195
–
4,3
200
bomb-100-10
1,1
190
–
46,8
190
–
16,4
200
bomb-100-60
4,25
140
–
9,4
140
–
> 2h
bomb-100-100
9,4
100
–
1
100
–
> 2h
logistics-4-3-3
0,1
35
56
40
0
37
> 2h
> 2.1GB
logistics-2-10-10
1
84
> 2h
1,6
83
> 2h
> 2.1GB
logistics-3-10-10
1,5
108
> 2h
4,7
108
> 2h
> 2.1GB
logistics-4-10-10
2,5
125
> 2h
4,4
121
> 2h
> 2.1GB
ring-4
0,1
13
1
18
0,4
18
0
11
0
26
ring-5
0,1
17
6
20
4,3
31
0,1
14
0,1
58
ring-6
0,1
20
33
27
93,6
48
0,6
17
0,2
99
ring-7
0,1
30
444
33
837
71
3,8
20
0,5
204
ring-8
0,1
39
> 2h
> 2h
40
23
2
432
ring-30
13,4
121
–
–
> 2h
> 2.1GB
safe-10
0,1
10
0
10
0
10
0,1
10
0
10
safe-30
0,1
30
2
30
1,4
30
> 2h
0,2
30
safe-50
0,4
50
9
50
29,4
50
> 2h
0,7
50
safe-70
1,12
70
41
70
109,9
70
> 2h
2,4
70
safe-100
2,5
100
> 2.1GB
1252,4
100
> 2h
8,6
100
Table 4: Experiments over well known benchmarks. Times reported in seconds and rounded
to the closest decimal. ’–’ means time or memory out for smaller instances.
648

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
T0
POND
CFF
MBP
KACMBP
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
square-center-8
0,2
21
2
41
70,6
50
0
24
0
28
square-center-12
0,2
33
12
52
> 2h
0
36
0
42
square-center-16
0,3
44
1322
61
> 2h
0
48
0
56
square-center-24
0,8
69
> 2h
–
0
72
0
84
square-center-92
45,3
273
> 2h
–
0,9
276
0,3
322
square-center-96
50,2
285
–
–
0,9
288
0,3
336
square-center-100
> 2.1GB
–
–
1,1
300
0,3
350
square-center-120
> 2.1GB
–
–
1,9
360
0,4
420
cube-center-5
0,1
18
1
22
8,2
45
0
28
0
25
cube-center-7
0,1
27
2
43
> 2h
0
33
0
35
cube-center-9
0,2
33
3
47
> 2h
0,1
54
0
45
cube-center-11
0,3
45
29
87
–
0,2
59
0
55
cube-center-15
0,5
63
880
109
–
0,2
69
0
75
cube-center-19
0,8
81
> 2h
–
1,6
111
0,1
95
cube-center-63
28,5
279
> 2h
–
28
285
0,5
315
cube-center-67
41,6
297
–
–
> 2.1GB
0,7
335
cube-center-87
137,5
387
–
–
> 2.1GB
1,2
435
cube-center-91
> 2.1GB
–
–
–
1,2
455
cube-center-119
> 2.1GB
–
–
–
2,1
595
corners-square-12
0,1
64
11
44
1,7
82
0
36
0,2
106
corners-square-16
0,2
102
1131
67
13,1
140
0
48
0,6
158
corners-square-20
0,3
148
> 2h
73,7
214
0,3
60
3
268
corners-square-24
0,5
202
> 2h
321
304
0,6
72
7,5
346
corners-square-28
0,7
264
–
MPL
1,1
84
20,7
502
corners-square-36
1,7
412
–
–
1,5
108
3308,8
808
corners-square-40
2,5
498
–
–
7,8
120
> 2h
corners-square-72
26,1
1474
–
–
118,8
216
> 2h
corners-square-76
30,5
1632
–
–
371
228
–
corners-square-80
38,2
1798
–
–
649,6
240
–
corners-square-120
223,6
3898
–
–
> 2.1GB
–
corners-cube-15
0,8
147
907
105
134,5
284
3,7
69
174,1
391
corners-cube-16
0,9
174
3168
115
439,4
214
12,5
72
270,5
316
corners-cube-19
2,5
225
> 2h
868,4
456
549,5
111
1503,1
488
corners-cube-20
2,7
258
> 2h
3975,6
332
1061,9
90
2759
625
corners-cube-23
6,3
319
–
MPL
> 2h
6265,9
899
corners-cube-24
6,7
358
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
corners-cube-27
14,6
429
–
–
–
> 2h
corners-cube-52
448
1506
–
–
–
–
corners-cube-55
> 2.1GB
–
–
–
–
Table 5: Experiments over grid problems. Times reported in seconds and rounded to the
closest decimal. ’MPL’ for CFF means that plan exceeds maximal plan length
(500 actions). ’–’ means time or memory out for smaller instances.
649

Palacios & Geffner
T0
POND
CFF
MBP
KACMBP
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
adder-01
> 2h
1591
5
SNH
NR
NR
adder-02
> 2h
> 2h
SNH
NR
NR
blocks-01
0,1
5
0,1
4
0
6
NR
NR
blocks-02
0,3
23
0,4
26
> 2h
NR
NR
blocks-03
82,6
80
126,8
129
> 2h
NR
NR
coins-10
0,1
26
5
28
0,1
38
> 2h
4,2
106
coins-12
0,1
67
> 2h
0,8
72
> 2h
3654,7
674
coins-15
0,1
79
> 2h
3
89
–
> 2h
coins-16
0,3
113
–
33,3
145
–
> 2h
coins-17
0,2
96
–
1,4
94
–
–
coins-18
0,2
97
–
6,2
118
–
–
coins-19
0,2
105
–
16,5
128
–
–
coins-20
0,2
107
–
20,6
143
–
–
coins-21
> 2h
–
> 2h
–
–
comm-07
0,1
54
0
47
0
47
0,2
55
63,6
53
comm-08
0,1
61
1
53
0
53
0,2
71
1966,8
53
comm-09
0,1
68
1
59
0
59
0,2
77
> 2h
comm-10
0,1
75
1
65
0
65
0,3
85
> 2h
comm-15
0,1
110
6
95
0,2
95
0,9
115
–
comm-16
0,2
138
> 2h
0,4
119
1,6
151
–
comm-20
0,8
278
> 2.1GB
6,4
239
50,9
340
–
comm-25
2,3
453
–
56,1
389
> 2h
–
sortnet-06
0,6
21
18
20
SNH
0
17
0
21
sortnet-07
2,5
28
480
25
SNH
0
20
0
28
sortnet-08
9,6
36
> 2h
SNH
0
28
0
36
sortnet-09
76,8
45
> 2h
SNH
0
36
0
45
sortnet-10
> 2.1GB
–
SNH
0,1
37
0,1
55
sortnet-11
> 2.1GB
–
SNH
0,1
47
0,1
66
uts-k-04
0,1
23
2
22
0,1
22
5,4
32
1,5
30
uts-k-05
0,1
29
4
28
0,3
28
1247,3
38
195,4
42
uts-k-06
0,2
35
10
34
0,8
34
1704,8
50
> 2h
uts-k-07
0,4
41
13
40
1,9
40
> 2h
> 2h
uts-k-08
0,6
47
24
47
4,4
46
> 2h
–
uts-k-09
0,9
53
> 2h
8,6
52
–
–
uts-k-10
1,3
59
2219
67
16,5
58
–
–
uts-l-07
0,2
70
201
58
0,2
41
10,5
89
> 2h
uts-l-08
0,3
80
937
67
0,4
47
41,1
106
> 2h
uts-l-09
0,6
93
> 2h
0,8
53
1176
137
–
uts-l-10
0,7
97
> 2h
1,6
59
> 2h
–
Table 6: Experiments over problems from IPC5. Times reported in seconds and rounded
to the closest decimal. ’SNH’ for CFF means that goal syntax not handled, while
’NR’ for MBP and KACMBP that these planners were not run due to lack of
translations from PDDL. ’–’ means time or memory out for smaller instances.
650

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
T0
POND
CFF
MBP
KACMBP
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
time
len
dispose-4-1
0,1
59
9
55
0,1
39
> 2h
17,1
81
dispose-4-2
0,1
110
36
70
0,2
56
> 2h
> 2h
dispose-4-3
0,3
122
308
102
0,6
73
–
> 2h
dispose-8-1
2,7
426
> 2.1GB
339,1
227
–
–
dispose-8-2
18,4
639
> 2.1GB
2592,1
338
–
–
dispose-8-3
197,1
761
–
> 2h
–
–
dispose-12-1
78
1274
–
ME
–
–
dispose-12-2
2555
1437
–
> 2.1GB
–
–
dispose-12-3
> 2.1GB
–
–
–
–
dispose-16-1
382
1702
–
–
–
–
dispose-16-2
> 2.1GB
–
–
–
–
look-and-grab-4-1-1
0,3
30
3098
16
> 2h
> 2h
0,6
54
look-and-grab-4-1-2
0,5
4
> 2h
Mcl
0,02
5
0,0
6
look-and-grab-4-1-3
0,61
4
> 2h
Mcl
0,01
5
0,0
6
look-and-grab-4-2-1
35
12
> 2.1GB
> 2h
> 2h
0,63
40
look-and-grab-4-2-2
49,41
4
> 2h
Mcl
0,02
5
0,01
6
look-and-grab-4-2-3
60,02
4
> 2h
Mcl
0,02
5
0,01
6
look-and-grab-4-3-1
> 2.1GB
> 2.1GB
> 2h
> 2h
0,98
60
look-and-grab-4-3-2
213,3
4
–
> 2h
0,02
5
0,02
6
look-and-grab-4-3-3
> 2.1GB
–
> 2h
0,02
5
0,01
6
look-and-grab-8-1-1
58,2
242
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-1-2
75,3
90
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-1-3
55,89
58
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-2-1
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-2-2
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-2-3
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
1195
178
look-and-grab-8-3-1
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-3-2
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
> 2h
look-and-grab-8-3-3
> 2h
–
–
> 2h
17,9
58
Table 7: Problems from Palacios and Geﬀner (2006, 2007): Times reported in seconds and
rounded to the closest decimal. ’–’ means time or memory out for smaller instances.
’ME’ and ’Mcl’ mean too many edges and too many clauses respectively.
T0 dominates in all these domains except in Adder where POND is the only planner able
to solve an instance, and Sortnet, where MBP and KACMBP do very well, possibly due to
use of the cardinality heuristic and OBDD representations. T0 fails on Adder because FF
gets lost in the search. Looking at this problem more closely, we found that FF could solve
the (translation of the) ﬁrst instance in less than a minute provided that the CNF goal for
this problem is encoded in DNF as explained in footnote 9, page 646. The domains Adder,
Blocks, and Sortnet in the table, along with the domain Look-and-Grab in the next table,
are the only domains considered where FF run on the K1 translation reports no solution
after a brief search, triggering then the use of the complete Kmodels translation. In all the
other cases where Kmodels was used, the K1 translation had an unreachable goal ﬂuent and
there was no need to try FF on it.
651

Palacios & Geffner
T0
POND
CFF
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
push-to-4-1
0,2
78
5
50
0,3
46
push-to-4-2
0,3
85
171
58
0,7
47
push-to-4-3
0,6
87
–
1,6
48
push-to-8-1
81,8
464
> 2h
> 2.1GB
push-to-8-2
457,9
423
> 2h
> 2.1GB
push-to-8-3
1293,1
597
> 2h
> 2.1GB
push-to-12-1
> 2h
–
–
push-to-12-2
> 2h
–
–
push-to-12-3
> 2.1GB
–
–
1-dispose-8-1
82,2
1316
> 2.1GB
> 2h
1-dispose-8-2
> 2.1GB
> 2.1GB
> 2h
1-dispose-8-3
> 2.1GB
–
–
Table 8: Other problems from Palacios and Geﬀner (2006, 2007). MBP and KACMBP
were not tried on these problems as they use a diﬀerent syntax. Times reported
in seconds and rounded to the closest decimal. ’–’ means time or memory out for
smaller instances.
The problems reported in Table 7 and Table 8 are variations of a family of grid problems
(Palacios & Geﬀner, 2006, 2007). Dispose is about retrieving objects whose initial location is
unknown and placing them in a trash can at a given, known location; Push-to is a variation
where objects can be picked up only at two designated positions in the grid to which all
objects have to be pushed to: pushing an object from a cell into a contiguous cell moves
the object if it is in the cell. 1-Dispose is a variation of Dispose where the robot hand being
empty is a condition for the pick up actions to work. As a result, a plan for 1-Dispose has to
scan the grid, performing pick ups in every cell, followed by excursions to the trash can, and
so on. The plans can get very long (a plan is reported with 1316 actions). Look-and-Grab
has an action that picks up the objects that are suﬃciently close if any, and after each pick-
up must dump the objects it collected into the trash before continuing. For the problem
P-n-m in the table, n is the grid size and m is the number of objects. For Look-n-Grab,
the third parameter is the radius of the action: 1 means that the hand picks up all the
objects in the 8 surrounding cells, 2 that that the hand picks up all the objects in the 15
surrounding cells, and so on. The domains in Tables 7 and 8 have width 1 except 1-Dispose
and Look-n-Grab. This is because, the hand being empty is a ﬂuent that is relevant to
the goal, and clauses about the location of objects are all relevant to ’hand empty’. In all
these domains T0 appears to do better than the other planners. The Kmodels translation
was triggered only in the instances Look-and-Grab-n-m-r for m > 1 (the width of these
instances, as mentioned in Section 6.6, is m, independent of grid size).
We also report some additional data in Table 9, comparing the search that results from
the use of the FF planner over the classical translations in T0, to the search carried out
by Conformant-FF over the original conformant problems. Conformant-FF is a conformant
planner built on top of FF that searches explicitly in belief space. The table illustrates the
two problems faced by belief-space planners mentioned in the introduction and the handle
652

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
CFF
FF in T0
Problem
Nodes
Time
Nodes/sec
Nodes
Time
Nodes/sec
bomb-100-1
5149
32,9
156,5
5250
0,41
12804,9
bomb-100-100
100
0,8
125
201
7,53
26,7
Safe-100
100
1747,4
0,1
102
0
25500
logistics-4-10-10
356
4,42
80,5
774
0,47
1646,8
square-center-8
4634
59,3
78,1
46
0,05
920
square-center-12
39000
>5602,5
7
72
0,03
2400
cube-center-5
2211
8,2
269,6
74
0,01
7400
cube-center-7
81600
>5602,5
14,6
105
0,0
5250
blocks-01
46
0,0
4600
47
0
11750
blocks-02
1420
>5602,5
0,3
86
0,0
4300
coins-20
1235
20,6
60
783
0,04
19575
comm-25
517
56,1
9,2
1777
0,43
4132,6
uts-k-10
58
16,5
3,5
62
0,34
182,4
dispose-8-1
1107
339,1
3,3
11713
0,78
15016,7
dispose-8-2
1797
2592,1
0,7
87030
14,32
6077,5
dispose-8-3
2494
>5602,5
0,4
580896
190,2
3054,1
look-and-grab-4-1-1
4955
>5602,5
0,9
79
0,1
790
Table 9: CFF over Conformant Problems vs. FF over Translations: Nodes stand for number
of nodes evaluated, Time is expressed in seconds, and Nodes/sec stands for average
number of nodes per second. Numbers shown in bold when either CFF or FF
evaluate signiﬁcantly less nodes (an order-of-magnitude reduction or more). Times
preceded by ‘>’ are time outs.
653

Palacios & Geffner
over them that results from the translation-based approach. The belief representation and
update problem appears in the overhead of maintaining and evaluating the beliefs, and
shows in the number of nodes that are evaluated per second: while CFF evaluates a few
hundred nodes per second; FF evaluates several thousands. At the same time, the heuristic
used in CFF in the conformant setting, appears to be less informed that the heuristic used
by FF over the classical translations. In domains like Square-Center-n, Cube-Center-n,
Blocks, and Look-and-Grab, FF needs orders-of-magnitude less nodes than CFF to ﬁnd a
plan, while the oppositive is true in Dispose-n-m where FF evaluates many more nodes
than CFF. Nonetheless, even then, due to the overhead involved in carrying the beliefs, FF
manages to solve problems that CFF cannot solve. For example, the instance Dispose-8-3
is solved by T0 after evaluating more than half a million nodes, but times out in CFF after
evaluating less than three thousand nodes.
Tables 10 and 11 provide details on the results of the Conformant Track of the 2008
International Planning Competition (IPC6) (Bryce & Buﬀet, 2008), held almost at the time
where the original version of this paper was submitted, with planner binaries submitted to
the organizers a few months before.
The version of T0 in IPC6 was diﬀerent from the
version of T0 used in IPC5, where it was the winning entry, and diﬀerent also from the
version reported in this paper.
In relation, to the former, T0 IPC6 was a cleaner but
complete reimplementation; in relation to the latter, T0 IPC6 handled problems with width
greater than 1 in a diﬀerent way. As explained in the previous section, the current version
of T0, uses K1 as the basic translation regardless of the width of the problem, switching to
Kmodels when the search over K1 fails. In the version of T0 at IPC6, the basic translation
was a combination of K0 and K1; more precisely, merges for literals L with width w(L) = 1,
were generated according to K1, but merges for literals L with width w(L) ̸= 1 were not
generated at all. The result was that the basic translation in T0 in IPC6 was lighter than
the basic translation of the current version of T0 but could fail on problems with width
higher than 1 that the latter can solve. Retrospectively, this was not a good choice, but it
didn’t have much of an impact on the results. There was however a bug in the program
that prevented two width-1 domains, Forest and Dispose, to be recognized as such, and
thus resulted in the use of the Kmodels translation, that is complete for all widths, but does
not scale up that well.
The other two conformant planners entered into IPC6 where CpA(H) and CpA(C);
these are belief-space planners that represent beliefs as DNF formulas, and use simple
belief-state heuristics for guiding the search (Tran, Nguyen, Pontelli, & Son, 2008, 2009).
The belief progression in these planners is done quite eﬀectively, by progressing each term
in turn, according to the 0-approximation semantics. The potential blow up comes from the
number of terms in the DNF formula encoding the initial belief state. Rather than choosing
the terms of the initial belief state as the possible initial states, these planners limit the
terms in the DNF formula to a collection of ’partial initial states’ that do not assign any
truth value to the literals that are deemed irrelevant. The resulting belief representation is
complete but may still result in an exponential number of terms (Son & Tu, 2006). In order
to reduce further the number of terms in this initial DNF formula, ’independent’ one-of
expressions are combined. For example, two independent one-of clauses oneof(x1, x2) and
oneof(y1, y2) which would give rise to 4 possible initial states and DNF terms, are combined
into the single one-of expression oneof(x1 ∧y1, x2 ∧y2), that results into 2 possible initial
654

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
Domain
# Instances
CpA(H)
CpA(C)
T0 IPC6
Blocks
4
4
3
3
Adder
4
1
1
1
UTS Cycle
27
2
2
3
Forest
9
1
1
8
Rao’s keys
29
2
2
1
Dispose
90
76
59
20
Table 10: Data from the Conformant Track of the recent IPC6 Competition: Number of
problems solved by each of the conformant planners, with time out of 20 mins.
In bold, entry for planner that performed best in each domain. The data is from
Bryce and Buﬀet (2008)
states and terms. These one-of expressions are independent when they can be shown not
to interact in the problem. The technique appears to be related to the notion of ’critical
initial states’ considered in Section 7, where it was shown that plans that conform with all
critical initial states must conform also with all possible initial states. The heuristics used
by CpA(H) and CpA(C) are combinations of the cardinality heuristic, that measures the
number of states in a belief state, the total sum heuristic, that adds the heuristic distances
to the goal from each possible state, and the number of satisﬁed goals, that counts the
number of top goals achieved. These heuristics are all very simple, yet they work well on
some benchmarks.
Tables 10 and 11 show data obtained from the IPC6 organizers from the planner logs.
The ﬁrst table appears in the IPC6 report (Bryce & Buﬀet, 2008), where the new domains
Forest and Rao’s keys are explained, and shows the number of problems solved by each
planner, displaying in bold the planner that did best in each domain. The planner CpA(H),
was declared the winner, as it was declared best in three domains (Blocks, Rao’s keys,
Dispose), with T0 doing best in two domains (UTS Cycle and Forest), and CpA(C) doing
best in one (Adder).
Table 11 shows additional details on some of the instances; in particular, the total time
taken to solve the instance and the length of the plans for each of the three planners.
In terms of domain coverage, the planners do similarly on most domains, except in
Forest, where T0 solved most of the instances and CPA(H) solved few (8/9 vs. 1/9), and
Dispose, where CPA(H) solved most of the instances and T0 solved few (76/90 vs. 20/90).
In terms of time and plan quality, CpA(H) and CpA(C) appear to be slightly faster
than T0 on Blocks, but produce much longer plans. In Dispose, T0 scales up better than
CpA(H) and CpA(C) over the size of the grids, and worse on the number of objects.
Indeed, only T0 manages to solve the largest grid but for a single object (Dispose-10-01),
and only CpA(H) and CpA(C) solve instances with more than 2 objects in the largest grids.
As in most cases, plan lengths produced by T0 are shorter; e.g., the plan for Dispose-04-03
contains 125 actions for T0, 314 for CpA(H), and 320 for CpA(C).
Dispose is actually a domain where the cardinality heuristic does very well in the gener-
ation of plans, even if the plans tend to be rather long. As discussed above, in this domain,
an agent has to scan a grid collecting a set of objects at unknown locations, and each time
655

Palacios & Geffner
the action of picking up an object from a cell that may contain the object is made (except
for the ﬁrst time), the cardinality of the belief state is reduced. Indeed, if initially an object
may be at positions p1, p2, . . . , pn, after a pick up at p1, the object can be in positions
p2, . . . , pn or in the gripper, after a pick up at p2, the object can be in positions p3, . . . , pn or
in the gripper, and so on, each pick up action decreasing the cardinality of the belief state,
until becoming a singleton belief where the object must be in the gripper with certainty.
The problem with the version of T0 used in IPC6 in the Dispose domain, was not only
that FF explores too many states in the search, but as explained above, that it used the
expensive Kmodels translation instead of the lighter K1 translation that is complete for
this domain that has width 1. With this bug ﬁxed, T0 solves 60 rather than 20 of the 90
Dispose instances, still failing on some of the larger grids with many objects, but producing
much shorter plans. For example, Dispose-06-8 is solved with a plan with 470 actions, while
CpA(H) and CpA(C) solve it with plans with 2881 and 3693 actions respectively. The
same bug surfaced in the Forest domain, but it just prevented the solution of one instance
only. Forest, Dispose, and UTS Cycle have all conformant widths equal to 1, while the
other domains have all larger widths (see Table 2 for the widths of Blocks and Adder).
The second domain in IPC6 where FF got lost in the search was Adder, where indeed, T0
did not solve any instance. The instance that is shown to be solved by T0 in the competition
report, appears to be a mistake. Similarly, the fourth instance of blocks, that is reported as
solved by CPA(H), may be a mistake too; indeed, no plan for such an instance can be found
in the logs, and T0 reports that the goal is unreachable in the Kmodels translation that
is complete. According to T0, instance four of Rao’s key is unsolvable too. On the other
hand, T0 failed on the larger UTS Cycle and Rao’s key instances during the translation.
In the the ﬁrst, the resulting PDDL’s are too large and can’t be loaded into FF; in the
second, the number of init clauses turns out to be quite large (above 300), giving rise to
a still larger set of prime implicates (above 5000) that caused the translator to run out of
memory. The second instance of Rao’s keys, however, is rather small and T0 didn’t solve it
due to a diﬀerent bug. With this bug ﬁxed, T0 solves it in 0.3 seconds, producing a plan
with 53 actions, which compares well with the solutions produced by CpA(H) and CpA(C)
in 0.7 and 1.9 seconds, with 85 and 99 steps, respectively.
10. Non-Deterministic Actions
The translation schemes considered are all limited to problems with deterministic actions
only. Nonetheless, as we illustrate below, these schemes can be applied to non-deterministic
actions as well provided suitable transformations are included. We cover these transforma-
tions brieﬂy as a matter of illustration only.
Consider a conformant problem P with non-deterministic action eﬀects a : C →oneof(S1,
S2, . . . , Sm), where each Si is a set (conjunction) of literals, and the transformed problem
P ′, where these eﬀects are mapped into deterministic rules of the form a : C, hi →Si, with
the expression oneof(h1, . . . , hm) added to the initial situation of P ′. In P ′, the ’hidden’ hi
variables are used for encoding the uncertainty on the possible outcomes Si of the action a.
It is easy to show that the non-deterministic conformant problem P and the deter-
ministic conformant problem P ′ are equivalent provided that only plans for P and P ′ are
considered where the non-deterministic action a from P are executed at most once. Namely,
656

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
Problem
Instance
CpA(H)
CpA(C)
T0 IPC6
time
len
time
len
time
len
Blocks
1
0
4
0
7
0,1
5
2
0,1
28
0,1
35
0,1
23
3
5,9
411
6,3
157
17,8
83
4
143,9
257
Adder
1
8,5
3
8,3
3
UTS Cycle
1
0,8
3
0,6
3
0,1
3
2
25,3
6
24,7
6
0,7
7
3
5,4
10
Forest
1
3,6
24
11,6
18
0,2
16
2
1,3
45
3
2,2
78
4
12,1
129
5
14,4
115
6
69,7
200
7
355,1
256
8
Rao’s keys
1
0,1
28
0
29
0
16
2
0,7
85
1,9
99
Dispose
4,1
0,3
80
0,4
88
0,1
77
4,2
0,7
197
0,9
206
3,6
110
4,3
1,3
314
1,8
320
528,3
125
4,4
2
431
2,8
434
6,1
4,7
270
4,5
187
0,9
204
6,2
10,4
643
42,2
735
217,7
329
6,3
17,7
1016
97,9
1228
6,4
27,6
1389
172,5
1721
8,1
40,1
753
40,3
518
7,4
326
8,2
86,7
1851
524,6
1962
8,3
86,7
1851
10,1
45
683
10,2
Table 11: Running time and plan length from IPC6 logs. Time in seconds. Blanks stand
for time or memory out. Only 13 of the 90 Dispose-n-m instances shown, At
IPC6, size n of grid ranged from 2 to 10, while number m of objects, from 1 to
10. T0 scales up best on n and worst on m.
657

Palacios & Geffner
a correspondence exists between the conformant plans for P that use such actions at most
once with the conformant plans for P ′ that use the same actions at most once too. On the
other hand, a conformant plan for P ′ where these actions are done many times will not
necessarily represent a conformant plan for P. Indeed, if a non-deterministically moves an
agent up or right in a square grid n × n, starting in the bottom left corner, n actions a in
a row would leave the agent at either the top left corner or the bottom right corner in P ′,
and anywhere at Manhattan distance n from the origin in P. The divergence between P
and P ′, however, does not arise if non-deterministic actions are executed at most once.
Building on this idea, a non-deterministic conformant planner can be obtained from a
deterministic conformant planner in the following way. For the non-deterministic problem
P, let P1 be the problem P ′ above, with the additional constraint that the actions a in
P1 arising from the non-deterministic actions in P can be executed at most once. This
is easily achieved by adding a precondition enabled(a) to a that is true initially and that
a sets to false. Let then P2 represent the deterministic conformant problem where each
non-deterministic action a in P is mapped into 2 deterministic actions, each executable
only once, and each having its own ’hidden ﬂuents’ h1, . . . , hm with the oneof(h1, . . . , hm)
expression in the initial situation. Similarly, let Pi be the deterministic problem that results
from encoding each non-deterministic action in P with i deterministic ’copies’.
From this encoding, a simple iterative conformant planner for non-deterministic prob-
lems P can be deﬁned in terms of a conformant planner for deterministic problems by
invoking the latter upon P1, P2, P3, and so on, until a solution is reported. The reported
solution uses each copy of a ’non-deterministic action’ at most once, and thus encodes a
solution to the original problem.
We have implemented this strategy on top of T0 with an additional reﬁnement that
takes advantage of the nature of the KT,M translation, where assumptions about the initial
situation are maintained explicitly in tags. Basically, ’non-deterministic’ actions a in Pi are
allowed to be executed more than once provided that all the literals KL/hi that depend
on a particular outcome of these actions (Si) are erased. This is implemented by means
of an additional reset(a) action in Pi whose unconditional eﬀect is enabled(a) (i.e., the
action a can then be done again) and whose conditional eﬀects are ¬KL →¬KL/hi and
KL →KL/hi for i = 1, . . . , m. Namely, literals KL/hi where the truth of L depends
on a particular non-deterministic outcome (Si) are erased, except when L is true with no
assumptions; i.e. when KL is true. Then non-deterministic actions a can be executed more
than once in a plan provided that each occurrence of a, except for the ﬁrst one, is preceded
by a reset(a) action.
Table 12 compares the resulting non-deterministic planner with MBP and KACMBP
on a number of non-deterministic problems considered in the MBP and KACMBP papers.
We have just added an additional domain, Slippery Gripper (sgripper), that is similar to
classical Gripper where a number of balls have to be moved from room A to B, except
that the robot cannot move from A to B directly, but has a non-deterministic move action
move(A, C, D) that moves the robot from A to either C or D. A typical plan for moving
two balls from A to B is to pick them at A, move to C or D, move from C to B, and from
D to B, ﬁnally dropping the balls at B.
For the deterministic conformant planner (T0) used in the non-deterministic setting we
added the following modiﬁcation: merges are not introduced only for precondition and goal
658

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
T0
MBP
KACMBP
Problem
time
len
time
len
time
len
sgripper-10
1,4
48
> 2h
0,6
68
sgripper-20
16,7
93
> 2h
5,4
148
sgripper-30
90
138
–
23,3
228
btuc-100
2,9
200
> 2h
2
200
btuc-150
9,2
300
> 2h
7,9
300
btuc-200
23
400
–
16,9
400
btuc-250
44,6
500
–
33,2
500
btuc-300
82
600
–
62,1
600
bmtuc-10-10
0,1
20
65,9
29
0,2
20
bmtuc-20-10
0,1
40
> 2h
0,6
40
bmtuc-20-20
0,3
40
> 2h
2,2
40
bmtuc-50-10
0,9
100
–
3,6
100
bmtuc-50-50
3,3
100
–
2722,4
100
bmtuc-100-10
4,9
200
–
25,1
200
bmtuc-100-50
14,9
200
–
> 2h
bmtuc-100-100
30,2
200
–
> 2h
nondet-ring-5
18,3
19
0
18
0,1
32
nondet-ring-10
> 2h
2,1
38
0,5
112
nondet-ring-15
> 2h
1298,9
58
2,4
242
nondet-ring-20
–
> 2h
7,3
422
nondet-ring-50
–
–
603,1
2552
nondet-ring-1key-5
> 2h
0,1
33
0,2
42
nondet-ring-1key-10
> 2.1GB
11,2
122
4
197
nondet-ring-1key-15
–
5164,4
87
33,7
375
nondet-ring-1key-20
–
> 2.1GB
246,5
1104
nondet-ring-1key-25
–
–
1417,5
2043
nondet-ring-1key-30
–
–
> 2h
Table 12: Non-deterministic problems. All problems except sgripper are from MBP and
KACMBP. These problems were modiﬁed to render a simple translation into
PDDL; in particular, complex preconditions were moved in as conditions. Times
reported in seconds and rounded to the closest decimal. ’–’ means time or memory
out for smaller instances.
literals but for all literals. The reason is that in this setting it pays to remove the uncertainty
of all literals when the reset mechanism is used. Indeed, provided with this simple change
and the reset mechanism, in none of the problems we had to move beyond P1 (a single copy
of each non-deterministic action) even if in all the domains non-deterministic actions are
required many times in the plans (e.g., if there are more than 2 balls in room A).
As it can be seen from the table, T0 does better than MBP on these collection of non-
deterministic domains, although not as well as KACMBP, in particular, in the NonDet-
Ring and Non-Det-Ring-1Key domains. In any case, the results obtained with T0 on these
domains are quite meaningful. In all cases where T0 failed to solved a problem, the reason
was that the classical planner (FF) got lost in the search for plans, something that may
improve with further advances in classical planning technology.
659

Palacios & Geffner
11. Related Work
Most recent conformant planners such as CFF, POND, and MBP cast conformant planning
as an heuristic search problem in belief space (Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000). Compact belief
representations and informed heuristic functions, however, are critical for making these ap-
proach work. As an eﬀective belief representation, these planners use SAT and OBDDs
techniques that while intractable in the worst case often exhibit good behavior on average.
As heuristics, on the other hand, they use ﬁxed cardinality heuristics that count the number
of states that are possible for a given belief state (a tractable operation on OBDD repre-
sentations) or heuristics obtained from a relaxed planning graph suitably extended to take
uncertain information into account. These heuristics appear to work well in some domains
but not in others. From this perspective, the translation-based approach provides a handle
on the two problems: belief states in P become plain states in the translation KT,M(P),
that is then solved using classical heuristics. We have also established the conditions under
which this belief representation is compact and complete.
A sound but incomplete approach to planning with incomplete information is advanced
by Petrick and Bacchus (2002) that represent belief states as formulas. In order to make
belief updates eﬃcient though, several approximations are introduced, and in particular,
while existing disjunctions can be carried from one belief to the next, no new disjunctions
are added. This imposes a limitation on the type of problems that can be handled. The
two other limitations of this approach are that domains must be crafted by hand, and that
no control information is derived from the domains so that the search for plans is blind.
Our approach can be understood as providing a solution to these two problems too: on
the one hand, the move to the ’knowledge-level’ is done automatically, on the other, the
problem lifted to the knowledge-level is solved by classical planners able to search with
control information derived automatically from the new representation.
A third thread of work related to our approach arises from the so-called 0-approximation
semantics (Baral & Son, 1997). In the 0-approximation semantics, belief states b are repre-
sented not by sets of states but by a single 3-valued state where ﬂuents can be true, false, or
unknown. In Proposition 3 above, a correspondence was established between the plans for
P that are conformant according to the 0-approximation semantics and the classical plans
for the translation K0(P), which in turns is an instance of the more general translation
Ki(P) that is complete for problems with width i = 0. The semantics of the translation
K0 is thus related to the 0-approximation semantics, yet the K0 translation delivers some-
thing more: a computational method for obtaining conformant plans that comply with the
0-approximation semantics using a classical planner.
The 0-approximation and the basic K0 translation are too weak for dealing with the
existing benchmarks.
The translations Ki extend K0 for problems of higher width by
replacing the set of ﬂuents KL by ﬂuents KL/t where the tags t encode assumptions about
the initial situation. The extensions of the 0-approximation semantics in the context of
conformant planning have taken a diﬀerent form: switching from a single 3-valued state
for representing beliefs to sets of 3-valued states, each 3-valued state progressed eﬃciently
and independently of the others (Son, Tu, Gelfond, & Morales, 2005). The initial set of
3-valued states is obtained by forcing states to assign a boolean truth-value (true or false)
to a number of ﬂuents. Crucial for this approach to work is the number of such ﬂuents;
660

Compiling Uncertainty Away in Conformant Planning Problems
belief representation and update are exponential in it.
The conditions that ensure the
completeness of this extension of the 0-approximation semantics can be expressed in terms
of a relevance analysis similar to the one underlying our analysis of width (Son & Tu,
2006): the ﬂuents that must be set to true or false in each initial 3-valued state are those
appearing in a clause in CI(L) for a precondition or goal literal L. In particular, if in the
initial situation there are n tautologies pi∨¬pi, each relevant to a precondition or goal literal
L, then the number of initial 3-valued states required for completeness is exponential in n, as
each has to make each ﬂuent pi true or false. The diﬀerence with our approach can be seen
when each of the tautologies pi ∨¬pi is relevant to a unique precondition or goal literal Li.
In such a case, the number of 3-valued or ’partial’ states required for completeness remains
exponential in n, while the resulting problem has width 1 and thus can be solved with the
K1 translation that involves tags with a single literal. In other words, while the tags used
in our translation scheme encode the local contexts required by the diﬀerent literals in the
problem, the initial 3-valued states (Son & Tu, 2006) encode their possible combinations in
the form of global contexts. These global contexts correspond to the consistent combinations
of such local contexts, which may thus be exponential in number even if the problem has
bounded width. The planners CpA(H) and CpA(C), discussed above in the context of
the Conformant Track of the recent 2008 Int. Planning Competition (IPC6), build on this
approach, but reduce the number of partial initial states required using a technique that can
replace many one-of expressions by a single one (Tran et al., 2008, 2009); a simpliﬁcation
related to the notion of ’critical’ initial states discussed in Section 7.
Another diﬀerence with the 3-valued approach (Son et al., 2005; Son & Tu, 2006), is
that the translation approach not only addresses the representation of beliefs but also the
computation of conformant plans: once a conformant problem P is translated into a problem
KT,M(P), it can be solved by a classical planner. The approaches that have been deﬁned on
top of the 0-approximation semantics, like the knowledge-level approach to planning with
incomplete information by Petrick and Bacchus (2002), need a way to guide the search for
plans in the simpliﬁed belief space. While the search by Petrick and Bacchus (2002) is blind
(iterative deepening), the search by Son et al. (2005), Son and Tu (2006) is guided by a
combination of simple heuristics such as cardinality or subgoal counting.
12. Summary
While few practical problems are purely conformant, the ability to ﬁnd conformant plans is
needed in contingent settings where conformant situations are an special case. In this paper,
we have introduced a new approach to conformant planning where conformant problems P
are converted into classical planning problems KT,M(P) that are then solved by a classical
planner. We have also studied the conditions under which this general translation is sound
and complete. The translation depends on two parameters: a set of tags, referring to local
contexts in the initial situation, and a set of merges that stand for valid disjunctions of
tags. We have seen how diﬀerent translations, such as KS0 and Kmodels, can be obtained
from suitable choices of tags and merges, and have introduced a measure of complexity in
conformant planning called conformant width, and a translation scheme Ki that is polyno-
mial for a ﬁxed i and complete for problems with width bounded by i. We have also shown
that most conformant benchmarks have width 1, have developed a conformant planner T0
661

Palacios & Geffner
based on these translations, and have shown that this planner exhibits a good performance
in comparison with existing conformant planners. Recently, we have explored the use of
these ideas in the more general setting of contingent planning (Albore, Palacios, & Geﬀner,
2009).
