arXiv:1004.4801v1  [cs.AI]  27 Apr 2010
Ontology-based inference for causal explanation ∗
Ph. Besnard1
M.-O. Cordier2 4
Y. Moinard3 4
May 6, 2008
Abstract
We deﬁne an inference system to capture explanations based on causal
statements, using an ontology in the form of an IS-A hierarchy. We ﬁrst
introduce a simple logical language which makes it possible to express
that a fact causes another fact and that a fact explains another fact.
We present a set of formal inference patterns from causal statements to
explanation statements. We introduce an elementary ontology which gives
greater expressiveness to the system while staying close to propositional
reasoning.
We provide an inference system that captures the patterns
discussed, ﬁrstly in a purely propositional framework, then in a datalog
(limited predicate) framework.
1
Introduction
We are aiming at a logical formalization of explanations from causal statements.
For example, it is usually admitted that ﬁre is an explanation for smoke, on the
grounds that ﬁre causes smoke. In other words, ﬁre causes smoke is a premise
from which it can be inferred that ﬁre is an explanation for smoke. In this
particular example, concluding from cause to explanation is immediate but such
is not always the case, far from it. In general, the reasoning steps leading from
cause to explanation are not so trivial:
Example. We consider two causal statements:
(i) Any ship that is about to sink causes her crew to launch some red rocket(s)
(ii) On July the 14th, the celebration of the French national day causes the
launching of ﬁreworks all over France.
So, if the place is a coastal city in France, on July the 14th, then red rockets
∗This preprint of a paper published in Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering Journal
(publisher: IOS Press, editor: Hojjat Adeli), 15(4), pp. 351–367, 2008) is an extended version
of [BCM07].

2Institution: Universit´e de Rennes I
3Institution: INRIA
4Address:
IRISA,
Campus
de
Beaulieu,
35042
Rennes
cedex,
France,

1

being launched could be explained either by some ship(s) sinking or by a national
day ﬁrework launched.
In this example, it is needed to acknowledge the fact that
a red rocket is a kind of (colourful) rocket
in order to get the second explanation, which makes sense.
Example (cont’d). Suppose that we now add the following statement:
(i) Seeing a red rocket being launched triggers a rescue process.
Now, on July the 14th in a coastal city in France, a possible explanation for the
triggering of the rescue process, as happens in practice, is that a national day
ﬁrework has been launched.
Thus we say that “α explains β” when adding α to our knowledge, and
using a “suitable chain” of causal and taxonomical information, β is obtained.
Which chains are “suitable” is one of the subjects addressed in this text. We
deﬁne a dedicated inference system to capture explanations based on causal
statements and stress that the rˆole of ontology-based information is essential.
Our causal information is restricted to the cases where the causation never fails,
rejecting e.g. “smoking causes cancer”. We leave also for future work temporal
aspects. Also, we consider that the causal information is provided by the user,
we are not concerned by the extraction of causal information as in scientiﬁc
research. We provide a way to extract what we call explanations from causal
(and “ontological”) information given by the user: we aim at providing all the
(eventually tentative) explanations that can be obtained. Then, some choice
between these explanations should be made by the user, depending of its needs,
but this aspect is not considered here.
In the second section, we introduce the propositional logical language that
we propose to use, then we deﬁne the set of patterns dedicated to inferring
explanations from causal statements and ontological information. In the third
section we extend the formalism to a restricted predicate case (a la “datalog”,
no quantiﬁers admitted in the formulas), the ontology consisting in links be-
tween constant symbols. We introduce two kinds of parameters for a predicate:
“existential” and “universal” ones. Then we extend this to predicates of any
arity and we introduce also ontological links between predicates. In the fourth
section, we discuss a few features of the formalism. In the conclusion, we sum-
marize the main points and we propose some possible future work.
2
The propositional formalism
2.1
Vocabulary and ﬁrst properties
For the sake of clarity, we present the propositional version of the formalism
ﬁrst. We distinguish various types of statements in our formal system:
C: A theory expressing causal statements. E.g. On alarm causes Heard bell
or Flu causes Fever T emperature.
2

O: An ontology in the form of a set of IS-A links between two items which
can appear in a causal statement.
E.g., T emperature 39 →IS−A Fever T emperature,
T emperature 41 →IS−A Fever T emperature,
Heard loud bell →IS−A Heard bell,
Heard soft bell →IS−A Heard bell.
W: A classical propositional theory expressing truths (i.e., incompatible facts,
co-occurring facts, . . .). E.g., Heard soft bell →¬Heard loud bell).
Intuitively, propositional symbols denote elementary properties describing states
of aﬀairs, which can be “facts” or “events” such as Fever T emperature,
On alarm, Heard bell.
The causal statements express causal relations between facts or events ex-
pressed by these propositional symbols. Some care is necessary when provid-
ing these causal and ontological atoms. If “Flu causes Fever T emperature”,
we will conclude Flu explains T emperature 39 from T emperature 39 →IS−A
Fever T emperature, but we cannot state Flu causes T emperature 39: we re-
quire that the causal information is provided “on the right level” and in this
case, T emperature 39 is not on the right level.
Besides, our restricted ontology could be termed “taxonomy”.
The formal system we introduce below is meant to infer, from such premises
C ∪O ∪W, formulas denoting explanations. This inference will be denoted ⊢C.
The ontological atoms express some common sense knowledge which is necessary
to infer these “explanations”. Notice that a feature of our formalism is that
standard implication alone cannot help to infer explanations [BCM06, BCM07].
In this section, α, β, . . . denote the propositional atoms and Φ, Ψ, . . . denote
sets thereof.
Atoms
1. Propositional atoms: α, β, . . ..
2. Causal atoms: α causes β.
3. Ontological atoms: α →IS−A β.
4. Explanation atoms: α explains β because possible Φ.
An ontological atom reads: α is a β.
An explanation atom reads: α is an explanation for β because Φ is possible.
Notation: In order to help reading long formulas, explanation atoms are
sometimes abbreviated as α explains β bec poss Φ.
Formulas
1. Propositional formulas: Boolean combinations of propositional atoms.
2. Causal formulas: Boolean combinations of causal or propositional atoms.
3

The premises of the inference ⊢C, namely C ∪O ∪W, consist of propositional
and causal formulas, and ontological atoms (no ontological formula). Notice
that explanation atoms cannot occur in the premises.
The properties of causal and ontological formulas we consider are as follows.
1. Properties of the causal operator
(a) Entailing [standard] implication: If α causes β, then α →β.
2. Properties of the ontological operator
(a) Entailing implication: If α →IS−A β, then α →β.
(b) Transitivity: If a →IS−A b and b →IS−A c, then a →IS−A c.
(c) Reﬂexivity: c →IS−A c.
Reﬂexivity is an unconventional property for an IS-A hierarchy. It is in-
cluded here because it helps keeping the number of inference schemes low (see
later).
W is supposed to include (whether explicitly or via inference) all the implica-
tions induced by the ontological atoms. For example, if Heard loud bell →IS−A
Heard bell is in O then Heard loud bell →Heard bell is in W.
Similarly,
W is supposed to include all conditionals induced by the causal statements
in C. For example, if Flu causes Fever T emperature is in C, then Flu →
Fever T emperature is in W.
2.2
Patterns for inferring explanations
A set of patterns, introduced in [BCM07], is proposed to infer explanations
from premises C ∪O ∪W. Before providing the rules (see § 2.3 below), let us
motivate these rules by listing the main patterns that we consider as desirable.
The base case explains β from α whenever α causes β (§ 2.2.1). More elaborate
cases explain β from α whenever α causes some β′ ontologically related with
β (§ 2.2.2, 2.2.3). Finally, explanations should be transitive (almost) (§ 2.2.4).
2.2.1
The base case
A basic idea is that what causes an eﬀect can always be suggested as an expla-
nation when the eﬀect happens to be the case:
 If
α causes β
and
W ̸|= ¬α

then
α explains β because possible {α}.
Example.
Consider a causal model such that W ̸⊢¬Flu and O is empty
whereas
C = {Flu causes Fever T emperature}.
Then, the atom Flu explains Fever T emperature because possible {Flu}
is inferred. That is, Flu is an explanation for Fever T emperature.
4

Notice that since Flu →Fever T emperature is in W, we get in fact that
W ̸⊢¬Flu is equivalent to W ̸⊢¬(Flu ∧Fever T emperature) which is why
Fever T emperature is not included in the set of the “conditions” for this ex-
planation.
By the way, “is an explanation” must be understood as provisional. Inferring
that Flu is an explanation for Fever T emperature is a tentative conclusion:
Should Flu be ruled out, e.g., ¬Flu ∈W, then Flu is no longer an explanation
for Fever T emperature.
Formally, with Form = Flu explains Fever T emperature bec poss {Flu},
we get
C ∪O ∪W ⊢C Form;
but
C ∪O ∪W ∪{¬Flu} ̸⊢C Form.
2.2.2
Wandering the IS-A hierarchy: Going upward
What causes an eﬀect can be suggested as an explanation for any consistent
ontological generalization of the eﬀect:



If
α causes β,
β →IS−A γ,
and
W ̸|= ¬α



then
α explains γ because possible {α}.
Example.
C
=
{On alarm causes Heard bell}
O
=
{Heard bell →IS−A Heard noise}
O states that hearing a bell is more precise than hearing a noise.
Since
On alarm is an explanation for Heard bell from the base case, it is also an
explanation for Heard noise. Let the causal theory CT consist in the two pre-
ceding atoms of C and O, W containing nothing else than the implications
induced by C and O, that is:
W =

On alarm →Heard bell,
Heard bell →Heard noise

We get CT ⊢C On alarm explains Heard noise bec poss{On alarm}.
Then, we additionally know that hearing a fog-horn is more precise than
hearing a noise, that a fog-horn is heard, and that hearing a fog-horn is not
hearing a bell. This is expressed by the causal theory CT ′, deﬁned by the sets C
as above, O ∪O′ and W ∪W ′ with O′ and W ′ as follows (W ′ contains the new
implication induced by O′, plus the other additional information):
O′ = {Heard fog-horn →IS−A Heard noise}.
W ′ =



Heard fog-horn →Heard noise,
Heard fog-horn,
¬(Heard bell ↔Heard fog-horn)



Even taking into account the fact that Heard bell is an instance of Heard noise,
it can no longer be inferred that On alarm is an explanation for Heard noise:
5

CT ′ ̸⊢C On alarm explains Heard noise bec poss{On alarm}.
The inference fails because it would need Heard noise to be of the Heard bell
kind (which is false, cf Heard fog-horn). Technically, the inference fails be-
cause W ∪W ′ ⊢¬On alarm.
The next example illustrates why resorting to ontological information is essential
when attempting to infer explanations: the patterns in the present § 2.2.2 as well
as in following § 2.2.3 extend the base case for explanations to ontology-based
consequences, not to any consequences.
Example. Rain makes me growl. Trivially, I growl only if I am alive. However,
rain cannot be taken as an explanation for the fact that I am alive.
C = {Rain causes I growl},
O = ∅,
W = {I growl →I am alive}.
We get: C ∪O ∪W ̸⊢C
Rain explains I am alive because possible {Rain}
2.2.3
Wandering the IS-A hierarchy: Going downward
What causes an eﬀect can presumably be suggested as an explanation when the
eﬀect takes place in one of its specialized forms:



If
α causes β,
γ →IS−A β,
and
W ̸|= ¬(α ∧γ),



then
α explains γ because possible {α, γ}.
Example. Consider a causal model with C and O as follows:
C = {On alarm causes Heard bell}
and
O =
 Heard loud bell →IS−A Heard bell
Heard soft bell →IS−A Heard bell

O means that Heard loud bell and Heard soft bell are more precise than
Heard bell.
Since On alarm is an explanation for Heard bell, it also is an explanation for
Heard loud bell and similarly Heard soft bell. This holds inasmuch as there
is no statement to the contrary:
The latter inference would not be drawn if for instance ¬Heard soft bell or
¬(Heard soft bell ∧On alarm) were in W.
Formally, with (Form loud) =
On alarm explains Heard loud bell bec poss {On alarm, Heard loud bell}
and (Form soft) =
On alarm explains Heard soft bell bec poss {On alarm, Heard soft bell}:
C ∪O ∪W
⊢C
(Form loud),
C ∪O ∪W
⊢C
Form soft,
and
C ∪O ∪W ∪{¬(Heard soft bell ∧On alarm)} ̸⊢C
(Form soft)
Here there is another example
6

Example. C = {Flu causes Fever T emperature} and
O = {T emperature 39 →IS−A Fever T emperature}.
W contains no statement apart from those induced by C and O, that is:
W = {Flu →Fever T emperature, T emperature 39 →Fever T emperature}
Inasmuch as Fever T emperature could be T emperature 39, Flu then counts
as an explanation for T emperature 39.
C ∪O ∪W ⊢C Flu explains T emperature 39 bec poss {Flu, T emperature 39}
Again, it would take Flu ∧T emperature 39 to be ruled out for the inference to
be prevented.
2.2.4
Transitivity of explanations
We make no assumption as to whether the causal operator is transitive (from
α causes β and β causes γ does α causes γ follow?). However, we do regard
inference of explanations as transitive which, in the simplest case, means that if
α explains β and β explains γ then α explains γ. Notice already that, since this
transitivity of explanations “gathers the conditions” (Point 3b § 2.3 below), it
is not absolute, and can easily be blocked.
The general pattern for transitivity of explanations takes two causal state-
ments, α causes β1 and β2 causes γ where β1 and β2 are ontologically related,
as premises in order to infer that α is an explanation for γ.
In the ﬁrst form of transitivity, β2 is inherited from β1 by going upward in
the IS-A hierarchy.



If
α causes β1, β2 causes γ,
β1 →IS−A β2,
and
W ̸|= ¬α,



then
α explains γ bec poss{α}.
Example. Sunshine makes me happy. Being happy is why I sing. Therefore,
sunshine is a plausible explanation for the case that I am singing.
C =

Sunshine causes I am happy
I am happy causes I am singing

W =

Sunshine →I am happy
I am happy →I am singing

So, for the inference relation ⊢C, C ∪O ∪W infers the atom:
Sunshine explains I am singing because possible {Sunshine}.
The above example exhibits transitivity of explanations for the simplest case
that β1 = β2 in the pattern α causes β1 and β1 causes γ entail
α explains γ because possible {α} (trivially, if β1 = β2 then β1 →IS−A β2).
7

This is one illustration that using reﬂexivity in the ontology relieves us from the
burden of tailoring deﬁnitions to capture formal degenerate cases.
The next example exhibits the general case β1 ̸= β2 in the pattern given
above.
Example. Let O = {Heard bell →IS−A Heard noise} and
C =

On alarm causes Heard bell
Heard noise causes Disturbance

W states the facts induced by C and O, that is:
W =



On alarm →Heard bell
Heard noise →Disturbance
Heard bell →Heard noise



So, for the inference relation ⊢C, C ∪O ∪W infers the atom:
On alarm explains Disturbance bec poss {On alarm}.
In the second form of transitivity, β1 is inherited from β2 by going downward
in the IS-A hierarchy.



If
α causes β1, β2 causes γ,
β2 →IS−A β1,
and
W ̸|= ¬(α ∧β2),


then
α explains γ bec poss{α, β2}.
Example. O = {Heard loud bell →IS−A Heard bell}
C =

On alarm causes Heard bell
Heard loud bell causes Deafening

W =



Heard loud bell →Heard bell
On alarm →Heard bell
Heard loud bell →Heard Deafening



On alarm does not cause Heard loud bell (neither does it cause Deafening),
but it is an explanation for Heard loud bell by virtue of the downward scheme.
Due to the base case, Heard loud bell is in turn an explanation for Deafening.
In fact, On alarm is an explanation for Deafening by virtue of transitivity.
Considering a causal operator which is transitive would give the same ex-
planations but is obviously more restrictive as we may not want to endorse an
account of causality which is transitive. Moreover, transitivity for explanations
not only seems right in itself but it also means that our model of explanations
can be plugged with any causal system whether transitive or not.
The preceding examples are here to introduce the general pattern for tran-
sitivity of explanations which is as follows:



If
α explains β bec poss Φ,
β explains γ bec poss Ψ,
and
W ̸|= ¬ V(Φ ∪Ψ),



then
α explains γ bec poss Φ ∪Ψ.
8

2.2.5
Explanation provisos and their simpliﬁcations
Explanation atoms are written
α explains β because possible Φ
as the
deﬁnition is intended to make the atom true just in case it is successfully checked
that the proviso is possible: An explanation atom is not to be interpreted as
a kind of conditional statement. Indeed, we do not write “if possible”. The
argument in “because possible” gathers those conditions that must be possible
together if α is to explain β (there can be others: α can also be an explanation
of β with respect to another set of arguments in “because possible”).
Notice that the set of conditions in an explanation atom can often be sim-
pliﬁed. Using V Φ to denote the conjunction of the formulas in the set Φ, the
following general scheme amounts to simplifying the proviso attached to an ex-
planation atom.
 If
for all i ∈{1, · · · , n}, α explains β because possible (Φi ∪Φ),
and
W |= V Φ →Wn
i=1
V Φi,

then
α explains β because possible Φ.
As a simple motivating example for this general scheme, let us consider the
case where we have
α causes β
and
β causes γ.
Then we get α explains β bec poss{α} and β explains γ bec poss{β} by
§ 2.2.1, thus α explains γ bec poss{α, β} by the general pattern for transitivity
§ 2.2.4. Now, we get α →β from α causes β, thus, W |= α is equivalent to W |=
α∧β: the two sets of condition {α} and {α, β} are equivalent here, which justiﬁes
to simplify the explanation atom into α explains γ because possible {α}. This
provides a justiﬁcation for the general pattern of simpliﬁcation of the set of
condition where n = 1, Φ = {α} and Φ1 = {β}.
More complex examples may involve disjunctions, such as in the small fol-
lowing example:
Let us suppose that we have derived the following two explanation atoms:
α
explains
γ
bec poss{α, β1} and α
explains
γ
bec poss{α, β2}.
Let us
suppose that W contains α →(β1 ∨β2). Then, as soon as α, together with
either β1 or β2, is possible, we get that α explains γ. Now, [W ̸|= ¬(α ∧β1) or
W ̸|= ¬(α∧β2)] is equivalent to [W ̸|= ¬(α∧(β1 ∨β2))] and, from α →(β1 ∨β2),
this is equivalent to [W ̸|= ¬α].
Thus, it is natural to get the explanation atom α explains γ bec poss{α}.
This is the general pattern for simpliﬁcation of the conditions of explanation
where n = 2, Φ = {α}, Φ1 = {β1} and Φ2 = {β2}. Generalizing this example
produces naturally the general pattern for simpliﬁcation of the conditions.
2.3
A formal system for inferring explanations
The above ideas are embedded in a short proof system extending classical logic:
9

1. Causal formulas
(α causes β) →(α →β).
2. Ontological atoms
(a) If β →IS−A γ then β →γ.
(b) If α →IS−A β and β →IS−A γ then α →IS−A γ.
(c) α →IS−A α
3. Explanation atoms
(a) Base case
If
δ →IS−A β, δ →IS−A γ, and W ̸|= ¬(α ∧δ),
then
(α causes β)
→
α explains γ because possible {α, δ}
(b) Transitivity (gathering the conditions)
If
W ̸|= ¬ V(Φ ∪Ψ), then
(α explains β because possible Φ ∧β explains γ because possible Ψ)
→
α explains γ because possible (Φ ∪Ψ).
(c) Simpliﬁcation of the set of conditions
If
W |= V Φ →Wn
i=1
V Φi,
then
V
i∈{1,···,n} α explains β because possible (Φi ∪Φ)
→
α explains β because possible Φ.
These schemes allow us to obtain the inference patterns described in the
previous section:
The base case § 2.2.1: apply (2c) upon (3a) where β = γ = δ prior to simplifying
by means of (3c).
The upward case § 2.2.2: apply (2c) upon (3a) where β = δ, prior to using (3c).
The downward case § 2.2.3: apply (2c) upon (3a) where δ = γ.
A more substantial application is:
C = {α causes β, γ causes ǫ},
O = {β →IS−A γ},
W = {α →β, β →γ, γ →ǫ}
The ﬁrst form of transitivity in Subsection 2.2.4 requires that we infer:
α explains ǫ because possible {α}
Let us proceed step by step:
α explains γ because possible {α}
by (3a with β = δ) as upward case
γ explains ǫ because possible {γ}
by (3a) as base case
α explains ǫ because possible {α, γ}
by (3b)
α explains ǫ because possible {α}
by (3c) simplifying the proviso.
2.4
A generic diagram
Below an abstract diagram is depicted that summarizes many patterns of in-
ferred explanations from various cases of causal statements and →IS−A links.
The theory is described as follows (see Figure 1):
10

α causes β,
α causes β0,
β2 causes γ,
β1 causes γ,
β3 causes ǫ,
γ1 causes δ,
γ3 causes δ,
ǫ3 causes γ3;
β →IS−A β2,
β1 →IS−A β,
β3 →IS−A β0,
β3 →IS−A β1,
γ1 →IS−A γ,
γ2 →IS−A γ,
γ2 →IS−A γ3,
γ2 →IS−A ǫ,
ǫ1 →IS−A ǫ,
ǫ2 →IS−A ǫ,
ǫ1 →IS−A ǫ3,
ǫ2 →IS−A ǫ3.
This example shows various diﬀerent “explaining paths” from a few given
causal and ontological atoms. Here there is a ﬁrst “explaining path” from α to δ
   explains
   alpha
   beta
   beta2
   beta1
   beta0
   gamma
   epsilon
   gamma1
   delta
   gamma2
   gamma3
   epsilon3
   beta3
   epsilon2
   epsilon1
is_a
causes
   {alpha,gamma1}
   {alpha,gamma1}
   {alpha}
Figure 1: A generic diagram, the theory with a ﬁrst explaining path
(Figure 1, see also path (1a) on Figure 2). We get successively:α explains β2 bec poss {α},
α explains γ1 bec poss {α, γ1},
and
α explains δ bec poss {α, γ1}.
As another “explaining path”, we get:
α explains β1 bec poss {α, β1}
α explains γ1 bec poss {α, β1, γ1},
and
α explains δ bec poss {α, β1, γ1}.
This second path is clearly not “optimal” since {α, γ1} is strictly included
in {α, β1, γ1}. The simplifying rule produces α explains δ bec poss {α, γ1} from
α explains δ bec poss {α, β1, γ1} but, from a computational point of view, it is
better not to generate the second path at all.
Here there are the four “optimal” explanation atoms from α to δ (see Figure 2
for the precise paths):
(1a)
α explains δ bec poss {α, γ1}
(1b)
α explains δ bec poss {α, γ2}
(2a) α explains δ bec poss {α, β3, ǫ1}
(2b) α explains δ bec poss {α, β3, ǫ2}.
We have implemented a program in DLV [LPF+06] (an implementation of
the Answer Set Programming (known as ASP) formalism [Bar03]) that takes
only a few seconds to give all the results σ1 explains σ2 bec poss Φ, for all
examples of this kind, including as here when diﬀerent explanation paths exist
(less than one second for the theory depicted in Figures 1 and 2). See [Moi07]
11

1a
1b
   alpha
   beta
   beta2
   beta1
   beta0
   gamma
   gamma1
   delta
   gamma2
   gamma3
   epsilon3
   beta3
   epsilon2
   epsilon1
   epsilon
2b
2a
is_a
causes
explains
Figure 2: Four optimal explanation paths from “alpha” to “delta”
for details about this implementation. Let us just notice that for now, it does
not make full simpliﬁcations: it tries to avoid generating explanations which are
not simpliﬁed, in a way which is optimal in simple cases like this example.
3
Introducing predicates
3.1
Motivations
In order to keep things as simple as possible, we have considered propositional
symbols only. However, we have seen various examples where this is not really
appropriate. Indeed, stating Heard loud bell →IS−A Heard bell is neither nat-
ural nor convenient. Indeed, we should also state Activating loud bell →IS−A
Activating bell if necessary and so on. It is clear that it is much more nat-
ural to state loud bell →IS−A bell, and to infer the results about Heard [...],
Activating [...] and so on.
We introduce predicate symbols (such as Heard, Activating, Own, ...) and
constant symbols such as bell, noise, loud bell, student, book, ....
The elementary terms (represented by α, β as in preceding sections) are
ground atoms such as Heard(bell), On(alarm), Own(student, book). We need
a way to use the ontological information together with the causal information.
The ontological links concern constant symbols, as in e. g. a →IS−A b.
We need a way to infer our old Heard loud bell →IS−A Heard bell from the
new ontological information stating here loud bell →IS−A bell. Again, since we
want to keep things simple, we put some restrictions. We distinguish two kinds
of behavior for a given parameter in a predicate (this is the main improvement
from [BCM07]).
Let us suppose that Heard(bell) means “I have heard some bell”. Then, we
12

can say that Heard is essentially existential (there exists some bell that I
have heard). A more explicit way to express this is to denote this predicate by
Heardone instead of Heard. Similarly, let us suppose that Own(student, book)
means that “every student owns some book”. We will say that the predicates
Heard and Own inherit upward for the parameter t in Heard(t) and in
Own(t1, t) through the IS −A hierarchy.
The other particular case of predicates, which inherit downward [for a
given parameter] through the IS −A hierarchy, are essentially universal [for
this parameter]. Let us take Like as an example, considering that Like(bell)
means I like bells (in general: I like all the bells). This predicate could be de-
noted by Likeall. This notation allows to use the two predicates Likeone and
Likeall together, if necessary, and has the advantage of indicating the kind of in-
heritance of a predicate in its denomination. Similarly, Own inherits downward
for the parameter t1 in Own(t1, t) and could be denoted by Ownall,one.
This problem of the way predicates should inherit through the IS−A hierar-
chy, is a matter of formalization of natural language. The way used here allows
to avoid explicit quantiﬁers such as ∃and ∀. When introducing a predicate, we
must state [for each of its parameters] whether it is essentially existential (then
it inherits upward such as Heardone) or essentially universal (then it inherits
downward such as Likeall), if we want to take advantage of the ontological
information with respect to this predicate. Predicates which are neither “es-
sentially existential” nor “essentially universal” for some of their parameters
cannot exploit the IS −A hierarchy for these parameters.
Let us provide the formal description of the new system.
3.2
The vocabulary with “upward and downward inherit-
ing” predicates
1. Classical vocabulary and formulas
(a) Predicate symbols.
Any arity is possible and, for each of their
parameters, predicates can be essentially existential or essentially
universal or without precision. The names of the predicate symbols
begin with an uppercase letter such as in P, Heard, On.
(b) Constant symbols. Their names begin with a lower case letter such
as in a, bell, loud bell.
(c) Classical atoms. A classical atom is a ground atom P(a1, ..., an)
where P is a predicate of arity n and ai’s are constants. A proposi-
tional symbol (i.e. a predicate of arity 0) P0 is thus a classical atom.
Classical atoms are denoted either as P(a1, ..., an) or P1(a) or by
Greek letters such as α or β1.
(d) Classical formulas.
A classical formula is a sentence (Boolean
combinations of classical atoms: only ground formulas are consid-
ered).
2. Causal atoms and formulas
13

(a) If α and β are classical atoms, then α causes β is a causal atom.
(b) A causal formula is a Boolean combination of classical or causal
atoms.
3. Ontological atoms
If a and b are constant symbols, then a →IS−A b is an ontological atom.
Since we want our “predicate” system to encompass the preceding “propo-
sitional” system, we must also consider ontological links between two
propositional symbols: if P0 and Q0 are two propositional symbols, then
P0 →IS−A Q0 is an ontological atom.
4. A causal theory consists of a set W of classical formulas, a set C of
causal formulas and a set O of ontological atoms.
5. Explanation atoms From a given causal theory, some explanation atoms
will be derived. An explanation atom is
α explains β because possible Φ
where α and β are classical atoms and Φ is a set of classical atoms. It
reads “α explains β because the set Φ is possible”.
Basically, the derivation of the explanation atoms is as given in the propo-
sitional case, thus now we can introduce directly the formal proof system.
3.3
Formal proof system of the formalism with predicates
1. Property of the causal atoms: entailing implication
(a) (α causes β) →(α →β)
2. Ontological atoms
The easiest way to present the rules in the predicate case is to augment
the ontology by introducing ontological links between ground atoms:
(a) Deriving an augmented ontological relation
i. If α = P0 and β = Q0 are propositional atoms, then
P0 →IS−A(aug.) Q0 whenever P0 →IS−A Q0.
ii. Let Pall,one, ,··· denote some predicate of arity n, essentially uni-
versal with respect to its ﬁrst parameter and essentially existen-
tial with respect to its second parameter (other parameters not
concerned here, clearly the ﬁrst or the second parameter could
similarly by the ith parameter for any i ∈{1, · · ·, n}).
Then
Pall,one, ,···(a1, b2, a3, · · · , an) →IS−A(aug.) Pone(a1, a2, a3, · · · , an)
whenever a2 →IS−A b2,
and
Pall,one, ,···(a1, a2, a3, · · · , an) →IS−A(aug.) Pone(b1, a2, a3, · · · , an)
whenever a1 →IS−A b1.
14

(b) Properties of the augmented ontological relation
i. Transitivity
If α →IS−A(aug.) β and β →IS−A(aug.) γ then α →IS−A(aug.) γ.
ii. Reﬂexivity
α →IS−A(aug.) α.
iii. Entailing implication
If α →IS−A(aug.) β then α →β.
The only diﬀerence with the propositional case is that we must use the
augmented ontology instead of the ontology given by the user.
3. Deriving explanation atoms
(a) Base case
If
β →IS−A(aug.) γ,
β →IS−A(aug.) δ, and W ̸|= ¬(α ∧β)
then
α causes γ
→
α explains δ because possible {α, β}.
(b) Transitivity of explanation cf Point 3b in § 2.3.
(c) Simplifying explanation atoms cf Point 3c in § 2.3.
Notice that we keep transitivity and reﬂexivity of the ontology, for the aug-
mented relation →IS−A(aug.). As for the ontology relation →IS−A, which is the
relation provided by the user, we could add these two properties if desired: this
would not modify the explanation atoms.
Here there is an example, illustrating also the interest of the general gener-
ating rule of explanations, with “down then up” ontological links (Point 3a):
C1
On(alarm) causes Heard(warning signal);
C2
Heard(loud noise) causes Wake up;
O1
loud bell →IS−A warning signal,
O2
hooter →IS−A warning signal,
O3
loud bell →IS−A loud noise,
O4
red flashing light →IS−A warning signal.
Heard is supposed to be essentially existential, thus it inherits upward (for
On, it does not matter in this example).
We get the following “augmented” ontological links:
O1aug:
Heard(loud bell) →IS−A(aug.) Heard(warning signal),
O2aug:
Heard(hooter) →IS−A(aug.) Heard(warning signal),
O3aug:
Heard(loud bell) →IS−A(aug.) Heard(loud noise),
O4aug:
Heard(red flashing light) →IS−A(aug.) Heard(warning signal).
Thus, we get the following explanation atoms:
E1:
On(alarm) explains Heard(loud noise)
bec poss {On(alarm), Heard(loud bell)}
E2:
Heard(loud noise) explains Wake up bec poss {Heard(loud noise)}
E1 comes from C1, O1aug and O3aug, and
E2 from C2, by the base case of explanations.
Then we get, by transitivity of explanations on E1 and E2,
15

On(alarm) explains Wake up bec possible {On(alarm),
Heard(loud bell), Heard(loud noise)} and ﬁnally
On(alarm) explains Wake up bec poss {On(alarm), Heard(loud bell)}
by simplifying the set of conditions, taking into account that we get
Heard(loud bell) →Heard(loud noise) from O3aug.
As a formal example, let us take the predicate variant of the example ending
§ 2.3, where P denotes a unary predicate which is essentially existential for its
parameter and γ some arbitrary classical atom.
C = {P(a) causes P(b), P(c) causes γ},
O = {b →IS−A c},
W = {P(a) →P(b), P(b) →P(c), P(c) →γ}
As in the example ending § 2.3, we get:
P(a) explains γ because possible {P(a)}.
Again, let us proceed step by step:
P(b) →IS−A(aug.) P(c)
by (2(a)ii)
P(a) explains P(c) because possible {P(a)}
by (3a) as upward case
P(c) explains γ because possible {P(c)}
by (3a) as base case
P(a) explains γ because possible {P(a), P(c)}
by (3b)
P(a) explains γ because possible {P(a)}
by (3c) simplifying the proviso
As an example of a predicate of arity greater than 1, let us deﬁne a binary
predicate Own where
Own(student, book) is intended to mean “every student owns a book”.
Let us suppose that our ontology contains
mary →IS−A student,
student →IS−A human
and
book →IS−A written document.
Notice that we allow “reiﬁcation” in our formalism: concepts such as “stu-
dent”, “human” and “book” are represented by constants, exactly as are “indi-
viduals” such as “Mary”. Since Own is intended to mean here “owns a” and
not “owns all”, this binary predicate is essentially existential (thus it inherits
upward) with respect to its second parameter. The case of the ﬁrst parameter
has been settled also since here Own(student, book) means “every student owns
a book”: Own is essentially universal with respect to its ﬁrst parameter. If we
need also another predicate Own′ where Own′(student, book) means there exists
a student owning a book, it is more convenient to denote Own by Ownall,one
and Own′ by Ownone,one.
We must state explicitly whether a predicate is essentially existential (“one”
kind) or essentially universal (“all” kind) (or none of these two options by
default), with respect to each of its parameters. This kind of problem occurs
each time we want to formalize natural language: the user must be aware that
it is important to make the intended meaning of each predicate precise.
It is an interesting feature of our formalism that this precise meaning can be
expressed in a natural way (at least if this predicate can be used from ontological
16

atoms). So, it is not enough to mention the arity of a predicate, its “one” or
“all” kind should be given for each of its parameters.
This will indicate to the system, for each parameter of a predicate, whether
the inheritance with respect to the ontology is “upward” (“one” kind param-
eter) or “downward” (“all” kind parameter).
It is possible to use parame-
ters for which neither the “one” kind nor the “all” kind applies. Let us con-
sider such a predicate Pall,na,one (“na” for “not available”).
Then, no aug-
mented ontological link exists between atoms of this predicate where this sec-
ond parameter has diﬀerent values on the left side and on the right side: if
P(t1, t2, t3) →IS−A(aug.) P(t′
1, t′
2, t′
3) is produced, then t2 = t′
2.
We would get here:
Ownall,one(human, book) →IS−A(aug.) Ownall,one(mary, book),
Ownall,one(human, written document) →IS−A(aug.)
Ownall,one(mary, written document),
Ownall,one(mary, book) →IS−A(aug.) Ownall,one(mary, written document),
Ownall,one(human, book) →IS−A(aug.)
Ownall,one(human, written document).
Thus, we would also get by transitivity of →IS−A(aug.):
Ownall,one(human, book) →IS−A(aug.) Ownall,one(mary, written document).
3.4
Extending the formalism:
ontological links between
predicates
We could even extend the formalism so that it allows ontological links between
predicates of arity 1 or more. As an example, let us suppose that we have the
two unary predicates (of the “one” kind, but it does not really matter here)
Heard and Perceived. It is natural to state
Heard →IS−A Perceived.
We would add the following to Point 2 § 3.3 (and similarly for higher arities):
(2ext′) Ontological atoms: introducing an augmented relation from an
ontology between predicates
If P, Q are unary predicates, then
if P →IS−A Q then P(a) →IS−A(aug.) Q(a).
In our example, we would get Heard(bell) →IS−A(aug.) Perceived(bell),
Heard(noise) →IS−A(aug.) Perceived(noise).
In this way, it is easier and more natural to express various relations between
“events”. Notice that these general ontological links between predicate symbols
generalize in a natural way the ontological links given above (Point 2(a)i in
§ 3.3) for propositional symbols.
It can be noticed that, with the ASP translation evoked above, predicates
and constants are represented by ASP constants anyway, thus it is not harder
to include the ontology between predicates.
Here there is the last example of what can be expected from this formalism:
17

Example. Getting cold usually causes Mary to become active. I see Mary
jogging. So, Mary getting cold might be taken as an explanation for her jogging.
C = {Getting cold(mary) causes Moving up(mary) }
O = {Jogging →IS−A Moving up}.
For now, W does not contain any special information (only the consequences
of the preceding causal and ontological atoms).
We get Jogging(Mary) →IS−A(aug.) Moving up(Mary) from (2ext′).
Thus W = {
Getting cold(mary) →Moving up(mary),
Jogging(mary) →Moving up(mary).}
“Mary getting cold” can be inferred as an explanation for “Mary is jogging”.
Indeed, the causal theory entails
Getting cold(mary)explains Jogging(mary)
bec poss{Getting cold(mary), Jogging(mary)}. (EXPL)
If now we add the fact that if the weather is not cold, then Mary cannot get
cold, this explanation is no longer possible in warm weather.
Adding the following formulas to W takes the new information into account:
Warm Weather,
¬(Warm Weather ∧Cold Weather),
¬Cold Weather →¬Getting cold(mary).
Then, the causal theory fails to entail the explanation atom (EXPL).
4
About a few features of the formalism
The explanation inference follows the patterns presented before. The inference
pattern (3a) in § 2.3 (or pattern (3a) in § 3.3) is important.
1. In this inference pattern, the direction of the →IS−A links a →IS−A b and
a →IS−A c is important. Unexpected conclusions would ensue if other
directions, e.g., b →IS−A a and c →IS−A a, were allowed.
2. Also, there are good reasons for excluding conclusions not endorsed by
this pattern. One reason is that it is better to limit the explanations to a
minimum, otherwise an overwhelming set of “explanations” could result.
As an example of conclusions not endorsed, notice that no explanation
atom can be derived if it does not start with a ground atom which occurs
somewhere on the left side of a causal atom.
As a short justiﬁcation of these two points, let us introduce an example which
comes from a real-world application [SMOC+98, BC99], but has been drastically
simpliﬁed and reduced. The causal model describes a physical system in which a
sliding of the ﬂywheel (to be abbreviated as SOF) causes a step in the vibration
measurement signal. It is also known that step and slow increase are two kinds
of evolution of the vibration measurement signal and that a sharp step is itself
a kind of step.
This is to be formalized as follows (the example has been simpliﬁed for the
sake of conciseness and clarity, thus the propositional version of § 2 suﬃces).
18

(C1) SOF causes Step;
(O1) Step →IS−A Evolution,
(O2) Slow increase →IS−A Evolution
(O3) Sharp step →IS−A Step.
Here are the explanation atoms which can be derived:
(E1) SOF explains Step bec poss{SOF},
(E2) SOF explains Evolution bec poss{SOF},
(E3) SOF explains Sharp step bec poss{SOF, Sharp step}.
Let us consider Point 1 above: Our concern here is about
SOF
explains Sharp step bec poss{SOF, Sharp step} which can be inferred
versus
SOF explains Slow increase bec poss{SOF, Slow increase} which cannot.
Why is it sensible to explain “evolution” and “sharp step” by a “sliding of
the ﬂywheel” while “slow increase” could not be explained by the same “sliding
of the ﬂywheel”? The reason is that, from the facts given here, a “slow increase”
is not a “step” (which is indeed explained by some “sliding of the ﬂywheel”), but
another kind of “evolution”. So, explaining “slow increase” by some “sliding of
the ﬂywheel” would be unmotivated from what we know about the system. On
the other hand, it is possible that some “sharp step”, which is a kind of “step”,
has been provoked by some “sliding of the ﬂywheel”. Notice that if there were
reasons to eliminate this possibility, it should have been noticed. We could e.g.
have added the information ¬(SOF ∧Sharp step) in W. Another way would
be to replace C1 by
(C1′) SOF causes Moderate step,
and to modify the ontological information accordingly.
This example also shows that we must exercise some care while stating the
ontological information, which was to be expected since the ontological informa-
tion plays a great rˆole in the formalism. Since a “step” is an “evolution”, there
are good reasons to explain “evolution” also by some “sliding of the ﬂywheel”:
If we have enough information to know that we get “evolution”, but not enough
to know whether it is a “step” or not, it is natural to provide “SOF” as an
explanation for this “evolution”.
Let us consider Point 2 now.
For this purpose, let us add the following
information about the system: “Any evolution in the vibration measurement
signal causes an alarm to be displayed on the operator control screen.”
We would then add the following formula to our causal theory.
(C2) Evolution causes Alarm.
The theory is now described by C1, C2 together with O1, O2 and O3 (W
does not contain special information, only the consequences of these formulas).
Then, the explanation atoms derived by the new theory are E1, E2, E3
and E4, plus E2′ obtained by transitivity from E2 and E4 and by an obvious
simpliﬁcation, with E4 and E2′ as follows:
(E4) Evolution explains Alarm bec poss{Evolution},
(E2′) SOF explains Alarm bec poss{SOF}.
19

We do not get
(notE2) Step explains Alarm bec poss{Step}.
The reason is that we restrict our “explanations” to those starting from a
ground atom which actually “causes” something, and Step does not appear on
the left side of a causal atom. Notice however that, if Step is established, then
so is Evolution from O1, thus, from E4 we indeed get some “explanation” in
which the left-hand side is established while the right-hand side is Alarm.
It must be noticed that here are cases (particularly when making abduction
from a set of atoms) where it is convenient to derive also “explanations” starting
from atoms such as Step here. This addition is immediate in our formalism.
5
Conclusion
We have provided a logical framework allowing predictive and abductive rea-
soning from causal information. Indeed, the formalism allows to express causal
information in a direct way. Then, we deduce so-called explanation atoms which
capture what might explain what, in view of the given information. We have
resorted to ontological information, which is key in generating sensible explana-
tions from causal statements.
The user provides taxonomic information as a list of ontological atoms a →IS−A
b intended to mean that object a “is a” b. The basic ground atoms, denoted
α, β, are then built with predicates, such as P(a, b). The user provides causal
information as causal atoms α causes β (which can occur in more complex
formulas). This makes formalization fairly short and natural. The ontology is
used in various patterns of inference for explanations. Such information is easy
to express, or to obtain in practice, due to existing ontologies and ontological
languages. If we were in a purely propositional setting, the user should write
Own small car →IS−A Own car, Own big car →IS−A Own car, and also
Heard small car →IS−A Heard car and so on.
This would be cumbersome. In contrast, our setting is “essentially proposi-
tional” for what concerns the causal atoms, in that it is as if Own(small car)
were a propositional symbol Own small car, while, for what concerns the on-
tology, we really use the fact that Heard and Own are predicates.
The notion of predicates “essentially existential” or “universal” allows to
keep a “datalog” formalism, very closed to a propositional one, without the
need for explicit quantiﬁers ∀(for all) or ∃(there exists).
The present proposal is a compromise between simplicity, as well as clarity,
when it comes to describing a situation, and eﬃciency and pertinence of the
results provided by the formalism.
Our work diﬀers from other approaches in the literature in that it strictly
separates causality, ontology and explanations. The main advantages are that
information is more properly expressed and that our approach is compatible
with various accounts of these notions, most notably causality. In particular,
20

we need no special instances of α causes α to hold (even though α causes α
for a particular α can be explicitly asserted). Similarly, if α is equivalent to γ
and β causes α hold, this does not mean that β causes γ holds. This feature
contrasts with [Bel06, Boc03, GLL+04, HP01a, HP01b, G.98] although in the
context of actions such confusion is less harmful. Some authors have already in-
troduced notions related to our causal and ontological atoms. In [Kau91, CD94],
there are “axioms” which can be loosely related to our causal and ontological
atoms. Our work investigates how “explanations” are obtained from such causal
and ontological information. On the other hand, we have not worked here on the
important subject of what can precisely be done from these explanation atoms.
This is left for future work, since we think that the formalization task is also a
crucial one. As for designing some plan recognition or some abductive reasoning
from our work, this is possible with simple additions over our formalism. Let us
just give one indication here: from the sets of conditions for each explanation
atom, “best explanations” for a given set set of α’s can be deﬁned.
Also as future work we should relax some of the strong restrictions on the
notion of “cause” made here.
We could introduce some ranking among the
causal atoms, in order to cope with cases such as “smoking causes cancer”.
Then, we could introduce the temporal aspect which is important as soon as
causation is involved, by adding a special temporal parameter.
We have designed a system in answer set programming that implements most
of the formalism introduced above. It is restricted to predicates of arities 0 or 1
(this could be easily extended) and the simpliﬁcation part is not fully completed
(this is much harder to modify, since the computation would be seriously more
complex, but this strong simpliﬁcation does not appear to be crucial). It works
for examples of reasonable size, but it should be expandable for some real life
examples, thus showing that our two main goals have been reached (simplicity
of the formalization by a user, and eﬃciency of the computation). Our present
translation in Answer set programming cannot be considered as a competitor
with achieved proposals such as the “causal calculator” CCalc of [GLL+04], but
it can at least give some indications that a real abductive system (for instance)
can be built over our present proposal. We can e.g. deal with the “cooking
example” of [Kau91, CD94] by adding only a few rules to our program.
As another future work, we should consider ontological links less elemen-
tary than the taxonomic relations considered in the present system. We think
however that the present system is a good basis for a really practical system.
