A FRAMEWORK FOR DEMOCRATIZING AI
A PREPRINT
Shakeel Ahmed, Ravi S. Mula, Soma S. Dhavala∗

January 6, 2020
ABSTRACT
Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence are considered an integral part of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. Their impact, and far-reaching consequences, while acknowledged, are yet to be
comprehended. These technologies are very specialized, and few organizations and select highly
trained professionals have the wherewithal, in terms of money, manpower, and might, to chart the
future. However, concentration of power can lead to marginalization, causing severe inequalities.
Regulatory agencies and governments across the globe are creating national policies, and laws around
these technologies to protect the rights of the digital citizens, as well as to empower them. Even
private, not-for-proﬁt organizations are also contributing to democratizing the technologies by making
them accessible and affordable. However, accessibility and affordability are all but a few of the facets
of democratizing the ﬁeld. Others include, but not limited to, portability, explainability, credibility,
fairness, among others. As one can imagine, democratizing AI is a multi-faceted problem, and it
requires advancements in science, technology and policy. At mlsquare, we are developing scientiﬁc
tools in this space. Speciﬁcally, we introduce an opinionated, extensible, Python framework that
provides a single point of interface to a variety of solutions in each of the categories mentioned
above. We present the design details, APIs of the framework, reference implementations, road map
for development, and guidelines for contributions.
1
Introduction
In the 21st century, we take it for granted how to harness the potential of electricity. It may seem incomprehensible that
specialist engineers had to be hired to operate electric generators in situ at homes just to run light bulbs in the early days.
It required a coming together of great minds, ripe business opportunities, technological breakthroughs, and abundance
of patience, to turn electricity into what we now consider a mere utility. While Machine Learning(ML) and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence(AI) have been around for a long time, with roots in various disciplines such as a Statistics, Computer
Science, Neuroscience, Physics, Philosophy, among others, the ecosystem seems to be ripe for deriving utilitarian value
out of them. We are already witnessing their proven utility in Information Retrieval, and e-commerce, to name a few.
But it is just the tip of the ice-berg. They are a part of a much larger, sweeping 4th Industrial Revolution[1], whose
ramiﬁcations are too signiﬁcant to ignore, and too complex to fathom. As it stands today, AI† is a specialized ﬁeld, and
a select few have the expertise required to shape them for the beneﬁt of the society at large. A plausible solution is
to democratize the very creation, distribution, and consumption of the technology. A concerted cooperation between
public and private entities in creating both scientiﬁc and technological tools is necessary. Governments are reacting by
creating national policies and task forces [2], and new laws are being formed to protect the rights of data citizens[3, 4].
Many institutions, both academic and private[5, 6, 7, 8, 9] are addressing this problem by heavily investing in advancing
the science and technology. Below, we take a cursory look at some desirable attributes of AI that make it responsible,
and responsive.
• Portable: Separate the creation of AI from its consumption
JAVA transformed the enterprise software by making it portable across platforms – code once written, can be
run everywhere. Likewise, intelligence (encoded in the form of models) once created, shall run anywhere.
∗corresponding author
arXiv:2001.00818v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2020

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
Some existing approaches are via porting models in PMML[10] format, or compile them to ONNX[11] format,
implemented in winML[12]. Another approach is to embrace write-once, scale-anyhow paradigms like
Spark[13] and Julia[14]. Our approach is discussed in Section 2.1.
• Explainable†: Provide plausible explanations, along with predictions When decisions are made by AI agents
in high stakes environments, such as those encountered in FinTech, EdTech, and Healthcare, it is imperative
that a human being would be able to interpret those decisions in the context of the situation, and explain how
the agent has come to that decision[15, 16]. Tools such as LIME[17], CORELS[18], DoWhy[19], shapely[20]
are some practical approaches to providing explanations. For an overview see here[21]. Our approach is
outlined in Section 2.2.
• Credible: Provide coverage intervals, and other uncertainty quantiﬁcation metrics
Statistical Software such as SAS R
⃝,STATA R
⃝, and many libraries in R[22], provide uncertainty estimates, along
with predictions, in terms of standard errors and p-values. Bayesian counterparts produce credible intervals.
Statistics community lays enormous importance on producing such inference summaries. Unfortunately, ML
tools rarely provide such reports, as they are primarily concerned with prediction tasks alone. This problem
is exasperated in the Deep Learning space, where they reportedly can make conﬁdent mistakes[23]. How
can we make AI credible by not only making predictions, but also by reporting coverage intervals and other
uncertainty estimates around the predictions? For a curated list of papers, and tools, see [24].
• Fair: Make AI-bias free and equitable
It is said, what we eat is what we are and what we think is what we become. AI is no different. What is
predicted is based on what data the AI systems are fed. As a result, AI systems can make biased, unethical
decisions, putting some sections of the community at risk. How can AI be made fair and equitable? Recent, on
going work by IBM, provides some alternatives to detecting bias, and acting on it [25].
• Decentralized and Distributable - Let models go where data is, instead of the other way round
All internet-ﬁrst commercial players rely on user generated data to provide hyper personalized products.
Although such products provide tangible beneﬁts to the end users, they come at the cost of risking private
data and security threats. A decentralized system wherein the data remains within the users’ premises can
potentially avoid such privacy issues. This pivoting has lead to the popularization of techniques such as
Secure Multiparty Computation(SMPC) and Federated Learning. SMPC restricts exposing model weights,
while Federated Learning takes care of securely distributing the training process to multiple worker nodes.
Frameworks like PySyft[26] makes SMPC and Federated Learning intuitive and accessible to machine learning
developers. Decentralizing the distribution channel of data, and intelligence, can mitigate some risks of
centralized control.
• Declarative: Say what the model needs and what it should do. Do not worry about how it should go about
doing it
An important aspect of ML model development is getting the right data, and model management. Many
practitioners estimate that more than 80% of Developer time goes in the ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) jobs.
However, Developers should only be concerned with what they need and not how they should get the data. This
problem is largely addressed by the databases world with standards like SQ. Many databases, including NoSQL
databases, support SQL for querying and retrieving the data. Project Morpheous[27] certainly looks very
interesting as it makes graph and tabular data interoperable seamlessly. It is a practical alternative to associative
arrays that attempt to unify RDBS, Graphs, and NoSQL databases[28]. That means that Data Scientist can
leverage SQL/OpenCypher for asking what they need and ofﬂoad the “getting” part to the database’s compute
engines. While such open standards are not available for model speciﬁcation, the workhorse ’lm’ package
in R allows models to be speciﬁed in the formula syntax. And SAS’s language certainly looks like the SQL
analogue for model speciﬁcation. Can we make SQL/OpenCypher the de facto declarative language for ETL
and develop a standard to declaratively specify the entire pipeline, including model speciﬁcation and data ﬂow
speciﬁcation? For an outline of the proposal, see here[29].
• Reproducible: Reproduce any result, on-demand
Model building and doing Data Science is experimental in nature. Unless carefully managed, reproducing
the results is next to impossible, particularly when working in distributed environments. At the very least, all
results shall be reproducible. It is possibly by ensuring that 1) Data 2) Models and 3) Run Time Environments
are versioned. An open source ML-As-A-Service platform, daggit[30], promises to handle this responsibility
by using DVC[31], git[32] and docker[33], for versioning Data, Models, and Run Times, respectively.
The above list is neither comprehensive nor exhaustive. There are many other challenges to over come such as making
AI systems scalable, auditable, actionable, governable, discoverable among others. But, as it appears, solutions are
†AI & ML, Explainability & Interpretability, Models & Algorithms are used interchangeably for the sake of simplicity
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
fragmented, and a holistic viewpoint is missing. At mlsquare, we are developing a single point of interface to bring
several solutions together. In the next Sections, we focus on the speciﬁc solutions we are building.
2
Democratizing AI at mlsquare
We provide an extensible Python framework that incorporates the above mentioned tools, where possible, and innovate
where necessary. The following are the design goals:
• Bring Your Own Spec First. Use existing, well-documented APIs, such as those in sklearn for ML. Only
provide implementations or extend the functionality where lacking.
• Bring Your Own Experience First: Minimal changes shall be introduced in the development workﬂow. For
example, with just one additional line of code to standard model ﬁtting in sklearn, the resulting model can
run on a GPU.
• Consistent: All the quality attributes of AI described earlier shall become ﬁrst class methods of a model object
with a consistent interface. It should not be necessary to stitch different, possibly incompatible, functionalities.
• Compositional: Deep Learning, when looked from a technology perspective, is a lego block computational
framework for composing models. They can support inputs and outputs of varying shape, size, and nature.
It allows many models to be expressed compositionally, without having to implement every piece of it. The
lego block architecture gives a lot of expressive power to the model designer. With backing from all hardware
vendors, and framework developers, hardware acceleration is an added beneﬁt.
• Modular: Thanks to inherent modularity of Deep Learning technology, exploit the inherent object-orientedness
of many algorithms. For example, when developing a Decision Tree equivalent in Deep Neural Network
(DNN)[34], write the Decision Tree as a DNN layer. Then, one could immediately use it either in a classiﬁ-
cation or regression task. Even one can develop a Kernel Decision Tree. This modularization ampliﬁes the
expressiveness.
• Extensible: All the provided implementations shall be extensible or default behaviours can be overwritten if
one chooses to.
In the following subsections, we describe our approach to providing portability and explainability.
2.1
Portability
As ML is practiced today, Data Scientist or an ML Scientist would write the models in a particular language (eg
Python), and a Production Engineer would rewrite them in a different language or reimplement them in a different tech
stack – scalability being the primary concern. This is called as the two language problem. One way to deal with the
two language problem is to unify the tech stack. Languages like Julia claim that same piece of code can scale from
a laptop to a cluster. Frameworks like Apache Spark also support multiple languages, and scale from a single CPU
system to a cluster. But a developer is tied to a single ecosystem. Another way to achieve portability is by means by
having an intermediate representation of the models such as PMML and ONNX. Many Deep Learning frameworks such
as a TensorFlow[35],PyTorch[36] and MXNet[37] support ONNX. Of interest is WinML which allows saving sklearn,
xgboost[38] models in ONNX. It does so by reimplementing the models in a target language like TensforFlow. While
such exact reimplementations might provide high ﬁdelity portings, extending and supporting the models can be tedious
and time consuming, if not impossible. Rather than providing such one-to-one operator level mappings of models, we
suggest a more generic semantic mapping of models as an efﬁcient alternative. We utilize three different approaches
that enable this transpilation process, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. We focus on supervised tasks.
1. Exact Semantic Map
When an exact equivalence between a user supplied model(referred to as primal model), and it’s neural network
counterpart(referred to as proxy model) exists, we can initialize the weights of the neural network with the
parameters of the ﬁtted model, and just save the model. This can be achieved for many classical models that
fall under the Generalized Linear Models umbrella. An advantage of this approach is that the proxy model is
faithful to the primal model.
2. Approximate Semantic Map
In this approach, the proxy model is trained on same data as the primal model, but its target labels are the
predictions from the primal model. Further, the proxy model’s architecture is chosen so as to closely fulﬁll
proxy model’s intent. Together, they ensure a better semantic approximation. In someways, the capacity of the
proxy model is constrained by the primal model’s capacity. In Section cite results section, we compare the the
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
performance of such transpiled models. On the theoretical side, a Probably Approximately Faithful (PAF)
framework has to be developed.
3. Universal Map
In the third approach, both the intent and implementation can be delegated to the proxy model. In someways,
neural networks are used as generic black box functional approximators. This may be useful when the primal
models can not be ﬁt on large data sets, or there is no theoretical backing for a semantic map. Say, a user is
interested in training a sklearn Logistic Regression model on a 1TB dataset. This would be extremely
hard with existing sklearn implementations. On the other hand, a proxy model can be easily scaled with
the underneath hardware. But the downside is that, ﬁdelity between primal and proxy models may not be
preserved.
2.2
Explainability
Explainability of black-box machine learning models is extremely critical while developing machine learning appli-
cations. Typically, explainability is focused on explaining what a model did or how a model was making predictions.
While they are certainly useful for a Data Scientist, they are not really the explanations that an end-user needs. Instead,
the explanations shall be about the predictions, and what an end user can do about them. We approach explainability
from this perspective. In particular, we deﬁne, at an abstract level, explanations as predicates in a First Order Logic
system, represented in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF). A proxy model shall produce such predicates as its output. In
that light, we see producing explanations as a synthetic language generation problem.
The explain method provides explanations of a model’s output. explain is model agnostic and provides interpretations
as a decision tree path. We use recurrent neural networks to train on the outputs of a localized decision tree for the
given training dataset. When fed with a new unseen data point, this RNN would output the corresponding decision tree
path traversed. This path provides us with the decision taken by the model at each feature and acts as an interpretation
for the same. explain is an ongoing research and is only available as a prototype.
3
Speciﬁcs of the Framework
The mlsquare framework utilizes multiple extensible components as shown in Fig.1. Portability in the framework is
achieved with a single line of additional code. The user is expected to pass their standard machine learning model(primal
model) to the dope function. dope then handles the responsibility of detecting and triggering the corresponding neural
network architecture with the help of adapters and optimizers. Internally, a neural network architecture search
(NAS) occurs and dope returns the optimal neural network model. The Python object returned is wrapped in such a
way that it’s interface remains identical to that of primal model sent to dope. Below, we outline the components that act
as the foundation for dope’ing.
3.1
Dope
dope accepts the primal model as an argument(see Fig. 2). Additional model conﬁguration can be passed as keyword
arguments. This function handles the responsibility of mapping the primal model to its neural network equivalent.
Once the right architectural parameters are obtained, dope delegates the responsibility of wrapping the neural network
model with the characteristics of the primal model to adapters. The adapter returns a Python Object that behaves
like the primal model but under the hood utilizes neural networks. As shown in Fig. 1, dope is assisted by two other
components - registry and adapters.
3.2
Adapter
Adapters act as a connector between the primal model and the proxy model (i.e. the neural network equivalent). We
currently support Keras[39] as the backend for our proxy models and sklearn for primal models. Adapters provide
methods(ex - fit, score, predict etc.) that extend on the proxy model’s APIs. When the fit method is invoked, it
triggers the Optimizer. The Optimizer receives model conﬁgurations and returns a trained model. Adapter then
returns the trained model to dope. The save method exports the trained model as a Keras and ONNX models. The
Adapter module can hold multiple Adapter classes for each type of "primal-proxy" mappings. For example, we
currently have two classes in Adapters - SklearnKerasClassifier and SklearnKerasRegressor. A sklearn
classiﬁer model, that needs to be mapped to a Keras model, can utilize the SklearnKerasClassifier adapter. New
adapters can be written for interacting with other scientiﬁc libraries.
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
Figure 1: Components in the Framework
Figure 2: Converting a Standard ML Model using dope
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
3.3
Optimizer
The neural network architecture of the proxy model can depend on the dataset it is being trained. Hence, we pass the
proxy model through a neural architecture search (NAS) process. We use Tune[40] based on Ray[41] for our models’
NAS process. The optimizer component searches for best model and returns it to the adapter. Conﬁguration of tune
can be edited or reconﬁgured by passing the parameters via the fit method of the proxy model.
3.4
Registry
The registry object, like the name suggests, maintains a registry of models supported by ML Square. registry is a
python dictionary object which is initialized while importing the mlsquare library. It expects a tuple of length two
as key - name of the algorithm and the package name. registry then returns the corresponding proxy model and

decorator in the models’ class deﬁnition. The model should contain adapter, model name and primal models’ module
name. Then, upon calling dope, a corresponding NAS can be triggered.
3.5
Architectures
The architectures module in mlsquare library provides the semantic mappings of the primal models.
It
is a Python class with various attributes to deﬁne the mappings. These attributes include the corresponding
adapter of the model, module name of the primal model, name of the algorithm and model parameters required
to initialize the neural network.
To keep track of multiple versions of a given proxy model, an additional
attribute called version is supported. There are three levels of class declarations involved in creating a model
mapping.
BaseClass is the topmost abstract base class (ABC). This class ensures that the basic methods ex-
pected for the functioning of a proxy model are not left undeclared. The next level is a generic parent class
from which multiple algorithms can inherit common attributes. For example, the GenralizedLinearModel is
used as a parent class for LinearRegression, LogisticRegression, RidgeRegression etc. The ﬁnal level is
declaring the proxy model itself as a class. This level includes declaring the key attributes required to create the model.
Taking a closer look at Fig.
3 reveals how the modular aspects of neural networks are being utilized in
mlsquare to accomplish semantic mappings. Tweaking the activation and loss function set in the model parameters of
the proxy model that inherits GeneralizedLinearModel can provide a range of different models. It provides a lot
of ﬂexibility for the developers in deciding how a model mapping should be declared.
4
Workﬂow
Figure 4 shows a typical user workﬂow while utilizing mlsquare’s dope functionality. Such a workﬂow involves three
touchpoints with dope while transpiling the model.
1. import the dope function
2. pass the primal model to the dope function
3. use the transpiled model to train, score, predict or save it for future use
The following subsections provide details on the different methods available on the transpiled proxy model.
4.1
Developer Experience
The code snippet below demonstrates a typical workﬂow of training and scoring a Sklearn Linear Regression model.
1 from
mlsquare
import
dope
2 from
sklearn.linear_model
import
LinearRegression
3 from
sklearn.preprocessing
import
StandardScaler
4 from
sklearn. model_selection
import
train_test_split
5 import
pandas as pd
6 from
sklearn.datasets
import
load_diabetes
7
8 model = LinearRegression ()
9 diabetes = load_diabetes ()
10
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
Figure 3: UML Representation of architecture
Figure 4: Workﬂow representation
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
11 X = diabetes.data
12 sc = StandardScaler ()
13 X = sc. fit_transform(X)
14 Y = diabetes.target
15
16 x_train , x_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split (X, Y, test_size =0.60 ,
random_state =0)
17
18 m = dope(model)
19
20 m.fit(x_train , y_train)
21 m.score(x_test , y_test)
Listing 1: Usage of dope
As mentioned earlier, adding one additional line of code(line no. 18) converts the sklearn model into a neural network.
The object returned by dope() can then be used like any other sklearn model. The API interface remains consistent,
with the only difference being that the training and scoring are performed on a neural network. The capabilities of this
extended model are explained in detail in the following sections.
4.1.1
fit() method
Below shown is a code snippet for calling the fit() method.
1 # Train
with
default
mappings
2 m.fit(x_train , y_train)
3
4 # Train
with
additional
parameters
5 # tune by ray
package is the NAS backend
used by mlsquare
6 from ray import
tune
7 # Define the
hyperparameters
you wish to customize
8 params = {’optimizer ’:{’grid_search ’:[’adam ’, ’nadam ’]}}
9 m.fit(X_train , y_train , params=params)
Listing 2: Customizing Neural Architecture Search
When the fit method is called a neural architecture search is performed. If no additional parameters are given (line
no.2), the default mappings are used to create and train the neural network. dope provides the option to customize
the hyperparameters used for neural architecture search (line no. 8 and 9). In the above example, we customize the
"optimizer" of the neural network. This, in turn, does a grid search on adam and nadam optimizers and returns the best
performing model.
4.1.2
score() and predict() methods
The dope’d model contains both the score and predict methods like a sklearn model.
1 # Scoring
your
models
2 m.score(x_test , y_test)
3 # Sample
output
4 # 90/90
[==============================]
- 0s 244us/step
5 # [0.5179819915029737 ,
0.911111111442248]
6
7 # Predict
outputs
8 y_pred = m.predict(x_test)
Listing 3: Score and Predict methods
In the above example, the score method returns a list with two values - loss and accuracy. The predict method returns an
array of predicted values.
4.1.3
Saving dope’d model
The save method available on the dope’d model allows exporting the trained model in two formats - ONNX and HDF5.
The method expects a ﬁle name while saving the model.
8

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
1 # Save
method
expects
file name as an argument
2 m.save(filename="my_model")
Listing 4: Saving a model
The ONNX ﬁle can then be loaded, converted or used directly in different runtimes. We could score a sklearn model
in chrome browser.
5
Results
The framework currently contains a collection of seven sklearn models mapped to their neural network equivalents.
Table 1 shows the performance comparison of each of these models. The comparisons are done by training and
scoring each algorithm on a relevant dataset. The training and scoring are done on the standard sklearn model and its
transpiled equivalent dope’d model.
Performance comparison
Algorithm
Dataset Name
Dope (acc/r2)
sklearn (acc/r2)
Logistic Regression
Iris
0.84
0.82
Linear Regression
UCI Diabetes
0.42
0.40
Ridge Regression
UCI Diabetes
0.44
0.42
Lasso Regression
UCI Diabetes
0.43
0.43
ElasticNet
Regres-
sion
UCI Diabetes
0.44
0.44
Linear SVC
Iris
0.84
0.91
Decision Tree Classi-
ﬁer
Iris
0.96
0.93
Table 1: Comparison of dope’d models vs Standard sklearn models
The datasets chosen were UCI Iris for regression algorithms and UCI Diabetes datasets[42] for classiﬁcation algorithms.
The performance metric used was accuracy and r2 score for classiﬁcation and regression respectively. Table 1
results clearly shows that the performance of models transpiled by dope are on par with their sklearn counterparts’
performance.
A more exhaustive collection of trial runs and their corresponding results can be found in this link. This spreadsheet
contains performance and conﬁguration details of each new algorithm added to mlsquare. Once a new algorithm is
added, a Python script trains and scores the algorithm with relevant datasets. By making it openly available to view the
results, it helps us maintain accountability and quality of new algorithms added.
6
Roadmap
Table 2 depicts the available features[✓], ongoing work[] and future research[] on the mlsquare framework. One of the
goals of building this framework is to propose and demonstrate the feasibility of a machine learning framework that can ease the
process of democratizing AI, utilizing existing tools with very minimal changes. The mlsquare framework currently supports the
portability feature(.save() method). It can convert above mentioned sklearn methods to a neural network model. We used Keras
as our primary framework to create the transpiled neural network. So far our focus has been in developing the right architecture that
can support a wide range of existing frameworks and in prototyping different custom features like save(), explain(), nas() and
so forth.
The following list provides a gist of our ongoing research:
1. Extending save() to XgBoost, IRT[43], Surprise[44] and DeepCTR[45]: Supporting these widely used frameworks
will help us make deep learning techniques more accessible to a broader audience.
2. Adding support for Deep Random Trails(DeRT) in explain(): DeRT is an in-house explainability technique. We are
currently working on on-boarding this tool to the explain method.
3. Adding support for PyTorch: As mentioned earlier, we currently use Keras to deﬁne the neural networks. We will soon
be extending support to PyTorch as well.
4. Extending neural architecture search capabilities with AutoKeras[46].
5. Bringing uncertainty quantiﬁcation as a ﬁrst class method on a model object.
9

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
Framework progress
ML Square
Supported module
Algorithm
Status
.save()
sklearn
Linear Regression
✓
Ridge Regression
✓
Lasso
✓
ElasticNet
✓
Support Vector Ma-
chines
✓
Decision Tree Classi-
ﬁer
✓
Linear Discriminant
Analysis

Decision Tree Regres-
sor

Multi-task Lasso

Multitask ElasticNet

Passive
Aggressive
Classiﬁer

Robust Regression

IRT

DeepCTR

XgBoost

Surprise

.explain()
DeRT

Interpret

Shapley

.nas()
Tune
✓
AutoKeras

.ci()

Table 2: Progress of mlsquare features
Contributing
mlsquare is an open-source framework built by committed and enthusiastic volunteers. We strongly believe in the power of
community-driven solutions. If you ﬁnd mlsquare’s mission exciting, you can contribute to the framework in the following ways -
1. Refer to this link to add new algorithms to dope that you might ﬁnd be useful to other developers.

marked as [] and [], respectively in Table 2.
3. This spreadsheet mentioned in Section 5 is an internal tool used by mlsquare to keep a track of the performance of every
algorithm available on the framework. We would like to add more datasets and create an openly accessible API to execute
training and inference sessions for anyone interested in contributing. If you know of an interesting dataset or is interested

4. We are open to contributions at all levels(from documentation to architectural design inputs). To suggest changes to the
framework, you can raise an issue on our GitHub repository.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, the need for democratizing AI, and several of its facets are introduced. An extensible Python framework is proposed
towards that end. Details of different components of the framework and their responsibilities are discussed. The framework
currently provides support for porting a subset of sklearn models to their approximately faithful Deep Neural Network counterparts,
represented in ONNX format. An important take-away is that, Deep Learning architectures can be constrained to reﬂect well-understood
modeling paradigms. It debunks a common misconception that Deep Learning requires big data. In order to democratize the very
creation of this framework, and bring transparency into the process, we have created a leader board to access the quality metrics
of the semantic maps. Several enhancements and extensions are in pipeline. A process is to put in place to allow community to
contribute.
10

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 6, 2020
