Deep In-GPU Experience Replay
Ben Parr
Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT
Experience replay allows a reinforcement learning agent
to train on samples from a large amount of the most recent
experiences. A simple in-RAM experience replay stores these
most recent experiences in a list in RAM, and then copies
sampled batches to the GPU for training. I moved this list
to the GPU, thus creating an in-GPU experience replay, and
a training step that no longer has inputs copied from the
CPU. I trained an agent to play Super Smash Bros. Melee,
using internal game memory values as inputs and outputting
controller button presses. A single state in Melee contains
27 floats, so the full experience replay fits on a single GPU.
For a batch size of 128, the in-GPU experience replay trained
twice as fast as the in-RAM experience replay. As far as I
know, this is the first in-GPU implementation of experience
replay. Finally, I note a few ideas for fitting the experience
replay inside the GPU when the environment state requires
more memory.
1
INTRODUCTION
Super Smash Bros. Melee is a video game created by Nintendo
in 2001 for the GameCube that is still played competitively
today. Based on “current viewership, sponsorship, player
base and, most importantly, future growth potential,” ESPN
listed Melee as number six on their 2016 Top 10 Esports Draft
[1], making Melee the longest-played game in the Esports
Draft. The GameCube can be emulated on modern hardware,
allowing an agent to train directly on game memory values,
such a a player’s exact position. In Spring 2017, Deepak
Dilipkumar, Yuan Liu and I created a deep reinforcement
learning agent based on Melee infrastructure code written by
Vlad Firoiu. The agent learned to avoid being hit by training
using these internal memory states and outputting controller
button presses. The best agent learned to avoid the toughest
AI built into Melee for a full minute 74.6% of the time.
Melee allows agents to directly compete, instead of com-
peting indirectly through a scoring system. Melee is also
more complex than Atari 2600 games, and thus is harder
to learn to play well. However, learning is simultaneously
easier since the agent directly knows the internal memory
of the game, such as characters’ positions and velocities, in-
stead of learning these features from pixels. Using internal
memory values also greatly decreases the size of the mem-
ory to store an environment state. This means an experience
replay containing the 1,000,000 most recent experiences can
easily fit inside the GPU memory. An in-GPU experience
replay reduces the communication cost between CPU and
GPU because an experience is copied to the GPU memory
only once, instead of once for every time it is sampled. Also,
once the experience replay is in the GPU, all logic for a
single train step can be moved to the GPU, thus removing
even more communication between the CPU and GPU. This
project achieves a significantly faster train step by reducing
the amount of bytes sent between the GPU and CPU.
Figure 1: A screenshot of the deep reinforcement
agent (Fox, left) using a special attack on the sword-
wielding opponent (Marth, right) on the entirely flat
Final Destination stage.
2
RELATED WORK
Reinforcement learning algorithms train on experiences cre-
ated by interacting with an environment [9]. An "experience"
is a tuple (s,a,r,s′), namely an old state, an action taken, a
reward for the action, and a new state (including whether
the new state is a terminal state). Instead of forgetting an
experience immediately after training on it, an experience
replay stores a large fixed amount of the most recent experi-
ences, with new experiences replacing old experiences in a
first-in first-out order. The experience replay starts empty.
Samples are initially added during the burn-in phase. Train-
ing is skipped during this burn-in phase in order to avoid
sampling the initial experiences too frequently. After the
burn-in phase, the agent then trains on random samples
arXiv:1801.03138v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2018

Dr. William Cohen’s ML with Large Datasets, December 2017, CMU
B. Parr
from this memory as new experiences are continually added.
This random sampling smooths learning and addresses the
issue of immediately forgetting a rare event [4].
DeepMind Technologies has successfully learned to play
Atari 2600 games using deep reinforcement learning [6].
DeepMind used a convolutional neural network combined
with a Q-learning variant to learn to play games using just
the games’ pixel output, containing 84×84×4 = 28,224 floats.
DeepMind Technologies also scaled their Atari 2600 agent
to parallel actors and parallel learners [7]. They created 100
bundles, where each bundle contained an actor that gener-
ated experiences from the Atari game, a local experience
replay, and a learner that updates network parameters from
the actor’s experiences. Each bundle sends gradients and
requests updated parameters from a distributed parameter
server.
Firoiu applied deep reinforcement learning to create a
Melee agent which used an actor-critic model with a deep
architecture and self-play. The trained model was able to
achieve excellent results with the Captain Falcon character
on the Battlefield stage, going on to even beat a number
of professional players [2]. In Spring 2017, my Deep Rein-
forcement Learning team trained three separate models to
play Melee [8]. The first used DeepMind’s original Deep Q-
Network (DQN) architecture. The other two models were
based on more recent variations of the regular DQN architec-
ture. Double DQN [10] uses two networks playing alternat-
ing roles in order to reduce the tendency of the regular DQN
to over-estimate action values. Dueling DQN [11] uses two
parallel networks that estimate the value function and ad-
vantage function, and finally combine these to estimate the
Q-value functions. The dueling DQN architecture performed
best out of the three tested models.
The original DeepMind Atari 2600 agent, the parallelized
DeepMind Atari 2600 agents and my Deep Reinforcement
Learning team’s agents all used a local experience replay con-
taining 1,000,000 experiences. Open source implementations
of experience replay store this large amount of experiences in
RAM1. Therefore, every time an experience is sampled from
the experience replay, it must be copied to the GPU mem-
ory. Since an experience is expected to be sampled multiple
times, this creates a "thrashing" effect. My Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning team’s Melee agent was trained on a state
containing only 27 floats based on internal memory values
[8], which means that the corresponding experience replay
1DeepMind
DeepMind
DQN
3.0
https://github.com/deepmind/dqn/
blob/9d9b1d13a2b491d6ebd4d046740c511c662bbe0f/dqn/NeuralQLearner.
lua#L245,
https://github.com/songrotek/DQN-Atari-Tensorflow/blob/
a6320f8e585a2423a5f4e963e387c79e8fe944f0/BrainDQN_Nature.py#L27,
https://github.com/gtoubassi/dqn-atari/blob/master/replay.py#L26
and
many more.
can fit in the memory of a single GPU. By moving the expe-
rience replay to its consumer, an experience is copied only
once to the GPU memory, instead of copied every time it is
sampled.
3
DATA
Competitive Super Smash Bros. Melee is a one player versus
another player fighting game where each player chooses one
character to play as from the list of 25 playable characters.
The goal of the game is to knock the opponent’s character off
the stage and into the abyss four times before the opponent
knocks your character off four times. Each character has a
wide array of offensive and defensive abilities. For example,
the character Marth has a sword which allows him to attack
from a further distance, but at a slower speed.
Melee was originally created for the Nintendo GameCube
console, which is no longer technologically advanced. In
fact, Melee can be played on most modern computers using
Dolphin Emulation software that emulates the GameCube
hardware. Fortunately, even one of the cheapest available
Google Cloud virtual machine, the g1-small machine, is able
to run Dolphin-emulated Melee. This allows for easy par-
allelization of gameplay generation. Emulation also allows
access to specific memory addresses, such as the memory
address containing the position of each character. Finally, em-
ulation allows an agent to pick the exact frame in the game
to push a button. In Spring 2017, my Deep Reinforcement
Learning team reused Vlad Firoiu’s implementation of this
infrastructure-like code [2]. Unfortunately this emulation
suffered from sporadically skipped frames, which caused an
increase in environment stochasticity.
The Melee agent is trained on a single GPU manager ma-
chine using gameplay data generated by 50 workers playing
Melee in parallel. First, the manager creates an initial model,
and uploads the model to the workers. The workers then
enter a loop: generate a few minutes of gameplay samples
from the current fixed model, upload the samples to the man-
ager, download the latest model, repeat. Each Melee worker
uses a fixed model to generate experience tuples. This al-
lows the manager to train on a stream of incoming gameplay
data generated faster than the manager could generate on its
own. Finally, the manager completes the loop by periodically
uploading an updated model to the workers.
4
METHODS
The in-GPU experience replay is represented in TensorFlow
as a single TensorFlow Variable that stores all 1,000,000 expe-
riences. Each experience, is packed into a single dimension.
In the Melee environment, a single state consists of 27 floats.
A single experience consists of two states (an old and a new
state), as well as three scalars: action, reward and is_terminal.

Deep In-GPU Experience Replay
Dr. William Cohen’s ML with Large Datasets, December 2017, CMU
Figure 2: Infrastructure outline where a single GPU-
enabled manager trains on gameplay generated on N
Google Cloud workers. This is the same infrastruc-
ture used in my Deep Reinforcement Learning team’s
Melee agent.
Therefore, the experience replay Variable has shape 1,000,000
by 57. The action scalar is an integer and is_terminal scalar is
a boolean. These scalars are cast to floats when added to the
experience replay, and cast back to their appropriate types
when sampling. Therefore, from a user’s perspective, this
casting is hidden.
The Experience Replay API has two methods: adding new
experiences, and randomly sampling from the current experi-
ences. The experience replay has a fixed size and starts empty.
Initially, experiences are added without removing any older
experiences. Once the experience replay is completely filled,
the oldest experiences are removed when newer experiences
are added, in a first-in first-out order. The experience replay
Variable is partitioned into contiguous blocks of equal size,
which is denoted as the "update-size". Experiences are queued
in RAM until the queue has enough experiences to update
the next block. Then the first update-size experiences in the
queue are copied to the next update block in the GPU mem-
ory using the TensorFlow scatter_update function2. This
block update approach is essential since TensorFlow has a
significant overhead each time values are copied to the GPU
memory. Therefore, by updating a whole block at once, this
overhead cost is reduced. The final update-size of 2,000 was
chosen based on experimental speed results.
A sample is generated from the experience replay by
first sampling integers uniformly between 0 and the cur-
rent experience replay size. These integers are then used
as the indexes into the experience replay Variable. Finally,
2tf.scatter_update is consistently faster than tf.assign to a contiguous slice.
the sampled experiences are unpacked into old state, new
state, action, reward and is_terminal Tensors. This approach
differs slightly from the in-RAM approach which uses the
random.sample() function, and therefore guarantees dis-
tinct experiences in a sample. The random uniform approach
from the in-GPU experience replay does not have this guar-
antee and therefore can include a single experience multiple
times in a single sample. However, since the experience re-
play size is much larger than the sample size, this difference
happens rarely (0.05% of the time for a sample size of 32).
The overall effect of this slight difference on the trained
agent’s performance is unclear. Regardless, I plan on switch-
ing back to sampling distinct integers once TensorFlow has
an efficient way to do so.
4.1
Integration with Reinforcement
Learning Algorithm
Once the experience replay is located in the GPU memory,
the train step logic can also be completely moved to the GPU.
For example, the neural network takes as input batch-size
many states and outputs batch-size many Q vectors, where
each Q vector contains a Q value for each of the possible
actions. The reinforcement learning algorithm then uses the
sampled actions as indexes into this network_output. This
was originally implemented as
tf.gather_nd(network_output, enumerate(actions)),
where gather_nd selects individual scalars from a two di-
mensional Tensor. Unfortunately, the enumerate function is
only available in Python, and not in TensorFlow. To convert
this code to TensorFlow, I use a constant enumerate_mask =
tf.range(0, batch_size * num_actions, num_actions),
which contains the indexes to the start of each row of the
flattened network output. Then, simply
tf.gather(tf.reshape(network_output, [-1]),
enumerate_mask + actions).3
Since the train step is completely moved to the GPU, there
is no longer a need to feed values into the GPU when running
a train step. However, for convenience, I originally allowed
feed values by using tf.placeholder_with_default. This
function causes a 25% increase in train step time, which is
abnormally high since the train step includes calculating
gradients and updating weights! So, I removed
tf.placeholder_with_default, resulting in a train step
with no inputs copied from the CPU.
4.2
Deep Q-Network Model
I used the Dueling DQN model since it performed best for
my Deep Reinforcement Learning team’s Melee agent. The
model uses target fixing, with the target network marked as
3This idea was taken from https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/issues/
206.

Dr. William Cohen’s ML with Large Datasets, December 2017, CMU
B. Parr
not trainable, so when the train step performs the parame-
ter updates, only the online network is updated. The target
network is instead updated to have the same weights as the
online network once every 10,000 train steps. Similar with
other DQN models, dueling DQN approximates the value
function Qw using a deep neural network. With the weights
parameterized by weights w, the weights are updated as:
w = w + α

r + γ max
a′∈A Qw(s′,a′) −Qw(s,a)

∇wQw(s,a)
The Dueling DQN architecture consists of two streams of
fully-connected layers, one which estimates the state value
function, and one which estimates the advantage function.
The streams share one hidden layer with 128 units, and then
branch out to separate fully-connected layers having 512
units. These two streams are combined to get an estimate of
the Q-value for a particular (state, action) pair:
Q(s,a) = V (s) + A(s,a) −
1
|A|
Õ
a′
A(s,a′)
5
RESULTS
Based on experimental results, I choose a GPU update-size
of 2000, and saw the following percent speedups in the train
step:
Table 1: Percent Speedup of Training from using In-
GPU Experience Replay instead of In-RAM Experi-
ence Replay
Batch Size
Percent Speedup
16
30.54%
32
54.87%
64
67.08%
128
114.41%
256
114.35%
All experiments were run on an NVIDIA TITAN X (Pascal)
with 12 GB of memory, with no other processes running on
the GPU. All results ignore startup costs, and thus begin after
the burn-in phase completes. For example, creating the expe-
rience replay TensorFlow Variable takes ~4 seconds. Overall,
this startup time takes less than a minute for the in-GPU
experience replay. Since this is a one time cost, this increased
initial start-up time from using the in-GPU experience mem-
ory is negligible relative to the total training time. Finally,
both the RAM implementation and GPU implementation
use an experience replay size of 1,000,000, and use the same
Dueling DQN model.
Figure 3: Average time to add a single experience when
updating "GPU Experience Update Size" many experi-
ences at a time. Lower times are better. For compar-
ison, the corresponding update time for the in-RAM
experience replay is 1.4 microseconds.
The RAM implementation of experience replay is able to
add a new experience in 1.4 microseconds. Adding a new
experience in the GPU is significantly more expensive, and
depends on how many experiences are added at a time (i.e.
update-size). I ran an experiment to illustrate this update-
size effect, and decided on an update-size of 2000, which
is able to add a new experience in 37.5 microseconds on
average. Therefore, adding a new experience to the in-GPU
experience replay is about 27 times slower than adding a
new experience to the in-RAM experience replay.
The increase in adding an experience to the in-GPU expe-
rience replay is small compared to the decrease in training
time. In general, as batch size increases, the train step time
should increase since the number of computed gradients also
increases, for example. However, the in-RAM experience re-
play implementation incurs a larger slowdown as batch size
increases, since it has to copy more samples to the GPU
memory. The in-GPU experience replay avoids this addi-
tional cost since the samples are already in the GPU memory.
Therefore, as batch size increases, the percent speedup from
a in-GPU experience replay also increased. So, not only did
the in-GPU experience replay train faster for all batch sizes,
but also scaled better with batch size.
Finally, I compared the time it took for the Melee agent
to train on 8.5 million gameplay frames. The original Melee
reinforcement agent used a batch size of 32 [8]. For this batch
size, the agent trained using the in-GPU experience replay
trained 57.8% faster than the in-RAM experience replay. Also,
for batch size of 128, the in-GPU experience replay trained
104.3% faster than the in-RAM experience replay.

Deep In-GPU Experience Replay
Dr. William Cohen’s ML with Large Datasets, December 2017, CMU
Figure 4: Average time to perform a single train step.
Lower times are better. The GPU Replay Memory uses
an update-size = 2000. Note that making the batch
size too large could decrease the performance of the
trained agent.
6
DISCUSSION
The biggest prerequisite of this project is that the the experi-
ence replay must fit inside the GPU. A Melee agent trained
on internal memory values easily fits. However, an environ-
ment with pixel inputs might not. For example, DeepMind’s
use of game pixels stored in 28,224 floats would naively re-
quire 2 ∗28224 + 3 = 56,451 for every experience, and thus
> 50 GB of GPU memory. No existing GPU has this much
memory. There are a few ways to make this tractable.
First, assuming the agent did not reach a state that
is_terminal, then the new state of an experience is the old
state of the next experience. So, by only storing one state
per experience, and modifying the sample operations, the
in-GPU experience replay could decrease the required GPU
memory size by a factor of two. Also, since each gameplay
added to the experience replay is a chain of temporally re-
lated experiences, there might be a way to compress the
space to store a single experience. For example, the expe-
rience replay could store a combination of state and state
changes, instead of always storing full states. Of course, this
all increases the complexity of sampling, and reconstructing
the original experience for the reinforcement learning algo-
rithm should still all be done inside the GPU. Finally, instead
of storing the original inputs as the states in the environment
replay, the in-GPU experience replay could instead store the
values at higher levels in the neural network as the states.
Then, the layers generating these smaller states could be
retrained separately and less often.
If reducing the amount of space required does not fix the
issue, then the simplest solution is to just reduce the number
of experiences the experience replay stores. Unfortunately
this could decrease the performance of the reinforcement
learning algorithm, and is not feasible if the space required
is much greater than the amount of memory on a single
GPU. In this case, the experience replay must be split across
multiple GPUs. In order to support multi-GPU experience
replay without changing training, the agent’s model would
have to be synchronized every train step, which could make
in-RAM experience replay a better alternative. However, if
willing to relax the synchronization requirement, each GPU
could have its own model that is synchronized periodically,
such as in DeepMind’s parallel bundles approach [7], or in
an iterative parameter mixing approach [5], or in a delayed
gradient descent approach [3].
7
CONCLUSION
I moved the experience replay from RAM to GPU memory.
This restructuring removed the need to feed sampled experi-
ences into the GPU at every train step. Instead, experiences
are copied to the GPU once. Not only did this consistently
speed up train time, but also decreased the incremental cost
of training on larger batch sizes. For the Melee agent, this
resulted in a 104.3% faster training with a batch size of 128,
and a 57.8% faster training with a batch size of 32.
