arXiv:1104.5601v1  [cs.LG]  29 Apr 2011
1
Mean-Variance Optimization in Markov Decision
Processes
Shie Mannor
(Corresponding Author) Department of Electrical and Engineering, Technion,
Haifa, ISRAEL 32000, tel ++972-4-8293284, fax ++972-4-8295757
John N. Tsitsiklis
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139
Abstract
We consider ﬁnite horizon Markov decision processes under performance measures that involve both the mean
and the variance of the cumulative reward. We show that either randomized or history-based policies can improve
performance. We prove that the complexity of computing a policy that maximizes the mean reward under a variance
constraint is NP-hard for some cases, and strongly NP-hard for others. We ﬁnally offer pseudopolynomial exact
and approximation algorithms.
keywords: Markov processes; dynamic programming; control; complexity theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
The classical theory of Markov decision processes (MDPs) deals with the maximization of the cumu-
lative (possibly discounted) expected reward, to be denoted by W. However, a risk-averse decision maker
may be interested in additional distributional properties of W. In this paper, we focus on the case where
the decision maker is interested in both the mean and the variance of the cumulative reward, and we
explore the associated computational issues.
Risk aversion in MDPs is of course an old subject. In one approach, the focus is on the maximization
of E[U(W)], where U is a concave utility function. Problems of this type can be handled by state
augmentation (e.g., Bertsekas, 1995), namely, by introducing an auxiliary state variable that keeps track
of the cumulative past reward. In a few special cases, e.g., with an exponential utility function, state
augmentation is unnecessary, and optimal policies can be found by solving a modiﬁed Bellman equation
(Chung & Sobel, 1987). Another interesting case where optimal policies can be found efﬁciently involves
piecewise linear utility functions with a single break point; see Liu and Koenig (2005).
In another approach, the objective is to optimize a so-called coherent risk measure (Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, & Heat
1999), which turns out to be equivalent to a robust optimization problem: one assumes a family of
probabilistic models and optimizes the worst-case performance over this family. In the multistage case

2
(Riedel, 2004), problems of this type can be difﬁcult (Le Tallec, 2007), except for some special cases
(Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005) that can be reduced to Markov games (Shapley, 1953).
Mean-variance optimization lacks some of the desirable properties of approaches involving coherent
risk measures and sometimes leads to counterintuitive policies. Bellman’s principle of optimality does
not hold, and as a consequence, a decision maker who has received unexpectedly large rewards in the
ﬁrst stages, may actively seek to incur losses in subsequent stages in order to keep the variance small.
Nevertheless, mean-variance optimization is an important approach in ﬁnancial decision making (e.g.,
Luenberger, 1997), especially for static (one-stage) problems. Consider, for example, a fund manager who
is interested in the 1-year performance of the fund, as measured by the mean and variance of the return.
Assuming that the manager is allowed to undertake periodic re-balancing actions in the course of the year,
one obtains a Markov decision process with mean-variance criteria. Mean-variance optimization can also
be a meaningful objective in various engineering contexts. Consider, for example, an engineering process
whereby a certain material is deposited on a surface. Suppose that the primary objective is to maximize
the amount deposited, but that there is also an interest in having all manufactured components be similar
to each other; this secondary objective can be addressed by keeping the variance of the amount deposited
small.
We note that expressions for the variance of the discounted reward for stationary policies were developed
in Sobel (1982). However, these expressions are quadratic in the underlying transition probabilities, and
do not lead to convex optimization problems.
Motivated by considerations such as the above, this paper deals with the computational complexity
aspects of mean-variance optimization. The problem is not straightforward for various reasons. One is the
absence of a principle of optimality that could lead to simple recursive algorithms. Another reason is that,
as is evident from the formula Var(W) = E[W 2] −(E[W])2, the variance is not a linear function of the
probability measure of the underlying process. Nevertheless, E[W 2] and E[W] are linear functions, and as
such can be addressed simultaneously using methods from multicriteria or constrained Markov decision
processes (Altman, 1999). Indeed, we will use such an approach in order to develop pseudopolynomial
exact or approximation algorithms. On the other hand, we will also obtain various NP-hardness results,
which show that there is little hope for signiﬁcant improvement of our algorithms.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the model and our notation. We

3
also deﬁne various classes of policies and performance objectives of interest. In Section III, we compare
different policy classes and show that performance typically improves strictly as more general policies are
allowed. In Section IV, we establish NP-hardness results for the policy classes we have introduced. Then, in
Sections V and VI, we develop exact and approximate pseudopolynomial time algorithms. Unfortunately,
such algorithms do not seem possible for some of the more restricted classes of policies, due to strong
NP-completeness results established in Section IV. Finally, Section VII contains some brief concluding
remarks.
II. THE MODEL
In this section, we deﬁne the model, notation, and performance objectives that we will be studying.
Throughout, we focus on ﬁnite horizon problems. 1
A. Markov Decision Processes
We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) with ﬁnite state, action, and reward spaces. An MDP
is formally deﬁned by a sextuple M = (T, S, A, R, p, g) where:
(a) T, a positive integer, is the time horizon;
(b) S is a ﬁnite collection of states, one of which is designated as the initial state;
(c) A is a collection of ﬁnite sets of possible actions, one set for each state;
(d) R is a ﬁnite subset of Q (the set of rational numbers), and is the set of possible values of the
immediate rewards. We let K = maxr∈R |r|.
(e) p : {0, . . . , T −1} × S × S × A →Q describes the transition probabilities. In particular, pt(s′ | s, a)
is the probability that the state at time t + 1 is s′, given that the state at time t is s, and that action
a is chosen at time t.
(d) g : {0, . . . , T −1} × R × S × A →Q is a set of reward distributions. In particular, gt(r | s, a) is
the probability that the immediate reward at time t is r, given that the state and action at time t is
s and a, respectively.
With few exceptions (e.g., for the time horizon T), we use capital letters to denote random variables, and
lower case letters to denote ordinary variables. The process starts at the designated initial state. At every
stage t = 0, 1, . . . , T −1, the decision maker observes the current state St and chooses an action At.
1Some of the results such as the approximation algorithms of Section VI can be extended to the inﬁnite horizon discounted case; this is
beyond the scope of this paper.

4
Then, an immediate reward Rt is obtained, distributed according to gt( · | St, At), and the next state St+1
is chosen, according to pt( · | St, At). Note that we have assumed that the possible values of the immediate
reward and the various probabilities are all rational numbers. This is in order to address the computational
complexity of various problems within the standard framework of digital computation. Finally, we will
use the notation x0:t to indicate the tuple (x0, . . . , xt).
B. Policies
We will use the symbol π to denote policies. Under a deterministic policy π = (µ0, . . . , µT−1), the
action at each time t is determined according to a mapping µt whose argument is the history Ht =
(S0:t, A0:t−1, R0:t−1) of the process, by letting At = µt(Ht). We let Πh be the set of all such history-based
policies. (The subscripts are used as a mnemonic for the variables on which the action is allowed to
depend.) We will also consider randomized policies. For this purpose, we assume that there is available
a sequence of i.i.d. uniform random variables U0, U1, . . . , UT−1, which are independent from everything
else. In a randomized policy, the action at time t is determined by letting At = µt(Ht, U0:t). Let Πh,u be
the set of all randomized policies.
In classical MDPs, it is well known that restricting to Markovian policies (policies that take into account
only the current state St) results in no loss of performance. In our setting, there are two different possible
“states” of interest: the original state St, or the augmented state (St, Wt), where
Wt =
t−1
X
k=0
Rk,
(with the convention that W0 = 0). Accordingly, we deﬁne the following classes of policies: Πt,s (under
which At = µt(St)), and Πt,s,w (under which At = µt(St, Wt)), and their randomized counterparts Πt,s,u
(under which At = µt(St, Ut)), and Πt,s,w,u (under which At = µt(St, Wt, Ut). Notice that
Πt,s ⊂Πt,s,w ⊂Πh,
and similarly for their randomized counterparts.
C. Performance Criteria
Once a policy π and an initial state s is ﬁxed, the cumulative reward WT becomes a well-deﬁned random
variable. The performance measures of interest are its mean and variance, deﬁned by Jπ = Eπ[WT ] and
Vπ = Varπ(WT), respectively. Under our assumptions (ﬁnite horizon, and bounded rewards), it follows

5
that there are ﬁnite upper boundsof KT and K2T 2, for |Jπ| and Vπ, respectively, independent of the
policy.
Given our interest in complexity results, we will focus on “decision” problems that admit a yes/no
answer, except for Section VI. We deﬁne the following problem.
Problem MV-MDP(Π): Given an MDP M and rational numbers λ, v, does there exist a policy in the set
Π such that Jπ ≥λ and Vπ ≤v?
Clearly, an algorithm for the problem MV-MDP(Π) can be combined with binary search to solve (up to
any desired precision) the problem of maximizing the expected value of WT subject to an upper bound
on its variance, or the problem of minimizing the variance of WT subject to a lower bound on its mean.
III. COMPARISON OF POLICY CLASSES
Our ﬁrst step is to compare the performance obtained from different policy classes. We introduce some
terminology. Let Π and Π′ be two policy classes. We say that Π is inferior to Π′ if, loosely speaking, the
policy class Π′ can always match or exceed the “performance” of policy class Π, and for some instances
it can exceed it strictly. Formally, Π is inferior to Π′ if the following hold: (i) if (M, c, d) is a “yes”
instance of MV-MDP(Π), then it is also a “yes” instance of MV-MDP(Π′); (ii) there exists some (M, c, d)
which is a “no” instance of MV-MDP(Π) but a “yes” instance of MV-MDP(Π′). Similarly, we say that two
policy classes Π and Π′ are equivalent if every “yes” (respectively, “no”) instance of MV-MDP(Π) is a
“yes” (respectively, “no”) instance of MV-MDP(Π′).
We deﬁne one more convenient term. A state s is said to be terminal if it is absorbing (i.e., pt(s | s, a) =
1, for every t and a) and provides zero rewards (i.e., gt(0 | s, a) = 1, for every t and a).
A. Randomization Improves Performance
Our ﬁrst observation is that randomization can improve performance. This is not surprising given that
we are dealing simultaneously with two criteria, and that randomization is helpful in constrained MDPs
(e.g., Altman, 1999).
Theorem 1. (a) Πt,s is inferior to Πt,s,u;
(b) Πt,s,w is inferior to Πt,s,w,u;
(c) Πh is inferior to Πh,u.

6
Proof. It is clear that performance cannot deteriorate when randomization is allowed. It therefore sufﬁces
to display an instance in which randomization improves performance.
Consider a one-stage MDP (T = 1). At time 0, we are at the initial state and there are two available
actions, a and b. The mean and variance of the resulting reward are both zero under action a, and both
equal to 1 under action b. After the decision is made, the rewards are obtained and the process terminates.
Thus WT = R0, the reward obtained at time 0.
Consider the problem of maximizing E[R0] subject to the constraint that Var(R0) ≤1/2. There is
only one feasible deterministic policy (choose action a), and it has zero expected reward. On the other
hand, a randomized policy that chooses action b with probability p has an expected reward of p and the
corresponding variance satisﬁes
Var(R0) ≤E[R2
0] = pE[R2
0 | A0 = b] = 2p.
When 0 < p ≤1/4, such a randomized policy is feasible and improves upon the deterministic one.
Note that for the above instance we have Πt,s = Πt,s,w = Πh, and Πt,s,u = Πt,s,w,u = Πh,u. Hence the
above example establishes all three of the claimed statements. q.e.d.
B. Information Improves Performance
We now show that in most cases, performance can improve strictly when we allow a policy to have
access to more information. The only exception arises for the pair of classes Πt,s,w,u and Πh,u, which we
show in Section V to be equivalent (cf. Theorem 6).
Theorem 2. (a) Πt,s is inferior to Πt,s,w, and Πt,s,u is inferior to Πt,s,w,u.
(b) Πt,s,w is inferior to Πh.
Proof.
(a) Consider the following MDP, with time horizon T = 2. The process starts at the initial state s0, at
which there are two actions. Under action a1, the immediate reward is zero and the process moves
to a terminal state. Under action a2, the immediate reward R0 is either 0 or 1, with equal probability,
and the process moves to state s1. At state s1, there are two actions, a3 and a4: under action a3, the
immediate reward R1 is equal to 0, and under action a4, it is equal to 1. We are interested in the
optimal value of the expected reward E[W2] = E[R0 +R1], subject to the constraint that the variance

7
is less than or equal to zero (and therefore equal to zero). Let p be the probability that action a2 is
chosen at state s0. If p > 0, and under any policy in Πt,s,u, the reward R0 at state s0 has positive
variance, and the reward R1 at the next stage is uncorrelated with R0. Hence, the variance of R0+R1
is positive, and such a policy is not feasible; in particular, the constraint on the variance requires
that p = 0. We conclude that the largest possible expected reward under any policy in Πt,s,u (and, a
fortiori, under any policy in Πt,s) is equal to zero.
Consider now the following policy, which belongs to Πt,s,w and, a fortiori, to Πt,s,w,u: at state s0,
choose action a2; then, at state s1, choose a3 if W1 = R0 = 1, and choose a4 if W1 = R0 = 0. In
either case, the total reward is R0 + R1 = 1, while the variance of R0 + R1 is zero, thus ensuring
feasibility. This establishes the ﬁrst part of the theorem.
(b) Consider the following MDP, with time horizon T = 3. At state s0 there is only one available action;
the next state S1 is either s1 or s′
1, with probability p and 1−p, respectively, and the immediate reward
R0 is zero. At either state s1 or s′
1, there is again only one available action; the next state, S2, is s2,
and the reward R1 is zero. At state s2, there are two actions, a and b. Under action a, the mean and
variance of the resulting reward R2 are both zero, and under action b, they are both equal to 1. Let
us examine the largest possible value of E[W3] = E[R2], subject to the constraint Var(W2) ≤1/2.
The class Πt,s,w contains two policies, corresponding to the two deterministic choices of an action
at state s2; only one of them is feasible (the one that chooses action a), resulting in zero expected
reward. However, the following policy in Πh has positive expected reward: choose action b at state
s2 if and only if the state at time 1 was equal to s1 (which happens with probability p). As long as p
is sufﬁciently small, the constraint Var(W) ≤1/2 is met, and this policy is feasible. It follows that
Πt,s,w is inferior to Πh. q.e.d.
IV. COMPLEXITY RESULTS
In this section, we establish that mean-variance optimization in ﬁnite horizon MDPs is unlikely to admit
polynomial time algorithms, in contrast to classical MDPs.
Theorem 3. The problem MV-MDP(Π) is NP-hard, when Π is Πt,s,w, Πt,s,w,u, Πh, or Πh,u.
Proof: We will actually show NP-hardness for the special case of MV-MDP(Π), in which we wish to
determine whether there exists a policy whose reward variance is equal to zero. (In terms of the problem

8
deﬁnition, this corresponds to letting λ = −KT and v = 0.) The proof uses a reduction from the
SUBSET SUM problem: Given n positive integers, does there exist a subset B of {1, . . . , n} such that
P
i∈B ri = P
i/∈B ri?
Given an instance (r1, . . . , rn) of SUBSET SUM, and for any of the policy classes of interest, we construct
an instance of MV-MDP(Π), with time horizon T = n + 1, as follows. At the initial state s0, there is only
one available action, resulting in zero immediate reward (R0 = 0). With probability 1/2, the process moves
to a terminal state; with probability 1/2, the process moves (deterministically) along a sequence of states
s1, . . . , sn. At each state si (i = 1, . . . , n), there are two actions: ai, which results in an immediate reward
of ri, and bi, which results in an immediate reward of −ri.
Suppose that there exists a set B ⊂{1, . . . , n} such that P
i∈B ri = P
i/∈B ri. Consider the policy that
chooses action ai at state si if and only if i ∈B. This policy achieves zero total reward, with probability
1, and therefore meets the zero variance constraint. Conversely, if a policy results in zero variance, then
the total reward must be equal to zero, with probability 1, which implies that such a set B exists. This
completes the reduction.
Note that this argument applies no matter which particular class of policies is being considered. q.e.d.
The above proof also applies to the policy classes Πt,s and Πt,s,u. However, for these two classes,
a stronger result is possible. Recall that a problem is strongly NP-hard, if it remains NP-hard when
restricted to instances in which the numerical part of the instance description involves “small” numbers;
see Garey and Johnson (1979) for a precise deﬁnition.
Theorem 4. If Π is either Πt,s or Πt,s,u, the problem MV-MDP(Π) is strongly NP-hard.
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 3, we will prove the result for the special case of MV-MDP, in which
we wish to determine whether there exists a policy under which the variance of the reward is equal
to zero. The proof involves a reduction from the 3-Satisﬁability problem (3SAT). An instance of 3SAT
consists of n Boolean variables x1, . . . , xn, and m clauses C1, . . . , Cm, with three literals per clause. Each
clause is the disjunction of three literals, where a literal is either a variable or its negation. (For example,
x2 ∨x4 ∨x5 is such a clause, where a bar stands for negation.) The question is whether there exists an
assignment of truth values (“true” or “false”) to the variables such that all clauses are satisﬁed.
Suppose that we are given an instance of 3SAT, with n variables and m clauses, C1, . . . , Cm. We

9
construct an instance of MV-MDP(Π) as follows. There is an initial state s0, a state d0, a state cj associated
with each clause Cj, and a state yi associated with each literal xi. The actions, dynamics, and rewards
are as follows:
(a) Out of state s0, there is equal probability, 1/(m+1), of reaching any one of the states d0, c1, . . . , cm,
independent of the action; the immediate reward is zero.
(b) State d0 is a terminal state. At each state cj, there are three actions available: each action selects one
of the three literals in the clause, and the process moves to the state yi associated with that literal;
the immediate reward is 1 if the literal appears in the clause unnegated, and −1 if the literal appears
in the clause negated. For an example, suppose that the clause is of the form x2 ∨x4 ∨x5. Under
the ﬁrst action, the next state is y2, and the reward is 1; under the second action, the next state is y4
and the reward is −1; under the third action, the next state is y5, and the reward is 1.
(c) At each state yi, there are two possible actions ai and bi, resulting in immediate rewards of 1 and
−1, respectively. The process then moves to the terminal state d0.
Suppose that we have a “yes” instance of 3SAT, and consider a truth assignment that satisﬁes all clauses.
We can then construct a policy in Πt,s (and a fortiori in Πt,s,u, whose total reward is zero (and therefore
has zero variance) as follows. If xi is set to be true (respectively, false), we choose action bi (respectively,
ai) at state yi. At state cj we choose an action associated with a literal that makes the clause to be true.
Suppose that state cj is visited after the ﬁrst transition, i.e., S1 = cj. If the literal associated with the
selected action at cj is unnegated, e.g., the literal xi, then the immediate reward is 1. Since this literal
makes the clause to be true, it follows that the action chosen at the subsequent state, yi, is bi, resulting in
a reward of −1, and a total reward of zero. The argument for the case where the literal associated with
the selected action at state cj is negated is similar. It follows that the total reward is zero, with probability
1.
For the converse direction, suppose that there exists a policy in Πt,s, or more generally, in Πt,s,u under
which the variance of the total reward is zero. Since the total reward is equal to 0 whenever the ﬁrst
transition leads to state d0 (which happens with probability 1/(m + 1), it follows that the total reward
must be always zero. Consider now the following truth assignment: xi is set to be true if and only if the
policy chooses action bi at state yi, with positive probability. Suppose that the state visited after the ﬁrst
transition is cj. Suppose that the action chosen at state cj leads next to state yi and that the literal xi

10
appears unnegated in clause Cj. Then, the reward at state cj is 1, which implies that the reward at state yi
is −1. It follows that the action chosen at yi is bi, and therefore xi has been set to be true. It follows that
clause Cj is satisﬁed. A similar argument shows that clause Cj is satisﬁed when the literal xi associated
with the chosen action at cj appears negated. In either case, we conclude that clause Cj is satisﬁed. Since
every state cj is possible at time 1, it follows that every clause is satisﬁed, and we have a “yes” instance
of 3SAT. q.e.d.
V. EXACT ALGORITHMS
The comparison and complexity results of the preceding two sections indicate that the policy classes
Πt,s, Πt,s,w, Πt,s,u, and Πh are inferior to the class Πh,u, and furthermore some of them (Πt,s, Πt,s,w)
appear to have higher complexity. Thus, there is no reason to consider them further. While the problem
MV-MDP(Πh,u) is NP-hard, there is still a possibility for approximate or pseudopolynomial time algorithms.
In this section, we focus on exact pseudopolynomial time algorithms.
Our approach involves an augmented state, deﬁned by Xt = (St, Wt). Let X be the set of all possible
values of the augmented state. Let |S| be the cardinality of the set S. Let |R| be the cardinality of the
set R. Recall also that K = maxr∈R |r|. If we assume that the immediate rewards are integers, then Wt
is an integer between −KT and KT. In this case, the cardinality |X | of the augmented state space X is
bounded by |S| · (2KT + 1), which is polynomial. Without the integrality assumption, the cardinality of
the set X remains ﬁnite, but it can increase exponentially with T. For this reason, we study the integer
case separately in Section V-B.
A. State-Action Frequencies
In this section, we provide some results on the representation of MDPs in terms of a state-action
frequency polytope, thus setting the stage for our subsequent algorithms.
For any policy π ∈Πh,u, and any x ∈X , a ∈A, we deﬁne the state-action frequencies at time t by
zπ
t (x, a) = Pπ(Xt = x, At = a),
t = 0, 1, . . . , T −1,
and
zπ
t (x) = Pπ(Xt = x),
t = 0, 1, . . . , T.
Let zπ be a vector that lists all of the above deﬁned state-action frequencies.

11
For any family Π of policies, let Z(Π) = {zπ | π ∈Π}. The following result is well known (e.g.,
Altman, 1999). It asserts that any feasible state-action frequency vector can be attained by policies that
depend only on time, the (augmented) state, and a randomization variable. Furthermore, the set of feasible
state-action frequency vectors is a polyhedron, hence amenable to linear programming methods.
Theorem 5. (a) We have Z(Πh,u) = Z(Πt,s,w,u).
(b) The set Z(Πh,u) is a polyhedron, speciﬁed by O(T · |X | · |A|) linear constraints.
Note that a certain mean-variance pair (λ, v) is attainable by a policy in Πh,u if and only if there exists
some z ∈Z(Πh,u) that satisﬁes
X
(s,w)∈X
wzT(s, w)
=
λ,
(1)
X
(s,w)∈X
w2zT (s, w)
=
v + λ2.
(2)
Furthermore, since Z(Πh,u) = Z(Πt,s,w,u), it follows that if a pair (λ, v) is attainable by a policy in Πh,u,
it is also attainable by a policy in Πt,s,w,u. This establishes the following result.
Theorem 6. The policy classes Πh,u and Πt,s,w,u are equivalent.
Note that checking the feasibility of the conditions z ∈Z(Πh,u), (1), and (2) amounts to solving a linear
programming problem, with a number of constraints proportional to the cardinality of the augmented state
space X and, therefore, in general, exponential in T.
B. Integer Rewards
In this section, we assume that the immediate rewards are integers, with absolute value bounded by
K, and we show that pseudopolynomial time algorithms are possible. Recall that an algorithm is a
pseudopolynomial time algorithm if its running time is polynomial in K and the instance size. (This is
in contrast to polynomial time algorithms in which the running time can only grow as a polynomial of
log K.)
Theorem 7. Suppose that the immediate rewards are integers, with absolute value bounded by K. Consider
the following two problems:
(i) determine whether there exists a policy in Πh,u for which (Jπ, Vπ) = (λ, v), where λ and v are given
rational numbers; and,

12
(ii) determine whether there exists a policy in Πh,u for which Jπ = λ and Vπ ≤v, where λ and v are
given rational numbers.
Then,
(a) these two problems admit a pseudopolynomial time algorithm; and,
(b) unless P=NP, these problems cannot be solved in polynomial time.
Proof.
(a) As already discussed, these problems amount to solving a linear program. In the integer case, the
number of variables and constraints is bounded by a polynomial in K and the instance size. The
result follows because linear programming can be solved in polynomial time.
(b) This is proved by considering the special case where λ = v = 0 and the exact same argument as in
the proof of Theorem 3. q.e.d.
Similar to constrained MDPs, mean-variance optimization involves two different performance criteria.
Unfortunately, however, the linear programming approach to constrained MDPs does not translate into an
algorithm for the problem MV-MDP(Πh,u). The reason is that the set
PMV = {(Jπ, Vπ) | π ∈Πh,u}
of achievable mean-variance pairs need not be convex. To bring the constrained MDP methodology to
bear on our problem, instead of focusing on the pair (Jπ, Vπ), we deﬁne Qπ = Eπ[W 2
T], and focus on the
pair (Jπ, Qπ). This is now a pair of objectives that depend linearly on the state frequencies associated
with the ﬁnal augmented state XT. Accordingly, we deﬁne
PMQ = {(Jπ, Qπ) | π ∈Πh,u}.
Note that PMQ is a polyhedron, because it is the image of the polyhedron Z(Πh,u) under the linear
mapping speciﬁed by the left-hand sides of Eqs. (1)-(2). In contrast, PMV is the image of PMQ under a
nonlinear mapping:
PMV = {(λ, q −λ2) | (λ, q) ∈PMQ},
and is not, in general, a polyhedron.
As a corollary of the above discussion, and for the case of integer rewards, we can exploit convexity
to devise pseudopolynomial algorithms for problems that can be formulated in terms of the convex

13
set PMQ. On the other hand, because of the non-convexity of PMV , we have not been able to devise
pseudopolynomial time algorithms for the problem MV-MDP(Πh,u), or even the simpler problem of deciding
whether there exists a policy π ∈Πh,u that satisﬁes Vπ ≤v, for some given number v, except for the
very special case where v = 0, which is the subject of our next result. For a general v, an approximation
algorithm will be presented in the next section.
Theorem 8. (a) If there exists some π ∈Πh,u for which Vπ = 0, then there exists some π′ ∈Πt,s,w for
which Vπ′ = 0.
(b) Suppose that the immediate rewards are integers, with absolute value bounded by K. Then the problem
of determining whether there exists a policy π ∈Πh,u for which Vπ = 0 admits a pseudopolynomial
time algorithm.
Proof.
(a) Suppose that there exists some π ∈Πh,u for which Vπ = 0. By Theorem 6, π can be assumed,
without loss of generality, to lie in Πt,s,w,u. Let Varπ(WT | U0:T), be the conditional variance of
WT, conditioned on the realization of the randomization variables U0:T. We have Varπ(WT) ≥
Eπ[Varπ(WT | U0:T)], which implies that there exists some u0:T such that Varπ(WT | U0:T = u0:T) = 0.
By ﬁxing the randomization variables to this particular u0:T, we obtain a deterministic policy, in Πt,s,w
under which the reward variance is zero.
(b) If there exists a policy under which Vπ = 0, then there exists an integer k, with |k| ≤KT such that,
under this policy, WT is guaranteed to be equal to k. Thus, we only need to check, for each k in the
relevant range, whether there exists a policy such that (Jπ, Vπ) = (k, 0). By Theorem 7, this can be
done in pseudopolynomial time. q.e.d.
The approach in the proof of part (b) above leads to a short argument, but yields a rather inefﬁcient
(albeit pseudopolynomial) algorithm. A much more efﬁcient and simple algorithm is obtained by realizing
that the question of whether WT can be forced to be k, with probability 1, is just a reachability game:
the decision maker picks the actions and an adversary picks the ensuing transitions and rewards (among
those that have positive probability of occurring). The decision maker wins the game if it can guarantee
that WT = k. Such sequential games are easy to solve in time polynomial in the number of (augmented)
states, decisions, and the time horizon, by a straightforward backward recursion. On the other hand a

14
genuinely polynomial time algorithm does not appear to be possible; indeed, the proof of Theorem 3
shows that the problem is NP-complete.
VI. APPROXIMATION ALGORITHMS
In this section, we deal with the optimization counterparts of the problem MV-MDP(Πh,u). We are
interested in computing approximately the following two functions:
v∗(λ) =
inf
{π∈Πh,u:Jπ≥λ} Vπ,
(3)
and
λ∗(v) =
sup
{π∈Πh,u:Vπ≤v}
Jπ.
(4)
If the constraint Jπ ≥λ (respectively, Vπ ≤v) is infeasible, we use the standard convention v∗(λ) = ∞
(respectively, λ∗(v) = −∞). Note that the inﬁmum and supremum in the above deﬁnitions are both
attained, because the set PMV of achievable mean-variance pairs is the image of the polyhedron PMQ
under a continuous map, and is therefore compact.
We do not know how to efﬁciently compute or even generate a uniform approximation of either v∗(λ)
or λ∗(v) (i.e., ﬁnd a value v′ between v∗(λ) −ǫ and v∗(λ) + ǫ, and similarly for λ∗(v)). In the following
two results we consider a weaker notion of approximation that is computable in pseudopolynomial time.
We discuss v∗(λ) as the issues for λ∗(v) are similar.
For any positive ǫ and ν, we will say that ˆv(·) is an (ǫ, ν)-aproximation of v∗(·) if, for every λ,
v∗(λ −ν) −ǫ ≤ˆv(λ) ≤v∗(λ + ν) + ǫ.
(5)
This is an approximation of the same kind as those considered in Papadimitriou and Yannakakis (2000):
it returns a value ˆv such that (λ, ˆv) is an element of the “(ǫ + ν)-approximate Pareto boundary” of the
set PMV . For a different view, the graph of the function ˆv(·) is within Hausdorf distance ǫ + ν from the
graph of the function v∗(·).
We will show how to compute an (ǫ, ν)-aproximation in time which is pseudopolynomial, and polyno-
mial in the parameters 1/ǫ, and 1/ν.
We start in Section VI-A with the case of integer rewards, and build on the pseudopolynomial time
algorithms of the preceding section. We then consider the case of general rewards in Section VI-B. We
ﬁnally sketch an alternative algorithm in Section VI-C based on set-valued dynamic programming.

15
A. Integer Rewards
In this section, we prove the following result.
Theorem 9. Suppose that the immediate rewards are integers. There exists an algorithm that, given ǫ, ν,
and λ, outputs a value ˆv(λ) that satisﬁes (5), and which runs in time polynomial in |S|, |A|, T, K, 1/ǫ,
and 1/ν.
Proof. Since the rewards are bounded in absolute value by K, we have v∗(λ) = ∞for λ > KT and
v∗(λ) = v∗(−KT) for λ < −KT. For this reason, we only need to consider λ ∈[−KT, KT]. To simplify
the presentation, we assume that ǫ = ν. We let δ be such that ǫ = 3δKT.
The algorithm is as follows. We consider grid points λi deﬁned by λi = −KT + (i−1)δ, i = 1, . . . , n,
where n is chosen so that λn−1 ≤KT, λn > KT. Note that n = O(KT/δ). For i = 1, . . . , n −1,
we calculate ˆq(λi), the smallest possible value of E[W 2
T ], when E[WT ] is restricted to lie in [λi, λi+1].
Formally,
ˆq(λi) = min
n
q
 ∃λ′ ∈[λi, λi+1] s.t. (λ′, q) ∈PMQ
o
.
We let ˆu(λi) = ˆq(λi) −λ2
i+1, which can be interpreted as an estimate of the least possible variance when
E[WT ] is restricted to the interval [λi, λi+1]. Finally, we set
ˆv(λ) = min
i≥k ˆu(λi),
if λ ∈[λk, λk+1].
The main computational effort is in computing ˆq(λi) for every i. Since PMQ is a polyhedron, this
amounts to solving O(KT/δ) linear programming problems. Thus, the running time of the algorithm has
the claimed properties.
We now prove correctness. Let q∗(λ) = min{q | (λ, q) ∈PMQ}, and u∗(λ) = q∗(λ) −λ2, which is the
least possible variance for a given value of λ. Note that v∗(λ) = min{u∗(λ′) | λ′ ≥λ}.
We have ˆq(λi) ≤q∗(λ′), for all λ′ ∈[λi, λi+1]. Also, −λ2
i+1 ≤−(λ′)2, for all λ′ ∈[λi, λi+1]. By adding
these two inequalities, we obtain ˆu(λi) ≤u∗(λ′), for all λ′ ∈[λi, λi+1]. Given some λ, let k be such that
λ ∈[λk, λk+1]. Then,
ˆv(λ) = min
i≥k ˆu(λi) ≤min
λ′≥λk u∗(λ′) ≤min
λ′≥λ u∗(λ′) = v∗(λ′),
so that ˆv(λ) is always an underestimate of v∗(λ).

16
We now prove a reverse inequality. Fix some λ and let k be such that λ ∈[λk, λk+1]. Let i ≥k be
such that ˆv(λ) = ˆu(λi). Let also ¯λ ∈[λi, λi+1] be such that q∗(¯λ) = ˆq(λi). Note that
λ2
i+1 −¯λ2 ≤λ2
i+1 −λ2
i = δ(λi + λi+1) ≤2δ(KT + δ) ≤3δKT.
(6)
Then,
ˆv(λ)
(a)
= ˆu(λi)
(b)
=
ˆq(λi) −λ2
i+1
(c)
= q∗(¯λ) −λ2
i+1
(d)
≥q∗(¯λ) −¯λ2 −3δKT
(e)
=
u∗(¯λ) −3δKT
(f)
≥v∗(¯λ) −3δKT
(g)
≥v∗(λ −δ) −3δKT
(h)
≥
v∗(λ −ǫ) −ǫ.
In the above, (a) holds by the deﬁnition of i; (b) by the deﬁnition of ˆu(λi); (c) by the deﬁnition of ¯λ;
and (d) follows from Eq. (6). Equality (e) follows from the deﬁnition of u∗(·). Inequality (f) follows from
the deﬁnition of v∗(·); and (g) is obtained because v∗(·) is nondecreasing and because ¯λ ≥λ −δ. (The
latter fact is seen as follows: (i) if i > k, then λ ≤λk+1 ≤λi ≤¯λ; (ii) if i = k, then both λ and ¯λ
belong to [λk, λk+1], and their difference is at most δ.) Inequality (h) is obtained because of the deﬁnition
ǫ = 3δKT, the observation δ < ǫ, and the monotonicity of v∗(·). q.e.d.
B. General Rewards
When rewards are arbitrary, we can discretize the rewards and obtain a new MDP. The new MDP is
equivalent to one with integer rewards to which the algorithm of the preceding subsection can be applied.
This is a legitimate approximation algorithm for the original problem because, as we will show shortly,
the function v∗(·) changes very little when we discretize using a ﬁne enough discretization.
We are given an original MDP M = (T, S, A, R, p, g) in which the rewards are rational numbers in
the interval [−K, K], and an approximation parameter ǫ. We ﬁx a positive number δ, a discretization
parameter whose value will be speciﬁed later. We then construct a new MDP M′ = (T, S, A, R′, p, g′),
in which the rewards are rounded down to an integer multiple of δ. More precisely, all elements of the
reward range R′ are integer multiples of δ, and for every t, s, a ∈{0, 1, . . . , T −1} × S × A, and any
integer n, we have
gt(δn | s, a) =
X
r: δn≤r<δ(n+1)
gt(r | s, a).

17
We denote by J, Q and by J′, Q′ the ﬁrst and second moments of the total reward in the original and
new MDPs, respectively. Let Πh,u and Π′
h,u be the sets of (randomized, history-based) policies in M and
M′, respectively. Let PMQ and P ′
MQ be the associated polyhedra.
We want to to argue that the mean-variance tradeoff curves for the two MDPs are close to each other.
This is not entirely straightforward because the augmented state spaces (which include the possible values
of the cumulative rewards Wt) are different for the two problems and, therefore, the sets of policies are
also different. A conceptually simple but somewhat tedious approach involves an argument along the
lines of Whitt (1978, 1979), generalized to the case of constrained MDPs; we outline such an argument
in Section VI-C. Here, we follow an alternative approach, based on a coupling argument.
Proposition 1. There exists a polynomial function c(K, T) such that the Hausdorf distance between PMQ
and P ′
MQ is bounded above by 2KT 2δ. More precisely,
(a) For every policy π ∈Πh,u, there exists a policy π′ ∈Π′
h,u such that
max
n
|J′
π′ −Jπ|, |Q′
π′ −Qπ|
o
≤2KT 2δ.
(b) Conversely, for every policy Π′
h,u, there exists a policy Πh,u such that the above inequality again
holds.
Proof. We denote by d(r) the discretized value of a reward r, that is, d(r) = max{nδ : nδ ≤r, n ∈Z}.
Let us consider a third MDP M′′ which is identical to M′, except that its rewards R′′
t are generated as
follows. (We follow the convention of using a single or double prime to indicate variables associated with
M′ or M′′, respectively.) A random variable Rt is generated according to the distribution prescribed by
gt(r | st, at), and its value is observed by the decision maker, who then incurs the reward R′′
t = d(Rt). Let
P ′′
MQ be the polyhedron associated with M′′. We claim that P ′′
MQ = P ′
MQ. The only difference between
M′ and M′′ is that the decision maker in M′′ has access to the additional information Rt −d(Rt).
However, this information is incosequential: it does not affect the future transition probabilities or reward
distributions.Thus, Rt−d(Rt) can only be useful as an additional randomization variable. Since P ′
MQ is the
set of achievable pairs using general (history-based randomized) policies, having available an additional
randomization variable does not change the polyhedron, and P ′′
MQ = P ′
MQ. Thus, to complete the proof
it sufﬁces to show that the polyhedra PMQ and P ′′
MQ are close.
Let us compare the MDPs M and M′′. The information available to the decision maker is the same

18
for these two MDPs (since all the history of reward truncations {Rτ −d(Rτ)}t−1
τ=1 is available in M′′
for the decision at time t). Therefore, for every policy in one MDP, there exists a policy for the other
under which (if we deﬁne the two MDPs on a common probability space, involving common random
generators) the exact same sequence of states (St = S′
t), actions (At = A′
t), and random variables Rt is
realized. The only difference is that the rewards are Rt and d(Rt), in M and M′′, respectively. Recall
that 0 ≤Rt −d(Rt) ≤δ. We obtain that for every policy π ∈Π, there exists a policy π′′ ∈Π′′ for which
0 ≤WT −W ′′
T = PT−1
τ=0
 Rt −d(Rt)) ≤δT, and therefore, |W 2
T −(W ′′
T )2| ≤2KT 2δ. Taking expectations,
we obtain |Jπ −J′′
π| ≤Tδ, |Qπ −Q′′
π| ≤2KT 2δ. This completes the proof of part (a). The proof of part
(b) is identical. q.e.d.
Theorem 10. There exists an algorithm that, given ǫ, ν, and λ, outputs a value ˆv(λ) that satisﬁes (5),
and which runs in time polynomial in |S|, |A|, T, K, 1/ǫ, and 1/ν.
Proof. Assume for simplicity that ν = ǫ. Given the value of ǫ, let δ be such that ǫ/2 = 2KT 2δ, and
construct the discretized MDP M′. Run the algorithm from Theorem 9 to ﬁnd an (ǫ/2, ǫ/2)-approximation
ˆv for M′. Using Proposition 1, it is not hard to verify that this yields an (ǫ, ǫ)-approximation of v∗(λ).
q.e.d.
C. An Exact Algorithm and its Approximation
There are two general approaches for constructing approximation algorithms. (i) One can discretize
the problem, to obtain an easier one, and then apply an algorithm specially tailored to the discretized
problem; this was the approach in the preceding subsection. (ii) One can design an exact (but inefﬁcient)
algorithm for the original problem and then implement the algorithm approximately. This approach will
work provided the approximations do not build up excessively in the course of the algorithm. In this
subsection, we elaborate on the latter approach.
We deﬁned earlier the polyhedron PMQ as the set of achievable ﬁrst and second moments of the
cumulative reward starting at time zero at the initial state. We extend this deﬁnition by considering
intermediate times and arbitrary (intermediate) augmented states. We let
Ct(s, w) =

(λ, q) : ∃π ∈Πh,u s.t.
Eπ[WT | St = s, Wt = w] = λ and
(7)
Eπ[W 2
T | St = s, Wt = w) = q
	
.

19
Clearly, C0(s, 0) = PMQ. Using a straightforward backwards induction, it can be shown that Ct(·, ·)
satisﬁes the set-valued dynamic programming recursion 2
Ct(s, w) = conv
a∈A
(X
s′∈S
pt(s′ | s, a)
X
r∈R
gt(r | s, a)Ct+1(s′, w + r)
)
,
(8)
for every s ∈S, w ∈R, and for t = 0, 1, 2, . . ., T −1, initialized with the boundary conditions
CT(s, w) = {(w, w2)}.
(9)
A simple inductive proof shows that the sets Ct(s, w) are polyhedra; this is because CT(s, w) is either
empty or a singleton and because the sum or convex hull of ﬁnitely many polyhedra is a polyhedron. Thus,
the recursion involves a ﬁnite amount of computation, e.g., by representing each polyhedron in terms of its
ﬁnitely many extreme points. In the worst case, this translates into an exponential time algorithm, because
of the possibly large number of extreme points. However, such an algorithm can also be implemented
approximately. If we allow for the introduction of an O(ǫ/T) error at each stage (where error is measured
in terms of the Hausdorf distance), we can work with approximating polyhedra that involve only O(1/ǫ)
extreme points, while ending up with a O(ǫ) total error; this is because we are approximating polyhedra in
the plane, as opposed to higher dimensions where the dependence on ǫ would have been worse dependence.
The details are straightforward but somewhat tedious and are omitted. On the other hand, in practice, this
approach is likely to be faster than the algorithm of the preceding subsection.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We have shown that mean-variance optimization problems for MDPs are typically NP-hard, but some-
times admit pseudopolynomial approximation algorithms. We only considered ﬁnite horizon problems,
but it is clear that the negative results carry over to their inﬁnite horizon counterparts. Furthermore, given
that the contribution of the tail of the time horizon in inﬁnite horizon discounted problems (or in “proper”
stochastic shortest path problems as in Bertsekas (1995)) can be made arbitrarily small, our approximation
algorithms can also yield approximation algorithms for inﬁnite horizon problems.
Two more problems of some interest deal with ﬁnding a policy that has the smallest possible, or the
largest possible variance. There is not much we can say here, except for the following:
2If X and Y are subsets of a vector space and α a scalar, we let αX = {αx | x ∈X} and X + Y = {x + y | x ∈X, y ∈Y }.
Furthermore, if for every a ∈A, we have a set Xα, then conva∈A{Xα} is the convex hull of the union of these sets.

20
(a) The smallest possible variance is attained by a deterministic policy, that is,
min
π∈Πh,u Vπ = min
π∈Πh Vπ.
This is proved using the inequality Varπ(WT) ≥Eπ[Varπ(WT | U0:T)].
(b) Variance will be maximized, in general, by a randomized policy. To see this, consider a single stage
problem and two actions with deterministic rewards, equal to 0 and 1, respectively. Variance is
maximized by assigning probability 1/2 to each of the actions. The variance maximization problem
is equivalent to maximizing the concave function q −λ2 subject to (λ, q) ∈PMQ. This is a quadratic
programming problem over the polyhedron PMQ and therefore admits a pseudopolynomial time
algorithm, when the rewards are integer.
Our results suggest several interesting directions for future research, which we brieﬂy outline below.
First, our negative results apply to general MDPs. It would be interesting to determine whether the
hardness results remain valid for specially structured MDPs. One possibly interesting special case involves
multi-armed bandit problems: there are n separate MDPs (“arms”); at each time step, the decision maker
has to decide which MDP to activate, while the other MDPs remain inactive. Of particular interest here
are index policies that compute a value (“index”) for each MDP and select an MDP with maximal index;
such policies are often optimal for the classical formulations (see Gittins (1979) and Whittle (1988)).
Obtaining a policy that uses some sort of an index for the mean-variance problem or alternatively proving
that such a policy cannot exist would be interesting.
Second, a number of complexity questions have been left open. We list a few of them:
(a) Is there a pseudopolynomial time algorithm for computing v∗(λ) or λ∗(v) exactly?
(b) Is there a polynomial or pseudopolynomial time algorithm that computes v∗(λ) or λ∗(v) within a
uniform error bound ǫ?
(c) Is the problem of computing ˆv(λ) with the properties in Eq. (5) NP-hard?
(d) Is there a pseudopolynomial time algorithm the smallest possible variance in the absence of any
constraints on the mean cumulative reward?
Third, bias-variance tradeoffs may pay an important role in speeding up certain control and learning
heuristics, such as those involving control variates (Meyn, 2008). Perhaps mean-variance optimization
can be used to address the exploration/exploitation tradeoff in model-based reinforcement learning, with

21
variance reduction serving as a means to reduce the exploration time (see Sutton and Barto (1998) for
a general discussion of exploration-exploitation in reinforcement learning). Of course, in light of the
computational complexity of bias-variance tradeoffs, incorporating bias-variance tradeoffs in learning
makes sense only if experimentation is nearly prohibitive and computation time is cheap. Such an approach
could be particularly useful if a coarse, low-complexity, approximate solution of a bias-variance tradeoff
problem can result in signiﬁcant exploration speedup.
Fourth, we only considered mean-variance tradeoffs in this paper. However, there are other interesting
and potentially useful criteria that can be used to incorporate risk into multi-stage decision making. For
example, Liu and Koenig (2005) consider a utility function with a single switch. Many other risk aware
criteria have been considered in the single stage case. It would be interesting to develop a comprehensive
theory for the complexity of solving multi-stage decision problems under general (monotone convex or
concave) utility function and under risk constraints. This is especially interesting for the approximation
algorithms presented in Section VI.
Acknowledgments: This research was partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation (contract
890015), a Horev Fellowship, and the National Science Foundation under grant CMMI-0856063.
