AutoMATES: Automated Model Assembly from Text, Equations,
and Software
Adarsh Pyarelal1, Marco A. Valenzuela-Esc´arcega2, Rebecca Sharp2, Paul D. Hein2, Jon
Stephens2, Pratik Bhandari2, HeuiChan Lim2, Saumya Debray2, and Clayton T. Morrison1
1School of Information, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
2Department of Computer Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
ml4ai.github.io/automates
Abstract
Models of complicated systems can be represented in diﬀerent ways - in scientiﬁc papers,
they are represented using natural language text as well as equations. But to be of real use,
they must also be implemented as software, thus making code a third form of representing
models. We introduce the AutoMATES project, which aims to build semantically-rich uniﬁed
representations of models from scientiﬁc code and publications to facilitate the integration of
computational models from diﬀerent domains and allow for modeling large, complicated systems
that span multiple domains and levels of abstraction.
1
Introduction
There exist today state-of-the-art computational models that can provide highly accurate predic-
tions about complex phenomena such as crop growth and weather patterns.
However, certain
phenomena, such as food insecurity, involve a host of factors that cannot be modeled by any single
one of these models, but which instead require the integration of multiple models.
To truly integrate these computational models, it is necessary to ‘lift’ them to a common rep-
resentation that is (i) agnostic to the software implementation, (ii) semantically rich enough to
represent the implicit domain knowledge in the models, and (iii) connected to the domain litera-
ture. The AutoMATES project aims to build technology to construct and curate semantically-rich
representations of scientiﬁc models by integrating three diﬀerent sources of information:
• natural language descriptions of models in publications and other technical documentation,
• the equations contained in these documents, and
• the software the implements these models.
An example of a model being represented in these three forms (text, equations, and software) is
shown in Figure 1. This model is a diﬀerential equation describing the biophysical variable, leaf
area index (LAI). The network on the right half of the ﬁgure is an aspirational representation of
the model as a Bayesian network. Although this example is hand-crafted, our end goal is to be able
to automatically assemble models with this level of semantic richness. In this paper, we describe
our high-level approach1 and present our latest results.
1For more technical details, please visit ml4ai.github.io/automates/documentation/deliverable reports.
1
arXiv:2001.07295v1  [cs.AI]  21 Jan 2020

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
Figure 1: Integration of text, equations, and code into a semantically-enriched Bayesian network.
Signiﬁcance:
This work will dramatically advance the state-of-the-art in automated model cura-
tion and integration, enabling scientists and analysts to understand complex mechanisms that span
multiple domains. By exposing the implicit domain knowledge baked into computational models,
this eﬀort will enable semantically rich automated model composition and reasoning in context, at
scale.
2
Architecture Overview
The AutoMATES system is designed to extract information from several knowledge sources, link
the extracted concepts into a uniﬁed model representation, compare models based on diﬀerent
features, and augment the models with supplementary information. Each of these components is
implemented independently, but designed to interoperate with each other. A high-level view of the
system’s architecture is shown in Figure 2. This modular architecture provides AutoMATES with
the extensibility required to support diﬀerent knowledge sources in the future as it is extended to
handle other domains. Brieﬂy, the four main components of AutoMATES are:
1. Extracting model information from diﬀerent aspects of source code and corresponding scien-
tiﬁc publications and technical documents. From source code, we extract the model from the
code implementation itself ( 3) as well as any supplementary information such as descriptions
expressed in comments. From scientiﬁc publications and documentation, AutoMATES reads
model information from text ( 5) and equations ( 4).
2. Grounding the extracted information by identifying when the same concept is expressed
in diﬀerent knowledge sources, and linking them together to form a uniﬁed, programming

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
Figure 2: Architecture overview
language-agnostic intermediary model representation: a Grounded Function Network (GrFN).
3. Comparing models, using the GrFN representation, by analyzing structural and functional
(via sensitivity analysis) similarities and diﬀerences ( 6).
4. Augmenting models through selection of model components appropriate for a task, composing
model components, generating model descriptions in context to augment existing documen-
tation, and model execution.
3
Scalable Program Analysis
Our program analysis approach to extracting model information from the source code implementa-
tion begins with for2py, a front-end translator that maps Fortran source programs to a language-
independent program analysis intermediate representation (PAIR) that is then used to generate
ﬁles used as input to subsequent analysis. This design decouples input processing from output
generation, and is motivated by the following:
1. Performance and scalability. Modules that are referenced by multiple program components
do not have to be reanalyzed separately for each referencing component. Independent source-
language modules can in principle, be analyzed concurrently.
2. Support for source-language heterogeneity.
This design makes it possible, in principle, to
support programs with diﬀerent components written in diﬀerent languages. It also allows us
to reason about models implemented in diﬀerent source languages.
3. Independence of back-end tasks. Diﬀerent back-end analysis tasks, e.g., sensitivity analysis
and comment analysis, can be carried out independently (and, if necessary, concurrently) on
the PAIR.
for2py currently handles a signiﬁcant subset of Fortran, including: data types such as scalars and
arrays; control constructs such as conditionals, loops, functions, and subroutines; and input/output
(I/O) primitives including formatted and list-directed I/O. We expect to soon complete the handling
of modules and derived types.
A fundamental challenge we have to address is that of scalability, since software implementing
sophisticated scientiﬁc models can encompass thousands of source ﬁles and hundreds of thousands
of lines of code.
We do this by performing analysis at the module level of granularity.
Given

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
the source code for a scientiﬁc model, we analyze its modules to identify deﬁne-use relationships
between them and construct a module dependency graph that identiﬁes these dependencies between
diﬀerent modules. We use a topological sort of this graph to guide the subsequent analysis of the
modules. The module dependency graph imposes a partial order on the modules of the analyzed
system, indicating which modules are independent of each other and can therefore be analyzed
in parallel. This ordering has three signiﬁcant implications for scaling. First, it allows modern
computer systems such as multi-core processors and cloud-based systems to be utilized eﬀectively.
Second, it provides the user a straightforward tunable tradeoﬀbetween computational resources
and analysis eﬃciency. Finally, it means that the cost of analyzing a software system is proportional
to the depth of its module dependency graph rather than its total size (number of nodes), resulting
in sublinear asymptotic complexity.
4
Contextualized Equation Parsing
Models are often represented concisely as equations, at a level of abstraction that can supplement
both the natural language description as well as the source code implementation. For humans to
compare the equations and source code for several models, as is done in [2], is time consuming
and expensive. Accordingly, we are developing an automated approach that identiﬁes the relevant
equations in text and rendered images of documents (PDFs treated as images) associated with sci-
entiﬁc models, parse them into an intermediate symbolic mathematical representation, and ground
the variables in the equations to text descriptions and source code variables.
Non-textual elements in PDFs have previously been identiﬁed using heuristics based on document
structure [4] or statistical learning [3, 1]. Here, taking advantage of advances in deep learning
[8], we identify the location of the bounding box surrounding the equations using machine vision
techniques. After identifying the location of the equations in the PDF, the next step in the pipeline
is to parse the rendered equation into an intermediate representation. We choose to use LATEX
because we have the LATEX source code for each of the training examples, and also because LATEX
preserves all of the typographic information (e.g., boldface, subscript, etc.), which conveys variable
semantics. We decompile the image using an encoder-decoder system that encodes the image of
the equation through a series of convolutions and produces LATEX commands that generate the
image [6, 5].
We are currently evaluating this process on a held-out subset of the data from
ArXiv.
This decoded LATEX representation will then be parsed into Python code (by extending coverage
of an open source rule-based system, latex2sympy2, to equation elements frequently found in the
domain) and then converted to a equation elements frequently found in the domain) and then
converted to a GrFN representation.
To ground the GrFN representation extracted from the
equations, we locate text that references the equation, using the equation identiﬁer when available
and the lexical content when it is not.
5
Machine Reading for Scientiﬁc Models
We are developing a framework for reading and extracting model information from the scientiﬁc
papers that directly describe the computational models (e.g., dssat, swap) whose source code we
analyze ( 3).
Scientiﬁc papers are typically available as PDFs, which need to be preprocessed into a format that
2https://github.com/augustt198/latex2sympy

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
Figure 3: Example of variables (represented as concepts, deﬁnitions and value assignments) ex-
tracted from scientiﬁc text as a result of the machine reading pipeline.
Priestley-Taylor Model
ASCE Model
Figure 4: Results of comparing Priestly-Taylor (PT) and ASCE models. Blue nodes represent
variables shared between PT and ASCE. Black nodes represent variables not shared but along
directed paths between shared variables.
Green nodes in the ASCE model represent variables
whose states directly aﬀect shared directed paths – if controlled, this isolates the portions of ASCE
that overlap with PT. Finally, orange nodes represent variables in the ASCE model that can be
isolated from the overlap in the comparison.
a machine reader can use. We make use of Science Parse3, an open source tool that segments the
sections based on the paper layout and typography.
Our framework then implements an open-domain information extraction system based on Eidos4,
a machine reading system designed to extract causal relations. At its core, Eidos has a grammar
of rules [10, 9] that model linguistic patterns commonly used by authors to express causality in
text. Here, where we are interested in gathering context about the models implemented in source
code, causal relations are useful, but not suﬃcient. We have modiﬁed Eidos to extract mentions
of model variables and their descriptions. Additionally, it will be critical to read for background
assumptions (e.g., model preconditions) and additional contextual information which could inform
the setting of parameters (using quantities and units identiﬁed by grobid-quantities5).
3https://github.com/allenai/science-parse
4https://github.com/clulab/eidos
5https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid-quantities

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
Figure 5:
Screenshot of the AutoMATES CodeExplorer (available at http://vanga.sista.
arizona.edu/automates), showing the translation of a the Priestley-Taylor method for calcu-
lating potential evapotranspiration (a submodule in DSSAT [7]) into a computation graph. The
assign
nodes are annotated with the automatically extracted LATEX-typeset representation of
the equation extracted from the code, which will facilitate linking with scientiﬁc publications.
Additionally, the variable nodes are automatically aligned with descriptions extracted from code
comments and scientiﬁc texts.
The extracted variables and their mentions will necessarily be aligned with the variables read from
source code ( 3) and equations ( 4) to ﬁnd and resolve commonalities and discrepancies in diﬀerent
representations of the same model. In Figure 3, we show a screenshot showing results of the current
text reading pipeline.
6
Model Analysis
Model comparison and eventual augmentation is then enabled by our model analysis pipeline,
which identiﬁes which portions of two or more models share the same or similar computations
about similar variables, and which components are diﬀerent.
This analysis is enabled by the uniﬁed grounded function network (GrFN) representation, such
that we ﬁrst identify shared variables and then analyze the GrFN topology to identify diﬀerences
in setting variables states. Figure 4 shows an example of comparing the PT and ASCE evapo-
transpiration models from the DSSAT crop modeling system [7]. Sensitivity analysis is then used
to analyze the functional relationships between the variables. Because sensitivity analysis can be
computationally expensive, we are developing methods that use automatic code diﬀerentiation to
eﬃciently compute the derivatives of variables with respect to each other, and Bayesian optimiza-

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
Figure 6: Initial results of automated sensitivity analysis. The pair of variables that the Priestley-
Taylor model of evapotranspiration is most sensitive to has been automatically identiﬁed given
bounds information for the input variables, and a surface plot has been generated that shows the
eﬀect of varying that pair of variables (maximum temperature and solar radiation) on the output
variable (potential evapotranspiration).
tion techniques to estimate sensitivity functions with as few samples as possible. The ﬁnal product
of this analysis (a) includes modular executable representations of grounded models (as dynamic
Bayesian networks), (b) provides results of model comparison to enable model choice in tasks, and
(c) based on grounded model similarity and diﬀerences, enables model composition.
In Figure 6, we show some initial results from automated sensitivity analysis.
7
Conclusions
Systems of interest for scientiﬁc, humanitarian, and security reasons often require the integration of
computational models from multiple domains - for example, modeling food security in a region re-
quires the use of computational crop, weather, and hydrology models, to name but a few. However,
this integration currently requires signiﬁcant manual eﬀort in the form of exposing and curating
interfaces to the computational models. The framework we are developing will greatly speed up
this curation and integration process, making it possible to eﬀectively model large, complicated
systems and reason about them at multiple levels of abstraction.

Pyarelal et al.
Modeling the World’s Systems, 2019
8
Resources, web sites, etc.
The system described here is open-source and publicly available at github.com/ml4ai/automates
and github.com/ml4ai/delphi. We have also set up a public webapp, CodeExplorer (see screen-
shot in Figure 5), which shows oﬀa subset of the functionality of the AutoMATES system, and is
live at vanga.sista.arizona.edu/automates.
9
