Development and application of a machine learning supported methodology for
measurement and veriﬁcation (M&V) 2.0$
Colm V. Gallaghera,b,∗, Kevin Leahya,b, Peter O’Donovana, Ken Brutona,c, Dominic T.J. O’Sullivana,b
aIntelligent Eﬃciency Research Group, School of Engineering, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
bMaREI Centre, Environmental Research Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
cDepartment of Mechanical, Biomedical and Manufacturing Engineering, Cork Institute of Technology, Cork, Ireland
Abstract
The foundations of all methodologies for the measurement and veriﬁcation (M&V) of energy savings are based on the same ﬁve
key principles: accuracy, completeness, conservatism, consistency and transparency. The most widely accepted methodologies
tend to generalise M&V so as to ensure applicability across the spectrum of energy conservation measures (ECM’s). These do
not provide a rigid calculation procedure to follow. This paper aims to bridge the gap between high-level methodologies and the
practical application of modelling algorithms, with a particular focus on the industrial buildings sector. This is achieved with the
development of a novel, machine learning supported methodology for M&V 2.0 which enables accurate and reliable quantiﬁcation
of savings.
A novel and computationally eﬃcient feature selection algorithm and powerful machine learning regression algorithms are em-
ployed to maximise the eﬀectiveness of available data. The baseline period energy consumption is modelled using artiﬁcial neural
networks, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbours and multiple ordinary least squares regression. Improved knowledge dis-
covery and an expanded boundary of analysis allow more complex energy systems be analysed, thus increasing the applicability
of M&V. A case study in a large biomedical manufacturing facility is used to demonstrate the methodology’s ability to accurately
quantify the savings under real-world conditions. The ECM was found to result in 604,527 kWh of energy savings with 57% un-
certainty at a conﬁdence interval of 68%. 20 baseline energy models are developed using an exhaustive approach with the optimal
model being used to quantify savings. The range of savings estimated with each model are presented and the acceptability of
uncertainty is reviewed. The case study demonstrates the ability of the methodology to perform M&V to an acceptable standard in
challenging circumstances.
Keywords: Energy eﬃciency, M&V 2.0, Machine learning, Energy modelling, Industrial buildings
1. Introduction
There are many widely recognised and well established
methodologies for the measurement and veriﬁcation (M&V)
of energy savings.
These include the International Perfor-
mance Measurement and Veriﬁcation Protocol (IPMVP) [1],
the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers’ (ASHRAE) Guideline 14 [2] and ISO
50015-2014 [3]. These methodologies are intertwined with one
another and provide guidance on applying universal approaches
to the wide spectrum of energy saving projects. Despite this,
the lack of a rigid calculation process has been highlighted as
a signiﬁcant shortcoming of these methodologies [4]. This is
less of an issue in residential and commercial applications as
the nature of the energy systems in place are more simplistic.
In contrast to this, industrial buildings contain complex energy
$©2018. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-
ND 4.0 licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
4.0/
∗Corresponding Author

URL: www.ucc.ie/en/ierg (Colm V. Gallagher)
systems with many variables impacting on energy consumption.
ASHRAE Guideline 14 states that its procedures do not include
major industrial loads. The lack of a prescribed, analytical pro-
cess that can be applied has implications on the accuracy and
reliability of energy savings.
In 2015, industry accounted for 25.3% of total ﬁnal energy
consumption in the European Union (EU) [5] and 20.9% in Ire-
land in 2016 [6]. The European Parliament have issued the
Energy Eﬃciency Directive in an attempt to maximise the ef-
ﬁciency with which energy is consumed in industry [7]. Un-
der the terms of the Directive, member states are obligated to
achieve 20% energy eﬃciency savings by 2020. The success of
energy conservation measures (ECMs) implemented to achieve
this target can only be measured using M&V. Thus, accurate
M&V is a necessity for ECMs to be conﬁdently relied upon
when assessing progress towards EU targets. The focus on en-
ergy eﬃciency is set to continue post-2020 with proposals to
update the Directive that include a new 30% energy eﬃciency
target for 2030 [8]. M&V has a critical role to play in the deliv-
ery of this energy eﬃciency policy.
The major focal point of legislation has been the implemen-
tation of ECMs to minimise consumption in the industrial sec-
Preprint submitted to Energy and Buildings
January 26, 2018
arXiv:1801.08175v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2018

tor. For this to be a success, the M&V performed on each in-
dividual ECM must be of suﬃcient accuracy so that the sav-
ings estimated can be relied upon. The cumulative impact of
these ECMs will be evidence of the success of the Directive.
There is a signiﬁcant danger that over estimation of savings on
an individual project level could hinder attempts to limit cli-
mate change. This has created a need for a methodology that is
capable of overcoming the barriers that impede accurate M&V
in industrial facilities. These challenges include cost, resources
and the time required to perform M&V. Earlier research aimed
at addressing these issues identiﬁed the potential of machine
learning as a suitable tool to achieve this [9]; hence, this paper
proposes a machine learning supported methodology to popu-
late this knowledge gap. A clearly deﬁned, prescriptive process
focused on harnessing the power of energy data in an eﬃcient
manner is presented.
There are three periods of interest in any M&V project: the
baseline, implementation and reporting periods. Although they
always occur sequentially, the length of each period will vary
depending on individual project parameters. The baseline pe-
riod occurs prior to the implementation of an ECM, with the
reporting period taking place following the implementation pe-
riod. A crucial step in M&V is the estimation of the adjusted
baseline in the reporting period. This is found by normalis-
ing the reporting period energy consumption to baseline period
conditions. Typically, engineering or statistical methods are ap-
plied to construct a baseline model capable of performing this
normalisation. Consequently, M&V is not an exact science and
maintaining accuracy throughout the process is critical to its
success. The three principle sources of uncertainty are sam-
pling, measuring and modelling. The IPMVP deﬁnes a method-
ological approach that can be applied to quantify uncertainty in
a project. In this, the minimum acceptable level of uncertainty
is deﬁned as the point at which savings are larger than twice the
standard error of the baseline value [10]. Lee et al. identiﬁed
uncertainty of baseline measurements as a key risk to energy
service companies in energy performance contracting [11].
In recent years, M&V 2.0 represents an area of signiﬁcant in-
terest and it is being used to further develop the commonly used
practices. M&V 2.0 diﬀers from traditional M&V as it uses
large data sets and automated advanced analytics to streamline
and scale the process [12]. The automated analytics can provide
ongoing savings estimates in close to real-time. This enables
M&V to progress from a static, retrospective process to a more
dynamic state in which savings can be maximised. The added
complexity of modelling has been driven by the increased avail-
ability of granular energy data from advanced metering infras-
tructure (AMI) systems. The use of this data coupled with au-
tomated processing has been identiﬁed as the most opportune
manner with which to progress M&V [13]. The increased ac-
curacy, certainty and standardisation of savings calculations of-
fered by M&V 2.0 is hugely beneﬁcial. To enable this, there
is a need to establish guidelines and best practices in order to
fully realise the potential of these advancements. The formal
methodology presented in this paper seeks to become this re-
source for the industrial sector.
2. Research questions
To date, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has been proven to be ad-
vantageous in building energy load prediction [14], with ma-
chine learning being a sub-ﬁeld of AI. The primary objective
of this research is the development of a replicable, robust and
detailed methodology to enable the use of machine learning for
the purposes of M&V in industrial facilities. The following re-
search questions were used to lead the analysis:
1. Can a deﬁnitive methodology be developed to provide ex-
plicit guidance on the application of machine learning in
M&V?
2. Is it possible for such a methodology to be robust enough
to harness the power of available data across the spectrum
of diﬀerent M&V projects?
3. Can machine learning algorithms be employed on large
data sets without increasing the resources required for
M&V?
4. An extended boundary of analysis is proposed to increase
the baseline energy model accuracy in circumstances with
limited system speciﬁc metering infrastructure. Can M&V
be completed with acceptable accuracy using this novel
boundary of analysis?
3. Related work
3.1. Methodologies
As introduced in Section 1, the IPMVP is the most preva-
lent M&V methodology employed worldwide. Four distinct ap-
proaches are deﬁned to cover a wide range of projects. Options
A and B isolate the retroﬁt with a project boundary that encom-
passes the aﬀected equipment. Option C is a whole-building
approach and applicable in cases where the savings are greater
than 10% of the total site energy consumption. Option D con-
sists of a calibrated simulation of the energy systems. This
approach is beneﬁcial in circumstances with no baseline data.
ASHRAE Guideline 14 and ISO50015 present methodologies
that are based on the same core concepts as the IPMVP. These
generalised methodologies have the distinct beneﬁt of being ro-
bust. The most signiﬁcant drawback of this approach is the
widely publicised lack of guidance on the calculation process.
This issue is ampliﬁed when performing M&V in industrial fa-
cilities, where the quantity of factors impacting on energy per-
formance complicates the modelling process.
There have been a variety of alternative approaches proposed
to expand the knowledge base in the industrial sector and at-
tempt to overcome these aforementioned problems. Therkelsen
et al.
analysed data from ﬁve industrial buildings to com-
pare absolute, intensity and regression approaches to M&V
and found regression based approaches were the most eﬀective
in translating energy savings values into contextualised energy
performance improvement values [15]. Kelly Kissock and Eger
proposed a general methodology that takes weather and pro-
duction into account for measuring plant-wide energy savings
[16]. This approach also has the ability to disaggregate savings
2

into components which provides additional resolution. This of-
fers a novel, alternative approach to the traditional methodolo-
gies; however, the method was found to be limited by the in-
formation in the data set, which can be sparse as whole-facility
billing data is used. Rossi and Vel´azquez presented a prescrip-
tive methodology for performing M&V on combined heat and
power (CHP) plants in industrial facilities [17]. Burman et al.
developed an M&V plan to compare the design and actual en-
ergy performance of a building. This approach was proposed
with a view to identifying the shortcomings in the construction
and building procurement processes [18].
The traditional methodologies also provide guidance on
quantifying uncertainty associated with estimated energy sav-
ings [10]. Granderson et al. developed an alternative statisti-
cal methodology that can be used to evaluate the accuracy of
building energy models. It should be noted that this approach
uses data from buildings in which no ECM was implemented to
quantify uncertainty and oﬀers a useful alternative for compar-
ing the performance of modelling algorithms. The ﬁve models
evaluated were all found to perform poorly when energy use
varied in ways that were not predictable from the outdoor air
temperature or the time of week [19]. This further exposes the
need to develop more intricate approaches to improve the ap-
plicability to the industrial sector.
In recent years, M&V 2.0 tools have been developed in an at-
tempt to automate the process. Ke et al. created a cloud-based
platform for estimating energy savings for any ECM with a case
study in a commercial building [20]. Granderson et al. applied
an automated whole-building M&V tool to historic data sets
from energy eﬃciency programs and performed a comparison
with traditional methods [12]. Ke et al. also applied eQUEST
software to calibrate energy simulation results using IPMVP
Option D [21]. Advancing the algorithms used for energy mod-
elling in industrial buildings is the ﬁrst step in evolving to M&V
2.0 practices in the industrial sector.
3.2. Baseline energy modelling
The critical step in any M&V methodology is the develop-
ment of an energy model prior to the implementation of the
ECM. This is known as the baseline energy model. It has been
highlighted in Section 3.1 that the approaches taken to model
this baseline energy consumption need to evolve in order to
fully capture the behaviour of systems in industrial buildings.
The use of more complex algorithms, beyond that of the typical
ordinary least squares linear regression techniques commonly
applied, enables practitioners to accurately model the complex
energy consumption behaviour in these scenarios; hence im-
proving the certainty with which savings are quantiﬁed.
Heo and Zavala utilised Gaussian process (GP) modelling
to determine energy savings and uncertainty levels in commer-
cial oﬃce buildings. The GP models developed were capable
of capturing the complex non-linear and multi-variable inter-
actions, as well as multi-resolution trends of energy behaviour
[22]. Sever et al. proposed inverse simulation as a less time-
intensive method of estimating energy savings in the industrial
sector. Savings were determined using a multi-variate three-
parameter change-point regression model driven with typical
weather data [23].
Granderson et al.
reviewed 10 diﬀerent
approaches to baseline energy modelling for whole-building
M&V methods in the commercial sector; the ﬁndings of which
can be used to build conﬁdence in model robustness. The mod-
els tested utilised a variety of diﬀerent algorithms including
principle component analysis, random forests, mean-week and
time approaches, advanced regression and nearest neighbours
[24]. Dong et al. employed support vector machines (SVM’s)
to forecast the energy consumption of four commercial build-
ings using outdoor air temperature, relative humidity and global
solar irradiation as predictor variables [25]. Rossi et al. applied
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) to accurately model the base-
line energy consumption of CHP plants [26].
Energy modelling has a whole host of applications that lie
outside of the scope of M&V. Therefore, it is prudent to re-
view the approaches taken elsewhere in an eﬀort to advance the
research ﬁeld of interest. As energy modelling in buildings is
quite a mature ﬁeld, there have been a number of extensive re-
views carried out. Zhao and Magoul´es conducted a comprehen-
sive review of simpliﬁed engineering, statistical and AI meth-
ods for the modelling and prediction of energy consumption in
buildings [27]. Yildiz et al. conducted a review of regression
and machine learning models for electricity load forecasting in
commercial buildings [28]. Harish and Kumar carried out a
comprehensive review of modelling and simulation techniques
for building energy systems, which included space loads, heat-
ing ventilation and air conditioning systems and lighting [29].
Foucquier et al. reviewed machine learning, thermal and hybrid
approaches used to model energy consumption, heating/cooling
demand and indoor temperature in buildings. It was concluded
that machine learning approaches can be the easiest to deploy,
with the hybrid machine learning and thermal modelling ap-
proaches oﬀering signiﬁcant promise in the future [30]. Tardi-
oli et al. reviewed the recent application of data-driven models
at an urban level and proved that they are useful in reducing the
time taken to create an energy consumption model while main-
taining an adequate level of accuracy [31]. Finally, Ahmad et
al. reviewed ANN and SVM’s with the aim of identifying bet-
ter forecasting of building’s electricity consumption. This study
concluded that artiﬁcial intelligence based approaches (i.e. ma-
chine learning) are advantageous in capturing the behaviour of
complex energy systems inﬂuenced by many parameters [32].
There are several examples of machine learning being used
to successfully predict energy consumption and related factors
in buildings. Wei at al. carried out a multi-objective optimiza-
tion of a heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) sys-
tem performance using a data-driven approach [33, 34]. The
multi-layer perceptron ensemble approach was used to build
accurate models that considered both energy consumption and
local environmental conditions such as air quality and CO2 lev-
els. Esen et al. have shown the successful use of ANN, SVM
and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems to model and pre-
dict the performance of ground-source heat pump systems with
minimal data [35–38]. Similarly, SVM, ANN and wavelet neu-
ral network approaches have been applied to model solar air
heaters, an otherwise diﬃcult task when conventional meth-
ods are used [39, 40]. On a less granular scale, Fumo et al.
3

propose a simpliﬁed method for estimating hourly energy con-
sumption of a building by applying a series of predetermined
coeﬃcients to the monthly energy consumption data from util-
ity bills [41]. Carpenter et al. used billing data to develop GP
and three-parameter cooling change point models [42].
AI modelling algorithms, including machine learning ap-
proaches, have been proven to be beneﬁcial for forecasting en-
ergy consumption in buildings. Within the scope of M&V, the
majority of research published to date focuses on residential
and commercial buildings. This has led to a knowledge gap
surrounding the application of these complex algorithms in in-
dustrial facilities for the purposes of energy savings veriﬁca-
tion. The methodology proposed and applied in this paper sat-
isﬁes this need, which enables M&V in industrial facilities to
progress to M&V 2.0.
4. Methodology
AMI is common place in modern industrial buildings. These
systems collect large quantities of granular energy data, which
can be used to discover knowledge on system behaviour. This
data is widely available, however, it is rarely utilised to its full
potential. Common issues that hinder the use of this data in-
clude the lack of a central data repository, ineﬃcient prepro-
cessing techniques and insuﬃcient subject matter knowledge.
This data can signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy with which
M&V can be performed, although the need for skilled profes-
sionals to perform tasks such as data cleaning and baseline en-
ergy modelling impedes the process.
The methodology presented in this paper is capable of over-
coming the issues impeding the eﬀective use of available data.
A novel alternative to the traditional M&V protocol is oﬀered.
In contrast to IPMVP and ASHRAE Guideline 14, a prescrip-
tive data handling and modelling procedure is detailed to ensure
that maximum accuracy is achieved. In addition to this, the pre-
scription of this methodology contributes to simpliﬁed decision
making and reduces the need for subject matter expertise.
It is important to note that the use of additional modelling
techniques, not included in this methodology, is at the discre-
tion of the M&V practitioner. Additionally, the data handling
framework is not completely prescriptive so as to maintain ap-
plicability and remain largely technology agnostic. More de-
tailed data pipelines have been developed for data-driven ana-
lytics applications in large-scale industrial facilities and these
can be integrated into the proposed methodology by the user
[43].
Figure 1 illustrates the process ﬂow diagram of the
methodology.
4.1. Step 1 - Deﬁnition of project parameters
It is critical that the scope and boundaries of the project are
deﬁned prior to any commencement of work. This ensures that
the M&V of the resultant energy savings can be completed in
an accurate, complete, conservative, consistent and transparent
manner. To do this, the following items need to be documented;
• ECM’s to be carried out
• Project boundary
• Relevance to total energy consumption on entire site
• Project time-line: Expected baseline, implementation &
reporting periods
• Relevant personnel
• Data sources
• Static factors
4.2. Step 2 - Data gathering
4.2.1. Extraction
The characteristics of each relevant data source identiﬁed
must be detailed. This should include the type of data, mea-
surement frequency, storage methods and access protocol. The
objective of this stage in the process is to outline a means of
accessing data from each distributed data source to enable data
extraction. Information on how to manage and access this data
beyond the baseline period must also be included. As per ISO
50015, this includes, but is not limited to, storage, backup,
maintenance and security of the data. The information collated
at this stage should be replicable so that the same process can
be followed during the reporting period.
4.2.2. Contextualisation
Contextualisation of the relevant data is critical in gaining
meaningful insights into the systems being analysed. Poor se-
mantic modelling is common for energy data across the indus-
trial sector. This has led to the need for a standardised method-
ology for describing data. One such solution to this problem is
Project Haystack [44]. The goal of the Haystack naming con-
vention is to make it easier and more cost eﬀective to analyse,
visualise and derive value from operational data. The object ori-
ented class hierarchy, illustrated in Figure 2, is based on three
entities: the site, pieces of equipment and points. The naming
convention uses a tag model to describe data within the context
of the facility. A full reference guide for applying the naming
convention is available online [44].
The Haystack naming convention is endorsed in this method-
ology as it has many uses far beyond the M&V application. If
deployed across systems on a site, communication and data ac-
cessibility is naturally improved, and hence analytics, is made
more straightforward. In the context of this methodology, other
naming conventions can be applied if desired. This step is im-
portant to ensure a contextualised, more useful data set is pro-
duced.
4.3. Step 3 - Feature selection
The contextualised data set can often be very large as hun-
dreds of variables are stored. It is important that only those vari-
ables that oﬀer importance in model construction are brought
forward for analysis. Therefore, feature selection is used to se-
lect a subset of relevant variables for use in model construction.
To clarify, the term ”variable” is used to refer to the raw input
data and the term ”feature” is used for those variables output
from the feature selection process. These will be the features
4

Figure 1: Process ﬂow diagram of the proposed methodology.
5

Figure 2: Basic three level hierarchy of the Haystack naming convention.
used at a later stage to construct the baseline energy consump-
tion models. Feature selection has many beneﬁts in this ap-
plication, including reducing the measurement and storage re-
quirements in the reporting period, minimising model training
time and avoiding high dimensionality for improved prediction
performance [45].
Feature selection algorithms can be categorised as either ﬁl-
ter or wrapper approaches. Filter-based solutions are generally
more applicable to high dimensional data as they rely on the
characteristics of the training data. In contrast to this, the wrap-
per approaches employ a learning algorithm and determines
its performance to select the variable subset. This generally
results in longer processing times and requires more comput-
ing resources. A combination of simple ﬁlter and wrapper ap-
proaches are employed in this methodology to minimise pro-
cessing speed, while selecting the optimal feature subset. A
Spearman rank correlation ﬁlter method is included in a wrap-
per that seeks to maximise the adjusted coeﬃcient of determina-
tion, R2, of the data set. This is found by constructing a multiple
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model. This approach
measures the strength and direction of monotonic association
between two variables using Algorithm 1. The Spearman cor-
relation coeﬃcient is deﬁned as the Pearson correlation coeﬃ-
cient between two ranked variables. This is then used to itera-
tively select variables to add to the feature subset. The addition
of each feature is evaluated with respect to the adjusted R2 value
produced using the previous feature subset. Algorithm 2 details
this iterative process which determines the optimal subset of
features.
To avoid multicollinearity, it is critical that the features iden-
tiﬁed are not just independent of the dependent variable, but
Algorithm 1: Calculation of Spearman rank correlation.
Input: Input data set expressed as an m x n matrix.
x[ , n] = dependent variable
for j = 1, . . . , n −1 do
r j = rank x[ ,j]
rn = rank x[ ,n]
if All m ranks are distinct integers then
for i = 1, . . . , m do
Compute
di = r j[i] −rn[m]
end
Compute
ρ = 1 −
6Σd2
i
m(m2−1)
else
for i = 1, . . . , m do
Compute ρ = cov(rj,rn)
σr jσrn , where
cov(rj, rn) is the covariance of the rank
variables
σrj&σrn are the standard deviations of the rank
variables
end
end
end
Output: Spearman correlation coeﬃcients, ρ, for each
input variable w.r.t. the dependent variable.
Algorithm 2: Spearman rank-based feature selection to opti-
mise adjusted multivariate coeﬃcient of determination.
Input: m x n matrix containing all input data.
x[ , n] = dependent variable
Apply algorithm 1 to calculate variable ranks
Order columns in input matrix by decreasing ρ
i = 1
ρi = Spearman correlation coeﬃcient between variable i
and x[, n]
subseti = x[ , cols(1, . . . , i, n)], i.e. variable with highest ρ
and dependent variable
Train OLS regression model for subseti & ﬁnd r2
ad ji
while i != no. of variables do
subseti+1 = x[ , cols(1, . . . , i + 1, n)]
Train OLS regression model for subseti+1 & ﬁnd r2
ad ji+1
if r2
ad ji+1 −r2
ad ji > 0.01 then
subseti = subseti+1
r2
ad ji = r2
ad ji+1
i = i + 1
end
else
Remove variable i + 1 from the dataset
end
return subseti
end
Output: Dataset with features selected.
6

also independent of each other. Multicollinearity can cause co-
eﬃcient estimates in multiple regression models to change er-
ratically in response to small changes in the model or data. The
variance inﬂation factor (VIF) is used to test for multicollinear-
ity between features and hence, avoid selecting redundant fea-
tures. Similar to the coeﬃcient of determination, there is no
single value for the VIF that indicates multicollinearity. A com-
monly used rule of thumb is a VIF value greater than 10 indi-
cates multicollinearity. For weaker models, values above 2.5
may cause concern. In keeping with the M&V principle of con-
servatism, any feature found to have a VIF greater than 5 should
be removed from the feature set.
4.4. Step 4 - Availability assessment and cleaning
A data availability assessment consists of an initial, high-
level statistical analysis of the proposed model features. The
results of this allow the practitioner to make an informed deci-
sion, based on data quality and integrity, as to which features
are suitable for analysis. The simple summary statistical mea-
sures detailed in Table 1 are to be used to enable evidence based
decision making.
Measure
Description
Mean
The average value in a set of numbers
Median
The value lying at the midpoint of a fre-
quency distribution of values.
No.
of Unique
Values
The number of unique values in the set of
measures for a variable.
No.
of Missing
Values
The quantity of values missing the dataset.
This is usually assessed with respect to a
measurement frequency being used in the
analysis.
Quartiles
The three points that divide the data set into
four equal groups, each group comprising a
quarter of the data, where the data is ordered
sequentially.
Minimum
The lowest value in the set.
Maximum
The highest value in the set.
Table 1: Statistical measures to be employed in the data availability assessment.
Features with large numbers of outliers, periods of missing
data or unreliable measurements should be omitted from the
feature subset. As a rule of thumb, features with more than 5%
of poor quality data should be omitted entirely from the sub-
set. Any features that fall short of this 5% omission threshold
can generally be cleaned using the process detailed in Section
4.4. In addition to the summary statistics, visualisation tech-
niques can also be used to gain an understanding of the data
at hand. Box plots, time series plots and histograms are useful
in graphically representing the data. This process ensures that
data quality and integrity is maintained. Section 5 presents an
implementation of this assessment.
Data cleaning is the process of detecting and removing inac-
curate entries in a data set. Maintaining quality in the baseline
period data is critical to ensuring the system under analysis is
accurately modelled. Under the IPMVP, baseline data should
not be replaced by modelled data, except when using Option D
[46]. Therefore, the scope of data cleaning in this application
is limited to simply identifying unclean data and subsequently
removing it. No backﬁlling of data is to take place. The only
exception to this is if data is missing for a consistent period of
time in the baseline period, then comparable data for the same
time period in a diﬀerent year can be employed.
The results of the data availability assessment carried out in
Section 4.4 are to be used to guide the data cleaning process.
Using the summary statistics, box plots, time series plots and
histograms output from the assessment, variables with irregu-
larities can be identiﬁed. Some of these irregularities cannot
be rectiﬁed with data cleaning; these features must be omitted
from the analysis. If features must be omitted, the feature selec-
tion algorithm should be reapplied with these features removed
from the data set. This can allow for new features to be included
in the data set.
4.5. Step 5 - Baseline energy modelling
The development of the optimal model of the baseline energy
consumption is critical to ensuring that the uncertainty associ-
ated with the ﬁnal energy savings is minimised. This model is
referred to as the baseline energy model. An exhaustive process
is used to ensure the model developed is tailored to the charac-
teristics of each speciﬁc project.
4.5.1. Aggregate based on measurement frequency
Firstly, the data is aggregated based on the measurement fre-
quency. This is necessary as each subsequent step is frequency
speciﬁc. The objective of this step is to generate multiple data
sets to enable an array of models be developed. The number
of data sets that can be created is dependent on the frequency
with which the data is measured. The wide availability of AMI
in modern industrial buildings generally results in data being
recorded in 15-minute intervals. For this case, the data is then
aggregated using the mean values for hourly and daily measure-
ment frequencies. This results in 3 data sets being available for
model development purposes. It is not advised that less gran-
ular data than that with a weekly measurement frequency be
used as these can result in insuﬃcient quantities of testing data
leading to unreliable results.
4.5.2. Partitioning of data
The data gathered at this stage of the process is for the base-
line period only as the ECM has not yet been implemented.
The data sets output from the previous aggregation stage is par-
titioned into training and testing data sets. This enables the
models to be constructed using the training data and tested on
an unseen set. A shuﬄed split is performed with 80% of data
used for training and 20% used for testing. This is in contrast to
the guidance given by the IPMVP which uses 100% of the base-
line data to construct the model and subsequently calculates the
performance metrics by applying the model to the same data
set [10]. This approach may be prone to over-ﬁtting the model
7

to the training data, which can result in random error or noise
being incorporated, resulting in unreliable performance evalua-
tion. The partitioning of the baseline period data and testing on
a data set not used in model construction may prove a more ac-
curate approach that results in a reliable and independent eval-
uation of performance.
The training data is brought forward to the next stage in the
methodology, while the testing data set is not used again until
performance evaluation is required in Section 4.5.5.
4.5.3. Feature scaling
Feature scaling is used to standardise the range of features
in the data set with a view to improving model performance.
It also improves the processing time of certain algorithms in-
cluding ANNs. This process is also known as standardisation
or Z-score normalisation and results in each feature having the
properties of a standard normal distribution (i.e. standard devi-
ation of 1 and mean of 0). Each of the training data sets input
into this stage of the process are standardised and the scaling
parameters of each feature in these data sets are stored for ap-
plication at a later stage.
4.5.4. Model training
Baseline energy models are trained using the data sets for
each measurement frequency. This is an exhaustive process
which seeks to identify the most appropriate model hyper-
parameters for each algorithm and measurement frequency.
Section 3.2 reviews the success of various machine learning al-
gorithms in the ﬁeld of M&V to date. The ability of machine
learning algorithms to model energy systems in industrial build-
ings outside the context of M&V is also presented. The ﬁndings
of this review led to the following algorithms being deemed the
most appropriate for application:
1. Ordinary least squares regression
2. k-Nearest neighbours regression
3. Artiﬁcial neural networks
4. Support vector machine regression
Each of the algorithms requires the values of certain param-
eters be set prior to the commencement of the learning process.
These are known as hyper-parameters. A grid-search approach
using 10-fold cross validation is employed to ﬁnd the optimal
values of each hyper-parameter. The recommended grid-search
values for each hyper-parameter are detailed in Table 2. As this
is not an exhaustive list of grid-search values, practitioners may
choose to alter the speciﬁcations of each. The values provided
are recommended based on previous research on this topic [9].
The training of models is an optimisation solution which uses
an iterative approach to arrive at the ﬁnal values of the hyper-
parameters.
A model constructed using each algorithm and measurement
frequency is output from this stage. For a case assessing 3 mea-
surement frequencies, there are 12 models developed.
4.5.5. Performance evaluation
To identify the most suitable model, the testing data is used
to evaluate the performance of each baseline energy model. The
testing data sets deﬁned in Section 4.5.2 are standardised using
the scaling factors employed on the training data sets. These are
speciﬁc to each modelling frequency. Each model developed is
then applied to the appropriate standardised data set to produce
a prediction of energy consumption.
The coeﬃcient of variation of root mean square error
(CV(RMSE)) and normalised mean bias error (NMBE) are em-
ployed to quantify the prediction performance of each model.
CV(RMSE) is a commonly employed performance metric and
is used in both IPMVP and ASHRAE Guideline 14. It is a mea-
sure of the variability between actual and predicted values. The
CV(RMSE) is employed as it gives context to the size of the er-
ror relative to the quantity being modelled. It is also important
to note that the RMSE is known as the standard error (SE) in
the IPMVP.
NMBE is an indication of overall bias in a regression model.
It quantiﬁes the tendancy of a model to over or underestimated
across a series of values. In contrast to the CV(RMSE), the
NMBE is independent of time and hence, it can result in over-
all positive bias cancelling out negative bias. The use of both
metrics in conjunction with each other allows for a true insight
into model performance.
Equations 1 and 2 are used calculate each metric, where yi
is the actual value, ˆyi is the predicted value, ¯y is the average of
the actual value, and n is the total number of predictions in the
period of analysis.
CV(RMS E) =
p
(1/n) Pn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
¯y
∗100
(1)
NMBE = (1/n) Pn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)
¯y
∗100
(2)
The best performing model is identiﬁed as the model that re-
sults in the lowest CV(RMSE), as this is the metric used to cal-
culate the uncertainty introduced. The NMBE is used to support
the model evaluation, however, it is not used in model selection
due to the possibility of positive bias cancelling out negative
bias and the objective of minimising modelling uncertainty.
4.6. Step 6 - Savings quantiﬁcation
The previous steps are all completed prior to the implemen-
tation of the ECM. This ensures that any shortcomings in the
approach are identiﬁed at an appropriate time that remedial ac-
tions can be taken. For example, if the feature selection algo-
rithm showed that the variables were not strongly correlated to
the dependent variable, then additional metering would be re-
quired to gather the necessary data in the baseline period. With
these steps completed, the implementation period is used to im-
plement the ECM and perform any commissioning works that
are necessary. The ﬁnal energy savings can then be quantiﬁed
so long as the necessary reporting period data is available.
4.6.1. Data gathering
Data for the ﬁnal subset of model features must be gathered
to enable calculation of the adjusted baseline. The information
for data sources and associated data points logged in Section
8

Algorithm
Description
Hyper-parameters
Grid Search
Bi-variable Linear
Regression
An ordinary least squares approach assumed to be representative
of typical M&V practice.
Intercept
True/False
Multi-variable Linear
Regression
A more detailed ordinary least squares model constructed using 9
additional features from the available data set.
Intercept
True/False
k-Nearest
Neighbours
Non-parametric model where the input consists of the k closest
training examples in the feature space. The output is the average
of the values of its k-nearest neighbours.
Maximum no. of
neighbours
Distance
Kernel
kmax = 1:10
d = 1:5
kernel = triangular
Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks
Non-linear statistical model. It is a two-stage regression model
typically represented by a network diagram. A single hidden layer
feed-forward neural network was developed in each instance.
No. of hidden units
Maximum no. of
iterations
Threshold
Weight decay
size = 1:10
itmax = 1,000
t = 0.01
d = (0.001,0.01,0.1,0.5)
Support Vector
Machines
Non-parametric technique reliant on kernel functions. Examples
are represented as points in space with a clear gap separating map-
ping categories.
Kernel
Cost
kernel = linear
c = (0.25,0.5,1)
Table 2: Description of algorithms and associated hyper-parameters.
4.2 is used to guide this process. The data for both the model
features and static factors must be gathered for the entirety of
the reporting period.
4.6.2. Preprocessing
The data gathered must be preprocessed to ensure integrity
and accuracy is maintained. This preprocessing involves trans-
forming the dataset into a format suited to the baseline pe-
riod model. The contextualised feature names, measurement
frequency and cleaning are all covered in this stage. As per
ASHRAE Guideline 14, independent variables must not be
more than 110% of the maximum and no less than 90% of the
minimum values of the corresponding model training data. If
the data does not conform to this requirement, an advisory note
must be attached to the savings to state that the data is beyond
the range of applicability of the model [2].
As the model is trained on a standardised dataset, all in-
put data must be standardised to the same scaling parameters.
Therefore, the reporting period data must be scaled to the same
mean and standard deviation as the training data set.
This
standardisation is required to maximise the performance of the
modelling algorithms.
4.6.3. Model application
The optimal model identiﬁed in Section 4.5.5 is applied to the
prepared reporting period data to calculate the adjusted base-
line. The scaling applied to standardise the reporting period
data must now be reversed to give a context to the adjusted base-
line. This can then be directly compared to the measured data
for the same period of analysis.
4.6.4. Non-routine adjustments
Non-routine adjustments are implemented on a project-by-
project basis in circumstances with changes in static factors.
These are often referred to as baseline adjustments (BLA). Each
BLA is a custom engineering calculation for the given problem.
They must be agreed between all project stakeholders.
4.6.5. Uncertainty
The energy savings estimated must have an associated level
of uncertainty and conﬁdence. It is important to note that diﬀer-
ing approaches for the calculation of uncertainty are proposed
by the IPMVP and ASHRAE Guideline 14. In the IPMVP, ac-
ceptable uncertainty requires the savings to be larger than twice
the standard error of the baseline value [10]. ASHRAE Guide-
line 14 states that uncertainty must be less than 50% of the an-
nual reported savings, at a conﬁdence level of 68% [2]. The
approach deemed suitable by the IPMVP is employed in this
methodology. Thus, Equation 3 is applied, where t is the t-
statistic for a given level of conﬁdence and degrees of freedom
and SE is the standard error of the estimate.
U = t ∗S E
(3)
In the IPMVP, standard error is calculated using all of the
baseline data. As discussed previously in Section 4.5.2, this
technique of using all baseline data to train and test the model
is prone to over-ﬁtting the model to that speciﬁc data set. The
performance metrics are in turn calculated based on the mod-
els ability to ﬁt the baseline data and subsequently, uncertainty
is calculated. This can result in low levels of model error on
the baseline data, but unreliable measures of uncertainty in the
reporting period. The introduction of a random data split over-
comes these issues by applying the model to an unseen testing
data set.
The ASHRAE approach to calculating uncertainty is not em-
ployed as it is too susceptible to the size of the baseline data
set. It is found in a similar fashion to the IPMVP approach us-
ing the CV(RMSE) in Equation 4, which assumes that there is
zero error introduced by the metering equipment; thus only the
9

uncertainty introduced by model is calculated. The quantity of
data available, required reporting period length and CV(RMSE)
are the only variables inﬂuencing the quantity of uncertainty
introduced in this phase.
It is clear in this equation that as
the quantity of training data available in the baseline period in-
creases, the uncertainty reduces. The same is true for the length
of the reporting period. To meet the uncertainty requirements
already discussed, the required model accuracy reduces as the
measurement frequency increases and the importance of an ac-
curate baseline model is diminished. This is seen as a ﬂawed
approach that does not exude conﬁdence in results.
U = t ∗1.26 ∗CV(RMS E)
F
∗
r
n + 2
n ∗m
(4)
The model performance required to ensure acceptable uncer-
tainty changes relative to the quantity of savings resulting from
an ECM. This relationship, based on the IPMVP approach, is
illustrated in Figure 3 and can be used as a reference chart for
establishing the required performance levels.
Figure 3: Model prediction performance requirements under varying fractional
savings.
5. Case study: Application of methodology and results
The proposed methodology was applied to quantify the sav-
ings resulting from an ECM carried out on the chilled water
system in a large biomedical manufacturing facility in Limer-
ick, Ireland. The facility operates a continuous production pro-
cess on a 24/7 basis. The generation and distribution of chilled
water consumes approximately 7-8% of the total site energy
consumption annually. The chilled water generated by a se-
ries of electrically powered chillers is used to satisfy the space
cooling loads across the facility. This is delivered using an ar-
ray of air handling units. The ECM consisted of the reduction
of chilled water consumption at an end-use level across the fa-
cility. This was achieved by identifying and optimising any air
handling units that were operating outside of design speciﬁca-
tions. Figure 4 illustrates the energy consumption of the chilled
water system prior to the implementation of the ECM, i.e. the
baseline energy consumption.
The proposed approach was deemed suitable due to a number
of project speciﬁc constraints. The whole-building approach
outlined by the IPMVP was not suitable as the savings were es-
timated to be considerably less than 10% of the total sites con-
sumption. In addition to this, there was insuﬃcient metering
infrastructure to allow the successful application of retroﬁt iso-
lation Options A or B. In residential and commercial buildings,
it is often appropriate to utilise outside air temperature as the
independent variable for modelling chilled water consumption,
however, in this case the energy system has added complexity
due to the production process in operation. The relationship be-
tween chilled water system electricity consumption and cool-
ing degrees days was found to be weak with a coeﬃcient of
determination, R2, of 0.36. In addition to this, the lack of avail-
ability of granular production data restricted analysis into the
relationship between production output and chilled water con-
sumption. To implement a conventional approach, additional
metering would need to be installed, which in turn would delay
the project implementation as baseline data would have to be
gathered.
Hence, the proposed methodology oﬀers a novel alternative
to the traditional approaches of M&V. The methodology can be
used to establish the relationships between total electrical con-
sumption of the chilled water system and a variety of other me-
tered quantities on site. Any signiﬁcant relationships with in-
dependent variables can then be used to model the energy con-
sumption in the baseline period, with a view to predicting the
adjusted baseline following the implementation of the ECM.
5.1. Step 1 - Deﬁnition of project parameters
Prior to the commencement of any ECM implementation
works, the following project scope and parameters were de-
ﬁned:
• ECM: Optimisation of air handling units to minimise the
consumption of chilled water. This results in meeting the
space cooling load with an increased eﬃciency.
• Boundary: The ECM will result in savings being achieved
in the chilled water system electricity consumption. All
other secondary beneﬁts are outside the scope of this anal-
ysis.
• Relevance to total facility consumption: Chilled water
system accounts for approximately 7-8% of site electricity
consumption.
• Baseline period: 1st January 2016 to 29th October 2016.
• Implementation period:
30th October 2016 to 15th
February 2017.
• Reporting period: 16th February 2017 to 25th September
2017.
• Relevant personnel: Facilities engineering team, M&V
practitioner.
• Data sources: Building management system (BMS), en-
ergy management software (EMS).
10

Figure 4: Electrical load of chilled water system in baseline period (pre-ECM).
• Static factors: Number of production lines, size of facil-
ity, production process, shift scheduling, building fabric,
space heating and cooling set-points, air change rates.
5.2. Step 2 - Data gathering
The existing metering infrastructure was utilised to develop
a model for the chilled water system electricity consumption.
Both the BMS and EMS store valuable data gathered by electri-
cal, mechanical and climatic meters located across the facility.
The characteristics of each data source are documented in Table
3. This will be referred to in the reporting period to replicate
the data gathering process.
Characteristic
BMS
EMS
Type of data
Mechanical,
electrical &
climatic
Electrical
Measurement frequency
Varies
15-min
Storage
On-site server
Remote server
Access
Local network
access
Cloud access
Table 3: Characteristics of data sources.
As discussed in Section 4.2, poor semantic modelling of en-
ergy data in industrial facilities is common. The Haystack nam-
ing convention was applied to the dataset to ensure each data
point has a context with regard to the site. This increases the
ease with which the data-driven model is then applied to data
gathered in the reporting period. Figure 5 gives an example of
the application of the Haystack naming convention to a sample
data point. The two data sources were then collated together
into a single dataset of contextualised data points.
5.3. Step 3 - Feature selection
The dataset available for analysis contained 505 variables,
each corresponding to a unique physical meter on-site. When
the dependent variable, the chilled water system electricity con-
sumption, is removed from this set, there are 504 variables that
can be input to the model development process. The use of all
Figure 5: Example of the application of the haystack naming convention to the
data.
of these variables to construct a model of the dependent vari-
able would not be sensible given the computing resources typ-
ically available to practitioners. All variables used to model
the consumption must add signiﬁcant value to the model to be
considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Application of the feature selection algorithms outlined in
Section 4.3 were applied to the dataset. This resulted in the
identiﬁcation of 15 variables that added value to the multiple
regression model explaining the dependent variable. Collinear-
ity tests were conducted to ensure all features are independent
variables and multicollinearity did not exist.
5.4. Step 4 - Availability assessment and cleaning
Box and whisker plots were used to visualise the statistical
measures detailed in Section 4.4. These plots are included in
Figure 6. Any points plotted outside the whiskers are consid-
ered outliers. Outliers are classiﬁed as being greater or less than
1.5 times the inter quartile range.
11

Figure 6: Box and whisker plots generated to evaluate each proposed model feature.
The results of the availability assessment are used to iden-
tify which features require cleaning. To comply with the IP-
MVP practices, this cleaning simply consists of omitting fea-
tures identiﬁed as unclean from the analysis. No back-ﬁlling of
unclean data is permissible. Any feature that had more than 5%
of data identiﬁed as outliers were omitted from the feature set.
As a result of the data cleaning, 10 features were identiﬁed
as being suitable for baseline energy model training. These fea-
tures, or independent variables, selected to model the chilled
water system electricity consumption are detailed in Table 4.
For conﬁdentiality reasons, the fully contextualised feature
names have not been included.
The R2
ad justed value for these 10 features was 0.663. Although
no strict limit for acceptable R2
ad justed exists, this value is on the
lower end of acceptable values. This value does however in-
crease as measurement frequency decreases indicating that the
relationship is stronger as data granularity increases. This could
possibly be due to delays between variable responses that do not
cause an issue with lower measurement frequency.
5.5. Step 5 - Baseline energy modelling
The initial dataset gathered has been minimised to include
the chosen independent variables (features) and the dependent
variable; this is known as the feature set. The feature set was
gathered using a 15-minute measurement frequency. The data
was aggregated to create four independent feature sets with 15-
minutes, hourly, daily and weekly measurement frequencies.
This enables an exhaustive approach to modelling, which re-
sults in the identiﬁcation of the optimal data granularity.
Each feature set was then split into training and testing data
using an 80:20 ratio. This allows models to be evaluated on un-
seen data, hence, improving reliability of results. The training
data was then standardised to ensure the best possible model ﬁt
is achieved. An OLS, k-NN, ANN and SVM regression model
was trained for each measurement frequency. A grid search ap-
proach was used to train the hyper-parameters of each model as
discussed in Section 4.5.4. This exhaustive approach led to 16
models being constructed.
In contrast to practices employed by the IPMVP and
ASHRAE Guideline 14, unseen data was used to evaluate the
performance of each model in the baseline period. This helps
prevent over-ﬁtting the model to the training data set, thus in-
12

Feature
Description
ahu04-elec
Electricity consumption of air handling
unit no. 4.
ahu05-elec
Electricity consumption of air handling
unit no. 5.
constructionsite-
elec
Electricity consumption of construction
site.
waterroom3pumps-
elec
Electricity consumption of pumps in water
room no. 3.
mainincomer-elec
Electricity consumption recorded on site
incomer from grid.
feederq11-elec
Production related electricity consump-
tion.
gasskid-gas
Gas consumption of gas skid.
comp01-air
Compressed air produced by compressor
no. 1
input10-elec
Production related electricity consump-
tion.
wasteplastics50-
elec
Electricity consumption related to pro-
cessing of production waste.
Table 4: Feature set output from application of feature selection algorithm.
Figure 7: Performance of all models evaluated on testing data set.
creasing its applicability. The standard error, or RMSE, is used
to calculate uncertainty in the ﬁnal savings, hence, it is impor-
tant that this is reliably quantiﬁed. The testing data set was
normalised using the same scaling factors applied to the train-
ing data set. The performance was then evaluated by applying
each model constructed to the testing data set and comparing
estimated values of the dependent variable to measured values.
This would not be possible without the data partition already
carried out. Figure 7 illustrates the performance of each model
in predicting the chilled water system electricity consumption
during the baseline period.
The optimal model was selected based on CV(RMSE), as
this metric directly impacts on energy savings uncertainty in
the reporting period. A k-NN model trained using data with an
hourly measurement frequency was the best performing model
with a CV(RMSE) of 11.23%. A triangular kernel, 5 being the
maximum number of neighbours and a distance equal to 1 were
the associated model hyper-parameters.
5.6. Step 6 - Savings quantiﬁcation
Following the complete implementation of the ECM, the re-
porting period began. The information relating to data sources
and characteristics documented in Sections 4.1 was used to
gather the data necessary to quantify savings in the reporting
period. It is at this point that the value of having contextualised
the data comes to fruition as the data can be gathered more eas-
ily with clear semantic modelling. As with the baseline period,
the raw data is gathered from both data sources and stored in a
single data set.
Preprocessing consists of checking the quality of the data and
aggregating it into the measurement frequency corresponding
to the optimal baseline model. Quality checking is performed
by assessing if the independent variables data gathered in the re-
porting period conforms to the range requirements of ASHRAE
Guideline 14 (i.e. must not be more than 110% and no less than
90% of the corresponding baseline data). This was not an is-
sue for this particular case study. The data was measured with
a 15-minute measurement frequency and was subsequently ag-
gregated to have an hourly measurement frequency to conform
to the baseline energy model input requirements. The model
was then applied to the processed data set to calculate the ad-
justed baseline energy consumption.
In most cases, the adjusted baseline can be directly compared
to measured quantities of the dependent variable for quantiﬁca-
tion of savings. However, this is not the case in this application
as there was a change in static factors during the M&V period of
analysis. The construction of a production area occurred during
the implementation period and was live at the beginning of the
reporting period. This area houses an additional production line
and has the capacity for the operation of additional production
lines in the future. This increased the cooling load of the fa-
cility which requires the savings calculated be adjusted. While
the chilled water system electrical consumption increased, the
cooling load also increased. Hence, had the ECM not been im-
plemented, the load would have been satisﬁed in a less eﬃcient
manner with even higher chilled water system electrical con-
sumption. This non-routine adjustment was made based on the
ﬂoor area of the site increasing by 20%. This was deemed ac-
ceptable as the chilled water system services the space cooling
requirements.
The energy savings in the reporting period are the diﬀerence
between the measured consumption and the adjusted baseline,
following the application of the non-routine adjustment. The
savings were calculated to be 604,527 kWh. A mere calcula-
tion of savings without an associated level of uncertainty and
conﬁdence is of little use in ensuring reliability and complete-
ness in M&V. The range of savings must be calculated for a
given conﬁdence interval to gain a true insight into project per-
formance. This range is dependent on the model performance
in the baseline period. The more accurate the baseline energy
model, the smaller the range of savings. The IPMVP approach
to uncertainty calculation detailed in Equation 3 was employed
to calculate the range of savings in this project to be;
Range of Savings = 604, 527 ± (t x S.E.)
13

6. Discussion
6.1. Energy savings in reporting period
The savings were calculated as being the diﬀerence between
measured consumption in the reporting period and the adjusted
baseline. This is illustrated in Figure 8. The regression model
is capable of forecasting well relative to the measured data for
large parts of the reporting period, although there are periods
in the summer months of 2017 in which the model actually pre-
dicts that more energy is being consumed than would have been
pre-ECM.
Figure 8: Measured consumption and adjusted baseline for entire period of
analysis.
Measurement
Frequency
Algorithm
Minimum
(kWh)
Median
(kWh)
Maximum
(kWh)
15-min
OLS
-113,236
628,938
1,371,112
k-NN
126,907
489,202
851,497
ANN
747,769
1,181,674
1,615,579
SVM
-335,004
422,329
1,179,662
Hourly
OLS
-60,369
649,542
1,359,454
k-NN
261,399
604,527
947,655
ANN
687,936
1,145,835
1,603,735
SVM
-273,881
448,371
1,170,623
Daily
OLS
-7,055
654,115
1,315,285
k-NN
123,428
555,656
987,884
ANN
346,580
783,606
1,220,632
SVM
-73,504
587,279
1,248,061
Weekly
OLS
285,067
814,873
1,344,678
k-NN
-82,744
402,815
888,374
ANN
-278,097
644,592
1,567,281
SVM
786,834
1,355,583
1,924,333
Table 5: Savings in kWh for all models developed under varying measurement
frequency with a conﬁdence interval of 68%.
6.2. Range of savings
The impact of modelling error on the range of savings can be
seen in Figure 9 with detailed results provided in Table 5. The
results include the savings estimated by all models developed
and the associated range of savings estimated with 68% conﬁ-
dence. The uncertainty in a project can be directly seen in the
range associated with the quantiﬁed savings. The mean savings
across all models is 710,558 kWh with a coeﬃcient of varia-
tion (CV) of 39.9%. Although the savings quantiﬁed by each
of the 20 models are dependent on the measurement frequency,
algorithm and individual hyper-parameters, trends are evident
over the set of models. The ANN regression models predict the
highest savings on average in each frequency subset with an av-
erage savings of 938,927 kWh and a CV of 28.3% . The OLS
models are the most consistent across all measurement frequen-
cies with an average savings ﬁgure of 686,866 kWh and a CV
of 12%, however, these savings also had the largest associated
ranges. In terms of average savings, the SVM models were the
most erratic with a CV of 62.6% across results.
This analysis shows the sensitivity of baseline energy models
to algorithms, measurement frequencies and hyper-parameters.
The range of savings across all 20 models is particularly dis-
tressing and this emphasises the need to maximum accuracy in
baseline energy models to ensure the range of savings are small;
thus, maximising conﬁdence in savings.
6.3. Acceptable uncertainty
As stated in the IPMVP, uncertainty is deemed acceptable
when the savings are larger than twice the standard error of the
baseline energy model. For comparative purposes, each model
developed was assessed to check if the uncertainty levels could
be deemed acceptable. Table 6 contains the results of this anal-
ysis. It was found that only 3 of the 20 models developed meet
the criteria deﬁned by the IPMVP. Critically, the optimal model
identiﬁed and applied for the ﬁnal calculation of savings in the
case study (k-NN with hourly measurement frequency) does not
meet the criteria for acceptable uncertainty. The problem with
this check is that the models that tend to predict a higher quan-
tity of savings are favoured, without necessarily being the most
accurate models. As discussed, the ANN models predicted the
highest savings on average across all measurement frequencies,
while the k-NN models had to lowest CV(RMSE) for every
measurement frequency. This results in the k-NN models not
being deemed acceptable due to their more conservative esti-
mation of savings. Hence, this is somewhat of a ﬂawed process
for the ﬁnal evaluation of model performance.
6.4. Measurement uncertainty
The uncertainty in the savings quantiﬁed is due to the error
introduced by the baseline energy modelling. Measurement er-
ror was omitted from this analysis to analyse the performance
of the regression model in isolation. It is critical that the range
of savings reported is minimised to maximise conﬁdence in the
M&V process. It is important to note that the measurement
error is likely to increase as more independent variables are re-
quired to model the baseline energy consumption. In particular,
14

Figure 9: Range of savings for all models developed under varying measurement frequency with a conﬁdence interval of 68%.
Measurement
Frequency
Algorithm
Savings
(kWh)
Standard
Error
(kWh)
Acceptable
15-min
OLS
628,938
746,293
No
15-min
k-NN
489,202
364,306
No
15-min
ANN
1,181,674
436,313
Yes
15-min
SVM
422,329
761,536
No
Hourly
OLS
649,542
713,806
No
Hourly
k-NN
604,527
345,010
No
Hourly
ANN
1,145,835
460,412
Yes
Hourly
SVM
448,371
726,214
No
Daily
OLS
654,115
663,477
No
Daily
k-NN
555,656
433,737
No
Daily
ANN
783,606
438,551
No
Daily
SVM
587,279
663,088
No
Weekly
OLS
814,873
525,191
No
Weekly
k-NN
402,815
481,329
No
Weekly
ANN
644,592
914,651
No
Weekly
SVM
1,355,583
563,795
Yes
Table 6: Acceptable levels of uncertainty for each model developed.
when these measurements are recorded using metering infras-
tructure on-site, each will have an associated uncertainty. This
is in contrast to the more simplistic modelling solutions that
rely on weather and occupancy data.
7. Conclusions
The research presented in this article oﬀers a novel approach
to utilise machine learning techniques for energy savings veriﬁ-
cation. A focus is placed on minimising uncertainty introduced
by the energy model in the quantiﬁed savings. A deﬁnitive
methodology was developed to provide explicit guidance on the
application of machine learning for the purposes of maximis-
ing the accuracy with which M&V can be carried out. M&V
practitioners do not need to have knowledge of the inner work-
ing of the modelling algorithms, as the step-by-step approach
to the problem includes performance checks that must be met
to ensure accuracy. A whole-facility approach is adopted to
widen the scope of analysis, while isolating the energy system
in which the ECM is implemented. This blended approach de-
ﬁnes a novel boundary of analysis and makes use of all data
recorded across the facility, without requiring the energy sav-
ings to be large relative to the site load (IPMVP Option C
constraint). The methodology has been designed to be robust
enough to be compatible across the spectrum of M&V projects.
The proposed methodology is of particular beneﬁt in circum-
stances with limited metering infrastructure directly related to
the energy system under analysis. Evidence of which can be
seen in the case study where M&V would not have been pos-
sible without the installation of additional metering equipment
and a data gathering period that would delay the ECM imple-
mentation. The methodology was directly applied using real-
world data for a large biomedical manufacturing facility. A to-
tal of 20 models were developed in the baseline period using
an exhaustive approach. The optimal model was identiﬁed as
a k-NN regression model trained with data measured hourly.
The CV(RMSE) of this model was 11.23%. The reporting pe-
riod was 222 days in duration with estimated energy savings
over this period being 604,527 kWh. Critically, following the
quantiﬁcation of the associated uncertainty, these savings were
found to range from 256,485 to 952,568 kWh at 68% conﬁ-
dence. The range of savings for all 20 models constructed were
investigated to show the impact model performance has on ﬁ-
nal savings. This highlighted that the procedure used to assess
acceptable uncertainty favours models that estimate higher sav-
ings in the reporting period, rather than those that perform bet-
15

ter in the independent cross validation testing.
It is important to note that the conditions in the case study
are representative of the issues that exist across the industrial
sector. These include a lack of suﬃcient metering, poor data
quality and changing static factors.
The application of the
methodology demonstrates its ability to overcome these issues
and quantify energy savings with an acceptable level of uncer-
tainty. The level of uncertainty achievable is dependent on in-
dividual project characteristics. Speciﬁcally, the relationship
between the dependent variable and available independent vari-
ables is the limiting factor in minimising uncertainty. The pro-
posed methodology seeks to realise the achievable uncertainty
by utilising the available resources. In the case study, the indus-
trial building did not represent ideal conditions and the results
illustrate this. The relationship between the chilled water elec-
trical load and the 10 independent variables had an adjusted R2
value of 0.663. This was for a 15-minute measurement fre-
quency which represented the poorest value of all the frequen-
cies analysed. As this is on the lower end of statistically signiﬁ-
cant values, the achievable model performance is limited by this
relationship. Evidence of this can be seen in the large range of
savings in the ﬁnal results. The problematic nature of the case
study enabled a robust assessment of the methodology to take
place.
The approach taken by the methodology reduces the need to
install additional metering infrastructure. This has the potential
to greatly reduce the resources required to complete accurate
M&V in any given project. Machine learning techniques are
able to extract relevant knowledge from the available data set
and utilise it to develop the baseline energy model.
8. Future work
Future work will focus on incorporating the modelling
methodology into an M&V framework for real-time, automated
savings veriﬁcation. The objective is to develop a framework
that can seamlessly handle the transition from real-time M&V
to long-term monitoring and targeting (M&T). Persistence of
savings has come under the spotlight with the implementation
of the EU Energy Eﬃciency Directive and the tools on the mar-
ket to solve this problem are very much residential and com-
mercial buildings focused. This framework will oﬀer an M&V
2.0 software solution for industrial buildings that will enable
a seamless transition to M&T ensuring persist savings are re-
alised.
