Making deep neural networks right for the right scientific reasons by
interacting with their explanations
Patrick Schramowski∗, Wolfgang Stammer∗, Stefano Teso, Anna Brugger,
Franziska Herbert, Xiaoting Shao, Hans-Georg Luigs,
Anne-Katrin Mahlein & Kristian Kersting
Abstract
Deep neural networks have shown excellent performances in many real-world applications.
Unfortunately,
they may show “Clever Hans”-like behavior—making use of confounding factors within datasets—to achieve high
performance. In this work, we introduce the novel learning setting of “explanatory interactive learning” (XIL)
and illustrate its benefits on a plant phenotyping research task. XIL adds the scientist into the training loop such
that she interactively revises the original model via providing feedback on its explanations. Our experimental
results demonstrate that XIL can help avoiding Clever Hans moments in machine learning and encourages (or
discourages, if appropriate) trust into the underlying model.
Imagine a plant phenotyping team attempting to characterize crop resistance to plant pathogens. The plant
physiologist records a large amount of hyperspectral imaging data. Impressed by the results of deep learning in other
scientific areas, she wants to establish similar results for phenotyping. Consequently, she asks a machine learning
expert to apply deep learning to analyze the data. Luckily, the resulting predictive accuracy is very high. The plant
physiologist, however, remains skeptical. The results are “too good, to be true”. Checking the decision process of
the deep model using explainable artificial intelligence (AI), the machine learning expert is flabbergasted to find that
the learned deep model uses clues within the data that do not relate to the biological problem at hand, so-called
confounding factors. The physiologist loses trust in AI and turns away from it, proclaiming it to be useless.
This example encapsulates an important issue of current explainable AI [1, 2]. Indeed, the seminal paper of
Lapuschkin et al. [3] helps in “unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing what machines really learn”. However,
rather than proclaiming, as the plant physiologist might, that the machines have learned the right predictions for
the wrong reasons and can therefore not be trusted, we here showcase that interactions between the learning system
and the human user can correct the model, towards making the right predictions for the right reasons [4]. This
may also increase the trust in machine learning models. Actually, trust lies at the foundation of major theories of
interpersonal relationships in psychology [5, 6] and we argue that interaction and understandability are central to
trust in learning machines. Surprisingly, the link between interacting, explaining and building trust has been largely
ignored by the machine learning literature. Existing approaches focus on passive learning only and do not consider
the interaction between the user and the learner [7, 8, 9], whereas, interactive learning frameworks such as active [10]
and coactive learning [11] do not consider the issue of trust. In active learning, for instance, the model presents
unlabeled instances to a user, and in exchange obtains their label. This is completely opaque—the user is oblivious
to the model’s beliefs and reasons for predictions and to how they change in time, and cannot see the consequences
of her instructions. In coactive learning, the user sees and corrects the system’s prediction, if necessary, but the
predictions are not explained to her. So, why should users trust models learned interactively?
Furthermore, although an increasing amount of research investigates methods for explaining machine learning
models, even here the notion of interaction has been largely ignored. Reconsider the study by Lapuschkin et al. [3].
They showed that one can find “Clever Hans”-like behavior in popular computer vision models basing their decisions
on confounding factors. Based on these findings, the authors recommended a word of caution towards the interest in
such models, but they did not offer a solution for correcting their behavior. Particularly in real-world applications,
where monitoring for every possible confounding factor or acquiring a new dataset due to existing confounders is
time and resource consuming, it is inevitable to move beyond revealing the (wrong) reasons by making a step towards
correcting the reasons underlying a models decisions.
Doing so is exactly the main technical contribution of the present study. We introduce the novel learning setting
of “explanatory interactive learning” (XIL) and illustrate its benefits in an important scientific endeavor, namely,
plant phenotyping. Starting from a learning system that does not deliver biologically plausible explanations for a
relevant, real-world task in plant phenotyping, we add the scientist into the training loop, who interactively revises
the original model by interacting via it’s explanations so that it produces trustworthy decisions without a major
Preprint. Work in progress.
∗Equal contribution.
1
arXiv:2001.05371v4  [cs.LG]  5 Mar 2024

c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
(a) Scientific Task
(b) Machine Learning: Often no interaction. Expert just provides the hyperspectral data and the labels.
(c) "Clever Hans"-like behavior: Explainable AI (XAI) methods may reveal "Clever Hans" behavior of the learnt machine,
in particular when using deep neural networks.
(d) Explanatory Interactive Machine Learning: Combines XAI and interactive machine learning to counteract
"Clever Hans"-like behavior.
Plant tissue & expected reasons
Hyperspectral cube
Spectral signatures
Predict if a plant suffers
from biotic stress using
hyperspectral images.
Viewer does not support full SVG 1.1
Figure 1: Explanatory Interactive Learning (XIL)—Human users revise learning machines towards trustworthy
decision strategies. The cartoons sketch the main unerlying idea for each case (row). (a-left) Data samples, expert-
classifications (checks and Xs with colors indicating the class) and explanations (overlaid with an edge filtered original
image for better interpretability) that an expert expects of an ML model. Yellow corresponds to relevant regions,
blue to irrelevant regions for a classification. Not even an expert can be certain about potential samples from a early
disease stage and what a valid explanation should be. (a-middle) Illustration of hyperspectral data consisting of
spatial and spectral dimensions. The planes on the top and left sides of the cube correspond to slices taken from the
center of the cube but placed on the edges for visualization. (a-right) The characteristic reflectance of healthy tissue
vs. disease spots. The vertical red, green and blue lines depict the three wavelengths of the RGB dataset. (b,c)
Classifications of a deep neural network (b) and its explanations (c). The learned model clearly uses confounding
factors, identified as the embedding agar solution, to explain its decision. (d) The human user provides feedback on
the reasons. In turn, the machine gets new information and can continue learning. The human-revised deep network
yields classifications matching a biologically plausible strategies. (All shown RGB images correspond to real RGB
images, while the edge overlays resulted from pseudo-RGB images generated from the original hyperspectral dataset,
cf. Methods RGB/HS classification.)
drop in performance. Specifically, XIL takes the form illustrated in Fig. 1. In each step, the learner explains its
interactive query to the domain expert, and she responds by correcting the explanations, if necessary, to provide
feedback. This allows the user not only to check whether the model is right or wrong on the chosen instance but
also if the answer is right (or wrong) for the wrong reasons, e.g., when there are ambiguities in the data such as
confounders [4]. By witnessing the evolution of the explanations, similar to a teacher supervising the progress of a
student, the human user can see whether the model eventually “gets it”. The user may even correct the explanation
presented to guide the learner. This correction step is crucial for more directly affecting the learner’s beliefs and is
integral to modulating trust [6, 12].
2

Algorithm 1
caipi takes as input a set of labeled examples L, a set of unlabeled instances U, and iteration
budget T.
1: f ←Fit(L)
2: repeat
3:
x ←SelectQuery(f, U)
4:
ˆy ←f(x)
5:
ˆz ←Explain(f, x, ˆy)
6:
Present x, ˆy, and ˆz to the user
7:
Obtain ¯y and explanation correction C
8:
if caipi:
9:
{(¯xi, ¯y)}c
i=1 ←ToCounterExamples(C)
10:
L ←L ∪{(x, ¯y)} ∪{(¯xi, ¯y)}c
i=1
11:
else if rrr:
12:
{(x, ¯y, A)} ←ToBinaryCorrectionMask(C)
13:
L ←L ∪{(x, ¯y, A)}
14:
U ←U \ {x}
15:
f ←Fit(L)
16: until budget T is exhausted or f is good enough
17: return f
Specifically, we make the following contributions: (i) Introduction of XIL with counterexamples (CE) to revise
“Clever Hans” behavior in a model-agnostic fashion. (ii) Adaption of the “right for the right reasons” (RRR) loss
to latent layers of deep neural networks. (iii) Showcasing XIL on the computer vision benchmark datasets PASCAL
VOC 2007 [13] and MSCOCO 2014 [14]. (iv) Evaluation of XIL on a highly relevant dataset for plant phenotyping,
demonstrating its potential as an enabler of scientific discovery. (v) Gathering of the plant phenotyping dataset and
the creation of a version with confounders. (vi) A user study on trust development within XIL [15].
A preliminary version of this manuscript has been published as a conference paper [16].
The present paper
significantly extends the conference version by (ii-v) Moreover, the ad-hoc XIL user study presented in [16] was
completely re-designed, newly conducted, and now includes a thorough statistical analysis (vi). To encourage further
research, we provide the created plant phenotyping dataset.
We proceed as follows. We start by formally introducing Explanatory Interactive Machine Learning (XIL) and
instantiate it in the caipi method [16] as well as the rrr method [4]. After introducing XIL, we discuss quantita-
tive results on test datasets, before providing details on how domain experts can revise learning machines and in
turn enable the machines to correct their abilities to solve the scientific real-world task of plant disease prediction.
Finally, we demonstrate the importance of explaining decisions for building trustful machines via a user study. Our
contributions thus address a main part of building trustworthy AI methods by providing an end-to-end, interactive
method to evaluate and revise machine learning models. This provides an important add-on to Rudin’s [17] message
“Stop explaining black-box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead”,
namely “Start interacting with explanations of machine learning models to avoid ‘Clever Hans’-like behavior.”
Explanatory Interactive Machine Learning (XIL)
In XIL, a learner can interactively query the user (or some other information source) to obtain the desired outputs of
the data points. The interaction takes the following form. At each step, the learner considers a data point (labeled or
unlabeled), predicts a label, and provides explanations of its prediction. The user responds by correcting the learner
if necessary, providing a slightly improved—but not necessarily optimal—feedback to the learner.
Let us now instantiate this schema to explanatory active learning—combining active learning with local explainers
(cf. Methods). Indeed, other interactive learning can be made explanatory too, including coactive learning [11], active
imitation learning [18], and mixed-initiative interactive learning [19], but this is beyond the scope of this paper.
Explanatory Active Learning.
In Explanatory Active Learning, we require black-box access to an active learner
and an explainer. We assume that the active learner provides a procedure SelectQuery(f, U) for selecting an
informative instance x ∈U based on the current model f, and a procedure Fit(L) for fitting a new model (or update
the current model) on the examples in L. The explainer is assumed to provide a procedure Explain(f, x, ˆy) for
explaining a particular prediction ˆy = f(x). The framework is intended to work for any reasonable learner and
explainer.
When using lime for computing an interpretable model locally around the queries to visualize explanations for
current predictions, this results in caipi as summarized in Alg. 1. At each iteration t = 1, . . . , T an instance x ∈U is
chosen using the query selection strategy implemented by the SelectQuery procedure. Then its label ˆy is predicted
3

using the current model f, and Explain is used to produce an explanation ˆz of the prediction. The triple (x, ˆy, ˆz) is
presented to the user as a (visual) artifact. The user checks the prediction and the explanation for correctness and
provides the required feedback. Upon receiving the feedback, the system updates U and L accordingly and re-fits
the model. The loop terminates when the iteration budget T is reached or the model is good enough.
During interactions between the system and the user, three cases can occur: (1) Right for the right reasons:
The prediction and the explanation are both correct. No feedback is requested. (2) Wrong for the wrong reasons:
The prediction is wrong. As in active learning, we ask the user to provide the correct label. While the explanation
may provide some signal as to why the prediction was wrong, we currently do not require the user to act on it—this
is an interesting avenue for future work—but treat the explanation to be simply wrong. (3) Right for the wrong
reasons: The prediction is correct but the explanation is wrong—the main target of XIL.
Model-agnostic XIL using counterexamples (CE).
The “right for the wrong reasons” case is novel in active
learning, and we propose explanation corrections to deal with it. They can assume different meanings depending
on whether the focus is on component relevance, polarity, or relative importance (ranking), among others. In our
experiments we ask the annotator to indicate the components that have been wrongly identified by the explanation
as relevant, that is,
C = {j : |wj| > 0 ∧the user believes the jth component to be irrelevant} .
Given the correction C, we are faced with the problem of explaining it back to the learner.
We propose a
simple strategy to achieve this. This strategy is embodied by ToCounterExamples. It converts C to a set of
counterexamples that teach the learner not to depend on the irrelevant components. In particular, for every j ∈C we
generate c examples (¯x1, ¯y1), . . . , (¯xc, ¯yc), where c is an application-specific constant. Here, the labels ¯yi are identical
to the prediction ˆy. The instances ¯xi, i = 1, . . . , c are also identical to the query x, except that the jth component
(i.e. ψj(x)) has been either randomized, changed to an alternative value, or substituted with the value of the jth
component appearing in other training examples of the same class. This counterexample strategy (ce) produces
c · |C| counterexamples, which are added to L, as summarized in Alg. 1. Importantly, this method is model-agnostic
and can be used also when applying a non-differentiable model.
XIL using gradients.
If the model is differentiable, the learner can also be regularized to be right for the right
reasons using the “Right for the Right Reasons” loss (rrr) introduced by Ross et al. [4]. Here one adds a penalty
to gradients that lie outside of a binary mask that indicates which features of the input are relevant. We modified
the original loss function to:
L(θ, X, y, A) =
N
X
n=1
K
X
k=1
−ckynk log(ˆynk)
|
{z
}
Right answers
+
λ1
N
X
n=1
D
X
d=1
 
And
δ
δhnd
K
X
k=1
ck log(ˆynk)
!2
|
{z
}
Right reasons
+
λ2
X
i
θ2
i
|
{z
}
Weight regularization
,
(1)
where θ describes the parameters of the network, X the input, y the ground truth and A the binary mask used in
the regularization term that discourages the input gradient from being large in regions marked by A. Instead of
regularizing the gradients with respect to X, as originally described in [4], we regularize the gradients of the final
convolutional layer h, corresponding to Gradient weighted Class Activation Maps (grad-Cam) ([20], cf. Methods).
Further c is a rescaling weight given to each class of the unbalanced dataset and ˆy corresponds to the network
prediction. The objective function is split into three terms. The first and the last are the familiar cross-entropy and
weight (θ) regularization terms. The second term is the new regularization term. The λ values are used to weight
the different regularizations. Ross et al. [4] state that the regularization parameter λ1 should be set such that the
“right answers” and “right reasons” terms have similar orders of magnitude.
rrr can easily be incorporated into XIL (see again Alg. 1), and, as demonstrated by Selvaraju et al.’s hint
approach [21], Eq. 1 can be extended if the user is confident about how a (visual) explanation should look like. See
Methods for an extended discussion of related work.
Demonstrating XIL on Computer Vision datasets.
We begin by considering simulated users—as it is common
for active learning—to evaluate the contribution of explanation feedback. Indeed, counterexample strategies (e.g.
caipi) can trivially accommodate more advanced models than the one employed here. We simulate a human annotator
that provides correct labels. Explanation corrections are also assumed to be correct and complete (i.e. they identify
all false-positive components), for simplicity.
Specifically, we applied our data augmentation strategy to a decoy variant of fashion-MNIST [16], based on [22]
(cf. Methods). The average test set accuracy of a multilayer-perceptron (with the same hyperparameters as in [4]) is
reported in Tab. 1(a) for three correction strategies: no corrections, our ce, and the input-gradient constraints (rrr).
The models’ explanations for ce are computed with lime. Additionally, for every training image, we added c = 1, 3, 5
4

(a) Fashion-MNIST (Toy) Dataset
no
Counterexamples
rrr
corr. c = 1 c = 3 c = 5
IG
Train 97%
93%
92%
92%
89%
Test
48%
82%
85%
85% 85%
(b) Scientific Dataset
no.
rrr
corr. grad-Cam
RGB 89%
87%*
HS
99%
95%
(c) HS Scientific Dataset
non-confounded test set
per-channel
no
rrr
average
corr. grad-Cam
non-tissue
81%
87%
full image
50%
82%
Table 1: Explanatory feedback can boost trust and performance. Highest performances are bold. (a) Accuracy on the
fashion MNIST dataset of an MLP without corrections (no corr.), with our (ce) using varying c (middle), and rrr
with input gradient (IG) constraints [4]. (b) The average model balanced accuracy of applying rrr with grad-Cam
over five cross-validation runs. With “*” we denote situations where decisions made based on the background could
not be fully removed. (c) The average model balanced accuracy over five cross-validation runs on a non-confounded
test set of the hyperspectral (HS) scientific data. The confounding background features were set to either the per-
channel average of the non-tissue regions or the full image of the training samples. The accuracies are reported for
HS-CNN.
(a) Test Image
(b) w/o Feedback
(c) XIL
Figure 2: XIL helps avoiding Clever Hans moments on unseen PASCAL VOC images (a). Ignoring user feedback, the
model focuses on a source tag present in the lower left corner (b). Training it via interacting with its explanations, it
does not consider the source tag to be relevant anymore (c). The visual explanations in (b,c) show relevant regions
for the model’s decision using light and irrelevant ones using dark colors.
counterexamples where the decoy pixels are randomized. When no corrections are given, the accuracy on the test
set is 48%: the confounders completely fool the network, cf. Tab. 1(b). Providing even a single counterexample
increases the accuracy to 82%, i.e., the effect of confounders drops drastically. With more counterexamples, the
accuracy of ce is similar to that of rrr. Both methods pose valid improvements, thus showing that explanatory
interactive learning (XIL) is an effective mean for correcting “Clever Hans” moments in machine learning and may
even improve predictive performance and beliefs.
Furthermore, we conducted experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2007 [13] dataset. We focused on a five-class
subset (cf. Methods) and revised the model using XIL with the rrr loss. Fig. 2 presents some example images
and their explanations with and without user feedback, i.e. default (test accuracy.: 78%) and XIL trained (test
accuracy: 73%). One can see that the classifier has learned the confounding factor for horse images (the source tag
on the bottom left corner) without user feedback. After retraining the classifier using user feedback on the location
of the source tag, we can see that the model no longer focuses on the confounder, demonstrating the benefit and
effectiveness of XIL also in this setting. Similar benefits can be observed on MSCOCO using hint-like extensions.
They may help to more quickly align human and gradient-based network explanations, as shown in the supplement.
5

Figure 3: Spectral signatures of measured agar plates with sugar beet leaf discs. Signatures were extracted of agar
on which healthy and inoculated sugar beet leaf discs were placed (a), of healthy and inoculated sugar beet leaf discs
(b) and C. beticola symptoms of sugar beet leaves (c). Signatures were extracted from 100 pixels for each group
and the mean value is presented. The vertical (green, blue, red) lines correspond to the wavelength selected for the
pseudo-RGB images.
Deep plant phenotyping: High predictive performance.
Next, we showcase the extent, importance, and
usability of XIL. To this end, we performed classification and revised corrections of the learned models on a real-
world, scientific dataset. This dataset corresponds to RGB and hyperspectral (HS) (cf. Methods) images of leaf
tissue from inoculated (Cercospora beticola) and healthy sugar beet plants. Notably, there is a strong variability in
the extent of disease severity over all samples, with some samples clearly showing the characteristic of Cercospora
Leaf Spot (CLS) (two rightmost samples in Fig. 1) while others do not (second to the left sample in Fig. 1) and for
the human eye appear indistinguishable—at least in RGB—from healthy leaves (top sample in Fig. 1). Roughly 50%
of inoculated tissue samples showed visible CLS.
We performed classification using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on the RGB and HS datasets (cf. Meth-
ods). The task was to classify the leaf samples into the one of the two classes: healthy or diseased. The correspond-
ing average balanced accuracies determined over 5 cross-validation runs are shown in the left column (no corr.) of
Tab. 1(b). They show high accuracies of 88% on the RGB dataset and nearly perfect performance of 99% on the HS
dataset. It seems the HS data contains more relevant information to the classification task.
Be careful!
The deep network might be right for the wrong reasons.
The nearly perfect predictive
performance is rather suspicious since plant phenotyping is a rather difficult task. Therefore, we wanted to know
the reasons for the predictions and visualized the explanations of the networks using grad-Cams.
Specifically,
we applied a spectral clustering and t-SNE [23] analysis, similar to [3], on the resulting explanations. Fig. 4(a)
shows the strategies of the CNN trained on the HS data for data points belonging to the test set only. Fig. S.1(a)
shows the strategies of the CNN trained with RGB data. One can identify that the HS-CNN has altogether two
prediction strategies, one for each predicted class label (cf. supplement for more details). In the case of control
samples, the HS-CNN focuses on large areas of the tissue, however, for inoculated samples, even if CLS are visible,
the network focuses on the nutritional solution (agar) to classify these as inoculated. Moreover, when analyzing the
reflectance of the agar across different stages of disease development, we could indeed identify differences between
control and inoculated nutrition solution. This can be seen in the left panel of Fig. 3. Given the much smaller data
dimensionality of the RGB images compared to the HS data, it seems likely that the RGB-CNN would have more
difficulties focusing only on the agar as a classification feature, thus explaining the different classification strategies
between HS and RGB-CNNs as well as the reduced classification performance of the RGB-CNN, compared to the
HS-CNN.
In any case, both CNNs showed high to very high performances by largely using confounding factors within
the dataset. The trained neural networks used strategies, which a biologist would consider as cheating rather than
valid problem-solving behavior. The accuracies may not correspond to the true performance when measured in an
environment outside of the lab setting, possibly even leading to dangerous consequences if left untackled.
Revising the model to be right for the right reasons.
It is too simple to say that we can not trust these
models and even question if machines are truly “intelligent”. We now show that with the human in the loop revising
the machine, as in the XIL setting, the models can recover from the observed “Clever Hans”-like strategies towards
trustful ones.
To this end, we let a plant biologist revise the machine by constraining the machine’s explanations to match
her domain knowledge. Since the used models are differentiable, we focused on using rrr rather than using the
CE strategy, though both would be valid here within the XIL framework. Specifically, we simulated the interaction
between the domain experts and the ML models. After training a model without any interactions, plant physiologists
6

Default HS-CNN Strategy Analysis
 Human-revised HS-CNN Strategy Analysis
Healthy
Tissue
Background
Healthy Tissue 1
Healthy Tissue 2
Partial
Healthy Tissue
CLS
(b)
(a)
Figure 4: Cluster analysis of the different decision strategies after training CNNs on the HS data with the cross-
entropy loss (Default) in (a) and with the rrr loss in (b). The images are visualized in a two-dimensional t-SNE
embedding and colored by the spectral clustering assignments.
analyzed the provided predictions and corresponding explanations. She decided that it is always a wrong reason to
focus on the background and consequently her annotations corresponded to binary masks of the whole tissue (cf.
Methods).
As before, we analyzed the decision strategies of the rrr trained model using t-SNE and spectral clustering.
The results are summarized in Fig. 4(b) for the HS-CNN and Fig. S.1(b) for the RGB-CNN. As one can see, after
training the HS-CNN with rrr, the model focuses on image regions lying only on the tissue, regardless of the
underlying class. The strategies of control samples correspond to nearly full activation of the whole tissue, whereas
for inoculated samples the identified relevant image regions are often very specific spots. Particularly, the model now
focuses on the CLS, which were previously essentially ignored. Fig. 1(d) shows in more detail several examples of
the observed strategies used by the corrected HS-CNN in comparison to the observed “Clever Hans” strategies of
the unrevised machine. Although the model’s performance slightly decreased, cf. Tab. 1(b), it is still able to classify
samples without visible symptoms. Even exploring different hyper-parameters for rrr, we were not able to force
the RGB-CNN to fully ignore the background, as illustrated in Fig. S.1(b). As shown in Fig. 3(a), although the
HS-CNN has much more information at hand to focus on the confounding factors in the first place. However, after
revision with rrr, it is easier for the HS-CNN to make accurate predictions based on the reflectance of the tissue
in comparison to the RGB-CNN (Fig. 3(b)). Particularly, the HS-CNN mainly uses a spectral area for prediction,
which is beyond the RGB area. This explains the difficulty of correcting the RGB-CNN.
We now focus on evaluating the default and revised models on a non-confounded test dataset to investigate the
generalization improvement of training with XIL. Due to a missing non-confounded test set for the scientific dataset,
we performed the simple trick of replacing the confounding features of all test samples with other values (cf. Methods).
The results are summarized in Tab. 1(c), reporting the average test accuracy over five cross-validations. One can see
7

TC1
TC2
TC3
Test Conditions
1
2
3
4
5
TiA Score
**
***
(a) Trust in AI
50%
70%
100%
1
2
3
4
5
6
Trust in Correct Rule Learning
***
***
(b) No Explanations
(TC1)
50%
70%
100%
Model Accuracy per Round
***
***
(c) Correct Explanations
(TC2)
50%
70%
100%
(d) Incorrect Explanations
(TC3)
Figure 5: Results of the user study on trust development. (a) shows the total TiA Score over the three test conditions
and (b-d) show in detail trust development (Q1) in correct rule learning after the three different learning stages of
model accuracy (50%, 75%, 100%) for each test condition. Only statistically significant results are highlighted. The
center line of the box plots represents the median of the data, the box the interquartile distance between the first
and third quartile, the whiskers the minimum and maximum value, discarding outliers which are plotted individually
above the whiskers. The number of asterisks indicate the P values: ∗P ≤0.05, ∗∗P ≤0.01, ∗∗∗P ≤0.001.
that indeed the accuracy of the revised model is higher than that of the default model for both modifications. These
results further indicate the generalization improvements due to XIL. Further experiments applying prior knowledge
can be found in the supplement.
Trust development during XIL.
After demonstrating that explanations and especially XIL are necessary to
reveal and correct so-called “Clever Hans” behavior of ML models we finally investigate how explanations influence
the trust of users in the learning process. To this end, we designed a questionnaire about a machine that learns a
simple concept by querying labels (but not explanation corrections) to an annotator. The online questionnaire was
administered to 106 participants of varying ages and backgrounds.
Specifically, we designed a toy binary classification problem of (3 × 3) black-and-white images, inspired by the
color dataset used in
[4]. The subjects were told that an image is positive if the two top corners are white and
negative otherwise. They were shown 30 images together with the classification of an AI model and a knowledgeable
annotator. The learning of the model was simulated by increasing the model’s classification accuracy from 50% over
70% to 100% after every 10 images. Each participant was randomly assigned to perform one of three experimental
conditions with varying feedback from the model. In test condition 1 (TC1), the participant received feedback
for each image in the form of the model’s prediction and the label provided by a knowledgeable annotator. No
explanations were shown.
Test conditions 2 and 3 (TC2, TC3) were identical to TC1, meaning that at every
stage the same example, prediction and feedback label were shown, but now explanations were also provided. The
explanations highlighted the two most relevant pixels in form of red dots. In TC2, the explanations converged to the
correct rule—they highlight the two top corners—from the 6th image onwards. In TC3 the explanations converged
to an incorrect rule—an image was classified as positive if the two top right pixels were white—from the 12th image
onward. To assess the participant’s trust in the model’s skills we used the Trust in Automation Questionnaire (TiA)
[24]. After each learning process stage, the subjects were asked to rate (Q1) “I trust that the AI has learned the
correct rule for classifying such images.”. Lastly, having seen all images, subjects were asked to answer the full TiA.
Fig. 5 summarizes the results, where (a) shows the total TiA score over TC1-TC3 and (b-d) the Q1 results
for each test condition over the different stages of the learning process.
They confirm previous findings: without
explanations, people trust highly accurate machines, but the trust drops when wrong behavior is witnessed [6]. Users
expect machines and their explanations to be correct. Indeed, explanations may increase the trust in earlier iterations
at lower predictive performances, if they are correct. But people do not forgive wrong explanations if the predictions
are correct. Thus, users really care about the “right for the wrong reasons” case.
Taking all our empirical results together, people care about “Clever Hans”-like moments in machine learning,
XIL can eliminate them, and XIL may even improve the model’s predictive performance.
8

Conclusion
In recent years, AI methods, especially machine learning with various directions and algorithms [25, 26], have become
more and more successful in a wide range of areas like computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics,
among others.
Consider e.g.
AlphaZero surpassing human-level performance in playing chess and Go.
During
its self-play training process, AlphaZero discovered a remarkable level of Go knowledge. This included not only
fundamental elements of human Go knowledge, but also non-standard strategies beyond the scope of traditional
human Go knowledge [27], exemplifying the potential of these methods to discover strategies previously unknown
even to experts of the domain. However, studies from various applications such as [28, 29, 30, 3] have revealed that
learning machines can also result in “Clever Hans”-like moments, i.e., human-undesired strategies where the machine
exploits artifacts in the dataset.
To “un-Hans” machines, we introduced the novel learning setting of “explanatory interactive learning” (XIL)
and illustrated its benefits.
XIL adds the scientist into the training loop.
She interactively revises the original
model via providing feedback on its explanations, used to automatically augment the training with counterexamples
or to modify the model using rrr. Our experimental results demonstrate that users care strongly about “Clever
Hans”-like moments in machine learning and XIL can indeed help avoiding them.
There are several possible avenues for future work to overcome the current limitations of XIL. Acquiring anno-
tations, especially of explanations, can be time consuming. The number of interactions required in order to reach
an acceptable state is an open issue [16]. Hence, one should work on optimal query strategies for XIL that aim
at minimizing the interaction efforts. Adapting regret bounds from co-active learning [11] might be an interesting
alternative. Moreover, the data at hand may not always allow XIL to fully alleviate wrong reasons without decreasing
the network’s predictive performance. One should develop ways for keeping the drop as small as possible. Further-
more, XIL relies on two assumptions, namely, (a) faithful explanations can be computed, and (b) the user feedback
is faithful, too. Assumption (a) is still subject to very active research, particularly for deep learning methods [31]
(see the supplement). One should improve the quality and robustness of XAI methods and also explore XIL for
interpretable models [32]. If the user is rather confident about the right reasons, learning to explain methods such as
hint provide an interesting avenue for future work. Our initial results, see the supplement, are encouraging. How-
ever, even scientific experts do not always know the reasons for predictions. Therefore, one should strive to better
understand the effects of wrong feedback and even adversarial attacks [33] on XIL. Additionally, one should turn
other interactive learning settings such as coactive [11], active imitation [18], mixed-initiative interactive [19] and
guided probabilistic learning [34] into explanatory one. Lastly, because it is not yet clear what makes explanations
good for humans [35], one should extend explanatory interactions towards using alternative explanations, multiple
modalities and counterfactuals [36, 37]. In any case, interacting with explanations of machine learning models is an
enabler for scientific discoveries for humans and machines in cooperation.
Methods
Active learning.
The active learning paradigm targets scenarios where obtaining supervision has a non-negligible
cost. Here we cover the basics of pool-based active learning, and refer the reader to two excellent surveys [38, 39]
for more details. Let X be the space of instances and Y be the set of labels (e.g. Y = {±1}). Initially, the learner
has access to a small set of labeled examples L ⊆X × Y and a large pool of unlabeled instances U ⊆X. The
learner is allowed to query the label of unlabeled instances (by paying a certain cost) to a user functioning as an
annotator, often a human expert. Once acquired, the labeled examples are added to L and used to update the
model. The overall goal is to maximize the model quality while keeping the number of queries or the total cost at
a minimum. To this end, the query instances are chosen to be as informative as possible, typically by maximizing
some informativeness criterion, such as the expected model improvement [40] or practical approximations thereof. By
carefully selecting the instances to be labeled, active learning can enjoy much better sample complexity than passive
learning [41, 42]. Prototypical active learners include max-margin [43] and Bayesian approaches [44]; recently, deep
variants have been proposed [45]. However, active (showing query data points) and even coactive learning (showing
additionally the prediction of the query data point) do not establish trust: informative selection strategies just pick
instances where the model is uncertain and likely wrong. There is a trade-off between query informativeness and user
“satisfaction”, as noticed and explored in [46]. To properly modulate trust into the model, we argue it is essential
to present explanations, e.g., visual ones as shown in Fig. 6.
Local explainers.
There are two main strategies for explaining machine learning models. Global approaches aim
to explain the model by converting it as a whole to a more interpretable format [7],[47]. Local explainers instead
focus on the arguably more approachable task of explaining individual predictions [9]. While explainable interactive
learning can accommodate any local explainer, in our implementations we used either lime [8] or grad-Cam [20],
both described next.
9

Figure 6: grad-Camsof a hyperspectral sample with spatial and spectral explanations of a corrected network.
Leftmost image shows the sample followed by the corresponding spatial activations maps mapped to four different
hyperspectral areas. The areas are 380-537 nm, 538-695 nm, 696-853 nm and 854-1010 nm.
The idea of lime (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) is simple: even though a classifier may rely
on many uninterpretable features, its decision surface around any given instance can be locally approximated by
a simple, interpretable local model. In lime, the local model is defined in terms of simple features encoding the
presence or absence of basic components, such as words in a document or objects in a picture. While not all problems
admit explanations in terms of elementary components, many of them do [8]; in this case, lime assumes these to be
provided in advance. An explanation can be readily extracted from such a model by reading off the contributions
of the various components to the target prediction and translating them into an interpretable visual artifact. For
instance, in document classification one may highlight the words that support (or contradict) the predicted class.
grad-Cams are a generalization of Class Activation Maps, introduced by [48] and take advantage of the facts
that, firstly, deeper layers of a CNN capture higher-level visual constructs and, secondly, that convolutional features
retain spatial information. As such, the last convolutional layer represents a trade-off between high visual repre-
sentation and spatial information. Specifically, a grad-Cam is computed by forward passing an image through
the network, applying a backpropagation of a one-hot encoding vector that specifies the class label of interest up
to the last convolutional layer. The resulting gradients of each channel are global average pooled, multiplied with
the corresponding feature maps, summed and finally passed through a RELU activation function. In this way, the
final feature maps of the convolutional feature extractor are weighted by the importance of these features. The
resulting two-dimensional heatmap can finally be interpolated to the original input size for visualization. In case
a 3D convolutional network is used to classify hyperspectral data the resulting heatmap is three dimensional also
showing activations along the spectral dimension of the data, cf. Fig. 6.
Explanatory Interactive Learning with counterexamples.
Why is this data augmentation a sensible idea?
To see this, consider the case of linear max-margin classifiers. Let f(x) = ⟨w, ϕ(x)⟩+ b be a linear classifier over
two features, ϕ1 and ϕ2, of which only the first is relevant. Fig. 7 shows that f(x) (red line) uses ϕ2 to correctly
classify a positive example xi. In order to obtain a better model (e.g. the green line), the simplest solution would be
to enforce an orthogonality constraint ⟨w, (0, 1)⊤⟩= 0 during learning. Counterexamples follow the same principle.
In the separable case, the counterexamples {¯xiℓ}c
ℓ=1 amount to additional max-margin constraints [49] of the form
yi⟨w, ϕ(¯xiℓ)⟩≥1. The only ones that influence the model are those on the margin, for which strict equality holds.
For all pairs of such counterexamples ℓ, ℓ′ it holds that ⟨w, ϕ(¯xiℓ)⟩= ⟨w, ϕ(¯xiℓ′)⟩, or equivalently ⟨w, δiℓ−δiℓ′⟩= 0,
where δiℓ= ϕ(¯xiℓ) −ϕ(xi).
In other words, the counterexamples encourage orthogonality between w and the
correction vectors δiℓ−δiℓ′, thus approximating the orthogonality constraint above. Most importantly, this data
augmentation procedure is model-agnostic, although alternatives indeed exist: (manually) adding a discovered data
artifact to samples of other classes [50], contrastive examples [51], feature ranking [52] for SVMs and constraints on
the input gradients for differentiable models [4].
We note that due to sampling, lime may output different explanations for the same prediction. To reduce the
variance of the experiments with ce of Tab. 1, we ran it 10 times and retained the k components identified most
often as relevant by lime.
fashion-MNIST dataset.
The fashion-MNIST dataset, a fashion product recognition dataset, includes 70,000
images over 10 classes. All images were corrupted by introducing confounders, that is, 4 × 4 patches of pixels in
randomly chosen corners whose shade is a function of the label in the training set and random in the test set (see [4]
for details).
PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset.
We used a subset of the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset in our experiment. This
subset includes resp. 1470 train and 782 test images over 5 classes (horse, cat, bird, bus, dog). Only samples from
the horse class contain confounding features, i.e. watermark text. We rescale all the images to 224*224*3 to use the
VGG-16 network [53] as classifier, and we used the ImageNet-pre-trained weights as initial weights, as well as the
10

Figure 7:
Mathematical intuition for the counterexample strategy, exemplified for linear classifiers. Two data fea-
tures are shown, ϕ1 and ϕ2, of which only the first is truly relevant. Left: The positive example xi is not enough
to disambiguate between the red and green classifiers. Middle: Counterexamples xi,ℓare obtained by randomizing
the irrelevant feature while keeping the label of xi. The counterexamples approximate a (local) orthogonality con-
straint. Right: The red classifier is inconsistent with the counterexamples and eliminated. See the Methods section
Explanatory Interactive Learning with counterexamples for details. (Best viewed in color).
ADAM optimizer [54]. We trained a default model without user feedback and a model with user feedback for 2k
epochs. The explanation method was instantiated with input gradients (IG).
Sample collection.
To demonstrate the significance of XIL, we demonstrate XIL for deep plant phenotyping and
plant disease detection, a growing and relevant field of research [55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60]. To this end, we recorded
a scientific, real-world dataset—a plant phenotyping dataset consisting of RGB and hyperspectral images (HS) of
healthy and diseased sugar beet leaves.
Then, we applied convolutional neural networks to classify the plants’
leaves into the categories control (healthy) and inoculated (diseased) and investigated the underlying reasons for
the network’s predictions. As a model disease, Cercospora leaf spot (CLS) was used. This is caused by Cercospora
beticola and is the most destructive leaf disease of sugar beet with worldwide economic importance.
The dataset used in this study corresponds to HS and RGB images of leaf discs of sugar beet cv. Isabella (KWS,
Einbeck, Germany) inoculated with Cercospora beticola. Sugar beet seeds were pre-grown in small pots and piqued
after the primary leaves were fully developed. The seedlings were then transferred into plastic pots (diameter of 17
cm) on commercial substrate (Topfsubstrat 1.5, Balster Erdenwerk, GmbH, Sinntal-Altengronau, Germany) under
greenhouse conditions and watered as necessary. After reaching growth stage 16 according to BBCH scale [61] the
plants were inoculated with C. beticola conidia which were collected from infested sugar beet leaves after incubation
in a moist chamber for 48 hours. A spore suspension of 5 × 105 was sprayed onto leaves before the plants were
transferred into plastic bags to achieve 100% RH for 48 hours. For image acquisition leaf discs were stamped out
with a cork borer of 2 cm diameter and placed on 10g/l pyhtoagar (Duchefa Biochemie B.V, Haarlem, Netherlands),
containing 0.34 mM benzimidazole, 10 g sucrose and 3 mg kinetin. To observe different symptom classes sugar beet
leaves of 9, 14 and 19 days after inoculation (dai) were used since the first symptoms appeared 9 dai. As a control
group, 18 leaf discs of untreated sugar beet plants were measured as well and five technical replications with 6 discs
each were used for each symptom group.
Each sample, both control and inoculated, was measured daily over five consecutive days such that a sample from
9 dai reappears four further times in the dataset as 10 to 13 dai. A few samples were discarded due to technical
issues. The percentage of healthy leaves to unhealthy leaves was approximately 26% to 74%, respectively. For image
acquisition leaf discs on agar were placed on a linear stage at a distance of 53 cm to a Hyperspec VNIR E-series
imaging sensor (Headwall Photonics, Bolton, MA, USA) in the range of 380 nm to 1010 nm. The VNIR sensor has a
spectral resolution of 2-3 nm and a pixel pitch of 6.5 µm. The sensor was surrounded by eight lamps (Ushio Halogen
Lamp J12V-150WA/80 (Marunouchi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan)) and the distance between lamps and leaves was
60 cm with a vertical orientation of 45°. Exposure times of 44 ms were used for the VNIR sensor.
The dataset consists of 2410 samples with 504 samples labeled as control and 1906 labeled as inoculated. Control
samples were not re-used as inoculated samples. The collected hyperspectral raw data size was around 4TB. After
preprocessing the data by cutting out the leaf discs into hyperspectral cubes the data size is 140 GB. Since there is
a lot of redundancy in the wavelength resolution, we further sub-sampled the depth of the data cubes resulting in a
final data size of 32GB.
Data preparation.
As mentioned above, each sample was imaged over five consecutive days such that each sample,
though slightly differing from day to day, is represented up to 5 times within the full dataset. In this way, a sample
from 9 dai would occur for 4 further days (10-13 dai). To prevent the models from memorizing the structure of the
11

individual leaf samples and correlating this to the corresponding labels, a precaution was taken to exclusively contain
all days of one sample either in the training or validation dataset.
Removing confounders for the scientific dataset.
It is essential to maintain the underlying assumption that
the training and test data are drawn from the same distribution. If this is not the case, changes in accuracy might
be due to artifacts of different data, rather than deficits of the model [62]. We applied two variations to the test
samples of the HS dataset to remove the confounders: we set the background (everything but the plant tissue) (1)
to the per-channel average of the non-tissue regions or (2) the per-channel average of the full images of the training
data. We then evaluated the default and rrr revised CNNs on this modified test dataset. We focused here only on
the HS data and model, due to the limitations of the RGB model’s performance.
RGB/HS classification.
The RGB images used for training the classifiers were generated from the hyperspectral
data, by slicing the data at the corresponding RGB channels that were provided by the camera system (cf. Fig. 1
(A-Right)). Before training the RGB classifiers, the data was standard scaled following z = (x −u)/s, where u is
the mean and s the standard deviation of the training samples.
To train a classifier on the RGB images of sugar beet leaves we used a VGG-16 [53] network pre-trained on
ImageNet [63] to finetune the network parameters using the RGB plant images. For training a batch size of 32,
a learning rate of 1e-4 and a step learning rate scheduler set to reduce the learning rate at epochs 5 and 15 by a
factor of 0.1 were used. Furthermore, the ADAM optimizer was used with L2 regularization 1e-5. Five separate
cross-validation folds were trained until convergence, using a data split of 0.75 for training and 0.25 for testing.
Convergence was reached after 30 epochs.
To classify the HS data we trained a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture with batch normalization
using 3D convolution filters, rather than standard 2D filters, learning features not only along the image dimensions
but also over the spectral dimensions. The used network is build up with four residual blocks, each containing one
to three convolutional layers. The last two layers are fully connected layers with a final softmax activation function.
The other layers use ReLU activations. During training the networks we used dropout to prevent overfitting. The
network’s parameters are trained with a stochastic gradient descent optimizer with momentum using a batch size of
10 HS images, a learning rate of 1e-4 and an L2 regularization of 1e-5.
Five separate cross-validation folds were trained until convergence, using a data split of 0.75 for training and 0.25
for testing. Convergence was reached after 100 epochs.
Analyzing classification strategies of the model.
Based on the results of [31], in which the authors performed
sanity checks over a variety of saliency methods, we chose to investigate our model’s explanations using Gradient-
weighted Class Activation Mapping (grad-Cam)[20].
To analyze the resulting strategies produced by the layer-wise relevance propagation method (LRP), the authors
of [3] revert to using spectral clustering on the resulting heatmaps in a pipeline they termed ’SpRAy’. This clustering
served to receive an overview of the extent of the model’s decision strategies. We apply SpRAy in a similar way,
however, rather than using the raw grad-Cam heatmaps, we perform a discrete Fourier transformation on these
beforehand to better differentiate different strategies which we had previously identified from single samples. In
detail, the pipeline is as follows
• Perform a discrete Fourier transform on downsized grad-Cam heatmaps.
• Using the Euclidean distance for the RGB data and the Cityblock distance for the HS data compute a k-nearest
neighbor graph of the Fourier transformed heatmaps, represented as an adjacency matrix, C.
• Compute the affinity matrix as suggested in [64] as A = max(C, CT ).
• Perform an eigengap analysis [64] to estimate the number of clusters, k, within the dataset.
• Perform spectral clustering on the affinity matrix, given k from the previous step
• Perform a t-SNE analysis [23] on the similarity matrix, estimated from the affinity matrix as in [3] as S =
1
A+ϵ,
whereby ϵ ∈[0, 1], here we used ϵ = 0.05.
Applying XIL to CNNs for scientific dataset.
We produced the matrix A (Eq. 1) corresponding to full tissue
masks for each sample. Specifically, for each sample, we created a binary mask having values of zero within the tissue
and values of one everywhere else, i.e. the background. In this way during training the gradients everywhere but on
the tissue are to be minimized.
The network models were retrained from the same initial values as in the default training mode (using only
the cross-entropy loss), however, now using rrr. To choose the optimal λ1 value, the resulting explanations were
visually assessed. The five cross-validation folds of HS-CNN were thus trained until convergence between 200 and
12

280 epochs using a λ1 = 20 value, with all other hyperparameters as in the default training mode. For training the
RGB-CNN with rrr the learning rate was reduced to a constant learning rate of 5e-05. Although applying a range
of λ1 values from 0.1 to 1000, using the RGB-CNN, no satisfactory convergence state could be reached in which the
regularized model showed acceptable explanations for each cross-validation run. The accuracies in Tab. 1 and the
strategies presented in Fig. 4(b) and Fig. S.1(b) correspond to grad-Cams of training the five cross-validation folds
with λ1 = 1 for up to 200 epochs.
Extended related work.
Using XIL with ce or rrr, users either introduce counterexamples into the dataset and
thus teach the learner not to depend on the irrelevant components or directly penalize the learner as soon as it uses
irrelevant components, respectively. One important advantage of XIL is that the user does not have to be certain
about the right reasons and instead can explore the learned reasons of the machine, in contrast to other procedures
such as preprocessing the training set.
Recently, Selvaraju et al. [21] presented a framework (hint) similar to rrr but instead of penalizing the wrong
reasons it advises the network to use a specific visual area (right reasons). As ce and rrr, the hint method could
be embedded within the introduced XIL framework in case the users are certain about the right reasons. However,
in many scientific applications such as the presented plant phenotyping dataset users are uncertain about what a
valid explanation should be. In this case, removing wrong reasons might be preferable to applying right reasons.
The possibility of bi-directional exchange between user and model due to interaction [65] also distinguishes XIL
from approaches for feature selection such as feature masking and approaches that embed prior knowledge into the
training process, e.g. [66]. Lastly, interactions also allow that the user can provide incomplete explanations, in other
words: only if it is actually required, the user can revise incorrect aspects of a model’s explanation.
Finally, we present the XIL framework here for visual tasks and visual explanations only. With our definition
of XIL, it is also applicable to other data domains like natural language processing, see e.g. [4, 16]. However, we
experienced that explanations, i.e. right and wrong reasons, are more difficult to define for this modality. In future
work one should generally address the best ways to present explanations, even in multi-modal scenarios.
Details on participant recruitment and study procedure.
The presented study is part of an extensive
thesis work [15]. It was conducted as an online survey, the link of which was distributed via the social network
Facebook and the forum of the student body of the department of computer science at TU Darmstadt. Due to the
distribution on these channels a wide range of people with different ages and different backgrounds was generated.
Each participant completed only one of the three test conditions with 33 participants in TC1, 36 participants in TC2
and 37 participants in TC3, totaling 106 participants overall.
The wording of the original TiA was modified by replacing “system” with “artificial intelligence (AI)”.The re-
sponse format to each question was a 5-point rating scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Statistical analysis of the user study.
Samples with missing values were removed from the analysis and for all
tests a significance level with alpha being 5% was used.
For all tests with the same sample/samples, the alpha level was corrected via the Bonferroni-Holm method. The
corrected alpha level will be stated for every analysis. For testing the hypotheses one multi-factorial analysis of
variances (MANOVA) and several one-factorial ANOVAs were conducted. The ANOVA, as well as the MANOVA,
requires normal distribution of data, independence of data as well as homogeneity of the variances. To test the
latter a Levene-Test was conducted before every ANOVA and the MANOVA. Normal distribution was presumed
due to the sample sizes and as the samples were drawn randomly the independence of data was also presumed. A
significant result of an ANOVA / MANOVA means that at least two of the groups differ significantly with respect
to the dependent variable, but it is not stated which groups differ. Therefore, if the carried out analyses of variances
were significant, post hoc tests were carried out to investigate which groups differed exactly. Post hoc tests were
selected in this study as the hypotheses did not point out which groups should differ, which is why every possible
comparison had to be considered. For post hoc testing, the Tukey-HSD-Test and the Pairwise-Test were performed.
The TiA score of subjects being familiar with AI over the whole sample (all test conditions combined) was higher
(M = 2.82, SD = .64) than the TiA score of subjects being unfamiliar with AI (M = 2.51, SD = .59). As the
conducted Levene-Test (F(5, 99) = 1.8, p = .12, α = .05) was not significant, the homogeneity of variance assumption
held. Therefore, the MANOVA was conducted with a significant result for the independent variable test condition
(F(2, 99) = 10.10, p < .001, α = .025). The MANOVA was significant for the independent variable familiarity with
AI (F(1, 99) = 7.12, p = .009, α = .025). It was not significant for the interaction of the two independent variables
(F(2, 99) = .28, p = .75, α = .025).
For Fig. 5(a) in order to determine which test conditions differed significantly in their TiA score, a pairwise test
was conducted as a post hoc test. The pairwise test showed significant differences between TC1 and TC3 (p = .0016,
α = .05) as well as between TC2 and TC3 (p = .0003, α = .05).
For Fig. 5(b) the conducted Levene-Test was not significant (F(2, 96) = .59, p = .56, α = .05). Therefore, an
ANOVA was conducted afterwards and showed a significant result (F(2, 96) = 33.83, p < .001, α = .0125). Trust in
13

the correct rule learning by the AI was significantly different between the blocks. The conducted Tukey-HSD test
found a significant difference in trust into the correct rule learning only between stage 1 and 3 (p < .001, α = .05)
and between stage 2 and 3 (p < .001, α = .05).
For Fig. 5(c) the Levene-Test was not significant (F(2, 104) = .28, p = .75, α = .05). The ANOVA was significant
(F(2, 104) = 23.19, p < .001, α = .0167). Therefore, a Tukey-HDS test was performed to investigate which blocks
differed significantly. The test found only stage 1 and 3 (p < .001, α = .05) and stage 2 and 3 (p < .001, α = .05) to
differ significantly with respect to trust in correct rule learning by the AI.
For Fig. 5(d) the conducted Levene-Test was not significant (F(2, 105) = 1.32, p = .27, α = .05). The afterwards
conducted ANOVA was also not significant (F(2, 105) = 1.62, p = .20, α = .05). Therefore, there was no significant
difference in trust into correct rule learning by the AI in TC3 and no post hoc test was performed.
Data availability
The ML benchmark Fashion-MNIST is available at https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist. The
PASCAL VOC2007 dataset is available at http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2007/. The RGB and
hyperspectral data that support the findings of this study are available at https://tudatalib.ulb.tu-darmstadt.
de/handle/tudatalib/2278.4 and in the code repository https://codeocean.com/capsule/4559958/tree. The
user study is available at https://github.com/ml-research/xil/tree/master/Trust_Study.
Code availability
The code and a fully runnable capsule to reproduce the figures and results of this article, including pre-trained
models, can be found at https://codeocean.com/capsule/4559958/tree.
Statement of ethical compliance
The authors confirm to have complied with all relevant ethical regulations, according to the Ethics Commission
of the TU Darmstadt (https://www.intern.tu-darmstadt.de/gremien/ethikkommisson/auftrag/auftrag.en.
jsp). An informed consent was obtained for each participant prior to commencing the user study.
