Design of a Framework to Facilitate Decisions  
Using Information Fusion 
Tamer M. Abo Neama 
Ismail A. Ismail 
Tarek S. Sobh  
M.  Zaki 
Military Technical College 

Arab Academy for 
Science, Technology and 
Maritime Transport 

Information Systems 
Department, Egyptian 
Armed Forces 

Azhar University 

Abstract 
Information fusion is an advanced research area which can assist decision makers in enhancing their decisions. 
This paper aims at designing a new multi-layer framework that can support the process of performing decisions 
from the obtained beliefs using information fusion. Since it is not an easy task to cross the gap between computed 
beliefs of certain hypothesis and decisions, the proposed framework consists of the following layers in order to 
provide a suitable architecture (ordered bottom up): 
1. A layer for combination of basic belief assignments using an information fusion approach. Such 
approach exploits Dezert-Smarandache Theory, DSmT, and proportional conflict redistribution to 
provide more realistic final beliefs. 
2. A layer for computation of pignistic probability of the underlying propositions from the corresponding 
final beliefs. 
3. A layer for performing probabilistic reasoning using a Bayesian network that can obtain the probable 
reason of a proposition from its pignistic probability. 
4. Ranking the system decisions is ultimately used to support decision making. 
A case study has been accomplished at various operational conditions in order to prove the concept, in 
addition it pointed out that: 
1. 
The use of DSmT for information fusion yields not only more realistic beliefs but also reliable pignistic 
probabilities for the underlying propositions. 
2. 
Exploiting the pignistic probability for the integration of the information fusion with the Bayesian 
network provides probabilistic inference and enable decision making on the basis of both belief based 
probabilities for the underlying propositions and Bayesian based probabilities for the corresponding 
reasons. 
A comparative study of the proposed framework with respect to other information fusion systems confirms its 
superiority to support decision making. 
Keywords 
Information Fusion, Bayesian networks, Belief combination, Pignistic Probability, Decision Making.  
1- Introduction 
The fusion of information arises in many fields of applications nowadays (especially in defense, medicine, 
finance, geo-science, economy, etc). To deal with the challenges of such applications an Information Fusion and 
Probabilistic Decision Making Framework has been designed to cross the large gap between beliefs and decision 
making. At the bottom layer of such framework we use DSmT for information fusion that yields not only more 
realistic beliefs but also reliable pignistic probabilities for the underlying propositions. The second layer 
Vol. 8, No. 28, July 2013, 1237-1250 

-1238- 
performs the pignistic probability, BetP{.}, computation. Such BetP{.} is used for the integration of the 
information fusion with the Bayesian network that occupies the third layer. Such architecture provides 
probabilistic inference and enables decision making on the basis of both belief based probabilities for the 
underlying propositions and Bayesian based probabilities for the corresponding reasons Figure (1). 
Actually the proposed framework builds up smoothly a probability structure that can be passed to the higher 
layer. The event (observation) of highest probability is passed to the higher layer where a Bayesian network can 
provide probabilistic reasoning [Weise et al., 1993]. For convenience, this approach is used to perform reasoning 
rather than using descriptive logic or a truth maintenance technique. Finally the decisions at the human computer 
interface are ranked rather than being expressed flat in order to support the decision maker. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the related work to the proposed framework, while section 
3 presents the problem statement. Setion 4 expresses the architecture of the proposed framework. Section 5 
presents the pignistic probability transformation. Section 6 discusses the probabilistic reasoning using Bayesian 
network. Section 7 discusses the results of an experimental case study. Finally, section 8 comprises the 
conclusion. 
 
2- Related Work 
Information fusion (IF) is defined as the combination of data from disparate sources to produce an outcome that 
is superior to any provided by an individual source. An outcome typically includes an improvement in accuracy, 
higher confidence through complementary information, or improved performance in the presence of 
countermeasures [Blasch et al., 2002]. IF can occur on multiple levels [Klein, 2004]. Sensor-level fusion is the 
level at which relevant data is extracted from the source signal. Feature-level fusion is the combination of data to 
produce a composite feature vector that characterizes the object under test. Decision-level fusion is the layer that 
provides a projection of a future state of the object based on the feature vector provided, and the information 
presented to an operator to facilitate a human decision.  
2.1 Military systems 
The work of [Krenc et al., 2009] presents experiences related to a combination of two contrary approaches to 
information fusion: the first is typically deterministic ontology fusion and the second is based on the theory of 
evidence by Dezert and Smarandache (DSmT). It is the expectation of the authors that the appropriate synergy of 
these two approaches may bring satisfactory results when fusing diverse types of information originated from 
miscellaneous sensors. For this reason a concept of the combination of these two approaches has been presented 
and a comparison of hard-decision fusion, DSmT fusion and a combination of DSmT and ontology fusion 
algorithms has been established. 
The authors of [Sumari et al., 2008] have designed and implemented a hierarchical multi-agent based information 
fusion system for decision making. The information fusion is implemented by applying a maximum score of the 
total sum of joint probabilities and is done by a collection of Information Fusion Agents (IFA) that forms a 
multiagent system. Information fusion products are displayed in graphical forms to provide comprehensive 
information regarding the military operation. By observing the graphics resulted from the information fusion, the 
Figure (1) The proposed framework 

-1239- 
commandant will have situational awareness and knowledge in order to make the most accurate strategic 
decision as fast as possible. 
2.2 Decision support systems DSSs  
The work of [Dezert et al., 2011] presented an extension of the multi-criteria decision making based on the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) which incorporates uncertain knowledge for generating basic belief 
assignments (bba’s). The combination of priority vectors corresponding to bba’s related to each sub-criterion is 
performed using the Proportional Conflict Redistribution, PCR, which has been proposed in [Dezert et al., 2011] 
forplausible and paradoxical reasoning. The method presented, called DSmT-AHP, is illustrated on simple 
examples. 
The multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem concerns the elucidation of the level of preferences of 
decision alternatives through judgments made over a number of criteria [Beynon, 2005]. At the Decision-maker 
(DM) level, a useful method for solving MCDM problem must take into account opinions made under 
uncertainty and based on distinct criteria with different importance. Among the interesting solutions of MCDM 
problem there is the work made by [Beynon, 2005]. This work includes a method called DS/AHP which 
extended the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method of Saaty [Saaty, 1990] with Dempster- Shafer Theory 
(DST) of belief functions so that it can take into account uncertainty and to manage the conflicts between 
expert’s opinions within a hierarchical model approach.  
The authors of [Smarandache et al., 2009] have investigated the possibility to use (DSmT) of plausible and 
paradoxical reasoning for overcoming DST limitations. Their approach is referred to as DSmT-AHP method. In 
this case, DSmT allows managing efficiently the fusion of quantitative (or qualitative) uncertain and possibly 
highly conflicting sources of evidences and proposes new methods for belief computation.  
2.3 Analysis and identification systems 
The work of [Jousselme et al., 2003] has analyzed an identification algorithm in the evidence theory framework. 
The identification algorithm is composed of four main steps:  
(1) Sensor reports are transformed into initial Basic Probability Assignments, BPA.  
(2) The successive BPAs are combined through Dempster’s rule.  
(3) The resulting BPAs are approximated to avoid algorithm explosion. 
(4) In parallel to step (3) a decision is taken on the identification/classification of an object from a database 
which is based on the maximum of pignistic probability criterion.  
2.4 Discussion 
The combination of statistical (probabilistic) reasoning and information fusion can afford powerful modeling and 
simulation tools that might be relied upon in various applications. Such applications may be military, political, 
analytical identification and decision support systems. Despite the fact that there is no formal architectural 
framework for modeling the underlying application there is a common agreement about an informal multi-layer 
architecture that consists of: 
a. 
The layer for calculating belief combinations and information fusion. 
b. The layer to find out the corresponding pignistic probability. 
c. 
The higher layer to perform probabilistic reasoning (in most of the cases using a variant of Bayesian 
networks). 
d. The top layer that can announce the undertaken decisions. 
Actually, all the previous works have implemented only partially these layers either manually or semi 
automatically. 
3- Problem statement 
Decision-making from heterogeneous, poorly reliable and conflicting information is a major challenge in most 
areas ofscience and engineering. Nowadays, there is a possibility to access an increasing amount of information 
and in some cases to make use of all that information to be able to make an informed and successful decision. 
The goal of high-level information fusion is to provide effective decision-support regarding situations.  

-1240- 
In this paper, this problem will be addressed by introducing a design of a framework to facilitate decisions from 
computed beliefs using information fusion and the theory of belief functions. The basic elements of the 
underlying framework are pointed out as follows: 
1) Given: The basic beliefs of the underlying hypotheses. 
2) Use: An information fusion agent to obtain hypothetical beliefs, m(.) from the available data 
using DSmT, taking into consideration the constraints that: 
                                                        
   
                                   
Then compute the pignistic probabilities BetP{.} from the obtained beliefs, m(X) using: 
BetP{A} =  
 
 
m(X)  
      (2) 
 
Where A ∈ GΘ; G is the space of beliefs and C denotes the cardinality. Performing probabilistic 
reasoning using a Bayesian network based on the values of that pignistic probability. 
3) Get: Ranked decisions; {d1,d2…dp…dq; 1 ≤ p ≤ q},  about the events that have been included in 
raw data in order to support the decision maker. 
4- The architecture of the proposed framework 
The proposed framework aims at providing a cause from the corresponding events (effects). To fulfill such aim it 
consists of several components that are integrated together, Figure (1). Figure (2) represents the transformation 
from beliefs to decisions. The relations between the proposed framework components are pointed out in the 
following: 
1) 
Information fusion using beliefs   
In this module the belief functions are combined using DSmT Theory. Accordingly, a set of the 
required beliefs are obtained, Figure (2). 
2) 
Probability computation 
It takes belief functions as input, makes necessary transformations and provides pignistic 
probabilities as its output.   
3) 
Bayesian network 
To provide probabilistic reasoning by taking the probabilities of observations / (symptoms) in 
order to compute the probability of evidence / (disease) and the system decisions are ranked 
according to their weights. 
         
     
 ∈  
 
Figure (2) Process model of the proposed framework 

-1241- 
5- Pignistic probability transformation 
Based on [Dezert et al., 2004] in order to take a rational decision within the DSmT framework, it is then 
necessary to construct a pignistic probability function from any generalized basic belief assignment, m(.), drawn 
from the DSm rule of combination (the classic or hybrid rule). This generalized pignistic transformation (GPT) is 
defined by equation (2):  
 
∀A ∈ DΘ,   
BetP{A} =  
 
 
m(X)  
       
 
Where CM(X) denotes the DSm cardinal of proposition X for the DSm model M of the problem under 
consideration. The decision about the solution of the problem is usually taken by the maximum of pignistic 
probability function BetP{.}. 
It has been proven in that BetP{A} is a subjective probability measure satisfying the following axioms 
of the probability theory:  
• 
Axiom 1 (nonnegative): The (generalized pignistic) probability of any event A is bounded by 0 and 1, i.e. 0 
≦ P{A} ≦ 1 
• 
Axiom 2 (unity): Any sure event (the sample space) has unity (generalized pignistic) probability, i.e. P{S} = 
1 
• 
Axiom 3 (additively over mutually exclusive events): If A, B are disjoint    (i.e. A∩B =  ) then P(A∪B) = 
P(A) + P(B) 
5.1The DSm cardinality 
One important notion involved in the definition of the generalized pignistic transformation (GPT) is the DSm 
cardinality [Dezert, 2003] [Dezert et al., 2004]. The DSm cardinality of any element A ∈ DΘ, denoted      , 
corresponds to the number of parts of A in the Venn diagram of the problem (model M) taking into account the 
set of integrity constraints (if any), i.e. all the possible intersections due to the nature of the elements θi. This 
intrinsic cardinality depends on the model M (free, hybrid or Shafer’s model). M is the model that contains A, 
which depends both on the dimension n = |Θ| and on the number of parts of non-empty intersections present in its 
associated Venn diagram. One has 1 ≤       ≤ 2n − 1.       must not be confused with the classical 
cardinality |A| of a given set A (i.e. the number of its distinct elements) that is why a new notation is necessary 
here.  
      is exactly equal to the sum of the elements of the row of Dn corresponding to proposition A in 
the un basis. Actually       is easy to compute by programming from the algorithm of generation of DΘ [Dezert, 
2003]. If one imposes a constraint that a set B from DΘ is empty (i.e. we choose a hybrid model), then one 
suppresses the columns corresponding to the parts which compose B in the matrix Dn and the row of B and the 
rows of all elements of DΘ which are subsets of B, getting a new matrix Dʹn which represents a new hybrid model 
M ʹ.  
5.2 A 3D example with a given hybrid model 
[Dezert et al., 2004] said consider now a 3D example in which we force all possible conjunctions to be empty, 
but θ1∩θ2 according to the following Venn diagram shown in Figure (3). 
 
         
     
 ∈  
 

-1242- 
 
 
Then, one gets the following list of elements (with their DSm cardinal) for the restricted DΘ 
taking into account the integrity constraints of this hybrid model: 
Table (1) Cardinality        for the chosen hybrid model M f [Dezert et al., 2004] 
 
A ∈ DΘ 
      
α0      
0 
α1    θ1∩θ2 
1 
α2    θ3 
1 
α3    θ1 
2 
α4    θ2 
2 
α5    θ1∪θ2 
3 
α6    θ1∪θ3 
3 
α7     θ2∪θ3 
3 
α8    θ1∪θ2∪θ3  
4 
6- Probabilistic reasoning using Bayesian network 
Depending on the belief analysis, the pignistic probability of the corresponding event could be computed by the 
proposed model. However, in many situations such probability is not sufficient for the application user. For 
instance, if the application is medical it will represent the probability of a ‘symptom’, as advised by multiple 
experts but we still have the question: what is the probability of the ‘disease’, which caused such symptom? 
The question is answered in the proposed framework model by making use of a Bayesian Network, BN, to 
represent the dependencies among variables in order to provide a concise specification of any joint probability 
distribution. The underlying BN takes the pignistic probability of an event as input and computes a 
corresponding expectation probability depending on both its topology and the conditional probability tables. 
A BN as a directed graph, in which each node is annotated with quantitative probability information could 
perform the reasoning process. The full specification of BN is as follows: 
1- A set of random variables makes up the nodes of the network. Variables may be discrete or continuous. 
2- A set of directed links or arrows connects pairs of nodes. If there is an arrow from node X to node Y, X is 
said to be a parent of Y. 
3- Each node X, has a conditional probability distribution P(X | Parents(X)) that quantities the effect of the 
parents on the node. 
4- The graph has no directed cycles and hence is a directed, acyclic graph, or DAG). 
The topology of the network specifies the conditional independence relationships that hold in the domain. The 
intuitive meaning of an arrow in a properly constructed network is usually that X has a direct influence on Y. It is 
usually easy for a domain expert to decide what direct influences exist in the domain- much easier, in fact, than 
actually specifying the probabilities themselves. 
Figure (3) Venn diagram of a DSm hybrid model for a 3D frame [Dezert et al., 2004] 

-1243- 
Once the topology of the Bayesian network is laid out, we need only to specify a conditional probability 
distribution for each variable, given its parents. Here the combination of the topology and the conditional 
distributions suffices to specify the full joint distribution for all the variables. Eventually, the output of BN is 
passed to the user interface in prder to support his current decisions. 
7- Case study 
7.1 Experimental setup 
Figure (4) presents the environment (hardware, software, and the connection) of the implementation of 
the proposed framework model. 
Its configuration can be described as follows: 
1- Hardware configuration 
a. 
Server machine 
i. Intel XEON dual core processor 
ii. 4GB RAM 
iii. 2 x 750GB HD 
iv. Ethernet 
b. client machine 
i. Intel Core 2 Duo  
ii. 2 GB RAM 
iii. 80 GB HD 
iv. Ethernet 
c. 
Ethernet router 
d. Internet connection. 
2- Software configuration 
a. 
Server machine 
i. OS: windows server for server machine  
ii. NetBeans IDE 7.0. 
iii. java development kit 1.6. 
iv. JADE agent software. 
v. GeNIe 2.0 (Bayesian network decision system) 
b. client machine 
i. OS : windows 7 for client machine.  
ii. java development kit 1.6. 
iii. JADE agent software. 

-1244- 
 
7.2 Case study details 
The case study under consideration discusses the problem of international mediation between two countries to 
solve some regional dispute. Throughout the analysis of the raw data, the proposed framework has found out five 
countries that may perform concealed mediation to resolve that dispute.  
To deal with this issue a divide and conquer approach has been exploited. Consequently, the hypotheses of the 
five countries are divided in two stages, the first stage takes into account three countries while the second stage 
comprises the three other countries, (one of the countries from the first stage along with the other two countries 
which have not been chosen before).  
There are mainly two sources of information, namely, S1 and S2, where S1 represents Arabic sources (text 
documents) and S2 represents foreign sources. 
The user in this case study is interested in: 
1- Computing the probabilities of the basic belief assignments obtained from the raw data for each country 
participated in mediation. 
2- Finding out the real motivation of the mediator. 
The solution of this case study could be obtained using the following procedure: 
7.2.1 The solution procedure 
 Basic belief assignment: The mediation problem can be represented by the frame of discernment Θ = {θ1, 
θ2, θ3, θ4, θ5}, where θ1, θ2, θ3, θ4, and θ5 are the hypotheses E, F, G, R, and U respectively. Since the 
data has the constraint hat both E and F are related and could cooperate with each otheras well as E and R 
are similarly related (intersected) then the DSm hybrid model,      is applicable rather than Shafer’s 
model. By considering the two information sources, S1 and S2 and applying the semantic network module 
on both of them, we could construct: 
Table (2) Basic belief assignment (bba’s) for stage 1  
 
E 
F 
G 
m(S1) 
0.51 
0.49 
0.0 
Figure (4) the proposed framework configuration 

-1245- 
m(S2) 
0.52 
0.0 
0.48 
Where m (Si), i=1, 2 represents the basic belief assignment (bba’s), of the underlying information source. 
 Application of the hybrid model: The choice of the DSm hybrid model allows some propositional 
intersections, while others are empty. Here E∩F≠ ,       while E ∩ G = E ∩ U = F ∩ G = R ∩ U =  , as 
well as all unions are not included. Then we performed the classic DSm rule in order to obtain the classic 
beliefs           and          , Table (3). Upon computing the values of belief tables, the following 
two conditions are satisfied: 
 m( ) = 0. 
 and,  
 
       
 , where G  is the space of beliefs i.e. A∈ {E, F, 
G, E∩F, E∩G, F∩G, E∩F∩G}. 
Table (3) Classic DSm beliefs in stage 1  
  
E 
F 
G 
E ∩ F 
E ∩ G 
F ∩ G 
E ∩ F ∩ G 
mDSmC 
0.265 
0.0 
0.0 
0.255 
0.245 
0.235 
0.000 
Depending on the classic DSm beliefs, a proportional conflict redistribution is performed to yields mPCR5 as 
illustrated in Table (4) 
 
Proportional conflict redistribution: To execute proportional conflict redistribution PCR, we transferred 
(at stage 1),      (E∩G)=0.245 to E and G and      (F∩G)=0.235, to F and G proportionally. 
 
Table (4) Proportional conflict redistribution for stage 1  
  
E 
F 
G 
E ∩ F 
E ∩ G 
F ∩ G 
E ∩ F ∩ G 
mPCR5 
0.391 
0.119 
0.235 
0.255 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
From Table (4) it is obvious that E has the highest mPCR5 value. Therefore E is chosen and added to 
R and U to form the second stage that starts with bba’s: 
 
 
Table (5) Basic belief assignment (bba’s) for stage 2  
 
E 
R 
U 
m(S1) 
0.5 
0.5 
0.0 
m(S2) 
0.48 
0.0 
0.52 
Where m (Si), i=1, 2 represents the basic belief assignment (bba’s), of the underlying information source. 
From the bba’s, the classic DSm beliefs are computed and reported in Table (6): 
Table (6) Classic DSm beliefs in stage 2  
  
E 
R 
U 
E ∩ R 
E ∩ U 
R ∩ U 
E ∩ R ∩ U 
mDSmC 
0.24 
0.0 
0.0 
0.24 
0.26 
0.26 
0.000 
         
  ∈   
   

-1246- 
To carry out the PCR, we transferred (at stage 2),      (E∩U)=0.26 to E and U and      (R∩U)=0.26, to 
R and U, proportionally. 
Table (7) Proportional conflict redistribution for stage 2 
  
E 
R 
U 
E ∩ R 
E ∩ U 
R ∩ U 
E ∩ R ∩ U 
mPCR5 
0.368 
0.128 
0.266 
0.240 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
The combination of stages (1) and (2) leads to Table (8) with final belief values. In that aggregated table the 
belief values, mPCR5 for E are ORed together, yielding a value of 0.391. 
Table (8) The Combination of mPCR5 for stages (1) and (2) 
  
E 
F 
G 
R 
U 
E ∩ F 
E ∩ R 
mPCR5 
0.391 
0.119 
0.235 
0.128 
0.266 
0.255 
0.240 
 
Pignistic probabilities: The pignistic probability values for the underlying Θ are obtained from the 
available belief values, mPCR5, by applying the following formula: 
∀A ∈ GΘ,  BetP{A} =   
 
 
m(X) 
 
Here GΘ is the space of beliefs and       denotes the cardinality i.e. the number of the hypothesis parts 
in the Venn diagram of M. Therefore, the pignistic probability is calculated by substituting CM(X) with the 
corresponding value illustrated in the cardinality table which illustrated in Table (1), and similarly by 
substituting m(X) with its corresponding belief value from the proportional conflict redistribution belief 
value shown in Table (8). 
Table (9) and Table (10) show the results of pignistic probabilities for the two stages. By combining the two 
tables one can obtain Table (11) in which BetP{E} is chosen by taking the higher corresponding value in the 
stage tables. 
Table (9) Calculations of the pignistic probabilities for stage 1  
E 
F 
G 
E ∩ F 
E ∩ G 
F ∩ G 
E ∩ F ∩ G 
BetP{.} 
0.708 
0.571 
0.236 
0.511 
0.000 
0.721 
0.000 
Table (10) Calculations of the pignistic probabilities for stage 2 
E 
R 
U 
E ∩ R 
E ∩ U 
R ∩ U 
E∩ R∩ U 
BetP{.} 
0.671 
0.551 
0.266 
0.488 
0.000 
0.569 
0.000 
Table (11) The combination of pignistic probabilities for stages (1) and (2)  
  
E 
F 
G 
R 
U 
E ∩ F 
E ∩ R 
BetP{.} 
0.708 
0.571 
0.236 
0.552 
0.266 
0.511 
0.488 
 
Bayesian network: The pair of expected “mediator” and its “associated probability” has been exploited as 
input to the BN, which can provide probabilistic reasoning that may help discovering the real motivation 
of a certain country to participate in the concluded mediation process. The BN consists of the probable 
mediator as an input node, the ability to take the decision to be a mediator as intermediate nodes and the 
motivating cause as the output node as shown in Figure (5). That figure indicates that, at the beginning 
both the political and the military motivations have equal probabilities (0.5) for both true and false causes. 
         
     
 ∈  
 

-1247- 
However, when mediator E is introduced with its highest pignistic probability value, the corresponding 
causes are changed to be political motivation with true and false values (0.973, 0.027) while the military 
motivation is decayed to (0.08, 0.92) respectively.   
 
7.2.2 Discussion of the case study 
By analyzing such case study (procedures and results) one can point out the following: 
 
General problems of information fusion in which Θ={θ1,θ2…θn}; where n ≥ 2, can be tackled by DSmT to 
compute the values of the required beliefs. If the problem dimensionality is high then can be divided into 
several subproblems. When the original problem has n dimensions, it can be divided into a number of 
three-dimensional problems so that          ; where r is the number of residual propositions. 
With this partitioning the data preprocessing becomes manageable and the size of the information fusion 
problem as well as its complexity is elegantly reduced. 
 
The problem partitioning should be carried out carefully, as follows: 
i. 
For n elements (propositions) get k three dimensional and r residues. Without loss of generality, in our 
case study k=1 and r=2 and it undergoes two independent stages (stage1 and stage 2).  
ii. 
In stage 1; the three dimensional fusion problem is solved and the belief results of that problem are 
given as: 
 
b11, b1j…b1J ;   
 
 
              (3) 
 
 
with b1j is the final belief value of the jth hypothesis in the 1st stage, and J is the number of elements 
in the set of beliefs mPCR5 for the first stage.  
iii. 
In stage 2 the hypothesis of the highest belief value is added to the two residues to form the second 
three dimensional problem. For that stage the belief results are: 
 
b21, b2q…b2Q ;   
 
 
     
     (4) 
 
With b2q is the belief value of the qth hypothesis in the 2nd stage and Q is the number of elements in 
the set of beliefs mPCR5 for the second stage. 
By combining the values of the beliefs of both stages an aggregate belief table can be 
obtained. 
iv. 
BetP{.} is computed for stage 1 
P11, P12,…, P1J 
  
 
 
        (5) 
Similarly for stage 2 we can obtain: 
Figure (5) Bayesian Network for the case study 
      
 
   
 
      
 
 

-1248- 
P21, P22,…,P2Q 
 
 
 
        (6) 
By combing the probabilities in the two stages the final pignistic probabilities BetP{.} can be obtained as  
P1, P2,…, P(J+Q-1)  
 
 
 
         (7) 
In this case actually a common hypothesis exists with two different (conflicting) values. To resolve such 
conflict the BetP{.} for that hypothesis is chosen for the aggregated values by taking the higher pignistic 
probability in the stage tables.  
7.3 Comparative study 
A comparative study of the proposed framework with other information fusion systems is illustrated in Table 
(12). This comparison as such, has pointed out the significance of the proposed framework features. These 
features confirm the fact that the proposed framework only represents a complete realization for all the model 
layers,    Figure (1). This ensures its superiority to support decision making. In this comparative study the 
proposed framework is compared with the identity fusion algorithm [Jousselme et al., 2003] and the multi-agent 
information fusion system [Sumari et al., 2008]. 
Table (12) Comparative study between the proposed framework and other information fusion systems 
Model 
 
Property 
the proposed framework 
Identity fusion algorithm 
[Jousselme et al., 2003] 
Multi-Agent Information 
Fusion Systems [Sumari 
et al., 2008] 
Main application 
area(s) 
- Anti-terrorism 
- Spy war 
- Security negotiations 
Direct fleet support scenarios 
where raw data reports are time 
dependent 
Military operations 
The information 
fusion technique 
Use of Dezert Smarandache 
Theory, DSmT. 
Actually, DSmT is applicable 
for “both” free and hybrid 
models that permit θi’s of Θ to 
be intersected. 
Use of Dempster Shafer theory 
of evidence for combining 
information 
coming 
from 
different sources.  
This theory is applicable “only” 
for free models in which θi’s of 
Θ should be exclusive and 
exhaustive. 
The theory of evidence is 
not 
taken 
into 
consideration; 
consequently, no beliefs 
are calculated to be relied 
upon.  Information fusion 
is based on the JDL model 
that has been carried out in 
four levels. 
Information 
management to 
support decision 
making 
On the basis of two levels: 
- Credal for combination of 
beliefs. 
- Pignistic 
for 
supporting 
probabilistic reasoning. 
The pignistic probability has 
been computed to specify the 
trust in belief functions after 
information fusion and to 
support the Bayesian network 
probabilistic reasoning. 
Computes 
basic 
probability 
assignments, BPAs and the 
successive BPA’s are combined 
through Dempster’s rule. 
This 
process 
is 
implemented by applying 
maximum score of the total 
sum of joint probabilistic 
fusion method. 

-1249- 
Decision making 
By performing probabilistic 
reasoning using a Bayesian 
network that can obtain the 
probable 
reason 
of 
a 
proposition from its pignistic 
probability. Thus the DSmT 
pignistic probability can serve 
two folds: 
1-Accuracy measure for the 
underlying beliefs. 
2-Input 
to 
the 
Bayesian 
network 
providing 
a 
conformal integration (i.e. 
decision might be changed 
when the basic beliefs are 
changed) between the belief 
and 
the 
probabilistic 
reasoning model. 
Decision is taken 
for the 
identification/classification 
of 
an object from a database based 
on the maximum value of 
pignistic probability criterion. 
Bayes 
formulation 
can 
produce 
an 
inference 
concerning 
an 
observed 
object 
viewed 
from 
existing events. Then the a 
posteriori 
conditional 
probability for each object 
calculated, one can decide 
the 
best 
estimated 
hypothesis by taking the 
greatest 
posteriori 
conditional 
probability 
value. 
Evidence based 
reasoning 
Can obtain the reason behind 
the believed hypothesis. 
Cannot 
obtain 
the 
reason 
behind the believed hypothesis. 
Does not depend on beliefs 
and does not use evidence 
theory. 
Ranking the output 
decisions 
Ranking the system decisions 
is ultimately used to support 
decision making 
Decision is taken based on the 
maximum value of pignistic 
probability. 
There is no ranking of 
output decisions; only one 
can 
decide 
the 
best 
estimated hypothesis by 
taking the greatest value of 
a 
posteriori 
conditional 
probability calculated by 
the Bayesian network. 
 
8- Conclusion 
Since it is not an easy task to obtain high-level decisions from computed beliefs, the proposed framework has 
been designed and implemented as Information Fusion and Probabilistic Decision Making Framework. Such 
framework consistes of the following layers: 
1. A layer that contains a belief computation agent for estimating the basic belief assignments. 
2. A layer for combination of basic belief assignments using an information fusion approach. Such approach 
exploits Dezert-Smarandache Theory, DSmT, and proportional conflict redistribution to provide more 
realistic final beliefs. 
3. A layer for computation of pignistic probability of the underlying propositions from the corresponding final 
beliefs. 
4. A layer for performing probabilistic reasoning using a Bayesian network that can obtain the probable reason 
of a proposition from its pignistic probability. 
5. A layer for ranking the system decisions is ultimately used to support decision making. 
A case study is investigated in details. It has proved the concept of the proposed framework and indicated the 
following: 
1. The use of DSmT for information fusion yields not only more realistic beliefs but also reliable pignistic 
probabilities for the underlying propositions. 
2. Making use of pignistic probabilities to integrate information fusion and the Bayesian network. By this way 
we could provide probabilistic inference and enable decision making that exploits both belief based 
probabilities for the underlying propositions and conditional probabilities of BN for finding out the 
corresponding reasons. 
3. A divide and conquer approach can considerably reduce the problem size. Such approach can transfer a 
problem with impractical large size due to large number of focal elements to a set of familiar 3D 
subproblems that can be easily tackled with reasonable time and space costs. 

-1250- 
A comparative study with respect to other information fusion systems has pointed out the significance of the 
proposed framework which makes it able to outperform similar decision making systems.
