arXiv:1301.5154v1  [cs.LO]  22 Jan 2013
A Rational and Eﬃcient Algorithm for View
Revision in Databases ⋆
Radhakrishnan Delhibabu ⋆⋆1,2 and Gerhard Lakemeyer2
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
SSN College of Engineering in Chennai, India

2 Informatik 5, Knowledge-Based Systems Group
RWTH Aachen, Germany

Abstract. The dynamics of belief and knowledge is one of the major
components of any autonomous system that should be able to incorpo-
rate new pieces of information. In this paper, we argue that to apply
rationality result of belief dynamics theory to various practical prob-
lems, it should be generalized in two respects: ﬁrst of all, it should allow
a certain part of belief to be declared as immutable; and second, the
belief state need not be deductively closed. Such a generalization of be-
lief dynamics, referred to as base dynamics, is presented, along with the
concept of a generalized revision algorithm for Horn knowledge bases.
We show that Horn knowledge base dynamics has interesting connec-
tion with kernel change and abduction. Finally, we also show that both
variants are rational in the sense that they satisfy certain rationality
postulates stemming from philosophical works on belief dynamics.
Keyword: AGM, Belief Update, Horn Knowledge Base Dynamics, Ker-
nel Change, Abduction, View update.
1
Introduction
Modeling intelligent agents’ reasoning requires designing knowledge bases for
the purpose of performing symbolic reasoning. Among the diﬀerent types of
knowledge representations in the domain of artiﬁcial intelligence, logical repre-
sentations stem from classical logic. However, this is not suitable for representing
or treating items of information containing vagueness, incompleteness or uncer-
tainty, or Horn knowledge base evolution that leads the agent to change his
beliefs about the world.
When a new item of information is added to a Horn knowledge base, incon-
sistency can result. Revision means modifying the Horn knowledge base in order
⋆This work extends from Chanderbose’s [7].
⋆⋆The author acknowledges the support of RWTH Aachen, where he is visiting scholar
with an Erasmus Mundus External Cooperation Window India4EU by the European
Commission when the paper was written.

to maintain consistency, while keeping the new information and removing (con-
traction) or not removing the least possible previous information. In our case,
update means revision and contraction, that is insertion and deletion in database
perspective. Our previous work [7,8] makes connections with contraction from
knowledge base dynamics.
Our Horn knowledge base dynamics, is deﬁned in two parts: an immutable
part (Horn formulae) and updatable part (literals) (for deﬁnition and properties
see works of Nebel [41] and Segerberg [45]). Knowledge bases have a set of
integrity constraints (see the deﬁnitions in later section). In the case of ﬁnite
knowledge bases, it is sometimes hard to see how the update relations should be
modiﬁed to accomplish certain Horn knowledge base updates.
Example 1. Consider a database with an (immutable) rule that a staﬀmember
is a person who is currently working in the research group under the chair.
Additional (updatable) facts are that matthias and gerhard are group chairs,
and delhibabu and aravindan are staﬀmembers. We restricted that staﬀand

each research group has only one chair ie. ∀x, y, z (y=x) ←group chair(x,y) ∧
group chair(x,z).
Immutable part: staﬀchair(X,Y)←staﬀgroup(X,Z),group chair(Z,Y).
Updatable part: group chair(infor1,matthias)←
group chair(infor2,gerhard)←
staﬀgroup(delhibabu,infor1)←
staﬀgroup(aravindan,infor2)←
Suppose we want to update this database with the information, staﬀchair(delhiba-
bu,aravindan), that is
staﬀchair(delhibabu,aravindan)←staﬀgroup(delhibabu,Z) V
group chair(Z,aravindan)
If we are restricted to deﬁnite clauses, there is only one plausible way to do
this: delhibabu and aravindan belong to groups infor1 and infor2, respectively,
this updating means that we need to delete (remove) matthias from the database
and newly add (insert) aravindan to the database (aravindan got promoted to
the chair of the research group infor1 and he was removed from research group
infor2). This results in an update that is too strong. If we allow disjunctive in-
formation into the database, however, we can accomplish the update by minimal
adding wrt consistency
staﬀgroup(delhibabu,infor1) ∨group chair(infor1,aravindan)
and this option appears intuitively to be correct.
When adding new beliefs to the Horn knowledge base, if the new belief is
violating integrity constraints then belief revision needs to be performed, other-
wise, it is simply added. As we will see, in these cases abduction can be used in

order to compute all the possibilities and it is not up to user or system to choose
among them.
When dealing with the revision of a Horn knowledge base (both insertions
and deletions), there are other ways to change a Horn knowledge base and it
has to be performed automatically also. Considering the information, change is
precious and must be preserved as much as possible. The principle of minimal
change [22,44] can provide a reasonable strategy. On the other hand, practical
implementations have to handle contradictory, uncertain, or imprecise informa-
tion, so several problems can arise: how to deﬁne eﬃcient change in the style of
AGM [1]; what result has to be chosen [27,32,39]; and ﬁnally, according to a prac-
tical point of view, what computational model to support for Horn knowledge
base revision has to be provided?
The rest of paper is organized as follows: First we start with preliminaries in
Section 2. In Section 3, we introduce knowledge base dynamics along with the
concept of generalized revision, and revision operator for knowledge base. Section
4 studies the relationship between knowledge base dynamics and abduction. In
Section 5, we discuss an important application of knowledge base dynamics in
providing an axiomatic characterization for insertion view atoms to databases;
and brief summary of the related works nature of view update problem for
incomplete to complete information. In Section 6 we give brief overview of related
works. In Section 7 we make conclusions with a summary of our contribution as
well as a discussion of future directions of investigation. All proofs can be found
in the Appendix.
2
Preliminaries
We consider a propositional language LP deﬁned from a ﬁnite set of propositional
variables P and the standard connectives. We use lower case Roman letters
a, b, x, y, ... to range over elementary letters and the Greek letters ϕ, φ, ψ, ... for
propositional formulae. Sets of formulae are denoted by upper case Roman letters
A, B, F, K, ..... A literal is an atom (positive literal), or a negation of an atom
(negative literal).
For any formula ϕ, we write E(ϕ) to mean the set of the elementary letters
that occur in ϕ. The same notation also applies to a set of formulae. For any set
F of formulae, L(F) represents the sub-language generated by E(F), i.e. the set
of all formulae ϕ with E(ϕ) ⊆E(F).
Horn formulae are deﬁned [15] as follows:
1. Every a ∈Φ, a and ¬a are Horn clauses.
2. a ←a1 ∧a2 ∧...∧an is a Horn clause, where n ≥0 and a, ai ∈Φ (1 ≤i ≤n).
3. Every Horn clause is a Horn formula, a is called head and ai is body of the
Horn formula.
4. If ϕ and ψ are Horn formulae, so is ϕ ∧ψ.
A deﬁnite Horn clause is a ﬁnite set of literals (atoms) that contains exactly
one positive literal which is called the head of the clause. The set of negative

literals of this deﬁnite Horn clause is called the body of the clause. A Horn
clause is non-recursive, if the head literal does not occur in its body. We usually
denote a Horn clause as head←body. Let LH be the set of all Horn formulae
with respect to LP.
Formally, a ﬁnite Horn knowledge base KB is deﬁned as a ﬁnite set of formula
from language LH, and divided into three parts: an immutable theory KBI is an
Horn formulae (head←body), which is the ﬁxed part of the knowledge; updatable
theory KBU is Horn clause (head←); and an integrity constraints KBIC is Horn
clause (←body).
Deﬁnition 1 (Knowledge Base). Let KB be a ﬁnite set of Horn formulae
from language LH called a Horn knowledge base with, KB = KBI ∪KBU ∪
KBIC, KB = KBI ∩KBU = ∅and KB = KBU ∩KBIC = ∅.
Working with deductively closed, inﬁnite belief sets is not very attractive
from a computational point of view. The AGM approach to belief dynamics is
very attractive in its capturing the rationality of change, but it is not always
easy to implement either Horn formula based partial meet revision, or model-
theoretical revision. In real application from artiﬁcial intelligence and database,
what is required is to represent the knowledge using a ﬁnite Horn knowledge base.
Further, a certain part of the knowledge is treated as immutable and should not
be changed.
Knowledge base change deals with situations in which an agent has to modify
its beliefs about the world, usually due to new or previously unknown incoming
information, also represented as formulae of the language. Common operations
of interest in Horn knowledge base change are the expansion of an agent’s cur-
rent Horn knowledge base KB by a given Horn clause ϕ (usually denoted as
KB+ϕ), where the basic idea is to add regardless of the consequences, and the
revision of its current beliefs by ϕ (denoted as KB * ϕ), where the intuition is
to incorporate ϕ into the current beliefs in some way while ensuring consistency
of the resulting theory at the same time. Perhaps the most basic operation in
Horn knowledge base change, like belief change, is that of contraction (AGM
[1]), which is intended to represent situations in which an agent has to give up
ϕ from its current stock of beliefs (denoted as KB-ϕ).
Deﬁnition 2 (Levi Identity). Let - be an AGM contraction operator for KB.
A way to deﬁne a revision is by using Generalized Levi Identity:
KB ∗α = (KB −¬α) ∪α
Then, the revision can be trivially achieved by expansion, and the axiomatic
characterization could be straightforwardly obtained from the corresponding
characterizations of the traditional models [17]. The aim of our work is not
to deﬁne revision from contraction, but rather to construct and axiomatically
characterize revision operators in a direct way.

3
Knowledge base dynamics
AGM [1] proposed a formal framework in which revision(contraction) is inter-
preted as belief change. Focusing on the logical structure of beliefs, they formu-
late eight postulates which a revision knowledge base (contraction knowledge
base was discussed in [8]) has to verify.
Deﬁnition 3. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base with an immutable part KBI.
Let α and β be any two Horn clauses from LH. Then, α and β are said to be
KB-equivalent iﬀthe following condition is satisﬁed: ∀set of Horn clauses E
⊆LH: KBI ∪E ⊢α iﬀKBI ∪E ⊢β.
These postulates stem from three main principles: the new item of informa-
tion has to appear in the revised Horn knowledge base, the revised base has to
be consistent and revision operation has to change the least possible beliefs. Now
we consider the revision of a Horn clause α wrt KB, written as KB ∗α. The
rationality postulates for revising α from KB can be formulated.
Deﬁnition 4 (Rationality postulates for Horn knowledge base revi-
sion).
(KB*1)
Closure: KB ∗α is a Horn knowledge base.
(KB*2)
Weak Success: if α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC then α ⊆KB ∗α.
(KB*3.1) Inclusion: KB ∗α ⊆Cn(KB ∪α).
(KB*3.2) Immutable-inclusion: KBI ⊆Cn(KB ∗α).
(KB*4.1) Vacuity 1: if α is inconsistent with KBI ∪KBIC then KB ∗α = KB.
(KB*4.2) Vacuity 2: if KB ∪α ⊬⊥then KB ∗α = KB ∪α.
(KB*5)
Consistency: if α is consistent with KBI ∪KBIC then KB ∗α con-
sistent with KBI ∪KBIC.
(KB*6)
Preservation: If α and β are KB-equivalent, then KB ∗α ↔KB ∗β.
(KB*7.1) Strong relevance: KB ∗α ⊢α If KBI ⊬¬α
(KB*7.2) Relevance: If β ∈KB\KB ∗α, then there is a set KB′ such that
KB ∗α ⊆KB′ ⊆KB ∪α, KB′ is consistent KBI ∪KBIC with α, but
KB′ ∪{β} is inconsistent KBI ∪KBIC with α.
(KB*7.3) Weak relevance: If β ∈KB\KB ∗α, then there is a set KB′ such that
KB′ ⊆KB ∪α, KB′ is consistent KBI ∪KBIC with α, but KB′ ∪{β} is
inconsistent KBI ∪KBIC with α.
To revise α from KB, only those informations that are relevant to α in some
sense can be added (as example in the introduction illustrates). (KB ∗7.1) is
very strong axiom allowing only minimum changes, and certain rational revision
can not be carried out. So, relaxing this condition (example with more details
can be found in [8]), this can be weakened to relevance. (KB ∗7.2) is relevance
policy that still can not permit rational revisions, so we need to go next step.
With (KB ∗7.3) the relevance axiom is further weakened and it is referred to as
”core-retainment”.

3.1
Principle of minimal change
Let a Horn knowledge base KB be a set of Horn formulae and ψ is a Horn clause
such that KB = {φ | ψ ⊢φ} is derived by φ. Now we consider the revision of a
Horn clause α wrt KB, that is KB ∗α.
The principle of minimal change (PMC) leads to the deﬁnition of orders
between interpretations. Let I be the set of all the interpretations and Mod(ψ)
be the set of models of ψ. A pre-order on I, denoted ≤ψ is linked with ψ. The
relation <ψ is deﬁned from ≤ψ as usual:
I <ψ I′ iﬀI ≤ψ I′ and I′ ≰ψ I.
The pre-order ≤ψ is faithful to ψ if it veriﬁes the following conditions:
1) If I, I′ ∈Mod(ψ) then I <ψ I′ does not hold;
2) If I ∈Mod(ψ) and I′ < Mod(ψ) then I <ψ I′ holds;
3) if ψ ≡φ then ≤ψ=≤φ.
A minimal interpretation may thus be deﬁned by:
M ⊆I, the set of minimal interpretations in M according to ≤ψ is denoted
Min(M, ≤ψ). And I is minimal in M according to ≤ψ, if I ∈M and there is
no I′ ∈M such that I′ <ψ I.
Revision operation * satisﬁes the postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3)
if and only if there exists a total pre-order ≤ψ such that:
Mod(ψ ∗φ) = Min(Mod(φ), ≤ψ).
4
Knowledge base dynamics and abduction
We study the relationship between Horn knowledge base dynamics (discussed in
the previous section) and abduction, a well-known from reasoning. This study
helps to bring these two ﬁelds together, so that abductive logic grammar proce-
dure could be used to implement revision. For this purpose, we use the concepts
of generalized kernel change (revision and contraction), an extension of kernel
contraction and revision introduced for belief bases. We ﬁrst observe that gener-
alized kernel change coincides with that of Horn knowledge base change (revision
and contraction), and then we process to show its relationship with abduction.
4.1
Kernel revision system
To revise a Horn formula α from a Horn knowledge base KB, the idea of kernel
revision is to keep at least one element from every inclusion-minimal subset of KB
that derives α. Because of the immutable-inclusion postulate, no Horn formula
from KBI can be deleted.
Deﬁnition 5 (Kernel sets). Let a Horn knowledge base KB be a set of Horn
formulae, where α is Horn clause. The α-inconsistent kernel of KB, noted by
KB⊥⊥α, is the set of KB′ such that:

1. KB′ ⊆KB ensuring that KBI ⊆KB′ and KBIC ⊆KB′.
2. KB′ ∪α is inconsistent with KBI ∪KBIC .
3. For any KB” such that KB′′ ⊂KB′ ⊆KB then KB′′ ∪α is consistent with
KBI ∪KBIC.
That is, given a consistent α, KB⊥⊥α is the set of minimal KB-subsets
inconsistent with α.
Example 2. Suppose that KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←
, b ←; KBIC : ø} and α= ←p. Then we have that:
KB⊥⊥α= {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a}}.
Revision by a Horn clause is based on the concept of a α-inconsistent-kernels.
In order to complete the construction, we must deﬁne a incision function that
cuts in each inconsistent-kernel.
Deﬁnition 6 (Incision function). Let KB be a set of Horn formulae. σ is a
incision function for KB if and only if, for all consistent Horn clauses α
1. σ(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆S KB⊥⊥α
2. If KB′ ∈KB⊥⊥α then KB′ ∩(σ(KB⊥⊥α)) , 0
Deﬁnition 7 (Hitting set). A hitting set H for KB⊥⊥α is deﬁned as a set
s.t. (i) H ⊆S(KB⊥⊥α), (ii) H∩KBI is empty and (iii) ∀X ∈KB⊥⊥α, X , ∅
and X ∩KBU is not empty, then X ∩H , ∅.
A hitting set is said to be maximal when H consists of all updatable state-
ments from S(KB⊥⊥α) and minimal if no proper subset of H is a hitting set
for KB⊥⊥α.
Deﬁnition 8 (Generalized Kernel revision). An incision function for KB
is a function s.t. for all α, σ(KB⊥⊥α) is a hitting set for KB⊥⊥α. An operator
∗σ for KB is a generalized kernel revision deﬁned as follows:
KB ∗σ α =
(KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α) ∪α
if α is consistent KBI ∪KBIC
KB
otherwise.
An operator ∗σ for KB is a generalized kernel revision iﬀthere is an incision
function σ for KB such that KB ∗α = KB ∗σ α for all beliefs α.
From the deﬁnition of hitting set, it is clear that when KB ⊢¬α, α is the
hitting set of KB⊥⊥α. On the other hand, when KBI ⊢α, the deﬁnition ensures
that only updatable elements are inserted, and α does follow from the revision.
Thus, week success (KB*2), immutable-inclusion(KB*3.2) and vacuity (KB*4.1)
are satisﬁed by generalized kernel revision of α from KB.
Example 3. Given KB={KBI : p ←a ∧b, p ←a, q ←a ∧b; KBU : a ←, b ←
; KBIC : ø }, α= ←p and KB⊥⊥α = {{p ←a ∧b}, {p ←a}}. We have

two possible results for the incision function and its associated kernel revision
operator:
σ1(KB⊥⊥α) = {p ←a ∧b} and KB ∗σ1 α = {{←a}, {←b}},
σ2(KB⊥⊥α) = {p ←a} and KB ∗σ2 α = {{←a}}.
Incision function σ2 produces minimal hitting set for KB⊥⊥α.
Theorem 1. For every Horn knowledge base KB, ∗σ is a generalized kernel
revision function iﬀit satisﬁes the postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
4.2
Relationship with abduction
The relationship between Horn knowledge base dynamics and abduction was
introduced by the philosopher Pierce (see [2]). We show how abduction grammar
could be used to realize revision with immutability condition. A special subset
of literal (atoms) of language LH, abducibles Ab, are designated for abductive
reasoning. An abductive framework ⟨P, Ab⟩stands for a theory P, which is a set of
Horn formulae from LH, with possible hypotheses Ab. An abductive framework
for a knowledge base KB = KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC can be given as follows:
P = KBI ∪{α ↔β|α is a Horn clause in KBU and β is an abducible
from Ab that does not appear in KB}.
Deﬁnition 9 (Minimal abductive explanation). Let KB be a Horn knowl-
edge base and α an observation to be explained. Then, for a set of abducibles
(KBU), ∆is said to be an abductive explanation wrt KBI iﬀKBI ∪∆⊢α. ∆
is said to be minimal wrt KBI ∪KBIC iﬀno proper subset of ∆is an abductive
explanation for α, i.e. ∄∆
′ s.t. KBI ∪∆
′ ⊢α.
Since an incision function is adding and removing only updatable elements
from each member of the kernel set, to compute a generalized revision of α from
KB, we need to compute only the abduction in every α-kernel of KB. So, it is
now necessary to characterize precisely the abducibles present in every α-kernel
of KB. The notion of minimal abductive explanation is not enough to capture
this, and we introduce locally minimal and KB-closed abductive explanations.
Deﬁnition 10 (Local minimal abductive explanations). Let (KBI∪KB′
U)
be a smallest subset of KBU, s.t ∆an minimal abductive explanation of α wrt
(KBI ∪KB′
U) (for some ∆). Then ∆is called local minimal for α wrt KBU.
Note 1. Let (KBI ∪KBU) ∈({∆+, ∆−}). Here ∆+ refers to admission Horn
knowledge base (positive atoms) and ∆−refers to denial Horn knowledge base(negative
atoms) wrt given α. Then problem of abduction is to explain ∆with abducibles
(KBU), s.t. (KBI ∪KBU) ∪∆+ ∪∆−⊢α and (KBI ∪KBU) ∪∆+ |= α ∪∆−
are both consistent with IC.

4.3
Generalized revision algorithm
The problem of Horn knowledge base revision is concerned with determining how
a request to change can be appropriately translated into one or more atoms or
literals. We give new generalized revision algorithm. It is enough to compute all
the KB-locally minimal abduction explanations for α wrt KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC.
If α is consistent with KB then well-known abductive procedure to compute an
abductive explanation for α wrt KBI could be used to compute kernel revision
Reasoning about Abduction and Deduction
Deﬁnition 11 ([51]). Let KB=(KBI, KBU, KBIC) be a knowledge base, T is
updatable part from KB. We deﬁne abduction framework ⟨KBBG, KBAb, IC⟩.
After Algorithm 1 is executed, u is derived part from KB′. The abduction ex-
planation for u in ⟨KBI ∪KB∗
U, KBIC⟩is any set Ti, where Ti ⊆KBAb such
that: KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪T |= u.
An explanation Ti is minimal if no proper subset of Ti is also an explanation,
i.e. if it does not exist any explanation Tj for u such that Tj ⊂Ti
Deﬁnition 12 ([51]). Let KB=(KBI, KBU, KBIC) be a knowledge base, T is
updatable part from KB. After Algorithm 1 is executed, u is derived part from
KB′. The deduction consequence on u due to the application of T , KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪
T ∪u is the answer to any question.
Algorithm 1
Generalized revision algorithm
Input :
A Horn knowledge base KB = KBI ∪KBU ∪KBIC
and a Horn clause α to be revised.
Output:
A new Horn knowledge base KB′ = KBI ∪KB∗
U ∪KBIC,
s.t. KB′is a generalized revision α to KB.
Procedure KB(KB, α)
begin
1.
Let V:= {c ∈KBIC | KBI ∪KBIC inconsistent with α wrt c}
P := N := 0 and KB′ = KB
2.
While (V , 0)
select a subset V ′ ⊆V
For each v ∈V ′, select a literal to be
remove (add to N) or a literal to be added(add to P)
Let KB := KR(KB, P, N)
Let V:= {c ∈KBIC | KBI inconsistent with α wrt c}
return
3.
Produce a new Horn knowledge base KB′
end.

Algorithm 2
Procedure KR(KB, ∆+, ∆−)
begin
1.
Let P := {e ∈∆+| KBI ̸|= e} and N := {e ∈∆−| KBI |= e}
2.
While (P , 0) or (N , 0)
select a subset P ′ ⊆P or N ′ ⊆N
Construct a set S1 = {X | X is a KB-closed locally
minimal abductive wrt P explanation for α wrt KBI}.
Construct a set S2 = {X | X is a KB-closed locally
minimal abductive wrt N explanation for α wrt KBI}.
3.
Determine a hitting set σ(S1) and σ(S2)
If ((N = 0) and (P , 0))
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU ∪σ(S1)}
else
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2) ∪σ(S1)}
end if
If ((N , 0) and (P = 0))
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2)}
else
Produce KB′ = KBI ∪{(KBU\σ(S2) ∪σ(S1)}
end if
4.
return KB′
end.
Theorem 2. Let KB be a Horn knowledge base and α is Horn formula.
1. If Algorithm 1 produced KB’as a result of revising α from KB, then KB’
satisﬁes all the rationality postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
2. Suppose KB′′ satisﬁes all these rationality postulates for revising α from
KB, then KB′′ can be produced by Algorithm 1.
5
Application: View updates in database
An important application of knowledge base dynamics, discussed in the previous
section, is in providing an axiomatic characterization of view updates in deduc-
tive and relational databases. A deﬁnite deductive database DDB consists of two
parts: an intensional database IDB (KBI), a set of deﬁnite program clauses;
and an extensional database EDB (KBU), a set of ground facts. The intuitive
meaning of DDB is provided by the Least Herbrand model semantics and all the
inferences are carried out through SLD-derivation. All the predicates that are
deﬁned in IDB are referred to as view predicatesand those deﬁned in EDB are
referred to as base predicates. Extending this notion, an atom(literals) with a
view predicate is said to be a view atom(literals), and similarly an atom(literals)
with base predicate is a base atom(literals). Further, we assume that IDB does

not contain any unit clauses and that predicates deﬁned in a given DDB are
both view and base predicates.
Two kinds of view updates can be carried out on a DDB: An atom(literals),
that does not currently follow from DDB, can be inserted; or an atom(literals),
that currently follows from DDB, can be deleted [7,8]. In this paper, we consider
only insertion an atom(literals) from a DDB. When an atom(literals) A is to
be inserted, the view update problem is to delete only some relevant EDB facts
and then to insert, so that the modiﬁed EDB together with IDB will satisfy the
insertion of A from DDB. As motivated in the introduction, our concern now is to
discuss the rationality of view update, and provide an axiomatic characterization
for it. This axiomatic characterization can be seen as a declarative semantics for
view updates in deductive databases.
Note that DDB can be considered [37,46] as a knowledge base to be revised.
The IDB is the immutable part of the knowledge database, while the EDB forms
the updatable part. Every base literal is an abducible, but since we deal only with
deﬁnite databases, we require only positive abducibles. In general, it is assumed
that a language underlying a DDB is ﬁxed and the semantics of DDB is the least
Herbrand model over this ﬁxed language. Therefore, the DDB is practically a
shorthand of its ground instantiation3, written as IDBG. Thus, a DDB represent
a knowledge base where the immutable part is given by IDBG and updatable
part is EDB. Hence, the rationality postulates (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3)
provide an axiomatic characterization for inserting a view atom(literals) A to
a deﬁnite database DDB, and a generalized insertion of A to DDB achieves
deletion of A from DDB.
As observed by Kowalski [26], logic can provide a conceptual level of un-
derstanding of relational databases, and hence rationality postulates (KB*1) to
(KB*6) and (KB*7.3)can provide an axiomatic characterization for view inser-
tion in relational databases too. A relational database together with its view
deﬁnitions can be represented by a deﬁnite deductive database (EDB repre-
senting tuples in the database and IDB representing the view deﬁnitions), and
so same algorithm can be used to insert view extensions from relational and
deductive databases.
But before discussing the rationality postulates and algorithm, we want to
make it precise, how a relational database, along with operations on relations,
can be represented by deﬁnite deductive database. We assume the reader is
familiar with relational database concepts. A relation scheme R can be thought
of as a base predicate whose arguments deﬁne the attributes A of the scheme.
Its relational extension r, is a ﬁnite set of base atoms R(A) containing the
predicate R. A database schema consists of ﬁnite collection of relational schemes
< R1, . . . , Rn >, and a relational database is a speciﬁc extension of database
schema, denoted as < r1, . . . , rn >. In our context, relational database can be
represented by EDB = S
i=1,...,n Ri(Ai).
3 a ground instantiation of a deﬁnite program P is the set of clauses obtained by
substituting terms in the Herbrand Universe for variables in P in all possible ways

Join is a binary operator for combining two relations. Let r and s be two
relational extensions of schema R (with attributes R) and S (with attributes
S), respectively. Let T = R ∪S. The join of r and s, written as r ⊗s, is the
relational extension q(T) of all tuples t over T such that there are tr ∈r and
ts ∈s, with tr = t(R) and ts = t(S). Join can be captured by a constraint clause
Q(T) ←R(R), S(S). Our integrity constraint (IC) is that each research group
has only one chair i.e. ∀x, y, z (y=x) ←group chair(x,y) ∧group chair(x,z) (see
deﬁnition and properties of similarity in works of Christiansen [11] and Godfrey
[19]).
Example 4. Let us consider two relational schemes R and S from Example 1,
with attributes R = {Group, Chair} and S = {Staff, Group}.Consider the
following extensions r and s:
s
Staﬀ
Group
delhibabu infor1
aravindan infor2
r Group
Chair
infor1 matthias
infor2 gerhard
Tab. 1. Base table for s and r
The following rule, T (Staff, Group, Chair) ←S(Staff, Group), R(Group, Chair)
represents the join of s and r, which is given as:
s ⊗r
Staff
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1 matthias
aravindan infor2 gerhard
Tab. 2. s ⊗r
To sum up, we showed how relational database and operators on relations can
be conceptually captured by deﬁnite deductive databases. All solutions trans-
late [38] a view update request into a transaction combining insertions and
deletions of base relations for satisfying the request. Further, a deﬁnite de-
ductive database can be considered as a knowledge base, and thus rationality
postulates and insertion algorithm of the previous section can be applied for
view updates in database.
5.1
View insertion algorithm
Since relational and deﬁnite deductive databases can be considered as knowledge
bases, and inserting a view atom(literals) (tuple) A can be considered as revision
of A, a speciﬁc instance of Algorithm 1 can be used to compute insertion of a
view atom(literals) to a database. In fact, we have to discuss how to compute
all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations for A wrt IDBG. As
expected, these abductive explanations can be computed using deduction trees,
and the process is discussed in the sequel.

Algorithm 3
Algorithm to compute all DDB-closed locally minimal
abductive explanation of an atom(literals)
Input :
A deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC an literals
A
Output :
Set of all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations
for A wrt IDBG
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
For every successful branch i: construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch i}
For every unsuccessful branch j: construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch j}
Produce set of all ∆i and ∆j computed in the previous step
as the result.
return
2.
Produce all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive
explanations in ∆i and ∆j
end.
Algorithm 4
Algorithm to compute all DDB-closed locally minimal
abductive explanation of an atom(literals)
Input :
A deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC an literals
A
Output :
Set of all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanations
for A wrt IDBG
begin
1.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
For every successful branch i: construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch i}
For every unsuccessful branch j: construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB
and D is used as an input clause in branch j}
2.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
Produce set of all ∆i and ∆j is consistent with IC
as the result.
return
Produce all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive
explanations in ∆i and ∆j
end.
An update request U = B, where B is a set of base facts, is not true in
KB. Then, we need to ﬁnd a transaction T = Tins ∪Tdel, where Tins(∆i) (resp.

Tdel(∆j)) is the set of facts, such that U is true in DDB′ = ((EDB −Tdel ∪
Tins)∪IDB ∪IC). Since we consider deﬁnite deductive databases, SLD-tree can
be used to compute the required abductive explanations. The idea is to get all
EDB facts used in a SLD-derivation of A wrt DDB, and construct that as an
abductive explanation for A wrt IDBG.
There are two ways to ﬁnd minimal elements (insertion and deletion) with
integrity constraints. Algorithm 3 ﬁrst checks consistency with integrity con-
straints and then reduces steps with abductive explanation for A . Algorithm 4
is doing vice versa, but both algorithm outputs are similar.
Unfortunately, this algorithm does not work as intended for any deductive
database, and a counter example is produced below. Thus, general algorithms 3
and 4 produced some unexpected sets in addition to locally minimal abductive
explanations.
Example 5. Consider a deductive database DDB as follows:
IDB : p ←a ∧e
EDB : a ←
IC : ←b
q ←a ∧f
e ←
p ←b ∧f
f ←
q ←b ∧e
p ←q
q ←a
We need to insert p. First, we check consistency with IC and after we ﬁnd
∆i and ∆j via tree deduction.
←p
←a, e
■
←q
←a, f
■
←a
■
←b, e
□
←b, f
□
From Algorithm 3 it is easy to conclude which branches are consistent wrt IC
(shown on tree by ■). For the next step, we need to ﬁnd minimal accommodate
and denial literal with wrt to p. The subgoals of the tree are ←a, e and ←a, f,
which are minimal tree deductions of only facts. Clearly, ∆i = {a, e, f} and
∆j = {b} with respect to IC, are the only locally minimal abductive explanations
for p wrt IDBG, but they are not locally minimal explanations.
From Algorithm 4, the subgoals of the tree are ←a, e, ←a, f, ←b, f and
←b, e. Clearly, ∆i = {a, b, e, f} and ∆j = {a, e, f}. In the next step, we check
consistency with IC. ∆i and ∆j are only locally minimal abductive explanations
for p wrt IDBG, but they are not locally minimal explanations (more explana-
tions can be found in [33]).
The program is clear due to the unwanted recursion p ←a ∧b, p ←a. Will
the algorithm work as intended if we restrict ourselves to acyclic program [8]

that excludes such loop? One would expect a positive answer, but unfortunately
still some unwanted sets may be produced as the following example highlights.
So, even for acyclic program, algorithms 3 and 4 do not work as intended
(that is to generate all and only the DDB-close locally minimal abductive ex-
planations). Does this mean that generalized revision can not be carried out for
database in general?. Probably we should approach the problem from diﬀerent
perspective. We have seen that algorithms 3 and 4 may compute some unwanted
sets in addition to the required ones. What exactly are those sets? Is it possible
to characterize them? The following lemma answers these questions.
Lemma 1. Let DDB = IDB∪EDB∪IC be a deﬁnite deductive database and A
an atom(literals). Let S be the set of all DDB-closed locally minimal abductive
explanations for A wrt IDBG. Let S′ be the set of explanations returned by
algorithms 3 and 4 given DDB and A as inputs. Then, the following propositions
hold:
1. S ⊆S′.
2. ∀∆′(∆′ ∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S′: ∃∆∈S s.t. ∆⊂∆′.
3. Suppose DDB is resticted to be acyclic then: ∀∆′ ∈S′: ∆′ ⊂S S.
Having characterized what exactly is computed by algorithms 3 and 4, we
now proceed to show that algorithms 5 and 6 are useful for view insertion. The
key to the solution is the following lemma, which established the preservable of
hitting set computation among two sets.
Lemma 2.
1. Let S be a set of sets, and S′ another set s.t. S ⊆S′ and every
member of S′\S contains an element of S. Then, a set H is minimal hitting
set for S iﬀit is a minimal hitting set for S′.
2. Let S be a set of sets, and S′ another set s.t. S ⊆S′ and for every member
X of S′\S: X contains a member of S and X is contained in S S. Then, a
set H is a hitting set for S iﬀit is a hitting set for S′.
Thus algorithms 3 and 4 in conjunction with an algorithm to compute mini-
mal hitting set can be used to compute partial meet revision (deﬁned in section
4.1) of A from DDB.

Algorithm 5
Partial meet revision for deﬁnite deductive database
Input :
A deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC an literals A
Output:
A Partial meet revision of A from DDB.
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
2.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
3.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
Let there be m such sets.
Let E∗= {{D1, . . . , Dm}|Di ∈∆i}
Let E be a inclusion-minimal set among E∗, i.e. ∄E′ ∈E∗
s.t. E′ ⊂E.
4.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
Let there be m such sets.
Let F ∗= {{D1, . . . , Dm}|Dj ∈∆j}
Let F be a inclusion-maximum set among F∗, i.e. ∄F ′ ∈F ∗
s.t. F ′ ⊆F.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
return
5.
Produce DDB\F ∪E as the result.
end.
Algorithm 6
Generalized revision for acyclic deﬁnite
deductive database
Input :
An acyclic deﬁnite deductive database DDB = IDB ∪EDB ∪IC
an literals A
Output:
A generalized revision of A from DDB.
begin
1.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
While (V , 0)
2.
Construct a complete SLD-tree for ←A wrt DDB.
3.
For every successful branch i:construct ∆i = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch i.
Construct a hitting set D for all ∆i’s computed in the previous step.
4.
For every unsuccessful branch j:construct ∆j = {D | D ∈EDB}
and D is used as an input clause in branch j.
Construct a hitting set D for all ∆j’s computed in the previous step.
Let V := {c ∈IC | IDB ∪IC inconsistent with A wrt c }
return
5.
Produce DDB\F ∪E as the result.
end.

When DDB is acyclic, generalized revision of A from DDB can be obtained
by Algorithm 6. Observe that the ﬁrst two steps of Algorithm 5 are same as
those of algorithms 3 and 4, and we have already established what exactly are
computed by them. Steps 3 and 4 clearly compute a minimal hitting set and as
established by lemma 1 and lemma 2, this algorithm produces a partial meet
contraction of A from DDB. This result is formalized below.
Theorem 3. Let DDB be a deﬁnite deductive database and A an atom(literals)
to be inserted. Then DDB’ is a result of algorithm 5 given DDB and A as inputs,
iﬀDDB’ is a partial meet revision of A from DDB, satisfying the postulates
(KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.1).
We proceed to present Algorithm 6 to compute generalized revision for deﬁ-
nite deductive database. As observed before, this is not possible in general, but
for a restricted case of acyclic program.
Theorem 4. Let DDB be a deﬁnite deductive database and A an atom(literals)
to be inserted. Then DDB’ is a result of algorithm 6 given DDB and A as in-
puts, iﬀDDB’ is a generalized revision of A from DDB, satisfying the postulates
(KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Algorithms 5 and 6 are ineﬃcient, as they need to build a complete SLD-tree.
Unfortunately, any rational algorithm for insertion can not avoid constructing
complete SLD-trees. If these algorithms are changed to extract input clauses from
incomplete SLD-derivation, then the new algorithm should check the derivability
of an atom(literals) from a deductive database, before any insertion is carried
out(otherwise, success can not be satisﬁed). Checking derivability is also compu-
tationally expensive and more then that, weak relevance policy (KB*7.3) will not
be satisﬁed in general. Finally, any rational algorithm must construct a complete
SLD-tree.
5.2
Incomplete to Complete Information
Many of the proposals in the literature on incomplete databases have focussed
on the extension of the relational model by the introduction of null values. In
this section, we show how view update provides completion of incomplete infor-
mation. More detailed surveys of this area can be found in [36].
The earliest extension of the relational model to incomplete information was
that of Codd [13] who suggested that missing values should be represented in
tables by placing a special null value symbol ′∗′ at any table location for which
the value is unknown. Table 3, shows an example of a database using this conven-
tion. Codd proposed an extension to the relational algebra for tables containing
such nulls, based on three valued logic and a null substitution principle.
In terms of our general semantic scheme, the intended semantics of a database
D consisting of Codd tables can be described by deﬁning Mod(D) to be the
set of structures MD′, where D′ ranges over the relational databases obtained

by replacing each occurrence of ′∗′ in the database D by some domain value.
Diﬀerent values may be substituted for diﬀerent occurrences.
A plausible integrity constraint on the meaning of a relational operator on
tables in T is that the result should be a table that represents the set of relations
obtained by pointwise application of the operator on the models of these tables.
For example, if R and S are tables in T then the result of the join R Z S should
be equal to a table T in T such that
Mod(T ) = {r Z t | r ∈Mod(R), s ∈Mod(S)}
In case the deﬁnitions of the operators satisfy this integrity constraint (with
respect to the deﬁnition of the semantics Mod on T ).
Let us consider what above equation requires if we take R and S to be the
Codd Tables 3. First of all, note that in each model, if we take the value of
the null in the tuple (delhibabu,*) to be v, then the join will contain one tuples
(delhibabu, v), which include the value v. If T is to be a Codd table, it will need
to contain tuples (delhibabu,X) to generate each of these tuples, where X are
either constants or ’*’. We now face a problem. First, X cannot be a constant c,
for whatever the choice of c we can ﬁnd an instance r ∈Mod(R) and s ∈Mod(S)
for which the tuple (delhibabu, c) does not occur in r Z s. If they were, X would
have their values in models of T assigned independently.
Here the repetition of ∗indicates that the same value is to be occurrence of
the null in constructing a model of the table. Unfortunately, this extension does
not suﬃce to satisfy the integrity constraint (∀x, y, z (y=x) ←group chair(x,y)
∧group chair(x,z)).
Staﬀ
Group
delhibabu infor1
delhibabu
*
Group
Chair
infor1
mattias
*
aravindan
Tab. 3. Base Table after Transaction
In the model of these tables in which ∗= infor1, the join contains the tuple
(delhibabu, infor1) and (infor1, aravindan).
If ∗1 = infor1 then (delhibabu, infor1) ∈R Z S
If ∗2 = infor1 then (infor1, aravindan) ∈R Z S
The following table shows when transaction is made to base table:
Staﬀ
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1
mattias
delhibabu
*
aravindan
Tab. 4. s ⊗r after Transaction

The following table shows completion of incomplete information with appli-
cation of integrity constraint and redundancy:
Staﬀ
Group
Chair
delhibabu infor1 aravindan
Tab. 5. Redundant Table
6
Related Works
We begin by recalling previous work on view deletion. Chandrabose [7,8], deﬁnes
a contraction operator in view deletion with respect to a set of formulae or sen-
tences using Hansson’s [21] belief change. Similar to our approach, he focused on
set of formulae or sentences in knowledge base revision for view update wrt. in-
sertion and deletion and formulae are considered at the same level. Chandrabose
proposed diﬀerent ways to change knowledge base via only database deletion,
devising particular postulate which is shown to be necessary and suﬃcient for
such an update process.
Our Horn knowledge base consists of two parts, immutable part and updat-
able part , but focus is on principle of minimal change. There are more related
works on that topic. Eiter [16], Langlois[28], and Delgrande [15] are focusing
on Horn revision with diﬀerent perspectives like prime implication, logical clo-
sure and belief level. Segerberg [45] deﬁned new modeling for belief revision
in terms of irrevocability on prioritized revision. Hansson [21], constructed ﬁve
types of non-prioritized belief revision. Makinson [34] developed dialogue form
of revision AGM. Papini[42] deﬁned a new version of knowledge base revision.
Here, we consider immutable part as a Horn clause and updatable part as an
atom(literals).
We are bridging gap between philosophical work, paying little attention to
computational aspects of database work. In such a case, Hansson’s[21] kernel
change is related with abductive method. Aliseda’s [2] book on abductive rea-
soning is one of the motivation keys. Christiansen’s [12] work on dynamics of
abductive logic grammars exactly ﬁts our minimal change (insertion and dele-
tion). Wrobel’s [48] deﬁnition of ﬁrst order theory revision was helpful to frame
our algorithm.
On other hand, we are dealing with view update problem. Keller’s [23] thesis
is motivation for view update problem. There is a lot of papers on view update
problem (for example, recent survey paper on view update by Chen and Liao[10]
and survey paper on view algorithm by Mayol and Teniente [35]. More similar
to our work is paper presented by Bessant et al. [4] , local search-based heuristic
technique that empirically proves to be often viable, even in the context of very
large propositional applications. Laurent et al.[29], parented updating deductive
databases in which every insertion or deletion of a fact can be performed in a
deterministic way.
Furthermore, and at a ﬁrst sight more related to our work, some work has
been done on ontology systems and description logics (Qi and Yang [43], and

Kogalovsky [24]). Finally, when we presented connection between belief update
versus database update, we did not talk about complexity (see the works of
Liberatore [30,31], Caroprese [6], Calvanese’s [9], and Cong [14]).
The signiﬁcance of our work can be summarized in the following:
- We have deﬁned new kind of revision operator on knowledge base and ob-
tained axiomatic characterization for it. This operator of change is based
on α consistent-remainder set. Thus, we have presented a way to construct
revision operator without need to make use of the generalized Levi’s identity
nor of a previously deﬁned contraction operator.
- We have deﬁned new way of insertion and deletion of an atom(literals) as per
norm of principle of minimal change.
- We have proposed new generalized revision algorithm for knowledge base dy-
namics, interesting connections with kernel change and abduction procedure.
- We have written new view insertion algorithm for DDB, and we provided Horn
knowledge base revision, using our axiomatic method.
- Finally, we shown connection between belief update versus database update.
7
Conclusion and remarks
The main contribution of this research is to provide a link between theory of
belief dynamics and concrete applications such as view updates in databases.
We argued for generalization of belief dynamics theory in two respects: to han-
dle certain part of knowledge as immutable; and dropping the requirement that
belief state be deductively closed. The intended generalization was achieved by
introducing the concept of knowledge base dynamics and generalized contrac-
tion for the same. Further, we also studied the relationship between knowl-
edge base dynamics and abduction resulting in a generalized algorithm for re-
vision based on abductive procedures. We also successfully demonstrated how
knowledge base dynamics can provide an axiomatic characterization for inser-
tion an atom(literals) to a deﬁnite deductive database. Finally, we give a quick
overview of the main operators for belief change, in particular, belief update
versus database update.
In bridging the gap between belief dynamics and view updates, we have ob-
served that a balance has to be achieved between computational eﬃciency and
rationality. While rationally attractive notions of generalized revision prove to
be computationally ineﬃcient, the rationality behind eﬃcient algorithms based
on incomplete trees is not clear at all. From the belief dynamics point of view,
we may have to sacriﬁce some postulates, vacuity for example, to gain computa-
tional eﬃciency. Further weakening of relevance has to be explored, to provide
declarative semantics for algorithms based on incomplete trees.
On the other hand, from the database side, we should explore various ways
of optimizing the algorithms that would comply with the proposed declarative
semantics. We believe that partial deduction and loop detection techniques, will
play an important role in optimizing algorithms of the previous section. Note

that, loop detection could be carried out during partial deduction, and com-
plete SLD-trees can be eﬀectively constructed wrt a partial deduction (with
loop check) of a database, rather than wrt database itself. Moreover, we would
anyway need a partial deduction for optimization of query evaluation.
Though we have discussed only about view updates, we believe that knowl-
edge base dynamics can also be applied to other applications such as view main-
tenance, diagnosis, and we plan to explore it further (see works [6] and [5]). It
would also be interesting to study how results using soft stratiﬁcation [3] with
belief dynamics, especially the relational approach, could be applied in real world
problems. Still, a lot of developments are possible, for improving existing oper-
ators or for deﬁning new classes of change operators. As immediate extension,
question raises: is there any real life application for AGM in 25 year theory?
[18]. The revision and update are more challenging in logical view update prob-
lem(database theory), so we can extend the theory to combine results similar to
Hansson’s [20], Konieczny’s [25]and Nayak, [40].
Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1. (If part) * satisﬁes (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3). We
must show that ∗is a generalized kernel revision. Let σ be a incision function
such that for α. When KBI ⊢α, (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3) imply that
KB ∗α = KB coincides with generalized revision and follow PMC.
When KBI ⊢¬α, the required result follows from the two observations:
1. ∃KB′ ∈KB⊥⊥α s.t.KB ∗α ⊆KB′ (when KBI ⊢α)
Let σ be an incision function for KB and ∗σ be the generalized revision on
KB that is generated by σ. Since * satisﬁes closure (KB*1), KB ∗σ α is KB
contained in α. Also, satisfaction of weak success postulate (KB*2) ensures
that α ⊆KB ∗σ α. Every element of KB⊥⊥α is a inclusion minimal subset
that does derive α, and so any subset of KB that does derive α must be
contained in a member of KB⊥⊥α.
2. T(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆KB ∗σ α (when KBI ⊢α)
Consider any β ∈T(KB⊥⊥α). Assume that β < KB ∗α. Since * satisﬁes
weak relevance postulate (KB*7.3), it follows that there exists a set KB’ s.t.
KB′ ⊆KB ∪α; KB′ is a consistent with α; and KB′ ∪{β} is inconsistent
with α. But this contradicts that β is present in every minimal subset of KB
that does derive α. Hence β must not be in KB ∗σ α.
(Only if part) Let KB ∗α be a generalized revision of α for KB. We have
to show that KB ∗α satisﬁes the postulate (KB*1) to (KB*6) and (KB*7.3).
Let σ be an incision function for KB and ∗σ be the generalized revision on
KB that is generated by σ.
Closure Since KB ∗σ α is a Horn knowledge base, this postulate is trivially
shown.
Weak Success Suppose that α is consistent. Then it is trivial by deﬁnition
that α ⊆KB ∗σ α.

Inclusion Trivial by deﬁnition.
Immutable-inclusion Since every X ∈KB⊥⊥α is such that X ⊆KBI then
this postulate is trivially shown.
Vacuity 1 Trivial by deﬁnition.
Vacuity 2 If KB ∪{α} is consistent then KB⊥⊥α = {{KB}}. Hence KB ∗σ α
= KB ∪{α}.
Consistency Suppose that α is consistent. Then KB⊥⊥α ,= ∅and by deﬁni-
tion, every X ∈KB⊥⊥α is consistent with α. Therefore, the intersection of
any subset of KB⊥⊥α is consistent with α. Finally, KB ∗σ α is consistent.
Uniformity If α and β are KB-equivalent, then KB⊥⊥α = KB⊥⊥β
Weak relevance Let β ∈KB and β < KB ∗σ α. Then KB ∗σ α , KB and,
from the deﬁnition of ∗σ,it follows that:
KB ∗σ α=(KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α)) ∪α
Therefore, from β < (KB\σ(KB⊥⊥α)) ∪α and β ∈KB, we can conclude
that β ∈σ(KB⊥⊥α). By deﬁnition σ(KB⊥⊥α) ⊆S KB⊥⊥α, and it follows
that there is some X ∈KB⊥⊥α such that β ∈X. X is a minimal KB-subset
inconsistent with α. Let Y = X\{β}. Then Y is such that Y ⊂X ⊆KB ⊆
KB ∪α. Y is consistent with α but Y ∪{β} is consistent with α. ■
Proof of Theorem 2. Follows from Theorem 1 and Deﬁnition 10. ■
Proof of Lemma 1.
1. Consider a ∆(∆∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S. We need to show that ∆is generated by
algorithm 3 at step 2. From lemma 1, it is clear that there exists a A-kernel
X of DDBG s.t. X ∩EDB = ∆j and X ∪EDB = ∆i. Since X ⊢A, there
must exist a successful derivation for A using only the elements of X as input
clauses and similarly X ⊬A. Consequently ∆must have been constructed
at step 2.
2. Consider a ∆′((∆′ ∈∆i ∪∆j) ∈S′. Let ∆′ be constructed from a success-
ful(unsuccessful) branch i via ∆i(∆j). Let X be the set of all input clauses
used in the refutation i. Clearly X ⊢A(X ⊬A). Further, there exists a mini-
mal (wrt set-inclusion) subset Y of X that derives A (i.e. no proper subset of
Y derives A). Let ∆= Y ∩EDB (Y ∪EDB). Since IDB does not(does) have
any unit clauses, Y must contain some EDB facts, and so ∆is not empty
(empty) and obviously ∆⊆∆′. But, Y need not (need) be a A-kernel for
IDBG since Y is not ground in general. But it stands for several A-kernels
with the same (diﬀerent) EDB facts ∆in them. Thus, from lemma 1, ∆is
a DDB-closed locally minimal abductive explanation for A wrt IDBG and
is contained in ∆′.
3. Since this proof requires some details of acyclic programs that are not directly
related to our discussion here, it is relegated [9].
Proof of Lemma 2.

1. (Only if part) Suppose H is a minimal hitting set for S. Since S ⊆S′ , it
follows that H ⊆S S′ . Further, H hits every element of S′ , which is evident
from the fact that every element of S′ contains an element of S. Hence H is
a hitting set for S′ . By the same arguments, it is not diﬃcult to see that H
is minimal for S′ too.
(If part) Given that H is a minimal hitting set for S′ , we have to show that
it is a minimal hitting set for S too. Assume that there is an element E ∈H
that is not in S S. This means that E is selected from some Y ∈S′\S. But
Y contains an element of S, say X. Since X is also a member of S′ , one
member of X must appear in H. This implies that two elements have been
selected from Y and hence H is not minimal. This is a contradiction and
hence H ⊆S S. Since S ⊆S′ , it is clear that H hits every element in S,
and so H is a hitting set for S. It remains to be shown that H is minimal.
Assume the contrary, that a proper subset H′ of H is a hitting set for S.
Then from the proof of the only if part, it follows that H′ is a hitting set
for S′ too, and contradicts the fact that H is a minimal hitting set for S′ .
Hence, H must be a minimal hitting set for S.
2. (If part) Given that H is a hitting set for S′ , we have to show that it
is a hitting set for S too. First of all, observe that S S = S S′ , and so
H ⊆S S. Moreover, by deﬁnition, for every non-empty member X of S′ ,
H ∩X is not empty. Since S ⊆S′ , it follows that H is a hitting set for S too.
(Only if part) Suppose H is a hitting set for S. As observed above, H ⊆
S S′ . By deﬁnition, for every non-empty member X ∈S, X ∩H is not
empty. Since every member of S′ contains a member of S, it is clear that H
hits every member of S′ , and hence a hitting set for S′ . ■
Proof of Theorem 3. From Lemma 1, it is clear that step 1 and 2 generate all
DDB-closed locally minimum abductive explanation for A wrt IDBG and some
additional sets that contain a DDB-closed local minimal abductive explanation
for A wrt IDBG. Step 3 and 4 clearly computes an inclusion-minimal hitting
set for this. This required now following Lemma 2 and Theorem 2. ■
Proof of Theorem 4. Follows from Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and Theorem 2. ■
