arXiv:2301.00374v1  [cs.CL]  1 Jan 2023
Optimizing Readability Using Genetic Algorithms
Jorge Martinez-Gil
Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH
Softwarepark 32a, 4232 Hagenberg, Austria

Abstract
This research presents ORUGA, a method that tries to automatically optimize the readability of
any text in English. The core idea behind the method is that certain factors aﬀect the readability of
a text, some of which are quantiﬁable (number of words, syllables, presence or absence of adverbs,
and so on). The nature of these factors allows us to implement a genetic learning strategy to replace
some existing words with their most suitable synonyms to facilitate optimization. In addition,
this research seeks to preserve both the original text’s content and form through multi-objective
optimization techniques. In this way, neither the text’s syntactic structure nor the semantic content
of the original message is signiﬁcantly distorted. An exhaustive study on a substantial number
and diversity of texts conﬁrms that our method was able to optimize the degree of readability in
all cases without signiﬁcantly altering their form or meaning. The source code of this approach is
available at https://github.com/jorge-martinez-gil/oruga
Keywords:
Text readability, Text Optimization, Genetic Algorithms
1. Introduction
Readability is a measure that tells us how easy it is to read a text. It corresponds to the level
of literacy that is expected from the readers in the target audience. In this way, readability is
considered one of the most critical factors that facilitate the user experience when consuming in-
formation. It is crucial because it is key to establishing a trusting relationship between information
producers and consumers. It must be considered that some factors, such as complexity, legibility,
or typography, contribute to making a text readable. However, not all factors are quantiﬁable and
cannot be optimized by automatic techniques. In this paper, we focus solely and exclusively on
factors of a quantiﬁable nature, which always revolve around basic or advanced statistics associated
with the text to be optimized.
Therefore, text readability refers to how simple it is to read and comprehend a given text,
depending on its unique characteristics.
These characteristics are usually measurable through
metrics like the number of syllables in a sentence. The diversity of words used to create a readability

score can be used to gauge this measure (Collins-Thompson, 2014). Therefore, ORUGA is intended
to facilitate the reader’s ability to understand a text by optimizing its readability.
In the context of this work, a clear distinction between readability and quality should be made.
Quality emphasizes essential elements like grammar, spelling, and voice. However, the goal of
producing textual information as plainly as possible and better matching it with its audience is
what is meant when a text is said to be readable. In this way, text readability partially overlaps
with the notion of text diﬃculty, which is also an essential aspect of human language, and has an
impact on the daily lives of most people who consume written information.
Our research is based on the premise that readability can be measured by considering met-
rics related to the text and then using a speciﬁc mathematical formula to calculate it. Because
diﬀerent readability scores are calculated using diﬀerent mathematical formulas, it is possible to
design a strategy that replaces many of the terms in the text with synonyms using a global opti-
mization scheme. Such optimization is about maximizing or minimizing the result yielded by such
mathematical formulas at the user’s convenience. In practice, such a strategy can be implemented
through a genetic algorithm, as shown throughout this work.
Therefore, our research oﬀers a viewpoint from the ﬁeld of computer science, concentrating on
the fundamental text representations and metrics utilized by readability assessment methods. In
this way, the most signiﬁcant contributions of this work to state-of-the-art are the following:
• We present, for the ﬁrst time, a technique that can automatically optimize the readability of
any text, i.e., we can minimize or maximize the degree of readability of a text automatically
without substantive changes.
• We study which are the best sources of synonyms currently available for text readability opti-
mization. Speciﬁcally, we have studied Wordnet, word2vec, and web scraping and established
a classiﬁcation around optimizing up to ten texts of diﬀerent natures.
• We present an additional method based on multi-objective optimization, whose mission is to
ensure that the minimum number of words needed in the original text is replaced in such a
way that the structure of the text is not impacted.
• Last but not least, we studied several strategies that allow us to measure (and therefore
optimize) the semantic distance between the original text and the generated text. In this
way, the impact on the original text’s meaning can be controlled.
This research work is structured as follows: Section 2 shows state-of-the-art methods and tools
for improving text readability.
Section 3 presents the technical details of our proposal; these
technical details are based on the design of a genetic cutting strategy that allows us to explore
a vast search space while consuming a reasonable amount of resources. Section 4 explains how
to minimize the impact on the form of the original text using a multi-objective optimization
2

technique. Section 5 shows how to preserve the essence of the original text by ensuring that the
distance between the original text and the text obtained is kept as small as possible. It is necessary
to remark that sections 3, 4, and 5 present information about the design of diﬀerent experiments
and the raw results obtained, and their subsequent analysis. Finally, we conclude with the main
lessons that can be learned from this research.
2. State-of-the-art
Let us begin with a formal deﬁnition of readability; for instance,(Chall & Dale, 1995) deﬁnes
readability as the ”total number of elements in a given text that aﬀect a reader’s success.” This
reader’s success is a measure of how well a text that is read at an optimal speed can be understood.
At the same time, (Mc Laughlin, 1969) deﬁnes readability as ”the level at which certain people ﬁnd
reading material convincing and understandable.” Beyond these deﬁnitions, we are particularly
interested in the quantiﬁable aspects of readability, i.e., what can be objectively measured. Oth-
erwise, it would not be easy to proceed to its optimization using a computer. Let us see what the
literature says about these quantiﬁable aspects.
2.1. Text readability in the scientiﬁc literature
Readability metrics usually use simple features to calculate the degree of readability of a text.
Some commonly used features are the number of sentences or words, the ratio of unique words,
the total number of syllables, the proportion of unique words in the text, the number of digits, the
number of words with many syllables, etc. Although, at ﬁrst, it may seem that these metrics are
simplistic, they are very commonly used for two important reasons: they are much cheaper and
faster to use than the alternatives consisting of human surveys, and according to experts, they
usually give exceptionally reliable results that are in line with reality.
The goal of improving readability is to increase the chances that readers can understand the
thoughts and ideas reﬂected in the text.
So that misunderstanding is minimized, information
processing is facilitated without requiring much eﬀort and energy consumption. With this goal in
mind, many sources can be found that advise how to improve a text’s readability. However, these
are manually compiled protocols that a human operator must translate into reality by modifying
the text manually. For example, for a given metric, it is better to shorten sentences; for another,
it is better to replace complex words with simpler ones, etc.
This is precisely where our contribution to the state-of-the-art lies. Optimizing texts automat-
ically using a metric as a target means we do not have to concern about taking any manual action
leading to altering the text. The genetic algorithm will ﬁnd a way to proceed automatically.
2.2. Why is text readability important?
There are several contexts and population groups for which readability is critical. Especially
when it is necessary to convey a written message to an audience. For example,
3

• Teachers need to be sure of the readability of a text before deciding whether it is appropriate
for their students. This is particularly important in language learning. With the method
presented here, the text can be optimized for a certain niche of learners.
• In the world of advertising, readability allows for building a trust relationship between ad-
vertisers and potential consumers. Advertising goods or services using texts with high read-
ability is usually not a good idea since the message might not reach an essential part of the
population. This is even more important in the search engine optimization sector, as many
search engines use readability metrics as a ranking factor when responding to user searches.
• Readability is also relevant for professionals who work on websites (Pantula & Kuppusamy,
2022), news (Qin, 2021), or even educational materials (Ante, 2022).
In some countries,
there is even a legal requirement that government agencies provide textual information with
certain readability levels to reach the entire population.
2.3. Readability metrics
There are several metrics to quantify how readable a text is (Meade & Smith, 1991). Most
metrics have been designed for the English language (Maqsood et al., 2022), although works also
explore readability in other languages (Madrazo Azpiazu & Pera, 2020). Without being exhaus-
tive, we can mention, in chronological order, some of the metrics that enjoy or have enjoyed more
signiﬁcant popularity when dealing with the English language.
Text readability depends not only on the characteristics of the text but also on the educational
background of the individuals interested in understanding the text.
We will see this reﬂected
below when measuring readability using formulas. We will see how readability metrics take a text
as input and calculate a numerical score that usually corresponds to the level of education required
to understand the text.
2.3.1. Dale-Chall readability
The Dale-Chall readability formula (Dale & Chall, 1948) requires a list of 3,000 words that
fourth-grade U.S. students could reliably understand, as shown in Equation 1.
DCRF = 0.1579
difficult words
total words
× 100

+ 0.0496

total words
total sentences

(1)
2.3.2. SMOG readability
The SMOG readability level (Mc Laughlin, 1969) can be assessed through a formula originally
used for checking health messages, as shown in Equation 2. It corresponds to the years of education
necessary to understand the text.
SMOG = 1.0430
r
number of polysyllables ×
30
number of sentences + 3.1291
(2)
4

2.3.3. ARI readability
The ARI assesses the U.S. grade level required to read a text (Senter & Smith, 1967). In some
ways, it is similar to other formulas. Its diﬀerence is that rather than counting syllables, it counts
characters: the more characters, the more complex the word. It also counts sentences as shown in
Equation 3. This sets it apart from some other formulas.
ARI = 4.71
total Characters
total Words

+ 0.5

total Words
total Sentences

−21.43
(3)
2.3.4. Flesch Kincaid readability
Flesch Kincaid’s readability score, as shown in Equation 4, is a metric based on grade levels
that is used commonly in the insurance industry. Grade levels made it much easier for people
to understand (Kincaid et al., 1975). A Flesch Kincaid Grade Level (FKGL) between 8 and 10
means that the text should be accessible to the public.
FKGL remains the most widely-used
formula today.
FKGL = 206.835 −1.015

total words
total sentences

−84.6
total syllables
total words

(4)
Over the past decade, several natural language processing (NLP) techniques have been pro-
posed to determine the readability of a text. Thus, as opposed to the classical approach of using
formulas that measure a limited set of text features, these new variants have attempted to mea-
sure the diﬃculty of understanding sentences and words and even the complexity of the syntax
(Martinc et al., 2021). Even some techniques based on predictors of readability, such as cohesion
and coherence, have received considerable attention. However, so far, these approaches have yet
to be able to predict the readability of a text better than the classical techniques discussed here
(Todirascu et al., 2016).
2.4. Semantic Similarity
The ﬁeld of semantic similarity measurement (Martinez-Gil, 2022) is one of the most ac-
tive in several diﬀerent research communities (information retrieval, database integration, nat-
ural language processing, and so on) (Rus et al., 2013).
This is due to its signiﬁcant implica-
tions on many available frameworks, methods, and tools (Navigli & Martelli, 2019) both in in-
dustry and academia.
The literature around this topic has skyrocketed in the last few years
(Chandrasekaran & Mago, 2021). However, most research works focus on determining the similar-
ity between words (Zhu & Iglesias, 2017), phrases, or documents (Martinez-Gil & Chaves-Gonzalez,
2019; Martinez-Gil & Chaves-Gonzalez, 2020).
In this way, rarely the likelihood of eﬀectively throwing out the most similar words to a
given one has been discussed. To this eﬀect, there are synonym libraries that have been man-
ually compiled and some word embedding techniques that do the job well.
The most promi-
5

nent solutions in this direction are WordNet (Pedersen et al., 2004), word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013), or BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
However, it must be taken into account that the re-
source requirements for techniques based on the computation of word embeddings are very high
(Martinez-Gil & Chaves-Gonzalez, 2022).
2.5. Contribution over the state-of-the-art
Determining text readability based on a formal analysis of the structures and words used has
been a recurring theme in the literature over the last few years. As a result, many metrics have
been proposed to measure text readability. A common denominator of all these metrics is that a
high score usually means the text is diﬃcult to understand. In other words, a higher degree of
study is needed to understand it. For this reason, many communication professionals often use
tools to help them discern whether the text ﬁts a given audience. However, none of these tools
can do the professional’s job automatically, which is why our contribution is essential.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time anyone has proposed automatically improving
the readability of text without signiﬁcantly altering the content or the text’s form. In addition,
we put this innovative method through its paces using a wide range of texts that varied in subject
matter and level of readability. Furthermore, we provide the source code of the ﬁrst implementation
for anyone interested in experimenting with or improving the method.
3. Part I: Design and Implementation of a Functional Solution
In the following, we explain our proposal for text readability optimization using a method
based on genetic algorithms. In this section, we outline the technical preliminaries, discuss the
implementation, show an illustrative example of how our approach works in practice, and conduct
an experimental study using real data and use cases that can help us get an idea of the performance
of this approach in practice.
3.1. Technical Preliminaries
Our hypothesis is that we can ﬁnd a set of synonyms to replace some words in the original
text so that the value returned by the readability formula can be optimized. For example, if the
readability formula rewards or penalizes long words, we have to ﬁnd synonyms of less length. In
reality, we only have to concern about understanding which formula best represents readability in
our speciﬁc scenario and indicate it as a ﬁtness function. The genetic algorithm will understand
how to proceed. Thus, we are faced with a classical optimization problem.
We intend to act only on the vocabulary since it is one of the most critical parts of that
language. It is widely assumed that vocabulary is the essential part of a language because, without
vocabulary, it is impossible to compose any message (Wilkins, 1972). We do not act on proper
nouns, prepositions, or other stop words to avoid distorting the original message.
6

While this problem can be solved by a brute-force search over the range of the words of a given
text w0, w1, ..., wn, the GA method scales very well when dealing with large texts. In this case, a
brute-force search would be prohibitively expensive. We could act on other aspects, such as the
structure, but then we would risk distorting the original text’s essence again.
Our idea is to ﬁnd the combination of words (which will be encoded in the form of an individual)
that optimizes the desired objective. The choice of the ﬁtness function is eﬀortless and has the
advantage that the solution automatically identiﬁes what kind of words lead to the optimization.
In this work, we work with three main sources of synonyms:
• WordNet (Miller, 1995), which is a thesaurus that has been manually compiled. It is probably
one of the most widely used dictionaries in information systems and will give us several
alternatives to substitute each candidate word.
No surprises are to be expected in this
library, except perhaps the substitution of words with a synonym that has a sense far from
the original. In any case, we have a solution to this problem.
• wordvec (Mikolov et al., 2013), which is an approach that calculates the vectors associated
with each word according to a textual corpus of relevance.
Once each vector has been
computed, a computation process can be performed by which the N vectors most similar
to a given one are identiﬁed. This way, synonyms of relevance are obtained for the word in
question. Note that this process is computationally expensive.
• Web scraping (Mitchell, 2018), which consists of obtaining the synonyms from some websites,
usually specialized, so that we can shuﬄe several alternatives per candidate word.
This
method obtains many high-quality word candidates, but it should be used responsibly because
it can cause problems on the server side if many hundreds or thousands of requests are made.
Therefore, the method is ﬁne for experimentation, but it would be unreasonable to exploit
it.
3.2. Implementation
The implementation of this novel approach is based on a classical optimization scheme using
genetic algorithms. Algorithm 1 brieﬂy explains in pseudo-code how the whole process is performed
by adapting the classical structure of the genetic algorithm (Forrest, 1996) where diﬀerent operators
capable of implementing selection, cross-over and mutation processes are considered in order to
evolve a given population towards the desired objective.
Please note that before starting the evolution process, a pre-processing of the text must be
done in order to identify the candidate words to be replaced by a synonym. We propose that all
words are candidates except: proper names, stop words, and prepositions. The reason for this is
that they are often words for which it is really diﬃcult to ﬁnd a synonym.
7

Algorithm 1 Optimizing Readability Using Genetic Algorithm
1: procedure ORUGA
2:
population ←generationRandomIndividual (population)
3:
calculateReadabilityScore (population)
4:
while (stop condition not reached) do
5:
parents ←selectionOfIndividuals (population)
6:
oﬀspring ←Crossover (parents)
7:
oﬀspring ←Mutation (oﬀspring)
8:
oﬀspring ←calculateReadabilityScore (oﬀspring)
9:
population ←updatePopulation (oﬀspring)
10:
endwhile
11:
optimizedText ←optimizedIndividual (population)
12:
optimizedText ←correctErrorsIfNecessary (optimizedText)
13:
return optimizedText
In relation to the genetic algorithm itself, the parametric details of the solution will be discussed
below, but it is possible to see how we implement it in the form of a classical evolutionary process.
This means that a population of individuals is selected randomly, and their readability score is
calculated. We then proceed with an iterative process of selection, crossover, and mutation; the
best individuals are passed from generation to generation until one of the stopping criteria is met:
the highest possible has been reached (unlikely), or the number of iterations has been exhausted
(very likely).
Finally, at the end of the evolutionary process, we correct the text in case grammatical errors
are produced by substituting a synonym that does not ﬁt the tense and the form of the sentence
in which it is framed. This way, we obtain a corrected readability score, which may vary slightly
from the one derived automatically. In return, we ensure that the results are usable, or at least
close to being usable.
3.3. Illustrative examples
Example 1 shows us how ORUGA works with written material about science extracted from
Wikipedia. In fact, our aim is to observe how ORUGA behaves when trying to minimize the FKGL
readability score using synonyms from the library WordNet. Let us remember that FKGL (or one
of its variants) is probably the most widely used metric and its optimization brings advantages
in several ﬁelds. Please note that the text to be treated can be of any length, but to facilitate
the presentation to the reader, we have chosen (and will choose throughout this paper) one that
contains only several sentences.
8

Example 1. Science
Original text Source: Wikipedia
“The sea moderates the climate and has important roles in the water cycle, car-
bon cycle, and nitrogen cycle. Humans harnessing and studying the sea have been
recorded since ancient times, and evidenced well into prehistory, while its modern
scientiﬁc study is called oceanography. The most abundant solid dissolved in sea-
water is sodium chloride.
The water also contains salts of magnesium, calcium,
potassium, and mercury, amongst many other elements, some in minute concentra-
tions. Salinity varies widely, being lower near the surface and the mouths of large
rivers and higher in the depths of the ocean; however, the relative proportions of
dissolved salts vary little across the oceans.” FKGL score: 14.06.
ORUGA - minimizing the FKGL score - library Wordnet
The sea moderates the climate and has important part in the H2O cycle, C cycle,
and N cycle. Humans harnessing and studying the sea have been taped since ancient
times, and attested well into prehistory, while its modern scientiﬁc study is called
oceanography. The most abundant solid fade out in brine is Na chloride. The H2O
too contains salts of magnesium, calcium, potassium, and mercury, amongst many
other elements, some in min concentrations. Salinity changes widely, being got down
near the surface and the mouths of large rivers and higher in the depth of the ocean;
however, the relative proportions of fade out salts change little across the oceans.
FKGL score: 11.85
As can be seen, ORUGA can optimize the textual input by ﬁrst automatically identifying which
words can be replaced by a synonym, and then undertaking a process of searching for synonyms
that improve the results of the metric to be optimized. In this way, the impact on the initial
message is minimal, although it is true that some synonyms can slightly distort the meaning of the
text, and therefore ﬁnal supervision by the user is required. However, there is no need to concern
because this problem will be addressed later in the paper.
Let us look now at Example 2, which is a written text about the history of Austria that has
been also extracted from Wikipedia, and we would like to to minimize the FKGL readability score
using synonyms automatically obtained by web scraping.
9

Example 2. History
Original text Source: Wikipedia
“Austria emerged from the remnants of the Eastern and Hungarian March at the
end of the ﬁrst millennium. Originally a margraviate of Bavaria, it developed into
a duchy of the Holy Roman Empire in 1156 and was later made an archduchy
in 1453. In the 16th century, Vienna began serving as the empire administrative
capital and Austria thus became the heartland of the Habsburg monarchy. After
the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, Austria established its own
empire, which became a great power and the dominant member of the German
Confederation. The defeat in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 led to the end of the
Confederation and paved the way for the establishment of Austria-Hungary a year
later.” FKGL score: 13.20
ORUGA - minimizing the FKGL score - web scraping
Austria looms from the debris of the Eastern and Hungarian March at the end of
the ﬁrst millennium. Originally a margravate of Bavaria, it matured within a duchy
of the Holy Roman Empire in 1156 and was next made an arch duchy in 1453.
In the 16th century, Vienna lead plate as the command departmental central and
Austria thus come the heartland of the Habsburg monarchy. After the divorce of
the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, Austria settled its own empire, that come a great
power and the dominant branch of the German Confederation. The defeat in the
Austro-Prussian War of 1866 led to the end of the Confederation and brick the way
for the founding of Austria-Hungary a year later. FKGL score: 11.35
Once again, we can see how the genetic algorithm has acted intelligently to decrease the text
readability score and therefore make the text accessible to more people.
It is clear that the
suitability of some words may be subject to debate, but the ﬁrst objective of this research, i.e., to
optimize the readability score, has been achieved. As we mentioned before, we will be concerned
to outline a ﬁnal product later in this paper.
Finally, let us look at the opposite case, i.e., let us see if we can make a text more diﬃcult to
read without losing its essence. In Example 3, we have a text about sports also extracted from
Wikipedia, and we do not want to make the text accessible to as many people as possible, but on
the contrary, we want to increase the level of readability. We will now try a diﬀerent metric, e.g.,
ARI.
10

Example 3. Sports
Original text Source: Wikipedia
“Real Madrid Club de Futbol, meaning Royal Madrid Football Club, commonly
referred to as Real Madrid, is a Spanish professional football club based in Madrid.
Founded in 1902 as Madrid Football Club, the club has traditionally worn a white
home kit since its inception. The honoriﬁc title real is Spanish for Royal and was
bestowed to the club by King Alfonso XIII in 1920 together with the royal crown in
the emblem. Real Madrid have played their home matches in the Santiago Bernabeu
Stadium in downtown Madrid since 1947. Unlike most European sporting entities,
Real Madrid members (socios) have owned and operated the club throughout its
history.” ARI score: 12.69.
ORUGA - maximizing the ARI score - web scraping
Real Madrid Club de Futbol, connotation Royal Madrid Football Club, frequently
referred to as Real Madrid, is a Spanish professional football business established
in Madrid.
Founded in 1902 as Madrid Football Club, the business has consis-
tently timeworn an alabaster home kit since its inception. The appellation title real
is Spanish for Royal and was entrusted to the business by King Alfonso XIII in
1920 together alongside the aristocratic culmination in the emblem. Real Madrid
have played their familiar matches in the Santiago Bernab´eu Stadium in downtown
Madrid afterward 1947. Unlike most European sporting entities, Real Madrid as-
semblage (socios) have owned and negotiated the business throughout its history.
ARI score: 15.53
As can be seen, after processing the fragment related to Real Madrid extracted from Wikipedia,
the genetic algorithm selects synonyms that are much longer and more complicated to read to
increase the ARI score. Although a use case consisting of making the text less accessible to people
is hard to imagine, it may ﬁnd application in some speciﬁc niches of learning, education, etc.
3.4. Experimental study
In this section, we explain the details of an empirical study that we have carried out to know
the feasibility of our new method. To do so, we ﬁrst established the conditions of the experi-
ments by setting up an experimental setup. Secondly, we have run and obtained the raw results.
Furthermore, thirdly, and lastly, we have proceeded with the analysis of the data obtained.
11

3.4.1. Experimental setup
Adjusting the parameters of the genetic algorithm diﬀers from the focus of this work. Therefore,
we have chosen a classical parameter setting, which has been shown to work quite well. Standard
tuning of the parameters, e.g., through a grid search, is a possible line of future work. In the
meantime, the parameters we have used for our experiments are the following:
• Population size {10, 15, 20}: 20
• Number of parents mating {10, 15, 20}: 10
• Number of genes: one per candidate word to be substituted by a synonym
• Fitness function: the user can choose among Equations 1, 2, 3, 4
• Stop condition: {100, 200, 300}: 300 generations
To test whether our approach can optimize text readability, we semi-randomly selected ten texts
extracted from Wikipedia. These texts are classiﬁed into several categories engineering, geography,
history, science, and sports. Some metrics, such as SMOG, require at least 30 sentences to apply
their formula. For cases where we do not reach 30 sentences, we will duplicate the text until
we reach that number of sentences. It should also be noted that depending on which readability
category each use case represents. For example, magenta represents the highest diﬃculty (FKGL
between 15 and 18), equivalent to an academic paper.
Red represents medium-high diﬃculty
(FKGL between 12 and 15). The black color represents a medium diﬃculty (FKGL between 9
and 12). Furthermore, the blue color represents a low-medium diﬃculty. It is estimated that up
to 80% of the native English-speaking population could understand text with an FKGL between
6 and 9, which is what the blue value represents.
Furthermore, every experiment was run on a standard computer with 32 GB of primary memory
and an Intel Core i7-8700 processor running at 3.20 GHz on Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit. Most of
the functionality has been implemented using the library PyGAD1, an open-source Python library
for building genetic algorithms.
3.4.2. Experiments
The ﬁrst experiment is the one that is the most useful in practice. It consists of trying to
minimize the readability of the ten proposed texts so that the processed text can reach the largest
possible audience. To do that, we want to use readability metrics which estimate the readability
of a text based on simple aspects such as syllable and word counts. We use the FKGL score since
this metric, or some of its variants, has been used for decades on traditional texts, and it is still
one of the most common and widely used traditional readability measures.
1https://pypi.org/project/pygad/
12

01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
1
1.5
2
2.5
#Use Case
Improvement (GL)
Figure 1: Results for the minimization of the FKGL score using WordNet
Fig 1 shows us the results obtained when reducing the FKGL for the texts under consideration
using the library WordNet.
The results shown are the summary of ten independent runs per
use case. Since we are dealing with cold start methods with random values, and there is even a
component of randomness in the mutations, we will almost always get a diﬀerent result, so it is
essential to show the results in this way.
Positive results have been obtained in all 100 experiments performed (ten runs for ten use cases).
In addition, minimum improvements, average improvements, and even maximum improvements
have been achieved in the range between 0.77 and 2.73 points on the FKGL scale.
Fig 2 shows us the results obtained using the synonym calculation method using word2vec.
As it is possible to see, the variance of the results is enormous, which means that using this
library will make the results not very predictable. At the same time, as in the previous case,
all 100 experiments were able to obtain readability improvements that ranged between 0.42 and
3.90-grade levels.
Fig 3 shows us the results we have obtained by searching for synonyms with web scraping
techniques. The results this time have a smaller variance than in the previous case. In addition,
we have again obtained favorable results in all 100 experiments performed.
The optimization
achieved ranges between 1.02 and 4.20-grade levels.
Table 1 shows the summary results of the 300 experiments performed (100 for each synonym
library). For WordNet, a median optimization of 1.63-grade levels is expected, very similar to
13

01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
1
2
3
4
#Use Case
Improvement (GL)
Figure 2: Results for the minimization of the FKGL score using word2vec
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
#Use Case
Improvement (GL)
Figure 3: Results for the minimization of the FKGL score using Web Scraping
14

Library
Minimum
Median
Maximum
WordNet
0.77
1.63
2.73
word2vec
0.42
0.96
3.90
Web scraping
1.02
1.61
4.20
Table 1: Summary of the results obtained using the diﬀerent libraries of synonyms
Use case
DCRF
SMOG
ARI
FKGL
01/science
1.11 ± 0.17
2.03 ± 0.13
2.90 ± 0.27
2.53 ± 0.15
02/history
0.29 ± 0.12
0.71 ± 0.08
0.84 ± 0.05
0.90 ± 0.04
03/geography
0.65 ± 0.07
0.91 ± 0.04
1.17 ± 0.12
1.33 ± 0.04
04/sports
0.78 ± 0.14
0.42 ± 0.12
0.83 ± 0.05
0.93 ± 0.10
05/engineering
0.59 ± 0.06
0.60 ± 0.10
0.66 ± 0.10
0.75 ± 0.09
06/geography
0.52 ± 0.15
0.70 ± 0.10
0.77 ± 0.19
0.77 ± 0.18
07/engineering
1.03 ± 0.15
0.51 ± 0.03
1.12 ± 0.21
1.32 ± 0.01
08/history
0.77 ± 0.09
0.27 ± 0.06
0.44 ± 0.00
0.73 ± 0.17
09/sports
0.46 ± 0.06
1.06 ± 0.28
0.99 ± 0.12
0.81 ± 0.10
10/history
0.74 ± 0.04
0.65 ± 0.03
0.77 ± 0.13
0.93 ± 0.04
Table 2: Summary of the results obtained for the experiments performed w.r.t. minimization. The numerical
values represent absolute improvements after using ORUGA
that achieved by web scraping. The median optimization using word2vec is the worst of the three
libraries considered. Please note that we are not judging here the quality of the replacements, but
the values to optimize the input text independently of the quality of the ﬁnal result.
Table 2 shows a summary of all the results we have obtained. The texts have been randomly
obtained from Wikipedia. The range of values shown indicates the minimum value that could be
reached and the maximum value (for minimization and maximization problems respectively).
We analyze the four formulas that we consider most representative, but the analysis of other
formulas would not be a problem. When working with SMOG, we must be careful because the text
to be analyzed requires at least 30 sentences. We have duplicated the text for these experiments
so that these 30 sentences can be used.
Table 3 shows a summary of all the results we have obtained when maximizing the readability
scores. As can be seen by comparing with the table above, it is much easier to increase the level
of readability than to decrease it, i.e., it is easier to make a text diﬃcult to read than the other
way around.
3.4.3. Discussion
We have seen how it is possible to build a solution that optimizes the readability of texts of
diﬀerent natures. Moreover, such optimization is done respecting the content and the form of
such texts, trying to minimize the impact of word replacements by synonyms that better ﬁt the
readability criteria of the diﬀerent formulas we have studied. We have seen how optimization can
occur in two ways. First, it can be done in such a way as to reduce the readability score, which
15

Use case
DCRF
SMOG
ARI
FKGL
01/science
1.98 ± 0.16
1.30 ± 0.06
1.80 ± 0.08
2.09 ± 0.14
02/history
1.85 ± 0.25
1.99 ± 0.09
3.88 ± 0.28
3.02 ± 0.08
03/geography
2.38 ± 0.12
1.23 ± 0.08
4.44 ± 0.13
4.00 ± 0.44
04/sports
2.09 ± 0.40
2.79 ± 0.07
4.63 ± 0.40
4.26 ± 0.04
05/engineering
2.10 ± 0.43
2.16 ± 0.11
4.55 ± 0.10
4.23 ± 0.35
06/geography
1.53 ± 0.21
1.81 ± 0.22
2.96 ± 0.04
2.90 ± 0.41
07/engineering
1.49 ± 0.38
1.71 ± 0.04
3.87 ± 0.46
3.34 ± 0.16
08/history
1.43 ± 0.18
3.09 ± 0.13
4.11 ± 0.63
3.70 ± 0.21
09/sports
1.60 ± 0.21
2.29 ± 0.16
3.54 ± 0.28
2.56 ± 0.04
10/history
2.06 ± 0.08
2.64 ± 0.04
3.99 ± 0.25
3.27 ± 0.52
Table 3: Summary of the results obtained for the experiments performed w.r.t. maximization. The numerical
values represent absolute improvements after using ORUGA
will allow more people to understand the text perfectly. This is undoubtedly the most practical
option in practice. Furthermore, secondly, it can be done to increase the readability score, allowing
a smaller number of people to understand the processed text unambiguously. This option has less
practical utility than can be discerned at ﬁrst glance.
Based on the research we have carried out, possible improvements can be made. For example,
a multi-objective optimization algorithm could simultaneously optimize the readability score by
aﬀecting as few words as possible. In this way, the impact of our method on the original text would
be even more negligible. A solution front could allow the human operator to decide the trade-oﬀ
between the score modiﬁcation and the replaced words.
Finally, and as a limitation of our method, it can be observed that sometimes the processed
text contains minor grammatical errors. This is because we have yet to use techniques that allow,
for example, to choose the appropriate verb tense for the context. Here there are two alternatives.
On the one hand, we can implement better methods for correcting grammatical errors to obtain a
corrected readability score; on the other hand, we can give the user the option to edit or choose
the word that best ﬁts each moment.
4. Part II: Minimizing the impact on the form of the original text
While in Section 3, we have seen that it is possible to design a functional solution to optimize
the text readability, we have also seen that the approach can be intrusive at times. That is, the
replacement of many words by synonyms can lead to a distortion of the original message. For
this reason, in this section, we focus on minimizing the impact of ORUGA on the original text
by replacing as few words as possible. To do so, we will build a solution based on multi-objective
optimization (MOO) that allows us to optimize readability and simultaneously minimize the num-
ber of replacements. This section comprises the technical preliminaries, the implementation, some
illustrative examples, and an empirical study to test several texts of diﬀerent natures.
16

4.1. Technical Preliminaries
We have already seen how in the ﬁeld of text readability, there has been a great eﬀort to build
straightforward formulas that can be understood by people and have a good correlation to how
easily a text can be read from a human perspective. Now we go one step further to obtain a higher
quality result. MOO is a strategy in which two or more objectives are simultaneously optimized.
This is the situation we ﬁnd ourselves in, given that we want: on the one hand, to improve the
readability of a text, and on the other hand, we want to reduce as much as possible the number of
words that need to be replaced to improve readability, and thus to minimize the impact that our
approach has on the original text form.
Furthermore, MOO is useful when decisions must be made despite potential trade-oﬀs between
more than one orthogonal objective. Again, this is our situation because our goals of maximizing
readability while simultaneously replacing the fewest possible words require us to pursue two
completely diﬀerent goals. In situations like this, diﬀerent solutions can simultaneously fulﬁll all
objectives. As a result, all optimal solutions ought to be regarded as equivalent merit without
any external evaluation from a human operator (Martinez-Gil & Chaves-Gonzalez, 2021). More
formally, we can model a MOO problem as expressed in Equation 5.
min (s1(⃗x), s2(⃗x), . . . , sn(⃗x))
subject to ⃗x ∈X
(5)
In MOO, no solution addresses all objective functions simultaneously. As a result, the priority
should be placed on ﬁnding solutions that cannot make any goals better without making at least
one of the other goals worse. Therefore, a solution ⃗x1 ∈X is said to dominate another one ⃗x2 ∈X
if the conditions expressed in Equation 6 are met.
si(⃗x1) ≤si(⃗x2) ∀i ∈{1, 2, 3, . . ., n}
sj(⃗x1) < sj(⃗x2) ∃j ∈{1, 2, 3, . . ., n}
(6)
In this way, a solution ⃗x ∈X is optimal if no solution might dominate it. An element x is
said to dominate another element y if x is not worse than y concerning all the goals and is strictly
better than y for at least one. The elements of the search space that are not dominated give rise
to a Pareto front, which represents the best possible solutions to the orthogonal objectives.
4.2. Implementation
There are several implementations for MOO strategies Kukkonen & Lampinen (2005); Zhang & Li
(2007). It is beyond the scope of this paper to consider them all. However, we will look at one of
the best ones, NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002). This strategy is summarized in Algorithm 2. Its mode
of operation is based on the concepts of fronts and crowding distance.
17

NSGA-II adheres to the basic structure of a genetic algorithm but employs a diﬀerent approach
to mating and selection for survival. In the NSGA-II, the ﬁrst step is to select individuals in a
front-wise fashion. In this way, a situation will arise where it will be necessary to divide a front
because it will not be possible for all individuals to survive.
The solutions are chosen according to the crowding distance for this particular splitting front.
Within the parameters of the objective space, the Manhattan Distance corresponds to the crowding
distance. On the other hand, it is desired that the extreme points be maintained with each new
generation, and as a result, an inﬁnite crowding distance is assigned to them. Algorithm 2 shows
us a possible implementation of this approach.
Algorithm 2 MOO Technique for Optimizing Text Readability
1: procedure ORUGA2-MOO
2:
population ←initializePopulation ()
3:
population ←generationRandomIndividual (population)
4:
calculateReadabilityScore (population)
5:
assignRankBasedOnPareto (population)
6:
auxiliarPopulation ←generationChildPopulation (population)
7:
while (stop condition not reached) do
8:
for (each individual in population and auxiliarPopulation) do
9:
solution ←calculateReadabilityScore (population)
10:
solution ←assignRankBasedOnPareto (population)
11:
solution ←generateNonDominateSolutions (population)
12:
solution ←determiningCrowdingDistance (population)
13:
for (each solution) do
14:
population ←addingSolutionsNextGeneration (population)
15:
end for
16:
end for
17:
population ←selectPointsLowFrontHighCrowdingDistance (population)
18:
population ←generationNextPopulation (population)
19:
end while
20:
optimizedText ←optimizedIndividual (solution)
21:
optimizedText ←correctErrorsIfNecessary (optimizedText)
22:
return optimizedText
NSGA-II is an example of a genetic algorithm, and it possesses the three characteristics listed
below: It operates based on an elitist principle, which states that only the most privileged mem-
bers of a population are permitted to be passed down to subsequent generations. In addition, it
employs a mechanism speciﬁcally designed to preserve diversity (crowding distance). As a direct
consequence of this, it can identify non-dominated solutions.
4.3. Illustrative examples
Since we are trying to optimize two orthogonal objectives simultaneously, it is impossible to
oﬀer a single solution. Nevertheless, we can put in the hands of the human operator a front of
18

solutions ranging from a total optimization by modifying the most signiﬁcant number of words to
a minor optimization by touching a minimum number of words. It is up to the human operator to
decide which solution to choose.
Example 4 shows a real trace that controls the number of words to be replaced using the
MOO technique known as NSGA-II. The text on which it operates is about geography and has
been extracted from Wikipedia. Once again, we must insist that although, in theory, it would
be possible to edit the words manually to satisfy the criteria of a given metric, this approach is
transparent and works automatically for any desired metric. Please note that the words in blue
are candidates to be replaced by a synonym.
Example 4. Geography Source: Wikipedia
Goal: Minimize the FKGL score by using Wordnet synonyms and minimize the words to
be replaced using NSGA-II.
“Niagara Falls is a group of three waterfalls at the southern end of Niagara Gorge,
spanning the border between the province of Ontario in Canada and the state of New
York in the United States. The largest of the three is Horseshoe Falls, which straddles
the international border of the two countries. It is also known as the Canadian Falls. The
smaller American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls lie within the United States. Bridal Veil Falls
is separated from Horseshoe Falls by Goat Island and from American Falls by Luna Island,
with both islands situated in New York. Formed by the Niagara River, which drains Lake
Erie into Lake Ontario, the combined falls have the highest ﬂow rate of any waterfall in
North America that has a vertical drop of more than 50 m (160 ft). During peak daytime
tourist hours, more than 168,000 m3 (5.9 million cu ft) of water goes over the crest of the
falls every minute.” FKGL score: 10.72.
Words to be replaced
FKGL expected
5
10.43 (▽2.71%)
6
10.28 (▽4.10%)
7
10.13 (▽5.50%)
8
9.98 (▽6.90%)
9
9.91 (▽7.56%)
10
9.84 (▽8.21%)
11
9.76 (▽8.96%)
12
9.68 (▽9.70%)
13
9.61 (▽10.35%)
As it is possible to observe, minor changes can be made to the original text and still optimize
readability. It is still an open question whether minor changes in form are not so minor in meaning.
But that open question will be addressed later in this paper.
19

4.4. Experimental study
This section will explain the speciﬁcs of an empirical study we conducted to determine whether
this novel approach is feasible. To accomplish this, we initially prepared an experimental setup so
that we could determine the parameters of the experiments. Second, we completed the test and
collected the unprocessed data. We have moved forward with the analysis of the data that we have
gathered, which brings us to our third and last point.
4.4.1. Experimental setup
As was the case in the preceding part, the meticulous ﬁne-tuning of the MOO strategy’s pa-
rameters will not be the primary focus of this work. As a result, following a brief preliminary study
based on a scheme of traditional parameter settings, one conﬁguration works quite well. As a direct
consequence of this, the following is a list of the parameters that we used for our experiments:
• Population size {10, 15, 20}: 20
• Number of parents mating {10, 15, 20}: 20
• Number of genes: one per candidate word to be substituted by a synonym
• Fitness function: the user can choose among Equations 1, 2, 3, 4, words to be replaced
• Stop condition: {300, 600, 900}: 900 generations
Furthermore, every experiment was run on a standard computer with 32 GB of primary memory
and an Intel Core i7-8700 processor running at 3.20 GHz on Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit. Most
of the functionality has been implemented using the library jMetalPy2, an open-source Python
library for designing and implementing MOO strategies (Ben´ıtez-Hidalgo et al., 2019).
4.4.2. Experiments
Now we will proceed with the experiments concerning minimizing the impact on the original
message’s form. While we focused previously on pure optimization, we focus here on minimizing
the number of replaced words to aﬀect how the message looks as little as possible.
In Figure 4, we can see a summary of the results obtained after our experiments. What we
have done is try to minimize the readability score (FKGL) at the same time as the number of
words to be replaced in the ten use cases we are using throughout this work. As can be seen,
we always obtain a Pareto front of solutions which indicates that the fewer words replaced, the
less optimization is carried out. However, it should also be noted that the fewer words replaced
also means a more negligible impact on the form of the initial message. It should be noted that
diﬀerent colors have been used for the Pareto fronts as in the previous experiments. Each color
represents the degree of diﬃculty of each case study.
2https://jmetal.github.io/jMetalPy/
20

10
11
12
13
14
15
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
12.7
12.8
12.9
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #1 - science
FKGL
4
5
6
7
8
12.4
12.5
12.6
12.7
12.8
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #2 - history
FKGL
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
15.8
15.9
16
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #3 - geography
FKGL
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10.4
10.6
10.8
11
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #4 - sports
FKGL
7
8
9
10
11
12
11.4
11.6
11.8
12
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #5 - engineering
FKGL
8
9
10
11
12
9.8
9.9
10
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #6 - geography
FKGL
10
11
12
13
14
15
13
13.2
13.4
13.6
13.8
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #7 - engineering
FKGL
6
7
8
9
10
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #8 - history
FKGL
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
18.2
18.4
18.6
18.8
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #9 - sports
FKGL
13
14
15
16
17
7.9
8
8.1
8.2
8.3
Words to be replaced
Readability Score
Use Case #10 - history
FKGL
Figure 4: Non-dominated solutions for ten use cases obtained using NSGA-II
21

4.4.3. Discussion
We have shown how it is possible to design a solution that enhances the readability of texts,
and we implemented that solution through MOO techniques. In addition, this sort of optimization
is carried out while paying attention to the form of the texts in question to minimize the impact
of replacing words with synonyms that better ﬁt the readability criteria of the various formulas we
have researched.
As we explained earlier the paper, this kind of optimization can also occur in two distinct
ways: it can be carried out to lower the readability score, making it possible for more people to
comprehend the text altogether. Also, as a second possibility, it is possible to do so in order to
improve the readability score, which will enable a lesser number of individuals to comprehend the
processed text.
Although the solutions will always be presented as a Pareto front for the human operator to
choose his solution, it is also possible to deﬁne proﬁles: conservative, medium, and aggressive,
which will opt for the conservative, medium, or more daring versions respectively without any
question, without prejudice to the fact that it should be possible to manually edit a word that
does not ﬁt the context.
5. Part III: Preserving the essence of the original text
In Section 3, we have seen how it is possible to design and implement a functional solution
to optimize the readability of any text. Although such a solution seems to work quite well, it
cannot be considered fully automatic since a human user still has to evaluate whether any word
used to replace original terms is not out of place in the context of the original message. In Section
4, we have used a MOO strategy to ensure that we only replace a minimum number of words in
the original text in order to preserve its form, and we even go a step further and allow a human
operator to decide the degree of impact of ORUGA on the form of the original text. In Section 5,
we will address a remaining problem, which is to keep under control the semantic distance between
the original text and the generated text so that a short distance guarantees that the original text
has not been distorted, while a long-distance means that we have been able to optimize readability
by a large amount, but at a high cost in terms of altering the meaning of the original text. The
importance of this third and ﬁnal part is that success in our strategy is what can guarantee that
the solution is entirely unsupervised.
5.1. Technical Preliminaries
The additional element we will add in this part is to measure the semantic distance between
the original text and the text to be delivered. In this way, we can control any signiﬁcant change
in the meaning of the message. This semantic distance will be the third objective in our MOO
strategy.
22

In the literature, there are methods that allow us to determine the semantic distance between
two pieces of text in a meaningful way, even when those pieces do not share any words. To do
that, words are embedded as vectors using this method. It has been demonstrated to perform
better than many of the methods considered to be state-of-the-art in the k-nearest neighbor’s
classiﬁcation.
With the help of Word Mover’s Distance (WMD) (Kusner et al., 2015), and given pre-trained
word embeddings, it is possible to automatically assess the semantic distance between two texts
by computing the minimum distance that the embedded words of one text need to travel to reach
the ones of another text. So, for example, we can use the WordNet library to calculate synonyms
that allow us to optimize text readability. At the same time, we can use word2vec to supervise
that the semantic between the generated text and the original text is minimized. We could use as
a metaphor that it is an adversarial process.
The beauty of this approach is that the diﬀerent synonym libraries now do not compete with
each other but collaborate to try to measure (and therefore facilitate control) the semantic distance
between the original text and the ﬁnal text. Values close to zero will indicate that the meaning of
the texts under consideration is practically equivalent, while distances approaching inﬁnity indicate
that the texts are incredibly diﬀerent.
Moreover, we do not have to concern about whether the genetic algorithm replaces a word with
one or more words (e.g., ’considering’ by ’taking into account’) since the WMD is prepared for
this contiguity, as it assumes by design that the texts will not have the same length. Since when
using WMD, each word is matched against all other words, but weighted by a ﬂow matrix T that
ensures the semantic distance will be symmetric, even when an unequal number of words must be
matched.
5.2. Implementation
In this work, we have decided to use WMD to facilitate the measurement of the semantic
distance between the initial text and the text that will be delivered at the end of the process. This
ensures that the synonyms used to replace candidate words are coherent. This choice is because
WMD can measure the amount of semantic distance that separates two pieces of text by comparing
the words that are important to each other. This is true even if the two pieces of text do not share
any words.
In addition to that, the method makes use of a representation known as the bag-of-words
representation. The idea behind this method is that it should be possible to ﬁgure out how far
apart two diﬀerent texts are by ﬁguring out the best way to move the distribution of the source
text and the text being targeted.
We can formally deﬁne our strategy, so that let d and d′ be the embedding representation of
two texts, and T ∈Rn×n where Tij ≥0 means how much of word i in d travels to word j in d′.
Furthermore, the distance between i and j might be c(i, j) = ∥xi −xj∥. By c(i, j), we denote the
23

cost of moving from one word to another. In order to transform d into d′, it is necessary to be sure
that the ﬂow from i is equivalent to di so that P
j Tij = di. In this way, the minimum cumulative
cost of moving d to d′, given all these constraints, is provided by the solution shown in Equation
7.
arg min
n
X
i,j=1
Tijc(i, j)
subject to
n
X
j=1
Tij = di ∀i ∈{1, 2, 3 · · ·n} ∧
n
X
i=1
Tij = d′
j ∀j ∈{1, 2, 3 · · ·n}
(7)
Therefore, we use a function that determines the distance between two texts as the cumulative
sum of the minimum distance each word in one text must move in vector space to the closest word
in the other text. Word embeddings derived from word2vec will be utilized for this work because
of their capability to maintain critical aspects of the context in which a word is used.
WMD is used quite frequently these days to calculate semantic distances, and this is one of
the reasons why. The only problem is that the complexity of computing the constrained minimum
cumulative cost in the worst case is O(p3 log u), where u is the number of unique words in the text
(Skianis et al., 2020). Therefore, when working with texts that contain a large number of unique
words, WMD may perform poorly. However, there are some techniques that improve performance.
In the context of this work, we have used the library gensim3 implementation of the WMD fed
by the word embeddings from word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013). In this way, what was previously a
rival synonym library now becomes an adversarial library that helps keep semantic distance under
control.
5.3. Illustrative examples
Example 5 provides us with information about engineering that was taken from Wikipedia.
We are interested in observing how ORUGA operates while attempting to minimize the FKGL
readability score, the number of words that need to be replaced, and the semantic distance between
the original text and the text that has been processed. We are replacing the synonyms with the
help of WordNet, and we are moving forward with the MOO with the help of NSGA-II. The
ultimate goal is to ensure a very low risk of distortion of the original message that wanted to be
communicated.
3https://pypi.org/project/gensim/
24

Example 5. Engineering
Original text Source: Wikipedia
“Big data refers to data sets that are too large or complex to be dealt with by
traditional data-processing application software. Data with many ﬁelds (rows) of-
fer greater statistical power, while data with higher complexity (more attributes or
columns) may lead to a higher false discovery rate. Big data analysis challenges
include capturing data, data storage, data analysis, search, sharing, transfer, visu-
alization, querying, updating, information privacy, and data source. Big data was
originally associated with three key concepts volume, variety, and velocity.
The
analysis of big data presents challenges in sampling, and thus previously allowing
for only observations and sampling. Thus a fourth concept, veracity, refers to the
quality or insightfulness of the data.” ARI score: 14.43.
12.9
13
13.1
13.2
13.3
10
0.15
0.2
Readability score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
ORUGA - Final
Minimize ARI score with the least risk of distorting the original message
Big data bring up to data sets that are too big or complex to be dealt with by
traditional data-processing application software. Data with many ﬁelds (rows) oﬀer
greater statistical power, while data with higher complexity (more attributes or
columns) may lead to a higher false ﬁnding rate. Big data analysis challenges include
capturing data, data storage, data analysis, search, sharing, transfer, visualization,
querying, updating, information privacy, and data source. Big data was originally
tied in with three key concepts volume, variety, and velocity. The analysis of big
data presents challenges in sampling, and thus previously let for only observations
and sampling. Thus a fourth concept, veracity, refers to the quality or acumen of
the data. ARI score: 13.33 - ▽7.62%
25

The example shows that we no longer operate as blindly as before. Now, we also minimize
the words to be replaced and the semantic distance between the initial and the generated text.
Therefore, the results are much more reasonable and can be relied upon to work in exploitation
environments. The readability score optimization is less spectacular than before, but the risk of
distorting the original message, both in form and content, is much more substantially reduced.
5.4. Experimental study
In this section, we have performed the empirical study to test this version of ORUGA. To do
so, we designed the experiments through an experimental setup. We performed the experiments
and collected the raw data. And ﬁnally, we proceeded with the analysis of the collected data.
5.4.1. Experimental setup
The accurate adjustment of the MOO strategy’s parameters is not the primary focus here, as
was the case with the previous parts of this research. One conﬁguration works quite well after a
brief preliminary study based on a conventional parameter-setting strategy. This came about as a
result of what was mentioned above. The following is a list of the parameters that we have used:
• Population size {10, 15, 20}: 20
• Number of parents mating {10, 15, 20}: 20
• Number of genes: one per candidate word to be substituted by a synonym
• Fitness function: Equations 1, 2, 3, 4, words to be replaced, and WMD (Kusner et al., 2015).
• Stop condition: {300, 600, 900}: 900 generations
5.4.2. Experiments
We are going to proceed with the experiments concerning minimizing the impact on the meaning
of the original message. We focus now on being able to produce a result that can be put (or be
close to being put into exploitation). To do this, we will conduct experiments to see if we can
control the diﬀerence in meaning between the original message’s content and the generated text.
Figure 5 shows us the summary of all the results obtained for the ten use cases that we have
been studying throughout this research work. As can be seen, each use case, no matter how topical
or challenging, corresponds to a good number of solutions ranging from the most conservative (the
one that has the least risk of distorting the original message) to the most aggressive (the one
that reduces the readability score more conclusively at the risk of distorting the original message).
According to previous experiments, each color represents a degree of diﬃculty.
26

12.6
12.8
13
13.2
13.4
10
0.1
0.15
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #1 - science
12.4
12.6
12.8
13
2
4
6
2
4
6
·10−2
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #2 - history
15.8
16
16.2
16.4
16.6
5
10
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #3 - geography
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
4
6
8
6 · 10−2
8 · 10−2
0.1
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #4 - sports
10.8
11
11.2
11.4
11.6
11.8
12
10
15
0.1
0.15
0.2
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #5 - engineering
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
10
10.1 5
10
6 · 10−2
8 · 10−2
0.1
0.12
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #6 - geography
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
16
18
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #7 - engineering
14.1
14.15
14.2
14.25
14.3
8
10
8 · 10−2
9 · 10−2
0.1
0.11
0.12
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #8 - history
18.4
18.6
18.8
19
5
10
6 · 10−2
8 · 10−2
0.1
0.12
0.14
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #9 - sports
8
8.1
8.2
8.3
12
14
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Readabity score
Words to be replaced
Semantic distance
Use Case #10 - history
Figure 5: Summary of the results obtained for the third (and ﬁnal) version of ORUGA
27

5.4.3. Discussion
We have seen how it is possible to build a solution that enhances the readability of texts of
very diﬀerent natures and readability levels, and we implemented that solution. In addition, this
sort of optimization is conducted while paying attention to both the content and the structure of
the texts in question to minimize the impact of replacing words with synonyms that are a better
ﬁt for the readability criteria of the various formulas we have researched.
Throughout this research, we have seen how it is possible to use genetic algorithms to improve
the readability of any text formulated in English. As we have explained earlier, optimization is
bi-directional. That is, it can automatically increase or decrease the readability of the text. Once
we established the basis for the optimization, we could control the number of words that could
be replaced; we could also control that the semantic distance between the original text and the
ﬁnal text does not skyrocket. Therefore, our initial goals of building a solution that improves the
readability of any text without signiﬁcantly altering its form or content have been achieved.
6. Conclusion
In this research work, we have seen how ORUGA can automatically optimize the readability of
a text by using genetic algorithms. We have shown that by automatically replacing some words of
the text to be optimized by their synonyms, we can optimize the readability levels in the direction
(minimize or maximize) we wish. Neither the content nor the form of the text is altered because
a minimal impact on the transformation of the original text is sought through various additional
MOO techniques. Although, in theory, analogous solutions could be built using neural language
models, this approach has a signiﬁcant advantage: it is unsupervised and requires no training.
An exhaustive empirical study has shown that we have successfully performed all experiments.
In the ﬁrst instance, these experiments consisted of processing texts of diﬀerent natures (history,
geography, sports, nature, and science) using three synonym libraries and using diﬀerent readability
metrics. In the second instance: designing a MOO solution to control the number of words to be
replaced. We have tested diﬀerent texts to assess and compare the feasibility of this approach.
Furthermore, in the third instance: measuring and controlling the semantic distance between the
original text and the one that will ﬁnally be outputted. For this, we have used a novel technique
that uses a library of synonyms to control the results obtained with another library of diﬀerent
synonyms in an adversarial process.
The results demonstrate that our hypothesis about text readability optimization at the begin-
ning of this paper is valid. Despite the success of this research, it is necessary to bear in mind
that simple formulas are typically simpler to put into practice, which is a limitation of this body
of work. These formulas have a fundamental inability to model the semantics of word usage in
context, which is needed to capture richer ideas of text diﬃculty.
28

As future work, a possible approach (yet computationally expensive) would be using a model
of contextual embeddings such as BERT on a large dataset. Then, it should be necessary to store
pairs of words and corresponding contextual representations and then use the nearest neighbors
approach to identify synonyms that include the context. In this way, the impact of text processing
will be even more limited.
Source code
The source code of this approach is published under MIT license in the following Github
repository: https://github.com/jorge-martinez-gil/oruga.
