Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Quantitative Fine-Grained Human Evaluation of
Machine Translation Systems: a Case Study on
English to Croatian
Filip Klubiˇcka · Antonio Toral · V´ıctor
M. S´anchez-Cartagena
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This paper presents a quantitative ﬁne-grained manual evaluation
approach to comparing the performance of diﬀerent machine translation (MT)
systems. We build upon the well-established Multidimensional Quality Metrics
(MQM) error taxonomy and implement a novel method that assesses whether
the diﬀerences in performance for MQM error types between diﬀerent MT
systems are statistically signiﬁcant. We conduct a case study for English-to-
Croatian, a language direction that involves translating into a morphologically
rich language, for which we compare three MT systems belonging to diﬀerent
paradigms: pure phrase-based, factored phrase-based and neural. First, we
design an MQM-compliant error taxonomy tailored to the relevant linguistic
phenomena of Slavic languages, which made the annotation process feasible
and accurate. Errors in MT outputs were then annotated by two annotators
following this taxonomy. Subsequently, we carried out a statistical analysis
which showed that the best-performing system (neural) reduces the errors
produced by the worst system (pure phrase-based) by more than half (54%).
Moreover, we conducted an additional analysis of agreement errors in which we
distinguished between short (phrase-level) and long distance (sentence-level)
errors. We discovered that phrase-based MT approaches are of limited use for
long distance agreement phenomena, for which neural MT was found to be
especially eﬀective.
F. Klubiˇcka
Dublin Institute of Technology

A. Toral
University of Groningen

V. M. S´anchez-Cartagena
Prompsit Language Engineering

arXiv:1802.01451v1  [cs.CL]  2 Feb 2018

2
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
Keywords neural machine translation · statistical machine translation ·
phrase-based machine translation · factored models · human evaluation · error
annotation · multidimensional quality metrics (MQM)
1 Introduction
A machine translation (MT) paradigm based on deep neural networks, usually
referred to as neural MT (NMT) (Bahdanau et al, 2015), has emerged in the
past few years. This has disrupted the MT ﬁeld since NMT, despite its infancy,
has already surpassed the performance of phrase-based MT (PBMT) (Koehn
et al, 2003), the mainstream approach to date.
The vast potential of NMT in terms of overall performance scores, be those
automatic (e.g. BLEU) or human (e.g. system rankings) was, for example,
showcased in 2016 news translation shared task at WMT,1 where NMT sys-
tems signiﬁcantly outperformed PBMT in 8 of the 9 language directions sub-
mitted where NMT systems were submitted, according to human evaluations
(system rankings). In these evaluations, users (mainly MT researchers) were
presented with a source-language sentence, its reference translation and a set
of machine translations produced by the diﬀerent systems submitted to the
shared task. They had to rank the machine translations.
Additionally, monolingual direct assessment adequacy and ﬂuency eval-
uations were also carried out in WMT 2016 for translations directions into
English. In these evaluations, users had only to give an adequacy and ﬂu-
ency score to individual translations. Whereas the language pairs for which
NMT outperformed PBMT according to the adequacy evaluation completely
matched those in the system ranking (the only language pair in which NMT
did not outperform PBMT was Russian-to-English), the ﬂuency direct assess-
ment showed that NMT output is more ﬂuent than PBMT output for all the
language pairs evaluated (including Russian-to-English).
In 2017 edition of the same shared task,2 the trend has gained strength
and, for all language directions, the best-performing submitted system either
follows the NMT architecture or is a hybrid system that includes an NMT
component.
The ﬁne-grained human evaluation presented in this paper greatly diﬀers
from WMT evaluation: instead of just ranking translations, the annotators
had to classify the errors contained in each translation produced by the MT
systems being evaluated according to a complete error hierarchy and choose
the particular tokens that contains the error.
Considering the high overall performance of NMT, researchers have in the
past year attempted to analyse the potential of NMT in more detail. While
overall scores, such as those obtained in WMT evaluation, give an indication
of the general performance of a system, they do not shed light on the strengths
1 http://www.statmt.org/wmt16/translation-task.html
2 http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task.html

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
3
and weaknesses of this new paradigm to MT. Hence, two recent papers have
looked at automatically conducting multifaceted evaluations:
– Bentivogli et al (2016) performed a detailed analysis of the English-to-
German language direction, comparing state-of-the-art PBMT and NMT
systems on transcribed speeches. Their ﬁndings show that NMT (i) de-
creases post-editing eﬀort, (ii) degrades faster than PBMT with sentence
length and (iii) improves notably on reordering and inﬂection.
– Toral and S´anchez-Cartagena (2017) carried out a series of analyses and
evaluations for NMT and PBMT systems on the news domain for 9 lan-
guage pairs. Their research corroborated the ﬁndings of Bentivogli et al
(2016) regarding NMT’s excellent performance on reordering and inﬂection
and its degradation with sentence length. In addition to that, Toral and
S´anchez-Cartagena’s ﬁndings show that NMT systems (i) exhibit higher
inter-system variability, (ii) lead to more ﬂuent outputs and (iii) perform
more reordering than PBMT, but less than hierarchical PBMT.
A limitation of these analyses lies in the fact that all of them were per-
formed automatically (e.g. reordering and inﬂection errors were detected based
on automatic evaluation metrics). More recently, other authors have per-
formed human analyses of NMT’s strengths and weaknesses in comparison
with PBMT and rule-based paradigms. Such human evaluations do not suﬀer
from the potential biases introduced by automatic tools employed in the above
papers.
– Burchardt et al (2017) presented a study based on an error categorization
speciﬁcally tailored to the English–German language pair (in both direc-
tions) and a test set carefully designed in order to cover the most relevant
linguistic phenomena. They conclude that NMT systems are able to pro-
duce translations that resemble those produced by rule-based MT without
using explicit linguistic information.
– Popovi´c (2017) also targeted the English–German language pair and iden-
tiﬁed language-related issues in the outputs of NMT and PBMT systems.
She concluded that NMT systems are better than PBMT ones in han-
dling verbs, English noun collocations, German compound words, phrase
structure and articles, while PBMT systems perform better when dealing
with prepositions, translation of English (source) ambiguous words and
generation of English (target) continuous tenses. As the issues are com-
plementary between the two MT paradigms analysed, results suggest that
hybridisation between them could be a promising way forward.
– Castilho et al (2017) evaluated the performance of NMT versus PBMT for
three diﬀerent translation domains: e-commerce product listings, patents
and massive open online courses. They performed error analysis with an
error taxonomy consisting of 7 categories for patent translation from Chi-
nese to English. The analysis showed that NMT made more omission errors
than PBMT, while PBMT systems made more errors related to sentence
structure than NMT. Overall, they concluded that, according to human
evaluation, NMT has not fully reached the quality of PBMT.

4
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
This paper adds to the body of research dealing with manual analysis of
NMT systems by conducting a detailed human analysis of the outputs pro-
duced by NMT and PBMT systems when translating news texts in the English-
to-Croatian language direction. We manually annotate the errors found ac-
cording to a detailed error taxonomy that is compliant with the hierarchical
listing of issue types deﬁned as part of the Multidimensional Quality Metrics
(MQM) (Lommel et al, 2014a). First, we deﬁne an error taxonomy that is
relevant to the problematic linguistic phenomena of this language pair. Subse-
quently, we annotate the errors produced by 3 state-of-the-art translation sys-
tems that belong to the following paradigms: PBMT, factored PBMT (Koehn
and Hoang, 2007) and NMT. Finally, we analyse the annotations and draw
conclusions.
This paper’s main contribution can thus be summarised as follows:
1. We conduct one of the ﬁrst human ﬁne-grained error analyses of NMT in
the literature and, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst one in which a
Slavic language is involved.
2. We analyse NMT in comparison not only to pure PBMT and hierarchical
PBMT, as in other previous work, but also with respect to factored models.
3. We develop an MQM-compliant error taxonomy for Slavic languages. It
is much more detailed in terms of error categories than that followed by
Castilho et al (2017) in their Chinese-to-English human evaluation, to ac-
count for the grammatical features of Slavic languages. Additionally, unlike
the taxonomies used by Burchardt et al (2017) and Popovi´c (2017), ours
is not restricted to a single language pair, and is at the same time based
on a well-known error categorization framework (MQM).
4. Unlike Burchardt et al (2017) and Popovi´c (2017), we included two annota-
tors in our evaluation so that each sentence is annotated twice. This allows
us to compute inter-annotator agreement, which increases the reliability of
our results.
5. We also employ a statistically grounded approach to analyzing and in-
terpreting the results of MQM error annotation that goes beyond simple
counting of errors.
This paper builds upon our recent work on this topic (Klubiˇcka et al, 2017),
which is here extended in a number of directions:
1. We have performed additional categorisation and analysis of agreement
errors, in order to investigate whether there is a diﬀerence in the number
of agreement errors produced in regards to their scope, i.e. we looked at
whether the reduction in agreement errors equally aﬀect phrase (or short
distance) agreement and sentence (or long distance) agreement.
2. We have included some examples of sentences from the dataset used in the
experiments to better illustrate the diﬀerent MQM error types.
3. We have included a more detailed discussion, expanded some points and
added an explanation of the statistics calculated from the MQM annota-
tion.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the MT
systems and the datasets used in our experiments. Section 3 includes the deﬁ-
nition of the error taxonomy and explains the annotation setup and guidelines
given to annotators. Next, Section 4 presents the results obtained and their
discussion. Section 5 describes the additional annotation focused on agreement
errors and analysis thereof. Finally, Section 6 outlines the conclusions and lines
of future work.
2 MT Systems and Datasets
This section describes the MT systems and the datasets used in our experi-
ments. We built PBMT, factored PBMT and NMT systems.
The 3 systems were trained on the same parallel data. We considered a set
of publicly available English–Croatian parallel corpora, comprising the DGT
Translation Memory,3 HrEnWaC,4 JRC Acquis,5 OpenSubtitles 2013,6 SE-
Times7 and Ted talks8, many of which can be obtained from OPUS9 (Tiede-
mann, 2009, 2012). We concatenated all of these corpora and performed cross-
entropy based data selection (Moore and Lewis, 2010) using the development
set. Once the data is ranked we keep the 25% highest-ranked sentence pairs
(4,786,516). Data selection was carried out in order to speed up training and
discard the training parallel sentences that are too diﬀerent from the domain of
the development and test sets (news) and hence could have a negative impact
on the results.
PBMT systems also require monolingual data for language modeling. To
this end we concatenated the hrWaC corpus (Ljubeˇsi´c and Klubiˇcka, 2014)
with the target side of the aforementioned parallel corpora.
As our development set we used the ﬁrst 1,000 sentences of the English
test set used at the WMT12 news translation task,10 translated by a profes-
sional translator into Croatian. Similarly, our test set is comprised of the ﬁrst
1,000 sentences of the English test set of the WMT13 translation task,11 again
manually translated into Croatian.
The PBMT system was built with Moses v3.012 (Koehn et al, 2007). In
addition to the default models we also used hierarchical reordering (Galley
and Manning, 2008), an operation sequence model (Durrani et al, 2011) and
a bilingual neural language model (Devlin et al, 2014).
3 https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/language-technologies/dgt-translation-memory
4 https://www.clarin.si/repository/xmlui/handle/11356/1058
5 http://tinyurl.com/CroatianAcquis
6 http://www.opensubtitles.org/
7 http://opus.nlpl.eu/SETIMES2.php
8 http://opus.nlpl.eu/TedTalks.php
9 http://opus.nlpl.eu
10 http://www.statmt.org/wmt12/translation-task.html
11 http://www.statmt.org/wmt13/translation-task.html
12 https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/tree/RELEASE-3.0

6
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
The factored PBMT system maps one factor in the source language (sur-
face form) to two factors in the target (surface form and morphosyntactic
description). This system is described in detail by S´anchez-Cartagena et al
(2016).
The NMT system is based on the sequence-to-sequence architecture with
attention (Bahdanau et al, 2015) and it was built with Nematus (Sennrich
et al, 2017). We applied sub-word segmentation with byte pair encoding (Sen-
nrich et al, 2016) jointly on the source and target languages. We performed
85 000 join operations. We deﬁned a hidden layer size of 1 000 and an em-
bedding layer size of 620. We used Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012) with a minibatch
size of 80, and reshuﬄed the training set between epochs. We applied gradient
clipping (Pascanu et al, 2013) with a cutoﬀof 1.0. Training was run for 10
days and a model was saved every 4.5 hours. We decoded the test set using an
ensemble of 4 models. These were the 4 models with the highest BLEU scores
on the development set.
Table 1 reports the scores obtained in terms of the BLEU (Papineni et al,
2002) and TER (Snover et al, 2006) automatic evaluation metrics on the 3
systems previously described. It can be observed from the table that the use
of factored models leads to a substantial improvement upon pure PBMT (6%
relative in terms of BLEU). NMT allows us to obtain a further notable im-
provement; 14% relative in terms of BLEU compared to the factored PBMT
system and 21% compared to the initial PBMT system. All the diﬀerences
are statistically signiﬁcant according to paired bootstrap resampling (Koehn,
2004) (p ≤0.05, 1 000 iterations).
System
BLEU
TER
PBMT
0.2544
0.6081
Factored PBMT
0.2700
0.5963
NMT
0.3085
0.5552
Table 1 Automatic evaluation (BLEU and TER scores) of the 3 MT systems
3 Error analysis
The fact that Croatian is rich in inﬂection, has rather free word order and
other similar phenomena not present in English gives rise to speciﬁc transla-
tion issues. For example, grammatical categories that do not exist in English,
like gender or case inﬂections in nouns, may be particularly hard to generate
reliably in a Croatian translation. We built our factored PBMT system (cf.
Section 2) aiming to directly address such issues. Similarly motivated was our
goal to ﬁnd out how an NMT system would grapple with the same issues. Ex-
isting research on this tells us that both systems should lead to improvements
on such linguistic aspects. However, this would happen for diﬀerent reasons:

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
7
factored SMT deals with explicit linguistic knowledge about grammatical cat-
egories, while NMT combined with sub-word representation (e.g. byte pair
encoding) solves the problem implicitly in an unsupervised manner, without
actually knowing what the grammatical categories are.
Indeed, as shown in Section 2, both systems lead to signiﬁcant improve-
ments compared to the pure PBMT system in terms of automatic evaluation
metrics. However, as is the nature of automatic scoring methods, these pro-
vide solely an overall score for each system, but do not indicate whether any of
the linguistic problems mentioned earlier have been addressed by the systems.
Hence, the question of whether the linguistic quality (or rather, grammatical-
ity) of the output is improved has not been answered by automatic evaluation.
Are cases and gender handled better? Has agreement been improved?
In order to provide answers to these research questions, we decided to
thoroughly compare these systems by systematically analyzing their outputs
via manual error analysis. In this way we can obtain a more complete picture
of what is happening in the translation, which can provide pointers on where
to act to obtain further improvements in the future. In the remainder of this
section, we describe the annotation framework, overall annotation process and
show the level of agreement between the annotators who took part in the
process.
3.1 Multidimensional Quality Metrics and the Slavic tagset
We decided to make use of the MQM framework, developed in the QTLaunch-
pad project,13 for performing the task of manual evaluation via error analysis.
It is a framework for describing and deﬁning custom translation quality met-
rics. It provides a ﬂexible vocabulary of quality issue types and a mechanism
for applying them to generate quality scores. It does not impose a single met-
ric for all uses, but rather provides a comprehensive catalogue of quality issue
types, with standardized names and deﬁnitions, that can be used to describe
particular metrics for speciﬁc tasks.
The main reason we chose the MQM framework was the ﬂexibility of the
issue types and their granularity; it gave us a reliable methodology for quality
assessment, that still allowed us to choose which error tags we wanted to use.
The MQM guidelines propose a great variety of tags on several annota-
tion layers.14 However, the full tagset is too comprehensive to be viable for
any annotation task, so the process begins with choosing the tags to use in
accordance with our research questions. It is good practice to start with the
so-called core tagset, a default set of evaluation metrics (i.e. error categories)
proposed by the MQM guidelines, shown in Figure 1.
However, given the morphological complexity of Croatian and the way
our MT systems were constructed, we found that these core categories were
not detailed enough, or rather, did not allow us to conduct an analysis of the
13 http://www.qt21.eu/mqm-definition/definition-2015-06-16.html
14 http://www.qt21.eu/mqm-definition/issues-list-2015-12-30.html

8
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
Fig. 1 The core set of error categories proposed by the MQM guidelines
speciﬁc phenomena we were interested in. Some categories that were of interest
to us, like speciﬁc Agreement types, were not present in the tagset, while some
errors, such as Typography, were irrelevant to our research questions.
For these reasons, we deﬁned our own set of tags by modifying the core
set, rearranging the hierarchy, adding new tags and removing those that were
of little relevance. We call this new tagset “the Slavic tagset”, as its expansion
allows for the identiﬁcation of grammatical errors which are commonly shared
by Slavic languages. This tagset is outlined in Figure 2.
Fig. 2 The Slavic tagset, a modiﬁed version of the MQM core tagset. The additional cate-
gories are highlighted with a red rectangle.
As evidenced by a comparison of the two ﬁgures, we did not change any-
thing about the Accuracy branch, but rather modiﬁed Fluency. As mentioned
earlier, we removed Typography, but added Register in its place. Register was
included because preliminary insights into the data showed a potential useful-
ness for annotating a breach of standardness, which has indeed cropped up a
couple of times in the systems’ outputs. For example, sometimes a synonym
for a word can be used, one that is a correct translation in a very general sense,
but is actually sub-standard and would not normally be found in that sentence
or that particular context (e.g. “She was the ﬁrst woman in space.” should
be translated as “Bila je prva ˇzena u svemiru.”, but is instead translated as

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
9
“Bila je prva ˇzenska u svemiru.”, roughly corresponding to “She was the ﬁrst
broad in space.” [broad, n. = woman, informal])
In addition to this change, and much more importantly, we added an-
other level to the hierarchy, speciﬁcally to the Agreement error tag, which we
expanded to cover the speciﬁc grammatical categories that need to agree in
Croatian (nominal categories such as Gender, Number and Case, and the ver-
bal category of Person). For example, if the sentence “The cats walk.”, which
should be translated as “Maˇcke hodaju.” is instead translated as “Maˇcka ho-
daju.” [The cat walk.], this is to be marked as an error in Agreement Number.
Given the notoriously low agreement on similar annotation tasks (cf. Sub-
section 3.4), it stands to reason that even the development of such a taxonomy
is already prone to human error or disagreement. This is why we made sure
that the categories we added were in line with the MQM guidelines; they were
already present in the expanded tagset (e.g. Register), and those that were
not (e.g. the diﬀerent agreement types) are analogous to tags that are. Still,
in order to make sure that we did not taking any missteps in the construction
of the taxonomy, we additionally discussed our changes with other researches
and colleagues not directly involved in this particular piece of research. Con-
sequently, the taxonomy was veriﬁed by both a traditional and computational
linguist who respectively specialise in both English and Croatian linguistics.
3.2 Accuracy versus Fluency
Unrelated to our interventions in the taxonomy, one important thing to note
about the annotation process, as stated in the MQM usage guidelines, is that
“Accuracy addresses the extent to which the target text accurately
renders the meaning of the source text, whereas Fluency, on the other
hand, relates to the monolingual qualities of the source or target text,
relative to agreed-upon speciﬁcations, but independent of relationship
between source and target.”15
In other words, ﬂuency issues can be assessed without regard to whether the
text is a translation or not. So for example, if a translated text tells the user
to push a button when the source tells the user not to push it, there is an
accuracy issue, while a spelling error or a problem with register remain issues
regardless of whether the text is translated.
It has to be said that at ﬁrst look this distinction might seem obvious and
clear-cut, but in practice it is anything but. Very often examples can seem like
they belong to either category, and so it is up to the annotators’ judgement
to decide which level is a better ﬁt, and then being consistent in following
through on the decisions made regarding dubious examples.
An example of an error category that might cause trouble for annotators
is Mistranslation, which describes issues that arise when the content on the
15 http://www.qt21.eu/downloads/MQM-usage-guidelines.pdf

10
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
target side of the translation does not accurately represent the content on
the source side. The issue is that it can seemingly overlap with the Fluency
branch; according to the guidelines, only one error should be tagged, and
Accuracy trumps Fluency if the required information is present in the source
text.
Source:
For example, websites provide...
Correct:
Na primjer, internetske stranice pruˇzaju...
Translation:
Na primjer, internetska stranica pruˇzaju...
Gloss:
For example, website provide...
Table 2 Example of a Mistranslation error that also causes an Agreement error.
An example of this is shown in Table 2, where the only actual error is the
translation of ‘website’ in the singular rather than the plural, which is explic-
itly encoded via the -s morpheme in the source text. However, this error then
causes a subject-verb agreement error, where the translated subject is singu-
lar, but the verb has been correctly translated as plural. This example should,
according to the guidelines, be classiﬁed only as Mistranslation, even though it
also shows problems with agreement. If the subject had been translated prop-
erly (as the plural), the subject-verb agreement problem would be resolved, so
in this case only ‘internetska stranica’ should be tagged as a Mistranslation.
3.3 Annotation setup
In order to carry out the annotations we used translate5,16 a web-based tool
that implements annotations of MT outputs using hierarchical taxonomies, as
is the case of MQM.
We had two annotators with very similar backgrounds at our disposal.
Both are native speakers of Croatian, and both have prior experience with
MQM as well as the same academic background; an MA in English linguistics
and information science. All of these aspects of the annotators’ backgrounds
are relevant: their language and linguistics background is necessary given that
English is the source language, and Croatian is the target language of our
systems, while the information science background promises, at the very least,
a basic understanding of what MT is and how it works. Thus, both annotators
are well-equipped to handle the task.
Prior to annotation, they were thoroughly familiarized with the translate5
system and the oﬃcial MQM annotation guidelines, which oﬀer detailed in-
structions for annotation within the MQM framework.17
16 http://www.translate5.net/
17 The
instructions
include
a
handy
decision
tree
to
aid
in
the
annotation
process.
It
can
be
found
at
the
following
URL:
http://www.qt21.eu/downloads/
annotatorsGuidelines-2014-06-11.pdf

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
11
The annotators annotated 100 randomly selected sentences from the test
set introduced in Section 2, while presented with the English source text, a
Croatian reference translation and the three unannotated system outputs at
the same time. They could choose in which order to annotate, but did not
know which translations belonged to which system, thus performing blind
annotation. The two annotators did not operate completely independently
of each other; they occasionally discussed particularly diﬃcult or ambiguous
sentences and how to approach them.
All three translations were annotated by both annotators, meaning that
each system translated the same 100 sentences, each annotator annotated the
resulting 300 translated sentences (100 source sentences for 3 MT systems),
producing a total of 600 annotated sentences (300 translated sentences for
2 annotators). We have made the annotated dataset publicly available on
GitHub.18
Once the sentences were annotated and the annotation data was extracted,
we calculated inter-annotator agreement (reported in Section 3.4) and ana-
lyzed the output to determine the performance of each system for each error
category (cf. Section 4).
3.4 Inter-Annotator Agreement
Though carefully thought out and developed, the MQM metrics (and manual
MT evaluation in general) are notorious for resulting in low inter-annotator
agreement (IAA) scores. This is attested by the body of work that has ad-
dressed this issue, most notably Lommel et al (2014b), who worked speciﬁcally
on MQM, and Callison-Burch et al (2007), who investigated several tasks. This
is why it is important that we check how well our annotators agree on the task
at hand, and whether this is consistent with prior work done with MQM.
Once the data was annotated, agreement was observed at the sentence
level, and inter-annotator agreement was calculated using Cohen’s Kappa (κ)
(Cohen, 1960). Agreement was calculated on the annotations of each system
separately, as well as on the concatenation of the annotations for the 3 systems
together. This way we can (i) investigate whether there are diﬀerences in
agreement across systems, and also (ii) gain insight into the overall agreement
between the two annotators. In addition, Cohen’s κ was also calculated for
every error type separately. Results can be found in Table 3.
The ’Any errors’ IAA value presented at the bottom of the table is the most
general agreement measure - it represents agreement on there being any sort
of error in a given sentence. These values will logically be higher than the IAA
values of the ’All errors’ measure (which looks at the total of error agreement,
but of speciﬁc error categories in a given sentence), and much higher than the
agreement calculated for each of the individual, speciﬁc error categories.
Examining the table reveals that our annotators agree most on evaluations
of the PBMT system, less so on evaluations of the Factored SMT system, and
18 https://github.com/GreenParachute/mqm-eng-cro/

12
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
Error type
PBMT
Factored
NMT
Concat
Accuracy
0.66
0.62
0.56
0.61
Mistranslation
0.51
0.48
0.58
0.53
Omission
0.34
0.39
0.37
0.37
Addition
0.50
0.54
0.33
0.47
Untranslated
0.86
0.86
-0.02
0.72
Fluency
0.50
0.41
0.29
0.43
Unintelligible
0.39
0.32
0.00
0.35
Register
0.37
0.20
0.22
0.27
Spelling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Grammar
0.50
0.43
0.33
0.45
Word order
0.56
0.33
0.21
0.40
Function words
0.43
0.27
0.36
0.35
Extraneous
0.56
0.32
0.49
0.46
Incorrect
0.37
0.18
0.34
0.29
Missing
0.00
0.49
0.00
0.33
Word form
0.48
0.46
0.36
0.47
Part of speech
-0.03
0.10
0.00
0.04
Tense...
0.44
0.36
0.15
0.38
Agreement
0.52
0.52
0.49
0.53
Number
0.53
0.55
0.52
0.54
Gender
0.46
0.59
0.48
0.53
Case
0.53
0.49
0.52
0.56
All errors
0.56
0.49
0.44
0.51
Any errors
0.80
0.67
0.51
0.64
Table 3 Inter-annotator agreement (Cohen’s κ values) for the MQM evaluation task. The
highest score for any individual system and the concatenation, as well as the overall score,
are shown in bold. Some of the error categories have no kappa scores attached because they
are parent categories that were never used on their own, so there were no data points to
calculate the scores.
least on evaluations of the NMT system. The drop in agreement scores for the
NMT system is a bit striking. Our intuition is that, because the outputs of the
NMT system are much more ﬂuent and grammatically correct (cf. Section 4,
errors become less clear cut, and more diﬃcult for our annotators to detect.
Or rather, any errors produced by the system are more debatable and the tags
are subject to the annotators’ interpretation, rather than grounded in some
sort of objective truth.
Still, the comparison of IAA between the diﬀerent systems is likely not
that meaningful, as involves a slightly diﬀerent sample size due to the diﬀerent
lengths of the outputs. Besides, even disregarding this discrepancy, agreement
scores are relatively low overall, with the average total κ being 0.51. Indeed,
the κ scores are relatively consistent across all error types for each system,
mostly ranging between 0.35 and 0.55. According to Cohen, such scores con-
stitute moderate agreement. As already stated, this is to be expected, given
the complexity of the problem and annotation schema. In fact, the IAA scores
in this work are notably higher than those that have been reported in similar
work, e.g. Lommel et al (2014b), who achieved κ scores ranging between 0.25
and 0.34.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
13
That said, this comparison should be taken with a grain of salt, given
that in our setup we looked at sentence-level agreement, while they calculated
agreement on the token level. The calculations are approached diﬀerently here
in order to attempt to account for some of the problems that come with span-
level annotation. As Lommel et al (2014b) point out, a “fundamental issue
that the QTLaunchPad annotation encountered was disagreement about the
precise scope of errors”. In other words, though annotators can agree that a
sentence contains the same issue, they might disagree on the span that the
issue covers. An example is shown in Table 4 (annotations marked in bold).
Source:
Trakhtenberg was the presenter of many programs before Hali-Gali times.
Annotator 1:
Bio je voditelj Trakhtenberg brojnih programa Hali-Gali prije puta.
Annotator 2:
Bio je voditelj Trakhtenberg brojnih programa Hali-Gali prije puta.
Table 4 Example of annotator disagreement on error span on the example of a Word order
error.
This case shows that annotators can agree on the nature and categorization
of issues, yet still disagree on their precise span-level location. Even though
they are instructed to mark minimal spans, i.e. spans that cover only the issue
in question, they frequently disagree as to what the scope of these issues is.
Lommel et al (2014b, 4) hypothesize that this may be due to the fact that
the two reviewers perceive the issue diﬀerently, and so see diﬀerent spans as
cognitively relevant. In some instances this disagreement may reﬂect diﬀering
ideas about optimal solutions, while in others the problem may have more to
do with perceptual units in the text.
In cases where annotators disagree on the span of the annotation, even
Lommel et al are uncertain as to how best to assess IAA. Thus, building on
their work and exploring a sentence-level approach is a direction we deemed
worth pursuing, as there seems to be no optimal solution, given that both the
sentence- and token-level approach come with certain drawbacks. However, to
dispel any doubt regarding the reliability of the annotators’ judgements on
the task at hand, further analysis of the results shows that both annotators’
annotations point to comparable conclusions, both when considered separately
and together. This is elaborated on in Section 4.
4 Results
Directly extracting raw annotation data from the translate5 system provides
a sum of error tags annotated for each error type by each annotator and system.
The total values are presented in Table 5.
Looking at the aggregate data alone, one can easily detect that both an-
notators have judged that the PBMT system contains the most errors, and
that the NMT system contains the smallest number of errors. This trend is

14
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
Annotator 1
Annotator 2
System
PBMT
Factored
NMT
PBMT
Factored
NMT
Total errors
317
276
178
264
199
132
Table 5 Total errors per system and annotator, ass annotated in MQM.
consistent across most ﬁne-grained error categories too, as we will see later on
in this section.
However, even though simply counting the errors can provide insight into
which system performs better, it does not allow us to draw statistically mean-
ingful conclusions from the results. Error counts cannot be directly compared
because diﬀerent MT systems may output sentences of diﬀerent lengths, which
is indeed the case in the data explored here: in the 100 annotated sentences,
the phrase-based system produced an average of 18.99 tokens per sentence, the
factored system averaged on 18.89, while the neural system produced 18.36 to-
kens per sentence. Hence, we need to normalize the scores.
There seems to be no related work on how to approach normalization
of MQM results. In all the work published so far, authors simply count the
number of MQM tags and stop there. Our normalization approach is rather
straightforward: instead of counting just error tags produced by each annota-
tor, we count the tokens that these errors are assigned to.
Once these counts are divided by the total number of tokens in the system’s
output, they provide a ratio of tokens with errors, as shown in Equation (1):
error ratio = output tokens with errors
total output tokens
(1)
Given that, according to this equation, the numerator counts words in
the output that contain an error, the ratio is biased in favour of systems
that produce shorter output. However, this is not a problem in our setup, as
our taxonomy includes an Omission error category. So if a word, segment,
or phrase (or whatever the annotators deem as the basic unit) is was not
translated from the source sentence, the target sentence is tagged with an
Omission error. While counting error tokens for our error ratio, we assume
that 1 token was omitted for every omission error in the output, and so every
omission error was given one phantom token to latch on to. This allows us
to perform the calculations and prevents translations that lack some of the
information of the source language sentence from having a low error rate.
The results of our error ratio calculations again show that the PBMT
system has the largest error/token ratio (0.2633), while the factored system
has a smaller ratio (0.212), and the NMT system has the smallest one (0.1277).
This is further backed up by a pairwise chi-squared (χ2) statistical signiﬁcance
test (Plackett, 1983); we calculate statistical signiﬁcance from 2x2 contingency
tables for every system pair (PBMT x Factored, PBMT x NMT and Factored
x NMT). In one such contingency table, the rows contain token counts for
each of the systems, while the columns contain counts of tokens with and
without errors. The null-hypothesis in this setting states that there is no link

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
15
between the MT system and the number of tokens with or without errors that it
produces (i.e. that no matter which system is employed, the number of errors is
relatively similar). With the p value lower than 0.0001 in all three comparisons,
we can safely dismiss the null hypothesis, showing that the diﬀerence in the
total counts of tokens with errors is statistically signiﬁcant for all three system
pairs.
These error/token ratios provide an overall score for each system. At this
point we would like to delve deeper and discover the performance of each
system for each error type. To this end, we repeated these same measurements,
but instead of performing them on all error types concatenated, they were
performed separately for each speciﬁc error category. The combined results of
the aforementioned calculations and transformations are presented in Table 6.
PBMT
Factored
NMT
Error type
OK
Error
OK
Error
OK
Error
Accuracy
3467
369
3525
291*
3402
266
Mistranslation
3547
289
3586
230*
3471
197
Omission
3801
35
3793
23
3619
49*
Addition
3814
22
3797
19
3655
13
Untranslated
3813
23
3797
19
3662
6*
Fluency
3195
641
3298
518*
3465
188**
Unintelligible
3790
46
3769
47
3668
0**
Register
3810
26
3794
22
3646
22
Spelling
3833
3
3812
4
3659
9
Grammar
3270
566
3371
445**
3497
156**
Word order
3752
84
3752
64
3646
22**
Function words
3801
35
3780
36
3650
18*
Extraneous
3829
7
3810
6
3664
4
Incorrect
3810
26
3790
26
3655
13*
Missing
3834
2
3812
4
3667
1
Word form
3389
447
3471
345*
3538
102**
Part of speech
3822
14
3800
16
3663
5*
Tense...
3775
61
3765
51
3648
20*
Agreement
3466
370
3540
276*
3566
102**
Number
3778
58
3772
44
3646
22*
Gender
3788
48
3756
60
3644
24*
Case
3614
222
3694
122*
3622
46**
Person
3836
0
3816
0
3664
4
Total errors
2826
1010
3007
809**
3199
469**
Table 6 Processed annotation data from both annotators concatenated: each system’s to-
tal number of tokens with and without errors. Statistical signiﬁcance for a system, when
compared to the system on its left, is marked with * where p-value is <0.05 and ** where
p-value is <0.0001. Cells with a green background indicate that the system has fewer er-
rors than the one on its left, while those in red indicate that it has more. In both cases,
the green/red background is only displayed when the diﬀerence between the error ratios is
statistically signiﬁcant.
We can derive several ﬁndings from this table. As mentioned earlier, looking
at the grand total of tokens with and without errors, the diﬀerence between the
systems is statistically signiﬁcant by a wide margin. When looking at PBMT

16
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
and factored PBMT, the factored system has signiﬁcantly fewer errors than
the pure PBMT system. The overall error rate is in this case reduced by 20%
(809 vs 1010 errors, cf. last row in Table 6). In addition, a separate analysis
of speciﬁc error types that contribute to this score reveals that only some of
the error categories are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the two systems. In the
table, those categories are ﬁlled in with a green background. One can see that,
when it comes to agreement errors, the only agreement error type that results
in a signiﬁcantly smaller number of errors with the factored PBMT system
compared to the pure PBMT system is agreement in case.
However, taking a look at NMT shows that, not only does it result in
a 42% overall error reduction compared to the factored system (469 vs 809
errors), and 54% with respect to pure PBMT (469 vs 1010 errors), but it also
produces even less agreement errors – overall, as well as at the level of number,
gender and case – while not using any kind of explicit linguistic information.
This might in part be due to the use of sub-word segmentation, as inﬂections
in Croatian are relatively regular. In addition to improving in the Agreement
category, NMT also produces signiﬁcantly fewer errors in many more categories
than the factored model does. Interestingly, it produces more Omission errors
than either of the other two systems. It seems that NMT tends to sacriﬁce
completeness of translation in order to increase overall ﬂuency. This result is
compatible with the average token per sentence ratio mentioned above: the
NMT system has the lowest one (18.36; while PBMT has 18.99 and factored
PBMT has 18.89).
5 Additional Agreement Annotation
In this section we look at the agreement error category in more detail. Our
motivation for picking this error type is twofold: (i) signiﬁcant gains have
been obtained in this error category (cf. Table 6) by NMT compared to the
two PBMT systems, and (ii) this error category constitutes the main branch
that we added to the core MQM tagset (to be able to evaluate the performance
of MT on relevant linguistic phenomena present in Slavic languages, cf. Figure
2).
Agreement is also worth exploring further because two syntactically dif-
ferent types of agreement are subsumed under the MQM Agreement tags,
namely:
– Local, short-distance agreement (or phrase agreement), which concerns
agreement of elements within a phrase.19
– Long-distance agreement (or sentence agreement), which concerns agree-
ment of elements at the sentence level, outside phrase boundaries. These
elements have wider spans and can be much further apart.
19 Unlike in SMT jargon, here a phrase refers to a grammatical unit, not just a string of
contiguous words.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
17
For example, local agreement would be agreement between an adjective
and a noun, or between a preposition and the following noun, while sentence
agreement would be agreement between a noun and a verb. Table 7 contains an
example of agreement errors at these two levels. The phrase bolded in the ﬁrst
sentence contains disagreement in case: the preposition “u” should introduce
a phrase in the dative case (“palijativnoj skrbi”), but the translation is in the
accusative case (“palijativne skrbi”), which is morphologically marked. The
phrase bolded in the second sentence contains disagreement in gender: the
noun “jedinica” (“unit”, feminine) is the subject of the sentence and as such
should agree with the verb “nastati” (“was created”) that follows it in gender,
number, case and person; however, in the translation, the verb is marked for
masculine gender (“nastao”) instead of the required feminine (“nastala”).
Phrase disagreement:
Veliki broj ljudi radi u palijativne skrbi.
Sentence disagreement:
Stalna antikorupcijska jedinica, koja se bori protiv
svakog oblika korupcije, nastao je 2011. godine.
Table 7 Example sentences showcasing the two diﬀerent spans an agreement error can
take. The ﬁrst sentence features disagreement in case, whereas the second one features
disagreement in gender.
This distinction is important not only linguistically, but can also be infor-
mative from a technical perspective. Thus, we conducted an additional layer
of annotation outside the framework of MQM: each agreement error was cat-
egorized as corresponding to either phrase or sentence level. Additionally, the
type of elements participating in the error was marked as well, in order to
obtain more ﬁne-grained insights.
For phrase agreement, the phrases in question can be prepositional phrases
(PP) that contain a noun phrase (NP), noun phrases that contain an adjec-
tive (ADJ) and a noun (N), noun phrases comprised of two nouns (N+N)
and noun phrases containing numerals (NUM+NP). In sentence agreement,
elements that often need to agree are subjects and verbs (S+V, usually noun
and verb), verbs and objects (V+O, usually verb and noun), two or more noun
phrases coordinated with a conjunction (NP+C+NP, usually “i” [“and”]), and
a noun phrase followed by a subordinating conjunction (NP+CSUB, usually
“koji/koja/koje” [“which” or “that”]). The results of applying this categori-
sation to our dataset are presented in Table 8.
As the table shows, the factored PBMT model leads to quite a large im-
provement upon pure PBMT when it comes to phrase agreement, but the im-
provement is almost negligible when it comes to sentence agreement (phrase
agreement sees a ∼38% relative reduction in errors, while the number of sen-
tence agreement errors is reduced by ∼4% relative). Meanwhile, the NMT
model produces substantially less agreement errors of both agreement types
(∼86% relative reduction in phrase agreement errors and ∼66% relative re-
duction in sentence agreement errors, when compared to pure PBMT).

18
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
Phrase agreement
Sentence agreement
Elements
PBMT
Factored
NMT
Elements
PBMT
Factored
NMT
PP+NP
24
14
3
S+V
20
19
7
ADJ+N
15
5
2
V+O
5
3
3
N+N
4
7
1
NP+C+NP
6
7
1
NUM+NP
1
1
0
NP+CSUB
1
2
0
Total
44
27
6
Total
32
31
11
Table 8 Breakdown and categorization of agreement errors found in the annotated data.
Knowing that both the factored model and NMT model produce less agree-
ment errors overall when compared to PBMT (cf. Table 6), it is no surprise
that they produce overall less of either level (phrase and sentence) of agree-
ment errors. However, just as in the MQM analysis conducted in the previous
section, simply counting errors is not enough to know whether the diﬀerence
in the number of errors between two MT paradigms is statistically signiﬁcant.
Thus, to determine whether these diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant over-
all, we once again normalized the errors to the token level and employed a
chi-squared (χ2) test. We calculate statistical signiﬁcance from 2x2 contin-
gency tables for every system pair (PBMT x Factored, PBMT x NMT and
Factored x NMT), for each type of error (overall phrase agreement and overall
sentence agreement), as well as for the elements that make up these errors.
In these contingency tables, rows contain token counts for each system, while
columns contain counts of tokens with and without agreement errors. The
null-hypothesis states that there is no link between the MT system and the
frequency of a given agreement error that it produces.
PBMT
Factored
NMT
Error type
OK
Error
OK
Error
OK
Error
Total
Phrase
1811
88
1835
54*
1824
12**
Sentence
1835
64
1827
62
1814
22**
Phrase agreement
PP+NP
1851
48
1861
28*
1830
6*
ADJ+N
1869
30
1879
10*
1832
4
N+N
1891
8
1875
14
1834
2*
NUM+NP
1897
2
1887
2
1836
0
Sentence agreement
S+V
1859
40
1851
38
1822
14*
V+O
1889
10
1883
6
1830
6
NP+C+NP
1887
12
1875
14
1834
2*
NP+CSUB
1897
2
1885
4
1836
0
Table 9 Normalized agreement annotation data: each system’s total number of tokens with
and without agreement errors, also including data with regards to which elements contained
errors. Statistical signiﬁcance for a system, when compared to the the one on its left, is
marked in green. If p-value is <0.05, it is marked with *, and ** where p-value is <0.0001.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
19
As shown in Table 9, the total counts show that when looking at phrase
agreement, there is steady improvement between the systems: the factored
system has signiﬁcantly less tokens with a phrase-agreement error than the
PBMT system (p=0.004), while the NMT system has signiﬁcantly less than
the factored system does (p<0.0001). On the other hand, looking at sentence
agreement and comparing pure PBMT to the factored PBMT model yields
a p-value of 0.8799, revealing no statistical signiﬁcance, while comparing the
factored model to the neural model yields a p-value of 0.00002, indicating a
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the number of tokens with errors. In other
words, when compared to PBMT, both the factored model and the NMT
model signiﬁcantly reduce the number of phrase-agreement errors, whereas the
factored model does not signiﬁcantly reduce the number of sentence-agreement
errors, but the neural system does.
These results are in line with previous research that showed how, for
the English-to-Croatian language pair, factored PBMT struggles with sen-
tence agreement due to the limitations of n-gram language models: S´anchez-
Cartagena et al (2016) showed that using high-order language models (with
order higher than 3) for morphosyntactic tags leads to a degradation in trans-
lation quality because of the free word order of Croatian. On the contrary, the
power of recurrent neural network units to model long-distance phenomena
allows the NMT system to improve on both phrase and sentence agreement.
6 Conclusion
This paper describes a ﬁne-grained human evaluation of three approaches to
MT (pure PBMT, factored PBMT and NMT). Our analysis has provided
answers to several questions, one of which was the main drive behind the
development of a factored system for English-to-Croatian: is there a way to
better handle agreement when translating to a morphologically rich language?
We can now conﬁdently claim that factored models result in signiﬁcantly less
agreement errors overall compared to pure PBMT, when translating from En-
glish to Croatian.
We can also conﬁdently conclude that NMT handles all types of agreement
better than both pure PBMT and factored PBMT, which corroborates the
ﬁndings of other researchers’ NMT evaluations conducted for other language
pairs. Our NMT system produces sentences with far fewer errors, and output
that is more ﬂuent and more grammatical, which should be of help when it
comes to the task of post-editing.
Furthermore, the error taxonomy that was developed for this research,
while only used for the English-to-Croatian language direction in the current
work, should be applicable for the analysis of errors for any translation direc-
tion towards a Slavic language, as it takes into account speciﬁc grammatical
properties shared by the members of this language family.
Among other possible lines of future work, including the application of
our methodology to another language pair that involves a Slavic target lan-

20
Filip Klubiˇcka et al.
guage (e.g. English–Czech), performing more controlled IAA analysis or IAA
adjudication, as well as comparing to an NMT model without sub-word seg-
mentation, another direction to go in is further adapting the tagset. In its
current version, it has been demonstrated to be informative when comparing
PBMT to factored PBMT. However, NMT has shown itself to produce lan-
guage that is so ﬂuent that the ﬁne-grained hierarchy in the Fluency branch
is of little use. Meanwhile, the most common error type in the NMT output is
Mistranslation, which, according to the MQM guidelines, covers both lexical
selection and (less intuitively) translation of grammatical properties (e.g. if
‘cats[pl.]’ is translated into Croatian as ‘maˇcka[sg.]’, this is to be tagged as
Mistranslation, in spite of correct lexical choice). This makes it quite a vague
category, so if one would wish to perform an even more nuanced analysis of
errors for NMT, adding additional layers to the Accuracy branch would seem
a promising direction to follow.
Acknowledgements We would like to extend our thanks to Maja Popovi´c, who provided
invaluable advice, and Denis Kranjˇci´c, who performed the annotation together with Filip
Klubiˇcka, ﬁrst author of the paper. This research was partly funded by the ADAPT Cen-
tre, which is funded under the SFI Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and
is co-funded under the European Regional Development Fund. This research has also re-
ceived funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013
under grant agreement PIAP-GA-2012-324414 (Abu-MaTran) and the Swiss National Sci-
ence Foundation grant 74Z0 160501 (ReLDI).
