Constrained optimization under uncertainty
for decision-making problems:
Application to Real-Time Strategy games
Valentin Antuori1 and Florian Richoux1,2
1LS2N, Université de Nantes, France

2JFLI, CNRS, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
April 24, 2019
Abstract
Decision-making problems can be modeled as combinatorial optimization prob-
lems with Constraint Programming formalisms such as Constrained Optimization
Problems. However, few Constraint Programming formalisms can deal with both
optimization and uncertainty at the same time, and none of them are convenient
to model problems we tackle in this paper. Here, we propose a way to deal with
combinatorial optimization problems under uncertainty within the classical Con-
strained Optimization Problems formalism by injecting the Rank Dependent Utility
from decision theory. We also propose a proof of concept of our method to show it
is implementable and can solve concrete decision-making problems using a regular
constraint solver, and propose a bot that won the partially observable track of the
2018 µRTS AI competition. Our result shows it is possible to handle uncertainty
with regular Constraint Programming solvers, without having to deﬁne a new for-
malism neither to develop dedicated solvers. This brings new perspective to tackle
uncertainty in Constraint Programming.
1
Introduction
Decision-making problems can be modeled as combinatorial optimization problems through
a given formalism, and then can be solved with appropriated tools, i.e., solvers. Combi-
natorial optimization problems are very frequent problems in domains such as logistics,
ﬁnance, supply chain, planning, scheduling and in industries such as pharmaceutical in-
dustry, transportation, manufacturing and automotive industry [15].
Strategy games propose a rich environment to study decision-making problems, allow-
ing researchers to develop new algorithmic approaches to model and solve such problems.
This is particularly true for Real-Time Strategy games, or RTS games, oﬀering a dynamic
environment under a fog of war forbidding players to have a complete information about
1
arXiv:1901.00942v3  [cs.AI]  23 Apr 2019

the game state. Such environments contain many challenging combinatorial optimization
problems.
Combinatorial optimization problems can be expressed through diﬀerent formalisms.
One convenient formalism used in AI is Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP) and
Constrained Optimization Problems (COP). The ﬁrst formalism deals with satisfaction
problems, i.e., problems where all solutions have the same quality. In this paper, a solution
is an assignment of each variable of the problem such that all constraints are satisﬁed.
The second formalism COP deals with optimization problems, i.e., problems where there
is a criteria to rank solutions.
There exist many extensions of the CSP formalisms dealing with uncertainty, but very
few of them have been extended to handle optimization problems, and when they did,
they force to declare additional parameters that might be undesirable and inconvenient
while modeling a problem.
This paper proposes a way to deal with a speciﬁc kind of decision-making problems
through combinatorial optimization under uncertainty within the classical COP formal-
ism using the Rank Dependent Utility from decision theory. We exhibit a proof of concept
with a simple bot playing to the µRTS game while solving a decision-making problem of
choosing the right units to produce. Our bot has won the partially observable track of
the 2018 µRTS AI competition.
This paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst motivate why we focus on single-stage
decision-making problem and why uncertainty is exclusively in the objective function in
Section 2. Then, we introduce basic notions about Constraint Programming and Decision
Theory in Section 3. In Section 4, we expose our main contribution: a way to handle
uncertainty within the classical COP formalism using the Rank Dependent Utility and
ﬁnally give a proof of concept in Section 5 by modeling with a COP a decision-making
problem under uncertainty in µRTS. Related works can be found in Section 6. We conclude
in Section 7.
2
Motivation
We introduce in this section the type of problems we focus on, and motivate why such
problems worth to be speciﬁcally tackled.
In this paper, we study single-stage decision-making problem an agent must solve un-
der uncertainty, where uncertainty lies on the value of some stochastic variables controlled
by a third-party agent (such as the environment where our agent evolves). Such stochas-
tic values only have an impact on the objective function the agent tries to maximize or
minimize, and not on constraints it must satisfy.
We think important to motivate the two following points: why single-stage decision-
making problems only, and why only considering uncertainty on the objective function
rather than on both the objective function and the constraints.
Studying single-stage decision-making problems means that a decision must be made
before revealing stochastic values so far unknown. Once these values are known, the agent
can only observe the consequences of its decision without having the possibility to sharpen
or ﬁx it like in multi-stage decision-making processes. Although multi-stage decision-
making problems are interesting and would deserve a proper study, we think single-
2

stage decision-making problems are still relevant and capture all one-shot decision-making
problems that must be made recurrently. Concrete examples can be 1. a factory manager
deciding about the production of the month taking into account the stock (known) and
client orders (unknown), 2. blind auctions where one aims to win some auctions taking
into account the available money (known) and other participants bid (unknown) or 3. air
traﬃc management where one must take into account the number of waiting planes for
taking oﬀand landing (known) and future demands (unknown). In his PhD thesis [10],
Éric Piette shows that decision-making problems in strategy games can be handle in
practice by single-stage decision-making problems only. Finally, another reason to study
single-stage decision-making problems is that some environments do not allow multi-stage
problems: To do multi-stage decision-making, some stochastic variables must be revealed
at each stage. However, it is easy to ﬁnd natural problems where stochastic variables are
never completely revealed. This is the case in RTS games for instance, where the fog of
war is never completely dissipated. The problem we tackle in the paper belongs to this
category.
Considering uncertainty having only an impact on a solution quality (the objective
function) rather than its possibilities (the constraints) makes sense for the same reasons
as above: There are many concrete decision-making problems where one knows what is
possible and what is not, but does not known what the quality of its decisions will be.
In other words, the scope of our possible decisions is known (our constraints) but we
live in an uncertain, dynamic environment where events out of our control can impact
not the applicability of our decisions but their quality. Examples cited in the previous
paragraph are still relevant here: whatever our client orders, we can make a production
plan of the month regarding our available stock only; we can bid to an auction regarding
only our available money, but we can lose because of better bids; and we can plan air
traﬃc knowing the current situation, but we can be overwhelmed by a group of arriving
planes if we made bad runway assignments.
3
Preliminaries
3.1
Constraint Programming
The basic idea behind Constraint Programming is to deal with combinatorial problems
by splitting them up into two distinct parts: the ﬁrst part is modeling your problem via
one Constraint Programming formalism. This is usually done by a human being and this
task must be ideally easy and intuitive. The second part consists in ﬁnding one or several
solutions based on your model. This is done by a solver, i.e., a program running without
any human interventions.
The two main formalisms in Constraint Programing are Constraint Satisfaction Prob-
lems (CSP) and Constrained Optimization Problems (COP). The diﬀerence between a
CSP and a COP is simple:
A CSP models a satisfaction problem, i.e., a problem where all solutions are equiva-
lent; the goal is then to just ﬁnd one of them, if any. For instance: ﬁnding a solution of a
Sudoku grid. Good grids lead to a unique solution, but let’s consider several solutions are
possible for a given grid. Then, ﬁnding one solution is suﬃcient, and no solutions seem
better than another one. Sometimes, we may also be interested in ﬁnding all solutions of
3

a problem instance.
A COP models an optimization problem, where some solutions are better than others.
For instance: Several paths may exist from home to workplace, but one of them is the
shortest.
Formally, a CSP is deﬁned by a tuple (V , D, C) such that:
• V is a set of variables,
• D is a domain, i.e., a set of values for variables in V ,
• C is a set of constraints.
A constraint over k variables can be seen as a function from Dk to {true, false} to
make explicit what combinations of values among its k variables are allowed or not.
Notice that D should formally be the set of the domain for each variable in V , thus
a set of sets of values. However, it is common to deﬁne the same set of values for all
variables of V , thus one can simplify D to be the set of values each variable in V can
take.
A CSP models a problem, and a problem instance is expressed by a CSP formula,
i.e., a set of constraints applied on variables in V where all constraints are linked by a
logical and. The goal is then to attribute a value in D for each variable in V such that
all constraints in C are satisﬁed, i.e., outputs true.
A COP is deﬁned by a tuple (V , D, C, f) where V , D and C represent the same sets
as a CSP, and f is an objective function applied on variables in V . The goal is ﬁrst to
ﬁnd a solution, i.e., a value of each variable such that all constraints are satisﬁed, like for
CSP, but moreover to ﬁnd the solution minimizing or maximizing the objective function
f among all possible solutions.
CSP and COP deal with certain information only. There exist many extensions of the
CSP formalisms dealing with uncertainty: Mixed CSP, Probabilistic CSP, Stochastic
CSP, etc. We invite the reader to look at surveys [17] and [5] on this topic. However,
few are convenient to model a decision-making problem where one does know what his
or her possible choices are (i.e., variables, domains and constraints are known and ﬁxed),
but a third-party agent (a person, an environment, etc) ﬁxes the values of some speciﬁc
variables. These values are unknown at the moment we must make a decision and impact
the value output by the objective function. Stochastic CSP [19] is the most well adapted
formalism to model such problems, but with the huge drawback that constraints are con-
sidered to be chance-constraints, i.e., constraints are considered true if their probability
to be true reaches a given threshold. The main problem with such a formalism is that this
threshold must be provided by the human being modeling the problem, and it is often
unclear in practice how to ﬁx a good threshold value for a given problem. This does not
follow the Constraint Programming philosophy where problem models must be easy to
produce by a human being, without any arbitrary choices.
Moreover, while COP are a trivial extension of CSP with an objective function, it is
absolutely not clear how to extend constraint satisfaction formalisms under uncertainty
to deal with optimization problems. Indeed, to each solution of a problem can correspond
several possible objective function values, due to uncertainty on stochastic variables, and
such values depend on the state of an environment determining stochastic variable values.
How is it then possible to discriminate solutions between them?
4

To the best of our knowledge, no Constraint Programming formalisms without chance-
constraints able to handle optimization problems under uncertainty have ever been pro-
posed. We propose in Section 4 a way to deal with uncertainty within the classical COP
formalism, allowing us to solve such problem models with classical solvers.
3.2
Decision Theory
We consider the set D of decisions an agent can take. The goal is to deﬁne a preference
relation ⪰D on this set. Preferring the decision d1 over d2 means to prefer d1 consequences
over d2 ones, thus we can also consider a space X of consequences, and study a preference
relation ⪰X on this space in such a way that we have d1 ⪰D d2 ⇐⇒x1 ⪰X x2 where xi
is the consequence of the decision di. However, we do not have this equivalence anymore
when uncertainty comes into play, because we are not sure anymore the decision d will
lead to the consequence x.
In uncertain environments, we consider the set S of possible states of the environment.
We consider consequences to be sets of states after making a decision. Thus, we have
X = P(S).
Utility-based theories consider P a probability distribution over X, i.e., a probability
distribution over sets of possible states in S. Let pd be the probability following P of
obtaining the consequence xd ∈X after making the decision d.
We can then introduce the notion of lottery. A lottery l is a tuple (x1, p1; ...; xn, pn)
where xi is a consequence and pi its associated probability, such that Pn
i=1 pi = 1. A lottery
is thus a sum-up of a decision in the sense it represents the list of possible consequences
of a decision with their associated probabilities. Let L be the set of lotteries. We can then
deﬁne a preference relation ⪰L on L. How we deﬁne ⪰L exactly depends on the decision
theory, but the idea is to bring back the equivalence d1 ⪰D d2 ⇐⇒l1 ⪰L l2.
There exist diﬀerent works on decision theory to establish this equivalence. We have
thus the notion of Expected Utility (EU) deﬁned by [18] in the game theory framework.
However EU has a limited power of expression since one can quickly derivate paradoxes
such as the Allais Paradox violating the independence axiom, telling that if someone
has no preference between decisions A and B, then he or she must still not have no the
preference if we mix A and B with some decision C.
Choquet Expected Utility is a decision theory based on capacities, a notion general-
izing probabilities. A special case of Choquet Expected Utility restricted to probability
deformation function is the Rank Dependent Utility (RDU) introduced by [11,12]. RDU
has more power of expression than EU since it can explain the Allais Paradox. Unlike EU,
RDU allow to model attraction or repulsion to risks through a probability deformation
function. This can help to modify on-the-ﬂy the behavior of an agent taking a decision
regarding its environment.
The Rank Dependent Utility is then a way to compute ⪰L, and then to evaluate and
compare lotteries such that l1 ⪰L l2
⇐⇒RDU(l1) ≥RDU(l2). RDU applied to the
lottery l is the function deﬁned by Equation 1.
In Equation 1, u(x) is a utility function over the consequence space, intuitively giving a
score to consequences, and φ(p) an increasing function from [0, 1] to [0, 1] and interpreted
as a probability deformation function. The function φ(p) can be anything, as soon as it
is monotone and both equalities φ(0) = 0 and φ(1) = 1 hold. Consequences in the lottery
5

RDU(l) = u(x1)+
 u(x2)−u(x1)

∗φ
 n
X
i=2
pi
!
+
 u(x3)−u(x2)

∗φ
 n
X
i=3
pi
!
+. . .+
 u(xn)−u(xn−1)

∗φ(pn)
(1)
l are ordered such that ∀xi, xj with i < j, we have u(xi) ≤u(xj).
This probability deformation function φ allows to model risk-aversion since a concave
φ function deﬁnes an attraction to risks and a convex φ function a repulsion to risks.
Intuitively, if we have φ(p) ≤p for all p, then the agent taking a decision will underes-
timate gains probabilities and then will show a kind of pessimism about risks. We will
have the opposite behavior if we have φ(p) ≥p for all p. Notice that sigmoid functions,
which are neither concave nor convex, are also possible. In our experiments in Section 5,
we use a sigmoid function rather than a convex function to model pessimism, to decrease
probabilities of good outcomes and increase probabilities of unfavorable ones.
Remember that consequences xi in l are ordered according to the value of u(xi), such
that consequences with a small score outputed by the utility function u are placed at the
beginning of the lottery l. The intuition behind Equation 1 is then the following: With
probability p = 1, by making the decision d, you are sure to have at least the score of
the worst consequence x1, i.e., u(x1). Then, with (deformed) probability φ(p2 + . . . + pn),
you can have the score u(x1) plus a gain equals to

u(x2) −u(x1)

. With probability
φ(p3 + . . . + pn), you can have an additional gain equals to

u(x3) −u(x2)

, and so on
until having an additional gain equals to

u(xn) −u(xn−1)

with probability φ(pn). The
obtained value depends on the order, or rank, of the value of the utility function applied
to consequences, justifying the name “Rank Dependent Utility”.
However, deﬁning a utility function u over the consequence space it not easy, even
for numerical-only consequences. This space is completely dependent on the problem
and even on the problem instance so it is not realistic to propose general-purpose utility
functions that could work and certify a behavior on any kind of decision-making problem.
This is however possible with the probability deformation function φ since it is always a
function from [0, 1] to [0, 1].
Our decision-making problems being modeled as optimization problems, a conse-
quence x of a decision d is the value of our objective function. Therefore, the relation ⪰X
is merely the relation ≥over real numbers. This implies that u is a function from R to
R. In this work, we consider u to be the identity function id(x) = x and will use generic
probability deformation functions φ to change an agent’s behavior regarding risks.
4
Main contribution
The main diﬃculty to tackle a combinatorial optimization problem under uncertainty via
Constraint Programming is the lack of reliable criterion to attribute a quality to each
possible solution. How do you rank solutions if they lead to diﬀerent objective function
values regarding possible values of stochastic variables?
The main contribution of this paper is proposing to inject the Rank Dependent Utility
from decision theory into the classical COP formalism to solve optimization problems
under uncertainty.
6

We consider decision-making problem where one knows what our variables are, what
values they can take (i.e., we know the domain of each variable), what values combinations
are possible or not (i.e., we know our constraints), but where we have an objective function
to optimize implicating stochastic variables for which values are unknown at the moment
we must take a decision, such that only a third-party (the environment, an independent
agent, etc) has the power to set the value of these variables.
This describes in fact most common decision-making situations: when we have to take
a decision, we often miss some pieces of information (we cannot have a perfect knowledge
about everything) that still have an impact on the quality of our decision. Should I
invest my money in stocks or bitcoins? We do not know if the price will climb up or fall
down, but we know however what we can or cannot do (how much money can we invest
for instance). The quality of our decision will be only revealed once stochastic variables
values will be known.
4.1
Injecting RDU into COP
We recall we are interested in modeling uncertainty in decision-making problems. These
problems without uncertainty can be modeled through the COP formalism. For many
cases, uncertainty in decision-making problems does not aﬀect what you can or cannot
do but on external unknown elements that have a direct impact on the decision quality.
An easy way to model such decision-making problems is to model it through the regu-
lar COP formalism, by deﬁning 1. a set of decision variables, i.e., regular variables which
the solver has the control on, 2. a set of stochastic variables, representing all unknown
pieces of information, 3. a domain for both decision and stochastic variables, 4. a proba-
bility distribution for the domain of each stochastic variable, 5. a set of constraints upon
decision variables and 6. an objective function mixing decision and stochastic variables. If
probability distributions of stochastic variables are unknown, we can approximate them
with statistics. A convenient point with games is that we can often simulate their envi-
ronment or analyze replays and then collect those statistics fairly easily.
Like Equation 1 suggests, we need to know all consequences of a decision to compute
RDU. This is of course intractable since we have |D||S| consequences for each decision,
with |S| the number of stochastic variables and |D| the cardinality of their domain. A
convenient way to approximate RDU is to do Monte Carlo sampling of stochastic variable
values, following their probability distribution.
We can now apply our objective function to compute the RDU and get a usable metric
under uncertainty, which allows us to rank solutions and guide our decisions.
Let’s consider a problem modeled by a COP with decision variables vi, stochastic
variables sj and an objective function f. Like described in Subsection 3.2, consequences
xi of a decision d corresponds to values output by f. In the context of a COP, a decision
d is a vector of values assigned to each decision variables vi. Using Algorithm 1, we can
compute the relation ⪰D among decisions by approximating the RDU of their respective
lottery with Monte Carlo samplings.
We give details about Algorithm 1 here. It takes as input a solution d (or a decision),
i.e., a vector of values in D for each decision variables of the problem. The algorithm
outputs a real number, a preference on the decision, i.e., its estimated RDU, giving us
the opportunity to compare it with other decisions. Line 1 initializes a vector x to save
7

Algorithm 1: Estimating a preference on the decision d
input : A decision d, i.e., a vector in Dn, with D the domain of decision variables
v1, . . . , vn
output: A preference on d, i.e., a real value
1 Initialize an empty vector x of size k, with k a parameter for the number of wanted
samples;
2 for i = 1 to k do
3
Sample values for stochastic variables s1, . . . , sm according to their probability
distribution;
// f is our objective function, taking both decision and
stochastic variables
4
x[i] ←f(v1, . . . , vn, s1, . . . , sm);
5 end
6 Sort(x);
// Considering each sample has a probability
1
k, computes RDU
7 RDU
←x[1]+(x[2]−x[1])∗φ(k−1
k )+(x[3]−x[2])∗φ(k−2
k )+. . .+(x[k]−x[k −1])∗φ( 1
k);
8 return RDU
k values of the objective function f, each value computed with a diﬀerent sampling of
stochastic variables. From Line 2 to Line 5, we sample stochastic variable values following
their probability distribution, computes the values of f regarding d and sampled values,
and store them into the vector x. This vector is sorted in Line 6. Lines 7 and 8 compute
an approximation of the RDU applying Equation 1 and return this value.
In our experiments next section, we draw k = 50 samples. In Algorithm 1, k being
a parameter and not an input, we do not take it into count to compute the algorithm
complexity. The complexity of Algorithm 1 is then in Θ(f), depending on the complexity
of the objective function f only. Sampling m stochastic variables is also outside the scope
of the complexity of Algorithm 1 since stochastic variables are not among its inputs.
5
Proof of concept
We give a proof of concept of our contribution to show it is implementable and use
it to solve a decision-making problem under uncertainty in a RTS game. We have in-
cluded this decision-making solving system into a bot playing to the game µRTS. Our
bot, named POAdaptive, has won the partially observable track of the 2018 µRTS AI
competition organized within the CIG 2018 conference. The code of our bot, our experi-
mental setup and our experimental results can be found in the following github repository:
github.com/richoux/microrts-uncertainty/tree/v1.0.
We will consider the following problem: RTS game propose to train units which often
follow a rock-paper-scissors scheme. Because of the fog of war, we do not perfectly know
the enemy army composition and we must infer his or her strategy from some partial
observations. We must constantly take a production decision answering this question:
8

Figure 1: A game frame of µRTS on a 8x8 map. Resources are in green, squares are
buildings and round items are units.
“What next units should I produce to counter my enemy strategy?”
5.1
µRTS
We decided to use µRTS has an experimental environment. µRTS is an open-source, min-
imalist real-time strategy game developed by Santiago Ontañón for research purpose [9].
The game is made upon classical RTS mechanisms: there are resources (or money) to
gather (green squares in Figure 1). This money allow us to build buildings and train units.
In µRTS, there are two kind of buildings: bases (white squares) where money is stocked
and barracks (grey squares) where army units are produced. Four units are available in
µRTS: workers (small grey circles), light units (orange circles, not appearing in Figure 1),
ranged units (blue circles) and heavy units (large yellow circles). Workers are weak against
all units but are the only ones able to gather resources and build buildings. Light, ranged
and heavy units are following a rock-paper-scissors scheme, in the sense that heavy units
are strong against light units, light units are strong against range units and range units
are strong against heavy units.
To win, a player must destroy all enemy units and buildings. If nobody reaches that
goal before a ﬁxed number of frames, the game ends in a draw.
µRTS supports both complete and partially observable games. In order to test our
method solving decision-making problem under uncertainty, we used µRTS exclusively in
partially observable mode.
5.2
Deciding about unit production
We propose here a model of our production problem through the regular COP formalism.
Let’s consider {H, L, R} the heavy, light and ranged type of units, respectively. We have:
9

• Two kind of decision variables: planX, with X ∈{H, L, R}, representing the total
number of units of type X we should have (i.e., the total number of units we
currently possess plus the number of units we plan to produce), and assignXY ,
∀X, Y ∈{H, L, R}, the number of our units of type X we plan to use to counter
enemy units of type Y .
• One kind of stochastic variables: enemyUnitsX, with X ∈{H, L, R}, representing
the total number of units of type X the enemy currently possesses.
• Domains for each variable are natural numbers from 0 to a threshold. We used 20
as a threshold in our experiments, which is suﬃcient for small maps in µRTS.
• Two kind of constraints:
assignHL + assignHR + assignHH = planH
assignRL + assignRR + assignRH = planR
assignLL + assignLR + assignLH = planL
3(planH−ourUnitsH)+2(planR−ourUnitsR)+2(planL−ourUnitsL) ≤stockResource
The ﬁrst three constraints create the bridge between the total number of units of
type X we aim to have and the number of units of type X we consider we need
to counter an unknown number of enemy units of type Y . The last constraint is
the resource balance constraint: given ourUnitsX the number of units of type X
we currently have, (planX −ourUnitsX) corresponds to the number of units X we
have to produce. A heavy unit costs 3 resource points, a light and ranged units
only 2. The parameter stockResources corresponds to the current resource points
we possess at the moment of we must decide about our production.
• The objective function max targetH + targetL + targetR with
targetX = min{1, (HX ∗assignHX
+RX ∗assignRX
+LX ∗assignLX
−enemyUnitsX)}
where X ∈{H, L, R} and coeﬃcient of AB-type (i.e., HH, HL, . . ., RR) are constants
representing how many units of type A we need to counter a unit of type B. The min
function for targetX is to avoid a mere sum of the expressions HX ∗assignHX + RX ∗
assignRX+LX∗assignLX−enemyUnitsX for the three possible X ∈{H, L, R}, otherwise
it would lead to simply produce the unit with the highest AB-type coeﬃcient. We take
the minimum between these expressions and the value 1 to allow to produce up to one
more unit than necessary.
Our AB-type coeﬃcients have been estimated by running 200 games of 10 units of
A against 10 units of B, for each combination of AB ∈{H, L, R}2. We then took the
ratio of the total numbers of surviving units over 200 simulations. For instance, after 200
games of type “10 heavy versus 10 light”, we had 1284 surviving heavy units and 480
10

surviving light units. Then our parameter HL is equals to
480
1284 = 0.3738 (i.e., we need
0.3738 heavy unit to deal against 1 light unit) and LH is equals to 1284
480 = 2.675.
Finally, statistics on enemyUnitsX stochastic variables have been made by analyzing
800 replays of µRTS games from 2017 competitions. For each frame and each unit type,
we counted these units occurrence. These statistics are sharpen by observations while
playing a game: if we observe for instance 3 enemy light units at the same moment,
we nullify probabilities that the enemy has 0, 1 or 2 light units only, and we normalize
remaining probabilities.
5.3
Experiments
Few µRTS bots have been developed for partially observable games, and most of them
are in fact scripted bots. We have taken a basic rush bot and only modify its production
behavior, giving our bot POAdaptive. We did not modify its initial build order (produce
no additional workers, start immediately a barracks with our unique worker and then
gather resources until the end of the game). We only add a quick hit-and-run behavior
for our ranged units and a light seek-and-destroy behavior.
Our bot adapts its production in function of the RDU preference computed according
to the objective function. We give our pure COP model to the GHOST solver [13], a solver
dealing with classical CSP or COP models and unable to handle uncertainty directly.
This shows that our way to inject decision theory into the classical COP formalism is
suﬃcient to handle uncertainty and do not required to develop a new formalism neither
dedicated solvers. We give to the solver 100 milliseconds per frame as computation budget
to solve our COP problem, to be consistent with µRTS competitions rules.
Figure 2: Final normalized scores of the partially observable track of the 2018 µRTS AI
competition.
With our bot POAdaptive, we won the partially observable track of the 2018 µRTS
AI competition, over 7 competitors. We did not tweak our bot before the competition to be
eﬃcient on the competition maps neither against speciﬁc bots (such as 2017 competitors).
11

This show that our decision-making solving is eﬃcient enough to beat scripted rush bots
as well as MCTS-based and Hierarchical Task Network-based bots. Figure 2 shows ﬁnal
scores of the 2018 µRTS AI competition, over 720 games for each bot within a round-
robin tournament over 12 maps (4 of them were kept secret before the beginning of the
competition). The cumulative score is the sum of the score result for each game, i.e., 1 for
a win, 0.5 for a tie and 0 for a loss. The scores are normalized by dividing the cumulative
scores by the number of games per bots, i.e., 720.
To evaluate our decision-making process, we run 100 games (50 starting at the North-
East position, 50 starting at the South-West position) between the second best bot
of the competition, POLightRush bot, and four methods: POAdaptive using RDU
with a pessimistic φ function, POAdaptive using RDU with an optimistic φ function,
POAdaptive using Expected Utility instead of RDU (this can be easily done by us-
ing RDU with φ as the identity function), and ﬁnally a baseline bot having exactly the
same behavior as POAdaptive except for the unit production decision, taken randomly
among the three military units. The pessimistic function we use is the logistic function
φ(p) =
1
1+exp(−λ∗(2∗p−shift)) where p is the probability and with parameters λ = 10 and
shift = 1.3. The optimistic function is the logit function φ(p) = 1 +
log(
p
2−p)
λ
with λ = 10.
Map size
8x8
12x12
16x16
Baseline
Win
14
38
50
Tie
0
2
12
Loss
86
60
38
Score
14
39
56
Expected utility
Win
27
35
52
Tie
2
6
9
Loss
71
59
39
Score
28
38
56.5
RDU with optimistic φ
Win
23
44
55
Tie
10
7
13
Loss
67
49
32
Score
28
47.5
61.5
RDU with pessimistic φ
Win
26
50
57
Tie
6
5
5
Loss
68
45
38
Score
29
52.5
59.5
Table 1: Results of 100 games played against LightRush bot on three small maps. In bold,
results with the highest score for each map.
We run experiments on three small basic maps 8x8, 12x12 and 16x16 as well as
on three large basic maps 24x24, 32x32 and 64x64. Results on small maps are shown
in Table 1, and normalized scores are illustrated by Figure 3. These results are more
representative of our decision-making system performances on small maps. Indeed on
larger maps, POAdaptive has too few occasions to meet enemy units since no scouting
behavior has been written (we know by experience that coding a proper scouting behavior
12

Figure 3: Normalized sum of scores of Table 1 (small maps) for each method.
would not be so trivial). Thus, behavior of these four methods tends to be the same.
POAdaptive’s adaptation skills give it a slight advantage and then slight better scores
than the baseline method. On these larger maps, RDU with the optimistic φ gives the
best results (this optimistic version was besides used for the CIG 2018 competition),
slightly better than the pessimistic version. Results on large maps are shown in Table 2
and Figure 4.
Map size
24x24
32x32
64x64
Baseline
Win
59
56
21
Tie
34
37
79
Loss
7
7
0
Score
76
74.5
60.5
Expected utility
Win
60
62
28
Tie
37
35
70
Loss
3
3
2
Score
78.5
79.5
63
RDU with optimistic φ
Win
71
63
24
Tie
21
32
76
Loss
8
5
0
Score
81.5
79
62
RDU with pessimistic φ
Win
66
54
27
Tie
25
38
73
Loss
9
8
0
Score
78.5
73
63.5
Table 2: Results of 100 games played against LightRush bot on three large maps. In bold,
results with the highest score for each map.
On small maps, Table 1 and Figure 3 show that both RDU versions outperformed
the EU version, itself outperforming our baseline. Unlike for large maps, the pessimistic
version gives slightly better results than the optimistic version. This can be explained
by the fact that small maps do not give you a lot of time to react when you spot an
13

unfavorable enemy army composition. Being already prepare to the worst helps in that
case.
Figure 4: Normalized sum of scores of Table 2 (large maps) for each method.
6
Related works
Uncertainty has been intensively studied for the last 30 years in ﬁelds dealing with combi-
natorial optimization such as Operational Research [2], but signiﬁcantly less works have
been done for optimization under uncertainty in Constraint Programming [5]. To the best
of our knowledge, all methods to solve optimization problems through Stochastic Con-
straint Programming use a formalism considering chance-constraints, usually handled by
scenario-based methods. [1] is a recent example where the authors inject a probabilis-
tic inference engine from the graphical model community into a classical solver to solve
Stochastic CSP instances, thus dealing with chance-constraints.
There are also few works in RTS Game AI using Constraint Programming techniques,
in particular through Constraint Satisfaction/Optimization Problems, and few of them
dealing with uncertainty. However, we can cite works of [6–8] where authors use Stochastic
CSP to make a bot participating to the General Game Playing competition. Their bot
has won the 2016 competition.
Although the following papers do not deal with uncertainty, they all focus on solving
optimization problems in RTS games, in particular StarCraft. Thus [14] propose to model
with COP the optimal building placement to make a wall at a base entrance in order to
make easier its defense. [4,13] propose a CSP and COP solver, GHOST, that we used
for our experiments. Their Constraint Programming solver as been designed to output
good quality solution within some tenth of milliseconds, make it usable in RTS games.
Beyond Constraint Programming but close enough, [3] use a branch and bound al-
gorithms to optimize build order in the RTS game StarCraft. Like [14], [16] tackle the
problem to optimize a wall-in building placement in StarCraft but through the prism of
Answer-Set Programming.
14

7
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a way to deal with combinatorial optimization problems
under uncertainty within the classical Constrained Optimization Problems formalism by
injecting the Rank Dependent Utility from decision theory. The diﬃculty for Constraint
Programming formalisms of handling both optimization and uncertainty at the same time
was due to the impossibility to rank solutions if they lead to diﬀerent objective function
values regarding possible values of stochastic variables.
We get around this diﬃculty by computing preferences over decisions with the Rank
Dependent Utility using our objective function to score decisions. This allow us to show it
is possible to handle uncertainty with regular Constraint Programming solvers, without
having to deﬁne a new formalism neither to develop dedicated solvers for uncertainty. This
brings new perspective to tackle uncertainty in combinatorial optimization problems that
where considered so far to be intractable.
To show our result is usable in practice, we propose a proof of concept of our result by
modeling a decision-making problem under uncertainty in the µRTS game via the classical
COP formalism, and we solve it using a regular COP solver. We thus tackle a production
unit problem and implement a bot playing partially observable µRTS games and deciding
what units to produce in order to maximize its chance to counter its opponent strategy.
Our bot has won the partially observable track of the 2018 µRTS AI competition and
outperforms equivalent bots based on Expected utility or randomly producing units.
Our result only concern short-horizon decision-making problems. We could adapt
it to take into account larger horizons of action planning and integrate it into a bot
taking long-term strategy decision under uncertainty. We also would like to investigate
problems where constraints contain stochastic variables. Finally, it would be interesting
to implement our result into a bot playing a more ambitious game such as StarCraft.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported by the Pays de la Loire region through the Atlanstic 2020
research grant COPUL.
