BioSpaun: A large-scale behaving brain model with
complex neurons
Chris Eliasmith, Jan Gosmann, Xuan Choo
Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Abstract
We describe a large-scale functional brain model that includes detailed, conductance-
based, compartmental models of individual neurons.
We call the model
BioSpaun, to indicate the increased biological plausibility of these neurons,
and because it is a direct extension of the Spaun model [1]. We demonstrate
that including these detailed compartmental models does not adversely aﬀect
performance across a variety of tasks, including digit recognition, serial work-
ing memory, and counting. We then explore the eﬀects of applying TTX, a
sodium channel blocking drug, to the model. We characterize the behav-
ioral changes that result from this molecular level intervention. We believe
this is the ﬁrst demonstration of a large-scale brain model that clearly links
low-level molecular interventions and high-level behavior.
Keywords:
Spaun, Neural Engineering Framework, Semantic Pointer
Architecture, conductance neurons, biological cognition
1. Introduction
Recently, several large-scale brain models have been described. These
include a biophysically detailed model from Markram’s group in the Human
Brain Project (HBP) [2], which includes about 31,000 compartmental neu-
rons and 37 million synapses, modelled with many equations per cell. This
model is large-scale because of the amount of computation required to sim-
ulate its behavior at this level of biological detail. Another model reported
earlier by the Synapse project has simulated 500 billion neurons – more than
5x the number in the human brain – although each neuron is much simpler
than those in the HBP model, and the connectivity is far more limited [3, 4].
Preprint submitted to ArXiv
February 18, 2016
arXiv:1602.05220v1  [q-bio.NC]  16 Feb 2016

We have also previously proposed a large-scale model that includes 2.5 mil-
lion neurons, 8 billion connections, and, unlike these other large-scale models,
exhibits a wide variety of cognitive behavior [1]. However, our model uses
simple leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons, and for this reason Markram has
claimed “It’s not a brain model” [5].
In this paper we incorporate detailed compartmental models of the type
used in the recent HBP model into diﬀerent cortical areas of our large-scale,
behaving brain model. We refer to this augmented model as “BioSpaun”. We
show that the behavior of the original Spaun model is not adversely aﬀected
by changing the neuron model. We further show that the additional com-
plexity can be used to test hypotheses not possible with the original model.
Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate that BioSpaun can be used to simulate the ef-
fects of adding the drug tetrodotoxin (TTX) to these areas of cortex. We
perform this manipulation to both visual cortex and frontal cortex, demon-
strating performance declines related to the dosage of drug applied, both
within and across diﬀerent tasks. While much remains to be done to verify
the accuracy of these simulations in vivo, we believe this is the ﬁrst demon-
stration of a large-scale behaving neural model that includes a high degree
of biophysical detail. Integrating these two aspects of brain modeling pro-
vides a new method for testing low-level molecular and other physiological
interventions on high-level behavior.
2. Methods
2.1. Modeling approach
The Neural Engineering Framework (NEF) identiﬁes three quantitatively
speciﬁed principles that can be used to implement nonlinear dynamical sys-
tems in a spiking neural substrate [6]. These methods have been used to
propose novel models of a wide variety of neural systems including parts of
the rodent navigation system [7], tactile working memory in monkeys [8], and
simple decision making in humans [9] and rats [10]. These methods have also
been used to better understand more general issues about neural function,
such as how the variability of neural spike trains and the timing of individ-
ual spikes relates to information that can be extracted from spike patterns
[11], and how mixed weight neuron models can be transformed into models
respecting Dales Principle, while preserving function [12].
Conceptually, the NEF can be thought of as a neural compiler which
allows a researcher to specify a computation as a general nonlinear dynamical
2

system in some state space, which is then implemented in a spiking neural
substrate using an eﬃcient optimization method. There are several sources
for detailed descriptions of these methods [6, 13, 14], so we do not describe
them here. Centrally, the NEF answers questions about how neural systems
might compute, but it does not address the issue of what, speciﬁcally, is
computed by biological brains.
In our more recent work, we address this second question by proposing a
general neural architecture that includes speciﬁc functional hypotheses. We
call this proposal the Semantic Pointer Architecture (SPA; [15]). The SPA
identiﬁes a generic means of characterizing neural representation, semantic
pointers, that are used to capture central features of perceptual, motor, and
cognitive representation. The SPA uses semantic pointers to address percep-
tual categorization, motor control, working and long-term memory, as well as
conceptual binding and structure representation. As well, the SPA includes a
characterization of cognitive control that relies on basal ganglia and thalamic
interactions with cortex for understanding action selection.
We have developed several models using the SPA that address a variety
of cognitive abilities. For instance, we have demonstrated the encoding and
decoding of the 114,000 concepts and their relations in the WordNet database
[16]. We have shown an SPA model that matches human performance on the
full Ravens Progressive Matrices (RPM) intelligence test, and demonstrated
its ability to capture aging eﬀects through biological manipulation [17]. We
have described how the SPA naturally uniﬁes the three most prevalent the-
ories of conceptual representation[18]. We have also shown simple models
of language parsing [19], instruction following [20], and the n-back task [21].
Together, we believe this body of works demonstrates a uniquely scalable
and biologically plausible approach to understanding cognitive function.
2.2. The Semantic Pointer Architecture Uniﬁed Network (Spaun)
To demonstrate the SPA in detail, we proposed a mechanistic, functional
model of the brain that uses 2.5 million spiking neurons, has about 8 bil-
lion synaptic connections, and performs 8 diﬀerent tasks [1, 15]. We refer to
this large-scale neural model as the Semantic Pointer Architecture Uniﬁed
Network (Spaun). Spaun consists of leaky integrate-and-ﬁre (LIF) model
neurons. The physiological and tuning properties of the cells are statisti-
cally matched to the various anatomical areas included in the model. There
are about 20 anatomical areas accounted for (see Figure 1). Four types of
neurotransmitters are included in the model (GABA, AMPA, NMDA, and
3

Dopamine), and their known time constants and synaptic eﬀects are simu-
lated.
What makes Spaun unique among large-scale brain models is its func-
tional abilities. Spaun receives input from the environment through its sin-
gle eye, which is shown images of handwritten or typed digits and letters,
and it manipulates the environment by moving a physically modelled arm,
which has mass, length, inertia, and so on. Spaun uses these natural in-
terfaces, in combination with internal cognitive processes, to perceive visual
input, remember information, reason using that information, and generate
motor output (writing out numbers or letters).
It uses these abilities to
perform eight diﬀerent tasks, ranging from perceptual-motor tasks (recre-
ating the appearance of a perceived digit) to reinforcement learning (in a
gambling task) to language-like inductive reasoning (completing abstract
patterns in observed sequences of digits).
These tasks can be performed
in any order, they are all executed by the same model, and there are no
changes to the model between tasks. To see the model perform the tasks,
see http://nengo.ca/build-a-brain/spaunvideos.
We have compared the performance of Spaun to human and animal data
at several levels of detail [1]. Along many metrics the two align; for exam-
ple, the model and the brain share (1) dynamics of ﬁring rate changes in
striatum during the gambling task, (2) error rates as a function of position
when reporting digits in a memorized list, (3) coeﬃcient of variation of inter-
spike intervals, (4) reaction time mean and variance as a function of sequence
length in a counting task, (5) accuracy rates of recognizing unfamiliar hand-
written digits, and (6) success rates when solving induction tasks similar to
those found on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices (a standard test of human
intelligence), among other measures. It is these comparisons, demonstrat-
ing the range and quality of matches between the model and real neural
systems, that makes it plausible to suggest that Spaun is capturing some
central aspects of neural organization and function.
The Spaun model is simulated in the neural simulation package Nengo
[22], which natively implements the NEF and SPA methods.
2.3. The compartmental model
To replace the simple LIF neurons in our model, we have chosen a com-
partmental conductance model of cortical neurons that is similar in complex-
ity to those used in the recent HBP model [2]. In the HBP model, neurons
had up to 13 ion channel types and 4 compartments. In this work, we use
4

Figure 1:
Functional and anatomical architecture of Spaun.
(a) Neuroanatomical
architecture of Spaun, with matching colors and line styles indicating correspond-
ing components in the functional architecture in b.
Abbreviations:
V1/V2/V4 (pri-
mary/secondary/extrastriate visual cortex), AIT/IT (anterior/inferotemporal cortex),
DLPFC/VLPFC/OFC (dorso-lateral/ventro-lateral/orbito- frontal cortex), PPC (poste-
rior parietal cortex), M1 (primary motor cortex), SMA (supplementary motor area), PM
(premotor cortex), v/Str (ventral/striatum), STN (subthalamic nucleus), GPe/i (globus
pallidus externus/internus), SNc/r (substantia nigra pars compacta/reticulata), VTA
(ventral tegmental area). (b) Functional architecture of Spaun. The working memory, vi-
sual input, and motor output components represent hierarchies that compress/decompress
neural representations between diﬀerent representational spaces. The action selection com-
ponent chooses which action to execute given the current state of the rest of the system.
The ﬁve internal subsystems, from left to right, are used to 1) map visual inputs to
conceptual representations, 2) induce relationships between representations, 3) associate
input with reward, 4) map conceptual representations to motor actions, and 5) map motor
actions to speciﬁc patterns of movement. Reproduced from [1].
5

the pyramidal cell model developed and described in detail in [23].
This
model is reduced from a model with several hundred compartments, based
on the neural reconstructions in [24]. The reduced model that we are using
has 20 compartments across 4 functional areas (soma, basal dendrite, api-
cal dendrite, and apical dendritic tuft), 27 parameters, and 9 diﬀerent ion
channels. After automatically choosing parameter values based on an opti-
mization method, the reduced model very closely replicated the behavior of
the complex model (see, e.g., Figure 2). The model is available for download
at http://senselab.med.yale.edu/ModelDB, and runs in the NEURON 7.1
simulator.
To replace neurons in the Spaun model with this compartmental model,
we developed a Python interface, called nengo detailed neurons, between
Nengo and NEURON. Consequently, all of BioSpaun except for the compart-
mental neurons were run in Nengo, while the Python interface to NEURON
was used to communicate between the two simulators. The Python interface
is available at https://github.com/nengo/nengo_detailed_neurons.
The NEF is deﬁned such that the response properties of the speciﬁc neu-
ron models being employed can be taken into account during the optimiza-
tion process for determining connection weights. Typically, point neurons are
used so all connections are to the same compartment. In the case of employ-
ing compartmental models, with diﬀerent compartments for diﬀerent areas
of the cell, the weights of excitatory synapses were uniformly distributed
along the compartment modeling the apical dendrite. The synaptic weights
were linearly scaled with the distance from the soma (up to a factor of 2
if at the end of the dendritic compartment). This method approximately
preserved the somatic eﬀects of arriving spikes, resulting in neuronal activity
that can be accounted for using the standard NEF methods. We intend to
replace this simple heuristic with more precise methods in the future. The
inhibitory synapses directly targeted the somatic compartment.
We exploited the inclusion of this more sophisticated neuron model by
testing the eﬀects of TTX on high-level function. TTX is known to block
voltage-gated sodium channels in neurons. Consequently, to simulate the
eﬀects of TTX on the compartmental neurons, diﬀerent percentages of the
sodium channels were blocked to simulate diﬀerent concentrations of the
drug.
6

Figure 2: The reduced model compared to the complex model in terms of passive response.
a) The morphology of a neuron from [24] used to create the reduced model.
b) An
illustration of the functional sections, deﬁned over 20 compartments, used to optimize
the reduced model. c) Voltage induced at diﬀerent locations in the models as a function
of a -1nA current injected in the soma. d) The somatic impedance as a function of low-
amplitude oscillatory somatic input current for both models. (e) The soma phase-shift
between the oscillatory input current and membrane potential oscillation for both models.
Reproduced from [23].
7

3. Results
3.1. Comparison of LIF and compartmental information processing
To ensure that the NEF method was successfully applied to populations
of compartmental neurons, we constructed a circuit consisting of 200 in-
put neurons in population A and 50 output neurons in population B. The
function computed by the circuit is identity, implementing a communication
channel. We injected one period of a sine wave into the input population
and reconstructed the input from both LIF and compartmental neurons (see
Figure 3).
Both circuits are able to represent the input well, although the compart-
mental neurons are slightly noisier. Speciﬁcally, the RMS error in the LIF
circuit was 0.1 whereas the RMS error in the compartmental circuit was 0.21.
To demonstrate the eﬀects of a high dose TTX application, we blocked 60%
of the sodium channels in the conductance neurons in this circuit (Figure
4. This manipulation signiﬁcantly negatively impacts the response of the
neurons and increases the RMS error.
3.2. Eﬀects of TTX application on visual processing
In the original Spaun model, the visual system consists of a ventral stream
model that includes V1, V2, V4 and IT. In the digit recognition task, Spaun
classiﬁes human handwritten digits from the MNIST database based on the
neural representation in area IT. To initially examine the eﬀects of using the
compartmental neurons in Spaun, we replaced the LIF neurons in IT with
compartmental neurons. This is a much more challenging task than a simple
communication channel because classiﬁcation is a highly nonlinear function.
A video of normal performance on the digit classiﬁcation task can be found
at https://youtu.be/QDSXhuPGHSs.
The original classiﬁcation accuracy of Spaun (94%) was preserved with
the introduction of the compartmental models (see Figure 5, leftmost value).
We examined the eﬀects of changing the dosage of TTX applied to these
model neurons on classiﬁcation accuracy. The results are shown in Figure 5.
As can be seen, classiﬁcation is robust to large numbers of blocked sodium
channels, with little decrease in accuracy at 50% channel blockage. However,
by 72% blockage, the model’s accuracy is at chance levels (i.e. 10%).
3.3. Eﬀects of TTX applied to frontal cortex across tasks
Application of TTX to visual cortex has a similar consequence across all
of the tasks performed by Spaun: the input is made noisier and less certain.
8

Figure 3: Simple information processing through a communication channel in LIF and
compartmental neurons.
The ﬁrst panel is the state variable input, which is encoded
into spikes by population A. The second panel shows the estimate of the state variable
from decoding spikes from population A. The third panel shows the estimate of the state
variable from decoding the spikes from population B. a) The channel implemented with
LIF neurons in both populations using standard NEF methods. b) The same channel
implemented with compartmental neurons in the output population.
9

Figure 4: TTX application to a communication channel. The same circuit as shown in
Figure 3b with 60% of the sodium channels blocked.
Figure 5:
Handwritten digit recognition accuracy as a function of TTX dosage in
BioSpaun. Error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals.
10

This is unsurprising given the kind of eﬀects demonstrated in the previous
section. However, those eﬀects are demonstrated in a largely feedforward
network. As well, the eﬀects are only explored in a single task. Here we
apply the manipulation to a recurrent network and examine the eﬀects the
same TTX manipulation across diﬀerent tasks.
To examine heterogeneous eﬀects of the same manipulation in a recurrent
network, we introduced conductance neurons into part of the frontal cortex
of Spaun. Speciﬁcally, the part of frontal cortex that we changed is mapped
to OFC and acts as a memory that is responsible for keeping track of the task
currently being performed. As before, this introduction made no observable
functional diﬀerence across tasks (see Figures 6 and 7).
We subsequently introduced TTX to block about 20% of the sodium
channels in this frontal area. We examined the performance on two cognitive
tasks, the counting task and the list memory task. The counting tasks con-
sists of showing BioSpaun a starting digit (e.g. 3) and a count digit (e.g. 4),
and then asking for the result of counting by the count digit from the starting
digit (e.g. 7). Spaun replicated human reaction time data on this task. An
example run of the performance of BioSpaun on the counting task is shown
in this video https://youtu.be/FoOGqzG8_WU. As shown, BioSpaun is able
to encode the starting and count digits, and begins the internal counting pro-
cess, but that process is interrupted (i.e. the task state is forgotten) before
the counting completes. Consequently, BioSpaun produces no result. Figure
6 demonstrates performance across various numbers of counts. These results
demonstrate that the performance signiﬁcantly worsens with the application
of TTX, both in terms of reaction time, and task completion. Notably, there
was a timeout of 2s to complete the task after the display of the last digit.
Consequently, the worst possible performance (i.e., not responding to the
task) was most common for 5 counts with TTX.
The second task we performed the same manipulation in is the list mem-
ory task. In the list memory task, BioSpaun is shown a list of digits (with
varying numbers of digits), which it must reproduce after a delay. The orig-
inal Spaun model captures primacy and recency eﬀects in such a task. Per-
formance of BioSpaun under the inﬂuence of TTX is shown in this video
https://youtu.be/kpwoBccdmd8. In this case, BioSpaun is able to encode
the list correctly, and begins to write out digits but is interrupted before
completing the list. Performance across lists of various lengths is shown in
Figure 7.
Although the behavior across these tasks is in someways quite diﬀerent,
11

Figure 6: Eﬀect of TTX application on the counting task time to completion. The control
task reproduces the results of [1] where it was shown to statistically match human perfor-
mance times, while using detailed neurons. The eﬀetcs of TTX application is shown by
the green line, which shows signiﬁcantly worse timing, with many time outs. Error bars
are 95% conﬁdence intervals.
as the model always produces some output in the list task, while often not
at all in the counting task, it is clear how these diﬀerent behaviors are the
result of the same TTX-induced failure. That is, TTX consistently induces
a failure to retain the task state long enough to complete the given task.
While preliminary, this is a useful demonstration of how a single brain model
can explain the behaviorally diﬀerent eﬀects of a single underlying molecular
manipulation.
4. Conclusion
Many reasons have been oﬀered as to why large-scale models are im-
portant to build. These include the ability to understand mysterious brain
disorders, from autism to addiction [25], to develop and test new kinds of
medical interventions, be they drugs or stimulation [26], and to provide a
way to organize and unify the massive amounts of data generated by the
neurosciences [27]. However, no question about brains seems to loom larger
than: How do brains control behavior? The vast majority of sophisticated
behavior is the result of the interactions between many brain areas, recruiting
12

Figure 7: Eﬀect of TTX application on the list memory task. Top: Performance with no
TTX application reproduces the results reported in [1], which are statistically indistin-
guishable from human performance, while using detailed neurons. Bottom: The eﬀects
of the same TTX application as in Figure 6. In this case the recency eﬀect is largely
destroyed, and after two items performance is at chance. Error bars are 95% conﬁdence
intervals.
13

many millions of cells, each of which exhibits complex nonlinear dynamics.
Without constructing models that explore these complex interactions, and
how they relate to those dynamics, we are unlikely to be able to understand
how to help a distressed brain, or explain how biological mechanisms give
rise to cognitive behavior. In short, without large-scale models, we cannot
test large-scale hypotheses.
Until the Spaun model, past work on large-scale models has been surpris-
ingly silent on the connection between complex neural activity and observable
behavior. Even with the introduction of Spaun, the link between low-level
biophysical properties and cognitive behavior was only mildly elucidated be-
cause of the simplicity of the single cell models employed. With BioSpaun,
we have provided a preliminary but suggestive method for simulating brain
models that include extensive biophysical detail while not sacriﬁcing a clear
connection to interesting behavior. We have only exploited this connection to
examine potential consequences of employing a drug whose eﬀects are reason-
ably approximated through a simply mechanism (i.e. local sodium channel
blockage). Nevertheless, we believe that this kind of model opens the pos-
sibility of examining how a wide variety of low-level biological interventions
can inﬂuence systemic behavior.
5. References
