Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
COARSE-GRAIN
FINE-GRAIN
COATTENTION
NET-
WORK FOR MULTI-EVIDENCE QUESTION ANSWERING
Victor Zhong1, Caiming Xiong2, Nitish Shirish Keskar2, and Richard Socher2
1Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA

2Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, CA

ABSTRACT
End-to-end neural models have made signiﬁcant progress in question answering,
however recent studies show that these models implicitly assume that the answer
and evidence appear close together in a single document. In this work, we propose
the Coarse-grain Fine-grain Coattention Network (CFC), a new question answer-
ing model that combines information from evidence across multiple documents.
The CFC consists of a coarse-grain module that interprets documents with respect
to the query then ﬁnds a relevant answer, and a ﬁne-grain module which scores
each candidate answer by comparing its occurrences across all of the documents
with the query. We design these modules using hierarchies of coattention and self-
attention, which learn to emphasize different parts of the input. On the Qangaroo
WikiHop multi-evidence question answering task, the CFC obtains a new state-
of-the-art result of 70.6% on the blind test set, outperforming the previous best
by 3% accuracy despite not using pretrained contextual encoders.
1
INTRODUCTION
A requirement of scalable and practical question answering (QA) systems is the ability to reason
over multiple documents and combine their information to answer questions. Although existing
datasets enabled the development of effective end-to-end neural question answering systems, they
tend to focus on reasoning over localized sections of a single document (Hermann et al., 2015;
Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018; Trischler et al., 2017). For example, Min et al. (2018) ﬁnd that 90%
of the questions in the Stanford Question Answering Dataset are answerable given 1 sentence in a
document. In this work, we instead focus on multi-evidence QA, in which answering the question
requires aggregating evidence from multiple documents (Welbl et al., 2018; Joshi et al., 2017).
Our multi-evidence QA model, the Coarse-grain Fine-grain Coattention Network (CFC), selects
among a set of candidate answers given a set of support documents and a query. The CFC is inspired
by coarse-grain reasoning and ﬁne-grain reasoning. In coarse-grain reasoning, the model builds a
coarse summary of support documents conditioned on the query without knowing what candidates
are available, then scores each candidate. In ﬁne-grain reasoning, the model matches speciﬁc ﬁne-
grain contexts in which the candidate is mentioned with the query in order to gauge the relevance of
the candidate. These two strategies of reasoning are respectively modeled by the coarse-grain and
ﬁne-grain modules of the CFC. Each module employs a novel hierarchical attention — a hierarchy
of coattention and self-attention — to combine information from the support documents conditioned
on the query and candidates. Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the CFC.
The CFC achieves a new state-of-the-art result on the blind Qangaroo WikiHop test set of 70.6% ac-
curacy, beating previous best by 3% accuracy despite not using pretrained contextual encoders. In
addition, on the TriviaQA multi-paragraph question answering task (Joshi et al., 2017), reranking
Most of this work was done while Victor Zhong was at Salesforce Research.
1
arXiv:1901.00603v2  [cs.CL]  13 May 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Sum
score_j
Query
Candidate_j
Support_1
Support_Ns
Coarse-grain
module
Coref
Encoder
Encoder
Encoder
Encoder
Fine-grain
module
Fine-grain
scorer
Coarse-grain
scorer
…
…
…
Figure 1: The Coarse-grain Fine-grain Coattention Network.
outputs from a traditional span extraction model (Clark & Gardner, 2018) using the CFC improves
exact match accuracy by 3.1% and F1 by 3.0%.
Our analysis shows that components in the attention hierarchies of the coarse and ﬁne-grain modules
learn to focus on distinct parts of the input. This enables the CFC to more effectively represent a
large collection of long documents. Finally, we outline common types of errors produced by CFC,
caused by difﬁculty in aggregating large quantity of references, noise in distant supervision, and
difﬁcult relation types.
2
COARSE-GRAIN FINE-GRAIN COATTENTION NETWORK
The coarse-grain module and ﬁne-grain module of the CFC correspond to coarse-grain reason-
ing and ﬁne-grain reasoning strategies. The coarse-grain module summarizes support documents
without knowing the candidates: it builds codependent representations of support documents and
the query using coattention, then produces a coarse-grain summary using self-attention. In contrast,
the ﬁne-grain module retrieves speciﬁc contexts in which each candidate occurs: it identiﬁes coref-
erent mentions of the candidate, then uses coattention to build codependent representations between
these mentions and the query. While low-level encodings of the inputs are shared between modules,
we show that this division of labour allows the attention hierarchies in each module to focus on
different parts of the input. This enables the model to more effectively represent a large number of
potentially long support documents.
Suppose we are given a query, a set of Ns support documents, and a set of Nc candidates. Without
loss of generality, let us consider the ith document and the jth candidate. Let Lq ∈RTq×demb,
Ls ∈RTs×demb, and Lc ∈RTc×demb respectively denote the word embeddings of the query, the ith
support document, and the jth candidate answer. Here, Tq, Ts, and Tc are the number of words in
the corresponding sequence. demb is the size of the word embedding. We begin by encoding each
sequence using a bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al., 2014).
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Support 1 encoding
Support N_s encoding
Query encoding
Coattention
Coattention
Self-attention
Self-attention
Candidate_j encoding
Self-attention
Self-attention
Coarse-grain
Scorer
…
…
…
Figure 2: Coarse-grain module.
Eq
=
BiGRU (tanh(WqLq + bq)) ∈RTq×dhid
(1)
Es
=
BiGRU (Ls) ∈RTs×dhid
(2)
Ec
=
BiGRU (Lc) ∈RTc×dhid
(3)
Here, Eq, Es, and Ec are the encodings of the query, support, and candidate. Wq and bq are param-
eters of a query projection layer. dhid is the size of the bidirectional GRU.
2.1
COARSE-GRAIN MODULE
The coarse-grain module of the CFC, shown in Figure 2, builds codependent representations of
support documents Es and the query Eq using coattention, and then summarizes the coattention
context using self-attention to compare it to the candidate Ec. Coattention and similar techniques
are crucial to single-document question answering models (Xiong et al., 2017; Wang & Jiang, 2017;
Seo et al., 2017). We start by computing the afﬁnity matrix between the document and the query as
A = Es(Eq)⊺∈RTs×Tq
(4)
The support summary vectors and query summary vectors are deﬁned as
Ss
=
softmax (A) Eq ∈RTs×dhid
(5)
Sq
=
softmax (A⊺) Es ∈RTq×dhid
(6)
where softmax(X) normalizes X column-wise. We obtain the document context as
Cs
=
BiGRU (Sq softmax (A)) ∈RTs×dhid
(7)
The coattention context is then the feature-wise concatenation of the document context Cs and the
document summary vector Ss.
Us
=
[Cs; Ss] ∈RTs×2dhid
(8)
For ease of exposition, we abbreviate coattention, which takes as input a document encoding Es and
a query encoding Eq and produces the coattention context Us, as
Coattn (Es, Eq) →Us
(9)
Next, we summarize the coattention context — a codependent encoding of the supporting document
and the query — using hierarchical self-attention. First, we use self-attention to create a ﬁxed-
length summary vector of the coattention context. We compute a score for each position of the
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Mention 1 encoding
for candidate j
Mention N_m encoding
for candidate j
Query encoding
Self-attention
Self-attention
Coattention
Self-attention
Fine-grain
Scorer
…
…
…
Figure 3: The ﬁne-grain module of the CFC.
coattention context using a two-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP). This score is normalized and
used to compute a weighted sum over the coattention context.
asi
=
tanh (W2 tanh (W1Usi + b1) + b2) ∈R
(10)
ˆas
=
softmax(as)
(11)
Gs
=
Ts
X
i
ˆasiUsi ∈R2dhid
(12)
Here, asi and ˆasi are respectively the unnormalized and normalized score for the ith position of the
coattention context. W2, b2, W1, and b1 are parameters for the MLP scorer. Usi is the ith position
of the coattention context. We abbreviate self-attention, which takes as input a sequence Us and
produces the summary conditioned on the query Gs, as
Selfattn (Us) →Gs
(13)
Recall that Gs provides the summary of the ith of Ns support documents. We apply another self-
attention layer to compute a ﬁxed-length summary vector of all support documents. This summary
is then multiplied with the summary of the candidate answer to produce the coarse-grain score. Let
G ∈RNs×2dhid represent the sequence of summaries for all support documents. We have
Gc
=
Selfattn (Ec) ∈Rdhid
(14)
G′
=
Selfattn (G) ∈R2dhid
(15)
ycoarse
=
tanh (WcoarseG′ + bcoarse) Gc ∈R
(16)
where Ec and Gc are respectively the encoding and the self-attention summary of the candidate. G′
is the ﬁxed-length summary vector of all support documents. Wcoarse and bcoarse are parameters of
a projection layer that reduces the support documents summary from R2dhid to Rdhid.
2.2
CANDIDATE-DEPENDENT FINE-GRAIN MODULE
In contrast to the coarse-grain module, the ﬁne-grain module, shown in Figure 3, ﬁnds the speciﬁc
context in which the candidate occurs in the supporting documents using coreference resolution 1.
Each mention is then summarized using a self-attention layer to form a mention representation. We
then compute the coattention between the mention representations and the query. This coattention
context, which is a codependent encoding of the mentions and the query, is again summarized via
self-attention to produce a ﬁne-grain summary to score the candidate.
Let us assume that there are m mentions of the candidate in the ith support document. Let the kth
mention corresponds to the istart to iend tokens in the support document. We represent this mention
using self-attention over the span of the support document encoding that corresponds to the mention.
1We use simple lexical matching between candidates and support documents. Details are found in A.1 of
the Appendix.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
`` Train on a Track '' is a 
song by American recording 
artist Kelly Rowland . It 
was written by Rob Fusari , 
Tiaa Wells , Balewa 
Muhammad , and …
Columbia Records (also known 
simply as Columbia) is an 
American record label owned 
by Sony Music Entertainment 
(SME), a subsidiary of Sony 
Corporation of America…
Query record_label train on a track
Destiny's Child was an 
American girl group whose 
final and best-known line-up 
comprised Beyoncé Knowles, 
Kelly Rowland… After years 
of limited success, they 
were signed in 1997 to 
Columbia Records…
Query
Support x
Support y
Support z
sony
Candidate 1
universal
columbia records
Candidate 2
Candidate j
…
…
…
…
…
…
Figure 4: An example from the Qangaroo WikiHop QA task. The relevant multiple pieces of evi-
dence required to answer the question is shown in red. The correct answer is shown in blue.
Mk = Selfattn (Es[istart : iend]) ∈Rdhid
(17)
Suppose that there are Nm mentions of the candidate in total. We extract each mention represen-
tation using self-attention to produce a sequence of mention representations M ∈RNm×dhid. The
coattention context and summary of these mentions M with respect to the query Eq are
Um
=
Coattn (M, Eq) ∈RNm×2dhid
(18)
Gm
=
Selfattn (Um) ∈R2dhid
(19)
We use a linear layer to determine the ﬁne-grain score of the candidate
yﬁne = WﬁneGm + bﬁne ∈R
(20)
2.3
SCORE AGGREGATION
We take the sum of the coarse-grain score and the ﬁne-grain score, y = ycoarse + yﬁne, as the score
for the candidate. Recall that our earlier presentation is with respect to the jth out of Nc candidates.
We combine each candidate score to form the ﬁnal score vector Y ∈RNc. The model is trained
using cross-entropy loss.
3
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the CFC on two tasks to evaluate its effectiveness. The ﬁrst task is multi-evidence
question answering on the unmasked and masked version of the WikiHop dataset (Welbl et al.,
2018). The second task is the multi-paragraph extractive question answering task TriviaQA, which
we frame as a span reranking task (Joshi et al., 2017). On the former, the CFC achieves a new state-
of-the-art result. On the latter, reranking the outputs of a span-extraction model (Clark & Gardner,
2018) using the CFC results in signiﬁcant performance improvement.
3.1
MULTI-EVIDENCE QUESTION ANSWERING ON WIKIHOP
Welbl et al. (2018) proposed the Qangaroo WikiHop task to facilitate the study of multi-evidence
question answering. This dataset is constructed by linking entities in a document corpus (Wikipedia)
with a knowledge base (Wikidata). This produces a bipartite graph of documents and entities, an
edge in which marks the occurrence of an entity in a document. A knowledge base fact triplet con-
sequently corresponds to a path from the subject to the object in the resulting graph. The documents
along this path compose the support documents for the fact triplet. The Qangaroo WikiHop task,
shown in Figure 4, is as follows: given a query, that is, the subject and relation of a fact triplet, a set
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Model
Masked Dev
Dev
Test
CFC (ours)
72.1%
66.4%
70.6%
Enitity-GCN (Cao et al., 2018)
70.5%
64.8%
67.6%
MHQA-GRN (Song et al., 2018)
62.8%
65.4%
Jenga (Facebook AI Research*, 2018)
65.3%
Vanilla Coattention Model (NTU*, 2018)
59.9%
Coref GRU (Dhingra et al., 2018)
56.0%
59.3%
BiDAF Baseline (Welbl et al., 2018)
54.5%
42.9%
Table 1: Model accuracy on the WikiHop leaderboard at the time of submission on September 14,
2018. Missing entries indicate that the published entry did not include the corresponding score. *
indicates that the work has not been published.
50
100
Query length
0
50
100
150
200
250
Number of wrong predictions
0
20
40
60
Number of supporting documents
0
50
100
150
200
500
1000
1500
2000
Average length of supporting documents
0
100
200
300
0
20
40
60
Number of candidates
0
50
100
150
200
250
fine only
coarse only
fine only
coarse only
fine only
coarse only
 
 
fine only
coarse only
Figure 5: WikiHop dev errors across query lengths, support documents lengths, number of support
documents, and number of candidates for the coarse-grain-only and ﬁne-grain-only models.
of plausible candidate objects, and the corresponding support documents for the candidates, select
the correct candidate as the answer.
The unmasked version of WikiHop represents candidate answers with original text while the masked
version replaces them with randomly sampled placeholders in order to remove correlation between
frequent answers and support documents. Ofﬁcial blind, held-out test evaluation is performed us-
ing the unmasked version. We tokenize the data using Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014).
We use ﬁxed GloVe embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014) as well as character ngram embed-
dings (Hashimoto et al., 2017). We split symbolic query relations into words. All models are trained
using ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2015). We list detailed experiment setup and hyperparemeters of the
best-performing model in A.2 of the Appendix.
We compare the performance of the CFC to other models on the WikiHop leaderboard in Table 1.
The CFC achieves state-of-the-art results on both the masked and unmasked versions of WikiHop. In
particular, on the blind, held-out WikiHop test set, the CFC achieves a new best accuracy of 70.6%.
The previous state-of-the-art result by Cao et al. (2018) uses pretrained contextual encoders, which
has led to consistent improvements across NLP tasks (Peters et al., 2018). We outperform this result
by 3% despite not using pretrained contextual encoders 2. In addition, we show that the division of
labour between the coarse-grain module and the ﬁne-grain module allows the attention hierarchies
of each module to focus on different parts of the input. This enables the CFC to more effectively
model the large collection of potentially long documents found in WikiHop.
3.2
RERANKING EXTRACTIVE QUESTION ANSWERING ON TRIVIAQA
To further study the effectiveness of our model, we also experiment on TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017),
another large-scale question answering dataset that requires aggregating evidence from multiple
sentences. Similar to Hu et al. (2018b); Wang et al. (2018), we decompose the original TriviaQA
task into two subtasks: proposing plausible candidate answers and reranking candidate answers.
2Adding contextual encoders is computationally challenging as the CFC models the entire document context
unlike (Cao et al., 2018). It is an area for future work.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Answerable
% of data
Before reranking
After reranking
EM
F1
EM
F1
Answerable
86.8%
59.8%
64.5%
63.2%
67.8%
Unanswerable
13.2%
17.5%
22.2%
17.9%
22.9%
Total
100%
54.0%
58.7%
57.1%
61.7%
Table 2: Answer reranking results on the dev split of TriviaQA Wikipedia. We use the BiDAF++
model with the merge method of span scoring by Clark & Gardner (2018) to propose candidate
answers, which are subsequently reranked using the CFC. “Answerable” indicates that the candidate
answers proposed contains at least one correct answer. “Unanswerable” indicates that none of the
candidate answers proposed are correct.
Model
Dev
∆Dev
CFC
66.4%
-coarse
61.9%
-4.5%
-ﬁne
63.6%
-2.8%
-selfattn
64.8%
-1.6%
-bidir
65.4%
-1.0%
-encoder
61.3%
-5.1%
Table 3: Ablation study on
the WikiHop dev set.
The
rows respectively correspond
to the removal of coarse-grain
module, the removal of ﬁne-
grain module, the replace-
ment of self-attention with av-
erage pooling, the replace-
ment of bidir.
with unidir.
GRUs, and the replacement
of encoder GRUs with projec-
tion over word embeddings.
We address the ﬁrst subtask using BiDAF++, a competitive span ex-
traction question answering model by Clark & Gardner (2018) and
the second subtask using the CFC. To compute the candidate list for
reranking, we obtain the top 50 answer candidates from BiDAF++.
During training, we use the answer candidate that gives the maxi-
mum F1 as the gold label for training the CFC.
Our experimental results in Table 2 show that reranking using the
CFC provides consistent performance gains over only using the
span extraction question answering model. In particular, reranking
using the CFC improves performance regardless of whether the can-
didate answer set obtained from the span extraction model contains
correct answers. On the whole TriviaQA dev set, reranking using
the CFC results in a gain of 3.1% EM and 3.0% F1, which suggests
that the CFC can be used to further reﬁne the outputs produced by
span extraction question answering models.
3.3
ABLATION STUDY
Table 3 shows the performance contributions of the coarse-grain
module, the ﬁne-grain module, as well as model decisions such
as self-attention and bidirectional GRUs.
Both the coarse-grain
module and the ﬁne-grain module signiﬁcantly contribute to model performance. Replacing self-
attention layers with mean-pooling and the bidirectional GRUs with unidirectional GRUs result in
less performance degradation. Replacing the encoder with a projection over word embeddings result
in signiﬁcant performance drop, which suggests that contextual encodings that capture positional in-
formation is crucial to this task.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of model prediction errors across various lengths of the dataset for the
coarse-grain-only model (-ﬁne) and the ﬁne-grain-only model (-coarse). The ﬁne-grain-only model
under-performs the coarse-grain-only model consistently across almost all length measures. This is
likely due to the difﬁculty of coreference resolution of candidates in the support documents — the
technique we use of exact lexical matching tends to produce high precision and low recall. How-
ever, the ﬁne-grain-only model matches or outperforms the coarse-grain-only model on examples
with a large number of support documents or with long support documents. This is likely because
the entity-matching coreference resolution we employ captures intra-document and inter-document
dependencies more precisely than hierarchical attention.
3.4
QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
We examine the hierarchical attention maps produced by the CFC on examples from the Wiki-
Hop development set. We ﬁnd that coattention layers consistently focus on phrases that are similar
between the document and the query, while lower level self-attention layers capture phrases that
characterize the entity described by the document. Because these attention maps are very large, we
do not include them in the main text and instead refer readers to A.3 of the Appendix.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure
7:
Fine-grain
coattention
and
self-attention
scores
for
for
the
query
located in the administrative territorial entity hampton wick war
memorial, for which the answer is “London borough of Richmond Upon Thames”.
The
coattention tends to align the relation part of the query to the context in which the mention occurs
in the text. The ﬁrst, second, and fourth mentions respectively describe Hampton Wicks, Hampton
Hills, and Teddington — all of which are located in Richmond upon Thames. The third describes
Richmond upon Thames itself.
Figure
6:
Coarse-grain
summary
self-attention
scores
for
the
query
country of origin the
troll,
for
which
the
answer
is
“United Kingdom”. The summary self-
attention tends to focus on documents
relevant to the subject in the query. The
top three support documents 2, 4, 5
respectively present information about
the literary work The Troll, its author
Julia Donaldson, and Old Norse.
Coarse-grain summary self-attention, described in equa-
tion 15, tends to focus on support documents that present
information relevant to the object in the query. Figure 6 il-
lustrates an example of this in which the self-attention fo-
cuses on documents relevant to the literary work “The
Troll”, namely those about The Troll, its author Julia
Donaldson, and Old Norse.
In contrast, ﬁne-grain coattention over mention represen-
tations, described in equation 19, tends to focus on the
relation part of the query. Figure 7 illustrates an example
of this in which the coattention focuses on the relation-
ship between the mentions and the phrase “located in the
administrative territorial entity”. Attention maps of more
examples can be found in A.3 of the Appendix.
3.5
ERROR ANALYSIS
We examine 100 errors the CFC produced on the WikiHop development set and categorize them
into four types. We list identiﬁers and examples of these errors in A.4 of the Appendix. The ﬁrst
type (42% of errors) results from the model aggregating the wrong reference. For example, for
the query country of citizenship jamie burnett, the model correctly attends to the
documents about Jamie Burnett being born in South Larnarkshire and about Lanarkshire being in
Scotland. However it wrongly focuses on the word “england” in the latter document instead of the
answer “scotland”. We hypothesize that ways to reduce this type of error include using more robust
pretrained contextual encoders (McCann et al., 2017; Peters et al., 2018) and coreference resolution.
The second type (28% of errors) results from questions that are not answerable. For example, the
support documents do not provide the narrative location of the play “The Beloved Vagabond” for
the query narrative location the beloved vagabond. The third type (22% of errors)
results from queries that yield multiple correct answers. An example is the query instance of
qilakitsoq, for which the model predicts “archaeological site”, which is more speciﬁc than the
answer “town”. The second and third types of errors underscore the difﬁculty of using distant super-
vision to create large-scale datasets such as WikiHop. The fourth type (8% of errors) results from
complex relation types such as parent taxon which are difﬁcult to interpret using pretrained
word embeddings. One method to alleviate this type of errors is to embed relations using tunable
symbolic embeddings as well as ﬁxed word embeddings.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
4
RELATED WORK
Question answering and information aggregation tasks.
QA tasks span a variety of sources
such as Wikipedia (Yang et al., 2015; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018; Hewlett et al., 2016; Joshi
et al., 2017; Welbl et al., 2018), news articles (Hermann et al., 2015; Trischler et al., 2017),
books (Richardson et al., 2013), and trivia (Iyyer et al., 2014). Most QA tasks seldom require
reasoning over multiple pieces of evidence. In the event that such reasoning is required, it typically
arises in the form of coreference resolution within a single document (Min et al., 2018). In con-
trast, the Qangaroo WikiHop dataset encourages reasoning over multiple pieces of evidence across
documents due to its construction. A similar task that also requires aggregating information from
multiple documents is query-focused multi-document summarization, in which a model summarizes
a collection of documents given an input query (Dang, 2006; Gupta et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2013).
Question answering models.
The recent development of large-scale QA datasets has led to a host
of end-to-end QA models. These include early document attention models for cloze-form QA (Chen
et al., 2015), multi-hop memory networks (Weston et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Kumar
et al., 2016), as well as cross-sequence attention models for span-extraction QA. Variations of cross-
sequence attention include match-LSTM (Wang & Jiang, 2017), coattention (Xiong et al., 2017;
2018), bidirectional attention (Seo et al., 2017), and query-context attention (Yu et al., 2018). Recent
advances include the use of reinforcement learning to encourage the exploration of close answers
that may have imprecise span match (Xiong et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2018a), the use of convolutions
and self-attention to model local and global interactions (Yu et al., 2018), as well as the addition
of reranking models to reﬁne span-extraction output (Wang et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2018b). Our
work builds upon prior work on single-document QA and generalizes to multi-evidence QA across
documents.
Attention as information aggregation.
Neural attention has been successfully applied to a vari-
ety of tasks to summarize and aggregate information. Bahdanau et al. (2015) demonstrate the use of
attention over the encoder to capture soft alignments for machine translation. Similar types of atten-
tion has also been used in relation extraction (Zhang et al., 2017), summarization (Rush et al., 2015),
and semantic parsing (Dong & Lapata, 2018). Coattention as a means to encode codependent repre-
sentations between two inputs has also been successfully applied to visual question answering (Lu
et al., 2016) in addition to textual question answering. Self-attention has similarly been shown to be
effective as a means to combine information in textual entailment (Shen et al., 2018; Deunsol Yoon,
2018), coreference resolution (Lee et al., 2017), dialogue state-tracking (Zhong et al., 2018), ma-
chine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), and semantic parsing (Kitaev & Klein, 2018). In the CFC,
we present a novel way to combine self-attention and coattention in a hierarchy to build effective
conditional and codependent representations of a large number of potentially long documents.
Coarse-to-ﬁne modeling.
Hierarchical coarse-to-ﬁne modeling, which gradually introduces com-
plexity, is an effective technique to model long documents.
Petrov (2009) provides a detailed
overview of this technique and demonstrates its effectiveness on parsing, speech recognition, and
machine translation. Neural coarse-to-ﬁne modeling has also been applied to question answer-
ing (Choi et al., 2017; Min et al., 2018; Swayamdipta et al., 2018) and semantic parsing (Dong
& Lapata, 2018). The coarse and ﬁne-grain modules of the CFC similarly focus on extracting coarse
and ﬁne representations of the input. Unlike previous work in which a coarse module precedes a
ﬁne module, the modules in the CFC are complementary.
5
CONCLUSION
We presented CFC, a new state-of-the-art model for multi-evidence question answering inspired
by coarse-grain reasoning and ﬁne-grain reasoning.
On the WikiHop question answering task,
the CFC achieves 70.6% test accuracy, outperforming previous methods by 3% accuracy.
We
showed in our analysis that the complementary coarse-grain and ﬁne-grain modules of the CFC fo-
cus on different aspects of the input, and are an effective means to represent large collections of long
documents.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors thank Luke Zettlemoyer for his feedback and advice and Sewon Min for her help in
preprocessing the TriviaQA dataset.
