Multi-Label Classiﬁcation on
Remote-Sensing Images
A project report submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the
degree of
Master of Science (MS)
by
Aditya Kumar Singh
Roll No: 16MS023
to the
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE EDUCATION AND RESEARCH,
KOLKATA
Supervised by:
Dr. B. Uma Shankar
Associate Professor - Machine Intelligence Unit - ISI Kolkata
July 2021
arXiv:2201.01971v1  [cs.CV]  6 Jan 2022

Declaration of Authorship
Friday 7th January, 2022
I, Mr. Aditya Kumar Singh, Registration No. 16MS023, a student of the Department
of Mathematics and Statistics of the 5 years integrated BS-MS Dual Degree Programme of
IISER Kolkata, hereby declare that the project report titled “Multi-Label Classiﬁcation on
Remote-Sensing Images” is my own work and, to the best of my knowledge, it neither contains
materials written by any other person, nor it has been submitted for any degree/diploma or any
other academic award anywhere before, except where due references have been made.
Aditya Kumar Singh
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Kolkata
Mohanpur, 741246, West Bengal, India.
ii

Certiﬁcate from the Supervisor and the Co-Supervisor
Friday 7th January, 2022
This is to certify that the project report entitled “Multi-Label Classiﬁcation on Remote-
Sensing Images” submitted by Mr. Aditya Kumar Singh, Registration No. 16MS023, a student
of Department of Mathematics and Statistics of the 5-year integrated BS-MS Dual Degree
Programme of IISER Kolkata, is based upon his own work under my supervision. This is also to
certify that either the project report or any part of it has been submitted for any degree/diploma
or any other academic award anywhere before, except where due references have been made.
In my opinion, the project report fulﬁlls the requirements for the award of the degree of Master
of Science.
Dr. B. Uma Shankar
Associate Professor
Machine Intelligence Unit
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
B.T. Road, Dunlop, 700108, West
Bengal, India.
Dr. Satyaki Mazumder
Assistant Professor
Department of Mathematics and
Statistics
Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Kolkata
Mohanpur, Nadia, 741246, West
Bengal, India.
iii
