Effective Building Block Design for
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks using Search
Jayanta K Dutta1, Jiayi Liu1, Unmesh Kurup1, Mohak Shah2
1Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
2University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA

Abstract
Deep learning has shown promising results on many ma-
chine learning tasks but DL models are often complex net-
works with large number of neurons and layers, and recently,
complex layer structures known as building blocks. Finding
the best deep model requires a combination of ﬁnding both
the right architecture and the correct set of parameters ap-
propriate for that architecture. In addition, this complexity
(in terms of layer types, number of neurons, and number
of layers) also present problems with generalization since
larger networks are easier to overﬁt to the data. In this paper,
we propose a search framework for ﬁnding effective archi-
tectural building blocks for convolutional neural networks
(CNN). Our approach is much faster at ﬁnding models that
are close to state-of-the-art in performance. In addition, the
models discovered by our approach are also smaller than
models discovered by similar techniques. We achieve these
twin advantages by designing our search space in such a
way that it searches over a reduced set of state-of-the-art
building blocks for CNNs including residual block, inception
block, inception-residual block, ResNeXt block and many
others. We apply this technique to generate models for mul-
tiple image datasets and show that these models achieve
performance comparable to state-of-the-art (and even sur-
passing the state-of-the-art in one case). We also show that
learned models are transferable between datasets.
1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) currently
produce state-of-the-art accuracy on many machine learn-
ing tasks including image classiﬁcation. Early Deep Learn-
ing (DL) architectures such as AlexNet [11], ZF net [25],
and VGG net [17] used only convolution, fully connected,
and/or pooling operations but still provided large improve-
ments over classical vision approaches. Recent advances in
the ﬁeld have improved performance further by using several
new and more complex building blocks that involve opera-
tions such as branching (e.g. inception [20], ResNeXt [22]
blocks) and skip connections (e.g. residual [9], ResNeXt
[22]). Since the set of operations to be used for each branch
remains an active area of research, ﬁnd the correct building
block involves searching over the possible conﬁgurations
of branch components. This increase in the search space
effectively means that in addition to traditional Deep CNN
hyperparameters such as layer size and number of ﬁlters,
training a model now includes searching over the various
combinations involved in constructing an effective building
block. This increased complexity corresponds to increased
training time and often means that the process of ﬁnding
the right architecture or conﬁguration remains the result of
extensive search.
Recently, there has been some research in tackling this
issue by automating the architecture discovery process. We
can consider these methods as falling into one of two cat-
egories. The ﬁrst set of methods focus on discovering the
entire architecture from primary building blocks i.e., con-
volution layers, pooling layers, fully connected layers etc
[27, 3, 15, 12]. The other set of methods focus on building
these architectures from the afore-mentioned more complex
blocks involving branching and skip connections. The goal
with this second set of methods is ﬁnding one particular
building block [28, 26] which is then repeated many times
to create the deep architecture. With both approaches tech-
niques such as reinforcement learning [27, 3, 28, 26] or
evolutionary algorithms [15, 12] are generally used to search
through the architecture space. One drawback to using such
search techniques is that they are computationally expensive.
In this paper, we consider the second approach - that of
designing an effective architectural building block which is
then repeated to create a deeper network. Motivated from the
ResNet [9] and Inception [20] module structure, our block
design includes branching and skip connections. ResNet [9]
only includes 2D convolution (n × n) operations in their
block design, Inception [20] includes 2D convolution as well
as row/column convolutions (n × 1 or 1 × n ﬁlters), and
1
arXiv:1801.08577v1  [cs.LG]  25 Jan 2018

Xception [7] includes separable depth-wise convolution op-
erations. There are also several techniques in the literature
for combining the outputs from different branches including
concatenation [20], adding [22] and summation with stochas-
tic afﬁne transformation [8]. We propose a search framework
for ﬁnding architectural building blocks for CNNs consider-
ing all the well-known operations in the branch along with
their combination techniques. We use random search over
the search space to generate building blocks and repeat this
block multiple times to create a deep network. With only 50
architectures searched, we are able to ﬁnd an architecture
providing comparable performance with respect to state-of-
the art models on multiple image recognition datasets in-
cluding CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, and FER2013. Our
approach has the additional advantage that the search process
is much simpler (random search) than previous approaches
(reinforcement learning and evolutionary techniques) that
need many more trials to generate architectures with com-
parable performance. Finally, the models discovered by our
approach are smaller (as measured in terms of number of
weight parameters) than models discovered by other archi-
tecture discovery methods.
2. Related work
Deep CNNs have shown promising results on many ma-
chine learning tasks including image classiﬁcation. Starting
from AlexNet [11] to the more modern ResNet [9] there have
been many architectural changes to improve the performance
of the deep CNN. These improvements have seen, among
other achievements, a drop in the top 5 error rate from 15.3%
to 3.57% for the ImageNet classiﬁcation task [16]. Previ-
ous CNNs included convolution layers, pooling layers, and
fully connected layers. These layers were then stacked to
create a deeper network. Recently, different kinds of layers
such as depthwise convolution, separable convolution, and
dilated convolution, have been introduced. In addition to
stacking the layers on top of each other, skip connections are
used to pass the gradients smoothly for deeper models. One
disadvantage of these advances is that it has become more
difﬁcult to select and optimize the best model for a practical
application. As a consequence there has been some interest
recently in ﬁnding architectures automatically.
Zoph, Le [27]: Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are
used to generate model descriptions of the neural network
to be trained and the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is
trained with reinforcement learning to maximize the ex-
pected accuracy of the generated architectures on a vali-
dation dataset. The RNN predicts ﬁlter height, ﬁlter width,
stride height, stride width, and number of ﬁlters for one layer
and repeats this layer to construct the CNN. Every prediction
is carried out by a softmax classiﬁer and then fed into the
next time-step as input. Generally, the process of generat-
ing an architecture stops if the number of layers exceeds
a certain value. After generating an architecture, a neural
network with this architecture is built, trained, and validated
with a held-out validation set. The validation performance
is used to update the policy of the RNN to generate better
architectures over time. This approach involves minimal
human intervention and depends on the RNN to learn the
policy from scratch. However, this approach also involves
further tuning of the hyperparameters of the RNN model and
needs many samples of architectures to learn a good policy.
Baker et al. [3]: MetaQNN is a meta-modeling algorithm
based on reinforcement learning that automatically gener-
ates high performing CNN architectures for a given learning
task. The learning agent sequentially chooses neural network
layers with layer types (e.g. convolutional, pooling, fully
connected, termination) and their corresponding hyperpa-
rameters via ϵ-greedy policy until it reaches a termination
state. The generated architecture is trained and validated
with a held-out validation set. The validation performance is
used as a reward to update the Q-learning network to gener-
ate better architectures over time. While this work extends
the architecture generation ability of [27] to more layer types,
it still suffers from similar drawbacks resulting from the use
of reinforcement learning which requires many samples to
accurately learn a good policy.
Real et al. [15]: This approach uses a simple evolution-
ary algorithm to automatically discover high performance
CNN models. The algorithm starts with random CNN archi-
tecture that usually performs poorly and then progressively
improves this architecture while navigating a fairly unre-
stricted search space. Each evolved model is trained and
validated with a held-out validation set and the performance
is considered as the individual’s quality or ﬁtness score. The
scheme uses repeated pairwise competitions of random indi-
viduals. Different mutations are used for the reproduction
steps and the child architectures are allowed to inherit the
parents’ weights whenever possible. Given the limited muta-
tion space for each step, it still requires a signiﬁcant amount
of computing resources to reach the optimal solution.
Miikkulainen et al. [12]: CoDeepNEAT is an automated
method for optimizing deep learning architectures through
evolution. At ﬁrst, a population of minimal complexity
neural networks are generated and over many generations
structure (nodes and edges) are added incrementally through
mutation. Each node represents a layer in the deep network
and contains a table of real and binary valued hyperparame-
ters. These hyperparameters are mutated through an uniform
Gaussian distribution and random bit-ﬂipping, respectively.
These hyperparameters determine the type and properties of
the layer. Each evolved model is trained and validated with
a held-out validation set and the performance is considered
as the individual’s quality or ﬁtness score. Because it starts
from a relatively complex architecture, it is more efﬁcient
than the approaches that begin from a cold start. However
2

since it limits its search space to a few initial neural net-
works, it is hard to reach the state-of-the-art performance
when compared to other architecture search methods.
Zoph et al. [28]:NASNet considers learning an architec-
tural building block rather than learning the full architecture.
The learned building block is then repeated many times to
create the deep architecture. An RNN is used to generate
the descriptions of the building block in a manner similar
to [27]. For CNN models, two types of building blocks are
learned: Normal cell and Reduction cell, where these blocks
return same size feature maps and reduced size feature maps
respectively. The controller RNN is trained using proximal
policy optimization to generate better architectural building
blocks over time. This approach also generates models that
are transferable with the best building blocks for one learn-
ing task also showing good performance over other learning
tasks as well. However the RNN itself still lacks transfer-
ability and needs to be retrained for each new problem. Also,
because the blocks are learned from scratch, this approach
requires many more trials to achieve state-of-the-art perfor-
mance.
Suganuma et al. [18]: Cartesian Genetic Programming
(CGP) is used to automatically construct CNN architectures
for an image classiﬁcation task. The CNN structure and
connectivity represented by the CGP encoding method are
optimized to maximize the validation accuracy. The CNN
architecture deﬁned by the CGP is trained and validated with
a held-out validation set and the performance is considered as
the quality or ﬁtness score of the architecture. However, CGP
creates an additional set of hyperparameters (e.g. mutation
rate) that now need to be searched over to ﬁnd the best model.
Cai et al. [6]: This paper proposes a reinforcement learn-
ing search framework where the action is to grow the network
depth or layer width based on the current network architec-
ture while preserving functionality. A shared encoder net-
work is used to learn a low-dimensional representation of the
given architecture and a separate actor network generates cer-
tain types of network transformation actions. After T steps
of transformations the ﬁnal network along with transferred
weights is trained and validated with a held-out validation
set. The validation performance is used to update the policy
using a policy gradient method. Because the mutation is
to either increase the network depth or the layer width, it
can efﬁciently search through very deep architectures. How-
ever this also limits its ability to ﬁnd a less complex but
good-enough architecture.
Negrinho et al. [13]: DeepArchitect provides a frame-
work for automatically designing and training deep models.
It proposes an extensible and modular language that allows
the human expert to compactly represent complex search
spaces over architectures and their hyperparameters. Ran-
dom search, Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS), and sequential
model-based optimization (SMBO) are used to explore the
Block
Previous Block Output (depth=d_in)
conv(1), d_in->d/4
+
opt_o(k)
opt_o(k)
opt_o(k)
opt_o(k)
opt_c(k)
conv(1), d->d or conv(1), d/4->d
Current Block Output (depth=d)
Figure 1. Design of CNN building block.
search space. However the result of the search is an achi-
tecture that performs much worse than architectures found
by current state-of-the-art architecture search methods (see
Table 1).
3. Methodology
3.1. Building block design
The residual building block (ResNet [9]) has made it
easier to train much deeper neural networks while producing
state-of-the art results. A residual block simply adds the
input of the block to the output of the layer(s) within the
block and can be described more formally by
G(x) = x + F(x),
(1)
where x is the input of the residual block, G(x) is the output
of the residual block and F(x) is the output of a residual
branch on the residual block. In the basic design, F(x)
contains two 3×3 convolution layers along with a batch nor-
malization and/or a rectiﬁed linear unit activation function.
For training deeper nets, the building block is modiﬁed as
a bottleneck design. It contains 3 layers instead of 2 (1 × 1,
3 × 3, 1 × 1 convolutions) and 1 × 1 layers responsible for
reducing and then increasing the depth dimension to reduce
the number of parameters for deeper nets.
Several variants of ResNet are available which have
multiple branches instead of a single residual branch, e.g.
ResNeXt [22], Inception-ResNet [19], Shake-shake Residual
3

net [8]. The ResNext building block performs a set of oper-
ations whose outputs are aggregated by summation but all
transformations are of the same topology. Inception-ResNet
uses the Inception module with skip connections. All the
operations and hyperparameters are selected carefully to
achieve better performance on the ImageNet classiﬁcation
task. The exact conﬁguration of each module varies through-
out the network. Shake-shake Residual nets use two branches
in the residual function and the outputs of the branches are
combined with the standard summation by a stochastic afﬁne
combination. We design our search space to use the same
block throughout the network (like ResNext) but allow the
operations inside the block to be learned (like Inception-
ResNet). This enables us to take combine the functionalities
from each of the above models while still limiting the extent
of the search space by having a block structure.
Our framework searches through a structure that can be
considered as a convolutional cell building block rather than
the whole architecture. The building block can then be
stacked many times to create a deep CNN. Figure 1 shows
the design of our building block. The residual branch starts
with a 1 × 1 convolutional layer to reduce the feature depth
by a factor of 4 with respect to the output feature depth
of the block. Unlike ResNet, where it contains a 3 × 3
convolutional layer after the bottleneck layer, we create three
branches. The operation in each branch can be selected from
the following operations with k ∈{1, 3, 5}:
• conv(k): k × k convolution which is generally used in
designing most CNNs.
• rc conv(k): k ×1 convolution followed by 1×k convo-
lution. Inception-v4 [19] uses this operation to reduce
the number of parameters.
• sp conv(k): k × k depthwise separable convolution
consists of a depthwise convolution followed by a point-
wise convolution [7], which enables more efﬁcient use
of model parameters.
The outputs from the branches can be combined using
one of the following operations:
• concat: concatenating the outputs in the feature dimen-
sion (like in the inception [20] module).
• add det: adding the outputs (like in the ResNeXt [22]
module).
• add stc: adding the outputs, weighted by a random con-
stant (like in the forward pass of shake-shake residual
[8] block)
Finally a 1 × 1 convolution layer is used to increase the
feature depth to the output feature depth of the block. Each
operation is followed by a batch normalization and rectiﬁed
linear unit activation function. We use strided operation
for doing spatial feature space reduction. In case of feature
reduction, 1 × 1 convolution with stride 2 is applied on the
input feature map of the block to match the dimension of the
residual branch before adding them. We double the number
of output units in case of spatial feature size reduction to
maintain constant hidden state dimension. Each block is
repeated n times before any spatial feature size reduction.
We consider the number of repetitions n and the number of
initial convolution ﬁlters as hyperparameters.
3.2. Search strategy
As we treat the choices of branches as hyperparameters,
we are open to many off-the-shelf optimization methods.
Random search is one of the simplest methods for hyperpa-
rameter optimization [4]. Compared to iterating over pre-
deﬁned parameter combinations (i.e., grid search), random
search shows a good balance between exploration and ex-
ploitation, and thus better convergence rate. It is also less
sensitive to the prior assumptions on the distribution of hy-
perparameters which makes it a more robust alternative when
applied to many different problems. In addition, the random
search algorithm is naively parallelizable as there is no de-
pendency on historical results.
There are of course more advanced methods such as
Bayesian optimization, evolutionary algorithms, and rein-
forcement learning that can be applied to the hyperparameter
optimization problem. In the case of exploration vs exploita-
tion techniques, the early stages are explorative and akin to
random search [5, 23]. Since our approach has a limited
search space and uses only a small number of trials (50), a
random search is enough to effectively explore this space.
More recent work [13] has also conﬁrmed that at the early
stage, random search clearly outperforms other optimization
algorithms in the ﬁrst ten trials. It is not clear that the other
methods, e.g. Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and Sequen-
tial Model-Based Optimization (MSBO), are better given the
large uncertainty associated with the training and validation
results within the ﬁrst hundred trials. As the target is to ﬁnd
a better architecture with fewer trials, we choose the random
search for the Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) process
in this work and leave other methods for future investigation.
It would be remiss not to mention that our search strategy
is focused only on improving the search space associated
with the hyperparameters of the CNN architecture. This
leaves other model parameters such as the learning rate,
momentum, initialization etc to be discovered. Our proposal
does not extend to these hyperparameters and techniques to
discover them are out of the scope of this study.
4. Experimental Results
We experimented on four image classiﬁcation datasets:
CIFAR-10 [10], CIFAR-100 [10], SVHN [14], FER2013
4

[1]. CIFAR-10 [10] is an object recognition dataset and has
50000 training examples and 10000 test examples with 10
categories. Among the training examples, 5000 examples
were used for validation. CIFAR-100 [10] is also an object
recognition dataset, but with 100 categories. It has 50000
training examples and 10000 test examples. Among the
training examples, 5000 examples were used for validation.
SVHN [14] is a digit recognition dataset and is obtained
from house numbers in Google Street View images. It has
73257 training examples and 26032 test examples with 10
categories. Among the training examples, 5000 examples
were used for validation. We did not use the additional
dataset for training on SVHN dataset. FER2013 [1] is a
facial expression recognition dataset and has 28709 training,
3589 validation and 3589 test examples with 7 categories.
We note that the test set in every case is never used for model
selection, and only used for ﬁnal model evaluation.
For all the experiments, we used momentum optimizer to
minimize the cross-entropy loss with a minibatch size of 128.
The initial learning rate was set to 0.1 and was decreased
every 25 epochs by a factor of 0.5. Momentum was set to 0.9
and maximum number of epochs was set to 500. We used
early stopping if the validation accuracy stops improving
within 50 trials. We used weight decay parameter equal to
0.001 for training and common image preprocessing tech-
niques including per pixel mean subtraction (calculated over
the training set), random cropping and random horizontal
ﬂipping (except for SVHN dataset). For all the experiments,
we selected top-10 models based on validation accuracy
and report the test accuracy on the best model. We also
construct an ensemble of the top-10 mdoels by averaging
their responses. We used the open source project hof and
Tensorﬂow [2] to carry out the experiments.
We randomly searched over the operations (opt o) and
their combination types (opt c) to create a building block.
The created block is stacked repeatedly to assemble the deep
learning architecture that is then trained. We report results
with only 50 architectures searched.
Figure 2 shows the best validation accuracies after each
search trial for the CIFAR-100 dataset. We observed that
after 20 iterations, the performance is no longer improved.
We ﬁnd that 50 trials is enough for reasonable performance
on all the datasets that were analysed in this work.
Table 11 shows the comparison between several automatic
architecture search methods on different datasets along with
the best performance found in the corresponding literature.
From the results, we observe that our approach achieved com-
petitive performance with respect to the number of searched
architectures and the model complexity measure in the num-
1The actual number of architectures searched was not provided in Real
et al.[15] The authors provided only wall-clock time. As they mentioned the
population size is 1000 and also from Figure-1 of the paper, our estimated
number of architectures searched can not be less than 15000.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Search trials
0.745
0.750
0.755
0.760
0.765
0.770
0.775
0.780
0.785
Best accuracy in searched architectures
Figure 2. The best score after each search trial for CIFAR-100.
ber of parameters. For CIFAR-10, it achieved better results
than most of the methods except Zoph, Le [27] and Zoph et
al. [28] where both the number of searches and the number
of model parameters are much larger than our approach. For
the CIFAR-100 dataset, our method achieved better results
than all other architecture search methods. For the FER2013
dataset, it achieves state-of-the art classiﬁcation accuracy.
For the SVHN dataset, our approach achieves competitive
performance compared to other methods, but with fewer
model parameters.
101
102
103
104
105
Number of trials
0.930
0.935
0.940
0.945
0.950
0.955
0.960
0.965
Accuracy
Zoph, Le
Baker et al.
Real et al.
Zoph et al.
Suganuma et al.
Cai et al.
Ours
Figure 3. Performance comparison of different architecture search
methods on CIFAR-10. The size of circles corresponds to the
complexity of the ﬁnal CNN model (see Table 2).
5. Discussion
Figure 3 visualizes the results of the different architecture
search strategies on the CIFAR-10 dataset. For approaches
that start from basic building blocks such as [27, 15, 28],
it is very hard to learn an effective block and replicate it
into a very deep network in a short amount of time. These
5

Table 1. Performance of automatic deep learning architecture search methods.
Method
Search
Parameter (CIFAR-10)
Finetune
Error rate % (single/ensemble)
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
SVHN
FER2013
Gastaldi [8]
-
26.2M
-
2.72
15.85
-
-
Zagoruyko, Komodakis [24]
-
-
-
-
-
1.54
-
Tang [21]
-
-
-
-
-
-
30.7
Ours
50
2.1M
No
5.06/4.09
21.60/17.48
2.84/2.34
28.28/25.49
Zoph, Le [27]
12800
7.1M
Yes
4.47
-/-
-/-
-/-
Baker et al. [3]
3500
11.18M
Yes
6.92/7.32
27.14/-
2.28/2.06
-/-
Real et al. [15]
15000
5.4M
No
5.40/4.40
23.00/-
-/-
-/-
Miikkulainen et al. [12]
7200
-
-
7.30/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
Zoph et al. [28]
20000
3.3M
-
3.41/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
Suganuma et al. [18]
300
1.68M
-
5.98/-
23.47/-
-/-
-/-
Cai et al. [6]
480
19.69M
-
5.70/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
Negrinho et al. [13]
64
-
-
11.00/-
-/-
-/-
-/-
techniques take 3 orders of magnitude more trials than our
approach to discover architectures that are only marginally
better in terms of accuracy.
The size of each data point in the ﬁgure represents the
model complexity as measured by the number of weight pa-
rameters. The model discovered by our approach is smaller
while still maintaining good prediction performance. This is
due to the design of the search strategy that limits the number
of branching options, the number of blocks, and enforces
repeatable blocks to assemble the architecture. In effect we
constrain our search to small networks of repeatable blocks
instead of arbitrarily deep networks with unconstrained layer
sizes.
The relatively small size of our models also has compu-
tational beneﬁts. These models require fewer resources and
can be trained faster than architecture that are discovered
by extensive search. Although a smaller model may not be
as representative as more complex ones, we are still able
to achieve comparable performance. Finally, these models
being smaller are also more generalizable and exhibit trans-
ferability. We designed a deep CNN using the best building
block of CIFAR-10 experiment and trained that network on
the CIFAR-100 dataset achieving an error rate of 21.8%.
The best architecture for each dataset is presented in
Table 2.
5.1. Ensemble of search results
If the gains in reducing training time and model complex-
ity are not enough to offset the reduction in performance, an
effective way to improve results is to construct ensembles of
searched models. Even though the top 10 models share simi-
lar performance, in our experiments, an ensemble prediction
further improved accuracy.
We also compare the types of blocks used by the differ-
ent models contrasting the blocks learned for all models vs
those learned for the top-10 (used to construct the ensemble
model). Figure 4 shows the histogram of occurrences of
building blocks used in the models searched for the CIFAR-
100 dataset. This analysis allows us to understand how the
different block components contribute to the result and pro-
vides some hints for future CNN design. For instance, in
the opt c block, add and concat operations are present in
the models that form the ensemble (top 10 models) while
add stc is absent potentially showing that it is not a good
choice to be a part of the architecture building block. We
also see that both conv and a ﬁlter size of 5 are slightly
favored in our problem settings. However, this analysis is
preliminary and as the number of searches are limited, we
do not draw any ﬁrm conclusions. In addition, with more
search iterations, optimization algorithms that leverage rela-
tions between hyperparameters may outperform the random
search method used in this paper.
6. Conclusion
An important advance that improves deep learning per-
formance is the use of building blocks - small branch-
ing/spanning convolution blocks with pooling and batch
normalization layers that can be repeated to construct deep
architectures. However, ﬁnding an effective building block
for a task essentially adds another set of parameters to an al-
ready rich hyperparameter space. This ever increasing search
space for hyperparameters means that effective architecture
design is often the result of extensive search combined with
deep expertise that allows experienced modelers to restrict
search to certain promising combinations of parameters. It
is not too much of a stretch to say that effective architecture
design is partly art rather than completely science.
One way to even the playing ﬁeld for architecture design
is to allow architectures to be learned rather than explicitly
designed. In this paper we have shown that posing the design
of a building block as a search problem over a limited set of
building block components is effective in generating CNNs
for image recognition. The key takeaway of our approach
is that simple choices are often as effective as more com-
6

add
concat
add_stc
0
5
10
15
20
Occurrences
opt_c
Random expectation
Full search
Best 10
sp_conv
rc_conv
conv
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
opt_o
1
3
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Filter size
Figure 4. Histogram of building blocks of the searched deep CNN architectures. Blue bars are from all the searched architectures, and the
orange bars are for top 10 models that form the ensemble. The black lines are the expected occurrences for the top 10 models, if randomly
selected.
Table 2. Building blocks for best model with respect to validation set of each dataset.
Dataset
Operation type
Combination type
Branch-1
Branch-2
Branch-3
Branch-4
CIFAR-10
conv(5)
sp conv(1)
sp conv(3)
rc conv(3)
add
CIFAR-100
conv(5)
conv(1)
sp conv(3)
sp conv(3)
add
SVHN
conv(1)
rc conv(3)
conv(5)
rc conv(1)
concat
FER2013
conv(5)
conv(3)
sp conv(5)
rc conv(1)
concat
plicated approaches to architecture design with the added
advantage of generating smaller models with better gen-
eralizability. We limit our search space to a small set of
components chosen from existing designs, limit the number
of building blocks to only four, and use random search to
explore this space. All these choices simplify our search
space and greatly reduce search time. What is remarkable
is that our technique discovered architectures that are, in
most cases, better in performance than existing architecture
search approaches and perform close to state-of-the-art (and
even improving state-of-the-art in one case). There is as
always a trade-off in terms of performance vs cost and we
believe for those cases where cost (in terms of model de-
sign/training time) is an important factor, our approach can
provide solutions that are comparable in performance.
There remain many avenues for future work. We are in-
terested in expanding this technique to non-vision datasets
and model architectures, including recurrent networks and
even reinforcement learning methodologies. In addition, we
are also interested in better understanding how much trans-
fer is possible between blocks learned via random search.
Finally, there is still some work to understand exactly what
this simpliﬁed approach captures about architecture design
that allows it to be so effective. This understanding could
pave the way to designing newer building block components
that are learned from more primitive blocks without the need
for large number of trials.
