Counting and Sampling from Markov Equivalent DAGs
Using Clique Trees
AMIREMAD GHASSAMI
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaignn, Urbana, IL, USA

SABER SALEHKALEYBAR
Electrical Engineering Department, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran

NEGAR KIYAVASH
School of ISyE and ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA

KUN ZHANG
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is the most common graphical model for representing
causal relationships among a set of variables. When restricted to using only observational
data, the structure of the ground truth DAG is identiﬁable only up to Markov equivalence,
based on conditional independence relations among the variables. Therefore, the number
of DAGs equivalent to the ground truth DAG is an indicator of the causal complexity of
the underlying structure–roughly speaking, it shows how many interventions or how much
additional information is further needed to recover the underlying DAG. In this paper, we
propose a new technique for counting the number of DAGs in a Markov equivalence class. Our
approach is based on the clique tree representation of chordal graphs. We show that in the case
of bounded degree graphs, the proposed algorithm is polynomial time. We further demonstrate
that this technique can be utilized for uniform sampling from a Markov equivalence class, which
provides a stochastic way to enumerate DAGs in the equivalence class and may be needed for
ﬁnding the best DAG or for causal inference given the equivalence class as input. We also extend
our counting and sampling method to the case where prior knowledge about the underlying
DAG is available, and present applications of this extension in causal experiment design and
estimating the causal effect of joint interventions.
1
arXiv:1802.01239v2  [cs.DS]  11 Sep 2018

1
Introduction
A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a commonly used graphical model to represent causal rela-
tionships among a set of variables [Pea09]. In a DAG representation, a directed edge X →Y
indicates that variable X is a direct cause of variable Y relative to the considered variable set. Such
a representation has numerous applications in ﬁelds ranging from biology [SPP+05] and genetics
[ZGB+13] to machine learning [PJS17, KF09].
The general approach to learning a causal structure is to use statistical data from variables to
ﬁnd a DAG, which is maximally consistent with the conditional independencies estimated from
data. This is due to the fact that under Markov property and faithfulness assumption, d-separation
of variables in a DAG is equivalent to conditional independencies of the variables in the underlying
joint probability distribution [SGS00, Pea09]. However, a DAG representation of a set of conditional
independencies in most cases is not unique. This restricts the learning of the structure to the
Markov equivalences of the underlying DAG. The set of Markov equivalent DAGs is referred to
as a Markov equivalence class (MEC). A MEC is commonly represented by a mixed graph called
essential graph, which can contain both directed and undirected edges [SGS00].
In general, there is no preference amongst the elements of MEC, as they all represent the same
set of conditional independencies. Therefore, for a given dataset (or a joint probability distribution),
the size of the MEC, i.e., the number of its elements, can be seen as a metric for measuring the
causal complexity of the underlying structure–this complexity indicates how many interventional
experiments or how much additional information (e.g., knowledge about the causal mechanisms)
is needed to further fully learn the DAG structure, which was only partially recovered from
mere observation. Another important application of the size of the MEC is the following: As
mentioned earlier, one can compare different DAGs to ﬁnd the most consistent one with a given
joint distribution over the variables. Here, the space of DAGs, or the space of MECs can be chosen
as the search space. Chickering showed that when the size of the MECs are large, searching over
the space of MECs is more efﬁcient [Chi02]. Hence, knowing the size of the MEC can help us decide
the search space.
For the general problem of enumerating MECs, Steinsky proposed recursive enumeration
formulas for the number of labelled essential graphs, in which the enumeration parameters are
the number of vertices, chain components, and cliques [Ste13]. This approach is not focused on
a certain given MEC. For the problem of ﬁnding the size of a given MEC, an existing solution
is to use Markov chain methods [HJY+13, BT17]. According to this method, a Markov chain is
constructed over the elements of the MEC whose properties ensure that the stationary distribution
is uniform over all the elements. The rate of convergence and computational issues hinders practical
application of Markov chain methods. Recently, an exact solution for ﬁnding the size of a given
MEC was proposed [HJY15], in which the main idea was noting that sub-classes of the MEC with a
ﬁxed unique root variable partition the class. The authors show that there are ﬁve types of MECs
whose sizes can be calculated with ﬁve formulas, and for any other MEC, it can be partitioned
recursively into smaller sub-classes until the sizes of all subclasses can be calculated from the ﬁve
formulas. An accelerated version of the method in [HJY15] is proposed in [HY16], which is based
on the concept of core graphs.
In this paper, we propose a new counting approach, in which the counting is performed on the
2

clique tree representation of the graph. Compared to [HJY15], our method provides us with a more
systematic way for ﬁnding the orientation of the edges in a rooted sub-class, and enables us to use
the memory in an efﬁcient way in the implementation of the algorithm. Also, using clique tree
representation enables us to divide the graph into smaller pieces, and perform counting on each
piece separately (Theorem 2). We will show that for bounded degree graphs, the proposed solution
is capable of computing the size of the MEC in polynomial time. The counting technique can be
utilized for two main goals: (a) Uniform sampling, and (b) Applying prior knowledge. As will be
explained, for these goals, it is essential in our approach to have the ability of explicitly controlling
the performed orientations in the given essential graph. Therefore, neither the aforementioned ﬁve
formulas presented in (He, Jia, and Yu 2015), nor the accelerated technique in (He and Yu 2016) are
suitable for these purposes.
(a) Uniform sampling: In Section 4, we show that our counting technique can be used to
uniformly sample from a given MEC. This can be utilized in many scenarios; followings are two
examples. 1. Evaluating effect of an action in a causal system. For instance, in a network of users,
we may be interested in ﬁnding out conveying a news to which user leads to the maximum
spread of the news. This question could be answered if the causal structure is known, but we
often do not have the exact causal DAG. Instead, we can resort to uniformly sampling from the
corresponding MEC and evaluate the effect of the action on the samples. 2. Given a DAG D from a
MEC, there are simple algorithms for generating the essential graph corresponding to the MEC
[Mee95, AMP+97, Chi02]. However, for MECs with large size, it is not computationally feasible
to form every DAG represented by the essential graph. In [HH09] the authors require to evaluate
the score of all DAGs in MEC to ﬁnd the one with the highest score. Evaluating scores on uniform
samples provides an estimate for the maximum score.
(b) Applying prior knowledge: In Section 5, we will further extend our counting and sampling
techniques to the case that some prior knowledge regarding the orientation of a subset of the edges
in the structure is available. Such prior knowledge may come from imposing a partial ordering of
variables before conducting causal structure learning from both observational and interventional
data [SSG+98, HB12, WSYU17], or from certain model restrictions [HHS+12, REB18, ENM17]. We
will show that rooted sub-classes of the MEC allow us to understand whether a set of edges with
unknown directions can be oriented to agree with the prior, and if so, how many DAGs in the
MEC are consistent with such an orientation. We present the following two applications: 1. The
authors in [NMR+17] proposed a method for estimating the causal effect of joint interventions from
observational data. Their method requires extracting possible valid parent sets of the intervention
nodes from the essential graph, along with their multiplicity. They proposed the joint-IDA method
for this goal, which is exponential in the size of the chain component of the essential graph, and
hence, becomes infeasible for large components. In Section 5, we show that counting with prior
knowledge can solve this issue of extracting possible parent sets. 2. In Section 6, we provide another
speciﬁc scenario in which our proposed methodology is useful. This application is concerned with
ﬁnding the best set of variables to intervene on when we are restricted to a certain budget for the
number of interventions [GSKB18].
3

2
Deﬁnitions and Problem Description
For the deﬁnitions in this section, we mainly follow Andersson [AMP+97]. A graph G is a pair
(V(G), E(G)), where V(G) is a ﬁnite set of vertices and E(G), the set of edges, is a subset of
(V × V) \ {(a, a) : a ∈V}. An edge (a, b) ∈E whose opposite (b, a) ∈E is called an undirected
edge and we write a −b ∈G. An edge (a, b) ∈E whose opposite (b, a) ̸∈E is called a directed
edge, and we write a →b ∈E. A graph is called a chain graph if it contains no partially directed
cycles. After removing all directed edges of a chain graph, the components of the remaining
undirected graph are called the chain components of the chain graph. A v-structure of G is a triple
(a, b, c), with induced subgraph a →b ←c. Under Markov condition and faithfulness assumptions,
a directed acyclic graph (DAG) represents the conditional independences of a distribution on
variables corresponding to its vertices. Two DAGs are called Markov equivalent if they represent
the same set of conditional independence relations. The following result due to [VP90] provides a
graphical test for Markov equivalence:
Lemma 1. [VP90] Two DAGs are Markov equivalent if and only if they have the same skeleton and
v-structures.
We denote the Markov equivalence class (MEC) containing DAG D by [D]. A MEC can be repre-
sented by a graph G∗, called essential graph, which is deﬁned as G∗= ∪(D : D ∈[D]). We denote
the MEC corresponding to essential graph G∗by MEC(G∗). Essential graphs are also referred to as
completed partially directed acyclic graphs (CPDAGs) [Chi02], and maximally oriented graphs
[Mee95] in the literature. [AMP+97] proposed a graphical criterion for characterizing an essential
graph. They showed that an essential graph is a chain graph, in which every chain component is
chordal. As a corollary of Lemma 1, no DAG in a MEC can contain a v-structure in the subgraphs
corresponding to a chain component.
We refer to the number of elements of a MEC by the size of the MEC, and we denote the size
of MEC(G∗) by Size(G∗). Let {G1, ..., Gc} denote the chain components of G∗. Size(G∗) can be
calculated from the size of chain components using the following equation [GP02, HG08]:
Size(G∗) =
c
∏
i=1
Size(Gi).
(1)
This result suggests that the counting can be done separately in every chain component. Therefore,
without loss of generality, we can focus on the problem of ﬁnding the size of a MEC for which
the essential graph is a chain component, i.e., an undirected connected chordal graph (UCCG), in
which none of the members of the MEC are allowed to contain any v-structures.
In order to solve this problem, the authors of [HJY15] showed that there are ﬁve types of MECs
whose sizes can be calculated with ﬁve formulas, and that for any other MEC, it can be partitioned
recursively into smaller subclasses until the sizes of all subclasses can be calculated from the ﬁve
formulas. We explain the partitioning method as it is relevant to this work as well.
Let G be a UCCG and D be a DAG in MEC(G). A vertex v ∈V(G) is the root in D if its
in-degree is zero.
Deﬁnition 1. Let UCCG G be the representer of a MEC. The v-rooted sub-class of the MEC is the
set of all v-rooted DAGs in the MEC. This sub-class can be represented by the v-rooted essential graph
G(v) = ∪(D : D ∈v-rooted sub-class).
4

For instance, for UCCG G in Figure 1(a), G(v1) and G(v2) are depicted in Figures 1(c) and 1(g),
respectively.
Lemma 2. [HJY15] Let G be a UCCG. For any v ∈V(G), the v-rooted sub-class is not empty and the set
of all v-rooted sub-classes partitions the set of all DAGs in the MEC.
From Lemma 2 we have
Size(G) = ∑
v∈V(G)
Size(G(v)).
(2)
Hence, using equations (1) and (2), we have
Size(G∗) =
c
∏
i=1 ∑
v∈V(Gi)
Size(G(v)
i
).
(3)
He et al. showed that G(v) is a chain graph with chordal chain components, and introduced
an algorithm for generating this essential graph. Therefore, using equation (3), Size(G∗) can be
obtained recursively. The authors of [HJY15] did not characterize the complexity, but reported
that their experiments suggested when the number of vertices is small or the graph is sparse, the
proposed approach is efﬁcient.
3
Calculating the size of a MEC
In this section, we present our proposed method for calculating the size of the MEC corresponding
to a given UCCG. We ﬁrst introduce some machinery required in our approach for representing
chordal graphs via clique trees. The deﬁnitions and propositions are mostly sourced from [BP93,
VA15].
For a given UCCG, G, let KG = {K1, · · · , Km} denote the set containing the maximal cliques of
G, and let T = (KG, E(T)) be a tree on KG, referred to as a clique tree.
Deﬁnition 2 (Clique-intersection property). A clique tree T satisﬁes the clique-intersection property if for
every pair of distinct cliques K, K′ ∈KG, the set K ∩K′ is contained in every clique on the path connecting
K and K′ in the tree.
Proposition 1. [BP93] A connected graph G is chordal if and only if there exists a clique tree for G, which
satisﬁes the clique-intersection property.
Deﬁnition 3 (Induced-subtree property). A clique tree T satisﬁes the induced-subtree property if for every
vertex v ∈V(G), the set of cliques containing v induces a subtree of T, denoted by Tv.
Proposition 2. [BP93] The clique-intersection and induced-subtree properties are equivalent.
Since we work with a UCCG, by Propositions 1 and 2, there exists a clique tree on KG, which
satisﬁes the clique-intersection and induced-subtree properties. Efﬁcient algorithms for generating
such a tree is presented in [BP93, VA15]. In the sequel, whenever we refer to clique tree T =
(KG, E(T)), we assume it satisﬁes the clique-intersection and induced-subtree properties. Note
that such a tree is not necessarily unique, yet we ﬁx one and perform all operations on it. For the
5

given UCCG, similar to [HJY15], we partition the corresponding MEC by its rooted sub-classes,
and calculate the size of each sub-class separately. However, we use the clique tree representation
of the UCCG for counting. Our approach enables us to use the memory in the counting process
to make the counting more efﬁcient, and provides us with a systematic approach for ﬁnding the
orientations.
For the r-rooted essential graph G(r), we arbitrarily choose one of the cliques containing r as
the root of the tree T = (KG, E(T)), and denote this rooted clique tree by T(r). Setting a vertex
as the root in a tree determines the parent of all vertices. For clique K in T(r), denote its parent
clique by Pa(K) . Following [VA15], we can partition each non-root clique into a separator set
Sep(K) = K ∩Pa(K), and a residual set Res(K) = K \ Sep(K). For the root clique, the convention is
to deﬁne Sep(K) = ∅, and Res(K) = K. The induced-subtree property implies the following result:
Proposition 3. [VA15] Let G be the given UCCG, and let T(r) be the rooted clique tree,
(i) The clique residuals partition V(G),
(ii) For each u ∈V(G), denote the clique for which u is in its residual set by Ku, and the induced subtree of
cliques containing u by Tu. Ku is the root of Tu. The other vertices of Tu are the cliques that contain u in
their separator set.
(iii) The clique separators Sep(K), where K ranges over all non-root cliques, are the minimal vertex separators
of G.
Note that sets Sep(K) and Res(K) depend on the choice of root. However, all clique trees have
the same vertices (namely, maximal cliques of G) and the same clique separators (namely, the
minimal vertex separators of G). Also, since there are at most p cliques in a chordal graph with
p vertices, there are at most p −1 edges in a clique tree and, hence, at most p −1 minimal vertex
separators.
With a small deviation from the standard convention, in our approach, for the root clique of T(r),
we deﬁne Sep(K) = {r}, and Res(K) = K \ {r}. Recall from Proposition 3 that for each u ∈V(G),
Ku denotes the clique for which u is in its residual set, and this clique is unique. We will need the
following results for our orientation approach. All the proofs are provided in the appendix.
Lemma 3. If u →v ∈G(r), then u ∈Sep(Kv).
Corollary 1. If u →v ∈G(r), then v ̸∈Sep(Ku).
Lemma 3 states that parents of any vertex v are elements of Sep(Kv). But, not all elements of
Sep(Kv) are necessarily parents of v. Our objective is to ﬁnd a necessary and sufﬁcient condition to
determine the parents of a vertex.
Lemma 4. If u →v ∈G(r), then for every vertex w ∈Res(Kv), u →w ∈G(r).
Lemma 4 implies that for every clique K, any vertex u ∈Sep(K) either has directed edges to all
elements of Res(K) in G(r), or has no directed edges to any of the elements of Res(K). For clique K,
we deﬁne the emission set, Em(K), as the subset of Sep(K) which has directed edges to all elements
of Res(K) in G(r). Lemmas 3 and 4 lead to the following corollary:
Corollary 2. Em(Kv) is the set of parents of v in G(r).
6

(")
($)
(%)
&′
&
()
(*
(*
()
(+
(,
(,
(+
(,
(+
(-)
(ℎ)
&′′
(*
()
(,
(+
(*
(,, (+
()
(,, (+
(0)
(,
(+
(1)
2)
2,
2′
(*
(,, (+
(,
(), (+
(3)
2)
2,
(*
()
(+
(*
(+
()
(+
(4)
2”)
2”,
Figure 1: Graphs related to Example 1.
This means that the necessary and sufﬁcient condition for u to be a parent of v is u ∈Em(Kv).
Therefore, for any clique K, we need to characterize its emission set. We will show that the Em(K)
is the subset of Sep(K) which satisﬁes the following emission condition:
Deﬁnition 4 (Emission condition for a vetex). We say vertex v satisﬁes the emission condition in clique
K if v ∈Sep(K), and Em(Kv) ̸⊆Sep(K).
As a convention, we assume that the root variable r satisﬁes the emission condition in all the
cliques containing it.
Theorem 1. u →v ∈G(r) if and only if u satisﬁes the emission condition in clique Kv in T(r).
Note that for a clique K, in order to ﬁnd Em(K) using Deﬁnition 4, we need to learn the emission
set of some cliques on the higher levels of the tree. Hence, the emission sets must be identiﬁed on
the tree from top to bottom.
After setting vertex r as the root, Theorem 1 allows us to ﬁnd the orientation of directed edges
in G(r) as follows. First, we form T(r). Then, for each K ∈KG, starting from top to bottom of T(r),
we identify all vertices which satisfy the emission condition to obtain Em(K). Finally, in each clique
K, we orient the edges from all the variables in Em(K) towards all the variables in Res(K).
Example 1. Assume the UCCG in Figure 1(a) is the given essential graph. Setting vertex v1 as the root of
G (by symmetry, v4 is similar), the corresponding clique tree T(v1) is shown in Figure 1(b), where in each
clique, the ﬁrst and the second rows represent the separator and the residual sets, respectively. In this clique
tree, we obtain Em(K1) = {v1}, and Em(K2) = {v2, v3}. Hence, the directed edges are v1 →v2, v1 →v3,
v2 →v4, and v3 →v4. This results in G(v1) in Figure 1(c), which is an essential graph with a single chain
component G′, (Figure 1(d)). Setting vertex v2 as the root (by symmetry, v3 is similar), the corresponding
clique tree T′(v2) is shown in Figure 1(e). In this clique tree, Em(K′) = {v2} and hence, the directed edge is
v2 →v3. This results in a directed graph, thus, Size(G′(v2)) = 1. Similarly, Size(G′(v3)) = 1. Therefore,
from (2), we have Size(G(v1)) = Size(G′(v2)) + Size(G′(v3)) = 2. Similarly, we have Size(G(v4)) = 2.
Setting vertex v2 as the root of G (by symmetry, v3 is similar), the corresponding clique tree T(v2) is
shown in Figure 1( f ). In this clique tree, Em(K1) = Em(K2) = {v2}, and hence, the directed edges
7

Algorithm 1 MEC Size Calculator
1: Input: Essential graph G∗, with chain components
2:
{G1, · · · Gc}.
3: Return: ∏c
i=1 SIZE(Gi)
4:
5: function SIZE(G)
6:
Construct a clique tree T = (KG, E(T)).
7:
if T ∈Memory then
8:
Load [T, SizeT], Return: SizeT
9:
else
10:
for v ∈V(G) do
11:
Set a clique K ∈Tv as the root to form T(v).
12:
SizeT(v) = RS(T(v), K, Sep(K)).
13:
end for
14:
Save [T, ∑v∈V SizeT(v)], Return ∑v SizeT(v)
15:
end if
16: end function
are v2 →v1, v2 →v3, and v2 →v4. G(v2) shown in Figure 1(g) is the essential graph with a single
chain component G′′, shown in Figure 1(h). Setting vertex v1 as the root, the corresponding clique tree
T′′(v1) is shown in Figure 1(i). In this clique tree Em(K′′
1 ) = {v1} and Em(K′′
2 ) = {v3}. Hence, the
directed edges are v1 →v3 and v3 →v4. The result is a directed graph, thus, Size(G′′(v1)) = 1. Similarly,
Size(G′′(v3)) = 1 and Size(G′′(v4)) = 1. Therefore, from (2), we have Size(G(v2)) = Size(G′′(v1)) +
Size(G′′(v3)) + Size(G′′(v4)) = 3. Similarly, we have Size(G(v3)) = 3.
Finally, using equation (2), we obtain that Size(G) = ∑i Size(G(vi)) = 10.
3.1
Algorithm
In this subsection, we present an efﬁcient approach for the counting process. In a rooted clique
tree T(r), for any clique K, let T(K) be the maximal subtree of T(r) with K as its root, and let
Res(T(K)) := S
K′∈T(K) Res(K′). Also, for vertex sets S1, S2 ⊆V, let [S1, S2] be the set of edges with
one end point in S1 and the other end point in S2.
Lemma 5. For any clique K, [Sep(K), Res(T(K))] is an edge cut.
We need the following deﬁnition in our algorithm:
Deﬁnition 5 (Emission condition for a clique). Clique K satisﬁes the emission condition if Em(K) =
Sep(K).
Remark 1. Theorem 1 implies that clique K satisﬁes the emission condition if and only if all elements in
Sep(K) satisfy the emission condition in K.
In the recursive approach, once the algorithm ﬁnds all the directed edges in G(r), it removes all
the oriented edges for the next stage and restarts with the undirected components, i.e., the edges
8

Function RS(T, Kroot, Sep(Kroot))
1: Initiate: SizeT = 1
2: Orient from Sep(Kroot) to Res(Kroot) in G.
3: Explore = Kroot
4: while Explore ̸= ∅do
5:
for K ∈Ch(Explore) do
6:
Form Em(K).
7:
if K satisﬁes emission condition then
8:
T = T\T(K)
9:
Remove [Sep(K), Res(T(K))] and components containing Res(T(K)) from G.
10:
if (T(K), Sep(K)) ∈Memory then
11:
Load [(T(K), Sep(K)), SizeT(K)]
12:
SizeT = SizeT × SizeT(K)
13:
else
14:
SizeT(K) = RS(T(K), K, Sep(K))
15:
Save [(T(K), Sep(K)), SizeT(K)]
16:
SizeT = SizeT × SizeT(K)
17:
end if
18:
else
19:
Orient from Em(K) to Res(K) in G.
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
Explore = Ch(Explore)
23: end while
24: Return: SizeT × ∏G′∈chain comp of G SIZE(G′).
that it removes are the directed edges. Therefore, we require an edge cut in which all the edges are
directed. This is satisﬁed by cliques with emission condition:
Theorem 2. If clique K satisﬁes the emission condition, [Sep(K), Res(T(K))] is a directed edge cut.
Therefore, by Theorem 2, if clique K satisﬁes the emission condition, in the clique tree, we can
learn the orientations in trees T(r) \ T(K) and T(K) separately. This property helps us to perform
our counting process efﬁciently by utilizing the memory in the process. More speciﬁcally, if rooted
clique trees T(r1) and T(r2) share a rooted subtree whose root clique satisﬁes the emission condition,
it sufﬁces to perform the counting in this subtree only once. Based on this observation, we propose
the counting approach whose pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 1.
The input to Algorithm 1 is an essential graph G∗, and it returns Size(G∗) by computing equation
(1), through calling function SIZE(·) for each chain component of G∗. In Function SIZE(·), ﬁrst the
clique tree corresponding to the input UCCG is constructed. If this tree has not yet appeared in the
memory, for every vertex v of the input UCCG, the function forms T(v) and calculates the number
of v-rooted DAGs in the MEC by calling the rooted-size function RS(·) (lines 10-13). Finally, it
saves and returns the sum of the sizes.
9

r
p
20
30
40
50
60
0.2
T1
0.50
2.26
6.65
19.55
55.59
T2
0.27
2.61
20.68
219.98
>3600
T2/T1
0.54
1.15
3.11
11.25
>65
0.25
T1
0.51
2.27
7.56
25.46
59.21
T2
0.40
8.77
101.84
1760.21
>3600
T2/T1
0.78
3.86
13.47
69.12
>60
Table 1: Average run time (in seconds).
Function RS(·) checks whether each clique K of each level of the input rooted tree satisﬁes
the emission condition (lines 7). If so, it removes the rooted subtree T(K) from the tree and the
corresponding subgraph from G (lines 8-10), and checks whether the size of T(K) with its current
separator set is already in the memory. If it is, the function loads it as SizeT(K) (lines 12); else, RS(·)
calls itself on the rooted clique tree T(K) to obtain SizeT(K), and then saves SizeT(K) in the memory
(lines 15 and 16). If the clique K does not satisfy the emission condition, it simply orients edges
from Em(K) to Res(K) in G (lines 19). Finally, in the resulting essential graph, it calls the function
SIZE(·) for each chain component (lines 24).
For bounded degree graphs, the proposed approach runs in polynomial time:
Theorem 3. Let p and ∆be the number of vertices and maximum degree of a graph G. The computational
complexity of MEC size calculator on G is in the order of O(p∆+2).
Remark 2. From Deﬁnition 4, it is clear that if Sep(Kv) ∩Sep(K) = ∅, then v ∈Sep(K) satisﬁes the
emission condition in clique K. We can use this property for locally orienting edges without ﬁnding emission
set Em(Kv).
3.2
Simulation Results
We generated 100 random UCCGs of size p = 20, · · · , 60 with r × (p
2) as the number of edges
based on the procedure proposed in [HJY15], where parameter r controls the graph density. We
compared the proposed algorithm with the counting algorithm in [HJY15] in Table 1. Note that,
as we mentioned earlier, since the counting methods are utilized for the purpose of sampling
and applying prior knowledge, the ﬁve formulas in [HJY15] are not implemented in either of the
counting algorithms. The parameters T1 and T2 denote the average run time (in seconds) of the
proposed algorithm and the counting algorithm in [HJY15], respectively. For dense graphs, our
algorithm is at least 60 times faster.
4
Uniform Sampling from a MEC
In this section, we introduce a sampler for generating random DAGs from a MEC. The sampler is
based on the counting method presented in Section 3. The main idea is to choose a vertex as the
root according to the portion of members of the MEC having that vertex as the root, i.e., in UCCG
G, vertex v should be picked as the root with probability Size(G(v))/Size(G).
10

Algorithm 2 Uniform Sampler
Input: Essential graph G∗, with chain components
G = {G1, · · · Gc}.
while G ̸= ∅do
Pick an element G ∈G, and update G = G \ G.
Run ROOTED(G).
end while
Return: G∗
function ROOTED(G)
Construct a clique tree T = (KG, E(T)).
Set v ∈V(G) as the root with prob. RS(T(v),K,Sep(K))
SIZE(G)
.
For every clique K in T(v), form Em(K).
Orient from Em(K) to Res(K) in G∗and G.
G = G ∪{chain components of G}.
end function
The pseudo-code of our uniform sampler is presented in Algorithm 2, which uses functions
SIZE(·) and RS(·) of Section 3.1. The input to the sampler is an essential graph G∗, with chain
components G = {G1, · · · Gc}. For each chain component G ∈G, we set v ∈V(G) as the root with
probability RS(T(v), K, Sep(K))/SIZE(G), where K ∈Tv, and then we orient the edges in G∗as in
Algorithm 1. We remove G and add the created chain components to G, and repeat this procedure
until all edges are oriented, i.e., G = ∅.
Example 2. For the UCCG in Figure 1(a), as observed in Example 1, Size(G(v1)) = Size(G(v4)) = 2,
Size(G(v2)) = Size(G(v3)) = 3, and Size(G) = 10. Therefore, we set vertices v1, v2, v3, and v4 as the root
with probabilities 2/10, 3/10, 3/10, and 2/10, respectively. Suppose v2 is chosen as the root. Then as
seen in Example 1, Size(G′′(v1)) = Size(G′′(v3)) = Size(G′′(v4)) = 1. Therefore, in G′′, we set either of the
vertices as the root with equal probability to obtain the ﬁnal DAG.
Theorem 4. The sampler in Algorithm 2 is uniform.
For bounded degree graphs, the proposed sampler is capable of producing uniform samples in
polynomial time.
Corollary 3. The computational complexity of the uniform sampler is in the order of O(∆p∆+2).
5
Counting and Sampling with Prior Knowledge
Although in structure learning from observational data the orientation of some edges may remain
unresolved, in many applications, an expert may have prior knowledge regarding the direction
of some of the unresolved edges. In this section, we extend the counting and sampling methods
to the case that such prior knowledge about the orientation of a subset of the edges is available.
11

Speciﬁcally, we require that in the counting task, only DAGs which are consistent with the prior
knowledge are counted, and in the sampling task, we force all the generated sample DAGs to
be consistent with the prior knowledge. Note that the prior knowledge may not be necessarily
realizable, that is, there may not exist a DAGs in the corresponding MEC with the required
orientations. In this case, the counting should return zero, and the sampling should return an
empty set.
5.1
Counting with Prior Knowledge
We present the available prior knowledge in the form of a hypothesis graph H = (V(H), E(H)).
Consider an essential graph G∗. For G∗, we call a hypothesis realizable if there is a member of the
MEC with directed edges consistent with the hypothesis. In other words, a hypothesis is realizable
if the rest of the edges in G∗can be oriented without creating any v-structures or cycles. More
formally:
Deﬁnition 6. For an essential graph G∗, a hypothesis graph H = (V(H), E(H)) is called realizable if
there exists a DAG D in MEC(G∗), for which E(D) ⊆E(H).
Example 3. For essential graph v1 −v2 −v3 −v4, the hypothesis graph H : v1 →v2 −v3 ←v4 is not
realizable, as the edge v2 −v3 cannot be oriented without forming a v-structure.
For essential graph G∗, let SizeH(G∗) denote the number of the elements of MEC(G∗), which are
consistent with hypothesis H, i.e., SizeH(G∗) = |{D : D ∈MEC(G∗), E(D) ⊆E(H)}|. Hypothesis
H is realizable if SizeH(G∗) ̸= 0.
As mentioned earlier, each chain component G of a chain graph contains exactly one root
variable. We utilize this property to check the realizability and calculate SizeH(G∗) for a hypothesis
graph H. Consider essential graph G∗with chain components G = {G1, · · · Cc}. Following the
same line of reasoning as in equation (1), we have
SizeH(G∗) =
c
∏
i=1
SizeH(Gi).
(4)
Also, akin to equation (2), for any G ∈G,
SizeH(G) = ∑
v∈V(G)
SizeH(G(v)).
(5)
Therefore, in order to extend the pseudo code to the case of prior knowledge, we modify functions
SIZE(·) and RS(·) to get H as an extra input. In our proposed pseudo code, the orientation task
is performed in lines 2 and 19 of Function RS(·). Let S be the set of directed edges of form (u, v),
oriented in either line 2 or 19. In function RS(·), after each of lines 2 and 19, we check the following:
if S ̸⊆E(H) then
Return: 0
end if
This guarantees that, any DAG considered in the counting will be consistent with the hypothesis H.
12

!"
#"
#$
#%
#&
!&
#"
#$
#%
#&
!%
#"
#$
#%
#&
Figure 2: Graphs related to Example 4.
Example 4. Consider the three hypothesis graphs in Figure 2 for the essential graph in Figure 1(a).
For hypothesis H1, SizeH1(G(v1)) = 2, SizeH1(G(v2)) = 1, and SizeH1(G(v3)) = SizeH1(G(v4)) = 0.
Therefore, we have three DAGs consistent with hypothesis H1, i.e., SizeH1(G) = 3. For hypothesis H2,
SizeH2(G(v2)) = SizeH2(G(v3)) = 2, and SizeH2(G(v1)) = SizeH2(G(v4)) = 0, Therefore, four DAGs are
consistent with hypothesis H2, i.e., SizeH2(G) = 4. Hypothesis H3 is not realizable.
One noteworthy application of checking the realizability of a hypothesis is in the context of
estimating the causal effect of interventions from observational data [MKB+09, NMR+17]. This
could be used for instance, to predict the effect of gene knockouts on other genes or some phenotype
of interest, based on observational gene expression proﬁles. The authors of [MKB+09, NMR+17]
proposed a method called (joint-)IDA for estimating the average causal effect, which as a main step
requires extracting possible valid parent sets of the intervention nodes from the essential graph,
with the multiplicity information of the sets. To this end, a semi-local method was proposed in
[NMR+17], which is exponential in the size of the chain component of the essential graph. This
renders the approach infeasible for large components. Using our proposed method to address this
problem, we can ﬁx a conﬁguration for the parents of the intervention target, and count the number
of consistent DAGs.
5.2
Sampling with Prior Knowledge
Suppose an experimenter is interested in generating sample DAGs from a MEC. However, due
to her prior knowledge, she requires the generated samples to be consistent with a given set of
orientations for a subset of the edges. In this subsection, we modify our uniform sampler to apply
to this scenario. We deﬁne the problem statement formally as follows. Given an essential graph
G∗and a hypothesis graph H for G∗, we are interested in generating samples from the MEC(G∗)
such that each sample is consistent with hypothesis H. Additionally, we require the distribution
of the samples to be uniform conditioned on being consistent. That is, for each sample DAG
D ∈MEC(G∗),
P(D) =





1
SizeH(G∗),
if E(D) ⊆E(H),
0,
otherwise.
Equations (4) and (5) imply that we can use a method similar to the case of the uniform
sampler. That is, we choose a vertex as the root according to the ratio of the DAGs D ∈MEC(G∗)
which are consistent with H and have the chosen vertex as the root, to the total number of
13

consistent DAGs. More precisely, in UCCG G, vertex v should be picked as the root with probability
SizeH(G(v))/SizeH(G). In fact, the uniform sampler could be viewed as a special case of sampler
with prior knowledge with H = G∗. Hence, the results related to the uniform sampler extend
naturally.
Example 5. Consider hypothesis graph H1 in Figure 2 for the essential graph G in Figure 1(a). As observed
in Example 4, we have SizeH1(G(v1)) = 2, SizeH1(G(v2)) = 1, SizeH1(G(v3)) = SizeH1(G(v4)) = 0, and
SizeH1(G) = 3. Therefore, we set vertices v1, v2, v3, and v4 as the root with probabilities 2/3, 1/3, 0, and 0,
respectively.
6
Application to Intervention Design
In this section, we demonstrate that the proposed method for calculating the size of MEC with prior
knowledge can be utilized to design an optimal intervention target in experimental causal structure
learning. We will use the setup in [GSKB18] which is as follows: Let G∗be the given essential graph,
obtained from an initial stage of observational structure learning, and let k be our intervention
budget, i.e., the number of interventions we are allowed to perform. Each intervention is on only
a single variable and the interventions are designed passively, i.e., the result of one intervention
is not used for the design of the subsequent interventions. Let I denote the intervention target set,
which is the set of vertices that we intend to intervene on. Note that since the experiments are
designed passively, this is not an ordered set. Intervening on a vertex v resolves the orientation of
all edges intersecting with v [EGS05], and then we can run Meek rules to learn the maximal PDAG
[PKM17]. Let R(I, D) be the number of edges that their orientation is resolved had the ground
truth underlying DAG been D, and let R(I) be the average of R(I, D) over the elements of the
MEC, that is
R(I) =
1
Size(G∗)
∑
D∈MEC(G∗)
R(I, D).
(6)
The problem of interest is ﬁnding the set I ⊆V(G∗) with |I| = k, that maximizes R(·).
In [GSKB18], it was proved that R(·) is a sub-modular function and hence, a greedy algorithm
recovers an approximation to the optimum solution. Still, calculating R(I) for a given I remains
as a challenge. For an intervention target candidate, in order to calculate R(I), conceptually, we
can list all DAGs in the MEC and then calculate the average according to (6). However, for large
graphs, listing all DAGs in the MEC is computationally intensive. Note that the initial information
provided by an intervention is the orientation of the edges intersecting with the intervention target.
Hence, we propose to consider this information as the prior knowledge and apply the method in
Section 5.
Let H be the set of hypothesis graphs, in which each element H has a distinct conﬁguration
for the edges intersecting with the intervention target. If the maximum degree of the graph is ∆,
cardinality of H is at most 2k∆, and hence, it does not grow with p. For a given hypothesis graph H,
let G∗
H = {D : D ∈MEC(G∗), E(D) ⊆E(H)} denote the set of members of the MEC, which are
14

10
20
30
40
50
Sample size (N)
0
2
4
6
8
SDE
p=10
p=20
p=30
Figure 3: SDE versus the sample size.
consistent with hypothesis H. Using the set H, we can break (6) into two sums as follows:
R(I) =
1
Size(G∗)
∑
D∈MEC(G∗)
R(I, D)
=
1
Size(G∗) ∑
H∈H ∑
D∈G∗
H
R(I, D)
= ∑
H∈H
SizeH(G∗)
Size(G∗) R(I, D).
(7)
Therefore, we only need to calculate at most 2k∆values instead of considering all elements of
the MEC, which reduces the complexity from super-exponential to constant in p.
6.1
Simulation Results
An alternative approach to calculating R(I) is to estimate its value by evaluating uniform samples.
We generated 100 random UCCGs of size p = 10, 20, 30 with r × (p
2) edges, where r = 0.2. In each
graph, we selected two variables randomly to intervene on. We obtained the exact R(I) using
equation (7). Furthermore, for a given sample size N, we estimated R(I) from the aforementioned
Monte-Carlo approach using our proposed uniform sampler and obtained empirical standard
deviation of error (SDE) over all graphs with the same size, deﬁned as SD(|R(I) −ˆR(I)|). Figure
3 depicts SDE versus the number of samples. As can be seen, SDE becomes fairly low for sample
sizes greater than 40.
7
Conclusion
We proposed a new technique for calculating the size of a MEC, which is based on the clique tree
representation of chordal graphs. We demonstrated that this technique can be utilized for uniform
sampling from a MEC, which provides a stochastic way to enumerate DAGs in the class, which
can be used for estimating the optimum DAG, most suitable for a certain desired property. We
also extended our counting and sampling method to the case where prior knowledge about the
15

structure is available, which can be utilized in applications such as causal intervention design and
estimating the causal effect of joint interventions.
Appendices
A
Proof of Lemma 3
Let dG(v, u) denote the distance between vertices v and u in G. The following result from [BT17] is
used in our proof. In the proof r always denotes the root vertex.
Lemma 6. [BT17] In an acyclic and v-structure-free orientation of a UCCG G the root variable r determines
the orientation of all edges u −w, for which dG(r, u) ̸= dG(r, w).
We partition vertices based on their distance from the root variable, and call each part a level.
Note that clearly, there is no edge from level li to lj, for j > i + 1, otherwise, the vertex in level lj
should be moved to level li+1. Based on Lemma 6, the direction of edges in between the levels
(mid-level edges) will be determined to be away from the root. After determining the mid-level
edges, we should check for the direction of in-level edges as well. We will show that the statement
of Lemma 3 holds for both mid-level and in-level edges.
• u →v ∈G(r) is a mid-level edge:
Proof by induction:
Induction base: We need to show that for any vertex w ∈l1, r ∈Sep(Kw). Let Kroot be the
root clique. By deﬁnition, r ∈Kroot. For any vertex w ∈l1, by deﬁnition of l1, w is adjacent
to the root, and hence, there exists a clique K ∈Tw such that r ∈K. Therefore, by the
clique-intersection property, r is contained in every clique on the path connecting Kroot and
K. Speciﬁcally, r should be contained in Kw, as Kw is the root of the subtree Tw, i.e., r ∈Kw,
otherwise, we will have a cycle in the tree. Noting that by our convention, r only appears in
separator sets, concludes that r ∈Sep(Kw). Therefore, the base of the induction is clear.
Induction hypothesis: As the induction hypothesis, we assume that for any variable u′ ∈li−1
and v′ ∈li, such that u′ →v′ ∈G(r), we have u′ ∈Sep(Kv′).
Induction step: Assume that u ∈li and v ∈li+1, such that u →v ∈G(r). We need to show
that u ∈Sep(Kv).
Claim 1. v ̸∈Ku.
Proof. Variable v is non-adjacent to any variable in lj, j ≤i −1. Therefore, for all w ∈lj,
Tw ∩Tv = ∅. On the other hand, u should have a parent in li−1. Therefore, there exists
w ∈li−1, such that Tw ∩Tu ̸= ∅. By induction hypothesis, w ∈Sep(Ku). Therefore, since
Tw ∩Tv = ∅, we have v ̸∈Ku.
Since u and v are adjacent, there exists a clique K ∈Tv, such that u ∈K.
16

Claim 2. If {u, v} ⊆K and v ̸∈Ku, then u ∈Kv.
Proof. By the induced-subtree property, since Kv is the root of subtree Tv, the path from Kroot
to K, passes through Kv. Similarly, the path from Kroot to K, passes through Ku. If u ̸∈Kv, then
the two aforementioned paths should be distinct, which results in a cycle in the tree, which is
a contradiction.
By Claim 2, u ∈Kv. Among all cliques that contain u, by Proposition 3, u is only in the
residual set of Ku, and by Claim 1, v ̸∈Ku; therefore Ku ̸= Kv. Therefore, u ∈Sep(Kv).
• u →v ∈G(r) is an in-level edge: Using the proof of Theorem 6 in [HG08], if u →v ∈G(r),
it should have been directed according to one of two possible rules: There exists vertex w
such that G induced on {w, u, v} is either (1) w →u −v, or (2) u →w →v and u −v. We
show that the later case is not possible. This is similar to a claim in the proof of Theorem 8 in
[HJY15].
Proof by contradiction: Suppose u −v is the ﬁrst edge in level li oriented by rule (2), that is,
the other previously oriented edges are oriented via rule (1). Therefore, for the direction of
edge u →w, there should be w0 in li−1 or li, such that w0 →u ∈G, and w0 not adjacent to w.
w0 should also be adjacent to v, otherwise, we would learn u −v from rule (1), not rule (2).
Then to avoid cycle {w0, u, w, v, w0}, w0 −v should be oriented as w0 →v. But this directed
edge will make a v-structure with w →v, which is a contradiction. Therefore, we only need
rule (1) for orientations.
In order to orient edges using rule (1), we can apply the mid-level orienting method recur-
sively. That is, we can consider the subgraph induced on a level and any vertex from the
previous level as the root, and orient the mid-level edges for the new root.
Claim 3. Using rule (1) recursively is equivalent to applying the mid-level orienting method recur-
sively.
This claim is clear because if there exists induced subgraph w →u −v in G on {w, u, v}, since
in applying the mid-level orienting method recursively every vertex becomes root once, at the
time that w becomes root, the edge u −v will fall in mid-levels. Therefore, it will be oriented
away from w, i.e., it will be oriented as u →v. Also, clearly we are not orienting any extra
edges, as Lemma 6, is merely based on rule (1).
Therefore, by the previous part of the proof, the statement of Lemma 3 holds for this oriented
edges as well. Applying this reasoning recursively concludes the desired result for all in-level
edges.
B
Proof of Corollary 1
By Proposition 3, for any vertex w, Kw is the root of Tw. That is, among the cliques containing w, Kw
is located in the highest level (in terms of the distance from the root if the tree).
Proof by contradiction. By Lemma 3, u ∈Sep(Kv) in T(r). That is, Kv is in a strictly lower level
than Ku in the clique tree. Now if v ∈Sep(Ku), Kv should be in a strictly higher level than Ku in the
clique tree, which is a contradiction.
17

C
Proof of Lemma 4
Proof by contradiction. Suppose there exists w ∈Res(Kv), such that u →w ̸∈G(r). As mentioned in
Section 2, [HJY15] showed that G(r) is a chain graph with chordal chain components. Therefore, by
the deﬁnition of chain graph, there should not be a partially directed cycle in this graph. Therefore,
in order to prevent a partially directed cycle on {u, v, w, u}, we should have w →v ∈G(r).
Therefore, by Lemma 3, w ∈Sep(Kv), and by Proposition 3, Kv is unique. Therefore, this is in
contradiction to the assumption of the lemma.
D
Proof of Corollary 2
By deﬁnition of the emissio set, Em(Kv) ⊆Pa(v). To prove the opposite direction, suppose there
exists vertex w, such that w →v ∈G(r), but w ̸∈Em(Kv). Then by Lemma 3, w ∈Sep(Kv), and by
Proposition 3, Kv is unique. Now, since w →v ∈G(r) and w ∈Sep(Kv), by Lemma 4, w ∈Em(Kv).
This implies that Pa(v) ⊆Em(Kv). Therefore, Em(Kv) = Pa(v).
E
Proof of Theorem 1
For the only if side, we need to show that (1) u ∈Sep(Kv), and (2) Em(Ku) ̸⊆Sep(Kv). (1) is obtained
from Lemma 3. We prove (2) by contradiction: Suppose Em(Ku) ⊆Sep(Kv). Then by Corollary 2,
Pa(u) ⊆Sep(Kv). Since u →v ∈G(r), as seen in the proof of Lemma 3, this edge should have been
directed from the induced subgraph w →u −v, for some vertex w. But since Pa(u) ⊆Sep(Kv),
every such vertex is in Kv, and hence, is adjacent to v. Therefore, the induced subgraph w →u −v
cannot exist.
For the if side, we ﬁrst note that since u, v ∈Kv, they are adjacent. By the assumption,
Em(Ku) ̸⊆Sep(Kv)
⇒Pa(u) ̸⊆Pa(v)
⇒∃w such that



w →u ∈G(r),
w →v ̸∈G(r).
If v →w ∈G(r), or v −w ∈G(r), in order to avoid a partially directed cycle on {w, u, v, w}, we
should have v →u ∈G(r). Therefore, by Corollary 1, u ̸∈Sep(Kv), and by Proposition 3, Kv is
unique. Therefore, this is in contradiction to the assumption.
Therefore, w and v are not adjacent, and hence, we have the induced subgraph w →u −v. This
implies that in order to avoid v-structure, u −v should be oriented as u →v, which is the desired
result.
F
Proof of Lemma 5
By Proposition 3, we can partition the vertices into three sets: Res(T(K)), Sep(K), and V(G) \
(Sep(K) ∪Res(T(K))). By the clique-intersection property, any vertex in T(r) \ T(K) which is not in
18

K, will not be contained in T(K), and hence, will not be adjacent with any vertices in Res(T(K)).
We note that vertices in T(r) \ T(K) can only appear in the separator set of K. Therefore, the set of
vertices in T(r) \ T(K) which are not in K is V(G) \ (Sep(K) ∪Res(T(K))).
Therefore, vertices in Res(T(K)) are not adjacent with any vertex in V(G) \ (Sep(K) ∪Res(T(K))).
Let S := Res(T(K)), and ¯S = V(G) \ S. Therefore, [Sep(K), Res(T(K))] = [S, ¯S], which implies that
[Sep(K), Res(T(K))] is an edge cut.
G
Proof of Theorem 2
Due to Lemma 5, we only need to show that all the edges in [Sep(K), Res(T(K))] are directed.
By the deﬁnition of emission condition for cliques, [Sep(K), Res(K)] is directed. For any variable
u ∈Sep(K), and v ∈Res(T(K)) \ Res(K), by Remark 1, u satisﬁes the emission condition in K.
Hence, if u ∈Kv by the clique-intersection property, and using Proposition 3, u satisﬁes the
emission condition in clique Kv as well. Therefore, by Theorem 1, u →v ∈G.
H
Proof of Theorem 3
In SIZE function, for a given graph G, we ﬁrst construct a clique tree T in O(p2) by a modiﬁed
version of maximum cardinality search [BP93]. We assume that in the worst-case scenario, the
memory condition in line 7 of Algorithm is not satisﬁed in any recursive call. Thus, we set each
vertex v ∈V(G) as the root and call RS function to compute the number of DAGs in G(v). Moreover,
in RS function, in the worst-case scenario, we assume that the emission condition is not satisﬁed in
any recursive call. Thus, the while loop in lines 4-24 orients all directed edges in G(v) by forming
emission sets for each clique K in the clique tree. In particular, in order to from Em(K), for any
vertex v in Sep(K), we check whether vertex v satisﬁes emission condition which we can do it in
linear time. Since the size of any clique K is at most p, the computational complexity of obtaining
Em(K) would be in the order of O(p2). Moreover, each clique K is considered only once in the
while loop. Thus, the directed edges in G(v) are recovered in O(p3) since we have at most p cliques
in the clique tree.
Now, we show that the degree of each vertex w in any chain component of G(v) decreases at least
by one after removing directed edges. To do so, we prove that there exists a directed edge in G(v)
that goes to vertex w. By contradiction, suppose that there is no such directed edge. Furthermore,
assume that vertex w is in a chain component G′. Consider the shortest path from v to w in G(v).
This path must pass through one of neighbors of w in G′ such as u. Since the distance from v to u is
less than v to w, u −w should be oriented as u →w (see Lemma 6). But it is in contradiction with
the fact that u and w are in the same chain component. Therefore, the degree of each vertex w in
any chain component of G(v) decreases at least by one after removing directed edges in G(v).
Let t(∆) be the computational complexity of running SIZE function on a graph with maximum
degree ∆. Based on what we proved above, we have
t(∆) ≤pt(∆−1) + cp3,
where c is a constant. The above inequality holds true since we have at most p chain component in
G(v) where the maximum degree in each of them is at most ∆−1. From this inequality, it can be
19

easily shown that t(∆) is in the order of O(p∆+1). Since we may have at most p chain components in
essential graph G∗, the computational complexity of MEC size calculator is in the order of O(p∆+2).
I
Proof of Theorem 4
The objective is to show that for the input essential graph G∗, any DAG D in the MEC represented
by G∗is generated with probability 1/Size(G∗).
Proof by induction: The function SIZE(·) ﬁnds the size of a component recursively, i.e., after
setting a vertex v as the root, and ﬁnding the orientations in G(v), it calls itself to obtain the size of
the chain components of G(v). We induct on the maximum number of recursive calls required for
complete orienting.
Induction base: For the base of the induction, we consider an essential graph with no required
recursive call: Consider essential graph G∗with chain component set G, for which, for all G ∈G,
for all v ∈V(G), Size(G(v)) = 1 (as an example, consider the case that G is a tree). Consider D
in the MEC represented by G∗, and assume vertex vG is required to be set as the root in chain
component G ∈G for D to be obtained. We have
P(D) = ∏
G∈G
P(vG picked) = ∏
G∈G
Size(G(v))
Size(G)
= ∏
G∈G
1
Size(G) =
1
∏G∈G Size(G)
=
1
Size(G∗),
where, the last equality follows from equation (1).
Induction hypothesis: For an essential graph G∗with maximum required recursions of l −1, any
DAG D in the MEC represented by G∗is generated with probability 1/Size(G∗).
Induction step: We need to show that for an essential graph G∗with maximum required recursions
of l, any DAG D in the MEC represented by G∗is generated with probability 1/Size(G∗). Assume
vertex vG is required to be set as the root in chain component G ∈G, and VG(v) is the set of vertices
required to be set as root in the next recursions in obtained chain components in G(v) for D to be
obtained. We have
P(D) = ∏
G∈G
P(vG picked)P(VG(v) picked)
= ∏
G∈G
Size(G(v))
Size(G) P(VG(v) picked).
By the induction hypothesis,
P(VG(v) picked) = 1/Size(Gv).
20

Therefore,
P(D) = ∏
G∈G
Size(G(v))
Size(G)
1
Size(G(v))
=
1
∏G∈G Size(G)
=
1
Size(G∗),
where, the last equality follows from equation (1).
J
Proof of Corollary 3
In ROOTED function, for any chain component G in G, we construct a clique tree in O(p2) [BP93]
and obtain probabilities of the from RS(T(v),K,Sep(K))
SIZE(G)
by running SIZE(G), which its computational
complexity is O(p∆+1) (see Theorem 3). After selecting one of the vertices in G as the root, say v,
we recover all directed edges in G(v) in O(p3) and obtain chain components of G(v). Similar to the
proof of Theorem 3, let t(∆) be the running time of the algorithm on a chain component in G with
maximum degree of ∆. Then, based on what we argued above, we have
t(∆) ≤pt(∆−1) + c(p∆+1 + p3),
where c is a constant. It can be shown that t(∆) is in the order of O(∆p∆+1). Since we may have at
most p chain components in G, the computational complexity of uniform sampler would be in the
order of O(∆p∆+2).
21
