Neural Style Transfer for Audio Spectrograms
Prateek Verma, Julius O. Smith
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA), Stanford University

Abstract
There has been fascinating work on creating artistic transformations of images by
Gatys et al. This was revolutionary in how we can in some sense alter the “style”
of an image while generally preserving its “content”. In this work, we present a
method for creating new sounds using a similar approach. For demonstration, we
investigate two different tasks, resulting in bandwidth expansion/compression, and
timbral transfer from singing voice to musical instruments.
1
Introduction
We present a new machine learning technique for generating music and audio signals. The focus of
this work is to develop new techniques parallel to what has been proposed for artistic style transfer for
images by Gatys et al. [1]. We present two cases of modifying an audio signal to generate new sounds.
A feature of our method is that a single architecture can generate these different audio-style-transfer
types using the same set of parameters which otherwise require complex hand-tuned diverse signal
processing pipelines. Finally, we propose and investigate generation of spectrograms from noise
by satisfying an optimization criterion derived from features derived from ﬁlter-activations of a
convolutional neural net. The potential ﬂexibility of this sound-generating approach is discussed.
2
Methodology
There has been recent work applying architectures in computer vision for acoustic scene analysis.
In particular, [3] uses standard architectures such as AlexNet, VGG-Net, and ResNet for sound
understanding. The performance gains from the vision models are translated to the audio domain as
well. The work in [2, 3] used a mel-ﬁlter-bank input representation, while we use Short-Time Fourier
Transform (STFT) log-magnitude instead. We desire a high-resolution audio representation from
which perfect reconstruction is possible via, e.g., Grifﬁn-Lim Reconstruction [7]. All experiments in
this work use an audio spectrogram representation having duration 2.57s, frame-size 30ms, frame-step
10ms, FFT-size 512, and audio sampling rate of 16kHz.
The core of the success of neural style transfer for vision is to optimize the input signal, starting with
random noise, to take on the features of interest derived from activations at different layers after the
passing through a convolutional net based classiﬁer which was trained on the content of the input
image. We follow a similar approach, with some modiﬁcations for audio signals. First, we train a
standard AlexNet [5] architecture, but have a smaller receptive size of 3 × 3 instead of the larger
receptive ﬁelds used in the original work. This is to retain the audio resolution, both along time and
frequency, as larger receptive ﬁelds would yield poor localization in the audio reconstruction, which
results in audible artifacts. We also add additional loss terms in order to match the averaged timbral
and energy envelope. All applications here correspond to timbre transfer of musical instruments
having no explicit knowledge of features such as pitch, note onset time, type of instrument, and so
on. The AlexNet was trained on audio spectograms to distinguish classes of musical instrument
sounds (80 from AudioSet), with 3 × 3 convolutions and 2 × 2 pooling, having a total of 6 layers
with objective function minimizing the cross-entropy loss using the Adam optimizer [4].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.01589v1  [cs.SD]  4 Jan 2018

3
Experiments
We focus on two experiments: (1) imposing the style of a tuning fork on a harp, resulting in bandwidth
compression down to the fundamental, and (2) transferring the style of a violin note to a singing voice,
resulting in bandwidth expansion. Thus, we have a new form of cross-synthesis imposing the style
of one instrument on the content of another, with applications similar to [6]. We explored various
hyper-parameters and single/multiple layers from which we extract these features for optimization.
The goal is to have a single parameter setting that can perform all of these tasks, without having to
explicitly develop hand-crafted rules. Traditionally there have been distinct signal processing based
approaches to do such tasks. Subplots in Figs. 1-2 a)-d) are log-magnitude spectrograms with the
y-axis 0-8kHz and x-axis 0-2.57s. Note in Fig. 2. how this approach not only changes the timbre,
but also increases the bandwidth of the signal, as seen in the strength of the higher harmonics. The
objective equation below drives the reconstructed spectrogram Xrecon from random noise to be the
spectra that minimizes the sum of weighted loss terms Lc denoting the content loss (the Euclidean
norm of the difference between the current activation ﬁlters and those of the content spectrogram), Ls
the style loss (which is the normalized Euclidean norm between the Gram matrix of ﬁlter activations
of selected convolutional layers similar to [1] between X and Xs), and Le and Lt which measure
deviation in the temporal and frequency energy envelopes respectively from the style audio. We
found that matching the weighted energy contour and frequency energy contour (timbral envelope),
namely es and ts, averaged over time in our loss function, helped in achieving improved quality. The
energy term in the loss function is required because the Gram matrix does not incorporate temporal
dynamics of the target audio style, and would generally follow that of the content if not included.
Xrecon
=
argminXLtotal = argminX αLc(x, xc) + βLs(x, xs) + γLe(xe, es) + δLt(xt, ts).
Figure 1: a) shows the Gaussian noise from
which we start the input to optimize, b) Harp
sound (content) c) Tuning Fork (style) and
d) Neural Style transferred output with hav-
ing content of harp and style of tuning fork
https://youtu.be/UlwBsEigcdE
Figure 2: a) shows the Gaussian noise from
which we start the input to optimize, b)
Singing sound (content) c) Violin note (style)
and d) Neural Style transferred output with
having content of singing and style of violin.
https://youtu.be/RpGBkfs24uc
4
Conclusion and Future Work
We have proposed a novel way to synthesize audio by treating it as a style-transfer problem, starting
from a random-noise input signal and iteratively using back-propagation to optimize the sound to
conform to ﬁlter-outputs from a pre-trained neural architecture. The two examples were intended to
explore and illustrate the nature of the style transfer for spectrograms, and more musical examples are
subjects of ongoing work. The ﬂexibility of this approach, and the promising results to date indicate
interesting future sound cross-synthesis methods. We believe this work can be extended to many
new audio synthesis/modiﬁcation techniques based on new loss-term formulations for the problem of
interest, and are excited to see and hear what lies ahead. 1
1Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Andrew Ng’s group and the Stanford Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory for the use of their computing resources. Prateek Verma would like to thank Ziang Xie
for discussion about challenges in the problem, and Alexandre Alahi for style transfer work in computer vision.
2
