International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2012.3202                                                                                                                       11 
                                                        
 
 
EXPERT PC TROUBLESHOOTER WITH 
FUZZY-LOGIC AND SELF-LEARNING SUPPORT 
 
Youssef Bassil 
 
LACSC – Lebanese Association for Computational Sciences 
Registered under No. 957, 2011, Beirut, Lebanon 
 

 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Expert systems use human knowledge often stored as rules within the computer to solve problems that 
generally would entail human intelligence. Today, with information systems turning out to be more 
pervasive and with the myriad advances in information technologies, automating computer fault diagnosis 
is becoming so fundamental that soon every enterprise has to endorse it. This paper proposes an expert 
system called Expert PC Troubleshooter for diagnosing computer problems. The system is composed of a 
user interface, a rule-base, an inference engine, and an expert interface. Additionally, the system features a 
fuzzy-logic module to troubleshoot POST beep errors, and an intelligent agent that assists in the knowledge 
acquisition process. The proposed system is meant to automate the maintenance, repair, and operations 
(MRO) process, and free-up human technicians from manually performing routine, laborious, and time-
consuming maintenance tasks. As future work, the proposed system is to be parallelized so as to boost its 
performance and speed-up its various operations. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Expert Systems, Fuzzy-Logic Systems, PC Troubleshooting, Fault Diagnosis    
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
An expert system sometimes referred to as knowledge-based system is a computer software that 
emulates the decision-making ability of a human expert [1]. In essence, expert systems do not use 
traditional programming paradigms to solve problems; rather, they use knowledge which they 
reason about to draw conclusions and provide solutions. Expert system is a subfield of artificial 
intelligence (AI), and was first conceived by Edward Feigenbaum, now considered the father of 
expert systems, who with other colleagues and associates built the first successful expert system 
in the late 60’s at Stanford University [2]. It was called the “Dendral” system, a portmanteau of 
the term "Dendritic Algorithm". Dendral was meant to emulate organic chemists to help 
automating the process of identifying unknown organic molecules [3, 4]. The advantage of expert 
systems over conventional programs is that their core algorithm is not encapsulated in the 
programming code but stored as knowledge in an independent database called knowledge-base or 
KB. In consequence, there is no need for the expert system to be reprogrammed and recompiled 
every time the knowledge changes. Practically, expert systems have significant applications 
including medical diagnosis, fault diagnosis, question-answering, industrial process controlling, 
climate forecasting, manufacturing failure analysis, decision support, and decision making [5]. 
Today, with the prevalent use of computers, fault diagnosis is becoming crucial in the field of 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
12
 
 
computer engineering and information technology, particularly in personal computer 
troubleshooting; however, acquiring the troubleshooting knowledge from expert computer 
technicians is limited as it requires continuous learning, training, and practice in maintenance 
skills which on the long run can dramatically increase organization operating costs, decrease their 
net productivity, and proliferate their revenue leakage and losses. Basically, PC (IBM Personal 
Computer) troubleshooting covers a wide spectrum of problems including hardware problems, 
software problems, network problems, server problems, operating system problems, and 
application software problems. This would impose a maintenance nightmare for large-scale 
enterprises and IT infrastructures as the number of possible technical problems and finding their 
solutions can become very huge and complex.  
 
This paper proposes an expert system for troubleshooting PC problems and diagnosing computer 
hardware, software, and network faults. The system is a rule-based expert system called Expert 
PC Troubleshooter that can be deployed in a web Intranet environment, allowing different 
distributed users and machines to access the system over a network architecture. The actual 
knowledge of the system is represented as production rules in the form of if <condition1> and 
<condition2> then <conclusion>  <solution>, and stored in a rule-base. Characteristically, the 
proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter comprises six major modules: a GUI web user interface 
which allows human troubleshooters to easily operate and interact with the system; a knowledge-
base more particularly a rule-base which houses and stores all PC troubleshooting knowledge as 
human-readable production rules; an inference engine which matches facts provided by human 
troubleshooters against rules in the rule-base, then produces a reasoning on these rules based on 
forward-chaining algorithm to derive conclusions and identify computer faults; a fuzzy-logic 
inference engine coupled with a fuzzy-logic rule-base which allows the diagnosis of BIOS POST 
beep errors that contain notions like very short beep, long beep, and very long beep; an 
autonomous intelligent agent for supporting knowledge acquisition and self-learning processes 
which scraps online troubleshooting knowledge located in predefined web resources and 
transforms them into production rules storable in the system’s rule-base; and an admin portal or 
expert interface which facilitates adding, editing, updating, and deleting the system’s production 
rules. 
 
The proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter aids in decision-making and allows automated fault 
detection and deep problem diagnosis by emulating the human reasoning activity. From a 
business perspective, the system would reduce maintenance costs, provide quicker problem 
resolution, reduce employee training time, and deliver higher job quality. 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
 
Fault diagnosis in the engineering field has received a lot of attention in research literature over 
the last years. Several theoretical and practical fault troubleshooting techniques have been 
developed and experimented to automate the diagnostic process of electronic devices. “Dendral” 
was maybe the first successful expert system built in the 1965 at Stanford University by Edward 
Feigenbaum, Bruce Buchanan, Joshua Lederberg, and Carl Djerassi, along with other colleagues, 
associates, and students. The “Dendral” term was derived from "Dendritic Algorithm" and was 
aimed at helping organic chemists to analyze the mass spectrometry data of chemical substances 
to determine the structure of their organic molecules and identify if they are considered unknown 
molecules. This was in the search for evidence of extraterrestrial life [4, 6]. SpotLight [7] is yet 
another expert system based on case knowledge whose purpose is to troubleshoot unplanned 
maintenance tasks in the aerospace industry. Its prime objective is to overcome system 
unreliability and reduce the frequency of equipment failure, in addition to support unplanned 
events that are unanticipated by the manufacturers such as weather related anomalies. The system 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
13
 
 
uses case knowledge to solve new problems by using already stored knowledge about similar 
problems. In a different context, a methodology for building an expert system for car 
troubleshooting and maintenance was proposed [8]. It simulates a human car mechanic to help 
car’s owners diagnose their car problems and get suggestions on how to solve them. The system 
employs various set of rules to handle the different type of failures but more specifically starting 
problems and their sub-problems. In the same domain, architecture for building an expert system 
that diagnoses faults in electronic hydraulic braking systems was proposed [9]. The architecture 
combines the acquired knowledge with fuzzy knowledge and uses them for the final diagnostic 
reasoning. Knowledge generation and reasoning are handled by a software simulation. [10] 
proposed a knowledge-based system for troubleshooting complex equipment based on case-based 
reasoning (CBR). The system harnesses stored cases representing experience to support decision 
makers in solving new problems. The expert troubleshooter recognizes the root cause of the new 
problem based on the most similar case, and then selects the best matching case to assert the root 
cause and consequently to formulate the repair plan. [11] proposed an expert system for the 
troubleshooting and diagnosis of electronic devices. The knowledge is acquired during the 
development phase from computer aided design, in addition to engineering data provided by the 
design engineer. A supplementary interview session is conducted to get any other remaining 
knowledge. In the troubleshooting phase, when a new problem is presented, the system reasons 
on the knowledge already stored in the system so that the cause error is diagnosed and reported. 
Another popular system is “PCDIASHOOT” (PC DIAgnosis and troubleSHOOTing) [12] which 
was developed to assist PC technicians and computer users in troubleshooting their computers in 
case they fail to boot. The system supports the diagnosis of IBM compatible PCs during the 
power-on self-test (POST). POST is a routine that checks computer’s hardware at boot time to 
ensure that they are present and functioning properly. “PCDIASHOOT” uses the POST generated 
troubleshooting codes to provide the troubleshooter with much more details on the fault a 
malfunctioning PC is having. 
 
3. THE PROPOSED EXPERT PC TROUBLESHOOTER 
 
The proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter is a rule-based expert system for diagnosing and 
troubleshooting PC faults and hardware problems. It is a web-based system that can deployed in 
an Intranet environment or hosted on the Internet. Typically, it is composed of six modules: a 
GUI user interface which eases the human-machine interaction; an knowledge-base or rule-base 
which stores the production rules of the system representing the troubleshooting knowledge; an 
inference engine which reasons on stored knowledge and user’s facts to draw conclusions and 
provide solutions for identified faults; a fuzzy-logic inference engine together with a fuzzy-logic 
rule-base which diagnoses BIOS POST beep errors; an intelligent agent which assists in the self-
learning and knowledge acquisition processes; and an expert interface which simplifies the 
manipulation and management of production rules by system’s administrators. Figure 1 depicts 
the core architecture of the proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Expert PC Troubleshooter 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
14
 
 
3.1. The User Interface 
 
The user interface of the proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter is a web-based interface accessible 
from any compatible web browser and allows a bi-directional communication between the system 
and the user. It is a sort of a step-by-step multi-page diagnostic questionnaire containing a 
sequence of questions that are asked to the user who would have to answer them thoroughly, so 
that the cause of the fault is identified and a matching solution is provided. In other words, it is 
web data form through which the possible symptoms of hardware faults are presented to the user 
on the screen. The user has then to select the symptoms that are exhibited by the malfunctioning 
PC so as to start a reasoning process to find the cause of the fault and its solution. Figure 2 shows 
a sample multiple-answer diagnostic question web-form asking the user for the type of problem 
he is having. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Expert PC Troubleshooter interface 
 
3.2. The Knowledge-Base 
 
The knowledge-base is a human-readable rule-base in which troubleshooting knowledge is 
represented as production rules originally acquired from human experts in the PC troubleshooting 
field. It is a data repository which provides a mean for knowledge to be collected, organized, 
saved, and searched. Upon reasoning, the expert system loads rules from the rule-base to the 
working memory and tries to match them against user’s facts submitted via the user interface. 
Once a match occurs, the fault is identified and a solution is provided to fix that fault. 
Fundamentally, the rules of the proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter are in the form of if-then 
statements, more formally they can be represented as IF A AND B THEN C  D where A denotes 
the first condition, B denotes the second condition, C denotes the conclusion, and D denotes the 
solution. For instance, a possible production rule could be stated as follows: IF hard disk problem 
AND SMART warning displayed THEN serious mechanical problems are detected  backup & 
replace your drive. Table 1 delineates a subset of the production rules stored in the rule-base. 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
15
 
 
Table 1. Production rules. 
IF 
AND 
THEN 
Solution 
Audio 
Sound Card can't be Detected. 
Damaged or Sound Card Not Installed 
Replace Sound Card 
Audio 
Driver Warning 
Driver Conflict or Incompatible Driver
Install The Appropriate Driver 
Audio 
Scratchy Sound 
Signal Interference 
Stay Away from Radio Frequency 
Sources 
Audio 
Speaker or Microphone won't Work 
Incorrect Jacks 
Use Proper Jacks 
BIOS 
Calendar-Related and Leap-Year 
Bugs. 
BIOS is out-of-date 
Upgrade Flash BIOS 
BIOS 
Can't Install Flash BIOS Update 
BIOS is Write-Protected 
Disable Write-Protection 
BIOS 
Can't Access BIOS 
BIOS is Password Protected 
Remove Password 
Hard 
Disk 
Can't Access Full Capacity of Hard 
Drive over 8.4GB 
BIOS is Out-of-Date 
Upgrade BIOS 
Hard 
Disk 
Can't Use UDMA Drives at Full 
Speed. 
BIOS is Out-of-Date or Incompatible 
IDE Cable 
Upgrade BIOS or Replace IDE Cable 
Hard 
Disk 
IDE Drive not Ready Errors During 
Startup 
Drive not Spinning Up Fast Enough at 
Startup 
Enable or Increase Hard Disk Predelay-
time 
Hard 
Disk 
Invalid Drive Specification Error 
Drive has not Been Partitioned 
Run FDISK to Create Valid Partitions 
Hard 
Disk 
Invalid Media Type Error 
Drive not Yet Formatted 
Format your Drive 
Hard 
Disk 
SMART Warning Displayed 
Serious Mechanical Problems are 
Detected 
Backup & Replace Your Drive 
Keyboard
Num Lock Stays Off when Starting 
System. 
Num Lock Shut off in BIOS 
Turn on Num Lock in BIOS 
Keyboard
Intermittent Keyboard Failures 
Keyboard Cable or Keyboard Jack 
Might be Defective 
Test Keyboard Cable or Jack with Digital 
Multimeter 
Keyboard
Keys are Sticking 
Keyboard might have Spilled Drink or 
Trapped Debris under Keys 
Remove Keytops and Clean under Keys, 
or Wash-out Keyboard 
Mouse 
Mouse can't be Detected 
Hardware Resource Conflict 
Use Windows Device Manager to Find 
Conflicts and Resolve them 
Mouse 
Can't use PS/2 Mouse 
PS/2 Mouse Port Might be Disabled 
Enable PS/2 Mouse Port 
Mouse 
Mouse Pointer Jerks Onscreen 
Mouse Ball or Rollers are Dirty 
Clean Mouse Mechanism 
Mouse 
Mouse Works in Windows, but Not 
When Booted to DOS 
DOS Driver Must be Loaded from 
AUTOEXEC.BAT or CONFIG.SYS 
Install DOS Mouse Driver, and 
Reference it in Startup Files 
Power 
Supply 
System Reboots 
Power Good Voltage Level out of 
Limits 
Check Power Supply with DMM; 
Replace Power Supply if Defective 
Power 
Supply 
Power Supply Fails after Additional 
Components are Added to System 
New Components Require more 5V 
Power than Old Power Supply can 
Provide 
Replace Failed Unit with a 300-watt or 
Larger Unit 
Power 
Supply 
Hard Disk or Fan won't Turn 
Defective or Overloaded Power 
Supply 
Replace Failed Unit with a 300-watt or 
Larger Unit 
Power 
Supply 
No Leds, No Fans are Turn 
Defective Power Supply 
Replace Power Supply 
Processor
System won't Start After New 
Processor is Installed 
Processor not Properly Installed 
Reseat and Reinstall Processor and 
Heatsink 
Processor
Improper CPU Identification during 
POST 
Old BIOS 
Upgrade BIOS 
Serial 
ATA 
Drives are not Recognized by 
System 
Some Systems have Disabled Serial 
ATA Ports 
Enable Onboard Serial ATA ports 
Serial 
ATA 
Can't use Onboard Serial Port 
Port Might be Disabled in BIOS 
Enable Port 
Serial 
ATA 
Conflict between Onboard Serial 
Port and other Device 
IRQ or I/O port Address Conflicts with 
other Device 
Adjust IRQ or I/O port Address in Use, 
or Disable Port 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
16
 
 
 
3.3. The Inference Engine 
 
It is the brain of the system which performs logical reasoning on rules and problem-solving 
strategies to derive answers and conclusions, and infers new knowledge. It is fed by 
troubleshooting data and facts from users and produces results about the causes of the 
corresponding faults and their possible solutions, keeping the reasoning process totally invisible 
from the user. The key elements of the inference engine are three: the rules representing 
troubleshooting knowledge, facts representing circumstances about a certain situation in the real 
world such as particular hardware or software fault, and the working memory which contains the 
facts and other runtime parameters to support the inference engine. The job of the inference 
engine is to match facts in the working memory against rules from the rule-base so as to 
determine which rule is applicable to which fact and consequently to formulate the conclusion. 
For instance, the inference engine can match the fact that a “PC cannot start” with the rule that 
states “IF PC cannot start THEN defective power supply  replace power supply” to conclude 
that the PC cannot boot because the power supply is defective which should be replaced. The 
algorithm used behind the inference engine employs a decision tree data structure that models all 
possible decisions with their possible consequences (Figure 3). The internal nodes of the tree 
correspond to the troubleshooting questions, the links to user’s answer alternatives, and the leaf 
nodes to conclusions and solutions. As for the reasoning algorithm, the forward-chaining 
algorithm is used which starts by questioning the user who does know anything about the solution 
and investigates progressively to reach the diagnosis results and propose some reasonable 
solutions. Below is the pseudo-code of the forward-chaining algorithm used by the inference 
engine of the proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter. 
 
Step 1: Read initial facts and store them into working memory. 
Step 2: Check the condition part (left side) of every production rule in the rule-base 
Step 3: If all the conditions are matched, fire the rule (execute the right side). 
Step 4: If more facts are present, do the following: 
Step 5: Read next fact and update working memory with the new facts. 
Step 6: Go to step 2 
Step 7: If more than one rule is selected, use the conflict resolution strategy to select the most appropriate 
rules and go to step 4. 
Step 6: Continue until all facts are exhausted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Startup 
No Live Screen But System is On 
Video Card Problem 
Replace your Video Card 
Startup 
System Beeps Several Times 
Fatal Hardware Errors 
Check for Any Defective Hardware 
Startup 
System Can't Find any Hard Drive 
Boot Priority Errors 
Set Hard Drive as the 1st Booting Device
Startup 
Computer won't Start After 
Installing Sound/Video/Network 
Card 
Conflict or Defective Hardware 
Remove all Connected Cards and Try 
Again 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Sample decision tree 
 
3.4. The Fuzzy-Logic Inference Engine 
 
The proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter features a fuzzy-logic inference engine and a fuzzy-logic 
rule-base to diagnose and analyze the BIOS POST beep error codes for the original IBM-PC. 
POST short for power-on self-test is a set of diagnostic routines built-in the BIOS firmware that 
check if the computer meets the necessary system requirements and that all hardware and 
peripherals are working correctly before booting the operating system [13]. If a malfunction is 
detected, an error message is displayed on the screen and various beep codes are output by the 
computer’s built-in loud speaker. Inherently, fuzzy-logic is a multivalued logic originally 
proposed by Lotfi Zadeh in 1965 [14] that allows the representation of data values where 
boundaries are not well defined such as very long, too short, rather cold, extremely hot etc. so that 
they get processed by machines. Fuzzy-logic is intended to represent a linguistic type of 
knowledge and reason on this knowledge using a computer. Using fuzzy-logic allows the 
expression of knowledge in a verbal form making the system more readable, flexible, and user-
friendly. 
 
The proposed Expert PC Troubleshooter accepts linguistic data variable such as short, long, and 
very long representing the duration of the beep generated during the POST process. It then de-
fuzzifies it into equivalent crisp (integer) value. Subsequently, the fuzzy-logic inference engine 
maps it against the rules from the fuzzy-logic rule-base to identify the type of POST fault and 
finally display the corresponding textual error message on the screen. The fuzzy-logic rules are 
expressed in the form of IF variable IS property THEN action, and they are the following: 
 
IF beep IS very short THEN normal POST, system is OK 
IF beep IS short THEN POST error 
IF beep IS long THEN system board problem 
IF beep IS very long THEN 3270 keyboard card 
IF beep IS continuous THEN power supply, system board, or keyboard problem 
IF beep IS infinite THEN power supply or system board problem or keyboard 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
18
 
 
The framework of the fuzzy-logic inference engine can be mathematically defined as (X, Lx, χ, 
µx), where X denotes the linguistic input variable, Lx denotes the different linguistic values that X 
can take, χ denotes the set of all possible crisp values, and µx denotes a fuzzy function that maps 
linguistic values into equivalent crisp values [15]. Therefore, the proposed Expert PC 
Troubleshooter can be described as follows: 
 
X = POST beep duration 
Lx = [very short, short, long, very long, continuous, infinite] 
χ = [0, >5] 
µx is the fuzzy membership function depicted in Figure 4 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The Membership Function 
 
3.5. Intelligent Agent & Knowledge Acquisition 
 
Knowledge acquisition is a method of learning which includes the collection, validation, 
translation, modeling, and storage of knowledge extracted from various sources such as human 
experts, other expert systems, or public knowledge repositories [16]. The proposed Expert PC 
Troubleshooter uses an autonomous intelligent agent whose aim is to acquire knowledge and keep 
the system's rule-base up to date. By definition an agent is a proactive computational entity that 
acts on behalf of other entities in an autonomous fashion and exhibits properties like learning, 
cooperation, and mobility [15]. The function of the proposed agent is to automatically collect 
knowledge from the World Wide Web by periodically connecting to the Internet and accessing 
several predefined web pages that contain a wealth of PC troubleshooting rules posted in HTML 
format. The agent then parses the HTML pages and extracts the embedded rules from within the 
pages. The agent then checks if these newly scraped rules are already in the knowledge-base, if 
so, they are ignored; otherwise they are added to the existing rules. As a matter of fact, the 
intelligent agent is helping in self-learning by automating the knowledge acquisition process 
which increases the knowledge of the expert system and improves the accuracy of its decision 
making capabilities. 
 
3.6. The Expert Interface 
 
The expert interface is the admin portal of the Expert PC Troubleshooter. It supports the 
management of production rules stored in the rule-base and allows human experts to review 
existing knowledge and adding new knowledge to the system. The supported activities are adding 
new rules, viewing, editing, and deleting existing rules. Figure 5 shows the admin expert 
interface. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The admin expert interface 
 
4. IMPLEMENTATION 
 
The Expert PC Troubleshooter is implemented using ASP.NET 4.0 and C#.NET 4.0 under the 
MS .NET Framework 4.0 and MS Visual Studio 2010. The rule-base is implemented as a 
relational database using MS Office Access 2010. Figure 6 shows a source-code snippet of a 
method that adds new rules to the rule-base via the expert interface. Figure 7 is a snapshot of the 
rule-base along with a bunch of troubleshooting rules implemented as a database using MS Office 
Access 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Source-code snippet 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.2, March 2012
 
20
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The rule-base in MS Office Access 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presented a novel expert system for troubleshooting and solving PC problems and 
faults. The system is called Expert PC Troubleshooter and it supports reasoning on knowledge 
using an inference engine and a rule-base encompassing troubleshooting production rules, in 
addition to a user and an admin interfaces that simplify operating and managing the system. 
Furthermore, the system features a fuzzy-logic module that diagnoses POST beep errors for IBM 
compatible PCs, and an autonomous intelligent agent that helps in knowledge acquisition. All in 
all, the Expert PC Troubleshooter allows the diagnosis of faults arising in computers in an 
accurate, rapid, systematic, efficient, and automated manner relieving human technicians from the 
burden of regularly scheduled maintenance tasks and routine support issues. Handling POST beep 
errors in a fuzzy-logic framework using linguistic terms instead of numbers makes the system 
more readable, easier to understand, flexible, and user-friendly. Likewise, automating the 
knowledge acquisition process makes the system dynamic and self-learner able to stay up-to-date 
with the latest troubleshooting knowledge upgrades all the time. In a business context, the Expert 
PC Troubleshooter meets industrial needs in a cost effective way, reduces maintenance costs, and 
promotes maintenance, repair, and operations concept (MRO), and automates problem solving 
and decision making in complex and large organizations and enterprises. 
 
As for future work, the Expert PC Troubleshooter is to be parallelized by implementing a parallel 
forward chaining algorithm allowing the inference engine to take advantage of multiprocessor 
systems. In effect, moving to a parallel architecture would increase the overall performance of the 
expert system and would speed-up its reasoning process.
