Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
SMOOTH MARKETS: A BASIC MECHANISM FOR
ORGANIZING GRADIENT-BASED LEARNERS
David Balduzzi1, Wojciech M Czarnecki1, Thomas W Anthony1, Ian M Gemp1,
Edward Hughes1, Joel Z Leibo1, Georgios Piliouras2, Thore Graepel1
1DeepMind <google.com>; 2Singapore University of Technology and Design <sutd.edu.sg>

ABSTRACT
With the success of modern machine learning, it is becoming increasingly important
to understand and control how learning algorithms interact. Unfortunately, negative
results from game theory show there is little hope of understanding or controlling
general n-player games. We therefore introduce smooth markets (SM-games), a
class of n-player games with pairwise zero sum interactions. SM-games codify a
common design pattern in machine learning that includes (some) GANs, adversarial
training, and other recent algorithms. We show that SM-games are amenable to
analysis and optimization using ﬁrst-order methods.
“I began to see legibility as a central problem in modern statecraft. The premodern state was, in many
respects, partially blind [. . .] It lacked anything like a detailed ‘map’ of its terrain and its people. It
lacked, for the most part, a measure, a metric that would allow it to ‘translate’ what it knew into a
common standard necessary for a synoptic view. As a result, its interventions were often crude and
self-defeating.”
– from Seeing like a State by Scott (1999)
1
INTRODUCTION
As artiﬁcial agents proliferate, it is increasingly important to analyze, predict and control their
collective behavior (Parkes and Wellman, 2015; Rahwan et al., 2019). Unfortunately, despite almost a
century of intense research since von Neumann (1928), game theory provides little guidance outside a
few special cases such as two-player zero-sum, auctions, and potential games (Monderer and Shapley,
1996; Nisan et al., 2007; Vickrey, 1961; von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944). Nash equilibria
provide a general solution concept, but are intractable in almost all cases for many different reasons
(Babichenko, 2016; Daskalakis et al., 2009; Hart and Mas-Colell, 2003). These and other negative
results (Palaiopanos et al., 2017) suggest that understanding and controlling societies of artiﬁcial
agents is near hopeless. Nevertheless, human societies – of billions of agents – manage to organize
themselves reasonably well and mostly progress with time, suggesting game theory is missing some
fundamental organizing principles.
In this paper, we investigate how markets structure the behavior of agents. Market mechanisms
have been studied extensively (Nisan et al., 2007). However, prior work has restricted to concrete
examples, such as auctions and prediction markets, and strong assumptions, such as convexity. Our
approach is more abstract and more directly suited to modern machine learning where the building
blocks are neural nets. Markets, for us, encompass discriminators and generators trading errors in
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and agents trading wins and losses in StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019).
1.1
OVERVIEW
The paper introduces a class of games where optimization and aggregation make sense. The phrase
requires unpacking. “Optimization” means gradient-based methods. Gradient descent (and friends)
are the workhorse of modern machine learning. Even when gradients are not available, gradient
estimates underpin many reinforcement learning and evolutionary algorithms. “Aggregation” means
weighted sums. Sums and averages are the workhorses for analyzing ensembles and populations
1
arXiv:2001.04678v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
across many ﬁelds. “Makes sense” means we can draw conclusions about the gradient-based dynamics
of the collective by summing over properties of its members.
As motivation, we present some pathologies that arise in even the simplest smooth games. Examples in
section 2 show that coupling strongly concave proﬁt functions to form a game can lead to uncontrolled
behavior, such as spiraling to inﬁnity and excessive sensitivity to learning rates. Hence, one of our
goals is to understand how to ‘glue together agents’ such that their collective behavior is predictable.
Section 3 introduces a class of games where simultaneous gradient ascent behaves well and is
amenable to analysis. In a smooth market (SM-game), each player’s proﬁt is composed of a
personal objective and pairwise zero-sum interactions with other players. Zero-sum interactions are
analogous to monetary exchange (my expenditure is your revenue), double-entry bookkeeping (credits
balance debits), and conservation of energy (actions cause equal and opposite reactions). SM-games
explicitly account for externalities. Remarkably, building this simple bookkeeping mechanism into
games has strong implications for the dynamics of gradient-based learners. SM-games generalize
adversarial games (Cai et al., 2016) and codify a common design pattern in machine learning, see
section 3.1.
Section 4 studies SM-games from two points of view. Firstly, from that of a rational, proﬁt-maximizing
agent that makes decisions based on ﬁrst-order proﬁt forecasts. Secondly, from that of the game as a
whole. SM-games are not potential games, so the game does not optimize any single function. A
collective of proﬁt-maximizing agents is not rational because they do not optimize a shared objective
(Drexler, 2019). We therefore introduce the notion of legibility, which quantiﬁes how the dynamics
of the collective relate to that of individual agents.
Finally, section 5 applies legibility to prove some basic theorems on the dynamics of SM-games under
gradient-ascent. We show that (i) Nash equilibria are stable; (ii) that if proﬁts are strictly concave
then gradient ascent converges to a Nash equilibrium for all learning rates; and (iii) the dynamics are
bounded under reasonable assumptions.
The results are important for two reasons. Firstly, we identify a class of games whose dynamics are,
at least in some respects, amenable to analysis and control. The kinds of pathologies described in
section 2 cannot arise in SM-games. Secondly, we identify the speciﬁc quantities, forecasts, that are
useful to track at the level of individual ﬁrms and can be meaningfully aggregated to draw conclusions
about their global dynamics. It follows that forecasts should be a useful lever for mechanism design.
1.2
RELATED WORK
A wide variety of machine learning markets and agent-based economies have been proposed and
studied: Abernethy and Frongillo (2011); Balduzzi (2014); Barto et al. (1983); Baum (1999); Hu
and Storkey (2014); Kakade et al. (2003; 2005); Kearns et al. (2001); Kwee et al. (2001); Lay and
Barbu (2010); Minsky (1986); Selfridge (1958); Storkey (2011); Storkey et al. (2012); Sutton et al.
(2011); Wellman and Wurman (1998). The goal of this paper is different. Rather than propose another
market mechanism, we abstract an existing design pattern and elucidate some of its consequences for
interacting agents.
Our approach draws on work studying convergence in generative adversarial networks (Balduzzi
et al., 2018; Gemp and Mahadevan, 2018; Gidel et al., 2019; Mescheder, 2018; Mescheder et al.,
2017), related minimax problems (Abernethy et al., 2019; Bailey and Piliouras, 2018), and monotone
games (Gemp and Mahadevan, 2017; Nemirovski et al., 2010; Tatarenko and Kamgarpour, 2019).
1.3
CAVEAT
We consider dynamics in continuous time dw
dt = ξ(w) in this paper. Discrete dynamics, wt+1 ←
wt + ξ(w) require a more delicate analysis, e.g. Bailey et al. (2019). In particular, we do not claim
that optimizing GANs and SM-games is easy in discrete time. Rather, our analyis shows that it is
relatively easy in continuous time, and therefore possible in discrete time, with some additional effort.
The contrast is with smooth games in general, where gradient-based methods have essentially no
hope of ﬁnding local Nash equilibria even in continuous time.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A
B
C
D
half a game
minimal NZ
η1 = η2
η1 = η2
η1 = η2 ⁄ 8
η1 = η2 ⁄ 8
Figure 1: Effect of learning rates in two games. Note: x-axis is log-scale. Left: “half a game”,
e.g. 2. Right: minimal SM-game, e.g. 3. Top: Both players have same learning rate. Bottom: Second
player has 1
8 learning rate of ﬁrst (which is same as for top). Reducing the learning rate of the second
player destabilizes the dynamics in “half a game”, whereas the SM-game is essentially unaffected.
1.4
NOTATION
Vectors are column-vectors. The notations S ≻0 and v ≻0 refer to a positive-deﬁnite matrix and
vector with all entries positive respectively. Rather than losses, we work with proﬁts. Proofs are in
the appendix. We use economic terminology (ﬁrms, proﬁts, forecasts, and sentiment) even though the
examples of SM-games, such as GANs and adversarial training, are taken from mainstream machine
learning. We hope the economic terminology provides an invigorating change of perspective. The
underlying mathematics is no more than ﬁrst and second-order derivatives.
proﬁt of ﬁrm i
πi(w)
(1)
gradient of proﬁt
ξi(w) := ∇wiπi(w)
proﬁt forecast
fvi(w) := v⊺
i · ξi(w)
(2)
aggregate forecast
P
i fvi(wi)
(3)
sentiment of ﬁrm i
v⊺
i · ∇wifvi(w)
(4)
2
SMOOTH GAMES
Smooth games model interacting agents with differentiable objectives. They are the kind of games
that are played by neural nets. In practice, the differentiability assumption can be relaxed by replacing
gradients with gradient estimates.
Deﬁnition 1. A smooth game (Letcher et al., 2019) consists in n players [n] = {1, . . . , n}, equipped
with twice continuously differentiable proﬁt functions {πi : Rd →R}n
i=1. The parameters are
w = (w1, . . . , wn) ∈Rd with wi ∈Rdi where Pn
i=1 di = d. Player i controls the parameters wi.
If players update their actions via simultaneous gradient ascent, then a smooth game yields a
dynamical system speciﬁed by the differential equation dw
dt = ξ(w) for
ξ(w) :=

ξ1(w), . . . , ξn(w)

where ξi(w) := ∇wiπi(w) is a di-vector. The Jacobian of a game is the (d × d)-matrix of second-
derivatives J(w) :=

∂ξα(w)
∂wβ
d
α,β=1. The setup can be recast in terms of minimizing losses by
substituting ℓi := −πi for all i.
Smooth games are too general to be tractable since they encompass all dynamical systems.
Lemma 1. Every continuous dynamical system on Rd, for any d, arises as simultaneous gradient
ascent on the proﬁt functions of a smooth game.
The next two sections illustrate some problems that arise in simple smooth games.
Deﬁnition 2. We recall some solution concepts from dynamical systems and game theory:
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
• A stable ﬁxed point1 w∗satisﬁes ξ(w∗) = 0 and v⊺· J(w∗) · v < 0 for all vectors v ̸= 0.
• A local Nash equilibrium w∗has neighborhoods Ui of w∗
i for all i, such that
πi(wi, w∗
−i) < πi(w∗
i , w∗
−i) all wi ∈Ui \ {w∗
i }.
• A classical Nash equilibrium w∗satisﬁes πi(wi, w∗
−i) ≤πi(w∗
i , w∗
−i) for all wi and all
players i.
Example 1 below shows that stable ﬁxed points and local Nash equilibria do not necessarily coincide.
The notion of classical Nash equilibrium is ill-suited to nonconcave settings.
Intuitively, a ﬁxed point is stable if all trajectories sufﬁciently nearby ﬂow into it. A joint strategy is a
local Nash if each player is harmed if it makes a small unilateral deviation. Local Nash differs from
the classic deﬁnition in two ways. It is weaker, because it only allows small unilateral deviations.
This is necessary since players are neural networks and proﬁts are not usually concave. It is also
stronger, because unilateral deviations decrease (rather than not increase) proﬁts.
2.1
PROBLEMS WITH POTENTIAL GAMES
A game is a potential game if ξ = ∇φ for some function φ, see Balduzzi et al. (2018) for details.
Example 1 (potential game). Fix a small ϵ > 0. Consider the two-player games with proﬁt functions
π1(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
1 and π2(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
2.
The game has a unique local Nash equilibrium at w = (0, 0) with π1(0, 0) = 0 = π2(0, 0).
The game is chosen to be as nice as possible: π1 and π2 are strongly concave functions of w1
and w2 respectively. The game is a potential game since ξ = (w2 −ϵw1, w1 −ϵw2) = ∇φ for
φ(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2(w2
1 + w2
2). Nevertheless, the game exhibits three related problems.
Firstly, the Nash equilibrium is unstable. Players at the Nash equilibrium can increase their proﬁts
via the joint update w ←(0, 0) + η · (1, 1), so π1(w) = η(1 −ϵ
2) = π2(w) > 0. The existence
of a Nash equilibrium where players can improve their payoffs by coordinated action suggests the
incentives are not well-designed.
Secondly, the dynamics can diverge to inﬁnity. Starting at w(1) = (1, 1) and applying simultaneously
gradient ascent causes the norm of vector ∥w(t)∥2 to increase without limit as t →∞– and at
an accelerating rate – due to a positive feedback loop between the players’ parameters and proﬁts.
Finally, players impose externalities on each other. The decisions of the ﬁrst player affect the proﬁts
of the second, and vice versa. Obviously players must interact for a game to be interesting. However,
positive feedback loops arise because the interactions are not properly accounted for.
In short, simultaneous gradient ascent does not converge to the Nash – and can diverge to inﬁnity. It
is open to debate whether the fault lies with gradients, the concept of Nash, or the game structure. In
this paper, we take gradients and Nash equilibria as given and seek to design better games.
2.2
PROBLEMS WITH LEARNING RATES
Gradient-based optimizers rarely follow the actual gradient. For example RMSProp and Adam use
adaptive, parameter-dependent learning rates. This is not a problem when optimizing a function.
Suppose f(w) is optimized with reweighted gradient (∇f)η := (η1∇1f, . . . , ηn∇nf) where η ≻0
is a vector of learning rates. Even though (∇f)η is not necessarily the gradient of any function, it
behaves like ∇f because they have positive inner product when ∇f ̸= 0:
(∇f)⊺
η · ∇f =
X
i
ηi · (∇if)2 > 0, since ηi > 0 for all i.
Parameter-dependent learning rates thus behave well in potential games where the dynamics derive
from an implicit potential function ξ(w) = ∇φ(w). Severe problems can arise in general games.
1Berard et al. (2019) use a different notion of stable ﬁxed point that requires J has positive eigenvalues.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Example 2 (“half a game”). Consider the following game, where the w2-player is indifferent to w1:
π1(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
1 and π2(w) = −ϵ
2w2
2.
The dynamics are clear by inspection: the w2-player converges to w2 = 0, and then the w1-player
does the same. It is hard to imagine that anything could go wrong. In contrast, behavior in the next
example should be worse because convergence is slowed down by cycling around the Nash:
Example 3 (minimal SM-game). A simple SM-game, see deﬁnition 3, is
π1(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
1 and π2(w) = −w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
2.
Figure 1 shows the dynamics of the games, in discrete time, with small learning rates and small
gradient noise. In the top panel, both players have the same learning rate. Both games converge.
Example 2 converges faster – as expected – without cycling around the Nash.
In the bottom panels, the learning rate of the second player is decreased by a factor of eight. The
SM-game’s dynamics do not change signiﬁcantly. In contrast, the dynamics of example 2 become
unstable: although player 1 is attracted to the Nash, it is extremely sensitive to noise and does not
stay there for long. One goal of the paper is to explain why SM-games are more robust, in general, to
differences in relative learning rates.
2.3
STOP GRADIENT AND LEARNING RATES
Tools for automatic differentiation (AD) such as TensorFlow and PyTorch include stop gradient
operators that stop gradients from being computed.
For example, let f(w)
=
w1 ·
stop gradient(w2) −ϵ
2(w2
1 + w2
2). The use of stop gradient means f is not strictly
speaking a function and so we use ∇AD to refer to its gradient under automatic differentiation.
Then
∇ADf(w) = (w2 −ϵw1, −ϵw2)
which is the simultaneous gradient from example 2. Any smooth vector ﬁeld is the gradient of a
function augmented with stop gradient operators, see appendix D. Stop gradient is often
used in complex neural architectures (for example when one neural network is fed into another
leading to multiplicative interactions), and is thought to be mostly harmless. Section 2.2 shows that
stop gradients can interact in unexpected ways with parameter-dependent learning rates.
2.4
SUMMARY
It is natural to expect individually well-behaved agents to also behave well collectively. Unfortunately,
this basic requirement fails in even the simplest examples.
Maximizing a strongly concave function is well-behaved: there is a unique, ﬁnite global maximum.
However, example 1 shows that coupling concave functions can cause simultaneous gradient ascent
to diverge to inﬁnity. The dynamics of the game differs in kind from the dynamics of the players
in isolation. Example 2 shows that reducing the learning rate of a well-behaved (strongly concave)
player in a simple game destabilizes the dynamics. How collectives behave is sensitive not only to
proﬁts, but also to relative learning rates. Off-the-shelf optimizers such as Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2015) modify learning rates under the hood, which may destabilize some games.
3
SMOOTH MARKETS (SM-GAMES)
Let us restrict to more structured games. Take an accountant’s view of the world, where the only
thing we track is the ﬂow of money. Interactions are pairwise. Money is neither created nor destroyed,
so interactions are zero-sum. If we model the interactions between players by differentiable functions
gij(wi, wj) that depend on their respective strategies then we have an SM-game. All interactions
are explicitly tracked. There are no externalities off the books. Positive interactions, gij > 0, are
revenue, negative are costs, and the difference is proﬁt. The model prescribes that all ﬁrms are proﬁt
maximizers. More formally:
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Deﬁnition 3 (SM-game). A smooth market is a smooth game where interactions between players
are pairwise zero-sum. The proﬁts have the form
πi(w) = fi(wi) +
X
j̸=i
gij(wi, wj)
(1)
where gij(wi, wj) + gji(wj, wi) ≡0 for all i, j.
The functions fi can act as regularizers. Alternatively, they can be interpreted as natural resources or
dummy players that react too slowly to model as players. Dummy players provide ﬁrms with easy
(non-adversarial) sources of revenue.
Humans, unlike ﬁrms, are not proﬁt-maximizers; humans typically buy goods because they value
them more than the money they spend on them. Appendix C brieﬂy discusses extending the model.
3.1
EXAMPLES OF SM-GAMES
SM-games codify a common design pattern:
1. Optimizing a function. A near-trivial case is where there is a single player with proﬁt
π1(w) = f1(w).
2. Generative adversarial networks and related architectures like CycleGANs are zero or near
zero sum (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2017).
3. Zero-sum polymatrix games are SM-games where fi(wi) ≡0 and gij(wi, wj) =
w⊺
i Aijwj for some matrices Aij. Weights are constrained to probability simplices. The
games have nice properties including: Nash equilibria are computed via a linear program
and correlated equilibria marginalize onto Nash equilibria (Cai et al., 2016).
4. Intrinsic curiosity modules use games to drive exploration. One module is rewarded for pre-
dicting the environment and an adversary is rewarded for choosing actions whose outcomes
are not predicted by the ﬁrst module (Pathak et al., 2017). The modules share some weights,
so the setup is nearly, but not exactly, an SM-game.
5. Adversarial training is concerned with the minmax problem (Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry
et al., 2018)
min
w∈W
X
i

max
δi∈Bϵ ℓ

fw(xi + δi), yi

.
Setting g0i(w0, δi) = ℓ
 fw0(xi + δi), yi

obtains a star-shaped SM-game with the neural
net (player 0) at the center and n adversaries – one per datapoint (xi, yi) – on the arms.
6. Task-suites where a population of agents are trained on a population of tasks, form a bipartite
graph. If the tasks are parametrized and adversarially rewarded based on their difﬁculty for
agents, then the setup is an SM-game.
7. Homogeneous games arise when all the coupling functions are equal up to sign (recall
gij = −gji). An example is population self-play (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al.,
2019) which lives on a graph where gij(wi, wj) := P(wi beats wj) −1
2 comes from the
probability that policy wi beats wj.
Monetary exchanges in SM-games are quite general. The error signals traded between generators
and discriminators and the wins and losses traded between agents in StarCraft are two very different
special cases.
4
FROM MICRO TO MACRO
How to analyze the behavior of the market as a whole? Adam Smith claimed that proﬁt-maximizing
leads ﬁrms to promote the interests of society, as if by an invisible hand (Smith, 1776). More formally,
we can ask: Is there a measure that ﬁrms collectively increase or decrease? It is easy to see that ﬁrms
do not collectively maximize aggregate proﬁt (AP) or aggregate revenue (AR):
AP(w) :=
X
i
πi(w) =
X
i
fi(wi)
AR (w) :=
X
i,j
max

gij(wi, wj), 0

.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A
B
C
D
Figure 2: SM-game graph topologies. A: two-player (e.g. GANs). B: star-shaped (e.g. adversarial
training). C: bipartite (e.g. task-suites). D: all-to-all.
Maximizing aggregate proﬁt would require ﬁrms to ignore interactions with other ﬁrms. Maximizing
aggregate revenue would require ﬁrms to ignore costs. In short, SM-games are not potential games;
there is no function that they optimize in general. However, it turns out the dynamics of SM-games
aggregates the dynamics of individual ﬁrms, in a sense made precise in section 4.3.
4.1
RATIONALITY: SEEING LIKE A FIRM
Give an objective function to an agent. The agent is rational, relative to the objective, if it chooses
actions because it forecasts they will lead to better outcomes as measured by the objective. In
SM-games, agents are ﬁrms, the objective is proﬁt, and forecasts are computed using gradients.
Firms aim to increase their proﬁt. Applying the ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation obtains
πi(w + vi) −πi(w)
|
{z
}
change in proﬁt
= v⊺
i ξi(w)
|
{z
}
proﬁt forecast
+
{h.o.t.},
(2)
where {h.o.t.} refers to higher-order terms. Firm i’s forecast of how proﬁts will change if it
modiﬁes production by vi is fvi(w) := v⊺
i ξi(w). The Taylor expansion implies that fvi(w) ≈
πi(w + vi) −πi(w) for small updates vi. Forecasts encode how individual ﬁrms expect proﬁts to
change ceteris paribus2.
4.2
PROFIT CHANGES DO NOT ADD UP
How does proﬁt maximizing by individual ﬁrms look from the point of view of the market as a whole?
Summing over all ﬁrms obtains
X
i
h
πi(w + vi) −πi(w)
i
|
{z
}
aggregate change in proﬁt
=
X
i
fvi(w)
|
{z
}
aggregate forecast
+
{h.o.t.}
(3)
where fv(w) = P
i fvi(w) is the aggregate forecast. Unfortunately, the left-hand side of Eq. (3) is
incoherent. It sums the changes in proﬁt that would be experienced by ﬁrms updating their production
in isolation. However, ﬁrms change their production simultaneously. Updates are not ceteris paribus
and so proﬁt is not a meaningful macroeconomic concept. The following minimal example illustrates
the problem:
Example 4. Suppose π1(w) = w1w2 and π2(w) = −w1w2. Fix w = (w1, w2) and let v =
(w2, −w1). The sum of the changes in proﬁt expected by the ﬁrms, reasoning in isolation, is
h
π1(w + v1) −π1(w) + π2(w + v2) −π2(w)
i
= w2
2 + w2
1 > 0
whereas the actual change in aggregate proﬁt is zero because π1(x) + π2(x) = 0 for any x.
Tracking aggregate proﬁts is therefore not useful. The next section shows forecasts are better behaved.
4.3
LEGIBILITY: SEEING LIKE AN ECONOMY
Give a target function to every agent in a collective. The collective is legible, relative to the targets, if
it increases or decreases the aggregate target according to whether its members forecast, on aggregate,
2All else being equal – i.e. without taking into account updates by other ﬁrms.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
they will increase or decrease their targets. We show that SM-games are legible. The targets are proﬁt
forecasts (note: not proﬁts).
Let us consider how forecasts change. Deﬁne the sentiment as the directional derivative of the
forecast Dvifvi(w) = v⊺
i ∇fvi(w). The ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of the forecast shows that the
sentiment is a forecast about the proﬁt forecast:
fvi(w + vi) −fvi(w)
|
{z
}
change in proﬁt forecast
= v⊺
i ∇fvi(w)
|
{z
}
sentiment
+ {h.o.t.}.
(4)
The perspective of ﬁrms can be summarized as:
1. Choose an update direction vi that is forecast to increase proﬁt.
2. The ﬁrm is then in one of two main regimes:
a. If sentiment is positive then forecasts increase as the ﬁrm modiﬁes its production –
forecasts become more optimistic. The ﬁrm experiences increasing returns-to-scale.
b. If sentiment is negative then forecasts decrease as the ﬁrm modiﬁes its production –
forecasts become more pessimistic. The ﬁrm experiences diminishing returns-to-scale.
Our main result is that sentiment is additive, which means that forecasts are legible:
Proposition 2 (forecasts are legible in SM-games). Sentiment is additive
Dvfv(w) =
X
i
Dvifvi(w).
Thus, the aggregrate proﬁt forecast fv increases or decreases according to whether individual
forecasts fvi are expected to increase or decrease in aggregate.
Section 5.1 works through an example that is not legible.
5
DYNAMICS OF SMOOTH MARKETS
Finally, we study the dynamics of gradient-based learners in SM-games. Suppose ﬁrms use gradient
ascent. Firm i’s updates are, inﬁnitesimally, in the direction vi = ξi(w) so that dwi
dt = ξi(w). Since
updates are gradients, we can simplify our notation. Deﬁne ﬁrm i’s forecast as fi(w) := 1
2ξ⊺
i ∇iπi =
1
2∥ξi(w)∥2
2 and its sentiment, ceteris paribus, as ξ⊺
i ∇ifi = dfi
dt (w).
We allow ﬁrms to choose their learning rates; ﬁrms with higher learning rates are more responsive.
Deﬁne the η-weighted dynamics ξη(w) := (η1ξ1, . . . , ηnξn) and η-weighted forecast as
fη(w) := 1
2∥ξη(w)∥2
2 = 1
2
X
i
η2
i · fi(w).
In this setting, proposition 2 implies that
Proposition 3 (legibility under gradient dynamics). Fix dynamics dw
dt := ξη(w). Sentiment decom-
poses additively:
dfη
dt =
X
i
ηi · dfi
dt
Thus, we can read off the aggregate dynamics from the dynamics of forecasts of individual ﬁrms.
5.1
EXAMPLE OF A FAILURE OF LEGIBILITY
The pairwise zero-sum structure is crucial to legibility. It is instructive to take a closer look at
example 1, where the forecasts are not legible.
Suppose π1(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
1 and π2(w) = w1w2 −ϵ
2w2
2. Then ξ(w) = (w2 −ϵw1, w1 −ϵw2)
and the ﬁrms’ sentiments are df1
dt = −ϵ(w2 −ϵw1)2 and df2
dt = −ϵ(w1 −ϵw2)2 which are always
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
non-positive. However, the aggregate sentiment is
df
dt(w) = −ϵ(w2 −ϵw1)2 −ϵ(w1 −ϵw2)2 + (1 + ϵ2)w1w2 −ϵ(w1 + w2)2
which for small ϵ is dominated by w1w2, and so can be either positive or negative.
When w = (1, 1) we have df
dt = 1 −ϵ(6 −5ϵ + 2ϵ2) ≈1 > 0 and df1
dt + df2
dt = −2ϵ(1 −ϵ)2 < 0.
Each ﬁrm expects their forecasts to decrease, and yet the opposite happens due to a positive feedback
loop that ultimately causes the dynamics to diverge to inﬁnity.
5.2
STABILITY, CONVERGENCE AND BOUNDEDNESS
We provide three fundamental results on the dynamics of smooth markets. Firstly, we show that
stability, from dynamical systems, and local Nash equilibrium, from game theory, coincide in
SM-games:
Theorem 4 (stability). A ﬁxed point in an SM-game is a local Nash equilibrium iff it is stable. Thus,
every local Nash equilibrium is contained in an open set that forms its basin of attraction.
Secondly, we consider convergence. Lyapunov functions are tools for studying convergence. Given
dynamical system dw
dt = ξ(w) with ﬁxed point w∗, recall that V (w) is a Lyapunov function if: (i)
V (w∗) = 0; (ii) V (w) > 0 for all w ̸= w∗; and (iii) dV
dt (w) < 0 for all w ̸= w∗. If a dynamical
system has a Lyapunov function then the dynamics converge to the ﬁxed point. Aggregate forecasts
share properties (i) and (ii) with Lyapunov functions.
(i) Shared global minima: fη(w) = 0 iff fη′(w) = 0 for all η, η′ ≻0, which occurs iff w is
a stationary point, ξi(w) = 0 for all i.
(ii) Positivity: fη(w) > 0 for all points that are not ﬁxed points, for all η ≻0.
We can therefore use forecasts to study convergence and divergence across all learning rates:
Theorem 5. In continuous time, for all positive learning rates η ≻0,
1. Convergence: If w∗is a stable ﬁxed point (S ≺0), then there is an open neighborhood
U ∋w∗where dfη
dt (w) < 0 for all w ∈U \ {w∗}, so the dynamics converge to w∗from
anywhere in U.
2. Divergence: If w∗is an unstable ﬁxed point (S ≻0), there is an open neighborhood
U ∋w∗such that dfη
dt (w) > 0 for all w ∈U \ {w∗}, so the dynamics within U are
repelled by w∗.
The theorem explains why SM-games are robust to relative differences in learning rates – in contrast
to the sensitivity exhibited by the game in example 2. If a ﬁxed point is stable, then for any dynamics
dw
dt = ξη(w), there is a corresponding aggregate forecast fη(w) that can be used to show convergence.
The aggregate forecasts provide a family of Lyapunov-like functions.
Finally, we consider the setting where ﬁrms experience diminishing returns-to-scale for sufﬁciently
large production vectors. The assumption is realistic for ﬁrms in a ﬁnite economy since revenues
must eventually saturate whilst costs continue to increase with production.
Theorem 6 (boundedness). Suppose all ﬁrms have negative sentiment for sufﬁciently large values of
∥wi∥. Then the dynamics are bounded for all η ≻0.
The theorem implies that the kind of positive feedback loops that caused example 1 to diverge to
inﬁnity, cannot occur in SM-games.
5.3
LEGIBILITY AND THE LANDSCAPE
One of our themes is that legibility allows to read off the dynamics of games. We make the claim
visually explicit in this section. Let us start with a concrete game.
Example 5. Consider the SM-game with proﬁts
π1(w) = −1
6|w1|3 + 1
2w2
1 −w1w2
and
π2(w) = −1
6|w2|3 + 1
2w2
2 + w1w2.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A
B
C
D
negative
sentiment
positive
sentiment
unstable
ﬁxed point
zero
sentiment
Figure 3: Legibile dynamics. Panels AB: Dynamics in an SM-game with both positive and negative
sentiment, under different learning rates. Panels CD: Cartoon maps of the dynamics.
Figure 3AB plots the dynamics of the SM-game in example 5, under two different learning rates for
player 1. There is an unstable ﬁxed point at the origin and an ovoidal cycle. Dynamics converge to
the cycle from both inside and outside the ovoid. Changing player 1’s learning rate, panel B, squashes
the ovoid. Panels CD provide a cartoon map of the dynamics. There are two regions, the interior and
exterior of the ovoid and the boundary formed by the ovoid itself.
In general, the phase space of any SM-game is carved into regions where sentiment dfη
dt (w) is
positive and negative, with boundaries where sentiment is zero. The dynamics can be visualized as
operating on a landscape where height at each point w corresponds to the value of the aggregate
forecast fη(w). The dynamics does not always ascend or always descend the landscape. Rather,
sentiment determines whether the dynamics ascends, descends, or remains on a level-set. Since
sentiment is additive, dfη
dt (w) = P
i ηi · df
dt(w), the decision to ascend or descend comes down to a
weighted sum of the sentiments of the ﬁrms.3 Changing learning rates changes the emphasis given
to different ﬁrms’ opinions, and thus changes the shapes of the boundaries between regions in a
relatively straightforward manner.
SM-games can thus express richer dynamics than potential games (cycles will not occur when per-
forming gradient ascent on a ﬁxed objective), which still admit a relatively simple visual description in
terms of a landscape and decisions about which direction to go (upwards or downwards). Computing
the landscape for general SM-games, as for neural nets, is intractable.
6
DISCUSSION
Machine learning has got a lot of mileage out of treating differentiable modules like plug-and-play
lego blocks. This works when the modules optimize a single loss and the gradients chain together
seamlessly. Unfortunately, agents with differing objectives are far from plug-and-play. Interacting
agents form games, and games are intractable in general. Worse, positive feedback loops can cause
individually well-behaved agents to collectively spiral out of control.
It is therefore necessary to ﬁnd organizing principles – constraints – on how agents interact that
ensure their collective behavior is amenable to analysis and control. The pairwise zero-sum condition
that underpins SM-games is one such organizing principle, which happens to admit an economic
interpretation. Our main result is that SM-games are legible: changes in aggregate forecasts are
the sum of how individual ﬁrms expect their forecasts to change. It follows that we can translate
properties of the individual ﬁrms into guarantees on collective convergence, stability and boundedness
in SM-games, see theorems 4-6.
Legibility is a local-to-global principle, whereby we can draw qualitative conclusions about the
behavior of collectives based on the nature of their individual members. Identifying and exploiting
games that embed local-to-global principles will become increasingly important as artiﬁcial agents
become more common.
