Designing a belief function-based accessibility
indicator to improve web browsing
for disabled people
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall and Arnaud Martin
Abstract The purpose of this study is to provide an accessibility measure of web-
pages, in order to draw disabled users to the pages that have been designed to be ac-
cessible to them. Our approach is based on the theory of belief functions, using data
which are supplied by reports produced by automatic web content assessors that test
the validity of criteria deﬁned by the WCAG 2.0 guidelines proposed by the World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) organization. These tools detect errors with gradual
degrees of certainty and their results do not always converge. For these reasons, to
fuse information coming from the reports, we choose to use an information fusion
framework which can take into account the uncertainty and imprecision of infor-
mation as well as divergences between sources. Our accessibility indicator covers
four categories of deﬁciencies. To validate the theoretical approach in this context,
we propose an evaluation completed on a corpus of 100 most visited French news
websites, and 2 evaluation tools. The results obtained illustrate the interest of our
accessibility indicator.
1 Introduction
The Web constitutes today an essential source of information and communication.
While users have a growing interest in terms of social, cultural and economic value,
and in spite of legislations and recommendations of the W3C community for making
websites more accessible, its accessibility remains hardly efﬁcient for some disabled
or ageing users. Actually, making websites accessible and usable by disabled people
is a challenge [8] that society needs to overcome [1].
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall, Arnaud Martin
DRUID-IRISA, University of Rennes 1, rue Edouard Branly, 22300 Lannion, FRANCE

1
arXiv:1501.04792v1  [cs.HC]  20 Jan 2015

2
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall and Arnaud Martin
To measure the accessibility of a webpage, several accessibility metrics have
been developed [16]. Evaluations are based on the failure to comply with the rec-
ommendations of standards, using automatic evaluation tools. They often give a
ﬁnal value, continuous or discrete, to represent content accessibility. However, the
fact remains that tests on accessibility criteria are far from being trivial [2]. Eval-
uation reports of automatic assessors contain errors considered as certain, but also
warnings or potential problems which are uncertain. Moreover there are differences
between assessor evaluations, even for errors considered as certain.
This work provides a new measure of accessibility and an information fusion
framework to fuse information coming from the reports of automatic assessors al-
lowing search engines to re-rank their results according to an accessibility level, as
some users would like [10]. This accessibility indicator considers several categories
of deﬁciencies. Our approach is based on the theory of the belief functions adapted
to take into account the defects of accessibility given by several automatic assessors
seen as information sources, the uncertainty of their results, as well as the possible
conﬂicts between the sources.
In the sections 2 and 3 we will give a description of accessibility tools based on
a recent standard and of data provided in their reports. In the 4th section, we will
describe the principles of our indicator and develop how we implement the belief
functions. In the 5th part, we will present an experiment before concluding.
2 Defect detection of webpage accessibility
Various accessibility standards propose recommendations for improving accessibil-
ity of webpages. The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 2.0) [3] pro-
posed by the W3C normalization organization, constitutes an international reference
in the ﬁeld. These guidelines cover a wide range of disabilities (visual, auditory,
physical, speech, cognitive, etc.) and several layers of guidance are provided:
• 4 overall principles: perception, operability, understandability & robustness;
• testable success criteria: for each guideline, testable success criteria are provided.
Every criterion is associated to one of the 3 deﬁned conformance levels (A, AA
and AAA), each representing a requirement of accessibility for users.
Several automatic accessibility assessors, based on various accessibility standards,
have been developed [5] for IT professionals. Their limits depend on the automatic
tests. Because it is at present not possible to test some criteria about the quality
of some pages, some assessor results are given with ambiguity. Consequently, the
existing automatic assessors look for the criteria which are not met and give the
defects according to 3 levels of validity: the number of errors, which are estimated
certain, the number of likely problems (warnings) whose reality is not guaranteed
and the number of potential problems (also called generic or non testable) which
leads to a complete uncertainty on the tested criterion accessibility.

Designing a belief function-based accessibility indicator to browse webpages
3
Finally, even though the results obtained by different assessors match for some
tested common criteria, results can differ, even for errors considered as certain.
3 Proposed accessibility indicator
After a request, the indicator has to supply information describing to users the ac-
cessibility level of each webpage proposed by a search engine. Presented simulta-
neously with these pages, the indicators’ information cover two aspects:
• the accessibility for categories of deﬁciencies: as previously proposed for ac-
cessibility estimation [6] we use 4 major categories: visual, hearing, motor and
cognitive deﬁciencies, as deﬁned by [15]. They are called “deﬁciency frames”;
• the level of accessibility for each deﬁciency frame.
Collecting results from several assessors has allowed us to beneﬁt from each of their
performance. In addition, it strengthens accessibility evaluation for similar results
and manages conﬂicts in case of disagreements. Automatic assessors check a set
of criteria which correspond to many deﬁciencies. As our accessibility evaluation
varies for every deﬁciency frame, our method consists in selecting the relevant cri-
teria for each deﬁciency frame and then balancing each criterion to consider the
difﬁculties met by users in case of failure. This weighting is based on the criterion
conformance level (A, AA, AAA), which corresponds to decreasing priorities (A:
most important, etc.). The errors and problems detected for every criterion of the
accessibility standard affect the accessibility indicator of the Web content tested ac-
cording to the deﬁciency frame the criterion belongs to, its weighting within the
frame, the number of occurrences when it is analyzed as a defect in the webpage
and the defect’s degree of certainty (error, likely or potential problem).
4 Defect detection and accessibility evaluation
After collecting webpage Uniform Resource Locators (URLp) selected by a search
engine from a request, these addresses are supplied to the accessibility assessors and
successively for each page, we detect accessibility defects, then estimate accessibil-
ity level by deﬁciency frame for each assessor, before fusing the data by deﬁciency
frame and taking the decision for every deﬁciency frame [7].

4
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall and Arnaud Martin
4.1 Assessor evaluations of selected pages
Each URLp is submitted to the accessibility evaluation tests by each assessor i that
tests all the criteria k of the WCAG 2.0 standard, and the following data are collected
by a ﬁlter that extracts the required data for each deﬁciency frame:
• Ne
k,i : errors observed for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• Nc
k,i : correct checkpoints for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• T e
k,i : tests that can induce errors for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• Nl
k,i : likely problems detected for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• T l
k,i : tests that can induce likely problems for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• N p
k,i : potential problems suspected for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• T p
k,i : tests that can induce potential problems for a criterion k by an assessor i;
• Ti : total tests by an assessor i, with:
Ti = ∑
k
(Ne
k,i +Nl
k,i +N p
k,i +Nc
k,i)
(1)
4.2 Accessibility indicator level of the pages
To model initial information including uncertainties, the reliability of the assessors
seen as information sources and their possible conﬂicts, we use the theory of belief
functions [4] [13]. Our objective is to deﬁne if a webpage is accessible (Ac) or not
accessible (Ac) and to supply an indication by deﬁciency frame. Consequently, these
questions can be handled independently for every deﬁciency frame Ωh = {Ac,Ac}.
We can consider every power set 2Ωh = {/0,Ac,Ac,Ω}.
The estimation of the accessibility Ac for a deﬁciency frame h and a source i
(assessor) is estimated from the number of correct tests for each of the criteria k
occurring in this frame, and from their conformance level represented by αk:
E(Ac)h,i = ∑k(Nc
k,i ∗αk)
Ti
(2)
The estimation of the non accessibility Ac for a deﬁciency frame h and a source
i is estimated from the number of errors for each of the criteria k occurring in this
frame, and from the αk coefﬁcient. A weakening β e
i coefﬁcient is also introduced to
model the degree of certainty of the error:
E(Ac)h,i = ∑k(Ne
k,i ∗αk ∗β e
i )
T e
k,i
(3)
The estimation of the ignorance Ωh for a deﬁciency frame h and a source i is es-
timated from the number of likely and potential problem for each of the criteria k

Designing a belief function-based accessibility indicator to browse webpages
5
occurring in this frame, and from the αk coefﬁcient. The weakening coefﬁcients β l
i
or β p
i are also used to model the degree of certainty of the problem:
E(Ωh,i = ∑k(Nl
k,i ∗αk ∗β l
i +N p
k,i ∗αk ∗β p
i )
∑k(T l
k,i +T p
k,i)
(4)
The mass functions of the subsets of 2Ωh are computed from the estimations:
m(Ac)h,i =
E(Ac)h,i
E(Ac)h,i +E(Ac)h,i +E(Ω)h,i
(5)
m(Ac)h,i =
E(Ac)h,i
E(Ac)h,i +E(Ac)h,i +E(Ω)h,i
(6)
m(Ω)h,i =
E(Ω)h,i
E(Ac)h,i +E(Ac)h,i +E(Ω)h,i
(7)
In addition, the source reliability can be modeled [11] with a δi coefﬁcient, which
constitutes a beneﬁt when some assessors are more efﬁcient than others:









mδi(Ac)h,i = δi ∗m(Ac)h,i
mδi(Ac)h,i = δi ∗m(Ac)h,i
mδi(Ω)h,i = 1−δi ∗(1−m(Ω)h,i)
(8)
4.3 Merging assessor results and decision-making
Once the masses for each assessor have been obtained, a fusion of the results is
conducted by deﬁciency frame, using the conjunctive rule [14], to combine them
and give information in the form of a mass function. These rule properties, which
strengthen common results and manage conﬂicts between sources, are particularly
relevant in this context, to deal with divergences between assessor evaluations. To
calculate the ﬁnal decision Dh(URLp) for a page by deﬁciency frame, we use the
pignistic probability [14].
There are several ways of presenting the accessibility indicator to users. To visu-
alize the deﬁciency frames, existing speciﬁc pictograms are effective. To present the
accessibility level we discretize the decision into 5 levels (very good, good, moder-
ate, bad or very bad accessibility) using thresholds and visualized it by an ”arrow”:
• if Dh < S1, the Web content accessibility is very bad (↓),
• if S1 < Dh < S2, the Web content accessibility is bad (↘),
• if S2 < Dh < S3, the Web content accessibility is moderate (→),
• if S3 < Dh < S4, the Web content accessibility is good (↗),
• if S4 < Dh, the Web content accessibility is very good (↑).

6
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall and Arnaud Martin
5 Experiments
To validate our approach, we present here the results obtained on a set of 100 news
Websites, among the most visited ones, all referenced by the OJD 1 organization
which provides certiﬁcation and publication of attendance ﬁgures for websites. We
test their homepages, following a study [12] concluding that their usability is pre-
dictive of the whole site. We chose two open source assessors AChecker, (source 1)
[9], and TAW (source 2) from which we extract automatically the accessibility test
results. Weight and threshold values given in Table 1 were previously empirically
deﬁned from Webpages 2 assumed to be accessible.
Weightings
α1 ; α2 ;α3
A, AA, AAA conformance levels
1 ; 0.8 ; 0.6
β e
i ; β l
i ;β p
i
Certainty levels of errors or problems
1 ; 0.5 ; 1
δ1 ; δ2 ;α3
AChecker and TAW reliabilities (sources)
1 ; 1
Thresholds S1 ; S2 ; S3 ; S4
Accessibility indicator levels
0.6 ; 0.7 ; 0.8 ; 0.9
Table 1: Constant values for our accessibility metric.
The results of these sources are summarized in Figure 1 for the 3 levels of cer-
tainty defects. The box plots present how their defects are distributed: minimum
and maximum (whiskers), 1st (bottom box plot) and 3rd quartiles (top box plot) and
average (horizontal line). We observe similarities between the assessors’ results for
the errors detected as certain, but also huge differences for the likely (warnings) and
potential (non testable) problems. The number of likely problems is almost null for
AChecker and the potential one remains always the same for TAW.
Fig. 1: Results of automatic assessors.
The detected defects are taken into account in our accessibility indicator results
presented in Figure 2. The mass function values of accessibility m(Ac) for the 2
sources, TAW and AChecker, and the fusion result are visualized for 3 deﬁciency
1 OJD: http://www.ojd.com/Chiffres/Le-Numerique/Sites-Web/Sites-Web-GP
2 Sites labeled by Accessiweb: http://www.accessiweb.org/index.php/galerie.html

Designing a belief function-based accessibility indicator to browse webpages
7
frames among the 4, and globally for all deﬁciencies. Firstly, we can see that m(Ac)
is not evenly distributed between the 2 sources: their distributions of errors (Fig-
ure 2) are comparable even if there is a larger range for AChecker; however the
mass function of accessibility is smaller for AChecker compared to TAW. This is
due to the more numerous potential problems (non testable criteria) detected by the
AChecker assessor, increasing substantially the denominator in the computation of
m(Ac) (Eq. 5). By the way, the values of E(Ω) and consequently of m(Ω), are more
important, as the β p
i weight for potential problems is 2 times higher than β l
i for the
likely problems (warnings). We can also notice that the fusion result obtained by the
conjunctive rule strengthens the mass functions of the 2 assessors.
Fig. 2: Accessibility indicator results.
In this corpus, visual and cognitive deﬁciencies have a higher impact on con-
tent accessibility than the motor ones. This is logical for news websites, as their
homepages include a large number of images. By the way, the motor indicator is
less impacted, in particular by the lack of alternatives for images, useful for visual
and cognitive deﬁciencies. Finally, we observe a similarity between the visual and
global indicators, as around 80% of all the checkpoints concern visual deﬁciencies
and also because these controls are properly taken into account by assessors.
Web content (URLp)
Decision
Visual
Motor
Cognitive
Global
LeParisien.fr
0.972 ↑
0.989 ↑
0.974 ↑
0.971 ↑
Famili.fr
0.769 →
0.924 ↑
0.838 ↗
0.766 ↗
Arte.tv
0.701 →
0.718 →
0.717 →
0.686 ↘
LePoint.fr
0.630 ↘
0.725 →
0.673 ↘
0.627 ↘
Table 2: Examples of detailed accessibility results by deﬁciency frame.
In Table 2 are presented detailed results for several sites with signiﬁcant indi-
cator result differences. For examples, LePoint.fr and Arte.tv, respectively 19th and
33th most consulted websites in France, obtain only 0.627 and 0.686 for the global
result, whereas LeParisien.fr, ranked 12th, reaches 0.971. For Family.fr we observe

8
Jean-Christophe Dubois, Yolande Le Gall and Arnaud Martin
differences between the deﬁciencies, nevertheless focus on accessibility generally
beneﬁts all deﬁciencies on the whole corpus.
6 Conclusion
We present an indicator estimating webpage accessibility levels for distinct cate-
gories of deﬁciencies, in order to supply easily understandable accessibility infor-
mation to users on pages proposed by a search engine. Our method based on belief
function theory fuses results from several automatic assessors and considers their
uncertainties. An accurate modelization of the assessor characteristics and of the
impact of defect guideline criteria on accessibility is proposed. An experiment per-
formed on a set of 100 news websites validates the method, which beneﬁts from
each of the assessor performances on speciﬁc criterion tests. Our future research
will focus on the implementation of a user’s personal weighting to balance the im-
portance of criteria.
