Evaluation Evaluation  
 a Monte Carlo study 
Anonymous1 
Abstract.  Over the last decade there has been increasing concern 
about the biases embodied in traditional evaluation methods for 
Natural Language Processing/Learning, particularly methods 
borrowed from Information Retrieval. Without knowledge of the 
Bias and Prevalence of the contingency being tested, or equivalently 
the expectation due to chance, the simple conditional probabilities 
Recall, Precision and Accuracy are not meaningful as evaluation 
measures, either individually or in combinations such as F-factor.  
The existence of bias in NLP measures leads to the ‘improvement’ 
of systems by increasing their bias, such as the practice of improving 
tagging and parsing scores by using most common value (e.g. water 
is always a Noun) rather than the attempting to discover the correct 
one. The measures Cohen Kappa and Powers Informedness are 
discussed as unbiased alternative to Recall and related to the 
psychologically significant measure DeltaP.  
In this paper we will analyze both biased and unbiased measures 
theoretically, characterizing the precise relationship between all 
these measures as well as evaluating the evaluation measures 
themselves empirically using a Monte Carlo simulation. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
A common but poorly motivated way of evaluating results of 
Language and Learning experiments is using Recall, Precision and 
F-factor.  These measures are named for their origin in Information 
Retrieval and present specific biases, namely that they ignore 
performance in correctly handling negative examples, they 
propagate the underlying marginal Prevalences and Biases, and they 
fail to take account the chance level performance. In the Medical 
Sciences, Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) analysis has 
been borrowed from Signal Processing to become a standard for 
evaluation and standard setting, comparing True Positive Rate and 
False Positive Rate.  In the Behavioural Sciences, Specificity and 
Sensitivity, are commonly used. Alternate techniques, such as Rand 
Accuracy, have some advantages but are nonetheless still biased 
measures unless explicitly debiased. We will recapitulate some of 
the literature relating to the problems with these measures, as well as 
considering a number of other techniques that have been introduced 
and argued within each of these fields, aiming/claiming to address 
the problems with these simplistic measures. 
This paper examines the relationships between these various 
measures, develops new insights into the problem of measuring the 
effectiveness of an empirical decision system or a scientific 
experiment, analyzing and introducing new probabilistic and 
information theoretic measures that overcome the problems with 
Recall, Precision and their derivatives. 
                                                                                              
1 University of Anonymity,  

2 
THE BINARY CASE  
It is common to introduce the various measures in the context of a 
dichotomous binary classification problem, where the labels are by 
convention + and − and the predictions of a classifier are 
summarized in a four cell contingency table. This contingency table 
may be expressed using raw counts of the number of times each 
predicted label is associated with each real class, or may be 
expressed in relative terms.  Cell and margin labels may be formal 
probability expressions, may derive cell expressions from margin 
labels or vice-versa, may use alphabetic constant labels a, b, c, d 
or A, B, C, D, or may use acronyms for the generic terms for True 
and False, Real and Predicted Positives and Negatives.   UPPER 
CASE typewriter font is used where the values are counts, and 
lower case where the values are probabilities or proportions 
relative to N or the marginal probabilities; in addition will use Mixed 
Case text font for popular nomenclature that may or may not 
correspond directly to one of our formal systematic names. True and 
False Positives (TP/FP) refer to the number of Predicted Positives 
that were correct/incorrect, and similarly for True and False 
Negatives (TN/FN), and these four cells sum to N. On the other hand 
tp, fp, fn, tn and rp, rn and pp, pn refer to the joint and 
marginal probabilities, and the four contingency cells and the two 
pairs of marginal probabilities each sum to 1. We will attach other 
popular names to some of these probabilities in due course. 
We thus make the specific assumptions that we are predicting and 
assessing a single condition that is either positive or negative 
(dichotomous), that we have one predicting model, and one gold 
standard labelling. Unless otherwise noted we will also for 
simplicity assume that the contingency is non-trivial in the sense that 
both positive and negative states of both predicted and real 
conditions occur, so that no marginal sums or probabilities are zero. 
We illustrate in Table 1 the general form of a binary contingency 
table using both the traditional alphabetic notation and the directly 
interpretable systematic approach. Both definitions and derivations 
in this paper are made relative to these labellings, although English 
terms (e.g. from Information Retrieval) will also be introduced for 
various ratios and probabilities. The positive diagonal represents 
correct predictions, and the negative diagonal incorrect predictions. 
The predictions of the contingency table may be the predictions of a 
theory or grammar, of some computational rule or system (e.g. an 
Expert System or a Neural Network or a POS Tagger), or may 
simply be a direct measurement, a calculated metric, or a latent 
condition, symptom or marker.  We will refer generically to "the 
model" as the source of the predicted labels, and "the population" or 
"the world" as the source of the real conditions. We are interested in 
understanding to what extent the model "informs" predictions about 
the world/population, and the world/population "marks" conditions 
in the model. 
D.M.W. Powers
 AILab, CSEM, Flinders University of South Australia,

 
2 
 
2.1 
Recall & Precision, Sensitivity & Specificity 
Recall or Sensitivity (as it is called in Psychology) is the proportion 
of Real Positive cases that are correctly Predicted Positive. This 
measures the Coverage of the Real Positive cases by the +P 
(Predicted Positive) rule. Its desirable feature is that it reflects how 
many of the relevant cases the +P rule picks up. It tends not to be 
very highly valued in Information Retrieval (on the assumptions that 
there are many relevant documents, that it doesn't really matter 
which subset we find, that we can't know anything about the 
relevance of documents that aren't returned). Recall tends to be 
neglected 
or 
averaged 
away 
in 
Machine 
Learning 
and 
Computational Linguistics (where the focus is on how confident we 
can be in the rule or classifier). However, in a Computational 
Linguistics/Machine Translation context Recall has been shown to 
have a major weight in predicting the success of Word Alignment [1]. 
In a Medical context Recall is moreover regarded as primary, as the 
aim is to identify all Real Positive cases, and it is also one of the legs 
on which ROC analysis stands. In this context it is referred to as True 
Positive Rate (tpr). Recall is defined, with its various common 
appellations, by equation (1): 
Recall   
=    Sensitivity = tpr = tp/rp  
      
 
=  TP / RP = A /(A+C)  
 
(1) 
Conversely, Precision or Confidence (as it is called in Data Mining) 
denotes the proportion of Predicted Positive cases that are correctly 
Real Positives. This is what Machine Learning, Data Mining and 
Information Retrieval focus on, but it is totally ignored in ROC 
analysis. It can however analogously be called True Positive 
Accuracy (tpa), being a measure of accuracy of Predicted Positives 
in contrast with the rate of discovery of Real Positives 
(tpr).  Precision is defined in (2): 
Precision 
=   Confidence = tpa = tp/pp  
 
 
=  TP / PP =  A /(A+B) 
 
(2) 
These two measures and their combinations focus only on the 
positive examples and predictions, although between them they 
capture some information about the rates and kinds of errors 
made.  However, neither of them captures any information about 
how well the model handles negative cases.  Recall relates only to 
the +R column and Precision only to the +P row.  Neither of these 
takes into account the number of True Negatives.  This also applies 
to their Arithmetic, Geometric and Harmonic Means: A, G and 
F=G2/A (the F-factor or F-measure). Note that the F-measure 
effectively references the True Positives to the Arithmetic Mean of 
Predicted Positives and Real Positives, being a constructed rate 
normalized to an idealized value. The Geometric Mean of Recall and 
Precision (G-measure) effectively normalizes TP to the Geometric 
Mean of Predicted Positives and Real Positives, and its Information 
content corresponds to the Arithmetic Mean of the Information 
represented by Recall and Precision. 
In fact, there is in principle nothing special about the Positive case, 
and we can define Inverse statistics in terms of the Inverse problem 
in which we interchange positive and negative and are predicting the 
opposite case.  Inverse Recall or Specificity is thus the proportion of 
Real Negative cases that are correctly Predicted Negative (3), and is 
also known as the True Negative Rate (tnr).  Conversely, Inverse 
Precision is the proportion of Predicted Negative cases that are 
indeed Real Negatives (4), and can also be called True Negative 
Accuracy (tna): 
Inverse Recall  
= tnr  
= tn/rn  
 
 
 
= TN/RN  
= D/(B+D)  
(3) 
Inverse Precision 
= tna  
= tn/pn  
 
 
 
= TN/PN  
= D/(C+D)  
(4) 
Rand Accuracy explicitly takes into account the classification of 
negatives, and is expressible (5) both as a weighted average of 
Precision and Inverse Precision and as a weighted average of Recall 
and Inverse Recall. Conversely, the Jaccard or Tanimoto similarity 
coefficient explicitly ignores correctly classificatied negatives (TN): 
Accuracy  
= tea = ter = tp+tn  
 
 
= rp*tpr+rn*tnr  
 
 
= pp*tpa+pn*tna = (A+D)/N  
(5) 
Jaccard  
= tp/(tp+fn+fp) = TP/(N-TN)  
 
 
= A/(A+B+C) 
= A/(N-D)  
(6) 
Each of the above also has a complementary form defining an error 
rate, of which some have specific names and importance: Fallout or 
False Positive Rate (fpr) are the proportion of Real Negatives that 
occur as Predicted Positive (ring-ins); Miss Rate or False Negative 
Rate (fnr) are the proportion of Real Positives that are Predicted 
Negatives (false-drops). False Positive Rate is the second of the legs 
on which ROC analysis is based. 
Fallout  
= fpr  
= fp/rp  
 
 
= FP/RP  
= B/(B+D)  
 
 (7) 
Miss Rate  
= fnr  
= fn/rn  
 
 
= FN/RN  
= C/(A+C)   
 
(8) 
Note that FN and FP are sometimes referred to as Type I and Type 
II Errors, and the rates fn and fp as alpha and beta, respectively – 
referring to falsely rejecting or accepting a hypothesis.  More 
correctly, these terms apply specifically to the meta-level problem of 
whether the precise pattern of counts (not rates) in the contingency 
table fit the null hypothesis of random distribution rather than 
reflecting the effect of some alternative hypothesis (which is not in 
general the one represented by either +P -> +R or −P -> −R or 
both). 
2.2 
Prevalence, Bias, Cost & Skew 
We now turn our attention to various forms of bias that detract from 
the utility of all of the above surface measures [2]. We will first note 
that rp represents the Prevalence of positive cases, RP/N, and is 
assumed to be a property of the population of interest – it may be 
constant, or it may vary across subpopulations, but is regarded here 
as not being under the control of the experimenter.  By contrast, pp 
Table 1. Systematic and traditional notations in a contingency table.  
 
+R 
−R   
 
 
+R
−R  
+P 
tp 
fp 
pp 
 
+P 
A 
B 
A+B
−P 
fn 
tn 
pn 
 
−P 
C 
D 
C+D
 
rp 
rn 
1   
 
A+C
B+D
N 

 
3 
 
represents the (label) Bias of the model [3], the tendency of the 
model to output positive labels, PP/N, and is directly under the 
control of the experimenter, who can change the model by changing 
the theory or algorithm, or some parameter or threshold, to better fit 
the world/population being modelled.  Note that F-factor effectively 
references tp (probability or proportion of True Positives) to the 
Arithmetic Mean of Bias and Prevalence.  A common rule of thumb, 
or even a characteristic of some algorithms, is to parameterize a 
model so that Prevalence = Bias, viz. rp = pp. Corollaries of this 
setting are Recall = Precision (= A = G = F), Inverse Recall = 
Inverse Precision and Fallout = Miss Rate. 
Alternate characterizations of Prevalence are in terms of Odds [4] 
or Skew [5], being the Class Ratio cs = rn/rp, recalling that by 
definition rp+rn = 1 and RN+RP = N.  If the distribution is highly 
skewed, typically there are many more negative cases than positive, 
this means the number of errors due to poor Inverse Recall will be 
much greater than the number of errors due to poor Recall. Given the 
cost of both False Positives and False Negatives is equal, 
individually, the overall component of the total cost due to False 
Positives (as Negatives) will be much greater at any significant level 
of chance performance, due to the higher Prevalence of Real 
Negatives.  
Note that the normalized binary contingency table with unspecified 
margins has three degrees of freedom – setting any three 
non−Redundant ratios determines the rest (setting any count supplies 
the remaining information to recover the original table of counts 
with its four degrees of freedom). In particular, Recall, Inverse 
Recall and Prevalence, or equivalently tpr, fpr and cs, suffice to 
determine all ratios and measures derivable from the normalized 
contingency table, but N is also required to determine significance. 
As another case of specific interest, Precision, Inverse Precision and 
Bias, in combination, suffice to determine all ratios or measures. 
We can also take into account a differential value for positives (cp) 
and negatives (cn) – this can be applied to errors as a cost (loss or 
debit) and/or to correct cases as a gain (profit or credit), and can be 
combined into a single Cost Ratio cv = cn/cp. Note that the value 
and skew determined costs have similar effects, and may be 
multiplied to produce a single skew-like cost factor c = cvcs. 
Formulations of measures that are expressed using tpr, fpr and cs 
may be made cost-sensitive by using c = cvcs in place of c = cs, 
or can be made skew/cost-insensitive by using c = 1 [5]. 
2.3 
ROC and PN Analyses  
Flach [5] has highlighted the utility of ROC analysis to the Machine 
Learning community, and characterized the skew sensitivity of 
many measures in that context, utilizing the ROC format to give 
geometric insights into the nature of the measures and their 
sensitivity to skew. ROC analysis plots the rate tpr against the rate 
fpr. A perfect classifier will score in the top left hand corner 
(fpr=0,tpr=100%). A worst case classifier will score in the 
bottom right hand corner (fpr=100%,tpr=0).  A random 
classifier would be expected to score somewhere along the positive 
diagonal (tpr=fpr) since the model will throw up positive and 
negative examples at the same rate (relative to population – these are 
Recall-like scales: tpr = Recall, 1-fpr = Inverse Recall).   
The ROC plot (Fig. 1) allows us to compare classifiers (models 
and/or parameterizations) and choose the one that is closest to (0,1) 
and furtherest from tpr=fpr in some sense.  These conditions for 
choosing the optimal parameterization or model are not identical. 
The most common condition is to minimize the area under the curve 
(AUC), which for a single parameterization of a model is defined by 
a single point and the segments connecting it to (0,0) and (1,1).  A 
particular cost model and/or accuracy measure defines an isocost 
gradient, which for a skew and cost insensitive model will be c=1, 
and hence another common approach is to choose a tangent point on 
the highest isocost line that touches the curve.  The simple condition 
of choosing the point on the curve nearest the optimum point (0,1) is 
not commonly used, but this distance to (0,1) is given by 
√[(-fpr)2 + (1-tpr)2], and minimizing this amounts to 
minimizing the sum of squared normalized error, fpr2+fnr2. The 
area under the simple trapezoid defined by the model is: 
AUC  
= (tpr-fpr+1)/2 
 
 
= (tpr+tnr)/2 
 
 
= 1 – (fpr+fnr)/2  
 
 
(9) 
For the cost and skew insensitive case, with c=1, maximizing 
AUC is thus equivalent to maximizing tpr-fpr or minimizing a 
sum of (absolute) normalized error fpr+fnr. The chance line 
corresponds to tpr-fpr=0, and parallel isocost lines for c=1 have 
the form tpr-fpr=k. The highest isocost line also maximizes 
tpr-fpr and AUC so that these two approaches are equivalent.  
Minimizing a sum of squared normalized error, fpr2+fnr2
, 
corresponds to a Euclidean distance minimization heuristic that is 
equivalent only under appropriate constraints, e.g. fpr=fnr, or 
equivalently, Bias=Prevalence, noting that all cells are non-negative 
by construction. 
Another ROC measure studied by Flach [5] is Weighted Relative 
Accuracy, defined to subtract off the component of the True Positive 
score that is attributable to chance and rescale to the range 
±1.  Maximizing WRacc is equivalent to maximizing AUC or 
tpr-fpr = 2·AUC−1, given c is constant.  Thus WRAcc is an 
unbiased accuracy measure, and the skew-insensitive form of 
WRAcc, with c=1, is tpr-fpr.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of ROC Analysis. The main diagonal 
represents chance with parallel isocost lines representing equal 
cost-performance. Points above the diagonal represent performance 
better than chance, those below worse than chance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of ROC Analysis. The main diagonal 
represents chance with parallel isocost lines representing equal 
cost-performance. Points above the diagonal represent performance 
better than chance, those below worse than chance.  
best 
tpr 
fpr 
worst 
good 
perverse 
sse0 
B 
sse1 

 
4 
 
2.4 
DeltaP, Informedness and Markedness 
Powers [4] also derived an unbiased accuracy measure to avoid the 
bias of Recall, Precision and Accuracy due to population Prevalence 
and label bias. The Bookmaker algorithm costs wins and losses in 
the same way a fair bookmaker would set prices based on the 
odds.  Powers then defines the concept of Informedness which 
represents the 'edge' a punter has in making his bet, as evidenced and 
quantified by his winnings.  Fair pricing based on correct odds 
should be zero sum – that is, guessing will leave you with nothing in 
the long run, whilst a punter with certain knowledge will win every 
time.  Informedness is the probability that a punter is making an 
informed bet and is explained in terms of the proportion of the time 
the edge works out versus ends up being pure guesswork.  Powers 
defined ‘Bookmaker Informedness’ for the general, K-label, case, 
but we do not have space here to deal with the general case and 
present a simplified dichotomous formulation of Powers 
Informedness, as well as the complementary concept of Markedness. 
Definition 1  
Informedness quantifies how informed a predictor is for the 
specified condition, and specifies the probability that a prediction 
is informed in relation to the condition (versus chance). 
Definition 2  
Markedness quantifies how marked a condition is for the 
specified predictor, and specifies the probability that a condition 
is marked by the predictor (versus chance). 
These definitions are aligned with the psychological and linguistic 
uses of the terms condition and marker. The condition represents the 
experimental outcome we are trying to determine by indirect 
means.  A marker or predictor (cf. biomarker or neuromarker) 
represents the indicator we are using to determine the 
outcome.  There is no implication of causality – that is something we 
will address later. However there are two possible directions of 
implication we will address now.  Detection of the predictor may 
reliably predict the outcome, with or without the occurrence of a 
specific outcome condition reliably triggering the predictor. 
For the dichotomous case we have 
Informedness = Recall + Inverse Recall – 1 
 
 
= tpr-fpr = 1-fnr-fpr 
 
(10) 
Markedness 
= Precision + Inverse Precision – 1 
 
 
= tpa-fna = 1-fpa-fna 
 
(11) 
We noted above that maximizing AUC or the unbiased WRAcc 
measure effectively maximized tpr-fpr and indeed WRAcc 
reduced to this in the skew independent case.  This is not surprising 
given both Powers and Flach set out to produce an unbiased measure, 
and the linear definition of Informedness will define a unique linear 
form.  Note that while Informedness is a deep measure of how 
consistently the Predictor predicts the Outcome by combining 
surface measures about what proportion of Outcomes are correctly 
predicted, Markedness is a deep measure of how consistently the 
Outcome has the Predictor as a Marker by combining surface 
measures about what proportion of Predictions are correct. 
In the Psychology literature, Markedness is known as DeltaP and is 
empirically a good predictor of human associative judgements – that 
is it seems we develop associative relationships between a predictor 
and an outcome when DeltaP is high, and this is true even when 
multiple predictors are in competition [6].  Perruchet and Peereman 
[7], in the context of experiments on information use in syllable 
processing, note that [6] identifies DeltaP as the normative measure 
of contingency, but propose a complementary, backward, additional 
measure 
of 
strength 
of 
association, 
DeltaP' 
aka 
Informedness.  Perruchet and Peeremant also note the analog of 
DeltaP to regression coefficient, and that the Geometric Mean of the 
two measures is a dichotomous form of the Pearson correlation 
coefficient, the Matthews' Correlation Coefficient, which is 
appropriate unless a continuous scale is being measured 
dichotomously in which case a Tetrachoric Correlation estimate 
would be appropriate [8]. 
2.5 
Causality, Correlation and Regression  
In a linear regression of two variables, we seek to predict one 
variable, y, as a linear combination of the other, x, finding a line of 
best fit in the sense of minimizing the sum of squared error (in y). 
The equation of fit has the form 
y  = y0 + rx·x    
where  
rx = [n∑x·y-∑x·∑y]/[n∑x2-∑x·∑x] 
 
 
(12) 
Substituting in counts from the contingency table, for the 
regression of predicting +R (1) versus −R (0) given +P (1) versus 
−P (0), we obtain this gradient of best fit (minimizing the error in 
the real values R): rP = DeltaP = Markedness. Conversely, we can 
find the regression coefficient for predicting P from R (minimizing 
the error in the predictions P): rR = DeltaP' = Informedness. 
Finally we see that the Matthews correlation, a contingency matrix 
method of calculating the Pearson product-moment correlation 
coefficient, ρ, is defined by: rG = ±√[Informedness·Markedness]. 
Given the regressions find the same line of best fit, these gradients 
should be reciprocal, defining a perfect Correlation of 1. However, 
both Informedness and Markedness are probabilities with an upper 
bound of 1, so perfect correlation requires perfect regression. The 
squared correlation is a coefficient of proportionality indicating the 
proportion of the variance in R that is explained by P, and is 
traditionally also interpreted as a probability. We can now interpret it 
either as the joint probability that P informs R and R marks P, given 
that the two directions of predictability are independent, or as the 
probability 
that 
the 
variance 
is 
(causally) 
explained 
reciprocally.  The sign of the Correlation will be the same as the sign 
of Informedness and Markedness and indicates whether a correct or 
perverse usage of the information has been made. 
Psychologists traditionally explain DeltaP in terms of causal 
prediction, but it is important to note that the direction of stronger 
prediction is not necessarily the direction of causality, and the 
fallacy of abductive reasoning is that the truth of A ! B does not in 
general have any bearing on the truth of B ! A.  
2.6 
Effect of Bias & Prev on Recall & Precision  
We now recast the Bookmaker Informedness and Markedness 
equations to show Recall and Precision as subject (13-14), in order 
to explore the effect of Bias and Prevalence on Recall and Precision, 
as well as clarify the relationship of Bookmaker and Markedness to 
these ubiquitous and iniquitous measures. 
Recall   
= Bookmaker (1−Prevalence) + Bias  
Bookmaker 
= (Recall-Bias) / (1−Prevalence) 
 
 (13) 
Precision  
= Markedness (1-Bias) + Prevalence  
Markedness  
= (Precision−Prev) / (1-Bias)  
 
(14) 

 
5 
 
Bookmaker and Markedness are unbiased estimators of above 
chance performance (relative to respectively the predicting 
conditions or the predicted markers). Equations (23-24) clearly show 
the nature of the bias introduced by both Label Bias and Class 
Prevalence.  If operating at chance level, both Bookmaker and 
Markedness will be zero, and Recall, Precision, and derivatives such 
as the F-measure, will merely reflect the biases.  Note that increasing 
Bias or decreasing Prevalence increases Recall  and decreases 
Precision, for a constant level of unbiased performance. We can 
more specifically see that the regression coefficient for the 
prediction of Recall from Prevalence is −Bookmaker and from Bias 
is +1, and similarly the regression coefficient for the prediction of 
Precision from Bias is −Markedness and from Prevalence is +1. 
Alternately, Informedness can be viewed (13) as a renormalization 
of Recall after subtracting off the chance level of Recall, Bias. 
Markedness (14) can be seen as a renormalization of Precision after 
subtracting off the chance level of Precision, Prevalence. Cohen’s 
Kappa measure [9,10] commonly used in assessor agreement 
evaluation was similarly defined as a renormalization of Accuracy 
after subtracting off the expected Accuracy as estimated by the dot 
product of the Biases and Prevalences.  All three renormalized 
measures are invariant in the sense that they are properties of the 
contingency tables that remain unchanged when we flip to the 
Inverse problem (interchange positive and negative for both 
conditions and predictions).  
Although Kappa does renormalize a debiased estimate of Accuracy, 
and is thus much more meaningful than Recall, Precision, Accuracy, 
and their biased derivatives, it is intrinsically non-linear, doesn't 
account for error well, and retains an influence of bias, so that there 
does not seem that there is any situation when Kappa would be 
preferable to Correlation as a standard independent measure of 
agreement [11,12,8]. Bookmaker Informedness, Markedness and 
Correlation, as their geometric mean, reflect the discriminant, dp, of 
relative contingency normalized according to different functions of 
the marginal Biases and Prevalences, and reflect probabilities 
relative to the corresponding marginal cases. However, Kappa scales 
in a way that reflects the actual error without taking into account 
expected error due to chance, and in effect it is really just scaling the 
actual mean error: Kappa is dp/[dp+mean(fp,fn)] which for small 
error approximates as 1-mean(fp,fn)/dp.  
The relatively good fit of Kappa to Correlation and Informedness is 
illustrated in Fig. 2, along with the poor fit of the Rank Weighted 
Average and the Geometric and Harmonic (F-factor) means. 
3 
CONCLUSIONS 
The system of relationships we have discovered is amazingly 
elegant and easy to teach as meaningful probabilities: Informedness 
is simply Recall + Inverse Recall - 1, whilst Markedness is simply 
Precision +Inverse Precision - 1. Correlation is their geometric 
mean. The non-linear Cohen Kappa is the next best alternative and 
approximates reasonably in the dichotomous case, especially when 
Bias tracks Prevalence and Informedness and Markedness collapse 
to Correlation as Recall and Precision collapse to Rand Accuracy.
