Topic Modeling on Health Journals with Regularized Variational
Inference
Robert Giaquinto
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN

Arindam Banerjee
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN

ABSTRACT
Topic modeling enables exploration and compact representation
of a corpus. The CaringBridge (CB) dataset is a massive collec-
tion of journals written by patients and caregivers during a health
crisis. Topic modeling on the CB dataset, however, is challenging
due to the asynchronous nature of multiple authors writing about
their health journeys. To overcome this challenge we introduce the
Dynamic Author-Persona topic model (DAP), a probabilistic graph-
ical model designed for temporal corpora with multiple authors.
The novelty of the DAP model lies in its representation of authors
by a persona — where personas capture the propensity to write
about certain topics over time. Further, we present a regularized
variational inference algorithm, which we use to encourage the
DAP model’s personas to be distinct. Our results show significant
improvements over competing topic models — particularly after
regularization, and highlight the DAP model’s unique ability to
capture common journeys shared by different authors.
KEYWORDS
machine learning, topic modeling, graphical model, regularized
variational inference, healthcare
Reference Format:
Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee. 2018. Topic Modeling on Health
Journals with Regularized Variational Inference. In Proceedings of Thirty-
Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18). AAAI, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 11 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
Topic models can compactly represent large collections of docu-
ments by the themes running through them. We introduce a topic
model designed for the unique challenges presented by the Caring-
Bridge (CB) dataset. The CB dataset includes journals written by
patients and caregivers during a health crisis. CB journals function
like a blog, and are shared to a private community of friends and
family. The full dataset includes 13.1 million journals written by
approximately half a million authors between 2006 and 2016. From
the CB dataset we’re interested in capturing health journeys, that
is, authors writing about the same topics over time.
The challenges in topic modeling on the CB dataset stem from
the asynchronous nature of author’s posts. Specifically, authors
start and stop journaling at different times — both in terms of
calendar dates and how far along they are in their health journey.
Additionally, authors post at irregular frequencies. While about
AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
2018. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use.
Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in Proceedings
of Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18).
15% of CB authors post nearly everyday, the majority of authors
typically post less frequently, often corresponding to a major update,
event, or anniversary of an event. What’s more, the length of these
posts can range from just a few words to thousands of words.
State-of-the-art topic models can identify topics [4], track how
topics change over time [3, 20–22], or associate authors with certain
topics [11, 12, 16, 18]. These models cannot, however, describe
common narratives and the author’s sharing them. We present the
Dynamic Author-Persona topic model (DAP), a novel approach
that represents authors by latent personas. Personas act as a soft-
clustering on authors based their propensity to write about similar
topics over time. Our approach is unique in multiple respects. First,
unlike other temporal topic models, the words making up a topic
don’t evolve over time — rather, DAP’s personas reflect the flow
of conversation from one topic to next. Second, we introduce a
regularized variational inference (RVI) algorithm, an approach we
use to encourage personas to be distinct from one another.
Our results show that the DAP model outperforms competing
topic models, producing better likelihoods on heldout data. Finally,
we demonstrate that using RVI further improves the DAP model’s
performance, and results in personas that are rich and compelling
descriptions of the health journeys experienced by CB authors.
The rest of the paper is as follows: in Section 2, a brief background
on temporal topic models is given. Section 3 presents the DAP model.
Section 4 details the model’s RVI algorithm. Section 5 introduces the
evaluation dataset and procedure. Section 6 shares the results of the
experiments. Finally, in Section 7 we summarize the contributions
of this paper.
2
BACKGROUND
Much of the research on topic modeling builds on the latent Dirich-
let allocation (LDA) model [4]. The LDA model doesn’t account for
meta-information like authorship or time. Nevertheless, interest in
LDA has endured, in part, due its ability to richly describe topics as
distributions over words and documents as mixtures of topics. In
the years since LDA’s introduction, others have extended the idea
to compliment corpora with a variety of structures and metadata.
Author information is common in many corpora. A few topic
models are designed to identify authors’ preferences for certain top-
ics, and the relationships between authors [11–13, 16, 18]. Corpora
with a temporal structure, such as scientific journals or newspaper
articles, are the focus of many of temporal topic models [3, 20–22].
Temporal Topic Models. Two topic models set the standard of
comparison for topic modeling on corpora with a temporal element:
the dynamic topic model (DTM) [3] and the topics over time model
TOT [21]. These two models represent very different approaches
to modeling time in a topic model.
arXiv:1801.04958v1  [cs.CL]  15 Jan 2018

AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee
The TOT model defines time as an observed variable, which
leads to a continuous treatment of time and the ability to predict
timestamps of documents. Alternatively, the DTM evolves topics
over time using a Markov process. In many corpora the evolution
of topics provides interesting insights. For example, Blei’s model of
the Science corpus shows words associated with a topic on physics
changing over a century.
Building directly on the DTM, in 2008 Wang et al. developed the
continuous time dynamic topic model (CDTM) which uses continu-
ous Brownian motion to model the evolution of topics over time
[20]. This is a major development in temporal topic models because,
unlike the DTM, it doesn’t require partitioning the data into dis-
crete time periods. Instead, the model assumes that at each time
step the variance in the topic proportions increases proportional to
the duration since the previous document. Similar to Wang et al.,
the Dynamic Mixture Model (DMM) is built for continuous streams
of text [22]. In the DMM, however, topics are fixed in time and the
model captures the evolution of document-level topic proportions
over time.
Topic Modeling of Health Journeys. In many topic modeling
applications to temporal corpora, the time component is ignored.
For example, Wen et al. model cancer event trajectories from users
of an online forum for breast cancer support [24]. Wen’s approach
uses LDA to extract cancer event keywords, which are then linked
together in time by temporal descriptions mined from the text.
This work demonstrates a quantitative approach to studying the
dynamics of social support network, and offer a powerful look at
the experiences of users in these support networks.
Numerous studies have shown that support networks, both
in person and online, are valuable tools for those suffering from
chronic conditions or life-threating illness and caregivers [1, 15, 23].
Additionally, online social networks can serve as a way to efficiently
disseminate information regarding someone’s status to their com-
munity. Understanding the health journeys of users in these social
support communities is valuable information for improving user ex-
perience. Topic models are uniquely suited to succinctly describing
and analyzing these health journeys.
3
THE DAP MODEL
The design of the DAP model was made with journaling behavior in
mind. Consider a CB author journaling about their surgery: initially
they may write about topics related to the surgical procedure, but
as time progresses the author is more likely to discuss recovery,
physical therapy, or returning to normal life. In other words, the
likelihood of a topic for some document depends where the doc-
ument’s author is in their health journey. As such, DAP assumes
that (1) a state space model controls the likelihood of a topic at each
time step, (2) each persona represents a different flow of topics over
time, and (3) each author has a distribution over personas.
The DAP’s approach for modeling topics in a document, and
words in a topic follows the correlated topic model (CTM) and
LDA, respectively [4, 10]. The idea of modeling latent personas was
originally proposed by [12], however in their Author-Persona Topic
model (APT) personas differ significantly from those proposed in
the DAP model. First, in the APT model each author may have a
different number of personas, whereas DAP models each author
as a distribution over a fixed number of personas — which acts
as a soft clustering on authors. Second, APT assigns a persona to
documents, which indirectly defines a topic distribution for each
cluster of documents, whereas we model documents as each having
their own distribution over topics. Lastly, while DAP’s personas also
correspond to a distribution over topics, DAP evolves these topic
distributions over time — thereby capturing the inherent temporal
structure resulting from an author writing multiple documents.
The DAP model directly addresses the challenges presented by
the CB dataset. First, the asynchronous nature of health journals
is handled by: (1) transforming each journal’s timestamp to the
time elapsed since the author’s first post, and (2) learning multiple
personas to account for a wide variety in topic trajectories. Second,
irregular posting behavior is managed by employing the Brown-
ian motion model, originally used in topic modeling by [20], to
model topic variance as proportional to the gap in time between
documents.
The generative process of the model is described below. The
model assumes that each document d in the corpus has a timestamp
st associated with it. Similar to the CDTM [20], timestamps are used
in a continuous Brownian motion model to capture an increase
in topic variance as time between observations increases. More
formally, if si and sj are timestamps at steps j > i > 0, then ∆sj,si is
the difference in time between sj and si. We use the shorthand ∆st
to denote the difference in time between timestamps st and st−1.
For brevity the variance σ∆st I is denoted Σt , where σ is a known
process noise in the state space model.
(1) Draw distribution over words βk ∼Dir(η) for each topic k.
(2) Draw distribution over personasκa ∼Dir(ω) for each author
a.
(3) For each persona p, draw initial distribution over topics:
α0,p ∼N(µ0, Σ0), ∀p ∈{1, . . . , P} .
(4) For each time step t, where t ∈{1, . . . ,T }:
• Draw distribution over topics:
αt,p ∼N(αt−1,p, Σt−1), ∀p ∈{1, . . . , P} .
• Update Σt according to Brownian motion model: Σt −
Σt−1 ∼N(0,σ∆st I).
• For each document d, where d ∈{1, . . . , Dt }:
(a) Choose persona indicator xt,d ∼Mult(κa) where a
corresponds to the author of document dt .
(b) Draw topic distribution θt,d ∼N(αtxt,d, Σt ) for docu-
ment dt .
(c) For each word wt,d,n, where n ∈{1, . . . , Ndt }:
i. Choose word topic indicator zn ∼Mult(π(θt,d)).
ii. Choose word wt,d,n from p(wt,d,n | βzn ), a multino-
mial probability conditioned on the topic indicator
zn.
Following the approach in the CTM and DTM, we use the func-
tion π(·) to map the Logistic Normal θt,d, parameterized by a mean
αt,k,p and covariance σ∆st I, to the multinomial’s natural parame-
ters via π(θt,d) =
exp(θt,d )
ÍD
d exp(θt,d ) in order to obey the constraint that
the parameters lie on the simplex.
The graphical model corresponding to this process is shown in
Figure 1. In LDA and its extensions the parameter α represents a

Topic Modeling on Health Journals with Regularized Variational Inference
AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the Dynamic Author-
Persona topic model (DAP). On top, topic distributions for
each persona evolve over time: αt |αt−1 ∼N(αt−1, Σ). The dis-
tribution over words for each topic, β ∼Dir(η), is fixed in
time. Each author a ∈{1, . . . ,A} is represented by a distribu-
tion over personas, that is κa ∼Dir(ω). The distribution over
topics for each document is dependent on the persona dis-
tribution xt,d for that document’s author, and the evolving
topic distribution αt .
prior probability of each topic. In the DAP model, αt,1:K,p takes on
an expanded role: it’s a distribution over K topics at time step t for
persona p. The choice of letting α evolve over time, as opposed to
β like in the DTM, is that in a collection of journals there is less
interest in changes to topics themselves. In other words, we model
the words associated with a topic as static in time, but the topics
an author writes about will change over time.
4
VARIATIONAL EM ALGORITHM
Given the model structure, next we derive an inference algorithm
used to estimate the model’s latent parameters. Much like LDA and
its extensions, the DAP model’s posterior:
p(κ, x,α, β,θ, z | w,ω,η) = p(κ, x,α, β,θ, z, w | ω,η)
p(w | µ0,σ0,η,ω)
,
is intractable due to the normalization term. In order learn optimal
values to the model’s parameters we use a form of variational in-
ference (VI), which approximates the difficult to compute posterior
distribution p with a simpler distribution q (see Blei et al., 2016
for a review). Variational inference casts an inference problem as
an optimization problem with the goal of finding parameters to
the variational distribution such that q = q(κ, x,α,θ, z, β) closely
approximates p = p(κ, x,α,θ, z, β | w). Our regularized variational
inference (RVI) algorithm seeks a distribution q ∈Q such that
q∗= arg min
q∈Q
KL(q || p) + ρr(q) ,
(1)
where KL(·) is KL-Divergence. The added term r(q) is a regular-
ization function we’ve introduced to discourage similar personas
(further detail given in Section 4.2), and ρ the corresponding hy-
perparameter.
To makeq easy to compute, we apply mean field variational infer-
ence which assumes that the parameters are posteriori independent.
Under the mean field assumption the variational distribution fac-
torizes as:
K
Ö
k=1
q(βk | λk)
A
Ö
a=1
q(κa | δa)
P
Ö
p=1
q(α1:T,k,p | ˆα1:T,k,p)×
T
Ö
t=1
Dt
Ö
d=1
q(xt,d,p | τt,d,p)q(θt,d | γt,d)
Ndt
Ö
n=1
q(zn | ϕn)
(2)
where we have introduced the following variational parameters:
the persona for each author κa is endowed with a free Dirich-
let parameter δa; each assignment of a persona to an author xt,d
is endowed with a free Multinomial parameter τt,d; in the varia-
tional distribution of α1:T,k,p the sequential structure is kept intact
with variational observations ˆα1:T,k,p; each document-topic pro-
portion vector θt,d is endowed with a free γd. The variance for the
document-topic parameters are vt,d and ˆvt,d, for the model and
variational parameter, respectively; each word-topic indicator is
endowed with a free multinomial parameter ϕt,d,n.
An optimal q cannot be computed directly, but following Jordan
et al. (1999) an optimization of the variational parameters proceeds
by maximizing a bound on the log-likelihood of the data. In the DAP
model, data is observed in words w for each document d at time
step t, hence we re-write the log-likelihood of the data logp(wt,d)
by:
logp(wt,d) = log
⨌Õ
z
Õ
x
p ∂θt,d, ∂αt, ∂β, ∂κ
= log
⨌Õ
z
Õ
x
pq
q
≥
⨌Õ
z
Õ
x
q logp −
⨌Õ
z
Õ
x
q logq
= Eq[logp] −Eq[logq]
(3)
The inequality in (3) follows from Jensen’s inequality. More-
over, it can be shown that the difference between logp(wt,d) and
Eq[logp] −Eq[logq] is KL(q || p). Hence maximizing the bound
in (3) is equivalent to minimizing the KL divergence between the
variational and true posteriors. We denote the Evidence Lower
BOund (ELBO) by L(δa,τt,d,γt,d,ϕn, λk) = Eq[logp] −Eq[logq].
Since our objective defined in (1) includes a regularization term, we
therefore maximize a surrogate likelihood consisting of the ELBO
minus the regularization term (see Wainwright and Jordan, 2007 for
a review of penalized surrogate likelihoods). Hence our objective
function Lρ for some regularization ρ is defined as:
Lρ(δa,τt,d,γt,d,ϕn, λk) ≜Eq[logp] −Eq[logq] −ρr(q) ,
(4)
where Eq[logp] expands for each term in the model, that is:

AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee
Eq[logp] =
K
Õ
k=1
V
Õ
v=1
Eq[logp(βk,v | η)]+
A
Õ
a=1
P
Õ
p=1
Eq[logp(κa,p | ω)]+
T
Õ
t=1
" P
Õ
p=1
K
Õ
k=1
Eq[logp(αt,k,p | αt−1,k,p)]+
Dt
Õ
d=1

Eq[logp(xt,d | κa)]+
Eq[logp(θt,d | αt xt,d, Σt )]+
Ndt
Õ
n=1
h
Eq[logp(zn | π(θt,d))]+
Eq[logp(wt,d,n | zn, β)]
i#
(5)
And, similarly −Eq[logq] is the entropy term associated with
each of the parameters. Some terms in (5) are simple, and well-
known from foundational topic models like LDA and CTM [4, 10].
For example, the topic distributions over words Eq[logp(βk,v | η)]
term is found in LDA, and in the DAP model the distributions
over personas for each author Eq[logp(κa,p | ω)] follows a sim-
ilar structure. Similarly, the non-conjugate pairs for word-topic
assignment Eq[logp(zn | π(θt,d))] has been studied in the CTM.
For completeness, we show the expansion of the more unique terms
Eq[logp(θt,d | αt xt,d, Σt )] and Eq[logp(αt,p | αt−1,p)] in the Ap-
pendix.
Expanding the objective function Lρ according to the distribu-
tion associated with each parameter allows updates to be derived for
each parameter. The parameters are optimized using a variational
expectation-maximization algorithm, the details of the algorithm
are given below.
4.1
Variational E-Step
During the E-step the model estimates variational parameters for
each document and saves the sufficient statistics required to com-
pute global parameters. The structure of the DAP model, while
unique, has some components that mimic previous topic models.
Specifically, the word-topic assignment parameter ϕ has the same
update found in the CTM due to the Logistic-Normal γ parameter.
Hence ϕ has a closed form update: ϕn,k ∝exp(γk)βk,v [10].
Each author’s persona is parameterized by a τ. To find an update
for τ we select ELBO terms featuring τ, and then take the derivative
with respect to each document and persona. The terms in the ELBO
containing τ are:
L[τ ] =
T
Õ
t=1
Dt
Õ
d=1
P
Õ
p=1
τt,d,p

Ψ(δa,p) −Ψ(
P
Õ
i=1
δa,i)

+
−1
2

(γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)⊤Σ−1
t (γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)+
Tr(Σ−1
t
diag(τt,d,p( ˆα2
t,p,k + ˆΣt,k,k)))

+
−τt,d,p logτt,d,p+
λt,d(
P
Õ
i=1
τt,d,i −1),
where the last term is the Lagrange constraint to ensure each vector
τt,d must sum to one. Takings the derivative with respect to one
specific document and persona we find that:
∂L
∂τt,d,p
= Ψ(δa,p) −Ψ(
P
Õ
i=1
δa,i) −logτa,p −1 + λ+
ˆαt,pΣ−1
t (γt,d −ˆαt,pτt,d,p) −1
2 Tr(Σ−1
t
diag( ˆα2
t,p + ˆΣt ))
A closed form solution for τt,d doesn’t exist. We therefore esti-
mate τt,d using exponential gradient descent.
Since the model includes non-conjugate terms (much like DTM,
CDTM, and CTM), an additional variational parameter ζ is intro-
duced to preserve the lower-bound during the expansion of the
term containing a non-conjugate pair: Eq[logp(zn | π(θt,d))]. Tak-
ing the derivative of all terms containing ζ and setting it to zero
yields an analogous closed form update to the one found in the
CTM: ˆζt = ÍK
k=1 exp(γt,d,k + ˆv2
t,k/2)
Finally, the DAP model estimates a topic distribution for each
document via the γt,d parameter. To update γt,d the terms in the
ELBO featuring γt,d are selected:
L(γt,d) =
T
Õ
t=1
Dt
Õ
d=1
−1
2(γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)⊤Σ−1
t (γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)+
Ndt
Õ
n=1
γt,dϕn −ζ −1(
K
Õ
k=1
exp(γt,d,k + ˆv2
t /2))
Taking a derivative of these terms with respect to γt,d,k yields:
∂L
∂γt,d,k
= −Σ−1
t (γt,d,k −ˆαt,1:P,kτt,d,k)+
Ndt
Õ
n=1
ϕn,k −
Ndt
ζ
exp(γt,d,k + ˆv2
t,k/2))
(6)
Since a closed form solution isn’t available, a conjugate gradient
algorithm is run using the gradient in (6).
Whereas γt,d represents the mean of the Logistic-Normal for a
document’s topic distribution, the parameter ˆvt,d is the variance.
The ELBO terms featuring ˆvt,d are:

Topic Modeling on Health Journals with Regularized Variational Inference
AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
L( ˆvt ) = Tr(Σ−1
t
ˆv)
K
Õ
k=1
1
2(log ˆv2
k + log 2π)−
Ndt ζ −1
K
Õ
k=1
exp(γt,d,k + ˆv2
t,k/2)
Therefore, setting the derivative of L( ˆvt,d) with respect to ˆvt,d
to zero and solving yields:
∂L
∂v2
t,d,k
= Σ−1
t,k,k +
1
2 ˆv2
t,d,k
−
Ndt
2ζ exp(γt,d,k + ˆv2
t,k/2),
which requires Newton’s method for each coordinate, constrained
such that ˆvt,k > 0, ∀k.
The parameter ˆαt represents the noisy estimate of αt . After
calculating ˆαt , the forward and backward equations will be applied
in the M-step to give a final posterior estimate αt . The terms in
the ELBO containing ˆαt are found by expanding Eq[logp(αt,p) |
αt−1,p)] for (7a) and Eq[logp(θt,d | αt xt,d, Σt )] for (7b) and (7c):
L( ˆα) =
T
Õ
t=1
P
Õ
p=1
−1
2( ˆαt,p −ˆαt−1,p)⊤Σ−1
t ( ˆαt,p −ˆαt−1,p)+
(7a)
T
Õ
t=1
Dt
Õ
d=1
−1
2

(γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)⊤Σ−1
t (γt,d −ˆαtτt,d)+
(7b)
T
Õ
t=1
Dt
Õ
d=1
P
Õ
p=1
Tr
h
Σ−1
t
diag

τt,d,p( ˆαt,p ˆα⊤
t,p + ˆΣt )
i
(7c)
Taking the derivative with respect to the mean term for each
persona gives the closed form update:
ˆαt,p =
ˆαt−1,p + ÍDt
d=1(γt,d −1)τt,d,p
1 + ÍDt
d=1 τ 2
t,d,p
(8)
We solve for ˆαt,p sequentially over time steps. For the initial
time step t = 1, we use the prior µ0 in place of ˆαt−1,p. Note that the
summations in (8) are collected during the E-step and ˆαt,p need only
be computed once after performing inference on all documents.
4.2
Regularized Variation Inference
Our RVI algorithm nudges αt to find topic distributions that are
different for each persona. A natural choice for capturing this idea is
an inner product between each of the personas (excluding a persona
with itself). Hence, we define the regularization function by:
ρr(q) =
P
Õ
p=1
Õ
1≤q ≤P,q,p
Dt
2 ρ ˆα⊤
t,pΣ−1
t
ˆαt,q ,
(9)
The parameter Σ−1
t
in included in the regularization for two
reasons. First, it simplifies the update to ˆαt,p. In (7) the term Σ−1
appears in every term, which allows it to be factored out and can-
celed. By including Σ−1 in the regularization the same cancellation
can occur. Second, since Σ−1
t
∝I then its inclusion has the effect of
encouraging personas to be orthogonal to one another. We include
the number of documents Dt at time t in r(q) so that the regular-
ization is applied evenly, regardless of dataset size or a skewed
distribution of documents over time. After including the regular-
ization term in (9) with the ELBO terms in (7), the regularized ˆαt,p
update is:
(1 +
Dt
Õ
d=1
τ 2
d,p) ˆαt,p + ρDt
Õ
q,p
ˆαt,q = ˆαt−1,p +
Dt
Õ
d=1
(γd −1)τd,p (10)
Since the vector ÍDt
d=1(γd −1)τd,p (of length K) is computed
during the E-step, then the RHS is known. Similarly, the term
(1 + ÍDt
d=1 τ 2
d,p) is known, and in combination with ρDt form the
weights over the unknown vector ˆαt,p, also of length K. Therefore,
(10) can be solved as a system of linear equations. Through exper-
iments we’ve found an optimal value of ρ ∈[0, 0.5]. The model
exhibits sensitivity to the hyperparameter ρ, if ρ is large (e.g. > 1.0)
then model quality drops due to personas overfitting to a single
topic. Since ˆα is only used to estimate the global parameter α during
the M-step, computing ˆα isn’t necessary for inference on holdout
datasets.
4.3
M-Step
In the M-step the global parameters α, κ, and β are updated such
that the lower bound of the log likelihood of the data is maximized.
Note, the update for β is exactly the same as derived for the LDA
model, and hence omitted.
The parameter δ represents the distribution over personas for
each author. The closed form update for δa,p is:
δa,p ∝ωp +
T
Õ
t=1
Dt
Õ
d=1
τt,d,p
shows that δ’s closed form update is an average of the persona
assignments, smoothed by the author-persona prior ω.
Once the variational observations ˆαt,p are computed, our ap-
proach follows the variational Kalman filtering method from Wang’s
Continuous Time Dynamic Topic Model, see Appendix for further
details. Specifically, we employ the Brownian motion to model time
dynamics. However, because the DAP model’s time-varying param-
eter is a distribution over latent topics, it performs best on data
discretized in time (resulting in a smallerT). The forward equations
mimic a Kalman filter:
mt,p =
ˆαt,pPt,p + mt−1,p ˆwt
Pt,p + ˆwt
Vt,p = ˆwt
Pt,p
Pt,p + ˆwt
where ˆwt is the known process noise, and Pt,p = Vt−1,p + σ∆st
captures the increase in variance as time between data points grows.
Finally, the backward equations:

AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee
αt−1,p = mt−1,p
σ∆st
Pt,p
+ αt,p
Vt−1,p
Pt,p
Σt−1,p = Vt−1,p + (Vt−1,p)2
(Pt,p)2 (Σt,p −Pt,p) ,
give the updates to the remaining global parameters.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
CaringBridge Dataset
The creation of our model is inspired by a desire to discover topics
on a unique dataset consisting of 14 million journals posted by
half a million authors on the social networking site CaringBridge
(CB). Established in 1997, CaringBridge is a 501(c)(3) non-profit
organization focused on connecting people and reducing the feel-
ings of isolation that are often associated with a patient’s health
journey. Due to their content, CB data has been anonymized prior
to analysis.
From the CB dataset we draw an evaluation dataset consisting of
journals written by authors who posted, on average, at least twice
a month over a one year period. Journal posts are only kept if they
contain 10 or more words. These constraints help identify a set of
active users. From the 123K authors meeting these criteria, 2,000
were randomly selected. Journals written by these 2,000 authors
total 114,532. Overall, authors in this dataset journal an average of
57 times, with a mean of 5 days between journal posts.
The journal texts were pre-processed in a standard way: any
HTML and non-ascii (including emojis) were removed; hyphenated
words and contractions were split; excess whitespace was ignored;
texts were tokenized and common stopwords along with words
appearing in over 90% of documents were removed; all punctuation
was stripped; and, words were reduced to their lemmas. Finally,
the texts were transformed to a bag of words format, keeping the
5,000 most used words as a vocabulary set. Because the dataset
includes journals written between 2006 and 2016 the timestamps
are transformed into a relative value and discretized, reflecting the
number of weeks since an authors first journal.
5.2
Evaluation
Journals are split into training and test sets with 90% of each au-
thor’s journals (N = 103, 018) for training and 10% (N = 11, 728)
for testing. Further, variance in model performance is estimated by
repeating this splitting procedure for 10-fold cross validation.
The performance of our model is compared to three other models
representing the state-of-the-art in this area. The first model for
comparison is LDA, which ignores authorship and temporal struc-
ture in the data. In order to evaluate LDA’s performance over time,
we train LDA on time steps up through t −1 and testing on time
step t (similar to the evaluation method in Wang and McCallum,
2006). The DTM also serves as an important baseline for compar-
ison because it models the evolution of topics over discrete time
steps. Lastly, we compare out model to CDTM, which builds on
DTM and introduces a continuous treatment of time. Following the
approach of others, we simply fix the number of topics at 25 for
all models. The number of personas learned by the DAP model is
fixed at 15.
Model
Per-word Log-Likelihood
Std. Dev.
DAP (ρ=0.0)
-7.22
0.04
DAP (ρ=0.2)
-6.47
0.04
LDA
-9.23
0.02
DTM
-9.65
0.03
CDTM
-8.82
0.03
Table 1: Overall comparison of models. Per-word log-
likelihoods for documents in the test dataset are computed.
Standard deviation in performance computed over the cross-
validation sets. While the basic DAP model without regular-
ization performs significantly better than competing model,
the RVI approach further increases log-likelihoods.
To evaluate the models we compute the per-word log-likelihood
(PW LL) on heldout data, which measures how well the model fits
the data and is computed by PW LL =
ÍD
d=1 logp(wd )
ÍD
d=1 Nd
. Note that
perplexity, another common metric used to compare topic models,
is related to PW LL via perplexity = exp(−PW LL). It has been
shown that perplexity (and hence PW LLs) don’t correlate with a
model finding coherent topics [5]. Nevertheless, PW LLs provide a
fair way to compare how well each model optimizes their objective
functions.
6
RESULTS
In addition evaluating model fit, we perform a qualitative analysis
of the DAP model to highlight the quality and usefulness of the
personas discovered. In particular, we establish that the personas
are unique from one-another and capture meaningful experiences
shared by authors.
6.1
Model Comparison
In Table 1 we list the per-word log-likelihood and standard devia-
tion between cross-validation sets for each of the competing models.
There is a significant improvement in the DAP model’s performance
after regularization. Further analysis of the likelihood computation
reveals that the regularization term contributes a relatively small
drop in likelihood compared to the total likelihood during train-
ing. Nevertheless, these results show that even a small amount of
regularization can nudge the model to seek out quality results. In
testing additional ρ values we found that, in general, ρ ∈[0.1, 0.3]
faired comparably. Larger values of ρ can cause model instability
and the document likelihoods to have long-tailed distributions. The
emergence of outlier document-likelihoods is unsurprising, regu-
larization encourages the personas to focus on different topics —
hence, large values of ρ inevitably result in personas that overfit.
Figure 2 shows mean per-word log-likelihoods at each time step.
The best performing DAP model shows consistently better results
over competing models. However, the unregularized DAP model
has a significant drop in performance in the first time step.
6.2
Persona Quality
To evaluate the quality of personas, we focus on three key elements:
authors are described by one clear persona; personas are distinct

Topic Modeling on Health Journals with Regularized Variational Inference
AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Community Support
Physical Therapy
Reflect on Life
Hopeful Prayer
Family Fun
Infection
Weather
School
family
therapy
life
god
christmas
blood
nice
school
friend
rehab
know
pray
play
infection
weather
shot
church
therapist
child
prayer
birthday
fluid
walk
go
thank
physical
never
lord
game
fever
lunch
appt
card
pt
love
bless
fun
antibiotic
cold
class
love
chair
year
please
kid
pressure
snow
tomorrow
service
speech
live
heal
party
kidney
outside
grandma
friends
progress
people
trust
year
iv
breakfast
teacher
support
move
cancer
peace
enjoy
lung
rain
home
gift
arm
moment
continue
dinner
clot
go
aunt
Cancer (clinical)
Cancer (general)
Intensive Care
Well Wishes
Hair Loss
Surgery
Bedtime
Weight
chemo
cancer
tube
dad
hair
surgery
sleep
weight
blood
treatment
breathe
mom
leg
surgeon
night
mommy
count
radiation
oxygen
everyone
wear
heart
bed
gain
bone
scan
lung
message
head
dr
wake
feed
marrow
chemo
feed
guestbook
look
office
nurse
daddy
platelet
tumor
x_ray
please
cut
op
say
bottle
round
oncologist
chest
prayer
knee
procedure
asleep
pound
clinic
dr
nurse
read
hat
cardiologist
_time_
feeding
transfusion
ct
vent
visit
wig
valve
room
oz
_url_
result
stomach
update
shave
ha
tell
milk
Table 2: Top 10 words associated with the most prevalent topics found by the DAP model (ρ = 0.2). Topic labels are selected
manually in order to aid reference with Figure 3. The words _time_ and _URL_ refer to the result of text pre-processing steps
for capturing common patterns like the time of day and website URLs, respectively.
Figure 2: In general the DAP model performs better than
competing models over time steps. The regularized DAP
model further improves performance and reduces variable
results found in the first time step of the unregularized
model. Error bars show one standard deviation in document-
level PWLL.
from one another, as shown in the combination of topics most
associated with that persona; and personas capture a coherent
health journey experienced by authors.
1:1 Author-Persona Mappings. Authors are modeled as a dis-
tribution over personas; however, to create interpretable results
we want these distributions to focus on a single persona. The DAP
model achieves this in the majority of cases: 71% of authors are con-
centrated on a single persona (> 90% probability for that persona),
and 27% of authors are evenly split between two personas. This
shows that, in general, the model finds personas that generalize
well enough to describe the majority of authors.
Distinct Personas. The DAP model includes a regularization
term specifically for encouraging personas with unique combina-
tions of topics. We examined the top three topics associated with
each persona. In the unregularized model, the 15 personas are only
a mix of 6 different topics. In fact, a topic on "Weather" appears as
a common topic for all 15 personas. On the other hand, the regular-
ized DAP model’s personas are a mix of 18 different topics. Further,
the most frequently appearing topic is "Cancer (general)" (in 6 of
15 personas), which is appropriate given that approximately half of
authors report cancer as a health condition.
Personas Reflect Coherent Health Journeys. In Figure 3 we
show the top three topics evolving over time for selected personas.
The labels listed for each topic are created manually based on words
and journals most associated with the topic. Words most associated
with each topic are listed in Tables 2. The persona plots in Figure 3
paint a compelling picture of common health journeys experienced
by CB users.
Personas reflect broad trends, often encompassing a range of
health journeys. Consider Persona 9, which reflects health journeys
beginning with a physical element, such as physical therapy or
a health issue taking a physical toll, followed by intensive care
and attention to weight. Many Persona 9 authors begin physical
therapy following an accident, or are caring for a premature baby

AAAI-18, February 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee
Figure 3: The unregularized DAP model finds compelling, unique personas corresponding to common health journeys experi-
enced by CaringBridge users. The three most likely topics for personas are plotted over time. Results shown for six personas
that highlight diversity in topic focus. Personas 0, 6, 8, and 14 highlight nuances in how an author writes about a topic like
cancer. Personas 0 and 14 engage with their community, and are less clinical when writing about cancer. Persona 14’s journals,
however, are more religious and often include prayer. On the other hand, when discussing health, Personas 6 and 8 write about
cancer using clinical terminology. When persona 6 is not sharing health updates the conversation is often on school, family,
and celebrations. Whereas, persona 8’s non-health updates are deep, reflective, and prayerful.
or child with a congenital disorder. However, there are a number
of rare disorders that follow Persona 9’s pattern. For instance, one
Persona 9 author writes about a family member with Guillain-Barré
syndrome, a rare rapid-onset disorder in which the immune system
attacks the nervous system resulting in muscle pain, weakness,
and even paralysis. The syndrome often requires admittance to an
intensive care unit, followed by rehabilitation – all common themes
of Persona 9.
7
CONCLUSION
The Dynamic Author-Persona topic model is uniquely suited to
modeling text data with a temporal structure and written by multi-
ple authors. Unlike previous temporal topic models, DAP discovers
latent personas — a novel component that identifies authors with
similar topics trajectories. Our RVI algorithm further improves the
DAP model’s performance over competing models and results in
the discovery of distinct personas. In evaluating the DAP model,
we introduce the CaringBridge dataset: a massive collection of jour-
nals written by patients and caregivers, many of who face serious,
life-threatening illnesses. From this dataset the DAP model extracts
compelling descriptions of health journeys.
Many opportunities exist for further research. Currently, we deal
with non-conjugate terms using the approach established in the
CTM. Recent advances in non-conjugate inference [7–9, 14, 17]
may lead to a more efficient approach to dealing with these difficult
terms.
