Customizable Contraction Hierarchies∗
Julian Dibbelt, Ben Strasser and Dorothea Wagner
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
August 24, 2015
Abstract
We consider the problem of quickly computing shortest paths in weighted graphs. Often, this
is achieved in two phases: 1) derive auxiliary data in an expensive preprocessing phase, 2) use this
auxiliary data to speedup the query phase. By adding a fast weight-customization phase, we extend
Contraction Hierarchies to support a three-phase workﬂow: The expensive preprocessing is split
into a phase exploiting solely the unweighted topology of the graph, as well as a lightweight phase
that adapts the auxiliary data to a speciﬁc weight. We achieve this by basing our Customizable
Contraction Hierarchies on nested dissection orders. We provide an in-depth experimental analysis
on large road and game maps that shows that Customizable Contraction Hierarchies are a very
practicable solution in scenarios where edge weights often change.
1
Introduction
Computing optimal routes in road networks has many applications such as navigation, logistics, traﬃc
simulation or web-based route planning. Road networks are commonly formalized as weighted graphs
and the optimal route is formalized as the shortest path in this graph. Unfortunately, road graphs tend
to be huge in practice with vertex counts in the tens of millions, rendering Dijkstra’s algorithm [18]
impracticable for interactive use: It incurs running times in the order of seconds even for a single
path query. For practical performance on large road networks, preprocessing techniques that augment
the network with auxiliary data in a (possibly expensive) oﬄine phase have proven useful. See [4] for
an overview. Many techniques work by adding extra edges called shortcuts to the graph that allow
query algorithms to bypass large regions of the graph eﬃciently. While variants of the optimal shortcut
selection problem have been proven to be NP-hard [7], determining good shortcuts is feasible in practice
even on large road graphs. Among the most successful speedup techniques using this building block are
Contraction Hierarchies (CH) by [20, 21]. At its core the technique consists of a systematic way of adding
shortcuts by iteratively contracting vertices along a given order. Even though ordering heuristics exist
that work well in practice [21], the problem of computing an optimal ordering is NP-hard in general [5].
Worst-case bounds have been proven in [1] in terms of a weight-dependent graph measure called highway
dimension and [30] have shown that many of these bounds are tight on many graph classes.
A central restriction of CHs as proposed by [21] is that their preprocessing is metric-dependent, that
is edge weights, also called metric, need to be known. Substantial changes to the metric, e. g., due to user
preferences or traﬃc congestion, may require expensive recomputation. For this reason, a Customizable
Route Planning (CRP) approach was proposed in [12], extending the multi-level-overlay MLD techniques
of [36, 26]. It works in three phases: In a ﬁrst, expensive phase, auxiliary data is computed that solely
exploits the topological structure of the network, disregarding its metric. In a second, much less expensive
phase, this auxiliary data is customized to a speciﬁc metric, enabling fast queries in the third phase. In
this work we extend CH to support such a three-phase approach.
Game Scenario
Most existing CH papers focus solely on road graphs, with [37] being a notable
exception, but there are many other applications with diﬀerently structured graphs in which fast shortest
path computations are important. One of such applications is games. Think of a real-time strategy game
where units quickly have to navigate across a large map with many choke points. The basic topology of
the map is ﬁxed, however, when buildings are constructed or destroyed, ﬁelds are rendered impassable or
freed up. Furthermore, every player has his own knowledge of the map. Many games include a feature
∗Partial support by DFG grant WA654/16-2 and EU grant 288094 (eCOMPASS) and Google Focused Research Award.
1
arXiv:1402.0402v5  [cs.DS]  21 Aug 2015

called fog of war: Initially only the ﬁelds around the player’s starting location are revealed. As his units
explore the map, new ﬁelds are revealed. Since a unit must not route around a building that the player
has not yet seen, every player needs his own metric. Furthermore, units such as hovercrafts may traverse
water and land, while other units are bound to land. This results in vastly diﬀerent, evolving metrics
for diﬀerent unit types per player, making metric-dependent preprocessing diﬃcult to apply. Contrary
to road graphs one-way streets tend to be extremely rare, and thus being able to exploit the symmetry
of the underlying graph is a useful feature.
Metric-Independent Orders for CHs
One of the central building blocks of this paper is the use
of metric-independent nested dissection orders (ND-orders) [22] for CH precomputation instead of the
metric-dependent order of [21]. This approach was proposed by [6], and a preliminary case study can
be found in [42]. A similar idea was followed by [16], where the authors employ partial CHs to engineer
subroutines of their customization phase. They also refer to preliminary experiments on full CH but did
not publish results. Similar ideas have also appeared in [31]: They consider graphs of low treewidth (see
below) and leverage this property to compute CH-like structures, without explicitly using the term CH.
Related techniques by [40, 11] work directly on the tree decomposition. Interestingly, our experiments
show that even large road networks have relatively low treewidth: Real-world road networks with vertex
counts in the 107 have treewidth in the 102.
Tree-Decompositions, Sparse Matrices and Minimum Fill-In
Customizable speedup techniques
for shortest path queries are a very recent development but the idea to order vertices along nested
dissection orders is signiﬁcantly older. To the best of our knowledge the idea ﬁrst appeared in 1973
in [22] and was reﬁned in [29]. They use nested dissection orders to reorder the columns and rows of
sparse matrices to assure that Gaussian elimination preserves as many zeros as possible. From the matrix
they derive a graph and show that vertex contraction in this graph corresponds to Gaussian variable
elimination. Inserting an extra edge in the graph destroys a zero in the matrix. The additional edges are
called the ﬁll-in. The minimum ﬁll-in problem asks for a vertex order that results in a minimum number
of extra arcs. In CH terminology these extra edges are called shortcuts. The super graph constructed by
adding the additional edges is a chordal graph. The treewidth of a graph G can be deﬁned using chordal
super graphs: For every super graph consider the number of vertices in the maximum clique minus one.
The treewidth of a graph G is the minimum of this number over all chordal super graphs of G. This
establishes a relation between sparse matrices and treewidth and in consequence with CHs. We refer
to [9] and [8] for an introduction to the broad ﬁeld of treewidth and tree decompositions.
1
2
3
4
5
(a) No
shortcuts,
maximum
search space is four arcs
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Two shortcuts, maximum
search space is two arcs
Figure 1: Contraction Hier-
archies for a path graph.
Minimizing the number of extra edges, i. e., minimizing the ﬁll-in,
is NP-hard [41] but ﬁxed parameter tractable in the number of extra
edges [27]. Note, however, that from the CH point of view, optimizing
the number of extra edges, i. e., the number of shortcuts, is not the sole
optimization criterion. Consider for example a path graph as depicted in
Figure 1: Optimizing the CH search space and the number of shortcuts
are competing criteria. A tree relevant in the theory of treewidth is the
elimination tree. [6] have shown that the maximum search space size in
terms of vertices corresponds to the height of this elimination tree. Unfor-
tunately, minimizing the elimination tree height is also NP-hard [32]. For
planar graphs, it has been shown that the number of additional edges is
in O(n log n) [24]. However, this does not imply a O(log n) search space
bound in terms of vertices as search spaces can share vertices.
Directed and Undirected Graphs
Real-world road networks contain
one-way streets and highways. Such networks are thus usually modeled
as directed graphs.
Our algorithms fully support direction of traﬃc—
however, we introduce it at a diﬀerent stage of the toolchain than most
related techniques, which should not be confused with only supporting
undirected networks. Our ﬁrst preprocessing phase works exclusively on
the underlying undirected and unweighted graph, obtained by dropping all edge directions and edge
weights. Direction of traﬃc as well as traversal weights are only introduced in the second (customization)
phase, where every edge can have two weights: an upward and a downward weight. If an edge corresponds
to an one-way street, then one of these weights is set to ∞. Note that this setup is a strength of our
algorithm: Throughout large parts of the toolchain we are not confronted with additional complexity
2

induced by directed edges. This contrasts with many other techniques, where considering edge direction
induces changes in nearly every step of the algorithm.
Our Contribution
The main contribution of our work is to show that Customizable Contraction Hi-
erarchies (CCH) solely based on the ND-principle are feasible and practical. Compared to CRP [12] we
achieve a similar preprocessing–query tradeoﬀ, albeit with slightly better query performance at slightly
slower customization speed and we need somewhat more space. Interestingly, for less well-behaved met-
rics such as travel distance, we achieve query times below the original metric-dependent CH of [21].
Besides this main result, we show that given a ﬁxed contraction order, a metric-independent CH can
be constructed in time essentially linear in the size of the Contraction Hierarchy with working memory
consumption linear in the input graph. Our specialized algorithm has better theoretic worst-case running
time and performs signiﬁcantly better empirically than the dynamic adjacency arrays used in [21]. An-
other contribution of our work are perfect witness searches. We show that for a ﬁxed metric-independent
vertex order it is possible to construct CHs with a provably minimum number of arcs in a few seconds
on continental road graphs. Our construction algorithm has a running time performance completely
independent of the weights used. We further show that an order based on nested dissection gives a
constant factor approximation of the maximum and average search space sizes in terms of the number
of arcs and vertices for metric-independent CHs on a class of graphs with very regular recursive vertex
separators. Experimentally, we show that road graphs have such a recursive separator structure.
Outline
Section 2 sets necessary notation. Section 3 discusses metric-dependent orders as used by [21],
highlighting speciﬁcs of our implementation. Next, we discuss metric-independent orders in Section 4.
In Section 5, we describe how to eﬃciently construct the arcs of the CH. The next Section 6 discusses
how to eﬃciently enumerate triangles in the CH — an operation needed throughout the customization
process detailed in Section 7. In Section 7 we further describe the details of the perfect witness search.
Finally, Section 8 concludes the algorithm description by introducing the algorithms used in the query
phase to compute shortest path distances and compute the corresponding paths in the input graph. We
then present an extensive experimental study that thoroughly evaluates the proposed algorithm. We
ﬁnish with the conclusion, and with directions for future work.
2
Basics
We denote by G = (V, E) an undirected n-vertex graph where V is the set of vertices and E the set of
edges. Furthermore, G = (V, A) denotes a directed graph, where A is the set of arcs. A graph is simple if
it has no loops or multi-edges. Graphs in this paper are simple unless noted otherwise, e. g., in parts of
Section 5. Furthermore, we assume that input graphs are strongly connected. We denote by N(v) the
neighborhood of vertex v ∈G, i. e., the set of vertices adjacent to v; for directed graphs the neighborhood
ignores arc direction. A vertex separator is a vertex subset S ⊆V whose removal separates G into two
disconnected subgraphs induced by the vertex sets A and B. The sets S, A and B are disjoint and their
union forms V . Note that the subgraphs induced by A and B are not necessarily connected and may be
empty. A separator S is balanced if |A| , |B| ≤2n/3.
A vertex order π : {1 . . . n} →V is a bijection. Its inverse π−1 assigns each vertex a rank. Every
undirected graph can be transformed into a upward directed graph with respect to a vertex order π, i. e.,
every edge {π(i), π(j)} with i < j is replaced by an arc (π(i), π(j)). Note that all upward directed graphs
are acyclic. We denote by Nu(v) the upward neighborhood of v, i. e., the neighbors of v with a higher
rank than v, and by Nd(v) the downward neighborhood of v, i. e., the vertices with a lower rank than
v. We denote by du(v) = |Nu(v)| the upward degree and by dd(v) = |Nd(v)| the downward degree of a
vertex.
Undirected edge weights are denoted using w : E →R>0. With respect to a vertex order π we deﬁne
an upward weight wu : E →R>0 and a downward weight wd : E →R>0. For directed graphs, one-way
streets are modeled by setting wu or wd to ∞.
A path P is a sequence of adjacent vertices and incident edges. Its hop-length is the number of edges
in P. Its weight-length with respect to w is the sum over all edges’ weights. Unless noted otherwise,
length always refers to weight-length in this paper. A shortest st-path is a path of minimum length
between vertices s and t. The minimum length in G between two vertices is denoted by distG(s, t). We
set distG(s, t) = ∞if no path exists. An up-down path P with respect to π is a path that can be split
into an upward path Pu and a downward path Pd. The vertices in the upward path Pu must occur by
3

increasing rank π−1 and the vertices in the downward path Pd must occur by decreasing rank π−1. The
upward and downward paths meet at the vertex with the maximum rank on the path. We refer to this
vertex as the meeting vertex.
The vertices of every acyclic directed graph (DAG) can be partitioned into levels ℓ: V →N such
that for every arc (x, y) it holds that ℓ(x) < ℓ(y). We only consider levels such that each vertex has
the lowest possible level. Note that such levels can be computed in linear time given a directed acyclic
graph.
The unweighted vertex contraction of v in G consists of removing v and all incident edges and inserting
edges between all neighbors N(v) if not already present. The inserted edges are referred to as shortcuts
and the other edges are original edges. Given an order π the core graph Gπ,i is obtained by contracting
all vertices π(1) . . . π(i −1) in order of their rank. We call the original graph G augmented by the set
of shortcuts a contraction hierarchy G∗
π = S
i Gπ,i. Furthermore, we denote by G∧
π the corresponding
upward directed graph.
v
z
y
x
1
2
1
1
Figure 2: Contraction
of v.
If the pair x, y
is considered ﬁrst,
a
shortcut
{x, y}
with
weight 3 is inserted.
If
the
pair
x, z
is
considered
ﬁrst,
an
edge
{x, z}
with
weight 2 is inserted.
This shortcut is part of
a witness x →z →y
for the pair x, y. The
shortcut
{x, y}
is
thus not added if the
pair x, z is considered
ﬁrst.
Given a ﬁxed weight w, one can exploit that in many applications it is
suﬃcient to only preserve all shortest path distances [21].
Weighted vertex
contraction of a vertex v in the graph G is deﬁned as the operation of removing v
and inserting (a minimum number of shortcuts) among the neighbors of v to
obtain a graph G′ such that distG(x, y) = distG′(x, y) for all vertices x ̸=
v and y ̸= v.
To compute G′, one iterates over all pairs of neighbors x, y
of v increasing by distG(x, y). For each pair one checks whether a xy-path of
length distG(x, y) exists in G\{v}, i. e., one checks whether removing v destroys
the xy-shortest path. This check is called witness search [21] and the xy-path
is called witness, if it exists. If a witness is found, the considered vertex pair
is skipped and no shortcut added. Otherwise, if an edge {x, y} already exists,
its weight is decreased to distG(x, y), or a new shortcut edge with that weight
is added to G. This new shortcut edge is considered in witness searches for
subsequent neighbor pairs as part of G. If shortest paths are not unique, it is
important to iterate over the pairs increasing by distG(x, y), because otherwise
more edges than strictly necessary can be inserted: Shorter shortcuts can make
longer shortcuts superﬂuous. However, if we insert the shorter shortcut after
the longer ones, the witness search will not consider them. See Figure 2 for
an example. Note that the witness searches are expensive and therefore the
witness search is usually aborted after a certain number of steps [21]. If no
witness was found until, we assume that none exists and add a shortcut. This
does not aﬀect the correctness of the technique but might result in slightly more
shortcuts than necessary. To distinguish, perfect witness search is without such
an one-sided error.
For an order π and a weight w the weighted core graph Gw,π,i is obtained
by contracting all vertices π(1) . . . π(i−1). The original graph G augmented by
the set of weighted shortcuts is called a weighted contraction hierarchy G∗
w,π.
The corresponding upward directed graph is denoted by G∧
w,π.
The search space SS(v) of a vertex v is the subgraph of G∧
π (respec-
tively G∧
w,π) reachable from v. For every vertex pair s and t, it has been shown that a shortest up-down
path must exist. This up-down path can be found by running a bidirectional search from s restricted
to SS(s) and from t restricted to SS(t) [21]. A graph is chordal if for every cycle of at least four vertices
there exists a pair of vertices that are non-adjacent in the cycle but are connected by an edge. An alter-
native characterization is that a vertex order π exists such that for every i the neighbors of π(i) in Gπ,i,
i. e., the core graph before the contraction of π(i), form a clique [19]. Such an order is called a perfect
elimination order. Another way to formulate this characterization in CH terminology is as follows: A
graph is chordal if and only if a contraction order exists such that the CH construction without witness
search does not insert any shortcuts. A chordal super graph can be obtained by adding the CH shortcuts.
The elimination tree TG,π is a tree directed towards its root π(n).
The parent of vertex π(i) is
its upward neighbor v ∈Nu(π(i)) of minimal rank π−1(v). Note that this deﬁnition already yields a
straightforward algorithm for constructing the elimination tree. As shown in [6], the set of vertices on the
path from v to π(n) is the set of vertices in SS(v). Computing a contraction hierarchy without witness
search of graph G consists of computing a chordal super graph G∗
π with perfect elimination order π. The
height of the elimination tree corresponds to the maximum number of vertices in the search space. Note
that the elimination tree is only deﬁned for undirected unweighted graphs.
4

3
Metric-Dependent Orders
Most publications on applications and extensions of Contraction Hierarchies use greedy orders in the
spirit of [21], but details of vertex order computation and witness search vary. For reproducibility, we
describe our precise approach in this section, extending on the general description of metric-dependent
CH preprocessing given in Section 2. Our witness search aborts once it ﬁnds some path shorter than the
shortcut—or when both forward and backward search each have settled at most p vertices. For most
experiments we choose p = 50. The only exception is the distance metric on road graphs, where we set
p = 1500. We found that a higher value of p increases the time per witness-search but leads to sparser
cores. For the distance metric we needed a high value because otherwise our cores get too dense. This
eﬀect did not occur for the other weights considered in the experiments. Our weighting heuristic is similar
to the one of [2]. We denote by L(x) a value that approximates the level of vertex x. Initially all L(x)
are 0. If x is contracted, then for every incident edge {x, y} we perform ℓ(y) ←max{ℓ(y), ℓ(x) + 1}. We
further store for every arc a a hop length h(a). This is the number of arcs that the shortcut represents
if fully unpacked. Denote by D(x) the set of arcs removed if x is contracted and by A(x) the set of
arcs that are inserted. Note that A(x) is not necessarily a full clique because of the witness search and
because some edges may already exist. We greedily contract a vertex x that minimizes its importance
I(x) deﬁned by
I(x) = L(x) + |A(x)|
|D(x)| +
P
a∈A(x) h(a)
P
a∈D(x) h(a).
We maintain a priority queue that contains all vertices weighted by I. Initially all vertices are inserted
with their exact importance. As long as the queue is not empty, we remove a vertex x with minimum
importance I(x) and contract it. This modiﬁes the importance of other vertices. However, our weighting
function is chosen such that only the importance of adjacent vertices is inﬂuenced, if the witness search
was perfect. We therefore only update the importance values of all vertices y in the queue that are
adjacent to x. In practice, with a limited witness search, we sometimes choose a vertex x with a sightly
suboptimal I(x). However, preliminary experiments have shown that this eﬀect can be safely ignored.
Hence, for the experiments presented in Section 9, we do not use lazy updates or periodic queue rebuilding
as proposed in [21].
4
Metric-Independent Order
The metric-dependent orders presented in the previous section lead to very good results on road graphs
with travel time metric. However, the results for the distance metric are not as good and the orders are
completely impracticable to compute Contraction Hierarchies without witness search as our experiments
in Section 9 show. To support metric-independence, we therefore use nested dissection orders as suggested
in [6] or ND-orders for short. An order π for G is computed recursively by determining a balanced
separator S of minimum cardinality that splits G into two parts induced by the vertex sets A and B.
The vertices of S are assigned to π(n −|S|) . . . π(n) in an arbitrary order.
Orders πA and πB are
computed recursively and assigned to π(1) . . . π(|A|) and π(|A| + 1) . . . π(|A| + |B|), respectively. The
base case of the recursion is reached when the subgraphs are empty. Computing ND-orders requires good
graph bisectors, which in theory is NP-hard. However, recent years have seen heuristics that solve the
problem very well even for continental road graphs [34, 15, 14]. This justiﬁes assuming in our particular
context that an eﬃcient bisection oracle exists. We experimentally examine the performance of nested
dissection orders computed by NDMetis [28] and KaHIP [34] in Section 9. After having obtained the
nested dissection order we reorder the in-memory vertex IDs of the input graph accordingly, i. e., the
contraction order of the reordered graph is the identity function. This improves cache locality and we
have seen a resulting acceleration of a factor 2 to 3 in query times. In the remainder of this section we
prepare and provide a theoretical approximation result.
For α ∈(0, 1), let Kα, be a class of graphs that is closed under subgraph construction and admits
balanced separators S of cardinality O(nα).
Lemma 1. For every G ∈Kα a ND-order results in O(nα) vertices in the maximum search space.
The proof of this lemma is a straightforward argument using a geometric series as described in [6]. As
a direct consequence, the average number of vertices is also in O(nα) and the number of arcs in O(n2α).
5

Lemma 2. For every connected graph G with minimum balanced separator S and every order π, the
chordal super graph G∗
π contains a clique of |S| vertices. Furthermore, there are at least n/3 vertices
such that this clique is a subgraph of their search space in G∧
π.
This lemma is a minor adaptation and extension of [29], who only prove that such a clique exists but
not that it lies within enough search spaces. We provide the full proof for self-containedness.
Proof. Consider the subgraph Gi of G∗
π induced by the vertices π(1) . . . π(i). Do not confuse with the
core graph Gπ,i. Choose the smallest i, such that a connected component A exists in Gi such that
|A| ≥n/3. As G is connected, such an A must exist. We distinguish two cases:
1. |A| ≤2n/3: Consider the set of vertices S′ adjacent to A in G∗
π but not in A. Let B be the set
of all remaining vertices. S′ is by deﬁnition a separator. It is balanced because |A| ≤2n/3 and
|B| = n−|A|
|{z}
≥n/3
−|S′|
|{z}
≥0
≤2n/3. As S is minimum, we have that |S′| ≥|S|. For every pair of vertices
u ∈S′ and v ∈S′ there exists a path through A as A is connected. The vertices u and v are not
in Gi as otherwise they could be added to A. The ranks of u and v are thus strictly larger than i.
On the other hand, the ranks of the vertices in A are at most i as they are part of Gi. The vertices
u and v thus have the highest ranks on the path. They are therefore contracted last and therefore
an edge {u, v} in G∗must exist. S′ is therefore a clique. Furthermore, from every u ∈A to every
v ∈S′ there exists a path such that v has the highest rank. Hence, v is in the search space of u,
i. e., there are at least|A| ≥n/3 vertices whose search space contains the full S′-clique.
2. |A| > 2n/3: As i is minimum, we know that π(i) ∈A and that removing it disconnects A into
connected subgraphs C1 . . . Ck. We know that |Cj| < n/3 for all j because i is minimum. We
further know that |A| = 1 + P |Cj| > 2n/3. We can therefore select a subset of components Ck
such that the number of their vertices is at most 2n/3 but at least n/3. Denote by A′ their union.
Note that A′ does not contain π(i). Consider the vertices S′ adjacent to A′ in G∗
π. The set S′
contains π(i). Using an argument similar to Case 1, one can show that |S′| ≥|S|. But since A′
is not connected, we cannot directly use the same argument to show that S′ forms a clique in G∗.
Observe that A′ ∪{π(i)} is connected and thus the argument can be applied to S′\{π(i)} showing
that it forms a clique. This clique can be enlarged by adding π(i) as for every v ∈S′\{π(i)} a
path through one of the components Ck exists where v and π(i) have the highest ranks and thus
an edge {v, π(i)} must exist. The vertex set S′ therefore forms a clique of at least the required size.
It remains to show that enough vertices exist whose search space contains the S′ clique. As π(i)
has the lowest rank in the S′ clique, the whole clique is contained within the search space of π(i).
It is thus suﬃcient to show that π(i) is contained in enough search spaces. As π(i) is adjacent to
each component Ck, a path from each vertex v ∈A′ to π(i) exists such that π(i) has maximum
rank showing that S′ is contained in the search space of v. This completes the proof as |A′| ≥n/3.
Theorem 1. Let G be a graph from Kα with a minimum balanced separator with Θ(nα) vertices. Then a
ND-order gives an O(1)-approximation of the average and maximum search spaces of an optimal metric-
independent contraction hierarchy in terms of vertices and arcs.
Proof. The key observation of this proof is that the top level separator solely dominates the performance.
Denote by πnd the ND-order and by πopt an optimal order.
First, we show a lower bound on the
performance of πopt. We then demonstrate that πnd achieves this lower bound showing that πnd is an
O(1)-approximation.
As the minimum balanced separator has cardinality Θ(nα), we know by Lemma 2 that a clique with
Θ(nα) vertices exists in G∗
πopt. As this clique is in the search space of at least one vertex with respect
to πopt, we know that the maximum number of vertices in the search space is at least Ω(nα). Further,
as this clique contains Θ(n2α) arcs we also have a lower bound of Ω(n2α) on the maximum number of
arcs in a search space. From these bounds for the worst case search space, we cannot directly derive
bounds for the average search space. Fortunately, Lemma 2 does not only tell us that this clique exists
but that it must also be inside the search space of at least n/3 vertices. For the remaining 2n/3 vertices
we use a very pessimistic lower bound: We assume that their search space is empty. The resulting lower
bound for the average number of vertices is 2/3 · Ω(0) + 1/3 · Ω(nα) = Ω(nα) and the lower bound for
the average number of arcs is 2/3 · Ω(0) + 1/3 · Ω(n2α) = Ω(n2α).
6

We required that G ∈Kα, i. e., that recursive O(nα) balanced separators exists. This allows us to
apply Lemma 1. We therefore know that the number of vertices in the maximum search space of G∧
πnd
is in O(nα). In the worst-case this search space contains O(n2α) arcs. As the average case can never be
better than the worst case, these upper bounds directly translate to upper bounds for the average search
space.
As the given upper and lower bounds match, we can conclude that πnd is a O(1)-approximation in
terms of average and maximum search space in terms of vertices and arcs.
5
Constructing the Contraction Hierarchy
In this section, we describe how to eﬃciently compute the hierarchy G∧
π for a given graph G and order π.
Weighted contraction hierarchies are commonly constructed using a dynamic adjacency array represen-
tation of the core graph. Our experiments show that this approach also works for the unweighted case,
however, requiring more computational and memory resources because of the higher growth in shortcuts.
It has been proposed [42] to use hash-tables on top of the dynamic graph structure to improve speed but
at the cost of signiﬁcantly increased memory consumption. In this section, we show that the contraction
hierarchy construction can be done signiﬁcantly faster on unweighted and undirected graphs. Note that
in our toolchain, graph weights and arc directions are accounted for during the customization phase.
Figure 3: Dots represent vertices in G′ and
H. Squares are additional super vertices in
H. Solid edges are in H and dashed ones in
G′. Notice how the neighbors of each super
vertex in H form a clique in G′. Further-
more, there are no two adjacent super ver-
tices in H, i. e., they form an independent
set.
Denote by n the number of vertices in G (and G∧
π), by m
the number of edges in G, by ˆm the number of arcs in G∧
π,
and by α(n) the inverse A(n, n) Ackermann function. For
simplicity we assume that G is connected. Our approach
enumerates all arcs of G∧
π in O( ˆm α(n)) running time and
has a memory consumption in O(m). To store the arcs of
G∧
π, additional space in O( ˆm) is needed. The approach is
heavily based upon the method of the quotient graph [23].
To the best of our knowledge it has not yet been applied in
the context of route planning and there exists no complexity
analysis for the speciﬁc variant employed by us. Therefore
we discuss both the approach and present a running time
analysis in the remainder of the section.
Recall that to compute the contraction hierarchy G∧
π
from a given input graph G and order π, one iteratively
contracts each vertex, adding shortcuts between its neigh-
bors. Let G′ = Gπ,i be the core graph in iteration i. We do
not store G′ explicitly but employ a special data structure
called contraction graph for eﬃcient contraction and neigh-
borhood enumeration. The contraction graph H contains
both yet uncontracted core vertices as well as an indepen-
dent set of virtually contracted super vertices, see Figure 3
for an illustration. These super vertices enable us to avoid
the overhead of dynamically adding shortcuts to G′. For
each vertex in H we store a marker bit indicating whether
it is a super vertex. Note that G′ can be obtained by con-
tracting all super vertices in H.
5.1
Contracting Vertices
A vertex x in G′ is contracted by turning it into a super vertex. However, creating new super vertices
can violate the independent set property. We restore it by merging neighboring super vertices: Denote
by y a super vertex that is a neighbor of x. We rewire all edges incident to y to be incident to x and
remove y from H. To support eﬃciently merging vertices in H, we store a linked list of neighbors for
each vertex. When merging two vertices we link these lists together. Unfortunately, combining these lists
is not enough as the former neighbors z of y still have y in their list of neighbors. We therefore further
maintain a union-ﬁnd data structure: Initially all vertices are within their own set. When merging x and
y, the sets of x and y are united. We chose x as representative as y was deleted.1 When z enumerates
1Or alternatively, we can let the union-ﬁnd data structure choose the new representative. We then denote by x the new
representative and by y the other vertex. In this variant, it is possible that the new x is the old y, which can be confusing.
7

its neighbors, it ﬁnds a reference to y. It can then use the union-ﬁnd data structure to determine that
the representative of y’s set is x. The reference in z’s list is thus interpreted as pointing to x.
It is possible that merging vertices can create multi-edges and loops. For example, consider that the
neighborhood list of y contains x. After merging, the united list of x will therefore contain a reference
to x. Similarly it will contain a reference to y, which after looking up the representative is actually x.
Two loops are thus created at x per merge. Furthermore, consider a vertex z that is a neighbor of both
y and x. In this case the neighborhood list of x will contain two references to z. These multi-edges and
loops need to be removed. We do this lazily and remove them in the neighborhood enumeration instead
of removing them in the merge operation.
5.2
Enumerating Neighbors
Suppose that we want to enumerate the neighbors of a vertex x in H. Note that x’s neighborhood in H
diﬀers from its neighborhood in G′. The neighborhood of x in H can contain super vertices, as super
vertices are only contracted in G′. We maintain a boolean marker that indicates which neighbors have
already been enumerated. Initially no marker is set. We iterate over x’s neighborhood list. For each
reference we lookup the representative v. If v was already marked or is x, we remove the reference from
the list. If v was not marked and is not x, we mark it and report it as a neighbor. After the enumeration
we reset all markers by enumerating the neighbors again.
However, during the execution of our algorithm, we are not interested in the neighborhood of x in
H, but we want the neighborhood of x in G′, i. e., the algorithm should not list super vertices. Our
algorithm conceptually ﬁrst enumerates the neighborhood of x and then contracts x. We actually do
this in reversed order. We ﬁrst contract x. After the contraction x is a super vertex. Because of the
independent set property, we know that x has no super vertex neighbors in H. We can thus enumerate
x’s neighbors in H and exploit that in this particular situation the neighborhoods of x in G′ and H
coincide.
5.3
Performance Analysis
As there are no memory allocations, it is clear that the working space memory consumption is in O(m).
Proving a running time in O( ˆmα(n)) is less clear.
Denote by d(x) the degree of x just before x is
contracted. d(x) coincides with the upward degree of x in G∧
π and thus P d(x) = ˆm. We ﬁrst prove that
we can account for the neighborhood cleanup operations outside of the actual algorithm. This allows
us to assume that they are free within the main analysis. We then show that contracting a vertex x
and enumerating its neighbors is in O(d(x)α(n)). Processing all vertices has thus a running time in
O( ˆmα(n)).
The neighborhood list of x can contain duplicated references and thus its length can be larger than
the number of neighbors of x. Further, for each entry in the list, we need to perform a union ﬁnd lookup.
The costs of a neighborhood enumeration can thus be larger than O(d(x)α(n)). Fortunately, the ﬁrst
neighborhood enumeration compactiﬁes the neighborhood list and thus every subsequent enumeration
runs in O(d(x)α(n)). Removing a reference has a cost in O(α(n)). Our algorithm never adds references.
Initially there are Θ(m) references. The total costs for removing references over the whole algorithm are
thus in O(mα(n)). As our graph is assumed to be connected, we have that m ∈O(m′) and therefore
O(mα(n)) ⊆O( ˆmα(n)). We can therefore assume that removing references is free within the algorithm.
As removing a reference is free, we can assume that even the ﬁrst enumeration of the neighbors of x is
within O(d(x)α(n)). Merging two vertices consists of redirecting a constant number of references within
a linked list. The merge operation is thus in O(1).
Our algorithm starts by enumerating all neighbors of x to determine all neighboring super vertices in
O(d(x)α(n)) time. There are at most d(x) neighboring super vertices and therefore the costs of merging
all super vertices into x is in O(d(x)). We subsequently enumerate all neighbors a second time to output
the arcs of G∧
π. The costs of this second enumeration is also within O(d(x)α(n)). The whole algorithm
thus runs in O( ˆmα(n)) time as P d(x) = ˆm, which completes the proof.
For this reason, we describe the simpler variant, where x is always chosen as representative and thus x always refers to the
same vertex.
8

5.4
Adjacency Array
While the described algorithm is eﬃcient in theory, linked lists cause too many cache misses in practice.
We therefore implemented a hybrid of a linked list and an adjacency array, which has the same worst
case performance, but is more cache-friendly in practice. An element in the linked list does not only hold
a single reference, but a small set of references organized as small arrays called blocks. The neighbors of
every original vertex form a single block. The initial linked neighborhood list are therefore composed of
a single block. We merge two vertices by linking their blocks together. If all references are deleted from
a block, we remove it from the list.
6
Enumerating Triangles
x
y
z
Figure
4:
A
trian-
gle
in
G∧
π.
The
triple
{x, y, z}
is
a
lower triangle of the
arc (y, z), an interme-
diate triangle of the
arc (x, z), and an up-
per
triangle
of
the
arc (x, y).
A triangle {x, y, z} is a set of 3 adjacent vertices. A triangle can be an upper,
intermediate or lower triangle with respect to an arc (x, y), as illustrated in
Figure 4. A triangle {x, y, z} is a lower triangle of (y, z) if x has the lowest rank
among the three vertices. Similarly {x, y, z} is a upper triangle of (x, y) if z has
the highest rank and {x, y, z} is a intermediate triangle of (x, z) if y’s rank is
between the ranks of x and z. The triangles of an edge (a, b) can be characterized
using the upward Nu and downward Nd neighborhoods of a and b. There is a
lower triangle {a, b, c} of an arc (a, b) if and only if c ∈Nd(a)∩Nd(b). Similarly,
there is an intermediate triangle {a, b, c} of an arc (a, b) with π−1(a) < π−1(b)
if and only if c ∈Nu(a) ∩Nd(b) and an upper triangle {a, b, c} of an arc (a, b) if
and only if c ∈Nu(a) ∩Nu(b). The triangles of an arc can thus be enumerated
by intersecting the neighborhoods of the arc’s endpoints.
Eﬃciently enumerating all lower triangles of an arc is an important base op-
eration of the customization (Section 7) and path unpacking algorithms (Sec-
tion 8).
It can be implemented using adjacency arrays or accelerated using
extra preprocessing. Note that in addition to the vertices of a triangle we are
interested in the IDs of the participating arcs as we need these to access the
metric of an arc.
Basic Triangle Enumeration
Triangles can be eﬃciently enumerated by exploiting their character-
ization using neighborhood intersections. We construct an upward and a downward adjacency array for
G∧
π, where incident arcs are ordered by their head respectively tail vertex ID. The lower triangles of an
arc (x, y) can be enumerated by simultaneously scanning the downward neighborhoods of x and y to
determine their intersection. Intermediate and upper triangles are enumerated analogously using the
upward adjacency arrays. For later access to the metric of an arc, we also store each arc’s ID in the
adjacency arrays. This approach requires space proportional to the number of arcs in G∧
π.
Triangle Preprocessing
Instead of merging the neighborhoods on demand to ﬁnd all lower triangles,
we propose to create a triangle adjacency array structure that maps the arc ID of (x, y) to the pair of
arc ids of (z, x) and (z, y) for every lower triangle {x, y, z} of (x, y). This requires space proportional
to the number of triangles t in G∧
π, but allows for a very fast access. Analogous structures allow us to
eﬃciently enumerate all upper triangles and all intermediate triangles.
Hybrid Approach
For less well-behaved graphs the number of triangles t can signiﬁcantly outgrow
the number of arcs in G∧
π. In the worst case G is the complete graph and the number of triangles t is
in Θ(n3) whereas the number of arcs is in Θ(n2). It can therefore be prohibitive to store a list of all
triangles. We therefore propose a hybrid approach. We only precompute the triangles for the arcs (u, v)
where the level of u is below a certain threshold. The threshold is a tuning parameter that trades space
for time.
Comparison with CRP
Triangle preprocessing has similarities with micro and macro code in CRP [16].
In the following, we compare the space consumption of these two approaches against our lower triangles
preprocessing scheme. However, note that at this stage we do not yet consider travel direction on arcs.
Hence, let t be the number of undirected triangles and m be the number of arcs in G∧
π; further let t′ be
the number of directed triangles and m′ be the number of arcs used in [16]. If every street is a one-way
street, then m′ = m and t′ = t; otherwise, without one-way streets, m′ = 2m and t′ = 2t.
9

Micro code stores an array of triples of pointers to the arc weights of the three arcs in a directed
triangle, i. e., it stores the equivalent of 3t′ arc IDs. Computing the exact space consumption of macro
code is more diﬃcult. However, it is easy to obtain a lower bound: Macro code must store for every
triangle at least the pointer to the arc weight of the upper arc. This yields a space consumption equivalent
to at least t′ arc IDs. In comparison, our approach stores for each triangle the arc IDs of the two lower
arcs. Additionally, the index array of the triangle adjacency array, which maps each arc to the set of
its lower triangles, maintains m + 1 entries. Each entry has a size equivalent to an arc ID. Our total
memory consumption is thus 2t + m + 1 arc IDs.
Hence, our approach always requires less space than micro code. It has similar space consumption
as macro code if one-way streets are rare, otherwise it needs at most twice as much data. However, the
main advantage of our approach over macro code is that it allows for random access, which is crucial in
the algorithms presented in the following sections.
7
Customization
Up to now we only considered the metric-independent ﬁrst preprocessing phase. In this section, we
describe the second metric-dependent preprocessing phase, known as customization. That is, we show
how to eﬃciently extend the weights of the input graph to a corresponding metric with weights for all arcs
in G∧
π. We consider three diﬀerent distances between the vertices: We refer to distI(s, t) as the shortest
st-path distance in the input graph G. With distUD(s, t) we denote the shortest st-path distance in G∧
π
when only considering up-down paths. Finally, let distA(s, t) be the shortest st-path distance in G∗
π, i. e.,
when allowing arbitrary not-necessarily up-down paths in G∧
π.
For correctness of the CH query algorithms (cf. Section 8) it is necessary that between any pair of
vertices s and t a shortest up-down st-path in G∧
π exists with the same distance as the shortest st-path
in the input graph G. In other words, distI(s, t) = distA(s, t) = distUD(s, t) must hold for all vertices s
and t. We say that a metric that fulﬁlls distI(s, t) = distA(s, t) respects the input weights. If additionally
distA(s, t) = distUD(s, t) holds, we call the metric customized. Note that customized metrics are not
necessarily unique. However, there is a special customized metric, called perfect metric mP , where for
every arc (x, y) in G∧
π the weight of this arc mP (x, y) is equal to the shortest path distance distI(x, y).
We optionally use the perfect metric to perform perfect witness search.
Constructing a respecting metric is trivial: Assign to all arcs of G∧
π that already exist in G their input
weight and to all other arcs +∞. Computing a customized metric is less trivial. We therefore describe in
Section 7.1 the basic customization algorithm that computes a customized metric mC given a respecting
one. Afterwards, we describe the perfect customization algorithm that computes the perfect metric mP
given a customized one (such as for example mC). Finally, we show how to employ the perfect metric
to perform a perfect witness search.
7.1
Basic Customization
A central notion of the basic customization algorithm is the lower triangle inequality, which is deﬁned as
following: A metric mC fulﬁlls it if for all lower triangles {x, y, z} of each arc (x, y) of G∧
π, it holds that
mC(x, y) ≤mC(x, z) + mC(z, y). We show that every respecting metric that also fulﬁlls this inequality
is customized. Our algorithm exploits this by transforming the given respecting metric in a coordinated
way that maintains the respecting property and assures that the lower triangle inequality holds. The
resulting metric is thus customized. We ﬁrst describe the algorithm and prove that the resulting metric
is respecting and fulﬁlls the inequality. We then prove that this is suﬃcient for the resulting metric to
be customized.
Our algorithm iterates over all arcs (x, y) ∈G∧
π ordered increasingly by the rank of x in a bottom-up
fashion.
For each arc (x, y), it enumerates all lower triangles {x, y, z} and checks whether the path
x →z →y is shorter than the path x →y. If this is the case, then it decreases mC(x, y) so that
both paths are equally long.
Formally, it performs for every arc (x, y) the operation mC(x, y) ←
min{mC(x, y), mC(x, z) + mC(z, y)}. Note, that this operation never assigns values that do not cor-
respond to a path length and therefore mC remains respecting. By induction over the vertex levels, we
can show that after the algorithm is ﬁnished, the lower triangle inequality holds for every arc, i. e., for
every arc (x, y) and lower triangle {x, y, z} the inequality mC(x, y) ≤mC(x, z)+mC(z, y) holds. The key
observation is that by construction the rank of z must be strictly smaller than the ranks of x and y. The
ﬁnal weights of mC(x, z) and mC(z, y) have therefore already been computed when considering (x, y).
10

In other words, when the algorithm considers the arc (x, y), the weights mC(x, z) and mC(z, y) are
guaranteed to remain unchanged until termination.
Theorem 2. Every respecting metric that additionally fulﬁlls the lower triangle inequality is customized.
Proof. We need to show that between any pair of vertices s and t a shortest up-down st-path exists. As
we assumed for simplicity that G is connected, there always exists a shortest not-necessarily up-down
path from s to t. Either this is an up-down path, or a subpath x →z →y with π−1(x) > π−1(z) and
π−1(y) > π−1(z) must exist. As z is contracted before x and y, an edge {x, y} must exist. Because
of the lower triangle inequality, we further know that m(x, y) ≤m(x, z) + m(z, y) and thus replacing
x →z →y by x →y does not make the path longer. Either the path is now an up-down path or we can
apply the argument iteratively. As the path has only a ﬁnite number of vertices, this is guaranteed to
eventually yield the up-down path required by the theorem and thus this completes the proof.
7.2
Perfect Customization
x
y2
y1
y3
y4
ℓ
Figure
5:
The
vertices
y1 . . . y4
denote
the
upper
neighborhood
Nu(x)
of
x.
They
form
a
clique
(grey
area)
because
x
was
con-
tracted ﬁrst. As ℓ(x) < ℓ(yj)
for every j, we know by the
induction
hypothesis
that
the arcs in this clique are
weighted
by
shortest
path
distances. We therefore have
an all-pair shortest path dis-
tance table among all yj. We
have to show that using this
information we can compute
shortest path distances for
all arcs outgoing of x.
Given a customized metric mC, we want to compute the perfect met-
ric mP . We ﬁrst copy all values of mC into mP . Our algorithm then
iterates over all arcs (x, y) decreasing by the rank of x in a top-down
fashion.
For every arc it enumerates all intermediate and upper tri-
angles {x, y, z} and checks whether the path over z is shorter and ad-
justs the value of mP (x, y) accordingly, i. e., it performs mP (x, y) ←
min{mP (x, y), mP (x, z) + mP (z, y)}. After all arcs have been processed
mP is the perfect metric, as is shown in the following theorem.
Theorem 3. After the perfect customization, mP (x, y) corresponds to
the shortest xy-path distance for every arc (x, y), i. e., mP is the perfect
metric.
Proof. We have to show that after the algorithm has ﬁnished processing
a vertex x, all of its outgoing arcs in G∧
π are weighted by the shortest
path distance. We prove this by induction over the level of the processed
vertices. The top-most vertex is the only vertex in the top level. It does
not have any upward arcs and thus the algorithm does not have anything
to do. This forms the base case of the induction. In the inductive step,
we assume that all vertices with a strictly higher level have already been
processed. As consequence, we know that the upward neighbors of x form
a clique weighted by shortest path distances. Denote these neighbors by
yi. The situation is depicted in Figure 5. The weights of the yi encode a
complete shortest path distance table between the upward neighbors of
x.
Pick some arbitrary arc (x, yj). We show the correctness of our al-
gorithm by proving that either mC(x, yj) is already the shortest path
distance or a neighbor yk ∈Nu(x) must exist such that x →yk →yj is
a shortest up-down path. For the rest of this paragraph assume the exis-
tence of yk, we prove its existence in the next paragraph. If mC(x, yj) is
already the shortest xyj-path distance, then enumerating triangles will
not change mC(x, yj) and is thus correct. If mC(x, yj) is not the shortest
xyj-path distance, then enumerating all intermediate and upper trian-
gles of (x, yj) is guaranteed to ﬁnd the x →yk →yj path and thus
the algorithm is correct. The upper triangles correspond to paths with
ℓ(yk) > ℓ(yj) while the intermediate triangles to paths with ℓ(yk) < ℓ(yj).
It remains to show that the x →yk →yj shortest up-down path actually exists. As the metric is
customized at every moment during the perfect customization, we know that a shortest up-down xyj-path
K exists. As K is an up-down path, we can conclude that the second vertex of K must be an upward
neighbor of x. We denote this neighbor by yk . K thus has the following structure: x →yk →. . . →yj.
As yk has a higher rank than x, mP (yk, yj) is guaranteed to be the shortest ykyj-path distance, and
therefore we can replace the yk →. . . →yj subpath of K by yk →yj and we have proven that the
required x →yk →yj shortest up-down path exists, which completes the proof.
11

7.3
Perfect Witness Search
Using the perfect customization algorithm, we can eﬃciently compute the weighted CH with a minimum
number of arcs with respect to the same contraction order. We present two variants of our algorithm.
The ﬁrst variant consists of removing all arcs (x, y) whose weight after the basic customization mC(x, y)
does not correspond to the shortest xy-path distance mP (x, y). This variant is simple and always correct,
but it does not remove as many arcs as possible, if a pair of vertices a and b exists in the input graph
such that there are multiple shortest ab-paths. The second variant2 also removes these additional arcs.
An arc (x, y) is removed if and only if an upper or intermediate triangle {x, y, z} exists such that the
shortest path from x over z to y is no longer than the shortest xy-path. However, before we can proof
the correctness of the second variant, we need to introduce some technical machinery, which will also
be needed in the correctness proof of the stalling query algorithm. We deﬁne the “height” of a not-
necessarily up-down path in G∗
π. We show that with respect to every customized metric, for every path
that is not up-down, an up-down path must exist that is strictly higher and is no longer.
7.3.1
Variant for Graphs with Unique Shortest Paths
The ﬁrst algorithm variant consists of removing all arcs (x, y) from the CH for which mP (x, y) ̸= mC(x, y).
It is optimal if shortest path are unique in the input graph, i. e., between every pair of vertices a and b
there is only one shortest ab-path. This simple algorithm is correct as the following theorem shows.
Theorem 4. If the input graph has unique shortest paths between all pairs of vertices, then we can
remove an arc (x, y) from the CH if and only if mP (x, y) ̸= mC(x, y).
Proof. We need to show that after removing all arcs, there still exists a shortest up-down path between
every pair of vertices s and t. We know that before removing any arc a shortest up-down st-path K
exists. We show that no arc of K is removed and thus K also exists after removing all arcs. Every
subpath of K must be a shortest path as K is a shortest path. Every arc of K is a subpath. However,
we only remove arcs such that mP (x, y) ̸= mC(x, y), i. e., which are not shortest paths.
To show that no further arcs can be removed we need to show that if mP (x, y) = mC(x, y), then the
path x →y is the only shortest up-down path. Denote the x →y path by Q. Suppose that another
shortest up-down path R existed. R must be diﬀerent than Q, i. e., a vertex z must exist that lies on R
but not on Q. As z must be reachable from x, we know that z is higher than x. Unpacking the path Q
in the input graph yields a path where x and y are the highest ranked vertices and thus this unpacked
path cannot contain z. Unpacking R yields a path that contains z and is therefore diﬀerent. Both paths
are shortest paths from x to y in the input graph. This contradicts the assumption that shortest paths
are unique. We have thus proven that, if the input graph has unique shortest paths, we can remove an
arc (x, y) if and only if mP (x, y) ̸= mC(x, y).
7.3.2
Variant for General Graphs
rank
s
y
x
t
z
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 6: The rank sequence of the solid red path
is [3, 2, 1]. The 3 is the minimum of the ranks of
the endpoints of the {x, z} edge. Similarly the 2 is
induced by the {z, t} edge and the 1 by the {s, x}
edge. The rank sequence of the blue dashed path
is [3, 3, 2, 1] and the rank sequence of the green
dotted path is [4, 2, 1]. The solid red path is the
lowest followed by the blue dashed path and the
green dotted path is the highest.
Using the ﬁrst variant of our algorithm, even when
shortest paths are not unique in the original graph
is not wrong.
However, it is possible that some
arcs are not removed that could be removed.
Our
second algorithm variant does not have this weak-
ness. It removes all arcs (x, y) for which an inter-
mediate or upper triangle {x, y, z} exists such that
mP (x, y) = mP (x, z) + mP (z, y). These arcs can ef-
ﬁciently be identiﬁed while running the perfect cus-
tomization algorithm.
An arc (x, y) is marked for
removal if an upper or intermediate triangle {x, y, z}
with mC(x, y) ≥mC(x, z)+mC(z, y) is encountered.
However, before we can proof the correctness of the
second variant, we need to introduce some technical
machinery.
We want to order paths by “height”. To achieve
this, we ﬁrst deﬁne for each path K in G∗
π its rank
2Note that the second algorithm variant exploits that we deﬁned weights as being non-zero. If zero weights are allowed,
it may remove too many arcs. A workaround consists of replacing all zero weights with a very small but non-zero weight.
12

sequence. We order paths by comparing the rank sequences lexicographically. Denote by vi the vertices
in K. For each edge {vi, vi+1} in K the rank sequence contains min{r(vi), r(vi+1)}. The numbers in the
rank sequences are order decreasingly. Two paths have the same height if one rank sequence is a preﬁx
of the other. Otherwise we compare the rank sequences lexicographically. This ordering is illustrated in
Figure 6. We proof the following technical lemma:
Lemma 3. Let mC be some customized metric. For every st-path K that is no up-down path, an up-down
st-path Q exists, such that Q is strictly higher K and Q is no longer than K with respect to mC.
Proof. Denote by vi the vertices on the path K. As K is no up-down path, there must exist a vertex vi
on K that has lower ranks than its neighbors vi−1 and vi+1. vi−1 and vi+1 are diﬀerent vertices because
they are part of a shortest path and zero weights are not allowed. Further, as vi is contracted before its
neighbors, there must be a edge between vi−1 and vi+1. As the metric is customized, mC(vi−1, vi+1) ≤
mC(vi−1, vi)+mC(vi, vi+1) must hold. We can thus remove vi from K and replace it with the (vi−1, vi+1)
are without making the path longer. Denote this new path by R. R is higher than K as we replaced
r(vi) in the rank sequence by min{r(vi−1), r(vi+1)}, which must be larger. Either, R is an up-down path
or we apply the argument iteratively. In each iteration the path looses a vertex and therefore we can
guarantee that eventually we obtain an up-down path that is higher than K and no longer. This is the
desired up-down path Q that is no longer than K and strictly higher.
Note that, this lemma does not exploit any property that is inherent to CHs with a metric-independent
contraction ordering and is thus applicable to every CH.
Given this technical lemma, we can prove the correctness of the second variant of our algorithm.
Theorem 5. We can remove an arc (x, y) if and only if an upper or intermediate triangle {x, y, z} exists
with mP (x, y) = mP (x, z) + mP (z, y).
Proof. We need to show that for every pair of vertices s and t a shortest up-down st-path exists, that
uses no removed arc.
We show that a highest shortest up-down st-path has this property.
As the
metric is customized, we know that a shortest up-down st-path K exists before removing any arcs.
If K does not contain an arc (x, y) for which an upper or intermediate triangle {x, y, z} exists with
mP (x, y) = mP (x, z) + mP (z, y), then there is nothing to show. Otherwise, we modify K by inserting z
between x and y. This does not modify the length of K, but we can no longer guarantee that K is an
up-down path. If {x, y, z} was an intermediate triangle, then K is still an up-down path. However, it is
strictly higher, as we added r(z) into the rank sequence, which is guaranteed to be larger than r(x). If
{x, y, z} was an upper triangle, then K is still no up-down path anymore. Fortunately, using Lemma 3
we can transform K into an up-down path, that is no longer and strictly higher. In both case, the new
K is an up-down path or we apply the argument iteratively. As K gets strictly higher in each iteration
and the number of up-down paths is ﬁnite, we know that we will eventually obtain a shortest up-down
st-path where no arc can be removed.
Further, we need to show that if no such triangle exists, then an arc cannot be removed, i. e., we need
to show that the only shortest up-down path from x to y is the path consisting only of the (x, y) arc.
Assume that no such triangle and a further up-down path Q existed. Q must contain a vertex beside x
and y and all vertices in Q must have the rank of x or higher. Consider the vertex z that comes directly
after x in Q. As x is contracted before z and y, an arc between z and y must exist. Therefore, a triangle
{x, y, z} must exist that is an intermediate triangle, if z has a lower rank than y and is an upper triangle,
if z has a higher rank than y. However, we assumed that no such triangle can exist. We have thus proven
that we can remove an arc (x, y) if and only if an upper or intermediate triangle {x, y, z} exists with
mP (x, y) = mP (x, z) + mP (z, y).
7.4
Parallelization
The basic customization can be parallelized by processing the arcs (x, y) that depart within a level in
parallel. Between levels, we need to synchronize all threads using a barrier. As all threads only write to
the arc they are currently assigned to and only read from arcs processed in a strictly lower level, we can
thus guarantee that no read/write conﬂict occurs. Hence, no locks or atomic operations are needed.
On most modern processors, the perfect customization can be parallelized analogously to the basic
customization algorithm. However, seeing why this is correct is non-obvious because the exact order
in which the threads are executed inﬂuences intermediate results. Fortunately, the end result is always
the same and independent of the execution order. Our algorithm works as following: We iterate over
13

all arcs departing within a level in parallel and synchronize all threads between levels. For every arc
(x, y) we enumerate all upper and intermediate triangles and update mP (x, y) accordingly. Consider the
situation from Figure 5. Suppose that thread A processes the arc (x, yA) at the same time as thread B
processes the arc (x, yB). Further, suppose that thread A updates mP (x, yA) at the same moment as
thread B enumerates the {x, yB, yA} triangle. In this situation it is unclear what value thread B will
see. However, our algorithm is correct as long it is guaranteed that thread B will either see the old value
or the new value.
In the proof of Theorem 3, we have shown, that for every vertex x and arc (x, yi) either the arc
(x, yi) already has the shortest path distance or an upper or intermediate triangle {x, yi, yj} exists, such
that x →yj →yi is a shortest path. No matter in which order the threads process the arcs, they do
not modify shortest path weights. This implies that the shortest path x →yj →yi is thus retained,
regardless of the execution order. This shortest path is not modiﬁed and is guaranteed to exist before any
arcs outgoing from the current level are processed. Every thread is thus guaranteed to see it. However,
other weights can be modiﬁed. Fortunately, this is not a problem as long as we can guarantee that
no thread sees a value that is below the corresponding shortest path distance. Therefore, if we can
guarantee that thread B either sees the old value or the new value, as is the case on x86 processors, then
the algorithm is correct. If thread B can see some mangled combination of the old value’s bits and new
value’s bits, then we need to use locks or make sure that all outgoing arcs of x are processed by the same
thread.
7.5
Directed Graphs
Up to now we have focused on customizing undirected graphs. If the input graph G is directed, our
toolchain works as follows: Based on the undirected unweighted graph induced by G we compute a
vertex ordering π (Section 4), build the upward directed Contraction Hierarchy G∧
π (Section 5), and
optionally perform triangle preprocessing (Section 6).
For customization, however, we consider two
weights per arc in G∧
π, one for each direction of travel. One-way streets are modeled by setting the
weight corresponding to the forbidden traversal direction to ∞. With respect to π we deﬁne an upward
metric mu and a downward metric md on G∧
π. For each arc (x, y) ∈G in the directed input graph
with input weight w(x, y), we set mu(x, y) = w(x, y) if π−1(x) < π−1(y), i. e., if x is ordered before y;
otherwise, we set md(x, y) = w(x, y). All other values of mu and md are set to ∞. In other words,
each arc (x, y) ∈G∧
π of the Contraction Hierarchy has upward weight mu(x, y) = w(x, y) if (x, y) ∈G,
downward weight md(x, y) = w(y, x) if (y, x) ∈G, and ∞otherwise.
The basic customization considers both metrics mu and md simultaneously. For every lower triangle
{x, y, z} of (x, y) it sets mu(x, y) ←min{mu(x, y), md(x, z) + mu(z, y)} and md(x, y) ←min{md(x, y),
mu(x, z)+md(z, y)}. The perfect customization can be adapted analogously. For every intermediate tri-
angle {x, y, z} of (x, y) the perfect customization sets mu(x, y) ←min{mu(x, y), mu(x, z)+mu(z, y)} and
md(x, y) ←min{md(x, y), md(x, z) + md(z, y)}. Similarly for every upper triangle {x, y, z} of (x, y) the
perfect customization sets mu(x, y) ←min{mu(x, y), mu(x, z)+md(z, y)} and md(x, y) ←min{md(x, y),
md(x, z) + mu(z, y)}. The perfect witness search might need to remove an arc only in one direction.
It therefore produces, just as in the original CHs, two search graphs: an upward search graph and
a downward search graph.
The forward search in the query phase is limited to the upward search
graph and the backward search to the downward search graph, just as in the original CHs. The arc
(x, y) is removed from the upward search graph if and only if an intermediate triangle {x, y, z} with
mu(x, y) = mu(x, z) + mu(z, y) exists or an upper triangle {x, y, z} with mu(x, y) = mu(x, z) + md(z, y)
exists. Analogously, the arc (x, y) is removed from the downward search graph if and only if an inter-
mediate triangle {x, y, z} with md(x, y) = md(x, z) + md(z, y) exists or an upper triangle {x, y, z} with
md(x, y) = md(x, z) + mu(z, y) exists.
7.6
Single Instruction Multiple Data
The weights attached to each arc in the CH can be replaced by an interleaved set of k weights by storing
for every arc a vector of k elements. Vectors allows us to customize all k metrics in one go, amortizing
triangle enumeration time and they allow us to use single instruction multiple data (SIMD) operations.
Further, as we use essentially two metrics to handle directed graphs, we can store both of them in a 2-
dimensional vector. This allows us to handle both directions in a single processor instruction. Similarly,
if we have k directed input weights we can store them in a 2k-dimensional vectors.
The processor needs to support component-wise minimum and saturated addition, i. e., a+b = intmax
14

must hold in the case of an overﬂow. In the case of directed graphs it additionally needs to support
eﬃciently swapping neighboring vector components. A current SSE-enabled processor supports all the
necessary operations for 16-bit integer components. For 32-bit integer saturated addition is missing.
There are two possibilities to work around this limitation: The ﬁrst is to emulate saturated-add using a
combination of regular addition, comparison and blend/if-then-else instruction. The second consists of
using 31-bit weights and use 231 −1 as value for ∞instead of 232 −1. The algorithm only computes the
saturated addition of two weights followed by taking the minimum of the result and some other weight,
i. e., if computing min(a + b, c) for all weights a, b and c is unproblematic, then the algorithms works
correctly. We know that a and b are at most 231 −1 and thus their sum is at most 232 −2 which ﬁts into
a 32-bit integer. In the next step we know that c is at most 231 −1 and thus the resulting minimum is
also at most 231 −1.
7.7
Partial Updates
Until now we have only considered computing metrics from scratch. However, in many scenarios this is
overkill, as we know that only a few edge weights of the input graph were changed. It is unnecessary
to redo all computations in this case. The ideas employed by our algorithm are somewhat similar to
those presented in [21], but our situation diﬀers as we know that we do not have to insert or remove
arcs. Denote by U = {((xi, yi), wnew
i
)} the set of arcs whose weights should be updated, where (xi, yi)
is the arc ID and wnew
i
the new weight. Note that modifying the weight of one arc can trigger further
changes. However, these new changes have to be at higher levels. We therefore organize U as a priority
queue ordered by the level of xi. We iteratively remove arcs from the queue and apply the change. If
new changes are triggered we insert these into the queue. The algorithm terminates once the queue is
empty.
Denote by (x, y) the arc that was removed from the queue and by wnew its new weight and by wold its
old weight. We ﬁrst have to check whether wnew can be bypassed using a lower triangle. For this reason,
we iterate over all lower triangles {x, y, z} of (x, y) and perform wnew ←min{wnew, m(z, x) + m(z, y)}.
Furthermore, if {x, y} is an edge in the input graph G, we might have overwritten its weight with a
shortcut weight, which after the update might not be shorter anymore. Hence, we additionally test that
wnew is not larger than the input weight. If after both checks wnew = m(x, y) holds, then no change
is necessary and no further changes are triggered. If wold and wnew diﬀer we iterate over all upper
triangles {x, y, z} of (x, y) and test whether m(x, z) + wold = m(y, z) holds and if so the weight of the
arc (y, z) must be set to m(x, z) + wnew. We add this change to the queue. Analogously we iterate over
all intermediate triangles {x, y, z} of (x, y) and queue up a change to (z, y) if m(x, z) + wold = m(z, y)
holds.
How many subsequent changes a single change triggers heavily depends on the metric and can signiﬁ-
cantly vary. Slightly changing the weight of a dirt road has near to no impact whereas changing a heavily
used highway segment will trigger many changes. In the game setting such largely varying running times
are undesirable as they lead to lag-peaks. We propose to maintain a queue into which all changes are
inserted. Every round a ﬁxed amount of time is spent processing elements from this queue. If time runs
out before the queue is emptied the remaining arcs are processed in the next round. This way costs
are amortized resulting in a constant workload per turn. The downside is that as long the queue is not
empty some distance queries will use outdated data. How much time is spent each turn updating the
metric determines how long an update needs to be propagated along the whole graph.
8
Distance Query
In this section, we describe how to compute distance queries3, i. e., a shortest up-down path in G∧
π
between two vertices s and t given a customized metric and how to unpack into a shortest path edge
sequence in G.
8.1
Basic
The basic query runs two instances of Dijkstra’s algorithm on G∧
π from s and from t. If G is undirected,
then both searches use the same metric. Otherwise if G is directed the search from s uses the upward
metric mu and the search from t the downward metric md. In either case in contrast to [21] they operate
3We refer to the minimum sum over all weights over all st-paths as the distance between s and t. The term “distance
query” does not imply that we only consider shortest paths according to geographical distance.
15

on the same upward search graph G∧
π. Once the radius of one of the two searches is larger than the
shortest path found so far, we stop the search because we know that no shorter path can exist. We
alternate between processing vertices in the forward search and processing vertices in the backward
search.
8.2
Stalling
We implemented a basic version of an optimization presented in [21, 33] called stall-on-demand. The
optimization exploits that the shortest strictly upward sv-path in G∧
π can be longer than the shortest
sv-path in G∗
π, which can go up and down arbitrarily. The search from s only ﬁnds upward paths and if
we observe that an up-down path exists that is not longer, then we can prune the upward search. Denote
by x the vertex removed from the queue.
We iterate over all outgoing arcs (x, y) and test whether
d(x) ≥m(x, y) + d(y) holds. If it holds for some arc we prune x by not relaxing its outgoing arcs.
If d(x) > m(x, y) + d(y) holds, then pruning is correct because all subpaths of shortest up-down
paths must be shortest paths and the upward path ending at x is not shortest path as a shorter
up-down path through y exists.
We can also prune when d(x) ≥m(x, y) + d(y), but a diﬀerent
argument is needed.
To the best of our knowledge, correctness has so far not been proven for the
d(x) = m(x, y) + d(y) case. Notice that we do not exploit any special properties of metric independent
s
t
x
ℓ
Figure 7: The union of the
darkgray and lightgray areas
is the search space of s. Anal-
ogously the union of the dark-
gray and middlegray areas is
the search space of t.
The
darkgray area is the intersec-
tion of both search spaces.
The dotted arcs start in the
search space of s, but not in
the search space of t. Anal-
ogously the dashed arcs start
in the search space of t, but
not in the search space of s.
The solid arcs start in the in-
tersection of the two search
spaces.
The vertex x is the
LCA of s and t.
orders and thus our prove works for every CH.
Theorem 6. The upward search can be pruned when d(x) ≥m(x, y) +
d(y) holds.
Proof. We show that for every pair of vertices s and t an unprunable,
shortest, up-down st-path exists. Our proof relies on Lemma 3 which
orders paths by height and states that st-path that are no up-down paths
can be transformed into up-down paths that are no longer and strictly
higher. We know that some shortest st-path K exists. If K is not pruned,
then there is nothing to show. If K is pruned, then there exists a vertex
x on K at which the search is pruned. Without loose of generality we
assume that x lies on the upward part of K. Further there must exist
a vertex y and a path Q from s to x going through y such that Q is
no longer than the sx-preﬁx of K. Consider the path R obtained by
concatenating Q with the xt-suﬃx of K. R is by construction not longer
than K. If x is the highest vertex on K then R is an up-down path and R
is strictly higher. Otherwise, R is no up-down path, but using Lemma 3
R can be transformed into an up-down path that is strictly higher and
no longer. In both cases, R is no longer and strictly higher. Either, R
is unprunable or we apply the argument iteratively. As there are only
ﬁnitely many up-down paths and each iteration increases the height of
R, we eventually end up at an unprunable, shortest, up-down st-path,
which concludes the proof.
8.3
Elimination Tree
We precompute for every vertex its parent’s vertex ID in the elimination
tree in a preprocessing step. This allows us to eﬃciently enumerate all
vertices in SS(s) and SS(t) at query time. The vertices are enumerated
increasing by rank.
We store two tentative distance arrays df(v) and db(v). Initially these
are all set to ∞. In a ﬁrst step we compute the lowest common ancestor
(LCA) x of s and t in the elimination tree. We do this by simultaneously
enumerating all ancestors of s and t by increasing rank until a common
ancestor is found. In a second step we iterate over all vertices y on the
tree-path from s to x and relax all forward arcs of such y. In a third step
we do the same for all vertices y from t to x in the backward search. In
a ﬁnal fourth step we iterate over all vertices y from x to the root r and
relax all forward and backward arcs. Further in the fourth step we also
determine the vertex z that minimizes df(z)+db(z). A shortest up-down
16

Dijstra Baseline
Instance
# Vertices
# Arcs
# Edges Symmetric? Running Time [ms]
Karlsruhe
120 412
302 605
154 869
no
6
TheFrozenSea
754 195
5 815 688
2 907 844
yes
58
Europe
18 010 173 42 188 664 22 211 721
no
1 560
Table 1: Instances. We report the number of vertices and of directed arcs of the benchmark graphs.
We further present the number of edges in the induced undirected graph. We also report the running
time of Dijkstra’s algorithm with stop criterion averaged over 10 000 st-queries, where s and t are chosen
uniformly at random.
path must exist that goes through z. Knowing z is necessary to determine the shortest path distance
and to compute the sequence of arcs that compose the shortest path. In a ﬁfth cleanup step we iterate
over all vertices from s and t to the root r to reset all df and db to ∞. This ﬁfth step avoids having to
spend O(n) running time to initialize all tentative distances to ∞for each query. Consider the situation
depicted in Figure 7. In the ﬁrst step the algorithm determines x. In the second step it relaxes all dotted
arcs and the tree arcs departing in the lightgray area. In the third step all dashed arcs and the tree arcs
departing in the middlegray area and in the fourth step the solid arcs and the remaining tree arcs follow.
The elimination tree query can be combined with the perfect witness search. Before pruning any
arc, we compute the elimination tree. We then prune the arcs. It is now possible that a vertex has an
ancestor in the tree that is not in its pruned search space. However, we can still guarantee that every
vertex in the pruned search space is an ancestor and this is enough to prove the query correctness. To
avoid relaxing the outgoing arcs of an ancestor outside of the search space, we prune vertices whose
tentative distance df(x) respectively db(x) is ∞.
Contrary to the approaches based upon Dijkstra’s algorithm the elimination tree query approach
does not need a priority queue. This leads to signiﬁcantly less work per processed vertex. Unfortunately
the query must always process all vertices in the search space. Luckily, our experiments show that for
random queries with s and t sampled uniformly at random the query time ends up being lower for the
elimination tree query. If s and t are close in the original graph, i. e., not sampled uniformly at random,
then the Dijkstra-based approaches win.
8.4
Path Unpacking
All shortest path queries presented only compute shortest up-down paths. This is enough to determine
the distance of a shortest path in the original graph. However, if the sequence of edges that form a
shortest path should be computed, then the up-down path must be unpacked. The original CH of [21]
unpacks an up-down path by storing for every arc (x, y) the vertex z of the lower triangle {x, y, z} that
caused the weight at m(x, y). This information depends on the metric and we want to avoid storing
additional metric-dependent information. We therefore resort to a diﬀerent strategy: Denote by p1 . . . pk
the up-down path found by the query. As long as a lower triangle {pi, pi+1, x} of an arc (pi, pi+1) exists
with m(pi, pi+1) = m(x, pi) + m(x, pi+1), our algorithm inserts the vertex x between pi and pi+1 into
the path.
9
Experiments
In this section we present our careful and extensive experimental evaluation of the algorithms introduced
and described before.
Compiler and Machine
We implemented our algorithms in C++, using g++ 4.7.1 with -O3 for
compilation. The customization and query experiments were run on a dual-CPU 8-core Intel Xeon E5-
2670 processor, which is based on the Sandy Bridge architecture, clocked at 2.6 GHz, with 64 GiB of
DDR3-1600 RAM, 20 MiB of L3 and 256 KiB of L2 cache. The order computation experiments reported
in Table 2 were run on a single core of an Intel Core i7-2600K CPU processor.
17

Figure 8: All vertices in the
DIMACS-Europe graph.
Instances
We evaluate three large instances of practical relevance in
detail. In Section 10 we provide summarized experiments on further in-
stances. The sizes of our main test instances are reported in Table 1:
The DIMACS-Europe graph4 was provided by PTV5 for the DIMACS
challenge [17]. The vertex positions are depicted in Figure 8. It is the
standard benchmarking instance used by road routing papers over the
past few years. Note that besides roads it also contains a few ferries to
connect Great Britain and some other islands with the continent. The
Europe graph analyzed here is its largest strongly connected component,
which is a common method to remove bogus vertices. The numbers in
Table 1 are the numbers after computing the strongly connected compo-
nent. The graph is directed, and we consider two diﬀerent weights. The
ﬁrst weight is the travel time and the second weight is the straight line
distance between two vertices on a perfect Earth sphere. Note that in
the input data highways are often modeled using only a small number of vertices compared to the streets
going through the cities. This diﬀers from other data sources, such as OpenStreetMap6 that have a high
number of vertices on highways to model road bends. As demonstrated in Section 10.1, degree-2 vertices
do not hamper the performance of CHs. The Karlsruhe graph is a subgraph of the PTV graph for a
larger region around Karlsruhe. We consider the largest connected component of the graph induced by all
vertices with a latitude between 48.3° and 49.2°, and a longitude between 8° and 9°. The TheFrozenSea
graph is based on the largest Star Craft map presented in [38]. The map is composed of square tiles
having at most eight neighbors and distinguishes between walkable and non-walkable tiles. These are not
distributed uniformly, but rather form diﬀerently-sized pockets of freely walkable space alternating with
choke points of very limited walkable space. The corresponding graph contains for every walkable tile a
vertex and for every pair of adjacent walkable tiles an edge. Diagonal edges are weighted by
√
2, while
horizontal and vertical edges have weight 1. The graph is symmetric, i. e., for each forward arc there
is a backward arc, and contains large grid subgraphs. For comparability with other works we report in
Table 1 the time needed by Dijkstra’s algorithm. The variant of Dijkstra’s algorithm used to compute
the baseline running times did not reorder the vertices in-memory, used a 4-ary heap, was unidirectional,
used the stopping criterion.
9.1
Orders
Instance
MetDep Metis
KaHIP
Karlsruhe
4.1
0.5
< 1 532
TheFrozenSea
1 280.4
4.7
< 22 828
Europe
813.5 131.3 < 249 082
Table 2:
Orders.
Duration of order com-
putation in seconds.
No parallelization was
used.
KaHIP was parametrized for qual-
ity only, disregarding running time as it is
metric-independent. We are certain that large
speedups are possible.
However, this is not
the focus of this work. See the Future Works
section 11.1 for a discussion about how good
orders can be quickly computed.
We analyze three diﬀerent vertex orders: 1) The greedy
metric-dependent order is an order in the spirit of [21].
We refer to it as “MetDep” in the tables.
2) The
Metis 5.0.1 graph partitioning package contains a tool
called ndmetis to create ND-orders. 3) KaHIP 0.61 pro-
vides just graph partitioning tools.
We therefore im-
plemented a very basic nested dissection based program
on top of it.
We aimed at computing the best order
possible. Doing this fast is not the focus of this work.
For every graph we iteratively compute bisections with
diﬀerent random seeds using the “strong” conﬁguration
until for 10 consecutive runs no better cut is found. We
recursively bisect the graph until the parts are too small
for KaHIP to handle and assign the order arbitrarily in
these small parts. We set the imbalance for KaHIP to
20%. Note that our program is solely tuned for qual-
ity completely disregarding running time. It is certainly
possible to trade much speed for a negligible or even no decrease in quality. We therefore report the
running times as upper bounds, as no attempt was made to optimize them. Please do not cite our
reported running times to claim that KaHIP is slow. This is no valid conclusion.
Table 2 reports the times needed to compute the orders. Interestingly, Metis outperforms even the
metric-dependent greedy vertex ordering strategy. Figure 9 shows the sizes of the computed separators.
4Visit http://i11www.iti.kit.edu/resources/roadgraphs.php for details on how to acquire this graph.
5http://www.ptvgroup.com
6http://www.openstreetmap.org
18

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
10
20
30
40
0
25,000
50,000
75,000
100,000
125,000
(a) Karlsruhe
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GGG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGGG
GGG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGGG
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
GGGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
G
GGG
G
G
GG
GGGG
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
G
G
GGGG
G
G
GGG
G
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
(b) Europe
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
50
100
150
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
(c) TheFrozenSea
Figure 9: The amount of vertices in the separator (vertical) vs the number of vertices in the subgraph
being bisected (horizontal). We only plot the separators for (sub)graphs of at least 1000 vertices. The
red hollow circles is KaHIP and the blue ﬁlled triangles is Metis.
19

As expected, KaHIP results in better quality. The road graphs seem to have separators following a
Θ( 3√n)-law. On Karlsruhe the separator sizes steadily decrease from the top level to the bottom level,
making Theorem 1 directly applicable under the assumption that no signiﬁcantly better separators exist.
The KaHIP separators on the Europe graph have a diﬀerent structure on the top level. The separators
ﬁrst increase before they get smaller. This is because of the special structure of the European continent.
For example the cut separating Great Britain and Spain from France is far smaller than one would expect
for a graph of that size. In the next step KaHIP cuts Great Britain from Spain which results in one of the
extremely thin cuts observed in the plot. Interestingly Metis is not able to ﬁnd these cuts that exploit
the continental topology. The game map has a structure that diﬀers from road graphs as the plots have
two peaks. This eﬀect results from the large grid subgraphs. The grids have Θ(√n) separators, whereas
at the higher levels the choke points results in separators that approximately follow a Θ( 3√n)-law. At
some point the bisector has cut all choke points and has to start cutting through the grids. The second
peak is at the point where this switch happens.
9.2
CH Construction
Instance
Dyn. Adj. Array Contraction Graph
Karlsruhe
0.6
<0.1
TheFrozenSea
490.6
3.8
Europe
305.8
15.5
Table 3: Construction of the Contraction Hierarchy. We
report the time in seconds required to compute the arcs
in G∧
π given a KaHIP ND-order π. No witness search is
performed. No weights are assigned.
Table 3 compares the performance of our spe-
cialized Contraction Graph data structure, de-
scribed in Section 5, to the dynamic adjacency
structure, as used in [21] to compute undi-
rected and unweighted CHs. We do not report
numbers for the hash-based approach of [42] as
it is fully dominated. Our data structure dra-
matically improves performance. However to
be fair, our approach cannot immediately be
extended to directed or weighted graphs. For-
tunately, this is no problem as we can intro-
duced weights and directions during the cus-
tomization phase.
9.3
CH Size
In Table 4 we report the resulting CH sizes for various approaches. Computing a CH on Europe without
witness search with the metric-dependent order is infeasible even using the Contraction Graph data
structure. This is even true if we only want to count the number of arcs: We aborted calculations after
several days. We can however say with certainty that there are at least 1.3 × 1012 arcs in the CH and
the maximum upward vertex degree is at least 1.4 × 106. As the original graph has only 4.2 × 107 arcs,
it is safe to assume that using this order it is impossible to achieve a speedup compared to Dijkstra’s
algorithm on the input graph. However, on the Karlsruhe graph we can actually compute the CH without
witness search and perform a perfect witness search. The numbers show that the heuristic witness search
employed by [21] is nearly optimal. Furthermore, the numbers clearly show that using metric-dependent
orders in a metric-independent setting, i. e., without witness search, results in unpractical CH sizes.
However, they also show that a metric-dependent order exploiting the weight structure dominates ND-
orders. In Figure 10 we plot the number of arcs in the search space vs the number of vertices. The plots
show that the KaHIP order signiﬁcantly outperforms the Metis order on the road graphs whereas the
situation is a lot less clear on the game map where the plots suggest nearly a tie. KaHIP only slightly
outperforms Metis, when using a perfect customization. Table 5 examines the elimination tree. Note
that the height of the elimination tree corresponds7 to the number of vertices in the (undirected) search
space. As the ratio between the maximum and the average height is only about 2, we know that no
special vertex exists that has a search space signiﬁcantly diﬀering from the numbers shown in Table 5.
The elimination tree has a relatively small height compared to the number of vertices in G.
The treewidth of a graph is a measure widely used in theoretical computer science and thus interesting
on its own. The notion of treewidth is deeply coupled with the notion of chordal super graphs and vertex
separators.
See [10] for details.
The authors show in their Theorem 6 that the maximum upward
degree du(v) over all vertices v in G∧
π is an upper bound to the treewidth of a graph G. This theorem
yields a straightforward algorithm that gives us the upper bounds presented in Table 5.
7The numbers in Table 4 and Table 5 deviate a little because the search spaces in the former table are sampled while
in the latter we compute precise values.
20

Average upward search space size
Witness
search
# Arcs [·103]
# Triangles
unweighted
weighted
Order
undir.
upward
[·103] # Vertices
# Arcs # Vertices
# Arcs
Karlsruhe
MetDep
none
21 926
17 661
37 439 858
5 870 15 786 622
5 246 11 281 564
heuristic
—
244
—
—
—
108
503
perfect
—
239
—
—
—
107
498
Metis
none
478
463
2 590
164
6 579
163
6 411
perfect
—
340
—
—
—
152
2 903
KaHIP
none
528
511
2 207
143
4 723
142
4 544
perfect
—
400
—
—
—
136
2 218
TheFrozenSea
MetDep
heuristic
—
6 400
—
—
—
1 281
13 330
Metis
none
21 067
21 067
601 846
676
92 144
676
92 144
perfect
—
10 296
—
—
—
644
32 106
KaHIP
none
25 100
25 100
864 041
674
89 567
674
89 567
perfect
—
10 162
—
—
—
645
24 782
Europe
MetDep
heuristic
—
33 912
—
—
—
709
4 808
Metis
none
70 070
65 546
1 409 250
1 291
464 956
1 289
453 366
perfect
—
47 783
—
—
—
1 182
127 588
KaHIP
none
73 920
69 040
578 248
652
117 406
651
108 121
perfect
—
55 657
—
—
—
616
44 677
Table 4:
Size of the Contraction Hierarchies for diﬀerent instances and orders. We report the average
number of vertices and arcs reachable in the upward search space of a vertex.
This number varies
depending on whether a witness search is performed or not. It also varies depending on whether we
follow one-way streets in both direction or not. We also report the number of triangles. As an indication
for query performance, we report the average search space size in vertices and arcs, by sampling the
search space of 1000 random vertices.
Metis and KaHIP orders are metric-independent.
We report
resulting ﬁgures after applying diﬀerent variants of witness search. A heuristic witness search is one that
exploits the metric in the preprocessing phase. A perfect witness search is described in Section 7.
# Children
Height
Upper bound
of Treewidth
Instance
Order
avg.
max.
avg. max.
Karlsruhe
Metis
1
5
163.48
211
92
KaHIP
1
5
142.19
201
72
TheFrozenSea Metis
1
3
675.61
858
282
KaHIP
1
3
676.71
949
287
Europe
Metis
1
8 1283.45 2017
876
KaHIP
1
7
654.07 1232
479
Table 5: Elimination tree characteristics. Note that unlike in Table 4, these values are exact and not
sampled over a random subset of vertices. We also report upper bounds on the treewidth of the input
graphs, after dropping the directions of arcs.
21

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
0
50
100
150
200
(a) Karlsruhe
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
50,000
100,000
200
400
600
800
(b) TheFrozenSea
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
250,000
500,000
750,000
1,000,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
(c) Europe
Figure 10: The number of vertices (horizontal) vs the number of arcs (vertical) in the search space of
1000 random vertices. The red hollow circles is KaHIP and the blue ﬁlled triangles is Metis.
Witness
search
Avg. weighted upw. search space
Instance
Metric
Order
# Upward arcs # Vertices
# Arcs
Karlsruhe
Distance
MetDep
none
8 000 880
3 276
4 797 224
heuristic
295 759
283
2 881
perfect
295 684
281
2 873
Metis
perfect
382 905
159
3 641
KaHIP
perfect
441 998
141
2 983
Uniform
MetDep
none
5 705 168
2 887
3 602 407
heuristic
272 711
151
808
perfect
272 711
151
808
Metis
perfect
363 310
153
2 638
KaHIP
perfect
426 145
136
2 041
Random
MetDep
none
6 417 960
3 169
4 257 212
heuristic
280 024
160
949
perfect
276 742
160
948
Metis
perfect
361 964
154
2 800
KaHIP
perfect
424 999
138
2 093
Europe
Distance
MetDep heuristic
39 886 688
4 661
133 151
Metis
perfect
53 505 231
1 257
178 848
KaHIP
perfect
60 692 639
644
62 014
Table 6: Detailed analysis of the size of CHs. We evaluate uniform, random and distance weights on the
Karlsruhe input graph. Random weights are sampled from [0, 10000]. The distance weight is the straight
distance along a perfect Earth sphere’s surface. All weights respect one-way streets of the input graph.
22

Karlsruhe
TheFrozenSea
Europe
Metis KaHIP
Metis KaHIP
Metis KaHIP
full
# Triangles [10³] 2 590
2 207 601 846 864 041 1 409 250 578 247
# CH arcs [10³]
478
528
21 067
25 100
70 070
73 920
Memory [MB]
22
19
4 672
6 688
11 019
4 694
partial
Threshold level
16
11
51
54
42
17
# Triangles [10³]
507
512 126 750 172 240
147 620
92 144
# CH arcs [10³]
367
393
13 954
15 996
58 259
59 282
Memory [MB]
5
5
1 020
1 375
1 348
929
Enum. time [%]
33
32
33
33
32
33
Table 7: Precomputed triangles. As show in Section 6, the memory needed is proportional to 2t+m+1,
where t is the triangle count and m the number of arcs in the CH. We use 4 byte integers. We report t
and m for precomputing all levels (“full”) and all levels below a reasonable threshold level (“partial”).
We further indicate how much percent of the total unaccelerated enumeration time is spent below the
given threshold level. We chose the threshold level such that this factor is about 33 %.
Interestingly these numbers correlate with our other ﬁndings: The diﬀerence between the bounds on
the road graphs reﬂect that the KaHIP orders are better than Metis orders. On the game map there
is nearly no diﬀerence between Metis and KaHIP, which is in accordance with all other performance
indicators. The fact that the treewidth grows with the graph size reﬂects that the running times are not
independent of the graph size. These numbers strongly suggest that road graphs are not part of a graph
class of constant treewidth. However, fortunately, the treewidth grows sub-linearly. Our ﬁndings from
Figure 9 suggest that assuming a O( 3√n) treewidth for road graphs of n vertices might come close to
reality.
In Table 6 we evaluate the witness search performances for diﬀerent metrics. It turns out that the
distance metric is the most diﬃcult one of the tested metrics. That the distance metric is more diﬃcult
than the travel time metric is well known. However it surprised us, that uniform and random metrics
are easier than the distance metric. We suppose that the random metric contains a few very long arcs
that are nearly never used. These could just as well be removed from the graph resulting in a thinner
graph with nearly the same shortest path structure. The CH of a thinner graph with a similar shortest
path structure naturally has a smaller size. To explain why the uniform metric behaves more similar to
the travel time metric than to the distance metric we have to realize that highways do not have many
degree 2 vertices in the input graph. Note that for diﬀerent data sources this assumption might not
hold. Highways are therefore also preferred by the uniform metric. We expect an instance with more
degree-2 vertices on highways to behave diﬀerently. Interestingly the heuristic witness search is perfect
for a uniform metric. We expect this eﬀect to disappear on larger graphs.
Recall that a CH is a DAG, and in DAGs each vertex can be assigned a level. If a vertex can be
placed in several levels we put it in the lowest level. Figure 11 illustrates the amount of vertices and
arcs in each level of a CH. The many highly ranked extremely thin levels are a result of the top level
separator clique: Inside a clique every vertex must be on its own level. A few big separators therefore
signiﬁcantly increase the level count.
9.4
Triangle Enumeration
We ﬁrst evaluate the running time of the adjacency-array-based triangle enumeration algorithm. Fig-
ure 12 clearly shows that most time is spent enumerating the triangles of the lower levels. This justiﬁes
our suggestion to only precompute the triangles for the lower levels as these are the levels were the
optimization is most eﬀective. However, precomputing more levels does not hurt if enough memory is
available. We propose to determine the threshold level up to which triangles are precomputed based
on the size of the available unoccupied memory. On modern server machines such as our benchmarking
machine there is enough memory to precompute all levels. The memory consumption is summarized
in Table 7. However, note that precomputing all triangles is prohibitive in the game scenario as less
available memory should be expected.
23

0
25,000
50,000
75,000
100,000
4
32
256
(a) Karlsruhe/KaHIP
0
25,000
50,000
75,000
100,000
4
32
256
(b) Karlsruhe/Metis
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4
32
256
(c) TheFrozenSea/KaHIP
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4
32
256
(d) TheFrozenSea/Metis
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
4
32
256
(e) Europe/KaHIP
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
4
32
256
2,048
(f) Europe/Metis
Figure 11: The number of vertices (y-axis) per level (x-axis) is the blue dotted line. The number of arcs
departing in each level is the red solid line, and the number of lower triangles in each level is the green
dashed line. Warning: In contrast to Figure 12 these ﬁgures have a logarithmic x-scale.
24

0
20,000
40,000
0
50
100
150
200
(a) Karlsruhe/KaHIP
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
0
50
100
150
200
(b) Karlsruhe/Metis
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
0
250
500
750
(c) TheFrozenSea/KaHIP
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
0
250
500
750
(d) TheFrozenSea/Metis
0
2,000,000
4,000,000
6,000,000
8,000,000
0
250
500
750
1,000
1,250
(e) Europe/KaHIP
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
(f) Europe/Metis
Figure 12: The number of lower triangles (y-axis) per level (x-axis) is the blue dashed line, and the time
needed to enumerate all of them per level is the red solid line. The time unit is 100 nanoseconds. If the
time curve thus rises to 1 000 000 on the plot the algorithm needs 0.1 seconds. Warning: In contrast to
Figure 11 these ﬁgures do not have a logarithmic x-scale.
9.5
Customization
In Table 8 we report the times needed to compute a customized metric using the basic customization
algorithm. A ﬁrst observation is that on the road graphs the KaHIP order leads to a faster customization
whereas on the game map Metis dominates. Using all optimizations presented we customize Europe in
below one second.
When amortized8, we even achieve 415 ms which is only slightly above the non-
amortized 347 ms reported in [16] for CRP. Note that their experiments were run on a diﬀerent machine
with a faster clock but 2 × 6 instead of 2 × 8 cores, while using a turn-aware data structure, making an
exact comparison diﬃcult.
Previous works have tried to accelerate the preprocessing phase of the original two-phase CH to the
point that it can be used in a similar scenario as our technique. A fast preprocessing phase can be
8We refer to a server scenario of multiple active users that require simultaneous customization, e. g., due to traﬃc
updates.
25

Karlsruhe
TheFrozenSea
Europe
Pre.
# Metrics
Metis KaHIP
Metis KaHIP
Metis KaHIP
SSE trian. # Thr.
Pairs time [s] time [s] time [s] time [s] time [s] time [s]
no
none
1
1
0.0567
0.0468
7.88
10.08
21.90
10.88
yes
none
1
1
0.0513
0.0427
7.33
9.34
19.91
9.55
yes
all
1
1
0.0094
0.0091
3.74
3.75
7.32
3.22
yes
all
16
1
0.0034
0.0035
0.45
0.61
1.03
0.74
yes
all
16
2
0.0035
0.0033
0.66
0.76
1.34
1.05
yes
all
16
4
0.0040
0.0048
1.19
1.50
2.80
1.66
Table 8: Customization performance. We report the time needed to compute a maximum customized
metric given an initial pair of upward and downward metrics. We show the impact of enabling SSE,
precomputing triangles (Pre. trian.), multi-threading (# Thr.), and customizing several metric pairs at
once.
Metric
Precomputed Customization Amortized
Undirected
# Metrics
bits
SSE # Threads
triangles
time [s]
time [s]
no
2 (up & down)
32
no
1
none
7.88
7.88
yes
1
32
no
1
none
6.65
6.65
yes
4
32
no
1
none
9.36
2.34
yes
4
32
yes
1
none
8.51
2.13
yes
8
16
yes
1
none
8.52
1.06
yes
8
16
yes
2
none
5.00
0.63
yes
8
16
yes
2
all
2.16
0.27
yes
8
16
yes
16
all
0.63
0.08
Table 9: Detailed customization performance on TheFrozenSea. We report the time needed to compute
a maximum customized metric from an initial metric. We show the impact of exploiting undirectedness,
customizing several metrics at once, reducing the bitwidth of the metric, enabling SSE, multi-threading
(# Thr.), and precomputing triangles (Pre. trian.).
Note that the order in which improvements are
investigated is diﬀerent from Table 8. Also note that results are based on the Metis order as Table 8
shows that KaHIP is outperformed.
viewed as form of customization phase. In [21] a sequential preprocessing time of 451 s was reported.
This compares best to our 9.5 s sequential customization time. Note that the machine on which the 451 s
were measured is slower than our machine. However, the gap in performance is large enough to conclude
that we achieve a signiﬁcant speedup. Furthermore, [2] report a CH preprocessing time of 2 min when
parallelized on 12 cores. This compares best against our 415 ms parallelized amortized customization
time. While the machine used in [2] is slightly older and slower than our machine and the number of
cores diﬀers (12 vs. 16), again, the performance gap is large enough to safely conclude that a signiﬁcant
speedup is present. Besides the diﬀerences in running time, both CH preprocessing experiments were
only performed for travel time weights. To the best of our knowledge, nobody has been able to reproduce
such running times for less well-behaved weights, such as travel distance. For example, in [21] the fastest
CH preprocessing time reported for distance metric is 2,853 s. This contrasts with CCH, for which we
can prove that the customization and elimination tree query running times are completely independent
of the weights used.
Unfortunately, the optimizations illustrated in Table 8 are pretty far from what is possible with the
hardware normally available in a game scenario. Regular PCs do not have 16 cores and one cannot
clutter up the whole RAM with several GB of precomputed triangles. We therefore ran additionally
experiments with diﬀerent parameters and report the results in Table 9. The experiments show that it is
possible to fully customize TheFrozenSea in an amortized9 time of 1.06s without precomputing triangles
or using multiple cores. However a whole second is still too slow to be usable, as graphics, network
and game logic also require resources. We therefore evaluated the time needed by partial updates as
9We refer to a multiplayer scenario, where, e. g., fog of war requires player-speciﬁc simultaneous customization.
26

Arcs removed from queue Partial update time [ms]
med.
avg.
max. med.
avg.
max.
Karlsruhe
Metis
2
3.5
857 0.001 0.003
0.9
KaHIP
3
3.7
466 0.001 0.002
1.0
TheFrozenSea Metis
6 311.7
14494 0.008 1.412
100.2
KaHIP
6 343.1
19417 0.008 1.490
164.6
Europe
Metis
2
10.2
14188 0.005 0.052
134.6
KaHIP
3
9.8
8202 0.008 0.045
81.0
Table 10: Partial update performance. We report time required in milliseconds and number of arcs
changed for partial metric updates. We report median, average and maximum over 10000 runs. In each
run we change the upward and the downward weight of a single random arc in G to random values
in [0, 105]. The metric is reset to initial state between runs. Timings are sequential without SSE. No
triangles were precomputed.
Karlsruhe
TheFrozenSea
Europe
# Thr. Pre. trian. Metis KaHIP Metis KaHIP Metis KaHIP
1
none
0.15
0.13 30.54
33.76 67.01
32.96
16
none
0.03
0.02
3.26
4.37 14.41
5.47
1
all
0.05
0.05
8.95
12.51 23.93
10.75
16
all
0.01
0.01
1.93
2.29
3.50
2.35
Table 11: Perfect Customization. We report the time required to turn an initial metric into a perfect
metric. Runtime is given in seconds, without use of SSE.
described in Section 7.7. We report our results in Table 10. The median, average and maximum running
times signiﬁcantly diﬀer. There are a few arcs that trigger a lot of subsequent changes whereas for most
arcs a weight change has nearly no eﬀect. The explanation is that highway arcs and choke point arcs are
part of many shortest paths and thus updating such an arc triggers signiﬁcantly more changes.
Finally, we report the running times of the perfect customization algorithm in Table 11. The required
running time is about 3 times the running time needed by the basic customization. Recall that the basic
customization in essence enumerates all lower triangles, i. e., it visits every triangle once, while the perfect
customization also enumerates all intermediate and upper triangles, i. e., it visits every triangle three
times.
9.6
Query Performance
We experimentally evaluated the running times of the query algorithms. For this we ran 106 shortest
path distance queries with the source and target vertices picked uniformly at random. The presented
times are averaged running times on a single core without SSE.
In Table 12 and 13 we compare the query running times. The “MetDep+w” variant use a metric-
dependent order and a non-perfect witness search in the spirit of [21].
The details are described in
Section 3. The “Metis-w” and “KaHIP-w” variants use a metric-independent order computed by Metis
or KaHIP. Only a basic customization was performed, i. e., no witness search was performed.
The
“Metis+w” and “KaHIP+w” variants use the same metric-independent order but a perfect customization
followed by a perfect witness search was performed. We evaluate three query variants. The “Basic”
variant uses a bidirectional variant of Dijkstra’s algorithm with stopping criterion. The “Stalling” variant
additionally uses the stall-on-demand optimization as described in Section 8.2. Finally, we also evaluate
the elimination tree query and refer to it as “Tree”. This query requires the existence of an elimination
tree of low depth and is therefore not available for metric-dependent orders. We ran our experiments
on all three of our main benchmark instances. Experiments on additional instances are available in
Section 10. For both road graphs, we evaluate the travel-time and distance variants. We report the
average running time needed to perform a distance query, i. e., we do not unpack the paths. We further
27

Visited up. search space
Stalling
Time
Instance Metric Variant
Algorithm # Vertices
# Arcs # Vertices # Arcs
[µs]
Karlsruhe
Travel-Time
MetDep+w Basic
81
370
—
—
17
Stalling
43
182
167
227
16
Metis-w
Basic
138
5 594
—
—
62
Stalling
104
4 027
32
4 278
67
Tree
164
6 579
—
—
33
KaHIP-w
Basic
120
4 024
—
—
48
Stalling
93
3 051
26
3 244
55
Tree
143
4 723
—
—
25
Metis+w
Basic
127
2 432
—
—
32
Stalling
104
2 043
19
2 146
41
Tree
164
2 882
—
—
17
KaHIP+w
Basic
114
1 919
—
—
27
Stalling
93
1 611
18
1 691
35
Tree
143
2 198
—
—
14
Distance
MetDep+w Basic
208
1978
—
—
57
Stalling
70
559
46
759
35
Metis-w
Basic
142
5 725
—
—
65
Stalling
115
4 594
26
4 804
75
Tree
164
6 579
—
—
33
KaHIP-w
Basic
123
4 117
—
—
50
Stalling
106
3 480
17
3 564
59
Tree
143
4 723
—
—
26
Metis+w
Basic
138
3 221
—
—
39
Stalling
115
2 757
21
2 867
50
Tree
164
3 604
—
—
21
KaHIP+w
Basic
122
2 626
—
—
32
Stalling
106
2 302
14
2 350
43
Tree
143
2 956
—
—
17
Table 12: Contraction Hierarchies query performance. We report the query time in microseconds as well
as the search space visited, averaged over 106 queries with source and target vertices picked uniformly
at random. We use “visited” to diﬀerentiate from the maximum reachable search space given in Table 4.
For query algorithms that use stalling, we additionally report the number of vertices stalled, as well as
the number of arcs touched during the stalling test. Note that stalled vertices are not counted as visited.
All reported vertex and arc counts only refer to the forward search. We evaluate several algorithmic
variants. Each variant is composed of an input graph, a contraction order, and whether a witness search
is used. “+w” means that a witness search is used, whereas “-w” means that no witness search is used.
“MetDep+w” corresponds to the original CHs. The metrics used for “-w” are directed and maximum.
Results for Karlsruhe and the TheFrozenSea instances are in this table. Table 13 contains the results for
the Europe instance.
28

Visited up. search space
Stalling
Time
Instance Metric Variant
Algorithm # Vertices
# Arcs # Vertices # Arcs
[µs]
TheFrozenSea
Map-Distance
MetDep+w Basic
1 199
12 692
—
—
539
Stalling
319
3 460
197
4 345
286
Metis-w
Basic
610
81 909
—
—
608
Stalling
578
78 655
24
79 166
837
Tree
676
92 144
—
—
317
KaHIP-w
Basic
603
82 824
—
—
644
Stalling
560
74 244
50
74 895
774
Tree
674
89 567
—
—
316
Metis+w
Basic
567
28 746
—
—
243
Stalling
474
25 041
86
25 445
333
Tree
676
31 883
—
—
120
KaHIP+w
Basic
578
22 803
—
—
203
Stalling
475
19 978
81
20 138
276
Tree
674
24 670
—
—
106
Europe
Travel-Time
MetDep+w Basic
546
3 623
—
—
283
Stalling
113
668
75
911
107
Metis-w
Basic
1 126
405 367
—
— 2 838
Stalling
719
241 820
398 268 499 2 602
Tree
1 291
464 956
—
— 1 496
KaHIP-w
Basic
581
107 297
—
—
810
Stalling
418
75 694
152
77 871
857
Tree
652
117 406
—
—
413
Metis+w
Basic
1 026
110 590
—
—
731
Stalling
716
83 047
271
89 444
951
Tree
1 291
126 403
—
—
398
KaHIP+w
Basic
549
41 410
—
—
305
Stalling
418
33 078
117
34 614
425
Tree
652
45 587
—
—
161
Distance
MetDep+w Basic
3 653
104 548
—
— 2 662
Stalling
286
7 124
426
11 500
540
Metis-w
Basic
1 128
410 985
—
— 3 087
Stalling
831
291 545
293 308 632 3 128
Tree
1 291
464 956
—
— 1 520
KaHIP-w
Basic
584
108 039
—
—
867
Stalling
468
85 422
113
87 315 1 000
Tree
652
117 406
—
—
426
Metis+w
Basic
1 085
157 400
—
— 1 075
Stalling
823
124 472
247 127 523 1 400
Tree
1 291
177 513
—
—
557
KaHIP+w
Basic
575
56 386
—
—
425
Stalling
467
46 657
101
47 920
578
Tree
652
61 714
—
—
214
Table 13: Contraction Hierarchies query performance. Continuation of Table 12.
29

report the average number of “visited” vertices in the forward search. For the “basic” and “stalling”
queries, these are the vertices removed from the queue. For the “tree” query, we regard every ancestor
as “visited”. The numbers for the backward search are analogous and therefore not reported. We also
report the average number of arcs relaxed in forward search of each query variant. Finally, we also
report the average number of vertices stalled and the average number of arcs that need to be tested in
the stalling test. Note that, a stalled vertex is not counted as “visited”.
An important detail necessary to reproduce these results consists of reordering the vertex IDs ac-
cording to the contraction order. Preliminary experiments showed that this reordering results in better
cache behavior and a speed-up of about 2 to 3 because much query time is spent on the topmost clique
and this order assures that these vertices appear adjacent in memory.
As already observed by the original CH authors, we conﬁrm that the stall-on-demand heuristic
improves running times by a factor of 2–5 compared to the basic algorithm for “greedy+w”. Interestingly,
this is not the case with any variant using a metric-independent order. This can be explained by the
density of the search spaces. While, the number of vertices in the search spaces are comparable between
metric-independent orders and metric-dependent order, the number of arcs are not comparable and thus
metric-independent search spaces are denser. As consequence, we need to test signiﬁcantly more arcs in
the stalling-test, which makes the test more expensive and therefore the additional time spent in the test
does not make up for the time economized in the actual search. We thus conclude that stall-on-demand
is not useful, when using metric-independent orders.
Very interesting is the comparison between the elimination tree query and the basic query.
The
elimination tree query always explores the whole search space. In contrast to the basic query, it does
not have a stopping criterion. However, the elimination tree query does not require a priority queue.
It performs thus less work per vertex and arc than the basic query. Our experiments show, that the
basic query always explores large parts of the search space regardless of the stopping criterion. The
elimination tree query therefore does not visit signiﬁcantly more. A consequence of this eﬀect is that
the time spent in the priority queue outweighs the additional time necessary to explore the remainder
of the search space. The elimination tree query is therefore always the fastest among the three query
types when using metric-independent orders. Combining a perfect witness search with the elimination
tree query results in the fastest queries for metric-independent orders. However, the perfect witness
search results in three times higher customization times. Whether, it is superior therefore depends on
the speciﬁc application and the speciﬁc trade-oﬀbetween customization and query running time needed.
The orders computed by KaHIP are nearly always signiﬁcantly better than those produced by Metis.
However, signiﬁcantly more running time must be invested in the preprocessing phase to obtain these
better order. It therefore depends on the situation which order is better. If the running time of the
preprocessing phase is relevant, then Metis seems to strike a very good balance between all criteria.
However, if the graph topology is ﬁxed, as we expect it to be, then the ﬂexibility gained by using Metis
is not worth the price. Interestingly, on the game map KaHIP and Metis seem to be very close in terms
of search space size. The diﬀerence is only apparent when using the perfect customization. For a setup
with basic customization, the two orders should are nearly indistinguishable.
The metric-dependent orders with travel-time outperform the metric-independent orders. However,
it is very interesting how close the query times actually are. On the Europe graph, the basic query visits
about the same number of vertices, regardless of whether a metric-dependent or the KaHIP order is
used. The real diﬀerence lies in the number of arcs that need to be relaxed. This number is signiﬁcantly
higher with metric-independent orders.
However, the eﬀect this has on the actual running times is
comparatively slim. Using KaHIP without perfect witness search results in an elimination tree query
that is only about 4 times slower than using the stalling query combined with metric-dependent orders.
If a perfect witness search is used then, the gap is below a factor of 2. Further, the metric-dependent
orders only win because of the stall-on-demand optimization. The KaHIP order combined with perfect
customization outperforms the basic query combined with metric-dependent orders.
It is well-known that metric-dependent CHs work signiﬁcantly better with the travel-time metric
than with other less well behaved metrics such as the geographic distance. For such metrics, the KaHIP
order outperforms the metric-dependent orders. For example the basic query with perfect customization
visits less vertices and less arcs. This is very surprising, especially considering, that the metric-dependent
orders that we computed are better than those reported in [21], i. e., the gap with respect to the original
implementation is even larger.
However, combining the stalling query with metric-dependent orders
yields the smallest number of visited vertices and relaxed arcs. Unfortunately, combining the stalling
query with metric-independent orders does not yield the same beneﬁt and even makes the query running
times worse.
Fortunately, the metric-independent orders can be combined with the elimination tree
30

Distance query
Path
LCA Reset Arc relax
Total Unpack Length
[µs]
[µs]
[µs]
[µs]
[µs]
[vert.]
Karlsruhe
Travel-Time
Metis
0.6
0.8
31.3
33.0
20.5
189.6
KaHIP
0.6
1.4
23.1
25.2
18.6
Distance
Metis
0.6
0.8
31.5
33.2
27.4
249.4
KaHIP
0.6
1.4
23.5
25.7
24.7
TheFrozenSea Map-Distance Metis
2.7
3.1
310.1
316.5
220.0
596.3
KaHIP
3.0
3.2
308.7
315.5
270.8
Europe
Travel-Time
Metis
4.6
19.0
1471.2 1496.3
323.9 1390.6
KaHIP
3.4
9.9
399.4
413.3
252.7
Distance
Metis
4.7
19.0
1494.5 1519.9
608.8 3111.0
KaHIP
3.6
10.0
411.6
425.8
524.1
Table 14: Detailed elimination tree performance without perfect witness search. We report running time
in microseconds for the elimination-tree-based query algorithms. We report the time needed to compute
the LCA, the time needed to reset the tentative distances, the time needed to relax the arcs, the total
time of a distance query, and the time needed for full path unpacking as well as the average number of
vertices on such a path which is metric-dependent.
query. As result, the fastest variant is the combination of KaHIP order, perfect witness search, and
elimination tree query, which is over a factor of two faster than stalling with the metric-dependent order.
Interestingly, the later is even beaten when no perfect witness search is performed, but with a signiﬁcantly
lower margin.
A huge advantage of metric-independent orders compared to metric-dependent orders is that the
resulting CH performs equally well regardless of the weights of the input graph. The combination of
metric-independent order, elimination tree query and basic customization results in setup, where the
order in which the vertices are visited and the order in which the arcs are relaxed during the query
execution does not even depend on the weights of the input graph. It is thus impossible to construct a
metric, where this setup performs badly. This contrasts with the CH of [21], whose performances varies
signiﬁcantly depending on the input metric.
In Table 14, we give a more in-depth experimental analysis of the elimination tree query algorithm
without perfect witness search. We break the running times down into the time needed to compute the
least common ancestor (LCA), the time needed to reset the tentative distances and the time needed to
relax all arcs. We further report the total distance query time, which is in essence the sum of the former
three. We additionally report the time needed to unpack the full path. Our experiments show that the
arc-relaxation phase clearly dominates the running times. It is therefore not useful to further optimize
the LCA computation or to accelerate tentative distance resetting using, e. g., timestamps. We only
report path unpacking performance without precomputed lower triangles. Using them would result in a
further speedup with a similar speed-memory trade-oﬀas already discussed for customization.
9.7
Comparison with Related Work
We conclude our experimental analysis on the DIMACS Europe road network with a ﬁnal comparison of
related techniques, as shown in Table 15. For Contraction Hierarchies (CH), we report results based on
implementations by [21, 13] and ourselves, covering diﬀerent trade-oﬀs in terms of preprocessing versus
query speed. More precisely, we observe that our own CH implementation (used for detailed analysis and
comparison in Section 9.1–9.6) has slightly slower queries on travel time metric but factor of 2.1 faster
queries on distance metric, at the cost of higher preprocessing time. Recall from Section 3 that we employ
a diﬀerent vertex priority function and no lazy updates. For Customizable Route Planning (CRP), we
report results from [13, 12].
Traditional, metric-dependent CH oﬀers the fastest query time (91 µs, on our machine), but it incurs
substantial metric-dependent preprocessing costs, even when parallelized (109 s, 12 cores). Furthermore,
CH performance is very sensible regarding metrics used: For distance metric, preprocessing time increases
31

Metric-Dep.
Prepro.
Queries
Turn-
Time [s]
Search Space
Time [µs]
Algorithm
Implementation
Machine
Metric
aware
(# Threads)
[# Vertices]
(# Threads)
CH
[21]
Opt 270
Time
◦
1 809
(1)
356
152 (1)
CH
[21]
Opt 270
Dist
◦
5 723
(1)
1 582
1 940 (1)
CH
[21]
E5-2670
Time
◦
1 075.88
(1)
353
91 (1)
CH
[21]
E5-2670
Dist
◦
3 547.44
(1)
1 714
1 135 (1)
CH
our
E5-2670
Time
◦
813.53
(1)
375
107 (1)
CH
our
E5-2670
Dist
◦
9 390.32
(1)
1422
540 (1)
CH
[13]
X5680
Time
◦
109
(12)
280
110 (1)
CH
[13]
X5680
Dist
◦
726
(12)
858
870 (1)
CRP
[13]
X5680
Time
•
0.37 (12)
2 766
1 650 (1)
CRP
[13]
X5680
Dist
•
0.37 (12)
2 942
1 910 (1)
CRP
[12]
i7 920
Time
◦
4.7
(4)
3 828
720 (2)
CRP
[12]
i7 920
Dist
◦
4.7
(4)
4 033
790 (2)
CCH
our
E5-2670
Time
◦
0.74 (16)
1 303
413 (1)
CCH
our
E5-2670
Dist
◦
0.74 (16)
1 303
426 (1)
CCH+a
our
E5-2670
Time
◦
0.42 (16)
1 303
416 (1)
CCH+a
our
E5-2670
Dist
◦
0.42 (16)
1 303
421 (1)
CCH+w
our
E5-2670
Time
◦
2.35 (16)
1 303
161 (1)
CCH+w
our
E5-2670
Dist
◦
2.35 (16)
1 303
214 (1)
Table 15: Comparison with related work on the DIMACS Europe instance with travel time and distance
metric. We compare our approaches, CCH, CCH with amortized customization (CCH+a), and CCH
with perfect witness search (CCH+w), with diﬀerent CRP and CH implementations from the literature.
We report performance of the metric-dependent fraction of overall preprocessing, i. e., vertex ordering
and contraction time for CH, customization time for CRP and CCH. We further report average query
search space, including stalled vertices for CH (which might not be included in the CH ﬁgures taken
from [13]). We ﬁnally report running time in microseconds. If parallelized, the number of threads used is
noted in parenthesis. Since the CH performance in [21] was evaluated on a ten year old machine (AMD
Opteron 270), we obtained the source code and re-ran experiments on our hardware (Intel Xeon E5-2670)
for better comparability. Also note that the latest CRP implementation by [13], evaluated on an Intel
Xeon X5680, is turn-aware (•), i. e., it uses turn tables (set to zero in the reported experiments); We
therefore additionally take results from [12] obtained on an Intel Core-i7 920, which uses a turn-unaware
implementation but parallelizes queries.
32

by factor of 3.2–11.5 and query time by factor of 4.9–12.8.
In contrast to traditional CH, Customizable Contraction Hierarchies (CCH) by design achieve a
performance trade-oﬀwith much lower metric-dependent preprocessing costs, similar to CRP. Accounting
for diﬀerences in hardware, CCH basic customization time is about a factor of 2–3 slower than CRP
customization, but still well below a second.
On the other hand, CCH query performance is factor
of 2–4 faster than CRP, both in terms of search space as well as query time (even when accounting
for diﬀerences due to turn-aware implementation and hardware used).
Most interestingly, on travel
distance, CCH outperforms even the best CH result in terms of query performance. Overall, CCH is
more robust wrt. to the metric than CRP: By design, CCH customization processes the same sequence
of lower triangles for any metric, while the CCH elimination-tree query (given a ﬁxed source and target)
processes the same sequence of vertices and arcs for any metric.
The CRP implementation of [13] uses SSE to achieve its customization time of 0.37 s. In a server
scenario where customization is run for many users concurrently (e. g., to customize traﬃc updates for all
active users), we propose to amortize triangle enumeration time by using SSE to customize metrics for
four users at once (cf. “Metric Pairs” in Table 8). With this amortized customization (CCH+a, 0.42 s),
we can almost close the gap to CRP customization performance.
For even better CCH query performance, we may employ perfect customization and witness search
(CCH+w). It increases customization time by factor of 3.2 (enumerating all lower, intermediate and
upper triangles), but enables a CCH query variant that, while still visiting all vertices in the elimination
tree, needs to consider far fewer arcs (cf. Table 13). Thereby, CCH+w further improves CCH query
performance by factor of 1.9 for distance metric and factor of 2.6 for time metric. With 161 µs for travel
time, CCH+w query times are almost as fast as the best CH result of 91 µs.
10
Further Instances
10.1
OpenStreetMap-based Road Graphs
Figure 13: All vertices in the
OSM-Europe graph.
OpenStreetMap (OSM) is a very popular collaborative eﬀort to create
a map of the world. From this huge data source very large road graphs
can be extracted, that are very detailed depending on the exact region
considered. Using the data provided by GeoFabrik10 and the tools pro-
vided by OSRM11, we extracted a road graph of Europe and report its
size in Table 16. The exact graph is available in DIMACS format on our
website12. The geographic region corresponding to the graph is depicted
in Figure 13. Note that compared to the DIMACS Europe, our OSM Eu-
rope graph also contains Eastern Europe and Turkey. The graph’s east
border ends at the east border of Turkey and then goes upward cutting
through Russia. On the other hand, the DIMACS Europe graph stops
at the German-Polish border.
OSM-Eur DIMACS-Eur
Vertices
174M
18M
Arcs
348M
42M
Deg. 1 Vertices
8M
4M
Deg. 2 Vertices
143M
2M
Deg. >2 Vertices
23M
11M
Table 16: Size of the DIMACS Europe instance
compared to the OSM Europe instance.
At ﬁrst glance the DIMACS Europe graph looks
drastically smaller, at least in terms of vertex count.
However, this is very misleading.
A peculiarity of
OSM is that the road graphs have a huge number of
degree-2 vertices. These vertices are used to encode
the curvature of a road. This information is needed
to correctly represent a road graph on a map but not
necessarily for routing.
However, most other data
sources, including the one on which the DIMACS
graph is based, encode this information as arc at-
tributes and thus have fewer degree-2 vertices. Ac-
celerating shortest path computations on graphs with
a huge number of vertices of degree 1 or 2 is signif-
icantly easier relative to the graph size.
One reason is that Dijkstra’s algorithm cannot exploit the
abundance of low-degree vertices. Dijkstra’s algorithm with stopping criterion needs on average 27 s
for a st-query with s and t picked uniformly at random on the OSM-Europe graph. This contrasts
10http://download.geofabrik.de/
11http://project-osrm.org/
12http://i11www.iti.kit.edu/resources/roadgraphs.php
33

with the DIMACS Europe graph, where only 1.6 s are needed. A slower baseline obviously leads to
larger speedups. Table 16 shows that the diﬀerence between the two Europe graphs in terms of vertex
count is signiﬁcantly smaller, when discarding degree 1 and degree-2 vertices. In fact, relative to their
geographical region’s area, the two graphs seem to be approximately comparable in size.
Partitioner Vertices
Arcs
Input
174M
348M
Search Graph Size Metis
174M
400M
Avg. Search Space Metis
1 312 495 930
Search Graph Size KaHIP
174M
434M
Avg. Search Space KaHIP
678 119 295
Table 17: CH sizes for OSM Europe. The search
space sizes were obtained by randomly sampling
10 000 vertices uniformly at random.
Triangle Customization
#Thr. space [GB]
time [s]
Metis
1
—
43.1
16
—
5.3
1
16.0
17.3
16
16.0
2.1
KaHIP
1
—
30.6
16
—
3.4
1
7.2
11.4
16
7.2
1.7
Table
18:
Customization
performance
on
OSM Europe. We vary the number of threads and
whether precomputed triangles are used. SSE is
enabled, running times are non-amortized and no
perfect customization was performed.
Query time [ms]
Dijkstra-
Metis
3.7
based
Metis
1.0
Elimination- KaHIP
1.7
Tree
KaHIP
0.5
Table 19: Query performance on OSM Europe,
averaged over 10 000 random st-pairs chosen uni-
formly at random.
We
computed
contraction
orders
for
OSM-
Europe. The sizes of the resulting CHs are reported
in Table 17. These sizes can be compared with the
“undirected” numbers of Table 4. We did not perform
experiments with a perfect witness search. Metis or-
dered the vertices within 29 minutes, whereas the
KaHIP-based ordering algorithm needed slightly less
than 3 weeks. However, as already discussed in de-
tail, we did not optimize the later for speed and
therefore one must not conclude from this experi-
ment that KaHIP is slow. The CHs for OSM-based
graphs are signiﬁcantly larger. The DIMACS-Europe
CH only contains 70M arcs for Metis whereas the
OSM-Europe CH contains 400M arcs for Metis. How-
ever, this is due to the huge amount of low-degree
vertices in the input.
On the DIMACS graph the
size increase compared to the number of input arcs
is 70 M/42 M = 1.67 whereas for the OSM-based
graph the size increase is only 400 M/348 M = 1.15.
This eﬀect can be explained by considering what hap-
pens when contracting a graph consisting of a single
path.
In the input graph every vertex, except the
endpoints, has 2 outgoing arcs, one in each direc-
tion. As long as the endpoints are contracted last,
every vertex, except the endpoints, in the resulting
CH search graph also have degree 2. There is thus
no size increase. As the OSM-based graph has many
degree-2 vertices, this eﬀect dominates and explains
the comparatively small size increase.
The search
space sizes are nearly identically. For example the
KaHIP search space contains 117K arcs for the DI-
MACS Europe graph, whereas it contains 119K arcs
for the OSM Europe graph. This eﬀect is explained
by the fact, that both data sources correspond to al-
most the same geographical region. The mountains
and rivers are thus in the same locations and the
number of roads through these geographic obstacles
are the same in both graphs, i. e., both graphs have
very similar recursive separators. The small size in-
crease is explained by the fact that the OSM-based
graph also includes Eastern Europe. The customiza-
tion times are reported in Table 18. As the OSM-
based graph has more arcs, the customization times
are higher on that graph. On the DIMACS Europe
graph 0.61s are needed whereas 1.7s are needed on
OSM Europe for the KaHIP order and 16 threads,
which is a surprisingly small gap considering the diﬀerences in input sizes. Eliminating the degree-2
vertices from the input should further narrow this gap. As the search space sizes are very similar, it is
not surprising that the query running times reported in Table 19 are nearly identical.
10.2
Further DIMACS-Instances
During the DIMACS challenge on shortest path [17] several benchmark instances were made available.
Among them is the Europe instance used throughout our in-depth experiments in previous chapters.
34

Customization [ms]
CH Query
Vertices
Arcs CH Arcs
1 thread
16 threads
Dijkstra
[µs]
Graph
[·103]
[·103]
[·103]
Uni
Bi Uni
Bi
[µs] Uni
Bi
NY
264
730
1 547
46
52
11
12
16 303
34
34
BAY
321
795
1 334
29
39
7
8
17 964
20
20
COL
436
1 042
1 692
40
51
12
12
25 505
35
41
FLA
1 070
2 688
4 239
93
117
25
32
63 497
30
26
NW
1 208
2 821
4 266
88
110
24
31
73 045
27
27
NE
1 524
3 868
6 871
195
255
54
57
96 628
68
64
CAL
1 891
4 630
7 587
195
250
61
64
114 047
43
43
LKS
2 758
6 795
12 829
478
646
75
87
175 084 138
149
E
3 599
8 708
14 169
395
514
85
96
233 511
86
88
W
6 262 15 120
24 115
682
894 121
132
425 244
82
84
CTR
14 082 33 867
57 222 2 656 3 592 392
416 1 050 314 276
285
USA
23 947 57 709
97 902 3 617 7 184 698
979 1 883 053 264
286
Table 20: Instance sizes and experimental results for the additional DIMACS road graphs graphs. The
instances are weighted by travel time. They are undirected, i. e., no one-way streets exist and the weight
of an arc corresponds to its backward arc’s weight. The ”Uni” numbers exploit this and have one weight
per CH arc, whereas the ”Bi” numbers do not and have two weights per CH arc. We report the number
of vertices, directed arcs after removing multi-arcs, arcs in the CH search graph, the time needed to do a
full non-amortized customization with 1 and 16 threads, the average running time of Dijkstra’s algorithm
with stopping criterion, and the average running time of an elimination-tree distance query. The order
were computed with KaHIP. We averaged over 10 000 queries where s and t were picked randomly at
uniform. We only do a basic customization and no perfect customization.
Besides this instance, also a set of graphs representing the road network of the USA was published. In
Table 20 we report experiments for these additional DIMACS road graphs. Other than the DIMACS-
Europe instance, these USA instances originate from the U.S. Census Bureau.
Note that the USA
instances have some known data quality issues: The graphs are generally undirected (no one-way streets)
and highways are sometimes not connected at state borders. The DIMACS-Europe comes from another
data source and does not have these limitations. This is the reason why we focus on the Europe instance
in the main part of our evaluation.
However, as the graphs are undirected we can evaluate the impact of using a single undirected
metric has on customization running times compared to using two directed metrics (as used on DIMACS
Europe). Experiments using a single metric are marked with “Uni” in the table, whereas the experiments
with two metrics are marked with “Bi”. The query running times are very similar. This is not surprising
as the number of relaxed arcs does not depend on whether one or two weights are used. For larger graphs
there is a slightly larger diﬀerence in running times. We believe that this is a cache eﬀect. As the “Bi”
variant has twice as many weights, less arcs ﬁt into the L3 cache. For the smaller graphs this eﬀect does
not occur because the higher CH levels occupy less memory than the cache’s size and thus doubling the
memory consumption is non-problematic.
The diﬀerence in customization times between the two variants is larger. The number of enumerated
triangles is the same, but twice as many instructions are executed per triangle. We would thus expect a
factor of 2 diﬀerence in the customization running times. However, this factor is only observed on the
largest instance. On all smaller instances, the gap is signiﬁcantly smaller. Again, this is most likely the
result of cache eﬀects.
10.3
Further Game Instances
Besides our main game benchmark instance TheFrozenSea, the benchmark data set of [38] contains a
large variety of diﬀerent game maps. To demonstrate that our technique also works on other game maps
we ran our experiments on a selection of diﬀerent graphs from the set. “16room 005” is a synthetic map
with many rooms in grid shape that are connected through small doors. “AcrosstheCape” is another
Star Craft map that is sometimes used as benchmark instance. “blastedlands” originates from WarCraft
3 and is the largest map in that set in terms of vertices. “maze512-4-3” is a synthetic map that consists
35

Vertices Edges CH Arcs Metis Customize [ms] Dijkstra CH Query
Graph
[·103] [·103]
[·103]
[s] 1thr.
16thr.
[µs]
[µs]
16room 005
231
838
2 959 1.196
359
41
10 913
15
AcrosstheCape
392 1 534
12 632 2.452 4 789
563
23 609
239
blastedlands
131
507
3 740 0.896 1 250
144
6 075
304
maze512-4-3
209
686
1 641 0.996
138
35
7 810
6
ost100d
137
531
3 722 0.880 1 076
124
5 607
116
random512-35-8
161
421
1 805 0.988
469
39
7 422
223
random512-40-8
114
280
797 0.684
115
16
4 856
41
Table 21: Instance sizes and experimental results for the additional game-based graphs. We report the
number of vertices, undirected edges, arcs in the CH search graph, the running time Metis needed to
compute the order, the time needed to do a full non-amortized customization with 1 and 16 threads
using an undirected weight, the average running time of Dijkstra’s algorithm with stopping criterion and
the average running time of an elimination-tree distance query. We averaged over 10 000 queries where
s and t were picked randomly at uniform.
of a random maze with corridors that are 4 ﬁelds wide. “ost100d” is the largest map from the Dragon
Age Origins map set. “random512-35-8” and “random512-40-8” are synthetic maps that contain random
obstacles. The diﬀerence between them is the amount of space covered by obstacles. The website13 from
which the data originates includes pictures depicting each instance.
All experiments were run using a single undirected metric with 32bits per weight. The customization
running times are non-amortized. We did not perform experiments with a perfect witness search.
All additional game-based instances have fewer vertices than TheFrozenSea. Further, the CH query is
the slowest on TheFrozenSea with 316 µs. Interestingly, a full customization is slower on AcrosstheCape
than on TheFrozenSea by about a factor of 2. This is most likely due to slight diﬀerences in the structures
of the maps. However, we believe that it is safe to conclude from the experiments that our technique
works across a wide range of maps.
11
Conclusions
We have extended Contraction Hierarchies (CH) to a three-phase customization approach and demon-
strated in an extensive experimental evaluation that our Customizable Contraction Hierarchies approach
is practicable and eﬃcient not only on real world road graphs but also on game maps. We have proposed
new algorithms that improve on the state-of-the-art for nearly all stages of the toolchain: Using our
contraction graph data structure, a metric-independent CH can be constructed faster than with the es-
tablished approach based on dynamic arrays. We have shown that the customization phase is essentially
a triangle enumeration algorithm. We have provided two variants of the customization: The basic variant
yields faster customization running times, while perfect customization and witness search computes CHs
with a provable minimum number of shortcuts within seconds given a metric-independent vertex order.
We proposed an elimination-tree based query that unlike previous approaches is not based on Dijkstra’s
algorithm and thus does not use a priority queue. This results in signiﬁcantly lower overhead per visited
arc, enabling faster queries. Finally, our extensive experimental analysis shed some light onto the inner
workings of Contraction Hierarchies.
11.1
Future Work
Good separators are the foundation of Customizable Contraction Hierarchies: Finding better separators
directly improves both customization as well as query performance. For our purposes, the time required
to compute good separators was of no primary concern (we do it once per graph). Hence, our nested
dissection implementation based on KaHIP [34] was not optimized for speed but rather to demonstrate
that good separators exist.
For some applications this may be too slow. However, since we performed the experiments reported
in this paper, signiﬁcant improvements have been made in this domain: The works of [39] lay the
13http://www.movingai.com/benchmarks/
36

foundations of a well-implemented KaHIP-based algorithm. [35] introduce a new and surprisingly simple
road graph bisection algorithm called Inertial Flow. FlowCutter [25], available as preprint, computes
the best metric-independent contraction orders we have observed so far, much faster than the nested
dissection implementation presented in this work. This results in decreased query and customization
times and reduced memory consumption for Customizable Contraction Hierarchies.
Our experiments suggest, that even metric-dependent Contraction Hierarchies implicitly exploit the
existence of small graph cuts. However, this does not seem to be the only exploited feature as metric-
independent orders behave diﬀerently when it comes to details: For example, the stall-on-demand op-
timization only works with metric-dependent orders, for both travel time as well as distance metric,
but not for the metric-independent orders. Further investigations into this eﬀect might yield additional
valuable insights. A good starting point could be the theoretical works of [3].
Further investigation into algorithms explicitly exploiting treewidth [11, 31] seems promising. Also,
determining the precise treewidth of road networks could prove useful.
In practice, route planning services consider several additional real-world constraints beyond the
scope of this paper. These include, e. g., turn costs and restrictions, historic traﬃc data for rush hours,
and range constraints due to limited electric vehicle batteries. For turns, we assume that Customizable
Contraction Hierarchies is well applicable as the size of graph cuts cannot grow arbitrarily when turn-
expanding the road graph. We are interested in further in-depth experimental analysis of aforementioned
scenarios.
Acknowledgment: We would like to thank Ignaz Rutter and Tim Zeitz for very inspiring conver-
sations.
