Indicators of Good Student Performance in
Moodle Activity Data
Ewa Młynarska
Insight Centre, University
College Dublin, Ireland

centre.org
Derek Greene
Insight Centre, University
College Dublin, Ireland

Pádraig Cunningham
Insight Centre, University
College Dublin, Ireland

ABSTRACT
In this paper we conduct an analysis of Moodle activity data
focused on identifying early predictors of good student per-
formance. The analysis shows that three relevant hypothe-
ses are largely supported by the data.
These hypotheses
are: early submission is a good sign, a high level of activity
is predictive of good results and evening activity is even bet-
ter than daytime activity. We highlight some pathological
examples where high levels of activity correlates with bad
results.
Keywords
Learning analytics, Data mining, Moodle
1.
INTRODUCTION
The availability of log data from virtual learning environ-
ments (VLEs) such as Moodle presents an opportunity to
improve learning outcomes and address challenges such as
high levels of student dropout [1, 9, 13]. Research has shown
that certain activity patterns are indicative of good student
performance. At the most basic level, it is typically the case
that higher levels of activity correlates with good grades
[8]. Digging deeper, it has been shown that work submitted
close to the deadline is less likely to score well [3] and that
evening activity is a better predictor of good performance
than daytime activity [8].
The main contribution of this paper is to analyse a large
volume of Moodle activity data to determine whether it can
provide any early indicators of good or poor student perfor-
mance. We use the data to test three fundamental hypothe-
ses that have been proposed in a number of recent studies:
1. Submitting an assignment well in advance of the dead-
line is predictive of students achieving good grade [3].
2. A high level of Moodle activity before submission is pre-
dictive of a student achieving good performance [8].
3. Evening Moodle activity is more predictive of good per-
formance than daytime activity [8].
We ﬁnd that these hypotheses are largely borne out in the
context of our data (see Section 3). However, we do observe
some anomalous cases where high levels of activity on cer-
tain assignments are negatively correlated with high grades.
This indicates situations where a student’s eﬀort (in terms
of Moodle activity) does not appear to be rewarded with
good results.
In the next section we provide a summary of previous re-
search on educational data mining that is relevant to our
work. Section 3 describes the Moodle data that is analysed
in our paper, and reports on the extent to which the data
supports the three fundamental hypotheses outlined above.
The paper ﬁnishes with some conclusions and plans for fu-
ture work in Section 4.
2.
RELATED WORK
Initial studies related to the key performance hypotheses de-
scribed in Section 1 were performed by Casey and Gibson
[8].
Two of their hypotheses are partially covered in our
work: 1) do Moodle page views correlate with ﬁnal grades?
2) does it matter if students access Moodle resources on
or oﬀcampus? The authors ﬁnd that the higher the level
of Moodle activity, the higher the student grades. Activ-
ity oﬀcampus and in the evenings also showed correlation
with higher grades. Casey and Gibson [7] examined Moodle
log data from Computer Science courses to understand stu-
dent behaviour, focusing on the relation between resource
view counts and ﬁnal course grades. They concluded that
the correlation between Moodle activity and student perfor-
mance was mostly positive, although the hypothesis did not
hold true for Masters courses.
Following work performed in [1] covering “at risk” students,
Corrigan [9] continued the idea of applying machine learning
models in this area, by using a Support Vector Machine clas-
siﬁer to identify such students and alert lecturers via a web
application. Interestingly, Agnihotri et al [2] showed that
there is positive correlation between grades and login activ-
ity, but only up to certain level of activity, beyond which
the eﬀect diminishes.
Lindrum et al. [4] proposed early at-risk factor detection
by measuring how well a ﬁnal grade could be predicted by
whether the student opened a course resource within a given
arXiv:1601.02975v1  [cs.CY]  12 Jan 2016

time period.
Bovo et al. [5] created an application to monitor students’
progress during their course. For predicting progress, a num-
ber of diﬀerent classiﬁers were considered, including logistic
regression and naive bayes. Input features to the classiﬁers
included login frequency, date of last login, amount of time
spent online, the number of lessons viewed, and the number
of assignments completed. The authors used the mean grade
obtained at the ﬁnal exams as the target variable. Based on
the outputs, the authors aimed to identify key predictors of
ﬁnal grades. In [6], student grades were predicted by ap-
plying various Artiﬁcial Neural Networks to Moodle data
for 250 students. ANNs with an incremental hidden layer
algorithm turned produce the best results. Features which
were used for the analysis included the number of exami-
nation sessions, mark, total accesses, percentage of resource
views, total number of resources of each type viewed, and
percentage of accesses per month.
Jiang et al. [11] analyzed data coming from Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs), with a focus on student partici-
pation. Speciﬁcally, they attempted to predict ﬁnal student
performance based on a combination of students’ Week 1
assignment performance and social interaction within the
MOOC environment. Prediction was performed using lin-
ear regression on a number of diﬀerent features, including
average quiz score, number of peer assessments, and their
social network degree.
In the PASTA system [10], decision tree classiﬁers were used
to predict whether a student would pass or fail their ﬁnal
exams.
The predictions were based on information com-
ing from three diﬀerent sources: automatic marking sys-
tem, discussion board, and assessment marks.
Based on
these predictions, timely preventive feedback was provided
to students. Other systems have focused on providing course
coordinators and administrators with insights into student
progress. For instance, the DreamBox system visualizes the
progress of the students in order to recommend the introduc-
tion of particular learning interventions to support students
encountering diﬃculties [12].
3.
EVALUATION
Our main exercise was to test the three hypotheses outlined
in the Introduction on our Moodle data. We ﬁnd that the
hypotheses are mostly supported by the data.
The only
exception is that there are a few scenarios where eﬀort is
negatively correlated with grade.
3.1
Data
The UCD Moodle data covered 360 courses, 2,194 assign-
ments, and 71,077 assignment submissions. Student records
were anonymized before any analysis was performed, and we
considered only data related to grades, deadlines, submission
times, and general activity logs. For our experiments, we fo-
cused on a subset of 60 assignments from courses run during
ﬁrst semester of the 2014/2015 academic year for which there
was complete assignment submission information available.
Figure 1: Pearson correlations for all assignments
between grades and time at which assignments were
submitted, relative to assignment deadlines.
3.2
Hypothesis 1
The expectation is that last minute submissions would not
score well so the amount of time remaining between sub-
mission and the deadline should correlate with grade. From
the analysis we excluded all submissions after the deadline
so that late penalties would not skew the results. We cal-
culated correlation between grades and time remaining to
submission for the 60 assignments. These correlations are
sorted and plotted in Figure 1.
Most of the assignments
(42 out of 60) have positive correlation but there are some
anomalies. Some reasons for these anomalies are; vaguely
speciﬁed deadlines, deadline extensions, artefacts in mark-
ing schemes (see Figure 2), many submissions after deadline
and no penalties for late submissions.
The ﬁrst graph in Figure 2 shows that most of the submis-
sions were very close to the deadline and an early submission
with a very low grade skews the correlation.
The second
graph shows that the submissions are clustered at tutorial
times (with 80 points stacked one on top of the other in a few
places on the graph) with little variation between diﬀerent
grades.
Most of the assignments with negative correlation are com-
ing from Level 1 courses (1st year undergraduate), suggest-
ing that few of the ﬁrst year students have not developed
good time management practices. We also ﬁnd that Level
3 courses show the highest correlation between grades and
submission time (see Figure 3).
This suggests that most
third year students are good at time management but the
last minute brigade are an obvious target for intervention.
3.3
Hypothesis 2
The second hypothesis suggests that high levels of Moodle
activity will correlate with a high grade. Overall activity
plots conﬁrm the ﬁndings reported in [8] about periods of
time when students are more active on Moodle. We found
that the ﬁrst part of the week (Mon-Wed) and midday are
most busy. We can infer from the results that high activity
is caused by lectures and practical sessions. There are also
spikes of activity in the evenings when students submit their
assignments and work from home.
The largest spikes in
activity occur during examinations.

Figure 2: Examples of courses with anomalies in re-
lation to grades, when compared to number of hours
before the assignment’s submission deadline.
Figure 3: Correlations for Level 3 assignments be-
tween grades and time at which assignments were
submitted, relative to assignment deadlines (mean
correlation = 0.33).
The main analysis conducted for hypothesis 2 is similar
to that for the ﬁrst hypothesis. However, due to the fact
that each course includes a number of assignments and each
might have diﬀerent structure, time for submission, other
factors inﬂuencing the submissions, we chose to do corre-
lation analysis at an assignment level rather than a course
level.
Moodle logs many event types and it is to be expected that
some events are not useful for this analysis. After analysis
Table 1: Summary of daytime and evening activity
results, in terms of (1) average count of activities
per student during two weeks before submission; (2)
correlation between grades and number of activities.
Time
Average count
Grade-activity correlation
Daytime
41
0.07
Evening
15
0.13
Figure 4: Pearson correlations between grades and
level of Moodle activity by students for all assign-
ments during the seven days before assignment sub-
missions.
the correlations of diﬀerent event subsets we settled on this
subset {view assign, view course, view page, submit for grading
assign, submission statement, accepted assign, submit assign,
view conﬁrm submit, assignment form assign}. This leaves a
total of 241,401 events in the analysis down from an original
set of 332,879.
For each of the assignments we calculate the correlation be-
tween grade and activity as represented by Moodle events
in the two weeks up to submission. These correlations are
sorted and plotted in Figure 4. Most of the correlations (41
out of 60) are positive as expected, however the right hand
side of the ranking shows some negative correlations. This
is a bad sign as it suggests that eﬀort does not always de-
liver a reward.
These assignments are another target for
intervention.
3.4
Hypothesis 3
Our ﬁnal hypothesis suggests that evening activity should
be more predictive of high grades than daytime activity.
Testing this required that the activity data be divided into
two intervals. To determine suitable time intervals, we ex-
amined the total number of activities per hour across all
courses. The most signiﬁcant spike of the daytime activity
happened between 8am and 6pm, whereas evening activity
rose between 6pm and midnight.
Our analysis showed that evening activity did in fact show
a higher correlation (Table 1), i.e. the correlation between
evening activity levels and grade is stronger for daytime ac-
tivity. This shows that the timing of activities is important
in addition to the number of activities. This motivated the
time-series analysis we report in the next section.

4.
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
Here we proposed a number of indicators of the success of
students in achieving high grades in courses at undergrad-
uate level.
We used a large data set of Moodle log data
originating from Computer Science courses to examine the
extent to which these hypotheses were supported. While in-
complete and noisy log data may have lead to correlations
in our experiments that were not particularly strong, these
correlations were still mostly positive, which suggests that
the factors we have chosen are inﬂuencing the grades in the
way we expect.
The observations from our experiments further support the
idea that students who are more active on Moodle and sub-
mit assignments earlier will achieve better results. As a next
step, we plan to further explore the validity of the clusters
classifying students into “good” and “bad” students on the
assignment and course level.
While we did observe outliers in our correlation analysis,
the associated courses should be considered using a sepa-
rate analysis to determine whether external factors are at
play (e.g.
continuous assessment rather than discrete as-
signments, lack of material provided on Moodle for a speciﬁc
course). Finally, it is worth considering anomalous clusters
in the context of activity outside that assignment or course.
In future research it would help in identiﬁcation of the reason
for the “bad” and “good” student performance, diﬀerences
between modules and anomalies to change the way modules
are delivered increasing successful learning.
