Land Use Detection & Identiﬁcation using
Geo-tagged Tweets
Saeed Khan
School of ITEE
University of Queensland
Brisbane, Australia

Md Shahzamal
Department of Computing
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia

Abstract—Geo-tagged tweets can potentially help with ‘sens-
ing’ the interaction of people with their surrounding environ-
ment. Based on this hypothesis, this paper makes use of geo-
tagged tweets in order to ascertain various land uses with a
broader goal to help with urban/city planning. The proposed
method utilises supervised learning to reveal spatial land use
within cities with the help of Twitter activity signatures. Specif-
ically, the technique involves using tweets from three cities of
Australia namely Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney. Analytical
results are checked against the zoning data provided by respective
city councils and a good match is observed between the predicted
land use and existing land zoning by the city councils. We show
that geo-tagged tweets contain features that can be useful for
land use identiﬁcation.
Index Terms—land use, twitter, spatio-temporal, urban zoning
I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of urban planning is to develop cities with the best
possible productive use of land, the ultimate purpose being
improving peoples’ day to day life and better management
of resources. Generally, the urban planning characterises
residential, commercial or recreational use of the land. The
land classiﬁcation or zoning determines how each segment of
the land is to be used. Zoning can be deﬁned as the process
of dividing land in a city council (municipality) into various
segments based upon its intended use. Thus, it may enforce
a variety of speciﬁc or conditional uses of land. It may also
indicate the size and dimensions of land area as well as the
form and scale of constructions. One of the issues associated
with zoning is that it requires actual assessment with regards
to the use of land as originally planned. This information
needs to be collected on site, and is usually obtained through
survey or questionnaire to record how people interact with
their land. This approach has restrictions in the sense that it
is very much dependent upon the willingness of people to
participate in such activity, involves costs, and, essentially is
just a snapshot in time. Technologies such as GIS [1] may
reveal some of the uses of land through image processing.
However, since images are not acquired very frequently, such
techniques may not be very productive.
As a result of using a large number of mobile devices,
people leave behind digital footprints of their interaction with
the environment. Availability of a vast number of mobile
applications has turned the mobile devices into sensors of
human activity in space and time. This has led to the advent of
new research areas such as smart cities and urban computing
with a goal to understand the city dynamics through ubiquitous
data, and thus improving the quality of life. Data sources
such as GPS, Bluetooth, Wiﬁand cell phone records are
becoming more and more useful for applications such as
transport planning [2], trafﬁc estimation [3] and social studies
[4]. This paper suggests a method to use Twitter data to
determine the type of land people tweet from by analysing
the temporal patterns of their tweeting behaviour. The method
is scalable and efﬁcient compared to some other techniques
in the literature and can utilise any number of data points in
order to capture the best possible spatial features.
II. RELATED WORK
For urban planning, a number of different data sources
have been used by various researchers in their studies
to model and characterise land use. The data for these
studies comes from either a GPS device, cell phone, or
a Location Based Social Network service. A quick review
of work related to each of these technologies is provided here.
a) GPS::
This data source has limited availability,
is recorded every few seconds and is usually based on a
small number of subjects. It is not very widely used for
land classiﬁcation purposes. The data set is usually acquired
through buses and taxis e.g. in [5], the authors conduct
analysis of GPS tracks obtained from taxis to infer the
mobility of individuals and detect areas of various activities
using a pre-deﬁned map of the places of interest.
b) Cell Phone Data:: Usually known as Call Detail
Records (CDRs) contain information for a large number of
people, but is not easy to acquire because of privacy issues
and with location precision at the level of mobile tower
only when some activity is initiated. In [6], the authors use
cell phone data to analyse the relationship between cellular
activity and commercial land use to identify the prevailing
arXiv:2101.03337v1  [math.NA]  9 Jan 2021

pattern in each area. They qualitatively presented their results
and did not use any land use information. In another similar
study [7], the authors analysed the cell phone activity to
characterise and cluster similar locations.
c) Location Based Social Networks:: These offer precise
location information in the form of latitude and longitude
when users enable the geo-location feature. This data set
can be most up to date and is easy to acquire as a result
of ubiquitous use of various mobile and social network
applications by people. [8] model activity patterns in New
York City and London by using the geo-located information
provided by a social networking platform. They characterise
the activity patterns by using a set of pre-deﬁned categories
which indicate the type of check-in locations. Due to this
approach, their results provide a coarse idea of the land
use. In another work, [9] present a method to explore land
use and user activities at a large scale with the help of
Foursquare platform. They validate the results with personal
interviews to conﬁrm the identiﬁed land uses. In [10], the
authors group twitter users by city zone and various times of
the day to study the daily dynamics of the city. For a zone,
they compare daytime activity with night time to determine
zones showing increased activity. Using multiple regression,
they determine how various land uses inﬂuence different time
of the day via changing coefﬁcients. They observed that user
activity seemed to decrease throughout the day for land uses
such as education, health and ofﬁces, remained constant for
parks, and increased for retail and residential zones. This
study aims to establish the link between twitter activity and
the known land use types and does not intend to determine
the land uses from twitter activity itself. In [11] and [12],
the authors propose a method to characterise geographic
regions by focusing on day-to-day living patterns of crowds
using Twitter data. To grasp images of a city, the regularity
of a region is deﬁned by using activity patterns such as the
number of tweets, their contents, the number of users and
the movement of crowds. Moreover, the changes in regularity
patterns with respect to time are analysed and the grouped
urban types are categorised by tracking similar patterns across
the regions.
In this study, we also make use of publicly available
geo-tagged tweets for the identiﬁcation of land use in a city.
However, we purely use the temporal patterns of raw twitter
activity without using any textual information or user proﬁles.
Our method is simplistic, requires less processing and thus
can be applied on any volume of data. Speciﬁcally, we use
temporal signatures of Brisbane tweets as a template (training
data) against which land use in other cities is subsequently
detected and predicted. We validate the results against land
use data provided by councils of test cities and observe a
good match between the predicted land use and actual land
classiﬁcation.
III. DATA SET & EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The data set has been collected using Twitter Streaming
API [13] covering Australia and spanning a period from
January 2015 till July 2016. It consists of 9462345 tweets
from 245796 unique users. For Sydney we have 947964
geo-tagged tweets and 40281 unique users, for Melbourne
we have 854821 geo-tagged tweets and 35556 unique users
and for Brisbane we have 276394 geo-tagged tweets and
14555 unique users in the data set. The proposed method
involves using the spatial location of tweets for above three
cities of Australia. Brisbane is chosen as the baseline city,
and Melbourne and Sydney are used as test cities on which
the method is applied. For Brisbane, Central Business District
(CBD) is chosen as the reference around which various land
use zones are identiﬁed based on its city council’s scheme.1
Although the council divides land into numerous types, key
zones consist of business, residential, education and recreation
since these zones account for the highest twitter activity
compared to other zones.
Starting from the Brisbane CBD, corresponding temporal
signatures are extracted for each key zone. These signatures
are later used as a template. The hypothesis is that areas
in different cities can be classiﬁed by their similarity to
these temporal signatures. To detect land use in our test
cities, CBDs are selected again and various activity clusters
are generated from the city-blocks until some meaningful
temporal patterns are obtained. Then, the closest matching
temporal pattern from Brisbane is found for each unknown
cluster and the land use is thus predicted. This predicted
cluster is then compared to actual land use based on its city
zoning scheme and the overlap percentage is calculated for
evaluation.
IV. TEMPORAL SIGNATURE GENERATION
Using Brisbane as baseline city, each of the key identiﬁed
zone is analysed for its twitter activity. Figure 1 shows the
city council’s land zoning scheme based on areas surrounding
the CBD. Since each geo-tagged tweet contains its location
information and time-stamp, the temporal pattern for every
hour of the day is extracted and plotted. This temporal
signature reﬂects the twitter activity for a given land zone
and spans the entire period of the data set. As a result,
four temporal signatures are generated for business (Blue 1),
residential (Light pink 1, 2, 3 & Maroon 1, 2), education
(Yellow 5) and recreation (Yellow 2 & Grey 2) land use,
respectively.
Figure 2 shows the temporal behaviour of each key land
zone as the normalised hourly tweets for the entire data
set. Normalisation is the process of adjusting values from
different scales to some common scale in order to provide a
better comparison of the values. For example, the raw data
1Schemes can be found here.

Fig. 1: Brisbane City Zoning Map: land use is identiﬁed by a combination of colour and number e.g. business (Blue 1),
residential (Light pink 1, 2, 3 & Maroon 1, 2), education (Yellow 5) and recreation (Yellow 2 & Grey 2).
Source: cityplan.brisbane.qld.gov.au/eplan/#/Property/0
for Business cluster consists of very high values for each
hour compared to other clusters, and gives an impression
that it is probably the most ‘active’ cluster. However, a better
analysis would be to ﬁgure out the average percentage of
tweets posted in each hour of a day within each of the
clusters. Consequently, each hourly record value is divided
by the overall average of all hours to get the corresponding
normalised value. In this way, the average for all normalised
values is 1 for each cluster.
T c
h =
#T c
h
P23
h=0 #T c
h
where T c
h is the percentage of tweets in hour h ∈{0, . . . , 23}
within cluster c, and #T c
h is the raw count of such tweets.
As shown in Figure 2, the business zone is characterised
by a large tweeting activity during day time. The ﬁrst peak
in the tweeting activity is observed around 1 p.m. and the
Fig. 2: Brisbane Temporal Signatures

second peak is seen at 5 p.m. This might be related to the
times corresponding to activities such as going for a lunch
or going home. Spatially, this zone covers areas such as
hotels, restaurants, shopping centres and ofﬁces. Some bus
and train stations are also included in it. Hence, overall this
zone represents ‘business’ activity in the city. The residential
zone shows increasing twitter activity in the afternoon with
maximum shown at 10 p.m. It covers areas comprising of
private residences, apartments and hostels. The education zone
has its maximum peak at 10 a.m. followed by another one at
12 p.m. After this, the trend in the twitter activity gradually
declines. This zone covers area including a school and a TAFE
in South Brisbane. The recreation zone has its distinctive
peak at 7 p.m. after which there is a sharp decline in twitter
activity. Spatially it covers areas including Suncorp Stadium
and Brisbane Convention & Exhibition Centre. We hypothesise
that Twitter activities in other cities such as Melbourne and
Sydney have the same pattern for each of the four land
uses. We test this hypothesis through our proposed land use
detection model.
V. LAND USE DETECTION
In this section, land use is detected for each test city:
Melbourne and Sydney by using the spatial location of tweets.
The cluster building process is manual and incremental as per
following steps:
1) Start from CBD, randomly pickup a city-block, get its
latitude-longitude bounding box, retrieve the data points con-
tained inside and plot its temporal curve. If the curve contains
data points for every hour of the day, keep the city-block as
one of the clusters. Otherwise:
2) Manually expand the cluster by adding adjoining areas
by enlarging the latitude-longitude bounding box. Check the
temporal pattern again and expand further if necessary until a
full temporal curve showing data for every hour of the day is
obtained.
3) Choose another city-block and generate clusters in above
manner.
4) Discard any cluster with incomplete temporal curve i.e
missing data points for certain hour(s) of the day.
This cluster generation process emphasises that there should
be no zero reading for any hour because this might indicate
that such a cluster is either just random or irregular in nature
with not much activity taking place in it. In comparison, a
cluster which has activity for every hour of the day shows
that it is consistently and regularly used by people and this is
important for determining an activity or land use eventually. It
should also be noted that some of the clusters may eventually
form a little far from the CBD as a result of this process.
A. Melbourne Clusters
For Melbourne, the cluster building process explained above
is followed and eventually four clusters are generated which
are then subjected to further processing and analysis. These
clusters are shown in ﬁgure 3.
The temporal patterns for each of these unknown clusters
are shown in ﬁgure 4 and these plots represent normalised
data. Each of these clusters is yet unknown in terms of the land
use that it actually represents. As a next step, these clusters
are compared with Brisbane’s known zones to judge their
similarity. This similarity is evaluated quantitatively by using
the measure of mean-squared error. The mean-squared error
(MSE) function calculates the average of squares of errors,
or in other words, the average squared difference between
the observed values (here a temporal activity signature from
Brisbane) and predicted values (here a temporal activity sig-
nature from Melbourne). It is always non-negative and values
closer to zero are better as they indicate less error, with zero
signifying no error at all.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Xi −Yi)2
(1)
where n is the number of data points, Xi represents observed
values and Yi represents predicted values. The similarity be-
tween values can also be measured with other techniques such
as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [14]. PCA is based on
dimensionality reduction concept and involves building vectors
based on observed and predicted values. This work, however,
uses MSE technique because of its simplicity in calculating
errors. Each extracted cluster of Melbourne is checked against
every zone of Brisbane and the corresponding mean-squared
error is calculated. This error is calculated on the basis of each
hourly normalised value for a cluster and then the overall error
is summed. Table I lists errors for each pair of Melbourne and
Brisbane cluster below:
Brisbane Zones
Business
Residential
Education
Recreation
Melb. Cluster 1
0.045
0.156
0.419
0.387
Melb. Cluster 2
0.206
0.204
0.611
0.607
Melb. Cluster 3
0.098
0.613
0.184
0.90
Melb. Cluster 4
0.239
0.190
0.834
0.117
TABLE I: MSE between Melbourne & Brisbane reference
clusters
The minimum error for each pair of clusters is highlighted
in bold and based on this, the cluster for Melbourne is
assigned. e.g. Cluster 1 has the least error when compared
against the Business zone of Brisbane. So the model has
predicted that Cluster 1 of Melbourne probably belongs to
Business area of the city. Similarly, Cluster 2 of Melbourne
has least error against Residential zone of Brisbane and so
this cluster is predicted as Residential. In this way, a land
use prediction is made for all Melbourne clusters to be later
validated against actual land use based on its city council’s
classiﬁcation scheme. If the predictions are mostly correct, it
is indicative that we can use a city’s twitter activity pattern as
a reference to identify the land use in other similar cities.
B. Sydney Clusters
For Sydney, the clusters are built in a similar fashion and
four clusters are generated for further processing and analysis.
These clusters are shown in ﬁgure 5.

(a) Cluster 1
(b) Cluster 2
(c) Cluster 3
(d) Cluster 4
Fig. 3: Melbourne Clusters. Cluster 1 ranges from -37.820565 to -37.806470 (latitude) and 144.955165 to 144.974617
(longitude). Cluster 2: -37.799383 to -37.787955 (latitude) and 144.916789 to 144.935543 (longitude). Cluster 3: -37.800277 to
-37.792296 (latitude) and 144.957810 to 144.964049 (longitude). Cluster 4: -37.824938 to -37.817277 (latitude) and 144.971911
to 144.988133 (longitude).
Fig. 4: Melbourne Temporal Signatures
The temporal patterns of each of these unknown clusters
are shown in ﬁgure 6. The plots represent normalised hourly
twitter activity for the corresponding cluster. These clusters
are yet unknown in terms of the land use that they actually
represent. Like Melbourne, these clusters are compared with
Brisbane’s known zones to judge their mutual similarity. Each
Sydney cluster is matched against every zone of Brisbane and
their corresponding mean-squared error is calculated. Table II
lists errors for each pair of Sydney and Brisbane cluster. The
minimum MSE error for each pair of clusters is highlighted
and based on this, the cluster for Sydney is assigned. Cluster
1 is predicted as Business, Cluster 2 as Residential, Cluster 3
as Education, and Cluster 4 as Recreation.
Brisbane Zones
Business
Residential
Education
Recreation
Sydney Cluster 1
0.030
0.238
0.267
0.536
Sydney Cluster 2
0.266
0.114
0.691
0.355
Sydney Cluster 3
0.398
1.204
0.198
1.613
Sydney Cluster 4
0.397
0.321
1.190
0.149
TABLE II: MSE between Sydney & Brisbane reference clus-
ters
VI. LAND USE VALIDATION
In this section, we validate the extracted clusters of
Melbourne and Sydney against actual land use and evaluate the

(a) Cluster 1
(b) Cluster 2
(c) Cluster 3
(d) Cluster 4
Fig. 5: Sydney Clusters. Cluster 1 ranges from -33.868316 to -33.863256 (latitude) and 151.202142 to 151.213085 (longitude).
Cluster 2: -33.890915 to -33.888452 (latitude) and 151.196287 to 151.200373 (longitude). Cluster 3: -33.891788 to -33.886575
(latitude) and 151.182370 to 151.190743 (longitude). Cluster 4: -33.895203 to -33.888043 (latitude) and 151.220731 to
151.227083 (longitude).
Fig. 6: Sydney Temporal Signatures
overall methodology. To validate the empirical results obtained
so far, the actual land zoning information provided by the city
councils of Melbourne and Sydney is utilised. Comparison
is made against the type of land zone corresponding to the
predicted cluster type. The Melbourne city council divides
land into commercial, recreation, residential and mixed-use
zones etc. as shown in ﬁgure 7. Similarly, the Sydney city
council divides land into commercial, mixed-use, residential
and industrial zones etc. as shown in ﬁgure 8.
In order to determine how closely the identiﬁed clusters
signify the ofﬁcial land uses, we calculate the degree of
overlap between polygon shape of each extracted cluster and
the polygon of relevant underlying space in the ofﬁcial zoning
map of a city. Table III shows the percentages of overlap
for various types of clusters for both cities. We ﬁnd that in
general there is a high similarity between the ofﬁcial land use
types and the predicted land use types from twitter. According
to Table III, the business areas in the ofﬁcial zoning maps
are identiﬁed appropriately by our predicted business clusters
with accuracy ranging between 52% and 62%. Similarly, the
percentage of similarity between the residential land zone and
our predicted residential cluster is between 50% and 56%.
The education cluster of Melbourne is predicted incorrectly
and hence its accuracy against actual education zone is 0%,
whereas for Sydney it is 53.5%. The highest accuracy is

Fig. 7: Melbourne Zoning Map
Fig. 8: Sydney Zoning Map
Predicted Land Use
Ofﬁcial Land Use
Business
Residential
Education
Recreation
Melbourne
Business
52.4%
-
-
-
Residential
-
56%
-
-
Education
-
-
0%
-
Recreation
-
-
-
67.2%
Sydney
Business
62.5%
-
-
-
Residential
-
50%
-
-
Education
-
-
53.5%
-
Recreation
-
-
-
52.6%
TABLE III: Overlap between the land use predicted by Twitter
activity and the Ofﬁcial land use.
observed for recreation zone ranging from 52% to 67%.
Not all types of ofﬁcial land zones are necessarily predicted
in all cities, as is the case with Melbourne’s education cluster.
This is because its corresponding extracted cluster (Cluster
3) generated slightly higher error with respect to it. In terms
of calculating the overlap between extracted cluster and its
underlying actual land zone, the area of underlying zone
plays a key part. The cluster itself may have been predicted
correctly for its actual use, but its overlap percentage is
inﬂuenced by the size of the council’s land zone area.
For instance, the predicted cluster may have a small area
owing to concentration of tweets in a limited space but its
corresponding actual land zone area may be much larger.
This is possible for places like parks where people might
gather in a speciﬁc part of it and their resulting cluster will
be much smaller than the rest of the park, hence yielding
smaller overlap percentage. Another issue is the best number

of clusters. Current methodology relies on a limited number
of clusters and determining the best number of clusters may
also be a fruitful area for further research.
Overall, it can be argued that the predicted clusters in both
cities predominantly match their respective actual land zones.
Thus, the proposed methodology in this study demonstrates
that geo-tagged tweets show great promise for land use iden-
tiﬁcation, and this suggests proﬁtable areas for future research
in how best to tune this method for maximum accuracy.
Although, it has been shown that key ofﬁcial land use types are
reasonably represented by our predicted clusters, this whole
analysis is still preliminary and needs further investigation.
Moreover, it would also be worth validating the empirical
results against some survey data when available.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The availability of massive geo-data generated as a result
of ubiquitous use of various online and mobile applications
has highlighted its prospective use in various ﬁelds, one of
which is urban development and planning. In this study, a
method has been proposed and demonstrated for identifying
and predicting land use using Twitter data from Brisbane and
subsequently testing on Melbourne and Sydney. The results
indicate that geo-tagged tweets can represent the land use in
line with ofﬁcial land zoning to a good extent. The percentage
of overlap is found to be as high as 67.2% for Melbourne’s
recreation zone followed by 62.5% for Sydney’s business zone.
The results of this work are comparable to those of [9] and
[15], but the cluster generation method used here is simpler
yet robust compared to those studies which use a much slower
clustering method requiring ﬁltering out of many raw data
points. On the other hand, our method can work with virtually
any volume of data and without removing any records or losing
underlying spatial features.
It should be noted that the precise nature of activities being
undertaken by twitter users is not determined as a result of
our technique at this stage.
