On the Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent in Low-precision Number
Formats
Matteo Cacciola1
Antonio Frangioni2
Masoud Asgharian3
Alireza Ghaffari4
Vahid Partovi Nia4
1Polytechnique Montreal
2University of Pisa
3McGill University
4Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Abstract
Deep learning models are dominating almost all
artiﬁcial intelligence tasks such as vision, text,
and speech processing. Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (SGD) is the main tool for training such
models, where the computations are usually per-
formed in single-precision ﬂoating-point num-
ber format. The convergence of single-precision
SGD is normally aligned with the theoretical re-
sults of real numbers since they exhibit negligi-
ble error. However, the numerical error increases
when the computations are performed in low-
precision number formats. This provides com-
pelling reasons to study the SGD convergence
adapted for low-precision computations.
We
present both deterministic and stochastic analy-
sis of the SGD algorithm, obtaining bounds that
show the effect of number format. Such bounds
can provide guidelines as to how SGD conver-
gence is affected when constraints render the
possibility of performing high-precision compu-
tations remote.
1
Introduction
The success of deep learning models in different machine
learning tasks have made these models de facto for almost
all vision, text, and speech processing tasks. Figure 1 de-
picts the size of deep learning models, indicating an ex-
ponential increase in the size of the models, and hence an
urge for efﬁcient computations. A common technique used
in training deep learning models is SGD but the theoretical
behaviour of SGD in rarely studied in low-precision num-
ber formats. Although there is a surge of articles on real
numbers (for example see Polyak (1967), Schmidt et al.
(2011), Ram et al. (2009)), the performance of SGD in low-
precision number formats started recently. Depending on
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
0
2
4
6
8
10
Date
Number of Parameters (Billions)
AlexNet
InceptionV2
AmoebaNet−B
ResNext−101
Bit−M
VIT−G
SwinV2
SEER−RG
Transformer
GPT2
MegatronLM
Figure 1: Exploding trend of deep learning models for im-
age classiﬁcation (black) and language models (blue) in
time.
the precision, the loss landscape can change considerably.
Figure 2, for instance, depicts this situation for ResNet-18
loss landscape in both single-precision and low-precision
number formats. Motivated by Figure 2, we present a for-
mal study of SGD for quasi-convex functions when com-
putations are performed in low-precision number formats.
We note that numerical errors, both in forward and back
propagation, can possibly affect the convergence behaviour
of the algorithm. It is conceivable that the numerical er-
rors should increase as the precision decreases. To under-
stand the effect of number format on the convergence of
SGD, a careful analysis of the SGD algorithm for a prede-
termined precision is needed. We present both determin-
istic and stochastic analysis of the normalized SGD algo-
rithm, obtaining bounds that show, explicitly, the effect of
precision, i.e. number format. Such bounds can provide
guidelines as to how SGD convergence is affected when
constraints render performing high-precision computations
impractical, and to what extent the precision can be reduced
without compromising SGD convergence.
Our experiments are performed for logistic regression on
MNIST dataset. They conﬁrm that the trajectory of the loss
in low-precision SGD setup has at least a limit point whose
loss value is in the proximity of the minimum when the
numerical errors are relatively small, see Theorem 4.1 and
Theorem 4.3.
arXiv:2301.01651v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2023

On the Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent in Low-precision Number Formats
Figure 2: ResNet-18 loss landscape in single-precision
(left) and low-precision number format (right).
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a lit-
erature review on the low-precision training of deep learn-
ing models and also provides some common background
for theoretical analysis of SGD. Section 3 discusses some
preliminary notations and deﬁnitions for analysis of quasi-
convex loss function and also the ﬂoating point number for-
mats. Section 4 contains the main theoretical results. Sec-
tion 5 provides some experimental results that support our
theoretical results. We conclude in Section 6.
2
Related works
Recently, deep learning models provide state-of-the-art
performance in various machine learning tasks such as
computer vision, speech, and natural language processing
(NLP). The size of ImageNet classiﬁcation models after the
introduction of AlexNet size is exploded to 200×, and the
size of language models are getting 10× bigger every year.
The recent trend of deep learning models shows that larger
models such as transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and
their variants such as GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019), Mega-
tronLM (Shoeybi et al., 2019), and Brown et al. (2020) are
easier to generalize on different downstream tasks. More-
over, examples of large language models are included in
Figure 1 (blue line) and they show an increasing trend in
number of parameters over time. A similar trend also ap-
pear in vision models, specially after the advent of vision
transformers (Zhai et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2022) that
beat convolutional neural networks (Mahajan et al., 2018)
on various tasks, see Figure 1 (black line). Although such
large models have advantage in terms of accuracy, they suf-
fer from high computational cost in their training and infer-
ence phases. Moreover, the high computational complex-
ity of these models causes high energy consumption and
memory usage which makes their training and deployment
difﬁcult and even sometimes infeasible. Thus, reducing the
computational complexity of large deep learning models is
crucial.
On the other hand, there has been some efforts in manu-
ally redesigning smaller models with similar accuracy as
large models which often require more complicated train-
ing.
In image classiﬁcation small models such as Mo-
bileNet (Howard et al., 2017) have a similar accuracy as
ResNet He et al. (2016), and in language models, Dis-
tilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019) shows close performance to
BERT. Meanwhile there have been some efforts in design-
ing models automatically such as Liu et al. (2018); Zoph
et al. (2018). Other methods include those preserving the
baseline model’s architecture while modifying computa-
tions e.g. compressing large models using sparse estima-
tion Luo et al. (2017); Ramakrishnan et al. (2020); Furuya
et al. (2022), or simplifying computations by running on
low-precision number formats Jacob et al. (2018); Wu et al.
(2020). Some researchers are even pushing frontiers by
storing weights and reducing activation to binary (Hubara
et al., 2016) or ternary numbers (Li et al., 2021).
Training large models are compute intensive using single-
precision ﬂoating point. This is why hardware manufac-
turers such as NVIDIA, Google, Transcent, and Huawei
started supporting hardware for low-precision number for-
mats such as Bﬂoat, ﬂoat16, and int8. Recently researchers
try to map single-precision computations on lower bits,
see Zhang et al. (2020); Zhao et al. (2021); Ghaffari et al.
(2022).
Majority of the literature on SGD assumes convex loss
function. We weaken this assumption by considering quasi-
convex class of loss functions that include convex functions
as special case. One of the ﬁrst works on quasi-convex
optimization is Kiwiel and Murty (1996), where is proven
that the gradient descent algorithm converges to a station-
ary point. Later, in Kiwiel (2001), the differentiability hy-
pothesis is removed and the convergence result is shown
using quasi-subgradients. In the case of perturbed SGD, in
Hu et al. (2015) the authors are able to deal with bounded
biased perturbation on the quasi-subgradient computation.
In a subsequent work Hu et al. (2016) analyzed the stochas-
tic setting. Recently, Zhang et al. (2022) studied the low-
precision SGD for strongly convex loss functions where the
authors used Langevin dynamics. In comparison, our work
differs in two aspects (i) we assume quasi-convexity, (ii)
our setup adds noise to the SGD and this allows for less
stringent assumptions on the noise and its distribution.
3
Preliminaries
We start with some preliminary notations about quasi-
convexity and ﬂoating point number formats in the sequel.
3.1
Quasi-convexity
Deﬁnition 3.1. A function f : IRd →IR is said to be quasi-
convex if ∀a ∈IR, f −1[(−∞, a)] = {w ∈IRd| f(w) ∈
(−∞, a)} = Sf,a is convex.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Given a quasi-convex function f : IRd →
IR, the quasi-subgradient of f at w ∈IRd is deﬁned as
¯∂∗f(w) = {g ∈IRd | ⟨g, w′ −w⟩≤0, ∀w′ ∈Sf,f(w)}

Matteo Cacciola1
Antonio Frangioni2
Masoud Asgharian3
Alireza Ghaffari4
Vahid Partovi Nia4
In what follows, the optimal value and optimal set of a
function f on a set Ωare respectively denoted by f ∗and
Ω∗, i.e. f ∗= infw∈Ωf(w) and Ω∗= argminw∈Ωf(w).
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let p > 0 and L > 0. f : IRd →IR is said
to satisfy the H¨older condition of order p with constant L if
f(w) −f ∗≤L[dist(w, Ω∗)]p
where dist(w, w′) = minw′ ∥w −w′∥where ∥· ∥denotes
the Euclidean norm.
3.2
Floating points
A base β ∈N, with precision t ∈N, and exponent range
[emin, emax] ⊂Z deﬁne a ﬂoating point system F, where
an element y ∈F can be represented as
y = ±m × βe−t,
(1)
where m ∈Z, 0 ≤m < βt, and e ∈[emin, emax].
For an x ∈[βemin−t, βemax(1 −β−t)], let the ﬂoat pro-
jection function be ﬂ(x) := PF(x), then for x, y ∈F, the
rounding error for basic operations op ∈{+, −, ×, /}, is
ﬂ(x op y) = (x op y)(1 + δ0),
(2)
where the error is bounded by δ0 ≤β1−t .
When trying to compute a subgradient g ∈∂f(w) for a
w ∈F the error is bounded to
ﬂ(g) = g(1 + δ1),
where |δ1| ≤cδ0 and c > 0 depends on the number of
operations needed for computing such subgradient. A step
of subgradient descent in ﬂoating point in IRd is:
wk+1 = {wk −η[gk(1 + δ1k)]} (1 + δ2k),
where we suppose η ∈F, ∥δ1k∥≤cδ0
√
d and ∥δ2k∥≤
δ0
√
d where d is the dimension of δ. We can reformulate it
in terms of absolute error
wk+1 = wk −η(gk + rk) + sk,
and if the norm of the subgradient gk and wk+1 is bounded,
then so are ∥rk∥≤R and ∥sk∥≤S. Note that the inﬁnity
norm of the errors are bounded
∥δ1k∥∞≤cδ0,
∥δ2k∥∞≤δ0,
so
R2 ≤cδ0 ∥gk∥,
S2 ≤δ0 ∥wk∥.
4
Main results
Although our study is mainly motivated by training deep
learning models and ﬂoating point errors, they can be ap-
plied elsewhere.
4.1
Deterministic analysis
Let PΩ(·) be the projection operator over Ω. We start with
adapting and improving the results of Hu et al. (2015) in
the presence of error in the summation
Theorem 4.1. Let f : IRd →IR be a quasi-convex function
satisfying the H¨older condition of order p and constant L.
Let wk+1 = PΩ(wk −ηˆgk + sk) where Ω⊂IRd is com-
pact, c is the diameter of Ω, and ˆgk =
gk
∥gk∥+ rk, with
gk ∈¯∂∗f(wk), ∥rk∥< R < 1, ∥sk∥≤S. Then
lim inf
k→∞f(wk) ≤f ∗+ LΓp(c),
where
Γ(c) = η
2
"
1 +

R + S
η
2# _ "
η
2
(
1 −

R + S
η
2)
+ c

R + S
η
#
.
See the Appendix for the proof.
Remark: Unlike Hu et al. (2015), decreasing η does not
decrease the error bound always, so we can derive its opti-
mal value by minimizing the bound with respect to η.
Deﬁne
η1 =
S
√
1 + R2 ,
η2 =
r
S(c −2S)
1 −R2
,
η3 = c −S
R
Corollary 4.1.1. The optimal choice for the step size η that
minimizes the error bound in Theorem 4.1 is reached in at
least one of this 3 points {η1, η2, η3}.
The next result presents a ﬁnite iteration version of the pre-
vious result. The effect of the number of iterations K, and
the starting point w0 are clearly reﬂected in the bound for
mink<K f(wk).
Theorem 4.2. Let f : IRd →IR be a quasi-convex function
satisfying the H¨older condition of order p and constant L.
Let w′
k+1 = wk−ηˆgk and wk+1 = w′
k+1+sk where ˆgk =
gk
∥gk∥+ rk, where gk ∈¯∂∗f(wk), ∥rk∥< R, ∥sk∥≤S.
Then,
min
k<K f(wk) ≤f ∗+ L

Γ(c0) +
c0
2ηK
p
,
with c0 = ∥w0 −w∗∥.
See the Appendix for the proof.
4.2
Stochastic analysis
Here, we present the stochastic counterpart of Theorem 4.1.
The theorem requires only mild conditions on the ﬁrst two
moments of the errors. We start by deﬁning the notion of
stochastic quasi-subgradient.

On the Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent in Low-precision Number Formats
Figure 3: A two dimensional ∥w∥0.2 quasi-convex function
(top panel), and the SGD trace plot conﬁrming the stochas-
tic and deterministic bounds hold (bottom panel).
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let w and w′ be d-dimensional random
vectors deﬁned on the probability space (W, F, P) and f :
IRd →IR be a measurable quasi-convex function. Then
g(w) is called a unit noisy quasi-subgradient of f at w
if ∥g(w)∥
a.s.
= 1 and P

Sf,f(w) ∩Aw ̸= ∅
	
= 0, where
Aw = {w′ : ⟨g(w), w′ −w⟩> 0}·
Thus, inspired by results of Hu et al. (2016), we prove the
following theorem that take into account both randomness
in the gradient and the computation numerical error.
Theorem 4.3. Let f : IRd →IR be a continuous quasi-
convex function satisfying the H¨older condition of order p
and constant L . Let wk+1 = PΩ[wk −η(ˆgk + rk) + sk]
where Ωis a convex closed set, ˆgk is a unit noisy quasi-
subgradient of f at wk, rk’s are i.i.d. random vectors with
IE {rk} = 0 and IE

∥rk∥2	
= dσ2
r, and similarly sk’s are
i.i.d random vectors with IE {sk} = 0 and IE

∥sk∥2	
=
dσ2
s. Further assume that ˆgk, sk, and rk are uncorrelated.
Then,
lim inf
k→∞f(wk) ≤f ∗+ L
η
2(1 + dσ2
r) + dσ2
s
2η
p
a.s.
See the Appendix for the proof.
Similar to Corollary 4.1.1 one can derive the optimal step
size.
Corollary 4.3.1. The optimal step size η that minimizes the
error bound in Theorem 4.3 is η∗=
q
dσ2s
dσ2r+1.
Figure 4: The Holder’s parameters p and L are manually
ﬁtted to the loss function that is evaluated at different dis-
tances from the optimal point. The left panel is a linear ﬁt
with p = 1 and L = 0.95. The right panel demonstrate
the ﬁt with p = 1.6 and L = 0.85. We used p = 1.6 and
L = 0.85 for our experiments.
Remark: It immediately follows the optimal step size is
σs
σr for large d.
5
Experiments
We performed two types of experiments, a simple quasi-
convex function and a logistic regression on MNIST
dataset.
5.1
Simple quasi-convex function
To asses the bounds obtained in our theorems we start
with a simple quasi-convex function that exactly satisfy the
Holder’s condition. We chose f(w) = 3∥w∥0.2 where
w ∈IR40. In this example, the parameters of Holder’s
condition are p = 0.2 and L = 3. We added noise to the
gradients and to the weight update denoted by ∥rk∥and
∥sk∥respectively. This noise has a uniform distribution
rki ∼U(−Br, Br), and ski ∼U(−Bs, Bs). Figure 3
shows the stochastic and deterministic bound for this ex-
periment. Note that, the theoretical bounds holds in both
stochastic and deterministic cases.
5.2
Logistic regression
Here, we present experimental results of logistic regression
on the ﬁrst two principal components of MNIST dataset.
For this experiment, we need to estimate the parameters of
the Holder’s condition for the loss function in order to com-
pute the bounds. To do so, the Holder’s parameters p and
L are manually ﬁtted to the loss function that is evaluated
at different distances from the optimal point, see Figure 4.
The optimal point w∗in our experiments is obtained us-
ing single-precision ﬂoating point gradient descent (GD)
method and is used as a reference to compute the parame-
ters of the bounds f ∗and c.
Computation of the gradients involves inner products that
are computed by multipliers and accumulators. The accu-
mulator have numerical error relative to its mantissa size.

Matteo Cacciola1
Antonio Frangioni2
Masoud Asgharian3
Alireza Ghaffari4
Vahid Partovi Nia4
Figure 5: Logistic regression trained using single-precision
SGD and a ﬁxed learning rate.
Figure 6: Logistic regression trained using Bﬂoat SGD
with accumulator size of 15 (sk ̸= 0 and rk ̸= 0).
We tested our logistic regression setup using Bﬂoat num-
ber format and reduced accumulator size. Also note that
according to Theorem 4.3, the values of dσ2
s and dσ2
r are
required to compute the bounds. Thus, in our experiments,
we used empirical values of those parameters to compute
the bounds. Also note that we did not plot the deterministic
bounds for these experiments as they are too pessimistic.
In order to evaluate the Holder’s condition parameters, p
and L, estimated as shown in Figure 4, we use a single-
precision SGD to conﬁrm if the bounds hold. Figure 5
demonstrates that the loss trajectory (blue line) has a limit
point in the proximity of the optimal point of the convex
loss function.
Figure 6 demonstrates the loss trajectory
when both weight update and gradient computations are
performed using Bﬂoat number format. Note that Bﬂoat
has 8 bit exponent and 7 bit mantissa and is used recently
to train deep learning models. The computations are per-
formed using 15-bit accumulator mantissa. Figure 7 shows
the loss trajectory when the weight update is in single pre-
cision and only gradient computations are performed using
Bﬂoat number format. In this experiment, the stochastic
bound is numerically equal to the single-precision SGD,
indicating that the precision of weight update is more im-
portant compared to the precision of the gradients.
Reducing the accumulator mantissa size has a direct effect
Figure 7: Logistic regression trained using Bﬂoat gradients
with accumulator size of 15, and single-precision weight
update (sk = 0 and rk ̸= 0).
Figure 8: Logistic regression trained using Bﬂoat gradients
with accumulator size of 10, and single-precision weight
update (sk = 0 and rk ̸= 0).
on the convergence of SGD. Figure 8 shows that stochastic
bound is increased in the case of 10-bit accumulator size.
In this experiment, the loss trajectory oscillates more in the
neighbourhood of the optimum point. This indicates the
accumulator size plays an important role in reducing the
numerical errors of the low-precision SGD computations,
and consequently improves the convergence of SGD.
6
Conclusion
We have studied the convergence of low-precision ﬂoating-
point SGD for quasi-convex loss functions and extended
some existing deterministic and stochastic bounds for con-
vex loss functions. In our theoretical setup, we considered
numerical errors for weight update and gradient compu-
tations. We have also derived the optimal step size as a
corollary of our theoretical results. Furthermore, in our ex-
periments, the effect of numerical errors on weight update
and gradient computations are demonstrated. Our experi-
ments show that the accumulator mantissa size plays a key
role in reducing the numerical error and improving the con-
vergence of SGD. Although our experiments with logistic
regression are promising, extension of the experiments for
more complex models is an appealing direction as the fu-
ture work.

On the Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent in Low-precision Number Formats
