arXiv:1101.4479v1  [cs.CL]  24 Jan 2011
A Context-theoretic Framework for
Compositionality in Distributional Semantics
Daoud Clarke∗
University of Hertfordshire
1. Introduction
In recent years, the abundance of text corpora and computing power has allowed
the development of techniques to analyse statistical properties of words. For exam-
ple techniques such as latent semantic analysis (Deerwester et al. 1990) and its vari-
ants, and measures of distributional similarity (Lin 1998; Lee 1999) attempt to derive
aspects of the meanings of words by statistical analysis, while statistical informa-
tion is often used when parsing to determine sentence structure (Collins 1997). These
techniques have proved useful in many applications within computational linguistics
and natural language processing (Schütze 1998; McCarthy et al. 2004; Grefenstette 1994;
Lin 2003; Bellegarda 2000; Choi, Wiemer-Hastings, and Moore 2001), arguably provid-
ing evidence that they capture something about the nature of words that should be
included in representations of their meaning. However, it is very difﬁcult to reconcile
these techniques with existing theories of meaning in language, which revolve around
logical and ontological representations. The new techniques, almost without exception,
can be viewed as dealing with vector-based representations of meaning, placing mean-
ing (at least at the word level) within the realm of mathematics and algebra; conversely
the older theories of meaning dwell in the realm of logic and ontology. It seems there
is no unifying theory of meaning to provide guidance to those making use of the new
techniques.
The problem appears to be a fundamental one in computational linguistics since
the whole foundation of meaning seems to be in question. The older, logical theories
often subscribe to a model-theoretic philosophy of meaning (Kamp and Reyle 1993;
Blackburn and Bos 2005) According to this approach, sentences should be translated
to a logical form that can be interpreted as a description of the state of the world.
The new vector-based techniques, on the other hand, are often closer in spirit to the
philosophy of “meaning as context”, that the meaning of an expression is determined by
how it is used. This is an old idea with origins in the philosophy of Wittgenstein (1953),
who said that “meaning just is use” and Firth (1957), “You shall know a word by the
company it keeps”, and the distributional hypothesis of Harris (1968), that words will
occur in similar contexts if and only if they have similar meanings. This hypothesis
is justiﬁed by the success of techniques such as latent semantic analysis as well as
experimental evidence (Miller and Charles 1991). Whilst the two philosophies are not
obviously incompatible — especially since the former applies mainly at the sentence
level and the latter mainly at the word level — it is not clear how they relate to each
other.

© 2005 Association for Computational Linguistics

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Meaning as Context
Vector-based Techniques
Philosophy
Mathematics
Context-theoretic Framework
Development of Context Theories
Figure 1
Method of Approach in developing the Context-theoretic Framework.
The
problem
of
how
to
compose
vector
representations
of
mean-
ings
of
words
has
recently
received
increased
attention
(Widdows 2008;
Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh 2008;
Mitchell and Lapata 2008;
Erk and Pado 2009;
Preller and Sadrzadeh 2009;
Guevara 2011;
Baroni and Zamparelli 2010)
al-
though
the
problem
has
been
considered
in
earlier
work
(Smolensky 1990;
Landauer and Dumais 1997;
Foltz, Kintsch, and Landauer 1998;
Kintsch 2001).
A
solution to this problem would have practical as well as philosophical beneﬁts. Current
techniques such as latent semantic analysis work well at the word level, but we cannot
extend them much beyond this, to the phrase or sentence level, without quickly
encountering the data-sparseness problem: there are not enough occurrences of strings
of words to determine what their vectors should be merely by looking in corpora. If we
knew how such vectors should compose then we would be able to extend the beneﬁts
of the vector based techniques to the many applications that require reasoning about
the meaning of phrases and sentences.
This paper describes the results of our own efforts to identify a theory that can
unite these two paradigms, and includes a summary of work described in the author’s
DPhil thesis (Clarke 2007). In addition, we also discuss the relationship between this
theory and methods of composition that have recently been proposed in the literature,
showing that many of them can be considered as falling within our framework.
Our approach in identifying the framework is summarised in Figure 1:
•
Inspired by the philosophy of meaning as context and vector based
techniques we developed a mathematical model of meaning as context, in
which the meaning of a string is a vector representing contexts in which
that string occurs in a hypothetical inﬁnite corpus.
2

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
•
The theory on its own is not useful when applied to real world corpora
because of the problem of data sparseness. Instead we examine the
mathematical propertes of the model, and abstract them to form a
framework which contains many of the properties of the model.
Implementations of the framework are called context theories since they
can be viewed as theories about the contexts in which strings occur. By
analogy with the term “model-theoretic” we use the term
“context-theoretic” for concepts relating to context theories, thus we call
our framework the context-theoretic framework.
•
In order to ensure that the framework was practically useful, context
theories were developed in parallel with the framework itself. The aim
was to be able to describe existing approaches to representing meaning
within the framework as fully as possible.
In developing the framework we were looking for speciﬁc properties; namely, we
wanted it to:
•
provide some guidelines describing in what way the representation of a
phrase or sentence should relate to the representations of the individual
words as vectors;
•
require information about the probability of a string of words to be
incorporated into the representation;
•
provide a way to measure the degree of entailment between strings based
on the particular meaning representation;
•
be general enough to encompass logical representations of meaning;
•
be able to incorporate the representation of ambiguity and uncertainty,
including statistical information such as the probability of a parse or the
probability that a word takes a particular sense.
The framework we present is abstract, and hence does not subscribe to a particular
method for obtaining word vectors: they may be raw frequency counts, or vectors ob-
tained by a method such as latent semantic analysis. Nor does the framework provide a
recipe for how to represent meaning in natural language, instead it provides restrictions
on the set of possibilities. The advantage of the framework is in ensuring that techniques
are used in a way that is well-founded in a theory of meaning. For example, given
vector representations of words, there is not one single way of combining these to give
vector representations of phrases and sentences, but in order to ﬁt within the framework
there are certain properties of the representation that need to hold. Any method of
combining these vectors in which these properties hold can be considered within the
framework and is thus justiﬁed according to the underlying theory; in addition the
framework instructs us as to how to measure the degree of entailment between strings
according to that particular method. We will attempt to show the broad applicability of
the framework by applying it to problems in natural language processing.
The contribution of this paper is as follows:
•
We deﬁne the context-theoretic framework and introduce the mathematics
necessary to understand it. The description presented hear is cleaner than
3

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
that of (Clarke 2007), and in addition we provide examples which should
provide intuition for the concepts we describe.
•
We relate the framework to methods of composition that have been
proposed in the literature, namely:
–
vector addition (Landauer and Dumais 1997;
Foltz, Kintsch, and Landauer 1998)
–
the tensor product (Smolensky 1990; Clark and Pulman 2007;
Widdows 2008)
–
the multiplicative models of Mitchell and Lapata (2008)
–
matrix multiplication (Rudolph and Giesbrecht 2010;
Baroni and Zamparelli 2010)
–
the approach of Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2008).
2. Context Theory
In this section, we deﬁne the fundamental concept of our concern, a context theory and
discuss its properties.
Deﬁnition 1 (Context Theory)
A context theory is a tuple ⟨A, A, ξ, V, ψ⟩, where A is a set (the alphabet), A is a unital
algebra over the real numbers, ξ is a function from A to A, V is an abstract Lebesgue
space and ψ is an injective linear map from A to V .
We will explain each part of this deﬁnition, introducing the necessary mathematics
as we proceed. We assume the reader is familiar with linear algebra; see (Halmos 1974)
for deﬁnitions that are not included here.
2.1 Algebra over a ﬁeld
We have identiﬁed an algebra over a ﬁeld as an important construction since it gener-
alises nearly all the methods of vector-based composition that have been proposed.
Deﬁnition 2 (Algebra over a ﬁeld)
An algebra over a ﬁeld (or simply algebra when there is no ambiguity) is a vector space
A over a ﬁeld K together with a binary operation (a, b) 7→ab on A that is bilinear, i.e.
a(αb + βc) = αab + βac
(αa + βb)c = αac + βbc
and associative, i.e. (ab)c = a(bc) for all a, b, c ∈A and all α, β ∈K.1 An algebra is called
unital if it has a distinguished unity element 1 satisfying 1x = x1 = x for all x ∈A.
1 Some authors do not place the requirement that an algebra is associative, in which case our deﬁnition
would refer to an associative algebra.
4

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
d1
d2
d3
cat
0
2
3
animal
2
1
2
big
1
3
0
Table 1
Example of possible occurrences for three terms in three different contexts.
We are generally only interested in real algebras, i.e. the situation where K is the ﬁeld
of real numbers, R.
Example 1
The square real-valued matrices of order n form a real unital associative algebra under
standard matrix multiplication. The vector operations are deﬁned entry-wise. The unity
element of the algebra is the identity matrix.
This
means
that
our
proposal
is
more
general
than
that
of
Rudolph and Giesbrecht (2010),
who
suggest
using
matrix
multiplication
as
a
framework for distributional semantic composition. The main differences in our
proposal are:
•
We allow dimensionality to be inﬁnite, instead of restricting ourselves to
ﬁnite-dimensional matrices;
•
Matrix algebras form a ∗-algebra, whereas we do not currently place this
requirement;
•
We emphasise the order structure that is inherent in real vector spaces
when there is a distinguished basis.
The purpose of ξ in the context theory is to associate elements of the algebra with
strings of words. Considering only the multiplication of A (and ignoring the vector
operations), A is a monoid, since we assumed that the multiplication on A is associative.
Then ξ induces a monoid homomorphism a 7→ˆa from A∗to A. We denote the mapped
value of a ∈A∗by ˆa ∈A, which is deﬁned as follows:
ˆa = ξ(a1)ξ(a2) . . . ξ(an)
where a = a1a2 . . . an for ai ∈A, and we deﬁne ˆǫ = 1, where ǫ is the empty string. Thus,
the mapping deﬁned by ˆ allows us to associate an element of the algebra with every
string of words.
The algebra is what tells us how meanings compose. A crucial part of our thesis is
that meanings can be represented by elements of an algebra, and that the type of compo-
sition that can be deﬁned using an algebra is general enough to describe the composition
of meaning in natural language. To go some way towards justifying this, we give several
examples of algebras that describe methods of composition that have been proposed in
the literature: namely point-wise multiplication (Mitchell and Lapata 2008), vector ad-
dition (Landauer and Dumais 1997; Foltz, Kintsch, and Landauer 1998) and the tensor
product (Smolensky 1990; Clark and Pulman 2007; Widdows 2008).
5

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Example 2 (Point-wise multiplication)
Consider the n-dimensional real vector space Rn. We describe a vector u ∈Rn in terms
of its components as (u1, u2, . . . un) with each ui ∈R. We can deﬁne a multiplication ·
on this space by
(u1, u2, . . . , un) · (v1, v2, . . . , vn) = (u1v1, u2v2, . . . unvn)
It is easy to see that this satisﬁes the requirements for an algebra speciﬁed above. Table
2.1 shows a simple example of possible occurrences for three terms in three different
contexts, d1,d2 and d3 which may, for example, represent documents. We use this to
deﬁne the mapping ξ from terms to vectors. Thus, in this example, we have ξ(cat) =
(0, 2, 3) and ξ(big) = (1, 3, 0). Under point-wise multiplication, we would have
\
big cat = ξ(big) · ξ(cat) = (1, 3, 0) · (0, 2, 3) = (0, 6, 0).
One commonly used operation for composing vector-based representations of
meaning is vector addition. As noted by Rudolph and Giesbrecht (2010), this can be
described using matrix multiplication, by embedding an n-dimensional vector u into
a matrix of order n + 1:







α u1 u2 · · · un
0
α 0
· · · 0
0
0
α · · · 0
...
...
...
...
0
0
0
· · · α







where α = 1. The set of all such matrices, for all real values of α, forms a subalgebra of
the algebra of matrices of order n + 1. A subalgebra of an algebra A is a sub-vector space
of A which is closed under the multiplication of A. This subalgebra can be equivalently
described as follows:
Example 3 (Additive algebra)
For two vectors u = (α, u1, u2, . . . un) and v = (β, v1, v2 . . . vn) in Rn+1, we deﬁne the
additive product ⊞by
u ⊞v = (αβ, αv1 + βu1, αv2 + βu2, . . . αvn + βun)
To verify that this multiplication makes Rn+1 an algebra, we can directly verify the
bilinear and associativity requirements, or check that it is isomorphic to the subalgebra
of matrices discussed above.
Using the table from the previous example, we deﬁne ξ+ so that it maps n-
dimensional context vectors to Rn+1, where the ﬁrst component is 1, so ξ+(big) =
(1, 1, 3, 0) and ξ+(cat) = (1, 0, 2, 3) and
\
big cat = ξ+(big) ⊞ξ+(cat) = (1, 1, 5, 3).
Point-wise multiplication and addition are not attractive as methods for composing
meaning in natural language since they are commutative, whereas natural language
is inherently non-commutative. One obvious method of composing vectors that is not
6

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
commutative is the tensor product. This method of composition can be viewed as a
product in an algebra by considering the tensor algebra, which is formed from direct
sums of all tensor powers of a base vector space.
We assume the reader is familiar with the tensor product and direct sum (see
(Halmos 1974) for deﬁnitions); we recall their basic properties here. Let Vn denote a
vector space of dimensionality n (note that all vector spaces of a ﬁxed dimensionality
are isomorphic). Then the tensor product space Vn ⊗Vm is isomorphic to a space Vnm of
dimensionality nm; moreover given orthonormal bases B = {b1, b2, . . . , bn} for Vn and
C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} for Vm there is an orthonormal basis for Vnm deﬁned by
{bi ⊗cj : 1 ≤i ≤n and 1 ≤j ≤m}.
Example 4
The multiplicative models of (Mitchell and Lapata 2008) correspond to the class of ﬁnite
dimensional algebras. Let A be a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space. Then every associative
bilinear product on A can be described by a linear function T from A ⊗A to A, as
required in Mitchell and Lapata’s model. To see this, consider the action of the product ·
on two orthonormal basis vectors a and b of A. This is a vector in A, thus we can deﬁne
T (a ⊗b) = a · b. By considering all basis vectors, we can deﬁne the linear function T .
If the tensor product can loosely be viewed as “multiplying” vector spaces, then the
direct sum is like adding them; the space Vn ⊕Vm has dimensionality n + m and has
basis vectors
{bi ⊕0 : 1 ≤i ≤n} ∪{0 ⊕cj : 1 ≤j ≤m};
it is usual to write b ⊕0 as b and 0 ⊕c as c.
Example 5 (Tensor algebra)
If V is a vector space, then we deﬁne T (V ), the free algebra of tensor algebra generated
by V as:
T (V ) = R ⊕V ⊕(V ⊗V ) ⊕(V ⊗V ⊗V ) ⊕· · ·
where we assume that the direct sum is commutative. We can think of it as the direct
sum of all tensor powers of V , with R representing the zeroth power. In order to make
this space an algebra, we deﬁne the product on elements of these tensor powers, viewed
as subspaces of the tensor algebra, as their tensor product. This is enough to deﬁne the
product on the whole space, since every element can be written as a sum of tensor
powers of elements of V . There is a natural embedding from V to T (V ), where each
element maps to an element in the ﬁrst tensor power. Thus for example we can think of
u, u ⊗v, and u ⊗v + w as elements of T (V ), for all u, v, w ∈V .
This product deﬁnes an algebra since the tensor product is a bilinear operation.
Taking V = R3 and using ξ as the natural embedding from the context vector of a string
7

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
d2 d3 d5 d6 d7 d8
d2 d3 d5 d6 d7 d8
d2 d3 d5 d6 d7 d8
orange
fruit
orange ∧fruit
Figure 2
Vector representations of the terms orange and fruit based on hypothetical occurrences in six
documents and their vector lattice meet (the darker shaded area).
T (V ), our previous example becomes
\
big cat = ξ(big) ⊗ξ(cat)
= (1, 3, 0) ⊗(0, 2, 3)
∼= (1(0, 2, 3), 3(0, 2, 3), 0(0, 2, 3))
∼= (0, 2, 3, 0, 6, 9, 0, 0, 0)
where the last two lines demonstrate how a vector in R3 ⊗R3 can be described in the
isomorphic space R9.
2.2 Vector lattices
The next part of the deﬁnition speciﬁes an abstract Lebesgue space. This is a special
kind of vector lattice, or even more generally, a partially ordered vector space.
Deﬁnition 3 (Partially ordered vector space)
A partially ordered vector space V is a real vector space together with a partial ordering
≤such that:
if x ≤y then x + z ≤y + z
if x ≤y then αx ≤αy
for all x, y, z ∈V , and for all α ≥0. Such a partial ordering is called a vector space order
on V . An element u of V satisfying u ≥0 is called a positive element; the set of all
positive elements of V is denoted V +. If ≤deﬁnes a lattice on V then the space is called
a vector lattice or Riesz space.
Example 6 (Lattice operations on Rn)
A vector lattice captures many properties that are inherent in real vector spaces when
there is a distinguished basis. In Rn, given a speciﬁc basis, we can write two vectors u and
v as sequences of numbers: u = (u1, u2, . . . un) and v = (v1, v2, . . . vn). This allows us to
8

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
deﬁne the lattice operations of meet ∧and join ∨as
u ∧v = (min(u1, v1), min(u2, v2), . . . min(un, vn))
u ∨v = (max(u1, v1), max(u2, v2), . . . max(un, vn))
i.e. the component-wise minimum and maximum, respectively. A graphical depiction
of the meet operation is shown in ﬁgure 2.
The vector operations of addition and multiplication by scalar, which can be deﬁned in
a similar component-wise fashion, are nevertheless independent of the particular basis
chosen. This makes them particularly suited to physical applications, where it is often
a requirement that there is no preferred direction. Conversely, the lattice operations de-
pend on the choice of basis, so the operations as deﬁned above would behave differently
if the components were written using a different basis. We argue that it makes sense for
us to consider these properties of vectors in the context of computational linguistics
since we can often have a distinguished basis: namely the one deﬁned by the contexts
in which terms occur. Of course it is true that techniques such as latent semantic analysis
introduce a new basis which does not have a clear interpretation in relation to contexts;
nevertheless they nearly always identify a distinguished basis which we can use to
deﬁne the lattice operations.
We argue that the mere association of words with vectors is not enough to constitute
a theory of meaning. Vector representations allow the measurement of similarity or
distance, through an inner product or metric, however we believe it is also important
for a theory of meaning to model entailment, a relation which plays an important rôle in
logical theories of meaning. In propositional and ﬁrst order logic, the entailment relation
is a partial ordering, in fact it is a Boolean algebra, which is a special kind of lattice. It
seems natural to consider whether the lattice structure that is inherent in the vector
representations used in computational linguistics can be used to model entailment.
We believe our framework is suited to all vector-based representations of natural
language meaning, however the vectors are obtained. Given this assumption, we can
only justify our assumption that the partial order structure of the vector space is suitable
to represent the entailment relation by observing that it has the right kind of properties
we would expect from this relation.
There may, however, be more justiﬁcation for this assumption, based on the case
where the vectors for terms are simply their frequencies of occurrences in n different
contexts, so that they are vectors in Rn. In this case, the relation ξ(x) ≤ξ(y) means that
y occurs at least as frequently as x in every context. This means that y occurs in at
least as wide a range of contexts as x, and occurs as least as frequently as x. Thus the
statement “x entails y if and only if ξ(x) ≤ξ(y)” can be viewed as a stronger form of the
distributional hypothesis of Harris (1968).
In fact, this idea can be related to the notion of “distributional generality”, intro-
duced by Weeds, Weir, and McCarthy (2004) (see also (Geffet and Dagan 2005)). A term
x is distributionally more general than another term y if x occurs in a subset of the
contexts that y occurs in. The idea is that distributional generality may be connected to
semantic generality. An example of this is the hypernymy or “is a” relation that is used to
express generality of concepts in ontologies, for example, the term animal is a hypernym
of dog since a dog is an animal. They explain the connection to distributional generality
as follows:
9

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Although one can obviously think of counter-examples, we would generally expect that
the more speciﬁc term dog can only be used in contexts where animal can be used and
that the more general term animal might be used in all of the contexts where dog is used
and possibly others. Thus, we might expect that distributional generality is correlated
with semantic generality. . .
Our proposal, in the case where words are represented by frequency vectors, can
be considered a stronger version of distributional generality, where the additional re-
quirement is on the frequency of occurrences. In practice, this assumption is unlikely
to be compatible with the ontological view of entailment. For example the term entity is
semantically more general than the term animal, however entity is unlikely to occur more
frequently in each context, since it is a rarer word. A more realistic foundation for this
assumption might be if we were to consider the components for a word to represent the
plausibility of observing the word in each context. The question then of course, is how
such vectors might be obtained. Another possibility is to attempt to weight components
in such a way that entailment becomes a plausible interpretation for the partial ordering
relation.
Even if we allow for such alternatives, however, in general it is unlikely that the
relation will hold between any two strings, since u ≤v if and only if ui ≤vi for each
component, ui, vi, of the two vectors. Instead, we propose to allow for degrees of entail-
ment. We take a Bayesian perspective on this, and suggest that the degree of entailment
should take the form of a conditional probability. In order to deﬁne this, however, we
need some additional structure on the vector lattice that allows it to be viewed as a
description of probability, by requiring it to be an “abstract Lebesgue space”.
Deﬁnition 4 (Banach lattice)
A Banach lattice V is a vector lattice together with a norm ∥· ∥such that V is complete
with respect to ∥· ∥.
Deﬁnition 5 (Abstract Lebesgue Space)
An Abstract Lebesgue (or AL) space is a Banach lattice V such that
∥u + v∥= ∥u∥+ ∥v∥
for all u, v in V with u ≥0, v ≥0 and u ∧v = 0.
Example 7 (ℓp spaces)
Let u = (u1, u2, . . .) be an inﬁnite sequence of real numbers. We can view ui as compo-
nents of the inﬁnite-dimensional vector u. We call the set of all such vectors the sequence
space; it is a vector space where the operations are deﬁned component-wise. We deﬁne
a set of norms, the ℓp-norms, on the space of all such vectors by
∥u∥p =
 X
i>0
|ui|p
!1/p
The space of all vectors u for which ∥u∥p is ﬁnite is called the ℓp space. Considered
as vector spaces, these are Banach spaces, since they are complete with respect to the
associated norm, and under the component-wise lattice operations, they are Banach
lattices. In particular, the ℓ1 space is an abstract Lebesgue space under the ℓ1 norm.
10

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
The ﬁnite-dimensional real vector spaces Rn can be considered as special cases of
the sequence spaces (consisting of vectors in which all but n components are zero) and,
since they are ﬁnite-dimensional, we can use any of the ℓp norms. Thus, our previous
examples, in which ξ mapped terms to vectors in Rn can be considered as mapping to
abstract Lebesgue spaces, if we adopt the ℓ1 norm.
2.3 Degrees of entailment
An abstract Lebesgue space has many of the properties of a measure space, where the
set operations of a measure space are replaced by the lattice operations of the vector
space. This means that we can think of an abstract Lebesgue space as a vector-based
probability space. Here, events correspond to positive elements with norm less than or
equal to 1; the probability of an event u is given by the norm (which we shall always
assume is the ℓ1 norm), and the joint probability of two events u and v is ∥u ∧v∥1.
Deﬁnition 6 (Degree of entailment)
We consider the degree to which u entails v to be the conditional probability of v given
u:
Ent(u, v) = ∥u ∧v∥1
∥u∥1
.
If we are only interested in degrees of entailment (i.e. conditional probabilities) and
not probabilities, then we can drop the requirement that the norm should be less
than or equal to one, since conditional probabilities are automatically normalised. This
deﬁnition, together with the multiplication of the algebra, allows us to compute the
degree of entailment between any two strings according to the context theory.
Example 8
The vectors given in Table 2.1 give the following calculation for the degree to which cat
entails animal:
ξ(cat) = (0, 2, 3)
ξ(animal) = (2, 1, 2)
ξ(cat) ∧ξ(animal) = (0, 1, 2)
Ent(ξ(cat), ξ(animal)) = ∥ξ(cat) ∧ξ(animal)∥1/∥ξ(cat)∥1 = 3/5
An important question is how this context-theoretic deﬁnition of the degree of
entailment relates to more familiar notions of entailment.2 There are three main ways in
which the term entailment is used:
•
The model-theoretic sense of entailment in which a theory A entails a
theory B if every model of A is also a model of B. It was shown in
(Clarke 2007) that this type of entailment can be described using context
theories, where sentences are represented as projections on a vector space.
2 Thanks are due to the anonymous reviewer who identiﬁed this question and related issues.
11

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
•
Entailment between terms in the word net hierarchy, for example the
hypernymy or is-a relation between the terms cat and animal encodes the
fact that a cat is an animal. In (Clarke 2007) we showed that such relations
can be encoded in the partial order structure of a vector lattice.
•
Human common-sense judgments as to whether one sentence entails or
implies another sentence, as used in the Recognising Textual Entailment
Challenges (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2005).
Our context-theoretic notion of entailment is thus intended to generalise both the ﬁrst
two senses of entailment above. In addition, we hope that context theories will be useful
in the practical application of recognising textual entailment.
Our deﬁnition is more general than the model-theoretic and hypernymy notions of
entailment however, as it allows the measurement of a degree of entailment between
any two strings: as an extreme example, one may measure the degree to which “not a”
entails “in the”. Whilst this may not be useful or philosophically meaningful, we view
it as a practical consequence of the fact that every string has a vector representation in
our model, which coincides with the current practice in vector-based compositionality
techniques.
2.4 Lattice ordered algebras
A large class of context theories make use of a lattice ordered algebra which merges the
lattice ordering of the vector space V with the product of A.
Deﬁnition 7 (Partially ordered algebra)
A partially ordered algebra A is an algebra which is also a partially ordered vector
space, which satisﬁes u · v ≥0 for all u, v ∈A+. If the partial ordering is a lattice, then
A is called a lattice ordered algebra.
Example 9 (Lattice ordered algebra of matrices)
The matrices of order n form a lattice ordered algebra under normal matrix multi-
plication, where the lattice operations are deﬁned as the entry-wise minimum and
maximum.
Example 10 (Operators on ℓp spaces)
Operators on the ℓp spaces are also lattice ordered algebras, by the Riesz-Kantorovich
theorem (Abramovich and Aliprantis 2002), with the operations deﬁned by:
(S ∨T )(u) = sup{S(v) + T (w) : v, w ∈U + and v + w = u}
(S ∧T )(u) = inf{S(v) + T (w) : v, w ∈U + and v + w = u}
If A is a lattice ordered algebra which is also an abstract Lebesgue space, then
⟨A, A, ξ, A, 1⟩is a context theory. Many of the examples we discuss will be of this
form, so we will use the shorthand notation, ⟨A, A, ξ⟩. It is tempting to adopt this as
the deﬁnition of context theory, however, as we will see, this is not supported by our
prototypical example of a context theory (which we will introduce in the next section)
as in this case the algebra is not necessarily lattice ordered.
12

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
3. Context Algebras
In this section we describe the prototypical examples of a context theory, the context
algebras. The deﬁnition of a context algebra originates in the idea that the notion of
“meaning as context” can be extended beyond the word level to strings of arbitrary
length. In fact, the notion of context algebra can be thought of as a generalisation of the
syntactic monoid of a formal language: instead of a set of strings deﬁning the language,
we have a fuzzy set of strings, or more generally, a real-valued function on a free monoid.
Deﬁnition 8 (Real-valued language)
Let A be a ﬁnite set of symbols. A real-valued language (or simply a language when
there is no ambiguity) L on A is a function from A∗to R. If the range of L is a subset of
R+ then L is called a positive language. If the range of L is a subset of [0, 1] then L is
called a fuzzy language. If L is a positive language such that P
x∈A∗L(x) = 1 then L is
a probability distribution over A∗.
The following inclusion relation applies amongst these classes of language:
distribution =⇒fuzzy =⇒positive =⇒real-valued
Since A∗is a countable set, the set RA∗of functions from A∗to R is isomorphic
to the sequence space, and we shall treat them equivalently. We denote by ℓp(A∗) the
set of functions with a ﬁnite ℓp norm, when considered as sequences. There is another
heirarchy of spaces given by the inclusion of the ℓp spaces: ℓp(A∗) ⊆ℓq(A∗) if p ≤q. In
particular,
ℓ1(A∗) ⊆ℓ2(A∗) ⊆ℓ∞(A∗) ⊆RA∗
where the ℓ∞norm gives the maximum value of the function and ℓ∞(A∗) is the space of
all bounded functions on A∗.
Note that probability distributions are in ℓ1(A∗) and fuzzy languages are in ℓ∞(A∗).
If L ∈ℓ1(A∗)+ (the space of positive functions on A∗such that the sum of all values
of the function is ﬁnite) then we can deﬁne a probability distribution pL over A∗by
pL(x) = L(x)/∥L∥1. Similarly, if L ∈ℓ∞(A∗)+ (the space of bounded positive functions
on A∗) then we can deﬁne a fuzzy language fL by fL(x) = L(x)/∥L∥∞.
Example 11
Given a ﬁnite set of strings C ⊂A∗, which we may imagine to be a corpus of documents,
deﬁne L(x) = 1/|C| if x ∈C, or 0 otherwise. Then L is a probability distribution over
A∗.
Example 12
Let L be a language such that L(x) = 0 for all but a ﬁnite subset of A∗. Then L ∈ℓp(A∗)
for all p.
Example 13
Let L be the language deﬁned by L(x) = |x| where x is the length of (i.e. number of
symbols in) string x. Then L is a positive language which is not bounded: for any string
y there exists a z such that L(z) > L(y), for example z = ay for a ∈A.
13

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Example 14
Let L be the language deﬁned by L(x) = 1/2 for all x. Then L is a fuzzy language but
L /∈ℓ1(A∗)
We will assume now that L is ﬁxed, and consider the properties of contexts of strings
with respect to this language.
Deﬁnition 9 (Context vectors)
Let L be a language on A. For x ∈A∗, we deﬁne the context of x as a vector ˆx ∈RA∗×A∗,
i.e. a real-valued function on pairs of strings:
ˆx(y, z) = L(yxz).
Our thesis is centred around these vectors, and it is their properties that form the
inspiration for the context-theoretic framework.
The question we are addressing is: does there exist some algebra A containing the
context vectors of strings in A∗such that ˆx · ˆy = c
xy where x, y ∈A∗and · indicates
multiplication in the algebra? As a ﬁrst try, consider the vector space L∞(A∗× A∗) in
which the context vectors live. Is it possible to deﬁne multiplication on the whole vector
space such that the condition just speciﬁed holds?
Example 15
Consider the language C on the alphabet A = {a, b, c, d, e, f} deﬁned by C(abcd) =
C(aecd) = C(abfd) = 1
3 and C(x) = 0 for all other x ∈A∗. Now if we take the shorthand
notation of writing the basis vector in L∞(A∗× A∗) corresponding to a pair of strings as
the pair of strings itself then
ˆb = 1
3(a, cd) + 1
3(a, fd)
ˆc = 1
3(ab, d) + 1
3(ae, d)
bbc = 1
3(a, d)
It would thus seem sensible to deﬁne multiplication of contexts so that
1
3(a, cd) ·
1
3(ab, d) = 1
3(a, d). However we then ﬁnd
ˆe · ˆf = 1
3(a, cd) · 1
3(ab, d) ̸= c
ef = 0
showing that this deﬁnition of multiplication doesn’t provide us with what we are
looking for. In fact, if there did exist a way to deﬁne multiplication on contexts in
a satisfactory manner it would necessarily be far from intuitive, as, in this example,
we would have to deﬁne (a, cd) · (ab, d) = 0 meaning the product ˆb · ˆc would have to
have a non-zero component derived from the products of context vectors (a, fd) and
(ae, d) which don’t relate at all to the contexts of bc. This leads us to instead deﬁne
multiplication on a subspace of L∞(A∗× A∗).
Deﬁnition 10 (Generated Subspace A)
The subspace A of L∞(A∗× A∗) is the set deﬁned by
A = {a : a =
X
x∈A∗
αxˆx for some αx ∈R}
14

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
Because of the way we deﬁne the subspace, there will always exist some basis B =
{ˆu : u ∈B} where B ⊆A∗, and we can deﬁne multiplication on this basis by ˆu · ˆv =
c
uv where u, v ∈B. Deﬁning multiplication on the basis deﬁnes it for the whole vector
subspace, since we deﬁne multiplication to be linear, making A an algebra.
However there are potentially many different bases we could choose, each corre-
sponding to a different subset of A∗, and each giving rise to a different deﬁnition of
multiplication. Remarkably, this isn’t a problem:
Proposition (Context Algebra)
Multiplication on A is the same irrespective of the choice of basis B.
Proof
We say B ⊆A∗deﬁnes a basis B for A when B is a basis such that B = {ˆx : x ∈B}.
Assume there are two sets B1, B2 ⊆A∗that deﬁne corresponding bases B1 and B2 for
A. We will show that multiplication in basis B1 is the same as in the basis B2.
We represent two basis elements ˆu1 and ˆu2 of B1 in terms of basis elements of B2:
ˆu1 =
X
i
αiˆvi
and
ˆu2 =
X
j
βjˆvj,
for some ui ∈B1, vj ∈B2 and αi, βj ∈R. First consider multiplication in the basis
B1. Note that ˆu1 = P
i αiˆvi means that L(xu1y) = P
i αiL(xviy) for all x, y ∈A∗. This
includes the special case where y = u2y′ so
L(xu1u2y′) =
X
i
αiL(xviu2y′)
for all x, y′ ∈A∗. Similarly, we have L(xu2y) = P
j βjL(xvjy) for all x, y ∈A∗which
includes the special case x = x′vi, so L(x′viu2y) = P
j βjL(x′vivjy) for all x′, y ∈A∗.
Inserting this into the above expression yields
L(xu1u2y) =
X
i,j
αiβjL(xvivjy)
for all x, y ∈A∗which we can rewrite as
ˆu1 · ˆu2 = [
u1u2 =
X
i,j
αiβj(ˆvi · ˆvj) =
X
i,j
αiβj d
vivj.
Conversely, the product of u1 and u2 using the basis B2 is
ˆu1 · ˆu2 =
X
i
αiˆvi ·
X
j
βjˆvj =
X
i,j
αiβj(ˆvi · ˆvj)
thus showing that multiplication is deﬁned independently of what we choose as the
basis. ■
15

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Example 16
Returning to the previous example, we can see that in this case multiplication is in fact
deﬁned on L∞(A∗× A∗) since we can describe each basis vector in terms of context
vectors:
(a, fd) · (ae, d) = 3(ˆb −ˆe) · 3(ˆc −ˆf) = −3(a, d)
(a, cd) · (ae, d) = 3ˆe · 3(ˆc −ˆf) = 3(a, d)
(a, fd) · (ab, d) = 3(ˆb −ˆe) · 3 ˆf = 3(a, d)
(a, cd) · (ab, d) = 3ˆe · 3 ˆf = 0,
thus conﬁrming what we predicted about the product of ˆb and ˆc: the value is only correct
because of the negative correction from (a, fd) · (ae, d). This example also serves to
demonstrate an important property of context algebras: they do not satisfy the positivity
condition; i.e. it is possible for positive vectors (those with all components greater than
or equal to zero) to have a non-positive product. This means they are not necessarily
partially ordered algebras under the normal partial order. Compare this to the case of
matrix multiplication, for example, where the product of two positive matrices is always
positive.
The notion of a context theory is founded on the prototypical example given by
context vectors. So far we have shown that multiplication can be deﬁned on the vector
space A generated by context vectors of strings, however we have not discussed the
lattice properties of the vector space. In fact, A does not come with a natural lattice
ordering that makes sense for our purposes, however, the original space RA∗×A∗does —
it is isomorphic to the sequence space. Thus ⟨A, A, ξ, RA∗×A∗, ψ⟩will form our context
theory, where ξ(a) = ˆa for a ∈A and ψ is the canonical map which simply maps ele-
ments of A to themselves, but considered as elements of RA∗×A∗. There is an important
caveat here however: we required that the vector lattice be an abstract Lebesgue space,
which means we need to be able to deﬁne a norm on it. The ℓ1 norm on RA∗×A∗is an
obvious candidate, however it is not guaranteed to be ﬁnite. This is where the nature of
the underlying language L becomes important.
We might hope that the most restrictive class of the languages we discussed, the
probability distributions over A∗would guarantee that the norm is ﬁnite. Unfortunately,
this is not the case, as the following example demonstrates.
Example 17
Let L be the language deﬁned by
L(a2n) = 1/2n+1
for integer n ≥0, and zero otherwise, where by an we mean n repetitions of a, so for
example, L(a) = 1
2, L(aa) = 1
4, L(aaa) = 0 and L(aaaa) = 1
8. Then L is a probability
distribution over A∗, since L is positive and ∥L∥1 = 1. However ∥ˆa∥1 is inﬁnite, since
each string x for which L(x) > 0 contributes 1/2 to the value of the norm, and there are
an inﬁnite number of such strings.
The problem in the previous example is that the average string length is inﬁnite.
If we restrict ourselves to probability distributions over A∗in which the average string
length is ﬁnite, then the problem goes away.
16

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
Proposition
Let L be a probability distribution over A∗such that
¯L =
X
x∈A∗
L(x)|x|
is ﬁnite, where |x| is the number of symbols in string x; we will call such languges ﬁnite
average length languges. Then ∥ˆy∥1 is ﬁnite for each y ∈A∗.
Proof
Denote the number of occurrences of string y as a substring of string x by |x|y. Clearly
|x|y ≤|x| for all x, y ∈A∗. Moreover,
∥ˆy∥1 =
X
x∈A∗
L(x)|x|y ≤
X
x∈A∗
L(x)|x|
and so ∥ˆy∥1 ≤¯L is ﬁnite for all y ∈A∗. ■
If L is ﬁnite average length, then A ⊆ℓ1(A∗× A∗), and so ⟨A, A, ξ, ℓ1(A∗× A∗), ψ⟩is
a context theory, where ψ is the canonical map from A to ℓ1(A∗× A∗). Thus context al-
gebras of ﬁnite average length languages provide our prototypical examples of context
theories.
3.1 Discussion
The beneﬁt of the context-theoretic framework is in providing a space of exploration for
models of meaning in language. Our effort has been in ﬁnding principles by which to
deﬁne the boundaries of this space. Each of the key boundaries, namely, bilinearity and
associativity of multiplication, and entailment through vector lattice structure, can also
be viewed as limitations of the model.
Bilinearity is a strong requirement to place, and has wide-ranging implications for
the way meaning is represented in the model. It can be interpreted loosely as follows:
components of meaning persist or diminish but do not spontaneously appear. This is
particularly counter-intuitive in the case of idiom and metaphor in language. It means
that, for example, both red and herring must contain some components relating to the
meaning of red herring which only come into play when these two words are combined
in this particular order. Any other combination would give a zero product for these
components. It is easy to see how this requirement arises from a context-theoretic
perspective, nevertheless from a linguistic perspective it is arguably undesirable.
One potential limitation of the model is that it does not explicitly model syntax, but
rather syntactic restrictions are encoded into the vector space and product itself. For
example, we may assume the word square has some component of meaning in common
with the word shape. Then we would expect this component to be preserved in the
sentences He drew a square and He drew a shape. However, in the case of the two sentences
The box is square and *The box is shape we would expect the second to be represented
by the zero vector since it is not grammatical; square can be a noun and an adjective,
whereas shape cannot. Distributivity of meaning means that the component of meaning
that square has in common with shape must be disjoint with the adjectival component of
the meaning of square.
17

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
Associativity is also a very strong requirement to place; indeed Lambek (1961)
introducted non-associativity into his calculus precisely to deal with examples that were
not satisfactorily dealt with by his associative model (Lambek 1958).
Whilst we hope that these features or boundaries are useful in their current form,
it may be that with time, or for certain applications there is a reason to expand or
contract certain of them, perhaps because of theoretical discoveries relating to the model
of meaning as context, or for practical or linguistic reasons, if, for example, the model is
found to be too restrictive to model certain linguistic phenomena.
4. Applications to Textual Entailment
The only existing framework for textual entailment that we are aware of is that of
Glickman and Dagan (2005). However this framework does not seem to be general
enough to deal satisfactorily with many techniques used to tackle the problem since
it requires interpreting the hypothesis as a logical statement.
Conversely, systems that use logical representations of language are often imple-
mented without reference to any framework, and thus deal with the problems of repre-
senting the ambiguity and uncertainty that is inherent in handling natural language in
an ad-hoc fashion.
Thus it seems what is needed is a framework which is general enough to satisfacto-
rily incorporate purely statistical techniques and logical representations, and in addition
provide guidance as to how to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty in natural language.
It is this that we hope our context-theoretic framework will provide.
In this section we analyse approaches to the textual entailment problem, showing
how they can be related to the context-theoretic framework, and discussing potential
new approaches that are suggested by looking at them within the framework. We ﬁrst
discuss some simple approaches to textual entailment based on subsequence matching
and measuring lexical overlap. We then look at how Glickman and Dagan’s approach
can be considered as a context theory in which words are represented as projections
on the vector space of documents. This leads us to an implementation of our own in
which we used latent Dirichlet allocation as an alternative approach to overcoming the
problem of data sparseness.
4.1 Subsequence Matching and Lexical Overlap
We call a sequence x ∈A∗a “subsequence” of y ∈A∗if each element of x occurs in
y in the same order, but with the possibility of other elements occurring in between,
so for example abba is a subsequence of acabcba in {a, b, c}∗. Subsequence matching
compares the subsequences of two sequences: the more subsequences they have in
common the more similar they are assumed to be. This idea has been used successfully
in text classiﬁcation (Lodhi et al. 2002) and also formed the basis of the author’s entry
to the second Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge (Clarke 2006).
If S is a semigroup, ℓ1(S) is a lattice ordered algebra under the multiplication of
convolution:
(f · g)(x) =
X
yz=x
f(y)g(z)
where x, y, z ∈S, f, g ∈ℓ1(S).
18

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
Example 18 (Subsequence matching)
Consider the algebra ℓ1(A∗) for some alphabet A. This has a basis consisting of elements
ex for x ∈A∗, where ex the function that is 1 on x and 0 elsewhere. In particular eǫ is
a unity for the algebra. Deﬁne ξ(a) = 1
2(ea + eǫ); then ⟨A, ℓ1(S), ξ⟩is a context theory.
Under this context theory, a sequence x completely entails y if and only if it is a sub-
sequence of y. In our experiments, we have shown that this type of context theory can
perform signiﬁcantly better than straightforward lexical overlap (Clarke 2006). Many
variations on this idea are possible, for example using more complex mappings from A∗
to ℓ1(A∗).
Example 19 (Lexical overlap)
The simplest approach to textual entailment is to measure the degree of lexical over-
lap: the proportion of words in the hypothesis sentence that are contained in the text
sentence (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2005). This approach can be described as a
context theory in terms of a free commutative semigroup on a set A, deﬁned by A∗/ ≡
where x ≡y in A∗if the symbols making up x can be reordered to make y. Then
deﬁne ξ′ by ξ′(a) = 1
2(e[a] + e[ǫ]) where [a] is the equivalence class of a in A∗/ ≡. Then
⟨A, ℓ1(S/ ≡), ξ′⟩is a context theory in which entailment is deﬁned by lexical overlap.
More complex deﬁnitions of ˆx can be used, for example to weight different words by
their probabilities.
4.2 Document Projections
Glickman and Dagan (2005) give a probabilistic deﬁnition of entailment in terms of
“possible worlds” which they use to justify their lexical entailment model based on oc-
currences of words in web documents. They estimate the lexical entailment probability
LEP(u, v) to be
LEP(u, v) ≃nu,v
nv
where nv and nu,v denote the number of documents that the word v occurs in and the
words u and v both occur in respectively. From the context theoretic perspective, we
view the set of documents the word occurs in as its context vector. To describe this
situation in terms of a context theory, consider the vector space L∞(D) where D is the
set of documents. With each word u we associate an operator Pu on this vector space by
Pued =
 ed if u occurs in document d
0 otherwise.
where ed is the basis element associated with document d ∈D. Pu is a projection, that
is PuPu = Pu; it projects onto the space of documents that u occurs in. These projec-
tions are clearly commutative (they are in fact band projections): PuPv = PvPu = Pu ∧Pv
projects onto the space of documents in which both u and v occur.
In their paper, Glickman and Dagan assume that probabilities can be attached to
individual words, as we do, although they interpret these as the probability that a
word is “true” in a possible world. In their interpretation, a document corresponds to a
possible world, and a word is true in that world if it occurs in the document.
They do not, however, determine these probabilities directly; instead they make
assumptions about how the entailment probability of a sentence depends on lexical
19

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
entailment probability. Although they do not state this, the reason for this is presumably
data sparseness: they assume that a sentence is true if all its lexical components are true:
this will only happen if all the words occur in the same document. For any sizeable
sentence this is extremely unlikely, hence their alternative approach.
It is nevertheless useful to consider this idea from a context theoretic perspective.
The probability of a term being true can be estimated as the proportion of documents
it occurs in. This is the same as the context theoretic probability deﬁned by the linear
functional φ, which we may think of as determined by a vector p in L∞(D) given by
p(d) = 1/|D| for all d ∈D. In general, for an operator U on L∞(D) the context theoretic
probability of U is deﬁned as
φ(U) = ∥U +p∥1 −∥U −p∥1,
where U + = U ∨0 and U −= (−U) ∨0 and the lattice operations are deﬁned by the
Riesz-Kantorovich formula (Example 10). The probability of a term is then φ(Pu) =
nu/|D|. More generally, the context theoretic representation of an expression x =
u1u2 . . . um is Px = Pu1Pu2 . . . Pum. This is clearly a semigroup homomorphism (the
representation of xy is the product of the representations of x and y), and thus together
with the linear functional φ deﬁnes a context theory for the set of words.
The degree to which x entails y is then given by φ(Px ∧Py)/φ(Px). This corresponds
directly to Glickman and Dagan’s entailment “conﬁdence”; it is simply the proportion
of documents that contain all the terms of x which also contain all the terms of y.
4.3 Latent Dirichlet Projections
The formulation in the previous section suggests an alternative approach to that of
Glickman and Dagan to cope with the data sparseness problem. We consider the ﬁnite
data available D as a sample from a corpus model D′; the vector p then becomes a
probability distribution over the documents in D′. In our own experiments, we used
latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) to build a corpus model based on
a subset of around 380,000 documents from the Gigaword corpus. Having the corpus
model allows us to consider an inﬁnite array of possible documents, and thus we can
use our context-theoretic deﬁnition of entailment since there is no problem of data
sparseness.
Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) follows the same vein as Latent Semantic Anal-
ysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al. 1990) and Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA)
(Hofmann 1999) in that it can be used to build models of corpora in which words within
a document are considered to be exchangeable; so that a document is treated as a bag
of words. LSA performs a singular value decomposition on the matrix of words and
documents which brings out hidden “latent” similarities in meaning between words,
even though they may not occur together.
In contrast PLSA and LDA provide probabilistic models of corpora using Bayesian
methods. LDA differs from PLSA in that, while the latter assumes a ﬁxed number of
documents, LDA assumes that the data at hand is a sample from an inﬁnite set of
documents, allowing new documents to be assigned probabilities in a straightforward
manner.
Figure 3 shows a graphical representation of the latent Dirichlet allocation genera-
tive model, and ﬁgure 4 shows how the model generates a document of length N. In
this model, the probability of occurrence of a word w in a document is considered to be
a multinomial variable conditioned on a k-dimensional “topic” variable z. The number
20

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
α
θ
z
w
β
N
Figure 3
Graphical representation of the Dirichlet model. The inner box shows the choices that are
repeated for each word in the document; the outer box the choice that is made for each
document; the parameters outside the boxes are constant for the model.
1.
Choose θ ∼Dirichlet(α)
2.
For each of the N words:
(a)
Choose z ∼
Multinomial(θ)
(b)
Choose w according to
p(w|z)
Figure 4
Generative process assumed in the Dirichlet model
of topics k is generally chosen to be much fewer than the number of possible words,
so that topics provide a “bottleneck” through which the latent similarity in meaning
between words becomes exposed.
The topic variable is assumed to follow a multinomial distribution parameterised
by a k-dimensional variable θ, satisfying
k
X
i=1
θi = 1,
and which is in turn assumed to follow a Dirichlet distribution. The Dirichlet distribu-
tion is itself parameterised by a k-dimensional vector α. The components of this vector
21

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
can be viewed as determining the marginal probabilities of topics, since:
p(zi) =
Z
p(zi|θ)p(θ)dθ
=
Z
θip(θ)dθ.
This is just the expected value of θi, which is given by
p(zi) =
αi
P
j αj
.
The model is thus entirely speciﬁed by α and the conditional probabilies p(w|z)
which we can assume are speciﬁed in a k × V matrix β where V is the number of
words in the vocabulary. The parameters α and β can be estimated from a corpus
of documents by a variational expectation maximisation algorithm, as described by
Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003).
Latent Dirichlet allocation was applied by Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003) to the tasks of
document modelling, document classiﬁcation and collaborative ﬁltering. They compare
latent Dirichlet allocation to several techniques including probabilistic latent semantic
analysis; latent Dirichlet allocation outperforms these on all of the applications. Re-
cently, latent Dirichlet allocation has been applied to the task of word sense disambigua-
tion (Cai, Lee, and Teh 2007; Boyd-Graber, Blei, and Zhu 2007) with signiﬁcant success.
Consider the vector space L∞(A∗) for some alphabet A, the space of all bounded
functions on possible documents. In this approach, we deﬁne the representation of a
string x to be a projection Px on the subspace representing the (inﬁnite) set of documents
in which all the words in string x occur. Again we deﬁne a vector q(x) for x ∈A∗where
q(x) is the probability of document x in the corpus model, we then deﬁne a linear
functional φ for an operator U on L∞(A∗) as before by φ(U) = ∥U +q∥1 −∥U −q∥1. φ(Px)
is thus the probability that a document chosen at random contains all the words that
occur in string x. In order to estimate φ(Px) we have to integrate over the Dirichlet
parameter θ:
φ(Px) =
Z
θ
 Y
a∈x
pθ(a)
!
p(θ)dθ,
where by a ∈x we mean that the word a occurs in string x, and pθ(a) is the probability
of observing word a in a document generated by the parameter θ. We estimate this by
pθ(a) ≃1 −
 
1 −
X
z
p(a|z)p(z|θ)
!N
,
where we have assumed a ﬁxed document length N. The above formula is an estimate
of the probability of a word occurring at least once in a document of length N, the sum
over the topic variable z is the probability that the word a occurs at any one point in
a document given the parameter θ. We approximated the integral using Monte-Carlo
sampling to generate values of θ according to the Dirichlet distribution.
22

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
Model
Accuracy
CWS
Dirichlet (106)
0.584
0.630
Dirichlet (107)
0.576
0.642
Bayer (MITRE)
0.586
0.617
Glickman (Bar Ilan)
0.586
0.572
Jijkoun (Amsterdam)
0.552
0.559
Newman (Dublin)
0.565
0.6
Table 2
Results obtained with our Latent Dirichlet projection model on the data from the ﬁrst
Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge for two document lengths N = 106 and N = 107
using a cut-off for the degree of entailment of 0.5 at which entailment was regarded as holding.
We built a latent Dirichlet allocation model using Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003)’s
implementation on documents from the British National Corpus, using 100 topics.
We evaluated this model on the 800 entailment pairs from the ﬁrst Recognising Tex-
tual Entailment Challenge test set.3 Results were comparable to those obtained by
Glickman and Dagan (2005) (see Table 2). In this table, Accuracy is the accuracy on the
test set, consisting of 800 entailment pairs, and CWS is the conﬁdence weighted score;
see (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2005) for the deﬁnition. The differences between
the accuracy values in the table are not statistically signiﬁcant because of the small
dataset, although all accuracies in the table are signiﬁcantly better than chance at the 1%
level. The accuracy of the model is considerably lower than the state of the art, which
is around 75% (Bar-Haim et al. 2006). We experimented with various document lengths
and found very long documents (N = 106 and N = 107) to work best.
It is important to note that because the LDA model is commutative, the resulting
context algebra must also be commutative, which is clearly far from ideal in modelling
natural language.
5. The Model of Clark, Coecke and Sadrzadeh
One of the most sophisticated proposals for a method of composition is that
of Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2008) and the more recent implementation of
(Grefenstette et al. 2011). In this section, we will show how their model can be described
as a context theory.
The authors describe the syntactic element of their construction using pregroups
(Lambek 2001), a formalism which simpliﬁes the syntactic calculus of (Lambek 1958).
3 We have so far only used data from the ﬁrst challenge, since we performed the experiment before the
other challenges had taken place.
23

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
These can be described in terms of partially ordered monoids, a monoid G with a
partial ordering ≤satisfying x ≤y implies xz ≤yz and zx ≤zy for all x, y, z ∈G.
Deﬁnition 11 (Pregroup)
Let G be a partially ordered monoid. Then G is called a pregroup if for each x ∈G there
are elements xl and xr in G such that
xlx ≤
1
(1)
xxr ≤
1
(2)
1 ≤xxl
(3)
1 ≤xrx
(4)
If x, y ∈G, we call y a reduction of x if y can be obtained from x using only rules (1) and
(2) above.
Pregroup grammars are deﬁned by freely generating a pregroup on a set of basic
grammatical types. Words are then represented as elements formed from these basic
types, for example:
John likes Mary
π
πrsol
o
where π, s and o are the basic types for ﬁrst person singular, statement and object,
respectively. It is easy to see that the above sentence reduces to type s under the
pregroup reductions.
As Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2008) note, their construction can be generalised
by endowing the grammatical type of a word with a vector nature, in addition to its
semantics. We use this slightly more general construction to allow us to formulate it
in the context-theoretic framework. We deﬁne an elementary meaning space to be the
tensor product space V = S ⊗P where S is a vector space representing meanings of
words and P is a vector space with an orthonormal basis corresponding to the basic
grammatical types in a pregroup grammar and their adjoints. We assume that meanings
of words live in the tensor algebra space T (V ), deﬁned by
T (V ) = R ⊕V ⊕(V ⊗V ) ⊕(V ⊗V ⊗V ) ⊕· · ·
For an element v in a particular tensor power of V , such that v = (s1 ⊗p1) ⊗(s2 ⊗p2) ⊗
· · · ⊗(sn ⊗pn), where the pi are basis vectors of P, then we can recover a complex
grammatical type for v as the product γ(v) = γ1γ2 · · · γn, where γi is the basic gram-
matical type corresponding to pi. We will call the vectors such as this which have a
single complex type (i.e. they are not formed from a weighted sum of more than one
type) unambiguous.
We also assume that words are represented by vectors whose grammatical type is
irreduceable, i.e. there is no pregroup reduction possible on the type. We deﬁne Γ(T (V ))
as the vector space generated by all such vectors.
We will now deﬁne a product · on Γ(T (V )) that will make it an algebra. To do this, it
sufﬁces to deﬁne the product between two elements u1, u2 which are unambiguous and
whose grammatical type is basic, i.e. they can be viewed as elements of V . The deﬁnition
of the product on the rest of the space follows from the assumption of distributivity. We
24

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
deﬁne:
u1 · u2 =



u1 ⊗u2 if γ(u1 ⊗u2) is irreduceable
⟨u1, u2⟩otherwise.
This product is bilinear, since for a particular pair of basis elements, only one of the
above two conditions will apply, and both the tensor and inner products are bilinear
functions. Moreover, it corresponds to composed and reduced word vectors, as deﬁned
in (Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh 2008).
To see how this works on our example sentence above, we assume we have vectors
for the meanings of the three words, which we write as vword. We assume for the purpose
of this example that the word like is represented as a product state composed of three
vectors, one for each basic grammatical type. This removes any potentially interesting
semantics, but allows us to demonstrate the product in a simple manner. We write this
as follows:
John
likes
Mary
(vJohn ⊗eπ) · (vlikes,1 ⊗eπr) · (vlikes,2 ⊗es) · (vlikes,3 ⊗eol) · (vMary ⊗eo)
where eγ is the orthornormal basis vector corresponding to basic grammatical type
γ. More interesting representations of like would consist of sums over similar vectors.
Computing this product from left to right:
(vJohn ⊗eπ) · (vlikes,1 ⊗eπr)· (vlikes,2 ⊗es) · (vlikes,3 ⊗eol) · (vMary ⊗eo)
=
⟨vJohn, vlikes,1⟩(vlikes,2 ⊗es) · (vlikes,3 ⊗eol) · (vMary ⊗eo)
=
⟨vJohn, vlikes,1⟩(vlikes,2 ⊗es) ⊗(vlikes,3 ⊗eol) · (vMary ⊗eo)
= ⟨vJohn, vlikes,1⟩⟨vlikes,3, vMary⟩(vlikes,2 ⊗es)
As we would expect in this simpliﬁed example the product is a scalar multiple of the
second vector for like, with the type of a statement.
This construction thus allows us to represent complex grammatical types, similar to
Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2008), however it also allows us to take weighted sums
of these complex types, giving us a powerful method of expressing the syntactic and
semantic ambiguity of lexical semantics.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented a context-theoretic framework for natural language semantics. The
framework is founded on the idea that meaning in natural language can be determined
by context, and is inspired by techniques that make use of statistical properties of
language by analysing large text corpora. Such techniques can generally be viewed as
representing language in terms of vectors. These techniques are currently used in appli-
cations such as textual entailment recognition, however the lack of a theory of meaning
that incorporates these techniques means that they are often used in a somewhat ad-
hoc manner. The purpose behind the framework is to provide a uniﬁed theoretical
foundation for such techniques so that they may used in a principled manner.
By formalising the notion of “meaning as context” we have been able to build a
mathematical model that informs us about the nature of meaning under this paradigm.
Speciﬁcally, it gives us a theory about how to represent words and phrases using
25

Computational Linguistics
Volume xx, Number xx
vectors, and tells us that the product of two meanings should be distributive and
associative. It also gives us an interpretation of the inherent lattice structure on these
vector spaces as deﬁning the relation of entailment. It also tells us how to measure the
size of the vector representation of a string in such a way that the size corresponds to
the probability of the string.
We have demonstrated that the framework encompasses several related ap-
proaches to
compositional
distributional semantics,
including
those based on
a predeﬁned composition operation such as addition (Mitchell and Lapata 2008;
Landauer and Dumais 1997; Foltz, Kintsch, and Landauer 1998) or the tensor prod-
uct (Smolensky 1990; Clark and Pulman 2007; Widdows 2008), matrix multiplica-
tion (Rudolph and Giesbrecht 2010), and the more sophisticated construction of
Clark, Coecke, and Sadrzadeh (2008).
6.1 Practical Investigations
Section 4 raises many possibilities for the design of systems to recognise textual entail-
ment within the framework
•
Variations on substring matching: experiments with different weighting
schemes for substrings, allowing partial commutativity of words or
phrases, and replacing words with vectors representing their context,
using tensor products of these vectors instead of concatenation.
•
Extensions of Glickman and Dagan’s approach and our own
context-theoretic approach using latent Dirichlet allocation, perhaps using
other corpus models based on n-grams or other models in which words do
not commute, or a combination of context theories based on commutative
and non-commutative models.
•
The LDA model we used is a commutative one. This is a considerable
simpliﬁcation of what is possible within the context-theoretic framework;
it would be interesting to investigate methods of incorporating
non-commutativity into the model.
•
Implementations based on the approach to representing uncertainty in
logical semantics similar to those described in (Clarke 2007).
All of these ideas could be evaluated using the data sets from the Recognising Textual
Entailment Challenges.
There are many approaches to textual entailment that we have not considered here;
we conjecture that variations of many of them could be described within our frame-
work. We leave the task of investigating the relationship between these approaches and
our framework to further work.
Other areas that we are investigating, together with researchers at the University
of Sussex, is the possibility of learning ﬁnite-dimensional algebras directly from corpus
data, along the lines of (Guevara 2011) and (Baroni and Zamparelli 2010).
One question we have not addressed in this paper is the feasibility of computing
with algebraic representations. Although this question is highly dependent on the
particular context theory chosen, it is possible that general algorithms for computation
within this framework could be found; this is another area that we intend to address in
further work.
26

Daoud Clarke
A Context-theoretic Framework for Distributional Semantics
6.2 Theoretical Investigations
Although the context-theoretic framework is an abstraction of the model of meaning as
context, it would be good to have a complete understanding of the model and the types
of context theories that it allows. Tying down these properties would allow us to deﬁne
algebras that could truly be called “context theories”.
The context-theoretic framework shares a lot of properties with the study of free
probability (Voiculescu 1997). It would be interesting to investigate whether ideas from
free probability would carry over to context-theoretic semantics.
Although we have related our model to many techniques described in the liter-
ature, we still have to investigate its relationship with other models such as that of
Song and Bruza (2003) and Guevara (2011).
We have not given much consideration here to the issue of multi-word expres-
sions and non-compositionality. What predictions does the context-theoretic framework
make about non-compositionality? Answering this may lead us to new techniques for
recognising and handling multi-word expressions and non-compositionality.
Of course it is hard to predict the beneﬁts that may result from what we have
presented, since we have given a way of thinking about meaning in natural language
that in many respects is new. This new way of thinking opens the door to the uniﬁcation
of logic-based and vector-based methods in computational linguistics, and the potential
fruits of this union are many.
