Image Based Review Text Generation with Emotional Guidance
Xuehui Sun
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Zihan Zhou
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Yuda Fan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
In the current ﬁeld of computer vision, automat-
ically generating texts from given images has been a
fully worked technique. Up till now, most works of this
area focus on image content describing, namely image-
captioning. However, rare researches focus on gener-
ating product review texts, which is ubiquitous in the
online shopping malls and is crucial for online shop-
ping selection and evaluation. Diﬀerent from content
describing, review texts include more subjective infor-
mation of customers, which may bring diﬀerence to the
results. Therefore, we aimed at a new ﬁeld concerning
generating review text from customers based on images
together with the ratings of online shopping products,
which appear as non-image attributes. We made sev-
eral adjustments to the existing image-captioning model
to ﬁt our task, in which we should also take non-image
features into consideration. We also did experiments
based on our model and get eﬀective primary results.
1
Introduction
Traditional image-captioning work usually intends
to describe the content of a given image using human-
like properly formed English sentences [1, 2, 3, 4]. Dif-
ferent from general image-captioning, review texts are
expected to contain the evaluation of the product and
emotion of the reviewer instead of merely describing
the picture. Although the data of real review texts is
quite suﬃcient, few works have taken an insight into
this topic.
Our purpose is to generate review texts
with emotions, describing the possible feedback from
those who had bought this product, just like Figure 1
presents.
In a sense, our work is quite close to the tradi-
tional image-captioning work, and image plays a sig-
niﬁcant role deciding the content of our resulting texts.
That means it is sensible to follow preceding models to
achieve our target of review text generating based on
images. However, if we only use images alone, the re-
sult will be more closer to objective description rather
than subjective reviewing, lacking subjective informa-
tion like orientation and emotion. Therefore, we need
to use non-image features to guide our review texts
Figure 1: Review texts with diﬀerent emotions.
to be generated.
Moreover, non-image features may
have diﬀerent structures and properties for perception
comparing to image features.
To be speciﬁc, image
features describe concrete vision information, but non-
image features characterize abstract information.
In
consideration of these diﬀerences, we need to employ
extra skills to make them work together but separately.
We utilize the reviews of products from customers to
guide our output to imitate. With product images and
other non-image attributes, we can build a caption-like
deep learning model. To make sure our review texts
contains appropriate emotions, we use the ratings of
the reviewers on products to direct the review texts.
These ratings are included in the dataset, representing
a general evaluation of the purchaser. Inspired by work
based on generating text reviews from aspect-sentiment
scores [5], we decide to combine the aspect of images
and scores and translate them into review texts.
Image-captioning models mostly follows encoder-
decoder architecture, which is ﬁrst proposed and used
by Vinyals et al. [1]. They use deep convolution neural
network (CNN) to extract image features, performing
as the encoder, and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
like Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [6] to convert
features to texts, acting as the decoder. To make out-
arXiv:1901.04140v1  [cs.CL]  14 Jan 2019

puts resemble the real words, we employ Guiding Long-
Short Term Memory networks (gLSTM) [7] to gener-
ate the words. Meanwhile, utilizing the same frame-
work, we can ﬁgure out what are customers interested
in by adopting the attention mechanism proposed by
[2]. Diﬀerent from image-captioning tasks where the
text directly describes the image, the connection be-
tween image and text is not that tight in our settings.
Imagine doing both image-captioning and review text
generation with the same picture, say a ring with a di-
amond. In an image-captioning task, simply “A ring
with a diamond” would be suﬃcient. But in a review
text generation task, a more commonsensical solution
may be “I like the ring for the beautiful diamond in it.”
In a sense, in each step of generation, we have to think
about what we are going to focus on, instead of just fo-
cusing on the next describable object. This is why the
attention mechanism in [4] which directly generates at-
tention mask from the previous word is not applicable
here. To solve this issue, we designed a bilevel gLSTM
model, in which a new lower-level gLSTM is utilized to
generate the current context information, which the at-
tention mask is based upon. The higher-level gLSTM
is a Time-Dependent gLSTM (td-gLSTM) which is in-
troduced in [4], except there is now an additional ﬁeld
in the guidance for non-image feature.
In our task, both image features and non-image fea-
tures are essential and each plays a diﬀerent role. The
image features provide the entities (watch, ring, shoes,
etc.)
and attributes (color, texture, shape, etc.)
to
review with, or in other words, what to review.
On
the contrary, non-image features determine the back-
ground setting and the underlying tone of the review,
or how to review. In a sense, non-image features are
more like static global guidance throughout the gen-
eration process, while image features are directly used
to determine what to say in the next step of genera-
tion. This contradiction is why we adopt the attention
mechanism for the image features and gLSTM model
for the non-image features.
2
Related Work
Since the early success of applying deep neural net-
works in image-captioning tasks such as [8, 1] , numer-
ous methods have been developed to solve this prob-
lem.
Vinyals et al. [1] proposes an encoder-decoder
framework, using CNN to extract image features, and
LSTM [6] to generate description texts.
This struc-
ture implements an end-to-end model, maximizing the
likelihood of the target description sentence.
To ﬁx
problems such as image information losing for more de-
scriptive captions and regional features over-balancing,
in recent researches, attention mechanism has been
widely adopted since it was ﬁrst introduced by Xu et
al. [2]. This mechanism aims to make salient features
take precedence over other ones. In [2], two diﬀerent
types of attention were introduced, namely “Stochastic
Hard Attention” and “Deterministic Soft Attention”.
You et al. [3] combines bottom-up concepts (visual at-
tributes extracted by diﬀerent possible methods) with
top-down attributes from the CNN model, and uses
“input and output attention” to implement a real-time
generating word prediction. The attention mechanism
utilizes ample visual semantic aspects of local parts
besides natural global information of images. Zhou et
al. [4] raises a new method called “Text-Conditional
Attention”, which uses context information to guide
while generating attention masks.
Jia et al. [7] introduces an extended LSTM model
called Guiding Long-Short Term Memory network
(gLSTM). It adds semantic information extracted from
the images as an extra input to each LSTM block in
order to guide the model, making the result more con-
nected to the content of images. And Zhou et al. [4]
raises a further enhanced Time-Dependent gLSTM (td-
gLSTM) model, which changes the property of time-
invariant guidance in gLSTM, and allows the guidance
to evolve over time. We draw on the experience of these
works and also use the td-gLSTM model for our text
generating.
In the ﬁeld of product reviews generation, Zhang
et al. [5] uses aspect-sentiment product scores to gen-
erate review texts aligned with the aspects and rat-
ings. It proposes Sequential Review Generation Models
(SRGMs) and Hierarchical Review Generation Models
(HRGMs) to implement the generation. However, the
target of this model is concentrated, aiming at gener-
ating reviews at a single aspect of vehicles. Therefore,
this model does not use any visual information of the
products. For our goal, both image and non-image in-
formation is critical. It may bring monotonicity or re-
peatability to the resulting review text without either
of them. Based upon existing image-captioning and re-
view texts generating models, we use both image and
non-image features. That is where the innovation of
our work is.
3
Approach
There are three parts of input needed: product im-
age features pre-extracted by CNN, given non-image
features of products and word-embedding vectors con-
verted from currently generated review texts by a pre-
trained word-embedding model.
Figure 2 shows an overview of our model using
bilevel gLSTM. The lower-level gLSTM uses embed-
ding vector of already generated words as its input
and gives out an attention mask. The higher-level td-
gLSTM receives diﬀerent features in conjunction and
generates the next word.
3.1
Raw Image Feature Encoder
The ﬁrst part of our network is the raw image feature
encoder, which extracts the features of product images

Figure 2: The sketch graph of our model. The graph on the left is an overview and the graph on the right provides
detailed structure of every guidance generator.
without any other processing methods. A simple deep
CNN model is used to convert given images into image
feature vectors. In the model training procedure, this
is only used in end-to-end training.
Therefore, this
part can be omitted when the training dataset contains
pre-extracted image features. The result of raw image
feature encoder is:
f = F(a),
(1)
where a is the input product image, f is the image
feature vector, and F denotes CNN encoding function.
3.2
Guidance Generator
The hardcore of our model is the guidance generator.
This “guidance” here denotes the guidance to the td-
gLSTM block, which consists of image features and
non-image features, as two diﬀerent types of guidance.
The most critical part of our guidance generator is the
generating of image guidance.
We apply the attention mechanism from [2] in or-
der to make our network “pay attention to” certain
deﬁnitive areas of input images, guided by context in-
formation. We use the image features obtained above
as inputs, and generate an attention mask to automat-
ically locate the area we want to focus on in the feature
maps.
Inspired by “Text-Conditional Attention” method
introduced in [4], we use word-embedding vectors for
semantic guidance to generate attention masks. Nev-
ertheless, diﬀerent from the original text-conditional
attention method, we use a gLSTM model here. This
gLSTM receives a word-embedding vector of already
generated words and outputs the corresponding atten-
tion mask at the current time step. It uses non-image
features as guidance. Non-image features denote the
ratings of products given by purchasers, which appears
in the dataset. According to the gLSTM model, we
deﬁne the memory cell and gates in each gLSTM block
as follows:
it = σ(Wixxt + Wimmt−1 + Wiqgt)
ft = σ(Wfxxt + Wfmmt−1 + Wfqgt)
ot = σ(Woxxt + Wommt−1 + Woqgt)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙tanh(Wcxxt + Wcmmt−1 + Wcqgt)
mt = ot ⊙ct.
(2)
Here it, ft, ot, ct are the input gate, the forget gate,
the output gate, and the memory cell of the LSTM
model at time state t. mt is the hidden state, and also
the output of the current block generated by the mem-
ory cell, appearing as the target attention mask here.
xt is the input texts, which is the word-embedding
vector converted from input words already generated
from the result review texts. W[·][·] denotes the weight
parameters that need to be trained. σ(·) and tanh(·)
are activation functions of sigmoid and hyperbolic. ⊙
represents element-wise multiplication. gt denotes the
guidance information, which is actually non-image fea-
ture vectors here. We use non-image features to guide
our gLSTM model to generate attention masks from
already generated words. We can write the result as a
more simpliﬁed version:
mt = G(xt, gt),
(3)
where G(xt, gt) is the gLSTM decoding function with
xt as input and gt as guidance. The guidance indeed
means using given product ratings to decide the un-
derlying emotion of our target review texts. Then the

image feature vectors obtained by raw image feature
encoder will be encoded again by this attention mask.
Finally, we get attention image feature vectors, which
is the result of the attention mechanism.
After applying the attention mask to the raw image
feature vectors, we ﬁnish the image guidance gener-
ating process. Next, we concatenate the image guid-
ance vector with the review guidance.
We use non-
image features as review guidance, namely the ratings
of products in the dataset mentioned above. The result
of guidance generating is:
ˆgt = (f ⊙mt) ⊕gt,
(4)
where ˆgt is the combined guidance (feature) vector,
f ⊙mt is image feature vector with attention mask
applying. ⊕denotes vector concatenating operation.
3.3
Feature Decoder
The last part of our model decodes all features and
generates the target output words. After concatenating
both feature vectors above, the resulting vector is used
as the time-dependent guidance of a td-gLSTM model.
In every unit of time, the above models are repeated,
and a new word of the output sequence is generated.
Our ﬁnal result is:
yt = D(xt, ˆgt),
(5)
where D(xt, ˆgt) is the td-gLSTM decoding function
with xt as input and ˆgt as guidance. yt is the next word
we obtain.
4
Experiments
4.1
Dataset
Our experiment is based on Amazon product data
introduced in [9].
This dataset contains real-world
product information and user reviews on Amazon.com
over the past decades, in which the product images and
user reviews are what we need.
This dataset includes millions of products from 24
diﬀerent categories. In our experiment, we only focus
on the “Clothing, Shoes and Jewelry” category. The
review texts are English sentences, and the reviewers’
ratings are integers from 1 to 5.
4.2
Visual features
We use the features presented in [10], which is ex-
tracted using a pre-trained convolutional neural net-
work, the Caﬀe reference model [11]. This model has
been shown to be useful for this type of images in [9]
and [10]. It implements the architecture in [12] with
5 convolutional layers followed by 3 fully-connected
layers and was pre-trained on 1.2 million ImageNet
(ILSVRC2010) images. Each extracted feature is taken
from the output of its second fully-connected layer
(FC7) with length F = 4096.
4.3
Performance
We did our experiment using a trained model based
on 40000 sets of data including image feature vectors,
non-image ratings, and ground-truth review texts. We
ﬁltered those data with review text longer than 100
out, and 34810 sets of data remained. The size of word-
embedding dictionary is 2934. The output text also has
length 100.
Table 1 shows some sample test results of our ex-
periments. It turns out that out model can success-
fully generate review texts related with correct prod-
uct information and the emotion of generated texts
can change with diﬀerent review ratings. Our training
dataset is relatively small due to time and source limit-
ing, so the result still faces some problems occasionally
such as repetition of words, misidentiﬁcation and gen-
erating meaningless texts.
But deﬁnitely our model
will work better with larger datasets or more skillful
natural language processing methods. We also did ab-
lation experiments of replacing the gLSTM-based at-
tention by “Deterministic Soft Attention” method in
[2].
But due to the insuﬃciency of our dataset, the
results did not show too much defects, and the superi-
ority of the ﬁnal model using gLSTM is not that dis-
tinguishable from words. For this reason, we did not
display the results of ablation experiments, but only
displayed the results of our ﬁnal models from diﬀerent
products and diﬀerent ratings.
