Mirror Learning: A Unifying Framework of Policy Optimisation
Jakub Grudzien Kuba 1 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Jakob Foerster 1
Abstract
Modern deep reinforcement learning (RL) al-
gorithms are motivated by either the gener-
alised policy iteration (GPI) or trust-region learn-
ing (TRL) frameworks.
However, algorithms
that strictly respect these theoretical frameworks
have proven unscalable. Surprisingly, the only
known scalable algorithms violate the GPI/TRL
assumptions, e.g.
due to required regularisa-
tion or other heuristics.
The current explana-
tion of their empirical success is essentially “by
analogy”: they are deemed approximate adapta-
tions of theoretically sound methods. Unfortu-
nately, studies have shown that in practice these
algorithms differ greatly from their conceptual
ancestors.
In contrast, in this paper we intro-
duce a novel theoretical framework, named Mir-
ror Learning, which provides theoretical guar-
antees to a large class of algorithms, including
TRPO and PPO. While the latter two exploit the
flexibility of our framework, GPI and TRL fit in
merely as pathologically restrictive corner cases
thereof. This suggests that the empirical perfor-
mance of state-of-the-art methods is a direct con-
sequence of their theoretical properties, rather
than of aforementioned approximate analogies.
Mirror learning sets us free to boldly explore
novel, theoretically sound RL algorithms, a thus
far uncharted wonderland.
1. Introduction
The generalised policy iteration (Sutton & Barto, 2018,
GPI) and trust-region learning (Schulman et al., 2015,
TRL) frameworks lay the foundations for the design of
the most commonly used reinforcement learning (RL) al-
gorithms. At each GPI iteration, an RL agent first eval-
uates its policy by computing a scalar value function, and
then updates its policy so as to maximise the value function
1University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Jakub Grudzien

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).
at every environment state. This procedure serves well for
Markov Decision Problems (Bellman, 1957, MDPs) with
small state spaces, as it is guaranteed to produce a new pol-
icy whose value at every state improves monotonically over
the old one. However, the sizes of state spaces that many
practical problem settings constitute are intractable to ex-
act implementations of GPI. Instead, large scale settings
employ function approximation and sample based learning.
Unfortunately, such an adoption of GPI has proven unsta-
ble (Mnih et al., 2015), which has necessitated a number of
adjustments, such as replay buffers, target networks, etc., to
stabilise learning (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). In their days,
these heuristics have been empirically sucessful but were
not backed up by any theory and required extensive hyper-
parameter tuning (Mnih et al., 2016).
Figure 1. Known RL frameworks and algorithms as points in the
infinite space of theoretically sound mirror learning algorithms.
Instead, TRL improves the robustness of deep RL meth-
ods by optimising a surrogate objective, which restricts the
policy update size at each learning iteration while preserv-
ing monotonic improvement guarantees (Schulman et al.,
2015). To this end it introduces a notion of distance be-
tween policies, e.g. through evaluating the maximal KL-
divergence. Unfortunately, these types of measures do not
scale to large MDPs that TRL was meant to tackle in the
first place (since small problems can be solved by GPI).
Nevertheless, TRL’s theoretical promises and intuitive ac-
cessibility inspired a number of algorithms based on heuris-
tic approximations thereof. This paradigm shift led to sub-
stantial empirical success: First, in Trust-Region Policy Op-
timization (Schulman et al., 2015, TRPO), a hard constraint
mechanism on the policy update size was introduced. Sec-
ond, Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017,
PPO) replaced the hard constraint with the clipping objec-
arXiv:2201.02373v11  [cs.LG]  19 Nov 2024

Mirror Learning
tive which, intuitively, disincentivises large policy updates.
Since they were published, these algorithms have both been
applied widely, resulting in state-of-the-art (SOTA) perfor-
mance on a variety of benchmark, and even real-world,
tasks (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Berner et al., 2019).
There is a stark contrast between the empirical success and
the lack of theoretical understanding, which is largely lim-
ited to “proof by analogy”: For example, PPO is regarded
as sound since it approximates an algorithm compliant with
TRL. However, recent studies concluded that PPO arbitrar-
ily exceeds policy update size constraints, thus fundamen-
tally violating TRL principles (Wang et al., 2020; Engstrom
et al., 2020), which shows that PPO’s empirical success
does not follow from TRL. On a higher level, this reveals a
concerning lack of theoretical understanding of the perhaps
most widely used RL algorithm.
To reconnect theory with practice, in this paper we intro-
duce a novel theoretical framework, named Mirror Learn-
ing, which provides theoretical guarantees to a large class
of known algorithms, including TRPO (Schulman et al.,
2015), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and MDPO (Tomar
et al., 2020), to name a few, as well as to myriads of al-
gorithms that are yet to be discovered. Mirror learning is
a general, principled policy-learning framework that pos-
sesses monotonic improvement and optimal-policy conver-
gence guarantees, under arbitrary update-size constraints.
Intuitively, a mirror-learning policy update maximises the
current value function while keeping the, arbitrarily speci-
fied, update cost (called drift) small. The update is further
constrained within a neighbourhood of the current policy,
that can also be specified arbitrarily.
Since TRL and GPI were the only anchor points for theo-
retically sound policy optimisation, prior unsuccessful at-
tempts to proving the soundness of PPO and other algo-
rithms tried to shoe-horn them into the overly narrow con-
fines of these frameworks (Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2020; Queeney et al., 2021). Mirror learning shows that
this was a flawed approach: Rather than shoe-horning the
algorithms, we radically expand the space of theoretically
sound methods, naturally covering PPO et al in their cur-
rent, practical formulations. Our work suggests that the
empirical performance of these state-of-the-art methods is
a direct consequence of their theoretical properties, rather
than of aforementioned approximate analogies. Rather than
being limited by the confines of two singular anchor points
(GPI/TRL), mirror learning sets us free to explore an end-
less space of possible algorithms, each of which is already
endowed with theoretical guarantees.
We also illustrate the explanatory power of mirror learning
and use it to explain a number of thus far unexplained ob-
servations concerning the performance of other algorithms
in the literature.
Finally, we show that mirror learning allows us to view pol-
icy optimisation as a search on a directed graph, where the
total path-weight between any two nodes in an optimisa-
tion path is upper bounded by the optimality gap between
them, which we confirm experimentally. We also analyse
proof-of-concept instantiations of mirror learning that use
a variety of different neighbourhood and drift functions.
2. Background
In this section, we introduce the RL problem formulation
and briefly survey state-of-the-art learning protocols.
2.1. Preliminaries
We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) defined by
a tuple xS, A, r, P, γ, dy. Here, S is a discrete state space,
A is a discrete action space1, r : S ˆA Ñ r´Rmax, Rmaxs
is the bounded reward function, P : S ˆ A ˆ S Ñ r0, 1s
is the probabilistic transition function, γ P r0, 1q is the
discount factor, and d P PpSq (here PpXq denotes the
set of probability distributions over a set X) is the initial
state distribution. At time step t P N, the agent is at a
state st, takes an action at according to its stationary policy
πp¨|stq P PpAq, receives a reward rpst, atq, and moves to
the state st`1, whose probability distribution is Pp¨|st, atq.
The whole experience is evaluated by the return, which is
the discounted sum of all rewards
rγ
8 fi
8
ÿ
t“0
γtrpst, atq.
The state-action and state value functions that evaluate the
quality of states and actions, by providing a proxy to the
expected return, are given by
Qπps, aq fi Es1:8„P,a1:8„π
“
rγ
8 | s0 “ s, a0 “ a
‰
,
Vπpsq fi Ea0„π,s1:8„P,a1:8„π
“
rγ
8 | s0 “ s
‰
,
respectively. The advantage function, defined as
Aπps, aq fi Qπps, aq ´ Vπpsq,
estimates the advantage of selecting one action over an-
other. The goal of the agent is to learn a policy that max-
imises the expected return, defined as a function of π,
ηpπq fi Es0„d,a0:8„π,s0:8„P
“
rγ
8
‰
“ Es„ρπ,a„π
“
rps, aq
‰
.
Here, ρπpsq fi
8ř
t“0
γtPrpst “ s|πq is the (improper)
marginal state distribution.
Interestingly, the set of so-
lutions to this problem always contains the optimal poli-
cies—policies π˚, for which Qπ˚ps, aq fi Q˚ps, aq ě
Qπps, aq holds for any π P Π fi Ś
sPS PpAq, s P S, a P
1Our results extend to any compact state and action spaces.
However, we work in the discrete setting in this paper for clarity.

Mirror Learning
A. Furthermore, the optimal policies are the only ones that
satisfy the optimality equation (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
π˚p¨|sq “ arg max
¯πp¨|sqPPpAq
Ea„¯π
“
Qπ˚ps, aq
‰

In the next subsections, we survey the most fundamental
and popular approaches of finding these optimal policies.
2.2. Generalised Policy Iteration
One key advantage of the generalised policy iteration (GPI)
framework is its simplicity. Even though the policy influ-
ences both the rewards and state visitations, GPI guarantees
that simply reacting greedily to the value function,
πnewp¨|sq “ arg max
¯πp¨|sqPPpAq
Ea„¯π
“
Qπoldps, aq
‰

(1)
guarantees that the new policy obtains higher expected re-

over, this procedure converges to the set of optimal policies
(Sutton & Barto, 2018), which can be seen intuitively by
substituting a fixed-point policy into Equation (1).
In settings with small, discrete action spaces GPI can be
executed approximately without storing the policy variable
π by responding greedily to the state-action value func-
tion. This gives rise to value-based learning (Sutton &
Barto, 2018), where the agent learns a Q-function with the
Bellman-max update
Qnewps, aq “ rps, aq ` γ ¨ Es1„P
“
max
a1PA Qoldps1, a1q
‰
,
which is known to converge to Q˚ (Watkins & Dayan,
1992), and has inspired design of a number of methods
(Mnih et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al., 2016).
Another, approximate, implementation of GPI is through
the policy gradient (PG) algorithms (Sutton et al., 2000).
These are methods which optimise the policy πθ by pa-
rameterising it with θ, and updating the parameter in the
direction of the gradient of the expectd return, given by
∇θηpπθq|θ“θold “ Es„ρπθold
”
∇θEa„πθ
“
Qπθold ps, aq
‰ˇˇ
θ“θold
ı
,
which is the gradient of the optimisation objective of GPI
from Equation (1) weighted by ρπθold. An analogous re-
sult holds for (continuous) deterministic policies (Silver
et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015). Thus, PG based algo-
rithms approximately solve the GPI step, with a policy in
the neighbourhood of πθold, provided the step-size α ą 0
in the update θnew “ θ ` α∇θηpπθq|θ“θold is sufficiently
small. PG methods have played a major role in applications
of RL to the real-world settings, and especially those that
involve continuous actions, where some value-based algo-
rithms, like DQN, are intractable (Williams, 1992; Baxter
& Bartlett, 2001; Mnih et al., 2016).
2.3. Trust-Region Learning
In practice, policy gradient methods may suffer from the
high variance of the PG estimates and training instabil-
ity (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Zhao et al., 2011). Trust-
region learning (TRL) is a framework that aims to solve
these issues. At its core lies the following policy update
πnew “ arg max
¯πPΠ
Es„ρπold,a„¯π
“
Aπoldps, aq
‰
´ CDmax
KL pπold, ¯πq,
where C “ 4γ max
s,a |Aπoldps, aq|{p1 ´ γq2.
(2)
It was shown by Schulman et al. (2015) that this update
guarantees the monotonic improvement of the return, i.e.,
ηpπnewq ě ηpπoldq. Furthermore, the KL-penalty in the
above objective ensures that the new policy stays within
the neighbourhood of πold, referred to as the trust region.
This is particularly important with regard to the instability
issue of the PG-based algorithms (Duan et al., 2016).
Although the exact calculation of the max-KL penalty is in-
tractable in settings with large/continuous state spaces, the
algorithm can be heuristically approximated, e.g. through
Trust Region Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015,
TRPO), which performs a constrained optimisation update
πnew “ arg max
¯πPΠ
Es„ρπold,a„¯π
“
Aπoldps, aq
‰
subject to Es„ρπold
“
DKL
`
πoldp¨|sq, πnewp¨|sq
˘‰
ď δ,
where δ ą 0. Despite its deviation from the original theory,
empirical results suggest that TRPO approximately main-
tains the TRL properties. However, in order to achieve a
simpler TRL-based heuristic, Schulman et al. (2017) intro-
duced Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) which updates
the policy by
πnew “ arg max
¯πPΠ
Es„ρπold,a„πold
“
Lclip‰
,
(3)
Lclip “ min
´
rp¯πqAπoldps, aq, clip
`
rp¯πq, 1 ˘ ϵ
˘
Aπoldps, aq
¯
,
where for given s, a, rp¯πq fi ¯πpa|sq{πpa|sq. The clip oper-
ator truncates rp¯πq to 1´ϵ (or 1`ϵ), if it is below (or above)
the threshold interval. Despite being motivated from a TRL
perspective, PPO violates its very core principles by fail-
ing to constrain the update size—whether measured either
by KL divergence, or by the likelihood ratios (Wang et al.,
2020; Engstrom et al., 2020). Nevertheless, PPO’s ability
to stabilise policy training has been demonstrated on a wide
variety of tasks, frequently resulting in SOTA performance
(Henderson et al., 2018; Berner et al., 2019). This begs
the question how PPO’s empirical performance can be jus-
tified theoretically. Mirror learning, which we introduce in
the next section, addresses this issue.
3. Mirror Learning
In this section we introduce Mirror Learning, state its the-
oretical properties, and explore its connection to prior RL
theory and methodology.

Mirror Learning
3.1. The Framework
We start from the following definition.
Definition 3.1. A drift functional D is a map
D : Π ˆ S Ñ tDπp¨|sq : PpAq Ñ Ru,
such that for all s P S, and π, ¯π P Π, writing Dπp¯π|sq for
Dπ
`
¯πp¨|sq|s
˘
, the following conditions are met
1. Dπp¯π|sq ě Dπpπ|sq “ 0 (nonnegativity),
2. Dπp¯π|sq has zero gradient2 with respect to ¯πp¨|sq,
evaluated at ¯πp¨|sq “ πp¨|sq (zero gradient).
Let ν ¯π
πpsq P PpSq be a state distribution that can depend
on π and ¯π. The drift Dν of ¯π from π is defined as
Dν
πp¯πq fi Es„ν ¯π
π
“
Dπp¯π|sq
‰
where νπ
¯π is such that the expectation is continuous in π and
¯π and monotonically non-decreasing in the total variation
distance between them. The drift is positive if Dν
πp¯πq “ 0
implies ¯π “ π, and trivial if Dν

We would like to highlight that drift is not the Bregman
distance, associated with mirror descent (Nemirovskij &
Yudin, 1983; Beck & Teboulle, 2003), as we do not re-
quire it to be (strongly) convex, or differentiable every-
where. All we require are, the much milder, continuity
and Gˆateaux-differentiability (Gateaux, 1922; Hamilton &
Nashed, 1982) of the drift functional at ¯πp¨|sq “ πp¨|sq.
We introduce one more concept whose role is to gener-
ally account for explicit update-size constraints. Such con-
straints reflect a learner’s risk-aversity towards subtantial
changes to its behaviour, like in TRPO, or are dictated by
an algorithm design, like the learning rate in PG methods.
Definition 3.2. We say that N : Π Ñ PpΠq is a neigh-
bourhood operator, where PpΠq is the power set of Π, if
1. It is a continuous map (continuity),
2. Every Npπq is a compact set (compactness),

Π, there exists ζ ą 0, such that χpπ, ¯πq ď ζ implies
¯π P Npπq (closed ball).
The trivial neighbourhood operator is N ” Π.
Let Dν be a drift, and π, ¯π be policies.
Suppose that
βπ P PpSq is a state distribution, referred to as a sam-

mirror operator transforms the value function of π into the
following functional of ¯π,
rMπnew
D Qπoldspsq “ Ea„πnew
“
Qπoldps, aq
‰
´ Dπoldpπnew|sq
2More precisely, all its Gˆateaux derivatives are zero.
Note that, in the above definition, Qπ can be equivalently
replaced by Aπ, as this only subtracts a constant Vπpsq in-
dependent of ¯π. We will use this fact later. As it turns out,
despite the appearance of the drift penalty, simply acting to
increase the mirror operator suffices to guarantee the pol-
icy improvement, as summarised by the following lemma,
proved in Appendix B.
Lemma 3.3. Let πold and πnew be policies. Suppose that
rMπnew
D Vπoldspsq ě rMπold

(4)
Then, πnew is better than πold, so that for every state s,
Vπnewpsq ě Vπoldpsq.
Of course, the monotonic improvement property of the ex-
pected return is a natural corollary of this lemma, as
ηpπnewq “ Es„d
“
Vπnewpsqs
ě Es„d
“
Vπoldpsqs “ ηpπoldq.
Hence, optimisation of the mirror operator guarantees the
improvement of the new policy’s performance. Condition
(4), however, is represented by |S| inequalities and solving
them may be intractable in large state spaces. Hence, we
shall design a proxy objective whose solution simply satis-
fies Condition (4), and admits Monte-Carlo estimation (for
practical reasons). For this purpose, we define the update
rule of mirror learning.
Definition 3.4. Let πold be a policy. Then, mirror learning
updates the policy by
πnew “ arg max
¯πPNpπoldq
Es„βπ
”“
M¯π
DVπold
‰
psq
ı
.
(5)
This, much simpler and clearer, problem formulation, is
also robust to settings with large state spaces and parame-
terised policies. Being an expectation, it can be approxi-
mated by sampling with the unbiased “batch” estimator
1
|B|
ÿ
s,aPB
” ¯πpa|sq
πoldpa|sqQπoldps, aq ´ ν ¯π
πoldpsq
βπoldpsqDπoldp¯π|sq
ı
. (6)
The distribution ν ¯π
πold can be chosen equal to βπold, in which
case the fraction from the front of the drift disappears, sim-
plifying the estimator. Note also that one may choose βπold
independently of πold. For example, it can be some fixed
distribution over S, like the uniform distribution. Hence,
the above update supports both on-policy and off-policy
learning. In the latter case, the fraction ¯πpa|sq{πoldpa|sq is
replaced by ¯πpa|sq{πhistpa|sq, where πhist is the policy used
to sample the pair ps, aq and insert it to a replay buffer (for
more details see Appendix F). Such a Monte-Carlo objec-
tive can be optimised with respect to ¯π parameters by, for
example, a few steps of gradient ascent. Most importantly,
in its exact form, the update in Equation (5) guarantees that
the resulting policy satisfies the desired Condition (4).

Mirror Learning
Lemma 3.5. Let πold be a policy and πnew be obtained from
the mirror update of Equation (5). Then,
rMπnew
D Vπoldspsq ě rMπold

Hence, πnew attains the properties provided by Lemma 3.3.
For proof, see Appendix B. Next, we use the above results
to characterise the properties of mirror learning. The im-
provement and convegence properties that it exhibits not
only motivate its usage, but may also contribute to ex-
plaining the empirical success of various widely-used al-
gorithms. We provide a proof sketch below, and a detailed
proof in Appendix C.
Theorem 3.6 (The Fundamental Theorem of Mirror Learn-
ing). Let Dν be a drift, N be a neighbourhood operator,
and the sampling distribution βπ depend continuously on
π. Let π0 P Π, and the sequence of policies pπnq8
n“0 be
obtained by mirror learning induced by Dν, N, and βπ.
Then, the learned policies
1. Attain the strict monotonic improvement property,
ηpπn`1q ě ηpπnq ` Es„d
«
νπn`1
πn
psq
βπnpsq Dπnpπn`1|sq
ff
,
2. Their value functions converge to the optimal one,
lim
nÑ8 Vπn “ V ˚,
3. Their expected returns converge to the optimal return,
lim
nÑ8 ηpπnq “ η˚,
4. Their ω-limit set consists of the optimal policies.
Proof sketch. We split the proof into four steps. In Step
1, we use Lemmas 3.3 & 3.5 to show that the sequence of
value functions pVπkqkPN converges. In Step 2, we show the
existance of limit points ¯π of pπkqkPN, and show that they
are fixed points of the mirror learning update, which we do
by contradiction. The most challenging Step 3, is where we
prove (by contradiction) that ¯π is a fixed point of GPI. In
the proof, we supposed that ¯π is not a fixed point of GPI,
and use the drift’s zero-gradient property (Definition 3.1)
to show that one could slightly perturb ¯π to obtain a policy
π1, which corresponds to a higher mirror learning objective.
This contradicts ¯π simultaneously being a fixed point of
mirror learning. Step 4 finalises the proof, by recalling that
fixed points of GPI are optimal policies.
Hence, any algorithm whose update takes the form of
Equation (5) improves the return monotonically, and con-
verges to the set of optimal policies. This result provides
RL algorithm designers with a template. New instances of
it can be obtained by altering the drift Dν, the neighbour-
hood operator N, and the sampling distribution function
βπ. Indeed, in the next section, we show how some of the
most well-known RL algorithms fit this template.
4. Mirror Learning View of RL Phenomena
We provide a list of RL algorithms in their mirror learning
representation in Appendix E.
Generalised Policy Iteration
For the trivial drift Dν ”
0, and the trivial neighbourhood operator N ” Π, the mir-
ror learning update from Equation (5) is equivalent to
πnew “ arg max
¯πPΠ
Es„βπold
“
Ea„¯π
“
Qπoldps, aq
‰‰
.
As in this case the maximisation is unconstrained, and the
expectation over s „ βπold is monotonically increasing in
the individual conditional Ea„¯π
“
Qπoldps, aq
‰
, the maximi-
sation distributes across states
πnewp¨|sq “ arg max
¯πp¨|sqPPpAq
Ea„¯π
“
Qπoldps, aq
‰
,
which is exactly the GPI update, as in Equation (1). Hence,
all instances of GPI, e.g., policy iteration (Sutton & Barto,
2018), are special cases of mirror learning, and thus in-
herit its improvement and convergence properties.
Fur-
thermore, neural implementations, like A3C (Mnih et al.,
2016), maintain these qualities approximately.
Trust-Region Learning
Let us choose the drift opera-
tor D to be the scaled KL-divergence, so that Dπp¯π|sq “
CπDKL
`
πp¨|sq, ¯πp¨|sq
˘
, where Cπ is a constant that de-
pends on π. Further, in the construction of the drift Dν
πp¯πq,
let us set ν ¯π
πpsq “ δps ´ smaxq, where δ is the Dirac-
delta distribution, and smax is the state at which the KL-
divergence between π and ¯π is largest. For the neighbour-
hood operator, we choose the trivial one. Lastly, for the
sampling distribution, we choose βπ “ ¯ρπ, the normalised
version of ρπ. Then, a mirror learning step maximises
Es„¯ρπold
”
Ea„πnew
“
Aπoldps, aq
‰ı
´ CπoldDmax
KL pπold, πnewq,
which, for appropriately chosen Cπold, is proportional (and
thus equivalent) to the trust-region learning update from
Equation (2). Hence, the monotonic improvement of trust-
region learning follows from Theorem 3.6, which also im-
plies its convergence to the set of optimal policies.
TRPO
The algorithm is designed to approximate trust-
region learning, and so its mirror-learning representation is
similar. We make the following changes: set the drift oper-
ator to Dν ” 0, and choose the neighbourhood operator to

Mirror Learning
the average-KL ball. Precisely,
Npπq “
␣
¯π P Π | Es„¯ρπ
“
DKL
`
πp¨|sq, ¯πp¨|sq
˘‰
ď δ
(
.
The resulting mirror learning update is the learning rule of
the TRPO algorithm. As a result, even though TRPO was
supposed to only approximate the monotonic trust-region
learning update (Schulman et al., 2015), this analysis shows
that TRPO has monontonic convergence guarantees.
PPO
We analyse PPO through unfolding the clipping ob-
jective Lclip (Equation (3)). For a given s P S, it equals
Ea„πold
“
min
`
rp¯πqAπoldps, aq, clip
`
rp¯πq, 1 ˘ ϵ
˘
Aπoldps, aq
˘‰
.
By recalling that rp¯πq “ ¯πpa|sq{πoldpa|sq, we use impor-
tance sampling (Sutton & Barto, 2018), and the trick of
“adding and subtracting”, to rewrite Lclip as
Ea„¯π
”
Aπoldps, aq
ı
´ Ea„πold
“
rp¯πqAπoldps, aq
´ min
`
rp¯πqAπoldps, aq, clip
`
rp¯πq, 1 ˘ ϵ
˘
Aπoldps, aq
˘‰
.
Going forward, we focus on the expectation that is sub-
tracted. First, we can replace the min operator with max,
with the identity -min fpxq “ max
“
´ fpxq
‰
, as follows
Ea„πold
“
rp¯πqAπoldps, aq
` max
`
´ rp¯πqAπoldps, aq, ´clip
`
rp¯πq, 1 ˘ ϵ
˘
Aπoldps, aq
˘‰
.
Then, we move rp¯πqAπoldps, aq inside the max, and obtain
Ea„πold
“
max
`
0,
“
rp¯πq ´ clip
`
rp¯πq, 1 ˘ ϵ
˘‰
Aπoldps, aq
˘‰
,
which can be simplified as
Ea„πold
”
ReLU
´“
rp¯πq ´ clip
`
rp¯πq, 1˘ϵ
˘‰
Aπoldps, aq
¯ı
(7)
Notice now that this expression is always non-negative,
due to the presence of the ReLU function (Fukushima &
Miyake, 1982).
Furthermore, for ¯π sufficently close to
πold, i.e., so that rp¯πq P r1 ´ ϵ, 1 ` ϵs, the clip operator
reduces to the identity function, and so Equation (7) is con-
stant and zero. Hence, it is zero at ¯π “ πold, and has a
zero gradient. Therefore, the expression in Equation (7)
is a drift functional of ¯πp¨|sq. This, together with taking
βπold ” ν ¯π
πold ” ¯ρπold, and the trivial neighbourhood oper-
ator N ” Π, shows that PPO, while it was supposed to
be a heuristic approximation of trust-region learning, is by
itself a rigorous instance of mirror learning. Thus, it in-
herits the monotonic improvement and convergence prop-
erties, which helps explain its great performance.
Interestingly, during the developmnent of PPO, a variant
more closely related to TRL was considered (Schulman
et al., 2017). Known as PPO-KL, the algorithm updates
the policy to ¯π “ πnew to maximise
Es„ρπold,a„¯π
“
Aπoldps, aq
‰
´ τDKLpπold, ¯πq,
and then scales τ up or down by a constant (typically 1.5),
depending on whether the KL-divergence induced by the
update exceeded or subceeded some target level. Intrigu-
ingly, according to the authors this approach, although
more closely-related to TRL, failed in practice.
Mir-
ror learning explains this apparent paradox. Namely, the
rescaling scheme of τ causes discontinuity of the penalty
term, when viewed as a function of πold and ¯π. This pre-
vents the penalty from being a valid drift, so unlike PPO
this version, PPO-KL, is not an instance of mirror learn-
ing. Recently, Hsu et al. (2020) introduced PPO-KL with a
fixed τ, allowing for continuity of the KL-penalty. Such an
algorithm is an instance of mirror learning, independently
of whether the forward or backward KL-divergence is em-
ployed. And indeed, the authors find that both versions of
the algorithms result in strong empirical performance, fur-
ther validating our theory.
5. Related Work
The RL community has long worked on the development
of theory to aid the development of theoretically-sound
techniques.
Perhaps, one of the greatest achievements
along this thread is the development of trust-region learn-
ing (Schulman et al., 2015, TRL)—a framework that al-
lows for stable training of monotonically improving poli-
cies. Unfortunately, despite its great theoeretical guaran-
tees, TRL is intractable in most practical settings. Hence,
the RL community focused on the development of heuris-
tics, like TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and PPO (Schul-
man et al., 2017), that approximate it while trading off
theoretical guarantees of TRL for practicality. As these
methods established new state-of-the-art performance on a
variety of tasks (Duan et al., 2016; Berner et al., 2019),
the conceptual connection to TRL has been considered the
key to success for many algorithms (Arjona-Medina et al.,
2018; Queeney et al., 2021). However, recent works have
shown that PPO is prone to breaking the core TRL princi-
ples of constraining the update size (Wang et al., 2020; En-
gstrom et al., 2020), and thus revealed an existing chasm
between RL practice and understanding—a problem that
mirror learning resolves.
Trust-region algorithms, although original, inspire connec-
tions between RL and optimisation, where the method of
mirror descent has been studied (Nemirovskij & Yudin,
1983).
This idea has recently been extended upon in
(Tomar et al., 2020), where Mirror Descent Policy Opti-
mization (MDPO) was proposed—the algorithm optimises
the policy with mirror ascent, where the role of the Breg-
man distance is played by the KL-divergence. The method

Mirror Learning
Figure 2. An intuitive view on the policy DAG and initial steps
of mirror learning. A policy vertex has a neighbour, within its
neighbourhood, which improves the return.
has been shown to achieve great empirical performance
(which is also implied by mirror learning). Notably, a new
stream of research in regularised RL is arising, where the
regulariser is subsumed into the Bregman distance. For ex-
ample, Neu et al. (2017) have shown that, in the average-
reward setting, a variant of TRPO is an instance of mirror
descent in a regularised MDP, and converges to the optimal
policy. Shani et al. (2020) have generalised TRPO to han-
dle regularised problems, and derived convergence rates for
their methods in the tabular case. Lan (2021) and Zhan
et al. (2021) have proposed mirror-descent algorithms that
solve regularised MDPs with convex regularisers, and also
provided their convergence properties. Here, we would like
to highlight that mirror learning is not a method of solving
regularised problems through mirror descent. Instead, it
is a very general class of algorithms that solve the classical
MDP. The term mirror, however, is inspired by the intuition
behind mirror descent, which solves the image of the orig-
inal problem under the mirror map (Nemirovskij & Yudin,
1983)—similarly, we defined the mirror operator.
Mirror learning is also related to Probability Functional
Descent (Chu et al., 2019, PFD). Although PFD is a gen-
eral framework of probability distribution optimisation in
machine learning problems, in the case of RL, it is an in-
stance of mirror learning—the one recovering GPI. Lastly,
the concepts of mirror descent and functional policy rep-
resentation are connected in a concurrent work of Vaswani
et al. (2021), who show how the technique of mirror de-
scent implements the functional descent of parameterised
policies. This approach, although powerful, fails to capture
some algorithms, including PPO, which we prove to be an
instance of mirror learning. The key to the generalisation
power of our theory is its abstractness, as well as simplicity.
6. Graph-theoretical Interpretation
In this section we use mirror learning to make a surprising
connection between RL and graph theory. We begin by
introducing the following definition of a particular directed
acyclic graph (DAG).
Definition 6.1 (Policy DAG). Let Dν be a positive drift,
and N be a neighbourhood operator. Then, the policy DAG
GpΠ, Dν, Nq is a graph where
• The vertex set is the policy space Π,
• pπ1, π2q is an edge if ηpπ1q ă ηpπ2q and π2 P Npπ1q,
• The weight of an edge pπ1, π2q is Dν
π1pπ2q.
This graph is a valid DAG because the transitive, asymmet-
ric “ă” relation that builds edges prevents the graph from
having cycles. We also know that, for every non-optimal
policy π, there in an outgoing edge pπ, π1q from π, as π1
can be computed with a step of mirror learning (see Figure
2 for an intuitive picture).
The above definition allows us to cast mirror learning as
a graph search problem. Namely, let π0 P Π be a ver-
tex policy at which we initialise the search, which fur-
ther induces a sequence pπnq8
n“0.
Let us define Uβ “
minπPΠ,sPS dpsq{βpsq. Theorem 3.6 lets us upper-bound
the weight of any traversed edge as
ηpπn`1q ´ ηpπnq ě Uβ ¨ Dν
πnpπn`1q.
(8)
Notice that ηpπnq´ηpπ0q “ řn
i“1
“
ηpπiq´ηpπi´1q
‰
con-
verges to η˚´ηpπ0q. Hence, the following series expansion
η˚ ´ ηpπ0q “
8
ÿ
n“0
“
ηpπn`1q ´ ηpπnq
‰
is valid.
Combining it with Inequality (8), we obtain a
bound on the total weight of the path induced by the search
η˚ ´ ηpπ0q
Uβ
ě
8
ÿ
n“0
Dν
πnpπn`1q,
(9)
Hence, mirror learning finds a path from π0 to the set of
graph sinks (the optimal policies), whose total weight is fi-
nite, and does not depend on the policies that appeared dur-
ing the search. Note that one could also estimate the left-
hand side from above by a bound pη˚ ` Vmaxq{Uβ which
is uniform for all initial policices π0. This finding may be
considered counterintuitive: While we can be decreasing
the number of edges in the graph by shrinking the neigh-
bourhood operator Npπq, a path to π˚ still exists, and de-
spite (perhaps) containing more edges, its total weight re-
mains bounded.
Lastly, we believe that this inequality can be exploited for
practical purposes: the drift functional D is an abstract
hyper-parameter, and the choice of it is a part of algo-
rithm design. Practicioners can choose D to describe a
cost that they want to limit throughout training. For ex-
ample, one can set D “ risk, where riskπp¯π|sq quan-
tifies some notion of risk of updating πp¨|sq to ¯πp¨|sq, or
D “ memory, to only make updates at a reasonable mem-
ory expense. Inequality (9) guarantees that the total ex-
pense will remain finite, and provides an upper bound for
it. Thereby, we encourage employing mirror learning with
drifts designed to satisfy constraints of interest.

Mirror Learning
7. Numerical Experiments
We verify the correctness of our theory with numerical ex-
periments. Their purpose is not to establish a new state-
of-the-art performance in the most challenging deep RL
benchmarks. It is, instead, to demonstrate that algorithms
that fall into the mirror learning framework obey Theorem
3.6 and Inequality (9). Hence, to enable a close connec-
tion between the theory and experiments we choose simple
environments and for drift functionals we selected: KL-
divergence, squared L2 distance, squared total variation
distance, and the trivial (zero) drift. For the neighbourhood
operator, in one suite of experiments, we use the expected
drift ball, i.e., the set of policies within some distance from
the old policy, measured by the corresponding drift; in the
second suite, we use the KL ball neighbourhood, like in
TRPO. We represent the policies with n-dimensional ac-
tion spaces as softmax distributions, with n ´ 1 parame-
ters.
For an exact verification of the theoretical results,
we test each algorithm over only one random seed.
In
all experiments, we set the initial-state and sampling dis-
tributions to uniform. The code is available at https:
//github.com/znowu/mirror-learning.
Single-step Game. In this game, the agent chooses one of
5 actions, and receives a reward corresponding to it. These
rewards are 10, 0, 1, 0, 5, respectively for each action. The
optimal return in this game equals 10.
Tabular Game. This game has 5 states, lined up next to
each other. At each state, an agent can choose to go left, and
receive a reward of `0.1, stay at the current state and re-
ceive 0 reward, or go right and receive ´0.1 reward. How-
ever, if the agent goes left at the left-most state, it receives
´10 reward, and if it goes right at the right-most state, it
recieves `10 reward. In these two cases, the game termi-
nates. We set γ “ 0.999. Clearly, the optimal policy here
ignores the small intermediate rewards and always chooses
to go right. The corresponding optimal expected return is
approximately 9.7.
GridWorld. We consider a 5 ˆ 5 grid, with a barrier that
limits the agent’s movement. The goal of the agent is to
reach the top-right corner as quick as possible, which ter-
minates the episode, and to avoid the bottom-left corner
with a bomb. It receives ´1 reward for every step taken,
and ´100 for stepping onto the bomb and terminating the
game. For γ “ 0.999, the optimal expected return is ap-
proximately ´7.
Figure 3 confirms that the resulting algorithms achieve the
monotonic improvement property, and converges to the op-
timal returns—this confirms Theorem 3.6. In these sim-
ple environments, the learning curves are influenced by the
choice of the drift functional more than by the neighbour-
hood operator, although not significantly. An exception oc-
Figure 3. Mirror learning algorithms with different drifts and
neighbourhood operators tested on simple environments.
The
solid lines represent the return, and the dotted ones represent
the total drift. Algorithms in the left column use the drift ball
neighbourhood, while those in the right use the KL ball. In both
columns there are algorithms with each of the aforementioned
drifts. Results are for one seed per environment and algorithm.
currs in the single-step game where, of course, one step of
GPI is sufficient to solve the game. We also see that the
value of the total drift (which we shift by Vπ0 on the plots
for comparison) remains well below the return in all envi-
ronments, confirming Inequality (9).
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced mirror learning—a framework
which unifies existing policy iteration algorithms. We have
proved Theorem 3.6, which states that any mirror learn-
ing algorithm solves the reinforcement learning problem.
As a corollary to this theorem, we obtained convergence
guarantees of state-of-the-art methods, including PPO and
TRPO. More importantly, it provides a framework for the
future development of theoretically-sound algorithms. We
also proposed an interesting, graph-theoretical perspective
on mirror learning, which establishes a connection between
graph theory and RL. Lastly, we verifed the correctness of
our theoretical results through numerical experiments on a
diverse family of mirror learning instances in three simple
toy settings. Designing and analysing the properties of the
myriads of other possible mirror learning instances is an
exciting avenue for future research.

Mirror Learning
