0 
The Turing Trap: 
The Promise & Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence 
Erik Brynjolfsson 
Stanford Digital Economy Lab 
http://brynjolfsson.com 
 
Forthcoming in Dædalus, Spring 2022 
 
In 1950, Alan Turing proposed an “imitation game” as the ultimate test of whether a machine 
was intelligent: could a machine imitate a human so well that it’s answers to questions 
indistinguishable from a human’s.1 Ever since, creating intelligence that matches human 
intelligence has implicitly or explicitly been the goal of thousands of researchers, engineers and 
entrepreneurs. The benefits of human-like artificial intelligence (HLAI) include soaring 
productivity, increased leisure, and perhaps most profoundly, a better understanding of our own 
minds.  
 
But not all types of AI are human-like – in fact, many of the most powerful systems are very 
different from humans – and an excessive focus on developing and deploying HLAI can lead us 
into a trap. As machines become better substitutes for human labor, workers lose economic and 
political bargaining power and become increasingly dependent on those who control the 
technology. In contrast, when AI is focused on augmenting humans rather than mimicking them, 
then humans retain the power to insist on a share of the value created. What’s more, 
augmentation creates new capabilities and new products and services, ultimately generating far 
more value than merely human-like AI. While both types of AI can be enormously beneficial, 
there are currently excess incentives for automation rather than augmentation among 
technologists, business executives, and policy-makers. 
 

 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
lan Turing was far from the first to imagine human-like machines. According to legend, 
3,500 years ago, Dædalus constructed humanoid statues that were so lifelike that they 
moved and spoke by themselves.2 Nearly every culture has its own stories of human-like 
machines, from Yanshi’s leather man described in the ancient Chinese Liezi text to the bronze 
Talus of the Argonautica and the towering clay Mokkerkalfe of Norse mythology. The word 
robot first appeared in Karel Čapek’s influential play Rossum’s Universal Robots and derives 
from the Czech word robota, meaning servitude or work. In fact, in the first drafts of his play, 
Čapek named them labori until his brother Josef suggested substituting the word robot.3 
Of course, it is one thing to tell tales about humanoid machines. It is something else to 
create robots that do real work. For all our ancestors’ inspiring stories, we are the first generation 
to build and deploy real robots in large numbers.4 Dozens of companies are working on robots as 
human-like, if not more so, as those described in the ancient texts. One might say that technology 
has advanced sufficiently to become indistinguishable from mythology.5  
The breakthroughs in robotics depend not merely on more dexterous mechanical hands 
and legs, and more perceptive synthetic eyes and ears, but also on increasingly human-like 
artificial intelligence. Powerful AI systems are crossing key thresholds: matching humans in a 
growing number of fundamental tasks such as image recognition and speech recognition, with 
applications from autonomous vehicles and medical diagnosis to inventory management and 
product recommendations.6 AI is appearing in more and more products and processes.7  
These breakthroughs are both fascinating and exhilarating. They also have profound 
economic implications. Just as earlier general-purpose technologies like the steam engine and 
A 

 
 
 
 
 2 
electricity catalyzed a restructuring of the economy, our own economy is increasingly 
transformed by AI. A good case can be made that AI is the most general of all general-purpose 
technologies: after all, if we can solve the puzzle of intelligence, it would help solve many of the 
other problems in the world,. And we are making remarkable progress. In the coming decade, 
machine intelligence will become increasingly powerful and pervasive. We can expect record 
wealth creation as a result.  
Replicating human capabilities is valuable not only because of its practical potential for 
reducing the need for human labor, but also because it can help us build more robust and flexible 
forms of intelligence. Whereas domain-specific technologies can often make rapid progress on 
narrow tasks, they founder when unexpected problems or unusual circumstances arise. That is 
where human-like intelligence excels. In addition, HLAI could help us understand more about 
ourselves. We appreciate and comprehend the human mind better when we work to create an 
artificial one.  
Let’s look more closely at how HLAI could lead to a realignment of economic and 
political power.  
The distributive effects of AI depend on whether it is primarily used to augment human 
labor or automate and replace it. When AI augments human capabilities, enabling people to do 
things they never could before, then humans and machines are complements. Complementarity 
implies that people remain indispensable for value creation and retain bargaining power in labor 
markets and in political decision-making. In contrast, when AI replicates and automates existing 
human capabilities, machines become better substitutes for human labor and workers lose 
economic and political bargaining power. Entrepreneurs and executives who have access to 

 
 
 
 
 3 
machines with capabilities that replicate those of human for a given task can and often will 
replace humans in those tasks. 
A fully automated economy could, in principle, be structured to redistribute the benefits 
from production widely, even to those who are no longer strictly necessary for value creation. 
However, the beneficiaries would be in a weak bargaining position to prevent a change in the 
distribution that left them with little or nothing. They would depend precariously on the 
decisions of those in control of the technology. This opens the door to increased concentration of 
wealth and power. 
This highlights the promise and the peril of achieving HLAI: building machines designed 
to pass the Turing Test and other, more sophisticated metrics of human-like intelligence.8 On the 
one hand, it is a path to unprecedented wealth, increased leisure, robust intelligence, and even a 
better understanding of ourselves. On the other hand, if HLAI leads machines to automate rather 
than augment human labor, it creates the risk of concentrating wealth and power. And with that 
concentration comes the peril of being trapped in an equilibrium where those without power have 
no way to improve their outcomes, a situation I call the Turing Trap.  
The grand challenge of the coming era will be to reap the unprecedented benefits of AI, 
including its human-like manifestations, while avoiding the Turing Trap. Succeeding in this task 
requires an understanding of how technological progress affects productivity and inequality, why 
the Turing Trap is so tempting to different groups, and a vision of how we can do better. 
*** 
I pioneer Nils Nilsson noted that “achieving real human-level AI would necessarily 
imply that most of the tasks that humans perform for pay could be automated.”9 In the 
same article, he called for a focused effort to create such machines, writing that “achieving 
A 

 
 
 
 
 4 
human-level AI or ‘strong AI’ remains the ultimate goal for some researchers” and he contrasted 
this with “weak AI,” which seeks to “build machines that help humans.”10 Not surprisingly, 
given these monikers, work toward “strong AI” attracted many of the best and brightest minds to 
the quest of–implicitly or explicitly–fully automating human labor, rather than assisting or 
augmenting it.  
For the purposes of this essay, rather than strong versus weak AI, let us use the terms 
automation versus augmentation. In addition, I will use HLAI to mean human-like artificial 
intelligence not human-level AI because the latter mistakenly implies that intelligence falls on a 
single dimension, and perhaps even that humans are at the apex of that metric. In reality, 
intelligence is multidimensional: a 1970s pocket calculator surpasses the most intelligent human 
in some ways (such as multiplication), as does a chimpanzee (short-term memory). At the same 
time, machines and animals are inferior to human intelligence on myriad other dimensions. The 
term “artificial general intelligence” (AGI) is often used as a synonym for HLAI. However, 
taken literally, it is the union of all types of intelligences, able to solve types of problems that are 
solvable by any existing human, animal, or machine. That suggests that AGI is not human-like.  
  
The good news is that both automation and augmentation can boost labor productivity: 
that is, the ratio of value-added output to labor-hours worked. As productivity increases, so do 
average incomes and living standards, as do our capabilities for addressing challenges from 
climate change and poverty to health care and longevity.11 Mathematically, if the human labor 
used for a given output declines toward zero, then labor productivity would grow to infinity.12  
The bad news is that no economic law ensures everyone will share this growing pie. 
Although pioneering models of economic growth13 14 assumed that technological change was 

 
 
 
 
 5 
neutral, in practice technological change can disproportionately help or hurt some groups, even if 
it is beneficial on average.15 
In particular, the way the benefits of technology are distributed depends to a great extent 
on how the technology is deployed and the economic rules and norms that govern the 
equilibrium allocation of goods, services, and incomes. When technologies automate human 
labor, they tend to reduce the marginal value of workers’ contributions, and more of the gains go 
to the owners, entrepreneurs, inventors, and architects of the new systems. In contrast, when 
technologies augment human capabilities, more of the gains go to human workers.16  
A common fallacy is to assume that all or most productivity-enhancing innovations 
belong in the first category: automation. However, the second category, augmentation, has been 
far more important throughout most of the past two centuries. One metric of this is the economic 
value of an hour of human labor. Its market price as measured by median wages has grown more 
than ten-fold since 1820.17 An entrepreneur is willing to pay much more for a worker whose 
capabilities are amplified by a bulldozer than one who can only work with a shovel, let alone 
with bare hands.  
In many cases, not only wages but also employment grow with the introduction of new 
technologies. With the invention of jet engines, pilot productivity (in passenger-miles per pilot-
hour) grew immensely. Rather than reducing the number of employed pilots, the technology 
spurred demand for air travel so much that the number of pilots grew. Although this pattern is 
comforting, past performance does not guarantee future results. Modern technologies–and, more 
important, the ones under development–are different from those that were important in the past.18  
In recent years, we have seen growing evidence that not only is the labor share of the 
economy declining, but even among workers, some groups are beginning to fall even farther 

 
 
 
 
 6 
behind.19 Over the past forty years, the numbers of millionaires and billionaires grew but the 
average real wages for Americans with only a high school education fell.20 While many 
phenomena contributed to this, including new patterns of global trade, changes in technology 
deployment are the single biggest explanation.  
If capital in the form of AI can perform more tasks, those with unique assets, talents, or 
skills that are not easily replaced with technology stand to benefit disproportionately.21 The result 
has been greater wealth concentration.22  
Ultimately, a focus on more human-like AI can make technology a better substitute for 
the many non-superstar workers, driving down their market wages, even as it amplifies the 
market power of a few.23 This has created a growing fear that AI and related advances will lead 
to a burgeoning class of unemployable or “zero marginal product” people.24 
*** 
n unfettered market is likely to create socially excessive incentives for innovations that 
automate human labor and produce weak incentives for technology that augments 
humans. The first fundamental welfare theorem of economics states that under a particular set of 
conditions, market prices lead to a pareto optimal outcome: that is, one where no one can be 
made better off without making someone else worse off. But the theorem does not hold when 
there are innovations that change the production possibilities set or externalities that affect 
people who are not part of the market.  
Both innovations and externalities are of central importance to the economic effects of 
AI, since AI is not only an innovation itself, but also one that triggers cascades of 
complementary innovations, from new products to new production systems.25 Furthermore, the 
effects of AI, particularly on work, are rife with externalities. When a worker loses opportunities 
A 

 
 
 
 
 7 
to earn labor income, the costs go beyond the newly unemployed to affect many others in their 
community and in the broader society. With fading opportunities often come the dark horses of 
alcoholism, crime, and opioid abuse. Recently, the United States has experienced the first decline 
in life expectancies in its recorded history, a result of increasing deaths from suicide, drug 
overdose, and alcoholism, what economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton call “deaths of 
despair.”26  
This spiral of marginalization can grow because concentration of economic power often 
begets concentration of political power. In the words attributed to Louis Brandeis: “We may 
have democracy, or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can’t have 
both.” In contrast, when humans are indispensable to value creation, economic power will tend 
to be more decentralized. Historically, most economically valuable knowledge–what economist 
Simon Kuznets called “useful knowledge”–resided within human brains.27 But no human brain 
can contain even a small fraction of the useful knowledge needed to run even a medium-sized 
business, let alone a whole industry or economy, so knowledge had to be distributed and 
decentralized.28 The decentralization of useful knowledge, in turn, decentralizes economic and 
political power.  
Unlike nonhuman assets such as property and machinery, much of a person’s knowledge 
is inalienable, both in the practical sense that no one person can know everything that another 
person knows and in the legal sense that its ownership cannot be legally transferred.29 In 
contrast, when knowledge becomes codified and digitized, it can be owned, transferred, and 
concentrated very easily. Thus, when knowledge shifts from humans to machines, it opens the 
possibility of concentration of power. When historians look back on the first two decades of the 
twenty-first century, they will note the striking growth in the digitization and codification of 

 
 
 
 
 8 
information and knowledge.30 In parallel, machine learning models are becoming larger, with 
hundreds of billions of parameters, using more data and getting more accurate results.31  
More formally, incomplete contracts theory shows how ownership of key assets provides 
bargaining power in relationships between economic agents (such as employers and employees, 
or business owners and subcontractors).32 To the extent that a person controls an indispensable 
asset (like useful knowledge) needed to create and deliver a company’s products and services, 
that person can command not only higher income but also a voice in decision-making. When 
useful knowledge is inalienably locked in human brains, so too is the power it confers. But when 
it is made alienable, it enables greater concentration of decision-making and power.33 
*** 
he risks of the Turing trap are amplified because three groups of people–technologists, 
businesspeople, and policy-makers–each find it alluring. Technologists have sought to 
replicate human intelligence for decades to address the recurring challenge of what computers 
could not do. The invention of computers and the birth of the term “electronic brain” were the 
latest fuel for the ongoing battle between technologists and humanist philosophers.34 The 
philosophers posited a long list of ordinary and lofty human capacities that computers would 
never be able to do. No machine could play checkers, master chess, read printed words, 
recognize speech, translate between human languages, distinguish images, climb stairs, win at 
Jeopardy or Go, write poems, and so forth. 
For professors, it is tempting to assign such projects to their graduate students. Devising 
challenges that are new, useful, and achievable can be as difficult as solving them. Rather than 
specify a task that neither humans nor machines have ever done before, why not ask the research 
T 

 
 
 
 
 9 
team to design a machine that replicates an existing human capability? Unlike more ambitious 
goals, replication has an existence proof that such tasks are, in principle, feasible and useful.  
While the appeal of human-like systems is clear, the paradoxical reality is that HLAI can be 
more difficult and less valuable than systems that achieve superhuman performance. 
In 1988, robotics developer Hans Moravec noted35 that “it is comparatively easy to make 
computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and difficult 
or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when it comes to perception and 
mobility.” But I would argue that in many domains, Moravec was not nearly ambitious enough. 
It is often comparatively easier for a machine to achieve superhuman performance in new 
domains than to match ordinary humans in the tasks they do regularly. 
Humans have evolved over millions of years to be able to comfort a baby, navigate a 
cluttered forest, or pluck the ripest blueberry from a bush, tasks that are difficult if not 
impossible for current machines. But machines excel when it comes to seeing X-rays, etching 
millions of transistors on a fragment of silicon, or scanning billions of webpages to find the most 
relevant one,. Imagine how feeble and limited our technology would be if past engineers set their 
sights on merely replicating human-levels of perception, actuation, and cognition.  
Augmenting humans with technology opens an endless frontier of new abilities and 
opportunities. The set of tasks that humans and machines can do together is undoubtedly much 
larger than those humans can do alone (Figure 1). Machines can perceive things that are 
imperceptible to humans, they can act on objects in ways that no human can, and they can 
comprehend things that are incomprehensible to the human brain. As Demis Hassabis, CEO of 
Deepmind, put it, the AI system “doesn’t play like a human, and it doesn’t play like a program. It 
plays in a third, almost alien, way . . . it’s like chess from another dimension.”36 Computer 

 
 
 
 
 
10 
scientist Jonathan Schaeffer explains the source of its superiority: “I’m absolutely convinced it’s 
because it hasn’t learned from humans.”37 More fundamentally, inventing tools that augment the 
process of invention itself promises to expand not only our collective abilities, but to accelerate 
the rate of expansion of those abilities. 
 
Figure 1 
[Labor Automation and Augmentation] 
 
 
 
What about businesspeople? They often find that substituting machinery for human labor 
is the low-hanging fruit of innovation. The simplest approach is to implement plug-and-play 
automation: swap in a piece of machinery for each task a human is currently doing. That mindset 
reduces the need for more radical changes to business processes.38 Task-level automation 

 
 
 
 
 
11 
reduces the need to understand subtle interdependencies and creates easy A-B tests, by focusing 
on a known task with easily measurable performance improvement.  
Similarly, because labor costs are the biggest line item in almost every company’s 
budget, automating jobs is a popular strategy for managers. Cutting costs–which can be an 
internally coordinated effort–is often easier than expanding markets. Moreover, many investors 
prefer “scalable” business models, which is often a synonym for a business that can grow 
without hiring and the complexities that entails.  
But here again, when businesspeople focus on automation, they often set out to achieve a 
task that is both less ambitious and more difficult than it need be. To understand the limits of 
substitution-oriented automation, consider a thought experiment. What if our old friend Dædalus 
had at his disposal an extremely talented team of engineers 3,500 years ago and had, somehow, 
built human-like machines that fully automated every work-related task that his fellow Greeks 
were doing.  
 
• Herding sheep? Automated. 
• Making clay pottery? Automated. 
• Weaving tunics? Automated. 
• Repairing horse-drawn carts? Automated. 
• Bloodletting victims of disease? Automated. 
 
The good news is that labor productivity would soar, freeing the ancient Greeks for a life of 
leisure. The bad news is that their living standards and health outcomes would come nowhere 

 
 
 
 
 
12 
near matching ours. After all, there is only so much value one can get from clay pots and horse-
drawn carts, even with unlimited quantities and zero prices.  
In contrast, most of the value that our economy has created since ancient times comes 
from new goods and services that not even the kings of ancient empires had, not from cheaper 
versions of existing goods.39 In turn, myriad new tasks are required: fully 60 percent of people 
are now employed in occupations that did not exist in 1940.40 In short, automating labor 
ultimately unlocks less value than augmenting it to create something new. 
At the same time, automating a whole job is often brutally difficult. Most jobs involve 
many tasks that are extremely challenging to automate, even with the most clever technologies. 
For example, AI may be able to read mammograms better than a human radiologist, but it cannot 
do the other twenty-six tasks associated with the job, according to O-NET, such as comforting a 
concerned patient or coordinating on a care plan with other doctors.41 My work with Tom 
Mitchell and Daniel Rock on the suitability for machine learning found many occupations in 
which machines could contribute some tasks, but zero occupations out of 950 in which machine 
learning could do 100 percent of the necessary tasks.42 
The same principle applies to the more complex production systems that involve multiple 
people working together.43 To be successful, firms typically need to adopt a new technology as 
part of a system of mutually reinforcing organizational changes.44 
Consider another thought experiment: Imagine if Jeff Bezos had “automated” existing 
bookstores by simply replacing all the human cashiers with robot cashiers. That might have cut 
costs a bit, but the total impact would have been muted. Instead, Amazon reinvented the concept 
of a bookstore by combining humans and machines in a novel way. As a result, they offer vastly 
greater product selection, ratings, reviews, and advice, and enable 24/7 retail access from the 

 
 
 
 
 
13 
comfort of customers’ homes. The power of the technology was not in automating the work of 
humans in the existing retail bookstore concept but in reinventing and augmenting how 
customers find, assess, purchase, and receive books and, in turn, other retail goods.  
Third, policy-makers have also often tilted the playing field toward automating human 
labor rather than augmenting it. For instance, the U.S. tax code currently encourages capital 
investment over investment in labor through effective tax rates that are much higher on labor 
than on plant and equipment.45  
Consider a third thought experiment: two potential ventures each use AI to create one 
billion dollars of profits. If one of them achieves this by augmenting and employing a thousand 
workers, the firm will owe corporate and payroll taxes, while the employees will pay income 
taxes, payroll taxes, and other taxes. If the second business has no employees, the government 
may collect the same corporate taxes, but no payroll taxes and no taxes paid by workers. As a 
result, the second business model pays far less in total taxes.  
This disparity is amplified because the tax code treats labor income more harshly than 
capital income. In 1986, top tax rates on capital income and labor income were equalized in the 
United States, but since then, successive changes have created a large disparity, with the 2021 
top marginal federal tax rates on labor income of 37 percent, while long capital gains have a 
variety of favorable rules, including a lower statutory tax rate of 20 percent, the deferral of taxes 
until capital gains are realized, and the “step-up basis” rule that resets capital gains to zero, 
wiping out the associated taxes, when assets are inherited.  
The first rule of tax policy is simple: you tend to get less of whatever you tax. Thus, a tax 
code that treats income that uses labor less favorably than income derived from capital will favor 
automation over augmentation. Undoing this imbalance would lead to more balanced incentives. 

 
 
 
 
 
14 
In fact, given the positive externalities of more widely shared prosperity, a case could be made 
for treating wage income more favorably than capital income, for instance by expanding the 
earned income tax credit.46 
Government policy in other areas could also do more to steer the economy clear of the 
Turing Trap. The growing use of AI, even if only for complementing workers, and the further 
reinvention of organizations around this new general-purpose technology implies a great need for 
worker training or retraining. In fact, for each dollar spent on machine learning technology, 
companies may need to spend nine dollars on intangible human capital.47 However, training 
suffers from a serious externality issue: companies that incur the costs to train or retrain workers 
may reap only a fraction of the benefits of those investments, with the rest potentially going to 
other companies, including competitors, as these workers are free to bring their skills to their 
new employers. At the same time, workers are often cash- and credit-constrained, limiting their 
ability to invest in their own skills development.48 This implies that governments policy should 
directly provide this training or provide incentives for corporate training that offset the 
externalities created by labor mobility.49 
In sum, the risks of the Turing Trap are increased not by just one group in our society, but 
by the misaligned incentives of technologists, businesspeople, and policy-makers. 
*** 
he future is not preordained. We control the extent to which AI either expands human 
opportunity through augmentation or replaces humans through automation. We can work 
on challenges that are easy for machines and hard for humans, rather than hard for machines and 
easy for humans. The first option offers the opportunity of growing and sharing the economic pie 
by augmenting the workforce with tools and platforms. The second option risks dividing the 
T 

 
 
 
 
 
15 
economic pie among an ever-smaller number of people by creating automation that displaces 
ever-more types of workers.  
While both approaches can and do contribute to progress, too many technologists, 
businesspeople, and policy-makers have been putting a finger on the scales in favor of 
replacement. Moreover, the tendency of a greater concentration of technological and economic 
power to beget a greater concentration of political power risks trapping a powerless majority into 
an unhappy equilibrium: the Turing Trap.  
The backlash against free trade offers a cautionary tale. Economists have long argued that 
free trade and globalization tend to grow the economic pie through the power of comparative 
advantage and specialization. They have also acknowledged that market forces alone do not 
ensure that every person in every country will come out ahead. So they proposed a grand 
bargain: maximize free trade to maximize wealth creation and then distribute the benefits 
broadly to compensate any injured occupations, industries, and regions. It hasn’t worked as they 
had hoped. As the economic winners gained power, they reneged on the second part of the 
bargain, leaving many workers worse off than before.50 The result helped fuel a populist 
backlash that led to import tariffs and other barriers to free trade. Economists wept. 
Some of the same dynamics are already underway with AI. More and more Americans, 
and indeed workers around the world, believe that while the technology may be creating a new 
billionaire class, it is not working for them. The more technology is used to replace rather than 
augment labor, the worse the disparity may become, and the greater the resentments that feed 
destructive political instincts and actions. More fundamentally, the moral imperative of treating 
people as ends, and not merely as means, calls for everyone to share in the gains of automation.  

 
 
 
 
 
16 
The solution is not to slow down technology, but rather to eliminate or reverse the excess 
incentives for automation over augmentation. In concert, we must build political and economic 
institutions that are robust in the face of the growing power of AI. We can reverse the growing 
tech backlash by creating the kind of prosperous society that inspires discovery, boosts living 
standards, and offers political inclusion for everyone. By redirecting our efforts, we can avoid 
the Turing Trap and create prosperity for the many, not just the few.  
 
Author’s note: The core ideas in this essay were inspired by a series of conversations with James 
Manyika and Andrew McAfee. I am grateful for valuable comments and suggestions on this 
work from Matt Beane, Seth Benzell, Katya Klinova, Alena Kykalova, Gary Marcus, Andrea 
Meyer, and Dana Meyer, but they should not be held responsible for any errors or opinions in the 
essay. 
 
Erik Brynjolfsson is the Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Professor and Senior Fellow at the 
Institute for Human-Centered AI and Director of the Digital Economy Lab at Stanford 
University. He is also the Ralph Landau Senior Fellow at the Institute for Economic Policy 
Research and Professor by Courtesy at the Graduate School of Business and Department of 
Economics at Stanford University, and a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic 
Research. He is the author or co-author of seven books including (with Andrew McAfee): 
Machine, Platform, Crowd: Harnessing Our Digital Future (2017), The Second Machine Age: 
Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (2014), and Race against the 
Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and 
Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy (2011) and (with Adam Saunders): 
Wired for Innovation: How Information Technology Is Reshaping the Economy (2009). 
 

 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
1 Alan  Turing (October 1950), "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind, LIX (236): 433–
460, doi:10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433.  An earlier articulation of this test comes from Descartes in 
The Discourse, in which he wrote,  
If there were machines which bore a resemblance to our bodies and imitated our actions 
as closely as possible for all practical purposes, we should still have two very certain 
means of recognizing that they were not real men. The first is that they could never use 
words, or put together signs, as we do in order to declare our thoughts to others. . . . 
Secondly, even though some machines might do some things as well as we do them, or 
perhaps even better, they would inevitably fail in others, which would reveal that they are 
acting not from understanding.  
 
2 Carolyn Price, “Plato, Opinions and the Statues of Daedalus,” OpenLearn, updated June 19, 
2019, https://www.open.edu/openlearn/history-the-arts/philosophy/plato-opinions-and-the-
statues-daedalus; and Andrew Stewart, “The Archaic Period,” Perseus Digital Library, 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.04.0008:part=2:chapter=1&hig
hlight=daedalus. 
3 “The Origin of the Word ‘Robot,’” Science Friday, April 22, 2011, 
https://www.sciencefriday.com/segments/the-origin-of-the-word-robot/.  
4 Millions of people are now working alongside robots. For a recent survey on the diffusion of 
robots, AI, and other advanced technologies in the United States, see Nikolas Zolas, Zachary 
Kroff, Erik Brynjolfsson, et al., “Advanced Technologies Adoption and Use by U.S. Firms: 
Evidence from the Annual Business Survey,” NBER Working Paper No. 28290 (Cambridge, 
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020). 
5 Apologies to Arthur C. Clarke. 
6 See, for example, Daniel Zhang, Saurabh Mishra, Erik Brynjolfsson, et al., “The AI Index 2021 
Annual Report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06312 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University, 2021), esp. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
chap. 2. In regard to image recognition, see, for instance, the success of image recognition 
systems in Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, et al., “Imagenet Large Scale Visual 
Recognition Challenge,” International Journal of Computer Vision 115 (3) (2015): 211–252. 
7 Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, “The Business of Artificial Intelligence,” Harvard 
Business Review (2017): 3–11. 
8 See for example, Hubert Dreyfus, What Computers Can’t Do (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
1972), Nils J. Nilsson, “Human-Level Artificial Intelligence? Be Serious!” AI Magazine 26 (4) 
(2005): 68; and Gary Marcus, Francesca Rossi, and Manuela Veloso, “Beyond the Turing 
Test,” AI Magazine 37 (1) (2016): 3–4.  
9 Nilsson, “Human-Level Artificial Intelligence?” 68. 
10 John Searle was the first to use the terms strong AI and weak AI, writing that with weak AI, 
“the principal value of the computer . . . is that it gives us a very powerful tool,” while strong AI 
“really is a mind.” Ed Feigenbaum has argued that creating such intelligence is the “manifest 
destiny” of computer science. (John R. Searle. 1980. Minds, Brains, and Programs. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 3(3): 417–57. 
 
11 If working hours fall fast enough, it is theoretically possible, though empirically unlikely, that 
living standards could fall even as productivity rises. 
12 However, as discussed below, this does not necessarily mean living standards would rise 
without bound. 
13 See, for example, Robert M. Solow, “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 70 (1) (1956): 65–94. 
 
15 See for example Daron Acemoglu, “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic 
Studies 69 (4) (2002): 781–809. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
16 See, for instance, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, Race Against the Machine: How the 
Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly 
Transforming Employment and the Economy (Lexington, Mass.: Digital Frontier Press, 2011); 
and Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, “The Race Between Machine and Man: Implications 
of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment,” American Economic Review 108 
(6) (2018): 1488–1542. 
17 For instance, the real wage of a building laborer in Great Britain is estimated to have grown 
from sixteen times the amount needed for subsistence in 1820 to 167 times that level by the year 
2000, according to Jan Luiten Van Zanden, Joerg Baten, Marco Mira d’Ercole, et al., eds., How 
Was Life? Global Well-Being since 1820 (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2014). 
18 For instance, a majority of aircraft on US Navy aircraft carriers are likely to be unmmaned. 
See Oriana Pawlyk, “Future Navy Carriers Could Have More Drones Than Manned Aircraft, 
Admiral Says”, Military.com, March 30, 2021. 
“ 
19 Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1) (2014): 61–103; and David Autor, “Work of the Past, 
Work of the Future,” NBER Working Paper No. 25588 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 2019). For a broader survey, see Morgan R. Frank, David Autor, James E. 
Bessen, et al., “Toward Understanding the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on 
Labor,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 (14) (2019): 6531–6539. 
20 Daron Acemoglu and David Autor, “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for 
Employment and Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics 4 (2011): 1043–1171. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
21 Seth G. Benzell and Erik Brynjolfsson, “Digital Abundance and Scarce Architects: 
Implications for Wages, Interest Rates, and Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 25585 
(Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2021). 
22 Prasanna Tambe, Lorin Hitt, Daniel Rock, and Erik Brynjolfsson, “Digital Capital and 
Superstar Firms,” Hutchins Center Working Paper #73 (Washington, D.C.: Hutchins Center at 
Brookings, 2021), https://www.brookings.edu/research/digital-capital- and-superstar-firms. 
23 There is some evidence that capital is already becoming an increasingly good substitute for 
labor. See, for instance, the discussion in Michael Knoblach and Fabian Stöckl, “What 
Determines the Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor? A Literature 
Review,” Journal of Economic Surveys 34 (4) (2020): 852. 
24 See, for example, Tyler Cowen, Average Is Over: Powering America beyond the Age of the 
Great Stagnation (New York: Penguin, 2013). Or more provocatively, Yuval Noah Harari, “The 
Rise of the Useless Class,” Ted Talk, February 24, 2017, https://ideas.ted.com/the-rise-of-the-
useless-class/. 
25 Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, “Artificial Intelligence, for Real,” Harvard Business 
Review, August 7, 2017. 
26 Robert D. Putnam, Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
2016) describes the negative effects of joblessness, while Anne Case and Angus Deaton,  Deaths 
of Despair and the Future of Capitalism (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2021) 
documents the sharp decline in life expectancy among many of the same people. 
27 Simon Smith Kuznets, Economic Growth and Structure: Selected Essays (New York: W. W. 
Norton & Co., 1965). 
 

 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
28 Friedrich August Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” The American Economic 
Review 35 (4) (1945): 519–530. 
29 Erik Brynjolfsson, “Information Assets, Technology and Organization,” Management Science 
40 (12) (1994): 1645–1662, https:// doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.40.12.1645.  
30 For instance, in the year 2000, an estimated 85 billion (mostly analog) photos were taken, but 
by 2020, that had grown nearly twenty-fold to 1.4 trillion (almost all digital) photos. 
31 Andrew Ng, “What Data Scientists Should Know about Deep Learning,” speech presented at 
Extract Data Conference, November 24, 2015, https://www.slideshare.net/ExtractConf/andrew-
ng-chief-scientist-at-baidu (accessed September 9, 2021). 
32 Sanford J. Grossman and Oliver D. Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of 
Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy 94 (4) (1986): 691–719; and 
Oliver D. Hart and John Moore, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of 
Political Economy 98 (6) (1990): 1119–1158. 
33 Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew Ng, “Big AI Can Centralize Decisionmaking and Power. And 
That’s a Problem,” MILA-UNESCO Working Paper (Montreal: MILA-UNESCO, 2021). 
34 “Simon Electronic Brain–Complete History of the Simon Computer,” History Computer, 
January 4, 2021, https://history-computer.com/simon-electronic-brain-complete-history-of-the-
simon-computer/.   
35 Hans Moravec (1988), Mind Children, Harvard University Press 
 
36 Will Knight “Alpha Zero’s ‘Alien’ Chess Shows the Power, and the Peculiarity, of AI” Technology 
Review, December 2017 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
37 Richard Waters, “Techmate: How AI Rewrote the Rules of Chess,” Financial Times, January 
12, 2018. 
38 Matt Beane and Erik Brynjolfsson, “Working with Robots in a Post-Pandemic World,” MIT 
Sloan Management Review 62 (1) (2020): 1–5. 
39 Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, “Introduction,” The Economics of New 
Goods (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 
40 David Autor, Anna Salomons, and Bryan Seegmiller, “New Frontiers: The Origins and 
Content of New Work, 1940–2018,” NBER Preprint, July 26, 2021. 
41 David Killock, “AI Outperforms Radiologists in Mammographic Screening,” Nature Reviews 
Clinical Oncology 17 (134) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41571-020-0329-7. 
42 Erik Brynjolfsson, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock, “What Can Machines Learn, and What 
Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy?” AEA Papers and Proceedings (2018): 43–47.  
43 Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Prasanna Tambe, “How Will Machine Learning 
Transform the Labor Market?” Governance in an Emerging New World (619) (2019), 
https://www.hoover.org/research/how-will-machine-learning-transform-labor-market. 
44 Paul Milgrom and John Roberts, “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, 
Strategy, and Organization,” American Economic Review 80 (3) (1990): 511–528. 
45 See Daron Acemoglu, Andrea Manera, and Pascual Restrepo, “Does the U.S. Tax Code Favor 
Automation?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring 2020); and Daron Acemoglu, 
ed., Redesigning AI (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2021). 
46 This reverses the classic result suggesting that taxes on capital should be lower than taxes on 
labor. Christophe Chamley, “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with 
 

 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
Infinite Lives,” Econometrica 54 (3) (1986): 607–622; and Kenneth L. Judd, “Redistributive 
Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,” Journal of Public Economics 28 (1) (1985): 59–
83. 
47 Tambe et al., “Digital Capital and Superstar Firms.” 
48 Katherine S. Newman, Chutes and Ladders: Navigating the Low-Wage Labor Market 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006). 
49 While the distinction between complements and substitutes is clear in economic theory, it can 
be trickier in practice. Part of the appeal of broad training and/or tax incentives, rather than 
specific technology mandates or prohibitions, is that they allow technologies, entrepreneurs, and, 
ultimately, the market to reward approaches that augment labor rather than replace it. 
50 See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Shock: Learning from 
Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade,” Annual Review of Economics 8 (2016): 
205–240.
