!  de !
1
34
Survey of Bayesian Network Applications to 
Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles (IAVs) 
Rocío Díaz de León Torres, Martín Molina, Pascual Campoy 
Computer Vision and Aerial Robotics Group, Centre for Automation and Robotics (CAR) UPM-
CSIC, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Calle José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, 28006 Madrid, Spain 
Abstract 
This article reviews the applications of Bayesian Networks to Intelligent 
Autonomous Vehicles (IAV) from the decision making point of view, which 
represents the ﬁnal step for fully Autonomous Vehicles (currently under discussion). 
Until now, when it comes making high level decisions for Autonomous Vehicles 
(AVs), humans have the last word. Based on the works cited in this article and 
analysis done here, the modules of a general decision making framework and its 
variables are inferred. Many eﬀorts have been made in the labs showing Bayesian 
Networks as a promising computer model for decision making. Further research 
should go into the direction of testing Bayesian Network models in real situations. 
In addition to the applications, Bayesian Network fundamentals are introduced as 
elements to consider when developing IAVs with the potential of making high level 
judgement calls. 
Key words: Bayesian Networks, Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles, decision 
making.  
1. Introduction 
Autonomous Vehicles are becoming more popular nowadays. Ranging from 
ground, aerial, and maritime to even space vehicles. Their applications range from 
activities of day to day use such as transporting passengers to more critical 
activities including combat and exploration(underwater, space). Their use carries 
with it beneﬁts and risks. They are capable of making decisions in situations in 
which humans could not do so, but we must ensure in some way that they make 
the right decisions so as not to put at risk the missions and the lives of people. The 
operational risk levels of Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles determine their 
acceptance by those who are intended to use their services. In order for an IAV to 
make a correct decision, it must consider several factors. These factors must be 
carefully selected into a context and represented, together with the relationships 
that exist between them.  
Regardless of the environment in which IAVs move, they all face situations of 
uncertainty. There is a possibility that the sensors produce noisy measurements 
and there may be uncertainty in the performance of the autonomous vehicle. There 
is also uncertainty in the way in which humans behave (their performance) and in 
the behaviour of the other agents with whom they interact. The surroundings in 
arXiv:1901.05517 [cs.AI] 16 Jan 2019 

!  de !
2
34
which they operate are also uncertain, we can not have control of everything. The 
representation itself of the knowledge of the environment could be uncertain. 
In the race for the creation of Autonomous Vehicles, Deep Learning has been the 
most popular computational model. It has been successfully used according to the 
Aerostack architecture [Carrio et al., 2017] for feature extraction, planning, 
situational awareness (perception), and motion control. However, if we consider the 
Aerostack architecture, we are missing applications to systems that receive high-
level symbolic commands and generates detailed behaviour sequences (executive 
system). We are also missing applications to systems that supervise the 
performance of the Autonomous Vehicles (supervision system). According to 
[Sünderhauf et al., 2018] the application of Deep Learning in robotics motivates 
research questions: How much trust can we put in the predictions of a Deep 
Learning system when misclassiﬁcations can have catastrophic consequences? 
How can we estimate the uncertainty in a deep network’s predictions and how can 
we fuse these predictions with prior knowledge and other sensors in a probabilistic 
framework? How well does Deep Learning perform in realistic unconstrained 
scenarios where objects of unknown class and appearance are encountered? 
Decision making stays as an open question [Gopalswamy and Rathinam, 2018] 
because the autonomous vehicle do not only need to identify and classify the 
physical world, it needs to identify and classify the human intention (from the other 
drivers and pedestrians). 
All these issues have made researchers consider Bayesian Networks as an 
alternative to let the Autonomous Vehicles deal with uncertainty and make 
intelligent decisions. Until now, the performance of the AVs depends to a high 
degree on human decision, however the current trend is to replace human decision 
making with algorithms. In [Kochenderfer, 2015] Bayesian Networks are 
presented as a suitable probabilistic computational model to deal with decision 
making under uncertainty. They are a good tool to model a variety of problems in 
diﬀerent contexts. They are supported by well established algorithms to learn their 
parameters and build their structure. Researchers have developed robust 
algorithms to precisely track the reasoning process called inference in a Bayesian 
Network. In this way an Intelligent Autonomous Vehicle could be able to justify its 
decisions. Because of existing Bayesian Networks algorithms and their graphical 
essence to represent problems, the decisions can be analized quantitatively and 
qualitatively. This paper reviews BNs from two perspectives: (1) the kind of tasks 
related to Autonomous Vehicles that have been devised using Bayesian Network 
models (2) their foundations that need to be considered to develop Intelligent 
Autonomous Vehicles with the potential of making high level judgement calls. 
In the next section, the general context in which an Autonomous Vehicle has to 
perform is described. Its interaction with the real world is considered as well. Here 
the operational factors of an IAV are presented. Section 3 covers BN concepts; 
learning, inference and veriﬁcation algorithms and software. Afterwards, signiﬁcant 
work on how operational factors have been modelled by BNs is discussed in 
Section 4. Cases of IAVs performing in ground, aerial, space, and maritime 

!  de !
3
34
environments are included. BNs contributions to IAVs and challenges are stated in 
Section 5. Section 6 discusses open research, speciﬁcally in the areas of safety 
and collaborative work carried out by IAVs. Section 7 comes to conclusions about 
the present analysis. 
2. Unmanned Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles 
In this article the word Intelligent has been used to emphasize the idea of 
Autonomous Vehicles making high level decisions, for example, in complex 
situations a combat autonomous airplane has to decide attack, retreat or defend 
[Cao et al., 2010] during a possible failure in communications. Under this context 
the IAV has to make a decision by its own, however, there are other circumstances 
under which and IAV has to make decisions to collaborate and interact with 
humans or others IAVs.  
Considering the current advances in technology is becoming more common we 
ﬁnd IAVs in our daily lives. In some countries the government has granted permits 
to car and technological companies to test their vehicles on real conditions. We 
can see on the streets, testing cars in UK [UKAutodrive, 2018] and California 
state [DMV California, 2018], [macReports, 2018]. An extensive area of the 
Trondheimsfjord in Northern Norway was designated as an oﬃcial test bed for 
autonomous shipping [Kongsberg, 2016] by the Norwegian Coastal Authority 
(NCA) on September 2016. As one of the ﬁrst coastal areas in the world oﬃcially 
dedicated to the development of technology for autonomous ships, the test bed is 
a vital facility for the future of shipping. In 2017 Norwegian government opened a 
third test bed in Horten [Kongsberg, 2017], the new area is open to both 
Norwegian and international organisations, and is designed to be a convenient, 
safe, non-congested space to trial new technology and vessels. The European 
Authority in Aviation Safety (EASA) has review the Challenges and Opportunities of 
the Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) [EASA, 2017]. They gathered in a conference 
senior aviation professionals from diﬀerent backgrounds regulators, manufacturers, 
airlines and associations from all world regions to discuss global aviation safety 
issues from the perspective of both the regulators and industry. For spaceﬂights, 
numerous autonomous operations have been successful, however anomalies have 
occurred during shuttle operations and other demonstration missions. Fully 
autonomous spaceﬂights have thus far been limited, to extent them, there are 
proposals to include real-time autonomous decision-making and human-robotic 
cooperation. These topics are being investigated but have not yet been ﬂight-
tested [Starek et al., 2016]. The advancement of robotics and autonomous 
systems will be central to the transition of space missions from current ground-in-
the-loop architectures to self-sustainable, independent systems, a key step 
necessary for outer-planet exploration and for overcoming the many diﬃculties of 
interplanetary travel. 
In a real world humans and Autonomous Vehicles have to learn to coexist and 
interact within a legal framework, regulations, environment and social 
requirements. All this aspects are important to deﬁne the way they are going to 

!  de !
4
34
share spaces and to operate individually and together. In [Carrio et al., 2017] they 
show Unmanned Aerial Vehicles components focusing on individual technical 
intrinsic factors and in [Thieme and Utne, 2017] they are presenting extrinsic 
factors so human and IAV can operate together. Intrinsic and extrinsic factors are 
going to inﬂuence the IAVs behaviour. By intrinsic factors the individual 
characteristics are considered, such as technical and reasoning skills. By extrinsic 
factors laws, organisational regulations, population requirements and nature 
restrictions are taken into account. With the inclusion of intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors is expected an IAV is able to reason about its own performance and be 
more aware of its surroundings. The Figure 1 shows the operation framework and 
interaction between humans and IAVs, the decisions made by both humans and 
IAV will always be aﬀected by intrinsic and extrinsic factors. We need a way to 
model human-IAV interactions, how humans and IAVs are reasoning, variables they 
are taking into account to come to a conclusion, and which ones are the origin of 
their decisions. The literature presents Bayesian Networks as a suitable approach 
to model IAV and humans behaviours, interactions including intrinsic and external 
factors. BN can provide graphical and numerical answers. We can see in what 
percentage the intrinsic and extrinsic factors aﬀected the decision making, 
calculate the operational risk so we can make the relevant changes to ensure the 
mission success and safety. 
Figure 1. Operation and interaction framework of IAV considering intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors. Diﬀerent colours are used to express humans and Autonomous Vehicles possess its own 
technical and reasoning skills, strengths and limitations (intrinsic factors). The grey rectangle 
means the relationships between humans and Autonomous Vehicles are also conducted under 
the shadow of environment, political and organisational regulations, social expectations and 
requirements, and economy (extrinsic factors). The links represent that the interaction between 
humans and Autonomous Vehicles could aﬀect mutually their behaviour too. 
Autonomous 
vehicle n
Autonomous 
vehicle
Human
Human n

!  de !
5
34
3. Bayesian networks  
Bayesian Networks are probabilistic graphical models used in Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
in a wide range of areas such as: speech recognition, medicine, stock markets, 
computer troubleshooting, text classiﬁcation, computer vision, bioinformatics. As 
shown in the next section, they have been also employed in Intelligent Autonomous 
Vehicles. This section introduces BN properties and gives an outline of the 
algorithms and software to explore their creation and reasoning process. 
Judea Pearl devised Bayesian networks in 1985 as a computational model for 
humans’ inferential reasoning, namely, the mechanism by which people integrate 
data from multiple sources and generate a coherent interpretation of that data 
[Pearl, 1985]. 
Causal networks, belief networks, probabilistic networks are other names for 
Bayesian networks. They let us represent knowledge based on conditional 
probability tables. Bayesian networks fundaments come from the Reverend 
Thomas Bayes’ (1702-1761) theorem on conditional probability. Since the 
knowledge represented in the net is mostly subjective, uncertain and incomplete, it 
comes natural to interpret the data (reasoning) in them from probability theory. 
Network topology depends on data of the study area. It can be created from 
databases, expert knowledge, document or situation analysis.
Formally a Bayesian network (BN) is a directed acyclic graph in which the nodes 
represent propositions (or variables), the arcs signify the existence of direct 
(causal) dependencies between the linked propositions and the strengths of these 
dependencies are quantiﬁed by conditional probabilities [Pearl, 1985]. Each arc is 
directed from a parent to a child, so all nodes with connections to a given node 
constitute its set of parents. Each variable is associated with a value domain and a 
conditional probability distribution (CPD) on parent’s values, Figure 2. The variables 
can take discrete or continuous values. Hence, it is possible to have hybrid BNs. 
From machine learning point of view, BNs' learning is referred to construct a 
network automatically from direct observations avoiding human intervention in the 
knowledge acquisition process. For a deeper view on how BNs manage 
probabilities, their theory related to decision making under uncertainty and 
machine learning see [Barber, 2012], [Kochenderfer, 2015]. 

!  de !
6
34
Figure 2. Possible Bayesian network for forest ﬁre extinction. Two Intelligent 
Autonomous Vehicles could take part in the mission: ground (GIAV) and aerial (AIAV). The 
mission success of extinguishing the ﬁre is related to weather conditions, GIAV’s and 
AIAV’s capabilities. 
3.1 Algorithms for BNs 
In order to exploit the BNs potential two main aspects have to be taken into 
account: learning and inference. The former has to do with deﬁning the network 
topology (relevant variables, edges and edges directions) and network parameters 
(a priori probability distributions and conditional probabilities. The latter updates 
the probabilities of the variables in the network when new evidence is instantiated 
on speciﬁc values of some variables. For both, several algorithms have been 
developed, given good results under speciﬁc circumstances (network topology, 
continuos or discrete variables, exact or approximate solution). 
Learning [Neapolitan, 2004], [Gaméz et al, 2011]. Design BNs in very complex 
domains, such as those random processes or situations from daily life, requires of 
methods to capture the structural relationship between variables from activities' 
data [Doshi et al., 2002]. The network structure can be created from expert’s 
knowledge. Nevertheless, for the expert could be diﬃcult to explain its knowledge 
and takes time to acquire it. Therefore, observations (data) have been considered 
to obtain and improve the network structure. In the learning of parameters, we 
start from the fact that we have the network structure and we obtain all the 
previous and conditional probability distributions from real data. In [Heckerman, 
1996] several methods are presented to learn the structure and parameters of a 
Mission 
Fire extinction
Weather 
conditions
GIAV’s 
capabilities
AIAV’s 
capabilities

!  de !
7
34
BN, including techniques to learn with incomplete data; also addresses the 
supervised and unsupervised cases. 
Inference [Neapolitan, 1990]. Once a network was built we can apply algorithms 
to manipulate the knowledge that represents. Inference (propagation) algorithms 
manage tasks such as: 
-Belief updating: calculate a posteriori probability based on a BN (model, 
parameters and/or evidences) [Jensen and Nielsen, 2007]. 
-Finding most probable explanation: the maximal posterior probability of a set of 
variables in the network given an observation of the values of another set of 
variables [Kwisthout, 2011]. 
-Finding maximum expected utility (MEU) decision [Russell and Norvig, 2009]. 
3.2 Veriﬁcation and validation 
When representing knowledge in a BN of a speciﬁc domain that was extracted 
from experts and data, it is important to certify that the model constructed is 
acceptable for use. We require of methods to make sure the network was built 
according to the conceptual speciﬁcations (how well the network ﬁts the data, 
veriﬁcation) and to estimate its prediction accuracy (validation). [Schietekat et al., 
2016] provide a methodology for validation and veriﬁcation (V&V) of a Bayesian 
Network (BN) model for aircraft vulnerability against infrared missile threats. [Ron, 
1995] review accuracy estimation methods and compare cross-validation and 
bootstrap methods. [Friedman et al., 1999] propose Bootstrap approach for 
conﬁdence measures to induce better structures from the data and to detect the 
presence of latent variables. [Zuk et al., 2006] study BNs sample complexity to 
understand the number of samples needed in order to guarantee a successful 
structure learning. [Van der Gaag et at., 2007] present a survey on sensitivity 
analysis of probabilistic networks for investigating the robustness of the output of 
the net. The basic idea of the analysis is to systematically vary the assessments for 
the network’s parameter probabilities over a plausible interval and study the eﬀects 
on the output computed from the network.  
3.3 Software 
Many universities, research institutes and companies have developed software to 
work with BN. Some of the works presented in this survey have used the following: 
GeNie. A tool for modelling and learning with Bayesian networks, dynamic 
Bayesian networks, and inﬂuence diagrams. It has been tested since 1998. Its 
compatible with other BN software. Includes learning and inference algorithms. 
There is a free academia version. Additional information can be see at: https://
www.bayesfusion.com 
bnlearn. An R package for learning the graphical structure of Bayesian networks, 
estimate their parameters and perform some useful inference. Since 2007, it has 
been under continuous development. For additional information see: http://
www.bnlearn.com 

!  de !
8
34
Netica. A powerful, easy-to-use, complete program for working with BN and 
inﬂuence diagrams. It has an intuitive user interface for drawing the networks, and 
the relationships between variables may be entered as individual probabilities, in 
the form of equations, or learned from data ﬁles (which may be in ordinary tab-
delimited form and have "missing data”). Under development since 1992. There is 
a free demo version that is full featured but limited in model size.  For additional 
information see: https://www.norsys.com/netica.html 
4. Applications  
This section describes articles that have been selected to show diﬀerent tasks 
related to IAVs. All the applications presented here involve the use of BN to model 
and analyse the problems. In some cases the BN conﬁgurations include just 
intrinsic or extrinsic operation-interaction factors and in others include both. We 
can see how real world variables have been considered to evaluate the 
performance of the autonomous systems, to represent the environment and 
infrastructure conditions. Speciﬁc situations on which the IAVs have to make 
decisions under uncertainty are also covered. 
4.1
Ground vehicles 
Nowadays, the recent autonomous car accidents have brought back questions 
such as: How to make vehicles safer? How to detect cyber-physical threats in 
IAVs? Who or what is to blame? The answers to this questions have been studied 
in the literature [Li et al., 2016], [Bezemskij et al., 2017], [Gopalswamy and 
Rathinam, 2018].  
The risk assessment for IAVs using Bayesian Networks has been approached in [Li 
et al., 2016]. They state a BN conﬁguration as a framework to bring many factors 
together. The BN structure is created taking into account causal relationships of 
the variables, the root nodes are the evidences connected in a second level to 
event nodes (navigation, anti-attack, device state and control system), all of them 
are connected to a central node use to detect when something wrong occurs to 
the IAV which do not meet the security requirement. The central node is linked to a 
monitor node that protects IAV against failure, if a monitoring unit is not working 
gives an alarm. Because of the alarm must be received within a given period of 
time and with a given probability, the alarm monitor node is linked to a node 
representing if the alarm has been received within the speciﬁc time to alarm. For 
further analysis it is worth to mention that they have deﬁned the network variables 
as binary. The main problem of IAV risk evaluation is how to determine what can be 
considered unsafe. This depends on the requirements of diﬀerent standards of 
transportation. As a study case they present a simulation of a car equipped with 
GNSS/INS going through a city, the simulation time is 100s, however, there is a 
blockage of the GNSS navigation signals starting at 20s and ending at 60s. The 
IAV risk rises up when the navigation sources are reduced. Based on this approach 
the car designers could realise a sensitivity analysis in the aim to get a deep view 
of the IAV system and ﬁnd the key factors of IAV security. The blockage of the 
GNSS navigation signals could cause the car loses its trajectory or has a erratic 

!  de !
9
34
behaviour. Depending on what we include in this BN as event nodes an alarm can 
rise. For the simulation, problems in the navigation system activated an alarm. It 
can be notice when the car gets lost, but additional analysis is needed so it can 
consider possible alternatives to ﬁnd its way and be able to think about 
consequences of its actions. Even though, they deﬁned an anti-attack node, the 
way that protection measurements satisfy the requirements is not explored.   
Like any computational system the IAVs are also subject to attacks.   [Bezemskij 
et al., 2017] have studied the cyber attacks or sensory channel attacks (physical) 
which could aﬀect the ability of an autonomous vehicle to navigate or complete a 
mission. They present a method based on Bayesian Networks that can tell when 
an autonomous vehicle is being under attack and whether the attack has been 
originated from the cyber or the physical domain. Detecting such threats is 
challenging, especially for resource-constrained systems, where highly accurate 
intrusion detection algorithms cannot be run on board and continuously. In a 
comparison with other methods proposed for threat detection such as Deep 
Neural Networks (DNN) for monitoring the CAN bus network and detecting 
malicious activity; in [Bezemskij et al., 2017]’s opinion DNN would be unlikely to 
be integrated into systems with resource constraint, since DNN are 
computationally heavy as they require a lot of processing power to teach the 
neurons using the data. Deep learning have shown being very accurate, but also 
an approach that consumes a lot of computational resources. If the Deep Learning 
Network is suﬃciently reliable could be used oﬄoaded to a more powerful 
infrastructure. This can reduce detection latency and reduce energy consumption, 
however, the major drawback is that it depends on the availability of an oﬄoading 
infrastructure, which is impractical in many areas of Autonomous Vehicles. 
Nevertheless, we need to bare in mind the number of variables in a BN and wether 
they are discrete or continuous. A big network will consume a big amount of 
computational resources. In [Bezemskij et al., 2017] BN are presented as an 
approach that can be applied across a variety of vehicles and can adapt by 
learning what is normal for that vehicle  and detecting deviations, so that is also 
applicable to unknown/probable threats. They demonstrate the validity of their 
approach on a ground autonomous robotic vehicle in a routine mission scenario, 
where it has a target which is to reach a destination, with stochastic elements that 
divert it. To detect the cyber-physical threats seventeen variables were deﬁned 
representing the monitored features: battery  voltage, compass bearing, pitch, roll, 
front distance, back distance, left distance, right distance, temperature, four 
variables each one for a motor, packet arrival time, action indicator, sequence 
number, CAN packet rate. Additionally, three variables to supervise the threat 
status were speciﬁed: cyber, normal (no threat) and physical. The data fed into the 
BN to train and query is the output of an heuristic binary classiﬁer, which ﬁlters 
incoming data samples violating frequency of occurrences of the data samples 
within the deviation region. It learns the signature characteristics from the sensor 
data being transmitted to the CAN bus. The heuristic binary classiﬁer achieves 
reasonably high threat detection rates. However, it does not have the ability to tell 
anything more about the source of the threat beyond its existence. To address this, 
they implemented a BN working with discrete data that can be in a qualitative or 
quantitative form. Besides, BNs are able to infer the unknown variables which are 

!
 de !
10
34
useful in a situation where an intrusion detection mechanism has to make a 
decision. To built, learn the parameters and query the BN they have used the open 
library bnlearn [Scutari, 2010], which runs under the statistical analysis 
environment R. From bnlearn the Hill-Climbing algorithm [Gámez et al., 2011] was 
selected to built the network. In order to built a BN and learn its parameters 
training datasets are needed. Training datasets were created based on the three 
events to be queried given the evidence: normal, cyber attack and physical attack. 
70 dataset were used for training and 30 data set for testing. In this work, it is 
important to notice that we need to count with relevant and enough data to make a 
good characterisation of the variables under study. 
The previous two works deal with fails detection and source identiﬁcation from 
where the sensor data alterations were originated. But who is about to blame when 
something goes wrong. In a real world we can not just consider the intrinsic 
operation factors of the IAVs, the IAVs can be also aﬀected by the operational 
external factors. We have to think about vehicles interacting with diﬀerent 
environments and people or even other vehicles. The current autonomous cars 
manufacturers shoulder the primary responsibility and liability associated with 
replacing human perception and decision making with automation. Until now, in a 
car that count with an autopilot when is about to collide, human response is 
required to take control and avoid crash. Nevertheless, when using autopilot 
humans become distracted and their reaction has not been fast enough causing 
accidents. A total automation of driving meaning automating human decision 
making could improve safety on the roads. That is the next big step that is still 
under discussion. [Gopalswamy and Rathinam, 2018] proposed an approach to 
apportion the responsibility and liabilities associated with autonomous cars 
between traditional automotive manufacturers, infrastructure players and third-
party players. For them, the automotive original equipment manufacturers should 
concentrate on providing all the physical components that are needed for a car to 
move and perceive its surroundings, the manufacturers could also provide 
advance driver assistance systems. The analysis of the performance of the 
physical components  should be separated from the analysis of the embedded 
software functionality. The software on board for autonomous cars would have the 
big responsibility to automate decisions to drive safely. High level decision making 
for cars it is more than just perceiving the world, means identifying and classifying 
human intentions (of other drivers and pedestrians), understanding the cars 
surroundings (objects near by, their state of motion, traﬃc signals, weather and 
road conditions), caring for its own safety and safety of the other ones. The car 
would move by driving by wired capabilities enabled by the manufacturer; the 
directions of displacement or car actions would depend on sensor data from the 
car itself and from the infrastructure operators. [Gopalswamy and Rathinam, 
2018] present a concept of special infrastructure traﬃc corridors provided with 
road site units ﬁtted with special devices to generate information about the 
situation on the road. A special device residing in the car will interface with the 
driving by wire capabilities to receive the traﬃc corridor information and provide 
the commands to drive autonomously, so the special device will make a decision 
and will instruct the vehicle to perform maneuvers. As we can see, diﬀerent parties 
are involved in the complete autonomous car operation. Often multiple 

!
 de !
11
34
components fail simultaneously and in such cases, we need a mechanism to 
deﬁne the blame for the individual components. We can have diﬀerent fault 
conﬁgurations that could result in the failure. To ﬁnd the probability of the fault 
conﬁgurations they devised a general BN. The root nodes represent random 
variables associated to each of the components of the autonomous vehicle 
system. These root binary nodes denote if one or more of the components are at 
fault or not. They assumed that fault variables are mutually independent. An 
intermediate node represent the set of all the possible outcomes of the functioning 
of the system. The outcomes are determined based on their severity and their risk 
level. It is also assumed that the set of outcomes is mutually exclusive. There is a 
third level at the bottom, which contains discrete random variables, each one 
being associated to the cost of the faults of each component. So, the BN has links 
from the fault nodes to the outcome node and to each one of the cost nodes. The 
outcome node has links to cost nodes. The cost can be viewed as the “blame” or 
“responsibility” assigned to the component and depends on the fault conﬁguration 
and the outcome of the system. The BN provides a model of the joint distribution 
of all the random variables in the system and their conditional dependencies. They 
infer the likelihood of an outcome for a given fault conﬁguration of the components 
based on hazard analysis [Beckers et al., 2013]. The paradigm presented by 
[Gopalswamy and Rathinam, 2018] establishes a clear way to separate and 
distribute responsibilities of the parties involved in the design, construction and 
performance of the autonomous cars.  In the one hand, there is an emphasis in the 
split between the car manufacturers and the intelligent software developers for 
autonomous car decision making.  On the other hand, new digitized roads are 
conceived. Even though a BN is deﬁned to show the way the parties would be 
interrelated and how we could calculate the degree of responsibility, they just 
present an hypothetical case for its evaluation. However, the probabilistic nature of 
BN could also helps us in the analysis of more uncertain situations, for example, 
the performance of all-terrain cars. The real world is full of unexpected things and 
the BN are a good way to deal with the changes that an all-terrain car could ﬁnd 
on its path.    
4.2 Space and Aerial Vehicles 
Modern aircrafts, whether for commercial, exploration or combat purposes, require 
special systems to operate in the absence of humans or to support pilots in their 
performance to make the right decisions. In order to operate autonomously, these 
aircrafts should be able to monitor the robustness of the on board software and 
sensor systems (intrinsic factors). The perception and analysis of the situations in 
which are immersed are also important for their autonomy (extrinsic factors). The 
air companies are investing on Artiﬁcial Intelligence to develop full autonomous 
airplanes to make ﬂying even safer by removing the risk of human error. But still, 
there is a lot of to do when it comes to control the airplane and diﬀerent situations 
during the entire ﬂight. Experts consider humans still beat computers when it 
comes to deal with a medical emergency, security incidents, or a quick mechanical 
ﬁx. There are several articles in the literature that show how the unmanned aerial 
vehicles could make decisions in complex environments replacing humans from 
the Bayesian networks perspective. Even that the diﬀerent Bayesian networks 
approaches for IAVs have not been tested in real scenarios the lab experiments 

!
 de !
12
34
indicate they could work for high level decision making. People interacting with 
IAVs will be able to see how the decision are made based on the graphical model 
and inference algorithms of the BN. 
In 2016 a book chapter [Starek et al., 2016] was published about spacecraft 
autonomy challenges for future space missions, they point out real-time 
autonomous decision-making and human-robotic cooperation as part of the 
biggest challenges. The spacecrafts automation has been studied for several 
years. One example in which an autonomous spacecraft has to select a landing 
site is formulated in [Serrano, 2006]. A landed exploration mission can be 
successful if a convenient ﬁnal landing site is chosen. Three main variables are 
deﬁned on which to select the landing site: terrain safety, engineering factors 
(spacecraft’s descendent trajectory, velocity and available fuel), and pre-selected 
by scientist multiple potential sites. These variables are parents of a discrete 
random node representing landing quality in a Bayesian network. Nodes 
representing terrain features are children of the node terrain safety. The terrain 
features are a combination of discrete and continuous random variables. The 
craters and rocks are discrete and the slope and roughness are continuous. The 
network was built to model probabilistically the relationships between the variables 
that impact the quality of a landing site. To evaluate the proposed approach, 
experiments were performed using a dynamics and spacecraft simulator for entry, 
descent and landing. Also, digital elevation maps representing a variety of 
planetary terrains were created. The results indicate that the proposed approach 
selects the site that best optimises all three key variables. For instance, in one of 
the experiments there are two regions of high scientiﬁc interest. However, one of 
the regions lies near the boundary of the engineering factor area and the other lies 
in an unsafe part of the terrain. Consequently, a site with medium scientiﬁc interest 
is selected because it has a better balance of all three key variables. We can 
consider each one of the three main variables, being decision nodes by them 
selves. The landing quality node is a node that makes decisions when integrating 
the information of the main variables. The most relevant information for decision 
making should be selected in advance if we want the autonomous system to react 
in real time. For example, determining areas of high scientiﬁc potential is a 
laborious process that involves numerous considerations beyond the scope of an 
on board reasoning system. To inﬂuence the on board site selection, the scientists’ 
preferred site can be designated in advance and integrated via the network. 
Depending on the characteristics of the mission, the variables and the 
relationships between them could change. Therefore, we would require the use of 
networks with variable structure. 
Since relatively few years the interest in the decision making of Autonomous 
Vehicles has been growing. In [Cao et al., 2010] the situation assessment of an 
UCAV (Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle) is explored. Because of no pilot, the 
casualties vanish. But, the signal between the operator and UCAV may be 
disturbed and it may be miss the attack chance in the complex battleﬁeld 
environment at present, UCAV strengthens the capacity of the autonomous attack 
and develops the autonomous decision system. Considering the concept of 
situation assessment which has been deﬁned as the perception, comprehension 

!
 de !
13
34
and prediction to the elements in the environment within a volume of time and 
space; they modelled the decision making process based on dynamic Bayesian 
networks (DBN). In the decision making process is important to study variables 
that can give information about the possible reaction of the adversary and ensure 
the mission success. The opposite main situations are attack, defence and retreat. 
The information of discrete nodes is from the opposite intention and activity. To 
assess the opposite situation, decision maker usually acquires the more 
information from the sensors and airborne warning and control system. 
UCAV has to deal with a huge load of information and to be selective for 
relevant information. The collected information comes from diﬀerent 
platforms and it is diﬃcult for decision maker to deal with so much diﬀerent 
information in limited time and under pressure. UCAV can take the autonomous 
decision making to plan and replan trails/task online, establish goals and deliver 
weapons according to the development of the battle ﬁeld situation. [Cao et al., 
2010] modelled a DBN as a tool for the UCAV to assess the situation. The DBN 
allows the UCAV to fuse a variety of perceptions (sensors, opinions, databases, 
situations) and ﬁnally gain the opposite situation. In the paper they used junction 
trees algorithm for inference. Since the algorithm is a static BN inference algorithm, 
they change the DBN to a static BN. The network structured and conditional 
probability table were deﬁned based on experts’ opinions, experiences and data 
learning through the computer. Initially with no information about the situation, it is 
assumed that the prior probabilities of nodes in DBN obey uniform distribution. 
After initialisation, the situation assessment system waits for the refresh data. 
Once new information is obtained, the reasoning of network is started up. The 
probability distribution of node state in network is refreshed, and the probability 
distribution of root node is obtained. With the change of time, the DBN can adopt 
reasoning according to the history and latest evidence information and its proved 
to have the ability to dynamically modify and improve the knowledge base 
and model of the situation assessment. Even that the simulation results 
proved to be similar to experts’ results, the authors point out that military 
knowledge and experts’ experiences are the key point for DBN. The 
structure and conditional probabilities of the networks depend on ways of 
thinking, experiences, multi source data and quantitative situation information 
for achieving autonomous decision making systems. Correct and rapid situation 
assessment has important research value and actual combat signiﬁcance on 
tactical ﬂight path, mission planning and distribution tasks.  
Following with combat situations, in a real battle an IAV could face pop up threats, 
such as aircrafts/helicopters or ground based defence systems. The information 
about these threats could be incomplete (only partially available or not fully 
known). [Gao et al., 2011] have addressed the problem of online dynamic 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) path planning. To attack the problem they 
integrated a structure varied discrete dynamic Bayesian network (SVDDBN) into a 
model prediction control (MPC) algorithm. The SVDDBN is used to construct an 
online dynamic threat assessment model by estimating and predicting the states of 
the pop up threats, and the output of this model is then fed into a MPC algorithm 
for path planning. The network proposed allows to consider uncertainty about 

!
 de !
14
34
time, position and behaviour of the threats. The network is capable of inferring 
when some data is missing or incomplete, such as in the situation where a pop up 
threat randomly appears or disappears. A converted measurement Kalman ﬁlter 
(CMKF) algorithm is integrated into the Bayesian Network to allow estimation of 
the missing data about the threats. The mission of the UAV considered in this 
paper is to ﬂy through, as safely as possible, a high threat area where a 
manoeuvring pop up threat could exist. Attention is conﬁned to a two dimensional 
(2D) representation of the situation. It is assumed that at any given time during the 
ﬂight the high threat area is a circular area with a pop up threat at the centre of the 
circle. A set of associated, dynamically changeable threat circles exists when the 
pop up threat changes in nature. All the nodes in the network represent information 
that is updated at every time slice t. The root nodes represent the threat 
probability, and the intermediate and bottom nodes represent threat 
information such as probability of UAV ﬁnding a threat if it ﬂies along the 
movement direction; distance between the UAV and the threat centre; 
completeness of information; indication of whether the distance between the UAV 
and a threat has changed, i.e. if the distance has increased, decreased, or remains 
unchanged; radius of the threat circle; angle between the movement directions of 
the threat and UAV and estimated threat state (i.e. missing data), which mainly 
involves the position, speed, acceleration and the movement direction of the 
threat. The threat probability was predicted using the threat assessment network 
and the forward inference algorithm. The results of the simulation showed that the 
selected parameters allowed in the tests to generate the required position in a 
shorter time to the ﬂight time, and this satisﬁes the requirement for generating UAV 
control in real time. However, special attention should be paid to select parameters 
that can let IAV make decision in real time without compromising to make correct 
decisions.   
Fly-by-wire commercial aircrafts and UAV are fully controlled by software. Failures 
in the software or a problematic software-hardware interaction can have disastrous 
consequences. This motivated [Schumann et al., 2011] work. They created a 
Bayesian network as the modelling and reasoning paradigm to achieve an onboard 
software health management (SWHM) system. A SWHM system monitors the 
behaviour of the software and interacting hardware during system operation. In 
addition, a SWHM system performs diagnostic reasoning in order to identify the 
most likely root cause(s) for the faults(s). This is particularly important, since many 
software problems do not directly manifest themselves but rather exhibit emergent 
behaviour. For UAVs, the available bandwidth for telemetry is severely limited; a 
dump of the system state and analysis by the ground crew in case of a problem is 
not possible. For manned aircraft, a SWHM system can reduce the pilot’s workload 
substantially. With a traditional on board diagnostic system, the pilot can get 
swamped by diagnostic errors and warnings coming from many diﬀerent 
subsystems. Because of many software problems occur due to problematic SW/
HW interactions, both software and hardware must be monitored in an integrated 
fashion. The network includes relevant nodes for ﬁle system related faults such as 
Status File_System, Sensor File System Error, Delay, Health File System, Write File 
System, Sensor Queue-length, Status Message_queue, Sensor Oscillation to 
represent software and hardware elements situations. The links between the 

!
 de !
15
34
variables speciﬁes the interaction between them. To simplify design and execution, 
and at the same time be able to manage temporal aspects (without having to use a 
dynamic Bayesian network), preprocessing steps were carried out. For 
demonstration purposes, they designed a ﬂawed software architecture with a 
global message queue that buﬀers all control signals and logs them in the ﬁle 
system before forwarding them. The following scenario was run: the ﬁle system is 
initially set to almost full. Subsequent control messages, which are being logged, 
might stay longer in the message queue, because the blocking write into an almost 
full ﬁle system takes substantial time. This situation potentially causes overﬂow of 
the message queue or leads to loss of messages. However, even if a small delay 
(i.e., a control message is not processed within its allotted time frame, but one or 
more time frames later) can cause oscillation of the entire craft. This oscillation, 
similar to PIO (pilot induced oscillation) can lead to dangerous situations or even 
loss of the aircraft. In this scenario, the software problem does not manifest itself 
within the software system (i.e., in form of errors or exceptions). Rather, the overall 
behaviour of the aircraft is impacted in a non-obvious way. The SWHM reasoner 
can then disambiguate the diagnosis by evaluating whether the fault is due to PIO 
or a software problem. The Bayesian networks for SWHM systems can be used 
to model software as well as interfacing hardware sensors, and fuse 
information from diﬀerent layers of the hardware-software stack. [Schumann 
et al., 2011] concluded that Bayesian networks system health models, 
compiled to arithmetic circuits, are suitable for on-board execution in an 
embedded software environment. However open questions remain, How to 
handle unexpected and unmodeled failures? How to more automatically 
generate SWHM Bayesian models based on information in artifacts? They 
suggest to include software engineering models, source code, as well as 
conﬁguration and log ﬁles. A good software-hardware interaction can take us 
to an error free performance of the UAV from the operational intrinsic factors 
point of view. The IAV could be able to achieve the tasks for which was 
made. Nevertheless, an IAV would need an additional element to reason 
about if would be useful to performed the task in certain time under speciﬁc 
situations. In other words, operational external factors could be considered 
towards IAVs.  
   
Either for combat or rescue issues, for example, the way to achieve cooperation 
between Autonomous Vehicles has been researched. In particular, the case of 
searching by UAVs was analysed by [Guo et al., 2012]. They modelled the 
capabilities of heterogenous UAVs with a tree shape Bayesian network for each 
one, the network structure was derived from expert knowledge. The root node 
represents sensing capability and bottom nodes represent the detection width, 
ﬂight velocity. We can include more UAVs’ attributes adding more nodes. To verify 
the eﬀectiveness of their searching area decomposition approach, simulation 
experiments were carried out in Matlab 7.1 environment on a laptop with 1.6GH 
CPU processor and 512M memory. In this simulation, three UAVs have to search 
an area deﬁned by a convex polygon with eight edges. First the UAVs' relative 
capability probabilities are computed reasoning with the Bayesian network for 
each UAV. Later, each UAV is assigned an area (convex polygon) according with its 

!
 de !
16
34
relative capabilities. Then, each UAV plan the waypoints needed to follow a zigzag 
pattern to those directions. Distance between parallel lines depends on the 
sensing width of the UAV. If any of the initial parameters to calculate the UAV’s 
sensing capability is missing temporarily, say an angle that determines the ﬁeld of 
view, the area decomposition task can not be taken anymore by any existing 
deterministic decomposition methods. Thanks to the Bayesian network approach, 
still it is possible to infer by a priori knowledge in this uncertain situation. Therefore 
the Bayesian network approach has advantages over other methods on coping 
with uncertainty. [Guo et al., 2012] presented a model to evaluate the individual 
skills. The global performance of a team is also an important factor to estimate in 
the future, in order to warrantee the mission success, as well as, to extend the 
model to the cooperation of various Autonomous Vehicles aerial, ground and 
maritime. 
When we have a scenario where many parties are intervening and many events are 
taking place, such as in a battle ﬁeld; a method to assess the damage is required 
to review the relationships and inﬂuences between the parties and the eﬀect of the 
actions to be taken. [Chen-han and Jian, 2014] built a Bayesian network for battle 
damage assessment. In the modelling process the nodes and parameters were 
gotten from assessing system based on professionals experience, information 
sources and their relations, the internal eﬀects on information sources. After the 
network was modelled, they apply inference to assess the damage of UAV to 
ground attacking, testing on hypothetical cases, in the attacking between UAV 
formation and airﬁeld runway from enemies. Discrete values are deﬁned for the 
node for real damage assessment: no damage, light damage, moderate damage, 
severe damage and completely destroyed. The variables were deﬁne according to 
the following factors: environmental diﬀerences of the objects, the characteristics 
varieties of the targets, direct relations between attacking eﬀects and targets, 
information of the data base and the professionals’ experience. In [Chen-han and 
Jian, 2014] for the study of the network, nodes and parameters were simplify. In a 
real world scenario, we have to select the most relevant variables for the decision 
making. A big size network would take us to delays to carry out actions. However, 
Bayesian networks are a convenient tool to help a commander to have graphically 
an overview of the problem and to simulate many situations, in order to foresee 
attack actions. In this case, networks of variable structure would be needed. In 
some point, in the inference process the interaction between the network 
estimations and expert criteria should be taken into account. 
If we want people trust and accept Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles, we should 
ensure  they are capable of evaluating situations in which humans are involved and 
taking the best choice. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) must follow governments’ 
rules for people safety, to be allow into the civilian airspace. UAV must be trained 
to handle emergency situations as a pilot usually would do it aboard a manned 
aircraft. In the speciﬁc emergency case of a forced landing, UAV has to decide the 
most suitable forced landing site from a list of known landing sites. A solution for 
this critical situation was formulated by [Coombes et al., 2016]. Based on the 
speciﬁcations for a forced landing system laid out in a NASA Technical report (Civil 
UAV capability assessment), three main criteria were developed for selecting a 

!
 de !
17
34
suitable location for an UAV to attempt a forced landing in order of importance: risk 
to civilian population, reachability and probability of a safe landing. The emphasis 
is on public safety, where human life and property are more important than the 
UAV airframe and payload. Mitigating risk to civilian population has a much higher 
weighting than site reachability and safe landing since aircraft survival is of a lower 
priority. General Aviation (GA) pilots consider technical factors in making a decision 
for UAV safe forced landing. These factors are considered to estimate the 
probability of a safe landing. Factors taken into account by pilots are: wind, 
obstacles, size, shape, slope, surface. All the previous benchmarks, were included 
in a Multi Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) Bayesian network. The root node is a 
decision node to select the site for landing. Each discrete state of the root node 
represents each possible site, the number of states is determined by the number 
of landing sites. The network was tested by simulation, using a pre-mapped area 
with fourteen known ﬁeld locations and discrete parameters. The scenario was a 
Cessna 182 in climb-out after taking oﬀ from Nottingham aerodrome. It had an 
engine failure at 400 meters above ground level with a wind speed of 10m/s from 
270o. According to the network landing site 13 was the site chosen to attempt the 
forced landing into, as it has the highest marginal posterior probability. It was the 
favoured choice because it was a long ﬁeld with over 50% extra length required, 
medium reachability, a safe grassy surface, free from obstacles, far from the 
civilian population. They solved the Bayesian network using diagnostic reasoning 
to improve computational speed and enable real time decision making. Pre-
analyses were taken into account to structure the network in a diﬀerent way. 
[Coombes et al., 2016] model gives an overview of multi criteria decision making. 
New types of nodes are included, decision node, utility node and criteria nodes. 
The criteria nodes have a direct inﬂuence on the utility node. The selection of the 
ﬁeld is based on the ﬁeld that gives the highest utility. To apply this model in real 
life has to be tested covering a larger number of cases, calculated the risks and 
consequences of the decisions. 
The current trend is human-IAVs coexistence. In the future we will get mixed 
working groups supervised by humans or autonomous systems. In the human 
working groups, the responsibilities can be delegated and individuals can 
autonomously take actions according to workload increases. Accordingly a group 
of drones becomes bigger, mental-workload for monitoring them will be more 
demanding for a human supervisor. Flexible levels of autonomy could reduce 
supervisor work. [Bazzano et al., 2017] predicted the level of autonomy via a 
Bayesian network classiﬁer in drone-traﬃc control tasks. In the bottom node three 
levels of autonomy are proposed: warning, suggestion and autonomous. The 
system warns the operator if critical situations occur, suggests feasible actions to 
him or monitors and performs actions autonomously without any human 
intervention. A node mission outcome has a direct inﬂuence on level of autonomy, 
and is a child of workload node. It was considered that the probability of changes 
in operator workload is conditioned on changes in the number of drones in three 
alert nodes: safe, warning and danger. Initial experiments were carried out with 
people to collect data to train the classiﬁer to learn how to determine the 
appropriate level of autonomy for the system. A cross validation technique (training 
data vs testing data) was used to test the classiﬁcation model performance. The 

!
 de !
18
34
Bayesian network training phase was performed by the Netica software, then the 
validation methodology was performed by obtaining a classiﬁcation level of 
autonomy equal to 83.44%. The NASA-TLX questionnaire was taken into 
consideration as subjective workload assessment technique. More variables that 
can give a wider view of humans performance need to be included, such as 
physical and mental skills. 
4.3 Maritime Vehicles 
All kind of vehicles are going into the direction of becoming autonomous and 
Maritime Vehicles are not the exception. The environment in which IAVs have to 
perform involves diﬀerent risks and variables, wether are moving on ground, air, 
space or water. All of them involve movement restrictions and acting conditions. 
Several studies have been carry out to evaluate the scenarios that maritime 
vehicles have to face. This section shows some examples about selection and 
evaluation of the variables represented in a Bayesian network model. Two articles 
have been chosen. The ﬁrst one is about monitoring the behaviour of maritime 
traﬃc [Lane et al., 2010]. The second one evaluates the risk of interaction 
between humans and autonomous underwater vehicles [Thieme and Utne, 2017].   
According to IMO (International Maritime Organization) international shipping 
transports more than 80 per cent of global trade to peoples and communities all 
over the world. Shipping is the most eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective method of 
international transportation for most goods; it provides a dependable, low-cost 
means of transporting goods globally, facilitating commerce and helping to create 
prosperity among nations and peoples. The world relies on a safe, secure and 
eﬃcient international shipping industry. All the traﬃc in the seas needs to be 
monitored. The transport of goods and passengers has to be safe and the marine 
and atmospheric pollution has to be avoided. Ships involved in commercial 
activities tend to follow set patterns of behaviour depending on the business in 
which they are engaged. If a ship exhibits anomalous behaviour, this could indicate 
it is being used for illicit activities. The IMO's International Convention for the 
Safety of Life at Sea requires automatic identiﬁcation system (AIS) to be ﬁtted 
aboard international voyaging ships with 300 or more gross tonnage (GT), and all 
passenger ships regardless of size. Ships with AIS transponders transmit their 
location, course, speed, and other details, such as their destination and ship 
identiﬁer, at regular intervals. The analysis of this information to identify behaviour 
patterns has been studied by [Lane et al., 2010]. An overall threat is often 
manifested by a series of individual behaviours. An example threat scenario is the 
illegal exchange of goods at sea. The behaviours exhibited by a ship undertaking 
this activity could include deviation from standard route, turning oﬀ an AIS 
transmitter, entering a zone known for illegal exchanges and close approach with 
another ship. Thus, ﬁve abnormal ship behaviours were outlined to be presented in 
AIS data: deviation from standard routes, unexpected AIS activity (transmitter 
switched oﬀ or false position has been given), unexpected port arrival, close 
approach and zone entry. For each behaviour, a process is described for 
determining the probability that is anomalous. Individual probabilities are combined 
using a Bayesian network to calculate the overall probability that a speciﬁc threat is 
presented. The root node (threat type) carry out the anomaly fusion for threat 

!
 de !
19
34
assessment. The middle nodes (behaviour variables) are root node’s children. Each 
of this variables takes a binary value, indicating that the behaviour is present or 
not. The nodes representing the observed detector outputs are children of 
behaviour variables. So the threat assessment is inﬂuenced by the detector outputs 
via behaviour variables. A numerical example is given to illustrate the principle of 
the Bayesian network for threat assessment. The results depend on interpreting 
outputs of anomaly detectors as probabilities.   
Deep water exploration comprises a big risk for humans. Nowadays, autonomous 
underwater vehicles scan the seabed while being monitored by humans. Since 
underwater vehicles are very expensive and diﬃcult to recover, a fail in an 
exploratory mission could result in big loses. Hence, risk models are needed to 
assess the mission success forehand and adapt the mission plan if necessary. A 
general scenario where humans and autonomous underwater vehicle collaborate 
has been represented in a Bayesian network by [Thieme and Utne, 2017]. Based 
on a case study they came into the conclusion that the human-autonomy vehicle 
collaboration can be improved in two ways: (1) through better training and 
inclusion of experienced operators and (2) through improved reliability of 
autonomous functions and situation awareness of vehicles. Their human-
autonomous collaboration Bayesian network can improve autonomous underwater 
vehicle design and autonomous underwater vehicle operations by clarifying 
relationships between technical, human and organizational factors and their 
inﬂuence on mission risk. [Thieme and Utne, 2017] follow a well structured ﬁve 
steps process to develop the Bayesian network:  
1. Describe aim and context of the BN 
The aim of the model in the article is to show the relationship between 
human operator performance and the technical performance of the 
autonomous system. The aim of the model determines the deﬁnition of the 
root node called HAC (human-autonomy collaboration) performance, which 
can take one of two values (inadequate, adequate).  
2. Gather and group information relevant for the context into nodes 
The literature was used to group the information into two overall categories: 
(1) autonomous function performance and (2) human operator performance. 
The performance of the two main agents is monitored through these nodes. 
Besides, the previous nodes a third node called level of autonomy have a 
direct inﬂuence on HAC node. A total of 24 nodes were deﬁne.  
3. Connect the nodes with directional arcs 
The links between variables (arcs) in the BN were deﬁned based on the 
ﬁndings in the literature and the relationships identiﬁed between factors. It 
was found out that some factors have a mutual inﬂuence on each other. 
However, since BN are acyclic, in this article the most frequently mentioned 
direction of inﬂuence deﬁned arcs. 
4. Determine the conditional probability tables and quantify the model 
The data for the input nodes in the model were derived from a case study, 
(with basis in autonomous underwater vehicle operation) in the 
Autonomous Underwater Robotics Lab at the Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology. 
5. Test and validate the model 

!
 de !
20
34
Since they present a new situation for which there are not enough historical 
data to contrast the results obtained by BN, the BN model was evaluated 
considering that was built based on the literature and it became structurally 
similar to previous models. 
Many factors were considered for building the net. However one stands out: Trust. 
Trust is a special factor in human-autonomous vehicle interaction. As in any 
relationship between humans, trust in the autonomous vehicle is built with time the 
human operator has been interacting with it. Trust also depends on the Operators’ 
Experience, Operators’ Training, Feedback of the Vehicle and Reliability of 
Autonomous Functions. Workload, Operators’ Experience, Time Delay of 
Transmission and Operators’ Training inﬂuence the Reaction Time of Operators. All 
these are examples of the factors that were included in the net. GeNIe 2.0 was 
used to conduct a sensitivity analysis, varying each node over the whole range and 
assessing the impact of this change on the target node. The target node for the 
sensibility analysis was the Human-Autonomy Performance Collaboration node. In 
the results of this analysis is noticed that the most inﬂuential input nodes on the 
HAC node are Autonomous Function Performance, Reliability of Autonomous 
Functions, Situational Awareness of Vehicles, Operators’Training and Operator’s 
experience. This is an article that represents a whole view of intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors integration. The model needs to be evaluated with real data and work with 
networks that can aﬀect the human and autonomous vehicle performance, for 
instance, networks for: environmental interactions, technical system performance, 
societal expectations and regulatory and customer requirements. Additional 
analysis is needed for variables that present mutual inﬂuences to determined how 
they aﬀect to each other performance. The validity of the model is assumed, but 
hasn’t been quantitative veriﬁed. 
4.4 Analysis  
The purposes of this article are to ﬁnd out the works that have been developed 
using Bayesian networks for IAVs applications, to know how they have been used 
and their results. After the search, the estate of the art is pointing out in the 
direction of high level decision making as a new area of interest for IAVs 
researches. Even that, all the works exposed in this article have been tested only 
on simulations, the results show that Bayesian networks are a promising 
computational model to assist IAVs in the decision making process. Each of the 
articles represent a diﬀerent situation that an IAV has to face. Taking the purposes 
as a starting point and the ﬁndings from the literature, the analysis is divided in 
three sections: (a) topics, (b) decision making framework and (c) Bayesian 
networks related aspects. 
(a) Topics 
Regardless of the means by which Autonomous Vehicles move, all of them in some 
moment of their performance need to make decisions. The articles are organized 
by means of transport. However, it can be noticed that the IAVs have to deal with 
similar aspects in the decision making process in a real world. Thus, the Bayesian 
networks have been used to model situations that involve the topics showed in 

!
 de !
21
34
Table 1. The description explains the BN's speciﬁc functions. Looking at the 
publication year of the articles, it comes out that the topics are very new. 
Advances in vehicle automation have led to let them operate in the real world, 
without evaluating their impact ﬁrst. Now the researchers are trying to model the 
behaviour of IAVs to integrate them into the peoples lives and the society 
complying with the established parameters. 
Table 1. Topics related to IAVs modelled with Bayesian networks
TOPIC
DESCRIPTION
REFERENCE
Landing site selection for 
scientiﬁc purposes
Selection of the best landing site 
in the space based on areas of 
scientiﬁc interest (decision).
[Serrano, 2006]
Situation assessment in a battle 
ﬁeld
Fusion of information and 
analysis of variables to study the 
opponents' reaction (prediction).
[Cao et al., 2010] 
Identify behaviour patterns
Detect unexpected behaviours or 
anomalies for threat assessment 
(anomaly fusion).
[Lane et al., 2010]
Dynamic threat assessment 
Estimation and prediction of the 
states of the pop up threats.
[Gao et al., 2011]
Software health management
Monitoring of the functioning of 
the software and hardware and 
their interaction during system 
operation (faults detection).  
Diagnostic reasoning in order to 
identify the most likely root 
causes for the faults.
[Schumann et al., 2011] 
Cooperation on search missions 
based on IAVs' capabilities  
Modelling of unmanned 
autonomous vehicles' capabilities
[Guo et al., 2012] 
Battle damage assessment
Damage assessment of the 
attack from IAV to enemies’ 
ground airﬁeld runway 
(consequences’ prognosis).
[Chen-han and Jian, 2014]
Safety
IAV malfunctioning is evaluated 
taking into account transport 
regulations (risk assessment)
[Li et al., 2016]
Landing site selection in the event 
of an emergency
Selection of a safe landing site 
based on priorities (decision).
[Coombes et al., 2016] 
Cyber-physical threats detection
Diagnosis to determine the origin 
of a threat (cyber attack or 
sensors attack).
[Bezemskij et al., 2017] 
Level of autonomy
Prediction of level of autonomy 
for IAVs' supervision (foresee the 
mental workload of the human).
[Bazzano et al., 2017] 
TOPIC

!
 de !
22
34
(b) Decision making framework for IAVs 
Since in the future the Intelligent Autonomous vehicles (IAVs) are going to move 
freely in the cities, countryside, sea, space or any area without a direct human 
control; the IAVs are going to have their own responsibilities and therefore have to 
make their own decisions. Cross a road, for example, means to make a decision. 
The car has to choose between stop to look for other ones crossing (cars or 
pedestrians) or to continue. Decision making for an Autonomous Vehicle is the 
process by which it makes a choice between diﬀerent options or possible ways to 
solve diﬀerent situations for its performance in diﬀerent contexts. In other words, 
the decision making framework set the conditions to identify a problem and select 
an action course to solve it according to predeﬁne goals. Based on the literature 
reviewed here, we state a decision making general framework of what it would 
mean for an autonomous vehicle to be able to make a decision. Making a decision 
would depend on several variables, such as, the ones shown in the decision 
making framework. Table 2 shows the decision making framework for IAVs, it 
contains ﬁve modules and their respective variables related to the articles studied: 
Trigger point. First at all, the autonomous vehicle has to recognised its current 
situation and to visualize its goals and priorities. Then the vehicle would look for 
ways to operate to reach its objectives. In a real world, the objectives do not come 
alone, they imply to take into account social, political, economical and government 
regulations. Depending on the situations, sometimes the vehicles can make 
decisions by their own and sometimes make group decisions. Then the vehicles 
would have to communicate to each other and to come to an agreement to deﬁne 
the way to operate collectively. The module trigger point does not have references 
because of is still under discussion, the moment when the vehicle has to make 
high level decisions involving free operation and interaction with humans and other 
vehicles is still under evaluation. Protocols need to be established. However, 
several advantages of IAVs' making decisions can be mentioned: their decisions 
are not aﬀected by their state of mind or fatigue, they are the result of the 
evaluation of multiple options, they can manage more data than humans and 
predict consequences. All the articles presented give an overview of moments 
when the IAVs have to make decisions. 
Preparation. The IAV has to know the kind of decisions it is able and allow to make 
(level of autonomy). When it is working in a group has to evaluate if can count on 
its partners (trust). To execute an action all its predeﬁned functions need to be 
Human-IAV relationship
Evaluation of the elements for an 
adequate human-IAV interaction 
to ensure the mission success. 
Trust is an important variable for 
collaboration (interactions)
[Thieme and Utne, 2017] 
Liability and responsibility
Ditribution of liability and 
responsibility in personal 
automotive transportation.
[Gopalswamy and Rathinam, 
2018] 
DESCRIPTION
REFERENCE
TOPIC

!
 de !
23
34
veriﬁed (reliability on vehicle functions). The context in which the decision is going 
to be made needs to be assess, circumstances or elements could be changing in 
time and space (situational awareness). Adequate forms to facilitate information 
exchange between IAVs and its partners, getting right information and in time is 
important (interaction). The IAVs also must  show its reaction in a clear way. The 
activities for which the vehicle has to be ready are also determined. In summary, in 
the preparation process all the elements that deﬁned the vehicle’s role are 
established.  
Evaluation. It consist of making a detailed study of every possible solutions that 
were generated for the problem, that is, looking at its advantages and 
disadvantages, individually with respect to the decision criteria, and one with 
respect to the other , assigning them a weighted value. The selection would be the 
one that adjust the most to the goals and criteria. Since we are talking about 
vehicles having a probabilistic model to quantitatively value their performance, the 
vehicles would be able to predict, according to their current state, in what degree 
they could meet their obligations. As well as, foresee the degree of posible 
damage that their decision could cause. Hence, it could study the probable 
consequences of its decisions and actions. The origin of the decision and the form 
the decision is being made is also measured. 
Execution. Implement the decision made according to the chosen plan in order to 
evaluate whether the decision was successful or not. The action(s) should be 
monitor during operations for future evaluations. Until now, the decisions have 
been implemented on simulations and more simulations are needed to create 
statistics and diﬀerent scenarios for possible situations on real life. Before 
execution; government, society and Autonomous Vehicles companies should 
come into an agreement to set up the manner IAVs will operate, this includes 
under what context they will performed (infrastructure conditions and participants). 
People should be informed about the vehicles skills and behaviour to know what to 
expect.  
Results evaluation. Once the decision was executed, it is necessary to evaluate if 
the problem was solved or not, that is, if the decision is having the expected result 
or not. 
In addition, we must be aware that the decisions that are taken continuously will 
have to be modiﬁed, due to the evolution of the situation or the appearance of new 
variables that aﬀect it. All the modules of the decision making framework not 
necessarily have to be included in all the situations to make decisions. Maybe for 
the design and behaviour analysis of the IAV we could need all of them, but for 
performance in real time we have to select just some of them.  
The studies exposed above take us to see that the Bayesian networks can let us 
deﬁne clear relationships between factors being part of the decision making 
framework, we can notice how they inﬂuence to each other, where the information 
and decision are coming from. Therefore, the causes and consequences of the 
decision can be evaluated. The interaction with other computational models is also 

!
 de !
24
34
possible, they can let us reason with information originated from other 
computational models or can share information to foresee events.  
All the decision making modules have been study separately. We could think to 
have in the future a BN that integrates all the diﬀerent modules. Consequently, we 
could count with a computational formalism to study how each module is aﬀecting 
the decision making. The model could track what module of the decision making 
framework should be modiﬁed to improve the decision or tell us what module took 
the vehicle to a bad decision. 
Table 2. Decision making framework for IAVs
MODULES
VARIABLES
DEFINITION
