arXiv:2001.06615v2  [cs.CY]  20 Jan 2022
THE RISK TO POPULATION HEALTH EQUITY POSED BY
AUTOMATED DECISION SYSTEMS
arXiv PREPRINT
Mitchell Burger
School of Population Health
UNSW Sydney
Sydney NSW Australia

20 January 2022 v2 – 7,830 words – British English
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Artiﬁcial intelligence is already ubiquitous, and is increasingly being used to
autonomously make ever more consequential decisions. Amid scrutiny of the use of narrow arti-
ﬁcial intelligence (which means performing singular tasks) and automated decision systems in sens-
itive domains such as policing and education, there is concern about impacts on equity and justice.
However, there has been relatively little research into the existing and possible consequences for
population health and equity of their use in medicine and public health.
Method: A narrative review of scholarly and grey literature was undertaken using a hermeneutic
approach. The review explores current and future uses of narrow artiﬁcial intelligence and auto-
mated decision systems in medicine and public health, issues that have emerged, and longer-term
implications for population health equity.
Results: Accounts reveal a tremendous expectation on artiﬁcial intelligence to transform medical
and public health practices, especially regarding precision medicine and precision public health. In-
creasingly frequent and prominent demonstrations of narrow artiﬁcial intelligence capability – par-
ticularly in diagnostic decision making, risk prediction, and disease surveillance – are stimulating a
rapid expansion in adoption, spurred by the COVID-19 pandemic. Automated decisions being made
about disease detection, diagnosis, treatment, and health funding allocation have signiﬁcant con-
sequences for individual and population health and wellbeing. Meanwhile, it is evident that hazards
including bias, incontestability, and erosion of privacy have emerged in sensitive domains where
narrow artiﬁcial intelligence and automated decision systems are in common use, such as criminal
justice and education. Reports of issues arising from their use in health are already appearing.
Discussion: As the use of automated decision systems expands in medicine and public health, it is
probable that these hazards will manifest more widely. Bias, incontestability, and privacy erosion
give rise to mechanisms by which existing social, economic and health disparities are perpetuated
and ampliﬁed. Consequently, there is a signiﬁcant risk that use of automated decision systems in
health will exacerbate existing population health inequities.
Conclusion: The industrial scale and rapidity with which automated decision systems can be ap-
plied to whole populations heightens the risk to population health equity. It is incumbent on health
practitioners and policy makers to explore the potential implications of using automated decision
systems, to ensure the use of artiﬁcial intelligence promotes population health and equity.
Keywords artiﬁcial intelligence · AI · automated decision systems · public health · precision public health · population
health · equity

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
1
Introduction
There is tremendous hype surrounding the future of artiﬁcial intelligence1 (AI) in health – particularly in medicine
[2–5], and increasingly in public health [6–10]. The singular, global impact of AI on population health has been called
out by the World Health Organization, who proclaim that “more human lives will be touched by health information
technology than any other technology, ever.” [11] While predictions vary about the extent to which AI will actually
revolutionise medicine and public health practices in the shorter term [as discussed by, for example, 2, 5, 7, 12–14],
scholars have identiﬁed the longer-term potential of AI to reduce global health inequalities [15–17]. Even the United
Nations Secretary-General has highlighted the potential of AI to advance human welfare, but has also emphasised its
potential to widen inequality and increase violence [18].
The hype about the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine and public health comes at a time of unprecedented
global interest in AI, wherein the potential future impacts of AI are being extensively analysed and discussed, including
on the pages of this journal [e.g., 19–22]. It has been common for the future risks of AI to predominate, especially
those relating to automation [e.g., 23–29], autonomous weapons [e.g., 24, 30, 31], and superintelligence [e.g., 32–36].
However, while the idea of artiﬁcial intelligence may still readily conjure science ﬁction dreams and nightmares in
popular imagination, the reality is that AI is here already [37, 38]. Meredith Whittaker and colleagues at the AI Now
Institute have stated: “The rapid deployment of AI and related systems in everyday life is not a concern for the fu-
ture—it is already here, with no signs of slowing down.” [39] Narrow artiﬁcial intelligence2 and predictive algorithms
suffuse society – they are woven into the fabric of our daily lives [42–44]; mediating “our social, cultural, economic
and political interactions” [38]. In this way, AI is already ubiquitous [37, 45, 46], often in very mundane forms in
everyday technologies [43] – smart phones, online advertising, social media, home assistants, recommendation engines
for music and video, online dating, autopilots, and customer support chatbots.
‘Automated decision systems’ are a particular mode of implementing AI which use classiﬁcations and predictions pro-
duced by expert systems or machine learning algorithms to make decisions autonomously.3 Such systems are already
prevalent in a broad range of sectors, including loan and credit card applications, algorithmic trading, drone warfare,
immigration, criminal justice, policing, job applications, education, university entry, utilities network management,
and social welfare [37, 38, 47, 50–53]. Their use by governments and corporations is rapidly expanding into ever
more consequential and sensitive domains [38, 39]. And what is particularly insidious about the expanding use of
automated decision making is the invisibility of their proliferation [37]. Crawford and colleagues write: “In many
cases, people are unaware that a machine, and not a human process, is making life-deﬁning decisions.” [54, p. 23] In
addition, people tend to become rapidly habituated to advances in AI performance, leading to creeping normalisation.
Contributing to this normalisation is the tendency for AI to have an ever-evolving deﬁnition as what is not yet possible
[55].4 Mundanity, invisibility, and habituation are enabling automated decision systems to proliferate unseen.
As artiﬁcial intelligence takes on more and more responsibility for consequential decisions, fundamental questions of
rights, fairness and equity arise [54, 57–59]. There is substantiated concern about the impact AI is already having
on equity and justice, with mounting evidence that AI systems can perpetuate, entrench and amplify existing discrim-
ination and inequality [e.g., 37, 54, 60–62]. This is prompting widespread debate about where and when AI and
automated decision systems can be used [e.g., 37, 63, 64]. However, while high-level warnings about medium and
long-term risks and societal impacts are widespread, the effects of the unseen proliferation of narrow AI and auto-
1The UK Parliament’s House of Lords Select Committee on Artiﬁcial Intelligence [1] wryly observed that “the debate around
exactly what is, and is not, artiﬁcial intelligence, would merit a study of its own”. For the purposes of this review the practical deﬁn-
ition of artiﬁcial intelligence speciﬁed by the House of Lords Select Committee is used: ‘Technologies with the ability to perform
tasks that would otherwise require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, and language translation.’ (p.
20)
2‘Narrow’ AI (also referred to as ‘weak’ AI) generally refers to an agent that undertakes a speciﬁc, singular task; typically in a
way that does not generalise to other tasks or domains [40]. For context, higher grades of AI are: ‘artiﬁcial general intelligence’,
which is also referred to as ‘strong AI’, and is taken to mean an agent performing tasks at least as well as humans across many or
all domains [24, 41]. ‘Superintelligence’ is performance that exceeds human intelligence across all domains [32].
3It is difﬁcult to more precisely deﬁne ‘automated decision systems’ because they are speciﬁc to context and purpose [47]. For
example, Reisman and colleagues deﬁne predictive policing automated decision systems as “any systems, tools, or algorithms that
attempt to predict crime trends and recommend the allocation of policing resources” (p. 13). A deﬁnition adapted for health could be:
any systems, tools, or algorithms that attempt to predict individual or population health trends or states, and decide the allocation
of health resources or speciﬁc interventions. This deﬁnition distinguishes automated decision systems from computerised decision
support systems [e.g., 48], which are intended to guide clinician-in-the-loop decision-making. Automated decision systems would
also be a higher risk categorisation in the FDA’s emerging regulatory framework for artiﬁcial intelligence or machine learning-based
software-as-a-medical device [49].
4Indeed, Tesler’s theorem – attributed to the computer scientist Larry Tesler – is that: “AI is whatever hasn’t been done yet.” [41,
p. 7]. Pioneering AI researcher John McCarthy also had a similar saying: “As soon as it works, no one calls it AI anymore.” [56].
2

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
mated decision systems in sensitive domains have only relatively recently started to be closely scrutinised. In health
– compared to domains such as criminal justice, policing and autonomous warfare – there has been less in-depth ana-
lysis of the consequences for population health and population health equity of the use of narrow AI and automated
decision systems. Acknowledging the conceptual ’fuzziness’ [65], for our purposes ‘population health’ can be taken
to mean the ‘collective health’ of populations, drawing on Rose’s conception that “healthiness is a characteristic of the
population as a whole and not simply of its individual members.” [66, p. 95] Population health equity on the other hand
is a political concept requiring judgement based on concepts of social justice as to whether measurable differences in
health (inequalities) are unjust or avoidable [67]. Key in this context is the differential impact of social determinants of
health (Marmot, 2005), and how these determinants are accounted for (or not) in data and automated decision systems
[68].
While accounts in medical and public health literature have posed the question about the effect on equity, and identiﬁed
risks [e.g., 69–71], analysis to date has focused primarily on the ethical and legal implications of medical applications
for individuals [e.g., 72]. The potential impact on population health equity of issues known to have emerged widely in
other sensitive domains, and the mechanisms by which they are likely act, therefore require further investigation.
2
Method
This review aims to begin to address this evidence gap regarding the use of automated decision systems in public
health by reviewing the current state of adoption of AI in health, drawing together detailed evidence of issues arising
in other sensitive domains, and speciﬁcally considering the implications for population health equity, including the
mechanisms by which population health equity may be affected. The speciﬁc research questions are:
1. Broadly, what is the current state of adoption of narrow AI and automated decision systems in medicine and
public health? And how are they expected to be used in the future?
2. What key issues of relevance to equity have emerged in the application of narrow AI and automated decision
making in other sensitive domains? Is there evidence of these issues emerging in medicine and/or public
health applications?
3. What are the possible implications and risks for population health equity?
To address these questions, a narrative review [73] using a hermeneutic approach has been undertaken. A hermeneutic
review involves an iterative process of developing understanding through cycles of search and acquisition of literature,
together with iterative analysis and interpretation [74]. It is an approach that it is suitable for questions requiring
clariﬁcation and insight which cover diverse and dynamic bodies of scholarly and grey literature [74, 75]. Furthermore,
this approach is consistent with Galea and colleagues’ [68] call for transdisciplinary synthesis, in that the review draws
on a range of literatures, including technical, public health, policy, and sociology.
Initially, literature was gathered by searching Scopus, PubMed, Web of Science, and IEEE Xplore databases, and
arXiv, medRxiv, and bioRxiv pre-print servers using the search terms ‘artiﬁcial intelligence’, ‘machine learning’, or
‘big data’, in combination with ‘public health’ or ‘epidemiology’. Searches were also conducted using the search
terms ‘artiﬁcial intelligence’ or ‘machine learning’, together with ‘bias’ or ‘privacy’. Grey literature was sourced
using Google Scholar, Hacker News5, WHO IRIS, United Nations Ofﬁcial Document System, and World Economic
Forum Reports. Relevant articles were selected by scanning titles and abstracts, yielding 240 references. Citation
tracking was then used to identify additional sources as analysis proceeded, in keeping with the hermeneutic approach.
Mapping, classiﬁcation, and thematic analysis was undertaken iteratively using NVivo 12 Pro qualitative analysis
software.
3
Results
3.1
Current state of adoption in health, and expected future uses
While the use of narrow artiﬁcial intelligence and automated decision systems is already widespread in sectors such
as ﬁnance, policing, and criminal justice; the health sector has a comparatively low – but rapidly expanding – level
of adoption [41, 76, 77]. In 2017, an American independent scientiﬁc advisory group JASON6 described the state of
adoption of AI in the health sector generally as being at an exploratory phase: “AI is beginning to play a growing role
in transformative changes now underway in both health and health care, in and out of the clinical setting. At present the
5https://news.ycombinator.com/
6See Federation of American Scientists [78]
3

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
extent of the opportunities and limitations is just being explored.” [79, p. 1] In the ensuing years the state of adoption
of AI in health has advanced markedly, with increasing and sometimes hyperbolic reports that AI is now starting to
replace doctors [e.g., 80–82]. The most active areas of application are use of machine learning for diagnostic support,
for example in medical imaging interpretation and multivariate risk prediction.7
In medicine, there have been prominent and increasingly frequent demonstrations of the capability of AI – in particular
machine learning – to perform diagnostics using medical images with the same performance levels as experienced
clinicians [2, 79, 87–90]. High-proﬁle examples include: automated detection of key trauma and stroke indications
in head CT scans [91, in The Lancet]; automated classiﬁcation of skin cancer at dermatologist-level [92, in Nature];
detection of diabetic retinopathy [93, in JAMA]; and automated classiﬁcation of abnormalities in chest radiographs [94,
in PLOS Medicine]. A systematic review published in The Lancet Digital Health found the “diagnostic performance
of deep learning models to be equivalent to that of health-care professionals”, although concerns were raised about
the prevalence of poor reporting in deep learning studies [88]. Since 2018 there has been an acceleration in US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approvals of AI algorithms [95]. As a further indicator of the accelerating advance
of AI adoption, AI-based tools have been widely implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic [e.g., 96–103].
However, to date there has been little high-quality evidence establishing the efﬁcacy of these tools in practice [104].
Future applications include “using artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning to support the integration of genomic
information into health care systems” [105, p. 22], so as to enable personalised drug protocols, precision prevention
[106], and early diagnosis of rare childhood diseases [107].
In public health accounts, AI is typically regarded with cautious optimism as having the potential to re-envisage and
transform public health practices [e.g., 6, 8, 9, 76, 108–111]. In this way it is similar to the predicted impact of ‘big
data’ in public health, a good overview of which is provided by Dolley [19]. Zandi and colleagues [77] capture the
promissory potential in their call for papers on ethical challenges of AI in public health:
These technologies promise great beneﬁts to the practice of medicine and to the health of popula-
tions. This is especially true in epidemiology and the tracking of outbreaks of infectious diseases,
behavioural science, precision medicine and the modelling and treatment of rare and/or chronic
diseases.
When combined with big data, AI approaches are expected to offer new opportunities to revolutionise epidemiology
[10] and to enable measurement of the impact of upstream determinants of health over the lifecourse [106, 112,
113]. Importantly, this would be a way of quantifying and revealing the “structured chances” that “drive population
distributions of health, disease, and well-being” [65]. Recent examples of this have been the use of machine learning to
quantify the relationship between social determinants and unmet dental care needs [114], prospective risk stratiﬁcation
for health plan payments [115], and prediction of COVID-19 outcomes based on sociodemographics [116]. This
opportunity arises because deep learning in particular offers novel capabilities to deal with complex, high-dimensional
data and relatively small sample sizes [84, 86] – so called ’wide’ data. The most aspirational accounts predict these
new approaches will be able to facilitate action on social and environmental determinants of health, and thereby reduce
health disparities [20, 68, 106, 113, 117].
However, despite this potential being recognised, public health has been comparatively slow to broadly adopt AI in
practice [45, 76, 118, 119]. Predicting and tracking infectious disease outbreaks was an emerging application area for
AI, and this has been greatly accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, with an AI epidemiological tool claiming to
have been the ﬁrst to sound warnings about the outbreak in Wuhan [120]. Key applications of AI in public health are:
• population health surveillance and disease detection [e.g., 119, 121–131], including COVID-19 [e.g., 132];
• predicting and tracking infectious disease outbreaks [e.g., 8, 133–135], including COVID-19 [e.g., 124];
• primary and secondary prevention of disease [e.g., 106, 136–139];
• environmental health [e.g., 140–145];
• disease screening [e.g., 146–150]; and
• risk factor intervention and treatment adherence [e.g., 151–154].
An illustrative example is McKinney and colleagues [146] demonstrating material reductions in the rates of false pos-
itives and false negatives using an AI system for breast cancer screening, highlighting AI’s potential to improve the
7Machine learning is a sub-branch of artiﬁcial intelligence research and practice – for deﬁnitions of machine learning and deep
learning see for example Brooks [83], Russell and Norvig [40], and LeCun et al. [84]. Challen and colleagues [85] plotted the
current state of adoption of machine learning in healthcare as at 2019, and projected future applications in terms of increasing levels
of automation. Similarly, Ching and colleagues [86] provide an excellent and comprehensive survey of the state of adoption of deep
learning in medicine.
4

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
efﬁcacy and cost-effectiveness of breast cancer screening programs, acknowledging however that robust evidence is
lacking [150]. There have also been a number of demonstrations of the capability of AI to achieve accurate risk predic-
tion [e.g., 155–168]. Weng and colleagues [169] exempliﬁed this capability by demonstrating that machine learning
approaches could use routine clinical data to signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of cardiovascular risk prediction,
compared to an established algorithm.
Risk prediction algorithms are also increasingly being used as a ﬁrst line of automated triage in advance of primary care
appointments [79, p. 23]. For example, UK-based company Babylon Health8 has a partnership with the UK’s National
Health Service (NHS) called ‘GP at hand’ to provide online general practice consultations, with over 35,000 registered
members as at January 2019 [170]. Babylon Health uses a digital symptom checker underpinned by AI to triage
patients – this is an example of an automated decision system. Although concerns have been raised about the safety of
digital symptom checkers [171], in mid-2019 Babylon Health was able to raise an additional US$550m in investment
capital in order to enable the company to expand into the United States and develop the capability of its AI to diagnose
more serious conditions [172]. Another application is automated prescribing of contraceptives. A small-scale study
published in September 2019 in the New England Journal of Medicine evaluated the safety of telecontraception, which
involves the automated prescribing of contraceptives with or without clinicians in the loop. The study found that
telecontraception may increase the accessibility of contraception, and also promote better adherence to treatment
guidelines compared to in-person clinics [173].
AI-based risk stratiﬁcation is also being used to enable automated, risk-adjusted, per capita funding allocation for
health services and primary care. In this application the amount of money allocated to people for primary care ser-
vices for a period of time is assigned based on their health status and algorithmic predictions of risk. For example,
a commercial algorithm is used by a number of Accountable Care Organisations in America to make healthcare re-
sourcing decisions for over 70 million people [174, 175]. As another example, the Australian Government recently
trialled risk-adjusted funding for primary care through the Health Care Homes initiative.9 The amount of funding
provided to participating general practitioners to coordinate the care of individual patients will be decided using a
predictive risk algorithm. The algorithm – developed by the CSIRO10 – factors in more than 50 variables, includ-
ing demographics, a proxy for social determinants (the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ SEIFA indices for social and
economic status11), physiology, medicines, conditions, pathology results, and lifestyle factors [177].
In summary, accounts in literature and the media reveal a tremendous expectation on AI to transform medical and
public health practices. There have been prominent demonstrations of successful narrow AI capability in medical and
public health applications – particularly in diagnostic decision making, risk prediction and disease surveillance. These
demonstrations reinforce the hype and expectation surrounding AI, and stimulate its rapidly expanding adoption in
medicine and public health. This rapid adoption reinforces the need to carefully consider the longer-term hazards
speciﬁc to public health.
3.2
Emerging issues
As the adoption of narrow AI and automated decision making in sensitive domains expands, this review has found
that signiﬁcant evidence of emerging issues has been gathered, including in health applications. Indeed, Whittaker
and colleagues [39, p. 42] contend that the harms and biases in AI systems are now beyond question. “That debate
has been settled,” they write, “the evidence has mounted beyond doubt”. They point to a growing consensus – citing a
string of high-proﬁle examples – that AI systems are perpetuating and amplifying inequities [39, 60]. This review will
now focus on three key issues which have emerged in the analysis phase: 1) bias, 2) opacity and incontestability, and
3) erosion of privacy – as these appear to be materialising in medical and public health applications of AI, and also
because of the potential for these issues to give rise to mechanisms by which existing health inequities are entrenched
and ampliﬁed, engendering potential risk for population health equity.
3.2.1
Bias
Of the issues that have emerged in the application of AI and automated decision making, bias is perhaps the most
prominent in the literature reviewed. Deﬁning bias is difﬁcult because the term has speciﬁc meanings in ﬁelds such as
statistics, epidemiology, and psychology, and these are often confusingly contradictory [37]. Whittaker and colleagues
[39] distinguish between two types of bias arising from automated decision systems: allocative – where resources
8https://www.babylonhealth.com/
9http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/health-care-homes
10https://www.csiro.au/
11See Australian Bureau of Statistics [176]
5

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
or opportunities are unfairly distributed; and representational – where harmful stereotypes and categorisations are
reproduced and ampliﬁed.
The hope that AI will assist to overcome biases in human decision making [e.g., 178–180] has been used as a justi-
ﬁcation for the use of automated decision systems [e.g., 52]. However, there have been glaring examples of racial,
gender and socioeconomic biases evident in AI and automated decision making used in a number of sensitive domains,
including:
• criminal justice [50, 61, 181–183];
• policing [184–189];
• hiring practice [190, 191];
• university admissions [192];
• online advertising [37, 193, 194];
• education [37, 195–198];
• immigration [39]; and
• facial recognition [199–204].
There is also emerging evidence of the harmful impact of biases in the context of algorithmic censorship [205, 206].
For example, there is racial bias in how hate speech is moderated [207], gender bias in how nudity is censored on
Instagram [208, 209], and censorship of marginalised communities through overly-restrictive automated ﬁltering of
LGBTQ content on YouTube, Tumblr and Twitter [210].
Generally, algorithmic biases can arise in two main ways: in the upfront design (speciﬁcation) of an algorithm, and in
the data that are used to train algorithms, for example by being unrepresentative, or encoding existing systemic biases
[24, 54, 211, 212]. Bughin and colleagues [41, p.37] explain how bias can be caused by data: “Since the real world is
racist, sexist, and biased in many other ways, real-world data that feeds algorithms will also have these features—and
when AI algorithms learn from biased training data, they internalize the biases, exacerbating those problems.” As bias
can arise unintentionally from data used to train the algorithms, it can be very difﬁcult to detect and measure [37, 47,
52, 213].
Algorithmic bias – especially undetected bias – can lead to inaccurate and inappropriate generalisation [3, 83, 123,
214]. Generalisation is a key issue in machine learning theory and practice [43]. The general rigidity and brittleness of
machine learning models means that models built for a speciﬁc purpose cannot be readily transferred to other applica-
tions, nor are they robust to changes over time [83]. Barocas and Selbst [213] make the crucial point that inappropriate
generalisation is typically a result of careless reliance on “statistically sound inferences that are nevertheless inaccur-
ate” (p. 688) – rather than deliberate prejudice. Again, that the disparate impact is inadvertent, makes it wickedly
difﬁcult to detect. And moreover, inappropriate generalisation can have a performative12 impact [43, 215], where
inaccurate predictions actively contribute to produce discriminatory outcomes. This is especially evident in criminal
justice and predictive policing implementations of automated decision systems [50, 183–185, 187]. Inaccurate gener-
alisation also stems from AI’s inherent reliance on data, and the axiomatic tension between over-ﬁtting to past data
and predictive accuracy. Writing for Computerworld, George Nott quotes Genevieve Bell: "Humans can sometimes
fear their choices are being "prescribed by their past" by these algorithms, which by their nature work on retrospective
data" [216]. The reliance on past data is a key reason why there is a risk that automated decision systems will perpetu-
ate inequities, particularly where the systems rely on data that either reﬂects past systemic inequalities, or does not
adequately encode social and environmental determinants [6].
As with other high-stakes domains, bias has been called out as a key issue that will need to be addressed before AI
can be trusted and more widely adopted in health [37, 85, 217, 218]. Speciﬁc to the health domain, numerous scholars
have highlighted the lack of diversity, inclusiveness, and representativeness in health datasets [e.g., 19, 37, 39, 45, 80,
106, 213, 219–225]. And as previously noted, the use of biased data is known to reproduce and amplify discrimination
and injustice [54, 213, 226]. For instance, Straw and Callison-Burch [227] demonstrated the existence of signiﬁcant
biases in natural language processing models used in psychiatry, and identiﬁed the risk that these biases may widen
health inequalities.
In public health too, it is well-recognised that skewed and unrepresentative data can bias the results of traditional
epidemiological and population health analyses such as disease surveillance, leading to inaccurate estimates and in-
ference for diverse populations [65, 128, 133]. Exemplifying how data quality can affect automated decision systems,
12Performativity, in this context, is the act of making a prediction having the effect of contributing to the predicted outcome
coming into being.
6

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
ﬂawed data was blamed for the failures of Idaho’s automated decision system to equitably allocate home care fund-
ing [228]. And in a study that has striking similarities to ProPublica’s revelatory investigative reporting into racially
biased crime risk prediction [50], Obermeyer and colleagues [174] detected signiﬁcant racial bias in a commercial al-
gorithm used by Accountable Care Organisations in America and applied to an estimated 200 million people each year.
Their analysis revealed that White patients were given the same risk score as Black patients who were considerable
sicker, inadvertently leading to Black patients having unequal access to care. The authors estimated that resolving this
disparity would have more than doubled the proportion of Black patients receiving additional assistance (from 17.7%
to 46.5%). The paucity of environmental and social exposure data has also been identiﬁed [e.g., 79, 229], however the
potential for this to lead to biases in narrow AI and automated decision systems needs to be further explored [224].
3.2.2
Opacity and incontestability
Another key issue is the opacity of artiﬁcial intelligence, and the ensuing incontestability of automated decisions.
Algorithms and AI are opaque and invisible processes, often characterised as ‘black boxes’ [24, 38, 51, 230, 231].
Once an AI algorithm has been trained – particularly one based on deep learning – it is not clear how it is making
decisions [51, 232]. The lack of explainability of AI when applied in healthcare has been identiﬁed as a threat to the
core ethical values of medicine [233]. Research into public perceptions reveal confusion amongst the general public
about the inner workings of algorithms, and wariness about inscrutable algorithmic processes that have delegated
responsibility for high-stakes decisions [234–236].
A consequence of this opacity is the difﬁculty of questioning and contesting automated decisions. Whittaker and
colleagues at the AI Now Institute observe that when automated decision systems make errors, “the ability to question,
contest, and remedy these is often difﬁcult or impossible” [39]. This is exempliﬁed in the United States criminal justice
system, where “Defendants rarely have an opportunity to challenge their [algorithmic] assessments” [50]. Furthermore,
the ability of humans to intervene, override or even explain decisions is severely limited, rendering frontline workers
disempowered intermediaries [39]. Early reports suggest that issues of incontestability have emerged in the use of
automated decision systems in health. This powerlessness is evident in Colin Lecher’s article for The Verge [52] about
the case of a women with cerebral palsy who had her health services funding cut in half by an automated algorithmic
decision. When an attorney began to investigate complaints about the algorithm, he found: “No one seemed able to
answer basic questions about the process. The nurses said, ‘It’s not me; it’s the computer’.”
For people who are the subjects of automated decisions, there is even more of a sense of powerlessness. Regarding the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) legal challenge to Idaho’s use of an algorithmic decision system to allocate
home care funding [see also 228], Lecher [52] writes: “Most importantly, when Idaho’s system went haywire, it was
impossible for the average person to understand or challenge”. Incontestability can therefore lead to aggregation of
power, limited opportunities for redress, and an unwillingness and inability of vulnerable people to contest their own
treatment, thereby perpetuating and exacerbating existing inequities and discriminatory dynamics [54, 61].
The tendency to blindly trust complex statistical methodologies both fortiﬁes the inscrutability of automated decisions,
and also intensiﬁes the performativity of prediction. In the ﬁeld of public health, concern has been raised about
overconﬁdence in big data and complex statistical techniques [45, 237]. Salathé [126] refers to this as “big-data
hubris”. Similarly, Krieger [112], quoting prescient statistician Lancelot Hogben, cautions against hiding “behind
an impressive façade of ﬂawless algebra”. Artiﬁcial intelligence systems, because they are considered ‘intelligent
technology’, are particularly prone to going uncontested [54, pp. 6-7]. Underlying this misplaced trust is a reductionist
belief in the neutrality of data – a belief in data being beyond reproach. Sheila Jasanoff [226] captures this eloquently:
...in modernity, information, along with its close correlate data, has been taken for granted as a set of
truth claims about the way the world is. Information, as conventionally understood, quite simply is
what is: it consists of valid observations about what the world is like. Data represents a speciﬁc form
of information, a compilation of particular types of facts designed to shed light on identiﬁable issues
or problems. As representations of reality, both public information and public data were seen until
recently as lying to some extent outside the normal domains of political inquiry. (p. 5, emphasis in
the original)
But data are not neutral [44, 238, 239]. Krieger [65] for one cautions against treating populations as statistical entities
comprised only of data, calling out the “uncritical approach to presenting and interpreting population data, premised on
the dominant assumption that population rates are statistical phenomena driven by innate individual characteristics.”
What follows from overconﬁdence in complex statistical techniques and belief in the neutrality of data is a misplaced
trust in the ability of automated decision systems to make correct, unbiased decisions. Virginia Eubanks is quoted
by Lecher [52] as saying that “there is a “natural trust” that computer-based systems will produce unbiased, neutral
results.” Likewise, Campolo and colleagues [37], citing Sandra Mayson’s work on algorithmic risk assessment in
7

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
setting bail, point out the potential of risk assessment to “legitimize and entrench” problematic reliance on statistical
correlation, and to "[lend such assessments] the aura of scientiﬁc reliability.” And similarly, Barocas and Selbst [213]
identify the “imprimatur of impartiality” conferred on the decisions taken by algorithmic systems. This is important
because it gives rise to a false conﬁdence in the superiority of automated decisions.
Through their complexity, invisibility, and inhumanity, algorithmic decisions are achieving incontestability. And thus,
when predictions are made, they verge on acts of creation, of magic [240]. Will Knight wrote in 2017: “As the
technology advances, we might soon cross some threshold beyond which using AI requires a leap of faith.” Considering
how “indecipherable” algorithmic systems can be [38], and how they can be “beyond the understanding even of the
people using them” [52], it should therefore not be surprising that the use of automated decision systems creates legal
uncertainty by challenging conventional models of autonomy [241] and creating a growing “accountability gap" [39].
This is perpetuated by trade secrecy and intellectual property provisions that enable proprietary systems to be shielded
from scrutiny, even in the face of legal challenge [37–39, 50, 123, 174, 215, 231]. The research of the AI Now Institute
has uncovered “black boxes stacked on black boxes: not just at the algorithmic level, but also trade secret law and
untraceable supply chains.” [60] In this way, trade secrecy reinforces the incontestability of automated decisions [39],
which heightens the risk that existing biases and disparities are perpetuated and ampliﬁed through disproportionately
affecting vulnerable and at-risk populations.
3.2.3
Privacy erosion
The use of artiﬁcial intelligence is also having a signiﬁcant impact on human rights to privacy, freedom of expression,
and access to information [242–245]. While privacy issues are not limited to AI, three dynamics eroding privacy: re-
identiﬁcation risk, intrusive data extraction and capitalisation, and invasive surveillance – stand out from the literature
in relation to AI. Firstly, many scholars and institutions have highlighted the risk of re-identiﬁcation and compromising
individual privacy which arise from big data analytics and AI [e.g., 19, 44, 215, 246–248]. Secondly, expanding use of
AI in surveillance – for example use of facial recognition in policing [215], and monitoring of employees’ emotional
state for performance evaluation and retention decisions [37] – is eroding privacy and amplifying discriminatory dy-
namics [39, 215, 249]. And thirdly, as a result of the recognition of and the use of AI to exploit the economic value
of personal data [250, 251], systems for data extraction, ‘dataﬁcation’ and capitalisation are becoming increasingly in-
trusive and pervasive [31, 226, 249, 252–255]. This intrusiveness and exploitation has resulted in growing community
wariness of data sharing, and erosion of social licence for use of individual data [234, 256, 257].
Reports about erosion of privacy are also already prevalent in health applications of narrow AI. Like other domains,
the value of personal health data has long been recognised [250, 251, 258–260]. The extraction of data will be driven
more and more by commercialisation and productisation of data as a tradable asset [249, 252–255]. In health, this
has seen the emergence of specialist data brokers, such as Explorys13, which was purchased by IBM in 2015. An
example brokerage is Memorial Sloan Kettering (MSK) Cancer Center entering into a licencing agreement with AI
start-up Paige.AI14 to “grant exclusive access to MSK’s intellectual property in computational pathology, including
access to MSK’s 25 million pathology slides.” [261]. However, the lure of using personal health data in AI and big data
applications is driving an erosion of rights to privacy, conﬁdentiality, and data ownership [10, 262–264]. For example,
there are increasing privacy concerns expressed in the media and literature about health apps’ lack of transparency
around data sharing and use [265]. Another example is data sharing between the UK National Health Service and
Google DeepMind being considered a betrayal of public trust [266–268]. Google has also faced media criticism
for gathering personal health information on millions of people in the United States as part of ’Project Nightingale’
[269–271], as has Memorial Sloan Kettering health service for its data sharing arrangement with Paige.AI [272].
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic there has also been widespread debate regarding the impact on privacy of using
digital tracking tools including AI [e.g., 273]. Campolo and colleagues [37] point out that in domains like health,
because of AI’s reliance on large amounts of data, the privacy rights of vulnerable populations are particularly at risk
due to lack of informed consent, inability to opt out, and poor due process mechanisms. In this way, erosion of privacy
and commodiﬁcation of individuals’ data will likely disproportionately affect vulnerable populations.
4
Discussion
Increasingly frequent and prominent demonstrations of narrow AI capability in medicine and public health are stimu-
lating a rapid expansion in their adoption, reinforced by economic drivers and accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The examples given in section 3.1 of automated decision systems that allocate health services funding illustrate how
decisions which are automatically made based on the results of an algorithm can be consequential for population
13https://www.ibm.com/watson/health/explorys/
14https://paige.ai/
8

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
health. In the example of the Health Care Homes program in Australia, through its scale, decisions have meaningful
consequences for population health and wellbeing, for the livelihood of general practitioners, and for the sustainability
of the primary care tier of the Australian health system. Malfunctioning of these systems would therefore be expected
to adversely affect population health equity.
Meanwhile, it is clear from the results of this review that there is signiﬁcant evidence of and concern about issues that
have emerged in the use of narrow AI and automated decision making in sensitive domains where AI is already widely
utilised. As the use of narrow AI-based automated decision systems and algorithmic prediction in health continues
to expand, it is probable that the same issues which have demonstrably emerged in other sensitive domains will also
manifest widely in medicine and public health applications. Indeed, there is emerging evidence of this happening
already – that it is not more widespread is perhaps due to the comparatively slower adoption of AI in public health.
There are two key reasons why it is highly probable that issues such as bias, incontestability and erosion of privacy
will manifest widely in health. Firstly, as outlined in the results section, early reports of issues associated with the use
of automated decision systems and predictive algorithms in health have already surfaced, and it is reasonable to expect
this trend to continue. Secondly, the same circumstances and drivers which have compelled adoption of automated
decision systems and given rise to issues in other high-stakes domains, also exist in medicine and public health –
indicating the adoption trajectory and consequences are likely to be similar. Key amongst these drivers are cost and
capacity pressures facing health services, and the commercial imperative to use AI to capitalise on growing health data
assets.
The same imperatives to constrain costs and capitalise on data exist in other sensitive domains – such as education,
policing, criminal justice, and immigration – and this has incentivised the adoption of automated decision systems
by public agencies and corporations in those domains [39, 47]. A process of learning and emulation akin to policy
transfer15 will likely ensure the adoption trajectory of automated decision systems will be similar in the health domain.
This emulation and diffusion of innovation occurs because jurisdictions and agencies “face common problems” and
they look to other communities for lessons and solutions [275]. The process is accelerated by a futures industry whose
purpose is to market ideas and trade on promises and expectation. Hadjiisky and colleagues write:
...an entire global marketplace of ideas and recommendations on ‘best practices’ has emerged, in-
cluding international organizations, commissions, donor groups, consultants, think tanks, institutes,
networks, partnerships, and various gatherings of the great and the good such as Davos. They may
not use the terminology of ‘policy transfer’ but that, in essence, is what they are debating and selling.
(p. 2-3)
Indeed, there is tremendous expectation heaped upon AI and precision health approaches to increase the efﬁciency of
healthcare services and systems as a means of containing costs [39, 52, 219, 220]. Dolley [19] captures this in relation
to public health:
Precision public health is exciting. Today’s public health programs can achieve new levels of speed
and accuracy not plausible a decade ago. Adding precision to many parts of public health engage-
ment has led and will lead to tangible beneﬁts. Precision can enable public health programs to
maintain the same efﬁcacy while decreasing costs, or hold costs constant while delivering better,
smarter, faster, and different education, cures and interventions, saving lives. (p. 6)
The drive to rapidly adopt AI in health is given urgency by the oft-cited pressures facing health systems around the
world, including population ageing, workforce shortages, increased prevalence and incidence of noncommunicable
diseases, and variability in service quality and clinical outcomes [76, 276–278]. These pressures are especially acute
in low-income countries, where health resources are particularly scare [76], contributing to the expectation that AI
will beneﬁt global health [15–17]. Similarly, long-standing problems with current diagnostic approaches, such as
invasiveness, cost, accessibility, and low precision, as well as the limitations of traditional analytic approaches, are
driving interest in improved AI-enabled methods [3, 79]. The COVID-19 pandemic has been a ‘perfect storm’ that has
exacerbated these pressures, further accelerating the adoption of AI [98, 99, 101–103].
The drive to adopt AI in health also follows closely on the heels of the imperative in medicine and public health to
capitalise on big data. Much like AI more recently, ’big data’ has commonly been expected to transform medicine and
public health practice [e.g., 19, 20, 105, 128, 133, 214, 231, 279, 280]. AI – particularly deep learning – promises
the ability to ﬁnally exploit big, complex, noisy, highly-dimensional health data that health organisations have been
15Policy transfer can be deﬁned as a process of learning and emulation by policy makers in which “knowledge about policies,
administrative arrangements, institutions etc. in one time and/or place is used in the development of policies, administrative ar-
rangements and institutions in another time and/or place.” [274]
9

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
accumulating [8, 45, 117, 128, 231, 281]. For example, an editorial in The Lancet Public Health [76] states: “The
ability of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning algorithms to analyse these multiple and rich data types at a
scale not previously possible could bring a step change in public health and epidemiology.” There is a convergence
between the accumulation of data [254] and hyper-enthusiasm about AI. The drive to make use of and assetize data in
health [282, 283] will drive adoption of AI and automated decision systems. Typifying this drive is a call by the Chief
Executive of a new United Kingdom National health Service agency, NHSX, to capitalise on big data and AI [284].
Underscoring the ﬁnancial imperative pressuring health services and agencies to adopt AI, the economic opportunity
has been identiﬁed not only by corporations, but by governments and public agencies [e.g. in Australia: 278, 285,
286].
What the drive to address health system pressures and capitalise on data portends is that the adoption of AI systems
will be substantiated on the basis of health service efﬁciency and productivity – chasing “commercial vistas of fab-
ulous scale” [287] – and not necessarily on improving population health or population health equity. Obermeyer and
colleagues’ [174] analysis already exhibits the perverse outcomes resulting from optimisation of AI prediction based
on health service cost as a goal function, and not population health outcomes. Because of the likely focus on efﬁciency
and headlong rush toward adoption, issues may well go overlooked or even ignored.
So why does it matter that issues such as bias, incontestability, and privacy erosion manifest widely? It matters be-
cause these issues give rise to mechanisms by which existing social, economic and health inequities are perpetuated and
ampliﬁed, and also potentially create new inequities. Bias does this by perpetuating and amplifying existing inequities
where automated decision systems rely on data that unknowingly echo systemic inequities, or do not adequately take
account of the social and environmental determinants of health which drive inequitable health disparities. The opacity
and incontestability of automated decision systems disproportionately affect vulnerable populations through aggreg-
ation of power, limiting opportunities for redress, and the inability of vulnerable people to contest unjust decisions.
Similarly, vulnerable populations are disproportionately at risk of privacy erosion and data exploitation through the
use of AI. Together these issues have the potential to perpetuate and exacerbate existing inequities and discriminatory
dynamics. This leads to a signiﬁcant risk that use of automated decision systems in health will amplify and entrench
existing population health inequities.
Examples of population health inequities that may be affected include the persistent life expectancy gap afﬂicting
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in Australia [288, 289], and the stark socio-economic gradient in health
outcomes evident in many countries [290–292], through, for example, social and environmental determinants such as
intergenerational trauma not being accounted for in algorithmic allocation of health resources. In addition, because of
the strong inﬂuence of social determinants of health [290], the use of automated decision systems in other domains
such as welfare and immigration, will undoubtedly also have a downstream effect on population health equity [see for
example 293], either because these determinants are missing in the data, or the data lack diversity, inclusiveness, and
representativeness.
Previous scholarly warnings regarding the risk that ‘precision’ health approaches have the potential to exacerbate
health inequities lends credence to the existence of the risk to population health equity posed by narrow AI and
automated decision systems. There have been strong warnings from within public health (albeit with little empirical
evidence of their manifesting to date) that ‘precision medicine’, as well as emerging ‘precision public health’ and ‘pre-
cision prevention’ approaches (which employ narrow AI, automated decision systems and algorithmic risk prediction)
have the potential to produce disparate impacts, amplify existing prejudices, and propagate health inequities [7, 76,
106, 118, 220, 226, 294, 295]. Elucidating this, Lavigne and colleagues [45] write:
...particularly when applying these approaches to decision-making or predictions at a population
level, attention must be paid to the potential for these approaches to produce health inequities, either
through the use of biased data or through uneven access to the technology. Predictions and models
based on non-representative or biased data can propagate underlying biases and exacerbate health
inequities at a population level if sufﬁcient care is not taken to mitigate these issues. (p. 176)
Moreover, socioeconomic gradients in access to, as well as the means and resources to best utilise new precision
health tools – for example genomic risk prediction – have the potential to widen inequalities further [106, 220, 296].
The focus on individual risk factors promoted by precision approaches can also reinforce the notion of individual
responsibility, prolonging the use of individualist, behaviourist interventions, which tend to entrench and exacerbate
socioeconomic disparities in health outcomes [7, 19, 106, 113, 220, 297]. The focus on individual risk factors also un-
dermines the rationale and societal propensity to act on structural, upstream determinants of health inequities, thereby
permitting inequities in population health to persist [6, 106, 118, 294]. Meagher and colleagues [106, p. 11] succinctly
capture this idea in relation to genomic data: “genomic explanations for health disparities can distract and even ex-
culpate society from taking responsibility for the structural determinants of those inequities, undermining the political
momentum of those seeking justice”. This same rationale applies to the use of AI and automated decision systems.
10

arXiv PREPRINT - 20 JANUARY 2022 V2
5
Conclusion
Amid unprecedented global interest in artiﬁcial intelligence, there are tremendous expectations that AI will transform
medicine and public health practice. And while it may go largely unnoticed, narrow AI and predictive algorithms are
already ubiquitous; woven into the fabric of our daily lives. Decisions which are being made automatically about dis-
ease detection, diagnosis, treatment and funding allocation have signiﬁcant consequences for individual and population
health and wellbeing.
The evidence collated in this review makes it clear that issues have emerged in sensitive domains like criminal justice
where narrow AI and automated decision systems are already in common use. As their use in health rapidly expands,
it is probable that the same issues – bias, incontestability, and privacy erosion – will also manifest widely in medicine
and public health applications. Reports of this happening are already appearing. Moreover, the combination of hype,
the drive to adopt automated decision systems to address cost pressures – accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic –
and the commercial imperative to capitalise on health data assets, may conspire to obscure issues, as has occurred in
other domains.
Crucially, bias, incontestability, and erosion of privacy give rise to mechanisms by which existing social, economic
and health disparities are perpetuated and ampliﬁed by automated decision systems. Therefore, there is a signiﬁcant
risk that the use of automated decision systems in health will exacerbate existing population health inequities and
potentially create new ones. Medical and public health interventions have obviously produced disparate outcomes
in the past; what makes the risk with narrow AI and automated decision systems different is the industrial scale and
rapidity [287] with which they can be applied to whole populations, combined with the incontestability of decisions.
This means negative consequences can quickly escalate to affect whole populations.
While it is too soon to say whether the issues emerging in health applications of narrow AI and automated decision
systems have led to worsened population health inequity, it is incumbent on health practitioners and policy makers to
explore and be mindful of the potential implications of using automated decision systems, so as to ensure the use of
AI promotes population health and equity. There is a need to design and implement automated decision systems with
care (using equity impact assessments for instance [see for example 298]), monitor their impact over time (especially
longer-term effects on population health), and take responsibility for responding to issues as they emerge – even if this
is long after a system has ﬁrst been introduced. To ﬁnish, Obermeyer and colleagues [174] set a very positive example.
After uncovering inadvertent racial bias in an automated decision system allocating health assistance funding, they
approached the algorithm manufacturer, who was able to independently replicate the results to conﬁrm the existence
of bias. The researchers and the algorithm manufacturer are now collaborating on developing solutions to address this
bias. This is a ﬁne example to emulate.
6
