3 Oct 2015
IUIs aim to incorporate intelligent automated capabilities in 
human computer interaction, where the net impact is a human-
computer interaction that improves performance or usability in 
critical ways. It also involves designing and implementing an 
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) component that eﬀectively leverages 
human skills and capabilities, so that human performance with 
an application excels. IUIs embody capabilities that have 
traditionally been associated more strongly with humans than 
with computers: how to perceive, interpret, learn, use language, 
reason, plan, and decide.
Motivation
Augmented and mixed reality are part of the input/output side 
of an intelligent user interface. There is a strong relationship 
between the intelligence in a system and the user interaction: 
ﬁrst, intelligent processing is found in the user interface(s) of 
the system, and its purpose is to enable an eﬀective, natural, or 
otherwise appropriate interaction of users with the system. For 
example, the system may support human-like communication 
methods such as speech or gesture; or it may adapt its style of 
!1
ISMAR 2015 Tutorial on 
Intelligent User Interfaces 
Daniel Sonntag, German 
Research Centre for Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence (DFKI)
Intelligent User Interfaces
will introduce you to the design and implementation of 
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUIs). 

3 Oct 2015
interaction to individual users. Second, intelligent processing is 
found in the “backend” of the system, and its primary purpose 
is to serve some beneﬁcial function such as performing actions 
partly autonomously on behalf of the users. In IUI, the 
relevance of the system’s intelligence to interaction with users 
is in the fore. 
In order to improve Augmented and Virtual Reality 
Applications, a deeper knowledge about the relationships 
between the aforementioned concepts/views (i.e., the 
intelligence in a system and the user interaction) would be 
highly beneﬁcial. Mostly this demand refers to a deeper 
knowledge about the following major topics.
Outline
• Design aspects of state-of-the-art intelligent user interfaces / 
interactive intelligent systems
• Semantic technologies: knowledge engineering in IUIs; user 
modelling
• Learning and automatic adaptation and planning in IUIs
• Input and output modalities (including the connection to 
VR/AR) 
• Multimodal interaction, conversational agents, question 
answering
• Emotions and aﬀective computing 
• Applications and Projects, Human Computation, 
Collaborative Multimodality 
This tutorial text is a compressed form of a new graduate 
lecture course at University of Kaiserslautern in 2013/2014/2015, 
see http://www.d&i.de/~sonntag/courses/WS14/IUI.html.
It is the worldwide ﬁrst university lecture course in IUI. The 
presenter is a senior programme committee member of the IUI 
conference series.
!2
This tutorial text is a compressed 
form of a new graduate lecture 
course, see http://www.dfki.de/
~sonntag/courses/WS14/
IUI.html. 

3 Oct 2015
IUI Community and 
Conferences
The IUI objectives are to increase productivity, decrease 
expenditures, and improve 
eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness, and 
naturalness of interaction. 
How? For example, by 
using knowledge 
representation, 
reasoning, ML, 
adaptation, and 
adaptivity. 
Examples include 

response systems, 
spoken dialogue 
systems, and head-worn 
user interfaces.  The IUI 
community is an 
interdisciplinary ﬁeld and 
transcommunity of the sub-disciplines in artiﬁcial intelligence 
(AI) and human-computer interaction (HCI). The community 
works on the the design, realisation, and evaluation of 
interactive systems that exhibit some form of intelligence. 
The main conference is the  International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 
(ACM IUI), which is a SIGHCI 
conference. It should be mentioned that 
IUI is the only premier conference that 
focuses on the relationships between the 
intelligence in a system and the user 
interaction. Two cases have to be 
distinguished. (1) The intelligent processing 
is found in the user interface(s) of the 
system, and its purpose is to enable an 
eﬀective, natural, or otherwise appropriate 
interaction of users with the system. For 
example, the system may support human-
like communication methods such as speech or gesture; or it 
may adapt its style of interaction to individual users. Or, (2), the 
the intelligent processing is found in the “backend”of the 
!3
AI
IUI
HCI

3 Oct 2015
system, and its primary purpose is to serve 
some beneﬁcial function such as performing 
actions partly autonomously on behalf of 
the users. The relevance of the system’s 
intelligence to interaction with users. A 
special case is when the intelligent 
processing is used not directly in the 
system.
There a many excellent conferences for the 
diﬀerent cases. A quantitative overview of 
good conferences is given below, by Riedl 
and Jameson. Here, the term intelligent UI  
stands for techniques used to realise 
intelligent systems have their origins in AI—though in many 
cases a subﬁeld has formed around a given type of technique 
(no longer primarily associated with AI). The canonical 
intelligent system includes a wide variety of capabilities, 
including sensing and perception, knowledge representation 
and reasoning, learning, creativity, planning,  autonomous 
!4

3 Oct 2015
motion and manipulation, natural language processing, and 
social interaction. 
Relationships between the intelligence in a system and the user 
interaction refer to our ﬁrst case, the intelligent processing is 
found in the user interface(s) of the system, and its purpose is 
to enable an eﬀective, natural, or otherwise appropriate 
interaction of users with the system. For example, the system 
may support human-like communication methods such as 
speech or gesture; or it may adapt its style of interaction to 
individual users. Systems where the intelligence lies mainly in 
the user interfaces have the following speciﬁc examples: 
systems with adaptive user interfaces are automatically adapted 
to the inferred capabilities or needs of the user; or multimodal 
systems that aim to enable more natural, human-like forms of 
input and output; systems with human-like virtual characters 
that enable the user to interact with a system in a way that is 
partly similar to human-human interaction; smart 
environments in which embedded objects interact intelligently 
!5
Some high-ﬁdelity tools have 
been designed to support 
prototyping of new multimodal 
systems that support 
collaborative group interactions. 
In order to improve Augmented 
and Virtual Reality Applications, 
a deeper knowledge about 
multimodal systems would be 
highly beneﬁcial.

3 Oct 2015
with their users; personalised websites, in which the displayed 
content is adapted to the inferred interests of the user. 
Systems where the intelligence lies mainly behind the user 
interfaces have the following implementations: recommender 
systems, which present products, documents, or other items 
that are expected to be of interest to the current user; systems 
that employ intelligent technology to support information 
retrieval; learning environments that oﬀer learning assistance 
on the basis of assessments of each learner’s capabilities and 
needs; interface agents that perform complex or repetitive 
tasks with some guidance from the user; situated assistance 
systems that monitor and support a user’s daily activities; 
Systems for capturing knowledge from domain experts who are 
not knowledge engineers; games that make use of AI 
technology to create the opponents against which the human 
players play. 
Main questions and challenges 
In what ways can artiﬁcial and human intelligence work 
together eﬀectively?
Where does intelligent processing yield the greatest beneﬁts 
for interaction, relative to other forms of computation?
 What patterns of division of processing between the human 
and the intelligent system tend to be successful, and which less 
so?
Challenges to usability and 
acceptance the incorporation 
of intelligence
The performance of an intelligent component may be fallible, 
leading to inappropriate interpretations or actions. Intelligent 
processing is often—though not inevitably—relatively diﬃcult 
for users to predict, understand, and control. If they rely on 
!6
Systems where the intelligence 
lies mainly behind the user 
interfaces and systems where the 
intelligence lies mainly in the 
user interfaces are in the focus. 

3 Oct 2015
relatively extensive information about the users, intelligent 
systems may raise certain types of privacy and security risks. 
An increased ability of a 
system to take over tasks 
that normally require 
thought and judgment can 
limit the breadth of 
experience and the 
responsibility of users.
How can we understand 
users’ requirements for 
intelligent support in a 
particular context when the 
potential users have little 
idea of what sort of 
intelligent support is 
currently feasible?
How can we design an 
evaluation of a system that comprises measures of the 
performance of the intelligent algorithms, observations of 
users’ behaviour, and the interpretation of users’ subjective 
reactions?
There is a growing interest in and importance of IUI to answer 
these questions; and familiar examples of concrete suggestions 
and solutions include information retrieval systems that 
employ forms of intelligent processing, product recommender 
systems for e-commerce, telephone-based spoken dialogue 
systems; and household robots. No longer viewed as only 
embodying “artiﬁcial intelligence”, there are also AI 
companions, i.e.,  (anthropomorphic)  agents, and animated 
computer agents. See, for example:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IhVu2hxm07E 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MaTfzYDZG8c
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ySljCcnq4o
Other IUI solutions are often more application-speciﬁc and 
sometimes also more lightweight.
!7

3 Oct 2015
Architecture of intelligent user 
interfaces
for implementing IUI’s core areas: input analysis, output 
generation, user- and discourse-adapted interaction, agent-
based interaction, model-based interface design, and intelligent 
interface evaluation. A given system may involve intelligence on 
more than one level. For example, an AI-based game may oﬀer 
multimodal 
interaction with the 
user as well as 
intelligent game 
playing on the part of 
the game’s characters. 
More complex 
architectures are 
needed to account for 
such a complex 
behaviour; often they 
take users models, 
discourse models, 
domain models, and 
task models, and 
media models into 
account. In addition, 
the input processing features a comprehensive media analysis 
competency and automated media analysis, design, and 
interaction management. Also, speciﬁc user modelling 
approaches (Kobsa and Wahlster 89, Horvitz 97) and planning 
approaches (Allen and Hendler 90) can have a major role to 
play.  The analysis of input is based on multimodal input (e.g., 
spoken, typed, and hand written language; gestures, including 
hand, eye, and body states and motion). The generation 
(planning or realisation according to, e.g., user models)  is the 
step that co-ordinates the output which is presented to the 
user. 
It can be said that the modelling of the user, discourse, task, 
and situation and interaction management, including possible 
tailoring of interaction to the user, task, and/or situation, is the 
main groundwork and enabler for adaptive and adaptable 
user interfaces.  
!8

3 Oct 2015
An important additional  
source of information for new 
mixed reality interfaces is the 
new handbook on multimodal 
user interfaces by Oviatt and 
Cohen, “The Paradigm Shift 
to Multimodality.” This book 
is based on the theory of 
multimodal interaction, where 
AI is the basis for multimodal 
interaction in IUIs and 
explains the foundation of 
human-centred multimodal 
interaction and interface 
design, based on the cognitive 
and neurosciences, as well as 
the major beneﬁts of multimodal interfaces for human 
cognition and performance. It describes the data-intensive 
methodologies used to envision, prototype, and evaluate new 
multi-modal interfaces. From a system 
development viewpoint, this book outlines 
major approaches for multimodal signal 
processing, fusion, architectures, and 
techniques for robustly interpreting users’ 
meaning. The ISMAR community beneﬁts 
most from a detailed review of techniques 
for robustly interpreting users’ meaning 
from multiple input sources. This 
knowledge will help in making mixed reality 
reality interface more responsive in the 
future by automatically interpreting 
multimodal input in real-time and providing  
mixed reality visualisations in real-time. 
In addition, the Intelligent User Interfaces 
department at DFKI develops the basics 
for multi-modal human-computer 
interaction and personalised dialogue 
systems integrating speech, gestures, and 
facial expressions with physical interaction. In this process, 
user, task, and domain models are used to design dialogue 
patterns that are as natural and robust as possible—even in 
group discussions or loud environments. 
!9

3 Oct 2015
For example, by integrating virtual characters, even emotions 
and socially interactive behaviour can be achieved as an output 
(in addition to the multimodal input fusion aspect that 
includes emotion processing in the sense of human computing). 
A major focus lies mobile user interfaces to location-based and 
context-sensitive services especially for speciﬁc application 
domains such as medicine. In addition to the intuitive access to 
the Internet of Services and Things in the context of the 
semantic web, the DFKI department also studies barrier-free 
access to instrumented environments and networked worlds for 
seniors. Signiﬁcant for this kind of IUI research and the DFKI 
department is the interdisciplinary method of operation 
especially the cooperation of computer scientists with 
computational linguists and cognitive psychologists, as well as 
the empirical and ergonomic evaluation of spoken dialogue 
systems and multimodal user interfaces.
The research programme 
THESEUS of the Federal 
Ministry of Economics and 
Technology aimed at 
developing a new internet 
based knowledge 
infrastructure in order to 
better deploy and make use 
of the information contained 
on the internet. In the 
context of innovative basic 
technologies, the DFKI 
intelligent user interface 
research department has 
been responsible for the 
work package “situation-
aware dialogue shell” in which multimodal interfaces for 
dialogue interaction between man and machine are being 
implemented. Thus, users can formulate their questions 
intuitively and reﬁne them during the dialogue with the system. 
DFKI’s main publication within the research pre-project 
SmatyWeb is the book “Ontologies and Adaptivity in Dialogue 
for Question Answering”, see http://www.d&i.de/~sonntag/
Ontologies_and_Adaptivity_in_Dialogue_for_Question_Answe
ring.html. The appeal of being able to ask a question to a 
mobile internet terminal and receive an answer immediately 
has been renewed by the broad availability of information on 
!10

3 Oct 2015
the Web. Ideally, a spoken dialogue system that uses the Web as 
its knowledge base would be able to answer a broad range of 
questions. A new generation of natural language dialogue 
systems is emerging that transforms traditional keyword search 
engines into semantic answering machines by providing exact 
and concise answers formulated in natural language instead of 
today’s long lists of document references, which the user has to 
check by himself for relevant answers.
This book presents the anatomy of the fully operational 
SmartWeb system (funded by the German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research with grants totaling 14 million euros) 
that provides not only an open-domain question answering 
machine but a multimodal web service interface for coherent 
dialogue, where questions and commands are interpreted 
according to the context of the previous conversation. One of 
the key IUI innovations described in this book is the ability of 
the system to learn how to predict the probability that it can 
answer a complex user query in a given time interval.
Within the use case THESEUS TEXO researchers then 
developed an infrastructure for new web-based cross-company 
services that rely on Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). In 
this context the IUI research department creates a mobile, 
multimodal interface for the access to Business Webs.
In addition, the Innovation Alliance Digital Product Memory, 
being part of the promotion programme IKT2020, has 
researched on the semantic interoperability of diﬀerent 
product memories for ubiquitous, multimodal access to Digital 
Product Memories with partners from the ﬁelds of research, 
trade, logistics, the pharmaceutical industry and automobile 
industry - lead by our research department. Work on the 
development of open standards is actively continued in the 
W3C Object Memory Modelling Incubator Group . SemProM 
has developed the basics for the next generation of mobile, 
embedded and function-based elements for the semantic 
internet communication between everyday objects. Thereby, 
capacities of such “intelligent” products go far beyond the mere 
identiﬁcation function of current RFID labelling. They are 
!11
Eye Tracking has many 
applications in active or passive 
mode.  

3 Oct 2015
able to evaluate data of diﬀerent embedded sensors (e.g., 
temperature, lights, humidity, speed, 
acceleration, position) and to register all 
relevant product and process data at the 
same time. In terms of the “Internet of 
Things” this information can be actively 
exchanged with their environment, users 
and others products. Internet of Things is 
mainly about connected devices embedded 
in our everyday environment. Typically, 
’interaction’ in the context of IoT means 
interfaces which allow people to either 
monitor or conﬁgure IoT devices. Some 
examples include mobile applications and 
embedded touch screens for control of 
various functions (e.g., heating, lights, and energy eﬃciency) in 
environments such as homes and oﬃces. In some cases, 
humans are an explicit part of the scenario, such as in those 
cases where people are monitored (e.g., children and elderly) by 
IoT devices. Interaction in such applications is still quite 
straightforward, mainly consisting of traditional graphical 
interfaces, which often leads to clumsy co-existence of human 
and IoT devices. Thus, there is a need to investigate what kinds 
of interaction techniques could provide IoT to be more human 
oriented, what is the role of automation and interaction, and 
how human originated data can be used in IoT.
The joint project RES-COM (resource conservation by 
context-activated machine-to-machine communication) will 
play an important role towards resource-conserving production 
and service oﬀerings in the context of recommendations 
presented by the German Industry-Science Research Alliance 
concerning the project Industry 4.0 for the future. 
We follow up on these so-called carrier projects in the EIT 
Digital framework, where one of the light-house project is 
called “Cyber-physical Systems for Smart Factories”. This 
H2020 project of the European communion (project lead 
Daniel Sonntag, DFKI) combines Industry 4.0 technology 
with intelligent user interface technology for human-robot 
collaboration.  See http://d&i.de/smartfactories/.
The over-arching challenge to address is to combine CPS safety 
and performance. While addressing safety challenges, the 
outcomes include models of the behaviour of loops with 
!12

3 Oct 2015
human operators, in particular how to ensure safety. Because 
humans are unpredictable, a special outcome is a model which 
account for humans as producing anomalies by reacting to 
predictable maintenance tasks and unpredictable events.
Technical advancements:
• GPU-based deep learning machine learning infrastructure 
for anomaly treatment and data mining
• RFID based product memory infrastructure
• Smart factories knowledge portal infrastructure for an 
anomaly instance base (knowledge management)
• Model based prediction with anomaly detection followed by 
machine learning and real time veriﬁcation
• Intelligent user interfaces for expert knowledge 
acquisition, human behaviour input and human-robot 
interaction by using, e.g., vision sensors.
These components are built into an architecture and are to be 
extended with the characterisation of a human collaborator 
who is also “in the loop” and may also exhibit anomalous 
behaviour. Cyber-physical systems are implemented in human 
 
!13

3 Oct 2015
!14
Wahlster W (1998) Intelligent User Interfaces: An Introduction. In Maybury, 
Wahlster: Readings in Intelligent User Interfaces
INTRODUCTION 
Intelligent User 
Interfaces: 
An Introduction 
This introduction describes the need for intelligent 
user interfaces (IUIs), specifies the intended purpose 
and use of this collection, outlines the collection's 
scope, and defines basic terminology used in the field. 
After outlining the theoretical foundations of intelli-
gent user interfaces, this introductory section describes 
the current state of the art and summarizes the struc-
ture and contents of this collection, which addresses 
some remaining fundamental problems in the field. 
1. MOTIVATION 
The explosion of available materials on corporate, 
national, and global information networks is driving 
the need for more effective, efficient, and natural inter-
faces to support access to information, applications, 
and people. This is exacerbated by the increasing com-
plexity of systems, the shrinking of task time lines, and 
the need to reduce the cost of application and interface 
development. Fortunately, the basic infrastructure for 
advanced multimedia user interfaces is rapidly appear-
ing or already available. In addition to traditional pub-
lic telephone networks, cable, fiber-optic, wireless and 
satellite communications are rapidly evolving with the 
aim of serving many simultaneous users through a 
great variety of multimedia communications (e.g., 
video, audio, text, data). Rapidly advancing micro-
processor and storage capabilities, coupled with multi-
media input and output devices integrated into work- 
stations and portable machines, provide a dizzying 
array of potential for personal and personalized multi-
media interaction. 
Interface technology has advanced from initial 
command line interfaces to the established use of 
direct manipulation or WIMP (windows, icons, menus, 
and pointing) interfaces in nearly all applications. 
Even some of the first computing systems incorporated 
graphical displays and light pens as pointing devices 
(Everett et al. 1957). The next generation of interfaces, 
often called "intelligent," will provide a number of 
additional benefits to users, including adaptivity, con-
text sensitivity, and task assistance. As with traditional 
interfaces, principled intelligent interfaces should be 
learnable, usable, and transparent. In contrast, howev-
er, intelligent user interfaces promise to provide addi-
tional benefits to users that can enhance interaction, 
such as: 
• Comprehension of possibly imprecise, ambigu- 
ous, and/or partial multimodal input 
• Generation of coordinated, cohesive, and coher- 
ent multimodal presentations 
• Semi- or fully automated completion of dele 
gated tasks 
• Management of the interaction (e.g., task comple- 
tion, tailoring interaction styles, adapting the 
interface) by representing, reasoning, and exploit- 
ing models of the user, domain, task, and context 
 
In: RUIU, San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998, pp. 1- 13.
http://www.d&i.de/wwdata/Publications/
Introduction_to_intelligent_User_Interfaces.pdf

3 Oct 2015
!15
Lieberman H (2009) User interface goals, AI opportunities.                  
AI Mag 30(4):16–22
Articles
Is AI antithetical to good user interface design? From the ear-
liest times in the development of computers, activities in
human-computer interaction (HCI) and AI have been inter-
twined. But as subﬁelds of computer science, HCI and AI have
always had a love-hate relationship. The goal of HCI is to make
computers easier to use and more helpful to their users. The goal
of artiﬁcial intelligence is to model human thinking and to
embody those mechanisms in computers. How are these goals
related?
Some in HCI have seen these goals sometimes in opposition.
They worry that the heuristic nature of many AI algorithms will
lead to unreliability in the interface. They worry that AI’s
emphasis on mimicking human decision-making functions
might usurp the decision-making prerogative of the human
user. 
These concerns are not completely without merit. There are
certainly many examples of failed attempts to prematurely foist
AI on the public. These attempts gave AI a bad name, at least at
the time. 
But so too have there been failed attempts to popularize new
HCI approaches. The ﬁrst commercial versions of window sys-
tems, such as the Xerox Star and early versions of Microsoft
Windows, weren’t well accepted at the time of their introduc-
tion. Later design iterations of window systems, such as the
Macintosh and Windows 3.0, ﬁnally achieved success. Key was
that these early failures did not lead their developers to con-
clude window systems were a bad idea. Researchers shouldn’t
construe these (perceived) AI failures as a refutation of the idea
of AI in interfaces. 
Modern PDA, smartphone, and tablet computers are now
beginning to have quite usable handwriting recognition. Voice
recognition is being increasingly employed on phones, and
even in the noisy environment of cars. Animated agents, more
polite, less intrusive, and better thought out, might also make a
Copyright © 2009, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. All rights reserved. ISSN 0738-4602
User Interface Goals, 
AI Opportunities
Henry Lieberman
■This is an opinion piece about the relation-
ship between the fields of human-computer
interaction (HCI) and artificial intelligence
(AI). The ultimate goal of both fields is to make
user interfaces more effective and easier for peo-
ple to use. But historically, researchers have dis-
agreed about whether “intelligence” or “direct
manipulation” is the better route to achieving
this. There is an unjustified perception in HCI
that AI is unreliable. There is an unjustified
perception in AI that interfaces are merely cos-
metic. This disagreement is counterproductive. 
This article argues that AI’s goals of intelli-
gent interfaces would benefit enormously by the
user-centered design and testing principles of
HCI. It argues that HCI’s stated goals of meet-
ing the needs of users and interacting in natu-
ral ways would be best served by application of
AI. Peace. 
16
AI MAGAZINE
www.media.mit.edu/~lieber/Publications/UI-
Goals-AI-Opportunities.pdf

3 Oct 2015
!16
Oviatt S (1999) Ten myths of multimodal interaction.                        
Commun ACM 42(11):74–81 
74
November 1999/Vol. 42, No. 11 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
Multimodal systems process combined natural input modes—such as
speech, pen, touch, hand gestures, eye gaze, and head and body movements—in
a coordinated manner with multimedia system output. These systems represent a new direction for com-
puting that draws from novel input and output technologies currently becoming available. Since the appear-
ance of Bolt’s [1] “Put That There” demonstration system, which processed speech in parallel with manual
pointing, a variety of multimodal systems has emerged. Some rudimentary ones process speech combined
with mouse pointing, such as the early CUBRICON system [8]. Others recognize speech while determin-
ing the location of pointing from users’ manual gestures or gaze [5].
Moving from traditional interfaces toward 
interfaces offering users greater expressive power,
naturalness, and portability.
Recent multimodal systems now recognize a
broader range of signal integrations, which are no
longer limited to the simple point-and-speak combi-
nations handled by earlier systems. For example, the
Quickset system integrates speech with pen input that
includes drawn graphics, symbols, gestures, and
pointing. It uses a semantic unification process to
combine the meaningful multimodal information
carried by two input signals, both of which are rich
and multidimensional. Quickset also uses a multi-
agent architecture and runs on a handheld PC [3]. 
Figure 1 illustrates Quickset’s response to the multi-
modal command “Airstrips... facing this way, facing
this way, and facing this way,” which was spoken
while the user drew arrows placing three airstrips in
correct orientation on a map.
Multimodal systems represent a research-level par-
adigm shift away from conventional windows-icons-
menus-pointers (WIMP) interfaces toward providing
users with greater expressive power, naturalness, flexi-
bility, and portability. Well-designed multimodal sys-
tems integrate complementary modalities to yield a
highly synergistic blend in which the strengths of each
mode are capitalized upon and used to overcome
weaknesses in the other. Such systems potentially can
function more robustly than unimodal systems that
involve a single recognition-based technology such as
speech, pen, or vision.
Sharon Oviatt
Ten Myths of
Multimodal
Interaction
http://www.researchgate.net/publication/
27296705_Ten_Myths_of_Multimodal_Interaction

3 Oct 2015
!17
Sonntag, D (2012) Collaborative Multimodality, KI - German Journal on 
Artificial Intelligence 26 (2):161–168
DOI 10.1007/s13218 012 0169 4
FACHBEITRAG
Collaborative Multimodality
Daniel Sonntag
Received: 9 August 2011 / Accepted: 19 January 2012
© Springer-Verlag 2012
Abstract This essay is a personal reﬂection from an Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) perspective on the term HCI. Espe-
cially for the transfer of AI-based HCI into industrial envi-
ronments, we survey existing approaches and examine how
AI helps to solve fundamental problems of HCI technology.
The user and the system must have a collaborative goal. The
concept of collaborative multimodality could serve as the
missing link between traditional HCI and intuitive human-
centred designs in the form of, e.g., natural language inter-
faces or intelligent environments. Examples are provided in
the medical imaging domain.
Keywords AI methods · Multimodal interaction ·
Dialogue systems · Collaboration
1 Introduction
The term Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) confuses
some researchers and practitioners. Many think of HCI as
including diverse areas of traditional graphical and web user
interfaces, others rather think of new multimodal input and
output devices, tangible user interfaces, virtual and aug-
mented reality, intelligent environments, and/or interfaces
in the ubiquitous computing paradigm. Whereas the sup-
porters of the traditional HCI view have a strong motivation
and justiﬁcation in the desktop-based ubiquitousness of tra-
ditional computer terminals with computer screens, psycho-
logical analysis background, and integral evaluation meth-
ods, the new AI-based technologies can impress with intu-
D. Sonntag (!)
German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3,
66123 Saarbruecken, Germany

itive human-centred designs. (It should be noted that human-
centred designs do not necessarily improve the usability of
an HCI, especially in industrial environments.)
HCI is the business of designing user interfaces that peo-
ple can work well with. Hence, it is an area of research,
design, and application, which combines all the aforemen-
tioned diverse areas. There is a great variety in these partly
overlapping areas which are all involved in this business.
In this article, the ﬁrst goal is to give an overview of the
AI-based HCI techniques which include multimodal interac-
tion. We think that in the future, AI will have a great inﬂu-
ence on multimodal interaction systems. Therefore, we will
begin by articulating the key issues of the concept of multi-
modal interfaces in the sense of a combination of traditional,
screen-based HCI techniques and interfaces with new (mo-
bile) multimodal input and output devices and interaction
forms. Goebel and Williams have commented on the goal
to stitch together the breadth of disciplines impinging on AI
[8]; following their idea, we try to stitch together the breadth
of disciplines impinging on AI-based multimodal HCI. For
this purpose, we will introduce the notion of collaborative
multimodality, which could serve as the missing link be-
tween traditional HCI and intuitive human-centred designs.
The second goal is to give a summary of the various dif-
ferent approaches taken by ourselves and other participants
in the research ﬁeld of multimodal dialogue-based HCI for
prototyping industry-relevant applications of intelligent user
interfaces (IUIs). We think that collaborative multimodal-
ity as introduced here represents one of the major usability
requirements. AI methods such as sensory input interpre-
tation and explicit models of the discourse of the interac-
tion and the domain of interest are employed to create an
argument in favour of the hypothesis that the emergence
of a complex, collaborative multimodal behaviour is what
best describes an intelligent user interface. To prove this,
www.d&i.de/~sonntag/collaborative-
multimodality.pdf

3 Oct 2015
!18
Kognit: Intelligent Cognitive Enhancement Technology by Cognitive Models and
Mixed Reality for Dementia Patients
Daniel Sonntag
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3
Saarbruecken, Germany
Abstract
With advancements in technology, smartphones can already
serve as memory aids. Electronic calendars are of great use in
time-based memory tasks. In this project, we enter the mixed
reality realm for helping dementia patients. Dementia is a
general term for a decline in mental ability severe enough
to interfere with daily life. Memory loss is an example. Here,
mixed reality refers to the merging of real and virtual worlds
to produce new episodic memory visualisations where phys-
ical and digital objects co-exist and interact in real-time.
Cognitive models are approximations of a patient’s mental
abilities and limitations involving conscious mental activi-
ties (such as thinking, understanding, learning, and remem-
bering). External representations of episodic memory help
patients and caregivers coordinate their actions with one an-
other. We advocate distributed cognition, which involves the
coordination between individuals, artefacts and the environ-
ment, in four main implementations of artiﬁcial intelligence
technology in the Kognit storyboard: (1) speech dialogue and
episodic memory retrieval; (2) monitoring medication man-
agement and tracking an elder’s behaviour (e.g., drinking wa-
ter); (3) eye tracking and modelling cognitive abilities; and
(4) serious game development towards active memory train-
ing. We discuss the storyboard, use cases and usage scenar-
ios, and some implementation details of cognitive models and
mixed reality hardware for the patient. The purpose of future
studies is to determine the extent to which cognitive enhance-
ment technology can be used to decrease caregiver burden.
Introduction
Dementia is a mental disorder that is associated with a pro-
gressive decline in mental functions and abilities. Memory,
thinking, language, understanding, and judgement are af-
fected. While many older adults will remain healthy and pro-
ductive, overall this segment of the population is subject to
cognitive impairment at higher rates than younger people.
There are two important directions of research: the use of AI
to elders with dementia and the design of advanced assistive
technology. We combine those two to form a new research
ﬁeld: intelligent cognitive enhancement technology. Cogni-
tive assistance can be characterised as therapeutic, aimed at
correcting a speciﬁc pathology or defect. Some of our im-
plementations fall into this category. Enhancement however
Copyright c⃝2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
is an intervention that improves a subsystem in some way
other than repairing something that is broken or dysfunc-
tioning. This is of particular interest because new intelligent
user interfaces in the form of vision-based wearable devices
give patients, and humans in general, new effective cognitive
abilities (most notably in the area of information retrieval.)
”In practice, the distinction between therapy and enhance-
ment is often difﬁcult to discern, and it could be argued
that it lacks practical signiﬁcance.” (Bostrom and Sandberg
2009)
Intelligent cognitive assistance and enhancement tech-
nologies may enable older adults to live independently for
longer periods of time. In 2014, the Alzheimer’s Association
documented that approximately 10-20% of the population
over 65 years of age suffer from mild cognitive impairment
(MCI); in 2013, Americans provided billion hours of unpaid
care to people with Alzheimer’s disease and other demen-
tias.1
The envisioned beneﬁt is to improve independent and
self-determined living. As institutionalisation has an enor-
mous ﬁnancial cost, intelligent cognitive enhancement tech-
nologies may also help to reduce healthcare system costs,
while at the same time provide relief and more time for
caregivers and family members. In Kognit, we focus on new
computer-based technologies on the horizon that offer help
for patients directly by supporting an independent and self-
determined living and, indirectly, in the caregiving of de-
mentia patients, to provide relief and more time for family
members. Cognitive models and mixed reality should result
in new cognitive enhancement technology (ﬁgure 1).
Our research about cognitive enhancement technology
is supported by a number of clinical research and related
works about memories of daily life activities, a design case
study for Alzheimer’s disease (Cohene et al. 2007), real-
ity orientation for geriatric patients (Taulbee, Lucille R and
Folsom, James C 1966), using validation techniques with
people living with dementia, computer based technology
and caring for older adults (Spry Foundation 2003), and
non-pharmaceutical treatment options for dementia (Dou-
glas, James, and Ballard 2004). The focus is on cognitive
assistants (Cogs) interfaces that include sensor interpreta-
tion, activity recognition, pro-active episodic memory, and
1See http://www.alz.org/downloads/facts ﬁgures 2014.pdf
Sonntag, D (2015) Kognit: Intelligent Cognitive Enhancement Technology 
by Cognitive Models and Mixed Reality for Dementia Patients, AAAI  

3 Oct 2015
environments! This represents a new  "cyber-physical" form of 
IUIs. The software/hardware outcome package consists of 
anomaly controllers for smart factories. We focus on both open 
and closed-loop controllers in the robot domain and reporting/
maintenance domain in manufacturing. Similar medical CPS 
examples with multimodal interaction have been implemented 
in ERmed, see http://www.d&i.de/RadSpeech/ERmed. 
The four 
introductory Papers 
for IUI—and one 
recent application 
paper—-you have 
just seen should 
provide you with a 
additional 
information on the 
theoretical 
foundations of 
intelligent user 
interfaces, this 
introductory section 
describes the current 
state of the art. A 
number of resources 
for teachers, 
students, and researchers contain additional information about 
this subject area. Some of these selected resources can be  
found in the last section of this tutorial text.  
!19

3 Oct 2015
How to read an IUI research 
paper
Reading IUI research papers eﬀectively is challenging. These 
papers are often written in a very condensed style because of 
page limitations and the intended audience, which is assumed 
to already know the area well. Moreover, the reasons for 
writing the paper may be diﬀerent than the reasons the paper 
has been assigned, meaning you have to work harder to ﬁnd the 
content that you are interested in.
The ﬁrst thing to understand is that the research papers you 
will read have been published in diﬀerent kinds of places. Some 
papers have been published in the proceedings of a conference, 
for example at IUI, a SIGART / SIGCHI conference 
submission.
These papers have been peer-reviewed but are typically strictly 
limited in length to about 10-12 pages. Other papers have been 
published in archival journals, such as TiiS. These papers have 
also been peer-reviewed but there are typically not any length 
restrictions, so they generally include more detail in every 
dimension. Some papers are technical reports. These are not 
peer-reviewed. In areas related to Computer Science, you may 
ﬁnd that there is ﬁrst a technical report version which is then 
later published in a conference or a journal. If a paper appears 
both in conference and journal form, the journal version is 
typically a later, expanded and revised version of the work. 
To develop an eﬀective reading style for research papers, it can 
help to know what you should get out of the paper, and where 
that information is located in the paper. Typically, the 
introduction will state not only the motivations behind the 
work, but also outline the solution. Often this may be all the 
expert requires from the paper. The body of the paper states 
the authors' solution to the problem in detail, and should also 
describe a detailed evaluation of the solution in terms of 
arguments or an empirical evaluation (case study, experiment, 
etc.). Finally, the paper will conclude with a recap, including a 
discussion of the primary contributions. A paper will also 
discuss related work to some degree. 
!20

3 Oct 2015
The questions you want to have answered by reading a paper in 
order to communicate eﬀectively in a professional environment 
& work in IUI group projects, review and evaluate IUIs (to a 
certain extend), recognise the need to keep up to date with 
developments in IUI, participate professionally in industrial 
research and development (after taking related information 
science courses) are the following: 
What are motivations for this work? For a research paper, 
there is an expectation that a solution to a problem has been 
found that no one else has published in the literature. The 
paper should describe why the problem is important and why it 
does not have a trivial solution; that is, why a new solution may 
be required. Implicitly there is implication that previous 
solutions to the problem are inadequate. Occasionally an 
author will fail to state either point, making your job much 
more diﬃcult. 
What is the proposed solution? This is also called the 
hypothesis or idea. There should also be an argument about 
why the solution solves the problem better than previous 
solutions. There should also be a discussion about how the 
solution is achieved (designed and implemented) or is at least 
achievable.
How is the proposed solution evaluated? An idea alone is 
usually not adequate for publication of a research paper. What 
argument and/or experiment is made to make a case for the 
value of the ideas? What beneﬁts or problems are identiﬁed? 
Are they convincing? 
How does the proposed solution relate to other 
proposed solutions? If this is an important problem, other 
researchers have probably also tried to solve it. How do the 
alternative approaches compare to this one? Has this work 
already been done? Don't limit yourself to the related work 
references cited by the authors. 
What are the contributions? The contributions in a paper 
may be many and varied. Ideas, software, experimental 
techniques, and area survey are a few key possibilities. 
What are future directions for this research? Not only 
what future directions do the authors identify, but what ideas 
did you come up with while reading the paper?
!21

3 Oct 2015
Research Paper Reading List
More conceptual 
1
Wahlster W (1998) Intelligent User Interfaces: 
An Introduction. In Maybury, Wahlster: Readings in 
Intelligent User Interfaces
2
Lieberman H (2009) User interface goals, AI 
opportunities. AI Mag 30(4):16–22
3
Horvitz E (1999) Uncertainty, action, and 
interaction: In pursuit of mixed-initiative computing. IEEE 
Intell Syst 14:17–20
4
Maybury MT, Stock O, Wahlster W (2006) 
Intelligent interactive entertainment grand challenges. In: Proc 
of IEEE intelligent systems pp. 14–18
5
Rich C, Sidner CL, Lesh N (2001) Collagen: 
applying collaborative discourse theory to human-computer 
interaction. AI Mag 22(4):15–26
6
Oviatt S (1999) Ten myths of multimodal 
interaction. Commun ACM 42(11):74–81 
7
Sonntag, D (2012) Collaborative Multimodality, 
KI - German Journal on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 26 (2):161–168
8
McGuiness, D. (2004) Question Answering on 
the Semantic Web,  IEEE Intelligent Systems 19(1):82–85
9
Lieberman H, Liu H, Singh P, Barry B 
(2004), Beating common sense into interactive applications, AI 
Magazine 25(4):63–76. AAAI Press.
10
Horvitz E, Kadie C, Paek T, and Hovel D 
(2003) Models of attention in computing and communication: 
from principles to applications. Commun. ACM 46, (3):52–59.
More technical  
1
Sarwar B, Karypis G, Konstan J, Riedl J 
(2001) Item-based collaborative ﬁltering recommendation 
algorithms. WWW 2001: 285-295
!22

3 Oct 2015
2
Gajos KZ, Wobbrock JO, Weld DS (2008) 
Improving the performance of motor-impaired users with 
automatically-generated, ability-based interfaces. In: 
Proceeding of SIGCHI (CHI ’08). ACM, New York, pp 1257–
1266 (Video)
3
Prasov Z, Chai J Y: What's in a in a gaze?: the 
role of eye-gaze in reference resolution in multimodal 
conversational interfaces. In Proceedings of the 13th 
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, IUI ’08, 
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2008), 20–29.
4
Parikh D, Kovashka A, Parkash A, and 
Grauman K: Relative attributes for enhanced human-machine 
communication. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
(2012). 
5
Toyama T, Kieninger T, Shafait F, and Dengel A: 
Gaze guided object recognition using a head-mounted eye 
tracker. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking 
Research and Applications, ETRA ’12, ACM (New York, NY, 
USA, 2012), 91–98.
6
Orlosky J, Kiyokawa K, and Takemura H: 
Dynamic text management for see-through wearable and 
heads-up display systems. In Proceedings of IUI ’13, pages 363–
370, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
7
Sonntag D,  Weber M, Hammon 
M, Cavallaro A, (forthcoming) Integrating Pens in Breast 
Imaging for Instant Knowledge Acquisition (extended version), 
AI Magazine, 2013
8
Mahmud J, Zhou M, Megiddo N, Nichols J, 
and Drews C (2013). Recommending targeted strangers from 
whom to solicit information on social media. In Proceedings of 
the 2013 international conference on Intelligent user interfaces 
(IUI '13). ACM
9
Liu Q, Liao C, Wilcox L, Dunnigan A, 
and Liew B (2010) Embedded media markers: marks on paper 
that signify associated media. In Proceedings of the 15th 
international conference on Intelligent “ser interfaces (IUI '10). 
ACM
10
Fader A, Soderland S, and Etzioni O (2011). 
Identifying relations for open information extraction. In 
!23

3 Oct 2015
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP '11), pages 1535–1545. 
(The NLP paper, backend technology)
11
Morency LP, Sidner C, Lee C, and Darrell T 
(2007) Head gestures for perceptual interfaces: The role of 
context in improving recognition. Artif. Intell. 171(8-9):568–585. 
(The ML paper)
12
Dinakar K, Jones B, Havasi C, Lieberman 
L, and Picard R (2012) Commonsense Reasoning for 
Detection, Prevention and Mitigation of 
Cyberbullying, Transactions on Intelligent Interactive Systems 
(ACM TiiS) 2(3): 1–30
13
Horvitz E, Breese J, Heckerman D, Hovel D, 
and Rommelse K (1998) The lumière project: Bayesian user 
modeling for inferring the goals and needs of software users. In 
Proceedings of the Fourteenth conference on Uncertainty in 
artiﬁcial intelligence (UAI'98), CA, USA, 256-265.
Books and Proceedings
A. Maybury, Wahlster: Readings in Intelligent User Interfaces, 
1998
B. Sonntag: Ontologies and Adaptivity in Dialogue for 
Question Answering, 2010
C. Russel, Norvig: Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
3rd Edition, 2010
D. Fogarty, Horvitz, Kapoor, Tan: Intelligence and Interaction, 
Workshop Proceedings, IJCAI 2009
E. Jameson, Spaulding, Yorke-Smith: Usable AI, AI Magazine, 
Volume 30, 2009
F. Rogers, Sharp, Preece: Interaction Design: Beyond Human-
Computer Interaction, 3rd edition, 2011
G. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial, 3rd Edition, 1996
!24
