arXiv:2001.05012v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jan 2020
1
PoPS: Policy Pruning and Shrinking for
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Dor Livne and Kobi Cohen
Abstract— The recent success of deep neural networks (DNNs)
for function approximation in reinforcement learning has trig-
gered the development of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
algorithms in various ﬁelds, such as robotics, computer games,
natural language processing, computer vision, sensing systems,
and wireless networking. Unfortunately, DNNs suffer from high
computational cost and memory consumption, which limits the
use of DRL algorithms in systems with limited hardware re-
sources.
In recent years, pruning algorithms have demonstrated consid-
erable success in reducing the redundancy of DNNs in classiﬁca-
tion tasks. However, existing algorithms suffer from a signiﬁcant
performance reduction in the DRL domain. In this paper, we
develop the ﬁrst effective solution to the performance reduction
problem of pruning in the DRL domain, and establish a working
algorithm, named Policy Pruning and Shrinking (PoPS), to train
DRL models with strong performance while achieving a compact
representation of the DNN. The framework is based on a novel
iterative policy pruning and shrinking method that leverages the
power of transfer learning when training the DRL model. We
present an extensive experimental study that demonstrates the
strong performance of PoPS using the popular Cartpole, Lunar
Lander, Pong, and Pacman environments. Finally, we develop an
open source software for the beneﬁt of researchers and developers
in related ﬁelds.
keywords—Deep reinforcement learning, deep neural net-
work, pruning algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have at-
tracted much attention in recent years due to their capability
to provide a good approximation of the objective value in
decision making tasks while dealing with very large state and
action spaces. In contrast to classic reinforcement learning
methods that perform well for small-size models but perform
poorly for large-scale models, DRL combines a deep neural
network (DNN) with reinforcement learning for overcoming
this issue. The DNN is used to map from states to actions
in large-scale models so as to yield a policy that maximizes
the objective value. In DeepMind’s recently published Nature
paper [1], [2], a DRL algorithm was developed to teach
computers how to play Atari games directly from the on-screen
© 2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Dor Livne and Kobi Cohen are with the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 8410501 Israel.

This work was supported in part by the U.S.-Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF) under grant 2017723, and by the Cyber Security Research
Center at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev under grant 076/16.
pixels, and strong performance was demonstrated in many
tested games. In recent years, there is a growing attention of
using DRL methods in various ﬁelds, such as robotics, natural
language processing, computer vision, sensing systems, and
wireless networking. A survey of recent studies can be found
in [3].
The superior performance of DRL algorithms in decision
making tasks has triggered the need to make them practically
appealing when using cheap hardware devices. For example,
industrialization of artiﬁcially intelligent engines in controlled
manufacturing processes often requires small and cheap sens-
ing devices to detect and respond to events. Another example
is automatizing users in wireless communication and Internet
of Things (IoT) systems which often consist of low power,
computationally limited and battery constrained nodes.
This issue has been recognized by the industry, and there
are more and more players in the market that develop chips for
low-power devices that support computationally intensive deep
learning algorithms with low-power consumption. Prominent
examples are Qualcomm Artiﬁcial Intelligence Engine, Intel’s
EyeQ family of system-on-chip (SoC) devices, Intel’s Myriad
2 family, NXP’s ADAS chip, and more. Along with these
industrial developments, establishing fundamental algorithmic
methods to reduce the size of DRL models is crucial for
making them practically appealing for a wide range of ap-
plications that use systems with limited hardware resources.
This challenge has triggered a new and fascinating research
direction: How to train DRL models with strong performance
while achieving compact representations of the DNNs? In this
paper we address this issue.
A. Contributions
In recent years, pruning algorithms have demonstrated con-
siderable success in reducing the redundancy of DNNs in
classiﬁcation tasks (see related work in Section I-B). The basic
idea is to remove low-ranked neurons from the DNN which
are redundant and do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the output,
resulting in a sparse DNN with a small number of non-zero
parameters and faster operations. Pruning DNN is an iterative
process, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The popular vanilla version
works as follows [4]. The ﬁrst step is to train the model. Then,
the algorithm enters an iterative process. At each iteration,
the algorithm prunes the low-ranked connections with weights
below a certain threshold. Then, it ﬁne-tunes the model to
recuperate from the pruning procedure. Eventually, the pruning
procedure generates a sparse DNN, which is tractable for
hardware implementations [5].
Despite the success of pruning methods in classiﬁcation
tasks, they suffer from a signiﬁcant performance reduction

2
Fig. 1.
An illustration of the pruning procedure. The ﬁrst step is to train
the model, the second is to prune it, and the last is to ﬁne-tune the pruned
model. The algorithm iterates the last two steps.
in the DRL domain. There exist a number of recent stud-
ies that developed a DRL framework to guide the pruning
process of a DNN [6], [7]. However, those methods did not
address the problem of training a DRL model with a compact
representation as we consider here. The objective in [6], [7]
was to train DNNs with a compact representation used in
classiﬁcation tasks (and not in the DRL domain). The pruning
actions were guided by a trained non-compact DRL model.
In this paper, we develop the ﬁrst effective solution to the
performance reduction problem of pruning in the DRL domain,
and establish an algorithm that achieves the state-of-the-art
results in terms of training DRL models with strong required
performance while minimizing the size of the DNN in the DRL
domain. Speciﬁcally, our contributions are summarized below:
1) Developing a novel Policy Pruning and Shrinking
(PoPS) algorithm for training DRL models: In the DRL
domain, the goal of an agent is to learn a policy, which is a
mapping from a state to an action. Thus, the objective value
at each state-action pair is not given as in supervised learning,
but need to be learned online by exploring actions. Therefore,
the agent faces the well known exploration versus exploitation
dilemma. On the one hand, the agent should explore all actions
in order to ﬁgure out their inﬂuence on the objective function.
On the other hand, it should exploit the information gathered
so far to choose the best actions. Existing pruning techniques
do not operate well in the DRL domain since the ground truth
is not given. Therefore, they must explore the state space in
order to recuperate from the pruning procedure by interacting
with the environment. This leads to a signiﬁcant instability in
the pruning procedure and increases the performance loss. As
a result, when implementing pruning in the DRL domain, our
algorithm must guard against losing a signiﬁcant information
regarding the optimal policy. Once the algorithm has this
ability, it can detect redundancy in the DRL model, and train
a regenerated shrunk dense model with strong performance.
Building upon this insight, we develop the ﬁrst effective
solution to the performance reduction problem of pruning in
the DRL domain. Speciﬁcally we establish a novel Policy
Pruning and Shrinking (PoPS) algorithm to train DRL models
with strong performance while achieving a compact represen-
tation of the DNN. PoPS executes an iterative procedure using
three main steps to achieve this goal. In the ﬁrst step, PoPS
leverages the power of transfer learning to capture the full
information regarding the desired policy. Speciﬁcally, PoPS
trains a teacher network using a large-scale DRL model to
yield a policy that maximizes the objective function without
pruning. In the second step, PoPS executes a novel transfer
learning-based policy pruning procedure, which is controlled
by the teacher, to ﬁnd an efﬁcient pruned representation of the
model. The policy pruning step avoids the direct interaction
with the environment when implementing pruning in the DRL
domain. Since the teacher that controls the pruning process has
already explored and exploited actions successfully, the ﬁne
tuning step has the ability to remove redundancy iteratively
without the need of exploring actions which are less likely to
contribute signiﬁcantly to the objective function. In the third
step, namely the policy shrinking step, PoPS regenerates and
trains a newly-constructed smaller dense model based on the
redundancy measured by the policy pruning procedure. The
policy pruning and policy shrinking steps are repeated until
the algorithm can no longer detect any redundancy. A detailed
description of PoPS algorithm is given in Section III.
2) Open source software: We developed an open source
software implementation of the PoPS algorithm. PoPS was
developed using Python and is available at GitHub (see
link in [8]). The open source software is built in an object
oriented programming fashion which makes it easy to adjust to
different environments and model settings. Our experimental
study demonstrates the versatility of the software in four
different challenging environments, as detailed in the next
paragraph. We encourage the use of the open source software
by researchers and developers in related ﬁelds.
3) Achieving the state-of-the-art performance in exten-
sive experimental study: We evaluated our framework using
four different challenging environments from the OpenAI
gym library [9], namely Cartpole, Lunar Lander, PONG,
and Pacman environments, associated with different model
architectures, namely deep Q-network (DQN) with a feed-
forward fully connected network, Actor-Critic network with
a feed-forward fully connected network, DQN with a Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN), and dueling DQN with CNN,
respectively. We compared PoPS with the commonly used
magnitude-based weight pruning [4] using the gradual pruning
framework [10], dubbed Magnitude-Base Gradual Pruning
(MBGP), which is known to achieve strong performance in
many DNN architectures, and the Knowledge Distillation-
Based Pruning (KDBP) algorithm which demonstrated im-
provements in the pruning procedure in various classiﬁcation
settings by using knowledge distillation when pruning DNNs
[11]. In all tested environments, PoPS generated a compact
representation of the DRL model with strong performance
and a size of less than 1% of the initial representation size.
By contrast, the MBGP and KDBP algorithms were not able
to reduce the size below 28% in the Cartpole environment,

3
68% in the Lunar Lander environemnt, 6% in the Pong
environment, and 8% in the Pacman environment, of the initial
representation size without signiﬁcantly degrading the agent’s
performance. The results obtained by PoPS present the state-
of-the-art performance in terms of training DRL models with
strong required performance while minimizing the size of the
DNN in the DRL domain.
B. Related Work
DRL algorithms have attracted much attention in recent
years due to their capability to provide a good approximation
of the objective value while dealing with very large state and
action spaces. In DeepMind’s recently published Nature paper
[2], a DRL algorithm was developed to teach computers how
to play Atari games directly from the on-screen pixels, and
reported strong performance in many games. In [12], strong
performance was found for several players in MNIST games
and the switch riddle. A Double Q-learning method has been
proposed in [13], where two DNNs simultaneously learn the
policy and value evaluation. A survey of recent studies can
be found in [3]. This recent success has triggered the need
to make DRL algorithms practically appealing when using
cheap hardware devices. This is particularly relevant for DRL
algorithms in sensing and inference systems (see [14]–[17] and
references therein), IoT, and wireless communication networks
[18]–[24], that often require to operate using low power,
computationally limited and battery constrained devices. The
proposed PoPS framework in this paper addresses this chal-
lenge.
DNNs are typically over-parameterized, i.e, there is a
signiﬁcant redundancy in deep learning models [25]. This
redundancy leads to a waste of both computation and memory
usage, which limits their use in resource-constrained devices.
Therefore, in recent years, various methods have been de-
veloped to ﬁnd efﬁcient compact representations of DNNs.
In [4], the authors developed a pruning method followed by
vector quantization and Huffman coding [26] to compress
neural networks. In [27], a pruning technique, called Network
Trimming, was developed, where neurons are pruned based on
the statistics of neuron activations. In [28], an iterative two-
step algorithm was developed to effectively prune channels in
each layer. In [10], the authors augmented Tensorﬂow with a
pruning framework to prune the network connections during
the training phase. In [29], the authors developed a layer-
compensated pruning algorithm for a layer-wise compensate
ﬁlter pruning. In [30], they proposed the LeGR algorithm,
which is parameterized to learn layer-wise afﬁne transforma-
tions over the ﬁlter norms. It constructs a learned global rank-
ing to achieve an efﬁcient resource-constrained ﬁlter pruning.
In [6], [7], (non-compact) DRL models were used to explore
the architecture space of the model in order to ﬁnd an efﬁcient
architecture. Speciﬁcally, in [6], DRL was used to determine
which layers should be dropped and the size of the remaining
layers. In [7], DRL was used to evaluate an efﬁcient sparsity
ratio of each layer. However, those methods did not address
the problem of training a DRL model with a compact represen-
tation as we consider here. In [31], the authors developed the
incremental network quantization (INQ), an iterative network
quantization method that incorporates three interdependent
operations: weight partitioning, group-wise quantization, and
re-training. In [32], [33], LightNN algorithm that replaces the
multiplications to one shift or a constrained number of shifts
and adds in binarized NNs to improve the energy efﬁciency
was developed and analzyed. Finally, the existing pruning
methods suffer from a signiﬁcant performance reduction in
the DRL domain as explained and demonstrated in Sections
I-A, IV.
Training a student network using the outputs of a trained
teacher network was ﬁrst introduced in [34], with the goal
of compressing a large ensemble model to a single network.
This approach was extended later in [35] to transfer knowl-
edge from a deep neural network to a shallow one. More
recently, it was used for policy distillation to train smaller
dense networks that perform at the expert level [36]. In this
paper, we extend the method of training a student network
to guard against the performance loss of pruning in the DRL
domain. Transfer learning methods to ﬁne-tune the model in
the pruning procedure were used in [11], [37] in the form
of Knowledge Distillation [38] to improve the stability and
robustness of the pruning process in classiﬁcation tasks. These
methods, however, did not address the performance reduction
problem of pruning in the DRL domain, which we address in
this paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
A. System Model
Consider a system consisting of an agent who interacts with
an environment. Let S be the state space that the system can
reach, and st ∈S be the system state at time t. Let A be
the action space that the agent can take. At each time (say t),
the agent takes action at ∈A, receives reward rt+1, and the
system transits to state st+1, which is observed (or partially
observed) by the agent. An illustration of the system is given
in Figure 2.
Fig. 2.
An illustration of the system model. At each time (say t), the agent
takes action at ∈A, receives reward rt+1, and the system transits to state
st+1, which is observed (or partially observed) by the agent.
Let
R =
T
X
t=1
γt−1rt
(1)

4
be the accumulated discounted reward, where 0 ≤γ ≤1 is
a discounted factor, and T is the time horizon of the control
problem. The agent’s objective is to ﬁnd a policy π : S →A
that maximizes the expected accumulated discounted reward:
max
π
E [R(π)] ,
(2)
where E [R(π)] denotes the expected accumulated discounted
reward when the model performs policy π.
B. Background of Reinforcement Learning Solutions to (2)
Q-learning is a reinforcement learning method that aims
at ﬁnding good policies to solve the dynamic programming
problem in (2). It has been widely applied in various decision
making problems, primarily because of its ability to evaluate
the expected utility without requiring prior knowledge about
the system model, and its ability to adapt when stochastic
transitions occur [39]. The basic idea of Q-learning is to
approximate the objective value (referred to as Q-value) for
all possible state-action pairs. This is done by minimizing the
Time Difference (TD) error using a stochastic approximation
method that judiciously trades off between exploring all avail-
able actions to ﬁgure out their inﬂuence on the objective value,
and exploiting actions which are likely to be more valuable in
terms of maximizing the objective value.
While Q-learning performs well when dealing with small
action and state spaces, it becomes impractical when the
problem size increases, mainly for two reasons: (i) A stored
lookup table of Q-values for all possible state-action pairs
is required, which makes the storage complexity intolerable
for large-scale problems. (ii) As the state space increases,
many states are rarely visited, which signiﬁcantly decreases
performance.
In recent years, DRL methods that combine DNN with Q-
learning, have shown great potential for overcoming these is-
sues. Using DRL, the DNN maps from the (partially) observed
state to an action, instead of storing a lookup table of Q-
values. Furthermore, large-scale models can be represented
by the DNN well so that the algorithm can preserve good
performance for very large-scale models. A well known DRL
algorithm was presented in DeepMind’s Nature paper [2] and
demonstrated superior performance for teaching computers
how to play Atari games directly from the on-screen pixels.
Since then, there is a growing attention on using DRL methods
in various ﬁelds (see related work in Section I-B).
C. The Objective
Unfortunately, DNNs are usually very demanding in com-
putational power and memory usage, which limits the use of
DRL algorithms in systems with limited hardware resources.
Therefore, the objective of this paper is to develop a fundamen-
tal method to train DRL models with strong performance in
terms of solving (2) while achieving compact representations
of the DNNs. In the next section we address this challenge.
III. THE POLICY PRUNING AND SHRINKING (POPS)
ALGORITHM
As discussed in Section I-A.1, existing pruning algorithms
do not effectively apply to the DRL domain, due to the
performance loss with respect to the policy learning incurred
by the pruning procedure when interacting directly with the
environment. The suggested PoPS algorithm is designed to
solve the issue of the performance reduction of pruning in the
DRL domain. The framework is based on a novel iterative
policy pruning and shrinking method that leverages the power
of transfer learning when training the DRL model.
Note that running a sort of exhaustive search over layer sizes
to ﬁnd compact representations gradually becomes impractical
in large-scale NNs due to the huge architecture space. The
basic idea of PoPS is to use the power of pruning-based
technique in detecting the redundancy over the DNN by
dictating the compression direction in the huge architecture
space. Thus, it avoids the need of running a laborious gradual
search.
A. Architecture of the PoPS Algorithm
In this section we present the architecture of PoPS algo-
rithm. PoPS aims to ﬁnd an efﬁcient, compact, and redundant-
free representation of the DNN. An illustration of PoPS
architecture is given in Fig. 3. We next discuss in details each
component in the architecture.
1) Creating a teacher: This part of PoPS algorithm trains
an agent to obtain a policy that solves (2) using a large-scale
redundant DNN. The output of this module is the DRL model
Qteacher with the corresponding DNN. This output is used as
a teacher that guides the iterative policy pruning and shrinking
steps.
In order to train the teacher to solve (2), two commonly used
training methods were incorporated in the framework. This
makes the framework applicable to a wide range of decision
making tasks. The ﬁrst is a Q-learning type that uses the DNN
(referred to as Deep Q-network or DQN) to map from the
observed state to a Q-value for each action [2]. The action
that maximizes the Q-value is selected (according to ǫ-greedy
distribution). Note that standard Q-learning methods use the
same parameters for estimating the target and the current Q-
value, resulting in a large correlation between the TD target
and the updated parameters at every training step. This makes
the training procedure highly unstable. Thus, the target DQN
overcomes this issue by using a separate network with ﬁxed
parameters for estimating the TD target, where every N steps
the algorithm copies the parameters from the DQN network
to the target network. Denote the DQN network by Q and the
target network by Qtarget. Then, the updates to the Q-values
satisfy the following equation:
Qt+1 (st, at) = Qt (st, at)
+α

rt+1 + γ max
at+1 Qtarget
t
(st+1, at+1)
−Qt (st, at)] ,
(3)

5
Fig. 3.
An illustration of the PoPS framework.
Fig. 4.
An illustration of the IPP module used in PoPS algorithm.
Fig. 5.
An illustration of the Shrinking module used in PoPS algorithm.
where the subscript t denotes the time index, and
rt+1 + γ max
at+1 Qtarget
t
(st+1, at+1)
(4)
is the learned value obtained by getting reward rt+1 after
taking action at in state st, moving to the next state st+1,
and then taking action at+1 that maximizes the future Q-value
seen at the next state. The term Qt (st, at) is the old learned
value. Thus, the algorithm aims at minimizing the TD error
between the learned value and the current estimate value. The
learning rate α is set to 0 ≤α ≤1, which is typically set
close to zero.
The second commonly used method that we incorporate in

6
the PoPS framework to train the teacher is the Advantage
Actor-Critic method [40]. The actor critic model uses two
neural networks. The ﬁrst is an actor neural network that
we denote by Qθ, where θ is the actor network parameters.
The second is a critic network denoted by ˜Qw, where w is
the critic network parameters. Qθ is used to determine the
optimal action and ˜Qw is used to estimate the state-value
function of the current state. Intuitively, the actor observes
the environment reaction to it with an action, while the critic
observes the actor and provides a feedback. Qθ and
˜Qw
are trained simultaneously. The increments ∆wt, ∆θt of the
parameters w, θ, respectively, at time t, satisfy the following
equations:
∆wt = α(rt+1 + γ ˜Qw
t (st+1) −˜Qw
t (st))∇w ˜Qw
t (st),
(5)
and
∆θt = ∇θ(log(Qθ
t (st, at))) ˜Qw
t (st+1).
(6)
To further reduce the high variability in value-based meth-
ods, we use the advantage function instead of the value
function such that:
∆θt = ∇θ(log(Qθ
t(st, at)))A(st, at),
(7)
where
A(st, at) = rt+1 + γ ˜Qw
t (st+1) −˜Qw
t (st+1).
(8)
This prodedure evaluates the gain in taking a speciﬁc action
as compared to the average rewarded action at a given state.
2) Experience Replay: Once PoPS has trained the teacher,
it periodically stores batches of randomly selected experience
replay instances in the buffer (where typically the batch size
is between 10, 000 and 30, 000). Note that for large-scale
problems, the buffer capacity should not be too small to avoid
missing important experiences and suffering from a perfor-
mance reduction while replacing old experiences that reside
in the buffer. In our experiments, the buffer capacity was set
to 100, 000. Then, the iterative policy pruning and shrinking
steps are trained by the experience replay instances and do
not interact directly with the environment. It is important to
note that the experience accumulation step is repeated until
the student model has sufﬁcient coverage of the state space
for each training session.
3) Iterative Policy Pruning (IPP): We develop a funda-
mental iterative policy pruning (IPP) method to approach the
performance limits when pruning the DNN, which are far to
be reached by existing pruning methods in the DRL domain.
IPP is an iterative process, as illustrated in Fig. 4. At each
iteration, IPP prunes the DNN by accumulating experiences
from the teacher. It then ﬁne tunes the model using policy
distillation method [36]. At each time step, IPP prunes each
layer so that the sparsity of the layers satisﬁes the gradual
pruning equation [10]:
gt = gﬁnal + (ginitial −gﬁnal)

1 −t −t0
n∆
3
,
for
t ∈{t0, . . . , t0 + n∆t},
(9)
where t is the global step of the training process. The term gt is
the sparsity demand at the global step t, ginitial is the initial
sparsity of the layer (typically set to 0), gﬁnal is the target
sparsity, and t0 is the global step from which the algorithm
starts to prune (typically set to 0). The term n is the number
of pruning steps to preform until gt reaches gﬁnal, and ∆is
the pruning frequency.
Every N time steps, IPP evaluates the model. If the evalu-
ation of the model is lower then a predeﬁned low threshold it
stops the pruning, ﬁne tunes the model using policy distillation
with the KL-divergence loss function (see (10) below), and
trains the model until it recuperates and solves (2). Specif-
ically, Let D = {si, qt
i}N
i=1 be the state-value experience
replay pairs generated by the teacher, and {qs
i }N
i=1 be the
student values (i.e., the model that we want to train). Then,
IPP aims at matching the output distributions between {qs
i }N
i=1
and {qt
i}N
i=1 using the KL-divergence measure. Let θs be the
parameters of the student network. Then, θs is trained to be
the minimizer of the following loss function:
LKL(D, θs) =
N
X
i=i
softmax
qt
i
τ

log




softmax
qt
i
τ

softmax(qs
i )



,
(10)
where τ denotes the temperature of the softmax function. If τ
is high, the output of the softmax function is softened. Since
the outputs of the teacher are the expected future discounted
reward of each possible action, IPP aims at making them
sharper by taking a small τ.
Once the model recuperates, the pruning procedure contin-
ues. If the evaluation of the model solves (2), then IPP saves
the model. The IPP continues accumulating experiences from
the teacher and repeats this procedure until the convergence
condition is met, i.e., the sparsity remains unchanged for M
consecutive iterations. Then, the output model is the one IPP
saved which solves (2).
In Fig. 6 we illustrate the performance after one step of
the iterative pruning procedure by IPP as compared to the
iterative pruning procedure by the commonly used magnitude-
based weight pruning [4] using the gradual pruning framework
[10]. It can be seen that the IPP procedure achieves very
good performance, and overcomes the signiﬁcant performance
loss typically incurred by the pruning procedure in the DRL
domain.
4) Policy Shrinking: This part of PoPS algorithm shrinks
the model to obtain a dense small-scale DNN based on the
output from IPP. The ﬁrst step is to measure the redundancy
of the model based on the output from IPP, and generate
the dense model accordingly. The second step is to train the
newly generated model using experiences from the teacher. An
illustration is given in Fig 5.
4.1) Measuring redundancy and creating model: This step
measures the number of non-zero parameters of the DNN
output by the IPP module to determine the redundancy in that
layer. This step determines the size of each layer which is
required for efﬁcient operations. Then, the algorithm shrinks
the model, i.e., creates a dense DNN, where the number of

7
Fig. 6.
The performance after one step of the iterative pruning procedure
by IPP as compared to the iterative pruning procedure by the commonly
used Magnitude-Based weight pruning [4] using the Gradual Pruning (MBGP)
framework [10].
variables of each layer is determined by the number of non-
zero parameters that was measured in the sparse model.
4.2) Train model: This component trains the newly gener-
ated shrunken model by taking experiences from the teacher.
The algorithm uses the policy distillation training method with
KL-divergence loss function in this step as well, as detailed
in the IPP module.
Finally, after the model is trained, the algorithm compares
its size with the size of the model that was constructed
at the previous iteration. If the difference is smaller then
a predeﬁned threshold it concludes that the algorithm has
converged. Otherwise, it repeats the procedure.
B. Pseudo Code of the PoPS algorithm
The pseudo code of PoPS algorithm is described in Al-
gorithm 1. Let Qteacher be a pre-trained model and let Qi
be a trained model at iteration i (where Q0 = Qteacher ).
D = {si, qt
i}N
i=1 is the Experience Replay set described
in Section III-A. The description of Algorithm III-B starts
by pruning the model using the IPP module as detailed in
Section III-A, and illustrated in Fig. 4. IPP ﬁrst accumulates
experiences from Qteacher stored in D, as illustrated in Figure
3 via the accumulate-experience function in the pseudo code.
Then, it prunes and ﬁne-tunes the model using batches from
D and the KL-divergence loss function described in (10) by
the prune-and-train function. PoPS repeats this procedure until
the IPP convergence condition is met, as detailed in Section
III-A. Once the IPP convergence condition is met, the output
of the IPP module Qsparse
i
is used as the input to the Shrinking
module.
The Shrinking module measures the redundancy at each
layer, denoted by M, by using the sparsity of Qsparse
i
via the
measure-redundancy function in the pseudo code. Qpre−train
i+1
denotes a randomly initialized model built by the measure
M via the create-model function, which is then trained using
batches from D and the KL-divergence loss function described
in (10) by the train function. Eventually, a trained model,
denoted by Qi+1, is stored as the output of the Shrinking
module. PoPS ends when the size of the model converges.
C. Open Source Software
We developed an open source software implementation of
PoPS algorithm. Researchers and developers in related ﬁelds
are welcome to integrate PoPS in their working environment.
PoPS was developed using Python and is available at GitHub
(see link in [8]). The implementation details of the open source
software are described in the Appendix.
D. Complexity Discussion
The number of multiplications through a feed-forward fully
connected network with G layers, in which K is the size of
the input state vector and dg is the number of units in the
g′th layer, is given by D = Kd1 + PG−1
g=1 dgdg+1. As a
result, the computational complexity of the forward and back
propagation for one sample is given by O(D). In PoPS, the
complexity of accumulating N experiences by the teacher is
O(DN) and the complexity of preforming back-propagation
on M experiences is O(DM). Thus, each iteration of the IPP
module has a complexity of order O(D(N + M)). in the
Shrinking module, given that at each iteration the model is
trained on M experiences, the complexity of each iteration
is O(D(N
+ M)). Typically, the number of experiences
is between 10, 000 and 30, 000. The number of iterations
required to reach a compact architecture by PoPS depends
on the amount of the redundancy in the initial DNN. Higher
redundancy might result in running more iterations. In our
experiments, PoPS converged to a compact architecture after
no more then 9 iterations, which is very efﬁcient.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section we present an extensive experimental study to
evaluate the performance of PoPS algorithm. To demonstrate
the robustness and versatility of PoPS algorithm, we tested
PoPS using four different environments from the OpenAI gym
library [9], each has a different model setting. The experiments
were executed on ASUS Turbo GeForce GTX 1080 TI GPU.
We compared the following algorithms: (i) the commonly used
magnitude-based weight pruning [4] using the gradual pruning
framework [10], dubbed Magnitude-Base Gradual Pruning
(MBGP), which is known to achieve strong performance in
many DNN architectures; (ii) the Knowledge Distillation-
Based Pruning (KDBP) algorithm, which demonstrated im-
provements in the pruning procedure in various classiﬁcation
settings by using knowledge distillation when pruning DNNs
[11]; and (iii) the proposed PoPS algorithm. Note that the
existing MBGP and KDBP vanilla versions conduct pruning
in supervised learning settings. Thus, we adapted them to the
DRL setting. As explained in Section III-A, two common DRL
training methods were implemented, namely DQN, and Actor-
Critic. Since the ground truth is not given in the DRL domain,
we replaced it by the learned values. In the DQN setting, we
used the TD values, given in (4) as the ground truth during

8
the ﬁne-tuning procedure. In the Actor-Critic setting, we used
the Advantage values, given in (8), to prune the actor, which
is the DRL model used for the inference task (where the
critic was trained using the TD values given in (4)). When
implementing MBGP in the DRL domain, the pruned model
interacts with the environment and feeds the experience replay
with experiences. The ﬁne-tuning procedure is preformed at
each time-step by evaluating the TD or Advantage values using
a batch of experiences from the experience replay.
When implementing KDBP in supervised learning settings,
the student network is trained with the soft teacher output to
improve the ﬁne-tuning process, where the true labels are used
to supervise the student output. The loss is computed using the
cross-entropy between the true labels and the student output
distribution, and the cross-entropy between the soft student
output distribution and the soft teacher output distribution [11].
Therefore, when implementing KDBP in the DRL domain,
we use the soft output teacher to improve the ﬁne-tuning
process. The pruned network interacts with the environment
to obtain experiences which are then used to evaluate the
distribution over TD values or Advantage values to compute
the cross-entropy between those values and the student output
distribution. They are used by the teacher as well to evaluate
the soft teacher output distribution to compute the cross-
entropy between the soft student output distribution and the
soft teacher output distribution.
In both KDBP and MBGP, the interactions of the pruned
agent with the environment makes the training less stable.
A. Solving the Cartpole Environment with Compact Represen-
tations of a DQN
In the Cartpole environment, a pole is attached to a cart,
which is allowed to move along the x-axis, as illustrated in
Fig. 7. The state space contains the velocity and position of the
cart, the velocity of the tip of the pole, and the angle between
the pole and the vertical line. At each time step, the agent is
allowed to push the cart to the left or to the right, with a force
of −1 and +1 unit, respectively, i.e., |A| = 2. The pendulum
starts upright, and the goal is to prevent it from falling over.
At each time step where the pole remains upright, the agent

9
receives a reward of +1. The episode ends when the pole is
more the 15 degrees from vertical, or the cart moves more then
2.4 units from the center, or if the pole stays upright for 200
time steps. The maximum possible reward over an episode is
thus 200. A policy that solves the environment is considered
to be a policy that achieves more than 195 points in average
over 100 episodes.
Fig. 7.
An illustration of the Cartpole environment.
The DRL architecture that was used in this experiment was
a DQN with 3 feed-forward fully connected layers with 256,
256, and 128 neurons, respectively, summing up to a total
of roughly 100K parameters. The initial model was trained
using a target DQN, as described in III-A, until it was able
to solve the environment. Then, we tested the performance of
PoPS, MBGP, and KDBP algorithms in terms of solving the
environment while obtaining compact representations of the
DQN setting.
We present the performance of PoPS algorithm in Table
I, and MBGP and KDBP algorithms in Table II. It can be
seen that PoPS algorithm achieves tremendous performance
gain over the MBGP and KDBP algorithms after only several
iterations. Speciﬁcally, PoPS generated a compact representa-
tion of the DRL model that solves the environment with a size
of less than 0.3% of the initial DQN representation size. By
contrast, the MBGP and KDBP algorithms were not able to
generate a representation of the DRL model that solves the
environment with a size of less than 40% of the initial DQN
representation size.
B. Solving the Lunar Lander Environment with Compact Rep-
resentations of an Actor-Critic Architecture
In the second experiment, we tested the performance of the
algorithms in the Lunar Lander environment. The environment
consists of a ship and a landing pad in a shifting landscape, as
illustrated in Fig. 8. The observation is an 8 dimensional state
vector that includes the ship’s coordinates, velocity, lander-
angle, angular-velocity, right-leg and left-leg grounded ﬂag.
The action space consists of 4 discrete actions: do nothing, ﬁre
main engine, ﬁre left engine, and ﬁre right engine. Successful
landing yields 100 points, crash landing yields −100 points,
each leg that contacts the ground yields 10 points, and ﬁring
the main engine would subtract 0.3 points per time step. An
episode begins in a random state and ends when the lander
lands successfully, crashes, ﬂies out of bounds, or reaches 1000
time steps. A policy that solves the environment is considered
to be a policy that achieves more than 200 points in average
over 100 episodes.
Fig. 8.
An illustration of the Lunar lander environment.
The architecture that was used in this experiment was an
Actor-Critic network with 3 feed-forward fully connected lay-
ers with 64 neurons each, summing up to a total of roughly 9K
parameters. The initial model was trained with a Critic in an
Actor-Critic fashion until it was able to solve the environment.
Then, we tested the performance of PoPS, MBGP, and KDBP
algorithms in terms of solving the environment while obtaining
compact representations of the Actor-Critic setting.
We present the performance of PoPS algorithm in Table III,
and MBGP and KDBP algorithms in Table IV. It can be seen
again that PoPS algorithm achieves tremendous performance
gain over the MBGP and KDBP algorithms after only several
iterations. Speciﬁcally, PoPS generated a compact representa-
tion of the DRL model that solves the environment with a size
of less than 0.8% of the initial Actor-Critic representation size.
By contrast, the MBGP and KDBP algorithms were not able
to generate a representation of the DRL model that solves the
environment with a size of less than 68% of the initial Actor-
Critic representation size. This experiment demonstrates the
ability of PoPS to detect redundancy in a smaller model as
well.
C. Solving the Pong Environment with Compact Representa-
tions of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
In the third experiment, we tested the performance of
the algorithms in the Pong environment. Pong is a two-
dimensional game that simulates a tennis table. The player
uses the paddle to hit a ball back and forth, and it aims at
passing the ball beyond the opponent’s pad. An illustration
is given in Fig. 9. The observation is an RGB image of the
screen which is an array of shape (210, 160, 3). The state space
is comprised of 4 grey scaled frames of size 84X84 stacked
together. The action space consists of 3 discrete actions: up,
down, and stay. A reward of +1 is received when the player
passes the ball beyond the opponent’s pad, whereas a reward
of −1 is received when the ball passes the player’s pad. The
episode ends when a score of 21 (winning ) or −21 (losing)
is reached. A policy that solves the environment for the player

10
TABLE I
POPS PERFORMANCE IN THE CARTPOLE ENVIRONMENT
Iteration
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
0
100K (100%)
> 195
1
16K (16.2%)
> 195
2
2K (1.92%)
> 195
3
1.5K (1.5%)
> 195
4
1.2K (1.2%)
> 195
5
908 (0.91%)
> 195
6
590 (0.59%)
> 195
7
437 (0.43%)
> 195
8
292 (0.29%)
> 195
9 (output)
249 (0.25%)
199.96
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF MBGP AND KDBP IN THE CARTPOLE
ENVIRONMENT
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
under MBGP
Average score
under KDBP
100K (100%)
>195
>195
90K (90%)
>195
>195
80K (80%)
>195
>195
70K (70%)
>195
>195
60K (60%)
>195
>195
50K (50%)
>195
>195
40K (40%)
180
130
35K (35%)
140
164
30K (30%)
< 80
187
< 28K (28%)
< 80
< 80
TABLE III
POPS PERFORMANCE IN THE LUNAR LANDER ENVIRONMENT
Iteration
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
0
9K (100%)
> 200
1
1.4k (16.7%)
> 200
2
200 (2.22%)
> 200
3
160 (1.78%)
> 200
4 (output)
66 (0.73%)
249
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF MBGP AND KDBP IN THE LUNAR LANDER
ENVIRONMENT
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
under MBGP
Average score
under KDBP
9K (100%)
> 200
> 200
8.1K (90%)
> 200
> 200
7.2K (80%)
< 100
> 200
6.2K (70%)
< 100
> 200
6.1K (68.6%)
< 100
120
< 6K (68%)
< 100
< 100
TABLE V
POPS PERFORMANCE IN THE PONG ENVIRONMENT
Iteration
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
0
1.6M (100%)
>18
1
266K (15.8%)
>18
2
128K (7.6%)
>18
3
60K (3.6%)
>18
4
22K (1.3%)
>18
5 (output)
15K (0.92%)
18.9
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE OF MBGP AND KDBP IN THE PONG ENVIRONMENT
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
under MBGP
Average score
under KDBP
1.6M (100%)
> 18
> 18
1.28M (80%)
> 18
> 18
0.96M (60%)
< 0
> 18
0.64M (40%)
< 0
> 18
0.34M (20%)
< 0
> 18
0.1M (6%)
< 0
16
< 0.08M (5%)
< 0
< 0
TABLE VII
POPS PERFORMANCE IN THE PACMAN ENVIRONMENT
Iteration
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
0
1.6M (100%)
>1800
1
0.128M (8%)
>1800
2
0.03M (1.9%)
>1800
3 (output)
4K (0.26%)
2050
TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE OF MBGP AND KDBP IN THE PACMAN
ENVIRONMENT
# non-zero parameters
(percentage of initial size)
Average score
under MBGP
Average score
under KDBP
1.6M (100%)
> 1800
> 1800
1.28M (80%)
> 1800
> 1800
0.96M (60%)
> 1800
> 1800
0.64M (40%)
> 1800
> 1800
0.176M (11%)
> 1800
> 1800
0.174M (10.9%)
1020
> 1800
0.16M (10%)
< 500
> 1800
0.128M (8%)
< 500
1550
0.12M (7.5%)
< 500
< 500
is considered to be a policy that achieves more than 18 points
in average over 100 episodes.
The Pong environment has a very high dimension. Thus, the
capacity should not be too small, to avoid missing important
experiences and suffering from a performance reduction. In
PoPS, the teacher feeds batches of experiences before each

11
Fig. 9.
An illustration of the Pong environment.
ﬁne-tuning or training phase by interacting with the Pong
environment. Thus, the experiences in the experience replay
are shifted dynamically, giving the pruned model the notion
that there is a limitless amount of experiences. This method
covers the large state space of Pong environment efﬁciently.
The architecture that was used in this experiment was a
CNN with 3 convolutional layers with a ﬁlter size of 8, 4,
and 3, respectively, and the numbers of channels were 32, 64,
and 64, respectively. The 3 convolutional layers were followed
by one fully connected layer with 512 neurons. The initial
model was trained using a target DQN, as described in
Section III-A. The model was trained until it was able to
solve the environment. Then, we tested the performance of
PoPS, MBGP, and KDBP algorithms in terms of solving the
environment while obtaining compact representations of the
DQN with the CNN setting.
We present the performance of PoPS algorithm in Table V,
and MBGP and KDBP algorithms in Table VI. It can be seen
again that PoPS algorithm achieves tremendous performance
gain over the MBGP and KDBP algorithms after only several
iterations. Speciﬁcally, PoPS generated a compact representa-
tion of the DRL model that solves the environment with a size
of less than 1% of the initial DQN with CNN representation
size. By contrast, the KDBP algorithm, although presented a
signiﬁcant improvement as compared to the ﬁrst two experi-
ments, was not able to generate a representation of the DRL
model that solves the environment with a size of less than 6%
of the initial DQN with CNN representation size. The MBGP
algorithm performed poorly in this setting and was not able
to generate a representation of the DRL model that solves the
environment with a size of less than 60% of the initial DQN
with CNN representation size.
D. Solving the Pacman Environment with Compact Represen-
tations of a Dueling DQN with CNN
In the fourth experiment, we tested the performance of the
algorithms in the Pacman environment. The player (i.e., agent)
controls the Pacman and tries to collect all the Pac-Dots while
avoiding the ghosts. An illustration is given in Fig. 10. The
observation is an RGB image of the screen which is an array
of shape (210, 160, 3). The state space is comprised of 4 grey
scaled frames of size 84X84 stacked together. The action
space consists of 9 discrete actions: none, up, down, right, left,
up-right, up-left, down-left and down-right. A reward of +10
is given for each collection of a Pac-Dot, +50 for Power Pellet
and +200 for destroying vulnerable ghosts (multiplied by two
if the player destroys them in succession). The episode ends
once the Pacman runs out of lives or if the Pacman manages to
collect all the Pac-Dots. A policy that solves the environment
for the player is considered to be a policy that achieves more
than 1800 points in average over 100 episodes.
Fig. 10.
An illustration of the Pacman environment.
The architecture that we used in this experiment is a CNN
with 3 convolutional layers with a ﬁlter size of 8, 4, and 3,
respectively, and the numbers of channels were 32, 64, and
64, respectively. The 3 convolutional layers were followed by
one fully connected layer with 512 neurons and then an output
layer with 10 neurons to implement a dueling architecture [41].
The initial model was trained using a target dueling DQN, as
described in Section III-A. The model was trained until it was
able to solve the environment. Then, we tested the performance
of PoPS, MBGP, and KDBP algorithms in terms of solving
the environment while obtaining compact representations of
the dueling DQN with the CNN setting.
We present the performance of PoPS algorithm in Table
VII, and MBGP and KDBP algorithms in Table VIII. It can
be seen that PoPS achieves tremendous performance gain over
the MBGP and KDBP algorithms in this setting as well after
only several iterations. Speciﬁcally, PoPS generated a compact
representation of the DRL model that solves the environment
with a size of less than 0.3% of the initial dueling DQN with
CNN representation size. By contrast, the MBGP and KDBP
algorithms were not able to generate a representation of the
DRL model that solves the environment with a size of less
than 10%, and 8%, respectively, of the initial dueling DQN
with CNN representation size.
V. CONCLUSION
We have developed a policy pruning and shrinking (PoPS)
framework for achieving compact representations of DNNs

12
in the DRL domain. The suggested framework is based on
a novel iterative policy pruning and shrinking method that
leverages the power of transfer learning when training the
DRL model. Extensive experimental results using Cartpole,
Lunar Lander, Pong, and Pacman environments demonstrated
tremendous performance gain of PoPS over the MBGP and
KDBP algorithms in all four environments and different model
settings. The results obtained by PoPS present the state-of-
the-art performance in terms of training DRL models with
strong required performance while minimizing the size of the
DNN in the DRL domain. This research demonstrates the great
potential of PoPS in making DRL models practically appealing
for a wide range of applications that use systems with limited
hardware resources. We developed open source software of
PoPS framework which is available in [8]. Researchers and
developers in related ﬁelds are invited to incorporate PoPS
in their working environment. Finally, despite the success of
DRL-based algorithms in many ﬁelds, not much is known
about their theoretical performance guarantees. In particular, a
potential future direction is to establish theoretical guarantees
for compression ratios in the DRL domain.
VI. APPENDIX
A. Implementation Details of the Open Source Software
In this appendix, we summarize the implementation details
of the open source software that we developed. PoPS was
developed using Python and is available at GitHub (see link
in [8]). Fig. 11 illustrates the top level hierarchy of all the
modules in the PoPS project. Interested readers are encouraged
to read the README ﬁle for further information.
Fig. 11.
The PoPS project directory as seen in GitHub.
1) The conﬁgs.py ﬁle holds the conﬁguration for each
environment and model, parameters (such as the target sparsity
and the pruning frequency for the pruning procedure) that
affect the initial training phase, and the PoPS procedure.
2) The model.py ﬁle contains the model architecture for each
environment such as class DQNPong, class CartPoleDQN,
class ActorLunarLander, and CriticLunarLander. These mod-
els are used for the initial training phase, and follow the
DQNAgent interface. Each model is associated with a Student
version that inherits it, such as StudentPong. The Student
version is adjusted for the PoPS algorithm such that the loss
function is the loss presented in (10) and the architecture is
a dynamic architecture which is deﬁned by the redundancy
measures.
3) The train.py ﬁle contains functions that execute the policy
distillation training procedure as well as the IPP’s pruning and
ﬁne-tuning steps. The functions are well documented and are
used by a variety of models and environments.
4) The ﬁle prune.py contains the IPP module orchestrating
the pruning phase in the PoPS algorithm as detailed in Section
III with the train student function which is used for pruning
and ﬁne tuning the model.
5) The utils package contains several modules with helpful
utilities.
For each environment there is a unique evaluation tool and
an accumulated experience function. These two functions with
the modules described above implement the interface needed
for the PoPS algorithm. The implementation of PoPS algo-
rithm is similar for each environment and is well documented
at GitHub, including the experiments presented in Section IV.
For each environment, the initial trained model is given in the
saved models folder as well, with a train script for the initial
training phase for reconstructing the experiments from scratch
if desired. For instance, a description of the Pong experiment
is given below. An illustration of the experiment directory as
seen in GitHub is given in Fig. 12.
• The evaluate.py ﬁle is the unique evaluation tool for the
Pong environment. It can used as a stand alone script as
well to evaluate models in the Pong environment.
• The copy weights.py ﬁle is the function needed for PoPS
to create the initial Q0 Student model from the teacher
model Qteacher. It is a compatibility function for the
purpose of creating a Student version of a model.
• The train gym.py ﬁle is a script to initially train the model
to solve the environment.
• The PoPS iterative Pong.py ﬁle is for the PoPS algorithm
which uses the modules discussed above. It is very easy
to read and implement. The ﬁrst step is to import the
teacher model and then create the initial student model
with copy weights.py. Then, there is a convergence loop
where PoPS prunes the model using IPP, evaluates the
redundancy, creates a model with a size according to
the measured redundancy, trains it, and repeats until
convergence.
• The accumulate experience Pong.py ﬁle is a module
which ﬁlls the Experience Replay with interactions of
the teacher model with the Pong environment. The experi-
ences in the Experience Replay are used later for training
with respect to the KL divergence loss function (10).

13
Fig. 12.
The experiment directory of Pong as seen in GitHub.
