Inferring Informational Goals from Free-Text Queries:
A Bayesian Approach
David Heckerman and Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052-6399

Abstract
People using consumer software applications
typically do not use technical jargon when
querying an online database of help topics.
Rather, they attempt to communicate their
goals with common words and phrases that
describe software functionality in terms of
structure and objects they understand. We
describe a Bayesian approach to modeling the
relationship between words in a user’s query
for assistance and the informational goals of
the user. After reviewing the general method,
we describe several extensions that center on
integrating additional distinctions and struc-
ture about language usage and user goals into
the Bayesian models.
1
Introduction
The management of uncertainty plays an important
role in understanding the goals or intentions behind
the words a person uses to communicate ideas. Prob-
lems with communication and understanding are ex-
acerbated when people attempt to describe unfamil-
iar ideas and concepts.
We present a Bayesian ap-
proach to interpreting queries composed by users of
software applications searching for information about
the means for achieving goals with the software. The
problem of interpreting a user’s informational goals
given a query is typically one of reasoning under un-
certainty. In the realm of assistance with consumer
software applications, people typically are unfamiliar
with the terms that expert user’s or software designers
may use to refer to structures displayed in a user inter-
face, states of data structures, and classes of software
functionality.
We take a Bayesian perspective on information re-
trieval (IR) for inferring the goals and needs of soft-
ware users. The approach centers on the construction
of probabilistic knowledge bases for interpreting user
queries. Within the knowledge bases, variables repre-
senting a broad set of potential information goals inﬂu-
ence the likelihood of a user generating diﬀerent words
in their queries for assistance. Our work comes in the
context of the broader history of investigation of prob-
abilistic and utility-theoretic methods in IR (Maron
& Kuhns, 1960; Robertson, 1977; Cooper & Maron,
1978; Turtle & Croft, 1996; Keim, Lewis, & Madigan,
1997). Probabilistic analyses have been employed in a
variety of ways in information retrieval, including work
on ascribing a probabilistic semantics to notions of rel-
evance associated with ranking strategies and learning
from data. There has been growing interest in employ-
ing probabilistic graphical models to retrieval prob-
lems (Turtle & Croft, 1990; Fung & Del Favero, 1995).
Discussion has continued in the IR community on the
challenges and pitfalls of probabilistic representations
and analysis (Cooper, 1994).
In contrast to previous data-centric, statistical ap-
proaches to information retrieval, we present our inves-
tigation of a more resource-intensive approach that re-
lies on the framing and assessment of knowledge bases
by human experts.
Such handcrafting of knowledge
bases is infeasible for grappling with massive retrieval
problems like accessing information from large, hetero-
geneous databases like the World Wide Web. However,
we found that the approach is appropriate for building
a powerful retrieval tool for use in the focused context
of providing help for users of the Microsoft Oﬃce suite
of applications.
The Microsoft Oﬃce suite of word
processing, spreadsheet analysis, database, messaging
and scheduling, and presentation applications is relied
upon by millions of users. We found that the value
associated with the quality of retrieval derived from a
custom-tailored Bayesian IR system could justify the
signiﬁcant expense incurred by extensive user model-
ing.
We shall describe a general approach to modeling the
probabilistic relationships between a user’s words and

Query

p
(Goal
1
| Query)

p
(Goal
n
| Query)

Figure 1: The overall goal of Bayesian assessment and
inference is to infer a probability distribution over a
set of concepts, given a query.
their informational goals. First, we describe a basic
model and updating procedure. We then discuss our
work to introduce default probabilities to ease the as-
sessment burden as well as leveraging additional struc-
ture in language to enhance the performance of the
system following. Finally, we discuss how the assess-
ment and inference strategies were scaled up to handle
user assistance for applications in the Microsoft Oﬃce
suite of desktop applications.
2
User goals, queries, terms
At the time we initiated our project in Bayesian infor-
mation retrieval, managers in the Oﬃce division were
ﬁnding that people were having diﬃculty ﬁnding assis-
tance eﬃciently. Problems with accessing solutions to
problems and for discovering new features were rooted
in problems with terminology. As an example, users
working with the Excel spreadsheet might have re-
quired assistance with formatting “a graph.” Unfor-
tunately, Excel had no knowledge about the common
term, “graph,” and only considered in its keyword in-
dexing, the term “chart.” One approach to this prob-
lem would have been to build sets of synonyms within
the paradigm of keyword search.
However, this ap-
proach would not have addressed the uncertain re-
lationship between a user’s query and informational
goals. Consequently, we turned to a probabilistic ap-
proach for diagnosing a user’s problems given a query.
In a general user-modeling approach to information re-
trieval, we seek to infer a probability distribution over
concepts given a user’s query or utterance.
For ex-
ample, if a user states “I need help with graphing,”
we would like to infer a probability distribution over
a set of user goals. An appropriate probability distri-
bution would likely be diﬀerent for the query, “I want
to change the way the graph looks.” We pursued a
Bayesian analysis of terms to generate a probability
distribution over utterances.
Traditional approaches to Bayesian IR have employed
word counting to gather probabilistic information on
Query
Goal n
Goal 3
Goal 2
Goal 1
Figure 2: Bayesian network for diagnosing problems
from a user query. This representation is intractable
for knowledge acquisition given the large number of
potential queries.
the relationships of words to concepts. With a user
modeling approach, we have the ability leverage knowl-
edge that is typically not available in text written for
online assistance with software. We are interested in
capturing the way people actually describe their prob-
lems.
In a general model we consider all possible queries and
all possible goals, as captured by the Bayesian network
in Figure 2. We structure this IR problem with a set
of problem variables, representing a user’s problems,
inﬂuencing the probability distribution over plausible
queries. As indicated in the ﬁgure, it may be impor-
tant to represent dependencies among problems. In a
high-ﬁdelity model, we might seek to consider depen-
dencies among problems over time and represent ex-
plicit temporal probabilistic relationships among prob-
lems. At run time, we observe the user’s query and
infer probabilities of concepts.
It is infeasible to represent the large number of dis-
tinct queries that might be composed by users. In-
stead, we developed an approximation. To simply the
assessment and inference, we made the following as-
sumptions:
• Single user problem: Only a single problem is ac-
tive at any time.
• Order irrelevance: The order of terms in a query
is disregarded.
• Irrelevance of unrecognized terms: Only words in
the lexicon are included in the analysis.
Taken together, these assumptions deﬁne a Bayesian
term-spotting methodology.
To ease the assessment burden we made a fourth as-
sumption.
We additionally assumed term indepen-
dence:
terms are independent of other terms, con-
ditioned on the problem.
A Bayesian network for

Goal
Term m
Term 3
Term 2
Term 1
Figure 3:
A reformulation of the problem into a
Bayesian term-spotting analysis.
We consider the
presence or absence of words, discarding key informa-
tion about the sequence of words and dependencies
among words.
the reformulated term-spotting problem is displayed in
Figure 3. Clearly, assumptions of term independence
and order irrelevance may lead to signiﬁcant informa-
tion loss, given the great importance of structure and
dependencies among word in human communication.
Nevertheless, we were interested in the quality of in-
ference for Bayesian term spotting.
To construct the knowledge bases, we enlisted usabil-
ity specialists to assist with the identiﬁcation of the
problems of users and their associated help topics, as
well as terms that might be seen typically in queries
conditioned on the problems of users. For a prototyp-
ing eﬀort, we speciﬁed the set of problems associated
with help topics for the Microsoft Excel application.
For each problem, we identiﬁed sets of terms whose
likelihood of appearing in a query would be inﬂuenced
by the presence of a problem.
To simplify assessment, we employed a stemmer to re-
duce the number of terms by collapsing a multitude
of derived forms into more basic roots or lemmas. For
example, derived forms of the reference to printing a
document, including “print,” “printed” and “printing”
were reduced to the root, “print.”
Beyond consideration of root forms of words, special
phrases and distinctions were added to consideration
when deemed important. Such special distinctions in-
cluded term with distinguished patterns of capitaliza-
tion (e.g., “Word,” as in Microsoft Word, and “word”
are treated as distinct terms).
After constructing the problem and term distinctions,
we pursued knowledge from experts on the probabili-
ties of terms being used in a query conditioned on the
existence of each problem. Speciﬁcally, we sought, for
each term t, the conditional probability that the term
would appear in a query given a user assistance goal
g linked to the terms, p(t|g, ξ), where ξ refers to the
background state of knowledge of the person assessing
the probability. To ease the assessment, a log scale
was employed which discretized the conditional prob-
 | goal
 Modifying chart
                           
• chart
• graph
• cells
• row
• column
• insert
• modify
• edit
• format
• plot
• file
•
p(term | goalj)
 Formatting document
Figure 4: Building a knowledge base. Usability experts
worked to identify key terms used by consumers and
assessed the likelihood of terms used in a query for
assistance conditioned on diﬀerent problems.
abilities into a set of buckets which were separated by
equivalent likelihood ratios.
Given such a set of terms identiﬁed at run time, we
can infer the likelihood of user problems and thus ap-
propriate help topics via Bayesian updating. At run
time, we collect recognized terms from a query, reduce
them to root form and input the ﬁndings for inference.
We then compute the probability of all user problems
(as represented by appropriate help topics), given all
of the terms present (t+) and absent (t−) in a query,
denoted p(g|t+t−, ξ). Given the independence assump-
tions we have made, the posterior probability of each
topic is given by
p(gi|t+t−, ξ) =
α p(gi|ξ) Q
j p(t+
j |gi, ξ) Q
k 1 −p(t−
k |gi, ξ)
(1)
where p(gi|ξ) is the prior probability of each user in-
formational goal gi and α is a renormalizing constant
equal to the probability of seeing the set of terms in
the phrase. We do not need to compute α if we wish
only to generate a ranking.
3
Leak probabilities and assessment
Methods for limiting knowledge acquisition eﬀort are
paramount in attempts to handcraft a knowledge base
for Bayesian IR. To ease the assessment load, we devel-
oped a means for focusing probability assessment on
relevant terms-user problem relationships. In ﬂeshing
out the term and problem distinctions in the knowl-
edge base, experts were asked to identify terms associ-
ated with each problem that were “relevant” or made
more likely by the presence of that problem. As indi-
cated in Figure 4, these positive inﬂuences were indi-
cated by establishing a link between each user problem

 Modifying chart  
 Formatting document
Leak term
"I want to insert some text under my chart…"
Figure 5: At run time, terms in the knowledge base
are spotted. Leak terms are used for the probability
of words in the knowledge base being seen, conditioned
on help topics that are not directly linked to the term.
and the term positively inﬂuenced by the presence of
the user problem.
During probability assessment, we explicitly assessed
only the conditional probabilities of terms t for user
goals g linked to the terms. Rather than assess con-
ditional probabilities for terms not explicitly linked
to topics, we assume a small default leak probability,
p(t|g, ξ) = ϵ, for the likelihood of seeing a term given
an unlinked topic. The leak probability captures the
notion that user problems may cause terms even if
they are not believed to be relevant at the time the
probabilistic IR model is constructed.
As captured by Figure 5, at run time, we consider
whether or not terms are present in the query, and,
for each user problem, whether the problem is explic-
itly linked to a term or not. We consider four possible
outcomes for each help topic and term in the knowl-
edge base:
1. A user problem has links to a term that is not in
the query
2. A user problem has links to a term that is in the
query
3. A user problem does not have links to a term that
is in a query
4. A user problem does not have links to a term that
is not in the query
To compute the posterior probability for a user prob-
lem, for each term appearing in the query that is not
linked to that problem, we fold in the small leak prob-
ability. Thus, when a query is analyzed, we consider
each of the four conditions, and compute the proba-
bility of each user problem as,
p(gi|t+t−, ξ) =
α p(gi|ξ) Q
j p(tj|gi, ξ) Q
k[1 −p(tk|gi, ξ)]ϵl(1 −ϵ)m(2)
where tj are terms seen in the query and linked to user
informational goal gi, tk are terms linked to user goal
gi but not seen in the query, and where there are l
terms seen in the query but not linked to the problem
gi, and m terms that are not linked to the problem gi
and not seen in the query.
4
Prototyping and reﬁnement
We worked with the Microsoft Oﬃce division to build
an initial prototype of the Bayesian term-spotting
methodology. The prototype was based on a knowl-
edge base composed of approximately 600 terms to
reason about the likelihood of about 40 user problems,
abstracted to cover a large class of problems in the Ex-
cel domain. Informal validation of the performance of
the system demonstrated that the system performed
signiﬁcantly better than keyword-based help systems,
and a commitment was made to begin to scale the
system to realistic databases covering thousands of
help topics. Work on the scaling the system to such
large databases and continued testing led to further
improvements.
Several reﬁnements to the basic Bayesian approach
were introduced during the period of testing. Specif-
ically, we developed additional abstractions of sets of
terms that have related meaning and added new struc-
ture based in language usage in the user assistance
realm.
4.1
Additional abstraction of terms
As part of scaling up the size of the Bayesian IR knowl-
edge bases, we found opportunity for providing addi-
tional abstraction of terms to minimize the number of
assessments and links. We developed the notion of a
metanym to refer to sets of words that are probabilis-
tically inﬂuenced by the existence of user problems
in a similar manner. Metanyms include phrases that
point at the same basic observation or concept, more
closely related synonyms, hypernyms, and hyponyms.
As an example, a user may employ the terms “delete,”
“erase,” “remove,” “kill,” “lose,” and “get rid of” in
an equivalent pattern of usage. To reduce the number
of links and assessments, we can deﬁne a metanym re-
ferred to as “deletion” and deﬁne it with terms that
refer to the concept of deleting. Seeing any term con-
tained in the metanym activates the metanym. The
the probabilities of metanym conditioned on user prob-
lem is stored and used in the Bayesian information
retrieval.

4.2
Modeling language about existing and
desired states
In the coarse of building and testing early prototypes
of the Bayesian term-spotting methodology, we iden-
tiﬁed several opportunities for reﬁning the approach
centering on a consideration of patterns in natural
queries.
In particular, speciﬁc cases where inappro-
priate topics percolated to the top of a ranked list led
to valuable insights about how we might integrate ad-
ditional knowledge about the relationship of user goals
and language used in queries.
We found that typical queries for assistance with soft-
ware frequently contain noun phrases that refer to ei-
ther (1) the current state of aﬀairs and objects that
exist now, or to (2) desired states of aﬀairs achievable
via the transformation of the current state of aﬀairs
with some software functionality or through through
the creation of new objects. As an example, the prob-
abilistic relationships between “chart” and sets of user
problems depend on whether “chart” is used in the
phrase “this chart” versus when the word is used in
the phrase “a chart.”
Thus, the conditional proba-
bilities of terms given user problems may depend on
whether the terms are being used to refer to existing
or desired objects. Articles (“a chart,” “this chart”),
prepositions (e.g., “under this chart”), and adjectives
adjacent to noun phrases appeared to be rich sources
of evidence about the form of word.
We found that our intuitions about the importance of
existing versus desired objects in understanding the
goal of queries coincided with the notion of deﬁnite-
ness studied by linguists. Indo-European languages as
well as many non-Indo-European languages, including
Japanese, make use of special words and structure to
communicate existing versus desired objects and states
of aﬀairs. For example in English, deﬁnite articles, in-
cluding “the” and “this,” adjacent to noun phrases
typicaly signals that an object exists, while indeﬁnite
articles, such as “a” and “some,” implies nonexistence
of the object described in the adjacent noun phrase.
Given the potential importance of discriminating ex-
isting versus desired objects or states in interpreting
queries for assistance with software applications, we
developed a Bayesian approach to modeling terms used
in the deﬁnite versus the indeﬁnite sense.
The ap-
proach is based on the observation that the type and
number of functional words such as articles, conjunc-
tions, prepositions, and possessives provide evidence
about the probability that objects are being referred
to in the deﬁnite form. For example, the use of pos-
sessives is strong evidence that the noun referred to
by a function word exists. Consider the phrase, “I’d
like to change the colors of text under my chart.” The
Existence
Nonexistence
Current result
Desired result
*
*
“I’d like  to insert  some  rows   under   my  chart”
Figure 6: A Bayesian approach to considering indeﬁ-
niteness in queries for assistance. We identify clauses
and compute the probability of indeﬁnite usage of
terms based on adjacent function words.
preposition, “under,” and the possessive, “my,” tells
us that the chart is likely to exist. On the other hand,
consider the phrase, “How can I create a chart?” The
article “a” is an indeﬁnite article, as it suggests that
“chart” is a desired, but as of yet, nonexisting object.
We integrated an analysis of the use of the deﬁnite
versus the indeﬁnite form of a term with the basic
Bayesian information retrieval methods we have de-
scribed. In the approach, an expert constructing the
knowledge base has the option of noting that the use of
a term or metanym can be split into the indeﬁnite and
deﬁnite uses, and to indicate distinct links between
user goals and the diﬀerent uses of the terms. Then,
conditional probabilities are assessed for the likelihood
of a term being used in a query given the indeﬁnite
usage, p(t+|I, gi, ξ), and for the deﬁnite usage of the
term, p(t+|D, gi, ξ).
Figure 6 captures the run-time analysis of the deﬁnite
versus indeﬁnite usage.
When a query is analyzed,
function words such as articles, possessives, and prepo-
sitions are noted and used to identify noun clauses.
Then the function words adjacent to and modifying
noun clauses are used to compute the probability that
the noun in the adjacent clause is being used in the
indeﬁnite versus the deﬁnite sense.
To model the likelihood of indeﬁnite usage, we consider
the probability, p(I|F1 . . . Fn, g, ξ), that the terms in
a clause are being used in the indeﬁnite form, given
adjacent function words F1 . . . Fn.
We can simplify
the additional assessment task by assuming that I is
conditionally independent of the goals and construct
functions that estimate the probability of indeﬁnite
use given the set of function words adjacent to the
clause. If we make an additional assumption that func-
tion words are independent of other function words
given I, we can compute p(I|F1 . . . Fn, ξ) from an as-
sessment of the likelihood of a function word given the
presence of a noun of indeﬁnite form, p(F|I, ξ), and a

prior probability of the indeﬁnite form, p(I|ξ).
Given a knowledge base extended with assessments
of the likelihoods for indeﬁnite and deﬁnite forms
of terms conditioned on goals, we use the estimated
p(I|F1..Fn, ξ) to compute p(t+|gi, ξ),
p(t+|gi, ξ) = p(t+|I, gi, ξ) p(I|F1 . . . Fn, ξ)
+ p(t+|¬I, gi, ξ) p(¬I|F1 . . . Fn, ξ)
(3)
If there are no function words yielding information
about the usage in the adjacent noun clause, we simply
use the prior probability of the indeﬁnite form.
We explored an extension to this method which as-
sumed that all words are either neutral, deﬁnite, indef-
inite, or unknown and developed weighting approaches
that appropriately adjust p(t+|gi, ξ) for these methods.
With this more detailed approach, we assumed that,
if a link is not labeled, we should compute the proba-
bilities of deﬁnite, indeﬁnite, and neutral as reﬂecting
the ratio of labeled links in the rest of the knowledge
base.
Assessing and implementing the existence versus de-
sired usages in the prototype led to improvements in
the performance of the system. Most noticeable was
the appropriate lowering of probabilities assigned to
topics related to the creation of new objects when
queries were issues about modiﬁcations of existing ob-
jects.
4.3
Disambiguating noun and verb usages
We also sought to enhance the system by adding
knowledge of additional structure in language. In En-
glish, many words can be used as nouns or verbs de-
pending on the structure of the phrase. As an exam-
ple, consider the word “print” appearing in the phrase
“How do I print this?” (verb form) or the phrase “How
can I make this print darker?” (noun). The property
describing the dual use of these words is called zero
derivation.
We can enhance the accuracy of the Bayesian term-
spotting analysis by assessing separate probabilities
and links for the noun form of words and the verb form
of words.
That is, for a subset of specially marked
zero-derivation terms, we link and assess conditional
probabilities for the noun form, p(t+|N, gi, ξ) and the
verb form, p(t+|¬N, gi, ξ), of usage. A set of function
words that appear after and before the zero-derivation
terms give us deterministic knowledge on whether the
term is being used as a noun or verb. At run-time, we
employ templates that detect whether zero-derivation
terms are being used in the noun form or verb form
and return information about the use of the word. The
appropriate conditional probabilities is then passed to
Figure 7: A derivative of the Bayesian term-spotting
approach was scaled up to handle thousands of topics
and served as the primary user assistance system in
Microsoft Oﬃce, named Answer Wizard.
the base probabilistic updating described above.
On rare occasions where we are uncertain of the usage,
we can gather evidence about the probability that the
word is being used in noun or verb form and compute
the conditional probabilities of the term given goals,
similar to the computation of probabilities in the con-
text of uncertainty about the existing versus nonexist-
ing usage. We expand the independence assumptions
to assume that g is independent of N and I given F,
compute the probability of a term being used in the
noun form, and ﬁnally compute p(t+|gi, ξ).
5
Scaling the approach to the real
world
Given the solid performance of the prototype, a deci-
sion was made by the Microsoft Oﬃce product divi-
sion to collaborate with our team on scaling the ap-
proach up to handle thousands of topics and for the
creation of distinct knowledge bases for foreign lan-
guages where Microsoft Oﬃce has a large user base.
Knowledge bases were created for the Microsoft Of-
ﬁce Suite, including Access, Excel, Powerpoint, Word,
Outlook, as well as for Microsoft Project application,
employing a derivative updating scheme.
As part of the eﬀort of scaling up the approach, an
assessment and testing environment was created for
building knowledge bases and team of usability experts
was assembled for enumerating distinctions and for as-
sessing conditional probabilities. This group of people
includes psychologists and other specialists in human-
computer interaction.

During the early phases of assembling a team and con-
structing knowledge bases, numerous questions arose
on the process of assessing conditional probabilities.
These questions led to the development of guidelines
and prototypical examples to assist with transmitting
a uniﬁed vision of the nature of the probability of terms
conditioned on user goals.
The implementation team found that it was help-
ful to allow experts to assess conditional probabili-
ties on a scale of 1 to 13, and to later remap the
assessed numbers to probabilities. The mapping be-
tween the numbers and probabilities, and associated
guidelines for experts, was deﬁned by assuming equal
likelihood ratios among adjacent buckets. Deﬁnitions
were provided for each point on the scale with exam-
ples and natural-language deﬁnitions that character-
ized the likelihood of terms, given the presence of a
user goal. Guidelines were created in terms of typical
sentences and parts of speech used to refer to speciﬁc
goals.
Such deﬁnitions assisted with explaining the
task to assessors as well as for normalizing the proba-
bilities assessed by diﬀerent groups of people.
The assessment task posed a signiﬁcant challenge, in-
cluding formulating a distinct set of topics represent-
ing distinct user goals, identifying terms and phrases
employed by users to describe their goals, to explic-
itly linking terms to multiple topics, and to assessing
the conditional probabilities. The Bayesian IR model
for the Microsoft Word application is representative
for the Oﬃce applications. In Oﬃce ’95, the Bayesian
model for Microsoft Word included over 1,000 topics,
5,000 terms, and 145,000 dependencies.
Each full-time usability expert completed on average
about 40 topics per week. After creating an English
version, the models were translated into twelve lan-
guages, including German, French, Spanish, Italian,
Swedish, Japanese, Brazilian Portuguese, Dutch, Dan-
ish, Norwegian, Korean, and Traditional Chinese. Lo-
calization of the English knowledge base to the other
languages was found to take approximately one month
for a full-time person.
To test the knowledge bases as well as to monitor
for problems as real-world implementations were con-
structed and integrated into products, a large, cover-
ing set of “smoke test” queries was created for each
software application. These queries were gleaned by

ies with human subjects at Microsoft’s usability labs.
The performance requirement was to have a good an-
swer for queries appear in the top ﬁve of the returned
list for no less than 99 per cent of the queries.
Studies were also performed with users. In the stud-
ies, users seeking assistance were allowed to rephrase
their queries up to three times for each informational
goal. The studies showed that users would receive a
good answer to their question within the top ﬁve rec-
ommended topics in approximately 75 percent of their
queries. A large fraction of failures was attributed to
user’s inputting single, vague words instead of describ-
ing their goal more naturally, in a manner they might
request assistance from a colleague.
6
Conclusion
We have described a Bayesian term-spotting method-
ology that allows users of computer software to request
assistance by composing natural free-text queries. We
presented a basic set of assumptions and a Bayesian
updating method, and then described how we ex-
tended the initial approach by considering additional
structure in queries.
The Bayesian framework we provided allowed for the
construction and assessment of a large probabilistic
information retrieval system by a team of usability ex-
perts. The costs of the intensive assessment eﬀort re-
quired to build a large handcrafted knowledge base
typically may overwhelm the value of enhanced infor-
mation retrieval. However, for the case of enhancing a
product used by many millions of people, the detailed
assessment can be worth the cost of manual construc-
tion of a database. We are now exploring means for au-
tomating the construction of Bayesian term-spotting
knowledge bases.
