GATED RECURRENT NETWORKS FOR SEIZURE DETECTION 
M. Golmohammadi, S. Ziyabari, V. Shah, E. Von Weltin, C. Campbell, I. Obeid and J. Picone 
Neural Engineering Data Consortium, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 

Abstract— Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with 
sophisticated units that implement a gating mechanism 
have emerged as powerful technique for modeling 
sequential signals such as speech or electroencephalography 
(EEG). The latter is the focus on this paper. A significant 
big data resource, known as the TUH EEG Corpus 
(TUEEG), has recently become available for EEG research, 
creating a unique opportunity to evaluate these recurrent 
units on the task of seizure detection. In this study, we 
compare two types of recurrent units: long short-term 
memory units (LSTM) and gated recurrent units (GRU). 
These are evaluated using a state of the art hybrid 
architecture 
that 
integrates 
Convolutional 
Neural 
Networks (CNNs) with RNNs. We also investigate a variety 
of initialization methods and show that initialization is 
crucial since poorly initialized networks cannot be trained. 
Furthermore, 
we 
explore 
regularization 
of 
these 
convolutional gated recurrent networks to address the 
problem of overfitting.  Our experiments revealed that 
convolutional LSTM networks can achieve significantly 
better performance than convolutional GRU networks. The 
convolutional LSTM architecture with proper initialization 
and regularization delivers 30% sensitivity at 6 false alarms 
per 24 hours. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Diagnosis of clinical conditions such as epilepsy are 
dependent on electroencephalography (EEG), the 
recording of the brain’s electrical activity through 
electrodes placed on the scalp. Delivering a conclusive 
diagnosis of a brain-related illness without an EEG is 
often unfeasible [1]. The large amounts of time required 
by specialized neurologists to interpret these records, has 
created a workflow bottleneck – neurologists are 
overwhelmed with the amount of data that needs to be 
manually reviewed [2]. There is a great need for partial 
or complete automation of the EEG analysis process, and 
automated technology is slowly emerging to fill this void 
[3][4]. Automatic analysis of EEG scans reduces time to 
diagnosis, reduces error and enhances a neurologist’s 
ability to administer medications. The ability to search 
EEG records symbolically greatly accelerates the review 
process.  
In this paper, we focus specifically on the problem of 
seizure detection. Many algorithms have been applied to 
this problem including time–frequency analysis methods 
[5][6], nonlinear statistical models [7] and more modern 
machine learning approaches such as neural networks 
and support vector machines [8]. Despite much progress, 
current EEG analysis methodologies are far from perfect 
with many being considered impractical due to high false 
detection rates [9]-[11]. The machine learning challenges 
of this application are described extensively in [1]. 
A significant big data resource, known as the TUH EEG 
Corpus (TUEEG) [12], has become available for EEG 
interpretation creating a unique opportunity to advance 
technology. Using a subset of this data that has been 
manually annotated for seizure events [13], a novel deep 
structure has been recently introduced which achieves a 
low false alarm rate on EEG signals [14]. This system 
integrates convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with 
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to deliver state of the 
art performance. In this paper, our goal is to investigate 
the use of RNNs using the high-performance architecture 
described 
in 
[13]. 
We 
also 
explore 
improved 
initialization methods and regularization approaches. 
II. RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS 
A recurrent neural network (RNN) is an extension of a 
conventional feedforward neural network which can 
handle a variable-length input. The RNN handles the 
variable-length sequence by having a recurrent hidden 
state whose activation at each time is dependent on that 
of the previous time. Standard RNNs are hard to train due 
to the well-known vanishing or exploding gradient 
problems [15][16]. To address the vanishing gradient 
problem, the gated recurrent network architectures such 
as long short-term memory (LSTM) [17] unit and gated 
recurrent unit (GRU) were proposed [18]. 
LSTM was presented in [17]. The most commonly used 
architecture was described in [19], and is formulated as:  
𝑖௧=  𝜎(𝑈௜𝑥௧+ 𝑊௜𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑝௜∘𝑐௧ିଵ+ 𝑏௜) , 
(1) 
𝑓௧=  𝜎(𝑈௙𝑥௧+ 𝑊௙𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑝௙∘𝑐௧ିଵ+ 𝑏௙) , 
(2) 
𝑐௧= 𝑓௧∘𝑐௧ିଵ+ 𝑖௧∘𝑔(𝑈௖𝑥௧+ 𝑊௖𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑏௖) ,  
(3) 
𝑜௧=  𝜎(𝑈௢𝑥௧+ 𝑊௢𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑝௢∘𝑐௧+ 𝑏௢) , 
(4) 
𝑠௧= 𝑜௧∘𝑔(𝑐௧) . 
(5) 
where 𝑖௧, 𝑓௧, 𝑐௧, 𝑜௧, and 𝑠௧ are the input gate, forget gate, 
cell state, output gate and block output at time instance t, 
respectively; 𝑥௧ is the input at time t; 𝑈∗, and 𝑊∗are the 
weight matrices applied on input and recurrent hidden 
units, respectively; 𝜎(. ) and 𝑔(. )are the sigmoid and 
tangent activation functions, respectively; 𝑝∗ and 𝑏∗ are 
the peep-hole connections and biases, respectively; and ∘ 
means element-wise product. 

As an alternative to the LSTM, the Gated Recurrent Unit 
(GRU) architecture was proposed in [20]. In [18], a GRU 
architecture was found to achieve better performance 
than LSTM on some tasks. A GRU is formulated as: 
𝑟௧=  𝜎(𝑈௥𝑥௧+ 𝑊௥𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑏௥) , 
(6) 
𝑧௧=  𝜎(𝑈௭𝑥௧+ 𝑊௭𝑠௧ିଵ+ 𝑏௭) , 
(7)  
𝑠̃௧=  𝑔(𝑈௦𝑥௧+ 𝑟௧∘(𝑊௦𝑠௧ିଵ) + 𝑏௦ , 
(8) 
𝑠௧= 𝑧௧∘𝑠௧ିଵ+ (1 − 𝑧௧) ∘ 𝑠̃௧ . 
(9)  
As one can see, a GRU architecture is similar to LSTM 
but without a separate memory cell. Unlike LSTM, a 
GRU does not include output activation functions and 
peep-hole connections. It also integrates the input and 
forget gates into an update gate, 𝑧௧, to balance between 
the previous activation, 𝑠௧ିଵ, and the candidate 
activation, 𝑠̃௧. The reset gate, 𝑟௧, allows it to forget the 
previous state [21]. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
Our basic architecture, which employs a convolutional 
recurrent neural network, is presented in Figure 1. In this 
architecture, we integrate 2D CNNs, 1-D CNNs and 
LSTM 
networks 
to 
better 
exploit 
long-term 
dependencies. This structure currently uses LSTMs. 
However, we can easily replace LSTMs with GRUs. 
Feature extraction is performed using a fairly standard 
linear frequency cepstral coefficient-based feature 
extraction approach (LFCCs) popularized in applications 
such as speech recognition [22][23]. We also use first and 
second derivatives of the features since these provide a 
small improvement in performance [22]. 
Drawing on a video classification analogy, input data to 
the first layer of CNNs is composed of frames distributed 
in time where each frame is an image of width (W) equal 
to the length of a feature vector, the height (H) equals the 
number of EEG channels, and the number of image 
channels (N) equals one. Input data consists of T frames 
where T is equal to the window length multiplied by the 
number of samples per second. 
In our optimized system with a window duration of 21 
seconds, the first 2D convolutional layer filters 210 
frames (T = 21 × 10) of EEGs distributed in time with a 
size of 26 × 22 × 1 (W=26, H=22, N=1) using 16 kernels 
of size 3 × 3 and with a stride of 1. The first 2D max 
pooling layer takes as input a vector which is 260 frames 
distributed in time with a size of 26 × 22 × 16 and applies 
a pooling size of 2 × 2. This process is repeated two times 
with two 2D convolutional layers with 32 and 64 kernels 
of size 3 × 3 respectively and two 2D max pooling layers 
with a pooling size 2 × 2. 
The output of the third max pooling layer is flattened to 
210 frames with size of 384 × 1. Then a 1D convolutional 
layer filters the output of the flattening layer using 16 
kernels of size 3 which decreases the dimensionality in 
space to 210 × 16. Then we apply a 1D maxpooling layer 
with a size of 8 to decrease the dimensionality to 26 × 16. 
This is the input to a deep bidirectional LSTM network 
where the dimensionality of the output space is 128 and 
256. The output of the last bidirectional LSTM layer is 
fed to a 2-way sigmoid function which produces a final 
classification of an epoch. Epochs are typically 1 sec in 
duration. 
 
Figure 1: A deep recurrent convolutional architecture for two-dimensional decoding of EEG signals that integrates 2D CNNs, 1-D
CNNs and LSTM networks is shown. In this structure, LSTMs can be easily replaced by GRUs. 

To overcome the problem of overfitting and force the 
system to learn more robust features, regularizations are 
used in first two layers of CNNs. To increase non-
linearity, Exponential Linear Units (ELU) are used [24]. 
Adam is used in the optimization process along with a 
mean squared error loss function [14].  
IV. RESULTS 
The lack of big data resources that can be used to train 
sophisticated statistical models compounds a major 
problem in automatic seizure detection. Inter-rater 
agreement for this task is low, especially when 
considering short seizure events [1]. Manual annotation 
of a large amount of data by a team of certified 
neurologists is extremely expensive and time consuming. 
It is difficult to employ large numbers of board-certified 
neurologists to perform this task. In this study, we are 
reporting results on the TUH EEG Seizure Corpus 
(TUSZ) [13]. This dataset, which is publicly available, is 
a subset of the TUH EEG Corpus that focuses on the 
problem of seizure detection. A summary of the corpus 
(v1.1.1) is shown in Table 1. 
A comparison of the performance of the convolutional 
recurrent neural networks using GRU and LSTM 
architectures, for sensitivity in range of 30%, are shown 
in Table 2 The related DET curve is illustrated in Figure 2 
These systems were evaluated using a method of scoring 
popular in the EEG research community known as the 
overlap method [25]. True positives (TP) are defined as 
the number of epochs identified as a seizure in the 
reference annotations and correctly labeled as a seizure 
by the system. True negatives (TN) are defined as the 
number of epochs correctly identified as non-seizures. 
False positives (FP) are defined as the number of epochs 
incorrectly labeled as seizure while false negatives (FN) 
are defined as the number of epochs incorrectly labeled 
as non-seizure. Sensitivity shown in Table 2 is computed 
as TP/(TP+FN). Specificity is computed as TN/(TN+FP). 
The false alarm rate is the number of FPs per 24 hours.  
By comparing the results of CNN/LSTM with 
CNN/GRU, demonstrated in Figure 2, we find that in 
lower false positive rates, CNN/LSTM has significantly 
better performance from CNN/GRU, due to the fact that 
while GRU unit controls the flow of information like the 
LSTM unit, but it does not have a memory unit. LSTMs 
can remember longer sequences better than GRUs and 
outperform it in this task, since seizure detection requires 
modeling long distance relationships. Additionally, the 
training time of CNN/GRU was 10% less than 
CNN/LSTM. Hence, the training time of these two 
systems is comparable, since most of the cycles are used 
for training of convolutional layers.  
In neural networks, determining the proper initialization 
strategy for the parameters in the model is part of the 
difficulty in training.  Hence, we investigated a variety of 
initialization methods using the structure introduced in 
Figure 1. These results are presented in Table 4. The 
related DET curve is illustrated in Figure 4. In our 
experiments, we observed that the proper initialization of 
weights in a convolutional recurrent neural network is 
critical to convergence. For example, initialization with 
zeros 
or ones 
methods 
completely 
stalled 
the 
convergence process. Also, as we can see in Table 4, the 
performance of the system for the same sensitivity of 
30% can change from 7 to 40, for different initialization 
methods. This decrease in performance and deceleration 
of convergence arises because some initializations can 
result in the deeper layers receiving inputs with small 
variances, which in turn slows down back propagation, 
and retards the overall convergence process. 
The best performance is achieved using orthogonal 
initialization. This method is a simple yet effective way 
of combatting exploding and vanishing gradients. 
Orthogonal matrices preserve the norm of a vector and 
their eigenvalues have absolute value of one. This means 
that, no matter how many times we perform repeated 
matrix multiplication, the resulting matrix doesn't 
explode or vanish [26]. Also in orthogonal matrices, 
columns and rows are all orthonormal to one another, 
which helps the weights to learn different input features. 
Description
Train
Eval
Patients
196
50
Sessions
456
230
Files
1505
984
Seizure (secs)
51,140
53,930
Non-Seizure (secs)
877,821
547,728
Total (secs)
928,962
601,659
Table 1. An overview of the TUH EEG Seizure Corpus (v1.1.1)
System
Sensitivity
Specificity
FA/24 Hrs.
CNN/GRU
30.83%
91.49%
21
CNN/LSTM
30.83%
97.10%
6
Table 2. Recognition results for convolutional recurrent neural 
networks using GRU and LSTM architectures, for sensitivity 
in range of 30%. 
Figure 2. DET Curves for convolutional recurrent neural 
networks using GRU and LSTM architectures.

Overfitting is a serious problem in deep neural nets with 
many parameters. In this study, we used five popular 
regularization methods to address this problem. By using 
L1, L2 and L1/L2 techniques, we apply penalties on layer 
parameters during optimization [30]. These penalties are 
incorporated in the loss function that the network 
optimizes. In an alternative approach, we used dropout to 
prevents units from co-adapting too much by randomly 
dropping units and their connections from the neural 
network during training [30]. Also, we studied the impact 
of introducing zero-centered Gaussian noise to the 
network [30]. The results of these experiments are 
presented in Table 3 along with a DET curve in Figure 3. 
While generally L1/L2 has the best performance, as we 
move towards a low FA rate, dropout delivers a lower FA 
rate. Additionally, we found that the primary error 
modalities observed were false alarms generated during 
brief delta range slowing patterns such as intermittent 
rhythmic delta activity. Our closed-loop experiments 
showed us that all the regularizing methods presented in 
Table 3 are playing an important role in increasing the 
false alarms of slowing patterns. Even though dropout is 
effective in CNNs, when dropout is placed over kernels 
it leads to diminished results. To solve this problem, in 
our future work, an efficient Bayesian convolutional 
neural network is being explored that places a probability 
distribution over the CNN’s kernels [31]. This approach 
offers better robustness to overfitting on small data and 
show improve the robustness of our training process. 
SUMMARY 
In this paper, we investigated two deep learning 
architectures 
(LSTM 
and 
GRU) 
for 
automatic 
classification 
of 
EEGs 
using 
CNNs. 
LSTMs 
outperformed GRUs. We also studied initialization and 
regularizations of these networks. In future research, we 
are designing a more powerful architecture based on 
reinforcement learning concepts. We are also optimizing 
regularization and initialization algorithms for these 
approaches. Our goal is to approach human performance 
which is in the range of 75% sensitivity with a false alarm 
rate of 1 per 24 hours [11]. Robust training procedures 
are needed to make this technology relevant to a wide 
range of healthcare applications.
