Nanowars can cause epidemic resurgence and fail to promote cooperation
Hypothetical nanotech-based wars targeting non-cooperative infectious agents
would reduce, not improve planetary health
Dirk Helbing1, 2, ∗and Matjaˇz Perc2, 3, 4, 5, †
1Computational Social Science, ETH Z¨urich,
Stampfenbachstraße 48, 8092 Z¨urich, Switzerland
2Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefst¨adterstraße 39, 1080 Vienna, Austria
3Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics,
University of Maribor, Koroˇska cesta 160, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
4Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital,
China Medical University, Taichung 404332, Taiwan
5Alma Mater Europaea, Slovenska ulica 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
Abstract
In a non-sustainable, “over-populated” world, what might the use of nanotechnology-based tar-
geted, autonomous weapons mean for the future of humanity? In order to gain some insights, we
make a simpliﬁed game-theoretical thought experiment. We consider a population where agents play
the public goods game, and where in parallel an epidemic unfolds. Agents that are infected defectors
are killed with a certain probability and replaced by susceptible cooperators. We show that such
“nanowars”, even if aiming to promote good behavior and planetary health, fail not only to pro-
mote cooperation, but they also signiﬁcantly increase the probability of repetitive epidemic waves. In
fact, newborn cooperators turn out to be easy targets for defectors in their neighborhood. Therefore,
counterintuitively, the discussed intervention may even have the opposite effect as desired, promoting
defection. We also ﬁnd a critical threshold for the death rate of infected defectors, beyond which
resurgent epidemic waves become a certainty. In conclusion, we urgently call for international regu-
lation of nanotechnology and autonomous weapons.
Keywords: planetary health, cooperation, evolutionary game theory, public goods, epidemic spreading, nanowars

1
arXiv:2201.04747v1  [physics.soc-ph]  13 Jan 2022

INTRODUCTION
In November 2019, newspapers reported “Earth Needs Fewer People to Beat the Climate Cri-
sis”, a call for action with more than 11.000 signatories [1]. At the same time, thousands of
experts in the AI and robotics communities have raised concerns about autonomous weapons such
as drones and “killer robots” [2]. In perspective, when combined with face recognition or other
identiﬁcation techniques, it has been warned that “slaughterbots” could be used for targeted killing,
e.g., of dissidents or unwanted minorities. Given that this opens new possibilities for genocide,
the recent failure of the United Nations to ban autonomous weapons is concerning [3].
Here, we discuss another conceivable scenario that has not been talked about much: In a simpli-
ﬁed though experiment, we will study some implications of a scenario assuming that nanotechnol-
ogy might be used for targeted killing and population control outside of classical battleﬁelds. For
this purpose, we apply game-theoretical methodology, which has been used to analyze situations
of competition and war since the very beginning, and extend it by an epidemiological spreading
model.
Without any doubt, we are now living in digital times, where huge amounts of Big Data are
created by the Internet of Things (IoT), based on sensor networks, from which data can be ob-
tained in wireless ways. By now, the technology has advanced to the point, where nanotechnology
can be used to establish what is called the “Internet of Bodies” (IoB) [4]. In fact, the World Eco-
nomic Forum (WEF) stated in June 2020 [5]: “We’re entering the era of the ‘Internet of Bodies’:
collecting our physical data via a range of devices that can be implanted, swallowed or worn.”
Applications like the IoB may be based on the exposition of bodies to nanoparticles, i.e. less
than micrometer-scale particles or structures, not visible to the naked eye, which may be used, for
example [6, 7],
1. to give people a unique electronic identity (e-ID) and track them,
2. to measure body functions and cellular activities, or
3. to manipulate processes in the body (e.g., to heal a disease).
Of course, the opposite, i.e. causing a disease would also be possible. Hence, people could
be killed slowly but surely. This is particularly evident for deadly viruses, which are particular
kinds of nanoparticles and might be modiﬁed by gain-of-function research [8]. For example, it is
conceivable to wirelessly switch certain functionality on or off [9]. For further information one
2

may search for the “Internet of (Bio-)Nano Things”, “of Medical Things”, “of Military Things”,
and “of Virus Things”.
Inspired by this, we discuss the following simpliﬁed scenario that does not claim realism, but
rather serves to initiate an overdue debate. In the very tradition of “thought experiments” such
as “Schr¨odinger’s cat” [10], the scenario discussed here is purely hypothetical and does not claim
similarities with real events. It innovatively combines the spatial disease spreading of viruses
according to a SIRS model [11] with the dynamics of cooperation or defection in a social dilemma
game [12]. We further assume that the hypothetical kinds of viruses can be switched between two
different states: a harmless, mild, symptom-free one and an aggressive, potentially deadly one.
In other words, the assumed kinds of viruses may be weaponized in a targeted and personalized
way. Inspired by the “Karma Police” program [13], which judges the value of a person with a
citizen score that is determined by mass surveillance, we further assume that switching could be
targeted, using personal data, as in the “Skynet” program [14].
Our model corresponds to a setting in which a simpliﬁed kind of citizen score is determined by
the behavior of a person, namely where a positive value is given to a cooperative agent, while a
defector gets a negative value. Moreover, it is assumed that a negative value may trigger a triage
decision, which turns the virus deadly when the targeted agent is infected.
We assume that the targeting, i.e. the personalized switching between the harmless and deadly
state of the hypothetical, “customized” virus, is controlled by an autonomous AI system, which
has been tasked to “maximize planetary health”. In our model, the system targets and kills infected
defectors with the intention to “create a paradise full of healthy cooperators”. We will show that
such a scenario fails to reach its goal of eliminating defectors who show antisocial behavior, and
it further tends to cause epidemic resurgence, i.e. repetitive epidemic waves.
MATHEMATICAL MODEL
As basis of our model, we use a square lattice of size L2 with periodic boundary conditions,
where each agent is connected to its four nearest neighbors. The public goods game is thus played
in overlapping groups of size G = 5, where each agents belongs to g = G different groups [15].
Cooperators and defectors are initially distributed uniformly at random, and subsequently cooper-
ators contribute a ﬁxed amount, here considered to be equal to 1 without loss of generality, in each
instance of the public goods game, while defectors contribute nothing. The sum of all contribu-
3

tions in each group is multiplied by the factor R > 1, and the resulting public goods are distributed
amongst all group members irrespective of their initial contribution. If sx = C, i.e. player x is
cooperative, the payoff of x from every group g is
P g
C = RN g
C/G −1 ,
(1)
where N g
C is the number of cooperators in group g. If sx = D, i.e. player x is defecting, the payoff
of x is
P g
D = RN g
C/G .
(2)
Monte Carlo simulations [16] of this public goods game are carried out based on the following
elementary steps: A randomly selected player x plays the public goods game as a member of all
the g = 1, . . . , G groups of size G, whereby its payoff is
Psx =
X
g
P g
sx .
(3)
Next, player x chooses one of its nearest neighbors at random, and this player also acquires its
payoff Psy in the same way. Finally, player y copies the strategy sx of player x with a probability
given by a multinomial logit model. This is represented here by the Fermi function
w(sx →sy) = 1/{1 + exp[(Psy −Psx)/K]} ,
(4)
where K quantiﬁes the uncertainty in strategy adoptions due to errors in decision making or in-
complete information. We use K = 0.5 without loss of generality, and in agreement with the most
commonly used setup [17]. Each full Monte Carlo Step (MCS) entails L2 such elementary steps,
as L2 is the size of the periodic lattice, which gives a chance to every player to change its strategy
once, on average, in one full MCS.
In what follows, we will use between L = 50 and 400 and three different values of the multipli-
cation factor R that describe three signiﬁcantly different outcomes of the public goods dilemma.
For R = 3 we have a complete absence of cooperators, such that their average density in the sta-
tionary state, when the average fraction of both strategies becomes time independent, is ρC = 0.
For R = 4 we have a mixed cooperation-defection state of the stylized society, such that the av-
erage fraction of cooperators is ρC = 0.52 (see upper row of Fig. 1 for details). And ﬁnally, for
R = 5 we have a near domination of cooperators, such that their average fraction is ρC = 0.93.
These are well-known results, which have been reported often before [17].
4

Simultaneously to the public goods game, the same L2 agents on the square lattice are assumed
to be subject to an epidemic, which we simulate by means of Monte Carlo simulations of the
susceptible-infectious-recovered-susceptible (SIRS) model [18–21]. Accordingly, each agent can
be either in the susceptible (ex = S), infectious (ex = I), or recovered (ex = R) state. Initially all
agents are placed in the S state, but when the public goods game reaches the stationary state, we
assume that 1% agents have been randomly infected according to a uniform distribution, which
makes them infectious, thus setting off an epidemic wave.
The following elementary steps apply: We ﬁrst select an agent x uniformly at random. If
ex = S, we then select one of its neighbors y uniformly at random and, if ey = I, player x
becomes infected with probability p. We here use p = 0.5 without loss of generality [20, 21]. If the
neighbor y is in any other state, nothing happens. On the other hand, if ex = I, we verify whether
at least tr full MCS have passed since it became infected. If yes, agent x becomes recovered, and
if not, it remains infected. We note that tr is the so-called recovery time, which we set to 10 full
MCS, such that combined with p = 0.5, roughly each agent on the square lattice is infected once
during the ﬁrst epidemic wave (see the green line in the bottom row of Fig. 1). Lastly, if ex = R,
we verify whether at least ti full MCS have passed since it became recovered. If yes, agent x
becomes susceptible again, and if not, it remains recovered. Similarly to tr, ti is the immunity
time, i.e., the time after recovery during which an agent cannot become reinfected, which we set
to 6tr. This implies that, in the absence of any further triggered infections, the ﬁrst wave of the
epidemics is almost surely also the last one (see lower row of Fig. 1 for details), as all infectious
agents become recovered before those who were infected ﬁrst become susceptible again.
To introduce and study possible impacts of a targeted nanowar, we ﬁnally assume that it is
possible to turn the virus deadly, such that, with probability q, a infectious defector dies after
3/4th of the recovery time. To give this intervention the best chance to have a “prosocial” effect,
we assume that deceased infectious defectors will be replaced by newborn susceptible cooperators.
Hence, in resemblance to the Biblical “Last Judgment” scenario, some entity (e.g. AI system) is
trying to decrease the number of infectious agents and to rid the population of freeriders.
RESULTS
In what follows, we explore the impact of different values of q—akin to the intensity of
nanowar—on public cooperation and epidemic spreading for the three different values of R. In
5

Fig. 2, we ﬁrst revisit the results presented in Fig. 1 for q = 0.5, thus unleashing nanowar with
a 50% chance of survival, while an infected defector will be killed and replaced by a susceptible
cooperator with a probability of 50%. Fundamental differences, especially in the SIRS dynamics
(bottom row), can be observed immediately. Instead of a single epidemic wave, we have con-
current waves that never seize. In this way, the nanowar has a self-perpetuating nature: newly
emerging susceptible cooperators feed new epidemic waves, which eliminate reemerging defec-
tors.
The public goods dynamics is comparatively less affected, although it is clear that the nanowar
entirely misses its assumed goal of promoting planetary health and social welfare through in-
creased cooperation. On the contrary, if anything, the level of cooperation even somewhat de-
creases, because the newly introduced cooperators enable surrounding defectors to exploit them.
In addition to the never-ending epidemic waves, we thus observe a decline of public cooperation
due to the counterintuitive effect that newborn cooperators do not increase cooperation, but rather
promote nearby freeriding.
It is of further interest to determine more accurately to what degree these worrying conse-
quences of nanowar manifest for other values of q (the nanowar intensity), and for different propen-
sities of the environment to support cooperation. We therefore vary q with 0 ≤q ≤1 and record
the average stationary fraction ρC of cooperators, the average stationary fraction ρI of infectious
agents, and the probability for the emergence of recurrent epidemic waves over 300 independent
realizations of the nanowar scenario. The results shown in Fig. 3 essentially conﬁrm the worst
case, namely epidemic resurgence and failure to promote cooperation—with the exception of a
slightly positive trend of cooperation for R = 3 (leftmost panel). It should be noted, however, that
for R = 3 the default state in the public goods game is all out defection. Accordingly, the little rise
in ρC as q increases is simply due to the fact that, when defectors are killed, they are replaced by
cooperators, which results in an artiﬁcially maintained, low, non-zero fraction of cooperators. The
outcome, however, is not the emergence of compact cooperative clusters, but short-lived isolated
cooperators that turn into defectors, only to be killed and replaced again by the nanowar machin-
ery. The cost for the Pyrrhic victory in this brave new world is half of the population always being
in an infectious state.
Results in Fig. 3 also show that, for larger R, i.e., in more cooperative environments, the nega-
tive impacts of nanowar are likely to be smaller—in that recurrent epidemic waves are lower and
ﬂatter, as well as never fully certain, which ultimately results in a lower value ρI of infectious
6

agents. For example, for R = 4, a full-on nanowar with q = 1 leaves only half as much of
the population (22%) in the infectious state compared to R = 3 (53%). For R = 5, this further
decreases to just 6.9%. This is understandable, of course, since the lack of defectors in predomi-
nantly cooperative societies drastically decreases the number of available targets for the nanowar
machine. Therefore, the negative consequences that we have reported for non-cooperative (R = 3)
and somewhat cooperative (R = 4) societies, do not manifest so strongly, but are still there.
Furthermore, with regard to the results presented in Fig. 3, we note that the critical threshold
in q for never ending epidemic waves also increases with increasing R. For R = 3, a nanowar
with intensity qc = 0.175(4) is already guaranteed to always induce recurrent epidemic waves.
For R = 4, the same critical value already increases to qc = 0.276(4), whereas for R = 5, leaving
all else the same, the certainty of recurrent epidemic waves never comes to be, with the highest
probability being just below 60% at q = 1, as can be observed in the middle and rightmost panel
of Fig. 3 (solid grey line).
Some of these terrible outcomes can be mitigated by imagining even greater control over the
newborns that follow nanowar eliminations. For example, one could imagine the newborns being
not only cooperators, but also recovered rather than susceptible, i.e., immune at least for the dura-
tion of the immunity time, or longer. We have veriﬁed that this signiﬁcantly lowers the probability
for recurrent epidemic waves (results not shown), but still does nothing to promote cooperation.
With regards to the latter, the fact that a nanowar fails to promote cooperation can still be
considered as a relatively lenient outcome. Research has shown that people are often conditionally
cooperative [22–25], cooperating only if others also cooperate. A model where an eliminated
defector would not be replaced by a cooperator but simply left vacant could, thus, easily further
erode cooperation in such a case. Many other alterations to the current setup can be envisaged
along similar lines. Future research will certainly address some of these possibilities. For the time
being, however, we feel that the presented results deter convincingly against considering, let alone
implementing, nanowar.
To conclude, we underline, as already emphasized time and again in various works in social
physics and computational social science [26, 27], that linear thinking often fails when it comes
to attempts to better society. As the nanowar thought experiment proves, we must expect the un-
expected, such as the fact that killing defectors and replacing them with cooperators can actually
impair cooperation rather than promoting it, or that killing off infected agents actually feeds an
epidemic rather than halting it. The secret to understanding such counterintuitive results lies in col-
7

lective behavior and self-organization in complex dynamical systems, which cannot be determined
or enforced by top down approaches, but should be promoted in a bottom-up way, by assisting in-
teractions of individuals, which are expected to produce favorable collective effects [28].
DISCUSSION
The aim of our study is to warn of dangers of social engineering and to raise awareness for
potential threats by dual uses of nanotechnology. At the moment, the use of nanoparticles seems
to be under-regulated. Adding nanoparticles to food, for example, mostly does not have to be
declared, and possible societal side effects of using nanotechnology are often not discussed. How-
ever, everyone is exposed to nanoparticles via food, water, air, contact, drugs or vaccines in various
concentrations, while some of them are toxic [29]. Under such conditions, dual uses are conceiv-
able. We also remind of Murphy’s law, according to which everything that can go wrong will go
wrong, sooner or later.
To make the case for international regulation, we have chosen a particularly drastic, “apoca-
lyptic” kind of scenario, which, if it really took place, would certainly be judged as crime against
humanity. Not only do we condemn the implementation of such scenarios. Our results also show
that the attempt to improve the state of the world by killing defectors can miserably fail: The exis-
tence of a social dilemma situation will cause a never-ending re-occurrence of defectors, where a
“war against misbehaviour” (here: defection) can even decrease cooperation. This is also expected
when the agents are conditionally cooperative, i.e. if they cooperate when having a sufﬁcient
number of cooperative neighbors—especially when the population density is reduced. As a con-
sequence, we doubt that a better world will result by targeting individuals and trying to eradicate
“bad behavior” or even killing defectors.
Instead, for a desirable collective behavior to emerge in a complex dynamical system such as
our society, one needs to focus on the interactions between system components rather than the
components themselves (the agents) [28]. This is a matter of “mechanism design”. In fact, com-
plexity theory, computational social science, and evolutionary game theory are full of examples
illustrating how interactions may be changed in such a way that cooperation is promoted by local
interactions.
8
