346 
Using Qualitative Relationships for Bounding Probability Distributions 
Chao-Lin Liu and Michael P. Wellman 
University of Michigan AI Laboratory 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA 

Abstract 
We exploit qualitative probabilistic relationships 
among variables for computing bounds of con­
ditional probability distributions of interest in 
Bayesian networks. Using the signs of qualita­
tive relationships, we can implement abstraction 
operations that are guaranteed to bound the dis­
tributions of interest in the desired direction. By 
evaluating incrementally improved approximate 
networks, our algorithm obtains monotonically 
tightening bounds that converge to exact distri­
butions. For supermodular utility functions, the 
tightening bounds monotonically reduce the set 
of admissible decision alternatives as well. 
1 
Introduction 
Approximation techniques have gained increasing interest 
among those employing Bayesian networks for probabilis­
tic reasoning, despite the fact that computing a desired 
probability distribution to a fixed degree of accuracy has 
been shown to be NP-hard (Dagum & Luby 1993). Ap­
proximation techniques offer reasonable prospects of sig­
nificant accuracy, and increased opportunity to consider ap­
plications larger than we could otherwise. For instance, ap­
proximation techniques can be useful for applications that 
need to respond to requests for solutions under time con­
straints. By appropriately managing the reasoning process, 
we may obtain approximate solutions that meet the needs 
of these applications in cases where we would not be able 
to compute exact solutions given the time constraints. 
Researchers have explored a wide range of techniques to 
enable evaluation algorithms to compute approximations of 
desired probability distributions. One common approach 
is to compute point-valued approximations of desired dis­
tributions. For instance, stochastic simulation algorithms 
compute approximations of desired distributions with ran­
dom numbers sampled based on the given Bayesian net­
work (Pearl 1987; Henrion 1988; Neal 1993). Some other 
algorithms compute approximations by ignoring informa­
tion that specifies the exact distribution in the given net­
work, for example, state-space abstraction (Wellman & Liu 
1994) and arc removal (van Engelen 1997). 
Another popular approach is to compute bounds or inter­
vals of the desired probability distributions. For instance, 
bounded conditioning computes bounds of probabilities by 
limiting the number of cutset instances used in computa­
tion (Horvitz, Suermondt, & Cooper 1989). Localized par­
tial evaluation computes intervals of probability values by 
ignoring selected nodes in the network (Draper & Hanks 
1994). 
One advantage of computing probability intervals over 
point-valued approximations is that intervals explicitly 
specify a range that contains exact solutions, thereby pro­
viding information about bounds of possible errors. Al­
gorithms that compute point-valued approximations typi­
cally do not provide comparable information. Also, many 
algorithms that compute probability intervals can control 
the tightness of the intervals by tuning the amount of ne­
glected information, thereby improving bounds when al­
located more computation time. As a result, when used in 
anytime computation (Horvitz 1990; Boddy & Dean 1994 ), 
these algorithms guarantee monotonic improvement of the 
quality of returned solutions for any problem instance. In 
contrast, the algorithms that compute point-valued approxi­
mations usually expect the approximations to improve with 
the allocated computation time only on average. 
In this paper, we extend our iterative state-space abstraction 
(ISSA) algorithm (Wellman & Liu 1994) to compute the 
bounds of cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of in­
terest. The extended algorithm takes advantage of qualita­
tive relationships among variables in the computation. The 
qualitative relationships that summarize special quantita­
tive dependence relationships among variables are as origi­
nally defined for qualitative probabilistic networks (QPNs) 
(Wellman 1990). When variables in Bayesian networks ex­
hibit these special quantitative relationships, it is possible 
to compute bounds of conditional CDFs of interest using 
such relationships. We report conditions under which the 

Qualitative Relationships for Bounding Probabilities 
347 
extended ISSA algorithm can compute bounds of condi­
tional CDFs, and show that these bounds tighten monoton­
ically with iterations. When used with supermodular utility 
functions, the tightening bounds imply reduction of the set 
of decision alternatives that might be optimal, thereby help­
ing decision makers to focus on fewer decision alternatives. 
Next, we review definitions of qualitative relationships and 
define bounds of cumulative distribution functions. Then, 
we discuss conditions for computing bounds of CDFs, and 
how to control the tightness of these bounds. In Section 4, 
we review our ISSA algorithm and discuss extensions of 
the algorithm for computing bounds. In Section 5, we de­
scribe some applications of the bounds, and, in Section 6, 
we compare and contrast our algorithm with existing algo­
rithms designed for computing probability intervals. 
2 
Background 
2.1 
Qualitative relationships 
The qualitative relationships we employ are based on 
those defined for qualitative probabilistic networks (QPNs) 
(Wellman 1990). QPNs are abstractions of Bayesian net­
works, with conditional probability tables summarized by 
the signs of qualitative relationships between variables. 
Each arc in the network is marked with a sign-positive 
( + ), negative (-), or ambiguous (?)--denoting the sign of 
the qualitative probabilistic relationship between its termi­
nal nodes. 
The interpretation of such qualitative influences is based 
on first-order stochastic dominance (FSD) (Fishburn & 
Vickson 1978). Let F(x) and F'(x) denote two CDFs of a 
random variable X. Then F(x) FSD F'(x) holds if and 
only if (iff) F(x) w F'(x) for all x. We say that one node 
positively influences another iff the latter's conditional dis­
tribution is increasing in the former, all else equal, in the 
sense of FSD. 
Definition 1 ((Wellman 1990)) Let F(zlxi, y) be the cu­
mulative distribution function of Z given X = Xi and the 
rest of Z's parents Y = y. Node X positively influences 
node Z, denoted s+(x, Z), iff, for all Xi, Xj, y, 
Analogously, we say that node X negatively influences 
node Z, denoted s-(x, Z), when we reverse the direction 
of the dominance relationship in Definition 1. The arc from 
X to Z in that case carries a negative sign. When the dom­
inance relationship holds for both directions, we denote the 
situation by S0(X, Z). However, this entails conditional 
independence, and so we typically do not have a direct arc 
from X to Z in this case. When none of the preceding re­
lationships between the two CDFs hold, we put a question 
mark on the arc, and denote such situations as S7 (X, Z). 
We may apply the preceding definitions to boolean nodes 
under the convention that true > false. 
In this paper, we extend the notation to express conditional 
influences, and use it in a slightly more general way. The 
expression s+(x, Zllc) means that F(zlx, c) is decreasing 
in x given C = c, and s-(X, Zllc) means that F(zlx, c) 
is increasing in x given C = c. Moreover, X and C do not 
have to be parents of Z. 
2.2 
Bounds of probability distributions 
Definition 2 A CDF F(x) is an upper bound of F(x), if 
F(x) FSD F(x). A CDF F(x) is a lower bound of F(x), 
if F(x) FSD F(x). 
Notice that lower and upper probabilities (Chrisman 1995) 
and bounds of CDFs are related concepts. With the bounds 
of CDFs, we may define lower and upper probabilities of 
X. Let M denote the event that Xi < X w Xj. The 
lower and upper probabilities of M, denoted by Pr(M) and 
Pr(M), respectively, are: 
Pr(M) 
Pr(M) 
max(O, F(xj) -F(xi)), and 
F(xi) -F(xi)· 
Pr(M) is guaranteed to be between 0 and 1 since 1 > 
F(xi) 2: F(xi) 2: F(xi) 2: 0. 
3 
Bounding probability distributions 
In this section, we report methods for computing bounds 
of selected conditional CDFs in Bayesian networks. These 
methods take advantage of qualitative relationships among 
nodes for bounding probability distributions. 
We also 
present methods for controlling the tightness of bounds. 
We can compute bounds of some probability distribu­
tions by strengthening and weakening selected CDFs in 
Bayesian networks. Let Y be a child of A, and denote the 
set of parents of Y excluding A by P X (Y). For simplic­
ity henceforth, we denote F(Y = viA = a, P X (Y) = 
px(Y)) by F(yla,px(Y)). WestrengthenF(yla,px(Y)) 
with respect to A by replacing F(yla,px(Y)) with 
F'(yla,px(Y)) such that 
F'(yla,px(Y)) FSD F(yla,px(Y)), for all a. 
The most important effect of strengthening the CDF 
F(yla, px(Y)) with respect to A is to increase the proba­
bility ofY being a larger value for some states of A. Analo­
gously, we weaken CDF F(yla,px(Y)) when the FSD re­
lationship is reversed, and weakening F(yla,px(Y)) with 
respect to A implies that we decrease the probability of Y 
being a larger value for some states of A. 
Using these strengthening and weakening operations, we 
may compute the bounds of selected conditional probabil-

348 
Liu and Wellman 
Figure I: A Bayesian network with a link marked with a 
qualitative sign. 
ity distributions when some of the links of a Bayesian net­
work can be marked with decisive qualitative signs:"+" or 
"-". Consider the network in Figure I, and assume that we 
strengthen F(yjx) with respect to X by replacing F(yjx) 
with F'(yjx) such that F'(yjx) FSD F(yjx) for all states 
of X. Given that s+(Y, Z) implies that F(zjy) is decreas­
ing in y, our strengthening F(yjx) will decrease F(zjx), 
since the probability of Y being larger has been increased 
for all states of X. Therefore, we have obtained a lower 
bound of F(zjx) for all x by strengthening F(yjx). As a 
result, we also have obtained a lower bound of F(zje) for 
all e because F(zje) = Ex F(zix) Pr(xje). 
This example illustrates that we may compute bounds of 
CDFs by locally strengthening selected CDFs. Specifically, 
given s+(Y, Z), we are able to compute a lower bound of 
F(zle) by strengthening F(yjx) with respect to X. The 
strengthening of F(yjx) can be carried out by using the 
values in the conditional probability tables (CPT) associ­
ated withY. 
In the following theorem statements, we use ancestral or­
dering of nodes as defined below. 
Definition 3 (cf. (Neapolitan 1990)) Let J denote a set of 
nodes { J1, . . .  , Jn} in a Bayesian network. [ J1, . . . , Jn] 
is an ancestral ordering of the nodes in J if for every Ji E 
J all the ancestors of Ji are ordered before Ji. 
The following theorem presents conditions for computing 
bounds of a conditional CDF of a variable Z given the ev­
idence E = e by strengthening and weakening the dis­
tributions of the children of a distinguished node A. We 
call nodes whose values are instantiated evidence nodes, 
and we denote the set of evidence nodes by E. Let Y be 
the children of A and yi be a node in Y. The theorem 
is applicable when children of A meets the stated require­
ments. We denote the subset Y \ {Yi} of Y by SB(Yi), 
and we use the notationS"' (Yi, Zlle, X) to represent that 
S"' (Yi, Z) given E = e and all possible instantiations of 
X, where rJi is a sign for qualitative relationship between 
yi and Z. 
Theorem 1 Assume that: 
1. For all i, ·s<(Yi, Zlle, SB(Yi)), where rJi is either 
+.-,orO. 
2. CI(Z,{E,Y},A). 
3. E, A, and Y appear in order in an ancestral ordering. 
4. Yi is not a descendant of nodes in S B (Yi). 
When ai = -, we obtain, respectively, a lower and an 
upper bound of F(zje) by weakening and strengthening 
F(yija,px(Yi)) with respect to A. When rJi =+.we ob­
tain, respectively, an upper and a lower bound of F(zje) 
by weakening and strengthening F(yija,px(Yi)) with re­
spect to A. When a• = 0, neither strengthening nor weak­
ening F(yija,px(Yi)) with respect to A affects F(zje). 
Proof. Proof for this theorem is an extension of our ex­
planation for the preceding example where node X is A 
in the theorem. This theorem and its proof extend the basic 
ideas to consider the case when A has multiple child nodes. 
(Due to space limitations, proofs are available only in the 
full paper, available at http://www. umich. edur chao lin!.) 
Example 1 In the network shown below, we have (a) 
s+(Yl, Zlle, Y2) and s-(Y2, Zlle, Yl) for any e, (b) 
CI(Z, {E, Yl, Y2}, A), (c) [E, A, Yl, Y2] is an ancestral 
ordering, and (d) Yl is not a descendant ofY2 and vice 
versa. Therefore, we can obtain a lower bound of F(zje) 
for any E = e by strengthening F(ylja) or weakening 
F(y2ja) with respect to A. 
~ 
E 
1\ 
Z 
+ 
-
Figure 2: An applicable example for Theorem I. 
Theorem I can be applied to cases where we strengthen 
and weaken multiple such F(yija, px(Yi)), as long as 
these strengthening and weakening operations are coordi­
nated consistently so that the effects are to find a lower 
or an upper bound of F(zje). This extended interpre­
tation of the theorem can be proved inductively as fol­
lows. The theorem dictates that we obtain a bound of 
the exact F(zje) by strengthening or weakening one par­
ticular F(yija,px(Yi)). 
In addition, we can obtain a 
new bound of F(zje) by strengthening or weakening one 
more such F(yija,px(Yi)) in the ABN where (n -
1) F(yija,px(Yi))has been strengthened or weakened. 
Therefore, by induction, we may coordinate the strength­
ening and weakening operations to obtain lower (or upper) 
bounds of F(zje) by strengthening or weakening the con­
ditional probability distributions of all nodes in Y with re­
spect to A. 
The first condition of Theorem I requires that yi have a 
non-ambiguous qualitative relationship with Z. This quali­
tative relationship determines the selection of strengthening 
and weakening operations for computing desired bounds. 
The remaining conditions ensure that we can compute 
desired bounds by locally modifying F(yija,px(Yi)). 
Specifically, when A has multiple child nodes Y, we can, 
simultaneously and independently, strengthen or weaken 
the conditional probability distribution of each node in Y 

Qualitative Relationships for Bounding Probabilities 
349 
to obtained bounds of F(zie). Notice that this and the fol­
lowing theorem do not require a decisive qualitative rela­
tionship between the evidence nodes E and the node of 
interest z. 
Example 2 Theorem 1 may be applicable to networks that 
are as complex as the one shown below. In this network, 
we assume all links point from the left to the right hand 
side, and we use thick gray links to represent bunches of 
links that might exist between clouds of nodes and individ­
ual nodes. WithE = {El, E2, E3}, we can verify that 
CI(Z, {E, Y}, A) holds in this network. Also, [E, A, Y] 
is an ancestral ordering, and yi is not a descendant of 
SB(Yi) for all yi_ Therefore, Theorem 1 is applicable 
to any yi that satisfies the first condition in the theorem. 
Figure 3: Another applicable example for Theorem 1. 
Theorem 1 cannot be applied to cases where A is a parent 
node of Z because Y and Z represent distinct nodes. The 
following theorem specifies conditions and methods for ab­
stracting the parents of Z to compute bounds of F(zie). 
Theorem 2 In addition to Conditions 3 and 4 of Theo­
rem 1, assume that Z E Y. We obtain, respectively, a 
lower and an upper bound of F(zie) by strengthening and 
weakening F ( z I a, px ( Z)) with respect to A. 
Example 3 In the network shown in Figure 2, we have (a) 
[E, Yl ,Z] is an ancestral ordering and (b) Z is the only de­
scendant of Yl. Therefore, Theorem 2 is applicable, and 
we can obtain a lower bound of F(zie) by strengthening 
F(ziyl) with respect to Yl. Analogously, we obtain a 
lower bound of F(zie) by strengthening F(ziy2) with re­
spect to Y2. 
Theorems 
and 
2 
also 
provide 
guidelines 
for 
obtaining 
tighter 
bounds. 
For 
convenience, 
if 
H(x) FSD G(x) FSD F(x), we say that G(x) is 
less dominating than H(x). 
Roughly speaking, the 
following corollary, which follows from Theorem 1, 
states that we can obtain tighter bounds of F(zie) by 
setting F(yila,px(Yi)) to a less (or more) dominating 
alternative. 
Corollary 1 Let G(yila,px(Yi)) and H(yila, px(Yi)) 
be alternatives for weakening F(yila,px(Yi)) with re­
spect to A. Assume that H(yila,px(Yi)) is less domi­
nating than G(yila,px(Yi)) for all a and px(Yi). Then, 
weakening F(yila,px(Yi)) by G(yii a,px(Yi)) rather 
than H(yila,px(Yi)) provides a tighter lower bound of 
F(zie) when <Ti = -,and a tighter upper bound of F(zie) 
when <Ti = +. 
Analogously, strengthening F(yiia, px(Yi)) by a less 
dominating CDF provides a tighter upper bound of F(zie) 
when <Ti = -,and a tighter lower bound of F(zie) when 
(ji = +. 
Similarly, we may derive the following corollary from The­
orem 2. This corollary provides guidelines for obtaining 
tighter bounds in applying Theorem 2. 
Corollary 2 Applying Theorem 2, we obtain tighter lower 
(upper) bounds of F(zie) by setting F(zla,px(Z)) to a 
less (more) dominating alternative. 
Notice that neither Theorem 1 nor Theorem 2 requires any 
particular qualitative relationship between A and nodes in 
Y. As we mention in Section 4.1, the existence of a par­
ticular qualitative relationship between A and nodes in Y 
facilitates, but is not required for, the application of the the­
orems. 
4 
State-space abstraction 
In previous work, we report an iterative state-space ab­
straction (ISSA) algorithm for approximate evaluation of 
Bayesian networks (Wellman & Liu 1994). The ISSA al­
gorithm aggregates states of variables into superstates to 
construct abstract versions of the original Bayesian net­
works (OBNs) that specify exact probability distributions. 
We use these abstract Bayesian networks (ABNs) to com­
pute point-valued approximations of the probability distri­
butions of interest. 
To construct ABNs, we select some nodes, called ab­
stracted nodes, from the OBNs, and aggregate their states. 
As a result of state aggregation, we need to assign the CPTs 
of both the abstracted nodes and their child nodes. We call 
the method used in this assignment task a CPT assignment 
policy. In this section, we introduce the dominance policy 
for computing bounds of CDFs. 
4.1 
Dominance policy 
Recall that we need to assign the CPTs of the abstracted 
node and its child nodes when we abstract a node. The 
dominance policy modifies the CPT of the abstracted node 
A as follows: 
l 
Pr([ak,t]lpa(A)) = l:Pr(ailpa(A)), 
(1) 
j=k 
where P A(A) is the set of parents of A, and [ak,t] is the 
superstate representing the aggregation of states from ak 
through at, k w l. 

350 
Liu and Wellman 
We may choose to strengthen or weaken selected condi­
tional probability distributions, depending on whether we 
want to compute lower or upper bounds of the desired 
CDFs. Let Y be a child node of A, and P X (Y) be the 
subset of parent nodes of Y excluding A. If we choose 
to strengthen the conditional probability distributions of Y 
with respect to A, we assign the CPT of Y as follows. 
F(yi[ak,t],px(Y)) 
= 
min F(yla;, px(Y)) (2) 
jE(k,l) 
If we choose to weaken the conditional probability distri­
butions of Y with respect to A, we assign the CPT of Y as 
follows. 
F(yj[ak,t],px(Y)) 
= 
max F(yla;,px(Y)) (3) 
jE(k,l) 
We need to compare the probability values of the states 
a;, j 
= k, l, aggregated in a superstate [ak,d in the 
OBNs and ABNs in order to apply the aforementioned the­
orems in analyzing the effects of the dominance policy. 
In terms of Theorem 1, we want to strengthen or weaken 
F(yija,px(Yi)) to obtain desired bounds when we ab­
stract node A. However, A in an ABN has fewer states than 
A in the OBN, so for a superstate [ak,z]. we do not have cor­
responding Pr(yila;,px(Yi)) for all j = k, l in the ABN. 
Fortunately, we may show that the strengthening and weak­
ening operations in the dominance policy have the effects 
of strengthening and weakening distributions that we de­
fined at the beginning of Section 3. We show this by trans­
forming the ABNs into equivalent networks and comparing 
these equivalent networks with the OBNs. The procedure 
for constructing equivalent networks of ABNs and related 
proofs are available in the full paper. 
Application of (2) and (3) becomes easier when the links 
from the abstracted node to its child nodes can be marked 
with decisive qualitative signs. For instance, if the sign 
from A toY is"+", the right hand sides of (2) and (3) are 
simply F(yja,,px(Y)) and F(yjak,px(Y)), respectively. 
However, the application of (2) and (3) does not require any 
particular qualitative relationship between A andY. 
4.2 Single node abstraction 
In this section, we report the application of the ISSA algo­
rithm to computing bounds of distributions using qualita­
tive relationships among nodes. We discuss the application 
of Theorems 1 and Corollary 1. The application of Theo­
rem 2 and Corollary 2 is analogous. 
We operationalize Theorem 1 using the state-space abstrac­
tion methods. To compute bounds of the desired CDFs 
F(zle), we can abstract the state space of any node A that 
meets the conditions of the theorem. We may apply the in­
ference algorithms for QPNs (Druzdzel & Henrion 1993) 
to locate those nodes whose children have unambiguous 
qualitative relationships with Z as specified in the first con­
dition of the theorem. We apply (1) to assign the CPT of 
A, and we apply (2) or (3) to assign the CPTs of the child 
nodes of A. The selection of (2) or (3) depends on whether 
we want to compute lower or upper bounds of the desired 
CDFs, and Theorem 1 provides guidelines for the selection. 
The CDF F(zle) specified in the ABNs constructed in this 
manner is a bound of the CDFs of the F(zle) specified 
in the OBNs. This is due to Theorem 1 and the fact that 
we can show that the effects of applying the dominance 
policy in abstracting nodes are equivalent to strengthening 
(or weakening) the conditional probability distributions of 
the children of the abstracted nodes. 
We can show that ISSA returns bounds that tighten in 
each iteration using Corollary 1. The tightening bounds 
are due to the fact that, as we split superstates, the 
reassigned CDFs, respectively, become less and more 
dominating when we strengthen and weaken the orig­
inal CDFs. 
Consider the case in which we want to 
strengthen F(yja,px(Y)) with respective to A. When 
we split the superstate [ak,d into two superstates [ak,m] 
and [am+l,d• m E (k, l), F(yj[ak,t],px(y)) is replaced 
with F(yj[ak,m],px(y)) and F(yj[am+1,z],px(y)). We 
can easily verify that F(yj[ak,!],px(y)) is not larger than 
F(yi[ak,m],px(y)) and F(yi[am+l,t], px(y)) with (2). As 
a result, the newly reassigned CDFs are less dominating, 
and, according to Corollary 1, the bounds of F(zle) tighten 
in each iteration of ISSA. 
4.3 
Multiple node abstraction 
We may compute bounds of CDFs by abstracting multiple 
nodes that do not share child nodes. With an analogous 
method used in the previous section, we can show that the 
bounds obtained by evaluating network with multiple ab­
stracted nodes tighten as we split superstates. 
Without loss of generality, we may assume that the pur­
pose of abstracting nodes is to compute an upper bound 
of F(zle). We analyze the effects of abstracting multiple 
nodes by assuming that we abstract one node at a time and 
that we abstract nodes Ai, i = 1, 2, ... , m. Let ABNi de­
notes the ABN that is constructed by sequentially abstract­
ing node A1 up to node Ai. Clearly, by applying the result 
from the previous section, the F(zle) specified in ABNi is 
an upper bound of the F(zle) specified in ABNi-1 since 
one more node is abstracted in ABNi than in ABNi-1. 
Therefore, by induction, we can show that the F(zle) spec­
ified in ABNm is an upper bound of the F(zle) specified 
in the OBN. 
The remaining problem is to show that the ABNm that is 
constructed by sequentially abstracting node A 1 through 
Am is the same as the ABN that is constructed by simul­
taneously abstracting all Ais. Recall that we use maximal 

Qualitative Relationships for Bounding Probabilities 
351 
and minimal operations for strengthening and weakening 
CDFs in (2) and (3). As a result, the order that we abstract 
the nodes matters only when the abstracted nodes share 
child nodes. When abstracted nodes share child nodes, ab­
stracting nodes in different orders may result in different 
abstract networks due to the fact that maximal and mini­
mal operations are not commutative. However, when the 
abstracted nodes do not share child· nodes as in our case, 
the ordering of these nodes being abstracted will not affect 
the resulting network, and the ABNm that is constructed by 
sequentially abstracting node A 1 through Am is the same 
as the ABN that is constructed by abstracting all A is in any 
order. Therefore, we have shown that we can abstract mul­
tiple nodes that do not share child nodes to obtain bounds 
of CDFs. 
4.4 
Generalized qualitative relationship 
We can extend the applicability of the theorems by re­
laxing the required qualitative relationship. Consider the 
CDF F(ylx, c), where c denotes instantiations of condi­
tioning variables other than x. Assume that X has m states, 
x1,x2, . . .  ,xm. We use S;t"(X,YIIc) to denote the situa­
tion in which F(ylx, c) has the following property: n is 
the smallest integer such that, for any y, i E [1, m], j E 
[n,m),i + j:::; m, 
Analogously, we use S;;(X, Yllc) to denote the situation 
in which F(ylx, c) has the following property: n is the 
smallest integer such that, for any y, i E [1, m J, j E 
[n,m),i + j:::; m, 
F(ylxi, c) FSD F(ylxi+i• c). 
Notice that Si(X, Yllc) and S:l (X, Yllc) correspond to 
s+(X, Yllc) and s-(x, Yllc), respectively. 
With 
the 
generalized 
qualitative 
relationship, 
we 
may extend the applicability of the reported theo­
rems. 
Assume that the qualitative relationship be­
tween yi and Z is s®'(Yi,ZIIe,SB(Yi)) rather 
than scr' (Yi, Zlle, SB(Yi)). To obtain bounds of 
F(zle), we need to replace F(zle, y) by F(zle, y) such 
that F(z!e, y) 2': F(zle, y) for all z and y and that 
scr'(Yi,ZIIe,SB(Yi)) holds in the abstract network. 
When the values of F(zle, y) are available, we may be 
able to replace F(zle, y) in such a manner, and we may 
apply the theorems to compute bounds of F(zle). 
Assume that we have st ( Z, T) in the network shown 
in following figure, and consider the task of computing 
bounds of F(tle). In this case, none of the reported theo­
rems are applicable as they are stated. However, assuming 
that Z has three possible states, we may replace F(t!z) us­
ing the following method to create an approximate version 
of the network in which s+ ( Z, T) holds. 
F(tlz1) 
max(F(t, zl), F(t, z2)) 
F(tlz2) 
= 
max(F(t, zl), F(t, z2)) 
F(tlz3) = F(tlz3) 
As a result, we have (a) F(tle, yl, y2) 2': F(tle, y1, y2) for 
all y1 and y2, s+(Y1, Tile, Y2) and s-(Y2, Tile, Y1) in 
this approximate network, and we may apply the theorems 
to compute upper bounds of the the actual F(tle) using this 
approximate network. 
Figure 4: Application of the generalized qualitative rela­
tionships. 
In addition, the generalized qualitative relationship sim­
plifies the strengthening and weakening operations. For 
instance, if we have S®(A, Yi), the right hand sides of 
(2) and (3) become minjE[I-n+l,t] F(ylxj,pa(Y)) and 
maxiE[k,k+n-1] F(ylxi, pa(Y) ), respectively. 
5 
Potential Applications 
We can apply the ISSA algorithm along with existing in­
ference algorithms for QPNs (Wellman 1990; Druzdzel & 
Henrion 1993) for qualitative probabilistic inference. For 
instance, bounds of probability distributions can be used to 
resolve ambiguous qualitative relationships between vari­
ables in QPNs. We report applications of bounds to this 
task in another paper (Liu & Wellman 1998). 
We may also combine the ISSA algorithm with inference 
algorithms with QPNs to return purely qualitative solu­
tions and incrementally more precise numerical solutions. · 
Assume a Bayesian network in which links are already 
marked with qualitative signs. After we infer qualitative re­
lationship between variables, we may want to know some­
thing about the numerical relationship between these vari­
ables. The ISSA algorithm can compute monotonically 
tightening bounds of conditional CDFs. 
The tightening bounds of CDFs allow us to compute tight­
ening intervals for the expected values of variables. The 
expected value of a variable Z is Iz z dF(zle). There­
fore, by Theorem 3, the intervals for the expected value of 
Z must tighten, if we compute the expected value using the 
lower and upper bounds of F(zle). 
Theorem 3 (cf. (Fishburn & Vickson 1978)) Let g(x) be 
a monotonically increasing function of a random vari­
able X, and F(x) and F'(x) denote two cumulative dis­
tribution functions of X. 
Then, F(x) FSD F'(x) iff 
I g(x )dF(x) 2': I g(x )dF' (x ). 

352 
Liu and Wellman 
The tightening intervals for expected values can be use­
ful for applications that use monotone decisions (Wellman 
1990). Let the function <5u ( x) choose the value of decision 
variable D to maximize the utility u for a variable x. 
<5u(x) = argmax u(d,x) 
d 
It can be shown that <5u ( x) increases monotonically in x if 
u is a supermodular function (Ross 1983). 
Definition 4 A function u is called supermodular if, for all 
d1 x d2 andx1 x x2: u(d1,x2)+u(d2,x1) x u(d1,x1)+ 
u(d2, x2). 
A common example of supermodular functions is the util­
ity function defined as the negative of the squared-error loss 
function L(d,x) = (d- x)2 (cf. (Berger 1985)). The 
tightening intervals for the expected values of X imply that 
the range of D in which the optimal d exists is decreasing, 
thereby helping decision makers to focus on fewer alterna­
tives of D in applications with monotone decisions. 
In addition, our theorems can be used to compute the 
bounds of travel costs on stochastically consistent trans­
portation networks defined in (Wellman, Ford, & Larson 
1995). We can apply our theorems to compute bounds of 
travel costs, and extend the applicability of our theorems to 
a broader class of transportation networks, using the gener­
alized qualitative relationships defined in Section 4.4. 
6 
Related work 
Our approach is similar to many existing algorithms for 
computing bounds of probability values in that we ig­
nore some information that specifies the exact distribu­
tions of Bayesian networks in the computation. For in­
stance, bounded conditioning ignores some cutset instance 
to compute probability bounds and consider more instances 
to improve the bounds (Horvitz, Suermondt, & Cooper 
1989). Search-based algorithms search more probable as­
signments of all variables and use these instances to com­
pute probability bounds. The bounds can be improved by 
considering more instances that are less probable (Poole 
1993). The incremental term computation method takes 
advantage of the idea of more probable instances but uses 
a different strategy to compute the bounds (D'Ambrosio 
1993). The localized partial evaluation algorithm removes 
selected nodes from networks to compute probability in­
tervals and recovers selected nodes to improve intervals 
(Draper & Hanks 1994). Our algorithm ignores some dis­
tinction of states of selected variables to compute approx­
imations and recovers distinction of states to improve the 
approximations. 
Similar to some other algorithms, ours assumes spe­
cial numerical properties of the underlying distributions 
of Bayesian networks. 
For instance, Poole (1993) and 
D'Ambrosio (1993) design algorithms that are best for 
networks with skewed distributions. 
Jaakkola and Jor­
dan (1996) develop techniques for computing bounds of 
likelihood for sigmoid Bayesian networks. Our algorithm 
requires the existence of qualitative relationships among 
some variables. 
Some algorithms use the maximal and minimal values of 
a set of numbers in computing the desired bounds. For 
instance, the mini-buckets algorithm uses maximizing and 
minimizing functions to bound the values of functions for 
mini-buckets (Dechter 1997). Our algorithm is more close 
to Poole's method (1997), but we use bounds of conditional 
CDFs and Poole uses bounds of conditional probability val­
ues. 
Our algorithm is different from existing algorithms in some 
aspects. First, we directly compute the bounds of condi­
tional CDF of interest, i.e., F(zie). In contrast, some algo­
rithms (Dechter 1997; Poole 1997) compute upper (lower) 
bounds of Pr(zle) by dividing upper (lower) bounds of 
Pr(z, e) by lower (upper) bounds of Pr(e). Another differ­
ence is that we compute bounds using point-valued infor­
mation rather than propagating bounds in the computation 
(Draper & Hanks 1994). Finally, we require the networks 
be specified with point-valued probabilistic information. 
We compute bounds of CDFs rather than exact CDFs for 
saving computational cost. The imprecision is an artifact 
of the computation algorithm. There is a school of research 
that works on modeling uncertain situations using proba­
bility intervals or other alternatives, and they also study al­
gorithms for computing probability intervals (Walley 1991; 
Thone, Gtintzer, & KieBling 1992; Chrisman 1996; Luo et 
al. 1996; Cozman 1997). 
7 
Summary 
We report an application of an extended version of our 
ISSA algorithm for computing lower and upper bounds 
of conditional cumulative distribution functions of interest. 
The algorithm takes advantage of qualitative relationships 
among variables for bounding the distributions. We show 
that the bounds tighten monotonically with iterations of 
computation, thereby providing a guarantee for improving 
quality of approximations for anytime computation. In par­
ticular, when used in applications with supermodular utility 
functions, the monotonically tightening bounds help reduce 
the set of decision alternatives in each iteration of the ISSA 
algorithm.
