On the Evaluation of Intelligent Process Automation
Deborah Ferreira1, Julia Rozanova1, Krishna Dubba2, Dell Zhang2∗, Andre Freitas1
1Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, UK
2Blue Prism AI Labs, c/o WeWork, 125 Kingsway, London WC2B 6NH, UK

Abstract
Intelligent Process Automation (IPA) is emerging as a sub-
ﬁeld of AI to support the automation of long-tail processes
which requires the coordination of tasks across different sys-
tems. So far, the ﬁeld of IPA has been largely driven by sys-
tems and use cases, lacking a more formal deﬁnition of the
task and its assessment. This paper aims to address this gap
by providing a formalisation of IPA and by proposing speciﬁc
metrics to support the empirical evaluation of IPA systems.
This work also compares and contrasts IPA against related
tasks such as end-user programming and program synthesis.
Introduction
Robotic Process Automation (RPA) aims to provide a sup-
porting framework to automate the long-tail of processes
which involve routine tasks, structured data and determin-
istic outcomes (Aguirre and Rodriguez 2017). RPA supports
end-users in the automation of existing processes without
the requirement of a programming language.
Even though there has been an increase in investments in
the area of RPA, it still relies on the explicit encoding of
rules and conﬁgurations for process generation, with lim-
ited use of AI methods. Agostinelli et al. (Agostinelli, Mar-
rella, and Mecella 2019) provides an analysis of several RPA
tools, none of the studied tools has self-learning ability and,
are not able to automatically understand which actions be-
long to which process (intra-routine learning) and which
processes are available for automation (inter-routine learn-
ing).
The goal of Intelligent Process Automation (IPA) is to
generalise RPA, proving the tools to create complex work-
ﬂows, with minimal user interference (Reddy, Harichan-
dana, and T Alekhya 2019). IEEE Standards Association
deﬁnes Intelligent Process Automation as “a preconﬁgured
software instance that combines business rules, experience
based context determination logic, and decision criteria to
initiate and execute multiple interrelated human and auto-
mated processes in a dynamic context.” (807 2017).
Consider, for example, a user that works in the IT depart-
ment of a company and is responsible for redirecting tick-
ets from the request system to the correct department. RPA
∗Dell Zhang is on leave from Birkbeck, University of London.
would allow the user to automate this process by manually
generating a set of rules capable of redirecting each ticket
to the appropriate department; however, if the process is
complex, with several variables, the implementation might
be costly and slow. IPA systems, on the other hand, would
observe the user’s actions and detect the patterns between
different requests and the redirected departments. With suf-
ﬁcient examples and the clariﬁcation of the user intents, it
would automate the process, minimising human interven-
tion.
So far, the ﬁeld of IPA has been largely driven by systems
and use cases, lacking a more formal deﬁnition of the task
ans its systematic evaluation. This paper aims to address this
gap by focusing on the following contributions:
1. Providing a formalisation of IPA.
2. Proposing speciﬁc metrics to support the empirical evalu-
ation of IPA methods and systems.
3. Introducing a new benchmark for the evaluation of IPA.
4. Comparing and contrasting IPA against related tasks such
as end-user programming and program synthesis.
This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the
formalisation of IPA and related concepts. Section 3 intro-
duces the modalities and tasks that are part of IPA. Section
4 analyses research areas that are similar to IPA. Section 5
then uses the formalism deﬁned previously to deﬁne metrics
for the different IPA tasks. Section 6 presents the method-
ology used for constructing a benchmark for evaluating IPA
tasks. Finally, Section 7 concludes this work.
Formalising IPA
At the center of IPA is the capture and formalisation of a
workﬂow (the interaction between end-user actions, soft-
ware and data artefacts within an end-user interface environ-
ment) in a formal language which can be used to re-enact the
workﬂow.
IPA formal languages have particular properties which
aims at eliciting the end-user actions embedded within a
workﬂow. The formalisation of these properties is a pre-
requisite for the deﬁnition of an evaluation methodology.
It is through this language that we may understand and
arXiv:2001.02639v2  [cs.HC]  4 Feb 2020

evaluate a given interactor, such as the Sikuli GUI automa-
tion tool1. Operating directly with the interactor allows us
to evaluate the interaction of the end processes with the
same interfaces a human would encounter, rather than the
extremely varied computations that underlie the systems
with which it interacts. To this end, we propose an abstract
interaction language with which to describe the kind of
interface-centred activity to be mimicked by IPA. We ﬁrst
deﬁne it purely syntactically, and then describe its intended
instantiation in terms of GUIs and GUI interactions.
Deﬁnition 1. An interface is a ﬁnite set I of symbols
{i1, . . . , in} which will be referred to as interface elements.
Deﬁnition 2. An environment e is deﬁned by a 4-
tuple (I, F, Ω, S) where I = I1, . . . , In is a ﬁnite set
of interfaces, Ωis a countably inﬁnite set of variables
(arg1, arg2, . . .) or value symbols and F is a set of ﬁnitary
function symbols f(s, arg1, . . . argm) where each arg may
be any interface element i ∈Ij or a value v ∈Ω. S will be
referred to as the state space.
The following example serves to introduce the intended
concrete realisations of the described language, after which
we turn to the deﬁnitions relevant to its interpretation.
I1
I2
form input box
submit button
dropdown
submit button
selection1
selection2
Figure 1: A simpliﬁed environment e with two interfaces, I1
and I2.
Example 1. An end-user may work on a single desktop
conﬁguration with multiple windows, each of which can be
identiﬁed as a separate interface. We may assume the inter-
face elements are represented by unique IDs.
In Figure 1, let I1 = {i(1)
1 , i(1)
2 }, where these identify the
form input box and the submit button respectively. The state
symbol s will represent the computational state under the
hood, while the function set F is determined by the valid
actions relevant to the interfaces: here, for example, one can
imagine these to include a click action f1(s, i) and a text
input action f2(s, i, ‘example text input’).
The set Ωis that of all possible user inputs to the
text box. To simplify, suppose that in this case it is
Ω= {‘a’, . . . , ‘z’, ‘ ’}∗(where ∗is the Kleene star).
Deﬁnition 3. A model or instantiation of an environment e
is deﬁned with respect to a working computer desktop with
ﬁnitely many graphical user interfaces, an interactor (which
may either be automatic, such as a Sikuli program instance,
or a human end-user) which has its own language and an
1http://sikulix.com/
interpretation function [[·]] which will be described compre-
hensively in the next deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4. Interpretation Function:
Given an environment e = (I, F, Ω, S) and a ﬁxed inter-
actor language, we deﬁne the following interpretation func-
tion:
• [[S]] is abstractly deﬁned to be the computational state
space of the machine on which we are hypothetically op-
erating.
• For each interface element symbol i ∈I, [[i]] maps i to a
unique meaningful segment of the interface such as a but-
ton, a list item, a form, a paragraph of text or a scrollbar.
• [[I]] is the set {[[i]] | i ∈I}, so that [[I]] refers to a com-
plete interface or window.
• [[Ω]] is the set of all values which are possible interac-
tor inputs: in the case of a computerized interactor, this
would be a set of all possible data artifacts such as strings,
booleans, integers or images that would be recognised by
the interactor’s own program language as program argu-
ments.
• [[F]] is the set of all valid action functions in the inter-
actor language, so that each functional symbol f ∈F is
mapped to a valid action function of matching arity, with
arguments interpreted pointwise according to the interpre-
tation function.
For notational simplicity, we will henceforth conﬂate en-
vironmental elements with their interpretations (for exam-
ple, I for [[I]]) and suppress the state space argument to ac-
tion functions.
Deﬁnition 5. An interface element i is positionally realised
if there exists a coordinate pair bb(i) = ((x0, y0), (x1, y1))
deﬁning the bounding box associated with the instantiation
of i in the graphical user interface.
I1
form input box
submit button
Figure 2: Interface element i(1)
1
with a positional realisation
visualised as a bounding box.
A soft typing system may be implemented if one intro-
duces an environmental vocabulary, by which descriptive
types may be assigned to both interface elements and input
values.
Deﬁnition
6.
An
environment
vocabulary
T ⊂{‘a’, . . . , ‘z’, ‘ ’}∗is a set of descriptive strings
strings. Deﬁne type : S{I1, . . . , In, Ω} →T to be a
descriptor function for interface elements and values which
may serve as action function arguments.

Example 2. In ﬁgure 1, one may choose to deﬁne an envi-
ronment vocabulary such that type(i1) = ‘button’.
A descriptive vocabulary (or soft typing system) is not
strictly necessary, but may serve for greater interpretability
and potentially be used to introduce constraints on function
arguments. If the system designer wishes, one may similarly
introduce an action vocabulary to which action functions
may be mapped.
The purpose of the formalization in this section has been
to formally deﬁne a process in the context of IPA. The fol-
lowing deﬁnitions complete this goal and allows us to deﬁne
the core tasks of IPA and to suggest evaluation metrics.
Deﬁnition 7. A process p (with respect to a interpreted en-
vironment e) is an ordered sequence of action functions
p =
 f0(arg(0)
0 , . . . , arg(0)
n0 ),
f1(arg(1)
0 , . . . , arg(1)
n1 ),
...
fm(arg(m)
0
, . . . , arg(m)
nm )

with valid action functions and arguments interpreted
(and valid) in the speciﬁed environment.
Deﬁnition 8. In the case that an environment e is instanti-
ated (or realised) with respect to a computational interactor,
its programming language is referred to as an IPA Realisa-
tion Language.
Deﬁnition 9. An IPA program is a process p in an environ-
ment e which is instantiated with respect to an IPA Realisa-
tion Language.
Although the deﬁnition of a process is purposefully en-
vironment agnostic, for the purpose of the tasks described
in the next section we speciﬁcally assume process to mean
a process which is an IPA program. In particular, the tasks
named demo2process and text2process require the output to
be an IPA process with respect to some IPA realisation lan-
guage.
IPA Modalities & Tasks
Intelligent Process Automation can be deﬁned as a com-
bination of four different tasks: demo2text, demo2process,
text2process and process2text, as shown in Figure 3. In this
section we will describe each one of the tasks, using a moti-
vational example presented in Figure 4.
With respect to our formalization, these tasks may be un-
derstood as the exercise of deﬁning a mapping between the
three different environment interpretations which refer to the
same desktop conﬁguration interpreting the interface set I
but with action functions and arguments instantiated with re-
spect to three different interactor “languages”: the recorded
activity of a human (which constitutes a demo), any IPA Re-
alisation Language (which deﬁnes the target process) and
human natural language (instructional text).
text2process
process2text
demo2process
demo2text
Process
Text
Demo
Figure 3: IPA tasks
demo2process (D2P)
At the center of IPA is the task of transforming a demonstra-
tion to a program that is capable of re-executing the same
process demonstrated by the user. We assume that all tasks
are result-oriented, i.e., the user wants to achieve a speciﬁc
result by executing the task. The results can be speciﬁc ob-
jectives, such as creating documents with speciﬁc values, or

ing about the payment of a service.
Returning to the example in Figure 4, the resulting pro-
cess is implemented using the Sikuli GUI Automation Tool.
Running the Sikuli program, we obtain the same ﬁnal
spreadsheet as in in the demonstration.
demo2text (D2T)
The demo2text task requires the conversion from a demon-
stration of a user executing an activity to a natural lan-
guage description of the executed activity. In the example,
the demonstration is a screen-recording of a user’s desktop,
divided into different time segments, where each segment
has a corresponding natural language description of the ac-
tions. The natural language description should be a set of
imperative sentences, where each sentence describes a single
action that should be taken in order to replicate the demon-
stration.
The generation of natural language descriptions allows
users to understand better the process that is being demon-
strated, especially for users that are not executing the action,
allowing new users to quickly learn how to execute the pro-
cess themselves without external interference.
In Figure 4, we present the conversion from a video
demonstrating a user manipulating a spreadsheet with stu-
dent’s grades to the corresponding natural language descrip-
tion of the task.
Demo2text is similar to the task of automated video cap-
tioning. However, video captioning is the task of describ-
ing general videos using natural language (Pan et al. 2017),
while demo2text focuses on the description of Desktop ac-
tions (usually materialised in video form) with imperative
sentences.
text2process (T2P) and process2text (P2T)
Instead of having the end-user instance workﬂow demon-
stration, it is possible to target a text description of the work-
ﬂow. The text2process task is particularly useful when the
user wants to generate the process from the description of

1. Open the spreadsheet 
[grades.xls].
2. Create a new column [Final Mark] 
after the column [Task 5].
3. Under the column [Final Mark], 
compute the average of the columns 
[Task1], [Task2], [Task3], [Task4] 
and [Task5]
Video demonstrations
Natural language description
Process implementation
Figure 4: Example of IPA tasks
the activity. The task is similar to end-user programming and
semantic parsing, giving that users can convert from natu-
ral language to a program that implements a process (Sales,
Handschuh, and Freitas 2017) and Program Synthesis, since
the ﬁnal goal is generating a program. Given a set of imper-
ative sentences, we want to generate a program that executes
the described actions.
Similarly, the user might also want to generate the NL
description of a process that is already implemented, espe-
cially in cases where the process becomes too complex to be
analysed by humans.
Related Work
Intelligent process automation aims to replicate and im-
prove, iteratively, activities carried out by humans. Com-
paring the performance of different IPA techniques requires
well-deﬁned tasks and metrics that reﬂect the relevant as-
pects when automating a process. In this section, we present
the benchmarks present in similar research areas.
Even though IPA applications, such as software intelli-
gence and RPA, have particular research questions (Aalst et
al. 2018), there are only a few published datasets designed
to help addressing this demand.
One conspicuously related dataset is the Mini World of
Bits (MiniWoB) (Shi et al. 2017), a benchmark of 100 re-
inforcement learning environments containing many of the
characteristics of live web tasks, created in a controlled con-
text. Each MiniWoB environment is an HTML page with a
resolution of 210x160 pixels, and a natural language task
description, such as “Click on the ‘Next’ button.”. The en-
vironment provides a precise evaluation metric, rewarding
simulated behaviour, with rewards ranging from -1.0 (fail-
ure) to 1.0 (success), according to the results of each action,
i.e., if the action shifts the current state to a state closer to
the environment goal or not.
The same work (Shi et al. 2017) also proposes FormWoB,
which consists of four web tasks based on real ﬂight book-
ing websites, and QAWoB, which approaches web tasks as
question answering, soliciting questions from crowd work-
ers. Even though MiniWoB provides an essential baseline
for IPA, it is still a synthetic dataset, not reﬂecting real user
applications. It has a speciﬁc screen size, a limited number
of applications and user actions, creating a controlled and
closed environment.
An example of a real (non-synthetic) dataset for soft-
ware intelligence is the PhotoShop Operation Video (PSOV)
Dataset (Cheng et al. 2018), containing videos and dense
command annotations for Photoshop Software, with 74
hours of videos and 29,204 labelled commands. Despite
PSOV presenting real-world use cases, it is still limited to
one speciﬁc software, i.e., it is not generalisable to other ap-
plications.
Comparable benchmarks can be found in the research
area of video captioning. (Rohrbach et al. 2015) presents the
MPII Movie Description dataset (MPII-MD) which contains
transcribed and aligned audio descriptions and script data
sentences of a set of 55 movies of diverse genres. (Torabi et
al. 2015) introduces a dataset including 84.6 hours of paired

video/sentences from 92 DVDs, with high-quality natural
language phrases describing the visual content in a given
segment of time.
A process can be seen as a formal representation of a task;
therefore, there is an evident alignment between IPA and
semantic parsing (SP). Unlike IPA, several benchmarks are
available for SP, from which we can obtain insights.
Most of these benchmarks focus on evaluating the conver-
sion from a natural language speciﬁcation to a program writ-
ten in a speciﬁc programming language. WikiSQL (Zhong,
Xiong, and Socher 2017) is a collection of questions, corre-
sponding SQL queries, and SQL tables. NL2Bash (Lin et al.
2018) is a corpus with frequently used Bash commands with
its respective natural language description. Other applica-
tions include converting from a visual object to code (Ling et
al. 2016; Beltramelli 2018) and from source code to Pseudo-
code in different languages (Oda et al. 2015).
Process mining is also another closely related research
area; it aims to discover, monitor and improve real processes,
extracting knowledge from event logs (Van Der Aalst et al.
2011). Unlike IPA, it does not have its main focus on au-
tomation, but on ﬁnding answers for domain-speciﬁc ques-
tions, such as analysing patient treatment procedures (Bose
and van der Aalst 2011), and discovering the roles of the
people involved in the various stages of a speciﬁc pro-
cess (van Dongen 2015).
Evaluation Metrics
D2P & T2P
This section concentrates on a weighted quantiﬁcation of the
correctness and completeness of the generated IPA program
output. Correctness and completeness are deﬁned against a
gold reference IPA program which was produced by one or
more human programmers.
Given a set Π = {p1, . . . pk} of generated IPA pro-
grams where each pj
=
f0(arg0, ..., argn) ◦.... ◦
fm(arg0, ..., argn) and a corresponding gold standard Π⋆,
we deﬁne a set of metrics of varying granularity that can be
seen as approximate measures of program correctness.
We start with the following error functions:
• Strict Error:
Estrict(p, p⋆) =
0
if pj = p⋆
j
1
otherwise
MAEstrict(Π) =
X
pj∈Π
Estrict( pj, p⋆
j)
|Π|
• Predicate / Argument Sensitive Error:
Esensitive(p, p⋆) =
X
f∈{f0,...,fm},
arg∈{arg0,...,argn}
Earg(arg, arg⋆) + Epred(f, f ⋆)
|Π|
Epred(f, f ⋆) =
0
if f = f ⋆
1
otherwise
Earg(arg, arg⋆) =



Eimage arg
if arg is an image
Esymb arg
if arg is a symbolic
value
For an image argument, the intersection over union (IoU)
is used to deﬁne Eimage arg. Given the bounding box of the
corresponding interface element (bb(i(arg))) and the gold
standard bounding box (bb⋆(i(arg))):
IoU = area of (bb(i(arg)) ∩bb⋆(i(arg)))
area of (bb(i(arg)) ∪bb⋆(i(arg)))
where Eimage arg(arg)
=
0 if IoU
>
0.5 and
Eimage arg(arg) = 0 otherwise.
IoU assumes that Imagesys can be registered within the
gs reference Screenshotgs.
An alternative way to deﬁne Eimage arg is by directly
comparing the two argument images using means squared
error (MSE) or structural similarity index (SSIM) (Wang et
al. 2004):
MSE =
1
mn
m−1
X
i=0
n−1
X
j=0
[I(i, j) −K(i, j)]2
SSIM(x, y) =
(2µxµy + c1)(2σxy + c2)
(µ2x + µ2y + c1)(σ2x + σ2y + c2)
The previous measures do not take into account the
order of the program statements. In order to capture
the sequential nature of an IPA program we include a
sequence-based metric which is based on the longest
common subsequence (LCS) function. Given two sequences
X = (x1, x2, . . . , xm) and Y = (y1, y2, . . . , yn), and given
that the preﬁxes of X are X1,2,...,m and the preﬁxes of Y
are Y1,2,...,n, LCS is deﬁned as:
LCS(Xi, Yj) =



















∅
(if i = 0 or j = 0)
LCS(Xi−1, Yj−1)ˆxi
(if i, j > 0 and xi = yj)
max{LCS(Xi, Yj−1), LCS(Xi−1, Yj)}
(if i, j > 0 and xi ̸= yj).
In order to compute the maximal program fragment gen-
erated we encode the programs Π⋆and Π as a sequence
of unique symbols si from a hash table derived from the
statements of Π⋆∪Π. The maximum program overlap
(MPO) is deﬁned as:
MPO(Π, Π⋆) = lcs(S,S⋆)
|S|
P2T & D2T
Evaluating generated text is a requisite for areas related
to Natural Language Generation, such as Machine Trans-
lation, Automatic Summarisation, Image/Video Captioning,
and Document Similarity. BLEU has been widely applied

and accepted as an evaluation metric for the tasks in the men-
tioned areas (Gatt and Krahmer 2018).
Similarly, we apply BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) to eval-
uate text generated from demonstrations and processes. Our
goal is to automatically evaluate for a demonstration Di
or a process Pi how well a candidate generated sentence
ci matches the set of of demonstration/process descriptions
Si = {si1, ..., sim}. BLEU computes the n-gram overlap
between the generated text description and the reference de-
scription. BLEU score depends on two different other fac-
tors: modiﬁed n-gram precision and brevity penalty.
Modiﬁed precision score computes the fraction of words
matched between candidate descriptions and reference de-
scriptions in the entire test corpus. Differently from preci-
sion, it clips the n-grams when it matches with the reference,
avoiding high-precision results obtained with only repeti-
tions of correct words. Modiﬁed n-gram precision is com-
puted as follows:
pn =
P
C∈{Candidates}
P
n-gram∈C
Countclip(n-gram)
P
C∈{Candidates}
P
n-gram∈C
Count(n-gram)
The brevity penalty factor penalizes candidates descrip-
tions, c, shorter than the reference descriptions, r, computed
as follows:
BP =
1
if c > r
e(1−r/c)
if c ≤r
Finally, the BLEU score is calculated as
BLEU = BP · exp (
N
X
n=1
wn log pn)
where wn are positive weights summing to one and N is
the size of the n-grams.
Real World of Bits Benchmark
To the best of our knowledge, there are no datasets available
that can be used as a benchmark for all tasks deﬁned in this
work. Therefore, we create a benchmark for evaluation of
IPA approaches. Inspired by the MiniWoB (Shi et al. 2017),
we name our dataset Real World of Bits (RealWoB). In this
section we describe how we generated our benchmark.
RealWoB contains 100 different entries, where each entry
is related to one speciﬁc task (e.g., searching for a ﬂight) and
it contains:
• A screen recording (video) of a user performing the task;
• A natural language summarisation of the task;
• A natural language step-by-step description of the task;
• A program that is capable of re-executing the task, written
in Sikuli GUI Automation Tool and TagUI2.
2https://github.com/kelaberetiv/TagUI
Each video has an average of 56 seconds and is divided
into time intervals, where each interval has a corresponding
natural language description.
There are two types of natural language description for the
task: a more general idea of the task being performed, i.e., a
summarisation, and a detailed step-by-step description. The
summarised text is used as a guide for the annotator, in or-
der to generate the video, description and program. The de-
tailed description is written using imperative sentences, such
as “Click on the button ‘Send”.
RealWoB also contains a program for every task. The pro-
grams were implemented based on the videos and the nat-
ural language step-by-step. Every sentence in natural lan-
guage corresponds to one or more commands in the pro-
gram/process. Figure 5 presents an example of pair of nat-
ural language step-by-step description process implementa-
tion in Sikuli.
The 100 tasks are divided into 10 categories:
• Spreadsheet use: 10 tasks
• Spreadsheet and browser use - simple: 10 tasks
• Spreadsheet and browser use - elaborate: 10 tasks
• Webmail suite use: 10 tasks
• Spreadsheet and Webmail suite use: 10 tasks
• Webmail suite and browser use: 10 tasks
• Browser, spreadsheet and Webmail suite use: 10 tasks
• Browser (social media) use: 10 tasks
• Browser (social media) and spreadsheet use: 10 tasks
• Random selection of previous tasks executed in a different
operating system: 10 tasks
The selected group of tasks/computer applications are
common for ofﬁce workers, with a high number of potential
end users. We identiﬁed the tasks as suitable for automation,
where none or little human input is required.
The automation of tasks using webmail suites and web
browsing is particularly hard due to the dynamic state of the

ones that involve browsing the web, we cache a version of
the used webpage and assume it as the current state of the
page.
For illustration purposes, Table 1 presents one example of
each task.
RealWoB was annotated by four different annotators, A,
B, C and D, where C is a specialist in IPA. It was constructed
with the following steps:
1. We deﬁned 90 different tasks based on investigating ev-
eryday ofﬁce worker tasks.
2. Annotator A recorded 90 videos, running the tasks on
Windows 10.
3. Annotator B wrote a summary of the task being per-
formed, a step by step description (for every video seg-
ment) and a program capable of executing the task auto-
matically.

1. Type "Total hours" in order to describe the cell.
2. Type "=SUM(" to initiate the summation
formula with arguments: cells D14, D25, D36,
D47 and D58.
3. Type ")" and "Enter" to apply the formula.
Step-by-step description
Process implementation
Figure 5: NL description and respective Sikuli process implementation.
Table 1: Examples of tasks in dataset RealWoB.
Category
Task Example (Summary)
Spreadsheet
Open a spreadsheet <ﬁle location>containing columns for names of students and marks for ﬁve assignments.
Create a new column containing the mean of the marks for each student.
Spreadsheet + browser
Open the website: https://veggiedesserts.co.uk/vegan-carrot-cake/
Find the ingredients for the recipe on the page.
Open a spreadsheet <ﬁle location>containing a column for ingredients and a column for quantity.
Copy the recipe details into the spreadsheet.
Spreadsheet + browser
Open a spreadsheet <ﬁle location>containing a list of products.
Search each item on https://www.idealo.co.uk/
Add the lowest price in the column next to each product name.
Webmail
Open outlook.

Spreadsheet + Webmail
Open a spreadsheet containing names of people, places (origin and destination) and dates (in a spreadsheet),
Open outlook.

Webmail + browser
Open outlook.

Use https://www.skyscanner.net/ to verify the price of the ﬂight.
Browser + spreadsheet + webmail
Open outlook.

Use https://www.skyscanner.net/ to verify the price of the ﬂight.
Add the name of the person and the cheapest ﬂight to a (pre-created) spreadsheet.
Browser (social media)
Go to https://www.imdb.com/chart/top?ref =nv mv 250.
Search for the trailers of the top 5 movies of all time on Youtube using the name of the movie and the word trailer.
Browser (social media) + spreadsheet
Find the current top 10 hashtags on Twitter.
Add the hashtags it to a pre-created spreadsheet.
Random task - Different OS
Any of the above tasks executed using the OS Ubuntu.
4. Annotator C veriﬁed and corrected the videos and the an-
notations.
5. From the 90 different tasks, we chose ten random tasks.
6. Annotator B recorded the ten tasks using Ubuntu 16.04.
7. Annotator D wrote a summary of the task being per-
formed, a step by step description (for every video seg-
ment) and a program capable of executing the task auto-
matically.
8. Annotator C veriﬁed and corrected the videos and the an-
notations.
Conclusion
In this work, we present a formalisation for IPA using a
bottom-up approach, deﬁning several composing blocks of
an IPA program. We also deﬁne the modalities and tasks that
are part of IPA, demo2text, demo2process, text2process and
process2text, and we present how these tasks relate to simi-
lar research areas.
With the formalisation, it was also possible to deﬁne ap-
propriate metrics for each one of the tasks, evaluating the
resulting process or text. We also describe how we built a
dataset that can be used as a benchmark for the IPA tasks.
We envision that the research area in IPA will see signiﬁ-
cant progress in the next few years, following the increased

use of RPA tools. The formalisation present in this work is a
starting step towards building complex IPA systems.
While we have provided the formalisation, evaluation
techniques and methodology for designing a benchmark,
there is an important next step in this research: joining to-
gether these contributions and creating a baseline for each
one of the IPA tasks.
