Applying Strategic Multiagent Planning to Real-World
Travel Sharing Problems
Jan Hrnˇcíˇr
Agent Technology Center
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
121 35 Prague, Czech Republic

Michael Rovatsos
School of Informatics
The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9AB, United Kingdom

ABSTRACT
Travel sharing, i.e., the problem of ﬁnding parts of routes
which can be shared by several travellers with diﬀerent points
of departure and destinations, is a complex multiagent prob-
lem that requires taking into account individual agents’ pref-
erences to come up with mutually acceptable joint plans. In
this paper, we apply state-of-the-art planning techniques to
real-world public transportation data to evaluate the feasi-
bility of multiagent planning techniques in this domain. The
potential of improving travel sharing technology has great
application value due to its ability to reduce the environmen-
tal impact of travelling while providing beneﬁts to travellers
at the same time.
We propose a three-phase algorithm that utilises performant
single-agent planners to ﬁnd individual plans in a simpliﬁed
domain ﬁrst and then merges them using a best-response
planner which ensures resulting solutions are individually
rational. Finally, it maps the resulting plan onto the full
temporal planning domain to schedule actual journeys.
The evaluation of our algorithm on real-world, multi-modal
public transportation data for the United Kingdom shows
linear scalability both in the scenario size and in the num-
ber of agents, where trade-oﬀs have to be made between
total cost improvement, the percentage of feasible timeta-
bles identiﬁed for journeys, and the prolongation of these
journeys. Our system constitutes the ﬁrst implementation
of strategic multiagent planning algorithms in large-scale
domains and provides insights into the engineering process
of translating general domain-independent multiagent plan-
ning algorithms to real-world applications.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.11 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Distributed Artiﬁcial In-
telligence – Multiagent systems
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation
Keywords
multiagent planning, real-world application, travel sharing
1.
INTRODUCTION
Travelling is an important and frequent activity, yet peo-
ple willing to travel have to face problems with rising fuel
prices, carbon footprint and traﬃc jams. These problems
can be ameliorated by travel sharing, i.e., groups of people
travel together in one vehicle for parts of the journey. Par-
ticipants in such schemes can beneﬁt from travel sharing in
several ways: sharing parts of a journey may reduce cost
(e.g., through group tickets), carbon footprint (e.g., when
sharing a private car, or through better capacity utilisation
of public means of transport), and travellers can enjoy the
company of others on a long journey.
In more advanced
scenarios one could even imagine this being combined with
working together while travelling, holding meetings on the
road, etc.
Today, there exist various commercial online services for
car1, bike, and walk sharing as well as services which as-
sist users in negotiating shared journeys2, and, of course,
plenty of travel planning services3 that automate individ-
ual travel planning for one or several means of transport.
On the research side, there is previous work that deals with
the ridesharing and car-pooling problem [1, 8, 14].
How-
ever, no work has been done that attempts to compute joint
travel plans based on public transportation timetable data
and geographical stop locations, let alone in a way that
takes into account the strategic nature of the problem, which
comes about through the diﬀerent (and potentially conﬂict-
ing) preferences of individuals who might be able to beneﬁt
from travelling together. From the point of view of (multia-
gent) planning, this presents itself as a very complex appli-
cation scenario: Firstly, even if one restricted oneself to cen-
tralised (non-strategic) planning, the domain is huge – pub-
lic transportation data for the UK alone currently involves
240, 590 timetable connections for trains and coaches (even
excluding local city buses), which would have to be trans-
lated to a quarter of a million planning actions, at least in
a naive formalisation of the domain. Secondly, planning for
multiple self-interested agents that are willing to cooperate
only if it is beneﬁcial for them is known to be exponentially
harder than planning for each agent individually [2]. Yet
any automated service that proposes joint journeys would
have to guarantee such strategic properties in order to be
acceptable for human users (who could then even leave it to
the service to negotiate trips on their behalf).
1E.g., www.liftshare.com or www.citycarclub.co.uk.
2E.g., www.companions2travel.co.uk, www.travbuddy.com.
3E.g., in the United Kingdom: www.nationalrail.co.uk for
trains,
www.traveline.info
and
www.google.com/transit
for multi-modal transportation.
arXiv:1301.0216v1  [cs.AI]  2 Jan 2013

In this paper, we present an implementation of best-res-
ponse planning (BRP) [13] within a three-phase algorithm
that is capable of solving strategic travel sharing problems
for several agents based on real-world transportation data.
Based on a simpliﬁed version of the domain that ignores
timetabling information, the algorithm ﬁrst builds individ-
ual travel plans using state-of-the-art single-agent planners
that are available oﬀthe shelf. It then merges these indi-
vidual plans and computes a multiagent plan that is a Nash
equilibrium and guarantees individual rationality of solu-
tions, as well as stability in the sense that no single agent
has an incentive to deviate from the joint travel route. This
is done using BRP as the underlying planner, as it is the
only available planner that can solve strategic multiagent
planning problems of such scale, and is proven to converge
in domains that comply with certain assumptions, as is the
case for our travel sharing domain. In a third and ﬁnal step,
the resulting multiagent plan is mapped onto the full tem-
poral planning domain to schedule actual journeys.
This
scheduling task is not guaranteed to always ﬁnd a feasible
solution, as the previous simpliﬁcation ignores a potential
lack of suitable connections. However, we show through an
extensive empirical evaluation that our method ﬁnds useful
solutions in a large number of cases despite its theoretical
incompleteness.
The contribution of our work is threefold: Firstly, we show
that current multiagent planning technology can be used in
important planning domains such as travel sharing by pre-
senting its application to a practical problem that cannot
be solved with other existing techniques.
In the process,
we describe the engineering steps that are necessary to deal
with the challenges of real-world large-scale data and pro-
pose suitable solutions. Secondly, we present an algorithm
that combines diﬀerent techniques in a practically-oriented
way, and which is largely based on domain-independent oﬀ-
the-shelf heuristic problem solvers. In fact, only data prepro-
cessing and timetable mapping use domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge, and much of the process of incorporating this knowl-
edge could be replicated for similar other domains (such as
logistics, manufacturing, and network communications). Fi-
nally, we provide a potential solution to the hard computa-
tional problem of travel sharing that could be exploited for
automating important tasks in a future real-world applica-
tion to the beneﬁts of users, who normally have to plan such
routes manually and would be overwhelmed by the choices
in a domain full of diﬀerent transportation options which is
inhabited by many potential co-travellers.
We start oﬀby describing the problem domain in section 2
and specifying the planning problem formally in section 3,
following the model used in [13]. Section 4 introduces our
three-phase algorithm for strategic planning in travel sharing
domains and we present an extensive experimental evalua-
tion of the algorithm in section 5. Section 6 presents a dis-
cussion of our results and section 7 concludes.
2.
THE TRAVEL SHARING DOMAIN
The real-world travel domain used in this paper is based
on the public transport network in the United Kingdom,
a very large and complex domain which contains 4, 055 rail-
way and coach stops supplemented by timetable informa-
tion. An agent representing a passenger is able to use diﬀer-
PostgreSQL database system
NaPTAN XML data
Transform NaPTAN
NPTDR XML data
Transform NPTDR
Data processing
Transport database
PL/pgSQL functions
Figure 1: Overview of the data transformation and
processing
ent means of transport during its journey: walking, trains,
and coaches. The aim of each agent is to get from its start-
ing location to its ﬁnal destination at the lowest possible
cost, where the cost of the journey is based on the dura-
tion and the price of the journey. Since we assume that all
agents are travelling on the same day and that all journeys
must be completed within 24 hours, in what follows below
we consider only travel data for Tuesdays (this is an arbi-
trary choice that could be changed without any problem).
For the purposes of this paper, we will make the assump-
tion that sharing a part of a journey with other agents is
cheaper than travelling alone. While this may not currently
hold in many public transportation systems, deﬁning hypo-
thetical cost functions that reﬂect this would help assess the
potential beneﬁt of introducing such pricing schemes.
2.1
Source data
The travel sharing domain uses the National Public Trans-
port Data Repository (NPTDR)4 which is publicly available
from the Department for Transport of the British Govern-
ment. It contains a snapshot of route and timetable data
that has been gathered in the ﬁrst or second complete week
of October since 2004. For the evaluation of the algorithm
in section 5, we used data from 20105, which is provided in
TransXChange XML6.
National Public Transport Access Nodes (NaPTAN)7 is a UK
national system for uniquely identifying all the points of ac-
cess to public transport. Every point of access (bus stop,
rail station, etc.)
is identiﬁed by an ATCO code8, e.g.,
9100HAYMRKT for Haymarket Rail Station in Edinburgh.
Each stop in NaPTAN XML data is also supplemented by
common name, latitude, longitude, address and other pieces
of information. This data also contains information about
how the stops are grouped together (e.g., several bus bays
that are located at the same bus station).
To be able to use this domain data with modern AI plan-
ning systems, it has to be converted to the Planning Domain
Deﬁnition Language (PDDL). We transformed the data in
three subsequent stages, cf. Figure 1. First, we transformed
the NPTDR and NaPTAN XML data to a spatially-enabled
PostgreSQL database. Second, we automatically processed
and optimised the data in the database. The data processing
4data.gov.uk/dataset/nptdr
5www.nptdr.org.uk/snapshot/2010/nptdr2010txc.zip
6An XML-based UK standard for interchange of route and
timetable data.
7data.gov.uk/dataset/naptan
8A unique identiﬁer for all points of access to public trans-
port in the United Kingdom.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
50 min
30 min
20 min
30 min
120 min
80 min
60 min
Figure 2: An example of the relaxed domain (e.g.,
it takes 50 minutes to travel from the stop A to B)
by SQL functions in the procedural PL/pgSQL language in-
cluded the following steps: merging bus bays at bus stations
and parts of train stations, introducing walking connections
to enable multi-modal journeys, and eliminating duplicates
from the timetable. Finally, we created a script for generat-
ing PDDL speciﬁcations based on the data in the database.
More details about the data processing and PDDL speciﬁ-
cations can be found in [11].
2.2
Planning domain deﬁnitions
Since the full travel planning domain is too large for any
current state-of-the-art planner to deal with, we distinguish
the full domain from a relaxed domain, which we will use to
come up with an initial plan before mapping it to the full
timetable information in our algorithm below.
The relaxed domain is a single-agent planning domain repre-
sented as a directed graph where the nodes are the stops and
the edges are the connections provided by a service. The
graph must be directed because there exist stops that are
used in one direction only. There is an edge from A to B if
there is at least one connection from A to B in the timetable.
The cost of this edge is the minimal time needed for travel-
ling from A to B. A plan Pi found in the relaxed domain for
the agent i is a sequence of connections to travel from its ori-
gin to its destination. The relaxed domain does not contain
any information about the traveller’s departure time. This
could be problematic in a scenario where people are travel-
ling at diﬀerent times of day. This issue could be solved by
clustering of user requests, cf. chapter 7.
A small example of the relaxed domain is shown in Fig-
ure 2. An example plan for an agent travelling from C to F
is P1 = ⟨C →D, D →E, E →F⟩. To illustrate the dif-
ference between the relaxed domain and the full timetable,
there are 8, 688 connections in the relaxed domain for trains
and coaches in the UK compared to 240, 590 timetable con-
nections.
Direct trains that do not stop at every stop are ﬁltered out
from the relaxed domain for the following reason: Assume
that in Figure 2, there is only one agent travelling from
C to F and that its plan in the relaxed domain is to use
a direct train from C to F. In this case, it is only possible
to match its plan to direct train connections from C to F,
and not to trains that stop at C, D, E, and F. Therefore, the
agent’s plan cannot be matched against all possible trains
between C and F which is problematic especially in the case
where the majority of trains stop at every stop and only
a few trains are direct. On the other hand, it is possible to
C
D
E
F
S1
S2
S1
S3
S2
S4
S5
Figure 3: An example of the full domain with stops
C, D, E and F for the joint plan P = {C
(1)
−−→D
(1,2)
−−−→
E
(1)
−−→F }
match a plan with a train stopping in every stop to a direct
train, as it is explained later in section 4.3.
The full domain is a multiagent planning domain based on
the joint plan P. Assume that there are N agents in the
full domain (each agent i has the plan Pi from the relaxed
domain). Then, the joint plan P is a merge of single-agent
plans deﬁned by formula
P =
N
[
i=1
Pi
where we interpret S as the union of graphs that would re-
sult from interpreting each plan as a set of edges connecting
stops. More speciﬁcally, given a set of single-agent plans, the
plan merging operator S computes its result in three steps:
First, it transforms every single-agent plan Pi to a directed
graph Gi where the nodes are the stops from the single-
agent plan Pi and the edges represent the actions of Pi (for
instance, a plan P1 = ⟨C →D, D →E, E →F⟩is trans-
formed to a directed graph G1 = {C →D →E →F}). Sec-
ond, it performs a graph union operation over the directed
graphs Gi and labels every edge in the joint plan with the
numbers of agents that are using the edge (we don’t intro-
duce any formal notation for these labels here, and simply
slightly abuse the standard notation of sets of edges to de-
scribe the resulting graph).
As an example, the joint plan for agent 1 travelling from
C to F and sharing a journey from D to E with agent 2
would be computed as
⟨C →D, D →E, E →F⟩∪⟨D →E⟩=
{C
(1)
−−→D
(1,2)
−−−→E
(1)
−−→F}
With this, the full domain is represented as a directed multi-
graph where the nodes are the stops that are present in the
joint plan of the relaxed domain. Edges of the multigraph
are the service journeys from the timetable. Every service
is identiﬁed by a unique service name and is assigned a de-
parture time from each stop and the duration of its journey
between two stops.
In the example of the full domain in
Figure 3, the agents can travel using some subset of ﬁve
diﬀerent services S1 to S5. In order to travel from C to D
using service S1, an agent must be present at stop C before
its departure.
3.
THE PLANNING PROBLEM
Automated planning technology [9] has developed a variety
of scalable heuristic algorithms for tackling hard planning
problems, where plans, i.e., sequences of actions that achieve

a given goal from a given initial state, are calculated by
domain-independent problem solvers. To model the travel
sharing problem, we use a multiagent planning formalism
which is based on MA-STRIPS [2] and coalition-planning
games [3]. States are represented by sets of ground ﬂuents,
actions are tuples a = ⟨pre(a), eﬀ(a)⟩. After the execution
of action a, positive ﬂuents p from eﬀ(a) are added to the
state and negative ﬂuents ¬p are deleted from the state.
Each agent has individual goals and actions with associated
costs. There is no extra reward for achieving the goal, the
total utility received by an agent is simply the inverse of the
cost incurred by the plan executed to achieve the goal.
More formally, following the notation of [13], a multiagent
planning problem (MAP) is a tuple
Π = ⟨N, F, I, {Gi}n
i=1, {Ai}n
i=1, Ψ, {ci}n
i=1⟩
where
• N = {1, . . . , n} is the set of agents,
• F is the set of ﬂuents,
• I ⊆F is the initial state,
• Gi ⊆F is agent i’s goal,
• Ai is agent i’s action set,
• Ψ : A →{0, 1} is an admissibility function,
• ci : ×n
i=1Ai →R is the cost function of agent i.
A = A1 × . . . × An is the joint action set assuming a con-
current, synchronous execution model, and G = ∧iGi is the
conjunction of all agents’ individual goals. A MAP typically
imposes concurrency constraints regarding actions that can-
not or have to be performed concurrently by diﬀerent agents
to succeed which the authors of [13] encode using an admis-
sibility function Ψ, with Ψ(a) = 1 if the joint action a is
executable, and Ψ(a) = 0 otherwise.
A plan π = ⟨a1, . . . , ak⟩is a sequence of joint actions aj ∈A
such that a1 is applicable in the initial state I (i.e., pre(a1) ⊆
I), and aj is applicable following the application of a1, . . . ,
aj−1. We say that π solves the MAP Π if the goal state
G is satisﬁed following the application of all actions in π
in sequence.
The cost of a plan π to agent i is given by
Ci(π) = Pk
j=1 ci(aj). Each agent’s contribution to a plan π
is denoted by πi (a sequence of ai ∈Ai).
3.1
Best-response planning
The best-response planning (BRP) algorithm proposed in
[13] is an algorithm which, given a solution πk to a MAP Π,
ﬁnds a solution πk+1 to a transformed planning problem Πi
with minimum cost Ci(πk+1) among all possible solutions:
πk+1 = arg min{Ci(π)|π identical to πk for all j ̸= i}
The transformed planning problem Πi is obtained by rewrit-
ing the original problem Π so that all other agents’ actions
are ﬁxed, and agent i can only choose its own actions in such
a way that all other agents still can perform their original
actions. Since Πi is a single-agent planning problem, any
cost-optimal planner can be used as a best-response plan-
ner.
In [13], the authors show how for a class of congestion plan-
ning problems, where all ﬂuents are private, the transforma-
tion they propose allows the algorithm to converge to a Nash
equilibrium if agents iteratively perform best-response steps
using an optimal planner. This requires that every agent
can perform its actions without requiring another agent, and
hence can achieve its goal in principle on its own, and con-
versely, that no agent can invalidate other agents’ plans.
Assuming inﬁnite capacity of vehicles, the relaxed domain
is an instance of a congestion planning problem9.
The BRP planner works in two phases: In the ﬁrst phase,
an initial plan for each agent is computed (e.g., each agent
plans independently or a centralised multi-agent planner is
used). In the second phase, the planner solves simpler best-
response planning problems from the point of view of each
individual agent. The goal of the planner in a BRP problem
is to minimise the cost of an agent’s plan without changing
the plans of others.
Consequently, it optimises a plan of
each agent with respect to the current joint plan.
This approach has several advantages. It supports full con-
currency of actions and the BRP phase avoids the exponen-
tial blowup in the action space resulting in much improved
scalability. For the class of potential games [16], it guaran-
tees to converge to a Nash equilibrium. On the other hand,
it does not guarantee the optimality of a solution, i.e., the
quality of the equilibrium in terms of overall eﬃciency is
not guaranteed (it depends on which initial plan the agents
start oﬀwith). However, experiments have proven that it
can be successfully used for improving general multiagent
plans [13]. Such non-strategic plans can be computed using
a centralised multiagent planner, i.e., a single-agent plan-
ner (for instance Metric-FF [10]) which tries to optimise the
value of the joint cost function (in our case the sum of the
values of the cost functions of agents in the environment)
while trying to achieve all agents’ goals. Centralised multi-
agent planners have no notion of self-interested agents, i.e.,
they ignore the individual preferences of agents.
4.
A THREE-PHASE STRATEGIC TRAVEL
SHARING ALGORITHM
The main problem when planning for multiple agents with
a centralised multiagent planner is the exponential blowup
in the action space which is caused by using concurrent, in-
dependent actions [13]. Using a naive PDDL translation has
proven that a direct application of a centralised multiagent
planner to this problem does not scale well. For example,
a simple scenario with two agents, ferries to Orkney Islands
and trains in the area between Edinburgh and Aberdeen re-
sulted in a one-day computation time.
As mentioned above, we tackle the complexity of the domain
by breaking down the planning process into diﬀerent phases
9 Following the deﬁnition of a congestion planning prob-
lem in [13], all actions are private, as every agent can use
transportation means on their own and the other agents’
concurrently taken actions only aﬀect action cost. A part of
the cost function deﬁned in section 4.4 depends only on the
action choice of individual agent.

Input
• a relaxed domain
• a set of N agents A = {a1, . . . , aN}
• an origin and a destination for each agent
1. The initial phase
For i = 1, . . . , N do
Find an initial journey for agent ai using
a single-agent planner.
2. The BR phase
Do until no change in the cost of the joint plan
For i = 1, . . . , N do
1. Create a simpler best-response planning (BRP)
problem from the point of view of agent ai.
2. Minimise the cost of ai’s plan without changing
the plans of others.
End
3. The timetabling phase
Identify independent groups of agents G = {g1, . . . , gM}.
For i = 1, . . . , M do
1. Find the relevant timetable for group gi.
2. Match the joint plan of gi to timetable using
a temporal single-agent planner in the full domain
with the relevant timetable.
End
Figure 4: Three-phase algorithm for ﬁnding shared
journeys for agents
that avoid dealing with the full ﬁne-grained timetable data
from the outset. Our algorithm, which is shown in Figure 4,
is designed to work in three phases.
4.1
The initial phase
First, in the initial phase, an initial journey is found for each
agent using the relaxed domain. A journey for each agent
is calculated independently of other agents in the scenario
using a single-agent planner. As a result, each agent is as-
signed a single-agent plan which will be further optimised in
the next phase. This approach makes sense in our domain
because the agents do not need each other to achieve their
goals and they cannot invalidate each other’s plans.
4.2
The BR phase
Second, in the BR phase (best-response phase), which is also
based on the relaxed domain, the algorithm uses the BRP al-
gorithm as described above. It iteratively creates and solves
simpler best-response planning problems from the point of
view of each individual agent.
In the case of the relaxed
domain, the BRP problem looks almost the same as a prob-
lem of ﬁnding a single-agent initial journey. The diﬀerence
is that the cost of travelling is smaller when an agent uses
A
C
D
E
F
G
B
H
part 1
part 2
part 4
part 5
part 3
(1)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
Figure 5: Parts of the group journey of two agents
A
C
D
E
F
G
B
H
T1
T2
T2
T2
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T2
T1
Figure 6:
The full domain with services from the
relevant timetable.
There are ﬁve diﬀerent trains
T1 to T5, and train T1 is a direct train.
a connection which is used by one or more other agents, as
will be explained below, cf. equation (1).
Iterations over agents continue until there is no change in
the cost of the joint plan between two successive iterations.
This means that the joint plan cannot be further improved
using the best-response approach.
The output of the BR
phase is the joint plan P in the relaxed domain (deﬁned in
section 2.2) that speciﬁes which connections the agents use
for their journeys and which segments of their journeys are
shared. The joint plan P will be matched to the timetable
in the ﬁnal phase of the algorithm.
4.3
The timetabling phase
In the ﬁnal timetabling phase, the optimised shared jour-
neys are matched against timetables using a temporal single-
agent planner which assumes the full domain. For this, as
a ﬁrst step, independent groups of agents with respect to
journey sharing are identiﬁed.
An independent group of
agents is deﬁned as an edge disjoint subgraph of the joint
plan P. This means that actions of independent groups do
not aﬀect each other so it is possible to ﬁnd a timetable for
each independent group separately.
Then, for every independent group, parts of the group jour-
ney are identiﬁed. A part of the group journey is deﬁned as
a maximal continuous segment of the group journey which is
performed by the same set of agents. As an example, there is
a group of two agents that share a segment of their journeys
in Figure 5: Agent 1 travels from A to G while agent 2 trav-
els from B to H. Their group journey has ﬁve parts, with
the shared part (part 3) of their journey occurring between
stops C and F.
In order to use both direct and stopping trains when the
group journey is matched to the timetable, the relevant
timetable for a group journey is composed in the following
way: for every part of the group journey, return all timetable
services in the direction of agents’ journeys which connect

Table 1: Parameters of the testing scenarios
Scenario code
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Number of stops
344
721
1 044
1 670
2 176
Relaxed domain connections
744
1 520
2 275
4 001
4 794
Timetabled connections
23 994
26 702
68 597
72 937
203 590
Means of transport
trains
trains, coaches
trains
trains, coaches
trains
the stops in that part. An example of the relevant timetable
for a group of agents from the previous example is shown in
Figure 6. Now, the agents can travel using the direct train
T1 or using train T2 with intermediate stops.
The relevant timetable for the group journey is used with
the aim to cut down the amount of data that will be given
to a temporal single-agent planner. For instance, there are
23 994 timetabled connections in Scotland.
For an exam-
ple journey of two agents, there are only 885 services in
the relevant timetable which is approximately 4 % of the
data. As a result, the temporal single-agent planner gets
only the necessary amount of data as input, to prevent the
time-consuming exploration of irrelevant regions of the state
space.
4.4
Cost functions
The timetable data used in this paper (cf. section 2.1) con-
tains neither information about ticket prices nor distances
between adjacent stops, only durations of journeys from one
stop to another.
This signiﬁcantly restricts the design of
cost functions used for the planning problems. Therefore,
the cost functions used in the three phases of the algorithm
are based solely on the duration of journeys.
In the initial phase, every agent tries to get to its destination
in the shortest possible time. The cost of travelling between
adjacent stops A and B is simply the duration of the journey
between stops A and B. In the BR phase, we design the cost
function in such a way that it favours shared journeys. The
cost ci,n for agent i travelling from A to B in a group of n
agents is then deﬁned by equation (1):
ci,n =
 1
n 0.8 + 0.2

ci
(1)
where ci is the individual cost of the single action to i when
travelling alone. In our experiments below, we take this to
be equal to the duration of the trip from A to B.
This is designed to approximately model the discount for the
passengers if they buy a group ticket: The more agents travel
together, the cheaper the shared (leg of a) journey becomes
for each agent. Also, an agent cannot travel any cheaper
than 20 % of the single-agent cost. In reality, pricing for
group tickets could vary, and while our experimental results
assume this speciﬁc setup, the actual price calculation could
be easily replaced by any alternative model.
In the timetabling phase, every agent in a group of agents
tries to spend the shortest possible time on its journey.
When matching the plan to the timetable, the temporal
planner tries to minimise the sum of durations of agents’
journeys including waiting times between services.
5.
EVALUATION
We have evaluated our algorithm on public transportation
data for the United Kingdom, using various oﬀ-the-shelf
planners for the three phases described above, and a number
of diﬀerent scenarios. These are described together with the
results obtained from extensive experiments below.
5.1
Planners
All three single-agent planners used for the evaluation were
taken from recent International Planning Competitions (IPC)
from 2008 and 2011. We use LAMA [18] in the initial and
the BR phase, a sequential satisﬁcing (as opposed to cost-
optimal) planner which searches for any plan that solves
a given problem and does not guarantee optimality of the
plans computed. LAMA is a propositional planning system
based on heuristic state-space search. Its core feature is the
usage of landmarks [17], i.e., propositions that must be true
in every solution of a planning problem.
SGPlan6 [12] and POPF2 [7] are temporal satisﬁcing plan-
ners used in the timetabling phase. Such temporal planners
take the duration of actions into account and try to min-
imise makespan (i.e., total duration) of a plan but do not
guarantee optimality. The two planners use diﬀerent search
strategies and usually produce diﬀerent results. This allows
us to run them in sequence on every problem and to pick the
plan with the shortest duration. It is not strictly necessary
to run both planners, one could save computation eﬀort by
trusting one of them.
SGPlan6 consists of three inter-related steps: parallel de-
composition, constraint resolution and subproblem solution
[4, 10, 15, 19]. POPF2 is a temporal forward-chaining partial-
order planner with a speciﬁc extended grounded search strat-
egy described in [5, 6]. It is not known beforehand which
of the two planners will return a better plan on a particular
problem instance.
5.2
Scenarios
To test the performance of our algorithm, we generated ﬁve
diﬀerent scenarios of increasing complexity, whose param-
eters are shown in Table 1.
They are based on diﬀerent
regions of the United Kingdom (Scotland for S1 and S2,
central UK for S3 and S4, central and southern UK for S5).
Each scenario assumes trains or trains and coaches as avail-
able means of transportation.
In order to observe the behaviour of the algorithm with dif-
ferent numbers of agents, we ran our algorithm on every
scenario with 2, 4, 6, . . . , 14 agents in it. To ensure a reason-
able likelihood of travel sharing to occur, all agents in the
scenarios travel in the same direction. This imitates a pre-
processing step where the agents’ origins and destinations
are clustered according to their direction of travel. For sim-

plicity reasons, we have chosen directions based on cardinal
points (N–S, S–N, W–E, E–W). For every scenario and num-
ber of agents, we generated 40 diﬀerent experiments (10 ex-
periments for each direction of travel), resulting in a total of
1, 400 experiments. All experiments are generated partially
randomly as deﬁned below.
To explain how each experiment is set up, assume we have
selected a scenario from S1 to S5, a speciﬁc number of agents,
and a direction of travel, say north–south. To compute the
origin–destination pairs to be used by the agents, we place
two axes x and y over the region, dividing the stops in the
scenario into four quadrants I, II, III and IV. Then, the
set O of possible origin–destination pairs is computed as
O := {(A, B)|((A ∈I ∧B ∈IV) ∨(A ∈II ∧B ∈III))
∧|AB| ∈[20, 160]}
This means that each agent travels from A to B either from
quadrant I to IV or from quadrant II to III. The straight-
line distance |AB| between the origin and the destination
is taken from the interval 20–160 km (when using roads or
rail tracks, this interval stretches approximately to a real
distance of 30–250 km). This interval is chosen to prevent
journeys that could be hard to complete within 24 hours.
We sample the actual origin-destination pairs from the el-
ements of O, assuming a uniform distribution, and repeat
the process for all other directions of travel.
5.3
Experimental results
We evaluate the performance of the algorithm in terms of
three diﬀerent metrics: the amount of time the algorithm
needs to compute shared journeys for all agents in a given
scenario, the success rate of ﬁnding a plan for any given
agent and the quality of the plans computed. Unless stated
otherwise, the values in graphs are averaged over 40 experi-
ments that were performed for each scenario and each num-
ber of agents. The results obtained are based on running
the algorithm on a Linux desktop computer with 2.66 GHz
Intel Core 2 Duo processor and 4 GB of memory. The data,
source codes and scenarios in PDDL are archived online10.
5.3.1
Scalability
To assess the scalability of the algorithm, we measure the
amount of time needed to plan shared journeys for all agents
in a scenario.
In many of the experiments, the SGPlan6 and POPF2 used
in the timetabling phase returned some plans in the ﬁrst few
minutes but then they continued exploration of the search
space without returning any better plan. To account for this,
we imposed a time limit for each planner in the temporal
planning stage to 5 minutes for a group of up to 5 agents,
10 minutes for a group of up to 10 agents, and 15 minutes
otherwise.
Figure 7 shows the computation times of the algorithm. The
graph indicates that overall computation time grows roughly
linearly with increasing number of agents, which conﬁrms
that the algorithm avoids the exponential blowup in the ac-
tion space characteristic for centralised multiagent planning.
10 agents.fel.cvut.cz/download/hrncir/journey sharing.tgz
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
computation time [min]
agents in scenario
S1: Scotland (trains)
S2: Scotland (trains, coaches)
S3: Central UK (trains)
S4: Central UK (trains, coaches)
S5: South and central UK (trains)
Figure 7:
Computation time against number of
agents
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
computation time [min]
scenario size [connections in the relaxed domain]
12 agents
8 agents
4 agents
Figure 8: Computation time against scenario size
Computation time also increases linearly with growing sce-
nario size. Figure 8 shows computation times for 4, 8 and
12 agents against the diﬀerent scenarios.
While the overall computation times are considerable (up to
one hour for 14 agents in the largest scenario), we should em-
phasise that the algorithm is eﬀectively computing equilib-
rium solutions in multi-player games with hundreds of thou-
sands of states. Considering this, the linear growth hints at
having achieved a level of scalability based on the structure
of the domain that is far above naive approaches to plan
jointly in such state spaces. Moreover, it implies that the
runtimes could be easily reduced by using more processing
power.

 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
groups with timetable [%]
group size [number of agents]
S1: Scotland (trains)
S2: Scotland (trains, coaches)
S3: Central UK (trains)
S4: Central UK (trains, coaches)
S5: South and central UK (trains)
Figure 9: Percentage of groups for which a timetable
was found as a function of group size.
5.3.2
Success rate
To assess the value of the algorithm, we also need to look at
how many agents end up having a valid travel plan. Plan-
ning in the relaxed domain in the initial and the BR phase
of the algorithm is very successful.
After the BR phase,
99.4 % of agents have a journey plan. The remaining 0.6 %
of all agents does not have a single-agent plan because of
the irregularities in the relaxed domain caused by splitting
the public transportation network into regions. The agents
without a single-agent plan are not matched to timetable
connections in the timetabling phase.
The timetabling phase is of course much more problem-
atic.
Figure 9 shows the percentage of groups for which
a timetable was found, as a function of group size. In or-
der to create this graph, number of groups with assigned
timetable and total number of groups identiﬁed was counted
for every size of the group. There are several things to point
out here.
Naturally, the bigger a group is, the harder it is to ﬁnd
a feasible timetable, as the problem quickly becomes over-
constrained in terms of travel times and actually available
transportation services.
When a group of agents sharing
parts of their journeys is big (5 or more agents), the per-
centage of groups for which we can ﬁnd a timetable drops
below 50 %. With a group of 8 agents, almost no timetable
can be found. Basically what happens here is that the initial
and BR phases ﬁnd suitable ways of travelling together in
principle, but that it becomes impossible to ﬁnd appropriate
connections that satisfy every traveller’s requirements, or do
not add up to a total duration of less than 24 hours.
We can also observe that the success rate is higher in sce-
narios that use only trains than in those that combine trains
and coaches. On closer inspection, we can observe that this
is mainly caused by diﬀerent service densities in the rail and
coach networks, i.e., the ratios of timetabled connections
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
improvement in cost [%]
agents in scenario
S1: Scotland (trains)
S2: Scotland (trains, coaches)
S3: Central UK (trains)
S4: Central UK (trains, coaches)
S5: South and central UK (trains)
Figure 10: Average cost improvement
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
groups with prolongation < 30 % [%]
group size [number of agents]
Figure 11: Percentage of groups with less than 30 %
journey prolongation
over connections in the relaxed domain. For example, the
service density is 33 train services a day compared to only
4 coach services in Scotland. As a consequence, it is much
harder to ﬁnd a timetable in a scenario with both trains and
coaches because the timetable of coaches is much less regular
than the timetable of trains. However, this does not mean
that there is less sharing if coaches are included. Instead, it
just reﬂects the fact that due to low service density, many of
the envisioned shared journeys do not turn out to be feasible
using coaches. The fact that this cannot be anticipated in
the initial and BR phases is a weakness of our method, and
is discussed further in section 7.
5.3.3
Plan quality
Finally, we want to assess the quality of the plans obtained
with respect to improvement in cost of agents’ journeys and
their prolongation, to evaluate the net beneﬁt of using our
method in the travel sharing domain. We should mention
that the algorithm does not explicitly optimises the solu-
tions with respect to these metrics. To calculate cost im-

provement, recalling that Ci(π) = P
j ci(aj) for a plan is
the cost of a plan π = ⟨a1, . . . , ak⟩to agent i, assume n(aj)
returns the number of agents with whom the jth step of the
plan is shared. We can deﬁne a cost of a shared travel plan
C
′
i(π) = P
j ci,n(aj)(aj) using equation (1).
With this we
can calculate the improvement ∆C as follows:
∆C =
P
i∈N Ci(πi) −P
i∈N C
′
i(πN)
P
i∈N Ci(πi)
(2)
where N is the set of all agents, πi is the single-agent plan
initially computed for agent i, and πN is the ﬁnal joint plan
of all agents after completion of the algorithm (which is in-
terpreted as the plan of the “grand coalition” N and reﬂects
how subgroups within N share parts of the individual jour-
neys).
The average cost improvement obtained in our experiments
is shown in Figure 10, and it shows that the more agents
there are in the scenario, the higher the improvement. How-
ever, there is a trade-oﬀbetween the improvement in cost
and the percentage of groups that we manage to ﬁnd a suit-
able timetable for, cf. Figure 9.
On the one hand, travel sharing is beneﬁcial in terms of
cost. On the other hand, a shared journey has a longer du-
ration than a single-agent journey in most cases. In order
to evaluate this trade-oﬀ, we also measure the journey pro-
longation. Assume that Ti(π) is the total duration of a plan
to agent i in plan π, and, as above, πi/πN denote the initial
single-agent plans and the shared joint plan at the end of
the timetabling phase, respectively. Then, the prolongation
∆T of a journey is deﬁned as follows:
∆T =
P
i∈N Ti(πN) −P
i∈N Ti(πi)
P
i∈N Ti(πi)
(3)
Journey prolongation can be calculated only when a group
is assigned a timetable and each member of the group is
assigned a single-agent timetable. For this purpose, in every
experiment, we also calculate single-agent timetables in the
timetabling phase of the algorithm.
A graph of the percentage of groups that have a timetable
with prolongation less than 30 % as a function of group size
is shown in Figure 11. The graph shows which groups ben-
eﬁt from travel sharing, i.e., groups whose journeys are not
prolonged excessively by travelling together. Approximately
15 % of groups with 3–4 agents are assigned a timetable that
leads to a prolongation of less than 30 %. Such a low per-
centage of groups can be explained by the algorithm trying
to optimise the price of the journey by sharing in the BR
phase. However, there is a trade-oﬀbetween the price and
the duration of the journey. The more agents are sharing
a journey, the longer the journey duration is likely to be.
These results were obtained based on the speciﬁc cost func-
tion (1) we have introduced to favour travel sharing, and
which would have to be adapted to the speciﬁc cost struc-
ture that is present in a given transportation system. Also,
the extent to which longer journey times are acceptable for
the traveller depends on their preferences, but these could
be easily adapted by using diﬀerent cost functions.
6.
DISCUSSION
The computation of single-agent plans in the initial phase
involves solving a set of completely independent planning
problems. This means that the planning process could be
speeded up signiﬁcantly by using parallel computation on
multiple CPUs.
The same is true for matching diﬀerent
independent groups of agents to timetabled connections in
the timetabling phase. As an example, assume that there are
N agents in the scenario and t1, . . . , tN are the computation
times for respective single-agent initial plans. If computed
concurrently, this would reduce the computation time from
t = PN
i=1 ti to t′ = maxN
i=1(ti). Similar optimisations could
be performed for the timetabling phase of the algorithm. In
the experiments with 10 agents, for example, this would lead
to a runtime reduced by 48 % in scenario S1 and by 44 % in
scenario S5.
A major problem of our method is the inability to ﬁnd appro-
priate connections in the timetabling phase for larger groups.
There are several reasons for this. Firstly, the relaxed do-
main is overly simpliﬁed, and many journeys found in it do
not correspond to journeys that would be found if we were
planning in the full domain. Secondly, there are too many
temporal constraints in bigger groups (5 or more agents), so
the timetable matching problem becomes unsolvable given
the 24-hour timetable. However, it should also be pointed
out that such larger groups would be very hard to identify
and schedule even using human planning.
Thirdly, some
parts of public transportation network have very irregular
timetables.
Our method clearly improves the cost of agents’ journeys by
sharing parts of the journeys, even though there is a trade-
oﬀbetween the amount of improvement, the percentage of
found timetables and the prolongation of journeys. On the
one hand, the bigger the group, the better the improvement.
On the other hand, the more agents share a journey, the
harder it is to match their joint plan to timetable. Also, the
prolongation is likely to be higher with more agents travel-
ling together, and will most likely lead to results that are
not acceptable for users in larger groups.
Regarding the domain-independence of the algorithm, we
should point out that its initial and BR phases are com-
pletely domain-independent so they could easily be used in
other problem domains such as logistics, network routing or
service allocation. In the traﬃc domain, the algorithm can
be used to plan routes that avoid traﬃc jams or to control
traﬃc lights. What is more, additional constraints such as
staying at one city for some time or travelling together with
a speciﬁc person can be easily added. On the other hand, the
timetabling phase of the algorithm is domain-speciﬁc, pro-
viding an example of the speciﬁc design choices that have to
be made from an engineering point of view.
To assess the practical value of our contribution, it is worth
discussing how it could be used in practice as a part of
a travel planning system for real passengers. In such a sys-
tem, every user would submit origin, destination and travel
times. Diﬀerent users could submit their preferences at dif-
ferent times, with the system continuously computing shared
journeys for them based on information about all users’ pref-
erences. Users would need to agree on a shared journey in

time to arrange meeting points and to purchase tickets, sub-
ject to any restrictions on advance tickets etc. Because of
this lead time, it would be entirely suﬃcient if the users

last member of the travel group submits his or her journey
details, which implies that even with our current implemen-
tation of the algorithm, the runtimes would be acceptable.
From our experimental evaluation, we conclude that rea-
sonable group sizes range from two to four persons. Apart
from the fact that such groups can be relatively easily co-
ordinated, with the price model used in this paper, cf. for-
mula (1), every member of a three-person group could save
up to 53 % of the single-agent price. The success rate of the
timetabling phase of the algorithm for three-person groups
in the scenario S3 (trains in the central UK) is 70 %.
7.
CONCLUSION
We have presented a multiagent planning algorithm which
is able to plan meaningful shared routes in a real-world
travel domain. The algorithm has been implemented and
evaluated on ﬁve scenarios based on real-world UK public
transport data. The algorithm exhibits very good scalabil-
ity, since it scales linearly both with the scenario size and
the number of agents. The average computation time for
12 agents in the scenario with 90 % of trains in the UK is
less than one hour. Experiments indicate that the algorithm
avoids the exponential blowup in the action space character-
istic for a centralised multiagent planner.
To deal with thousands of users that could be in a real-
world travel planning system, a preprocessing step would be
needed: The agents would have to be divided into smaller
groups by clustering them according to departure time, di-
rection of travel, origin, destination, length of journey and
preferences (e.g., travel by train only, ﬁnd cheapest journey).
Then, the algorithm could be used to ﬁnd a shared travel
plan with a timetable. To prevent too large groups of agents
which are unlikely to be matched to the timetable, a limit
can be imposed on the size of the group. If a group plan
cannot be mapped to a timetable, the group can be split
into smaller sub-groups which are more likely to identify
a suitable timetable.
Finally, the price of travel and ﬂexibility of travel sharing
can be signiﬁcantly improved by sharing a private car. In
the future, we would like to explore the problem of planning
shared journeys when public transport is combined with ride
sharing. Then, in order to have a feasible number of nodes
in the travel domain, train and bus stops can be used as
meeting points where it is possible to change from a car to
public transport or vice versa.
8.
