A Two-Stage Multimodal Emotion Recognition
Model Based on Graph Contrastive Learning
Wei Ai
School of Computer and Information Engineering
Central South University of Forestry and Technology
ChangSha, China

FuChen Zhang
School of Computer and Information Engineering
Central South University of Forestry and Technology
ChangSha, China

Tao Meng*
School of Computer and Information Engineering
Central South University of Forestry and Technology
ChangSha, China

YunTao Shou
School of Computer and Information Engineering
Central South University of Forestry and Technology
ChangSha, China

HongEn Shao
School of Computer and Information Engineering
Central South University of Forestry and Technology
ChangSha, China

Keqin Li
Department of Computer Science
State University of New York
New Paltz, New York 12561, USA

Abstract—In terms of human-computer interaction, it is be-
coming more and more important to correctly understand the
user’s emotional state in a conversation, so the task of multimodal
emotion recognition (MER) started to receive more attention.
However, existing emotion classification methods usually perform
classification only once. Sentences are likely to be misclassified
in a single round of classification. Previous work usually ignores
the similarities and differences between different morphological
features in the fusion process. To address the above issues, we
propose a two-stage emotion recognition model based on graph
contrastive learning (TS-GCL). First, we encode the original
dataset with different preprocessing modalities. Second, a graph
contrastive learning (GCL) strategy is introduced for these
three modal data with other structures to learn similarities and
differences within and between modalities. Finally, we use MLP
twice to achieve the final emotion classification. This staged
classification method can help the model to better focus on
different levels of emotional information, thereby improving the
performance of the model. Extensive experiments show that
TS-GCL has superior performance on IEMOCAP and MELD
datasets compared with previous methods.
Index Terms—graph contrastive learning, graph convolutional
network, multimodal emotion recognition, two-stage classification
I. INTRODUCTION
Emotion is an indispensable element in human daily com-
munication, and the goal of multimodal emotion recognition
is to automatically identify and track the emotional state of
* is the corresponding author.
User
Hi, can you tell me today's weather forecast?. (Neutral)
I'm sorry to hear that. If I misunderstood, please 
explain, and I'll try to respond accurately.
Are you always this clueless? You don't get what I'm 
asking at all!(Anger)
Absolutely! Thanks so much for the compliment! Just 
share your plans, and I'll suggest a schedule.
Hello! Certainly, I can help you check today's weather 
forecast. May I know your city, please?
Ai Robot
Wow, you're awesome! Can you give me tomorrow's 
schedule?(Surprise)
Fig. 1. An example of effective multimodal multi-emotion human-machine
interaction in which multimodal emotion recognition plays a key role.
speakers in a conversation [7]. This task is receiving increasing
attention in the fields of natural language processing (NLP)
and multimodal processing. Multimodal emotion recognition
has many potential applications, such as assisting dialogue
analysis in legal trials and e-health services. Additionally, it is
arXiv:2401.01495v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2024

a critical component in creating more natural human-machine
interactions, a specific example of which is shown in Fig. 1.
With the rapid growth of conversational data on social
media platforms, more and more researchers have begun to
pay attention to multimodal emotion recognition. Multimodal
emotion recognition analyzes complex emotional expressions
more easily. By combining multiple modalities, the diversity
and complexity of human emotions can be better captured.
However, multimodal data such as video, audio, and text
have differences in feature space distribution, which leads to
the gap problem between different modalities in multimodal
emotion recognition [1]. To eliminate the differences between
the features of each modality, the current mainstream multi-
modal feature fusion method is to directly map each modality
into a shared feature space for representation. For example,
the Tensor Fusion Network (TFN) [8] introduces tensor de-
composition technology to decompose the fused multimodal
feature representation into different weight matrices to capture
the relationship between multimodal features, which helps
to capture multimodal data interaction information better.
Nevertheless, the above methods still suffer from indelible
heterogeneity when mapping different modal features to a
standard representation space. To address the above issues, we
introduce a strategy of graph contrastive learning to eliminate
this heterogeneity.
In addition, the current deep learning methods often perform
one-time classification when dealing with emotion recognition
tasks, and there is no secondary correction or reclassification
mechanism, which directly reduces the model’s performance.
For example, Hu et al. [9] used Graph Convolution Network
(GCN) to achieve multimodal data fusion and emotion recog-
nition. Two-stage classification can decompose the task into
two smaller subtasks, thereby reducing the complexity of the
overall mission and making the model easier to train and
optimize.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel modal
called a two-stage emotion recognition in conversations model
based on graph contrastive learning (TS-GCL), which aims to
simulate the emotion recognition process in human dialogue.
Human beings can recognize the emotion of the sentence
itself and modify or re-understand the feeling of a sentence
according to the context. This process can be better simulated
by using two classifications.
The main contributions of our study are summarized below:
• We propose a novel two-stage multimodal emotion recog-
nition model (TS-GCL) based on graph contrastive learn-
ing, which utilizes graph contrastive learning strategies
to continuously update and correct the differences be-
tween samples, making the model anti-noise and anti-
bias ability. At the same time, it effectively enhances the
robustness of the model.
• We propose a novel two-stage classification method for
MER, which has a clear division of labor. The first stage
is to judge the emotional polarity (positive, negative, or
neutral), and the second stage is to classify more de-
tailed dynamic categories. Each stages is responsible for
tasks of different granularity. The two-stage classification
method is closer to human beings identifying emotions.
• Our proposed model is extensively evaluated on two
benchmark datasets, IEMOCAP and MELD. The exper-
imental results show its superiority over existing algo-
rithms in accuracy and F1-score.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Multimodal Emotion Recognition
Emotion recognition has been fully applied in many fields,
including social media analysis, customer service and market
research, and public opinion monitoring. With the development
of artificial intelligence, deep learning methods have surpassed
traditional machine learning algorithms in all aspects.
In recent years, as an essential topic of natural language
processing, MER has attracted more and more interest from
researchers [17]–[25]. Unlike ordinary emotion recognition,
MER needs to consider modeling the speaker’s contextual
information and the problem of semantic information fusion
from multiple modalities. To this end, Poria et al. [10]
proposed a video emotion recognition method that considers
the context of video content. Specifically, they used LSTM
for context modeling, and the context information was further
used for emotion recognition. Hazarika et al. [11] proposed a
Conversational Memory Network (CMM) to capture context
dependencies in conversations. Although previous methods
have achieved good performance on MER, most ignore the
differences between different emotion categories, so we intro-
duce a graph contrastive learning mechanism and a two-stage
classification method, which can not only effectively model the
emotion from three modal graph structure information. We can
better learn the representation of graphs and compare graphs so
that the features between graphs expressing the same emotion
are more similar. The graph features of different emotions are
more differentiated.
B. Contrastive Learning
Self-supervised learning (SL), as an essential part of deep
learning, has received extensive attention in recent years.
Contrastive representation learning (CRL) is a representative
method in self-supervised learning. Its core idea is to learn
the discriminative features for distinguishing samples by con-
tinuously reducing the distance between positive samples and
expanding the space between positive samples.
Li et al. [12] proposed introducing contrastive representation
learning into the model, randomly sampling multiple slices on
the feature sequence, maximizing the similarity between differ-
ent slice representations of the same speech, and minimizing
other Similarity between slice representations. Kim et al. [13]
proposed a Contrastive Adversarial Learning (CAL) frame-
work, which consists of a Contrastive Learning Module and an

Adversarial Module, to learn representations that distinguish
between different expressions. Compared with methods that
directly use contrastive learning for expression recognition,
contrastive adversarial learning improves the robustness of fea-
tures. Although the model’s performance is further improved
after introducing contrastive learning in previous methods, how
to model the dependencies and internal consistency among
different modalities becomes a new challenge.
III. PRELIMINARY INFORMATION
In this section, we detail the use of different preprocessing
methods for other modalities, and at the same time, we define
the MER task mathematically.
A. Feature Extraction
To verify the model’s performance, this paper uses two
multimodal emotion recognition general data sets, IEMOCAP
and MELD. They use three data forms (text, audio, video) for
storage. Aiming at these three different data storage forms,
a targeted data preprocessing method is used for feature en-
coding to obtain high-quality semantic feature representations
with rich semantic information. We will describe the encoding
process of each mode in detail as follows.
1) Text Feature Extraction: We will extract word-level text
vector features from transcripts in the dataset. Specifically,
influenced by previous work [2], [3], [17], we convert tran-
scripts into text vector features using the RoBERTa [4] pre-
trained model, which is the most advanced sentence encoding
model known to us and has shown its superiority in a variety
of tasks. Properties, including question-answering systems,
named entity recognition, and information retrieval. Using this
model, we obtain excellent word embedding representations
δt.
2) Audio Feature Extraction: The fluctuation of sound in
the audio signal is not only the expression of sound but also
reflects the ups and downs of the speaker’s inner emotions.
Sometimes, a person’s behavior may not accurately reflect his
emotional state, but his voice is an undisguised expression
of real emotion. Inspired by previous research [5], [6], we
extracted audio features δa using OpenSMILE.
3) Vision Feature Extraction: We utilize 3D-CNN as a
visual feature extractor. The model is a network architecture
for visual representation learning. Recent work [5], [6] has
demonstrated its capability in various downstream tasks such
as video analysis and medical image processing. Finally, we
used 3D-CNN to extract 512-dimensional visual features δv.
B. Problem Definition
Suppose I speakers and N sentences are in a multimodal
dialogue. Then it can be expressed as two sets S and U,
where S = {s1, s2, . . . , sI}, U = {u1, u2, . . . , uN}. The
multimodal emotion recognition task needs to predict the
emotional label of each sentence when the speaker speaks.
We define a mapping function φ to represent the connection
between each sentence and the speaker. For example, sφn
represents the speaker corresponding to the n-th sentence. We
will use the preprocessing method described above to obtain
the representation features ui ∈Rd of the utterance. The
representation features of each utterance contain data from
three modalities, namely text, audio, and vision. In summary,
it can be expressed as:
ui = {δt
i, δa
i , δv
i }
(1)
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
In order to enhance the performance of multimodal emotion
recognition, we propose a new method called a two-stage mul-
timodal emotion recognition model based on graph contrastive
learning (TS-GCL). The overall architecture of TS-GCL is
shown in Fig. 2.
A. Modality Encoder
Contextual information plays an important role in predict-
ing emotion labels for each utterance. Therefore, converting
contextual information into discourse feature expression has
positive benefits. We use a bidirectional Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) for contextual information extraction on
sentence sequences U = {u1, u2, . . . , uN} because it can
effectively capture long-term dependencies, which is impor-
tant for understanding long-distance associations in text or
sequence data. The calculation process is as follows:
−→
hi = −−−−→
LSTM(ui),
(2)
←−
hi = ←−−−−
LSTM(ui),
(3)
hi = [−→
hi, ←−
hi], i ∈{1, . . . , N}.
(4)
where −→
hi and ←−
hi represent the cell states of two unidirectional
lstm forward propagation and backward propagation respec-
tively, hi ∈Rd represents the output of a bidirectional LSTM.
B. Speaker Embedding
Speaker information can provide clues about the speaker’s
social background, emotional tendencies, and attitudes. This
helps to better understand the context of the text and thus
predict emotion more accurately. And speaker information can
enhance the modeling of dialogue context. The same piece
of text may have different emotional interpretations between
different speakers. Embedding speaker information helps to
capture context information more accurately. Therefore, we
decide to embed the original speaker’s information si into it
before composing it. The speaker embedding λi calculation
process is as follows:
λi = Wssi + bλ
i
(5)
where Ws is the weight matrix and bλ
i is the bias vector.

Emotion Prediction
Feature Extraction
Graph Contrastive Learning
Two-Stage Classifications
···
Video
Video Feature Set
3D-CNN
Audio Feature Set
Audio
···
OpenSMILE
Positive 
Samples
···
···
···
···
Negative 
Samples
Tell her to wear her 
own earrings…… 
Tell her to wear her 
own earrings…… 
Text
Text Feature Set
Positive 
Samples
RoBERTa
···
···
···
···
···
Negative 
Samples
Positive 
Samples
···
···
Negative 
Samples
···
Multi-task Learning
Positive Emotion
Negative Emotion
Neutral Emotion
biLSTM
biLSTM
biLSTM
Intra-class
Comparison
Intra-class
Comparison
Intra-class
Comparison
Inter-class
Comparison
Inter-class
Comparison
Inter-class
Comparison
Speaker
+
+
+
Fig. 2. We propose the architecture of TS-GCL. It is mainly divided into three parts. The first part is feature extraction, using different preprocessing methods
to process the original dataset. The second part is graph contrastive learning. This part describes in detail the graph construction process and the process of
contrastive learning. The last part is two-stage classification, in which MLP is used for secondary classification in the emotion classification process, so as to
achieve better classification results.
C. Graph Construction
Inspired by previous work [15], [16], [14]. we construct a
directed graph GM = {VM, EM, TM} to represent a dialogue
consisting of I utterances as follows, where M ∈{t, a, v}.
In this graph, the node set V(|V| = 3N) corresponds to
utterances in three different utterance modes, and the edge
type set T includes the context, speaker, and utterance mode
dependencies between utterances. The edge set E ⊂V × V
indicates that there is a dialog relationship between nodes.
The specific way to construct the graph is as follows:
Nodes: Given a dialog, the number of nodes in the graph
is positively related to the number of sentences in the dialog.
This paper constructed a graph containing 3N nodes, where
each statement contains three nodes va
i , vv
i , vt
i in the graph,
which represent [ht
i, λi], [ha
i , λi], [hv
i , λi] and correspond to
three modes.
Edges: We assume that every utterance in the same dialogue
is related to other utterances. Therefore, there will be a
connection between any two nodes of the same modality in
the same dialog. Furthermore, each node is also connected to

nodes of the same utterance but from different modalities. For
example, in the graph node vt
i will be connected to va
i and vv
i .
Edge Weighting: We imagine that if there is a higher
similarity between two nodes, then the information interaction
between them will also be more important, which indicates that
the edge weight between them should be larger. To capture
the similarity between node expressions, we adopt angular
similarity as a way to measure the edge weight of two nodes.
There are two types of edges in the graph, namely: 1)
edges connecting nodes of the same modality, and 2) edges
connecting nodes of different modalities. To differentiate these
two cases, we employ different edge weighting strategies. For
nodes of the same modality, the weights of their edges are
calculated as follows:
Aij = 1 −arccos(sim(vi, vj))
π
(6)
where vi and vj denote the feature representations of the i-th
and j-th nodes in the graph. For nodes in different modalities,
their edge weights are calculated as follows:
Aij = ω(1 −arccos(sim(vi, vj))
π
)
(7)
where ω is a hyper parameter.
According to the above steps, we further use GCN to encode
contextual features.
˜P = (D + I)−1/2(Aij + I)(D + I)−1/2
(8)
where P is the Laplacian matrix, D is the degree matrix, and I
is the identity matrix. The iterative process of different layers
can be represented by multiple layers of graph convolutional
network (GCN) as follows:
H(l+1) = φ((1 −κ) ˜PH(l) + κH(0))((1 −ϱ(l))I+ϱ(l)W(l))
(9)
where κ and ϱ represent hyperparameters, φ represents the
activation function, and W(l) is a learned weight matrix.
D. GCL: Graph Contrastive Learning
GCL aims to make full use of the complementary infor-
mation of different modalities by using contrastive learning,
which can enhance the model’s sensitivity to emotional fea-
tures and improve emotion recognition accuracy by shortening
the distance between positive samples and expanding the
space between negative samples. For samples from the same
modality, construct positive and negative pairs. Positive pairs
include representations of the same modality for the same
sample, and teams of negative samples have representations of
the same modality for different samples. Using the Softmax
function, the similarity between positive and negative exam-
ples is mapped to a specific range to distinguish intra-class and
inter-class samples better, thereby providing a more accurate
loss function for the training of comparative learning. The
intra-class comparison loss and inter-class comparison loss are
calculated as follows:
LMMD =
1
N 2p
X
i,j
µ(ρM
i , ρM
j )
−
2
NpNn
X
i,j
µ(ρM
i , ηM
j )
+ 1
N 2n
X
i,j
µ(ηM
i , ηM
j )
(10)
where Np denotes the number of positive samples, Nn denotes
the number of negative samples, ρM
i
is a positive sample in the
same category, ηM
j
is a negative sample in the same category,
µ is the kernel function, the similarity between the two texts.
The three terms in the formula calculate the difference
in distribution between positive samples, the difference in
distribution between positive and negative samples, and the
difference in distribution between negative samples. By mini-
mizing these distribution differences, we can make the model
pay more attention to the emotion’s characteristics rather
than the differences between datasets. This helps improve the
generalization ability of emotion classifiers to perform well
under different data distributions.
Comparable loss and other possible classification loss com-
binations, reaching the loss function, the calculation process
is as follows:
LGCL = LMMN + ζ · Lclassification
(11)
Where ζ is the missing weight factor.
E. Multi-task Learning
After graph comparison learning processing, we get a vector
χM
i
after multi-modal fusion. The target category (label) for
each emotion is denoted by yi ∈{−1, 0, 1}, where (−1), (1),
and (0) represent the neutral emotion, positive emotion, and
negative emotion of the first classification in the secondary
classification, respectively.
The multi-modal fusion feature vector χM
i
and the cor-
responding target category yi will be used as the input of
the multi-layer perceptron. By performing backpropagation
training on samples, the multilayer perceptron will gradually
learn appropriate weights and biases for better prediction in
secondary classification tasks. The process is as shown in the
formula:
yi = softmax(MLP(χM
i )), yi ∈{−1, 0, 1}
(12)
ˆyi = softmax(MLP(χM
i ))
(13)
So far, we got emotion labels ˆyi for each sentence.

TABLE I
ON THE IEMOCAP DATASET, OUR METHOD IS COMPARED WITH OTHER BASELINE METHODS; THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ARE SHOWN IN THE TABLE
BELOW. THE BEST RESULTS IN EACH COLUMN ARE SHOWN IN BOLD. AVERAGE(W) STANDS FOR WEIGHTED AVERAGE.
Methods
IEMOCAP
Happy
Sadness
Neutral
Angry
Excitement
Frustration
Average(w)
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
bc-LSTM
28.7 34.8
57.7 60.3
54.7 52.4
56.6 57.3
51.7 57.3
67.7 59.3
55.1 55.4
CMN
25.7 30.1
55.6 62.8
53.2 52.7
61.0 59.3
55.0 60.3
70.7 60.1
56.3 56.1
ICON
22.5 30.3
59.1 64.9
62.6 57.8
65.1 63.4
58.8 62.9
67.1 60.7
59.7 59.0
MFN
23.7 34.6
65.5 70.1
55.2 52.1
71.4 66.5
63.8 62.1
68.6 62.7
60.0 59.7
DialogueRNN
25.1 33.9
74.8 78.3
58.2 59.0
65.1 65.6
80.3 71.5
61.0 58.8
63.6 62.4
A-DMN
43.0 50.2
69.8 76.4
63.0 62.9
63.6 56.5
87.8 77.4
53.7 55.5
64.9 64.2
DialogueGCN
40.7 42.9
88.8 84.1
62.2 63.8
67.2 64.0
65.3 63.0
64.2 66.9
65.0 64.2
CTnet
48.0 50.8
78.0 79.7
69.3 65.5
73.0 67.2
85.6 78.7
52.1 58.7
68.2 67.5
LR-GCN
54.1 55.3
81.9 78.8
59.1 63.8
69.7 69.0
76.0 73.9
68.3 68.6
68.5 68.1
GraphCFC
43.5 54.1
85.1 84.5
64.3 62.0
71.2 70.3
78.7 73.8
63.7 62.2
68.9 68.4
TS-GCL
71.2 70.0
81.3 81.7
67.4 64.2
60.5 61.4
74.6 76.5
62.0 64.6
70.3 70.2
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
In this section, we describe the implementation details of
the model during training. Our experimental environment is
the Windows 11 operating system, and the computer used
is equipped with an Intel Core i7 13700k processor and an
NVIDIA RTX 3090 graphics card. The construction of the
deep learning algorithm adopts Python 3.8 and PyTorch 1.9.1
version.
B. Benchmark Dataset Used
In MER, two multimodal dialogue data sets, IEMOCAP and
MELD, are usually used for comparative experiments. The
following is an introduction to these two data sets:
IEMOCAP: is an emotion database for studying emotional
expressions and interactive behaviors. Dialogue in IEMOCAP
covers a variety of emotional states, such as anger, happiness,
sadness, neutral, etc., as well as different situations, such as
face-to-face communication, telephone communication, etc.
This allows researchers to explore the relationship between
emotion, interaction, communication, etc. while examining
multimodal expressions in a laboratory setting.
MELD: is a multimodal dataset widely used in emotion
recognition research to help researchers understand emo-
tional expressions more comprehensively. The dialogues in
the dataset come from movie clips containing text dialogue,
audio, and video information. The conversations of the MELD
dataset cover a variety of emotional states, such as anger,
happiness, sadness, neutral, etc., as well as different situations
and emotional intensities.
C. Baseline Models
In this section, we detail the baseline model compared with
the model in this paper, which are the results achieved on two
general datasets, which will be described in detail below:
text-CNN efficiently extracts critical text features through
convolution pooling operation, and its end-to-end learning
method also promotes the development of text classification
tasks.
MFN can give full play to multi-modal complementarity
through multi-level fusion and end-to-end training, but its
structure is complex, and training is difficult. A large amount
of labeled data is required for supervised training.
bc-LSTM: The bc-LSTM provides sufficient context infor-
mation through the target word’s forward and backward con-
text vectors to help the model better understand the semantics
of the target word, but the computational complexity is also
high.
CMN proposed a cross-modal contextual attention mecha-
nism, which can learn the correlation between text and video
features and perform adaptive multi-modal fusion. However,
it cannot clearly distinguish the feature contribution of uni-
modality and multimodality, and the demand for labeled data
is significant.
DialogueRNN used a Conditional Random Field (CRF) in
the context generator part, which can effectively model the
context dependency of sentences. However, using CRF also
increases the computational complexity of the model.
DialogueGCN is a dialogue modeling method based on a
graph convolutional network. It models dialogue as a sen-
tence graph, and graph edges represent sentence relationships.
GCN is used to learn the representation of sentence graphs.
Therefore, it has achieved excellent performance on emotion

TABLE II
ON THE MELD DATASET, OUR METHOD IS COMPARED WITH OTHER BASELINE METHODS. THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ARE SHOWN IN THE TABLE
BELOW. THE BEST RESULTS IN EACH COLUMN ARE SHOWN IN BOLD. AVERAGE(W) STANDS FOR WEIGHTED AVERAGE.
Methods
MELD
Neutral
Surprise
Fear
Sadness
Joy
Disgust
Anger
Average(w)
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
Acc. F1
text-CNN
74.8 73.2
45.2 45.1
3.7 3.2
21.7 22.1
49.8 48.7
8.7 8.6
35.0 34.7
55.3 54.9
MFN
76.3 76.1
41.0 39.6
0.0 0.0
14.0 13.7
46.6 45.9
0.0 0.0
41.0 39.7
55.1 54.3
bc-LSTM
76.8 76.1
25.0 24.5
9.2 8.6
24.2 23.6
54.4 54.1
4.4 4.1
44.0 42.9
59.5 58.3
CMN
75.0 73.6
46.9 45.7
0.0 0.0
23.3 22.5
44.7 44.4
0.0 0.0
44.9 43.8
55.8 54.3
ICON
74.2 73.6
50.1 48.8
0.0 0.0
23.3 22.4
50.4 49.9
0.0 0.0
45.1 43.8
56.6 55.2
DialogueRNN
77.5 78.0
53.0 52.1
2.6 2.4
34.3 33.7
54.7 53.1
7.8 6.8
44.0 42.8
60.3 59.4
A-DMN
78.7 77.6
55.3 54.8
8.8 6.9
24.5 23.8
24.5 22.6
3.6 3.1
40.9 40.4
55.4 55.1
GraphCFC
76.7 76.0
49.8 48.7
0.0 0.0
27.0 25.8
52.0 52.3
0.0 0.0
47.8 47.3
61.6 61.2
TS-GCL
78.1 80.6
56.7 56.4
6.8 5.2
42.3 43.7
68.3 66.3
2.3 2.6
43.8 48.5
64.4 64.1
recognition tasks.
ICON (Interaction-Context Network) is a network model
for multimodal dialogue, which uses GRUs to track contex-
tual interaction history so a better context receptive field is
obtained.
D. Results and Discussion
We comprehensively compare our proposed emotion recog-
nition algorithm TS-GCL with other deep learning algorithms.
On the IEMOCAP and MELD datasets, Table I and Table II
show the recognition accuracy and F1 value of each algorithm
on each emotion category and the average accuracy and F1
value of the model as a whole. Experimental results signifi-
cantly demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed
algorithm.
IEMOCAP: As shown in Table I, TS-GCL has achieved
excellent performance on the IEMOCAP dataset, taking the
lead in four indicators, among which the accuracy rate and
F1 are 70.3% and 70.2%, respectively. In addition, TS-GCL
has achieved excellent performance in the happy category, and
the accuracy and F1 of other categories are slightly lower
than different existing algorithms. Analysis of the reasons
shows that TS-GCL considers the similarities and differences
between modalities and modalities during fusion and simu-
lates human emotions for emotional classification by using
graph comparison learning strategies and two emotions label
classification methods for better performance.
MELD: As shown in Table II, TS-GCL has achieved
excellent performance on the MELD dataset, leading in terms
of indicators, among which the accuracy rate and F1 are
64.4% and 64.1%, respectively, compared with the existing
comparison algorithms have achieved a small margin leading.
In the four categories of surprise, fear, sadness, and Sadness,
TS-GCL has achieved leading performance in accuracy and
F1. Due to the severe category imbalance problem in the
MELD dataset, TS-GCL generally performs on fear and dis-
gust compared to existing algorithms, and our future work will
also optimize this phenomenon.
The analysis of the aforementioned experimental results
indicates that TS-GCL demonstrates superior performance,
effectively capturing the similarities and differences among
emotion samples. Based on these outcomes, further optimiza-
tion can be pursued, along with the utilization of a sec-
ondary emotion classification approach. This approach avoids
the shortcomings observed in previous methods for emotion
classification.
Fig. 3. Ablation experiments on the IEMOCAP dataset. We conduct experi-
ments on each component of TS-GCL and jointly compare with the benchmark
models bc-LSTM, ICON and DialogueGCN.

E. Ablation Studies
In this section, we choose three benchmark models, dissect
the TS-GCL model step by step, present the experimental
results of each part, and analyze their performance on the
IEMOCAP dataset to gain insight into their impact on the
overall performance. At the same time, three benchmark mod-
els are selected for comparison. We present the corresponding
experimental results in Fig. 3.
• Observing and comparing the effects of GCL and TS-
GCL, we can see the impact of the secondary classifica-
tion method on TS-GCL. Although related to our choice
of state-of-the-art feature extractors, secondary classifica-
tion methods still have some effect. Compared with not
using TS (Two-Stage GCN), the accuracy is improved by
1.4%. Secondary classification methods enable models to
better adapt to specific domains or user emotions.
• Observing and comparing the effects of TS and TS-GCL,
we can see the influence of GCL on TS-GCL. Compared
with not using GCL, the accuracy increased by 1.9%.
Graph contrastive learning introduces richer contextual
information and relationship modeling for multimodal
emotion recognition, which can improve the feature learn-
ing ability of the model, thereby achieving better results
in multimodal emotion recognition tasks.
TS-GCL achieves the best performance when we use both
TS and GCL. These partial combinations constitute our final
model, and our plausible model is demonstrated experimen-
tally.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a two-stage multimodal emotion
recognition model based on graph contrastive learning (TS-
GCL), which achieves efficient cross-modal feature fusion and
designs a novel contrastive learning strategy to reduce the
distance between samples. Different emotion labels in modals
enhance the semantic representation ability of nodes. Then,
we propose a two-stage classification method for multi-task
multi-modal emotion recognition. The two-stage classification
method can facilitate the module design of the model, so
that modules in different stages can be tuned and optimized
independently.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (Grant No. 61802444); the Changsha Natural
Science Foundation (Grant No. kq2202294), the Research
Foundation of Education Bureau of Hunan Province of China
(Grant No. 20B625, No. 18B196, No. 22B0275); the Research
on Local Community Structure Detection Algorithms in Com-
plex Networks (Grant No. 2020YJ009).
