arXiv:2001.05952v2  [cs.AI]  4 Aug 2022
On Expert Behaviors and Question Types for Efﬁcient
Query-Based Ontology Fault Localization1
Patrick Rodler2
Abstract.
We challenge existing query-based ontology fault local-
ization methods wrt. assumptions they make, criteria they optimize,
and interaction means they use. We ﬁnd that their efﬁciency depends
largely on the behavior of the interacting expert, that performed cal-
culations can be inefﬁcient or imprecise, and that used optimization
criteria are often not fully realistic. As a remedy, we suggest a novel
(and simpler) interaction approach which overcomes all identiﬁed
problems and, in comprehensive experiments on faulty real-world
ontologies, enables a successful fault localization while requiring
fewer expert interactions in 66 % of the cases, and always at least
80 % less expert waiting time, compared to existing methods.
1
Introduction, Discussion and Approach
Motivation. As Semantic Web technologies have become widely
adopted in, e.g., security and health applications, the quality assur-
ance of the knowledge underpinning these applications is a critical
requirement. At the core of semantic technologies, ontologies are a
means to represent knowledge in a formal, structured and human-
readable way, with a well-deﬁned semantics. Due to high ontology
complexity, expressive logics used, or distributed, collaborative and
tool-supported development processes pursued, faults in ontologies
are frequent [3, 7]. Among those, faults that affect the ontology’s se-
mantics (e.g., wrong entailments) are of particular concern, e.g., a
medical system could suggest a wrong therapy for a patient. Since
manual quality assurance is virtually infeasible for present-day on-
tologies, a range of tools have been proposed, aiming i.a. at fault pre-
vention [8, 15], detection [3], localization [7, 17] and repair [5, 6, 19].
(Query-based) Ontology Fault Localization. This work is devoted
to the problem of fault localization, based on ideas from the ﬁeld of
model-based diagnosis [4, 9]: Given an ontology that violates pre-
deﬁned requirements (e.g., consistency, coherency, no unwanted en-
tailments), ﬁnd a diagnosis, i.e., an irreducible set of axioms whose
faultiness explains all requirements violations. A deletion or ade-
quate modiﬁcation of the axioms of a diagnosis leads to a repaired
ontology compliant with the given requirements. However, a sub-
problem inhering fault localization is the fact that there is often a
substantial number of competing diagnoses, where all of them lead
to repaired ontologies with different semantics [10]. Hence, identify-
ing the actual diagnosis (the one diagnosis pinpointing the actually
faulty axioms, which leads to a repaired ontology with the intended
1 Extended versions of this paper were published in the Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Industrial, Engineering and Other Applications
of Applied Intelligent Systems (IEA/AIE-2019) [1] and in the Knowledge-
Based Systems (KBS) journal [2]. Please ﬁnd (self-explaining) slides of this
work at http://tiny.cc/b00igz.

semantics) is a pivotal step towards meaningful and sustainable on-
tology repair. One particularly appealing [12] approach to this end
is interactive query-based ontology debugging [10, 18], where addi-
tional information to isolate the actual diagnosis is gathered by an
interactive system in terms of a query-answer dialog with a (domain)
expert. Each query is a true/false-question about (non-)entailments
of the intended ontology and has the property to invalidate at least
one diagnosis regardless of the answer. An example of a query from
a medical domain would be Q = {Tumor ⊑∃causes.Pain}, i.e.,
“Does every tumor cause pain?” Queries and their associated answers
are used by the system as test cases to successively rule out diag-
noses, until ultimately a single (highly probable) one remains. This
interactive technique is especially attractive as it lets the user focus
on the intended ontology rather than on (the analysis of) the faulty
one. More speciﬁcally, it relieves the expert from the need to analyze
which or why entailments do (not) hold in the faulty ontology or why
the faulty ontology does not meet the given requirements. Instead, the
task of the expert reduces to the mere classiﬁcation of certain axioms
as either entailments or non-entailments of the intended ontology.
Challenges and Goals. Since expert consultations are costly, query-
based debuggers pursue the following goals: (G1) Find the actual
diagnosis (G2) with the least effort and (G3) with the least waiting
time for the interacting user. The following inﬂuencing factors de-
termine how well these goals can be approached: (F1) The way of
interacting with the expert (how to deﬁne a query?), (F2) the expert
behavior (how will the expert answer queries?), (F3) the criterion to
be optimized (how to measure the expert’s effort?), and (F4) the used
algorithm for query computation (how to compute the best query?).
Existing Approaches. We now discuss how existing query-based
methods address these questions: (F1) A (normal) query is a set of
axioms Q = {ax 1, . . . , ax k} (this deﬁnition is natural for algorith-
mic and computational reasons, cf. [1] for details). Showing the ex-
pert Q means asking them whether or not ax 1 ∧. . .∧ax k is entailed
by the intended ontology. (F2) The (query-based) expert is viewed
as a function that maps queries to either true or false, where true
(false) means that each (some) query-axiom is (not) entailed by the
intended ontology. Clearly, to answer positively, the expert must ex-
amine each query-axiom; as opposed to the negative case, where it
sufﬁces to know some non-entailed query-axiom. So, whether (and
how much) information beyond the mere answer false (i.e., that some
undeﬁned query-axiom is non-entailed) is obtained depends on the
expert at hand. To study the impact of different answering behav-
iors on fault localization efﬁciency, we complement the (existing)
notion of the query-based expert with the one of an axiom-based ex-
pert, i.e., a function which maps query-axioms to either true or false.
While query-based and axiom-based experts are equally-behaving in
the afﬁrmative case, we can conceive of various axiom-based sub-

types in the negation case, e.g., the minimalist (classiﬁes one query-
axiom by false), the pragmatist (classiﬁes query-axioms one-by-one,
until and including the ﬁrst negative one that is encountered), and
the maximalist (classiﬁes each query-axiom). Note that each (nega-
tive) axiom-based answer is strictly more informative than a query-
based one, i.e., an axiom-based answering strategy means better di-
agnoses elimination and less cost. (F3) Most often, the number of
queries (#Q) is used to quantify fault localization cost. Because the
(global) minimization of #Q is NP-hard, query selection heuristics
[11, 13, 18] are employed for choosing the best query in each it-
eration based on a (local) one-step-lookahead assessment (how fa-
vorable is the expected situation after a query is answered?). How-
ever, these heuristics do not take into account the number of axioms
(#Ax) an expert has to classify, although the size of different queries
in terms of the included axioms can vary considerably. Hence, we
argue that #Ax is a more realistic measure to evaluate the expert’s
effort. Moreover, a query deﬁned as a set of axioms, see (F1), cou-
pled with the fact that heuristics perform a binary (true vs. false)
query-analysis, yields a dilemma. For, if the interacting expert is not
query-based, this binary analysis is only an approximation as there
are exponentially many possible axiom-based expert answers (each
query-axiom can be true/false/unanswered), and an exact analysis is
impractical since exponential. (F4) State-of-the-art methods [14] can
efﬁciently compute queries that are informative wrt. the minimiza-
tion of #Q under the assumption of a query-based expert, but they do
neither (primarily) consider the expert’s effort for query answering
nor the contingency of an axiom-based expert interacting with the
system.
To sum up, existing works tackle (F1)–(F4) in a way that (i) fault
localization efﬁciency depends on (the behavior of) the interacting
expert, (ii) ﬁnding of best queries might be inefﬁcient or only ap-
proximate, and (iii) optimized criteria appear to be not fully realistic.
New Approach. To remedy these issues, we suggest to use so-called
singleton queries instead of normal ones. A singleton query (SQ) is
a query which includes exactly one axiom (cf. the example query
above). Albeit pretty simple, the SQ-approach solves all problems
we discussed. In particular, SQs have exactly two outcomes, entail a
(necessarily) unique expert behavior (all expert types coincide), and
imply #Ax = #Q (unequivocal optimization criterion). Further im-
mediate advantages are: Each computed SQ-query-axiom depends
on all so-far acquired expert inputs (better informed computations),
worst-case search costs for best SQ are less than for best normal
query (smaller search space), heuristic query evaluation is always
exact and plausible for SQs, concepts (e.g., heuristics [11, 13, 18],
UIs [16]) for normal queries are directly reusable for SQs (compat-
ibility), with SQs there is no need to instruct experts (on how to op-
erate for best results), to ascertain the expert’s type a-priori, or to
adapt algorithms to different experts (simpler computation and op-
timization process), and SQs mean an equally or more informative
feedback per asked axiom (all queried axioms are indeed answered).
Hence, the SQ-technique addresses (F1)–(F3) in an elegant way,
in that queries are deﬁned as SQs (F1), which directly answers, and
thus obviates the need to care about, (F2) and (F3). Solely, regarding
(F4), there is a hitch related to the (per-se favorable) smaller search
space for SQs, in that a more sophisticated query search is required
to ensure that the output is indeed an SQ. Whereas the conception of
an efﬁcient general algorithm for SQs is an open research question,
we were able to develop a polynomial time and space algorithm to
ﬁnd, wrt. a given set of diagnoses, the best SQ among those of the
form Q = {ax} where ax is an element of the ontology.
2
Evaluation Results and Concluding Remarks
Evaluation. We conducted extensive experiments on faulty real-
world ontologies to study normal queries in combination with the
discussed expert types and to compare them with SQs. In the tests,
we used only queries Q ⊆O for each ontology O. Focus of the
investigations were the discussed goals (G1)–(G3). Speciﬁcally, we
examined the following questions: (Q1) Does the expert answering
behavior make a difference (wrt. fault localization cost)? Answer:
For normal queries, yes. We observed signiﬁcant differences (over-
heads of up to 140 %) between the distinct expert types (in terms of
both #Q and #Ax). For SQs, trivially no, as all expert behaviors co-
incide. (Q2) Which strategy is the best to answer normal queries?
Answer: Wrt. #Ax: The pragmatist always performed superior (on
avg.) to all others. Wrt. #Q: It was not clear-cut, but overall the prag-
matist tended to be the best as well. Hence, when relying on normal
queries, we should advise experts to pursue the pragmatist answering
approach. (Q3) What is better, SQs or normal queries? Answer: Wrt.
#Ax: SQs led to less expert effort in two thirds of the tested cases.
Wrt. #Q: Interestingly, SQs were mostly the better choice as well.
(Q4) Which approach (query type and answering strategy) is com-
putationally most efﬁcient (wrt. the expert’s waiting time)? Answer:
SQs. Time savings against normal queries were substantial (always
larger than 80 %), which can be attributed to the smaller search space.
Conclusion. Singleton queries represent an elegant solution to all
discussed problems of existing query-based fault localization meth-
ods, and moreover enable a successful determination of the faulty
axioms while proving more efﬁcient on avg. than existing techniques
in terms of both expert interaction effort and expert waiting time.
