61 
Dealing with Uncertainty in Situation Assessment: 
towards a Symbolic Approach 
Charles Castel, Corine Cossart, Catherine Tessier 
ONERA-CERT 
BP 4025 - 31055 Toulouse Cedex 04- France 
Abstract 
The situation assessment problem is considered, 
in terms of object, condition, activity, and plan 
recognition, based on data coming from the real­
word via various sensors. It is shown that uncer­
tainty issues are linked both to the models and to 
the matching algorithm. Three different types of 
uncertainties are identified, and within each one, 
the numerical and the symbolic cases are distin­
guished. The emphasis is then put on purely sym­
bolic uncertainties: it is shown that they can be 
dealt with within a purely symbolic framework 
resulting from a transposition of classical nume­
rical estimation tools. 
1 
SITUATION ASSESSMENT PROBLEM 
Let us consider the generic problem that is dealt with in 
the PERCEPTION project1 [BCF+98], [CCMT97): a sym­
bolic representation of what is going on in an observed 
environment has to be built and updated, for applications 
such as surveillance, intelligence, or decision-aid systems, 
and autonomous systems. The environment includes mo­
bile entities and is observed via various sensors (black and 
white, color and infrared cameras, radars). Numerical pro­
cessings take sensor data as inputs and deliver recognized 
and tracked objects with symbolic properties (e.g. the type 
of the objects: pedestrian, vehicle ... ) and numerical attribu­
tes (position, speed ... ) The symbolic level interprets these 
objects in terms of on-going and future activities (e.g. the 
pedestrian is going to take his car and leave the parking­
lot), so that the decision level (e.g. a human decision­
maker) should be informed with semantically rich data and 
that further relevant actions should be undertaken. 
Human observers may also be involved as "sensors", and 
their reports are direct inputs for the symbolic level. 
1 http://www.cert.fr/fr/dcsd/PUB/PERCEPTION/ 
2 
PRINCIPLES 
The set of the current activities is assessed by the symbolic 
level thanks to plan prototypes based on the expected 
properties and attributes of the objects and on the expected 
variations of the properties and attributes with time. Three 
basic notions are used: 
• a condition prototype is an expected property a priori 
qualifying the objects that are likely to be observed. 
Condition prototypes are expressed by atomic formulas 
built from predefined predicates, e.g. (type x pedestrian), 
(speed x 4kmlh), (getting-closer x y) with x andy being 
variables; 
• an activity prototype is a set of expected conditions 
and constraints a priori qualifying the objects that are 
likely to be observed. Activity prototypes are represented 
by constrained cubes [TGLP88], i.e. 
conjunctions of 
atomic formulas associated with constraints, in which all 
the variables are assumed to be existentially quantified 
[CCMT97]. 
Ex: {(type x pedestrian), (type y vehicle), (speed y v) {v = 
0}, (getting-closer-tox y)}, withx, y and v being variables. 
• a plan prototype is a temporal graph of activity proto­
types; it is represented by an interpreted Petri net [DA91] 
whose places are associated with activity prototypes. 
Ex: 
pedestrian 
moving 
towards-vehicle 
pedestrian 
gelling 
into-vehicle 
parked-occupied-vehicle 
vehicle 
moving 
towards-exit 
parked-vehicle 
(typ e y vehicle) 
(speedyv){v=O) 
(type y vehicle) 
(speedy v){v = 0) 
(type y vehicle) 
(speedy v){v H) 
(moving -away-from y parking-lot) 
(type y vehicle) 
(speedy v){v H) 
(getting-closer-to y exit) 
Figure 1: vehicle-departure plan prototype 
Let P be the set of plan prototypes. 

62 
Castel, Cossart, and Tessier 
An observation obsn is a set of properties directly issued 
by the numerical processing, resulting from a numerical­
symbolic translation, or issued by a human observer at time 
tn. The current situation Sn at time tn is a set of plans 
(Pi,m,,n), defined as marked elements Pi of P; the mar­
king mi of a plan prototype Pi at time tn corresponds to 
the fact that some properties in obsn match the interpreta­
tion of some places (activity prototypes) in Pi. 
Given obsn+l and Sn, the elaboration of the current situ­
ation Sn+l at time tn+l is a prediction-verification process 
which is based on the following principles: 
i) a greater importance is given to the continuation of 
existing plans; ii) all the objects appearing in properties 
within obsn have to be explained, i.e. to belong to at least 
one plan; iii) the prediction of situation Sn+l from situ­
ation Sn is the set of the reachable markings mi + k of 
plans (Pi,m;,n); iv) the verification consists in matching 
the properties of obsn+l with those reachable markings; 
if some properties remain unmatched this way, new plans 
(Pj,mj,n+l) are created. 
As a given object may be associated with several plans, 
Sn+l represents the different hypothetic plans that are 
likely to be in progress in the observed environment. 
3 
UNCERTAINTY ISSUES 
Whatever the situations are built for (immediate or delayed 
warnings or actions, information collecting in an intelli­
gence context, detection of specific activities ... ), the situ­
ation assessment process has to deliver appropriate results, 
which means that [KSH91]: 
• results (assessed situations) have to agree with the global 
mission goal: a potentially hazardous situation has to be 
reported early, even if the assessment is not complete or 
certain; all the situations that are significant for the mission 
must be expected and recognized. 
• results have to be accurate, i.e. situations must not in­
clude a high number of different plan hypotheses. There­
fore, activity and plan prototypes, as well as the matching 
algorithm, have to be discriminating enough (a plan proto­
type that would model that anything can happen is of minor 
interest). 
• results have to be computed efficiently, without too nu­
merous or too complicated models. 
Let us now analyze the situation assessment process from 
the uncertainty point of view. 
3.1 
UNCERTAINTY AND THE MODELS 
The whole situation assessment process is a series of trans­
formations from sensor data into high level symbolic pro­
perties. 
3.1.1 
Conditions 
Conditions are the first link between sensor data and the 
symbolic level. They include: 
- numerical attributes, such as the position in the environ­
ment, or the speed, of a tracked object; 
- classification results, such as the type of the objects (e.g. 
an object is classified as a pedestrian or a vehicle); 
- elementary actions that may result from a numerical­
symbolic translation (e.g. getting-closer-to, close-to). 
The accuracy of the numerical attributes depends on the nu­
merical processings and is only a matter of numerical pre­
cision. On the other hand, classes and elementary actions 
have to be a priori defined, and the accuracy of the defini­
tion has direct consequences on object matching: a com­
promise has to be found between too strict and too loose 
definitions. For example, condition getting-closer-to will 
hold for a pedestrian P 1 moving towards a parked vehicle 
VI if Pl 's speed vector belongs to a given cone (see figure). 
y 
X 
Figure 2: getting-closer-to(P 1, VI) 
This kind of definition allows the dispersion of natural be­
haviours and the imprecision on the numerical measure­
ments to be taken into account. Nevertheless, there is a 
threshold effect (the condition holds if P 1 is within the cone 
and does not hold even if he is close to it). Furthermore, a 
unique definition may not be suited to a real environment 
in so far as actual behaviours for achieving a given goal 
may be very different from one another, depending on the 
particular objects at stake and on the environmental context 
(weather, environment layout...) 
The second point is that a given condition may include 
several sub-conditions (this is the case for class conditions 
that are most of the time defined by several parameters): 
should all the sub-conditions hold to make the condition 
hold too? or are there any sub-conditions that are less im­
portant than the others? what is the difference for condition 
assessment when a sub-condition• is mismatched, and when 
it is not matched at all through lack of information? 
3.1.2 
Activities 
The assessment of an activity, as a set of conditions, re­
sults from the assessment of the conditions describing it 
and therefore inherits the corresponding uncertainty issues. 
Nevertheless further particular issues can be identified. 
Activities are closely linked to the types of the objects as 
they are the actors. The uncertainty on types (e.g. an object 
is close to the pedestrian class, but also to the vehicle class) 
may result in several exclusive activity hypotheses being 
created (e.g. pedestrian-moving OR vehicle-moving). 
An activity may not be fully assessed or distinguished from 
another one by means of its mere condition set. For ins­
tance, an empty parked vehicle cannot be distinguished 

from a parked vehicle with a driver inside: what can be 
told is that there is a parked vehicle. A refinement can be 
made thanks to the current plan hypotheses and the history 
of the observations: if one of these hypotheses is vehicle­
departure plan and a pedestrian just disappeared near the 
vehicle involved, activity parked-occupied-vehicle is most 
likely to hold. 
Finally, the same questions as before are raised: should 
all the conditions hold to make the activity hold too? or 
are there any conditions that are less important than the 
others? what is the difference for activity assessment when 
a condition is mismatched, and when it is not matched at 
all through lack of information? 
3.1.3 
Plans 
The assessment of a plan, as a temporal sequence of activi­
ties, results from the assessment of the activities and there­
fore inherits the corresponding uncertainty issues. A par­
ticular problem that arises when considering "free" envi­
ronments, where no predefined procedure is available, is 
the assessment of the temporal sequence of the activities: 
does the set of the assessed activities match the temporal 
sequence described in the prototype? are other sequences 
acceptable? what to do with extra activities? 
3.2 
UNCERTAINTY AND MATCHING 
As an explanation is required for each observed object, a 
given object has to be matched to one activity within one 
plan. What happens as a result of the prediction - verifica­
tion process is that this object may be matched to several 
activities and plans, and conversely, a given plan may be 
associated to several different objects. The questions that 
are raised are the following: should all the matchings be 
kept or not? should the plan hypotheses with no new cor­
responding observations be kept and for how long, given 
that there may be objects that are occulted or not observa­
ble? are there hypotheses that are more relevant than the 
others, considering the mission? 
4 
CLASSIFICATION OF 
UNCERTAINTIES 
The previous analysis results in a classification of the un­
certainties within the situation assessment problem. Three 
main types of uncertainties may be identified: matching un­
certainties, conjunction uncertainties, and disjunction un­
certainties. 
4.1 
MATCHING UNCERTAINTIES 
Matching uncertainties are linked to the data-to-model 
matching problem: data coming from sensors or issued 
by numerical processings have to be matched with pre­
defined models corresponding to higher semantic levels, 
e.g. the pedestrian type, the getting-closer-to condition, 
Symbolic Uncertainty in Situation Assessment 
63 
the vehicle-moving activity, or the vehicle-departure plan. 
As stated before, data hardly perfectly match predefined 
models, and impeifect matchings have to be considered. 
Nevertheless, two different cases have to be distinguished: 
• a first case is numerical imperfect matching, which in­
volves parameters that take their values in continuous do­
mains, where distances can be defined. 
Ex: (i) the position or speed associated to an object is im­
precise, depending on the sensor data or the numerical al­
gorithms. 
A traditional approach for the estimation of such parame­
ters is Kalman filtering [MM93], which allows the state 
(i.e. the set of the parameters such as position and speed) 
of a dynamic system to be predicted and updated by new 
measurements, on the basis of a quadratic error criterion. 
Noise effects coming from both measurements and model­
ling are taken into account. It is widely used in object dy­
namic tracking (e.g. [JKC97]). 
(ii) condition getting-closer-to is more or less satisfied, de­
pending on the position of the pedestrian with respect to 
the cone (see figure 2). 
This is classically dealt with thanks to probabilistic or pos­
sibilistic approaches, depending on the available know­
ledge. 
For example, Herzog, in the V ITRA project 
[Her95], uses a measure of degrees of applicability that ex­
presses the extent to which a spatial relation is applicable. 
Every relevant geometric factor (relative distance, angular 
deviation from a given canonical direction ... ) is mapped 
onto interval [0, 1] by means of cubic spline functions as­
sociated with different qualitative notions (such as the con­
tiguity or the proximity for the relative distance). The de­
gree may depend on different spline values, e.g. the degree 
of relation right of is a combination of the direction and 
proximity factors. 
In a traffic context, [FHKN96] use predicates to describe 
the (relative) motion of one (or two) objects. Primitives 
such as fast(X, t), equal-orientation(X, Y, t), which can be 
directly derived from the speed and orientation attributes 
estimated by the tracking process, are modelled by means 
of fuzzy sets. 
• a second case is symbolic imperfect matching, which in­
volves symbolic items, i.e. discrete frames, within which 
no distance can be defined. 
Ex: (i) property (type VI, car) imperfectly matches proto­
type condition (type y, bus); (ii) so does property (type VI, 
car) with prototype condition (type x, pedestrian). 
Hints to deal with such imperfect matchings will be given 
in the sequel. 
It is worth noticing however that many symbolic items are 
simply abstractions of numerical features, especially when 
data only come from physical sensors: an object VI is la­
belled as a car because the values of the numerical para­
meters of the corresponding shape in the images (e.g. sur­
face, position of the center of gravity, elongation, rotundi­
ty ... ) match the reference values of class car. Therefore, a 
numerical distance between e.g. a car and a bus or a pedes­
trian can be soundly defined as an aggregation of the res-

64 
Castel, Cossart, and Tessier 
pective distances between each parameter, thus allowing a 
matching quality coefficient to be defined. This projection 
onto a numerical space may also be propagated to the up­
per symbolic levels provided all the items involved have 
numerical bases. For example, in the static scene inter­
pretation system described in [LLMC96], each object type 
is characterized by different attributes (geometric attribute, 
aspect attribute ... ) The validation of the object hypotheses 
is based on the assessment of a global confidence degree 
for each object type. This global degree is a combination 
of the confidence degrees of the different attributes, which 
are directly computed from numerical characteristics of the 
detected shapes in the images. 
Purely symbolic items do not have any numerical bases 
and therefore cannot be projected onto any numerical space 
without adding any supplementary knowledge, as weights, 
preferences, etc. Examples of such symbolic items are data 
coming from human observers, and condition, activity and 
plan prototypes. 
4.2 
CONJUNCTION UNCERTAINTIES 
Conjunction 
uncertainties 
arise 
when 
several 
sub­
conditions, conditions or activities have to hold to make a 
condition, activity or plan respectively hold. 
• In the case where numerical matching quality coefficients 
can be defined for each component of the item to be as­
sessed, a common approach is to aggregate them, following 
given rules that most often depend on external knowledge. 
In [DP95], Dubois and Prade extend the basic principles 
of fuzzy pattern matching (characterized by data which 
can be pervaded by imprecision and uncertainty, and re­
quirements which may be fuzzy) to situations where dif­
ferent subparts of a pattern have various levels of impor­
tance. They develop the case where the importance weight 
becomes a function of the concerned attribute value. In 
[BL96] it is noticed that, with classical likelihood aggrega­
tion rules such as min/max in the possibility theory, the 
matching quality decreases as the description is more de­
tailed, because of the imperfect matching of individual de­
tails. Therefore the concept of description redundancy is 
defined, which allows the matching likelihood to be as­
sessed by selecting a limited number of description items. 
A method is described to assess how many items, and 
which ones, may be dropped. 
• In the other cases, there is no means to quantify to what 
extent the set of components matches the item. 
Ex: 
(i) let {(type y vehicle), (speed y J5kmlh)} be a 
two-condition activity prototype. 
This activity holds if 
there exist an object y assessed as a vehicle with a 15kmlh 
speed. Let us suppose that the lower level (or a human 
observer) issues the following data: {(speed OJ JOkm/h), 
(close-to OJ building)}, which means that an object OJ 
with a speed of lOkmlh was detected near the building. 
To what extent does this observation match the activity 
prototype? "0.5'', as only one predicate can be matched 
out of two? or more, as JOkmlh is quite close to J5kmlh? 
how is it possible to quantify the missing condition (type y 
vehicle) and the additional one (close-to 0 J building)? 
(ii) to what extent does activity sequence (pedestrian­
moving-towards-vehicle, pedestrian-stopped, pedestrian­
moving-towards-vehicle, 
pedestrian-getting-into-vehicle, 
vehicle-moving-towards-exit) 
match 
plan 
prototype 
vehicle-departure? 
Hints to deal with such symbolic conjunction uncertainties 
will be given in the sequel. 
4.3 
DISJUNCTION UNCERTAINTIES 
Within the prediction - verification process, a set of dis­
junctive hypotheses of conditions, activities or plans is cre­
ated each time several matchings are possible between data 
and models: therefore, hypothesis disjunction uncertainties 
are a consequence of matching and conjunction uncertain­
ties described above. 
• In the case where numerical matching quality coeffi­
cients can be associated to conditions and activities, and 
likelihood coefficients can be associated to the transitions 
between activity prototypes within plan prototypes, each 
disjunction element can be qualified by a global coefficient 
resulting from the aggregation of the different matching 
quality and likelihood coefficients. If pruning is necessary, 
a preference function based on these global coefficients 
or on external knowledge can be defined. For example, 
[HB93] propose a task-driven approach to the surveillance 
problem in traffic, characterized by a selective attention. 
A dynamic form of Bayesian network is used to capture 
the changing relationships between scene objects: given a 
task (e.g. attend to likely overtaking and ignore likely fol­
lowing), it provides measures of which pairs of objects are 
worth further attention. Then a dedicated tasknet is used 
to identify the likelihood of the wanted task (e.g. over­
taking), of the related but unwanted tasks( e.g. following, 
queueing), and of the default unknown task. Tasknets are 
static Bayesian networks, with a priori conditional proba­
bilities that reflect a preferential bias towards a feature that 
is deemed to be most interesting. 
• In other cases, there is no means to quantify to what extent 
a plan hypothesis is better than another one, except with 
external knowledge based criteria, such as mission depen­
dent preferences. In [CG91], a system for story understan­
ding is described in which Bayesian networks are dynami­
cally constructed in order to evaluate the conditional proba­
bilities of competing plan hypotheses given the evidence. 
The prior probability of each hypothesis is computed un­
der the assumption of a large but finite domain of equipro­
bable elements: the probability is linked with the number 
of instances of the plan. [Bau94] presents a framework 
based on Dempster-Shafer's theory for assessing and se­
lecting plan hypotheses that takes into account disjunctive 
and uncertain observations as well as agents' preferences. 
Agent-specific preferences are encoded as basic probability 
assignments. A total ordering of the hypotheses can be ob-

tained by collapsing the belief intervals computed for each 
hypothesis into a pignistic probability. 
5 
SYMBOLIC UNCERTAINTIES 
In this section, we particularly focus on purely symbolic 
items for which no intrinsic numerical basis is available. 
Symbolic data may be projected onto numerical spaces as, 
in some cases, predefined likelihood or preference measu­
res encode notions such as sensor reliability, information 
quantity or matching satisfaction. But, as it is a matter of 
context, no universal method is available [DP94]. What is 
aimed at is to show that, within the situation assessment 
framework, some notions widely used in continuous con­
texts can be transposed within discrete ones. 
5.1 
AN ESTIMATION PROBLEM 
The prediction - verification principle explained in sec­
tion 2 shows that the predicted state of the observed en­
vironment (i.e. the activities to come) is computed from 
previous information and models (plan prototypes), and re­
vised with new information, within a dynamic process: it is 
the same principle as numerical estimation. Therefore, dy­
namic situation assessment, at the activity and plan levels, 
is a symbolic estimation problem. 
Existing estimation techniques are numerical techniques: 
they aim at assessing deterministic or random magnitudes 
from observations tainted with stochastic errors. Kalman 
filtering, already mentioned in section 4.1, is one of these 
techniques. As our problem is to estimate the situation in a 
dynamic environment from uncertain reference models on 
the one hand and uncertain data on the other, the idea is 
to reconsider the symbolic layers of situation assessment 
in the light of numerical estimation techniques. The basic 
notions of Kalman filtering are especially investigated, and 
adapted to the symbolic context of situation assessment. 
5.2 
FROM KALMAN FILTERING TO SYMBOLIC 
ESTIMATION 
Kalman filtering addresses dynamic systems whose state 
equation involves a matrix representing how the state 
varies with time, a deterministic input, and a random noise, 
the state noise, modifying the deterministic evolution of the 
state. The observation equation links the current observa­
tion to the current state via a second matrix and a second 
type of random noise, the observation noise. 
Prediction of the state estimate at time tn+l is accom­
plished from the state estimate at time tn, so is the pre­
dicted observation at time tn+l· The covariance matrix of 
the state estimation error is also computed. 
The second step consists in comparing the observation at 
time tn+l with the prediction, and consequently to revise 
the state estimate. This revision depends on the prediction 
errors and on the noises. 
Symbolic Uncertainty in Situation Assessment 
65 
The notions and principles of Kalman filtering are now go­
ing to be transposed into the symbolic world. 
5.2.1 
Symbolic state 
In Kalman filtering, the state is assumed to be a gaussian 
variable characterized by a mean and a covariance. This 
can be transposed through the notions of kernel plan and 
kernel activity, and plan and activity tolerance, thus rede­
fining the plan and activity prototypes. 
Definition 1 a plan prototype Pi is a pair (KPi, T(Pi)). 
The kernel plan K Pi is a minimum sequence of activity 
prototypes that has to be necessarily matched by a sequence 
of observations in order to interpret them as an instance 
of Pi. The plan tolerance T(Pi) is a dispersion around 
K Pi: it is a set of supplementary activity prototypes that 
will possibly be matched by the observed sequence. 
Let P be the set of plan prototypes. 
Ex: kernel plan of vehicle-departure plan prototype is se­
quence: 
pedestrian 
moving 
towards-vehicle 
vehicle 
moving 
towards-exit 
Figure 3: kernel plan for vehicle-departure 
Plan tolerance may include pedestrian-stopped and 
vehicle-moving-off activity prototypes. 
Definition 2 an activity prototype Aij within a plan pro­
totype Pi is a pair (KAiJ>T(Aij)). The kernel activity 
K Aij is a minimum set of conditions and constraints that 
have to be necessarily matched by an observation in order 
to assess it as an instance of Aij. The activity tolerance 
T(Aij) is a dispersion around KAij." it includes both nu­
merical dispersions around conditions and constraints of 
K Aij, and supplementary conditions and constraints, that 
will possibly be matched by the observed activity. 
Ex: kernel activity of moving-vehicle activity prototype is 
((type y vehicle) (speed y v)}; activity tolerance may in­
clude (v 2: 30kmlh} constraint or (speed y 25kmlh) condi­
tion (numerical dispersion), and supplementary symbolic 
conditions such as (make y Renault), (moving-backwards 
y). 
Definition 3 the current state Sn at time tn is a set 
of marked plan prototypes of P, i.e. 
a set of plans 
(KPi,mi,n,T(Pi,mi,n)). For each plan, KPi,mi,n is the 
Petri net associated to kernel plan K Pi and marked with 
marking mi at time tn; T(Pi,mi,n) is the set of supple­
mentary activities belonging to T(Pi) that hold at time tn. 

66 
Castel, Cossart, and Tessier 
A 
Or' ftkemelacuvity 
 
 
"'-
dupenwn 
%Orr 5 (. 61 ......... . 
\' 
\ 
/ 
1 kernel plan 
0 &;,per,JO 
arouud kemel 
plan 
Figure 4: kernel activities, kernel plan, and dispersions 
Marking mi corresponds to a subset of activity prototypes, 
i.e. pairs (KAij,mi,n,T(Aij,mi,n)): it means that each 
K Aij,mi ,n holds at time tn and that some conditions of 
T(Aij) also hold. It is the same for supplementary activit­
ies within T(Pi,mi,n)· 
The equation of evolution for state Sn is given by the Petri 
net based plan prototypes, since they represent the tem­
poral linkings of the activities. The inputs are events as­
sociated to the transitions of the Petri nets (e.g. event (type 
x pedestrian) meaning that a pedestrian is appearing, thus 
modifying the symbolic state of the system). 
The main difference with the numerical case is that the pre­
diction temporal horizon is finite for one state, since plan 
prototypes involve finite sequences of activities. 
5.2.2 
Symbolic observations 
Let us assume that only purely symbolic observations are 
available, i.e. data coming from human observers or not 
assessed with numerical criteria. 
Definition 4 as for the numerical case, the observation 
equation is a projection of the current state onto the set 
of actually observable activities. This projection depends 
on observation conditions (environment layout, observa­
tion means). 
5.2.3 
Noises 
As for the numerical case, two different kinds of noises can 
be distinguished: state noise and observation noise, res­
pectively modifying the state and observation equations. 
Definition 5 a state noise is a deviation of a plan from the 
plan prototype, resulting from unexpected events created by 
objects that do not belong to that plan prototype. 
Ex: (i) a dog may cross the road just ahead of a car leaving 
the parking-lot; this car has to brake suddenly, thus modify­
ing plan vehicle-departure; (ii) two independent plans may 
interact: the vehicle-departure car may have to brake be­
cause of a vehicle-arrival parking car. 
Definition 6 an observation noise is a deviation of the ac­
tual observation from what should be observed given the 
current state. 
Ex: (i) dysfunctions within the observation means, or a 
bad weather, may alter the observations; (ii) objects that 
have nothing to do with the on-going plans are observa­
tion noises for these plans, e.g.: a dog wandering on the 
parking-lot; objects belonging to several independent and 
non-interacting plans are observation noises for one ano­
ther; moreover, these objects may create unexpected oc­
cultations. 
Remark: observation noise does not modify the current 
state as it is just a matter of perception conditions, whereas 
state noise does. It is worth noticing however that an obser­
vation noise may become a state noise, e.g. the wandering 
dog may cause the vehicle-departure car to brake suddenly. 
In that sense, both kinds of noises can be correlated, as it 
may be the case in Kalman filtering. 
5.3 
DYNAMIC ASPECTS 
5.3.1 
One-step prediction 
Definition 7 let Sn+lln be the one-step predicted situ­
ation from Sn. Sn+lln is the set of the reachable markings 
mi + k, k E {0, 1} of plans (KPi,mi,n' T(Pi,mi,n)): 
it 
is 
a 
disjunction 
of 
activity 
prototype 
subsets 
{(KAij, mi+k, n+lln• T(Aij, mi+k, n+lln))}, k E {0, 1}. 
Ex: let us assume that situation Sn corresponds to activ­
ity subset {pedestrian-moving-towards-vehicle, parked­
vehicle} within plan vehicle-departure. 
Sn+lln is the 
disjunction {pedestrian-moving-towards-vehicle, parked 
vehicle} OR {pedestrian-getting-into-vehicle, 
parked­
vehicle}. 
Remark: T(Aij, mi+l, n+lln) is the expected dispersion 
around the predicted activities associated with marking 
mi + 1; it is composed of propagated matched conditions 
ofT(Aij, mi, n)· 
Ex: if (make y Renault) is a supplementary condition of 
activities pedestrian-moving-towards-vehicle and parked­
vehicle, it is propagated by the prediction process and 
associated to the disjunction {pedestrian-moving-towards­
vehicle, parked vehicle} OR {pedestrian-getting-into­
vehicle, parked-vehicle} 
Figure 5: prediction process 
Definition 8 the 
predicted 
observation, 
denoted 
obsn+lln• results from the projection of Sn+lln onto 
the observable space. 
obsn+lln 
is therefore the 
disjunction of observable activity prototype 
subsets 

5.3.2 
Revision 
A main notion in Kalman filtering is innovation, which re­
presents the observation prediction error, i.e. the difference 
between predicted and actual observations. Innovation is 
the basis for state estimate revision. In the same way, the 
notion of symbolic innovation can be defined. 
Definition 9 the symbolic innovation In+l results from 
the matching of observation obsn+l delivered at time 
tn+l with predicted observation obsn+lln· Revised state 
Sn+lln+l• denoted Sn+b is a function of In+l· 
Two cases have to be distinguished: 
• obsn+l matches obsn+lln (i.e. one subset of observable 
activity prototypes within the predicted disjunction); what 
is observed instantiates what is expected, therefore, state 
estimate Sn+l is within prediction Sn+lln• there is no in­
novation. 
Ex: if obsn+lln is {(type PI pedestrian), (speed PI v)} 
(predicted kernel activity) with tolerance {v ::; 8kmlh} 
within a pedestrian-moving plan, and obsn+l is { (type PI 
pedestrian), (speed PI 5 kmlh)}: obsn+l is more precise 
than obsn+lln because of the speed value. This numerical 
dispersion is included within the predicted activity tole­
rance. 
• obsn+l does not match obsn+lJn· 
An impeifect mat­
ching, characterizing the common features of obsn+l and 
obsn+lln is then considered. Let infn+l be the result of this 
imperfect matching. 
1. if infn+l matches the kernels of one subset of the pre­
dicted activities and possibly some of the predicted tole­
rance conditions, innovation In+l is the set of supplemen­
tary properties contained in obsn+l· Revision then depends 
on these properties: 
- if they involve objects already known or expected within 
the current plans, they are integrated as extended tolerances 
within the current plans. 
Ex: if obsn+l is now {(type PI pedestrian), (speed PI 
5 kmlh), (close-to PI building)}, supplementary property 
(close-to PI building) concerns object PI and can be in­
tegrated within plan pedestrian-moving tolerance; or, if a 
more specific plan prototype exists and includes this pro­
perty, revision is a switch from the less specific to the more 
specific plan. 
- if they involve objects that are unknown and unexpec­
ted, they are noises for the current plans. Revision consists 
in instantiating new plan prototypes in P involving these 
properties. 
Ex: if obsn+l is now set {(type PI pedestrian), (speed PI 
5kmlh), (type VI vehicle), (speed VI 25kmlh)} supplemen­
tary properties - which are observation noise for the cur­
rent plan - are associated with a new object V 1. Therefore, 
activity prototype vehicle-moving within vehicle-arrival 
Symbolic Uncertainty in Situation Assessment 
67 
plan prototype can be instantiated. 
In this case, observation noises may also lead to instanti­
ate new plan prototypes with fictitious objects. Only an 
improvement in observation conditions can discard those 
groundless hypotheses. 
- a particular case occurs when supplementary properties 
link already existing and new objects: revision then con­
sists in matching a more specific plan within P. 
Ex: let us assume that obsn+l is the previous set with sup­
plementary property (getting-closer VI P 1). The plan is 
not pedestrian-moving plan anymore but car-picking-up­
pedestrian plan. 
2. if infn+ 1 does not match the kernels of any subset of the 
predicted activities, revision consists in considering other 
plans within P. Nevertheless, if some properties are com­
mon to infn+l and to the kernels, they can direct the choice 
to more relevant plans. 
Ex: let us assume that obsn+l is now {(speed PI v), (close­
toP I building)}. infn+l would be (speed PI v ). Therefore, 
the on-going plan is necessarily an object-moving plan. 
Remarks: 
- The computation of imperfect matching infn+l has 
already been studied for conditions expressed as logical 
cubes (with no constraints) [CCMT97]. 
It is based on 
cube anti-unification and reduction. The extension to cons­
trained cubes is currently under study. 
- For the time being, there is no a priori links between plan 
prototypes yet. A graph-based structure of those proto­
types, with less specific - more specific links is currently 
being studied, so as a hierarchy of the involved objects. 
6 
DISCUSSION 
Considering the purely symbolic part of situation assess­
ment as an estimation problem brings several improve­
ments to the principles set out in section 2. 
The first point is that purely symbolic uncertainty is dealt 
with within a symbolic framework, without projecting it 
onto subjective numerical spaces. It has been shown that 
notions such as symbolic kernels and tolerances and sym­
bolic noises could be defined. Hints towards symbolic im­
perfect matching are also given. 
One consequence of the estimation approach is that the re­
sult issued is less combinatorial, since some of the uncer­
tainties fall within noises or tolerances and no longer create 
new activities or plans. Moreover, it allows a least com­
mitment strategy to be followed in so far as least detailed 
activities and plans are first selected for matching. In the 
same way, minimum changes are given greater importance 
at the plan level, just as for numerical estimation algorithms 
in which the inertia of past events is a basis for prediction. 
It is worth noticing that this point of view is different from 
[DDdSCP95]'s for example. 

68 
Castel, Cossart, and Tessier 
Nevertheless, four important remarks have to be made: 
• Disjunction is a powerful tool when several items can 
no longer be considered within the same model: that is 
why it is used in Kalman filtering especially in multi-target 
tracking (multi-model Kalman filtering [BBS88]). Con­
sequently, the symbolic noises and tolerances that are in­
troduced do not eliminate disjunctions, but contribute to 
reduce their drawback, i.e. the combinatorial explosion. 
• The previous remark is particularly important when 
"noise becomes signal". For example, let us suppose that 
plan vehicle-departure is going on in the environment, with 
current activity being pedestrian-moving-towards-vehicle. 
Another vehicle entering the parking-lot is state noise for 
this plan. But if this latter vehicle gets close to the pedes­
trian and the driver attacks the pedestrian, this is no longer 
noise, but a mugging plan : models have to be switched. 
• The framework that is proposed is a first step towards 
activity and plan learning in so far as tolerances and noises 
allow unpredicted items to be intergrated within the mo­
dels. 
• Obviously, situation assessment problems are seldom 
purely symbolic (or purely numerical). As a matter of fact, 
a further approach would be to use both quantitative and 
symbolic handling of uncertainty in the same application 
[KSH91], i.e. to mix two a priori very different worlds ...
