128 
DESHPANDE ET AL. 
UAI2001 
Efficient Stepwise Selection in Decomposable Models 
Amol Deshpande* 
Computer Science Department 
University of California 
Berkeley, CA 94720 

Minos Garofalakis 
Bell Laboratories 
Michael I. Jordan 
Computer Science & Statistics 
University of California 
Berkeley, CA 94720 

600 Mountain A venue 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974 

Abstract 
In this paper, we present an efficient algo­
rithm for performing stepwise selection in 
the class of decomposable models. We fo­
cus on the forward selection procedure, but 
we also discuss how backward selection and 
the combination of the two can be performed 
efficiently. 
The main contributions of this 
paper are (1) a simple characterization for 
the edges that can be added to a decompos­
able model while retaining its decomposabil­
ity and (2) an efficient algorithm for enumer­
ating all such edges for a given decomposable 
model in O(n2) time, where n is the number 
of variables in the model. 
We also analyze the complexity of the overall 
stepwise selection procedure (which includes 
the complexity of enumerating eligible edges 
as well as the complexity of deciding how to 
"progress"). We use the KL divergence of 
the model from the saturated model as our 
metric, but the results we present here extend 
to many other metrics as well. 
1 
Introduction 
Undirected graphical models have become increasingly 
popular in areas such as information retrieval, statis­
tical natural language processing, and vision, where 
they are often referred to as maximum entropy or 
Gibbs models, and are viewed as having various repre­
sentational and statistical advantages. New tools for 
model selection and parameter estimation are being 
developed by researchers in these areas [PPL97, Hin99, 
•Part of the work was done while the author was vis­
iting Bell Laboratories. 
ZWM97]. General undirected models, however, have 
some serious disadvantages, in particular they require 
an invocation of Iterative Proportional Fitting (or re­
lated iterative algorithms) to find maximum likelihood 
estimates, even in the case of fully-observed graphs. As 
the inner loop of more general parameter estimation 
or model selection procedures (e.g., the M step of an 
EM algorithm), these iterative algorithms can impose 
serious bottlenecks. 
Decomposable models are a restricted family of undi­
rected graphical models that have a number of ap­
pealing features: (1) maximum likelihood estimates 
can be calculated analytically from marginal proba­
bilities, obviating the need for Iterative Proportional 
Fitting, (2) closed form expressions for test statistics 
can be found, and (3) there are several useful links 
to directed models (every decomposable model has a 
representation as either an undirected or a directed 
model), inference algorithms (decomposable models 
are equivalent to triangulated graphs), and acyclic 
database schemes [BFMY83]. Decomposable models 
would therefore seem to provide a usefully constrained 
representation in which model selection and parame­
ter estimation methods can be deployed in large-scale 
problems. Moreover, mixtures of decomposable mod­
els provide a natural upgrade path if the representa­
tional strictures of decomposable models are consid­
ered too severe. 
Although decomposable models are a subclass of undi­
rected graphical models, the problem of finding the 
optimal decomposable model for a given data sam­
ple is known to be intractable and heuristic search 
techniques are generally used [Edw95]. Most proce­
dures are based on some combination of (i) forward 
selection, in which we start with a small model and 
add edges as long as an appropriate score function 
increases [Hec98], and (ii) backward selection, where 

UA12001 
DESHPANDE ET AL. 
129 
starting with a larger model, edges are deleted from 
the model. Since the intervening models encountered 
in the search must also be decomposable, care must 
be taken such that deletion or addition of edges does 
not result in a non-decomposable model. Backward 
selection procedures for decomposable models are well 
known in the literature [Wer76, Lau96], but efficient 
forward selection procedures have not yet been devel­
oped. One of the goals of the current paper is to fill 
this gap. 
This paper is a theoretical paper that makes two main 
contributions. First, we provide a simple characteriza­
tion of the edges that can be added to a decomposable 
model (or, equivalently, the chordal graph correspond­
ing to the model) while resulting in another decom­
posable model. Second, based on this characterization 
we present an efficient algorithm for enumerating all 
such edges for the current model in O(n2) time, where 
n is the number of attributes. We provide a careful 
analysis of the running time complexity of the overall 
forward selection procedure, including the time taken 
for choosing which of the eligible edges to add to the 
current model. We use the minimization of KL diver­
gence as our metric, but the results we present can 
be extended to any other locally computable metric 
(e.g., [GG99]). 
Though our main focus is the new forward selection 
procedure, we also show that the algorithms are easily 
extended to backward selection or to a combination of 
forward and backward selection. The techniques and 
data structures we propose also naturally extend to 
the problem of finding strongly decomposable models 
in mixed graphs. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we derive a simple characterization for 
the edges that can be added to a chordal graph while 
maintaining its chordality. In Section 3, we describe 
the data structure that we use for finding such edges 
efficiently and discuss how it is maintained in the pres­
ence of additions to the underlying model graph. In 
Section 4, we analyze the overall complexity of the 
stepwise selection procedures for the KL divergence 
metric. We briefly discuss how the data structures can 
be extended for doing backward selection as might be 
required for a procedure that alternates between for­
ward and backward selection in Section 5. In Section 
6, we discuss how these algorithms can be extended for 
the case of mixed graphs and strong decomposability. 
We conclude with Section 7. 
Sab 
Figure 1: Structure of the subgraph induced by Va, Vb 
and Sab 
2 
Characterizing Edges Eligible for 
Stepwise Selection 
There is a classical characterization of the edges that 
can be deleted from a chordal graph 1 such that the 
resulting graph remains chordal: 
Theorem 2.1 [Wer76, Lau96] Given a chordal graph 
g, an edge can be deleted from the graph while main­
taining its chordality iff the edge belongs to exactly 
one of the maximal cliques of the graph. 
To complement this result, we propose the follow­
ing characterization of the edges that can added to 
a chordal graph without violating its chordality (the 
proof is given in Appendix A): 
Theorem 2.2 Given a chordal graph g = (V, E), an 
edge (va, vb) tt E can be added to the graph while 
maintaining its chordality iff it satisfies the following 
properties: 
1. There exists a subset of nodes Sab s;;; V -
{va,vb}, such that (v4,u),(vb,u) E E,Vu E Sabi 
i.e., Va and Vb are connected to all vertices in Sab; 
2. The set Sab is the minimal separator for Va and 
Vb in g (note that, since g is chordal, this implies 
that Sab is a clique); i.e., removing the nodes in 
Sab and all their incident edges from g separates 
va and Vb and no proper subset of Bab has this 
property. 
3 
Enumerating Eligible Edges for 
Forward Selection 
In this section, we describe how to enumerate all 
edges that can be added to the current chordal graph 
while maintaining chordality. For this purpose, we 
1 For simplicity, we use the terms decomposable model 
and chordal graph interchangeably. 

130 
DESHPANDE ET AL. 
UAI2001 
maintain two auxiliary data structures (i) a clique 
graph [GHP95] corresponding to the current chordal 
graph, (ii) a boolean n X n matrix, C:Ø, indexed by the 
attributes of data which maintains information about 
whether a pair of nodes is eligible for addition. Clearly, 
using C:Ø, we can enumerate the edges eligible for for­
ward selection in O(n2) time, where n is the number 
of attributes. The clique graph is required to update 
C:Øin O(n2) time when an edge is added to the under­
lying graph, as we will see later in the section. 
3.1 
Clique Graph 
3.1.1 
Definition and Properties 
Definition: A clique graph of a chordal graph Q = 
(V, E), denoted by CGo, has the maximal cliques of 
the chordal graph as its vertices, and has the prop­
erty that given any two maximal cliques, c1 and c2, 
there is an edge between these two cliques iff c1 n c2 
separates the node sets Ct \ Ct n C2 and C2 \ C1 n C2. 
Note that this usage of the term "clique graph" is 
non-standard; we are following the terminology of 
[GHP95].2 
We will note some properties of clique graphs. 
Lemma 3.1 Two nodes Va,Vb E V with (va,Vb) ¢ E 
satisfy the forward selection characterization (Section 
2.2) iff there exists an edge ( C1, C2) in CGo such that 
Va E C1 and Vb E C2. 
Lemma 3.2 [GHP95] A maximum spanning tree of a 
clique graph of a chordal graph, where the weight of 
an edge is the size of the intersection of the two cliques 
it joins, is a junction tree of the chordal graph. 
Lemma 3.3 The number of nodes in a clique graph 
of a chordal graph Q = (V, E) is at most lVI· 
3.2 
Updating the Clique Graph 
After all possible edges are enumerated and one edge is 
chosen based on a model selection criterion, we need 
to update the clique graph to reflect the addition of 
this new edge to the underlying chordal graph. In this 
section, we show how this can be done in O(n2) time. 
2Note also that the clique graph of a chordal graph is 
equivalent to an Almond Junction Tree [AK93, JJ94] of 
the graph; both of these structures can be seen as compact 
representations of all possible junction trees of a chordal 
graph. 
3.2.1 
Update Algorithm 
Let Q = (V, E) be the original chordal graph and let 
Go be the clique graph. Let the new edge that is added 
be (va, vb)· Also, let (Ca, Cb) be the corresponding 
edge in the clique graph (the edge from which this 
pair of nodes was obtained) and let Sab = Ca n Cb· 
Finally, let Q' and CGo' be the new model and clique 
graphs. 
Addition of the edge (va, vb) creates a new maximum 
clique Cab = 8ab + Va + Vb as shown in Figure 2. It 
is possible that Ca c Cab (or Cb c Cab), in which 
case, Ca (Cb) will not be a maximal clique in the new 
chordal graph. We assume for now that this does not 
happen. 
In that case, adding the edge (va, Vb) to Q 
results in a partial clique graph structure as shown in 
Figure 2. Note that the new clique will be connected 
to Ca and Cb in CGcy. 
Figure 2: Partial Structure of the Clique Graph after 
adding the edge (va, vb) 
After this node has been created and added to the 
clique graph, the update algorithm has to delete those 
edges from the clique graph which do not satisfy the 
clique graph property (Section 3.1.1). It is easy to see 
that no new edges between already existing maximal 
cliques in the clique graph will have to be added. Given 
this, the update algorithm is as follows (see Appendix 
B for the correctness proof): 
1. Let !}" 
= Q - 8ab· Find all nodes that are con­
nected to Va and to Vb in Q" and maintain this 
information in two arrays indexed by the vertices 
of Q. 
2. Deciding whether to keep an edge (C1, C2) E 
CGg in CGo': Let 812 = C1 n C2. If 812 t= 
8ab, then keep this edge. Otherwise, consider the 
graph Q-812(= g"). If va is connected to cl \812 
in this graph and Vb is COnnected to C2 \812 or vice 

UAI2001 
DESHPANDE ET Al. 
131 
versa, do not keep this edge in CGg'. Otherwise, 
keep it. This check can be performed in 0(1) time 
using the arrays constructed in Step 1. 
3. Adding edges involving Cab: 
1. For every maximal clique C' such that 
( C', Co.) 
E CGg' (after execution of the 
above step), add an edge (C', Cab) to CGg' 
if (G' n Cab) c So.b + Va. 
2. For every maximal clique C' such that C' n 
Cab = So.b + Va, explicitly check if this edge 
should be added to the clique graph. This re­
quires checking whether vb is separated from 
C' \ Sab + Va by Sab + Va, which can be done 
by looking up the arrays computed in Step 1. 
3. Repeat the above two steps for cb and Vb 
instead of Ca and Va· 
4. Remove Ca (Cb) if it is contained in Cab· 
3.2.2 
Complexity Analysis 
It is easy to see that Steps 1 and 3 can be performed 
in O(n2) time, but comparison of two sets to check if 
they are equal is O(n) in general. As such, the com­
plexity of Step 2 might seem to be O(n3) 3. To perform 
this step efficiently, we maintain a binary index on the 
minimal separators of the current model graph. A leaf 
of this index contains a list of pointers to all the edges 
that have associated with them the minimal separator 
corresponding to the leaf. Now given Sab, we can find 
all the edges with separator equal to Sab in time O(n) 
(since the height of the index is n). As we mentioned 
in Step 2, we only need to check such edges since the 
rest of the edges remain untouched. The deletions, 
if required, can be performed in 0(1) time per dele­
tion. Thus, given this data structure, Step 2 can be 
performed in time O(n2) (actually, in order O(n + n') 
time, where n' is the number of edges in GGg with 
separator Sab)· Insertions in this index can be done in 
Input: Q = (V, E), CGg, current model & clique graphs 0( n) time, by adding a pointer to the new edge at the 
Output: Q' = (V, E'), CGg', new model & clique graphs front of the list of pointers. Since there can be at most 
begin 
n insertions to this index in Step 3, the complexity of 
1. using t:fvt, choose which of the edges to add to Q 
Step 3 remains O(n2). 
2. let (va, vb) be the new edge to be added, let 
(Ga,Cb) E CGE be the corresponding edge in 
CGg and let Sab = Ca nCb. 
3. 911 +-- Q- Sab· Find all nodes connected to Va 
and to vb in 911 and maintain this information 
in two arrays indexed by the vertices of g. 
4. Q' +-- (V, E + (vo., vb)). 
5. CGg' +-- CGg. 
6. delete ( Ca, Cb) from CGg', add a new node Gab = 
So.b + Va + Vb and add edges (Ca, Cab) and (Cb, Cab)· 
7. 
for all edges (01, C2) E CGE do 
8. 
if 812 = C1 n C2 equal to Sab then 
9. 
if Va is connected to cl \ Sab and Vb 
is connected to C2 \ Sab or viceversa then 
10. 
delete the edge (Cr, G2) from CGg'. 
11. for all C' E GGv s.t. (G', Ca) E GQg, do 
12. 
S'..-C'nCa. 
13. 
if S' C Sab. + Va then 
14. 
add the edge (Cab, C') to CGg' 
15. for all C' E CGv s.t. C' n Cab= Sab + Va do 
16. 
check if Sab + Va separates Vb from C' \ (C' n Gab) 
17. 
if yes, add the edge (Cab, C') to CGg, 
3.3 
Updating £i-t 
Efvt is updated as follows : 
1. Set the entry ( Va, Vb) to false, since this edge is 
not eligible for addition any more. 
2. Since some edges are deleted from the clique 
graph, the corresponding pairs of nodes that 
might have been eligible for addition before may 
not be eligible any more. Noting that all such 
deleted clique graph edges must have the separa­
tor Sab, we set the entry corresponding to pairs 
( Vx, Vy) such that Vx is connected to Va and vy is 
connected to Vb in Q" = G - So.b, to false. This 
can be done by using the arrays computed during 
the clique graph update algorithm in O(n2) time. 
18. repeat Steps 11-17 for cb and Vb instead of Ca and Vo.· 
3. Some edges of the form (vx, va) or (vx, vb) may be 
now eligible for addition. To set the corresponding 
entries to true, for every edge that is added to 
the clique graph (C', Cab), set to true the entries 
corresponding to ( Vx' Va)' Vx E C'' Vx' Va ¢. G' n 
Cab· Similarly for Vb (please refer to Theorem 4.3 
for the proof that these include all the edges newly 
19. remove Ca (similarly, Cb) from CGg, if Ca C Cab· 
20. update £Las described in Section 3.3 
end 
Figure 3: Complete Forward Selection Algorithm 
3In many cases, model search is performed among mod­
els with a restricted maximum clique size. In that case, set 
comparisons take constant time and the data structure we 
describe next is not required. 

132 
OESHPANDE ET AL. 
UAI2001 
eligible for addition.). 
Thus, £_,Lean also be updated in O(n2) time. 
4 
Complexity of Overall Forward 
Selection Procedure 
The overall forward selection procedure has two 
parts: 
1. Enumerating all edges that can be added to the 
current model. 
2. Deciding which of the eligible edges to add to the 
model for "forward progress". 
Thus far, we have presented an O(n2) solution to 
the first problem, giving us an overall complexity of 
O(n2k), if a total of kedges are added starting with 
the null model. In this section, we analyze the com­
plexity of the second step with the aim of minimiz­
ing KL divergence from the saturated model, which is 
equivalent to maximum likelihood estimation. 
Theorem 4.1 [Mal91] Minimizing the KL divergence 
of a given model M from the saturated model is equiv­
alent to minimizing the entropy of the model H(M) 
which is defined as: 
H(M) = 'E,CECH(C)- L,SEsH(S) 
where C is the set of maximum cliques of the model, 
and S is the set of separators for a junction tree of 
the model. 
The entropy of a subset of attributes, 
A= (A1. ... , Ak), is defined to be: 
H(A) = L,aED(A1)x ... xD(Ak) !j;l log fc;) 
where D(Ai) denotes the domain of attribute A, f(a) 
denotes the number of data items which contain a and 
N is the total number of data points. 
Thus, the only information we need from a decompos­
able model, to compute its divergence from the satu­
rated model, is a list of its maximal cliques and a list of 
separators in some junction tree for the model. Many 
metrics for graphical models have a similar property 
and this property can be used to avoid recomputation 
of a junction tree for the new model obtained after an 
incremental change to the current model: 
Theorem 4.2 If two decomposable models M C M' 
differ only in one edge (va,vb), (i.e., (va,vb) if. M and 
(va, Vb) EM'), then the maximal cliques and the min­
imal separators in junction trees corresponding to the 
two models, JM = (Jc,Js) and JM' = (J(:,J$), 
where Jc, J(; are the lists of maximal cliques and 
Js, J¥ are the lists of separators, differ as follows: 
1. If Ca ct. Cab and Cb ¢ Cab, then J(; = Jc +Cab 
and J¥ = Js + Cab n Ca +Cab nCb  Sab· 
2. If Ca c Cab and Cb ¢ Cab, then J(; = Jc + 
Cab- Ca and J's = Js +Cab nCb- Sab· 
3. If Ca ¢ Cab and Cb c Cab, then J(; = Jc + 
Cab -Cb and J$ = Js +Cab n Ca  Sab· 
4. If Ca c Cab and Cb c Cab, then Jb = Jc + 
Cab - Cb -Ca and Jf, = Js - Sab· 
This immediately gives us the following corollary: 
Corollary 4.1 If two decomposable models M c M' 
differ only in one edge (v",vb), (i.e., (va,vb) ¢. M and 
(va,vb) EM), then 
H(M)  H(M') = H(Sab + Va) + H(Sab + Vb) 
-H(Sab + Va + Vb) - H(Sab) 
where Sab is the minimal separator of Va and Vb in M. 
Thus the change in the entropy of the model af­
ter adding (or deleting) an edge is only dependent 
on the minimal separator of the two vertices in the 
model graph and as such, this information can be pre­
computed for all pairs of nodes that are eligible for 
forward selection. During the forward selection proce­
dure, these "changes" can be associated with the cor­
responding edge in the clique graph. This also means 
that after adding a new edge to the model graph, we 
only have to compute new entropies corresponding to 
the new edges that are added to the clique graph. In 
the next theorem, we bound the total number of en­
tropies that have to computed after addition of an edge 
to the model graph: 
Theorem 4.3 The number of new entropies that 
need to be computed after adding the edge (va, Vb) 
to the underlying model graph (i.e., after performing 
one forward selection step) is at most to 2(n- na) + 
2(n-nb), where na, nb are the number of neighbors of 
Va and Vb respectively. 
Proof: Any new edge that is added to the clique graph 
must have Cab as one of its endpoints. Consider one 
such edge, (Cab,C'), with associated separatorS' = 
Cab n C'. This edge must satisfy one of the following 
properties (cf. Theorem B.3): 
• S' = Sab + Va: In this case, the pairs of nodes 
(v.,, vb), v, E C' \ 81 are (possibly newly) eligi­
ble for forward selection. Each such edge requires 
computation of H(S'), H(S' + vb), H(S' +v,) and 
H(S' + v., + vb)· Out of these, H(S' = Sab + Va) 
and H(S' + vb) have already been computed and 
we only have to compute H(S' + vx) and H(S' + 
v, + vb)· 

UAJ2001 
DESHPANDE ET AL. 
133 
• S' C Sab + Va: The edge (C', Ca) belongs to 
CGg' and also to CGg. This implies that pairs 
ofnodes (v.,,v1),v., E C'\S',v1 E Sab + va \S' 
were eligible for addition in Q as well and as such, 
the entropies needed for these pairs have already 
been computed. 
Thus, the only new entropies 
that need to be computed are for pairs of nodes, 
( Vx, Vb), Vx E C' \ S' and again we only need to 
compute H(S' + Vx) and H(S' + Vx + vb). 
• S' = Sab + vb or S' C Sab + vb: The analysis for 
these two cases is similar. 
Thus, the only new entropies that need to be computed 
are those corresponding to the pairs of nodes of the 
form ( Va, vx) or ( Vb, Vx) and we need to compute at 
most two entropies for every such pair. Since there are 
at most n - na + n - nb such pairs, the total number 
of new entropies that need to be computed is at most 
2(n- na) + 2(n- nb)· I 
Note that this theorem assumes that all the entropies 
required for forward selection in the current model are 
already computed, and hence it does not apply to the 
very first step. For example, if we start with the null 
model (empty model graph), then we need to compute 
() entropies to decide which edge to add in the first 
step. 
5 
Backward Selection 
In this section, we briefly outline how to extend our 
data structures for doing backward selection as might 
be required for a procedure which alternates between 
forward selection and backward selection. Details are 
deferred to the full version of the paper. 
For efficient enumeration of edges eligible for deletion 
and update of the clique graph data structures, we 
need to make two changes: 
• A matrix of size n x n, indexed by the vertices 
of the model, is maintained for enumeration of 
edges eligible for deletion. The entry in the matrix 
corresponding to a pair of nodes ( u, v) tells us 
whether the edge is present in the model, and if 
yes, whether it is eligible for deletion. 
• The binary index on the separators is augmented 
to keep the intersection sets for every possible pair 
of maximal cliques. This information is required 
to "re-insert" those edges in the clique graph that 
might have been deleted in the reverse step of 
adding this edge to the graph. 
The algorithms for clique graph update described ear-
lier have to be modified to maintain these data struc­
tures as well, but these updates can also be performed 
in O(n2) time during both backward selection and for­
ward selection. Also, it can be proved that: 
Theorem 5.1 The number of new entropies that 
need to be computed after deleting an edge from the 
underlying model graph (i.e., after performing one 
backward selection step) is at most (ISabl - 1) and 
those are all of the form H(Sab \ {vx}), for v., E Sab· 
6 
Mixed Graphs 
The results in this paper extend readily to the case 
of mixed graphs and strong decomposability, via the 
following theorem : 
Theorem 6.1 [Lau96] Given a strongly decompos­
able mixed graph G = (V, E), with V 
= Vd u Vc, where 
Vc is the subset of vertices corresponding to the con­
tinuous variables and Vd is the subset of vertices cor­
responding to the discrete variables, then the graph 
G' = (V + *, E + E*), with E* 
= {(*, v)Vv E Vd}, is 
chordal. 
7 
Conclusions 
Decomposable models possess several important char­
acteristics that make them an appealing class of statis­
tical models, as has been observed in applied contexts 
ranging from word sense disambiguation [BW94] to 
multi-dimensional histograms [DGROl]. Efficient al­
gorithms, however, are essential if this class of models 
is to be exploited in large-scale problems. In this pa­
per, we have presented an efficient new algorithm for 
performing stepwise selection in decomposable models. 
The enumeration of edges eligible for forward or back­
ward selection can be a serious practical bottleneck in 
decomposable models, and the new algorithm is a sig­
nificant improvement over the naive procedures that 
are currently used (cf. [Edw95]). Together with meth­
ods that allow rapid computation of sufficient statis­
tics, such as the cube computation techniques devel­
oped in the database literature [A +96] and techniques 
that exploit data sparseness [MJOO], we feel that these 
algorithms allow decomposable models (and their ex­
tension to mixtures of decomposable models) to be­
come an increasingly viable alternative in large-scale 
exploratory data analysis problems. 

134 
DESHPANDE ET AL. 
UAI 2001
