An Online Learning-based Framework for Tracking
Kamalika Chaudhuri
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
Yoav Freund
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
Daniel Hsu
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
Abstract
We study the tracking problem, namely, es-
timating the hidden state of an object over
time, from unreliable and noisy measure-
ments.
The standard framework for the
tracking problem is the generative frame-
work, which is the basis of solutions such as
the Bayesian algorithm and its approxima-
tion, the particle ﬁlters. However, these so-
lutions can be very sensitive to model mis-
matches. In this paper, motivated by online
learning, we introduce a new framework for
tracking. We provide an eﬃcient tracking al-
gorithm for this framework. We provide ex-
perimental results comparing our algorithm
to the Bayesian algorithm on simulated data.
Our experiments show that when there are
slight model mismatches, our algorithm out-
performs the Bayesian algorithm.
1
INTRODUCTION
We study the tracking problem, which has numerous
applications in AI, control and ﬁnance. In tracking, we
are given noisy measurements over time, and the prob-
lem is to estimate the hidden state of an object. The
challenge is to do this reliably, by combining measure-
ments from multiple time steps and prior knowledge
about the state dynamics, and the goal of tracking is
to produce estimates that are as close to the true states
as possible.
The most popular solutions to the tracking problem
are the Kalman ﬁlter (Kalman, 1960), the particle ﬁl-
ter (Doucet et al., 2001), and their numerous exten-
sions and variations (e.g. (Isard & Blake, 1998; van der
Merwe et al., 2000)), which are based on a generative
framework for the tracking problem. Suppose we want
to track the state xt of an object at time t, given only
measurement vectors M(·, t′) for times t′ ≤t. In the
generative approach, we think of the state X(t) and
measurements M(·, t) as random variables. We rep-
resent our knowledge regarding the dynamics of the
states using the transition process Pr(X(t)|X(t −1))
and our knowledge regarding the (noisy) relationship
between the states and the observations by the mea-
surement process Pr(M(·, t)|X(t)). Then, given only
the observations, the goal of tracking is to estimate
the hidden state sequence (x1, x2, . . .). This is done by
calculating the likelihood of each state sequence and
then using as the estimate either the sequence with
the highest posterior probability (maximum a poste-
riori) or the expected value of the state with respect
to the posterior distribution (the Bayesian algorithm).
In practice, one uses particle ﬁlters, which are an ap-
proximation to the Bayesian algorithm.
The problem with the generative framework is that in
practice, it is very diﬃcult to precisely determine the
distributions of the measurements. The Bayesian algo-
rithm can be sensitive to model mismatches, so using
a model which is diﬀerent from that generating the
measurements can lead to a large divergence between
the estimated states and the true states.
To address this, we introduce an online learning-based
framework for tracking.
In our framework, we are
given a set of state sequences or paths in the state
space; but instead of assuming that the observations
are generated by a measurement model from a path
in this set, we think of each path as a mechanism for
explaining the observations. We emphasize that this
is done regardless of how the observations are gener-
ated. Suppose a path (x1, x2, . . .) is proposed as an
explanation of the observations (M(·, 1), M(·, 2), . . .).
We measure the quality of this path using a prede-
ﬁned loss function, which depends only on the mea-
surements (and not on the hidden true state).
The
tracking algorithm selects its own path by taking a
weighted average of the best paths according the past
observations. The theoretical guarantee we provide is
that the loss of the path selected by the algorithm in

this online way by the tracking algorithm is close to
that of the path with the minimum loss; here, the loss
is measured according to the loss function supplied to
the algorithm. Such guarantees are analogous to com-
petitive analysis used in online learning (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006; Freund & Schapire, 1997; Littlestone
& Warmuth, 1994), and it is important to note that
such guarantees hold uniformly for any sequence of ob-
servations, regardless of any probabilistic assumptions.
Our next contribution is to provide an online learning-
based algorithm for tracking in this framework. Our
algorithm is based on NormalHedge (Chaudhuri et al.,
2009), which is a general online learning algorithm.
NormalHedge can be instantiated with any loss func-
tion.
When supplied with a bounded loss function,
it is guaranteed to produce a path with loss close to
that of the path with the minimum loss, from a set of
candidate paths. As it is computationally ineﬃcient
to directly apply NormalHedge to tracking, we derive
a Sequential Monte Carlo approximation to Normal-
Hedge, and we show that this approximation is eﬃ-
cient.
To demonstrate the robustness of our tracking al-
gorithm, we perform simulations on a simple one-
dimensional tracking problem. We evaluate tracking
performance by measuring the average distance be-
tween the states estimated by the algorithms, and
the true hidden states. We instantiate our algorithm
with a simple clipped loss function. Our simulations
show that our algorithm consistently outperforms the
Bayesian algorithm, under high measurement noise,
and a wide range of levels of model mismatch.
We ﬁnally note that Bayesian algorithm can also be
interpreted in an online learning-based framework.
In particular, if the loss of a path is the negative
log-likelihood (the log-loss) under some measurement
model, then, the Bayesian algorithm can be shown to
produce a path with log-loss close to that of the path
with the minimum log-loss. One may be tempted to
think that our tracking solution follows the same ap-
proach; however, the point of our paper is that one can
use loss functions that are diﬀerent from log-loss, and
in particular, we show a scenario in which using other
loss functions produces better tracking performance
than the Bayesian algorithm (or its approximations).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion 2, we explain in detail our explanatory model for
tracking. In Section 3, we present NormalHedge, on
which our tracking algorithm is based. In Section 4,
we provide our tracking algorithm. Section 5 presents
the experimental comparison of our algorithm with the
Bayesian algorithm on simulated data. Finally, we dis-
cuss related work in Section 6.
2
AN ONLINE-LEARNING
FRAMEWORK FOR TRACKING
In this section, we describe in more detail the setup of
the tracking problem, and our online learning-based
framework for tracking. In tracking, at each time t,
we are given as input, measurements (or observations)
M(·, t), and the goal is to estimate the hidden state of
an object using these measurements, and our knowl-
edge about the state dynamics.
In our online learning framework for tracking, we are
given a set P of paths (sequences) over the state space
X ⊂Rn. At each time t, we assign to each path in P
a loss function ℓ. The loss function has two parts: a
dynamics loss ℓd and an observation loss ℓo.
The dynamics loss ℓd captures our knowledge about
the state dynamics. For simplicity, we use a dynamics
loss ℓd that can be written as
ℓd(p) =
X
t
ℓd(xt, xt−1)
for a path p = (x1, x2, . . .). In other words, the dy-
namics loss at time t depends only on the states at time
t and t −1. A common way to express our knowledge
about the dynamics is in terms of a dynamics function
F, deﬁned so that paths with xt ≈F(xt−1) will have
small dynamics loss.
For example, consider an object moving with a con-
stant velocity. Here, if the state xt = (p, v), where p
is the position and v is the velocity, then we would
be interested in paths in which xt ≈xt−1 + (v, 0). In
these cases, the dynamics loss ℓd(xt, xt−1) is typically
a growing function of the distance from xt to F(xt−1).
The second component of the loss function is an ob-
servation loss ℓo. Given a path p = (x1, x2, . . .), and
measurements M = (M(·, 1), M(·, 2), . . .), the obser-
vation loss function ℓo(p, M) quantiﬁes how well the
path p explains the measurements. Again, for simplic-
ity, we restrict ourselves to loss functions ℓo that can
be written as:
ℓo(p, M) =
X
t
ℓo(xt, M(·, t)) .
In other words, the observation loss of a path at time
t depends only on its state at time t and the mea-
surements at time t. The total loss of a path p is the
sum of its dynamics and observation losses. We note
that the loss of a path depends only on that particular
path and the measurements, and not on the true hid-
den state. As a result, the loss of a path can always
be computed by an algorithm at any given time.
The algorithmic framework we consider in this model
is analogous to,
and motivated by the decision-
theoretic framework for online learning (Freund &

Schapire, 1997; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). At time
t, our algorithm assigns a weight wt
p to each path p in
P. The estimated state at time t is the weighted mean
of the states, where the weight of a state is the total
weight of all paths in this state. The loss of the algo-
rithm at time t is the weighted loss of all paths in P.
The theoretical guarantee we look for is that the loss of
the algorithm is close to the loss of the best path in P
in hindsight (or, close to the loss of the top ϵ-quantile
path in P in hindsight). Thus, if P has a small frac-
tion of paths with low loss, and if the loss functions
successfully capture the tracking performance, then,
the sequence of states estimated by the algorithm will
have good tracking performance.
3
NORMALHEDGE
In this section, we describe the NormalHedge algo-
rithm, which forms the basis of our tracking algorithm.
To present NormalHedge in full generality, we ﬁrst
need to describe the decision-theoretic framework for
online learning.
The problem of decision-theoretic online learning is as
follows. At each round, a learner has access to a set of
N actions; for our purposes, an action is any method
that provides a prediction in each round. The learner
maintains a distribution wi,t over the actions at time
t. At each time period t, each action i suﬀers a loss
ℓi,t which lies in a bounded range, and the loss of the
learner is P
i wi,tℓi,t.
We note that this framework
is very general – no assumption is made about the
nature of the actions and the distribution of the losses.
The goal of the learner is to maintain a distribution
over the actions, such that its cumulative loss over
time is low, compared to the cumulative loss of the
action with the lowest cumulative loss. In some cases,
particularly, when the number of actions is very large,
we are interested in achieving a low cumulative loss
compared to the top ϵ-quantile of actions. Here, for
any ϵ, the top ϵ-quantile of actions are the ϵ fraction
of actions which have the lowest cumulative loss.
Starting with the seminal work of Littlestone and War-
muth (1994), the problem of decision-theoretic online
learning has been well-studied in the literature (Fre-
und & Schapire, 1997; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1993; Cesa-
Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). The most common algorithm
for this problem is Hedge or Exponential Weights (Fre-
und & Schapire, 1997), which assigns to each action a
weight exponentially small in its total loss.
In this
paper however, we consider a diﬀerent algorithm Nor-
malHedge for this problem (Chaudhuri et al., 2009),
and it is this algorithm that forms the basis of our
tracking algorithm. While the Bayesian averaging al-
gorithm can be shown to be a variant of Hedge when
Algorithm 1 NormalHedge
initialize Ri,0 = 0, wi,1 = 1/N ∀i
for t = 1, 2, . . . do
Each action i incurs loss ℓi,t.
Learner incurs loss ℓA,t = PN
i=1 wi,tℓi,t.
Update cumulative regrets: Ri,t = Ri,t−1+(ℓA,t−
ℓi,t) ∀i.
Find ct > 0 satisfying
1
N
PN
i=1 exp

([Ri,t]+)2
2ct

= e.
Update distribution:
wi,t+1 ∝[Ri,t]+
ct
exp

([Ri,t]+)2
2ct

∀i.
end for
the loss function is the log-loss, such is not the case
for NormalHedge, which uses a very diﬀerent weight-
ing function.
In the NormalHedge algorithm, for each action i and
time t, we use wi,t to denote the NormalHedge weight
assigned to action i at time t. At any time t, we de-
ﬁne the regret Ri,t of our algorithm to an action i as
the diﬀerence between the cumulative loss of our algo-
rithm and the cumulative loss of this action. Also, for
any real number x, we use the notation [x]+ to denote
max(0, x). The NormalHedge algorithm is presented
below. The performance guarantees for the Normal-
Hedge algorithm can be stated as follows.
Theorem 1 (Chaudhuri et al., 2009). If NormalHedge
has access to N actions, then for all loss sequences, for
all t, for all 0 < ϵ ≤1, the regret of the algorithm to the
top ϵ-quantile of the actions is O(
p
t · ln(1/ϵ)+ln2 N).
A signiﬁcant advantage of using NormalHedge over
other online learning algorithms is that it has no pa-
rameters to tune, yet achieves performance compara-
ble to the best performance of previous online learning
algorithms with optimally tuned parameters. For more
discussion, see Section 3 of (Chaudhuri et al., 2009).
Another advantage is that the actions which have total
loss greater than the total loss of the algorithm, are
assigned zero weight.
Since the algorithm performs
almost as well as the best action, in a scenario where
a few actions are signiﬁcantly better than the rest, the
algorithm will assign zero weight to most actions. In
other words, the support of the NormalHedge weights
may be a very small set, and this property makes it
easier to design an approximation to it.

4
TRACKING USING
NORMALHEDGE
To apply NormalHedge directly to tracking, we set
each action to be a path in the state space, and the loss
of each action at time t to be the loss of the correspond-
ing path at time t. To make NormalHedge more robust
in a practical setting, we make a small change to the
algorithm: instead of using cumulative loss, we use a
discounted cumulative loss. For a discount parameter
0 < α < 1, the discounted cumulative loss of an action
i at time T is PT
t=1(1 −α)T −tℓi,t. Such discounted
losses have been used in reinforcement learning (Kael-
bling et al., 1996) as well as online learning (Hazan
& Seshadhri, 2009); intuitively, it makes the tracking
algorithm more ﬂexible, and allows it to more easily
recover from past mistakes.
However, a direct application of NormalHedge is pro-
hibitively expensive in terms of computation.
If we
consider paths over a discretization of the state space
of cardinality S, then, at time T, there are ST ac-
tions. One can take advantage of the structure of the
loss function to formulate the weight updates as a dy-
namic program; however, this is still expensive as each
update takes S2 time.
Therefore, in the sequel, we
show how to derive a Sequential Monte-Carlo based
approximation to NormalHedge, and we use this ap-
proximation in our experiments.
The key observation behind our approximation is that
the weights on actions generated by the NormalHedge
algorithm induce a distribution over the states at each
time t. We therefore use a random sample of states
in each round to approximate this distribution. Thus,
just as particle ﬁlters approximate the posterior den-
sity on the states induced by the Bayesian algorithm,
our tracking algorithm approximates the distribution
induced on the states by NormalHedge for tracking.
The main diﬀerence between NormalHedge and our
approximation is that while NormalHedge always
maintains the weights for all the actions, we delete an
action from our action list when its weight falls to 0.
We then replace this action by our re-sampling proce-
dure, which chooses another action which is currently
in a region of the state space where the actions have
low losses. Thus, we do not spend resources maintain-
ing and updating weights for actions which do not per-
form well. Another diﬀerence between NormalHedge
and our tracking algorithm is that in our approxima-
tion, we do not explicitly impose a dynamics loss on
the actions. Instead, we use a re-sampling procedure
that only considers actions with low dynamics loss.
This also avoids spending resources on actions which
have high dynamics loss anyway. We note that because
of these changes, our tracking algorithm does not have
Algorithm 2 Tracking algorithm
input N (number of actions), α (discount factor), Σ∗
(re-sampling parameter), F (dynamics function)
A := {x1,1, . . . , xN,1} with xi,1 randomly drawn
from X; Ri,0 := 0; wi,0 := 1/N ∀i
for t = 1, 2, . . . do
Obtain losses ℓi,t = ℓo(xi,t) for each action i and
update regrets:
Ri,t := (1 −α)Ri,t−1 + (ℓA,t −ℓi,t) where ℓA,t =
PN
i=1 wi,t−1ℓi,t.
Delete poor actions: let X = {i : Ri,t ≤0}, set
A := A \ X.
Re-sample actions:
A := A ∪Resample(X, Σ∗, t).
Compute weight of each action i:
wi,t
∝
[Ri,t]+
c
exp

([Ri,t]+)2
2c

where
c
is
the
solution
to
the
equation
1
N
PN
i=1 exp

([Ri,t]+)2
2c

= e.
Estimate: xA,t := PN
i=1 wi,txi,t.
Update states: xi,t+1 := F(xi,t) ∀i.
end for
the worst-case theoretical guarantees in Theorem 1;
however, we still expect it to have good performance
when tracking a slowly moving object.
Our tracking algorithm is speciﬁed in Algorithm 2.
Each action i in our algorithm is a path (xi,1, xi,2, . . .)
in the state space X ⊂Rn. However, we do not main-
tain this entire path explicitly for each action; rather,
the state update step of the algorithm computes xi,t+1
from xi,t using the dynamics function F, so we only
need to maintain the current state of each action. Re-
call, applying the dynamics function F should ensure
that the path incurs no or little dynamics loss (see
Section 2).
We start with a set of actions A initially positioned
at states uniformly distributed over the X, and a uni-
form weighting over these actions. In each round, like
NormalHedge, each action incurs a loss determined
by its current state, and the tracker incurs the ex-
pected loss determined by the current weighting over
actions. Using these losses, we update the cumulative
(discounted) regrets to each action. However, unlike
NormalHedge, we then delete all actions with zero or
negative regret, and replace them using a re-sampling
procedure. This procedure replaces poorly performing
actions with actions currently at high density regions
of X, thereby providing a better approximation to the
NormalHedge weights.
The re-sampling procedure is explained in detail in
Algorithm 3. The main idea is to sample from the re-
gions of the state space with high weight. This is done

Algorithm 3 Re-sampling algorithm
input X (actions to be re-sampled), Σ∗(re-sampling
parameter), t (current time)
for j ∈X do
Set ¯X := {i : Ri,t > 0}.
If ¯X = ∅: set ¯pi = 1/N ∀i. Else: set ¯pi ∝wi,t−1
∀i ∈¯X and ¯pi = 0 ∀i /∈¯X.
Draw i ∼Multinomial(¯p1, . . . , ¯pN).
Draw xj,t ∼N(xi,t, Σ∗), and set Rj,t := (1 −
α)Ri,t−1 + (ℓA,t −ℓo(xj,t)).
end for
by sampling an action proportional to its weight in
the previous round. We then choose a state randomly
(roughly) from an ellipsoid {x : (x−xt)⊤Σ−1
∗(x−xt) ≤
1} around the current state xt of the selected action;
the new action inherits the history of the selected ac-
tion, but has a current state which is diﬀerent from
(but close to) the selected action.
This latter step
makes the new state distribution smoother than the
one in the previous round, which may be supported
on just a few states if only a few actions have low
losses.
We note that Σ∗can be set so that the re-
sampling procedure only samples actions with low dy-
namics loss (and the state update step of the algorithm
ensures that the remaining actions in the set A do not
incur any dynamics loss); thus, our algorithm does not
explicitly compute a dynamics loss for each action.
5
SIMULATIONS
For our simulations, we consider the task of tracking
an object in a simple, one-dimensional state space. To
evaluate our algorithm, we measure the distance be-
tween the estimated states, and the true states of the
object.
Our experimental setup is inspired by the application
of tracking faces in videos, using a standard face de-
tector (Viola & Jones, 2001). In this case, the state
is the location of a face, and each measurement cor-
responds to a score output by the face detector for a
region in the current video frame. The goal is to pre-
dict the location of the face across several video frames,
using these scores produced by the detector. The de-
tector typically returns high scores for several regions
around the true location of a face, but it may also er-
roneously produce high scores elsewhere. And though
in some cases the detection score may have a proba-
bilistic interpretation, it is often diﬃcult to accurately
characterize the distribution of the noise.
The precise setup of our simulations is as follows. The
object to be tracked remains stationary or moves with
velocity at most 1 in the interval [−500, 500]. At time
2W
Blue: H(x, zt), Red: M(x, t).
2σo
Blue: ρ = 0, Red: ρ = 0.2.
Figure 1: Plots of the measurements (as a function of
x) for ρ = 0 and σo = 1 (top) and the density of the
noise nt(x) (bottom).
t, the true state is the position zt; the measurements
correspond to a 1001-dimensional vector M(t)
=
[M(−500, t), M(−499, t), . . . , M(499, t), M(500, t)] for
locations in a grid G = {−500, −499, . . . , 499, 500},
generated by an additive noise process
M(x, t) = H(x, zt) + nt(x).
Here, H(x, zt) is the square pulse function of width 2W
around the true state zt: H(x, xt) = 1 if |x −zt| ≤W
and 0 otherwise (see Figure 1, top). The additive noise
nt(x) is randomly generated independently for each t
and each x ∈G, using the mixture distribution
(1 −ρ) · N(0, σ2
o) + ρ · N(0, (10σo)2)
(see Figure 1, bottom). The parameter σo represents
how noisy the measurements are relative to the signal,
and the parameter ρ represents the fraction of outliers.
In our experiments, we ﬁx W = 50 and vary σo and ρ.
The total number of time steps we track for is T = 200.
In the generative framework, the dynamics of the ob-
ject is represented by the transition model xt+1 ∼
N(xt, σ2
d), and the observations are represented by
the measurement process M(x, t) ∼N(H(x, xt), σ2
o).
Thus, when ρ = 0, the observations are generated ac-
cording to the measurement process supplied to the

generative framework; for ρ > 0, a ρ fraction of the
observations are outliers.
In the online learning-based framework, the expected
state dynamics function F is the identity function, and
the observation loss of a path p = (x1, x2, . . .) at time
t is given by
ℓo(xt, M(·, t)) = −
X
x∈[xt−W,xt+W ]∩G
q(M(x, t))
where q(y)
=
min(1 + σo, max(y, −σo)) clips the
measurements to the range [−σo, 1 + σo].
That is,
the observation loss for xt with respect to M(·, t) is
the negative sum of thresholded measurement values
q(M(x, t)) for x in an interval of width 2W around xt.
Given only the observation vectors M, we use three dif-
ferent methods to estimate the true underlying state
sequence (z1, z2, . . .). The ﬁrst is the Bayesian algo-
rithm, which recursively applies Bayes’ rule to update
a posterior distribution using the transition and ob-
servation model. The posterior distribution is main-
tained at each location in the discretization G. For the
Bayesian algorithm, we set σo to the actual value of σo
used to generate the observations, and we set σd = 2.
The value of σd was obtained by tuning on measure-
ment vectors generated with the same true state se-
quence, but with independently generated noise val-
ues. The prior distribution over states assigns prob-
ability one to the true value of z1 (which is 0 in our
setup) and zero elsewhere. The second algorithm is our
algorithm (NH) described in Section 4. For our algo-
rithm, we use the parameters Σ∗= 400 and α = 0.02.
These parameters were also obtained by tuning over
a range of values for Σ∗and α. We also compare our
algorithm with the particle ﬁlter (PF), which uses the
same parameters as with the Bayesian algorithm, and
predicts using the expected state under the (approx-
imate) posterior distribution. For our algorithm, we
use N = 100 actions, and for the particle ﬁlter, we use
N = 100 particles. For our experiments, we use an im-
plementation of the particle ﬁlter due to (de Freitas,
2000).
Figures 2 and 3 show the true state and the states
predicted by our algorithm (Blue) and the Bayesian
algorithm (Red) for two diﬀerent values of σo for 5
independent simulations. Table 1 summarizes the per-
formance of these algorithms for diﬀerent values of the
parameter ρ, for two diﬀerent values of the noise pa-
rameter σo. We report the average and standard devi-
ation of the RMSE (root-mean-squared-error) between
the true state and the predicted state. The RMSE is
computed over the T = 200 state predictions for a sin-
gle simulation, and these RMSE values are averaged
over 100 independent simulations.
Our experiments show that the Bayesian algorithm
performs well when ρ = 0, that is, it is supplied with
the correct noise model; however, its performance de-
grades rapidly as ρ increases, and becomes very poor
even at ρ = 0.2.
On the other hand, the perfor-
mance of our algorithm does not suﬀer appreciably
when ρ increases. The degradation of performance of
the Bayesian algorithm is even more pronounced, when
the noise is high with respect to the signal (σo = 8).
The particle ﬁlter suﬀers a even higher degradation
in performance, and has poor performance even when
ρ = 0.01 (that is, when 99% of the observations are
generated from the correct likelihood distribution sup-
plied to the particle ﬁlter). Our results indicate that
the Bayesian algorithm is very sensitive to model mis-
matches.
On the other hand, our algorithm, when
equipped with a clipped-loss function, is robust to
model mismatches. In particular, our algorithm pro-
vides a RMSE value of 19.6 even under high noise
(σo = 8), when ρ is as high as 0.4.
We note that the degradation in the performance of
the Bayesian algorithm is solely due to a model mis-
match: when the same experiments are repeated, with
the Bayesian algorithm being supplied with the cor-
rect likelihood model, it performs at least as well as, or
better than our algorithm. Moreover, if the Bayesian
algorithm is supplied with a likelihood model with the
correct distribution (a mixture of two Gaussians), the
correct fraction of outliers ρ, but a diﬀerent outlier
variance (e.g., 2σo instead of 10σo), the performance
of the Bayesian algorithm improves signiﬁcantly over
having the incorrect distribution (although it still per-
forms worse than our algorithm).
We performed some additional experiments with our
algorithm to understand the eﬀect of varying the pa-
rameters Σ∗and α; the details are omitted due to lack
of space. The results indicate that the performance
of our algorithm depends on the value of Σ∗; if Σ∗is
set too high, there are not enough actions drawn from
the regions of the state-space where the object to be
tracked is, which makes it diﬃcult to track with a ﬁne
granularity. If Σ∗is set too low, then the actions are
very concentrated at where the current actions were,
and do not explore enough of the state space. On the
other hand, for a low level of outliers (about 20 percent
or less), our algorithm appears to have more or less the
same performance over a wide range of α values.
6
RELATED WORK
The generative approach to tracking has roots in con-
trol and estimation theory, starting with the seminal
work of Kalman (Kalman, 1960). The most popular
generative method used in tracking is the particle ﬁl-

Table 1: Experimental Results. Root-mean-squared-
errors of the predicted positions over T = 200 time
steps for our algorithm (NH), the Bayesian algorithm,
and the particle ﬁlter (PF). The reported values are
the averages and standard deviations over 100 simula-
tions.
Low Noise (σo = 1)
ρ
NH
Bayes
PF
0.00 3.18 ± 0.33
1.17 ± 0.09
1.23 ± 0.11
0.01 3.21 ± 0.34
1.90 ± 0.25
3.98 ± 1.06
0.05 3.26 ± 0.34
3.99 ± 0.52 81.70 ± 1.74
0.10 3.31 ± 0.35
6.40 ± 0.84 81.70 ± 1.74
0.15 3.42 ± 0.34
8.38 ± 1.10 81.70 ± 1.74
0.20 3.52 ± 0.41 10.28 ± 1.24 81.70 ± 1.74
High Noise (σo = 8)
ρ
NH
Bayes
PF
0.00 10.93 ± 2.52 10.98 ± 2.33 14.35 ± 5.16
0.01 11.26 ± 3.43 12.76 ± 3.07 44.29 ± 16.7
0.05 12.03 ± 3.47 19.75 ± 6.70 81.70 ± 1.74
0.10 12.25 ± 2.93 27.33 ± 10.9 81.70 ± 1.74
0.15 13.38 ± 3.07 32.78 ± 13.1 81.70 ± 1.74
0.20 14.15 ± 3.88 43.99 ± 26.8 81.70 ± 1.74
ter (Doucet et al., 2001), and its numerous variants.
The literature here is vast, and there have been many
exciting developments in recent years (e.g. (van der
Merwe et al., 2000; Klaas et al., 2005)); we refer the
reader to (Doucet & Johansen, 2008) for a detailed
survey of the results.
The sub-optimality of the Bayesian algorithm under
model mismatch has been investigated in other con-
texts such as classiﬁcation (Domingos, 2000; Gr¨unwald
& Langford, 2007). The view of the Bayesian algo-
rithm as an online learning algorithm for log-loss is
well-known in various communities, including informa-
tion theory / MDL (Merhav & Feder, 1993; Gr¨unwald,
2007) and computational learning theory (Freund,
1996; Kakade & Ng, 2004).
In our work, we look be-
yond the Bayesian algorithm and log-loss to consider
other loss functions and algorithms that are more ap-
propriate for our task.
There has also been some work on tracking in the on-
line learning literature (see, for example, (Herbster
& Warmuth, 1998; Koolen & de Rooij, 2008)). Our
method uses a diﬀerent class of actions than the track-
ing framework in these works. The algorithm of (Herb-
ster & Warmuth, 1998) considers, as their class of ac-
tions, paths that switch states at most a ﬁxed number
0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 1, ρ = 0
0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 1, ρ = 0.1
0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 1, ρ = 0.2
Figure 2: Predicted paths in ﬁve simulations (low noise
cases). The blue lines correspond to our algorithm, the
red lines correspond to the Bayesian algorithm, and
the dashed black line represents the true states.
of times. Moreover, their algorithm treats all switches
between states equally, and therefore fails to take ad-
vantage of prior knowledge about the state dynamics.
In contrast, we take into account such prior knowledge
using a dynamics loss so that sequences approximately
following the expected dynamics end up with lower
loss than those that do not, and as a result, we can
work with more sophisticated state transition dynam-
ics methods.
7
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduce a new framework for track-
ing based on online learning. We propose a new algo-
rithm for tracking in this framework that deviates sig-
niﬁcantly from the Bayesian approach. Experimental
results show that our algorithm signiﬁcantly outper-
forms the Bayesian algorithm, when the observations
are generated by a distribution deviating slightly from
the model supplied to the Bayesian algorithm. Our
work reveals an interesting connection between deci-
sion theoretic online learning and Bayesian ﬁltering.

0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 8, ρ = 0
0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 8, ρ = 0.1
0
50
100
150
200
−50
0
50
100
150
t
Position
 
 
NH
Bayes
σo = 8, ρ = 0.2
Figure 3: Predicted paths in ﬁve simulations (high
noise cases).
8
