AI Maintenance:
A Robustness Perspective
Pin-Yu Chen and Payel Das
IBM Research

Abstract—With the advancements in machine learning (ML) methods and compute resources,
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) empowered systems are becoming a prevailing technology. However,
current AI technology such as deep learning is not ﬂawless. The signiﬁcantly increased model
complexity and data scale incur intensiﬁed challenges when lacking trustworthiness and
transparency, which could create new risks and negative impacts. In this paper, we carve out AI
maintenance from the robustness perspective. We start by introducing some highlighted
robustness challenges in the AI lifecycle and motivating AI maintenance by making analogies to
car maintenance. We then propose an AI model inspection framework to detect and mitigate
robustness risks. We also draw inspiration from vehicle autonomy to deﬁne the levels of AI
robustness automation. Our proposal for AI maintenance facilitates robustness assessment,
status tracking, risk scanning, model hardening, and regulation throughout the AI lifecycle,
which is an essential milestone toward building sustainable and trustworthy AI ecosystems.
1. Introduction
Just like the indispensable role of cars in the
modern world, AI-empowered technology, and
ML-based systems and algorithms are bringing
revolutionary changes and far-reaching impacts
on our life, society, and environment, if not
happening already. As AI models are perceived
as a new “vehicle” to a better future, this article
aims to stress the importance of formalizing and
practicing AI maintenance from the robustness
perspective, by drawing analogies in the model
development and deployment between car and AI.
Towards achieving trustworthiness and sustain-
ability for AI, this article is motivated by the fol-
lowing question: Cars require regular inspection,
maintenance, and continuous status monitoring,
why should AI technology be any different?
Robustness in AI often entails multiple mean-
ings depending on the context and use cases.
In this article, we study robustness from the
perspective of the generalization capability of an
AI model in adversarial and unseen scenarios.
In general, the performance of an AI model is
evaluated in the average case, by comparing the
model predictions on a set of data samples to their
ground-truth labels and then using the average
prediction result as a performance metric, such
as the top-1 classiﬁcation accuracy measuring the
fraction of correct model prediction on the most-
likely (top-1) class over a dataset. In contrast, the
adversarial scenario evaluates the model perfor-
mance in the worst case among all possible and
plausible changes (often pre-speciﬁed) to the data
and AI model, by assuming a virtual adversary is
in place. Moreover, the unseen scenario evaluates
the model performance on new data samples that
are drawn from a different data distribution than
the seen data samples during training (but not
necessarily the worst-case distribution), possibly
caused by natural data/label shifts, and real-world
observational noises, among others.
The rationale for studying AI maintenance
© preprint
1
arXiv:2301.03052v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2023

from the robustness viewpoint is motivated by
the rapidly intensiﬁed demand for inspecting and
preventing failure modes for AI models, in or-
der to understand the limitations and prepare AI
technology for the real world against malicious
attempts and contiguous data changes. According
to a recent Gartner report1, 30% of cyberattacks
by 2022 will involve data poisoning, model theft
or adversarial examples (see [1] for an overview
of these new risks centered on machine learn-
ing). However, the industry seems underprepared.
In a survey of 28 organizations spanning small
and large organizations, 25 organizations did not
know how to secure their AI/ML systems [2].
Unlike car insurances that cover damage and
liability, the risk of lacking robustness in AI
models can be further ampliﬁed if cyber insurance
providers impose stringent requirements when the
root cause is related to AI failure modes2. More-
over, AI maintenance is closely related to action
plans for enhancing trustworthiness in safety-
related ML applications, such as fulﬁlling the
milestones and objectives deﬁned in the roadmap
of the European Union Aviation Safety Agency
(EASA)3, the AI/ML Software as a Medical
Device Action Plan deﬁned by U.S. Food &
Drug Administration4, and the NIST AI Risk
Management Framework5.
To gain insights into AI maintenance, this ar-
ticle ﬁrst introduces major robustness challenges
in the AI lifecycle for model development and
deployment. Then, we make analogies of the
commonality between car and AI maintenance.
Finally, we propose the conceptual framework
named “AI model inspector” for holistic robust-
ness inspection and enhancement. Similar to the
deﬁnitions of driving automation for vehicle au-
tonomy, we deﬁne six levels of AI robustness
towards facilitating qualitative and quantitative
assessment of AI technology throughout the en-
tire lifecycle.
1https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/
gartner-top-10-strategic-technology-trends-for-2020
2https://hbr.org/2020/04/the-case-for-ai-insurance
3https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom-and-events/news/
easa-releases-its-concept-paper-ﬁrst-usable-guidance-level-1-machine-0
4https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/
software-medical-device-samd/artiﬁcial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-software-medical-device
5https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework
2. Robustness Challenges in AI
Lifecycle
Figure 1 provides an overview of robustness
inspection pipeline in the AI lifecycle (left panel)
and the highlighted robustness challenges (right
panel). The AI lifecycle is recurring between
two phases: model development and deployment.
The model development phase consists of two
states: (i) data collection and processing, and
(ii) model training. Data collection and process-
ing include typical data operations such as data
acquisition and labeling, feature normalization,
ﬁltering, anonymization, and data augmentation.
Model training involves machine learning model
selection, algorithm development, system design,
and optimization. Between states (i) and (ii), data
sanitization inspects the data ﬁdelity and performs
mitigation steps (e.g., deleting problematic data
samples or correcting mislabeled samples) prior
to model training. After model development, the
AI lifecycle enters the state of (iii) model deploy-
ment, in which the trainable model parameters are
frozen for use. Between (ii) and (iii), performance
validation inspects and reduces the gap between
model training and deployment. If the deployed
model undergoes signiﬁcant performance degra-
dation, possibly due to naturally occurring data
shifts or malicious attempts, the AI lifecycle will
re-enter the model development phase to collect
new data or update the model. Between (iii) and
(i), continuous monitoring inspects the perfor-
mance status of the currently deployed model
and gives a notice upon observing signiﬁcant
performance degradation or detecting anomalous
events.
There are different types of robustness chal-
lenges in the model development and deployment
phases that can lead to model misbehavior and
degraded performance, varied by their objectives,
feasible actions on intervening in the AI model,
and knowledge about the AI model. In the ad-
versarial scenario, the robustness challenges can
be related to a “threat model” specifying what
an attacker can know and do to compromise the
AI model. In the unseen scenario, the robustness
challenges are associated with the domain gener-
alization capability between the development and
deployment phases. Figure 1 (right panel) lists
two highlighted robustness challenges for each
2

Figure 1. Left: Schematic illustration of robustness inspection pipeline (data sanitization, performance
validation, and continuous monitoring) in the AI lifecycle consisting of three major states: data collection and
processing, model training, and model deployment. The model development phase includes data collection
and processing and model training. Right: Highlighted robustness challenges in the AI lifecycle. In the model
development phase, the robustness challenges assume the training data are subject to manipulation prior to
model training. In the model deployment phase, the robustness challenges have no access to the training data
but may assume some knowledge of the deployed model such as the model architecture and the associated
model parameters. Based on the categorization of states in the AI lifecycle, the chart can be extended to
incorporate other robustness challenges and other trustworthiness dimensions such as safety, privacy, etc.
phase, which are detailed as follows.
2.1. Robustness challenges in development
phase
Data poisoning concerns the model perfor-
mance when trained on noisy data. The source of
noise may come from imperfect data collection
and processing such as incorrect data annotation,
data bias and imbalance, and context-irrelevant
spurious features. The noise may also be inten-
tionally introduced to the training data by adding
a set of poisoned data samples for the purpose of
undermining the model performance in the de-
ployment phase. For example, making the target
model has low classiﬁcation errors in develop-
ment but high classiﬁcation errors in deployment.
Such intentional data poisoning attacks usually
assume the ability to manipulate the training data
and have access or some partial knowledge about
the model details and training procedure [3].
Backdoor is a Trojan attack targeting machine
learning [4]. It works by injecting some pattern
(a trigger) with modiﬁed labels to a subset of
training data. Due to the memorization effect of
state-of-the-art machine learning models such as
neural networks, models trained on the tampered
dataset will contain a backdoor. In the deployment
phase, backdoored models will allow an attacker
to gain control of the model output in the presence
of the designated trigger, regardless of the actual
content of the data input. However, in the absence
of the trigger, the backdoored model will behave
like a normal model trained on the untampered
training dataset. Therefore, backdoor attacks are
stealthy because the tampered model will not
misbehave if the backdoor is inactivated. This
challenge can be ampliﬁed in distributed and de-
centralized machine learning paradigms involving
multiple parties exchanging limited information
about their local private data, such as federated
learning [5].
2.2. Robustness challenges in deployment
phase
The deployment phase takes a fully-tuned
model in the development phase and freezes the
model for subsequent data inference tasks. A
deployed model is called a white-box model if its
details are transparent to a user (e.g., releasing a
deep learning model with its model architecture
3

and pre-trained weights). Otherwise, if model
details are unknown (or partially known) to a user,
it is called a black-box (gray-box) model, such
as a prediction application programming interface
(API) or proprietary software that only gives
model prediction results and does not reveal other
details. For robustness assessment, the white-box
mode enables full-stack system debugging and
internal penetration testing, while the black-box
mode allows practical vulnerability and informa-
tion leakage analysis based on user access.
Adversarial examples are carefully crafted
data samples that cause prediction evasion when
compared to the original unmodiﬁed data samples
[6]. The easiness in prediction evasion reﬂects the
model sensitivity against small changes in data
inputs, such as a human-imperceptible additive
perturbation. The robustness challenges of adver-
sarial examples are often associated with safety-
critical and security-related AI applications, such
as autonomous driving cars, identiﬁcation and
recognition, and malware detection because their
existence can be interpreted as counter-examples
that violate the required robustness constraints. In
the black-box setting, adversarial examples can be
generated by iteratively modifying a data input
based only on the model’s prediction output [7].
Out-of-distribution generalization refers to the
characterization of model performance when the
input data samples undergo certain semantic-
preserving transformations that deviate from the
seen data distribution during model training. In
contrast, in-distribution generalization refers to
the model performance on data samples or in-
stances drawn from the same distribution as the
training data or environments. The quest for out-
of-distribution generalization is motivated by re-
taining robust predictions against natural varia-
tions (their effect can be either observable or hid-
den). The examples include distributional shifts
between development and deployment phases,
data/label drifts in online data streaming, com-
mon corruptions caused by measurement/device
errors, and data-invariant operations made by
image rotation or scaling. An ideal model in
deployment should generalize well or has the
ability to quickly recognize and adapt to unseen
data samples that are out-of-distribution yet share
similar contexts to the in-distribution data seen
during training.
3. Analogies between Car and AI
Maintenance
As AI-empowered algorithms and systems are
often perceived as a powerful yet mysterious tech-
nology to end users, we believe making analogies
to (autonomous) cars can deliver better trans-
parency and a more comprehensive understand-
ing of AI technology’s utilities and limitations.
Towards formalizing and standardizing the notion
of AI maintenance, we aim to draw connections
to a more familiar case – car maintenance – as
AI and car share many commonalities in model
development and deployment. The development
of new car models is a resource-intensive process
(e.g., electric cars). It is taken for granted that
essential regulatory and law requirements such as
reliability and safety are fully certiﬁed throughout
the development process, to avoid catastrophic
failures, fatal damage, and critical product recalls.
Similarly, AI model development can be quite ex-
pensive, especially when it comes to the training
of foundation models [8] that require pre-training
on large-scale datasets with neural networks con-
sisting of a massive number of trainable parame-
ters. Take the Generative Pre-trained Transformer
3 (GPT-3) [9] as an example, which is one of
the largest language models ever trained to date.
GPT-3 has 175 billion parameters and is trained
on a dataset consisting of 499 billion tokens. The
estimated training cost is about 4.6 million US
dollars even with the lowest priced GPU cloud
on the market in 20206. Having invested so much,
one would expect the resulting AI model is risk-
proof and robust to be deployed.
In deployment, car maintenance involves reg-
ular mechanical and electrical inspection, perfor-
mance testing and certiﬁcation, automobile part
replacement, and repair. We argue that many
familiar concepts in car maintenance can be well-
mapped to AI models. In what follows, we make
analogies between car and AI to facilitate the
consolidation of AI maintenance for robustness.
Table 1 summarizes the key terms that share
analogies between car and AI maintenance for ro-
bustness. In what follows, we divide those terms
into four categories and discuss their connections.
6https://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3/
4

Table 1. Analogies between car and AI models for maintenance and robustness divided into four categories.
Category
Car
AI
Model descriptions
and performance
characterization
user manual
model speciﬁcation
automobile parts
machine learning modules
warrant
robustness checkpoints
transmission efﬁciency
memory/data/power efﬁciency
Systematic inspection
and monitoring
collision test & safety report
internal robustness assessment
mechanical and electrical inspection
penetration testing and debugging
problematic status warning
operational errors
health state monitoring
model behavior tracking
Fix and update
repair
model ﬁx and update
wheel alignment
model calibration
winter tire
model hardening
ﬂat tire response
fast adaptation
Education and
societal impacts
driver licence
AI ethics and value alignment
sustainability
green and righteous AI
3.1. Model descriptions and performance
characterization
The “user manual” provides instructions for
an AI system, with descriptions specifying nec-
essary information for transparency and account-
ability, such as data and model training details,
privacy, usability, and impact statements regard-
ing recommended uses and possible misuse. The
“automobile parts” in AI means functional and
conﬁgurable modules in the machine learning
pipeline that can be modiﬁed and ideally stan-
dardized for the ease of model ﬁx and update. The
“warrant” in AI means qualitative and quantitative
performance checkpoints in the development pro-
cess. The “transmission efﬁciency” in AI relates
to how the model scales with data, memory,
and power, such as ﬂoating-point operations per
second (FLOPS).
3.2. Systematic inspection and monitoring
During model development, the “collision
test” for AI refers to internal comprehensive ro-
bustness assessment, white-hat hacking, and red-
teaming to identify limitations and hidden issues,
similar to comprehensive road testing and car
reviews. The results can be used to generate a
“safety report” providing a quantiﬁed level of
robustness in adversarial and unseen scenarios.
The “mechanical and electrical inspection” for
AI means penetration testing and debugging of
the entire system (e.g., the software and hard-
ware supporting AI technology) using probing
and active measurement. The “problematic status
warning” refers to real-time operational abnormal
event detection during deployment, such as erro-
neous instances or malfunctioning. The “health
state monitoring” means continuous tracking of
model behaviors, such as identifying the emer-
gence of adversarial threats and data drifts.
3.3. Fix and update
After inspecting and identifying errors and
risks, the “repair” for AI models refers to mit-
igation strategies to ﬁx, update, and re-certify
the underlying model. The “wheel-alignment” for
AI means model calibration, the “winter tire”
means hardening the model with a more robust
module, and the “ﬂat tire response” means fast
adaption of an AI model in the face of model
performance degradation and anomalous events.
Depending on the severity of the found robustness
risks, user demand, and enforced regulation for
AI technology, model ﬁx and update for AI main-
tenance can have differentiated services at varying
costs, ranging from simple model patching and
quick problem ﬁxing, module replacement, partial
model upgrade, to model rebuild.
3.4. Education and societal impacts
The “driver license” for AI means education
on the ethics and value alignment when using
AI technology, to understand its capabilities and
limitations. The “sustainability” for AI involves
gaining environmental awareness such as greener
AI models with reduced energy consumption, as
well as achieving positive societal impacts, in
order to fulﬁll social responsibility and prevent
possible misuse.
4. AI Model Inspector
Towards practicing and realizing the notion
of AI maintenance, in this section we propose a
5

Figure 2. The AI model inspector framework consists of detection and mitigation stages. The model under
inspection ﬁrst takes a series of robustness testing and checkpoints, including procedural and operational
assessment, passive evaluation on representative datasets, and active probing by generating new instances
on-the-ﬂy to ﬁnd failure modes. In the detection stage, the inspector extracts statistics and runs a diagnosis
to identify possible risks in robustness. In the mitigation stage, the inspector employs model ﬁx and update to
mitigate the identiﬁed robustness risks, and then re-assesses the model using the same robustness checklist.
Finally, the inspector returns a risk-mitigated model. The entire process is analog to car inspection, ﬁxing, and
cleaning for car maintenance.
methodology called AI model inspector, which is
a conceptual pipeline for proactive detection and
mitigation of robustness issues throughout the AI
lifecycle. We also highlight two case studies on
different robustness challenges to illustrate how
the AI model inspector can be realized. Finally,
as motivated by vehicle autonomy, we deﬁne
different levels of AI robustness.
4.1. Robustness inspection: detection and
mitigation
Figure 2
shows the pipeline of AI model
inspector consisting of two stages: detection and
mitigation. First, a user using the AI mainte-
nance service provides a model and/or some
data samples for robustness inspection. The in-
spection takes a series of robustness testing and
checkpoints in both qualitative and quantitative
manners, including procedural and operational
assessment, passive model performance evalua-
tion on representative datasets, and active probing
by generating new instances on-the-ﬂy to ﬁnd
failure modes. Qualitative assessment includes
soliciting system characterization and problem
descriptions from the model operator to gain a
comprehensive understanding of the scope and
details of model development and deployment,
such as what model and data are used for training,
how the model is deployed, how much informa-
tion is known to a user, what types of robustness
challenges are of top concerns, to name a few.
Based on the qualitative assessment, quantitative
analysis includes running the corresponding di-
agnosis and reporting the numerical results and
summary by generating and leveraging proper test
cases and datasets for performance evaluation.
Speciﬁcally, in the detection stage, the inspec-
tor extracts discriminative statistics and runs a
diagnosis to identify possible risks in robustness.
Then, in the mitigation stage, the inspector em-
ploys model ﬁx and update to mitigate the iden-
tiﬁed robustness risks, such as model ﬁnetuning
and re-training, adding or replacing some mod-
ules in the AI system, and re-assessing the model
using the same robustness checklist. Finally, the
inspector returns a risk-mitigated model. The en-
tire process is analog to car maintenance in terms
of car inspection, ﬁxing, and cleaning. The no-
tion of differentiated services in car maintenance
can also be mapped to the varying demand and
6

cost of AI maintenance, such as fast scanning,
thorough inspection, quick patching, and detailed
ﬁx and update. We note that the usage of the AI
model inspector is continuous rather than one-
shot. Based on the recurrence of the states in
the AI lifecycle, a model will repeatedly undergo
several transitions between the states of data col-
lection & processing, model training, and model
deployment. Moreover, a model can be ﬁxed but
broken again later. This is analogous to the notion
of weariness and fatigue testing in predictive car
maintenance – after inspection, some parts need
to be updated or replaced on a regular basis to
ensure the model remains in good condition.
Based on the robustness challenges shown in
Figure 1, we make the following two examples
that realize the concept of the AI model inspector.
Backdoor detection and mitigation: In the de-
tection stage, the inspector adopts the Trojan net
detector proposed in [10], which uses a limited
number of untampered clean data samples (as
few as one sample per class) to derive a dis-
criminate statistic for discerning a trained neural
network classiﬁer has any hidden backdoor. The
detector can even achieve data-free detection for
convolutional neural networks. After detection,
the inspector can adopt the mitigation strategy of
model sanitization proposed in [11] to remove the
backdoor by ﬁnetuning the model parameters.
Anomalous input detection and mitigation:
Given a data input to an AI model under inspec-
tion, the inspector can use internal data represen-
tations (e.g., similarity to training data), domain
knowledge (e.g., innate data characteristics and
physical rules), or external knowledge checking
(e.g., searching and reasoning over a knowl-
edge graph or a database) to determine whether
the data input is anomalous or not. Here, the
anomaly encompasses different robustness chal-
lenges, such as adversarial examples and out-
of-distribution samples. For instance, the innate
temporal dependency in audio data is used in
[12] to detect audio adversarial examples for
automatic speech recognition, and many distance
metrics based on the internal data representations
extracted from the model have been proposed to
detect out-of-distribution samples [13]. In addi-
tion to ﬁltering out anomalous inputs, the in-
spector can further take mitigation strategies to
update the model and strengthen its robustness
against anomalous inputs. For instance, the self-
progressing robust training method proposed in
[14] can further strengthen a trained model for
enhanced adversarial robustness by instructing the
model to mitigate the self-discovered ambiguity
during model ﬁnetuning.
4.2. Adversarial Machine Learning for
Robustness
Cars like the Mars Exploration Rovers can
successfully execute the assigned task on new
and unseen terrain because they were developed
in comprehensive simulated environments. For AI
models, one can incorporate the failure examples
generated from model inspection tools to improve
the robustness in unseen and even adversarial en-
vironments. This methodology is known as adver-
sarial machine learning, by introducing a virtual
adversary in the AI lifecycle to help create better
and more robust models. In the development
phase, the role of the virtual adversary is to simu-
late the out-of-distribution or worst-case scenarios
and generate new challenging cases to help the
model generalize better in unseen and adversarial
environments. In the deployment case, the role
of the virtual adversary is to employ proactive
robustness evaluation and risk discovery, in order
to prevent real damage and negative impacts.
One typical example is adversarial training [15]
which exploits self-generated adversarial exam-
ples during model training to strengthen adver-
sarial robustness against adversarial inputs in the
deployment phase. We refer the readers to [16] for
recent advances in adversarial machine learning
for AI robustness.
4.3. Roadmap towards the levels of AI
robustness
Inspired by the deﬁnitions for six levels of
driving automation for autonomous vehicles7, we
deﬁne six levels of AI robustness to facilitate
technical progress tracing, risk quantiﬁcation, and
inspection, model auditing, and standardization.
Table 2 compares the deﬁned levels for vehicle
autonomy and AI robustness, respectively. The
level of robustness quantiﬁes the progress in the
soundness of machine intelligence for robustness.
As the level increases, it signiﬁes the practice
7https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016 202104/
7

Table 2. Comparisons between the levels of vehicle autonomy versus AI robustness.
Level
Vehicle Autonomy
AI Robustness
0
no driving automation
no robustness (standard training)
1
driver assistance
generalization under distribution shifts
2
partial driving automation
robustness against single risk
3
conditional driving automation
robustness against multiple risks
4
high driving automation
universal robustness to known risks
5
full driving automation
human-aligned and augmented robustness
and guarantee of robustness in a more practical
and comprehensive manner. For AI robustness,
an increased level means broader coverage of
robustness risks under consideration. We believe
formalizing the levels of AI robustness can be
useful for the discussion and practice of AI
standardization related to robustness, security, and
safety, such as ISO/IEC JTC 1/WG 13 on Trust-
worthiness8 and ISO/TC 22/SC 32/WG 14 on
Safety and Artiﬁcial Intelligence9.
Level 0 means the original robustness ob-
tained from a standard model training process
without any risk mitigation operations. Level 1
concerns the generalization capability on natu-
rally occurring shifted data distributions, such
as maintaining robust predictions against dis-
tributional changes caused by spurious features
that are irrelevant to the actual semantic context
(e.g., classifying trafﬁc signs with altering sky
backgrounds). Level 2 considers the worst-case
robustness against single risk (e.g., adversarial
examples), and Level 3 extends to multiple risks,
such as the multi-objective (but selected) ro-
bustness to adversarial examples, common data
corruptions, and spurious correlations [17]. Level
4 guarantees universal robustness to all known
risks. Here universal robustness means joint ef-
fectiveness on all known robustness risks. Finally,
Level 5 aligns robustness with human-centered
values and user feedback, and it has the capability
to automatically augment new robustness that
is complimentary to existing robustness require-
ments. Depending on the requirements (e.g., law
regulation) and contexts of the applications, dif-
ferent levels can be necessitated as pre-requisite
before deployment. For example, some high-risk
AI applications should pass the criterion of higher
levels – similar to the necessary requirements
8https://www.iso.org/committee/45020.html
9https://standards.iteh.ai/catalog/tc/iso/
6ec701ad-7678-442d-b186-a84b9ba2bbdf/iso-tc-22-sc-32
for different driving automation conditions (e.g.,
driving on highways versus urban environments).
It is worth noting that the assessment of
level-1 robustness can likely be accomplished by
static evaluation on a representative dataset or
benchmark. However, moving forward to level 2
and above, the validation of worst-case robustness
performance also requires model intervention,
such as active model scanning and probing for
ﬁnding failure cases. Moreover, AI model inspec-
tor takes proactive steps for detecting and mit-
igating potential robustness risks, which differs
from existing frameworks such as Factsheets [18],
Model Cards [19], and Datasheets for Datasets
[20] that only employ passive model character-
ization and speciﬁcation. Finally, in addition to
maintenance for AI, one can also adopt AI to
improve maintenance, such as predictive main-
tenance that takes preventive care to AI models
based on historical records and risk forecasting.
5. Concluding Remarks
This article discusses a novel maintenance
framework for robustness in AI technology based
on analogies to the development and deployment
of car models. To instill and improve trustworthi-
ness in the AI lifecycle, we propose an automated
and scalable solution based on the principle of
AI model inspector for detecting and mitigating
potential risks when lacking robustness. Inspired
by vehicle autonomy, we also deﬁne different
AI robustness levels for formalizing, evaluating,
standardizing, and regulating risk-proof AI mod-
els. As AI technology is transforming our life,
society, and environment with greater width and
depth and at a faster speed than cars, we believe
the quest for AI maintenance is imminent and
necessary. Beyond robustness, the AI model in-
spector framework can also be extended to incor-
porate other dimensions of trustworthy AI, such
as fairness, explainability, privacy, accountability,
8

and uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
