Accurate reconstruction of image stimuli from human fMRI based on the 
decoding model with capsule network architecture 
Kai Qiao, Chi Zhang, Linyuan Wang, Bin Yan, Jian Chen, Lei Zeng, Li Tong* 
National Digital Switching System Engineering and Technological Research Center, Zhengzhou, China, 450001 
 
*Correspondence author: 
Li Tong 

 
Abstract 
In neuroscience, all kinds of computation models were designed to answer the open question of how sensory stimuli 
are encoded by neurons and conversely, how sensory stimuli can be decoded from neuronal activities. Especially, 
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) studies have made many great achievements with the rapid development 
of the deep network computation. However, comparing with the goal of decoding orientation, position and object category 
from activities in visual cortex, accurate reconstruction of image stimuli from human fMRI is a still challenging work. In 
this paper, the capsule network (CapsNet) architecture based visual reconstruction (CNAVR) method is developed to 
reconstruct image stimuli. The capsule means containing a group of neurons to perform the better organization of feature 
structure and representation, inspired by the structure of cortical mini column including several hundred neurons in 
primates. The high-level capsule features in the CapsNet includes diverse features of image stimuli such as semantic class, 
orientation, location and so on. We used these features to bridge between human fMRI and image stimuli. We firstly 
employed the CapsNet to train the nonlinear mapping from image stimuli to high-level capsule features, and from high-
level capsule features to image stimuli again in an end-to-end manner. After estimating the serviceability of each voxel 
by encoding performance to accomplish the selecting of voxels, we secondly trained the nonlinear mapping from 
dimension-decreasing fMRI data to high-level capsule features. Finally, we can predict the high-level capsule features 
with fMRI data, and reconstruct image stimuli with the CapsNet. We evaluated the proposed CNAVR method on the 
dataset of handwritten digital images, and exceeded about 10% than the accuracy of all existing state-of-the-art methods 
on the structural similarity index (SSIM). 
 
Keywords: brain decoding, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), visual reconstruction, capsule network 
(CapsNet), capsule features. 
 
1 Introduction 
Human brain decoding [1, 2, 3] plays an important role in brain-machine interfaces, may be extended to help disabled 
persons in expressing and motioning, and can also help us explore more about the brain mechanism. In these years, 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become an effective tool to monitor brain activities and visual 
decoding based on fMRI data obtained more and more attention. In contrast to visual encoding [4] that predicts the brain 
activities in response to visual stimuli, the inverse decoding [5, 6] aims to predict the information about visual stimuli 
through brain activities. In general, classification, identification and reconstruction of image stimuli based on fMRI data 
are three main means of visual decoding. Some progresses [7] have been achieved, but the most of previous researches 
focused on either prediction of its category [8, 9] or identification [4] from a candidate set of image stimuli for the 
unknown image stimulus. The reconstruction of image stimuli is the full-information and most difficult means of decoding, 
and fewer studies [10] worked on it. The accuracy of visual reconstruction was restricted by several problems: 1) the 
complex noise during the acquisition of fMRI data; 2) the high dimensionality and limited number of fMRI data; 3) 
difficulties when imitating the human visual mechanism to develop the computation models. 

Current reconstruction methods mainly focused on some simple or small image stimuli. Thirion et al. [11] 
reconstructed the simple images by rotating Gabor filters in the passive viewing experiment and imagery experiment for 
the same subject. Miyawaki et al. [12] achieved the reconstruction of simple binary contrast patterns (resolution: 10×10) 
by linearly mapping fMRI data to each pixel of image stimuli. Van Gerven et al. [13] reconstructed handwritten digits 6 
and 9 (resolution: 28×28) from the fMRI data based on deep belief network [14]. Schoenmakers et al. [15] tried to 
reconstruct handwritten English letter of ‘BRAINS’ (resolution: 56×56) from the fMRI data using linear gauss model 
based on sparse learning. Yargholi et al. [16] employed the gauss network to reconstruct handwritten digits 6 and 9. 
Fujiwara et al. [17] proposed the Bayesian CCA (BCCA) model based on probabilistic extension of canonical correlation 
analysis (CCA) model [18] that related fMRI data to image stimuli via a set of latent variables. Wang et al. [19] proposed 
the deep canonically correlated auto encoders (DCCAE) with nonlinear observation models, and reconstruct each view 
using the learned representations. Recently, some work [20, 21, 22] proved that features of some layers in CNN behaved 
strong correlation with the brain activities of particular visual cortex, and some researchers started to apply CNN to visual 
reconstruction. Using the convolution features of the first layer in CNN, Wen et al. [23] implemented the reconstruction 
of dynamic video frame by frame, and proposed two-stage cascade neural decoding method based on multivariate linear 
regression and deconvolutional neural network [24]. They first predicted features by multivariate linear regression, then 
reconstructed images by feeding the estimated features in a pretrained deconvolutional neural network. Du et al. [25] 
presented a deep generative multi-view model (DGMM) to regard the visual reconstruction as the Bayesian inference of 
the missing view. In a word, these studies have suggested that DNN especially CNN could help interpret human brain 
visual information. However, the accurate reconstruction of image stimuli remains to be challenging. 
In conclusion, the visual reconstruction aims to design the mapping from fMRI data to image stimuli. Some methods 
[11, 12] directly tried to learn a linear or nonlinear mapping based on limited number of samples. However, the linear 
mapping has limited ability to parse the complex function of visual information processing in human visual cortex, and 
nonlinear mapping is easy to be overfitting based on limited number of samples and has weak generalization. Depending 
on some specific architectures of feature representation, some methods [18] firstly mapped the fMRI data to the feature 
representation of corresponding image stimuli, then tried to employ these features to reconstruct the image stimuli through 
the architecture. CNN architecture with powerful image feature representation [26, 27], seems a good choice. The current 
state of the art visual reconstruction methods [23] relied on the linear or nonlinear mapping from fMRI data to the features 
of specific layer in CNN architecture, then tried to reconstruct image stimuli based on information stream of CNN 
architecture. However, is the path for the perfectly solving the reconstruction of image stimuli? 
As we know, there is a fact [28] that the performance on image classification task [29] is much better than on 
detection [30] and segmentation [31] tasks in computer vision in spite of both employing CNN architecture. CNN 
architecture composed of hierarchical convolutional and pooling layers, was firstly designed for invariance including 
translation invariance, rotating invariance, scale invariance and so on. During the forward propagation in CNN 
architecture, the extracted features are more and more abstract and the local detailed information such as pose and location 
which is valuable for detection or segmentation is sacrificed, which lead to the difference of performance on classification 
and detection or segmentation. CNN can be usually designed for specific procedure of information processing in human 
visual cortex, such as semantic extracting, or decoding of space location, however, CNN cannot extract diverse features 
of image stimuli, thus incapable of accurate reconstruction that require various sensory information extracting such as 
semantic class, orientation, location, scale, and so on. The fact that current reconstruction results were not similar with 
the image stimuli also proves the inference. Invariance and equivariance are two very important perceptions in visual 
representation. As shown in the figure 1, the invariance is usually designed for the specific task such as the semantic 
extracting, at the cost of discarding other features that are not correlated with the semantic information. However, the 
equivariance is designed for many tasks, because it keeps nearly all the features such as location, pose, orientation, and 
so on. Essentially, CNN architecture performs the invariance by hierarchical subsampling by pooling layer, instead of the 
equivariance that keeps the quantity of information unchanged while feature representation. The problem makes it 
difficult to rely on the incomplete information to perform full-information reconstruction of image stimuli. 

 
Fig. 1 The difference between invariance and equivariance. Invariance performs the invariable representation when 
transforming location, pose, and orientation of digit ‘6’, in order to keep invariable class. Equivariance performs the 
transformed representation when transforming the location, pose, and orientation of digit ‘6’, in order to keep equivariant 
representation. Invariance is usually designed for the specific task, but equivariance can be used for many tasks, because 
the equivariant representation contains more diverse features about the image.  
 
In addition, we analyzed it from the perspective of human visual mechanism. After one person glances at one image, 
he or she can simultaneously answer many questions about the image such as ‘what is the main object?’, ‘where is the 
object’, ‘what characteristics does the object have?’ and so on. We noticed that these questions contain many 
characteristics of the image and we can conclude that the procedure of visual information representation in human visual 
cortex requires the equivariance instead of invariance, because only equivariance can ensure that the semantic class, 
location, scale, orientation and some other detailed information be preserved instead of discarding, in order to deal with 
various visual tasks.  
According to the above analysis, in order to achieve accurate visual reconstruction, we need an architecture that can 
keep the equivariance when feature representation and contain diverse features to make it possible to achieve accurate 
reconstruction from the perspective of information completeness. 
Aimed at equivariance instead of simple invariance, Hinton [32] firstly proposed the concept of capsule and designed 
the promising capsule network (CapsNet) based on convolutional operation and routing by agreement. In CNN 
architecture, each layer just includes some disorder neurons which makes it hard to perform some organizations of detailed 
internal structure. However, in the CapsNet, Capsules serve as the basic units of each layer and contain a group of neurons, 
which can organize some internal structures inspired by the structure of cortical mini column [33] including several 
hundred neurons in primates. The length of a capsule can predict the presence of a particular object for the invariance, 
and the features in a capsule can predict the complete attributes of a particular object for the equivariance. The CapsNet 
reached high accuracy on MNIST [34] digits recognition and demonstrated considerably better results than CNN on 
highly overlapping digits. Most importantly, the CapsNet provide the equivariance when feature representation. The 
CapsNet can achieve the accurate classification, which can prove that the capsule features contained the abstract 

information; can achieve the accurate reconstruction, which prove that the capsule features contained the complete 
information of image stimuli and is the equivariance of image stimuli. 
In this study, we proposed the new CapsNet architecture based visual reconstruction (CNAVR) method that accords 
well with the human visual information representation in human visual cortex based on the equivariance. We relied on 
the linear mapping from fMRI data to the high-level capsule features in the CapsNet, then tried to reconstruct image 
stimuli through CapsNet architecture. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to study visual reconstruction 
via the new promising capsule network architecture. 
 
2 Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Experiment data 
The Dataset [16] employed in the study contains a hundred handwritten gray-scale digits (equal number of 6 and 9) 
at a 28×28 pixel resolution taken from the MNIST database and the fMRI data from V1, V2 and V3. The fMRI data 
contains 3092 voxels in total. In the experiment, we employed 10-fold cross validation to test the proposed CNAVR 
method. 
 
2.2 Overview of the proposed CNAVR method 
In order to achieve accurate visual reconstruction, we introduced the new CapsNet architecture to construct the 
feature representation of the equivariance between the image stimuli and capsule features, and learned the mapping from 
the fMRI data to capsule features. Our proposed CNAVR method included two-stage training. Firstly, we employed the 
CapsNet to train the equivariance from image stimuli to capsule features, and from capsule features to image stimuli in 
an end-to-end manner by using convolutional, fully connected and routing by agreement operations. After the training, 
given one input image, we can obtain the corresponding capsule features, and can reconstruct the input image accurately 
again based on the capsule features, which indicated that the capsule features did not throw away location, pose, scale 
characteristics and so on for the sake of invariance, and kept complete information of image stimuli when feature 
representation. Then we selected voxels to reduce dimensionality of fMRI data by encoding performance, and learned the 
mapping from dimension-decreasing fMRI data to the capsule features using several fully connected layers. After the 
two-stage training, we realized the mapping from fMRI data to visual reconstruction of image stimuli. Given the fMRI 
data of one presented image stimulus, we can predict its capsule features about 6 and 9 with the learned mapping, and the 
accurate reconstruction can be accomplished using the max-length capsule. 
 
2.3 Capsule and dynamic routing between capsules 
Hinton [32] recently proposed the perception of capsule and dynamic routing between capsules. Each capsule 
contains a group of neurons. As the equation (1), the capsule j performs the non-linear squashing activation function for 
the given input vector
j
s in the CapsNet, and output vector
j
v . The orientation of vector
j
s is preserved, but the length 
is squashed between 0 and 1. The parameters in
j
v represent the various properties (position, scale, and texture) of a 
particular entity, and the length are used to represent the existence of the entity. 
2
2
1
j
j
j
j
j


s
s
v
s
s
                                   (1) 
The input
j
s is a weighted sum over all prediction vectors ˆ j i
u
that is produced by multiplying the output
i
u of a 
capsule in the layer below by a weight matrix
ij
W . 
  
ˆ
ˆ
i j
i
j i
j
ij
j i
i
c


u
W u
s
u
                                    (2)  

The coupling coefficients
ij
c are determined by the iterative dynamic routing process. The coupling coefficients 
between capsule i and all the capsules in the layer above are determined by the softmax of 
ij
b indicating the probability 
that capsule i should be coupled to capsule j . 
ˆ
exp(
)
exp(
)
ij
ij
j
j i
ij
ij
ik
k
b
b
v
b
c
b



u
                                  (3) 
Where
ij
b is initially set to zero, then is iteratively refined by measuring the agreement between the output 
j
v  and the 
prediction ˆ j i
u made by capsule i in the layer below, using the scalar product
ˆ
j
j i
v u
. Three looping can obtain the nice 
coupling coefficients and routing by agreement essentially tried to learn the relation between part and whole. 
 
2.4 Training image feature representation of equivariance 
We employed the CapsNet to perform the equivariance between images and corresponding high-level capsule 
features. As shown in Figure 2, the CapsNet architecture is shallow with only two convolutional layers, dynamic routing 
layers and several fully connected layers. Given one image (size: 28×28), the first layer (Conv1) performs 256 
convolutional (kernels: 9 × 9) operations with a stride of 1 and ReLU [35] activation. This layer converts pixel intensities 
to the local features (size: 20 × 20) that are then used as inputs to the primary capsules. The second layer (PrimaryCaps) 
also performs 256 (32 × 8) convolutional (kernels: 256 × 9 × 9) operations with a stride of 2 to produce 32 capsule maps 
(size: 6 × 6) whose capsule is an 8D vector. This layer is to construct capsules for dynamic routing operation in next layer. 
The final Layer (DigitCaps) has one 16D capsule per digit class (from 0 to 9) and each of these capsules receives input 
from all 1152 (32 × 6 × 6) capsules in the layer below. 
 
Fig. 2 The architecture of CapsNet. The first two layers perform convolutional operations to construct the primary capsule 
structure. Each capsule in the PrimaryCaps layer includes 8D features, and each high-level capsule in the DigitCaps layer 
includes 16D features that include more diverse features. The architecture employs the dynamic routing to replace the 
pooling operations to avoid the loss of the valuable information such as orientation, location, scale and other detailed 
features that are important for the equivariance when forward propagation. The ‘yellow’ mark represents the longest 
capsule in the DigitCaps and using it can predict the input image based on three fully connected layers. 
 
Because the length of the capsule represents the probability that a specific entity exists, the CapsNet aims to make 
the corresponding capsule vector longer if some digit is present in the image and make the other capsule vectors shorter. 
So, the classification loss is simply the sum of the losses of all digit capsules, and defined as shown below. In the training, 
set
=1
cT
if a digit of class c is present and set
0.9
m

, 
0.1
m

and
=0.5

. 



2
2
max(0,
)
(1
)max(0,
)
Classification
c
c
c
c
c
L
T
m
T
m









v
v
                    (4) 
Most importantly, in order to ensure the equivariance of mapping from images to capsule features, the CapsNet adds 
a decoding network on top of the capsule network. The decoding network contains 3 fully connected layers using ReLU 
[35] activation function in the first two layer and sigmoid activation function in the output layer. The reconstruction can 
be accomplished with the corresponding capsule features. The full valuable diverse information for image reconstruction 
is preserved in the capsule features by minimizing the mean squared error (MSE) between the reconstructed image and 
the input image.  
So, the overall loss 
overall
L
is the classification loss plus the weighted decoding loss. The classification loss is to 
force the high-level capsules distinct in the length for different digits. The reconstruction loss is to force the network to 
preserve all the information required to reconstruct the image throughout the CapsNet, and acts a bit like a regularization.  
( ,
(
))
overall
classification
decoding
k
L
L
MSE I FC



v
                            (5) 
In the experiment, the Adam optimizing [36] was used to avoid overfitting and fasten the training. It is noted that
was set 4.0, batch size 10. We finished the training after about 20 epoch based on the MNIST dataset [34] using Tensorflow 
[37]. 
 
2.5 Training the mapping from the fMRI data to capsule features 
After finishing the training of the CapsNet, we obtained the architecture of feature representation for equivariance 
instead of invariance. Given one image stimulus, we can predict its high-level capsules’ features and also can reconstruct 
the image using the longest 16D capsule features. In order to realize the reconstruction of image stimuli from fMRI data, 
we need to map the fMRI data to capsule features. However, the fMRI data is usually limited because of the acquiring 
device, subjects, time and other reasons, and the dataset used in this study only contain 100-pair digits and corresponding 
fMRI data in total. In addition to the problem about the data, the dimensionality of the fMRI data reaches 3092, a very 
high number compared to the number of the samples. 
Faced with the problem of high dimensionality, we chose to use those voxels that are maximally correlated with the 
image stimuli and the correlation is measured by the effect of fitting namely encoding performance. So, we firstly 
employed the simple linear regression to fit each voxel with the capsule features instead of images, because the capsule 
features are the equivariance of image representation, contain all valuable information and have the shorter dimensionality. 
In detailed, as shown in the Figure 3, given one image, we can predict its 10 high-level capsules, and selected the longest 
capsule, then employed the 16D vector and the corresponding 3092D fMRI vector as a training sample. In this way, we 
can make up 90 training samples and employ linear regression to fit each voxel. In order to measure the encoding 
performance of each fMRI voxel, the goodness-of-fit between model predictions and measured voxel activities was 
quantified using the coefficient of determination (R2), which indicates the percentage of variance that is explained by the 
model. Finally we selected those voxels whose R2 is at the top 100, and reduced the dimensionality of fMRI data. 

 
Fig. 3 The architecture from the fMRI data to capsule features. The three fully connected layers are employed to predict 
‘pale yellow’ capsule and ‘deep yellow’ capsule that represent digit class 6 and 9 respectively. The ‘cyan’ vector represents 
the dimension-decreasing fMRI data based on the encoding performance that evaluated by the linear regression of high-
level capsule features. The previous trained CapsNet is used to make up training samples (pairs of two capsule features 
and dimension-decreasing fMRI data) to train the mapping from the fMRI data to capsule features. 
 
Next, we designed the network that maps fMRI data to the two capsules of digits 6 and 9. Our network is composed 
of three fully connected layer using ReLU activation function in the first two layer and no activation function in the last 
layer. It should be noted that we try to add the number of layers, but find no benefit in the experiment. The first layer’s 
dimensionality is 256, the second 128, and the last 32. We add the L2 regularization operations in the first two layers to 
prevent the network from overfitting because the number of training samples is too limited to be easily overfitting. The 
last layers are split into two 16D vectors in the middle and employed squashing function to resize each length between 0 
and 1. Each pair of sample include one input image and one fMRI vector, we first employed trained CapsNet to predict 
the capsules in response to each input image. The capsules of digits 6 and 9 serve as the ground truth to train the mapping 
from the 100D fMRI data to it. We employed the mean square error (MSE) to perform gradient descent to update the 
weight parameters. It should be noted that the weights in the CapsNet is fixed when training the three layers’ network.  
Similarly, we employed the Adam optimizing method to perform the training. The batch size is set 10, initial learning 
rate is set 0.0001. The learning curve of the training was shown in the figure below. We finished the training after about 
10000 iterations using Tensorflow [37]. From the figure below, we can see that our network behaves well on the 90 
training samples and do not suffer from the overfitting because of the regularization and voxels selecting operations. So 
far, we accomplished the mapping from the fMRI data to capsule features. 
 
 (a) The MSE on training samples                       (b) The MSE on testing samples 
Fig. 4 The learning curves during training. The mapping from the fMRI data to the capsule features is important for the 
next reconstruction. The MSE on testing samples is close to that on the training samples, which indicates that our proposed 

CNAVR method avoided the overfitting, because of the dimension-decreasing operations and the capsules including the 
feature information of equivariance. The performance will get improved when obtaining more fMRI data. 
 
2.6 Reconstructing image stimuli from human fMRI 
After the two-stage training above, we accomplished the equivariance between the images and capsule features, and 
the mapping from the fMRI data to capsule features. We can reconstruct the image stimuli using fMRI data. As show in 
the Figure 5, given one fMRI vector, we firstly selected the valuable voxels and predicted its capsule features about the 
digits 6 and 9 based on the trained three layer’ network, secondly we take out the longer capsule, finally we can accomplish 
the accurate reconstruction by the mapping from capsule features to images in the trained CapsNet. 
 
Fig. 5 The flow of visual reconstruction. The former half part trained at the second training stage is responsible for the 
mapping from dimension-decreasing fMRI data to the two high-level capsules’ features, the latter part trained at the first 
stage is responsible for the reconstruction based on the longer capsule. In this way, the high-level capsule features are 
used to bridge between the fMRI data and image stimuli. 
 
3 Results 
 
3.1 The encoding performance 
The dimensionality (3092) of the fMRI data is too big to train the mapping from fMRI data to capsule features using 
limited number (90) of samples, so we selected some valuable voxels according to coefficient of determination R2 
reflecting the performance of fitting on training set. As shown in the figure below, we employed the 10-fold cross 
validation to test our encoding performance for each voxel. We can see that mean correlation coefficient of top-100 voxels 
reached 0.86 and top-700 voxels exceed more than 0.65. The performance indicated that the capsule features make for 
better encoding although using the simplest linear regression, which proved the advantage of equivariance of CapsNet 
when feature representation, In addition, we found that we nearly selected the most of those top voxels using R2, and the 
selected voxels reached nearly about 85% of top-k voxels in terms of mean correlation coefficient. The comparison 
demonstrated that selecting voxels by R2 is a good choice and ensure the performance of the next visual reconstruction. 
 
Fig. 6 The encoding performance according to different methods of selecting. The X-axis represents the number of voxels 

selected from 3092 voxels. The Y-axis represents the mean correlation coefficient of prediction on testing set for selected 
voxels by 10-fold cross validation. We can see that employing capsule features can achieve good encoding performance, 
which indicate that capsules including diverse features such as semantic class, orientation, location, and so on.  
 
3.2 The results of reconstruction 
We employed several standard image similarity metrics, including Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC), mean 
squared error (MSE) and structural similarity index (SSIM) [38]. Note that MSE and PCC is not highly indicative of 
similarity, and serves as the auxiliary metrics, while SSIM was proposed to measure structural similarity, can address this 
shortcoming by taking texture into account and has strong persuasion. 
Firstly, we presented the reconstruction results of 12 distinct handwritten digits including the equal number of digits 
6 and 9. In order to present the results clearly, we gave the image stimuli, the theoretical reconstruction based on the 
capsule features of image stimuli, and the visual reconstruction based on the fMRI data. It should be noted that the 
theoretical reconstruction is obtained based on capsule features using image stimuli throughout CapsNet, and the visual 
reconstruction are obtained based on predicted capsule features using fMRI data. The theoretical reconstruction 
demonstrates the theoretical upper limit of our CNAVR method. 
From the figure below, we can see that the theoretical reconstruction is perfect and much close to the image stimuli, 
because the capsule’s feature guarantees no missing information when feature representation through trained CapsNet, 
which proved the equivariance. In addition, our visual reconstruction results are also much similar with the image stimuli, 
which prove the effective of the proposed CNAVR method. In detailed, we give corresponding quantitative evaluation for 
each reconstruction in table 1. It cannot be denied that some image reconstruction is not good, as shown in the last column 
in the figure. We analyzed that the second stage of mapping based on the limited samples remained improvement based 
on limited fMRI data, and the reconstruction part in the CapsNet is sensitive to the input capsule, and the reconstruction 
results will change when the capsule features are slightly perturbed. In addition, we can see that these image stimuli 
indeed do not belong to the common digits. He or she may recall corresponding common pattern if a common subject 
suddenly looks at the strange kind of image stimuli, which may be an interesting question. 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
original 
image 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theoretical 
reconstruction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visual 
reconstruction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) The reconstruction of handwritten digit 6 
 
 
 

 
G 
H 
I 
J 
K 
L 
original 
image 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theoretical 
reconstruction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visual 
reconstruction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) The reconstruction of handwritten digit 9 
Fig. 7 Reconstruction results of the proposed CNAVR method. The presented reconstruction includes five high-quality 
and one low-quality results for (a) and (b). Except for the last column, the reconstruction gets close to the original image 
stimuli, from the view of orientation, scale, location, and so on. The last column represents the small number of low-
quality reconstruction, and the most of low-quality reconstruction belong to the strange image stimuli, which needs further 
specific improvement. 
 
Table 1 The corresponding quantitative evaluation for each presented reconstruction in Figure 6. 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
MSE 
0.023 
0.021 
0.029 
0.037 
0.048 
0.090 
PCC 
0.934 
0.917 
0.833 
0.832 
0.774 
0.521 
SSIM 
0.906 
0.885 
0.826 
0.826 
0.772 
0.516 
 
G 
H 
I 
J 
K 
L 
MSE 
0.014 
0.013 
0.022 
0.026 
0.024 
0.115 
PCC 
0.912 
0.900 
0.890 
0.873 
0.869 
0.460 
SSIM 
0.901 
0.898 
0.888 
0.867 
0.866 
0.459 
 
Next, we presented the quantitative results based on 10-fold cross validate compared to the several state of the art 
methods. As shown in the table 2 below, although the PCC and MSE of our proposed CNAVR method is a little weaker 
than the current best DGMM [23] and De-CNN [25], the CNAVR exceeds about 10% than them on the most important 
SSIM metric. We analyzed that the methods should not be crazy about the much high MSE and PCC, because the complex 
noise in the fMRI data and limited samples reduce the significance of pixel-level comparison. Moreover, human do not 
care much detailed information in pixel-level and care much of structure according to attention mechanism. So, the two 
metric just serve as the auxiliary measure, and our proposed methods performed better overall. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 2 The quantitative comparison to other state of the art methods. 
Algorithms 
MSE 
PCC 
SSIM 
Miyawaki et al. [12] 
0.042 
0.767  
0.466 
Fujiwara et al. [17] 
0.119 
0.411 
0.192 
Wang et al. [19] 
0.074 
0.548 
0.358 
Wen et al. [23] 
0.038 
0.799 
0.613 
Du et al. [25] 
0.037 
0.803  
0.645 
Our CNAVR 
0.042 
0.769 
0.750 
 
4 Discussion 
The significance of the introduced new CapsNet architecture. In a regular CNN, there are general several pooling 
layers. Unfortunately, these subsampling layers tend to lose information for invariance, such as the precise location and 
pose of the objects. It’s really not a big deal if you want to classify the whole image, but it makes it challenging to perform 
accurate image segmentation, object detection and other tasks which require precise location and pose. Visual 
reconstruction is exactly the problem that needs to rely on complete characteristic information, which requires the 
equivariance instead of invariance when feature representation. The CapsNet architecture can be exactly fit for the 
problem, which benefits from the perception of capsule, dynamic routing and reconstruction regularization loss. In 
addition, it is obvious that human can simultaneously accomplish many different tasks such as image recognition, image 
object location, and object pose detection after looking at one image only once. Different tasks always need different 
characteristics of image and it can conclude that visual information processing in human visual cortex also requires the 
equivariance. The equivariance ensures that the location, scale, pose and some other detailed information be preserved 
instead of discarding. The similarity demonstrated that the new CapsNet architecture accords well with the human visual 
mechanism. Other architecture such as prevailing CNN does not have the equivariance, because they aimed at invariance, 
abstracting and continues hierarchical abstracting in the process of forward propagation. Our results about encoding 
during selecting voxels and reconstruction based on the fMRI data both proved the significance of the new CapsNet 
architecture, which is very promising for visual reconstruction including more complex natural image reconstruction. 
The importance of selecting voxels. As we know, selecting too many voxels will inevitably introduce more noise 
and not selecting enough voxels will miss some necessary information, which can both influence the quality of visual 
reconstruction. So, selecting voxels is an important procedure and challenging problem in visual reconstruction. On one 
hand, from the mean correlation coefficient of encoding based on top-k and R2 selection, we can find that the means of 
R2 nearly selected the most of top-k voxels. The second-stage training avoid the overfitting and the 10% higher on SSIM 
is partly attributed to the performance of selecting voxels, which indirectly indicate the importance of selecting voxels. 
On the other hand, we employed the much simple linear regression for the encoding to select voxels, and the distance 
between the theoretical reconstruction and visual reconstruction still remain wide, which indicates that we need to select 
better voxels to optimize the mapping from the fMRI data to capsule features. How to select the more of top-k voxels and 
employing nonlinear encoding may be some next choices. 
Two-stage training methods. We realized the reconstruction with the two-stage training by introducing the new 
CapsNet architecture that provides the equivariance. We tried to add the third stage of fine tuning that optimize the overall 
network include the CapsNet and the mapping from fMRI data to capsule features, however, the results did not have the 
prospective effects. We think that the limited training samples (less than 100) are not suitable for the jointly training. 
However, the jointly training or end-to-end training is indeed a good direction from the development of computer vision, 
and the end-to-end training for visual reconstruction based on the CapsNet and more samples may attract more attention 
in the future. 
Promising reconstruction for complex image stimuli. We only tested our proposed methods on the public dataset 
of digits 6 and 9. However, our proposed methods aimed at the reconstruction of digits from 0 to 9. In this study, we 
mainly aims at how to firstly introduce the new architecture to accomplish visual reconstruction. In addition, the CapsNet 

is promising for the reconstruction of more complex image stimuli, a more challengeable problem. The reconstruction of 
more complex image stimuli requires equivariance more, because more complex image stimuli have more complex 
characteristics and pattern. The next key procedure is to solve the problem of how to better measure the reconstruction 
results than the MSE error, in order to regularize the CapsNet to preserve the equivariance.  
 
5 Conclusion 
This paper firstly introduced the new CapsNet architecture for the visual reconstruction, inspired by the equivariance 
of information processing in human visual cortex. We proposed CNAVR method that provide the equivariance when 
feature representation. Selecting voxels to reduce the dimensionality of fMRI data and learning the mapping from fMRI 
data to the capsule feature space are the two key stages in visual reconstruction. We firstly employed the capsule features 
to estimate the serviceability of each voxel to accomplish the selecting of voxels, secondly we learned the mapping using 
very few samples. Based on the capsule features, the quality of the two key stages are guaranteed. By qualitative and 
quantitative results and comparison to the state of the art methods, the CNAVR achieved overwhelming superiority and 
exceeded by about 10% than the state of the art in the most important SSIM metric. These results demonstrated that our 
proposed architecture better accords well with the human visual cortex. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the 
first to study visual image reconstruction via promising capsule network, which easily lead to recall the breakthrough in 
the ImageNet classification 2012 [29] competition (the land mark of deep leaning era) by introducing CNN that created 
about 10% higher classification accuracy compared to traditional methods. Next, in order to achieve better visual 
reconstruction especially for complex images or videos, the exploration of CapsNet may spring up. There is no doubt that 
it’s still a start, but a promising start. 
 
6 Conflict of Interest 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 
7 Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under grant 2017YFB1002502 and National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61701089, No.61601518 and No. 61372172). 
 
8 Reference 
[1] Cox D D, Savoy R L. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)“brain reading”: detecting and classifying 
distributed patterns of fMRI activity in human visual cortex[J]. Neuroimage, 2003, 19(2): 261-270. 
[2] Haynes J D, Rees G. Decoding mental states from brain activity in humans[J]. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2006, 
7(7): 523-534. 
[3] Norman K A, Polyn S M, Detre G J, et al. Beyond mind-reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data[J]. Trends 
in cognitive sciences, 2006, 10(9): 424-430. 
[4] Kay K N, Naselaris T, Prenger R J, et al. Identifying natural images from human brain activity[J]. Nature, 2008, 
452(7185): 352-355. 
[5] Kamitani Y, Tong F. Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain[J]. Nature neuroscience, 2005, 
8(5): 679-685. 
[6] Haynes J D, Rees G. Predicting the orientation of invisible stimuli from activity in human primary visual cortex[J]. 
Nature neuroscience, 2005, 8(5): 686-691. 
[7] Naselaris T, Kay K N, Nishimoto S, et al. Encoding and decoding in fMRI[J]. Neuroimage, 2011, 56(2): 400-410. 
[8] Damarla S R, Just M A. Decoding the representation of numerical values from brain activation patterns[J]. Human 
brain mapping, 2013, 34(10): 2624-2634. 
[9] Mokhtari F, Hossein-Zadeh G A. Decoding brain states using backward edge elimination and graph kernels in fMRI 
connectivity networks[J]. Journal of neuroscience methods, 2013, 212(2): 259-268. 

[10] Naselaris T, Prenger R J, Kay K N, et al. Bayesian reconstruction of natural images from human brain activity[J]. 
Neuron, 2009, 63(6): 902-915. 
[11] Thirion B, Duchesnay E, Hubbard E, et al. Inverse retinotopy: inferring the visual content of images from brain 
activation patterns[J]. Neuroimage, 2006, 33(4): 1104-1116.  
[12] Miyawaki Y, Uchida H, Yamashita O, et al. Visual image reconstruction from human brain activity using a 
combination of multiscale local image decoders[J]. Neuron, 2008, 60(5): 915-929. 
[13] van Gerven M A J, de Lange F P, Heskes T. Neural decoding with hierarchical generative models[J]. Neural 
computation, 2010, 22(12): 3127-3142. 
[14] Hinton G E, Salakhutdinov R R. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks[J]. science, 2006, 
313(5786): 504-507. 
[15] Schoenmakers S, Barth M, Heskes T, et al. Linear reconstruction of perceived images from human brain activity[J]. 
NeuroImage, 2013, 83: 951-961. 
[16] Hossein-Zadeh G A. Reconstruction of digit images from human brain fMRI activity through connectivity informed 
Bayesian networks[J]. Journal of neuroscience methods, 2016, 257: 159-167. 
[17] Fujiwara Y, Miyawaki Y, Kamitani Y. Modular encoding and decoding models derived from Bayesian canonical 
correlation analysis[J]. Neural computation, 2013, 25(4): 979-1005. 
[18] Hardoon D R, Szedmak S, Shawe-Taylor J. Canonical correlation analysis: An overview with application to learning 
methods[J]. Neural computation, 2004, 16(12): 2639-2664. 
[19] Wang W, Arora R, Livescu K, et al. On deep multi-view representation learning[C]//Proceedings of the 32nd 
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-15). 2015: 1083-1092. 
[20] Yamins D L, Hong H, Cadieu C, et al. Hierarchical modular optimization of convolutional networks achieves 
representations similar to macaque IT and human ventral stream[C]//Advances in neural information processing systems. 
2013: 3093-3101. 
[21] Yamins D L K, Hong H, Cadieu C F, et al. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in 
higher visual cortex[J]. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111(23): 8619-8624. 
[22] Kriegeskorte N. Deep neural networks: a new framework for modeling biological vision and brain information 
processing[J]. Annual Review of Vision Science, 2015, 1: 417-446. 
[23] Wen H, Shi J, Zhang Y, et al. Neural Encoding and Decoding with Deep Learning for Dynamic Natural Vision[J]. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03425, 2016. 
[24] Zeiler M D, Taylor G W, Fergus R. Adaptive deconvolutional networks for mid and high level feature 
learning[C]//Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011: 2018-2025. 
[25] Du C, Du C, He H. Sharing deep generative representation for perceived image reconstruction from human brain 
activity[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07575, 2017. 
[26] Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition[J]. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. 
[27] He K, Zhang X, Ren S, et al. Deep residual learning for image recognition[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE conference 
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016: 770-778. 
[28] Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, et al. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database[C]//Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2009: 248-255. 
[29] Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton G E. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural 
networks[C]//Advances in neural information processing systems. 2012: 1097-1105. 
[30] Girshick R, Donahue J, Darrell T, et al. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic 
segmentation[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2014: 580-587. 
[31] Long J, Shelhamer E, Darrell T. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation[C]//Proceedings of the 
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2015: 3431-3440. 
[32] Sabour S, Frosst N, Hinton G E. Dynamic Routing Between Capsules[C]//Advances in Neural Information 

Processing Systems. 2017: 3857-3867. 
[33] Buxhoeveden D P, Casanova M F. The minicolumn hypothesis in neuroscience[J]. Brain, 2002, 125(5): 935-951. 
[34] LeCun Y. The MNIST database of handwritten digits[J]. http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 1998. 
[35] Szegedy C, Ioffe S, Vanhoucke V, et al. Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on 
Learning[C]//AAAI. 2017: 4278-4284. 
[36] Kingma D, Ba J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. 
[37] Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P, et al. Tensorflow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed 
systems[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, 2016. 
[38] Wang Z, Bovik A C, Sheikh H R, et al. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity[J]. 
IEEE transactions on image processing, 2004, 13(4): 600-612.
