Synthetic Embedding-based Data Generation
Methods for Student Performance
Dom Huh
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
George Mason University, Virginia, USA

Abstract
Given the inherent class imbalance issue within student performance datasets,
samples belonging to the edges of the target class distribution pose a challenge
for predictive machine learning algorithms to learn. In this paper, we introduce
a general framework for synthetic embedding-based data generation (SEDG), a
search-based approach to generate new synthetic samples using embeddings to
correct the detriment effects of class imbalances optimally. We compare the SEDG
framework to past synthetic data generation methods, including deep generative
models, and traditional sampling methods. In our results, we ﬁnd SEDG to outper-
form the traditional re-sampling methods for deep neural networks and perform
competitively for common machine learning classiﬁers on the student performance
task in several standard performance metrics.
1
Introduction
In the educational domain, student performance tasks involve designing a classiﬁer to predict the
performance of a student given a set of features. These datasets, however, are often skewed centrally
to the mean as a relative, more commonly known as bell-curve, grading scale is often employed.
Consequently, the limited number of examples belonging to outlier students, speciﬁcally those
demonstrating extreme success and failure, do not sufﬁciently represent minority classes, as opposed
to the overwhelming number of average performing students’ examples that represent to the majority
classes. This evident disproportion results in machine learning algorithms failing to understand and
learn how to classify the minority classes, which was supported in [12]. This issue we are describing
is known in the machine learning community as class imbalances. Class imbalances are recognized
when working with an imbalanced dataset, that exhibits a notable disparity in the number of examples
amongst different classes, and often can disproportionately harm the classiﬁer’s performance on the
minority classes. As [16] discusses, these datasets describe a nature of the problem, which correlates
heavily with rare events, small sample size, low class separability, and/or existence of within-class
subconcepts. For student performance datasets, we ﬁnd all to be the case, and even so, gaining insight
into the outlier students is signiﬁcant for the educators as it may point to indicators of failure and
success.
Commonly for class imbalance tasks, the nature of the dataset results in a relatively high predictive
accuracy for the majority classes and signiﬁcantly lower in the minority classes. If classiﬁcation
accuracy was used to evaluate the model’s efﬁciency, we would obtain an overly optimistic belief
in the classiﬁer. Thus, often for such datasets [11], we consider using Area under Curve (AUC) on
the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve, a graph used to show the trade-off between true
positive and false positive error, as the performance metric for the classiﬁer. The ROC space requires
the true positive rate (TPR), or more commonly known as the sensitivity, and the false positive rate
(FPR), or more commonly known as fall-out. We can calculate the values for TPR and FPR, seen in
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2101.00728v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2021

Figure 1: Confusion Matrix: A contingency table between true class and predicted class in a binary
class setting.
Figure 2: ROC curve: Above shows a graph in ROC space. The dotted line denotes the ROC curve if
the classiﬁcation is randomly estimated. The solid line denotes the ROC curve if the classiﬁcation is
more accurately estimated. The AUC would be the area under the ROC curves.
Equation 1, from the components in confusion matrix, a table containing the values of true and false
positives and negatives, seen in Figure 1.
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(1)
Then, we obtain the ROC curve to calculate the AUC score, seen in Figure 2. For multi-class settings,
we can use an one-vs-rest paradigm, and either obtain the AUC scores at the class level, or aggregate
with or without class weighing to obtain a micro-AUC or macro-AUC score respectively. When we
view at a class level, we call this class-AUC score.
Generally, as deﬁned in [16], there exists three common approaches to alleviate the effects of class
imbalances: data modiﬁcation, algorithm modiﬁcations, learning modiﬁcation. As the name suggests,
each approach modiﬁes different aspects of the learning system to counter class imbalances. In this
paper, we will focus on data modiﬁcation approaches, or more speciﬁcally sampling methods.
We consider two classes of sampling methods: oversampling and under-sampling. Oversampling
methods append samples to the pre-existing training set, whereas under-sampling methods remove
samples from the training set. Both approaches aim to balance the number of samples, given
some criteria, in the training set. More generally, sampling methods must consider two important
components. Firstly, the imbalanced criteria that is targeted must be deﬁned. For imbalanced dataset,
for example, the criteria may be the number of samples in the class. Secondly, the method of
creating the balance must then be deﬁned, such as randomly re-sampling or randomly removing
samples. Variations of these two components have been explored in the past works [17]. In particular,
a promising oversampling approach that has improved handling of imbalanced datasets has been
generating new synthetic samples from pre-existing samples from the training dataset, and this
method is known as Synthetic Data Generation (SDG). In [2], the authors introduced the prevalently
used Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE), which generates new samples by
modifying a pre-existing sample by adding the scaled (0-1) difference between feature vectors of its
2

Figure 3: Target Value Distribution: From the student performance dataset, the imbalance in the
distribution of target values skews centrally, indicating a disproportionate number of examples
between the central classes and the outer classes.
nearest neighbors, with the addition of noise. Furthermore, [7,8] proposed variants of SMOTE, called
DataBoost-IM and ADASYN respectively, changing the sampling criteria to be based on predictive
error.
Recently, deep learning methods have exhibited advances in robustness [10,14] and efﬁcacy, speciﬁ-
cally to end-to-end training approaches [18], for SDG methods. In speciﬁc, deep generative models
(DGMs), such as generative adversarial models, have been previously introduced to tackle class
imbalances [10,14].
In this paper, we introduce a framework for embedding-based SDG methods, called SEDG, to handle
effects of class imbalances on student performance tasks. The student performance dataset and the
set of classiﬁers used will be described in Section 2. Further details of SEDG framework and deep
generative models will be discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, the results are presented and evaluated.
2
Preliminaries
In this section, we will discuss the details of the Student Performance Dataset from [5] and the
classiﬁers used to test the SEDG framework introduced in this paper. The training methods and
implementation decisions will also be described.
2.1
Student Performance Dataset
The dataset provided by [5], can be used to predict student performance, or the ﬁnal grade, on a
scale from 0 to 20. The data was collected from two Portuguese secondary level schools, and has
649 samples of 32 features. In 3, we show the class imbalance in the dataset, skewed centrally as
mentioned in Section 1. In 4, we show the distribution of features in the dataset, where some features,
such as parent’s cohabitation status, extra paid classes, and extra educational school support, also
demonstrated to be imbalanced. Further information on the meaning of these features to can be
found in [5]. We will not opt to use the binary or ﬁve-level classiﬁcation found in other works on
this dataset, but will classify all 20 classes. For future works, we ﬁnd a three-level classiﬁcation, or
binary classiﬁcation between the outlier samples, which exists on the edges of the target values, and
the average samples to be more appropriate simpliﬁcation.
2.2
Classiﬁers
We will use three traditional machine learning classiﬁers (support vector machines, random forest,
gradient-boosted decision trees/XGBoost) and an neural network architecture which we will denote
as NNModel.
3

Figure 4: Feature Distribution: From the student performance dataset, we can see an imbalance in
some of the distribution of feature values.
Support vector machines (SVM) [9] are optimal-margin classiﬁers that seek to ﬁnd the hyper-plane
that maximize the geometric margins between binary classes. In a multi-class setting, we can proceed
by using an one-vs-rest approach, where the maximum score from n SVMs, where each SVM is
trained on masking all but one class to formulate a binary setting, is selected, or an one-vs-one
approach, where similar to one-vs rest, we formulate a binary setting, but with pairs of classes instead.
Decision trees [13] are tree-based classiﬁer that create binary splits based on a condition on the
features that maximizes information gain, a metric of weighted entropy. Random forest [3] is
a bootstrap aggregation, or bagging, algorithm using decision trees, where n learners learn on
bootstrapped subsets of the dataset and are also limited to a subset of features it can split on. Thus,
inference of random forest is run on majority vote of the learners. XGBoost [4] is a gradient boosting
algorithm using decision trees, where learners are introduced to additively correct errors of trained
learners. Gradient boosting refers to correcting the errors through gradient learning when adding new
learners [6].
For our experiments, the neural network architecture we call NNModel is a multi-layer perceptron
model that is sequentially made up of N LRND blocks, seen in Figure 5. The LRND block is
composed of a linear layer, rectiﬁed linear activation, batch normalization, and followed by a dropout
layer. This model is used for classiﬁcation, and its parameters are optimized using gradient learning
4

Figure 5: NNModel Block Diagram: In the diagram, the input is composed of k features. The input
data is ﬁrst mapped into embeddings, then passed into the processing component, which has N LRND
blocks, denoted as the dotted block. To obtain the ﬁnal prediction for a multi-class classiﬁcation, the
output is transformed using a softmax activation.
on cross entropy loss, seen in Equation 2, where p is the true, target function and q is the hypothesis
function, and an Adam optimizer scheduled to reduce and anneal the learning rate on plateaus by an
order magnitude.
L(p, q) = −1
N
X
∀x
p(x) log(q(x)), |x| = N
(2)
3
Synthetic Embedding-based Data Generation
In this section, we will discuss the embedding-based method for SDG that will be evaluated in
Section 4. We will formalize the generalized SDG method step by step, dividing the discussion into 4
chronological parts: sample selection, feature selection, feature modiﬁcation and synthetic sample
usage. In each step, we offer various design considerations. We will then write on deep generative
models in the context of SDG.
3.1
Sample Selection
We must ﬁrst consider how to select the samples from the original dataset to base the synthetic
samples on, and also, how many samples we want to select. The latter consideration of the number
of samples can be ﬁxed or stochastically chosen within a deﬁned range. we will call the former
consideration sample selection henceforth.
Naively, we can randomly select k samples from the entire dataset D, all with equal probability. Once
the samples are selected, we place them into a sample pool, S, that will be used to generate the new
synthetic samples. This approach will be referred to as random sample selection (RSS).
A more systematic approach is to partition the dataset D in a targeted manner and select a member Mi
of the partition P = {M0, M1...} to sample from. The member selection can occur at a probability
p, or deterministically, which can then be stochastically sample from, with or without replacement.
More concretely, suppose we want k samples and given we are working with imbalanced datasets, we
can choose the partition P to be divided based on the classes. We set each member of the partition
Mi ∈P to be associated to a probability pi proportional to their cardinality pi ∝|Mi|, which
represent how likely the member will be selected. Thus, there exists a surjective mapping from
the partitionP = {M0, M1...Mn} to the probability distribution ¯p = {p0, p1...pm}. A special case
would be to deterministically select the member Mi based on the cardinality, where |Mi| ≥|Mj| for
all j ∈[0, n]. Once a member Mi is selected, we sample m examples from the set, where m ≤k.
The value of m, similar to k, can be ﬁxed or randomly chosen within a deﬁned range. The m samples
are stochastically selected from M by performing RSS on the subset of D, we add this to our sample
pool S. We repeat our selection of a new member in the partition, with or without replacement, where
at the end of the process, we get |S| = k. This approach will be referred to as partition-based sample
selection (PaSS). We note that this approach is dependent solely on the dataset, and remains entirely
independent on the classiﬁer.
Another approach for sample selection consists of selecting samples based on the classiﬁer’s perfor-
mance, similar to concept of boosting. Speciﬁcally, we can associate higher selection likelihoods for
samples the learner has the largest margin for error, or uncertainty. In this context, we can consider
5

classiﬁcation accuracy to quantify error and uncertainty. Thus, we can place the highest probability
of selection to the samples that were misclassiﬁed, and rank the correctly classiﬁed samples based
on the classiﬁer’s certainty of the prediction. So, given a classiﬁer C and an loss function L(C, s),
where s ∈S is a sample belonging to the training set S, we let the selection probability pi for xi
to be greater than the selection probability pj for xj if and only if L(C, xi) > L(C, xj). The loss
function returns a scalar value that represents the correlation between the target and prediction values.
This approach will be referred to as performance-based sample selection (PeSS). We note that this
approach, in contrast to PaSS, is dependent on the classiﬁer, thus also requires trained model for its
operation. Consequently, PeSS is more computationally costly to use.
We now can formulate a selection method that incorporates from both PaSS and PeSS approaches by
using class-AUC score. We can ﬁrst use class partitions described above and the class-AUC score as
our uncertainty metric to develop a selection probability distribution to select the member to sample
from. Thus, we incorporate elements from the PaSS approach by using a class partition to ﬁrst select
a member to sample from, and we incorporate the AUC score from the classiﬁer to develop the
probability associated to member selection. We call this the partition-performance sample selection
approach, which we will refer to as PPSS.
3.2
Feature Selection
We can think of every sample S ∈¯S from the dataset D, where ¯S ⊆D, at a more granular level, to
be made up of features. Or in other words, a sample S = {f0, f1, f2...} can be deﬁned to be a set
of features. After sample selection, we can modify the selected samples to generate new samples.
Thus, given some mapping φ from S to S′ where φ : {f0, f1, f2...} →{f
′
0, f
′
1, f
′
2...} would provide
us new samples S
′, where S
′ ̸= S. But in order to modify these features, we now must consider
how to select which features to modify efﬁciently as to appropriately increase variance in the dataset
without creating class overlaps. But, to modify the samples, we must ﬁrst select the features of the
sample that we wish to adjust. We will discuss three approaches to select features: random selection,
feature imbalance, and feature importance approach. We can group the feature imbalance and feature
importance together, and label this weighted feature selection. In all, we will call this procedure
feature selection henceforth.
The random selection approach, similar to RSS, stochastically selects a subset of feature ¯f ⊆S =
{f0, f1, f2...}, where | ¯f| ≤|S| = n, with all features with equal probability. The number of feature
selected k = | ¯f| can be ﬁxed or randomly chosen per sample.
The feature imbalance approach is to select the feature based on feature value imbalances, as seen in
Figure 4. We can quantify the imbalances by using the following method, which differs from past
works [16]. We ﬁrst create x = {x0, x1...}, where |x| is the number of features, by counting the
number of examples that contains each unique value, resulting in a set of counts {c0, c1...}, for each
feature. Then, for each xi ∈x, we ﬁnd the clusters for xi using k-means, with k = 2, to obtain the
ratio ri between the difference between the two centroids, and the maximum count in xi. In the end,
we obtain a vector of ratios R = {r0, r1...}, where |R| = |x|, which we can ﬁrst normalize to treat
as a probability distribution to select subsets of features. This approach is largely motivated to place
higher emphasis on more imbalanced features, and thus attempting to balance all features’ value
representation.
The feature importance approach creates a probability distribution ¯p based on feature importance,
which will be used to select the features. Feature importance provides insight into the relationship
between the predictive system and the data, and how much signiﬁcance each feature in the data may
have on the overall system’s performance at the given task at hand. We will consider three approaches
to calculate and obtain the feature importance: mean decrease impurity importance, permutation
importance, drop-column importance.
3.2.1
Feature Importance
Mean decrease, or gini impurity, importance methods rely on the use of tree-based classiﬁers, and is
calculated by aggregating the gini decreases of each feature, which is criteria used to determine the
splits, at every tree. However, [15] has shown gini impurity importance approach is biased given the
scale of measurement or number of categories of the features. This approach can only be used for
tree-based classiﬁers, thus will only be consider such models.
6

Figure 6: Selection distribution from weighted feature selection methods for classiﬁers.
7

Permutation importance methods, on the other hand, calculate the feature importance by evaluating
the decrease in performance of a trained model on a test set that is shufﬂed on at the single feature
value of interest. The shufﬂing process can be repeated to test multiple permutations of the feature
values. Thus, permutation importance only requires the model to be trained once, but also needs to
use the testing dataset. Also, this approach can be used for any models.
Similarly, drop-column importance methods obtain the feature importance using the difference
between the baseline performance of a model, which would trained on the entire dataset, and the
performance of the model that has been trained on a limited dataset with a single feature value
dropped. Thus, drop-column importance can also be used for any model. However, we see that
drop-column importance is very computationally costly, proportionally to the number of features in
the dataset.
3.3
Feature Modiﬁcation
We must now consider how to modify the selected features optimally, a procedure we will call feature
modiﬁcation henceforth. We deﬁne optimality as maximizing the variance between the synthetic
samples from original samples and minimizing the class overlap in the new dataset. Our aim is
to maximize the improvements in the minority classes, since that is the deﬁcient area. To modify
the features, we can naively inject noise to the continuous features and replace discrete features
with sampling, but we wish to formulate a more targeted approach. In this paper, we will focus
on embedding-based modiﬁcations, a search-based method where we will leverage some learned
embeddings to offer insights in how to optimally modify the features.
Embeddings are mappings from the feature domain to a domain that can be more useful and under-
standable for the classiﬁer to perform the task at hand. In other words, we can think of embeddings as
optimized data pre-processing transforms. We consider two methods of embedding generation: clas-
siﬁcation transfer learning and auto-encoding. However, there are many other embedding generation
approaches [1] that have been successfully demonstrated in ﬁeld of representation learning.
3.3.1
Embedding Generation
Classiﬁcation transfer learning refers to learning the embedding mapping φθφ through training an
classiﬁer FθF on the task at hand. We note that both φθφ and FθF are parameters by their own
independent weights θφ and θF . Thus, inference on the model can be seen in Equation 3, where ˆy is
the prediction, and x is the input data.
ˆy = FθF (φθφ(x))
(3)
Thus, the classiﬁer and the embedding mapping are both optimized for the targeted tasks, given some
loss function L. Thus, if gradient learning is used, the weight updates can be seen in Equation 4,
where L is the loss function for classiﬁcation, such as cross entropy, which is seen in Equation 2.
θφ = θφ −∇θφL(y, ˆy)
θF = θF −∇θF L(y, ˆy)
(4)
Once the classiﬁer and embedding mapping are trained, we can export the embedding mapping to be
used for feature modiﬁcation.
Auto-encoders AθA are a type of neural network that learn to compress and decompress the input
data, thus having a bottleneck structure. In other words, let the set of layers l = {l0, l1...ln} be the
layer that make up the autoencoder, and |li| for i ∈(0, n) be the number of parameters in layer li,
then, in our deﬁnition, given 0 ≤a < c ≤n and b ∈(a, c), there must exists Lb such that |lb| < |la|
and |lb| < |lc|, where we will refer to lb as the bottleneck layer. The aim of the autoencoder is to
accurately build a reconstruction of the input given this decompression. Inference on auto-encoders
can be seen in Equation 5, where ˆx is the prediction, and x is the input data. We note that the
dimension of ˆx and x are equal.
ˆx = AθA(φθφ(x))
(5)
8

Auto-encoders are optimized given some loss function L, often referred to as the reconstruction loss,
and the target is the input data x. Typically, the loss function L will compare the input x to the
predicted value ˆx directly, using a function like mean-square error or cross entropy, again seen in
Equation 2. Thus, if gradient learning is used, the weight updates can be seen in Equation 6.
θA = θA −∇θAL(x, ˆx)
(6)
Once the auto-encoder is optimized, we can export a proper subset of layers E = {l0, l1, ...lb}, where
lb is the bottleneck layer, as the embedding mapping.
We will also consider variational auto-encoders (VAE), which follows the same inference and
optimization methods, however, we represent the bottleneck layer lb as a probability distribution,
often a Gaussian N(µ, σ). Thus, the input of layer lb+1 will be samples from the distribution
from lb. The loss function often used is empirical lower bound (ELBO), which combines the
reconstruction loss normally used in auto-encoders and the Kullback–Leibler divergence loss term
KL(PE(z|x), PD(z)), where E is a mapping that uses the layers {l0, l1, ...lb}, D is a mapping that
uses the layers {lb+1, lb+2, ...ln} and z is the latent space representation, or the output of the E. Thus,
z will be considered to be the embedding of the sample.
When we use the auto-encoders are the embedding function, we remark that the models are trained
on the training set independently to the training of the classiﬁer. Thus, for computational efﬁciency,
we can store and reuse embedding models.
For each of the embedding generation approaches, we can use principal component analysis for
dimensionality reduction and further compress the embedding.
Returning back to our discussion on feature modiﬁcation, as mentioned before, a sample S can be
thought of as a set of features ¯fs. These features can either be discrete and continuous. We will
consider both cases, and discuss how we can handle each case separately.
Assuming a set of features ¯fd ⊆S that was selected for modiﬁcation is homogeneously discrete, for
each element fd,i in ¯fd, there exists a set of possible values it can take on yi = {yi,0, yi,1, ...yi,k}. We
can randomly select a subset ci of yi, where |ci| ≤|yi| and if fd,i = yi,m then yi,m ̸∈ci. If the search
space for unique feature values yi is small enough, we can try all possible values for fd,i, however if
it is large, then we could sample a subset as mentioned. Given the embedding mapping φi : yi →Ei,
we calculate the similarity score between φi(fd,i) and φi(yi,j) for all yi,j ∈ci, and replace the
feature value with the one with the highest similarity score. We repeat this process for every feature
in ¯fd. However, given the embedding mapping φ : S →E, where ¯fd ⊆S, we will again follow
the same procedure, however we must compare φ(S) and φ(S′) where S = {f0, f1...fi, ...} and
S′ = {f0, f1...f ′
i, ...} where f ′
i ∈ci. When we repeat this process for each feature in ¯fd, we can
choose to replace S to the updated S′ for the proceeding feature modiﬁcations, or choose not to
replace S.
Assuming a set of features ¯fc ⊆S that was selected for modiﬁcation is homogeneously continuous,
for each element fd,i in ¯fd, we deﬁne a range with a ﬁxed step yi = {yi,0, yi,1, ...yi,k} where
fd,i ∈(yi,0, yi,k) and yi,0 < yi,k. Then, we proceed similarly to the discrete feature case for feature
modiﬁcation.
3.4
Synthetic Sample Usage
Once we obtain the synthetic samples, we now must decide how the samples will be utilized. We
propose two considerations: cold or warm start and iterative or non-iterative,.
Initially, the model learns on the training set Dtrain. Then, the set of synthetic samples Ds,t are
created and added to the training set Dtrain. We can choose to either re-initialize the weights of the
model, which we will call cold-start, or keep the weights from the previous training cycle, which we
will call warm-start. We must now decide whether to repeat the process of creating a new Ds,t+1
from the newly trained model, making the process iterative, or end the training cycle entirely, making
the process non-iterative. If the process is iterative, we can also choose to dropout and replace the
previous Ds,t partially or wholly with Ds,t+1, or append Ds,t+1 to the current Ds,t at each step. The
latter option can quickly become memory intensive.
9

3.5
Deep Generative Models
In this section, we will formalize and discuss deep generative models (DGM) in more depth. Gen-
erative models can either be deﬁned as modeling the conditional probability P(x|y), or the joint
probability P(x, y) or the prior P(x). A DGM is expressed using a deep neural network, param-
eterized by learnable weights θ. Equivalently, DGM are mappings fθ : y →x, fθ : x →x, or
fθ : x, y →x. In context of SDG, DGM can be viewed as an end to end approach to generating
synthetic samples, bypassing the need for Section 3.2, and 3.3. For our purposes, the objective is to
learn how to generate new samples following the deﬁnition of optimality discussed in Section 3.3.
Thus, we can set the input of the DGM to either be random noise, or samples selected using methods
from Section 3.1. A potential issue that is highly problematic is the possibility of the generative
model learning to map the input to itself without any variance, especially for traditional auto-encoders
and given the nature of the optimization. We suggest adding some regularization term to the loss
function to more directly counter the over-ﬁtting problem for future works, however this paper does
and will not propose a proven solution to this issue. In fact, we address this issue by simply preventing
over-ﬁtting with early stopping with heuristics, discussed in further detail in Section 4. Now, we will
discuss two main approaches to training DGMs: unsupervised and adversarial training.
3.5.1
Deep Generative Model Training
Unsupervised training refers to learning the prior P(x), thus in more practical terms, optimizing the
model using only the input x. An example of unsupervised training is training auto-encoders, where
we treat the input as the output as well. Instead of exporting the embedding function, as seen in
Section 3.3.1, we treat the auto-encoder as the generator model fθ : x →ˆx, where ˆx is the synthetic
sample. In this paper, we will solely focus on auto-encoders and VAEs as traditional unsupervised
learning methods for deep generative modeling.
Adversarial training adds onto unsupervised learning with the discriminator model, which learns to
discern real or fake data. At a high level, the generator model attempts to trick the discriminator model
by learning how to generate samples that are realistic. We will consider the traditional approach and
the conditional approach.
The traditional approach is to train the generator and discriminator models separately using unsu-
pervised and supervised learning respectively. The training for the generator model will follow the
procedure discussed in Section 3.3.1, however we aggregate the discriminator’s inaccuracy and the
reconstruction loss, scaled by α and 1 −α respectively, where |α| ≤1, to obtain our generative
model’s loss. The training of the discriminator will optimize normal classiﬁcation between real and
fake data using the dataset and the generator model. We can instead have the discriminator instead
predict on the latent representation,or the embedding, as seen in [18]. For this approach, we will
focus on adversarial auto-encoders and adversarial VAEs.
The conditional approach follows most of what is stated in the traditional approach, however we aim
to have both the generative and discriminative models conditioned on the class label, y. Similar to
practices discussed in [18], we can simply treat y as another input layer, paired with an embedding
layer, and is trained accordingly. For this approach, we will focus on conditional generative adversarial
networks using auto-encoders and VAEs as the generative model.
4
Results
In this section, we will evaluate the methods discussed in Section 3 using the student performance
dataset and classiﬁers described in Section 2. We will compare our results with other balancing
methods from past works, such as random oversampling, random under-sampling, SMOTE, Tomek
Links, extended nearest neighbors, and various combinations methods of these approaches.
We see that if the classiﬁers are trained on the dataset normally, optimizing the cross entropy loss, we
obtain performance seen in Figure 7, which follows our hypothesis of disproportion performance
between minority and majority classes. We seek to mitigate these effects of class imbalances with the
SDG methods we have proposed.
We used the balancing methods aforementioned in Section 1, and we obtained the max % improve-
ments over 50 trials. The results can be seen in Figure 8. However, as we can see, they all provide
10

Figure 7: Percent error distribution on the testing set over all target classes averaged over classiﬁers
from Section 2.2
Figure 8: Max % performance improvement with traditional sampling methods for imbalanced
student performance dataset on the testing set.
a performance boost to the all performance metrics, except for SMOTE+ENN and random under-
sampling, which detriments the classiﬁer’s performance. To avoid under-sampling methods to be
completely useless as there exists minority classes with ≤10 samples, thus under-sampling an
already limited number of samples would lose immense information, we limited the under-sampling
to majority classes..
We now will discuss our results from our experiments using the SEDG and DGM methods mentioned
in Section 3 and using the NNModel and the traditional models mentioned in Section 2.2 as the
classiﬁer. For all of the experiments below, we set the number of synthetic samples that will be
generated to 200 samples. All recorded improvements are on the testing set, which encompasses 40%
of the dataset. We deﬁne % improvement PI in Equation 7, where M(ysyn, ˆysyn) is the score from
some performance metric M from the dataset with the synthetic samples, and M(y, ˆy) is the score
from the performance metric M from the original dataset.
PI = M(ysyn, ˆysyn) −M(y, ˆy)
(7)
4.1
NNModel as Classiﬁer
Now, we consider using the NNModel deﬁned in Section 2.2 as our classiﬁer, and we will test our
embedding-based SDG methods and DGMs on the student performance dataset.
From Figure 9, we show the max improvements over different sampling methods from Section 3.1
over 50 trials. We note that PPSS method, or the AUC approach, demonstrates highest improvements
11

Figure 9: Performance improvement on different metrics over different sample selection methods
discussed in Section 3.1 using NNModel. The graphs above use the following notation: score refers
to predictive accuracy, auc_macro refers to macro-AUC score, and auc_class refers to AUC score per
class.
Figure 10: Performance improvement on different metrics over different generation methods discussed
in Section 3.5 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9. In this graph,
gen_ae represents generative auto-encoder, gen_vae represent generative VAE, gen_aae represents
generative adversarial auto-encoder, gen_avae represent generative adversarial VAE, gen_aae repre-
sents generative conditional adversarial auto-encoder, and gen_cavae represent generative conditional
adversarial VAE.
in predictive accuracy, however, based on the macro-AUC and class AUC scores, there doesn’t seem
to be a clear method that outperforms the others, all performing comparatively targeting the minority
classes than the traditional sampling methods seen in 8.
We now compare the max improvements over different generative methods, comparing models from
Section 3.5 and the traditional embedding-based SDG method in Section 3, over 50 trials. From
Figure 10, we note that DGMs demonstrates very minimal improvements in predictive accuracy
and macro-AUC score, and does not perform comparatively to the embedding-based SDG methods.
We assume this to be related to the issue of over-ﬁtting, as we accommodated this issue only by
employing early stopping with basic heuristics: if the majority of training data (≥50%) share ≥80%
of the features to the target sample, then we end training. We suggest for future works to handle this
issue of over-ﬁtting in the context of SDG more efﬁciently.
Similarly, the max improvements over different feature selection methods when using embedding-
based SDG, discussed in Section 3.2, over 50 trials. In Figure 11, we conﬁrm that weighing feature
selection is more effective than random feature selection in all performance metrics. For both accuracy
and macro-AUC, the difference is obvious, and for class AUC scores, we can see that majority of the
minority classes, as well as the majority classes, are handled better with weighed feature selection.
Figure 12 shows the max improvements over different feature weighing methods used in feature
selection, discussed in Section 3.2, over 50 trials. The feature imbalance approach performs better
in all scoring metrics, with permutation importance and drop-column importance, the two feature
importance methods, performing similarly in predictive accuracy. However, permutation importance
performs noticeably better in macro-AUC and class AUC than drop-column importance.
The max improvements over different feature modiﬁcation methods used, discussed in Section 3.3,
over 50 trials is seen in Figure 13. In terms of macro-AUC score, modiﬁcation approaches using
nearest neighbor search on features reduced by PCA and cosine similarity on embedded features
both outperformed other methods. We see that random feature modiﬁcation does better in terms of
12

Figure 11: Performance improvement on different metrics over different feature selection methods
discussed in Section 3.2 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9. The
letter i represents the use of some feature weighing, such as feature importance or feature imbalance,
for feature selection, and the letter r represent random feature selection.
Figure 12: Performance improvement on different metrics over different feature weighing approaches
discussed in Section 3.2 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9.
predictive accuracy. For class AUC score, we can see that cosine similarity on reduced features by
PCA helps the minority classes the most, however this approach does perform worse in terms of
macro-AUC score than random modiﬁcation.
We show the max improvements over different embedding generation methods for feature modiﬁ-
cation, discussed in Section 3.3.1, over 50 trials in Figure 14. We ﬁnd that for both accuracy and
macro-AUC score, using the embedding matrix from the NNModel outperform the other methods,
with VAE being a close second in terms of macro-AUC score. For class AUC scores, we ﬁnd that
VAEs and embedding matrix from NNModel improve the scores of the minority classes the most.
In Figure 15, we show the max improvements over different synthetic sample usage approaches
discussed in Section 3.4 over 50 trials. We ﬁnd that for all performance metrics, cold start performs
better than warm start approaches.
Figure 13: Performance improvement on different metrics over different feature modiﬁcation methods
discussed in Section 3.2 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9. In this
graph, r represents random modiﬁcation, pn represents nearest neighbor search on features reduced
by principal component analysis (PCA), pc represents cosine similarity on features reduced by PCA,
en represents nearest neighbor search on embedded features, and ec represents cosine similarity on
embedded features
13

Figure 14: Performance improvement on different metrics over different embedding methods dis-
cussed in Section 3.2 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9. In this
graph, model represents using the embedding learned by the NNModel for feature modiﬁcation, ae
represents using the embedding learned by an independent auto-encoder for feature modiﬁcation, and
vae represents using the embedding learned by an independent VAE for feature modiﬁcation.
Figure 15: Performance improvement on different metrics over different synthetic sample usage
discussed in Section 3.4 using NNModel. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9. In
this graph, any scores denoted with a preﬁx f means cold start training was used, and score denoted
with a preﬁx c means warm start training was used.
In Figure 16, we ﬁnd that the SEDG method outperforms all classic resampling methods for all
performance metrics when using NNModel as the classiﬁer. In fact, many of the classic sampling
method perform poorly, harming the performance, even given 50 trials to run. Most notably, the
class-AUC score demonstrate a signiﬁcant positive difference in targeting the minority classes when
using SEDG methods.
4.2
Traditional Classiﬁers
Now we consider the traditional classiﬁers seen in Section 2.2, and how SDG methods affect their
performances. First, we show that when we transfer the embeddings from the deep models, to act
as data pre-processing mappings, to these learners, their performance increases noticeably, as seen
in Table 1. This supports and allows us to proceed to use embedding-based SDG methods without
worries of the embeddings being incompatible to these classiﬁers.
Thus, we test the embedding-based SDG methods and the deep generative models on the traditional
classiﬁers similar to Section 4.1.
Figure 16: Performance improvement comparing traditional sampling methods against DGMs and
SEDG using NNModel as classiﬁer. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9.
14

Model
% improvement
OvR SVM
8.4615
OvO SVM
3.0769
Random Forest
13.846
XGBoost
4.2307
Table 1: Performance improvement when using trained NNModel’s embedding as data pre-processing
to following classiﬁers. In the table above, OvR SVM represents one-vs-rest SVM and OvO SVM
represents one-vs-one SVM.
Figure 17: Performance improvement on different metrics over different sample selection methods
discussed in Section 3.1 using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as
Figure 9.
From Figure 17, we show the max improvements over different sampling methods from Section
3.1 over 50 trials. Unlike to the results from Section 4.1, PaSS method demonstrates highest
improvements in macro-AUC and a close second in accuracy, however, for class AUC score and
accuracy, PPSS method performs the best.
The max improvements over different generative methods, discussed in Section 3.5, compared to
SEDG methods from Section 3 over 50 trials is seen in Figure 18. We see that SEDG methods
performs the best in accuracy, but generative adversarial autoencoder outperforms SEDG methods in
terms of macro-AUC score. For class AUC score, generative autoencoder seem to perform the best in
terms of improving the minority classes.
We ﬁnd the max improvements over different feature selection methods from Section 3.2 used in
embedding-based SDG method in Section 3, over 50 trials to again conﬁrm that weighted feature
selection proves to be more effective than random feature selection, seen in Figure 19.
Figure 20 shows the max improvements over different feature weighing methods used in feature
selection, discussed in Section 3.2, over 50 trials. Feature imbalance again performs best in terms
of accuracy, but falters in other performance metrics. For macro-AUC and class AUC scores, mean
decrease importance for tree-based classiﬁers seems to improve the minority classes the most than
the other approaches.
The max improvements over different feature modiﬁcation methods used, discussed in Section 3.3,
over 50 trials is seen in Figure 21. All modiﬁcation methods performed similarly in terms of class
Figure 18: Performance improvement on different metrics over different generation methods discussed
in Section 3.5 using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 10.
15

Figure 19: Performance improvement on different feature selection methods discussed in Section 3.2
using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 11.
Figure 20: Performance improvement on different feature weighing methods discussed in Section
3.2.1 using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 12
AUC scores, with random modiﬁcation taking a slight lead. In terms of accuracy and macro-AUC,
nearest neighbor on embedded features was the most successful.
We show the max improvements over different embedding generation methods for feature modiﬁca-
tion, discussed in Section 3.3.1, over 50 trials in Figure 22. We ﬁnd that for accuracy, autoencoder
outperform the other methods, with VAE and embedding matrix from NNModel performing similarly.
For both macro-AUC and class AUC score, using the embedding matrix from NNModel proves to be
the best.
In Figure 23, we ﬁnd that the SEDG method, while it does not excel in accuracy and macro-AUC
score % improvements for traditional machine learning classiﬁers, it is able to target the minority
classes more effectively in class-AUC score than all other methods. Additionally, compared to the
other classic re-sampling methods, the results show when considering all the performance metric,
SEDG methods, similarly to DGMs, performs the best as certain re-sampling approaches that excel
in one metric often fail to replicate the same success in other metrics.
Figure 21: Performance improvement on different metrics over different feature modiﬁcation methods
discussed in Section 3.2 using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as
Figure 13
16

Figure 22: Performance improvement on different embedding methods discussed in Section 3.3.1
using traditional classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure 9.
Figure 23: Performance improvement comparing classic re-sampling methods against DGMs and
SEDG with traditional machine learning classiﬁers. The graphs above use the same notation as Figure
9.
Figure 24: Likelihood of feature modiﬁcation and feature value candidates using generative VAE
from 100 synthetic samples per class.
17

4.3
Understanding Student Performance
In this section, we investigate the synthetic samples more in-depth for each class to improve our
understanding for student performance by showing how likely certain features are allowed to change
without much signiﬁcant changes to the data distribution, similar to feature importance. However,
with synthetic samples, we can also see how we can change these features, thus seeing possible
feature value candidates.
In Figure 24, we use a VAE as DGM to create 100 synthetic samples for each class to show how
likely each feature in each class is subject to change, and what feature values is reasonable. For
example, we can see for low performing students, the likelihood of changing absences is low, with
greater number of absences being a possible candidates. We also see that some features, such as
travel time, school supplies, and famrel, are highly susceptible to change, inferring to their lack of
distinction between possible candidates.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed methods for embedding-based SDG and investigated DGMs for class
imbalanced tasks, speciﬁcally student performance tasks. We tested SEDG approach and DGMs
against standard balancing methods, and found greater improvements in our proposed approaches
in terms of % improvement in accuracy, macro-AUC score, and class-AUC score when we use
our NNModel as the classiﬁer, and an more comprehensive improvement when we use traditional
machine learning classiﬁers on student performance task. We also introduced a technique for greater
interpretibilty for SDG methods by looking at the synthetic samples generated and seeing how likely
each feature is modiﬁed and to what values it can take on for each class.
6
Acknowledgement
We thank Samuel Schmidgall (George Mason University), Ji Kuo (George Mason University), and Jay
Deorukhkar (George Mason University) for helping create and build up the core ideas of the SEDG
framework, and their efforts in paper revisions. We thank Dr. Huzefa Rangwala (George Mason
University) for useful suggestions and advices that motivated key components such as weighted
feature selection. We thank Yuanqi Du (George Mason University) for assistance in selecting the area
of focus to be the educational domain and in ﬁnding the appropriate dataset.
