Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short,
Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
Johannes Schneider · Robin Richner ·
Micha Riser
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Autograding short textual answers has become much more feasible due
to the rise of NLP and the increased availability of question-answer pairs brought
about by a shift to online education. Autograding performance is still inferior to
human grading. The statistical and black-box nature of state-of-the-art machine
learning models makes them untrustworthy, raising ethical concerns and limit-
ing their practical utility. Furthermore, the evaluation of autograding is typically
conﬁned to small, monolingual datasets for a speciﬁc question type. This study
uses a large dataset consisting of about 10 million question-answer pairs from
multiple languages covering diverse ﬁelds such as math and language, and strong
variation in question and answer syntax. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of ﬁne-
tuning transformer models for autograding for such complex datasets. Our best
hyperparameter-tuned model yields an accuracy of about 86.5%, comparable to
the state-of-the-art models that are less general and more tuned to a speciﬁc type
of question, subject, and language. More importantly, we address trust and ethical
concerns. By involving humans in the autograding process, we show how to im-
prove the accuracy of automatically graded answers, achieving accuracy equivalent
to that of teaching assistants. We also show how teachers can eﬀectively control
the type of errors made by the system and how they can validate eﬃciently that
the autograder’s performance on individual exams is close to the expected perfor-
mance.
J. Schneider
Institute of Information Systems
University of Liechtenstein, Liechtenstein

R. Richner
Classtime / Institute of Information Systems
University of Liechtenstein, Liechtenstein

M. Riser
Classtime
Zurich, Switzerland

arXiv:2201.03425v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2022

2
Johannes Schneider et al.
Keywords Autograding · NLP · multi-lingual · BERT · question-answering ·
validation
1 Introduction
Teachers and professors spend a considerable amount of time on the unpleasant
work of correcting and grading homework, tests, and exams [50]. While answers
to multiple-choice questions do not need major time commitment to correct, free
text answers do. With improvements in natural language processing (NLP) and
digitalization of educational institutions, the necessary data is available to increase
the automation of marking answers.
An “autograder” system might support teachers in multiple ways. First of
all, it might grade questions completely autonomously. Even a seemingly small
workload reduction of a few percent in grading eﬀort amounts to thousands of
saved working hours per year on a global scale.1 Teachers could devote this time
to supporting students, e.g., assisting those in need of more personal coaching.
Second, an autograder can be employed when teachers cannot provide feedback
to students’ answers due to time constraints. For example, while students are
studying at home, answering questions for exam preparation, an autograder might
provide an assessment of their answers.
These are just some of the needs an autograder can serve. However, autograding
is only applicable if it achieves a certain level of performance, i.e., its decisions are
suﬃciently accurate. Otherwise, trust issues arise (known as algorithm aversion)
[4,15,17,23]. Aside from trust, errors by an automatic grading system can have a
profound impact on an individual. The student might not only fail the exam, but
the entire course and in extreme cases might even have to repeat an entire year of
school, meaning separation from existing classmates and psychological distress [13].
Current works, e.g., [23, 53] (and also this study), show that about 85-90% of
answers are graded correctly as correct/incorrect if all answers are autograded.
Humans make errors as well, and the risk is higher for repetitive tasks like grading
the same question dozens of times. For such tasks, error rates have been reported to
be in the range of 0.5% to 6% (p. 412 in [46]), which is likely lower for exams, since
they are often double checked. Thus, 90% accuracy on graded answers is clearly
below human performance and as such not suﬃcient for autonomous grading. The
fact that tuning “accuracy” on its own through model improvements is not enough
has also been emphasized by [29] calling for a broader view on autograding. While
errors cannot be fully avoided (at least for now), the type of error should ideally be
controllable. For example, it might be preferable to let a student pass who should
have failed than to fail a student who should have passed. One reason for this is
that given the choice between detecting errors correctly(precision) and detecting
all errors(recall), precision is preferable since it leads to a better learning eﬀect for
students [33].
Furthermore, from a practical perspective, existing work on autograding ap-
pears fragmented and diﬃcult to deploy at a school/university level covering many
1 Even a small country such as Switzerland employs more than 120000 teachers (https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_in_Switzerland), each spending several hours a year
on average with grading.

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
3
disciplines. Most papers focus on a single domain (area) and language. Deploy-
ing a large number of algorithms (for all kinds of questions and topics) would
lead to a system complexity and an IT landscape that is diﬃcult to manage. In
the past, less complex, simpler solutions have been preferred to more complex but
better-performing solutions [2]. This posits another motivation to evaluate existing
generic approaches on a larger, broader dataset.
To summarize, reliable autograder systems are necessary for trust and practical
utility. Reliability seems diﬃcult to achieve due to the statistical nature of AI and
considering that an autograder should work across multiple languages, subjects,
and styles of questions and answers. Questions might vary strongly depending on
subjects, i.e., a math-related question requires diﬀerent skills to answer (and to
mark) than a question related to other subjects such as language and history.
Also, teachers might pose questions very diﬀerently, both in terms of syntax and
semantic. From a technical perspective, this increases the risk of a mismatch of
the training data and (test) data used during operation, i.e., a teacher might pose
questions on a novel topic in a way not found in the training data. This can lead
to unexpectedly low performance.
In this study, we address these questions by using a dataset of question-answer
pairs that are more diverse in terms of languages and type of questions, as well
as being signiﬁcantly larger than prior works. We assess multiple state-of-the-art
transformer models, namely multilingual BERT and LaBSE, for the task of auto-
matic grading. We compare performance of both models with respect to diﬀerent
types of questions and languages. We restrict ourselves to questions whose answers
can be marked as correct or incorrect. We use a similarity score rather than “cor-
rect” or “incorrect” as output quantifying the distance of the question-answer pair
to the correct (question-)answer pair. Using two thresholds on the score, we can
place a question-answer pair into one of three categories: (most likely) “correct”,
“uncertain”, i.e., diﬃcult to grade, or (most likely) “incorrect”. We defer “uncer-
tain” question-answer pairs to be graded manually by the teacher. This makes
it possible to trade-oﬀthe fraction of autograded samples, i.e., work being done
(or outsourced) to the autograder, and accuracy metrics on autograded samples.
While our results indicate remarkable performance on average for small datasets,
i.e., classes with few students and questions, the deviation from the expected per-
formance can be large, i.e., it can be both signiﬁcantly better or worse. Since a
much poorer than expected grading is hardly tolerable, we propose a validation
procedure that reduces this risk. It relies on comparing the grading accuracy of
a set of questions and answers that are manually and automatically graded. To
minimize the eﬀort for teachers, we propose to leveraging the grading information
from “diﬃcult, uncertain samples” that must, either way, be handled by a human
to achieve high accuracy. This comes with a number of concerns we shall elaborate
on. Our approach is summarized in Figure 1.
In summary, we contribute as follows:
– We evaluate existing multilingual transformer models in the context of auto-
grading using a dataset covering multiple languages and question types posed
in a diﬀerent syntax. Our tuned model achieves an accuracy of about 86.5%
when classifying all samples as either correct or incorrect. This is comparable
to recent works with a much narrower scope both in terms of questions and
languages [23,53].

4
Johannes Schneider et al.
Fig. 1: Overview of approach: Answers are graded, taking into account minimum
accuracy thresholds speciﬁed by a teacher. Diﬃcult question/answer pairs are
(also) manually graded to ensure that accuracy requirements are met. Accuracy
on manually and automatically graded answers is compared to validate the per-
formance of the autograder.
– We propose deferring decisions for diﬃcult answers to humans. When doing
so, human-like accuracy levels are possible on the remaining answers.
– We also advocate explicitly monitoring and specifying desiderata, on the type
of errors an autograder should make.
In combination with deferring answers to humans, this leads to the following
outcome: Say we aim for a 2% false positive error rate (grading an incorrect
answer as correct) and 0% false negative rate — in other words, our target is
to ensure that the autograder does not fail any student unjustly. Then, still
about 10% of all questions are graded.
– To ensure that autograder performance is not just fulﬁlled on average on a
large set of questions and answers stemming from many exams, but also for a
(small) set stemming from a single exam we suggest introducing a validation
mechanism. It utilizes existing grading information of diﬃcult questions that
were delegated to a human grader. Our experimental evaluation shows that
autograder performance on small datasets ﬂuctuates more, i.e., it is indeed
commonly lower or larger than on a large dataset. But strong deviations from
expected accuracy can be reliably detected.
2 Related Work
2.1 Transformers and BERT
While many techniques from NLP are helpful in autograding, we primarily dis-
cuss those using deep learning and, more speciﬁcally, transformer models including
BERT. Transformers [52] are a key driver for current NLP success. They have a bet-
ter performance than recurrent and convolutional models for translation problems.
Extensions built on transformers such as BERT [27] have also yielded remarkable
results on question-answering, e.g., the SQuAD benchmark, which makes them
appealing for auto-grading. However, the SQuAD (and other benchmarks) are of-
ten fairly speciﬁc. For SQuAD an answer to a question has to be identiﬁed within
a given text segment, i.e., the benchmark is a reading comprehension task. It is
unclear whether the model works for other types of questions and answers which

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
5
makes an explicit evaluation necessary. A comparison of transformers and LSTM
models suggested that LSTM models might be preferable on small datasets, but,
generally, transformers tend to outperform recurrent models [18]. Transformers
rely on a self-attention mechanism, as illustrated in the architecture in Figure 2.
The left part in Figure 2 processing inputs is called an encoder in the context
of transformers and the right part of the ﬁgure processing (outputs and the en-
coded inputs) is called a decoder. Attention facilitates remembering “which past
inputs” are important using weights, rather than “what information of the inputs”
is important. While the wording might suggest that this is a subtle diﬀerence, in
practice, performance gains by remembering “the address of an object” rather than
“the object itself” is large. Technically, a weight is estimated for each past input
(based on the current input), indicating its relevance. Past inputs are aggregated
using a weighted sum. Transformers also do not require any recurrent computa-
tion. While recurrent networks implicitly have positional information (they get
one input token after the other and could learn to count them), transformers re-
quire an explicit positional encoding with each input. Transformers also leverage
embeddings to change “one-hot” word-encodings into vectors.
Fig. 2: Transformer (Figure from [52])
BERT is a language representation model developed by the Google AI language
team [14] based on transformers. Technically, BERT is a multi-layer bidirectional
transformer encoder for NLP tasks. It performs a bidirectional training of the
transformer instead of being bound to right-to-left or left-to-right training. Train-
ing relies on the masked language model and next sentence prediction. 15% of
all words are masked and predicted for the masked language model. For the next
sentence prediction, the network should learn to tell if for a sentence pair (A, B),
sentence B follows directly after sentence A or not. BERT can be trained on any
large collection of documents, e.g., Wikipedia. The resulting BERT model can be
ﬁne-tuned for numerous NLP tasks such as question-answering. In this case, a pre-

6
Johannes Schneider et al.
trained model is adjusted using question-answer pairs rather than training with
sentence pairs.
There also exist multilingual versions of BERT [24] trained on more than 100
languages from Wikipedia articles. [37] argue that with the multilingual BERT,
the “vector spaces between languages are not aligned, i.e., the sentences with the
same content in diﬀerent languages would be mapped to diﬀerent locations in
the vector space”. This is one motivation to introduce sentence-BERT [37], which
creates sentence embeddings that are close to each other if the original sentences
are (semantically) similar.
Besides the multilingual version of the classic BERT, there is also a Language-
agnostic BERT Sentence Embedding (LaBSE) [19]. It is a multilingual version
of BERT with sentence embeddings similar to Sentence-BERT [36]. The LaBSE
model claims to align vectors from diﬀerent languages that are semantically simi-
lar. LaBSE is based on a dual encoder architecture. While the two input sentences
are individually encoded, they use a shared pre-trained BERT encoder. It was
trained on mono- and bilingual translation pairs from Wikipedia and Common-
Crawl, i.e., 17 billion monolingual sentences. The bilingual translation pairs are
sourced from various web pages.
2.2 Autograding
Automatic grading involves multiple technologies and variations of tasks. We focus
on Automatic Short Answer Grading (ASAG) [10], but there is also research on
automatic essay scoring (AES) [16]. As the name implies, ASAG handles less data
than AES, i.e., typically only one phrase to one paragraph, but more than “ﬁll-the-
gap” (FG) type questions, which consider only one to few words [10]. Moreover,
the focus lies on content rather than writing style and structure (AES) or single
words (FG). ASAG (though potentially also AES) includes computer science [47]
and mathematical questions, including math-related questions with open-ended
answers [5]. It also encompasses questions from other areas such as psychology
and biology [3,39].
AES has a long history, dating back to 1964. Back then, 30 variables were
identiﬁed and included in an early system for AES [35]. In short, the “PEG” sys-
tem “scores based on shallow linguistic features, including essay length, number of
prepositions, number of relational pronouns, variation of word length, etc.” using
a simple KNN (K-nearest neighbors) approach [9]. A system called IEA [28] uses
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to analyze and score essays in various languages
as well as providing feedback to exercises. Other approaches like the “e-rater” [11]
or [8] have multiple features, e.g., to tag words, identify discourse (based on cue-
words) and perform topical analysis. In particular, [8] learns a similarity metric
between answers. In contrast, we rely on an embedding of text and standard simi-
larity metrics, i.e., the cosine similarity. However, we might also learn a similarity
metric using additional features stemming from early and more recent works such
as [10]. [10] employs clustering of answers so that a human only has to grade one
answer of the cluster, which saves a signiﬁcant portion of time. This idea might
also be added to our approach. A neural network-based approach to ﬁne-tune a
BERT model is discussed in [54,56]. [31] states that pre-trained models may gen-

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
7
eralize better on new essay topics that the trained model has not seen yet than
simple neural networks such as LSTMs.
For ASAG, [45] compares diﬀerent automatic grading algorithms used for Ara-
bic free text answer questions. They identify string-based and corpus-based text
similarity approaches. [47] utilizes recent measures of lexical similarity and aggre-
gation of word embeddings [6] to outperform methods like LSA for short answer
grading. [49] developed a model that predicts “marks using the distance between
the model answer and the student answer”. [49] assumes that the marks given
to answers highly depend on the similarity of words between the student answers
and the teachers’ solutions. The paper uses k-means clustering for sorting an-
swers into similar grade groups following the idea of [10]. [39] compares neural
network based approaches being used for essay scoring with short answer scoring.
The paper argues that LSTM based neural networks perform mostly better than
non-neural network based models for short answer scoring. [48] base their research
on a pre-trained BERT model instead of simpler neural networks, i.e., LSTMs as
in [25,39]. It is argued that the pre-trained BERT performs better when data aug-
mentation is done with domain-speciﬁc data. For instance, to grade short answers
on the domain of psychology, training BERT on a data set with domain data from
psychology will result in better performance for grading psychology-related short
answers. These ﬁndings also highlight that BERT might not perform as well on a
very diverse dataset (like ours) as on a very domain-speciﬁc one. [5] also obtained
best results (out of a set of models) using BERT for open-ended mathematical
questions.
[53] focused on a small-scale study using AI for formative and summative as-
sessment for a data science class. They employ both static code analysis for code
written in the data science language “R” and embeddings using BERT based on
students’ responses and correct answers. When using embeddings only, they re-
port an accuracy comparable to ours, i.e., 87% for balanced data. As in our work
(and others), similarity of embeddings was measured using the cosine distance. In
contrast to our work, the dataset is only small, monolingual, and from a particular
domain only. [53] also assesses the value of feedback provided by the autograder
based on student responses to a questionnaire and learning outcomes. The paper
reports a reduction in grading time when a teacher was able to use autograd-
ing results. However, they did not check, whether the graded answers are indeed
correct. Thus, it is unclear whether time savings came at the cost of increased er-
rors by relying too much on the autograding answers. We aim at a system design
that grades some questions automatically without human intervention or double-
checking by achieving (a large) user-speciﬁed precision and avoiding automatic
decision-making in case of uncertainty.
Trusting systems based on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) or, more speciﬁcally, NLP,
is a widespread concern beyond autograding. AI is known for its “black-box” na-
ture, making it diﬃcult to understand. This led to many works related to explain-
ing such networks and trust, e.g., [23,42,43]. [23] used a simple logistic regression
model as autograder. The paper investigated student perceptions at college level
of an autograder achieving 90% accuracy for questions related to programming
(Python code). It showed that students overestimated the probability of the au-
tograder misjudging correct examples as wrong (False Negative (FN)), which is a
problem with respect to trusting the system. However, despite tuning to achieve
low FN rate, the work [23] could not address this problem, i.e., the FN rate was

8
Johannes Schneider et al.
still 10%. Incorrectly failing 10% is undoubtedly too high since even lower errors
rates have led to lawsuits and outrage (see [38], p. 16). Our work addresses this
problem. We allow setting a FN rate of even 0%. We maximize the number of
graded answers, while ensuring that this constraint is fulﬁlled. In a programming
class, [4] investigated strategies to deploy an unreliable autograder during actual
exams. Their approach was to grant students multiple attempts, which lowered
the FN rate.
Explainability techniques have also been assessed in the context of autograders
[26]. Explanations can serve as justiﬁcations for (or, at least increase understand-
ing) of automatic grading decisions. [32] used word embeddings and an LSTM
with an attention mechanism to also focus on justiﬁcation (for a response). There
are also attempts to address short-comings of AI with respect to fairness [21]. In
particular, for auto-grading [30] discussed fairness, looking into bias as well as test
design and score interpretation.
In summary, the above approaches touch upon diﬀerent aspects of an auto-
grader system. Features relevant for autograding can be human-deﬁned linguistic
features, features from decompositions such as LSA, and features learnt in neural
network architectures. While many types of classiﬁcation algorithms have been
used for autograding, deep learning based models are prevalent. Simple string
matching-based approaches and similarity metrics based on embeddings of an-
swers using neural language models have been used to assess the match between
a given answer and a ground truth answer. Furthermore, several papers expressed
the idea of clustering, e.g., to grade similar answers to the same question jointly.
To conclude, BERT has been employed for both ASAG and AES. Assessing multi-
lingual models and large datasets from various subjects and a rich set of instructors
is a new development. In contrast to [4, 23, 53] our design follows the philosophy
that trustworthy results are more important than grading all questions. Further-
more, most works did not consider ethical concerns. They did not investigate the
option of not grading answers to achieve high accuracy for actual predictions,
which is key to ensuring trust in autograders.
3 Data
The data set stems from the startup Classtime2. Classtime provides a web browser-
based assessment tool illustrated in Figure 3. Its features include a free text answer
question type, which is the focus of this study. The tool allows students to write
answers ranging from one to hundreds of words or numbers. Teachers can compose
their own questions and answers or select them from a library of existing questions.
In this study, we restrict ourselves to questions requiring students to en-
ter textual (or numerical) answers. The raw data set consists of a set of tuples
(Q, Ac, Ag, G), where Q is a question, Ac the correct answer by the teacher, Ag
the answer to grade (provided by a student) and G ∈{correct, incorrect} a mark
by a teacher for the student’s answer Ag. The dataset consists of approximately
10 million answers and 990000 questions. Each question typically has multiple an-
swers as indicated by the cumulative distribution of the number of questions based
on unique answers in Figure 4. The distribution highlights that about 17% of all
2 www.classtime.com

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
9
Fig. 3: Web interface of tool for data collection from Classtime. It allows for many
types of questions. In this study, we only use questions allowing for free text
answers.
questions have two or fewer diﬀerent answers. More than 50% have seven or more
unique answers.
Fig. 4: Cumulative distribution of the number of unique answers per question
The answer and grade provided by the teacher are taken as ground truth.
Thus, our system heavily relies on the quality of grading by teachers. To assess data
quality, we manually investigated 300 tuples. We did not ﬁnd errors in the teachers’
answers and few in their grading, as we will discuss more in the evaluation. But
we found several decisions where the grading could be deemed lenient or hard at
ﬁrst sight. However, we lack the necessary context, e.g., rubrics and background

10
Johannes Schneider et al.
on students. For example, in many countries students are separated based on skills
leading to diﬀerent expectations of answer quality for identical questions.
Two exemplary questions with multiple answers are shown in Table 1. The
ﬁrst question could be marked correctly by comparing the ground truth and the
student’s reply. However, the second question cannot be marked correctly using a
simple binary comparison but requires, for example, the notion of similarity. We
also provide additional sample questions in Figure 5. Not unexpectedly, they high-
light the diverse nature of questions in content but also in style and syntax. For
example, though we only show questions in English, they might still contain ele-
ments of other languages. Some math questions contain special syntax or markup
code, e.g. “LaTex”, others do not. For language questions, where the correct form
of a verb should be inserted (ﬁll-in-the-gap), a verb might be given directly after
the gap or after the question or not all. Instructions might be part of the question
text or missing, i.e., assumed to be clear. The lack of a common uniform structure
might be seen as a data quality issue. It might also hinder the application of spe-
ciﬁc algorithms for speciﬁc question types if they rely on a pre-deﬁned question
and response structure. The chosen questions in Figure 5 are posed in English.
Language samples constitute roughly 50% in Figure 5. They are overrepresented
since English is the number one foreign language worldwide and exam questions
tend to be posed in English even for non-native speakers.3
arity
Simil-
Question
Ground Truth
Student Reply
ect?
Corr-
0.788
is such ...
with carla, she
stand
(sit)
i can’t
sitting
sitting
Yes
0.507
is such ...
with carla, she
stand
(sit)
i can’t
sitting
to sit
No
0.455
is such ...
with carla, she
stand
(sit)
i can’t
sitting
set
No
0.997
business manager
following:
deﬁne the
a artist team
as a part of
and accordingly
handles ﬁnances
and accounting.
handles the ﬁnances
artist’s team that
member of the
Yes
0.997
business manager
following:
deﬁne the
a artist team
as a part of
and accordingly
handles ﬁnances
the show
accounting for
ﬁnances/
handles
Yes
0.992
business manager
following:
deﬁne the
a artist team
as a part of
and accordingly
handles ﬁnances
artists team
and accounting on
handles money
Yes
Table 1: Example questions and answers. Each row corresponds to a training
sample.
The data stems from multiple languages, Ukrainian being the most represented
with more than 500’000 questions (see Table 2). The distribution of question types
3 We also translated questions from other languages to English. We found signiﬁcantly fewer
questions related to language (though they are still common).

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
11
Language
count
Question
Language
count
Question
Ukrainian
523257
Spanish
4421
English
184069
Croatian
3557
Russian
179177
English US
1744
German
71282
Thai
1073
Estonian
10028
Czech
647
French
5799
Italian
624
Portuguese
5605
Turkish
447
Table 2: Overview of question counts per language.
Fig. 5: English question samples in lowercase.

12
Johannes Schneider et al.
Fig. 6: Distribution of question types for n = 955 manually classiﬁed samples.
Fig. 7: Distribution of questions by answer format for n = 955 manually classiﬁed
samples.
Fig. 8: Distribution of word counts of answers (limited to 32)

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
13
is stated in Figure 6. A signiﬁcant portion of questions is related to language
including both questions related to foreign languages and the native language of a
student. There is also a large number of math-related questions but very few coding
questions. Other questions are a mix of a large pool of subjects, e.g., biology, art,
physics, economics, law, geography, chemistry, history, and sociology.
The distribution of answers based on response format is shown in Figure 7.
Fill-in-the-blank type questions are mainly related to language. An answer of a
few words is not necessarily shorter than an answer of one sentence but rather
the grammatical structure was not that of a sentence. A concise picture of the
distribution of the word count of answers is given in Figure 8. The frequency of
answers is quickly decaying with word count, i.e., most answers are only a few
words in length.
Many questions answer pairs are duplicates, i.e., diﬀerent students often pro-
vided the same answers. We removed duplicates in the dataset resulting in 4.3
million question-answer pairs.
In our dataset, there are more correct than incorrect answers, i.e., around 58%
of all answers are correct. In machine learning, using imbalanced datasets can have
adverse eﬀects on performance. Balancing refers to creating an equal distribution of
the classes, i.e., 50% correct and 50% incorrect answers. We employ oversampling
to create the same number of correct and incorrect replies. We randomly pick
answers from other questions. Picking a random answer for a speciﬁc question out
of millions of answers likely results in the answer being incorrect for the question.
4 Model and Deﬁnitions
We use the multilingual BERT and LaBSE models as discussed in the related
work. Both models take as input two pairs pc = (Q,Ac) and pg = (Q,Ag), where
Q is a question, Ac is the correct answer and Ag the answer to grade. The output
are two vectors, i.e., a vector vc for the pair pc and a vector vg for the pair pg.
While LaBSE performs sentence embeddings, for BERT we averaged the vectors
for all words. The model’s objective is to maximize the similarity between vectors
vc and vg if Ag is correct, while vectors vc and vg should be dissimilar otherwise.
This is illustrated in Figure 9.
The loss [7] for two question pairs pc, pg, ground truth value y and hyper-
parameter margin is given by:
loss(pc, pg, y) =
n
1 −cos(pc, pg),
if y = 1
max(0, cos(pc, pg) −margin), if y = −1
where cos(a, b) is the cosine similarity.
Similarity s(Q, Ac, Ag) for a question-answer triplet is indicated by the angle
between vectors pc and pg, i.e., s = pc∠pg. If the angle is small, the given answer
is likely correct. One can ﬁnd a threshold T ∗that maximizes accuracy by grading
a question-answer with a similarity above the threshold as correct and incorrect
otherwise. Near this threshold, uncertainty of predictions of the autograder is
largest, i.e., the autograder might appear to be no better than guessing. In other
words, such question-answer pairs are diﬃcult to grade for the autograder. To
improve the autograder, we deem these pairs as unsuitable for autograding, i.e.,
we exclude question-answer pairs falling in a speciﬁc range of similarities (around

14
Johannes Schneider et al.
Fig. 9: Vectors for question-answer pairs (Q,A) with Q being “Calculate
0.2+0.3+0.5+1-1.2+0.2”. Vectors falling in the green area are classiﬁed as correct,
those in the red area as incorrect and those in the grey area deemed “uncertain”.
the threshold T ∗) from being classiﬁed. The range is given by a lower and an upper
bound [T i, T c]. Formally, for a dataset D, we deﬁne the subsets of (Q,A) with
larger or lower similarity than a threshold T ∗and those within a threshold in the
range [T, T ′] as:
D(T, >) := {(Q, Ac, Ag, G) ∈D|s(Q, Ac, Ag) > T}
D(T, <) := {(Q, Ac, Ag, G) ∈D|s(Q, Ac, Ag) < T}
D(T, T ′) := {(Q, Ac, Ag, G) ∈D|(s(Q, Ac, Ag) ≥T) ∧(s(Q, Ac, Ag) ≤T ′)}
Thus, the dataset D(T i, <) consists of all question-answer pairs with a sim-
ilarity s(Q, Ac, Ag) below the lower threshold T i. These question-answer pairs
are judged as easy to grade and classiﬁed as incorrect. Analogously, samples in
D(T c, >) are graded as correct.
The accuracy Cc
D,Easy(T c) on samples classiﬁed as correct for a threshold T c
is given by:
Cc
D,Easy(T c) :=
X
(Q,Ac,Ag,G)∈D(T c,>),
G=′correct′
1
|D|
The accuracy Ci
D,Easy(T i) on samples classiﬁed as incorrect for a threshold T i is
given by:
Ci
D,Easy(T i) :=
X
(Q,Ac,Ag,G)∈D(T i,<),
G=′incorrect′
1
|D|
We also use the accuracy on diﬃcult samples that are classiﬁed as either correct
or incorrect using the optimal single threshold T ∗:

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
15
Cc
D,Diff(T ∗, T c) :=
X
(Q,Ac,Ag,G)∈D(T ∗,T c),
G=′correct′
1
|D(T ∗, T c)|
Ci
D,Diff(T i, T ∗) :=
X
(Q,Ac,Ag,G)∈D(T i,T ∗),
G=′incorrect′
1
|D(T i, T ∗)|
We illustrate the data used to compute accuracy Cc
D,Diff(T ∗, T c), Ci
D,Diff(T i, T ∗),
Ci
D,Easy(T i) and Cc
D,Easy(T c) for exemplary thresholds T c, T i and T ∗in Figure
10. Figure 12c in the evaluation shows actual accuracy values Ci
D,Easy(T) and
Cc
D,Easy(T) for a variable threshold T.
Fig. 10: Illustration of deﬁnitions for data (within a similarity range) used to
compute Cc
D,Diff(T ∗, T c), Ci
D,Diff(T i, T ∗), Ci
D,Easy(T i) and Cc
D,Easy(T c)
A teacher can specify similarity thresholds T i and T c to control the type of
error being made, e.g., she might specify that a correct answer should never be
misclassiﬁed as wrong. However, since similarity thresholds are diﬃcult to relate
to actual performance, i.e., accuracy, we let a teacher specify a minimum accuracy
level Ci
min for samples classiﬁed as incorrect or, equivalently put, a maximum false-
negative rate. Similarly, for samples being classiﬁed as correct a teacher can specify
a minimum accuracy level Cc
min, equivalently put, a maximum false positive rate.
The accuracy thresholds Ci
min and Cc
min can be used to compute similarity thresh-
olds T i and T c as follows:
We want to ﬁnd the maximum fraction of samples that can be automatically
graded while fulﬁlling the constraints on accuracy, i.e.,
T i := arg max
T
(Ci
D,Easy(T) > Ci
min)
T c := arg min
T
(Cc
D,Easy(T) > Ci
min)
A very simple optimization procedure uses all similarities S as candidates for T
and picks the largest one for T i and the smallest one for T c. 4
4 Investigating similarities in sorted order combined with eﬃcient search algorithms such as
binary search allows for a fast implementation.

16
Johannes Schneider et al.
Assume the best achievable threshold C∗
min, when all data is graded, is obtained
for a (tuned) threshold T ∗. If both accuracies Ci
min and Cc
min are larger than
C∗
min then it holds that T i < T ∗< T c, i.e., the samples within range [T i, T c] are
considered as diﬃcult and deferred to a human. However, in principle, one of the
accuracies Ci
min and Cc
min could be set below C∗
min. For example, the autograder
might grade on average 99% of all questions correctly. A teacher might accept an
accuracy of 98% for Cc
min but want 100% for Ci
min. In this case, we might have
T c < T ∗and T i < T ∗and also T c < T i < T ∗. Then there are no diﬃcult samples
that must be manually graded since the range [T i, T c] is empty. Furthermore, we
can increase T c to T i to improve accuracy Cc
D,Easy without an increase in samples
to grade manually, i.e., we can set T c := T i.
We deﬁne F i as the fraction of all samples in D being classiﬁed as incorrect,
i.e., F i := |D(T i, <)|/|D|. The terms T i, Ci and F i and Ci
min are illustrated
in Figure 12a. The case for F c, T c, Cc, and Cc
min is analogous, in particular,
F c := |D(T c, >)|/|D|. Thus, the sum of F i and F c gives the total fraction of
classiﬁed samples.
4.1 Autograder Validation
So far, we have described how to raise the (average) accuracy of an autograder
by assigning diﬃcult question-answer pairs to humans. While this is important,
it might not be suﬃcient to inspire complete trust in a system. Even if the auto-
grader’s performance has been assessed properly during development, i.e., using
an (independent) large test set, additional validation for each usage, i.e., check-
ing the autograder’s performance for each exam, is recommended for two reasons:
First, performance guarantees are statistical. In particular, for a small dataset, i.e.,
one with few questions and students, large deviations from average performance
cannot be ruled out completely. This can be oﬀputting since no exam should be
very poorly graded. Second, the variation in possible question-answer pairs is large
and likely not captured even within a large training and test set. Natural language
allows for very diverse type of samples, teachers might have a unique style of ask-
ing questions and, additionally, knowledge constantly evolves, i.e., new terms and
concepts are continually being invented. Performance of an autograder may drop
considerably for seemingly minor diﬀerences in training and test data distribution.
Suppose a teacher should mark a set of question-answer pairs DM. Then, the
performance of the autograder on the graded part of DM, i.e., the answers graded
as incorrect DM(T i, <) and those as correct DM(T c, >), might be signiﬁcantly
better or worse than indicated by the teacher’s supplied accuracy thresholds Ci
min
and Cc
min. We aim to validate that actual performance on the autograded samples
to ensure that the two constraints Cc
DM ,Easy(T c) > Cc
min and Ci
DM ,Easy(T i) >
Ci
min are fulﬁlled. Unfortunately, we do not know the ground truth for any sample
in DM(T i, <) or DM(T c, >) and we also do not like to impose additional work on
the teacher to grade any of these questions. From an eﬃciency perspective, it is
preferable to leverage samples that have to be graded by the teacher anyway (if
they exist), i.e., those that are deemed diﬃcult to grade.
Treating the teachers grading on the diﬃcult samples as ground truth we can
estimate the system’s accuracy on easy to grade samples. We relate the accuracy on
data deemed easy to grade and graded as correct Cc
DM ,Easy(T c) with that on data

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
17
deemed diﬃcult to grade. More precisely, we focus on “diﬃcult to grade” data that
would be graded as correct for a single threshold T ∗, i.e., the data within similarity
range [T ∗, T c] (see Figure 10 yielding accuracy Cc
DM ,Diff(T ∗, T c). (Analogous
thoughts apply for Ci
DM ,Diff(T i, T ∗) and Ci
DM ,Easy(T i))
Speciﬁcally, we assume (to be veriﬁed in the evaluation) that if the accuracy
on the diﬃcult to grade samples matches at least the one on diﬃcult samples of
the dataset used to test the system, and the system meets the accuracy constraint
on the dataset, then the constraint is also fulﬁlled on the data M to be graded,
i.e.
 Ci
DM ,Diff(T i, T ∗) ≥Ci
DV ,Diff(T i, T ∗)

Acc. on DM on diﬃcult samples better than on DV
∧
 Ci
DV ,Easy(T i) > Ci
min

Constraint on accuracy for easy samples fulﬁlled on DV
⇒Ci
DM ,Easy(T i) ≥Ci
min
Constraint on accuracy for easy samples fulﬁlled on DM
Accuracy on diﬃcult samples tends to be lower than those on easy samples.
Thus, we cannot simply check if accuracy Ci
DM ,Diff(T i, T ∗) is above the minimum
Ci
min.5 Furthermore, the above assumption is probabilistic as we shall elaborate on
in the evaluation, i.e., the bigger ∆:= Ci
DM ,Diff(T i, T ∗) −Ci
DV ,Diff(T i, T ∗) the
more likely the conclusion that the constraint is fulﬁlled holds. While a positive ∆
(better outcome on the data to grade DM) indicates no issues, the more negative
∆is, the less the autograder should be trusted. A negative ∆does not necessarily
rule out the use of the autograder even if no compromises on accuracy constraints
should be made. A teacher might increase thresholds Ci
min and/or Cc
min (by |∆|)
which reduces the number of samples judged as easy but increases accuracy. Large
|∆| can originate from the autograder but also the teacher and statistical variation
due to having a small dataset DM. Speciﬁcally, the teacher’s grading on diﬃcult
samples should contain few errors upon validation of the autograder.
There is a small subtlety that can happen if any of the minimum accuracy
constraints Ci
min, Cc
min is below that of the autograder’s average performance as
outlined in the last paragraph of Section 4. Assume, for example, an autograder
achieves a maximum accuracy level of 90% for the threshold T ∗, if all samples
are graded. Further, assume we aim for Ci
min = 100% but only for Cc
min = 85%.
In this case, it likely holds that T c < T ∗. Samples with similarity less than T ∗
would be graded as incorrect to maximize (overall accuracy). However, the lenient
constraint Cc
min (and thus T c) allows the autograder to grade samples as “correct”
that would not be graded as “correct” to maximize overall accuracy. In such a case,
there are also no samples that are deemed diﬃcult to grade as correct, i.e., the
samples in the range [T ∗, T c] are empty since T c < T ∗. To verify, a teacher must
manually grade a subset of DR(T c, >) ⊂DM(T c, >) that are deemed easy to grade
and compare the accuracy on the subset with the constraint Cc
min, i.e., check if
Cc
DR,Easy(T c) > Cc
min. Since the test is performed on a subset, statements are
probabilistic, i.e., we get a probability p(CDM ,Easy > Cc
min|CDR,Easy > Cc
min).
The probability can be increased by using a larger subset |DR(T c, >)|. The same
5 Mathematically speaking, fulﬁlling this condition is not necessary but suﬃcient to show
that also Ci
DM ,Easy(T i) > Ci
min.

18
Johannes Schneider et al.
reasoning applies if the constraint on accuracy for incorrectly graded samples is
smaller than the system’s expected performance.
5 Evaluation
5.1 Setup
To train the baseline, models for LaBSE and the (uncased) multilingualBERT were
taken from the open-source library HuggingFace [55]. We used the following hy-
perparameter setting: the maximal question length was 128 characters (characters
exceeding the limit were discarded), the maximal answer length was 64, batch size
was 32, freeze was 8 (i.e., the ﬁrst 8 layers were frozen), the cosine margin used
in the loss computation was 0.2. The linear output was 128, the learning rate was
0.000025 and epsilon ϵ = 1e−8. We used 10’000 questions (and all its answers) for
validation and another 10’000 questions (and all its answers) for testing and the
rest for training, i.e., 20’000 questions (and all the answers for those questions)
were not included in the training data. Thus, either a question (and all its answers)
belonged to the training set or the test set. We have the three datasets commonly
found in machine learning: one for training DT R, one for validation DV A and one
for testing DT E. In addition, to evaluate the autograder validation procedure out-
lined in Section 4.1, we consider random samples of 5% of the dataset DV = DT E
of the test dataset to be used as a sample DM to be graded by the teacher. We
do not estimate any parameter or tune any hyperparameter on DV , i.e., DT E. To
simulate poor autograder performance, we alter the label of a fraction f = 0.2 of
correct predictions of both the easy and diﬃcult questions so that they appear
erroneous.
We focused on the learning rate, the number of frozen layers and the cosine
margin, and the number of neurons in the linear out layer for hyperparameter
tuning. Hyperparameter tuning only yielded an accuracy gain of about 1%, and is
therefore not an essential task.
5.2 Results
Comparison of LabSE and BERT: Results are shown in Table 3, where the
threshold T for similarity to distinguish correct from incorrect answers has been
chosen to maximize accuracy. Since LaBSE performed better, we will focus on it
for the rest of the paper.
Impact of data characteristics: We also investigated correctness depending
on languages, answer and ground truth length, question type, and available an-
swers per question as shown in Figure 11. We noticed that correctness varies with
language and type of question. Generally, grading is most accurate for numeric
answers with error rates being less than half of other answer types. This is not
unexpected since semantic variation in answers tends to be limited given a sin-
gle number is expected, e.g., identical answers for “1” are, for example, “1.0”,
“1± 0”, “One”, and “one”. Drawing conclusions from diﬀerences in language must
be made with care since the question types employed also vary across languages.
Overall diﬀerences tend to be less than 8% between the language with the lowest

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
19
Model
Class
Precision/Recall
Accuracy
Threshold T
BERT
0
0.84 / 0.83
0.845
0.636
(Baseline)
1
0.85 / 0.86
LaBSE
0
0.87 / 0.81
0.853
0.608
(Baseline)
1
0.84 / 0.89
BERT
0
0.86 / 0.82
0.853
0.754
(Tuned)
1
0.84 / 0.88
LaBSE
0
0.88 / 0.82
0.865
0.753
(Tuned)
1
0.85 / 0.90
Table 3: Results for models including hyperparameter tuning.
Fig. 11: Misclassiﬁcation of autograder given that correct answer is either numeric,
textual or contains both elements.
and highest error. We also investigated the impact of the ground truth length and
accuracy of the autograder. We found no strong dependence.
We also conducted a more qualitative assessment by investigating errors of
300 question-answer pairs by the autograder. Interestingly, the errors did not just
point to poor grading by the autograder but also by the teacher. There can be
two types of annotation errors by a teacher. She can provide the wrong ground
truth, i.e., a reply that is an incorrect answer to her own question. She can also
error in the comparison, i.e., she alleges that the student’s reply does not match
the correct reply, although it does. In the investigated question-answers, we found
two incorrectly graded answers, i.e., the answer by the student and the ground
truth matched exactly, but the answer was still deemed incorrect. Two other
graded answers by teachers were debatable, e.g., the answer “could,need to, can,
can’t,may” was deemed incorrect given the correct answer of “1-could.2-need to.3-
can.4-cant.5.-may”. Grading among teachers was not consistent, i.e., sometimes
questions related to language with typos were considered correct, sometimes not.
In some cases, the ground truth contained typos, which might confuse the auto-
grader, e.g. “true” was spelled as “treue”, a German word for “loyality”. Overall,
we believe that the errors do not have a very large impact, i.e., less than propor-
tional. That is, an error rate of R of all annotated question-answer pairs reduces
the accuracy of the autograder by at most R, since deep learning models have
shown surprisingly high levels of robustness to label noise [40].

20
Johannes Schneider et al.
Common errors by the autograder for language were considering typos or plu-
ral forms as correct, e.g. “a poem was being writen” or “man’s clothes” instead of
“men’s clothes”. Interestingly, sometimes also the opposite held true, i.e. the auto-
grader considered an answer with a typo as incorrect despite the teacher grading
it as correct, e.g. “unistall” instead of “uninstall”. For math, close answers (some-
times with syntax errors) were commonly deemed correct, e.g. “(3y−4)(y+7)” was
deemed correct though it should have been “(3y −4)(y2 + 7)” as well as “7/80”
though it should have been “7/40”. Other questions seemed extremely diﬃcult to
grade correctly, since they might have strongly relied on order or they might be
fairly unique, e.g., asking for keyboard shortcuts in the “Adobe” software with the
answer being “ctrl+t ctrl+shift+alt ctrl+j ctrl+z ctrl+s”. Overall, even if data
quality was higher (no errors in ground truth) and answers were graded more
consistently (either a typo is always an error or never), it became apparent that
merely relying on semantic similarity might not suﬃce due to the large number of
questions and the fact that an autograder cannot reason logically.
Results when limiting autograding using thresholds T c and T i: Generally,
we consider diﬀerent constraints on the minimum accuracy Ci
min and Cc
min and we
compute the corresponding thresholds T c and T i for classiﬁcation (as introduced
in the model section). We estimated T c and T i using validation data. We report
accuracies Cc
D,Easy and Ci
D,Easy as well as the fractions of classiﬁed samples F i
and F c on test data D = DT E.
Figures 12a and 12b illustrate the case, when using either the threshold T c or
T i. Figure 12c shows the scenario using both. In Figure 12a above the threshold T c
a sample is deemed “easy to classify” and classiﬁed as correct. Below the threshold,
a sample is considered diﬃcult and it is graded manually. For a minimum accuracy
Cc
min of 0.9 about 49% of all samples get classiﬁed. In Figure 12b a sample is
classiﬁed by the autograder only if its similarity is below the threshold. In this
case, it is classiﬁed as incorrect. When demanding an accuracy Ci
min for incorrect
samples of 95% only 13% of all samples get classiﬁed. Overall, 62% of all samples
are classiﬁed and the overall accuracy of classiﬁed samples is 92%.
An accuracy of about 90% is deemed insuﬃcient to deploy the system for fully
automatic grading of high-stake exams. However, it might be valuable to grade
trial exams that a student does for preparation or to point out manually graded
questions that diﬀer from the autograding and should be veriﬁed. A teacher like
any human is subject to mistakes from time to time. She might provide wrong
marks “uniformly at random” due to occasional lack of attention. These mistakes
are fairly likely discovered. If a teacher achieves an accuracy close to 100% then
a system with an accuracy of 90% would diﬀer in about 10% of marked answers,
which a teacher should double-check. Thus, by checking 10% of all marks of the
classiﬁed samples and resolving any wrong marking, a teacher could discover 90%
of all sloppiness mistakes. Overall, since we classify only about 60%, a teacher
needs to check about 44%6 of answers. Potentially, this approach could save more
than 50% of work.
Error rates for humans for repetitive tasks are in the range of 0.5% to 6% (p.
412 in [46]). While such numbers vary from individual to individual we assume
6 The 38% of non-classiﬁed answers and 10% of the classiﬁed answers (62% got classiﬁed),
yielding 44% in total

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
21
(a) Accuracy Ci
D,Easy for samples classiﬁed as incorrect and the fraction of classiﬁed samples
F i, depending on the threshold T i for D = DT E.
(b) Accuracy Cc
D,Easy for samples classiﬁed as correct and the fraction of classiﬁed samples
F c depending on the threshold T c for D = DT E.
(c) Accuracy Cc
D,Easy and Ci
D,Easy depending on the thresholds T c and T i.
Fig. 12: Accuracy Cc
D,Easy and Ci
D,Easy depending on the thresholds T c and T i.
For single threshold, the best accuracy of about 86.5% is given by T ∗. Question-
answer pairs with a similarity between 0.5 to 0.89 are deemed diﬃcult to grade,
i.e., including them in the classiﬁcation yields an accuracy Cc
D,Easy and Ci
D,Easy
below the user given thresholds Ci
min=95% and Cc
min=0.9%

22
Johannes Schneider et al.
(a) Normal autograding on DM
(b) Poor autograding on DM
Fig. 13: Accuracy dependent on threshold T c for easy and diﬃcult to grade ques-
tions on the large set DV and small sets a teacher should grade (DM) and aims
to validate the autograding. The smaller dataset DM exhibits higher variation,
but overall behaves fairly similarly. For poor autograding we ﬂip 20% of samples
matching the ground truth and classiﬁed as correct to incorrect yielding a shift of
accuracy.
an accuracy of 98% for a teaching assistant grading an exam once.7 If we use
Cc
min = 0.98 and we do not allow the autograder to fail any students, we get a
possible workload reduction of slightly above 10% and overall accuracy of slightly
above 98%.
Results for Validation of Autograder: For the dataset DV overall accuracy
is maximized for a threshold T ∗= 0.76 leading to an accuracy of C∗= 86.5%.
We show accuracy for easy and diﬃcult subsets DM as well as the large set DV
depending on varying thresholds in Figure 13 and in Figure 14. We discuss the
7 High-stake exams are often reviewed by a second assistant leading to higher overall accu-
racy.

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
23
(a) Normal autograding on DM
(b) Poor autograding on DM
Fig. 14: Accuracy dependent on threshold T i for easy and diﬃcult to grade ques-
tions on the large set DV and small sets a teacher should grade (DM) and aims
to validate the autograding. The smaller dataset DM exhibits higher variation
but overall behaves fairly similarly. For poor autograding we ﬂip 20% of samples
matching the ground truth and classiﬁed as correct to incorrect. Accuracy gets
lower in a similar fashion for easy and diﬃcult to grade questions.
behavior of accuracy on easy and diﬃcult samples being subsets of the large dataset
DV ﬁrst. The (average) performance gap between the grading of easy and diﬃcult
samples is more than 10%, showing that diﬃcult samples are harder to grade for
the autograder.
The gap is non-constant. It is larger the closer the threshold T c or T i is to T ∗.
For samples near T ∗predictions are most uncertain. The accuracy improves faster
than linear when moving away from T ∗.
We observe large variance in accuracy for individual, randomly chosen subsets
DM ⊂DV for both easy and diﬃcult samples. Overall, variance is larger for
accuracy computed on diﬃcult samples than on easy samples. The reasoning is

24
Johannes Schneider et al.
the same as before, i.e., uncertainty is higher on diﬃcult samples, leading to larger
variance.
Furthermore, variances are non-constant, i.e., both easy and diﬃcult samples
are heteroscedastic. The variance on diﬃcult samples is largest on samples near
T ∗, and for easy samples, it is lowest near T ∗. This follows since the closer the
threshold to T ∗, the fewer diﬃcult samples exist, and the more easy ones and vice
versa. Variance in accuracy estimates decreases with the number of samples used.
Concretely, the large variance for diﬃcult samples DM (Figure 14) stems from the
fact that there are only about 5 samples with such a low similarity score. Thus,
if we alter just a single sample, accuracy can change by 20%, leading to large
variance.
Furthermore, it is beneﬁcial if deviations for the diﬃcult and easy samples on
DM from DV correlate strongly, i.e., it could be said that if the performance on
diﬃcult samples is below that on DV by t it is also below the same amount t for
easy samples. Unfortunately, correlation is only weak, as indicated by the vary-
ing length of vertical lines connecting outcomes for easy and diﬃcult samples in
Figures 13 and 14. It can be concluded from visual inspection and a Shapiro-Wilk
test that for a large range of thresholds T c accuracy on easy and diﬃcult samples
for a randomly chosen set DM is distributed roughly normal, i.e., Cc
M,Easy(T c) ∼
N(Cc
V,Easy(T c), σ(T c) and Cc
M,Diff(T c) ∼N(Cc
V,Diff(T c), σ(T c). Analogous thoughts
apply for T i. Exceptions are caused due to skew (accuracy is at most 1) and due
to very small sample sizes. Skew is most prevalent for T c close to 1 (or small T i).
Sample sizes are also small for such thresholds, e.g., few samples have a similarity
beyond 0.999 or below 0.2.
To summarize, a deviation of a few percent in accuracy between the large
dataset DV and a small dataset DM to grade are common. While this might
be for the better (higher accuracy), it could also be for the worse (lower accu-
racy). Such deviations are also expected due to the statistical nature of machine
learning. They can also be caused by the teacher, e.g., if the diﬃcult samples are
graded much more poorly than on average. A teacher can use more stringent con-
straints C′
min
c > Cc
min than her desired accuracy to reduce the risk that actual
performance is below Cc
min. On the positive side deviations are mostly only a few
percent. For large autograder errors on DM, i.e., if we change 20% of diﬃcult and
easy samples of DM to be wrongly graded, we see that this results in a drastic
shift of accuracy for both types of questions, i.e., those that are easy and diﬃcult
to grade. In practice, the essential questions are:
(i) “What is the risk that an accuracy constraint Cc
min is violated?”
(ii) “How much is a teacher’s workload reduced?”
More technically, Question (i) can be posed as: What is the risk the accuracy on
easy samples Cc
DM ,Easy is lower by m or more compared to the provided accuracy
Cc
min, i.e., Cc
DM ,Easy +m < Cc
min? In that light, Question (ii) becomes: How often
is the autograder still employed for such an m?”
In our case, we use m = 0, i.e., we only accept autograded answers if the
accuracy on the diﬃcult samples in the small dataset is at least that on the
large dataset. For m = 0, we obtain a risk of 50% that the constraint of Cc
min
is violated. At the same time, we also only use the autograder half the time,
i.e., for 50% of all the datasets DM. Assume we aim to avoid the scenario we
deemed “poor autograding” with a performance deterioration of m = 0.2. Then,
we only use the autograder if the following two condition apply: (i) the constraint

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
25
Cc
V,Diff −Cc
M,Diff > 0 is fulﬁlled and (ii) easy samples are graded very poorly,
i.e., Cc
M,Easy + m < Cc
min. From Figure 14 we see that the probability for (i)
is very low, i.e., a sample Cc
DM ,Diff would roughly have to deviate about 2.5-5
standard deviations. For a normal distribution, this corresponds to a probability
between 0.006 and 3 · 10−7. In our concrete scenario demanding an accuracy level
of Cc
min = 98% and Ci
min = 100%, the risk is below 0.0001. Furthermore, even
if the autograder grades all answers, i.e., 100%, incorrectly, the overall error rate
would increase by about 10% since the autograder only grades easy samples, which
amounts to about 10% of all samples.
6 Discussion and Limitations
Autograding has gained increased attention in recent years due to staggering im-
provements in NLP. However, error rates are typically still around 10% (aligned
with our outcome). While regulatory bodies have been asking for human agency
and oversight for AI systems as a guiding principle [12], most research has paid lit-
tle or no attention to meeting such demands when using and evaluating AI-based
autograders.
For automatic grading of high-stake exams, a 10% error rate is certainly not ac-
ceptable. An individual decision of such a system cannot be trusted (to be correct).
We argue that at least human-level performance should be aimed for in general.
By delegating work to humans, this is possible. Even if autograders achieve an
accuracy comparable to humans on average, they might exhibit stronger variation
and diﬀerent forms of errors. For example, autograders do not make sloppiness
errors due to being tired as teachers might, but they might make decisions in an
unethical way. Letting a student fail who should pass might be worse than letting a
student pass who should fail. Furthermore, our empirical investigation highlighted
that accuracy varies to some degree with question types and other factors such as
language. Generally, there are concerns with respect to concept drift, i.e., a mis-
match of training and test data that might lead to incorrect predictions in addition
to biases. This creates the need for the validation of autograders through manual
grading. However, manual work is a major hurdle and signiﬁcantly reduces the
beneﬁts of autograding. While our work aimed at minimizing this eﬀort, manual
grading of a signiﬁcant portion of answers is still required.
We believe that even minor biases resulting from exposure to incorrect predic-
tions should be avoided. However, our results indicate that only large deviations
from expectation can be detected reliably on small datasets. Identifying if an au-
tograder shows (on average) minor forms of bias, i.e., grading better or lower than
its speciﬁcation, requires the union of many exams, i.e., it can only be found out
after monitoring a teacher for a prolonged amount of time.
While this might sound unsatisfactory, it should be kept in mind that, in
practice, for non-automated grading little monitoring takes place since it is very
labor intense. At the same time, it is known that teacher’s grading suﬀers from
multiple shortcomings beyond simple “sloppiness errors” such as “rater drift” over
time or a tendency to be too lenient or too extreme [22]; in practice, little is done
to address these concerns.
Our work considered only two possible markings: correct or incorrect. In prac-
tice, complex questions are often graded gradually using points. We believe that

26
Johannes Schneider et al.
this changes the problem and the value of an autograder considerably. When ﬁne-
grained decision-making is required by introducing points, the system might more
commonly misjudge (slightly). Essentially the number of outcomes for a question
changes from two (correct/incorrect) to the number of possible points, e.g., if
points between [0-10] (including 0 and 10) are obtainable, there are 11 outcomes.
We believe that in this case, a system using similar NLP techniques like this and
other works, will commonly be oﬀby one or more points. If questions are graded
by the system in actual exams, a teacher must still double-check the grading, as
errors should be avoided. This signiﬁcantly reduces the system’s value though it
still has its merits.
Furthermore, a teacher performs multiple tasks beyond grading when exam-
ining human works. For example, she might look out for all kinds of cheating,
such as plagiarism or even discover psychological distress of students in essays.
Identifying cheating might increase in relevance since AI has also been subject to
subtle attacks, where inputs were changed slightly, altering classiﬁcation behavior
drastically. At the same time, such modiﬁcations of inputs were inconceivable for
a human. These so-called adversarial attacks have been successful in various areas
such as computer vision [1] and NLP [57] including short answer grading [20].
Therefore, additional tasks performed by a teacher should not be forgotten, e.g.,
covered by additional tools or integrated into existing tools based on further re-
search.
Additionally, our model could be enhanced by multiple techniques found in
other works such as adding domain-speciﬁc features [47,51] or recognizing question
types or their diﬃculty [34], and utilizing specialized methods for each of them
though on the downside this increases system complexity. It is especially interesting
to leverage rubrics as deﬁned by teachers. While our work aims to establish a
methodology that ensures high reliability of autograders, evaluated with real-world
data, it is also interesting to assess the proposed process (built into an actual
autograding system) and other potential beneﬁts aside from time-saving based on
a user study. For example, it might be interesting to see to what extent teachers’
satisfaction increases by focusing the grading primarily on more diﬃcult to grade
answers.
7 Conclusions
Autograding is becoming more and more feasible due to increased data and im-
provements in NLP. Our evaluation based on ﬁne-tuning state-of-the-art trans-
formers aligns with other works and their conclusion that current performance,
i.e., accuracy, cannot live up to human performance in general. However, when
diﬃcult to classify samples are deferred to humans, decision accuracy can be raised
substantially. Still, classiﬁer accuracy should always be assessed explicitly for a set
of novel question-answer pairs, since due to a large diversity of questions, there
might be considerable diﬀerences in performance on training, validation, and test
data. In future work, we aim to improve models, e.g., by utilizing additional in-
formation such as response times of students, implementing feedback to students,
e.g., in the form of personalized explanations of autograder decisions [42,44] and
human-to-AI coaches [41], improving trust issues [15,17], and including detection
of dishonest behavior.

Towards Trustworthy AutoGrading of Short, Multi-lingual, Multi-type Answers
27
