Strategic Features for General Games
Cameron Browne, Dennis J. N. J. Soemers, and Eric Piette
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering (DKE)
Maastricht University, Bouillonstraat 8-10
Maastricht, 6211 LH, The Netherlands
Abstract
This short paper describes an ongoing research project that
requires the automated self-play learning and evaluation of a
large number of board games in digital form. We describe the
approach we are taking to determine relevant features, for bi-
asing MCTS playouts for arbitrary games played on arbitrary
geometries. Beneﬁts of our approach include efﬁcient imple-
mentation, the potential to transfer learnt knowledge to new
contexts, and the potential to explain strategic knowledge em-
bedded in features in human-comprehensible terms.
Introduction
The Digital Ludeme Project1 is a ﬁve-year research project,
recently launched at Maastricht University, that aims to
model the world’s traditional strategy games in a single,
playable digital database. This database will be used to ﬁnd
relationships between games and their component ludemes,2
in order to develop a model of the evolution of games
throughout recorded human history and to chart their spread
across cultures worldwide. This paper describes a new ap-
proach to deﬁning strategic features for general games that
we are implementing in order to achieve the project’s aims.
Statement of the Problem
While there exists substantial archaeological evidence for
ancient games (i.e. those played before 500AD) the rule sets
explaining how these games were actually played are typ-
ically lost; our modern understanding of ancient and early
games is based primarily on modern reconstructions that
have proved to be less than reliable (Murray 1952).
A key challenge in this project will be to evaluate recon-
structions of ancient rule sets and to improve them where
possible. The general game system we are developing for
this project, called LUDII, must therefore be able to:
1. Model the full range of traditional strategy games.
2. Play them at a competent human level.
3. Evaluate rule set reconstructions for: a) historical authen-
ticity, and b) quality of play.
4. Improve rule set reconstructions where needed.
1Funded by a e2m ERC Consolidator Grant (http://ludeme.eu).
2Units of game-related information (Borvo 1977).
We aim to model the 1,000 most inﬂuential traditional
games throughout history, each of which may have multiple
interpretations, each of which may require hundreds of vari-
ant rule sets to be tested. This is therefore not just a mathe-
matical/computational challenge but also a logistical one, as
LUDII may need to be able to learn to play and evaluate up
to a million candidate rule sets over the project’s ﬁve years.
This paper outlines work-in-progress for achieving this
ambitious goal, through the self-play learning of simple
lightweight features that embody strategic knowledge about
the games being modelled. The features we propose are
geometry-independent, facilitating their transfer to new con-
texts, and represent basic strategies that may be understood
and explained in human-comprehensible terms.
Geometric Piece Features
The LUDII general game system employs Monte Carlo tree
search (MCTS) (Browne et al. 2012) as its core method
for AI move planning, which has proven to be a supe-
rior approach for general games in the absence of domain-
speciﬁc knowledge (Finnsson and Bj¨ornsson 2010). While
MCTS performance can vary signiﬁcantly if strictly random
playouts are used (Browne 2013), the reliability of Monte
Carlo simulations can be improved by biasing playouts with
domain-relevant features.
There is a signiﬁcant amount of prior research that de-
scribes the use of local features or patterns for game-playing
agents tailored towards a speciﬁc game. Some of the most
common approaches for generating features are:
• Manually constructing features using expert knowledge.
This was, for example, done by Gelly et al. (2006) for the
game of Go, and by Sturtevant and White (2007) for the
game of Hearts.
• Exhaustively generating all possible patterns up to a cer-
tain restriction (often limited to, e.g., areas of 3×3 cells).
This was, for example, done by Gelly and Silver (2007)
for the game of Go, and Lorentz and Zosa IV (2017) for
the game of Breakthrough. Sturtevant and White (2007)
also exhaustively generated combinations (for instance
pairs, triples, etc.) of the manually selected features for
the game of Hearts as described above.
• Supervised learning based on databases of human expert
games. This has been particularly common in the game
arXiv:2101.00843v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2021

of Go (Enderton 1991; Stoutamire 1991; van der Werf et
al. 2003; Bouzy and Chaslot 2005; Stern, Herbrich, and
Graepel 2006; Araki et al. 2007; Coulom 2007).
Other approaches include Gradual Focus (Skowronski,
Bj¨ornsson, and Winands 2009), a genetic programming ap-
proach to ﬁnd useful patterns (Hoock and Teytaud 2010),
and the use of deep convolutional neural networks for learn-
ing relevant features through self-play (Silver et al. 2016).
1
2
Figure 1: Bridge completion is a beneﬁcial pattern in Hex.
The features we are interested in here are geometric piece
patterns of arbitrary topology. For example, Figure 1 shows
a pattern of pieces that represents a beneﬁcial move for con-
nection games played on the hexagonal grid. If Black has
just played move 1 to intrude into the virtual connection
of two White pieces (left), then White should reply imme-
diately with move 2 to complete that connection. Biasing
MCTS playouts to play such moves with higher probability
was found to dramatically improve AI playing strength for
connection games such as Hex and Y (Raiko and Peltonen
2008).
Feature Deﬁnition
Each feature x deﬁnes:
1. A pattern px which speciﬁes one or more elements that
must be present or absent in certain locations in game
states for feature x to hold.
2. An action ax which may be encouraged or discouraged in
game states where x holds.
For most board games, actions can be sufﬁciently speci-
ﬁed using one or two integers; a location to move “to”, and
in some games a location to move “from”. For example, in
games such as Hex and Go a single board location is sufﬁ-
cient to uniquely identify any action in any particular game
state. In games such as Draughts or Chess, the current loca-
tion of the piece to be moved is also required.
Syntax
Each pattern consists of a set of elements. We deﬁne the fol-
lowing element types for each potential feature element, rel-
ative to the current mover:
• “-” Off-board location (for locating edges and corners).
• “.” Empty board location.
• “o” Friendly piece (i.e. of the mover’s colour).
• “x” Enemy piece (i.e. not of the mover’s colour).
• “Pn” Piece belonging to player n.
• “In” Piece with index n in the game deﬁnition.3
We also deﬁne “!” (i.e. “not”) versions of these element
types. For example, “!P2” means that the speciﬁed location
does not contain a piece belonging to Player 2. Locations can
simultaneously have multiple qualiﬁers, e.g. a location with
both “x” and “!I3” qualiﬁed would match an enemy piece at
that location unless it has index 3 in the game deﬁnition.
Topology
Rather than tying feature topology to any particular board
or grid type, feature elements are described by their rela-
tive locations on the underlying graph of the game board
(or more accurately its dual, which deﬁnes orthogonal cell
adjacencies). Starting with a given anchor location and di-
rection, the relative location of each element is deﬁned as a
walk through the underlying board graph. We assume that
the orthogonal neighbours of each board location are listed
in consecutive clockwise order, including null placeholders
for off-board steps.
Each walk is deﬁned as a sequence of adjacent steps
through the underlying board graph, where:
• 0 denotes a step forwards in the current direction.
• −1
3 denotes a
3 counterclokwise turns in a cell with a sides
(i.e. one turn in a triangle), then a step forwards,
• + 2
4 denotes 2a
4 clockwise turns in a cell with a sides (i.e.
two turns in a square), then a step forwards, etc.
Figure 2 shows the relative steps through cells with dif-
ferent numbers of sides. Fractional turns are rounded to the
nearest sensible fraction for any given cell (e.g., a turn of 1
4
in a triangle becomes equal to a turn of 1
3). The basic mech-
anism is similar in principle to the use of turtle commands
in computer graphics.
Note that cells with an odd number of sides, such as the
triangular and pentagonal cells shown in Figure 2, do not
have a forwards (0) direction. Such cases may be handled
by instantiating two pattern instances per ambiguous step:
one with 0 replaced by −1
a and one with 0 replaced by + 1
a
for that step in a cell with a sides.
1
3
-1
3
0
1
4
-1
4
1
5
-1
5
2
5
-2
5
0
1
6
-1
6
1
3
-1
3
Figure 2: Steps through various cells based on CW turns.
For example, a knight move may be described using this
notation as {0, 0, 1
4}, as shown in Figure 3 (left). This de-
scription can be mapped directly to other grids of arbitrary
topology to produce plausible results, such as the semi-
regular 3.4.6.4 tiling (right). Note that the turn of 1
4 is am-
biguous in the semi-regular grid, and is therefore split into
two possible patterns.
3The game deﬁnition maintains a unique index for each type of

N
N
Figure 3: Relative knight move {0, 0, 1
4} on the square grid
(left) and two equivalent moves on the semi-regular 3.4.6.4
grid (right).
Local vs Global Patterns
Patterns may be deﬁned as either:
• Relative: Apply to all valid anchor locations across the
board (taking null locations into account).
• Absolute: Apply only to the speciﬁed anchor location.
For convenience, the number of valid rotations and reﬂec-
tions for each pattern may also be speciﬁed, so that all possi-
ble instances of a given pattern may be generated across the
board from a single description.
Reactive vs Proactive Patterns
We distinguish between reactive patterns that trigger actions
directly in response to the previous player’s last move,4 and
proactive patterns that can trigger actions anywhere across
the board regardless of the previous player’s last move. This
distinction is similar to the distinction between “responsive”
and “non-responsive” patterns used in (Silver et al. 2016).
For example, the bottom row of Figure 4 shows the Hex
pattern described earlier in Figure 1 (left) and a reactive pat-
tern that describes this situation (middle). The top row shows
a proactive pattern that encourages Hex players to play two
disjoint steps away from existing friendly pieces. For clar-
ity in the diagrams, friendly pieces are denoted as white
disks and enemy pieces as black discs (the last move made
is dotted). White dots indicate empty cells, edges between
elements indicate cell adjacency, and green “+” symbols in-
dicate the preferred action triggered by each pattern. The
rightmost column of Figure 4 shows how these patterns map
easily from the hexagonal grid to the square grid.
Implementation
The LUDII system and associated feature mechanisms are
implemented in Java 8. Internal game states are deﬁned us-
ing a custom BitSet class, called a ChunkSet, that com-
presses the required state information in the minimum num-
ber of bits, based on each game’s deﬁnition.
equipment it involves, including containers (boards, piles, hands,
decks, etc.) and components (pieces, tiles, dice, cards, etc).
4There may be more than one opponent.
+
+
+
+
Figure 4: Reactive (bottom) and proactive (top) features.
For example, if a game involves no more equipment than
a board and uniform pieces in N colours, then the game state
is described by a ChunkSet subdivided into chunks of B
bits per board cell, where B is the lowest power of 2 that
provides enough bits to represent every possible state per
cell (including state 0 for the empty cells).5
For each game, we seek to derive an optimal feature set F,
which is the set of features that outperform all other known
feature sets for that game on average, within a given compu-
tational budget.
Feature Instantiation
As each game is loaded, an instance of every possible valid
rotation, reﬂection and translation is pre-generated once for
all component features fx of that game’s optimal feature
set F, including combinations of valid element types within
each feature. Each feature deﬁnition can therefore generate
hundreds of instances.
Each instance is deﬁned using the same custom BitSet
class as the game state. Hence, each feature instance can
be matched to the given game state efﬁciently using bitwise
parallel operations, such that only a few bitwise operations
need to be applied per instance match test, regardless of the
feature’s complexity.
Feature Application
Feature sets are applied to bias MCTS playouts as follows:
1. For each player move, all legal moves are generated and
initialised with equal probability of being selected.
2. Each reactive feature instance corresponding to the pre-
vious player’s last move is then checked for a match to
the current game state, and if a match is detected then
5Chunk sizes are set to the lowest power of 2 to avoid issues
with chunks straddling consecutive long member variables.

the feature’s weight is added to the probability of the fea-
ture’s action being selected (note that feature weights can
be negative for detrimental moves).
3. Each proactive feature instance is then applied across the
board and checked for a match to the current game state,
and if a match is detected then the feature’s weight is
added to the probability of the feature’s action being se-
lected.
4. The move to be made is then selected randomly according
to the resulting biased distribution.
Features can similarly be used in other parts of MCTS,
such as its selection phase. Note that reactive features are
much more efﬁcient to apply than proactive ones, as only
those patterns relevant to the previous player’s last move
need be tested. We therefore seek to generate reactive fea-
tures, and to replace proactive features with their reactive
equivalents, where possible.
Feature Generation
Manually generating features using expert knowledge, or ex-
tracting them through supervised learning from human ex-
pert games, are not suitable solutions for the current task
in which a wide variety of unfamiliar games must be sup-
ported. Exhaustive generation of features can be done more
easily, but has clear drawbacks due to the massive volume of
features it can generate.
One advantage of describing games by their component
ludemes is that these may be exploited to generate a plausi-
ble set of candidate feature patterns based on the speciﬁed
rules and equipment. Such patterns may not be suitable fea-
tures in and of themselves, but represent “minimum” pat-
terns which must be present in every feature – for example,
every Hex or Go feature must contain an empty “to” action
location – allowing signiﬁcant reductions in the number of
possible patterns to be generated. For many games, this kind
of knowledge can be extracted automatically from ludemes.
The subsequent ﬁne-tuning of features to obtain the op-
timal feature set F for a given game is still a work-in-
progress. Sufﬁce it to say that frequent pattern mining (Ag-
garwal and Han 2014) approaches to iteratively building
features from large numbers of randomly generated self-
play games has not proved effective. Learning feature sets
against a random opponent can have disastrous – and some-
times amusing – results in the unexpected behaviours that
can thwart the random player. There does not seem to be
any escape from evaluating feature sets using more time-
consuming but realistic tests against intelligent AI oppo-
nents, with MCTS as the baseline yardstick.
Features and Strategies
An attractive aspect of the proposed approach is that learnt
features have the potential to encode simple strategies for the
games to which they apply. For example, the features shown
on the top row of Figure 5 encourage the player to make
lines of four pieces of their colour, while the features shown
on the bottom row encourage the player to not make lines
of three pieces of their colour (the red “–” symbols indicate
negative weights that discourage such actions).
Figure 5: Patterns for a “line of 4” strategy (top) and a “not
line of 3” strategy (bottom).
Figure 6: Patterns for a “form groups of 3” strategy.
The features shown in Figure 6 encourage the player to
form groups of three pieces of their colour, by encouraging
singleton pieces to grow in any direction then discouraging
growth beyond group size 3. Similarly, the features shown in
Figure 7 encourage the player to form long, thin groups of
their pieces, by encouraging singleton pieces to grow in any
direction, then encouraging friendly pairs to extend at the
ends but discouraging growth at the common points adjacent
to both pieces (which would create shorter, thicker groups).
Feature Explanation
An additional beneﬁt of the ludemic model for games is that
features applicable to a given game may be readily trans-
ferred as candidate features for related games deﬁned by
similar ludemes. Any feature that has proved relevant for a
given context is a good starting point for similar contexts.
Further, we can potentially invert the causal relationship
between ludemes and features to reverse engineer compre-
hensible explanations for the learnt strategies that optimal
feature sets represent, by determining which ludemes are
responsible for given features. This relationship between a
game’s ludemes and its derived features is further strength-
ened by the fact that initial candidate feature sets are derived
directly from the game’s ludemic description during feature
generation process.
Each ludeme in the LUDII Ludeme Library corresponds to
a Java class with an appropriate name, providing a source of
convenient plain English captions for learnt concepts. And
even if the ludeme names do not provide sufﬁcient expla-
Figure 7: Patterns for a “form long thin groups” strategy.

nation in themselves, they provide hints for further post-
processing steps to ﬁnd geometric relationships within the
feature patterns. It is plausible that simple descriptions such
as “make lines of 4” or “make groups of 3” may be derived
from such feature sets. Implementing such mechanisms for
explainable AI in the context of startegy learning for general
games will be a key focus of future work.
Conclusion
Lightweight features based on geometric piece patterns have
a number of advantages for our work on the Anonymous
Project. They improve MCTS playing strength, map readily
to other geometries, encode simple strategies, can be asso-
ciated with the underlying ludemic descriptions of games,
and have the potential to help explain learnt strategies in
human-comprehensible terms. We will continue developing
and testing this approach as the LUDII general game sys-
tem matures to support an increasing range of game types,
and investigating the automated extraction and explanation
of relevant strategies from such learnt features.
