A Meta-Learning Algorithm for Interrogative
Agendas
Erman Acar1,2, Andrea De Domenico2, Krishna Manoorkar2 and Mattia Panettiere2
1LIACS, Universiteit Leiden
2Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Abstract
Explainability is a key challenge and a major research theme in AI research for developing intelligent
systems that are capable of working with humans more effectively. An obvious choice in developing
explainable intelligent systems relies on employing knowledge representation formalisms which are
inherently tailored towards expressing human knowledge e.g., interrogative agendas. In the scope of
this work, we focus on formal concept analysis (FCA), a standard knowledge representation formalism,
to express interrogative agendas, and in particular to categorize objects w.r.t. a given set of features.
Several FCA-based algorithms have already been in use for standard machine learning tasks such as
classification and outlier detection. These algorithms use a single concept lattice for such a task, meaning
that the set of features used for the categorization is fixed. Different sets of features may have different
importance in that categorization, we call a set of features an agenda. In many applications a correct
or good agenda for categorization is not known beforehand. In this paper, we propose a meta-learning
algorithm to construct a good interrogative agenda explaining the data. Such algorithm is meant to call
existing FCA-based classification and outlier detection algorithms iteratively, to increase their accuracy
and reduce their sample complexity. The proposed method assigns a measure of importance to different
set of features used in the categorization, hence making the results more explainable.
Keywords
Formal concept analysis, Machine learning, Interrogative agendas, Classification, Outlier detection
1. Introduction
As artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are playing key roles in our daily lives, developing
intelligent systems which can work with humans more effectively (instead of replacing them)
is becoming a central research theme [1, 2, 3]. Such theme is mostly pronounced as hybrid
intelligence, aiming to benefit from the strengths of both humans and the machine intelligence
in solving problems. Developing systems of such capability demands fundamentally novel
approaches to major research problems in AI: state-of-the-art systems outperform humans in
many cognitive tasks from playing video games [4] to pattern recognition [5], however they
fall short when it comes to other tasks such as common sense reasoning, performing causal
discovery, and behavioural human capabilities such as explaining its own decisions, adapting
to different environments, collaborating with others, etc. A particular challenge in developing
such systems relies on making them more interpretable [1, 6, 7] which is the main focus of this
paper.
The 1st International Workshop on Knowledge Representation for Hybrid Intelligence
© 2021 Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
CEUR
Workshop
Proceedings
http://ceur-ws.org
ISSN 1613-0073
CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)
arXiv:2301.01837v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2023

An obvious medium in making such systems interpretable relies on employing an existing
knowledge representation formalism which is inherently tailored towards expressing human
knowledge. One such type of human knowledge that is relevant in problem solving is captured
by the notion of interrogative agenda (also called research agenda [8]) of an epistemic agent
(which will be explained further in detail in Section 2.2). Intuitively, given a context, an
interrogative agenda abstracts a set of features that an epistemic agent is interested in. In order
to express interrogative agendas we employ the knowledge representation formalism of formal
concept analysis.
Formal concept analysis (FCA) is an influential foundational theory in knowledge representa-
tion and reasoning [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] which provides a framework for categorizing objects
w.r.t. a given set of features. The set of features used in the categorization (formal context
in FCA) can be identified as its agenda, and different agendas will correspond to different
categorizations. The agenda used to categorize a set of objects may be chosen on several factors
like the availability and precision of the data, the categorization methodology, and the purpose
of the categorization.1 In this paper, we focus on obtaining concept lattices (possibly fuzzy)
corresponding to different agendas (possibly non-crisp) However, in many applications, it is
unclear which interrogative agenda (Sec. 2.2) is best suited to obtain a categorization that can
be useful in dealing with a given problem. Thus, in this work, we focus on the task of using a
machine learning algorithm to learn such agendas, and hence a “good categorization” for the
problem at hand. In particular, we will address the task of classification and outlier detection.
In the realm of machine learning, formal concept analysis has been used in the past for
classification, outlier detection, rare concept mining and identification of rare patterns (Sec. 3).
However, to the best of our knowledge, all these methods use a single concept lattice (or its
sublattice) to deal with the problems mentioned above. That is, the agenda of the categorization
is fixed beforehand. The main difficulty in using such techniques relies on the fact that there
are exponentially many subsets of features (and weights) one has to take into account. On the
other hand, since some features may not be relevant for a given classification task, removing
them can reduce the data collection cost, its complexity, and may even improve the accuracy
for some tasks. However, determining the set of relevant features can be difficult, and it is an
important part of the preprocessing phase for many such algorithms.
In this paper, we propose a meta-learning algorithm to identify the best-suited agenda (and
hence categorization). That is, to estimate the significance of different sets of features for
the given task. The incorporation of such outer-loop on top of an existing classification or
outlier detection algorithm can potentially increase its generalising power and the performance.
Another major advantage of such method is that the learned agendas provide us an estimation
of the importance of different sets of features for the given task, making our results more
explainable.
Structure of paper.
In Section 2, we provide the relevant preliminaries. In Section 3, we
give an overview of FCA-based classification and outlier detection algorithms. In Section 4,
we describe the framework for learning agendas and provide a generic learning algorithm. In
1A logical framework for studying these different categorizations obtained from different agendas and their
interaction was developed in our earlier work [16] and applied to auditing domain.

Section 5, we conclude and give some directions for future research.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Formal concept analysis
A formal context [14] is a structure P = (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼) such that 𝐴and 𝑋are sets of objects and
features, respectively, and 𝐼⊆𝐴× 𝑋is the so-called incidence relation which records whether
a given object has a given feature. That is, for any object 𝑎and feature 𝑥, 𝑎𝐼𝑥iff 𝑎has
feature 𝑥. Formal contexts can be thought of as abstract representations of e.g., databases,
tabular data and such. Every formal context as above induces maps 𝐼(1) : 𝒫(𝐴) →𝒫(𝑋) and
𝐼(0) : 𝒫(𝑋) →𝒫(𝐴), respectively defined by the assignments
𝐼(1)[𝐵] := {𝑥∈𝑋| ∀𝑎(𝑎∈𝐵⇒𝑎𝐼𝑥)},
𝐼(0)[𝑌] = {𝑎∈𝐴| ∀𝑥(𝑥∈𝑌⇒𝑎𝐼𝑥)}.
(1)
A formal concept of P is a pair 𝑐= ([[𝑐]], ([𝑐])) such that [[𝑐]] ⊆𝐴, ([𝑐]) ⊆𝑋, and 𝐼(1)[[[𝑐]]] = ([𝑐])
and 𝐼(0)[([𝑐])] = [[𝑐]]. A subset 𝐵⊆𝐴(resp. 𝑌⊆𝑋) is said to be closed or Galois-stable
if 𝐶𝑙(𝐵) = 𝐼(0)[𝐼(1)[𝐵]] = 𝐵(resp. 𝐶𝑙(𝑌) = 𝐼(1)[𝐼(0)[𝑌]] = 𝑌). The set of objects [[𝑐]]
is intuitively understood as the extension of the concept 𝑐, while the set of features ([𝑐]) is
understood as its intension. The set of the all formal concepts of P (denoted by 𝐿(P)) can be
partially ordered as follows: for any 𝑐, 𝑑∈𝐿(P),
𝑐≤𝑑
iff
[[𝑐]] ⊆[[𝑑]]
iff
([𝑑]) ⊆([𝑐]).
(2)
With this order, 𝐿(P) is a complete lattice, the concept lattice P+ of P.
2.2. Interrogative agendas
In epistemology and formal philosophy, interrogative agenda (or research agenda [8]) of an
epistemic agent (or group of agents e.g., users) indicates the set of questions they are interested
in, or what they want to know relative to a certain circumstance. Intuitively, in any context,
interrogative agendas act as cognitive filters that block content which is deemed irrelevant by
the agent. Only the information the agent considers relevant is used e.g. in the formation of
their beliefs, or actions, etc. Deliberation and negotiation processes can be described as whether
or how agents succeed and interact in shaping their interrogative agendas, and the outcomes
of these processes can be described in terms of the aggregated (or “common ground”) agenda.
Also, phenomena such as polarization [17], echo chambers [18] and self-fulfilling prophecies
[19] can be described in terms of the formation and dynamics of interrogative agendas among
networks of agents.
Dealing with a classification or outlier detection problem, we may have different agendas
for different aims. For example, the agenda for the classification of consumers for a grocery
store based on their buying preferences is very different from the agenda of a political analyst
trying to classify the same set of people based on their political inclinations. Thus, interrogative
agendas play an important role in determining natural or useful categorization for a specific
purpose.

2.3. Interrogative agendas and flexible categorization
Let P = (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼) be a formal context. For a set of features 𝑌⊆𝑋, the formal context
induced by 𝑌from P is (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼∩𝐴× 𝑌). Given the set of all the features 𝑋, the (non-crisp)
interrogative agenda of an agent can be described by a mass function on 𝒫(𝑋). For an agenda
represented by 𝑚: 𝒫(𝑋) →[0, 1], and any 𝑌⊆𝑋, 𝑚(𝑌) represents the importance (or
intensity of the preference) of the set of features 𝑌according to the agenda given by 𝑚. We
assume that mass functions are normalized, that is,
∑︁
𝑌⊆𝑋
𝑚(𝑌) = 1.
(3)
Any such mass function induces a probability or preference function 𝑝𝑚: ℛ→[0, 1] such that
𝑝𝑚((𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼∩𝐴× 𝑌)) = 𝑚(𝑌), where ℛis the set of all the formal contexts corresponding
to the crisp agendas induced by subsets of 𝑋(i.e. the formal contexts corresponding to each
𝑌⊆𝑋).
The agendas of different agents can be aggregated using different Dempster-Shafer rules
[20, 21, 22] to obtain a categorization corresponding to aggregated agendas. A logical framework
for deliberation between different agents having different agendas is developed in [16]. This
framework can be applied to study categorizations when different agents with different interests
interact with each other for communication or joint decision making, as it is the case in auditing,
community analysis, linguistics, etc. We also describe a method to approximate the importance
of individual features from mass functions describing agendas by plausibility transform [23] or
pignistic transformation [24], methods used in Dempster-Shafer theory to transform Dempster-
Shafer mass functions to probability functions. These importance values of individual features
can be useful in several different applications like feature analysis, clustering, etc.
3. Classification and outlier detection using concept lattices
In this section, we give an overview of different classification and outlier detection techniques
using concept lattices.
3.1. Classification using concept lattices
Different algorithms have been applied to classify objects using formal concept analysis, that
is, using concept lattices. Fu et al. [25] provide a comparison between different FCA-based
classification algorithms, such as LEGAL [26], GALOIS [27], RULEARNER [28], CLNN and
CLNB [29]. Prokasheva et al. [30] describe different classification algorithms using FCA and
challenges to such methods.
In [31], Kuznetsov describes a classification algorithm that uses the JSM-method [32, 33].
He proposes to use concept lattices and training examples to form hypotheses as follows. Let
(𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼) be a formal context for the set of objects 𝐴and the set of features 𝑋. We add an
additional target feature 𝑥̸∈𝑋for denoting a class of an object. This partitions 𝐴into three
sets of objects 𝐴+, 𝐴−, and 𝐴𝜏consisting of objects known to have feature 𝑥, objects known to
not have feature 𝑥, and objects for which it is unknown whether or not they have it, respectively.

Positive hypotheses for the JSM-method based on this formal context are given by the sets of
features that are shared by a set of positive examples but not by any negative example. That is,
a set 𝐻⊆𝑋is a positive hypothesis iff 𝐼(0)[𝐻] ∩𝐴+ ̸= ∅and 𝐻̸⊆𝐼(1)[{𝑎}] for any 𝑎∈𝐴−.
Negative hypotheses are defined analogously. For any object 𝑏, it will be classified positively
(resp. negatively) if 𝐼(1)[{𝑏}] contains a positive (resp. negative) hypothesis but no negative
(resp. positive) hypotheses. In case 𝐼(1)[{𝑏}] contains both or neither, the classification is
undetermined or some other method like majority voting can be used to classify 𝑏. The method
sketched above has been used with different modifications in many FCA-based classification
algorithms [34, 35, 36]. Some classification algorithms based on FCA use concept lattices to
augment other classifiers like SVM [37], Naive Bayes classifier and Nearest neighbour classifier
[29] in preprocessing or feature selection. Other FCA-based classification methods include
biclustering [36], and cover-based classification [38].
3.2. Outlier detection using concept lattices
Outlier detection can be considered as a special case of binary classification where the classes
are outlier and non-outliers. Thus, any of the above-mentioned algorithms can be used for
outlier detection using concept lattices. Some other methods or algorithms based on formal
concept analysis have also been studied specifically for outlier detection or similar tasks like
mining rare concepts or patterns [39, 40, 41]. The simplest method to define the outlier degree
of an element from a concept lattice is by using the size of its closure (i.e. the smallest category
containing the element). Smaller size of closure of an object indicates that there are a small
number of elements which have the same features as the object and thus it is likely to be an
outlier. Sugiyama [39] suggests that the outlierness of an object in a concept lattice should not
depend on the size of its closure but one must consider the number of concepts it creates. He
suggests to define the outlierness score of a set of objects 𝐵⊆𝐴as
𝑞(𝐵) := |{(𝐺, 𝑌) ∈P+ | 𝐵⊆𝐺or 𝐼(1)[𝐵] ⊆𝑌}|.
(4)
This definition is more suited to detect outliers that belong to a densely agglomerated cluster
which locates sparsely if we overview the whole set of objects. Zhang et al. [41] propose an
outlier mining algorithm based on constrained concept lattices to detect local outliers using
a sparsity-based method. One of the key advantages of using formal concept analysis in
classification or outlier detection over other algorithms is that FCA can be used to deal with
both continuous and discrete attributes simultaneously, through the discretization of continuous
attributes by conceptual scaling (Sec. 3.3).
One of the major issues in applications of formal concept analysis is the complexity of the
algorithms involved. The fundamental reason behind the high complexity is that in the worst-
case scenario the number of categories in a concept lattice grows exponentially with the number
of objects and features involved. Several techniques have been devised in past to overcome this
complexity problem [42, 43, 44].
3.3. Discretization of continuous attributes and conceptual scaling
In order to apply formal concept analysis on attributes with continuous values, we need to
discretize them. The process of converting many-valued (possibly continuous-valued) attributes

into binary attributes or features for FCA is known as conceptual scaling [45]. Scaling is an
important part of most FCA-based techniques and has been studied extensively [45, 46, 47].
Choosing the correct scaling method depends on the specific task the concept lattice is used for.
4. Learning interrogative agendas
Formal concept analysis categorizes a given set of objects w.r.t a given set of features. Thus,
the outlier detection (or the classification) task at hand depends on the features (or attributes)
under consideration. However, in many applications it is hard to estimate which features are
of importance and how important they are, that is the correct agenda, for a given task. Here
we describe a machine learning framework that tries to solve this problem by using machine
learning to learn a “good” agenda for the given task. This provides a way to improve the
performance of FCA-based classification or outlier detection algorithms by choosing the correct
agenda. This also makes results more explainable by providing the importance value of each set
of features.
4.1. Space of possible agendas
As discussed in Section 2.3, an (non-crisp) interrogative agenda on a given set of features 𝑋
is given by a mass function 𝑚: 𝒫(𝑋) →[0, 1], where for any 𝑌⊆𝑋, 𝑚(𝑌) denotes the
importance of the set of features 𝑌in the categorization. The mass function 𝑚induces a
probability function 𝑝𝑚: ℛ→[0, 1], where ℛis the set of all the (crisp) formal contexts
induced from P = (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼) by different crisp agendas i.e. subsets of 𝑋. For any categorization
(formal context) P ∈ℛ, 𝑝𝑚(P) denotes the likelihood assigned or preference given to the
categorization P by the agenda 𝑚. Thus, the set of all possible non-crisp categorizations (resp.
non-crisp agendas) induced from a context P is given by the set of all the probability functions
on ℛ(resp. the set of all the possible mass functions on 𝒫(𝑋)). As discussed in the introduction,
we want to learn a “good” agenda that leads to a categorization that can be used to complete
a given task effectively. This corresponds to learning a probability function 𝑝on ℛwhich
represents a suitable categorization for the given task. That is, we use machine learning to search
for a “good” function in the space of probability functions on ℛ. For the sake of computational
and notational convenience, here we propose the following simplifications.
Let R be the set of real numbers. Let 𝑓: ℛ→R be a map assigning weight 𝑤L ∈R for every
P ∈ℛ. For any P ∈ℛ, 𝑓(P) denotes the importance (or preference) assigned to the context
P or to the corresponding set of features 𝑌, where P = (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼∩𝐴× 𝑌). We call any such
function 𝑓a non-crisp agenda as it gives weights (representing importance) to different sets of
features. Any such function can be seen as a real-valued vector of dimension |ℛ|. Thus, the
set of all such functions is isomorphic to the space R|ℛ|. As this space is linear, the shift from
probability functions on ℛto real-valued functions simplifies the task of learning an agenda
(weight function) that minimizes loss using a simple gradient descent method.
The weights assigned to lattices can be interpreted as probabilities on ℛ, (and hence mass
functions on 𝒫(𝑋)) via normalization when all the weights are non-negative. The negative
weights suggest that the corresponding categorization is opposite to the preferred categorization
for the task at hand. For example, suppose we are interested in detecting elements with a value

of feature 𝑓1 being abnormally high, while the outlier detection method used finds outliers with
value of 𝑓1 low. Then the learning algorithm is likely to assign a negative weight to the agenda
{𝑓1}.
As discussed earlier, one of the major problems in applications of formal concept analysis
is the complexity of the algorithms involved. Here, we are proposing to consider priority (or
weight) functions on a set of different concept lattices corresponding to different agendas. As the
number of different (crisp) agendas induced from a set 𝑋of features is exponential in |𝑋|, this
may add another exponential factor to the complexity of the algorithm. In many applications
where the number of features is large, this may make the problem computationally infeasible.
Thus, in most applications we need to choose a smaller set of concept lattices or (crisp) agendas
as a basis, that is set of (crisp) concept lattices on which the weight functions are defined. We
propose the following strategies for this choice.
1. Choosing agendas that consist of a small number of features In this strategy, we
choose the (crisp) agendas consisting of 𝛼or a smaller number of features to construct
basis concept lattices for some fixed 𝛼≪|𝑋|. This is based on the idea that tasks like
classification or outlier detection can be performed with good accuracy by considering
only a small number of features together. This is especially the case with tasks involving
epistemic components as humans use a limited number of features in combination for
basic tasks like comparison and classification. As these agendas consist of a small number
of features, the number of concepts in these concept lattices is small. This makes the
computational complexity low for most algorithms operating on concept lattices. Thus,
this method can be applied for finding agendas when the algorithms may have high
computational complexity for lattices with a large number of concepts. In some situations,
it may also be useful to add the full concept lattice (lattice corresponding to the full feature
set |𝑋|) to the set of basis lattices. This allows us to consider the full concept lattice with
all available information for the task at hand while having the possibility of giving higher
or lower (compared to other features) importance to some small subsets of features. For
example, if the weights attached to all the lattices except those given by agendas {𝑓1}
and 𝑋are close to 0 and the weights assigned to these agendas are similar, it corresponds
to the agenda in which the set of all features and {𝑓1} are the only important sets of
features. Thus, the concept lattice based on 𝑓1 alone would be of high significance.
2. Choosing important agendas based on prior or expert knowledge For some tasks,
we may have prior or expert knowledge assigning different importance or priority to
some lattices or agendas. In such cases, these lattices are taken as the set of basis lattices.
This provides us a way to incorporate prior or expert knowledge with other algorithms
using formal concept analysis.
3. Choosing agendas adaptively In this strategy, we start with a set of agendas given by
all the sets consisting of less than 𝛼features for some small 𝛼(usually taken as 1). We use
machine learning to learn weights assigned to them, and then drop all the oness which get
assigned a very low weight (after normalization). We then consider agendas consisting
of any set of features that is a subset of the union of agendas that are not removed in
the first step. Choosing these agendas can be interpreted as considering combinations of
features that are deemed important in the first learning step. We then repeat the learning

process with this new set of lattices. We keep repeating this process until all the agendas
(lattices) added in the last step get assigned low weights or we reach |𝑋| (full concept
lattice). In this way, we recursively check the possible combinations of agendas deemed
to be important so far in the next recursive step. This method works on assumption that
if a feature is not important on its own, then it is unlikely to be part of a set of features
that is important. However, this assumption may fail in several situations. In such cases,
this method should not be used to choose a basis.
There can be other effective strategies for choosing basis lattices for different tasks and algo-
rithms.
4.2. Learning algorithm
Once the set of possible agendas (or concept lattices) is chosen, we apply some classification
or outlier detection algorithm on each of these. For every lattice L ∈ℛ, we start assigning it
a random weight 𝑤∈R. Let 𝐴𝑙𝑔be any algorithm which performs classification or outlier
detection for a fixed concept lattice.
Suppose 𝐴𝑙𝑔is a classification (resp. outlier detection) algorithm classifying a set 𝐴of
objects into 𝑛classes using concept lattices. For any object 𝑎and a class 𝑘, let 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑎, L)
(resp. 𝐴𝑙𝑔(𝑎, L) denote the membership of the object 𝑎into the class 𝑘(resp. outlier degree)
according to the classification algorithm 𝐴𝑙𝑔acting on the lattice L. Notice that we allow for
our classifiers (resp. outlier detection algorithms) to be interpreted as fuzzy or probabilistic such
that membership value (resp. outlier degree) of 𝑎belongs to [0, 1]. For an algorithm 𝐴𝑙𝑔with
crisp output, the value 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑎, L) (resp. 𝐴𝑙𝑔(𝑎, L)) will be either 0 or 1. For a given weight
function 𝑤: ℛ→R, we say that the membership of 𝑎in the class 𝑘(resp. outlier degree of 𝑎)
assigned by the algorithm 𝐴𝑙𝑔acting on a non-crisp categorization described by 𝑤is
𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑘(𝑎, 𝑤) =
∑︀
L∈ℛ𝑤(L)𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑎, L)
∑︀
L∈ℛ𝑤(L)
.
(5)
Intuitively, this corresponds to taking the weighted sum of the result given by 𝐴𝑙𝑔on lattices
with weights provided by the agenda 𝑤. Let 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠be a loss function for a given classification
task, and let 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑜𝑢𝑡) be the total loss for the classification (resp. outlier detection) when
classes (outlier degrees) are assigned by 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑎, 𝑤) (resp. 𝐴𝑙𝑔(𝑎, 𝑤)). We use a gradient descent
method to learn the agenda 𝑓0 that minimizes the loss. We then use the learnt agenda 𝑓0 to
assign a class to an object that is for any test object 𝑏, its predicted membership in class 𝑘(resp.
outlier degree) is 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑏, 𝑓0) (resp. 𝐴𝑙𝑔(𝑏, 𝑓0)).
A generic algorithm for outlier detection can be given in a similar manner.
4.3. Example
Let us consider the following toy data table providing some information on different types of
apples. It contains information on the color, size, sweetness, and origin of the apples. We assume
that all apples under consideration are either green or red. For conceptual scaling, we divide
sweetness, price, and volume into low, medium, and high. This converts these continuous-
valued attributes into discrete-valued. The set of features is obtained by considering each value

Algorithm 1 Meta-Learning Algorithm for Interrogative Agendas
Input: a set of objects 𝐴, a set of features 𝑋, a training set 𝑇⊆𝑋, and a map 𝑦: 𝑇→𝐶representing the
labels on the training set, an algorithm 𝐴𝑙𝑔that takes in input some object and a concept lattice in ℛ, and outputs
an element in R𝐶representing its prediction for each class; a loss function 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠that compares two classifications
and outputs a real number, and a number of training epochs 𝑀.
Output A model that classifies objects in 𝑋.
1: procedure Train(𝐴, 𝑋, 𝑇, 𝑦, 𝐴𝑙𝑔, 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠, 𝑀)
2:
L1, . . . , L𝑛←compute the concept lattices of ℛ
3:
let 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠be an empty map from 𝐴to R𝐶
4:
let 𝑤be an array of weights of length 𝑛initialized with random values in R
5:
for 𝑒= 1, . . . , 𝑀do
6:
for 𝑎∈𝑋, 𝑘∈𝐶do
7:
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠[𝑎][𝑘] ←
∑︀𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑤(L𝑖)𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑘(𝑎,L𝑖)
∑︀𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑤(L𝑖)
8:
end for
9:
update 𝑤with an iteration of gradient descent using 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠)
10:
end for
11: end procedure
of attributes as a different feature. For example, High volume, red color, Medium price are a few
of them.
Type
Color
Volume
Sweetness
Local
Price
1
red
High
High
Yes
Medium
2
green
High
High
Yes
Medium
3
red
Medium
Medium
Yes
Medium
4
green
Low
High
No
Medium
5
green
High
Medium
No
Low
6
red
Medium
Low
Yes
Low
7
green
High
Medium
Yes
Low
8
green
High
Medium
Yes
High
Table 1
Exemplary data table containing the information on different types of apples w.r.t. attributes such as
color, volume, sweetness, et cetera.
Let 𝐴and 𝑋be the set of all types of apples and features respectively. The (non-crisp) agendas
of interest to us are the ones assigning mass to an attribute and not to an individual feature.
That is, we consider basis lattices corresponding to feature sets that contain all the values for
a given many-valued attribute. As an example, if a 𝑌⊆𝑋in the agendas corresponding to
a basis lattice contains the feature high volume, then it must also contain the features low
and medium volume. We use volume to denote the set of features {high volume, low volume,
medium volume}. A similar convention is used for the other attributes as well.
Let 𝐼⊆𝐴× 𝑋be the incidence relation and let 𝑃be a customer. Suppose we are interested
in classifying apples into types customer 𝑃likes (class 1) and does not like (class 2). Given a
formal context (concept lattice) P = (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼∩𝐴× 𝑌), describing a categorization of these
types of apples for a given agenda of interest 𝑌, we use the following simple algorithm to
predict the class for a new type of apple. Let 𝐴+ and 𝐴−be the set of apples known to be in
class 1 and class 2 respectively (from the training set). A set of features 𝐻⊆𝑌is said to be a

positive (resp. negative) hypothesis in w.r.t. a lattice (𝐴, 𝑋, 𝐼∩𝐴× 𝑌) iff 𝐻is Galois-stable,
𝐼(0)[𝐻] is non-empty, and 𝐼(0)[𝐻] ∩𝐴−= ∅(resp. 𝐼(0)[𝐻] ∩𝐴+ = ∅). For any new element 𝑡,
we put it in class 1 (resp. class 2) if the category 𝐼(1)[{𝑡}] contains only positive (resp. negative)
hypothesis. The algorithm is inconclusive when it contains neither type of hypothesis (no
information) or contains both type of hypotheses (inconsistent information).
Suppose the classification of apples of types 1-8 into classes 1 and 2 for customer 𝑃are as
𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠1 = {1, 2, 4, 5, 7} and 𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠2 = {3, 6, 8} and suppose also that we use the full concept
lattice (that is, agenda 𝑌= 𝑋). Let 𝑡0 be a new type of apple that is green, has high volume,
high sweetness, is local, and has a high price. Consider hypotheses 𝐻1 = {High sweetness}
and 𝐻2 = {Green, local} which are both contained in 𝐼(1)[{𝑡0}]. The hypothesis 𝐻1 is positive
while 𝐻2 is negative. Thus, the above classification algorithm can not classify this object as the
available information is inconsistent. However, in many cases, some subsets of features are of
much more importance to a customer than others. For example, from the above classification, it
is hinted that the customer 𝑃considers Sweetness and Price as more important features than
color or location. Our algorithm for learning agenda can help to recognize this difference in
importance of different sets of features and allow us to classify such elements.
Suppose we use our method to find the best categorization (or agenda) for the completion
of this task using the above classification algorithm with the basis lattice consisting of lattices
given by agendas comprising of one attribute (as discussed earlier, one attribute can correspond
to multiple features due to scaling). We start with random weights assigned to each of these
lattices. We then use the classification algorithm described above to classify new types of apples
into classes 1 and 2 using each of these lattices. We then sum over the weights of lattices in
which elements are assigned to either class. The new object is assigned to the class which has a
higher mass (the algorithm is indecisive if such a class does not exist). We use machine learning
(gradient descent) to train the algorithm to find the best weights for this classification task.
During the training phase, our algorithm can (generally) learn that the attribute (or set of
features) {sweetness} matters much more than other features to the customer 𝑃. Thus, a high
weight will be attached to the lattice with agenda {sweetness}. Thus, the above algorithm in
combination with our method assigns 𝑡0 to class 1. Adding this method on top of a classification
algorithm may give a better classification (that is, more elements classified correctly with a given
amount of training samples) given our learnt information ‘sweetness is much more important
for 𝑃in decision-making’ is true.
Similarly, higher (resp. lower) masses attached to agendas consisting of different sets of
a single attribute are helpful in better categorization when this attribute is more (resp. less)
important for the customer. Thus, using machine learning techniques (for example, gradient
descent when possible) to learn the best possible agenda to provide categorization to complement
the classification algorithm can improve its accuracy with less training. Considering more basis
lattices may further improve the accuracy and sample complexity. For example, it can be seen
that the types 5 and 7, which have medium sweetness and low price, belong to class 1. This
provides us with another likely hypothesis that the customer likes apples that are of medium
size (not necessarily high) but have a low price. This hints to us that the agenda {size, price}
may be of significant importance to the customer. In case this agenda is indeed more important
to the agent, the learning would assign it a high weight during training and thus allows us
to make more accurate predictions with a fewer number of samples. However, an increasing

number of basis lattices may increase computational complexity significantly, meaning that
such a decision needs to be made judiciously.
This simple example shows that the classification algorithm described above can be improved
in terms of accuracy, sample complexity, and explainability by adding a learning step for finding
out the best agenda for categorization. Adding this step to the different algorithms discussed
in Section 3, used for classification and outlier detection using concept lattices can improve
these algorithms in a similar manner. This is especially the case for the tasks in which the
importance of different features may be hard to estimate beforehand. The obtained agendas can
be defined formally using the logical framework described in [16]. In that paper, a logical model
was used to represent deliberation between agents with different agendas. This framework
can also be used to model deliberation or interaction between different learning algorithms by
aggregating learnt agendas using different techniques described in [16]. The agendas inferred
by our learning algorithm can be used for further tasks like aggregation from different sources.
For example, if for two different classifiers the agendas learned are given by the mass functions
𝑚1 and 𝑚2 on 𝒫(𝑋), then a combined classifier that takes both into account can be obtained
by choosing the agenda 𝐹(𝑚1, 𝑚2), where 𝐹is a suitable Dempster-Shafer combination rule
[21, 48, 22], and then applying the classification algorithm to the resulting lattice.
5. Conclusion and future directions
In this paper, targeting the explainability line of hybrid intelligence research [1], we proposed
a meta-learning algorithm to learn a "good" (interrogative) agenda for categorization (which
is used by a potential FCA-based classification or outlier detection algorithm). Adding such a
learning step to a given algorithm allows us to improve the accuracy and sample complexity
of the procedure while also making it more explainable. On the empirical side, a performance
evaluation and the ablation study on the results of employing different FCA-based classification
and outlier detection algorithms is an avenue of future research. Another investigation line is
the transferability analysis of "good" agendas e.g., how much knowledge do we transfer and
how good the data efficiency is when such an agenda is used on previously unseen environ-
ments/categorizations. Noteworthy is extending this methodology towards other interesting
application domains such as knowledge discovery, data visualization, information retrieval, etc.
On the theoretical side, this framework can be used to model deliberation between agendas
learnt from different algorithms, providing us a way to study their interaction, comparison, or
combination. Within the interpretation of taking the concept lattice as expert knowledge, the
learnt agendas can also be aggregated or compared with agendas of different experts allowing
us to incorporate learning and expert knowledge in categorization. From a multiagent systems
perspective, it is especially useful to model subjective categorizations involving multiple agents
(human experts and algorithms) with different agendas or goals interacting with each other.
In future work, we are considering investigation in a variety of directions e.g., investigating
desirable properties of various aggregation mechanisms, representational power such as pro-
portionality and fairness of induced agendas for multiple parties, convergence and robustness
guarantees for the "good" agendas, computational complexity analysis on hard and easy cases
for (non-)crisp agendas, and extending our method on a more general framework in order to

tackle the problem of features selection in an uniform way.
The meta-algorithm described in the present paper is currently employed in the development
of an outlier detection algorithm with good results. Currently, it has been tested on the datasets
from the ELKI toolkit [49] and it has been compared against the algorithms discussed in it. A
detailed report of the results will be available in the future.
