arXiv:1801.02832v1  [cs.IR]  9 Jan 2018
Biomedical Question Answering via Weighted
Neural Network Passage Retrieval
Ferenc Galk´o and Carsten Eickhoﬀ
Department of Computer Science,
ETH Zurich,
Switzerland

Abstract. The amount of publicly available biomedical literature has
been growing rapidly in recent years, yet question answering systems still
struggle to exploit the full potential of this source of data. In a prelimi-
nary processing step, many question answering systems rely on retrieval
models for identifying relevant documents and passages. This paper pro-
poses a weighted cosine distance retrieval scheme based on neural net-
work word embeddings. Our experiments are based on publicly available
data and tasks from the BioASQ biomedical question answering chal-
lenge and demonstrate signiﬁcant performance gains over a wide range
of state-of-the-art models.
Keywords: Biomedical Question Answering, Passage Retrieval
1
Introduction
Biomedical question answering is a key task in catering to clinical decision sup-
port and personal health information needs. Finding useful information in the
extensive collections of scholarly biomedical articles poses a challenge to highly
trained practitioners and patients alike [5]. Biomedical questions phrased by
experts are usually more speciﬁc than common Web search queries, making
them diﬃcult to satisfy using general-purpose retrieval models. A typical ex-
pert question (for example “Which enzymes synthesize catecholamines in adrenal
glands?”) shows speciﬁc domain knowledge and aims at more than just a gen-
eral overview about adrenal glands [15]. Instead, the expert is looking for a
narrow set of documents or snippets that help answering a speciﬁc relation of
the queried entities. Since many question answering systems rely heavily on doc-
ument and passage retrieval, an increased performance in these tasks tends to
propagate into signiﬁcant QA performance gains [13,16]. While the task of whole-
document retrieval for QA is well understood, passage-level retrieval approaches
have received comparably less attention [4,8,10,13].
This paper describes a piece of work in progress, focusing on passage-level
retrieval for biomedical question answering on the basis of weighted combinations
of neural network word embeddings. It makes the following contributions: (1) We
propose a novel approach for weighting query embedding vectors for the cosine

2
distance text matching scheme and show that it outperforms traditional models.
(2) We demonstrate signiﬁcant performance improvements over state-of-the-art
neural network retrieval models on a sizable publicly available benchmarking
dataset.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 formally intro-
duces the problem domain as well as the proposed method. Section 3 empirically
evaluates the merit of our method on the basis of publicly available data and
tasks created in the context of the BioAsq biomedical question answering chal-
lenge. Finally, Section 4 concludes with a summary and an outlook on future
directions.
2
Method
Let us assume a textual question Q consisting of individual terms, where each
term is represented by a ﬁxed-length vector. To satisfy Q, we rely on a large
collection of biomedical documents organized in passages. In order to represent
and retain the semantic content of the terms, we project them into semantically
meaningful vector spaces, such as induced by Word2Vec [6] or GloVe [11]. In this
way both the question Q = q1, q2, . . . , qi and each passage P = p1, p2, . . . , pj can
be represented as a sequence of ﬁxed-length vectors. In this high-dimensional
space, we can now relate individual terms to each other by means of distance
functions. A commonly employed measure of relatedness is the cosine of the
angle between word vectors as expressed by the cosine distance.
cos(q, p) = 1 −
qp
∥q∥2∥p∥2
Given such a representation as well as measure of similarity, we can now
perform a variety of operations ranging from clustering to retrieval [1,3]. In
order to represent multi-term units such as entire queries and passages, several
authors recommend uniform averaging of word vectors before ﬁnally returning
a ranked top-k list of closest passages to the query.
CD(Q, P) = 1 −
( 1
|Q|
P qi)( 1
|P |
P pj)
∥1
|Q|
P qi∥2∥1
|P |
P pj∥2
2.1
Weighted cosine distance
One serious issue with the well-known cosine distance retrieval approach intro-
duced above is that the uniform average vector is a poor semantic representation
for general texts. This is due to the presence and abundance of stop words such
as “the”, “a”, or “is” that carry little meaning. By assigning uniform weights
to all words, we water down the semantic content of informative words such as
“neurodegenerative”. To address this problem, non-uniform weighting schemes
such as idf can be used. A term’s collection-wide inverse document frequency
(idf) captures its uniqueness and assigns larger weights to rarer words on a

3
logarithmic scale. By assigning idf instead of uniform weights to the words, a
substantial increase in performance can be achieved as we will show in Section 3.
CDidf(Q, P) = 1 −
(
1
P idf(qi)
P idf(qi)qi)(
1
P idf(pj)
P idf(pj)pj)
∥
1
P idf(qi)
P idf(qi)qi∥2∥
1
P idf(pj)
P idf(pj)pj∥2
While there are alternative approaches for aggregation such as position en-
coding [14], that can take into consideration the ordering of words, a series of
preliminary studies suggest that idf weights perform best on the biomedical QA
task. For the sake of brevity, we do not include these experiments in our empirical
performance evaluation.
2.2
Adjusted idf weights
The previously presented idf weights depend solely on the distribution of words
in the corpus. Incoming queries, on the other hand, may originate from a diﬀerent
distribution. Using idf scores generated from the document collection to weight
query terms might result in a poor representation, since words that appear rarely
in documents but frequently in questions can receive an unduly large weight.
Question words such as “what”, “when”, “where” are intuitive examples. When
idf weights are calculated on a sizable sample of scholarly biomedical articles
obtained from PubMed, the weight for “what” is 5.05, whereas “disease” (2.68),
“protein” (2.59) and “artery” (4.16) end up being much less important despite
their greater de facto informativeness.
As a consequence, passages containing the word “what” will be estimated
to be more similar to the question “What is a degenerate protein?”, according
to our metric, than passages containing the more promising phrase “degenerate
protein”. In fact, if we were to perform idf-based stopping and only retain the
most important components of a question, our example question “What is a
degenerate protein?” becomes “What degenerate?” with the low-idf component
“is”, “a” and “protein” being removed while the desired reduction in this case
may have been “degenerate protein?” which captures the topical essence of the
original question much better.
We address this issue by generating idf weights from an alternative collec-
tion, speciﬁcally a mixture of large-scale corpora of biomedical [15] and general
questions [12]. Generating idf weights from the combined question set results in
smaller weights for general terms such as “what”, “which”, “when” and larger
weights for rarer, domain-speciﬁc terminology such as “protein”, “disease”, or
“artery”, making it possible to capture the true intention of bio-medical ques-
tions and passages. We refer to this method as CDq.
3
Experiments
Our empirical performance evaluation is based on documents and questions from
the BioASQ 2017 challenge’s document and snippet retrieval tasks [7]. The goal

4
in this task is to return the 10 most relevant passages from a collection of 12.8M
PubMed abstracts for a speciﬁc biomedical question. A training set of 1799
manually curated questions along with relevant passages are provided by the
challenge organizers. The test set is comprised of a separate set of 500 questions
organized in ﬁve equally-sized batches.
3.1
Baselines
To allow for a meaningful system comparison, we include a broad range of tra-
ditional as well as state-of-the-art performance baselines, trained and evaluated
on the same data and task as our proposed cosine-distance based methods.
RND This approach returns a random passage from the reference set of highly-
ranked documents to create a weak baseline.
MLP This approach uses position-encoded sentence embeddings that are con-
catenated and eventually classiﬁed in binary fashion in a multi-layer percep-
tron [4]. This is a re-implementation of a system participating in a previous
BioASQ challenge.
MP The Match Pyramid [9] model generates a similarity matrix from the pair-
wise word interactions between question and candidate passage. We use a
ﬁxed 30 by 30 matrix with zero padding and the identity function as a
measure of similarity. In a second step, convolutional ﬁlters condense the
interaction matrix into a ﬁnal vector representation for classiﬁcation.
DRMM The Deep Relevance Matching Model [2] is based on a similar scheme.
It computes pair-wise term interactions between question and candidate pas-
sage that are then ﬂattened into ﬁxed-size histograms and discretized and
weighted to give the ﬁnal vector representation.
3.2
Experimental Setup
All (machine learning) methods are trained using ﬁve-fold cross validation on
the training set. Word embeddings for all methods are computed as length-
50 word2vec vectors on the PubMed document corpus [7]. For each question
(training and test), a reference set of highly ranked documents is given by the
challenge organizers. We split these documents into individual sentences that
will serve as our retrieval unit. Negative training examples for machine learning
methods are randomly sampled from arbitrary non-relevant documents.
3.3
Results
Table 1 compares the various baselines and cosine distance variants in terms of
mean average precision (MAP), Precision, Recall and F1-scores each at a cut-oﬀ
rank of 10 retrieved passages. Statistical signiﬁcance of method diﬀerences is
determined using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test at α < 0.05-level and signiﬁcant
improvements over all baselines are indicated with an asterisk. While questions
were originally grouped in batches, here we forego this structure in the interest of

5
Table 1. Passage retrieval performance for biomedical question answering.
Method
MAP Precision Recall F1
RND
0.190
0.190
0.289 0.229
MLP [4]
0.226
0.236
0.352 0.282
MP [9]
0.344
0.323
0.470 0.383
DRMM [2] 0.348
0.344
0.510 0.411
CD
0.341
0.339
0.484 0.399
CDidf
0.344
0.348
0.487 0.406
CDq
0.377∗0.374∗
0.519 0.434∗
brevity. Batch-level scores showed some variance but displayed the same relative
method ranking as the aggregate overview.
Due to the limited length of the reference document list as well as each indi-
vidual abstract, random sentence selection does surprisingly well and sets a lower
limit to method performance. All compared approaches yield meaningful results
and signiﬁcantly outperform this baseline. MLP is the weakest machine learn-
ing approach with substantially lower performance scores than those achieved
by MP and DRMM. Cosine distance rankings are clearly improved by idf term
weighting, lifting their results on a level comparable to that of MP and DRMM.
Our adjusted term-weighting scheme following statistics of a separate, more rep-
resentative, question corpus introduces another improvement in result quality,
leading to the best overall results and a signiﬁcant improvement over all con-
testing methods.
4
Conclusion
This paper presents a piece of work in progress towards passage retrieval for
biomedical question answering via weighted cosine distances. In place of highly
parametric end-to-end ranking networks, we devise a number of lean non-parametric
weighting schemes that account for the diﬀerences in term distribution between
document and question corpora. Our experiments on publicly available BioASQ
data demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements over a range of ranking networks.
Especially in academic settings where datasets are often not suﬃciently large to
robustly ﬁt multitudes of neural network parameters, such light-weight architec-
tures are of increased interest.
While we noted the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in term distributions between cor-
pora at a biomedical example, the solution, as such, is not speciﬁc to the biomed-
ical domain. In the future, we aim to investigate more formally rigorous ways of
accounting for such diﬀerences as well as to evaluate them on a wider range of
topical domains.
