Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approaches To UCAV
Autonomy
Amir Husain∗, Bruce Porter†
January 26, 2017

1
Abstract
This paper covers a number of approaches that leverage Artiﬁcial Intelligence
algorithms and techniques to aid Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle (UCAV)
autonomy. An analysis of current approaches to autonomous control is provided
followed by an exploration of how these techniques can be extended and enriched
with AI techniques including Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN), Ensembling and
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to evolve control strategies for UCAVs.
2
Introduction
Current UAVs have limited autonomous capabilities that mainly comprise GPS
waypoint following, and a few control functions such as maintenance of sta-
bility in the face of environmental factors such as wind. More recently some
autonomous capabilities such as the ability for a ﬁxed wing UCAV to land on
the deck of a carrier have also been demonstrated [1]. These capabilities rep-
resent just the tip of the spear in terms of what is possible and, given both
the commercial and military applications and interest, what will undoubtedly
be developed in the near future. In particular, ﬂexibility in responses that can
mimic the unpredictability of human responses is one way in which autonomous
systems of the future will diﬀerentiate themselves from rules-based control sys-
tems. Human-style unpredictability in action selection opens the door to ﬁnd-
ing solutions that may not have been imagined at the time the system was
programmed. Additionally, this type of unpredictability in combat systems can
create diﬃculties for adversary systems designed to act as a counter.
∗SparkCognition Inc.
†Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin.
1
arXiv:1701.07103v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2017

The capability to compute sequences of actions that do not correspond to
any pre-programmed input - in other words, the ability to evolve new responses
- will be another area of future diﬀerentiation. There are many other such en-
hancements that will be enabled via autonomous systems powered by Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. In the following sections we will outline some of the advanced ca-
pabilities that can be engineered, and design and engineering approaches for
these capabilities.
3
Existing Control Systems
Some degree of autonomy in ﬂight control has existed for over a hundred years,
with autopilot inventor, Lawrence Sperry’s demonstration in 1913 [5] of a con-
trol system that tied the heading and attitude indicators to a control system
that hydraulically operated elevators and rudders. A fully autonomous Atlantic
crossing was achieved as early as 1947 in a USAF C-54 aircraft [6]. However,
much of the early work in automating control systems were mechanical imple-
mentations of rule-based systems drawing upon cybernetics and control theory.
They demonstrated that with such techniques it was possible to automate a
basic mission, including takeoﬀand landing.
Since the 1947 demonstration, considerable eﬀort has been invested in devel-
oping autonomous ﬂight capabilities for commercial and military aircraft. Mod-
ern ﬂight control or autopilot systems that govern landings are segmented in
ﬁve categories from CAT-I to CAT-IIIc [11], with capabilities varying based on
forward visibility and decision height. Many of these systems use rule-based, or
fuzzy-rule based control, incorporating sensor-fusion techniques such as Kalman
ﬁlters [7]. They are capable of following a planned route and adjusting for en-
vironmental factors such as cross-winds, turbulence and so on.
The increased popularity of commercial drones, and the heightened utiliza-
tion of military drone aircraft has, in parallel, created a new class of autonomous
capabilities. From Open Source initiatives such as the Ardupilot[8]ﬂight control
software for low-cost drones, to higher levels of autonomy in military drones.
Software such as the Ardupilot, for example, uses a combination of GPS posi-
tioning, additional sensors to gauge velocity and position, combined with basic
ﬂight control rules to autonomously navigate to a sequence of waypoints. Many
of these map-input based waypoint following capabilities are also implemented
in military surveillance and combat drones.
Another area of control innovation comes from swarm theory and related
control algorithms. At the simplest level, these algorithms seek inspiration from
the behavior of biological systems such as ant colonies or ﬂocks of birds. They
are collaboration algorithms that enable each individual system in the swarm
to compute its future actions based on its own measurements, but also those
of its neighbors. While basic swarm algorithms [10] are eﬀective in providing
coverage over an area, and automatically repositioning all nodes when one is
lost to maintain coverage, they do not provide much guidance on how to di-
vide mission responsibilities and burdens, and to eﬀectively delegate them to
2

individual nodes. The concept of a “swarm” as found in biology will have to
evolve into something entirely diﬀerent - perhaps somewhat similar to a pack
hunt - but even that analogy would only be marginal - in order for it to be
an eﬀective and useful system particularly in a military context. Some of the
reasons why we propose this conclusion regarding the inadequacy of existing
swarm algorithms is that most biologically inspired algorithms, such as Parti-
cle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [12] or Artiﬁcial Bee Colony Algorithm (ABC)
[13], are search or optimization techniques that do not account for the role of
an individual particle (or node) in the swarm. For example, PSO proposes the
same meta-heuristic for computing positional updates for all points and does
not incorporate a diﬀerential update mechanism based on the role of a particle.
In a subsequent publication, we intend to propose a “Pack Hunt Optimization”
(PHO) algorithm that we believe addresses the shortcomings of the existing
swarm algorithms we have cited, and holds relevance to UCAV control applica-
tions.
The state of current control systems can be summed up as follows:
• Eﬀective at basic navigation and path following
• Many existing techniques to fuse sensor data for accurate position identi-
ﬁcation
• Able to automatically take oﬀand land if runways are properly instru-
mented
• Actions beyond ﬂight control (such as weapons engagement) are presently
manual
• Missions are pre-deﬁned
• Swarm algorithms can provide additional value for relative positioning of
multiple assets and distributed sensing
4
Advanced Autonomous Capabilities
The purpose of this section is to outline a few areas of potential advancement
that can be expected of autonomous systems of the future. This list is neither
exhaustive nor complete with regards to the author’s current conception of all
such advanced capabilities. It is a subset of possible functions that is listed to
illuminate the broad contours of what is possible in terms of applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence to UCAV autonomy. Some features include:
1. Knowledge & Assessment Updates
(a) Identiﬁcation of potential threats outside pre-programmed mission
briefs
(b) Autonomous exploration and assessment of identiﬁed targets that
autonomous control deems to be high priority
3

(c) Enhancement and update to intelligence supplied as part of the mis-
sion brief and plan, based on actual observation
2. Autonomous Navigation and Swarm Coordination
(a) Ability to adjust to environmental conditions that cause system or
any linked swarm systems to deviate from mission plan expectations
(b) Ability to adjust to loss of a Swarm asset, not just in terms of re-
positioning, but including potential re-tasking (i.e. assumption of a
new role on the part of an individual asset)
3. Autonomous Evasion
(a) Automated update to mission plan based on sensor detection of prob-
able manned aerial intercept
(b) Automated update to mission plan based on detection of unexpected
sensor presence
(c) Autonomous evasion in the event of a RWR (Radar Warning Re-
ceiver) activation or MAW (Missile Approach Warning) system acti-
vation
4. Autonomous Targeting
(a) Autonomous addition to target lists based on computer vision or
alternate sensor based identiﬁcation of threats to mission (including
surface to air threats)
(b) Autonomous addition to target lists in the event that primary targets
have already been neutralized
(c) Autonomous deletion of a target from target lists in the event it has
been already neutralized, is found to violate a “hard” policy constraint
or is low priority and its neutralization harms the overall achievement
or success of the mission
5
The Need for a New Approach
In the preceding sections we explored the current state of autonomous systems
and the rules-based approach that is often employed to develop these systems.
Further, we also considered a number of advanced capabilities that would be
desirable in future autonomous control systems. A fundamental challenge in
developing these future capabilities is that the range of scenarios an autonomous
system would have to contend with in order to eﬀectively execute the required
maneuvers are enormous. Tackling such a large range of possibilities with a
rules-based system will be impractical not only because of the combinatorial
explosion of possibilities that would require individual rules, but also because
4

human designers of such a system may simply not be able to conceive every
imaginable scenario the autonomous system could ﬁnd itself in.
Another challenge is that rules-based systems are hard coded to measure
certain criteria, or sensor values, and then act based on this pre-speciﬁed criteria.
This hard coding means that each rule is tied to a speciﬁc set of sensors. If
additional sensors are added to a system, or existing sensors are upgraded, a
large number of rules would have to be re-written, creating an obvious cost and
eﬀort burden.
What we have described above is far from an exhaustive list of limitations in
current autonomous systems, but we believe they are suﬃcient to motivate the
need for a new architecture for autonomy. A future system that moves beyond
rules-based systems, incorporates learning capabilities so that actions can be
learned rather than hard coded, and can adapt to new information from new or
better sensors, will represent a substantial advance. In the sections that follow,
we deﬁne the contours of just such a system.
6
An Architecture for Advanced Autonomy
The fundamental architecture we propose in this paper is based on multiple
independent control systems connected to an action optimizer neural network.
Each of the multiple independent control systems can be neural networks or
non-ANN rule based control systems that output a suggested vector of actions
or control activations. The action optimizer ANN gates and weighs the inputs
supplied by each independent control system.
5

Let ckbe an independent control system, and s be an action optimizer neural
network to which c1..ncontrol networks are connected.
Additionally, let the
set E contain a collection e1..mof environmental inputs that are supplied to s.
Then, we denote the speciﬁc conﬁguration of all environmental inputs at time
t byEtand the output of s under these environmental inputs and based on the
inputs of all independent control networks, as follows:
s(Et, Ct) = At
The goal of our system is to optimize the selection of action sequences
At..t+ksuch that this sequences maximizes the performance of the system being
controlled.
It is important to understand what we mean by, “performance” here. We
deﬁne performance as a variable that is the output of a utility function U such
that this output is high when the weighted achievement of all mission parameters
is large, and low when the weighted achievement of mission parameters is small.
In other words, we are attempting to locally maximize U at least locally:
dU
dx = 0
and:
d2U
dx2 < 0
The question obviously arises, how do we build the function s? Convention-
ally, control functions have been built in various ways, for example as fuzzy rule
based systems [3]. However, we propose to implement the control function s
as an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN). As the application at hand will beneﬁt
from some knowledge of past actions, we speciﬁcally propose to implement the
network as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
7
Evolving Mission Speciﬁc Controllers
The actual training and evolution of the RNN represented by s is not the subject
of this paper and will be documented in a subsequent publication. In summary,
this can be done in a manner that combines real world and simulator envi-
ronments. However, in a more detailed future exploration we intend to cover
questions such as whether individual control networks, c1..n, can be trained in-
dependently and how a training set that reﬂects key the wide range of scenarios
the UCAV might experience would be compiled. For the purpose of the present
discussion, our basic approach is to use Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques
[4] to train the RNN in a simulated environment until a basic level of compe-
tence has been achieved, and to then allow the evolved network to control a
real craft. Collected data from the actual ﬂight is reconciled with the simulated
6

environment and the process is repeated until an acceptable level of capabil-
ity is demonstrated by s. This reconciliation would beneﬁt from applications of
Transfer Learning [14].
One of the beneﬁts of this approach is that the simulated environment can in-
troduce environmental constraints that s must respond to appropriately. For ex-
ample, these can be navigation constraints such as avoiding certain pre-identiﬁed
objects on a map. Work has already been done to use search algorithms such
as A* to ﬁnd viable paths around objects to be avoided[2]and this type of con-
straint can be implemented by one of the independent control networks (ck,as
presented in the previous section). Other examples of existing work that could
be leveraged in the form of an independent control network include collabora-
tive mapping algorithms for multiple autonomous vehicles [15]. Of course, other
constraints and optimizations would be represented by other ensembled control
networks, forcing s to weight them and choose from them carefully, in a way
that maximizes U.
Thus, the controller can be evolved to optimize operation in diﬀerent types
of environments, and under diﬀerent constraints. It may then become possible
to simply “upload” the optimal controller for a particular environment, or a
particular mission type, into the same craft and achieve mission-speciﬁc optimal
performance.
8
Semantic Interpretation of Sensor Data
Sensor data in autonomous systems does not have to remain limited to environ-
mental measurements or ﬂight sensor readings. It can include a variety of image
feeds from forward, rear or down-facing cameras. Additionally, radar data and
Forward Looking Infra Red (FLIR) sensor data is also a possibility. In order
to utilize all this diverse data to make decisions and even deviate in small but
important ways from the original mission plans, all of this data has to be inter-
preted and semantically modeled. In other words, its meaning and relevance to
the mission and its role in governing future action has to be established.
For the purpose of understanding how such data can be interpreted and
what its impact on decisions can be, we classify sensors and data sources into
the following categories:
1. Internal Sensors
(a) System Health (e.g.
Engine Vibration, Various Temperature and
internal system Pressure)
(b) System Performance (e.g. Velocity, Stress)
2. External Sensors
(a) Navigational Aides (e.g. Level, Wind speed, Inertial navigation gy-
roscopic sensors)
7

(b) Environmental Mapping (e.g. Camera, Radar, LIDAR, FLIR, RWR,
MAWS)
In an example table below, we show the types of impact that information re-
ceived from these sensors can potentially have on mission plans and vehicle
navigation.
Actions
Health
Perf.
Nav.
Envir. Mapping
Terminate Mission
X
X
X
Update Mission Achievement
X
Add New Target
X
De-prioritize Target
X
X
Change Course
X
X
X
Add Obstacle (Constrain Path)
X
Engage Weapon System
X
Evasive Maneuvers
X
Engage Countermeasures
X
In order to support the types of advanced autonomy outlined in Section 4 of
this paper, many of the actions highlighted in the table above will likely need
to be combined based on sensor input to form a chain of actions that update
the internal state and maps used by the autonomous asset. Sensor data may be
an input required by any controller ckor by the controller s.Thus, a sensor bus
connects all sensors to all controllers.
For many sensor types, instead of the sensor providing a raw output, we
transform the output to reﬂect semantic constructs. For example, instead of a
raw radar signal input, we may transform the signal into a data structure that
reﬂects the position, speed, heading, type and classiﬁcation of each detected
object. This transformation of raw sensor data into semantic outputs that use
a common data representation for each class of sensor enables replaceability of
underlying components so that the same controllers can work eﬀectively even
when sensors are replaced or upgraded.
The semantic output of individual sensor systems can be used by controllers,
and is also stored in a Cognitive Corpus, which is a database that can store
mission information, current status, maps, objectives, past performance data
and not-to-violate parameters for action that are used to gate the ﬁnal output
of the controller s.
8

9
Knowledge Representation For Advanced Au-
tonomy
As the more complete diagram of the proposed Autonomy Architecture il-
lustrates, the controller s receives input from a set of controllers c1..nand is also
connected to the sensor bus and the Cognitive Corpus. A state map stored
in the Cognitive Corpus reﬂects the full environmental picture available to the
autonomous asset. For example, it includes an estimate of the asset’s own posi-
tion, the positions of allied assets, the positions of enemy assets, marked mission
targets, paths indicating preferred trajectories at the time of mission planning,
territory and locations over which to avoid ﬂight and other pertinent data that
can assist with route planning, objective fulﬁllment and obstacle avoidance.
This state map forms another important input to the controller s as it
chooses the most optimal sequence of actions. The image below shows a visual
representation of what the state map might track. Here, it shows the location of
multiple allied assets, for example systems that might be part of a swarm with
the UCAV that is maintaining this map. There is also a hostile entity identiﬁed
with additional information regarding its speed and heading. Locations on the
9

ground indicate sites to be avoided. Sensor information carried in the set (or
vector) E result in updates to the state of each object in this map. Note that
the state map is maintained by each autonomous asset and while the underly-
ing information used to update it may be shared with, or received from other
systems, each autonomous asset acts based on its own internal representation,
or copy, of the state map.
While the details of an implementation are beyond the scope of this paper,
we propose that the information exchange between autonomous systems occur
using a blockchain protocol [9]. Beneﬁts of this approach include the fact that
in the event communication is interrupted and updates are missed, information
can be reconstructed with guarantees regarding accuracy and order. Further,
the use of a blockchain store ensures that a single or few malicious participants
cannot impact the veracity of the information contained therein.
While the ﬁgure shows a graphic representation of the map, it is possible
to represent such a map as a vector or matrix. By so doing, it can readily be
supplied to the controller s as an input.
10
Conclusion
Sophisticated autonomy requires control over a wider range of action than rule
based systems can support. The subtle changes in ﬂight patterns, identiﬁca-
tion of new threats, self-directed changes in mission proﬁle and target selection
all require autonomous assets to go beyond pre-ordained instructions. Machine
Learning and AI techniques oﬀer a viable way for autonomous systems to learn
and evolve behaviors that go beyond their programming. Semantic information
passing from sensors, via a sensor bus, to a collection of decision making con-
trollers makes provides for plug and play replacements of individual controllers.
An artiﬁcial neural network such as an RNN can ensemble and combine inputs
10

from multiple controllers to create a single, coherent control signal. In taking
this approach, while some of the individual controllers may be rules-based, the
RNN really evolves into the autonomous intelligence that can consider a vari-
ety of concerns and factors via control system inputs, and decide on the most
optimum action. We propose delinking control networks from the ensembler
RNN so that individual control RNNs may be evolved and trained to execute
diﬀering mission proﬁles optimally, and these “personalities” may be easily up-
loaded into the autonomous asset with no hardware changes necessary. One of
the challenges in taking this advanced approach may be the inability to guaran-
tee what exactly a learning, evolving autonomous system might do. The action
ﬁlter architecture proposed in this paper, which provides a hard “not to exceed”
boundary to range of action, delivers an out-of-band method to audit and edit
autonomous behavior, while still keeping it within parameters of acceptability.
