System Dynamics Modelling  of the Processes Involving the 
Maintenance  of the Naive T Cell Repertoire 
 
Grazziela P. Figueredo 
IMA Research  Group School 
of Computer Science 
University  of Nottingham 
Nottingham, NG8 1BB 
UK 

Uwe  Aickelin 
IMA Research  Group School 
of Computer Science 
University  of Nottingham 
Nottingham, NG8 1BB 
UK 

Amanda Whitbrook 
IMA Research  Group School 
of Computer Science 
University  of Nottingham 
Nottingham, NG8 1BB 
UK 

 
 
Abstract 
 
The  study  of immune  system  aging,  i.e. 
immunosenescence,  is a relatively  new re- 
search  topic.    It  deals  with  understand- 
ing the  processes of immuno-degradation 
that indicate   signs  of  functionality  loss 
possibly  leading  to  death.    Even  though 
it  is not  possible  to  prevent immunose- 
nescence,  there  is great  benefit  in  com- 
prehending  its  causes,  which  may  help 
to reverse some of the  damage  done and 
thus improve life expectancy.   One of the 
main factors influencing the process of im- 
munosenescence  is the  number  and  phe- 
notypical  variety  of naive T cells in an in- 
dividual.   This  work presents  a review of 
immunosenescence, proposes system dy- 
namics modelling of the processes involv- 
ing the  maintenance  of the  naive  T  cell 
repertoire and  presents  some preliminary 
results. 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
The  study  of aging  in  human  beings  is a  rel- 
atively new research topic and deals with un- 
derstanding the processes of tissue degeneration 
so that they  can  be  stopped  or  slowed  down. 
Some stages of degradation indicate  signs of 
functionality loss that precede  the  end  of life. 
Even though  it is not possible to prevent aging, 
there is great benefit in understanding its causes, 
which may help to reverse some of the  damage 
done and thus improve life expectancy. 
This work is concerned  with the aging of the 
immune system (IS), known as immunosenes- 
cence.   The  IS acts  to  fight and  prevent many 
kinds  of diseases  in  an  individual   throughout 
life. However, with age there is a decay of the IS 
performance  resulting  in degenerative  diseases, 
deregulated and  ineffective  immune  responses. 
This can end up in complete  collapse of the  de- 
fence  mechanisms  resulting  in  death.    Various 
theories have been proposed to explain this phe- 
nomenon, including the levels of antigenic stress, 
oxidation,  lack  of cellular  resources  and  DNA 
damage.  In order to investigate  how the IS ages 
and  fails it is necessary  to understand the  pro- 
cesses by which the  instabilities take place,  de- 
velop, propagate and turn  out to be destructive. 
By acquiring such knowledge it would be pos- 
sible to  create  predictive  models that can  esti- 
mate  the  immune  fitness  of a patient at  a cer- 
tain  age  given  their  vaccination history,  expo- 
sure to diseases and  hemograms.   Moreover, the 
knowledge could be applied  to any other  aging 
process,  since there  are  many  scientific,  social, 
security, engineering, economical and computa- 
tionally  important problems  demanding designs 
with  more  predictable degenerative   associated 
properties. 
A degenerative  system  is one that, through 
a  series  of sequential  events,  devolves  in  time 
until it reaches a point where its functionality is 
compromised.   Trying  to predict  when a certain 
system will no longer work properly to satisfy its 
original purpose has great benefit because the 
system can be replaced,  upgraded  or redesigned 
before this  point is reached.  This  has potential 
implications  for the  safety,  security  and  welfare 
of resources such as water,  air transport,  energy, 
product  quality,  computer networks and control. 
There  are many factors that can cause a sys- 
tem  to  deteriorate.   From  the  hardware  inter- 
actions perspective aging refers to progressive 
performance   degradation or  a  sudden  hang  or 
crash of a system due to exhaustion of operating 
system resources and accumulation of problems. 
Another   cause  is the  negligence  of a  system’s 
owners to modify it to meet changing needs and 
new demands  in the market,  such as new sources 
of information,  new  processes  and  technology 
upgrades.    Other   age-associated problems  can 
occur  as  the  result  of changes  that are  made 
without proper testing,  introducing new failures. 
Sometimes  systems  manufacturers find it  diffi- 
cult to keep up with the market  and to compete 

 
with new products. This work presents  a review 
of the  immunosenescence  phenomenon and  in- 
cludes a description of the various  theories  that 
could be used for modelling and developing algo- 
rithms  for solving degeneration problems.  Also, 
a proposal for a first simulation  model and some 
preliminary results  are presented. 
 
2 
Immunosenescence 
 
According  to  Bulati  et  al.  [2], aging  is a com- 
plex process that negatively  impacts  the  devel- 
opment of the immune system and its ability  to 
function.  Progressive  changes in the innate  and 
adaptive immune  systems  have a major  impact 
on the  capacity  of an individual  to produce  ef- 
fective immune  responses.   These  changes  that 
characterize the aging of the immune system are 
called  immunosenescence.   The  decrease  of im- 
munocompetence  in the elderly can be envisaged 
as the  result  of the  continuous  challenge  of the 
unavoidable  exposure  to  a  variety  of potential 
antigens,  i.e.   viruses,  bacteria, food  and  self- 
antigens  [5]. Antigens are the  cause of a persis- 
tent life-long antigenic stress, responsible for the 
filling of the  immunological  space by accumula- 
tion of effector T cells and immunological mem- 
ory [5]. With  age, there  is also a significant re- 
duction  of naive T cells caused by the involution 
of the  thymus.  This  situation eventually  leaves 
the body more susceptible  to infectious and non- 
infections  diseases [8]. In addition, there  is evi- 
dence  that clonotypical  immunity  deteriorates, 
while  ancestral innate   or  natural immunity  is 
conserved or even up-regulated [5, 10]. 
According   to  Franceschi   [5],  some  factors 
that characterize immunosenescence  are the  ac- 
cumulation of memory T cells, the decrease and 
exhaustion of naive T cells and a marked reduc- 
tion  of the  T cell repertoire.  Bulati  [2], on the 
other hand, believes both innate and adaptive 
immunity  are usually  involved in the  pathogen- 
esis of chronic  age-related diseases  like arthri- 
tis,  atherosclerosis, osteoporosis,  diabetes,  etc. 
However, innate immunity appears to be the 
prevalent mechanism  driving tissue damages  as- 
sociated  with  different age-related diseases  [2]. 
Thus, aging is accompanied by an age-dependent 
up-regulation of the inflammatory response, due 
to the chronic antigenic stress that impinges 
throughout life upon innate  immunity,  and  has 
potential implications  for the onset of inflamma- 
tory diseases.  Bulati  points out some important 
factors  related  to aging: 
 
• Reactivity of dendritic cells to self antigens 
can be characteristic of aging.  Furthermore, 
this  over-reactivity induces  T  lymphocyte 
proliferation  with subsequent higher risk of 
autoimmune diseases. 
 
• Hyper  activated  T  cells  are  possibly  in- 
volved in bone loss associated  with vascular 
disease in aged mice. 
 
• There  is a  decrease  in vaccine  responsive- 
ness. 
 
De Martinis  [6] and Franceschi  [5] state  that 
the most important characteristics of immunose- 
nescence  are  the  accumulation of memory  and 
effector T cells, reduction of naive T cells, 
shrinkage  of the  T  cell repertoire  and  a filling 
of immunological  space.  They  point out that: 
 
• The   filling  of  immunological   space  with 
memory  and  effector cells is a consequence 
of exposure  to  a  variety  of antigens  over 
time. 
 
• Clonal  expansion  of peripheral  T cells car- 
rying  receptors  for single epitopes  of both 
herpes  virus  Cytomegalovirus (CMV)  and 
Epstein-Barr virus  (EBV)  are  common  in 
the elderly and are associated  with the loss 
of early memory cells, an increase of T cyto- 
toxic cells and a gradual  filling of immuno- 
logical space. 
 
• With  the  decline of immune  function  there 
is  an  increase  in  autoantibody  frequency. 
An important result  of this may be the loss 
of ability  to  distinguish between  self and 
nonself molecules. 
 
• The   lifelong  respiratory  burst,    i.e. 
re- 
active  oxygen  species  (ROS)  causes  dam- 
age  to  important cellular  components  (li- 
pidic membranes,  enzymatic  and structural 
proteins   and  nucleic  acids)  during   aging. 
ROS damage is counteracted by several 
genetically controlled enzymatic and non- 
enzymatic  antioxidant defense systems.  All 
these  protective   mechanisms   tend   to  be- 
come less effective with age. 
 
• An  elderly  IS  becomes  more  predisposed 
to chronic  inflammatory reactions  and  less 
able to respond to acute  and  massive chal- 
lenges by new antigens.  Inflamm-aging,  the 
peculiar chronic inflammatory status which 
characterizes aging, is under genetic control 
and is detrimental to longevity.  It leads to 
long term  tissue  damage  and  is related  to 
an increased  mortality risk. 

 
• The chronic overexposure to stressors deter- 
mines a highly pathogenic sustained  activa- 
tion of the stress-response  system leading to 
a progressively  reduced  capacity  to recover 
from stress-induced modifications. 
 
3 
Evolutionary-based 
Immunosenescence 
 
De  Martinis   [6] and  Franceschi   [5] state   that 
human  immunosenescence  can  be envisaged  as 
a situation in which  the  most  evolutionary  re- 
cent, sophisticated defense mechanisms dete- 
riorate   with   age,   while  the   most   evolution- 
ary  old and  gross mechanisms  are preserved  or 
are neglibly affected and, in some cases, up- 
regulated.  Therefore,  the  aging of the  immune 
system  is not  a  random  process  without  rules 
or  directions,   but   rather is  subject  to  evolu- 
tionary  constraints. The antagonistic pleiotropy 
theory  of aging [4] states  that natural selection 
has  favoured  genes conferring  short-term bene- 
fits to the  organism  at  the  cost of deterioration 
in later life. Evolutionary ideas lead to the belief 
that the  IS has been selected  to serve individu- 
als only until  reproduction ceases.  This  means 
that the  optimum  functioning  of the  IS is only 
guaranteed  for the number  of years in which an 
individual   is capable  of reproduction  [4].   Af- 
ter  that, all the  biochemical  processes proceed 
freely without any past  selective pressure  to im- 
prove  the  life of that individual. The  trend  of 
thymic  ontogenesis  and  involution  in early  age 
supports  this hypothesis.  Humans  had a life ex- 
pectancy  of between  30 and  50 years  two cen- 
turies  ago.  Nowadays the IS must  serve individ- 
uals living to between  80 and  120 years,  which 
is much  longer  than  predicted  by  evolutionary 
forces.  Therefore,  old people have to cope with 
a lifelong antigenic burden  encompassing several 
decades  of evolutionary unpredicted  exposure. 
This chronic antigenic stress and subsequent in- 
flammatory burden  have a major impact  on sur- 
vival and frailty. 
 
4 
Candidates for 
Immunosenescence Models 
 
The four most influential theories from the above 
are  selected  as possible candidates for building 
computationally predictive  systems.  These the- 
ories are immunological  space filling with mem- 
ory cells, lack of naive T cells, the innate  system 
up-regulation, and accumulation of T-regulatory 
cells. 
4.1  
Space Filling 
 
The  immune  system  deteriorates with  age  by 
losing functionality and immunocompetent cells. 
Moreover,  it  becomes  limited  in  its  use  of re- 
sources;  there  is a  finite  number  of T  cells in 
operation  at any time and to work properly, the 
IS needs a reserve of naive T cells for new intru- 
sions, and  memory  cells for previously  encoun- 
tered antigens.  With  age, the repertoire of naive 
T cells shrinks proportionately to faced threats, 
while memory increases [5, 6, 8]. Late in life the 
T cell population becomes less diverse and some 
antigen-specific  types  of T cell clones can grow 
to a great  percentage  of the total  T cell popula- 
tion,  which takes up the  space needed for other 
T cells, resulting  in a less diverse and ineffective 
IS.  At some  point  there  are  not  enough  naive 
T  cells left  to  mount any  sort  of effective de- 
fense and the total  repertoire of T lymphocytes 
is filled with memory  cells. 
 
4.2  
Lack  of Naive T Cells 
 
Before 20 years  of age the  set  of naive  T  cells 
is sustained   primarily  from  thymic  output [8]. 
However, in middle age there  is a change in the 
source of naive T cells; as the thymus involutes, 
there is a considerable shrinkage in its T cell out- 
put,  which  means  that new T  cells are  mostly 
produced by peripheral  expansion.  There is also 
a belief that some memory  cells have their  phe- 
notype  reverted  back  to  naive  cells [8].  These 
two new methods of naive T cell repertoire main- 
tenance  are not effective [8] as they  do not pro- 
duce  new phenotypic  changes  on lymphocytes. 
Rather, evidence shows that they keep filling the 
naive T  cell space with  copies of existing  cells. 
Therefore,  the age-related loss of clones of some 
antigen-specific T cells could be irreversible,  be- 
cause there are no more naive T cells to maintain 
these clones. These age-related phenomena  lead 
to a decay of performance  in fighting aggressors. 
 
4.3  
Innate Up-regulation 
 
With  age there  is a decay in adequate function- 
ing of the  main  phagocytes,  i.e.   macrophages, 
neutrophils [3] and dendritic cells [1]. As a con- 
sequence,   deregulated  immune  and  inflamma- 
tory  responses  occur  in old people.   The  inves- 
tigation into  the  cellular  and  molecular  mech- 
anism underlying  these  disorders  has  provided 
compelling  evidence  that  up-regulation plays a 
critical role in the age-associated problems of the 
immune and inflammatory responses [10]. Thus, 

 
innate  immunity  and a high capacity  for mount- 
ing a strong  inflammatory response, useful at  a 
younger age can become detrimental later in life. 
Inflamm-aging  can thus be considered  the main 
phenomenon responsible  for  major  age-related 
diseases  and  the  evolutionary price  to  pay  for 
an  immune  system  that is fully capable  of de- 
fending against  infectious diseases earlier in life. 
 
4.4  Accumulation of Treg   Cells 
 
The individual’s ability to mount an effective 
immune  response  can  be limited  by  regulatory 
elements such as significant changes in the num- 
ber  of T  regulatory (Treg )  cells [9].  Treg   cells 
act to suppress  activation of the IS and thereby 
maintain immune system homeostasis and toler- 
ance.  They  can accumulate or reduce with age. 
The accumulation of Treg cells in the old inhibits 
or prevents  some immune  responses, i.e.   anti- 
tumoral ones.  Also, the  reduction of Treg  cells 
might compromise  the activation of immune re- 
sponses  in  the  aged.   Therefore,   an  imbalance 
in  Treg   normal  functioning  can  predispose  im- 
mune dysfunction.   This  results  in a higher  risk 
of  immune-mediated  diseases,  cancer  or  infec- 
tions. 
 
4.5  Discussion 
 
A summary   of the  main  characteristics of the 
candidate models described in the previous  sec- 
tions  is presented  in Table  1.  The  aim  of this 
work is to develop a model that considers each of 
these characteristics and also define more simple 
models in order to investigate  individual  aspects 
of the  immunosenescence  phenomenon.  In par- 
ticular, simulation  methods  such as system  dy- 
namics (SD) and agent based simulation  (ABS) 
would be suitable  for modelling the phenomena. 
An  SD  approach   aims  to  understand the  be- 
havior  of complex  systems  over time.   It  works 
with  feedback  loops and  stocks  and  flows that 
help  describe  the  systems’  nonlinearity.    ABS 
is concerned  with  modelling agents  to  observe 
their  behaviors  given  changes  to  the  environ- 
ment.  The model proposed in this paper is based 
on  reference  [8] and  involves  interactions that 
influence the  naive T cell populations.  It is de- 
scribed in the next  section. 
 
5 
Model: Naive T Cell  Output 
 
Some markers  of thymic  contribution in an  in- 
dividual  throughout life are defined by levels of 
T cell receptor  excision circle (TREC), which is 
 
Theories
Characteristics
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
Shrinkage of naive cells
×
×
Diversity decrease
×
×
Few clones taking space
×
×
Excessive memory cells
×
Loss of clones
×
Inflammation
×
×
Excessive T suppression
×
×
Degeneration
×
×
×
×
Auto-immunity
×
×
×
×
Less vaccine response
×
×
×
 
Table  1:  Main  characteristics of the  candidate 
models. 
 
 
one episomal circular DNA formed during the 
coding of the T-cell receptor.  TREC  percentage 
decays with shrinkage  of thymic output and ac- 
tivation  of naive  T  cells.  The  model proposed 
here  is  based  on  the  data   and  equations   ob- 
tained  in [8], which is concerned  with establish- 
ing an understanding of naive T cell repertoire 
dynamics.    The  model’s objective  is to  deter- 
mine the likely contribution of each of the naive 
T  cell’s sustaining sources,  by  comparing  esti- 
mates  of TREC   (see  Figure  1).    The  dynam- 
ics of naive proliferation, TREC  and reversal of 
memory  to  naive  T  cells are  modelled  mathe- 
matically.    An  SD model  of the  mathematical 
model  described  in  [8] is proposed  in order  to 
reproduce and further investigate the processes 
involving the  maintenance  of naive T  cell pop- 
ulations.   The  variables  involved are the  thymic 
output rate,  the number of active cells, the num- 
ber of memory cells turning into naive cells and 
the  number  of naive  T  cells obtained by naive 
peripheral proliferation. The number and phe- 
notypical variety of naive T cells in an individual 
is one of the main factors influencing the process 
of immunosenescence.    The  simulation  aims  to 
investigate  the  interactions between  each  vari- 
able  and  their  relevance  to  the  maintenance  of 
the naive T cell repertoire. 
 
5.1  
The Mathematical Model 
 
The  mathematical model proposed  in [8] is de- 
scribed by the differential equations (1) to (3) 
below, where N is the total  number of naive cells 
of direct thymic origin, Np   is the number of naive 
cells that have undergone  proliferation, A is the 
number  of activated cells, M  is the  number  of 
memory  cells and  t is the  time  (in years).   The 
first differential  equation  is: 

Np
‾
. N‾
N‾
. µ N
 
 
 
 
Figure  1: Dynamics  of naive T cells. 
cells to  memory  cells and  µm   is the  death  rate 
of memory  cells (equal  to 0.05). 
Initial  SD simulations using equations (1) to 
(3) and approximated values for the initial size of 
each population of cells and  the  ratios  that rule 
the  kinetics  of each population showed a decay 
in thymic  output after  the  age of about  twenty 
that became  more  pronounced with  time  (see 
Figure  2).   This  validate the  results  presented 
in  [8].   Future work  will use  variations on  the 
values for the ratio  variables  used in [8] in order 
to understand the importance of each individual 
integrant in the  system.   For  example,  it is im- 
portant to establish  how much  the  reversion  of 
memory cells to a naive phenotype  ratio impacts 
upon the depletion  of naive T cells with age, the 
dN  = s  e−λt t s(N  ) − [λ + µ  g(N  )]N,  
(1) 
dt  
0 
p 
n 
n 
p 
point in time that the system could be defined as 
losing functionality, and the impact  of the naive 
where   s0       is   the    thymic   output  (equal    to 
1.65);   λt   is  the  thymic  decay  rate   (equal   to 
proliferation rate  on the final simulation results. 
log(2) 
1 
−λt t 
15.7  (year−   )); and s0 e 
s(Np ) represents the 
number of cells that arise from the thymus where 
s(Np )  is the  rate  of export  of the  thymus  de- 
fined  by:   s(Np )  =        1       .  In  (1),  λn N   
rep- 
1+ s‾  Np 
resents  the  naive  cells’ incorporation  into  the 
naive proliferating pool and λn  is the naive pro- 
liferation rate  (which  has  the  values  0.22,  2.1, 
0.003,  0.005  in  [8]). µn    is  the  thymic  naive 
cell death  rate  (equal  to 4.4); µn g(Np )N  repre- 
sents  the  naive cell death  rate  and  the  function 
g(Np ) is the death  rate  of between naive TREC- 
positive  and  naive  TREC-negative, defined  as: 
bNp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  2: Decay of naive T cells from Thymus. 
 
 
Studies  on age-related declines  in  CD4+  T 
cell  function  [7] show  that there  is  a  reduced 
T-cell receptor  signaling intensity, defects in ac- 
tivation,  differentiatiation and  expansion  after 
g(Np )  = 1 + 
N‾p 
Np 
and  s‾ are  equilibrium 
p 
1+ N‾p 
and  scaling values respectively.  The  second dif- 
ferential  equation is: 
stimulation, reduced  production of interleukin-2 
and  impaired  ability  to provide cognate  help to 
B cells after immunization. These factors can be 
explained  by the fact that, without a continuous 
stream  of thymic output, T cells have increased 
dNp = λ 
dt  
n 
N +[ch(N, Np )−µn ]Np +λmn M,  
(2) 
longevity to compensate for the depletion  of new 
incoming  cells.  Several studies  support  the  fact 
where  c  is  the   proliferation  rate   (with   value 
0  (no  proliferation) or  equal  to  µn (1 + 300 )); 
p 
ch(N, Np )Np    represents the  naive  proliferation 
where  h(N, Np ) is the  dilution  of thymic-naive 
through  proliferation defined  by:   h(N, Np )  = 
that this  forced longevity  of T cells is sufficient 
for  the  accumulation  of  age-related  CD4+   T 
cells defects.  Therefore,  population-based mod- 
els of T-cell repertoire  evolution could guide new 
developments  for treating diseases  such  as  au- 
toimmunity and helping the recovery of the sys- 
  
1  
 
N +Np 
n     p is the death  rate of proliferation- 
1+    N‾p 
originated naive  cells and  λmn  is the  reversion 
rate  from memory into Np , which has the values 
0 and  0.5 in the  experiments  presented in   [8]. 
The  final differential  equation is: 
tem  after  depletion  caused  by infections,  radia- 
tion and age.Future work will aim to develop the 
SD model into an ABS model to simulate  com- 
ponents,  functions and interactions involving the 
immunosenescence  of T cells, taking  the aspects 
cited above into consideration. This should per- 
mit the replication of immuno-responses to stim- 
dM 
dt   = λa A − µm M − λmn M,  
(3) 
uli at  the  cellular level over the  course of a life- 
time and the simulation of thymic reconstitution 
where  λa   is  the  rate  of reversion  of activated 
with benefits and problems  associated. 
 

 
6 
Conclusions 
 
Understanding immunosenescence and its causes 
may help to reverse some of its consequences and 
improve  life expectancy.    Here,  the  important 
factors  related  to immunosenescence  have been 
identified  as  the  shrinkage  of the  naive  T  and 
B cell repertoire, decrease of innate  immune cell 
diversity,  filling of the  immunological  space  by 
only  a few types of phenotypical clones,  accu- 
mulation  of memory cells, loss of clones, inflam- 
mation,  excessive T cell suppression,  degenera- 
tion,  auto-immunity and  a decrease in response 
to vaccination.  One of the  main  factors  identi- 
fied as influent in the  process of immunosenes- 
cence  is  the  number  and  phenotypical  variety 
of naive T cells in an individual, which changes 
with age in quantity and diversity.  At the begin- 
ning of life, the thymus is the principal  source of 
naive T cells. With  age, there  is a decay in thy- 
mus output and a shift between the main source 
of naive T cells. It is believed that the sustaining 
of naive T cells in the  organism  is provided  by 
peripheral  expansion,  reversion  from a memory 
phenotype,  and long-lived T cells. 
This work has presented  a review of the 
immunosenescence  phenonmenon and  has  pro- 
posed  extending   an  existing  SD  model  of the 
processes involving the maintenance of the naive 
T  cell  repertoire  into  an  ABS  model.  
This 
should  provide  insight  into  how much  each  of 
the naive T cell sustaining possibilities influences 
the final pool of T cells. Initial experiments with 
the  SD model have supported the  the  notion  of 
thymic decay beginning at about age twenty and 
becoming  more  pronounced   with  age,  but  the 
use of an ABS model would permit the  replica- 
tion of immuno-responses  to stimuli at the cellu- 
lar level over the  course of a lifetime, providing 
further  insights into the immunosenescence  phe- 
nomenon.  The  ultimate goal of the  ABS model 
is to facilitate  sufficient understanding of aging 
processes so that boosting  techniques  for other 
real-world  degenerative  systems  may  be devel- 
oped.
