Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
  
Abstract— The aim of this paper is to study the fusion at 
feature extraction level for face and fingerprint biometrics. The 
proposed approach is based on the fusion of the two traits by 
extracting independent feature pointsets from the two modalities, 
and making the two pointsets compatible for concatenation. 
Moreover, to handle the ‘problem of curse of dimensionality’, the 
feature pointsets are properly reduced in dimension. Different 
feature reduction techniques are implemented, prior and after the 
feature pointsets fusion, and the results are duly recorded. The 
fused feature pointset for the database and the query face and 
fingerprint images are matched using techniques based on either 
the point pattern matching, or the Delaunay triangulation. 
Comparative experiments are conducted on chimeric and real 
databases, to assess the actual advantage of the fusion performed 
at the feature extraction level, in comparison to the matching 
score level. 
 
Index Terms— Face, Feature level fusion, Fingerprint, 
Multimodal Biometrics 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, biometric authentication has seen 
considerable improvement in reliability and accuracy, with 
some of the traits offering good performance. However none 
of the biometrics are 100% accurate. Multibiometric systems 
[1] remove some of the drawbacks of the uni-biometric 
systems by grouping the multiple sources of information. 
These systems utilize more than one physiological or 
behavioral characteristic for enrollment and verification/ 
identification. Ross and Jain [2] have presented an overview of 
Multimodal Biometrics with various levels of fusion, namely, 
sensor level, feature level, matching score level and decision 
level. 
However it has been observed that, a biometric system that 
 
Manuscript received May 25, 2007. This work has been partially 
supported by grants from the Italian Ministry of Research, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Biosecure European Network of Excellence.  
A. Rattani is with DIEE, University of Cagliari, Piazza d’Armi, 09123 

 D. R. Kisku is with DCSE, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,      

 M. Bicego is with DEIR, University of Sassari, via Torre Tonda 34,     

 M. Tistarelli is with DAP, University of Sassari, piazza Duomo 6, 
 07041 Alghero (SS) – Italy (Phone: +39 079 9720410, Fax: +39 079 

 
integrates information at an earlier stage of processing is 
expected to provide more accurate results than the systems that 
integrate information at a later stage, because of the 
availability of more richer information. Since the feature set 
contains much richer information on the source data than the 
matching score or the output decision of a matcher, fusion at 
the feature level is expected to provide better recognition 
performances.  
Fusion at matching score, rank and decision levels have 
been extensively studied in the literature [3][4]. Despite the 
abundance of research papers related to multimodal 
biometrics, fusion at feature level is a relatively understudied 
problem. As a general comment, it is noticed that fusion at 
feature level is relatively difficult to achieve in practice 
because multiple modalities may have incompatible feature 
sets and the correspondence among different feature spaces 
may be unknown. Moreover, concatenated feature set may lead 
to the problem of curse of dimensionality: a very complex 
matcher may be required and the concatenated feature vector 
may contain noisy or redundant data, thus leading to a 
decrease in the performance of the classifier  [5]. Therefore, in 
this context, the state of the art is relatively poor.  
Ross and Govindarajan [5] proposed a method for the 
fusion of hand and face biometrics at feature extraction level. 
Gyaourova et al. [6] fused IR-based face recognition with 
visible based face recognition at feature level, reporting a 
substantial improvement in recognition performance as 
compared to matching individual sensor modalities. Recently, 
Ziou and Bhanu [7] proposed a multibiometric system based 
on the fusion of face features with gait features at feature level. 
Even though face and fingerprint represent the most widely 
used and accepted biometric traits1, no methods for feature 
level fusion of these modalities have been proposed in the 
literature. The possible reason is the radically different nature 
of face and fingerprint images: a face is processed as a  
pictorial image (holistic approach) or as composed by patches 
(local analysis), while fingerprint is typically represented by 
minutiae points. In this paper a recently introduced 
methodology for face modeling [8] is exploited, which is 
based on a  point-wise representation of a face called Scale 
Invariant Features Transform (SIFT), thus making the feature 
 
1 Remarkably face and fingerprint data has been adopted as biometric 
traits to be included in the European electronic passport. The same traits are 
currently being used at the US immigration for manual identification of 
passengers. 
Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint 
Biometrics 
A. Rattani, D. R. Kisku, M. Bicego, Member, IEEE and M. Tistarelli 

Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
level fusion of face and fingerprints possible. 
Thus, this paper proposes a novel approach to fuse face and 
fingerprint biometrics at feature extraction level. The 
improvement obtained applying the feature level fusion is 
presented over score level fusion technique. Experimental 
results on real and chimeric databases are reported, confirming 
the validity of the proposed approach in comparison to fusion 
at score level.  
 
II. FACE AND FINGERPRINT BIOMETRICS 
A. Face Recognition based on Scale Invariant Feature 
Transform Features (SIFT) 
The face recognition system, preliminary introduced in [8], 
is based on the SIFT [9] features extracted from images of the 
query and database face. The SIFT features represent a 
compact representation of the local gray level structure, 
invariant to image scaling, translation, and rotation, and 
partially invariant to illumination changes and affine or 3D 
projections. SIFT has emerged as a very powerful image 
descriptor and its employment for face analysis and 
recognition was systematically investigated in [8] where the 
matching was performed using three techniques: (a) minimum 
pair distance, (b) matching eyes and mouth, and (c) matching 
on a regular grid. The present system considers spatial, 
orientation and keypoint descriptor information of each 
extracted SIFT point. Thus the input to the present system is 
the face image and the output is the set of extracted SIFT 
features s=(s1, s2,…….sm) where each feature point si=(x ,y ,θ, 
k) consist of the (x, y) spatial location, the local orientation θ  
and k is the keydescriptor of size 1x128.  
B. Fingerprint Verification based on Minutiae matching 
technique 
The fingerprint recognition module has been developed 
using minutiae based technique where fingerprint image is 
normalized, preprocessed using Gabor filters, binarized and 
thinned, is then subjected to minutiae extraction as detailed in 
[10]. However to achieve rotation invariance the following 
procedure is followed in the image segmentation module. 
In order to obtain rotation invariance, the fingerprint image 
is processed by first detecting the left, top and right edges of 
the foreground. The overall slope of the foreground is 
computed by fitting a straight line to each edge by linear 
regression. The left and right edges, which are expected to be 
roughly vertical, are fitted with lines of the form x = my + b 
and for the top edge the form y = mx + b is applied. The 
overall slope is determined as the average of the slopes of the 
left-edge line, the right-edge line, and a line perpendicular to 
the top edge line. A rectangle is fitted to the segmented region 
and rotated with the same angle to nullify the effect of rotation. 
Although the method is based on the detection of  edges, only 
a rough estimate of the fingerprint boundaries is required for 
fitting the lines and extracting the edges. This improves the 
robustness to noise in the acquired fingerprint image. The 
input to this system is a fingerprint image and the output is the 
set of extracted minutiae m=(m1, m2,…….mm), where each 
feature point mi=(x ,y ,θ) consist of the spatial location (x, y) 
and the local orientation θ. 
 
III. FEATURE LEVEL FUSION SCHEME 
The feature level fusion is realized by simply concatenating 
the feature points obtained from different sources of 
information. The concatenated feature pointset has better 
discrimination power than the individual feature vectors. The 
concatenation procedure is described in the following sections. 
A.  Feature set compatibility and normalization 
In order to be concatenated, the feature pointsets must be 
compatible. The minutiae feature pointset is made compatible 
with the SIFT feature pointset by making it rotation and 
translation invariant and introducing the keypoint descriptor, 
carrying the local information, around the minutiae position.  
The local region around each minutiae point is convolved 
with a bank of Gabor filters with eight different equally spaced  
degrees of orientation (0 , 22.5 , 45 , 67.5 , 90 , 112.5 ,135 , 
and 157.5), eight different scales and two phases (0 and π/2 ), 
giving a keydescriptor of size 1x128. The rotation invariance 
is handled during the preprocessing step and the translation 
invariance is handled by registering the database image with 
the query images using a reference point location [11]. Scale 
invariance is achieved by using  the dpi specification of the 
sensors. The keypoint descriptors of each face and fingerprint 
points are then normalized using the min-max normalization 
technique (snorm and mnorm ), to scale all the 128 values of each 
keypoint descriptor within the range 0 to 1. This normalization 
also allows to apply the same threshold on the face and 
fingerprint keypoint descriptors, when the corresponding pair 
of points are found for matching the fused pointsets of 
database and query face and fingerprint images. 
B. Feature Reduction and Concatenation 
The feature level fusion is performed by concatenating the 
two feature pointsets. This results in a fused feature pointset 
concat=(s1norm 
,s2norm,…smnorm,….m1norm, 
m2norm, 
mmnorm). 
Feature reduction strategy to eliminate irrelevant features can 
be applied either before [7] or after [5-6] feature 
concatenation.  
C. Feature Reduction techniques 
1. K-means clustering. The normalized feature pointsets 
(snorm and mnorm) are first concatenated together (concat). 
Redundant features are then removed using the “k-means” 
clustering techniques [12] on the fused pointset of an 
individual retaining only the centroid of the points from each 
cluster. These clusters are formed using spatial and orientation 
information of a point. The keypoint descriptor of each 
cluster’s centroid is the average of keypoint descriptors of all 
the points in each cluster. The distance classifier used is 
euclidean distance. The number of clusters are determined 

Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
using the PBM cluster validity index [13]. Since, the feature 
poinset from the two modalities i.e., face and fingerprint are 
affine invariant and moreover, they are normalized using 
normalization technique as discussed before. They are treated 
simply as a set of points belonging to an individual ir-
respective of whether they are extracted from face or 
fingerprint thus making K-means clustering possible. 
 
2. Neighbourhood Elimination. This technique is applied on 
the normalized pointset of face and fingerprint (snorm and 
mnorm) individually. That is, for each point of face and 
fingerprint, those point that lie within the neighbourhood of a 
certain radius (20 and 15 pixels for face and fingerprint 
respectively on experimental basis) are removed giving 
snorm’and mnorm’, the reduced face and fingerprint pointsets. 
Spatial information is used to determine the neighbours of 
each considered point. The result of neighbourhood 
elimination is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
3. Points belonging to specific regions. Only the points 
belonging to specific regions of the face i.e., specific 
landmarks like the eyes, the nose and the mouth lower portion  
and the fingerprint images (the central region) are retained as 
reduced pointset. Face images in BANCA Database are pre-
registered with respect to eyes and mouth location and the 
nose tip is manually identified for the current experiments. The 
corepoint in fingerprint is located using a reference point 
location algorithm discussed in [11]. A radius equal to 85 and 
120 pixels was set for the face and fingerprint feature points 
selection as shown in Fig. 2. The SIFT points around specific 
landmarks on face carry highly discriminative information as 
experimented and reported in [8]. The region around core 
point accounts for combating the effect of skin elasticity and 
non-linear distortion due to varing pressure applied during 
image acquisition as it is the least affected region. 
 
a)  
     
    
 b) 
    
 
Fig. 1. Effects of the neighbourhood elimination on a) Fingerprint  
and b) Face 
 
       
 
 
Fig. 2  Example of selected regions on a face (left)  and a fingerprint (right) 
 
The aims of the “k-means” and “neighbourhood 
elimination” techniques are to remove redundant information 
and at the same time retaining most of the information by 
removing onlyl the points which are very near, as computed 
using euclidean distance, to a specific point. As these points 
may not provide any additional information because of being 
in vicinity. And the aim of “points belonging to specific 
region” is to consider only the points belonging to highly 
distinctive region. Thus keeping only optimal sets. 
D.  Matching techniques 
The concatenated features pointset of the database and the 
query images concat and concat’ respectively (in which the 
feature reduction techniques have already been applied even 
before or after concatenation) are processed by the matcher 
which gives matching score based on the no. of matching pairs 
found between the two pointsets. In this study two different 
matching techniques are applied.  
 
1. Point pattern matching. This technique aims at finding the 
percentage of points “paired” between the concatenated 
feature pointset of the database and the query images. Two 
points are considered paired only if the spatial distance (1), the 
direction distance (2) and the Euclidean distance (3) between 
the corresponding key descriptors are all within some are 
within a pre-determined threshold, set with 4 pixels, 3°, 6 
pixels for ro, Өo, ko on the basis of experiments:  
0
2
2
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
r
y
y
x
x
concat
t
conca
sd
t
j
i
j
i
j
≤
−
′
+
−
′
=
′
 
(1) 
o
t
j
o
t
j
t
j concat
t
conca
dd
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
≤
−
′
−
−
′
=
′
)
360
,
min(
)
,
(
 
(2) 
0
2
'
'
)
(
)
,
(
k
k
k
concat
concat
kd
i
i
j
i
j
i
j
≤
−
=
∑
 
(3) 
where the points i and j are represented by (x, y, θ, k) with k 
= k1… k128 of the concatenated database and query  pointsets 
concat` and concat, sd is the spatial distance, dd  is the 
direction distance, and kd is the keypoint descriptor distance. 
The one to one correspondence is achieved by selecting among 
the candidates points lying within the threshold of spatial, 
direction and Euclidean distance, the one having mimimum 
Euclidean distance for the keypoint descriptor. Since, the 
feature pointsets are rotation, scale and translation invariant, in 
case of fingerprint, the registartion is done at image 
preprocessing  level as explained earlier and SIFT features for 
face are already affine invariant features. This obviates the 
need to calculate transformation parameters for aligning the 

Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
database and query fused pointsets. 
The final matching score is calculated on the basis of the 
ratio of the number of matched pairs to the total number of 
feature points found in the database and query sets, for both 
monomodal traits and for the fused feature pointset.  
 
a)
         b) 
 
 
Fig. 3. Triangulation of pointset: a)Voronoi diagram b)Delaunay triangulation 
 
2. Matching using the Delaunay Triangulation technique. 
In this case,  instead of considering individual points, triplet of 
points are grouped together as new features. Given a set S of 
points p , p2, ..., pN, the Delaunay triangulation of S is obtained 
by first computing its Voronoi diagram [14] which 
decomposes the 2D space into regions around each point such 
that all the points in the region around pi are closer to pi than 
delaunay triangulation is computed by connecting the centers 
of every pair of neighboring Voronoi regions.  
The Delaunay triangulation technique [15] is applied 
individually on the face and the fingerprint normalized pointset 
snorm and mnorm and then on the concatenated feature pointsets 
concat=(snorm , mnorm). Five features are computed from the 
extracted triplet of points. (a) The minimum and median angles 
(αmin αmed) of each triangle (b) The triangle side (L) with the 
maximum length (c) The local orientation (Ө) of the points at 
the triangle vertexes (d) The ratio (l1/l2) of the smallest side to 
the second smallest side of each triangle (e) The ratio (l2/l3) of 
the second smallest side to the largest side of each triangle. 
All these parameters compose the feature vector fv=(t1, t2 
,…,tn), where ti = (αmin,, αmed, L, Ө, l1/l2, l2/l3) is the triangle 
computed by the Delaunay triangulation. The process is 
repeated for the database and the query pointsets to get fv and 
fv’. The final score is computed on the basis of the number of 
corresponding triangles found between the two feature vectors 
fv and fv’. Two triangles are correctly matched if the difference 
between the attributes of the triangles ti and ti’ are within a 
fixed threshold. As the fused poinset contain affine invariant 
and pre-normalized points thus making the application of 
delaunay triangulation possible. 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The proposed approach has been tested on two different 
databases: the first consists of 50 chimeric individuals 
composed of 5 face and fingerprint images for each individual. 
The face images are taken from the controlled sessions of the 
BANCA  Database [16] and the fingerprint images were 
collected by the authors. The fingerprint images were acquired 
using an optical sensor at 500 dpi.  
The following procedure has been established for testing the 
mono-modal and multimodal algorithms: 
Training: one image per person is used for enrollment in 
the face and fingerprint verification system; for each 
individual, one face-fingerprint pair is used for training the 
fusion classifier.  
Testing: four remaining samples per person are used for 
testing, generating client scores. Impostor scores are generated 
by testing the client against the first sample of all other 
subjects. For the multimodal testing, each client is tested 
against the first face and fingerprint samples of the rest of the 
chimeric users. In total 50x4=200 client scores and 
50x49=2450 imposters scores for each of the uni-modal and 
the multimodal systems are generated. 
Evaluation: The best combination of feature reduction and 
matching strategy has been further tested on a real multimodal 
database acquired by the authors. The database consists of 100 
individual with four face and fingerprint images per person. 
The first face and fingerprint combination is used for training 
and the rest three image pairs are used for testing, providing 
100x3=300 client scores. Each individual is subject to 
imposter attack by ten random face and fingerprint pairs for a 
total of 100x10=1000 impostor scores. The experiments were 
conducted in four sessions recording False Acceptance Rate 
(FAR), False Rejection Rate (FRR) and Accuracy (which is 
computed at the certain threshold, FAR and FRR where the 
performance of the system is maximum ie., max (1-(FAR + 
FRR)/2). 
 
A. The face and the figerprint recognition systems were 
tested alone, without any modification in the feature sets, i.e. 
SIFT features (x, y, Ө ,k) and minutiae features (x, y, Ө). The 
matching score is computed using point pattern matching 
independently for face and fingerprint. The individual system 
performance was recorded and the results were computed for 
each modality as shown in table 1.  
 
B. In the second  session, the effect of introducing the 
keydescriptor around each minutiae point is examined. Once 
the feature sets are made  compatible, the keypoint descriptors 
of  SIFT and the minutiae points are normalized using the min-
max normalization technique. The normalized feature pointsets 
are then concatenated and the k-means feature reduction 
strategy is applied on each fused pointset.  
From the presented results (table 2), it is evident that the 
introduction of the keydescriptor for the fingerprints increased 
the recognition accuracy by 1.64%, and the feature level fusion 
outperformed both single modalities, as well as the score level 
fusion, with an increase in the accuracy of 2.64% in 
comparison to score level. The score level fusion is performed 
scores independently for face and fingerprint are computed 
independently for face and fingerprints which are then 
normalized and added using sum of scores technique.  
 

Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
C. In the third session, to remove redundant features, two 
feature reduction strategies are applied prior to concatenation. 
The matching is performed with the point pattern matching 
technique. From the experimental results, presented in table 3, 
it is evident that the application of the neighborhood removal 
technique does not increase the accuracy of the system. On the 
other hand, the reduction of points belonging to specific 
regions increased the recognition accuracy by 0.31%, while 
the FRR is dropped to 0%. Some statistics regarding the 
number of points retained in the fused poinsets, for all the 
three feature reduction techniques applied to one subject, are  
listed in  table 4 and the performances are depicted in table 3.  
 
TABLE 1. THE FAR, FRR AND ACCURACY VALUES OBTAINED FROM THE 
MONOMODAL TRAITS 
Algorithm 
FRR(%) 
FAR(%) 
Accuracy 
Face SIFT 
11.47 
10.52 
88.90 
Fingerprint 
7.43 
12.19 
90.18 
 
TABLE 2. FAR, FRR AND ACCURACY VALUES OBTAINED FROM THE 
MULTIMODAL FUSION 
Algorithm 
FRR (%) 
FAR (%) 
Accuracy 
Fingerprint  
5.384 
10.97 
91.82 
(Face+Finger) 
 score level  
5.66 
4.78 
94.77 
(Face+Finger) 
 Feature Level  
1.98 
3.18 
97.41 
 
TABLE 3. FAR, FRR AND ACCURACY VALUES FOR THE FEATURE REDUCTION 
TECHNIQUES 
Algorithm 
FRR(%) 
FAR(%) 
Accuracy 
Neighbourhood  
removal technique 
5.46 
4.61 
94.95 
Points belonging 
 to specific regions 
0 
4.54 
97.72 
 
TABLE 4. STATISTICS REGARDING THE NUMBER OF POINTS RETAINED IN THE 
THREE FEATURE REDUCTION TECHNIQUES I.E., K-MEANS, NEIGHBOURHOOD 
ELIMINATION AND POINTS BELONGING TO SPECIFIC LOCATIONS 
 
Algorithm 
Face 
(SIFT) 
Finger 
(Minutiae) 
Fused   
pointset 
The no. of  
Extracted  features 
145 
50 
195 
K-means clustering 
 technique 
145 
50 
89 
Neighbourhood 
 removal technique 
 73 
25 
98 
Points belonging 
 to specific regions 
 47 
20 
67 
 
D. In the fourth session, the matcher based on the Delaunay 
triangulation of the poinsets is introduced. The reported results 
are computed for monomodal modalities, and multimodal 
fusion at matching score and feature extraction level. In the 
first case, all the feature points were included for triangle 
computation, in a second case only the reduced set of points 
was used. The results presented in Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and table 5, 
show that the application of the Delaunay triangulation 
enhances the performance of the face and fingerprint 
modalities alone by 5.05% and 0.82%, respectively. Moreover, 
the multimodal feature level fusion using the Delaunay 
triangulation outperforms all the feature level fusion 
experiments, with the increase in recognition accuracy of 
0.35%. Finally, the combination of restricting the points to 
those belonging to specific regions and the Delaunay 
triangulation further enhanced the recognition accuracy by 
0.44%. 
This last configuration was further tested on the multimodal 
database acquired by the authors with multimodal fusion at 
score level and feature level. The results, presented in table 6, 
also demonstrate that the feature level fusion outperforms the 
score level fusion of 0.67%, also for the real multimodal 
database. The ROC curve obtained from the best strategy 
applied to the chimeric and the real multimodal databases is 
shown in Fig. 6. 
 
 
Fig. 4. The Accuracy Curve for Delaunay Triangulation of face, fingerprint, 
fusion at matching score and feature level 
 
TABLE 5. FAR, FRR AND ACCURACY VALUES FOR THE DELAUNAY 
TRIANGULATION TECHNIQUE 
Algorithm 
FRR 
(%) 
FAR 
(%) 
Accuracy 
Face SIFT 
2.24 
9.85 
93.95 
Fingerprint 
13.63 
3.07 
92.64 
Face+Finger at Matching level  
2.95 
8.07 
94.48 
Face+Finger at Feature Level  
2.95 
0.89 
98.07 
Face+Finger at Feature level 
using 
points 
belonging 
to 
specific region  strategy 
1.95 
1.02 
 98.51 
 
 
 
TABLE 6. FAR, FRR AND ACCURACY OF THE BEST MATCHING AND FEATURE 
REDUCTION STRATEGIES 
Algorithm 
FRR(%) 
FAR(%) 
Accuracy 
Best strategy at score fusion 
2.54 
5.48 
95.99 
Best strategy at feature  fusion 
1.12 
4.95 
96.66 

Paper#: 30 Title: Feature Level Fusion of Face and Fingerprint Biometrics 
 
 
Fig. 5. The ROC Curve for Delaunay Triangulation of face, fingerprint, 
fusion at matching score and feature level 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. ROC Curve for the best strategy in chimeric and multimodal database 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
A multimodal biometric system based on the integration of 
face and a fingerprint traits at feature extraction level was 
presented. These two traits are the most widely accepted 
biometrics in most applications. There are also other 
advantages in multimodal biometric systems, including the 
easy of use, robustness to noise, and the availability of low-
cost, off-the-shelf hardware for data acquisition. 
From a system point of view, redundancy can always be 
exploited to improve accuracy and robustness which is 
achieved in many living systems as well. Human beings, for 
example, use several perception cues for the recognition of 
other living creatures. They include visual, acoustic and tactile 
perception. Starting from these considerations, this paper 
outlined the possibility to augment the verification accuracy by 
integrating multiple biometric traits. In this paper a novel 
approach has been presented where both fingerprint and face 
images are processed with compatible feature extraction 
algorithms to obtain comparable features from the raw data. 
The reported experimental results demonstrate remarkable 
improvement in the accuracies by properly fusing feature sets. 
This preliminary achievement, does not constitute an end in 
itself, but rather suggests to attempt a multimodal data fusion 
as early as possible in the processing pipeline. In fact, the real 
feasibility of this approach, in a real application scenario, may 
heavily depend on the physical nature of the acquired signal. 
The experimental results demonstrate that fusing information 
from independent/ uncorrelated sources (face and fingerprint) 
at the feature level fusion increases the performance as 
compared to score level. As even in the literature, it is claimed 
that ensemble of classifier operating on uncorrelated features 
increases the performance in comparison to correlated 
features. This work does investigation at feature level and the 
results are inspiring. 
Further experiments, on “standard” multimodal databases, 
will allow to better validate the overall system performances.
