Using Neural Networks to Learn the Jet Stream
Forced Response from Natural Variability
Charlotte Connolly1, Elizabeth A. Barnes1, Pedram Hassanzadeh2,3 and Mike Pritchard4
1Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Rice University, Houston 77005 TX
3Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Rice University, Houston
77005 TX
4Department of Earth System Science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
January 3, 2023
This manuscript has been submitted for consideration for publication in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for the Earth Systems
1
arXiv:2301.00496v1  [physics.ao-ph]  2 Jan 2023

Abstract
Two distinct features of anthropogenic climate change, warming in the tropical upper tro-
posphere and warming at the Arctic surface, have competing eﬀects on the mid-latitude jet
stream’s latitudinal position, often referred to as a “tug-of-war”. Studies that investigate the
jet’s response to these thermal forcings show that it is sensitive to model type, season, initial
atmospheric conditions, and the shape and magnitude of the forcing. Much of this past work
focuses on studying a simulation’s response to external manipulation. In contrast, we explore
the potential to train a convolutional neural network (CNN) on internal variability alone and
then use it to examine possible nonlinear responses of the jet to tropospheric thermal forcing
that more closely resemble anthropogenic climate change. Our approach leverages the idea be-
hind the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, which relates the internal variability of a system to its
forced response but so far has been only used to quantify linear responses. We train a CNN on
data from a long control run of the CESM dry dynamical core and show that it is able to skill-
fully predict the nonlinear response of the jet to sustained external forcing. The trained CNN
provides a quick method for exploring the jet stream sensitivity to a wide range of tropospheric
temperature tendencies and, considering that this method can likely be applied to any model
with a long control run, could lend itself useful for early stage experiment design.
1
Introduction
The eddy-driven jet stream drives much of the northern hemisphere mid-latitude weather (e.g.
Nakamura et al., 2004; Athanasiadis et al., 2010; Shaw et al., 2016; Madonna et al., 2017). Conse-
quently, changes in the jet stream position and strength can result in enormous societal impact by
impacting heat waves, droughts, and ﬂooding events (Schubert et al., 2011; Coumou and Rahm-
storf, 2012; Bibi et al., 2020; Rousi et al., 2021, 2022), extreme weather across the mid-latitudes
(Mahlstein et al., 2012; R¨othlisberger et al., 2016), hurricane tracks (Mattingly et al., 2015), and
crop production (Kornhuber et al., 2019). Two robust features of anthropogenic climate change,
warming in the upper troposphere of the tropics and warming at the surface of the Arctic, have
been shown to independently force opposite responses in the mean jet location (e.g. Held, 1993;
Harvey et al., 2015; Stendel et al., 2021) These competing responses are driven by changes in the
pole to equator temperature gradient (Blackport and Screen, 2020; Stendel et al., 2021). Warming
in the tropical upper troposphere drives a poleward shift in the mean jet location by increasing
the upper tropospheric temperature gradient, while simultaneously, warming at the Arctic surface
drives an equatorward shift in the mean jet location by decreasing the surface temperature gradient
(Butler et al., 2010; Screen et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2020; Stendel et al., 2021), The competing jet
response stemming from these two thermal forcings is commonly referred to as the “tug-of-war” on
the jet stream. Current consensus across climate models is that the upper tropospheric warming
wins-out over the Arctic surface warming, causing a net poleward shift of the jet (Yin, 2005; Swart
and Fyfe, 2012; Barnes and Polvani, 2013; Harvey et al., 2015). However, there is still substantial
disagreement over the magnitude of the jet response due to uncertainty in the strength and spatial
extent of the regional heating anomalies (Grise and Polvani, 2016).
Warming in both the tropical upper troposphere and Arctic surface are caused by distinctly dif-
ferent dynamical processes that determine the characteristics of the thermal anomalies. The tropical
upper atmosphere warms more as a result of additional water vapor stored in the warmer tropical
tropospheric air (i.e. a reduction in the moist adiabatic lapse rate; (Sherwood and Nidhi Nishant,
2015).
The enhanced Arctic warming, commonly referred to as Arctic Ampliﬁcation, is occur-
ring three times faster than elsewhere on the planet (Blunden and Arndt, 2012; Druckenmiller
et al., 2021) and is driven by multiple processes that include changes in poleward energy transport
(Hwang and Frierson, 2010; Graversen and Langen, 2019), surface ice-albedo feedbacks (Manabe
2

and Stouﬀer, 1980; Dai et al., 2019), cloud feedbacks (Abbot and Tziperman, 2008) and lapse-
rate feedbacks (Pithan and Mauritsen, 2014). To further increase the complexity of the processes
driving the regional warming, the two thermal forcings likely do not act entirely independently.
Research has shown that increased transient Rossby waves initiated in the tropics may drive in-
creased heat transport into the high latitudes and as a result drive further warming in the mid-
and upper-troposphere of the Arctic (Lee, 2014; Dunn-Sigouin et al., 2021). Uncertainties in the
processes that contribute to the magnitude and shape of warming in the tropical upper troposphere
and Arctic surface (Blackport and Screen, 2020; Stendel et al., 2021), in turn, make it even more
challenging to predict the magnitude of the jet response.
Despite the large body of work that investigates the response of the mid-latitude jet under
climate change, multiple challenges, such as the short observational record, isolating the jet’s forced
response from internal variability, and modeling ice and cloud feedbacks continue to make the
question diﬃcult to answer (Tjernstr¨om et al., 2008; Kattsov et al., 2010; Cohen et al., 2014;
Pithan and Mauritsen, 2014; Vihma, 2014). The studies that have investigated the response of the
jet to a thermal forcing have shown that the jet is sensitive to the shape, location, and magnitude
of the thermal forcing (Butler et al., 2010), the season in which the forcing is imposed (McGraw
and Barnes, 2016), the current state of the atmosphere (i.e. position of the jet stream; (Gerber
et al., 2008; Barnes et al., 2010; Kidston and Gerber, 2010; Garﬁnkel et al., 2013), and the climate
models used for the study (Meehl et al., 2007; Barnes and Polvani, 2013).
In an attempt to explore circulation sensitivities to a wide range of possible thermal forcings,
Hassanzadeh and Kuang (2016b) used a control run from the GFDL dry dynamical core (Manabe
et al., 1974) and employed the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem (FDT) to compute the linear response
function of the circulation to a number of external thermal and mechanical forcing. FDT relates
the mean linear response of a nonlinear system to a forcing through a linear operator created from
the internal variability of the system (e.g. Kraichnan, 1959; Leith, 1975; Marconi et al., 2008).
With the ability to explore a forced response from internal variability, FDT has been proposed as a
method to quickly estimate circulation sensitivities in climate models (Fuchs et al., 2015) and serve
as a useful tool for planning expensive climate model experiments (Leith, 1975). There have been
encouraging results using FDT to explore the circulation response to thermal forcings in general
circulation models (Gritsun and Branstator, 2007) as well as more complex coupled climate models
(Phipps, 2010) to estimate the response to realistic sea surface thermal forcings (Fuchs et al., 2015).
In order for the linear operator of FDT to accurately predict the mean response to a forcing,
the system must satisfy a number of conditions (Marconi et al., 2008). The ﬁrst condition is that
the system must be in equilibrium, because FDT assumes that small changes in the system’s state
(internal variability) has a recovery back to equilibrium that is similar to the system’s response to
a small perturbation (Kraichnan, 1959; Leith, 1975). The second is that the perturbation must be
small enough so that the response is linear even though the system that the operator is created
from is not necessarily linear (Leith 1975). Lastly, the probability density function of the system
must be diﬀerentiable, and many applications of the FDT assume the system probability density
function is Gaussian (Majda et al., 2005), though work has been done to make versions of FDT
where the system can be quasi-Gaussian (Cooper and Haynes, 2011). In theory, a system that
satisﬁes these conditions can use FDT to compute the systems’ linear response to a forcing, though
there are practical challenges in applying FDT to high-dimensional systems, such as GCMs (Lutsko
et al., 2015; Hassanzadeh and Kuang, 2016b; Khodkar and Hassanzadeh, 2018).
Instead of using FDT to relate a forcing to a response, this study uses a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to learn the nonlinear relationship between a forcing and a response. Moreover,
using a CNN in place of the linear operator removes the need to make some of the FDT assumptions
(i.e. small forcing for a linear response, Gaussianity assumption). Training is performed on data
3

from a long control run with the CESM dry dynamical core. Once trained, the CNN is used to
explore the jet sensitivity to a variety of thermal forcings. Throughout this study, we evaluate
the CNN’s ability to quantify the CESM dry dynamical core’s jet sensitivity, placing particular
emphasis on the tug-of-war between the warming in the tropical upper troposphere and the Arctic
surface. Training a neural network on internal variability alone and then using it to predict a forced
response is, to our knowledge, a novel application of deep learning to climate analysis. Therefore,
we assess the strengths and weaknesses of this approach in multiple ways (see Section 3).
2
Methods
We train a CNN to predict the jet stream response to zonally averaged regional temperature
perturbations. The goal is to investigate jet sensitivity to thermal features associated with anthro-
pogenic climate change. The CNN, detailed in Section 2.2, is trained on a long control run from a
dry dynamical core, which is documented to reproduce the majority of the northern hemisphere’s
jet response to heating perturbations along with simulating the correct sign of the jet shift (e.g.
Mbengue and Schneider, 2013; Hassanzadeh et al., 2014; McGraw and Barnes, 2016; Baker et al.,
2017). Once trained, the CNN’s skill is examined by comparing to additional baseline prediction
methods and dry core experiments that include an imposed thermal forcing. Details on the dry
dynamical core setup, the CNN architecture and training, additional baseline prediction methods,
and additional dry core heating experiments are discussed in more detail in the following Sections.
2.1
Training Data
We use output from the Community Earth System Model (CESM) Eulerian spectral-transform
dry dynamical core (Lauritzen et al., 2018). The model runs are completed with the Held-Suarez
conﬁguration (Held and Suarez, 1994), such that friction exists at the surface and the temperature
is relaxed to a prescribed hemispherically symmetric temperature ﬁeld. The relaxation temperature
ﬁeld is set to equinoctial conditions and there is no absorption of solar energy by the atmosphere
(i.e. there are no seasons or diurnal cycles). All runs are performed at T42 resolution with 30
vertical levels, 64 latitude bands, and 128 longitude bands. The simulation is run in the above
conﬁguration for one million six hour time steps.
The ﬁrst 20,000 time steps (13.7 years) are
thrown out to account for model spin up.
All data processing is performed to create eﬃcient training data for a CNN (Section 2.2) to
predict the zonally-averaged jet response to a range of tropospheric temperature perturbations.
Two variables are used in this study, zonally averaged temperature and zonally averaged zonal
wind speed. The zonally-averaged temperature data is used to calculate the temperature tendency
ﬁeld used as input to the CNN. The zonally-averaged zonal wind speed is used to calculate the
initial location of the jet and the subsequent shift of the jet, which are used as a CNN input and
the CNN prediction respectively. We exclude data from 200 hPa and above, eﬀectively removing
the stratosphere which is not well resolved in this model without modiﬁcation (Polvani, 2002) and
so focus can remain solely on the troposphere for both the forcing and the jet response. Given that
this study focuses on hemispheric jets, we take advantage of the hemispheric symmetry in the dry
core and use each hemisphere as a separate independent sample, doubling the amount of available
training data to two million. After zonally averaging, removing the stratosphere, and considering
each hemisphere as a separate sample, the resulting size of the temperature ﬁeld is 25 vertical levels
by 32 latitude bands.
Backward diﬀerencing is used to calculate the temperature tendency which is then smoothed
using a backward running mean of 240 time steps (60 days) to remove higher frequency variability.
4

Removing the high frequency variability allows the network to focus on learning the response to a
forcing that more closely mimics continuous climate change forcing. This smoothing is also aligned
with FDT calculations, in which an integration over long time lags (often up to the decorrelation
timescale) is done; e.g., see Eq. (3) in Hassanzadeh and Kuang (2016b). Smoothing the data before
calculating the temperature tendency did not result in any changes in the CNN skill (not shown).
Following established methods (Woollings et al., 2010; McGraw and Barnes, 2016), the jet
location is deﬁned as the latitude of the maximum wind speed at a pressure level near the surface.
Zonal wind speeds from the 850 hPa level are used here and are ﬁrst smoothed with a 240 time
step (60 days) backward running mean. Then, a second order polynomial is ﬁt to the peak of the
smoothed 850 hPa zonal wind proﬁle and the jet location is deﬁned as the latitude of the maximum
wind speeds.
Now that a smoothed zonal temperature tendency and a jet location are calculated, the data
are split into training, validation, and testing data. Splitting is completed by chunking the data
into three groups where training data is the ﬁrst chunk, validation the second, and testing the last.
Lastly, the jet response to a given temperature tendency is deﬁned by the change in jet latitude
from the time of input to 120 time steps later (i.e. the jet shift). A positive jet shift indicates a
poleward shift in jet location and a negative jet shift indicates an equatorward shift in jet location
relative to the jet’s latitude at the time of prediction. The jet shift is calculated within each dataset
(training, validation, and testing) by subtracting a 240 time step backward running mean of jet
stream locations from a 240 time step forward running mean of jet stream locations 120 time steps
into the future. This processing results in 359,280 training samples, 199,280 validation samples,
and 1,399,558 testing samples. Training the CNN required fewer samples than expected as adding
more samples to the training dataset did not improve the CNN skill, explaining why the testing
dataset is much larger than the training and validation datasets.
2.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Figure 1: Schematic of the convolutional neural network with an example of an input and output.
CNNs are commonly used for image recognition and classiﬁcation tasks as the convolutional
5

layers can extract spatial features in the input image that help the network learn the correlations
between the inputs and output (Fukushima, 1980; Yann et al., 1998; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014). While
a fully connected feedforward network (e.g. LeCun et al., 2015) has the ability to learn the same
features extracted by the convolutional layers within a CNN, it may require a larger network and
more training data to do so (Yann et al., 1998; Ingrosso and Goldt, 2022). In this study, we utilize
a CNN so that the network can eﬃciently learn the correlation between temperature tendencies
and the jet response while also trying to minimize the amount of training data required.
The CNN has two inputs: a smoothed temperature tendency ﬁeld (K day−1) and an initial
jet location (degrees latitude). Including the temperature tendency as an input allows us to in-
vestigate the jet response to regional temperature tendencies and including the initial jet location
supplies the CNN with essential information about the current state of the jet at the prediction
time, an important factor for the jet response to forcing (Gerber et al., 2008; Barnes et al., 2010;
Kidston and Gerber, 2010; Garﬁnkel et al., 2013). Before the data is input into the CNN, the
smoothed temperature tendency ﬁeld is multiplied by a factor of 10 and the initial jet location is
standardized using the standard deviation and mean jet location from the training data. Scaling
and standardizing are done so that both inputs have similar magnitudes (order of 1).
The network consists of four convolutional layers: two average pooling layers, three dense layers,
and three dropout layers (Fig.
1).
Convolutional and dense layers use the hyperbolic tangent
activation function.
Data are passed through the network as follows: the scaled temperature
tendency goes directly into the ﬁrst convolutional layer with 32 ﬁlters of size 3 x 3 and a stride
of 1 followed by a second convolutional layer with the same attributes. The second convolutional
layer is then connected to an average pooling layer with a kernel size of 2 x 2. These three layers,
two convolutional and a single average pooling, are repeated with the same attributes with the
exception of containing 64 ﬁlters rather than 32 in the convolutional layers. The output from the
second average pooling layer is ﬂattened and the standardized initial jet location is concatenated
to the end. This layer is then fed into the ﬁrst dense layer with 500 nodes and then goes through a
dropout layer with a dropout rate of 30%. The data passes through a combination of dense layers
with 500 nodes followed by dropout layers with a dropout rate of 30% two more times. The data
from the ﬁnal dropout layer then passes into the output layer consisting of two nodes.
The CNN outputs two values denoted as µ and σ, which represent a mean and standard deviation
of a Gaussian distribution where µ denotes the predicted jet shift and σ represents its uncertainty.
Predicting the parameters of a Gaussian distribution is commonly used to quantify uncertainty for
neural networks (Nix and Weigend, 1994, 1995), and Gordon and Barnes (2022) recently showed the
utility of incorporating uncertainty into a regression neural network for climate science applications.
The network learns to predict µ and σ through the implementation of the negative log-likelihood
loss function:
Li = −log(pi)
(1)
where p is a value of the predicted Gaussian distribution evaluated at the true jet shift for the
ith input sample. To ensure the network is calibrated we employ the probability integral transform
(PIT) probability calibration scheme (Gneiting et al., 2007; Nipen and Stull, 2011; Barnes et al.,
2022). The PIT histogram for this CNN can be found in Supplementary.
To train the CNN, we use the Adam stochastic gradient descent optimization algorithm (Kingma
and Ba, 2014) with a learning rate of 10−7, a batch size of 256, and a random seed of 300. We
apply early stopping to halt the training process once the validation loss fails to decrease for 10
consecutive epochs and restore the model weights to the version with the lowest validation loss
(Prechelt, 2012).
6

2.3
Baselines
We establish two baselines in this study to assess the performance of the CNN and demonstrate
that the CNN has learned relationships between the jet response and the regional temperature
tendencies. The ﬁrst baseline is called persistence, similar to “persistence forecasting” (MacDonald,
1992), where future conditions are predicted to be identical to the current conditions. In our case,
this translates to the jet’s future location being the same as its location at the time of prediction (i.e.
jet shift equal to zero). Comparing this baseline to the CNN ensures that the CNN is predicting
jet shifts that are more accurate than predicting a jet shift of zero. The second baseline is called
average evolution and describes the average movement of the jet based on its position at the time
of prediction. For this baseline calculation, the training data is separated into 100 diﬀerent bins
according to the initial jet location, essentially grouping samples with similar initial jet locations
together. The average jet shift for each bin is calculated, resulting in an average jet response that
is solely dependent on the jet stream’s starting position. The average evolution baseline is not
sensitive to the number of bins or their exact spacing (not shown). This baseline ensures that the
CNN is not just predicting the average evolution of the jet based solely on the initial jet location
but is also using the temperature tendency input to make its prediction.
Every test sample is thus associated with three jet shift predictions, one from the CNN and
two from the additional persistence and average evolution baselines. Although comparing results
between the CNN and the two baselines is useful for placing the CNN’s predictions into context,
we highlight that the baselines make predictions based solely on information about the initial
location of the jet while the CNN is provided additional information in the form of the temperature
tendency. Thus, the CNN is able to explore the correlations between a temperature tendency and
a jet response.
2.4
Heating Experiments
The main goal of this study is to investigate the jet stream sensitivity to thermal forcing driven
by anthropogenic climate warming. However, as we have designed it, the CNN only trains on data
from a long control run (i.e. internal variability), and thus, only provides insights into the forced
response if the idea of the FDT holds (Kraichnan, 1959; Leith, 1975; Marconi et al., 2008). To
investigate whether this assumption is valid, we run additional dry core simulations (referred to as
heating experiments) with zonally symmetric imposed thermal forcing (F) that take the form of a
two-dimensional Gaussian in the latitude/pressure plane (Equation 2):
F(Θ, p) = qoexp
"
(| Θ | −Θo)2
Θ2w
−(| p | −po)2
p2w
#
(2)
where Θo and po are the horizontal and vertical centers respectively, Θw and pw deﬁne the width
and height, and the magnitude of the forcing is given by qo. Gaussians that fall near the edge are
cut oﬀand therefore not complete two-dimensional Gaussians. For all Gaussians created in this
study, Θ, Θw, p, pw, qo are reported in Appendix A.
Eighteen heating experiments with either one or two Gaussian thermal forcings imposed are run
out to equilibrium to quantify the true jet shift (see experiments #1-18 in Table A1). To perform a
direct comparison between the CNN-predicted jet responses and the dry core jet responses, the CNN
is given the same temperature tendency that is imposed in each of the dry core heating experiments.
For the CNN’s initial jet location input, the average jet location from the long control run is used
(42.4°). By comparing the true forced response from the dry core to the predicted forced response
7

by the CNN we are able to investigate the CNN’s ability to predict the jet response to thermal
forcing from training on internal variability alone.
Each heating experiment is initiated at the end of the long control run (time step one million;
684.9 years), and therefore, have the same initial conditions. The heating experiments are run for
an additional 20,000 time steps with the ﬁrst 4,000 removed to ensure that the model has reached
its new equilibrium. The 850 hPa zonal winds are then used to compute the location of the jet
(see Section 3.1). Finally, the true response of the jet to an imposed thermal forcing is deﬁned
as the average jet location during the long control run subtracted from the jet location in the
corresponding heating experiment.
3
Results
3.1
Evaluation of CNN skill
Figure 2: Predicted jet response (y-axis) versus the true jet response (x-axis) for the (a) CNN,
(b) average evolution baseline, and (c) persistence baseline using the testing data from the control
simulation. Panel (a) is a contoured by density and panels (b) and (c) are scatter plots. Mean
absolute errors are shown in the bottom right corner of each panel. Gray lines represent a perfect
prediction (one-to-one line). Green line in panel (a) represents the best-ﬁt line from the CNN
predictions.
We begin our discussion of the results with a focus on the deterministic predictions by the CNN
(µ). The deterministic skill on the testing data, which we deﬁne as the mean absolute error between
the predicted jet shift and the true jet shift, reveals how well the CNN generalizes to unseen samples
within the control simulation. The ﬁrst look at the entire testing dataset will appear to show a
modest diﬀerence; a closer look within the testing dataset will prove more interesting. Figure 2a
shows the relationship between the predicted jet shift and the true jet shift where predictions with
higher accuracy are closer to the gray diagonal line (one-to-one line). Using orthogonal distance
regression (Boggs and Rogers, 1990; Virtanen et al., 2020), which takes into account error in both
the x and y variables as well as the CNN-predicted uncertainties in y, we calculate the slope from
the testing data to be 0.5 deg. poleward / (deg. poleward). This positive slope demonstrates the
CNN has learned relationships between the jet shift and the inputs. However, the slope of the
CNN predictions is less than that of the one-to-one line implying that the CNN underestimates
the magnitude of the largest jet shifts.
This is likely a result of the imbalanced training data
8

as it includes more samples with smaller jet shifts than larger ones (shown in Figure 2a by the
density contours). During training, the goal of the CNN is to minimize the negative log-likelihood
loss function (see Equation 1), but with an unbalanced dataset, the CNN may never predict the
most extreme cases. Applying methods to make the network predict extremes, such as balancing
the dataset, using samples weights, or creating custom loss functions (Ma et al., 2013; Krawczyk,
2016), either caused a severe decrease in skill or did not succeed in solving the problem (not shown).
Nonetheless, as we will show next, the CNN outperforms the two benchmark baselines and is an
eﬀective tool for exploring jet sensitivity to external forcing.
Comparing the CNN’s skill on the testing data to that of the two baselines: average evolution
(Fig. 2b) and persistence (Fig. 2c), allows us to place the CNN’s skill into context against other
basic prediction methods. Persistence has the lowest performance with a mean absolute error of
2.22°. Average evolution performs only slightly worse than the CNN with mean absolute errors
of 1.86° and 1.77° respectively. Unlike persistence, which can only ever predict a jet shift of zero,
average evolution makes a prediction based on the average relationship between the initial jet loca-
tion and the jet shift of the training data, allowing it to capture the mean jet response. Regardless,
average evolution is limited to predicting one of the 100 jet shifts resulting from the methods used
to calculate it (see Methods), hence the stripes in Figure 2b. Based on the mean absolute error
alone, the CNN outperforms both the persistence and average evolution baselines for the testing
data from dry dynamical core long control run.
Figure 3: The mean absolute error from the three prediction methods, CNN (black line), average
evolution (cyan line), and persistence (orange line) grouped by initial jet locations. gray violin
plots show the density curves of the CNN’s error distribution where the width corresponds with
the frequency of the data. Numbers at the bottom of each bar indicate the number of samples
in each group and the average initial jet location from the training data is marked on the x-axis
(42.4°).
The mean absolute errors in Figure 2 represent the error over the entire testing set, which is
prone to obscuring interesting details hiding within the distribution. For a more comprehensive
analysis of the CNN’s skill, the testing data is thus separated into groups based on the initial
9

jet location. The mean absolute error for each group is shown for the CNN and the baselines in
Figure 3 and describes how the CNN’s skill and the baselines’ skill depend on the initial state of
the jet. The gray violin plots behind each bar indicate the CNN’s mean absolute error distribution
within that bin (i.e. the data used to calculate the CNN mean absolute error in each group). The
violin plots are smoothed with a kernel estimator using Scott’s rule and 100 points, which are the
default parameters of the Matplotlib library (Hunter, 2007). The numbers at the bottom of each
bar denote the number of samples in that bin. For all bins in Figure 3, the CNN outperforms the
baselines as demonstrated by the CNN’s error (black line) falling below the baseline errors (cyan
and orange lines). When the initial jet location is equatorward of 42° (labeled as “Avg.” along the
x-axis of Fig. 3), the CNN does considerably better than the baselines, but when the jet location
is poleward of 42°, the CNN and average evolution achieve similar skill. That is, in the cases where
the initial jet is near the pole, it appears that the CNN does not learn more than average evolution
but instead learns this average behavior to make its prediction.
When the initial jet location is near this climatological average position (42.4°), the errors of
the CNN and baselines converge (Fig. 3). About 30% of the samples in the training data have
initial jet locations within 2° of the climatological average and 14% of these samples have a jet shift
between -0.5° and 0.5°. Since so many samples near the climatological average have small jet shifts
and because the persistence baseline can only predict a jet shift of zero, the mean absolute error
for persistence is at its lowest near the jet’s climatological average position. The average evolution
baseline converges to a near zero prediction when the initial jet location is near the climatological
average, resulting in persistence and average evolution exhibiting similar errors.
Although the
persistence and average evolution baselines have an advantage near the climatological average, the
CNN still outperforms both baselines, implying that the CNN is using the additional information
provided by the input temperature tendencies.
Figure 4: The thermal forcing with a magnitude of qo = 0.25 K day −1 is moved around the
latitude and pressure plane where the shading in (a) and (b) represent the CNN-predicted jet shift
and uncertainty respectively.
An example of a thermal forcing is seen in the gray contours in
both panels. The “x” marks the center as well as the predicted jet shift and predicted uncertainty
associated with that thermal forcing. Gaussian parameters are found in Table A1 experiment #19.
10

Next, we focus on evaluating CNN’s ability to predict a jet stream forced response from an ar-
tiﬁcially constructed idealized temperature tendency not encountered within its noisy training en-
vironment. These temperature tendency inputs contain a two-dimensional Gaussian (see Methods)
with a prescribed magnitude, size, and location (latitude and pressure). Outside of the Gaussian,
the temperature tendency ﬁeld is ﬁlled with zeros. Although some of these thermal forcings have
magnitudes larger than any temperature tendencies found in the internal variability training data,
we will provide strong evidence to support the CNN’s ability to extrapolate in the coming sections.
CNN predictions made from a thermal forcing use an initial jet location deﬁned by the average
jet location of the training data (42.4°). Therefore, diﬀerences in predicted jet shifts between tem-
perature tendency inputs are a response to the thermal forcing alone and not the presumed initial
state.
The shading in Figure 4 shows the CNN-learned jet sensitivity to the location of heating by
holding the magnitude and the shape of a thermal forcing constant and changing only its location
(Fig.
4; see experiment #19 in Table A1).
An example of a thermal forcing is shown in the
gray contours where the “x” denotes its center and the color of the shading beneath represents
the predicted jet shift (Fig. 4a) and the predicted uncertainty (Fig. 4b) from the temperature
tendency.
Figure 4a exhibits multiple known features of the jet response to tropospheric thermal forcings.
For example, thermal forcings located higher in the troposphere are known to be more eﬀective at
perturbing the jet than thermal forcings located lower in the troposphere (Hassanzadeh and Kuang,
2016a; Kim et al., 2021). This feature is learned by the CNN and is shown in Figure 4a as darker
shading at higher pressure levels. In addition, warming in the tropical upper troposphere has been
previously shown to cause the jet to shift poleward (Chen et al., 2008; Lim and Simmonds, 2009;
Butler et al., 2010). This poleward jet shift is seen in Figure 4a as denoted by the red shading in
the tropical upper troposphere. Finally, heating at the polar surface has been shown to cause the
jet to shift equatorward (Butler et al., 2010; Deser et al., 2010; Screen et al., 2013) and this is seen
in Figure 4a by the blue shading, albeit weak, near the polar surface. These features indicate that
the CNN has learned the correct sign of the jet shift as supported by prior research.
Figure 4a also highlights how moving the center of the heating by a few degrees or pressure
levels can change the direction of the jet shift. Take for instance heating at the polar surface, where
moving the heating from 80° latitude to 75° latitude changes the jet response from an equatorward
shift to a poleward shift. Baker et al. (2017) investigates the jet sensitivity to the location of heating
by running 306 dry core experiments with an imposed Gaussian shaped temperature tendency that
is moved around the latitude-pressure plane, just as we have done here with a trained CNN. In
Baker et al. (2017), they show that changes in the latitude of the heating most strongly impact
the sign of the jet shift while changing the pressure level has very little impact. Similar behavior is
found here with the CNN, although with a few exceptions. A more in-depth discussion about the
failure of the CNN to capture the correct direction of the jet shift at the surface of the mid-latitudes
is found in Supplementary.
Recall that the CNN predicts both the jet shift (µ) as well as its uncertainty (σ).
Figure
4b displays the predicted uncertainty values and highlights three regions where the CNN is less
certain. The CNN is less certain when heating occurs around 10° latitude and 600 hPa (σ ≈4°)
and additionally has large uncertainty when the heating is centered near 85° latitude and 900 hPa
and the 60° latitude and 550 hPa (σ ≈1.5°). The reasons behind the greater uncertainty in these
regions require further investigation.
11

3.2
Nonlinearities learned by the CNN
Ideally, a beneﬁt of using a CNN is that it learns a nonlinear relationship between the temperature
tendency input and the jet shift output. The hyperbolic tangent activation functions in the convo-
lutional and dense layers of the CNN allow it to learn nonlinear relationships between the inputs
and outputs if nonlinearity is present in the data. However, this does not necessarily mean the CNN
has learned nonlinear relationships. To evaluate the nonlinearity learned by the CNN we complete
two analyses. The ﬁrst analysis examines how the CNN-predicted jet shift varies as a function of
the thermal forcing magnitude. The second analysis looks at scenarios where two thermal forcings
are simultaneously present in the temperature tendency input and explores whether the CNN has
learned a nonlinear interaction between the two. Keep in mind that neither of these analyses has a
ground truth, and so we are exclusively exploring what the CNN has learned. In the next section,
we will then further test the accuracy of the CNN with additional dry core simulations.
Figure 5: The CNN learned nonlinear responses where panel (a) shows example thermal forcing
with magnitudes of 1 K day−1 at the ﬁve locations and panels (b) and (c) show the linear response
(dashed line) and the predicted response from the CNN (solid lines). Note the diﬀerent y-axes in
panels (b) and (c). Gaussian parameters are found in Table A1 #20-24.
The ﬁrst nonlinear analysis explores how the jet shift varies as a function of the thermal forcing
magnitude by separately inputting thermal forcings of diﬀerent magnitudes in ﬁve diﬀerent locations
(Fig. 5a; see experiments #20-24 in Table A1). We use ten diﬀerent magnitudes that vary from
-1.0 K day−1 to 1.0 K day−1 in increments of 0.2 K day−1 for each location. For all cases, the
initial jet location input is ﬁxed at the average jet location of the training data (42.4°). Figure
5b and 5c compare a linear relationship (dashed lines) and the CNN’s learned relationship (solid
lines) between the thermal forcing magnitude and the jet shift. The jet response to temperature
tendencies near the polar surface and the mid-tropospheric mid-latitudes are the most linear as
shown by the green line in Figure 5b and the blue line in Figure 5c.
In both of these cases,
the CNN-predicted jet shift is most similar to the linear dashed line. In contrast, temperature
tendencies in the tropics and the upper troposphere of the polar region have the largest nonlinear
response (yellow line in Figure 5b, pink, and red lines in Figure 5c) as these cases vary greatly from
the dashed linear line.
We next explore the nonlinearities learned by the CNN when two thermal forcings are present.
12

Figure 6: Panel (a) shows the CNN-predicted jet shift from when two thermal forcings vary with
magnitude.
One at the surface of the pole (x-axis) and the other in the upper troposphere of
the tropics (y-axis). Panel (b) shows the predicted uncertainty for the predictions of panel (a).
Panel (c) is similar to panel (a) but the CNN predicts the jet shift from the two thermal forcings
independently. Panel (d) is the diﬀerence between panel (a) minus panel (c) representing the CNN
learned nonlinearity.
The thermal forcings are centered on two key regions, the tropical upper troposphere and the polar
surface. As discussed previously, warming in the tropical upper troposphere forces the jet to shift
poleward (e.g. Chen et al., 2008; Lim and Simmonds, 2009; Butler et al., 2010) and warming at
the polar surface forces the jet to shift equatorward (e.g. Butler et al., 2010; Deser et al., 2010;
Screen et al., 2013). When they occur simultaneously, they force competing eﬀects that can result
in a tug-of-war scenario on the jet stream (e.g. Harvey et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2020). To explore
the jet sensitivities to this climate change induced tug-of-war, the temperature tendency inputs are
composed of a Gaussian thermal forcing at the polar surface and another in the upper troposphere
of the tropics. Both vary independently in magnitude during the analyses (see experiment #25 in
Table A1) and Figure 6a shows the predicted jet shift (µ) and 6b shows the predicted uncertainty
(σ) for each forcing pattern. With regards to the tug-of-war, studies use a variety of atmospheric
models to show that despite opposite forced jet responses, the jet will likely shift poleward (Yin,
2005; Harvey et al., 2015). The upper right quadrant of Figure 6a depicts the situation where both
thermal forcings are positive (warming). In this scenario, the CNN predicts a poleward shift of the
jet in agreement with past work, however, the CNN is not equally certain for all predictions. As
shown in Figure 6b, the CNN is more conﬁdent with cooling at the pole and warming in the tropics
and less conﬁdent with warming in the pole combined with cooling in the tropics. Understanding
why these scenarios are more uncertain requires further investigation.
Figure 6a shows the CNN-predicted jet response when two thermal forcings are present in the
temperature tendency input. To test whether the CNN has learned a nonlinear impact on the jet
from two simultaneous forcings, we task the CNN to predict the jet shift from the two thermal
forcings independently (upper tropical troposphere and polar surface) and add the two predicted jet
shifts together subsequently. If the CNN exclusively learned a linear response between two forcings,
Figure 6a and Figure 6c would be identical, as predicting a jet shift from combined forcings would
be equal to predicting the jet shifts from individual forcing and adding the predictions together.
Instead, Figure 6d shows the diﬀerence in predicted jet shifts from these methods and provides
evidence of the nonlinearity learned by the CNN where inputs that contain stronger thermal forcings
(scenarios in the corners of 6d) have greater learned nonlinearity.
13

3.3
Out-of-sample tests
Thus far we have compared the CNN-predicted jet shifts to our established baselines, true jet shifts
harvested from the internal variability of the control run, and past work. We next evaluate the
ability of the CNN to predict the explicit simulated jet response to an imposed idealized steady
thermal forcing outside the training set. The FDT states that the linear response of a nonlinear
system to external forcing can be related to the internal variability of the system.
Under the
assumption that FDT holds, our CNN trained on internal variability may also be able to predict
a forced response. We next explore this by comparing the true forced jet shift calculated from
additional dry core experiments to the predicted jet shift by the CNN.
We perform 14 additional forced heating experiments with the dry dynamical core (see Methods
and Table A1 experiments #1-14). These 14 heating experiments are motivated by the tug-of-war
on the jet resulting from anthropogenic climate change (Harvey et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2020;
Stendel et al., 2021). To mimic the tug-of-war, each experiment contains a thermal forcing in the
tropical upper troposphere and at the polar surface. The left side of Figure 7 includes the magnitude
of each Gaussian shaped thermal forcing. The forced jet response from the dry dynamical core
experiments and the CNN-predicted jet response from 14 heating experiments are shown on the
right side of Figure 7. Comparing the true forced jet shift simulated by the dry core (green dots) and
the predicted jet shift by the CNN trained on internal variability (black lines), we see that across
all experiments, the CNN accurately captures the sign of the jet shift. Experiments #1 through #7
exhibit a negative jet shift and #8 through #14 exhibit a positive jet shift. Furthermore, nearly
all of the experiments (excluding #3, #4, and #14) have forced jet shifts that fall well within
the uncertainty bounds predicted by the CNN (±2σ; gray boxes). Additional discussion of other
heating experiments that do not focus on the tug-of-war on the jet can be found in Appendix C.
Heating experiments #6, #7, #8, and #9 contain only a thermal forcing at the polar surface
(no thermal forcing in the tropical upper troposphere) and are therefore useful for investigating
the diﬀerence in CNN-predicted uncertainty between polar warming and polar cooling. In heating
experiments #6 and #7, which contain polar warming, the CNN is less certain (larger σ), in
contrast to heating experiments #8 and #9, which contains polar cooling, where the CNN is more
certain (smaller σ).
The CNN’s uncertainty when there is a thermal forcing in the upper troposphere of the tropics is
more diﬃcult to discern from Figure 7 because the CNN’s uncertainty is impacted considerably by
the thermal forcing at the polar surface. However, heating experiments #3 and #12 include only a
thermal forcing in the tropical upper troposphere, one cooling and one warming respectively. These
heating experiments suggest that the CNN is more certain when the upper tropical troposphere is
cooling rather than warming.
4
Implications for Sensitivity Analysis
Given the CNN’s ability to replicate the sign of the jet stream’s forced response as validated
with the additional forced dry dynamical core experiments, we propose that our approach can be
deployed as a computationally eﬃcient tool to aid in the design of forced model experiments. To
demonstrate this, we next revisit a historical study (Butler et al. 2010; afterward B10) and show
how the pre-trained CNN can be used to replicate the study’s results as well as document possible
sensitivities not included in the initial work. In B10, diﬀerences in dry core atmospheric circulations
due to variations in the location and shape of thermal forcings were identiﬁed and documented.
To test the atmospheric sensitivity, B10 ran multiple experiments with diﬀerent imposed thermal
forcing patterns in the Colorado State University general circulation model (Ringler et al., 2000).
14

Figure 7: The 14 heating experiments, their resulting jet shift in the dry core, and the jet shift
as predicted by the CNN. The left side includes the magnitude of each Gaussian shaped thermal
forcing. The right side shows the true forced dry core jet shift (green dots), the predicted CNN jet
shift (black line), and the CNN-predicted uncertainty (gray boxes; ±2σ).
Although B10 did not quantify a shift of the jet stream the same way as we do here, the study
showed the zonal-mean zonal wind response and discussed which heating experiments resulted in a
stronger wind response. From this information, we are able to infer the relative magnitude of the
jet shift for each experiment.
Here, we focus on four speciﬁc heating experiments within B10 that aim to investigate how
sensitive the circulation response is to the height and shape of tropical upper tropospheric heating.
Examples of the thermal forcing patterns imposed in B10 are shown in Figure 8a-d and will be
referred to as heating experiments #26, #27, #28, and #29 for this discussion. In the original
study, B10 found that the jet shifts poleward in response to all heating experiments, but that
the magnitudes of the shifts varied. B10 shows that heating experiment #26 had the strongest
jet response and compressing the forcing vertically (heating experiment #27) or compressing the
forcing in the meridional direction (heating experiment #28) weakened the wind response. In the
last experiment (heating experiment #29), B10 showed that when the forcing was compressed
15

vertically and moved lower in the troposphere, the wind response was even weaker.
Figure 8: Panels (a) - (d) shows example thermal forcings of magnitude 0.5 K day−1 representing
the four heating experiments used in Butler et al. 2010, Gaussian parameters are found in Table
A1 #26-29. The panel outline corresponds to the predicted jet shifts (y-axis) in panel (e) which
are shown as a function of the magnitude of the temperate forcing (x-axis). The vertical gray line
at 0.5 K day−1 corresponds to the magnitude of the heating experiments used in Butler et al. 2010.
Following the same four heating experiments of B10, we recreated the thermal forcing patterns
(see experiments #26-29 in Table A1) and input them into the CNN with the initial jet location set
to the average jet location of the training data (42.4°). In addition to the magnitude of heating used
in B10 (qo = 0.5 K day −1), here the jet sensitivity to the magnitude of the thermal forcing is also
included since it is trivial to explore once the CNN is trained. Figure 8e shows the predicted jet shift
from the four heating experiments with varying magnitudes, and the vertical gray line indicates the
0.5 K day −1 magnitude used in B10. The CNN predicts the same relative relationship between
the heating experiments as found in B10, where heating experiment #26 exhibits the strongest
jet response and heating experiment #29 exhibits the weakest. Furthermore, by exploring the jet
sensitivity to the magnitude of heating, Figure 8e shows new information about jet sensitivity. For
example, as the magnitude of the thermal forcing increases, heating experiment #27 (compressed
vertically) and heating experiment #28 (compressed meridionally) converge to the same jet shift.
Alternatively, when the magnitude of the thermal forcing decreases, heating experiment #28 and
heating experiment #29 (compressed vertically and lower in the troposphere) converge to the same
jet shift. These two results could be conﬁrmed with a few targeted forced dry core simulations (not
done here), though it was the ability provided by the CNN to quickly explore jet shifts in response
to thermal forcings that allowed us to discover these possible jet sensitivities.
16

In this chapter, we show a successful example of using the CNN to explore the jet sensitivities
inside the dry dynamical core. The CNN is not perfect in its predictions which may be due to a lack
of predictability, non-optimal training of the CNN, a breakdown of the FDT, or a combination of
the three. However, as demonstrated throughout this paper, the comparisons in the CNN-predicted
jet shifts have the same sign and similar magnitudes to the forced jet shifts from the dry core in
response to a range of temperature tendencies and once trained, can make predictions quickly. We
wish to emphasize that this method should not replace the need to run designed climate model
experiments. Rather, training CNN on an existing long control run could provide the opportunity
to explore a large number of forcing experiments before any forced model runs are simulated and
be especially helpful for planning forced experiments in dynamic model simulations.
5
Conclusions
We explore the jet stream’s response to external forcing by training a CNN on smoothed temper-
ature tendencies from a dry dynamical core long control run to predict a shift in the jet stream’s
location 30 days later. The main motivation of this work is to explore the potential for training
a CNN on internal variability alone and then using it to examine possible nonlinear responses of
the jet to tropospheric thermal forcing that more closely resemble anthropogenic climate change.
Since the CNN is trained entirely on data from a control simulation, it exclusively learns from
internal variability. Nevertheless, by comparing the CNN-predicted jet shifts to established base-
lines, peer reviewed literature, and additional dry core heating experiments, we show that the CNN
can predict the forced jet shift to sustained forcing. The trained CNN is then used to investi-
gate jet sensitivities to scenarios that mimic the tug-of-war between the tropics and poles under
anthropogenic climate change.
Given the CNN’s ability to predict the jet response to thermal
forcings, we propose training a CNN on long control runs that are increasingly becoming more
available to explore model sensitivities to various forcings as a tool to aid in early stage climate
model experiment design. Future work could include extending this method to evaluate whether it
generalizes to diﬀerent experimental frameworks, including, but not limited to, evaluating it with
three-dimensional predictors, training on coupled climate model simulations, and learning complex
non-linear climate responses from forced simulations where FDT does not hold.
