Support Vector Machine and YOLO for a Mobile Food Grading System
Lili Zhua, Petros Spachosa,∗
aSchool of Engineering, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Abstract
Food quality and safety are of great concern to society since it is an essential guarantee not only for human health but
also for social development, and stability. Ensuring food quality and safety is a complex process. All food processing
stages should be considered, from cultivating, harvesting and storage to preparation and consumption. Grading is
one of the essential processes to control food quality. This paper proposed a mobile visual-based system to evaluate
food grading. Speciﬁcally, the proposed system acquires images of bananas when they are on moving conveyors.
A two-layer image processing system based on machine learning is used to grade bananas, and these two layers are
allocated on edge devices and cloud servers, respectively. Support Vector Machine (SVM) is the ﬁrst layer to classify
bananas based on an extracted feature vector composed of color and texture features. Then, the a You Only Look Once
(YOLO) v3 model further locating the peel’s defected area and determining if the inputs belong to the mid-ripened
or well-ripened class. According to experimental results, the ﬁrst layer’s performance achieved an accuracy of 98.5%
while the accuracy of the second layer is 85.7%, and the overall accuracy is 96.4%.
Keywords: Machine Vision, Image Processing, Food Processing, Machine Learning, Support Vector Machine.
1. Introduction
Food processing takes raw materials and converts
them into suitable forms for modern people’s dietary
habits. This process includes a series of physical and
chemical changes. During the entire process, the nu-
trition of the raw materials needs to be maintained to
the greatest extent, and the poisonous and harmful sub-
stances should be prevented from entering the food.
Therefore, food processing is highly valued by food sci-
entists, the food industry, and society [1].
The quality inspection of food and agricultural pro-
duce is arduous and labor-intensive to meet the increas-
ing expectations and standards of food processing. Af-
ter years of rapid development, Machine Vision Sys-
tem (MVS) has penetrated several aspects of people’s
lives.
Its high eﬃciency and accuracy assist various
industries to save a large amount of labor [2, 3]. In
agriculture, agri-technology and precision farming is an
interdisciplinary science that integrates with MVS and
utilizes data-intensive methods to achieve high agricul-
tural yields while reducing environmental impact. MVS
can acquire image data in a variety of land-based and
∗Corresponding author

aerial-based methods and can complete multiple types
of tasks as well, such as quality and safety inspection,
agriculture produce grading, foreign objects detection,
and crop monitoring [4].
In food processing, MVS
can collect a series of parameters such as size, weight,
shape, texture, and color of food, and even many details
that human eyes cannot observe. In this way, fatigue and
mistakes of workers caused by many repeated labors can
be avoided [5].
Banana is one of the most important tropical fruits
and basic staple food for many developing countries.
However, banana pests and diseases pose a threat to
sustainable production, and banana yellow leaf disease
caused by Panama disease is a destructive disease for
bananas [6]. Additionally, bananas’ ripening process
is so rapid that a large number of over-ripened bananas
cannot enter the market. As a result, researchers are in-
terested in developing automatic monitoring systems to
assist banana management.
In this study, a novel two-layer classiﬁer is pro-
posed, to realize banana grading and defect detection.
The classiﬁer comprises the ﬁrst-layer classiﬁer Support
Vector Machine (SVM) and the second-layer classiﬁer
YOLOv3. A feature vector containing extracted color
and texture information is the input for the ﬁrst-layer
classiﬁer, and the output of the ﬁrst-layer classiﬁer is
Preprint submitted to Journal of Internet of Things
January 6, 2021
arXiv:2101.01418v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2021

connected to the second-layer classiﬁer. This network
can provide both the banana ripeness level classiﬁca-
tion and peel defected area detection to be a solid foun-
dation for further implementing into a visual Internet
of Things (IoT) system, such as a smartphone applica-
tion. Furthermore, a Graphical User Interface (GUI) for
a computer application is built for users who need to as-
sess bananas’ qualities. Users do not have to enter the
warehouse but stay in front of a computer and work on
the developed application to evaluate bananas and ob-
serve the defects with ease. Finally,the two-layer clas-
siﬁer can be distributed by combining edge computing
and cloud computing to improve data communication
and computation eﬃciency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 reviews the recent related studies. Section 3 in-
troduces the main components of a MVS. Section 4 pro-
vides the data set and methodologies used in this re-
search. Section 5 explains and discusses the experiment
results, followed by Section 6 which illustrates the pro-
posed Internet of Things application. The conclusions
are in the Section 7.
2. Related Works
MVS applications have been applied to multiple re-
search areas of food processing, such as food safety
and quality evaluation, food process monitoring, and
foreign object detection. In an MVS, the role of im-
age processing is to guide the operation of the machin-
ery [7]. Regarding food safety and quality evaluation,
a multimode tabletop system and adopted spectroscopic
technologies for food safety and quality applications is
presented in [8]. In [9], they designed a hemispherical
illumination chamber to illuminate spherical samples
and a liquid crystal tunable ﬁlter (LCTF) based method
that contains two LCTF to acquire images of spherical
fruits and segmented hyperspectral fruit images to de-
tect at which maturity stage the sample fruit was. The
classiﬁcation accuracy is 98.5% for the “non-rotten”
class and 98.6% for the “rotten” class. In [10], they
adopted a bag-of-words model to locate fruits in im-
ages and combined several images from diﬀerent views
to estimate the number of fruits with a novel statisti-
cal model. This image processing method correlated
74.2% between automatic counting numbers and the
ground truth data. In [11] and [12], hyperspectral re-
ﬂectance imaging methods were applied to determine
the bruise or damage of blueberry. Pattern recognition
algorithm was adopted to separate stem and calyx and
detected blueberries with diseases and blueberries’ ori-
entations [13]. In [14], they installed a 3-CCD line-
scan camera and mirrors to capture a full view of pota-
toes. They also applied a method that combined Latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and a Mahalanobis distance
classiﬁer to detect the appearance defects of potatoes,
and a Fourier-based shape classiﬁcation method was uti-
lized to detect misshapen potatoes as well. In [15], not
only the proposed model realized grading the fruits with
Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM), but also it
successfully predicted the number of actual days that
the harvested mangoes can be sent away with Support
Vector Regression (SVR). In [16], they built a data set
of rice – FIST-Rice with 30,000 rice kernel samples
and developed a system called Deep-Rice for grading
rice by extracting the discriminative features from sev-
eral angles of the rice.
In [17], they adopted Artiﬁ-
cial Neural Networks (ANN) to classify the shapes of
boiled shrimps by accepting the Relative Internal Dis-
tance (RID) values. The RIDs were calculated by seg-
menting the shrimp images and drawing the co-related
lines on the segmented contour.
The overall predic-
tion accuracy of the ANN classiﬁer is 99.80%. In [18],
they presented a radial basis function SVM (RBF-SVM)
model to detect the defects on Cherry and Heirloom
tomatoes and developed a relation between the Lab
color space of tomato images and the defects. The se-
lected features for training and testing the model include
color, texture, and shape features. In [19], they pro-
posed a piecewise nonlinear curve ﬁtting (PWCF) pro-
cedure to maintain and present the spectral features of
the hyperspectral images, and the error-correcting out-
put code-based support vector machine (ECOC-SVM)
was adopted to address the apple bruise grading prob-
lem. In [20], they utilized a Radio-frequency identiﬁ-
cation (RFID) tag as an electromagnetic transducer to
convert the chemical-physical change of avocados into
a modulation of the electromagnetic parameters when
the avocados are ripening. The electromagnetic param-
eters were fed into a decision trees model to classify the
ripeness level of avocados. Other than RFID, another
radio frequency technology used is near-ﬁeld commu-
nication (NFC) working with a colorimeter to overcome
the inconsistent illumination conditions and improve the
robustness of images from diﬀerent devices.
A col-
orimeter is a photosensitive instrument that can mea-
sure how much color an object or substance absorbs. It
determines the color based on the red, blue, and green
components of the light absorbed by the object or sam-
ple, similar to the human eye. In [21], they integrated an
NFC tag, a mobile phone NFC reader, and a colorimeter
to detect the HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) color space
for fruits classiﬁcation. In this research, hue and satura-
tion were considered as the parameters to train the ma-
2

chine learning models. In [22], they used the colorime-
ter to measure the chlorophyll ﬂuorescence in tomatoes
to determine the degree of ripeness. In [23, 24], they
adopted colorimeters to extract the color information of
avocado and mango, respectively, to access the ripeness
and quality of each kind of fruit. The reviewed articles
present that a colorimeter can interpret the red, blue,
and green color of an object to avoid redundant color
information and conquer inconsistent illumination con-
ditions. However, such an instrument cannot represent
an image’s spatial information well due to missing color
information. When spatial information is required to lo-
cate small objects, a colorimeter obviously cannot meet
such needs, and a regular camera is still essential.
For banana grading, in [25], they developed a method
to classify bananas into healthy and unhealthy groups
based on image processing techniques and a neural net-
work, and they obtained an accuracy of 97%. In [26],
they designed a method to detect at which ripening
stages red bananas are by measuring the dielectric prop-
erties of red bananas and sending the features to a
Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) classiﬁer.
In [27], they also
adopted a fuzzy model that was optimized with parti-
cle swarm optimization (PSO) technique to grade un-
ripen, ripen and over-ripen bananas with the features of
the bananas’ peak hue and normalized brown area. The
accuracy of this model is 93.11%. A random forest clas-
siﬁer was utilized to grade the bananas according to the
color features in [28], and the accuracy arrived at 94.2%.
In [29], they also adopted machine learning algorithms
to classify diﬀerent types of bananas and their ripeness
levels. SVM achieved an accuracy of 99.1% to classify
the banana types and has a 96.6% accuracy in distin-
guishing the level of ripeness. In [30], an ANN outper-
forms other machine learning algorithms to detect the
ripeness of bananas with a feature vector that consists
of color and texture features, and the classiﬁcation ac-
curacy of this system is 97.75%. When it comes further
adopting the IoT methods, [31] proposed a framework
to classify diﬀerent date fruits by utilizing 5G and cloud.
The possibility of using cloud computing to detect ap-
ple chilling injury via spectrum-based classiﬁcation is
analyzed in [32].
Among the recently published articles, there is rarely
research that can combine grading the fruits and locat-
ing the defective spots together. Compared to the re-
viewed related work, this study proposed a two-layer
mechanism to realize both of the banana grading task
and defective area locating mission and integrated edge
computing and cloud computing into the system. A data
set composed of 150 banana images was created, and
these bananas were at diﬀerent ripeness levels. Tradi-
tional data augmentation methods and a deep learning-
based architecture called Cycle-Generative Adversarial
Network (CycleGAN) were adopted to enlarge the data
set to avoid overﬁtting.
A feature vector containing
color and texture features was used to train the ﬁrst layer
classiﬁer. Next, the YOLOv3 model can detect the fruit
peel’s defected areas in the images in the ripened class,
which is one of the ﬁrst layer’s output classes. This
design illustrates the support of the Internet of Things
structure for food processing and the entire controlling
process of the endpoints (bananas on moving conveyor
belts) via analyzing image classiﬁcation results.
3. Machine Vision System
An MVS can observe, capture, assess, and recognize
still or moving objects with one or several cameras au-
tomatically, usually in an industrial or production en-
vironment [33]. Then, the system utilizes the obtained
data to control the following manufacturing procedures.
An MVS usually includes digital cameras, image pro-
cessing programs, and a mechanical system, as shown
in Fig. 1. The illumination device provides suﬃcient
light to the object so that the camera can capture good
quality images of the object. Then, the programs in the
computer can process the images according to diﬀerent
purposes. The results of the processed images are for
the mechanical system to make the next operation deci-
sion.
This work will focus on the image acquisition, image
processing and image interpretation parts of the MVS.
3.1. Image acquisition
An MVS can obtain images in real-time via pho-
tographs, videos, and three dimensions (3D) techniques.
There are many ways to acquire good quality images in
food processing, such as stereo systems, remote sensing
(RS), X-ray, thermal imaging, and Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) [34–39].
3.2. Image processing
Image processing produces new images based on ex-
isting images to extract or improve the region of inter-
est. This process is digital signal processing, and it does
not involve interpreting the content or the meaning of
the images. The diﬀerent levels of the image processing
process [40], are shown in Fig. 2.
3

Figure 1: Principle components of a machine vision system.
Figure 2: Diﬀerent levels in image processing process.
3.2.1. Low level processing
Low level processing contains image acquisition and
image pre-processing.
Image acquisition is the pro-
cess of adopting diﬀerent imaging equipment and sens-
ing devices to obtain the images of samples and trans-
fer them to a digital form that can be read by com-
puters. Due to various imperfections in the shooting
environment, such as insuﬃcient illumination, long-
distance or low resolution of imaging equipment, un-
stable viewﬁnder, and other impurities in the view, the
original images usually require pre-processing for bet-
ter performing image analysis.
Typical image pre-
processing methods include image enhancement such as
adjusting the brightness or color of the images, cropping
the images to focus on the region of interest, and noise
removals such as undesirable noises or digital artifacts
from low light levels.
3.2.2. Intermediate level processing
Intermediate level processing includes image seg-
mentation, image representation, and image description.
Image segmentation is one of the essential steps in im-
age processing, as it largely determines whether image
analysis is focused on the target sample. Image segmen-
4

(a) GA2B and GB2A are the two map-
pings between domains A and B. DA
and DB are the adversarial discrimi-
nators.
(b) forward cycle-consistency loss
(c) backward cycle-consistency loss
Figure 3: The principles of CycleGAN.
tation is to separate the target from other useless im-
age information so that the computational cost of sub-
sequent image analysis can be reduced and improved
accuracy. Boundary representation and region represen-
tation are both image representation. The previous one
describes the size and shape features, while the latter
is for the image’s texture and defects. Image descrip-
tion can extract the quantitative information from the
images which have already been processed by the pre-
vious steps.
3.2.3. High level processing
High level processing contains image recognition and
image interpretation. During this step, statistical meth-
ods or deep learning methods are usually adopted to
classify the target. These processes typically can de-
termine how the following machines operate by serving
useful information.
3.3. Image interpretation
The ﬁnal step is image interpretation, where targets
should be classiﬁed and useful spatial information from
images should be derived. As a result, a decision based
on the analysis result of the image can be made. Al-
gorithms such as K-Nearest Neighbors, Support Vec-
tor Machine, neural networks, fuzzy logic, and genetic
algorithms can help interpret the information obtained
from the image. Neural network and fuzzy logic meth-
ods are proven to be involved with MVS in the food
industry successfully [41].
4. Data set and Methodologies
This section describes the data set that was used fol-
lowed by the methodologies.
4.1. Data set
In this study, the authors created a data set as the ex-
isting online open-access banana data sets only contain
bananas in perfect conditions. The authors took 150
images of bananas at diﬀerent ripeness levels and la-
belled them into three main groups: unripened, ripened,
and over-ripened (50 images for each group).
The
ripened class has two sub-classes that are mid-ripened
and well-ripened. The unripened group’s bananas are
still in green peels, while bananas in the ripened and
over-ripened groups have a yellowish peel and diﬀerent
brown spots. However, 150 samples are not satisfac-
tory for machine learning methodologies as it is easy to
cause overﬁtting. As a result, the authors adopted data
augmentation techniques, including traditional methods
and a deep learning method – CycleGAN, to enlarge the
data set.
Traditional data augmentation methods such as rota-
tion, ﬂipping, and shifting are widely used for machine
learning training. The authors also adopted CycleGAN
to generate images of defective bananas. Generative ad-
versarial net (GAN) [42] is a generative model to learn
the data distribution via an adversarial mode between a
generating network and a discriminating network. The
generating network generates samples similar to the real
samples as much as possible, while the discriminating
network tries to determine whether the samples are real
samples or generated false samples. As illustrated in
Fig. 3, CycleGAN [43] makes the principle of GAN ap-
ply to the image generation with ease. Based on GAN,
CycleGAN adds another pair of the generator - discrim-
inator, and cycle consistency loss to determine whether
the generated images’ style is consistent with the origi-
nal data set images.
When there are two domains A (style A) and B (style
B), {xi}N
i=1 and {yj}M
j=1 are samples where xi ∈A and yj ∈
5

Table 1: The total data set after data augmentation.
Original
Rotation
Flipping
Shifting
CycleGAN
Total
150
250
250
250
100
1000
B. The model involves a two mappings that are GA2B
and GB2A. GA2B is to transform the A style image to the
B style image and vice versa for GB2A. Additionally,
two adversarial discriminators DA and DB are used to
discriminate between the generated images and the real
images. Therefore, if two GANs are being trained at the
same time, one of the generator - discriminator pairs is
GA2B and DB and the other pair is GB2A and DA. Then,
an image x of style A should be able to transform back
to itself after two transformations and image y of style
B is the same as described in Eq. 1:
GB2A(GA2B(x)) ≃x,
GA2B(GB2A(y)) ≃y.
(1)
The ﬁrst-order distance between the two graphs can
be expressed as:
Lcyc(GA2B,GB2A, A, B) = Ex∼A[∥GB2A(GA2B(x)) −x ∥1]
+ Ey∼B[∥GA2B(GB2A(y)) −y ∥1].
(2)
Eq. 2 is the cycle consistency loss and Eq. 3 is one of
the terms of the total loss function:
L(GA2B,GB2A, DA, DB) = LG(GA2B, DB, A, B)
+ LG(GB2A, DA, B, A)
+ λLcyc(GA2B,GB2A, A, B),
(3)
where LG(GA2B, DB, A, B) is the loss of GA2B and DB
and LG(GB2A, DA, B, A) is the loss of GB2A and DA. The
expectation of CycleGan model is as Eq. 4:
G∗
A2B,G∗
B2A =arg
min
GA2B,GB2A max
DA,DB
L(GA2B,GB2A, DA, DB).
(4)
The comparison between the original unripened ba-
nana images and the generated ripened images is shown
in Fig. 4. The CycleGAN model created one hundred
new ripened banana images. The total data set after data
augmentation is as Table 1.
4.2. Methodologies
The proposed banana grading system includes data
augmentation, image segmentation, feature extraction,
and classiﬁcation. The ﬂowchart of the system is shown
in Fig. 5.
Figure 4: Five ripened banana images generated by CycleGAN (the
second row) based on the unripened banana images (the ﬁrst row).
Figure 5: The ﬂowchart of the proposed banana grading system.
4.2.1. Image segmentation
Image segmentation is to separate the target from the
background in an image. Image segmentation is the ﬁrst
step of image analysis, the basis of computer vision,
an important part of image understanding, and one of
the most diﬃcult problems in image processing. For a
grayscale image, the pixels inside the region generally
have intensity similarity but have discontinuous intensi-
ties at the region’s boundaries. Methods for process-
ing image segmentation include thresholding, region-
based segmentation, edge detection-based algorithms,
and machine learning-based methods. In this study, im-
age acquisition was performed in natural light to achieve
more real eﬀects as in practical applications, resulting in
inconsistent brightness in the background and shadows.
Consequently, it is not easy to ﬁnd a suitable threshold
and complete and accurate edges to segment the target.
Therefore, K-means is used here to address this prob-
lem. K-means utilizes distance as the evaluation index
of similarity. The basic idea is to cluster the samples
into diﬀerent clusters according to the distance. The
closer the two points are, the greater the similarity is. At
the end of the process, all the data are allocated to the
closest cluster center so that the sum of the squares of
the distances between each point and its corresponding
cluster center is minimized. Before applying K-means,
6

Figure 6: The sample inputs (the upper row), the masks (the middle
row) and the outputs (the lower row) of image segmentation step.
rank ﬁlter and log transformation were adopted to re-
duce noise and improve image contrast. The sample
segmentation results are shown in Fig. 6.
4.2.2. Feature Extraction
For images, each image has its characteristics that
can be distinguished from other types of images. Some
are natural features that can be intuitively felt, such
as brightness, edges, texture, and color. Some require
transformation or processing to obtain, such as mo-
ments, histograms, and principal components. These
features will be extracted in the form of numerical val-
ues or vectors so that the computer can identify images.
Typical image features are color features, texture fea-
tures, shape features, and spatial features.
Color Features. Color feature is a global feature that
describes the targets’ surface properties corresponding
to the image or image area. The general color feature is
based on the pixels’ characteristics, and all pixels that
belong to the image or image area have their contribu-
tions. Color features can be extracted using methods
such as color histograms, color sets, color moments,
and color coherence vectors. In this study, since the
unripened, ripened, and over-ripened bananas have dis-
tinctive color features (green, yellow, and brown), and
unnecessary to consider the color space distribution, the
color feature is one of the components that are extracted
to train the classiﬁer. Traditionally, RGB (Red, Greem,
Blue) color space is prevalent in digital image process-
ing. However, HSV color space is closer to how humans
perceive color and more suitable for statistical analysis
than RGB color space. Therefore, the color features of
the proposed data set were extracted in the HSV color
Table 2: The range for H, S, V values in HSV color space for two
banana groups.
Unripened
Ripened
H
72◦≤H ≤78◦
39◦≤H ≤72◦
S
85% ≤S ≤100%
70% ≤S ≤100%
V
27% ≤V ≤50%
69% ≤V ≤100%
space. Eq. 5, Eq. 6, and Eq. 7 can explain that how RGB
color space converts to HSV color space.
V = max( R
255, G
255, B
255),
(5)
S = 1 −
3
(R + G + B)[min(R,G, B)],
(6)
H =

θ,
G ≥B
2π −θ,G < B,
(7)
where θ = cos−1

(R−G)+(R−B)
2√
(R−G)2+(R−B)(G−B)

.
Due to the color characteristics of the three groups of
bananas, the corresponding H, S, and V value ranges are
acquired from the analogy between HTML color codes
and the natural colors of diﬀerent banana peels [25]. Ta-
ble 2 illustrates that H and V value ranges are distinct to
be two of the input features to classify the bananas.
Texture Features. The texture is another natural charac-
teristic of the surface of an object. It describes the gray
space distribution between the image pixels and the im-
age area, and it will not change with diﬀerent illumina-
tion. The texture feature is global, as well. However,
due to the texture is only a characteristic of an object’s
surface and cannot fully reﬂect the essential attributes
of the object, it is impossible to obtain high-level im-
age representation by only using texture features. Un-
like color features, texture features are not pixel-based
features. They require statistical calculations in an area
containing multiple pixels.
As a statistical feature, texture features often have ro-
tation invariance and are robust to noise. Local Binary
Pattern (LBP) [44] is an operator used to describe the
local texture features of an image, and it has signiﬁcant
advantages such as rotation invariance and gray invari-
ance.
The basic LBP operator is deﬁned as a 3 × 3
size texture unit, and the value of the center pixel is the
threshold. The grayscale value of the adjacent 8 pix-
els is compared with the center of the unit’s pixel value.
If the adjacent pixel value g0 is greater than the center
pixel value gc, the pixel position is marked as 1; oth-
erwise, it is 0. In this way, 8 pixels in the 3 × 3 unit
7

Figure 7:
A sample image:
(left) segmented image; (middle)
grayscale image; (right) the texture feature that was extracted by the
LBP operator.
can generate 8-bit binary numbers after compared to the
center pixel. These 8-bit binary numbers are arranged in
sequence to form a binary number. This binary number
is the LBP value of the center pixel. Therefore, there are
256 LBP values, and the LBP value of the center pixel
reﬂects the texture information of the area around the
pixel. Mathematically, the process can be expressed as
Eq. 8 and Eq. 9, where gc is the center pixel value and
g0 is the adjacent pixel value.
s(g0 −gc) =

1, g0 −gc ≥0
0, g0 −gc < 0,
(8)
LBP =
7
X
p=0
s(g0 −gc)2p.
(9)
Bananas at diﬀerent ripeness levels can show distinc-
tive texture features extracted by the LBP operator, as
shown in Fig. 7.
Shape Features.
Various shape feature-based re-
trieval methods can more eﬀectively use the region of
interest in the image for retrieval. However, many shape
features only describe the target’s local nature, and a
comprehensive description of the target often requires
high computation time and storage capacity. Require-
ments. Moreover, the target shape information reﬂected
by many shape features is not entirely consistent with
human perception because the shape reﬂected from the
2-D image is often not the actual shape of the 3-D object
due to the change of viewpoint and distortion.
Spatial Features.
Spatial features refer to the mu-
tual spatial position or relative orientation relationships
between multiple target segments in the image. These
relationships can also be divided into adjacent, overlap-
ping, and contained. Generally, the spatial position in-
formation can be divided into relative spatial position
information and absolute spatial position information.
The former relationship emphasizes the relative situa-
tion between the targets, including horizontal and ver-
tical positions. The latter relationship emphasizes the
distance and orientation of the targets. The relative spa-
tial position can be deduced from the absolute spatial
position, but it is often relatively simple to express the
relative spatial position information. Spatial relation-
ship features can enhance the ability to describe and dis-
tinguish image content, but spatial relationship features
are often more sensitive to the image, object rotation,
inversion, and scale changes. Besides, in practical ap-
plications, only using spatial information is often insuf-
ﬁcient to eﬀectively and accurately express scene infor-
mation. Usually, other features are needed to cooperate
with spatial relationship features.
In this study, two feature vectors, which were A =
[H V LBP] and B = [H V], were input into the candi-
date models respectively to select which feature vector
would yield the optimal result.
4.2.3. Classiﬁcation
In this study, the classiﬁcation task is divided into
two steps. The ﬁrst step is to feed extracted features
into a traditional machine learning classiﬁer to sepa-
rate bananas from unripened, ripened, and over-ripened
groups as traditional machine learning methods usu-
ally have simple architecture.
They will not require
too many computational resources.
The authors ap-
plied four models in this research, which are K - Nearest
Neighbours (KNN), Random Forest (RF), Naive Bayes
(NB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM), and com-
pared the performances of these four models. These
four models are eﬃcient and straightforward. They can
handle high-dimensional data and do not need to make
feature selection. SVM, RF, and BN have low compu-
tational overhead, and KNN performs better than SVM
on simple classiﬁcation problems. Therefore, these four
models are considered candidates in this study.
The
brown spots on banana peels will not be detected here as
there is no consistency of the level of brown color that
should be included, and for over-ripened bananas, the
detection of multiple irregular areas caused by the con-
nected brown areas will result in inaccurate results. Ad-
ditionally, it is unnecessary to detect the brown spots for
over-ripened bananas because the peel is mainly brown.
As a result, the bananas will be classiﬁed into three pri-
mary groups. The next step is to feed the output ripened
8

Figure 8: An example of KNN algorithm.
fruit images from SVM into the YOLOv3 [45] transfer
learning model to detect the brown spots and separate
the bananas into mid-ripened and well-ripened groups
according to how many brown areas they have.
K - Nearest Neighbours. K-nearest neighbour method
is one of the basic machine learning methods. Its im-
plementation method is to input test data into the model
trained by the data and labels in the training set. The
test data features are compared with the corresponding
features in the training set, and the ﬁrst K samples in the
training set that are most similar to it are found. The cat-
egory corresponding to the test data is the category that
appears most frequently among the K samples. KNN al-
gorithm is illustrated in Fig. 8. This principle also shows
that the result of the KNN algorithm mainly depends on
the choice of the K value.
In KNN, the distance between samples is calculated
as an index of dissimilarity between samples, avoiding
matching between samples. Generally, Euclidean dis-
tance (Eq. 10) and Manhattan distance (Eq. 11) are the
most popular methods to calculate the distance in KNN.
D(x, y) =
q
(x1 −y1)2 + (x2 −y2)2 + ... + (xn −yn)2
=
sX
i=1
n(xi −yi)2,
(10)
D(x, y) = |x1 −y1| + |x2 −y2| + ... + |xn −yn|
=
X
i=1
n|xi −yi|.
(11)
At the same time, KNN makes decisions based on
the dominant category of K samples, rather than a sin-
gle sample category decision. These two points are the
advantages of the KNN algorithm.
Random Forest. Before explaining random forests, the
concept of decision trees needs to be introduced ﬁrst. A
decision tree is a straightforward algorithm. The analyz-
ing process and results are explainable and also in line
with human intuitive thinking. The decision tree is a su-
pervised learning algorithm based on if-then-else rules,
and these rules are obtained through training rather than
manual formulation. The logic of the decision tree is
shown in Fig. 9(a).
Random forest is composed of many decision trees,
and there is no correlation between these decision trees.
When performing a classiﬁcation task, new input sam-
ples enter, and each decision tree in the forest deter-
mines its decision independently. Each decision tree
will get its classiﬁcation result. The most appeared de-
cision in all the classiﬁcation results will be considered
as the ﬁnal result. The relation between decision tree
and random forest is shown in Fig. 9(b).
Naive Bayes. Bayesian classiﬁcation is a general term
for a class of classiﬁcation algorithms.
These algo-
rithms are based on Bayes’ theorem, so they are col-
lectively called Bayesian classiﬁcation. Naive Bayesian
classiﬁcation is the simplest and most common classiﬁ-
cation method in Bayesian classiﬁcation. Its idea is to
calculate the posterior probability of the Y variable be-
longing to a speciﬁc category based on individual prior
probabilities. Eq. 12 illustrates that the probability of
Y occurring under X conditions can be determined by
knowing the three parts in the right-hand side of the
equation, which are the probability of X event (P(X),
the prior probability of X), the probability of Y belong-
ing to a speciﬁc class (P(Y), the prior probability of Y),
and the probability of event X under a particular cate-
gory of known Y (P(X|Y), the posterior probability).
P(Y|X) = P(YX)
P(X) = P(X|Y)P(Y)
P(X)
.
(12)
Support Vector Machine. Cortes and Vapnik proposed
SVM in [46] that is a supervised learning method and
can be widely applied to statistical classiﬁcation and
9

(a) An example of decision tree.
(b) The explanation of random forest.
Figure 9: Decision tree and random forest.
regression analysis. Its basic model is a linear classi-
ﬁer deﬁned on the feature space to ﬁnd the hyperplane
with the maximum interval between two types of data.
The learning strategy of SVM is to maximize the inter-
val, which can be formalized as a problem to solve the
convex quadratic programming, which is also equiva-
lent to the minimization problem of a regularized hinge
loss function. However, the data is not linearly sepa-
rable for most of the time. Under this circumstance,
the hyperplane that meets the condition does not exist
at all. For nonlinear situations, the SVM approach is
to choose a kernel function. The SVM ﬁrst completes
the calculation in the low-dimensional space and then
maps the input space to the high-dimensional feature
space through the kernel function.
Finally, the opti-
mal separating hyperplane is constructed in the high-
dimensional feature space so that the nonlinear data are
separated, as shown in Fig. 10. For multi-classes tasks,
a nonlinear SVM with Radial Basis Function (RBF) ker-
Figure 10: Nonlinear data classiﬁcation in high-dimensional feature
space with the SVM.
nel can be applied. The RBF kernel is k(x(i), x(j)) =
exp(−γ∥x(i) −x(j)∥2).
YOLOv3. You Only Look Once (YOLO) [47] is an
object recognition and localization algorithm based on
deep neural networks.
The most distinct feature of
YOLO is that it runs fast and can be used in real-time
systems. However, its mean Pixel Accuracy (mPA) to-
wards small objects is not satisfactory. On the premise
of maintaining YOLO’s speed advantage, YOLOv3
adopted the residual network structure to form a deeper
network level and uses multi-scale features for object
detection. Also, object classiﬁcation uses Logistic in-
stead of softmax, which improves prediction accuracy,
especially for small object recognition capabilities. In
YOLOv3, there are only convolution layers, and the size
of the output feature map is controlled by adjusting the
convolution step. Therefore, there is no particular lim-
itation on the size of the input picture. YOLOv3 draws
on the idea of Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) – small
size feature maps are used to detect large-sized objects
while large-sized feature maps are used to detect small-
sized objects. Comparing to the other structures that
are prevalent for object detection, such as Single Shot
MultiBox Detector (SSD), Faster Region-based Fully
Convolutional Networks (Faster R - FCN), and Reti-
naNet, the inference time of YOLOv3 is signiﬁcantly
faster [45]. This advantage is of great importance in the
industry as the high detection accuracy is valuable and
the detection speed also plays an important role. In this
research, the YOLOv3 model satisﬁes the need to detect
and locate the small spots on banana peels and oﬀers a
fast response to the inline application. Here, when the
YOLOv3 model detects ﬁve or less defected areas, this
sample will be considered a mid-ripened sample. Also,
a well-ripened sample is determined by whether there
are more than ﬁve defected areas found by the model.
10

4.2.4. Cloud Computing and Edge Computing
Cloud Computing. Cloud computing is a computing re-
source delivery model that integrates various servers,
applications, data and other resources and provides
these resources in the form of services through the In-
ternet [48]. Cloud computing services usually run on
a global network of secure data centers, regularly up-
graded to the latest fast and eﬃcient computing hard-
ware. Compared with a single organization data cen-
ter, it can reduce applications’ network latency and im-
prove economic eﬃciency. Simultaneously, it can sim-
plify data backup, disaster recovery, and business conti-
nuity at a lower cost as data can be mirrored on mul-
tiple redundant sites in the cloud provider’s network
[49].
In the training process of deep learning, mak-
ing learning eﬀective requires a large quantity of data.
The deep learning architecture ensures multiple levels
of neural networks. When the depth (the number of lay-
ers) is greater, more storage space is needed for the large
amount of data required for training. As tasks become
computationally intensive, power requirements will in-
crease. Therefore, traditional computers may not oper-
ate eﬃciently. This also leads to more capital invest-
ment in research and development institutions. There-
fore, performing depth learning training and analysis
in the cloud has become an ideal, simple and eﬀective
method [50].
Edge Computing. In the ﬁeld of the Internet of Things,
the edge refers explicitly to the end device’s vicinity, so
edge computing is the computation generated near the
end device. The network’s edge can be any functional
entity from the data source to the cloud computing cen-
ter. These entities are equipped with an edge comput-
ing platform that integrates the network’s core capabil-
ities, computing, storage, and applications, providing
end-users with real-time, dynamic and intelligent ser-
vice computing [51]. Unlike processing and algorithmic
decision-making of cloud computing, which needs to be
performed in the cloud, edge computing is an action that
pushes intelligence and computing closer to reality. The
main diﬀerences between cloud computing and edge
computing are reﬂected in multi-source heterogeneous
data processing, bandwidth load and resource waste, re-
source limitation, and security and privacy protection.
Therefore, the signiﬁcant problems that edge comput-
ing is solving are the high latency, network instability,
and low bandwidth problems that exist in the traditional
cloud computing mode due to resource constraints. By
migrating some or all of the processing procedures to be
close to users or data collection points, edge computing
can signiﬁcantly reduce the impact on applications in
Figure 11: Edge computing architecture.
cloud-centric sites [52]. The general structure of edge
computing is illustrated in Fig. 11.
4.2.5. Method Evaluation
The accuracy (Eq. 13), sensitivity/recall (Eq. 14), pre-
cision (Eq. 15) and F1 - score (Eq.16), all of which are
common evaluation methods in statistics, are used to
evaluate the ﬁrst-layer classiﬁcation results.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN ,
(13)
S ensitivity/Recall =
TP
TP + FN ,
(14)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP,
(15)
F1 −score = 2 · Precision · Reccall
Precision + Reccall.
(16)
TP = True positive, TN = True negative,
FP = False positive, FN = False negative.
To further assess the performance of the YOLOv3
model, mAP (mean Average Precision), Intersection
over Union (IoU), and recall are applied to evaluate the
predicted locations of the target. The deﬁnitions of the
evaluation methods are shown in Fig. 12.
The area of overlap means the area in both the ground
truth bounding box and the predicted bounding box,
while the area of union is the total area of the ground
truth bounding box and the predicted bounding box as:
IoU = Area of Overlap
Area of Union .
(17)
11

Figure 12: The deﬁnitions of the evaluation methods.
5. Experiments Results and Discussion
The experiments were conducted on the Ubuntu
18.04.4 LTS system, with an Intel® CoreTM i7-8700K

GeForce GTX 1080 Ti/PCIe/SSE2 graphic. As a cloud
server, we used a local available server at our laboratory.
For the ﬁrst classiﬁcation layer, 800 images were
used to train the ﬁrst layer classiﬁer, and 200 images
were for testing. After forming the the feature vector
A = [H V LBP] with the H value, V value, and LBP
features, and the feature vector B = [H V] with only
the H value and V value, the extracted A and B of all
the training images were fed into the four classiﬁers for
training, respectively. For the ﬁrst layer classiﬁer, the
performances between KNN, RF, NB, and SVM were
tested in this step. Table 3 presents the results of diﬀer-
ent methods training with feature vector A. The results
show that the training times of RF and NB are signif-
icantly less than the training times of KNN and SVM,
however, the performance of SVM training with feature
vector A outweighs the other algorithms. Additionally,
when the KNN model training with vector B, the accu-
racy is noticeable lower than when the model training
with vector A, while the other models show no signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerence between training with A and B.
As the SVM performs better than the other models,
training the SVM classiﬁer with the entire features was
conducted to test if the extracted feature vector A is the
most eﬀective one. Table 4 shows the performance of
training with the feature vector A is superior to training
with the entire features in both accuracy and processing
time aspects.
Table 5 shows the confusion matrix for the SVM’s
testing result. This confusion matrix demonstrates that
the overall predicting accuracy of the SVM classiﬁer
achieved 98.50% (with g = 0.005 and C = 1000). The
three mispredictions happened in the ripened class and
the over-ripened class. The reason for the wrong predic-
tions is that some images in the ripened class and over-
ripened class are quite similar and the labelling was ﬁn-
ished manually. As a result, for those images that also
can be labelled as another class, it is diﬃcult for the
classiﬁer to distinguish.
For the second layer, the ripened group’s defective
areas were labelled with an open-source tool called “la-
belImg” [53] manually, and the 61 images that were pre-
dicted as ripened were fed to the second predictor. One
sample ground truth data from each class is shown in
Fig. 13. However, all the ground truth data were labelled
based on subjective judgment, which will aﬀect the cri-
teria of being in which class. Therefore, an objective
standard of banana ripeness levels should be referenced
in the following work.
After 10,000 iterations and 40 hours of training, the
mAP of the testing results is 0.8239, and the average
IoU is 76.94%, the average recall and precision of the
testing results are 91.77% and 75.28%, respectively.
The average processing time to predict a testing image is
0.053 seconds. The high recall and low precision could
be that the model detected some spot areas that were
not labelled on the ground truth data. According to the
detected areas’ results, to which sub-class this sample
belongs will be determined by the number of the de-
tected areas. When the detected areas are more than
ﬁve, this banana will be classiﬁed as the well-ripened
12

Table 3: The comparison between diﬀerent algorithms as the ﬁrst layer classiﬁer (all models were trained with feature vector A/B).
Method
Parameters
Preprocessing Time
(second/per image)
Training Time
(second)
Accuracy
KNN + A
K = 3
0.093 with A
0.081 with B
51.313
92.87%
KNN + B
50.717
89.42%
RF + A
100 Trees
5.769
96.80%
RF+ B
5.554
94.57%
NB + A
–
1.396
94.50%
NB + B
1.393
94.15%
SVM + A
g=0.005,
C=1000
111.657
98.50%
SVM + B
111.158
97.63%
Table 4: The comparison between applying extracted features (A) and
entire features.
Method
SVM+A
SVM+entire features
Accuracy
98.50%
95.78%
Parameter
g=0.005, C=1000
Table 5: The confusion matrix for the ﬁrst-layer classiﬁer.
Predicted Class
Sensitivity
True Class
Unripened
Ripened
Overripened
Unripened
66
0
0
100
Ripened
0
60
2
96.77%
Overripened
0
1
71
98.61%
Precision
100
98.36%
97.26%
Acc=98.50%
(a) A mid-ripen sample.
(b) A well-ripen sample.
(c) A predicted mid-ripen sam-
ple.
(d) A predicted well-ripen sam-
ple.
Figure 13: The sample ground truth data and the predicted samples in
the mid-ripen and well-ripen classes.
group. The IoU result indicates that the predicted ar-
eas shifted from the ground truth labels to some extent,
but this will not aﬀect the predicted areas. As a result,
the confusion matrix, shown in Table 6, is based on the
number of predicted areas is still valid.
6. Application
In this section, a proposed system for banana grading
will be presented in detail. This system contains three
Table 6: The confusion matrix for the second-layer classiﬁer.
Predicted Class
Sensitivity
True Class
Mid-ripened
Well-ripened
Mid-ripened
31
2
93.94%
Well-ripened
4
26
86.67%
Precision
88.57%
92.85%
Acc=90.16%
layers: mechanical layer, local layer, and cloud layer,
shown in Fig. 14. The proposed mechanical layer will
be set up in future work since this research is focused
on the classiﬁer models and the GUI.
The mechanical layer has two functions. At the be-
ginning of the system, a conveyor belt can transfer food
to a tunnel with a steady illumination source and a cam-
era hanging on the top of it. In this tunnel, the camera
can take pictures of the food. Then, the image will be
sent to the local layer. The other function of the me-
chanical layer works at the end of the system as there
is a switch that can guide the food to two tracks. One
of the tracks is for healthy food, while the other one is
for defective food. Once the image of the food is sent
to the local layer, the local computer will execute pre-
processing to the image, such as contrast enhancement
and cropping, so that it will be possible to gain an accu-
rate analyzing result.
The ﬁrst layer of the proposed two-layer grading
model will be placed on the local layer, but the second
layer will be implemented on the cloud layer. Since the
ﬁrst layer of the model is SVM, a traditional machine
learning model, and it does not cost too much computa-
tional resource, placing it on edge (the local side) will
improve the device’s response time. When the image
does not need to be analyzed by the second layer of the
model, edge computing can reduce the data ﬂow from
the device to the cloud. Meanwhile, cloud computing
power still plays a role when further image analysis is
required. This arrangement will also be useful when the
application is transplanted to a smartphone application
in future research. If the SVM model’s result needs to
be further conﬁrmed its grade, the image will be sent
to the YOLOv3 model, which is implemented on the
13

Figure 14: The structure of the banana grading system.
cloud server. This deep learning model needs to run on a
GPU-based system; however, not every food processing
warehouse has this condition. Therefore, a GPU-based
cloud server is capable of tackling this problem. After
the model on the cloud assesses the image, the result
will be sent back to the local layer. According to the re-
sult, the system will control the switch on the conveyor
belt to enable the food to move to the right track.
At last, a user-side application with a user-friendly
GUI is also included in this system. The ﬂow chart of
how the application works is shown in Fig. 15. This
application can be used in an auto mode or a manual
mode. In auto mode, the inline camera hanging above
the conveyor belt will stream the banana images to this
application. Then the application will process each im-
age and save the results automatically. With the manual
mode, the user can assess images by taking pictures of
bananas manually as sometimes it is not necessary to
evaluate every single banana.
The input (the upper image) and output (the lower
image) of a sample banana is shown in Fig. 16(a). The
output image is the same as the input image as this ba-
nana is so unripened that there is no defective area on
the peel. As a result, the context box suggested that this
banana be transported to the market, and the green back-
ground means it passed the evaluation. When it comes
to a Machine Vision System, this banana will be sent to
a conveyor belt, which is leading to the good condition
banana group after its quality is determined.
Compared to the unripened banana, Fig. 16(b) illus-
trates an over-ripened sample banana. In this case, the
context box is red to alarm the user that this banana is
not good enough to be sent to the market. Then this
banana will be directed to the defective banana area.
7. Conclusion
This paper proposed a food grading system and fo-
cused on the novel two-layer classiﬁer, which is the
core of the system and can grade bananas according
to their ripeness levels. Because there is redundant in-
formation in the original images, and this information
will decrease the classiﬁcation accuracy, a feature vec-
tor composed of the essential color and texture informa-
tion was formed. The experiment results illustrate that
the SVM classiﬁer excels KNN, Random Forest, and
Naive Bayes. The extracted feature vector assisted the
SVM classiﬁer to achieve an accuracy of 98.5%. Then
the YOLOv3 system continued to detect the ripened
bananas’ defective areas and separated them into the
mid-ripened and the well-ripened groups. This system
accomplished the banana grading mission in terms of
ripeness and conquered the diﬃculty of detecting and
outputting small defected areas on bananas. The design
of the classiﬁcation layers’ distribution combines edge
computing and cloud computing, thereby alleviating the
14

Figure 15: The ﬂow chart of the application.
pressure of network communication, saving computing
resources, and shortening the feedback delay. This sys-
tem is also applicable for grading and locating the de-
fective areas of other varieties of fruit that have a sig-
niﬁcant change in color during ripening, such as apples,
mangoes, and tomatoes.
The future work will continue to improve the second-
layer classiﬁer’s performance by labelling the defected
areas more precisely and ﬁne-tuning the model, and im-
proving the application to a smartphone version so that
the banana evaluation could be realized with more ease.
