A Computational Framework for Motor Skill Learning
Krishn Bera1 Tejas Savalia2 Bapi Raju3
Abstract— There have been numerous attempts in explaining
the general learning behaviours by various cognitive models.
Multiple hypotheses have been put further to qualitatively
argue the best-ﬁt model for motor skill acquisition task and its
variations. In this context, for a discrete sequence production
(DSP) task, one of the most insightful models is Verweys Dual
Processor Model (DPM). It largely explains the learning and
behavioural phenomenon of skilled discrete key-press sequences
without providing any concrete computational basis of rein-
forcement. Therefore, we propose a quantitative explanation
for Verweys DPM hypothesis by experimentally establishing
a general computational framework for motor skill learning.
We attempt combining the qualitative and quantitative theories
based on a best-ﬁt model of the experimental simulations of
variations of dual processor models. The fundamental premise
of sequential decision making for skill learning is based on
interacting model-based (MB) and model-free (MF) reinforce-
ment learning (RL) processes. Our unifying framework shows
the proposed idea agrees well to Verweys DPM and Fitts three
phases of skill learning. The accuracy of our model can further
be validated by its statistical ﬁt with the human-generated data
on simple environment tasks like the grid-world.
I. INTRODUCTION
A wide range of our day to day activities like walking,
riding a bicycle or writing involve our seemingly innate
ability to acquire and execute motor skills. It is for this
reason that various domains in cognitive science have seen
an ample amount of research in motor skill acquisition. The
experiments have tried coming up with various cognitive
models to best explain the motor skills phenomenon by
hypothesizing various theories of representation, learning
and execution. The procedural skill and habitual learning
are a kind of non-declarative or implicit memory in our brain.
Various tasks like the pursuit rotor task [1], the m
n
task [2], serial reaction time (SRT) task [3] and discrete
sequence production (DSP) task [4] among others have
been used to study motor skill learning. However, we are
speciﬁcally looking at the DSP task because it builds upon
the notion that sequential control occurs at the cognitive level
as well as autonomous motor level reﬂecting an aspiration
for a much broader application. Verwey also proposes a Dual
Processor Model (DPM) based on two parallel processor
architecture to explain the DSP task learning. We will
see that the DPM not only explains the DSP phenomenon
1
International
Institute
of
Information
Technology,
Hyderabad

2
International
Institute
of
Information
Technology,
Hyderabad

3 International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad and

quite well but also relates to our interacting model-based
(MB) and model-free (MF) reinforcement learning (RL)
framework for skill learning.
Verwey
also
proposes
a
three-phase
execution
model
on the dual processor architecture. He classiﬁes these phases
similar to Fitts and Wulfs categories [5] [6] - namely into
cognitive, associative and motor phase. The cognitive phase
is a verbal stage where the movements are slow, inconsistent
and inefﬁcient requiring a signiﬁcant cognitive ability. A
substantial part of the movement is controlled consciously
and deliberately. The second phase represents the associative
phase where movements become more ﬂuid, reliable and
efﬁcient while requiring less cognitive activity. However,
some parts of the movement are controlled consciously
while others seem to be automatically controlled. The latest
phase represents the autonomous motor phase where the
movements are accurate, consistent and efﬁcient. Since the
movement is largely controlled automatically, little or no
cognitive activity is required.
II. METHOD
Our method represents a computational approach to the
skill learning task by proposing a reinforcement learning
model for sequential decision making. A reinforcement
learning model learns to reach a goal by maximizing its
rewards or utilities by interacting with an environment
rather than being explicitly taught. A reinforcement learning
agent that learns from the consequences of its actions
tries
to
optimize
between
its
exploitation-exploration
policies. Our proposed RL paradigm for sequential decision
making is reducible to sequential skill learning because
the former involves selecting a sequence of actions to
accomplish a goal, or to maximize an RL cost function.
Our model represents a reinforcement-maximizing variation
of sequential decision making, that is, given si, si+1, ..., we
want to choose an action aj at time step j that will lead to
receiving maximum total reinforcement in the future. [7]
Verweys DPM for DSP is a qualitative theory of sequential
skill learning without any quantitative treatment. The DPM
suggests that the initial phase of training is dominated
by the cognitive processor whereas the later phase of the
training is dominated by the motor processor. Verwey argues
that reaction mode of execution is associated with the slow
learning phase. It is dominated by the closed-loop control
of the cognitive processor. After substantial practice, the
execution switches to the chunking mode where sequence
learning happens without stimuli in an open-looped control
arXiv:1901.01856v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2019

of the motor processor. He also proposes associative mode
of execution with intermediate execution speed due to
successive priming of sequences.
Therefore, we try to build up a quantitative computational
framework based on interactive model-free and model-
based reinforcement learning paradigm that supports the
observations and processes of Verweys DPM for DSP.
Our proposed and generic model can be extended to more
general motor skill learning tasks. Our effort is to combine
the qualitative and quantitative theories based on a best-ﬁt
model of the experimental simulations of various dual
processor models. As a high-level abstract, our proposed
idea is that the early phase of training is dominated by
a cognitive model-based reinforcement learning process
whereas,
after
substantial
practice
in
the
later
stage,
the motor processor facilitated model-free reinforcement
learning is dominant. Some of the approaches that can be
potential candidates for such a computational paradigm
are the weighted stream model and parallel stream model
of reinforcement learning. In case of the weighted stream
model of model-based and model-free learning, the output
depends upon the weighted summation of both streams and
the dominant stream would contribute to the decision. In
the parallel stream model, there are competing and parallel
streams of MB and MF learning.
We
tried
testing
the
framework
proposed
in
[8].
In
this computational work, they present a combination of
reinforcement learning mechanisms applied to a toy grid-
world environment and further argue that this representation
of the combination is better than individual entities of the
dichotomy. It is further hypothesized that such a framework
can then be generally extended to explain skill acquisition,
investigation of which remains. For modelling skill learning,
they combine them with initial trials using model-based and
later trials using model-free reinforcement learning. The
model-based RL is implemented by a simple Depth-Limited
Search (DLS) and model-free RL by Temporal Difference
(TD) learning. Both the processes share a common look-up
table while searching for action with best expected reward.
The two processes interact hierarchically across trials –
the ﬁrst trial being completely model-based. The next trial
consists of a model-based DLS at the ﬁrst position in the
grid world and model-free TD at the next; alternating so on.
.
Many other related works have tried bringing into light
the working of dual processors for behavioural choices.
These models try proposing different mechanisms through
which the model-based and model-free processes interact.
In spite of all the working differences, all of them conﬁrm
the dual-processor model of model-based and model-free
reinforcement learning for sequential decision making. This
large corpus of work will form the fundamental inspiration
on which we build up our computational framework.
Discussed here are a few of the approaches towards framing
Initialize Internal Model with equal transition
probabilities and zero value for each state;
for Iteration i do
Agent at the start state;
j = 0;
while Till reward reached do
if j mod (i/factor) == 0 or j mod chunk size ==
0 then
Take Model-Based step:;
Build a search tree from the current state
based on the internal model of the
environment.;
Take an action that leads to the state
maximizes the expected reward at the end
of the search tree.;
Update Transition Probabilities;
Update Values of the state and Q-values of
the actions from that state;
else
Take Model-Free Step:;
Take the action that maximizes the
corresponding Q-value.;
Update Values of the State and Q values of
the corresponding action;
end
end
end
Algorithm 1: The Dual Process algorithm in [8]
a quantitative reinforcement learning framework of the dual
processor model.
The fMRI results from the experiment in [10] conﬁrms the
presence of dual learning processes involved in guiding
the sequential decision making. The neural signatures of a
model-free process are found in dorsolateral striatum (DLS)
whereas that of a model-based process is found in pre-frontal
cortex (PFC) areas of the brain. The experiment proposed in
[9] explores how the PFC and DLS dual systems arbitrate
control for behavioural choices. Using computational theory
of reinforcement learning, they suggest an uncertainty
based Bayesian principle of arbitration for the competing
parallel processes. The more dominant system is the one
which predicts actions with least uncertainty and most
accuracy. Temporal Difference Model (TDM) is yet another
framework that is recently proposed in [11]. It proposes a
hybrid model-based and model-free reinforcement learning
algorithm. In this framework, initially, the planning of
action sequences is executed by a model-based process
using abstract sub-goals to the target state. Overtime, each
sub-goal is learned by a trial-and-error approach much
along the lines of a model-free process. The proposed
Temporal Difference Model (TDM) is where there is a
goal-conditioned subdivision of the action sequences. For
an optimal state-action-reward policy, model-based learning
guides the model-free learning at periodic intervals that

ultimately leads to the goal state.
We
propose
to
test
the
above-mentioned
models
by
simulating simple environments like the grid-world. We can
compare our ﬁndings with the general DPM observations
from the DSP task. The accuracy of our model can further
be validated with the actual human subjects data on simple
environment tasks like the grid-world.
III. RESULTS
In the typical DSP task, the S-R outputs are slow at
ﬁrst due to the associative phase of execution where the
cognitive processor is dominant. As evident from the Fig.
1 and 4, the average response time in the initial training
phase is reasonably high. This is mostly attributed to the
model-based depth-limited search. The model-based RL
steps routinely take more time because they are data-efﬁcient
especially when there is not much information available
about the environment at the start of the experiment.
However, a purely model-based learning will follow the
minimal number of steps to reach the goal state provided the
optimal actions it takes by calculating the state prediction
error. See Fig. 2. Therefore, the model-based reinforcement
learning can be taken to obtain a typical representation of
the early phase practice in sequential motor skill learning
task like DSP.
However, in the later phase of the DSP task, the execution
speed gradually increases to attain a maximum after
substantial practice. This is because the actions are now
executing
in
chunking
mode
which
is
autonomously
controlled by the motor processor. We see a minimal
cognitive processor activity in this phase as the motor
processor executes a sequential learning task in an open-
looped control. The motor processing takes a signiﬁcantly
lesser execution time at each step because it uses experience
directly in form of reward prediction error. See Fig. 1, 4.
During the later phase of the training, we see in Fig. 3 that
the mean response time decreases to strike a constant time
with little or no ﬂuctuations. This is indicative of the fact
that the model-free process has taken over from the earlier
model-based reinforcement learning process. However, it is
critical to note that a purely model-free process will demand
a signiﬁcantly more extensive time to converge at a goal
state as evident from the number of steps taken by it in Fig
2.
IV. DISCUSSIONS
From the foregoing analysis of the results, we see that the
procedural and habitual memory for skill learning can be
well modelled by interacting model-based and model-free
reinforcement learning paradigm. In a signiﬁcant measure of
performance, the model proposed in [8] can be understood
as a quantitative interpretation of the Verweys qualitative
theory of sequential motor skill acquisition.
The
framework
also
correlates
surprisingly
well
with
Fig. 1.
MB, MF and Dual comparison: Time taken to reach the goal state
Fig. 2.
MB, MF and Dual comparison: Steps taken to reach the goal state
Fig. 3.
MB, MF and Dual comparison: Transveral time with practice

Fig. 4.
Response time decreases with practice
Fitts three phases of execution. The initial cognitive phase
is dominated by model-based processes whereas the late
motor phase is controlled by model-free processes. The
intermediate
associative
phase
seems
to
represent
an
outcome of the interacting model-free and model-based
processes. Therefore, such a reinforcement schema provides
us with a computational outline of the sequential motor skill
learning task. Figure 5 shows an overview of interacting
MB-MF reinforcement learning paradigm.
A scope of future work lies in the determination of
intricacies of the unanswered questions like if the model-
based
and
model-free
reinforcement
is
competitively
racing against each other or if it is the weighted sum of
their outputs that need to be calculated for action reward
prediction. Moreover, other algorithmic details need to be
ﬁgured out like - if model-based and model-free processes
have a common or individual reward table, or say where
is the exact trade-off between model-free steps and model-
based steps in case of temporal difference models (TDM).
From our initial results, it is evident that a combination of
model-based and model-free reinforcement learning presents
a functional account of the phases of skill learning. Such
a framework would also enable us to obtain better insights
into the other dichotomies of skill learning - habitual vs.
goal-directed learning or implicit or explicit learning.
V. CONCLUSIONS
To conclude, we propose a unifying framework for sequen-
tial motor skill acquisition by providing a concrete quan-
titative underpinning to Verweys DPM. The major insight
for such problems is that the interacting model-based and
model-free reinforcement learning paradigms can be used to
explain the typical behaviour and observations in sequential
motor skill tasks. Our effort in bringing the qualitative and
quantitative theory accomplishes the same. Moreover, the
proposed computational framework is quite generic and can
be potentially extended to general motor skill learning tasks
in the future.
Fig. 5.
Model-free and model-based Reinforcement Learning. Ref. Tous-
siant (2010)
