Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 34 (2009) 89-132
Submitted 8/08; published 2/09
Policy Iteration for Decentralized Control of
Markov Decision Processes
Daniel S. Bernstein

Christopher Amato

Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003 USA
Eric A. Hansen

Department of CS and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA
Shlomo Zilberstein

Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003 USA
Abstract
Coordination of distributed agents is required for problems arising in many areas, in-
cluding multi-robot systems, networking and e-commerce. As a formal framework for such
problems, we use the decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (DEC-
POMDP). Though much work has been done on optimal dynamic programming algorithms
for the single-agent version of the problem, optimal algorithms for the multiagent case have
been elusive. The main contribution of this paper is an optimal policy iteration algorithm
for solving DEC-POMDPs. The algorithm uses stochastic ﬁnite-state controllers to repre-
sent policies. The solution can include a correlation device, which allows agents to correlate
their actions without communicating. This approach alternates between expanding the
controller and performing value-preserving transformations, which modify the controller
without sacriﬁcing value. We present two eﬃcient value-preserving transformations: one
can reduce the size of the controller and the other can improve its value while keeping the
size ﬁxed. Empirical results demonstrate the usefulness of value-preserving transformations
in increasing value while keeping controller size to a minimum. To broaden the applicabil-
ity of the approach, we also present a heuristic version of the policy iteration algorithm,
which sacriﬁces convergence to optimality. This algorithm further reduces the size of the
controllers at each step by assuming that probability distributions over the other agents’
actions are known. While this assumption may not hold in general, it helps produce higher
quality solutions in our test problems.
1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) provide a useful framework for solving problems of
sequential decision making under uncertainty.
In some settings, agents must base their
decisions on partial information about the system state. In that case, it is often better to use
the more general framework of partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs).
Even more general are problems in which a team of decision makers, each with its own
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
local observations, must act together.
Domains in which these types of problems arise
include networking, multi-robot coordination, e-commerce, and space exploration systems.
The decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (DEC-POMDP) provides
an eﬀective framework to model such problems. Though this model has been recognized for
decades (Witsenhausen, 1971), there has been little work on provably optimal algorithms
for it.
On the other hand, POMDPs have been studied extensively over the past few decades
(Smallwood & Sondik, 1973; Simmons & Koenig, 1995; Cassandra, Littman, & Zhang, 1997;
Hansen, 1998a; Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000; Poupart & Boutilier, 2003; Feng & Zilberstein, 2004;
Smith & Simmons, 2005; Smith, Thompson, & Wettergreen, 2007). It is well known that
a POMDP can be reformulated as an equivalent belief-state MDP. A belief-state MDP
cannot be solved in a straightforward way using MDP methods because it has a continuous
state space. However, Smallwood and Sondik showed how to implement value iteration by
exploiting the piecewise linearity and convexity of the value function. This work opened the
door for many algorithms, including approximate approaches and policy iteration algorithms
in which the policy is represented using a ﬁnite-state controller.
Extending dynamic programming for POMDPs to the multiagent case is not straight-
forward. For one thing, it is not clear how to deﬁne a belief state and consequently form a
belief-state MDP. With multiple agents, each agent has uncertainty about the observations
and beliefs of the other agents.
Furthermore, the ﬁnite-horizon DEC-POMDP problem
with just two agents is complete for a higher complexity class than the single-agent version
(Bernstein, Givan, Immerman, & Zilberstein, 2002), indicating that these are fundamentally
diﬀerent problems.
In this paper, we describe an extension of the policy iteration algorithm for single agent
POMDPs to the multiagent case.
As in the single agent case, our algorithm converges
in the limit, and thus serves as the ﬁrst nontrivial optimal algorithm for inﬁnite-horizon
DEC-POMDPs. A few optimal approaches (Hansen, Bernstein, & Zilberstein, 2004; Szer,
Charpillet, & Zilberstein, 2005) and several approximate algorithms have been developed for
ﬁnite-horizon DEC-POMDPs (Peshkin, Kim, Meuleau, & Kaelbling, 2000; Nair, Pynadath,
Yokoo, Tambe, & Marsella, 2003; Emery-Montemerlo, Gordon, Schnieder, & Thrun, 2004;
Seuken & Zilberstein, 2007), but only locally optimal algorithms have been proposed for
the inﬁnite-horizon case (Bernstein, Hansen, & Zilberstein, 2005; Szer & Charpillet, 2005;
Amato, Bernstein, & Zilberstein, 2007).
In our algorithmic framework, policies are represented using stochastic ﬁnite-state con-
trollers. A simple way to implement this is to give each agent its own local controller. In
this case, the agents’ policies are all independent. A more general class of policies includes
those which allow agents to share a common source of randomness without sharing observa-
tions. We deﬁne this class formally, using a shared source of randomness called a correlation
device. The use of correlated stochastic policies in the DEC-POMDP context is novel. The
importance of correlation has been recognized in the game theory community (Aumann,
1974), but there has been little work on algorithms for ﬁnding correlated policies.
Each iteration of the algorithm consists of two phases. These are exhaustive backups,
which add nodes to the controller, and value-preserving transformations, which change the
controller without sacriﬁcing value. We ﬁrst provide a novel exposition of existing single-
90

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
agent algorithms using this two-phase view, and then we go on to describe the multiagent
extension.
There are many possibilities for value-preserving transformations. In this paper, we
describe two diﬀerent types, both of which can be performed eﬃciently using linear pro-
gramming. The ﬁrst type allows us to remove nodes from the controller, and the second
allows us to improve the value of the controller while keeping its size ﬁxed. Our empirical
results demonstrate the usefulness of value-preserving transformations in obtaining high
values while keeping controller size to a minimum.
We note that this work serves to unify and generalize previous work on dynamic program-
ming for DEC-POMDPs. The ﬁrst algorithm for the ﬁnite-horizon case (Hansen et al., 2004)
can be extended to the inﬁnite-horizon case and viewed as interleaving exhaustive backups
and controller reductions. The bounded policy iteration algorithm for DEC-POMDPs (Bern-
stein et al., 2005), which extends a POMDP algorithm proposed by Poupart and Boutilier
(2003), can be viewed through the lens of our framework as repeated application of a speciﬁc
value-preserving transformation.
Because the optimal algorithm will not usually be able to return an optimal solution
in practice, we also introduce a heuristic version of the policy iteration algorithm. This
approach makes use of initial state information to focus policy search and further reduces
controller size at each step. To accomplish this, a forward search from the initial state
distribution is used to construct a set of belief points an agent would visit assuming the
other agents use given ﬁxed policies. This search is conducted for each agent and then policy
iteration takes place while using the belief points to guide the removal of controller nodes.
The assumption that other agents use ﬁxed policies causes the algorithm to no longer be
optimal, but it performs well in practice. We show that more concise and higher-valued
solutions can be produced compared to the optimal method before resources are exhausted.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the formal
models of sequential decision making. Section 3 contains a novel presentation of existing
dynamic programming algorithms for POMDPs. In section 4, we present an extension of
policy iteration for POMDPs to the DEC-POMDP case, along with a convergence proof.
We discuss the heuristic version of policy iteration in section 5, followed by experiments
using policy iteration and heuristic policy iteration in section 6. Finally, section 7 contains
the conclusion and a discussion of possible future work.
2. Formal Model of Distributed Decision Making
We begin with a description of the formal framework upon which our work is based. This
framework extends the well-known Markov decision process to allow for distributed policy
execution.
We also deﬁne an optimal solution for this model and discuss two diﬀerent
representations for these solutions.
2.1 Decentralized POMDPs
A decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (DEC-POMDP) is deﬁned for-
mally as a tuple ⟨I, S, ⃗A, T, R, ⃗Ω, O⟩, where
• I is a ﬁnite set of agents.
91

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
(a)
System
a
Agent
s, r
System
a
Agent
o, r
System
a1
Agent
o1, r
Agent
a2
o2, r
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: (a) Markov decision process. (b) Partially observable Markov decision process.
(c) Decentralized partially observable Markov decision process with two agents.
• S is a ﬁnite set of states, with distinguished initial state s0.
• ⃗A = ×i∈IAi is a set of joint actions, where Ai is the set of actions for agent i.
• T : S × ⃗A →∆S is the state transition function, deﬁning the distributions of states
that result from starting in a given state and each agent performing an action.
• R : S × ⃗A →ℜis the reward function for the set of agents for each set of joint actions
and each state.
• ⃗Ω= ×i∈IΩi is a set of joint observations, where Ωi contains observations for agent i.
• O : ⃗A × S →∆⃗Ωis an observation function, deﬁning the distributions of observations
for the set of agents that result from each agent performing an action and ending in
a given state.
The special case of a DEC-POMDP in which there is only one agent is called a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
In this paper, we consider the case in which the process unfolds over an inﬁnite sequence
of stages. At each stage, all agents simultaneously select an action, and each receives the
global reward based on the reward function and a local observation based on the observation
function.
Thus, the transitions, rewards and observations depend on the actions of all
agents, but each agent must act based only on local observations. This is illustrated in
Figure 1.
The objective of the agents is to maximize the expected discounted sum of
rewards that are received, thus it is a cooperative framework.
We denote the discount
factor β and require that 0 ≤β < 1.
In a DEC-POMDP, the decisions of each agent aﬀect all the agents in the domain, but
due to the decentralized nature of the model each agent must choose actions based solely on
local information. Because each agent receives a separate observation that does not usually
provide suﬃcient information to eﬃciently reason about the other agents, solving a DEC-
POMDP optimally becomes very diﬃcult. For example, each agent may receive a diﬀerent
92

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: A set of horizon three policy trees (a) and two node stochastic controllers (b) for
a two agent DEC-POMDP.
piece of information that does not allow a common state estimate or any estimate of the
other agents’ decisions to be calculated. These single estimates are crucial in single agent
problems, as they allow the agent’s history to be summarize concisely, but they are not
generally available in DEC-POMDPs. This is seen in the complexity of the ﬁnite-horizon
problem with at least two agents, which is NEXP-complete (Bernstein et al., 2002) and
thus in practice may require double exponential time. Like the inﬁnite-horizon POMDP,
optimally solving an inﬁnite-horizon DEC-POMDP is undecidable as it may require inﬁnite
resources, but our method is able to provide a solution within ϵ of the optimal with ﬁnite
time and memory. Nevertheless, introducing multiple decentralized agents causes a DEC-
POMDP to be signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult than a single agent POMDP.
2.2 Solution Representations
A local policy for an agent is a mapping from local action and observation histories to actions
while a joint policy is a set of policies, one for each agent in the problem. As mentioned
above, an optimal solution for a DEC-POMDP is the joint policy that maximizes the
expected sum of rewards that are received over the ﬁnite or inﬁnite steps of the problem.
In inﬁnite-horizon problems, the rewards are discounted to maintain a ﬁnite sum. Thus, an
optimal solution is a joint policy that provides the highest value starting at the given initial
state of the problem.
For ﬁnite-horizon problems, local policies can be represented using a policy tree as seen
in Figure 2a. Actions are represented by the arrows or stop ﬁgures (where each agent can
move in the given direction or stay where it is) and observations are labeled “wl” and “wr”
for seeing a wall on the left or the right respectively. Using this representation, an agent
takes the action deﬁned at the root node and then after seeing an observation, chooses the
next action that is deﬁned by the respective branch. This continues until the action at a
leaf node is executed. For example, agent 1 would ﬁrst move left and then if a wall is seen
on the right, the agent would move left again. If a wall is now seen on the left, the agent
does not move on the ﬁnal step. A policy tree is a record of the the entire local history for
an agent up to some ﬁxed horizon and because each tree is independent of the others it can
93

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
be executed in a decentralized manner. While this representation is useful for ﬁnite-horizon
problems, inﬁnite-horizon problems would require trees of inﬁnite height.
Another option used in this paper is to condition action selection on some internal
memory state. These solutions can be represented as a set of local ﬁnite-state controllers
(seen in Figure 2b). The controllers operate in a very similar way to the policy trees in
that there is a designated initial node and following the action selection at that node, the
controller transitions to the next node depending on the observation seen. This continues for
the inﬁnite steps of the problem. Throughout this paper, controller states will be referred
to as nodes to help distinguish them from system states.
An inﬁnite number of nodes may be required to deﬁne an optimal inﬁnite-horizon DEC-
POMDP policy, but we will discuss a way to produce solutions within ϵ of the optimal
with a ﬁxed number of nodes. While deterministic action selection and node transitions are
suﬃcient to deﬁne this ϵ-optimal policy, when memory is limited stochastic action selection
and node transition may be beneﬁcial. A simple example illustrating this for POMDPs
is given by Singh (1994), which can be easily extended to DEC-POMDPs.
Intuitively,
randomness can help an agent to break out of costly loops that result from forgetfulness.
A formal description of stochastic controllers for POMDPs and DEC-POMDPs is given
in sections 3.2.1 and 4.1.1 respectively, but an example can be seen in Figure 2b. Agent 2
begins at node 1 and moves up with probability 0.89 and stays in place with probability
0.11. If the agent stayed in place and a wall was then seen on the left (observation “wl”), on
the next step, the controller would transition to node 1 and the agent would use the same
distribution of actions again. If a wall was seen on the right instead (observation “wr”),
there is a 0.85 probability that the controller will transition back to node 1 and a 0.15
probability that the controller will transition to node 2 for the next step. The ﬁnite-state
controller allows an inﬁnite-horizon policy to be represented compactly by remembering
some aspects of the agent’s history without representing the entire local history.
3. Centralized Dynamic Programming
In this section, we cover the main concepts involved in dynamic programming for the sin-
gle agent case. This will provide a foundation for the multiagent dynamic programming
algorithm described in the following section.
3.1 Value Iteration for POMDPs
Value iteration can be used to solve POMDPs optimally. This algorithm is more complicated
than its MDP counterpart, and does not have eﬃciency guarantees. However, in practice
it can provide signiﬁcant leverage in solving POMDPs.
We begin by explaining how every POMDP has an equivalent MDP with a continuous
state space. Next, we describe how the value functions for this MDP have special structure
that can be exploited. These ideas are central to the value iteration algorithm.
3.1.1 Belief State MDPs
A convenient way to summarize the observation history of an agent in a POMDP is through
a belief state, which is a distribution over system states. As it receives observations, the
94

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
agent can update its belief state and then remove its observations from memory. Let b
denote a belief state, and let b(s) represent the probability assigned to state s by b. If an
agent chooses action a from belief state b and subsequently observes o, each component of
the successor belief state obeys the equation
b′(s′) = P(o|a, s′) P
s∈S P(s′|s, a)b(s)
P(o|b, a)
,
where
P(o|b, a) =
X
s′∈S
"
P(o|a, s′)
X
s∈S
P(s′|s, a)b(s)
#
.
Note that this is a simple application of Bayes’ rule.
It was shown by Astrom (1965) that a belief state constitutes a suﬃcient statistic for
the agent’s observation history, and it is possible to deﬁne an MDP over belief states as
follows. A belief-state MDP is a tuple ⟨Π, A, T, R⟩, where
• Π is the set of distributions over S.
• A is the set of actions (same as before).
• T(b, a, b′) is the transition function, deﬁned as
T(b, a, b′) =
X
o∈O
P(b′|b, a, o)P(o|b, a).
• R(b, a) is a reward function, deﬁned as
R(b, a) =
X
s∈S
b(s)R(s, a).
When combined with belief-state updating, an optimal solution to this MDP can be used
as an optimal solution to the POMDP from which it was constructed. However, since the
belief state MDP has a continuous, |S|-dimensional state space, traditional MDP techniques
are not immediately applicable.
Fortunately, dynamic programming can be used to ﬁnd a solution to the belief state
MDP. The key result in making dynamic programming practical was proved by Smallwood
and Sondik (1973), who showed that the Bellman operator preserves piecewise linearity and
convexity of a value function. Starting with a piecewise linear and convex representation of
V t, the value function V t+1 is piecewise linear and convex, and can be computed in ﬁnite
time.
To represent a piecewise linear and convex value function, one need only store the value
of each facet for each system state. Denoting the set of facets Γ, we can store |Γ| |S|-
dimensional vectors of real values. For any single vector, γ ∈Γ, we can deﬁne its value at
the belief state b with V (b, γ) = P
s∈S b(s)γ(s). Thus, to go from a set of vectors to the
value of a belief state, we use the equation
V (b) = max
γ
X
s∈S
b(s)γ(s).
95

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
s1
s2
(a)
s1
s2
(b)
Figure 3: A piecewise linear and convex value function for a POMDP with two states (a)
and a non-minimal representation of a piecewise linear and convex value function
for a POMDP (b).
Figure 3a shows a piecewise linear and convex value function for a POMDP with two states.
Smallwood and Sondik proved that the optimal value function for a ﬁnite-horizon
POMDP is piecewise linear and convex. The optimal value function for an inﬁnite-horizon
POMDP is convex, but may not be piecewise linear. However, it can be approximated
arbitrarily closely by a piecewise linear and convex value function, and the value iteration
algorithm constructs closer and closer approximations, as we shall see.
3.1.2 Pruning Vectors
Every piecewise linear and convex value function has a minimal set of vectors Γ that repre-
sents it. Of course, it is possible to use a non-minimal set to represent the same function.
This is illustrated in Figure 3b. Note that the removal of certain vectors does not change
the value of any belief state. Vectors such as these are not necessary to keep in memory.
Formally, we say that a vector γ is dominated if for all belief states b, there is a vector
ˆγ ∈Γ \ γ such that V (b, γ) ≤V (b, ˆγ).
Because dominated vectors are not necessary, it would be useful to have a method for
removing them. This task is often called pruning, and has an eﬃcient algorithm based
on linear programming. For a given vector γ, the linear program in Table 1 determines
whether γ is dominated. If variables can be found to make ϵ positive, then adding γ to the
set improves the value function at some belief state. If not, then γ is dominated.
This gives rise to a simple algorithm for pruning a set of vectors ˜Γ to obtain a minimal
set Γ. The algorithm loops through ˜Γ, removes each vector γ ∈˜Γ, and solves the linear
program using γ and ˜Γ \ γ. If γ is not dominated, then it is returned to ˜Γ.
It turns out that there is an equivalent way to characterize dominance that can be useful.
Recall that for a vector to be dominated, there does not have to be a single vector that has
value at least as high for all states. It is suﬃcient for there to exist a set of vectors such
that for all belief states, one of the vectors in the set has value at least as high as the vector
in question.
96

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Variables: ϵ, b(s)
Objective: Maximize ϵ.
Improvement constraints:
∀ˆγ
X
s
b(s)ˆγ(s) + ϵ ≤
X
s
b(s)γ(s)
Probability constraints:
X
s
b(s) = 1,
∀s
b(s) ≥0
Table 1: The linear program for testing whether a vector γ is dominated.
s1
s2
convex combination
γ1
γ2
γ3
Figure 4: The dual interpretation of dominance. Vector γ3 is dominated at all belief states
by either γ1 or γ2. This is equivalent to the existence of a convex combination of
γ1 and γ2 which dominates γ3 for all belief states.
It can be shown that such a set exists if and only if there is some convex combination
of vectors that has value at least as high as the vector in question for all states. This is
shown graphically in Figure 4. If we take the dual of the linear program for dominance
given in the previous section, we get a linear program for which the solution is a vector of
probabilities for the convex combination. This dual view of dominance was ﬁrst used in a
POMDP context by Poupart and Boutilier (2003), and is useful for policy iteration, as will
be explained later.
3.1.3 Dynamic Programming Update
In this section, we describe how to implement a dynamic programming update to go from a
value function Vt to a value function Vt+1. In terms of implementation, our aim is to take
a minimal set of vectors Γt that represents Vt and produce a minimal set of vectors Γt+1
that represents Vt+1.
97

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
Each vector that could potentially be included in Γt+1 represents the value of an action a
and assignment of vectors in Γt to observations. A combination of an action and transition
rule will hereafter be called a one-step policy. The value vector for a one-step policy can
be determined by considering the action taken, the resulting state transitioned to and
observation seen and the value of the assigned vector at step t.
This is given via the
equation
γt+1
i
(s) = R(s, α(i)) + β
X
s′,o
P(s′|s, α(i))P(o|α(i), s′)γt
τ(i,o)(s′),
where i is the index of the vector, α(i) is its action, and τ(i, o) is the index of the vector in
Γt to which to transition upon receiving observation o and β is the discount factor. More
details on the derivation and use of this formula are provided by Zhang and Zhang (2001).
There are |A||Γt||Ω| possible one-step policies. A simple way to construct Γt+1 is to
evaluate all possible one-step policies and then apply a pruning algorithm such as Lark’s
method (Lark III, 1990). Evaluating the entire set of one-step policies will hereafter be
called performing an exhaustive backup.
It turns out that there are ways to perform a
dynamic programming update without ﬁrst performing an exhaustive backup. Below we
describe two approaches to doing this.
The ﬁrst approach uses the fact that it is simple to ﬁnd the optimal vector for any
particular belief state. For a belief state b, an optimal action can be determined via the
equation
α = argmaxa∈A
"
R(b, a) + β
X
o∈Ω
P(o|b, a)V t(T(b|a, o))
#
.
For each observation o, there is a subsequent belief state, which can be computed using
Bayes’ rule. To get an optimal transition rule, τ(o), we take the optimal vector for the
belief state corresponding to o.
Since the backed-up value function has ﬁnitely many vectors, there must be a ﬁnite set
of belief states for which backups must be performed. Algorithms which identify these belief
states include Smallwood and Sondik’s “one-pass” algorithm (1973), Cheng’s linear support
and relaxed region algorithms (Cheng, 1988), and Kaelbling, Cassandra and Littman’s
Witness algorithm (1998).
The second approach is based on generating and pruning sets of vectors. Instead of
generating all vectors and then pruning, these techniques attempt to prune during the gen-
eration phase. The ﬁrst algorithm along these lines was the incremental pruning algorithm
(Cassandra et al., 1997). Recently, improvements have been made to this approach (Zhang
& Lee, 1998; Feng & Zilberstein, 2004, 2005).
It should be noted that there are theoretical complexity barriers for DP updates. Littman
et al. (1995) showed that under certain widely believed complexity theoretic assumptions,
there is no algorithm for performing a DP update that is worst-case polynomial in all the
quantities involved. Despite this fact, dynamic programming updates have been success-
fully implemented as part of the value iteration and policy iteration algorithms, which will
be described in the subsequent sections.
98

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
3.1.4 Value Iteration
To implement value iteration, we simply start with an arbitrary piecewise linear and convex
value function, and proceed to perform DP updates. This corresponds to value iteration in
the equivalent belief state MDP, and thus converges to an ϵ-optimal value function after a
ﬁnite number of iterations.
Value iteration returns a value function, but a policy is needed for execution. As in the
MDP case, we can use one-step lookahead, using the equation
δ(b) = argmaxa∈A
"X
s∈S
R(s, a)b(s) + β
X
o∈Ω
P(o|b, a)V (τ(b, o, a))
#
,
where τ(b, o, a) is the belief state resulting from starting in belief state b, taking action a,
and receiving observation o. We note that a state estimator must be used as well to track
the belief state. Using the fact that each vector corresponds to a one-step policy, we can
extract a policy from the value of the vectors:
δ(b) = α
 
argmaxk
X
s
b(s)γk(s)
!
While the size of the resulting set of dominant vectors may remain exponential, in many
cases it is much smaller. This can signiﬁcantly simplify computation.
As in the completely observable case, the Bellman residual provides a bound on the
distance to optimality. Recall that the Bellman residual is the maximum distance across all
belief states between the value functions of successive iterations. It is possible to ﬁnd the
maximum distance between two piecewise linear and convex functions in polynomial time
with an algorithm that uses linear programming (Littman et al., 1995).
3.2 Policy Iteration for POMDPs
With value iteration, a POMDP is viewed as a belief-state MDP, and a policy is a mapping
from belief states to actions. An early policy iteration algorithm developed by Sondik used
this policy representation (Sondik, 1978), but it was very complicated and did not meet
with success in practice. We shall describe a diﬀerent approach that has performed better
on test problems. With this approach, a policy is represented as a ﬁnite-state controller.
3.2.1 Finite-State Controllers
Using a ﬁnite-state controller, an agent has a ﬁnite number of internal states. Its actions
are based only on its internal state, and transitions between internal states occur when
observations are received. Internal states provide agents with a kind of memory, which can
be crucial for diﬃcult POMDPs. Of course, an agent’s memory is limited by the number
of internal states it possesses. In general, an agent cannot remember its entire history of
observations, as this would require inﬁnitely many internal states. An example of a ﬁnite-
state controller can be seen by considering only one agent’s controller in Figure 2b. The
operation of a single controller is the same as that for each agent in the decentralized case.
We formally deﬁne a controller as a tuple ⟨Q, Ω, A, ψ, η⟩, where
99

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
• Q is a ﬁnite set of controller nodes.
• Ωis a set of inputs, taken to be the observations of the POMDP.
• A is a set of outputs, taken to be the actions of the POMDP.
• ψ : Q →∆A is an action selection function, deﬁning the distribution of actions
selected at each node.
• η : Q × A × Ω→∆Q is a transition function, deﬁning the distribution of resulting
nodes for each initial node and action taken.
For each state and starting node of the controller, there is an expected discounted sum
of rewards over the inﬁnite horizon. It can be computed using the following system of linear
equations, one for each s ∈S and q ∈Q:
V (s, q) =
X
a
P(a|q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,o,q′
P(o, s′|s, a)P(q′|q, a, o)V (s′, q′)

.
Where P(a|q) is the probability action a will be taken in node q and P(q′|q, a, o) is the
probability the controller will transition to node q′ from node q after action a was taken
and o was observed.
We sometimes refer to the value of the controller at a belief state. For a belief state b,
this is deﬁned as
V (b) = max
q
X
s
b(s)V (s, q).
Thus, it is assumed that, given an initial state distribution, the controller is started in the
node which maximizes value from that distribution. Once execution has begun, however,
there is no belief state updating. In fact, it is possible for the agent to encounter the same
belief state twice and be in a diﬀerent internal state each time.
3.2.2 Algorithmic Framework
We will describe the policy iteration algorithm in abstract terms, focusing on the key com-
ponents necessary for convergence. In subsequent sections, we present diﬀerent possibilities
for implementation.
Policy iteration takes as input an arbitrary ﬁnite-state controller. The ﬁrst phase of an
iteration consists of evaluating the controller, as described above. Recall that value iteration
was initialized with an arbitrary piecewise linear and convex value function, represented by
a set of vectors. In policy iteration, the piecewise linear and convex value function arises
out of evaluation of the controller. Each controller node has a value when paired with each
state. Thus, each node has a corresponding vector and thus a linear value function over
belief state space. Choosing the best node for each belief state yields a piecewise linear and
convex value function.
The second phase of an iteration is the dynamic programming update. In value iter-
ation, an update produces an improved set of vectors, where each vector corresponds to
a deterministic one-step policy. The same set of vectors is produced in this case, but the
100

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Input: A ﬁnite state controller, and a parameter ϵ.
1. Evaluate the ﬁnite-state controller by solving a system of linear equations.
2. Perform a dynamic programming update to add a set of deterministic nodes to the
controller.
3. Perform value-preserving transformations on the controller.
4. Calculate the Bellman residual.
If it is less than ϵ(1 −β)/2β, then terminate.
Otherwise, go to step 1.
Output: An ϵ-optimal ﬁnite-state controller.
Table 2: Policy Iteration for POMDPs.
actions and transition rules for the one-step policy cannot be removed from memory. Each
new vector is actually a node that gets added to the controller. All of the probability distri-
butions for the added nodes are deterministic. That is, a exhaustive backup in this context
creates a new node for each possible action and possible combinations of observations and
deterministic transitions into the current controller. This results in the same one-step poli-
cies being considered as in the dynamic programming update described above. As there
are |A||Γt||Ω| possible one-step polices, this number also deﬁnes the number of new nodes
added to the controller after an exhaustive backup.
Finally, additional operations are performed on the controller. There are many such
operations, and we describe two possibilities in the following section. The only restriction
placed on these operations is that they do not decrease the value for any belief state. Such
an operation is denoted a value-preserving transformation.
The complete algorithm is outlined in Table 2. It is guaranteed to converge to a ﬁnite-
state controller that is ϵ-optimal for all belief states within a ﬁnite number of steps. Fur-
thermore, the Bellman residual can be used to obtain a bound on the distance to optimality,
as with value iteration.
3.2.3 Controller Reductions
In performing a DP update, potential nodes that are dominated do not get added to the
controller. However, after the update is performed, some of the old nodes may have become
dominated. These nodes cannot simply be removed, however, as other nodes may transition
into them. This is where the dual view of dominance is useful. Recall that if a node is
dominated, then there is a convex combination of other nodes with value at least as high
from all states. Thus, we can remove the dominated node and merge it into the dominating
convex combination by changing transition probabilities accordingly. This operation was
proposed by Poupart and Boutilier (2003) and built upon earlier work by Hansen (1998b).
Formally, a controller reduction attempts to replace a node q ∈Q with a distribution
P(ˆq) over nodes ˆq ∈Q \ q such that for all s ∈S,
V (s, q) ≤
X
ˆq∈Q\q
P(ˆq)V (s, ˆq).
101

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
Variables: ϵ, x(ˆγ)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s
V (s, γ) + ϵ ≤
X
ˆγ
x(ˆγ)V (s, ˆγ)
Probability constraints:
X
ˆγ
x(ˆγ) = 1,
∀ˆγ
x(ˆγ) ≥0
Table 3: The dual linear program for testing dominance for the vector γ. The variable x(ˆγ)
represents P(ˆγ).
This can be achieved by solving the linear program in Table 3. As nodes are used rather
than vectors, we replace x(ˆγ) with x(ˆq) in the dual formulation which provides a proba-
bility distribution of nodes which dominate node q. Rather than transitioning into q, this
distribution can then be used instead. It can be shown that if such a distribution is found
and used for merging, the resulting controller is a value-preserving transformation of the
original one.
3.2.4 Bounded Backups
In the previous section, we described a way to reduce the size of a controller without
sacriﬁcing value. The method described in this section attempts to increase the value of
the controller while keeping its size ﬁxed. It focuses on one node at a time, and attempts to
change the parameters of the node such that the value of the controller is at least as high
for all belief states. The idea for this approach originated with Platzman (1980), and was
made eﬃcient by Poupart and Boutilier (2003).
In this method, a node q is chosen, and parameters for the conditional distribution
P(a, q′|q, o) are to be determined.
Determining these parameters works as follows.
We
assume that the original controller will be used from the second step on, and try to replace
the parameters for q with better ones for just the ﬁrst step. In other words, we look for
parameters which satisfy the following inequality:
V (s, q) ≤
X
a
P(a|q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,o,q′
P(q′|q, a, o)P(o, s′|s, a)V (s′, q′)


for all s ∈S.
Note that the inequality is always satisﬁed by the original parameters.
However, it is often possible to get an improvement.
The new parameters can be found by solving a linear program, as shown in Table 4.
Note that the size of the linear program is polynomial in the sizes of the POMDP and the
controller. We call this process a bounded backup because it acts like a dynamic programming
102

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Variables: ϵ, x(a), x(a, o, q′)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s
V (s, q) + ϵ ≤
X
a

x(a)R(s, a) + β
X
s′,o,q′
x(a, o, q′)P(o, s′|s, a)V (s′, q′)


Probability constraints:
X
a
x(a) = 1,
∀a, o
X
q′
x(a, o, q′) = x(a)
∀a
x(a) ≥0,
∀a, o, q′
x(a, o, q′) ≥0
Table 4: The linear program to be solved for a bounded backup. The variable x(a) repre-
sents P(a|q), and the variable x(a, o, q′) represents P(a, q′|q, o).
backup with memory constraints. To see this, consider the set of nodes generated by a DP
backup.
These nodes dominate the original nodes across all belief states, so for every
original node, there must be a convex combination of the nodes in this set that dominate
the original node for all states. A bounded backup ﬁnds such a convex combination.
It can be shown that a bounded backup yields a value-preserving transformation. Re-
peated application of bounded backups can lead to a local optimum, at which none of the
nodes can be improved any further. Poupart and Boutilier (2003) showed that a local op-
timum has been reached when each node’s value function is touching the value function
produced by performing a full DP backup. This is illustrated in Figure 5.
4. Decentralized Dynamic Programming
In the previous section, we presented dynamic programming for POMDPs. A key part of
POMDP theory is the fact that every POMDP has an equivalent belief-state MDP. No
such result is known for DEC-POMDPs, making it diﬃcult to generalize value iteration to
the multiagent case. This lack of a shared belief-state requires a new set of tools to be
developed for solving DEC-POMDP. As a step in this direction, we were able to develop an
optimal policy iteration algorithm for DEC-POMDPs that includes the POMDP version as
a special case. This algorithm is the focus of the section.
We ﬁrst show how to extend the deﬁnition of a stochastic controller to the multiagent
case. Multiagent controllers include a correlation device, which is a source of randomness
shared by all the agents. This shared randomness increases solution quality while minimally
increasing representation size without adding communication. As in the single agent case,
policy iteration alternates between exhaustive backups and value-preserving transforma-
103

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
s1
s2
value function for
controller
value function after
DP update
Figure 5: A local optimum for bounded backups. The solid line is the value function for the
controller, and the dotted line is the value function for the controller that results
from a full DP update.
tions. A convergence proof is given, along with eﬃcient transformations that extend those
presented in the previous section.
4.1 Correlated Finite-State Controllers
The joint policy for the agents is represented using a stochastic ﬁnite-state controller for
each agent. In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne a type of controller in which the agents act
independently. We then provide an example demonstrating the utility of correlation, and
show how to extend the deﬁnition of a controller to allow for correlation among agents.
4.1.1 Local Finite-State Controllers
In a local controller, the agent’s node is based on the local observations received, and the
agent’s action is based on the current node. These local controllers are deﬁned in the same
way as the POMDP controllers above, with each agent possessing its own controller that
operates independently of the others. As before, stochastic transitions and action selection
are allowed.
We formally deﬁne a local controller for agent i as a tuple ⟨Qi, Ωi, Ai, ψi, ηi⟩, where
• Qi is a ﬁnite set of controller nodes.
• Ωi is a set of inputs, taken to be the local observations for agent i.
• Ai is a set of outputs, taken to be the actions for agent i.
• ψi : Qi →∆Ai is an action selection function for agent i, deﬁning the distribution of
actions selected at each node of that agent’s controller.
• ηi : Qi × Ai × Ωi →∆Qi is a transition function for agent i, deﬁning the distribution
of resulting nodes for each initial node and action taken of that agent’s controller.
The functions ψi and ηi parameterize the conditional distribution P(ai, q′
i|qi, oi) which rep-
resents the combined action selection and node transition probability for agent i. When
104

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
s2
s1
+R
+R
–R
–R
AA
BB
AB
BA
BB
AA
AB
BA
Figure 6: A DEC-POMDP for which a correlated joint policy yields more reward than the
optimal independent joint policy.
taken together, the agents’ controllers determine the conditional distribution P(⃗a, ⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗o).
This is denoted an independent joint controller. In the following subsection, we show that
independence can be limiting.
4.1.2 The Utility of Correlation
The joint controllers described above do not allow the agents to correlate their behavior
via a shared source of randomness. We will use a simple example to illustrate the utility
of correlation in partially observable domains where agents have limited memory.
This
example generalizes the one given by Singh (1994) to illustrate the utility of stochastic
policies in partially observable settings containing a single agent.
Consider the DEC-POMDP shown in Figure 6. This problem has two states, two agents,
and two actions per agent (A and B). The agents each have only one observation, and
thus cannot distinguish between the two states. For this example, we will consider only
memoryless policies.
Suppose that the agents can independently randomize their behavior using distributions
P(a1) and P(a2). If the agents each choose either A or B according to a uniform distribution,
then they receive an expected reward of −R
2 per time step, and thus an expected long-term
reward of
−R
2(1−β). It is straightforward to show that no independent policy yields higher
reward than this one for all states.
Next, let us consider the even larger class of policies in which the agents may act in a
correlated fashion. In other words, we consider all joint distributions P(a1, a2). Consider
the policy that assigns probability 1
2 to the pair AA and probability 1
2 to the pair BB. This
yields an average reward of 0 at each time step and thus an expected long-term reward of
0. The diﬀerence between the rewards obtained by the independent and correlated policies
can be made arbitrarily large by increasing R.
105

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
4.1.3 Correlated Joint Controllers
In the previous subsection, we established that correlation can be useful in the face of
limited memory. In this subsection, we extend our deﬁnition of a joint controller to allow for
correlation among the agents. To do this, we introduce an additional ﬁnite-state machine,
called a correlation device, that provides extra signals to the agents at each time step. The
device operates independently of the DEC-POMDP process, and thus does not provide
agents with information about the other agents’ observations. In fact, the random numbers
necessary for its operation could be determined prior to execution time and made available
to all agents.
Formally, a correlation device is a tuple ⟨Qc, ψc⟩, where Qc is a set of nodes and ψc :
Qc →∆Qc is a state transition function. At each step, the device undergoes a transition,
and each agent observes its state.
We must modify the deﬁnition of a local controller to take the state of the correlation
device as input.
Now, a local controller for agent i is a conditional distribution of the
form P(ai, q′
i|qc, qi, oi). The correlation device together with the local controllers form a
joint conditional distribution P(⃗a, ⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗o), where ⃗q = ⟨qc, q1, . . . , qn⟩. We will refer to this
as a correlated joint controller. Note that a correlated joint controller with |Qc| = 1 is
eﬀectively an independent joint controller. Figure 7 contains a graphical representation of
the probabilistic dependencies in a correlated joint controller.
The value function for a correlated joint controller can be computed by solving the
following system of linear equations, one for each s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q:
V (s, ⃗q) =
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s,⃗a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)V (s′, ⃗q ′)

.
We sometimes refer to the value of the controller for an initial state distribution. For a
distribution b, this is deﬁned as
V (b) = max
⃗q
X
s
b(s)V (s, ⃗q).
It is assumed that, given an initial state distribution, the controller is started in the joint
node which maximizes value from that distribution.
It is worth noting that correlation can increase the value of a set of ﬁxed-size controllers,
but this same value can be achieved by a larger set of uncorrelated controllers.
Thus,
correlation is a way to make better use of limited representation size, but is not required
to produce a set of optimal controllers. This is formalized by the following theorem, which
is proved in Appendix A. The theorem asserts the existence of uncorrelated controllers;
determining how much extra memory is needed to replace a correlation device remains an
open problem.
Theorem 1 Given an initial state and a correlated joint controller, there always exists
some ﬁnite-size joint controller without a correlation device that produces at least the same
value for the initial state.
106

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
a1
q1
q’1
o1
qc
q2
a2
o2
q’2
Figure 7: A graphical representation of the probabilistic dependencies in a correlated joint
controller for two agents.
In the example above, higher value can be achieved with two node uncorrelated con-
trollers for each agent. If the problem starts in s1, the ﬁrst node for each agent would choose
A and transition to the second node which would choose B. The second node would then
transition back to the ﬁrst node. The resulting policy consists of the agents alternating
between choosing AA and BB, producing an expected long-term reward of
R
1−β which is
higher than the correlated one node policy value of 0. Thus, doubling memory for each
agent in this problem is suﬃcient to remove the correlation device.
4.2 Policy Iteration
In this section, we describe the policy iteration algorithm. We ﬁrst extend the deﬁnitions of
exhaustive backup and value-preserving transformation to the multiagent case. Following
that, we provide a description of the complete algorithm, along with a convergence proof.
4.2.1 Exhaustive Backups
We introduced exhaustive backups in the section on dynamic programming for POMDPs.
We stated that one way to implement a DP update was to perform an exhaustive backup,
and then prune dominated nodes that were created. More eﬃcient implementations were
described thereafter. These implementations involved interleaving pruning with node gen-
eration.
For the multiagent case, it is an open problem whether pruning can be interleaved
with node generation. Nodes can be removed, as we will show in a later subsection, but for
convergence we require exhaustive backups. We do not deﬁne DP updates for the multiagent
case, and instead make exhaustive backups a central component of our algorithm.
An exhaustive backup adds nodes to the local controllers for all agents at once, and
leaves the correlation device unchanged.
For each agent i, |Ai||Qi||Ωi| nodes are added
to the local controller, one for each one-step policy. Thus, the joint controller grows by
|Qc| Q
i |Ai||Qi||Oi| joint nodes.
Note that repeated application of exhaustive backups amounts to a brute force search
in the space of deterministic policies. This converges to optimality, but is obviously quite
ineﬃcient. As in the single agent case, we must modify the joint controller in between
107

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
adding new nodes. For convergence, these modiﬁcations must preserve value in a sense that
will be made formal in the following section.
4.2.2 Value-Preserving Transformations
We now extend the deﬁnition of a value-preserving transformation to the multiagent case.
In the following subsection, we show how this deﬁnition allows for convergence to optimality
as the number of iterations grows.
The dual interpretation of dominance is helpful in understanding multiagent value-
preserving transformations. Recall that for a POMDP, we say that a node is dominated if
there is a convex combination of other nodes with value at least as high for all states. Though
we deﬁned a value-preserving transformation in terms of the value function across belief
states, we could have equivalently deﬁned it so that every node in the original controller
has a dominating convex combination in the new controller.
For the multiagent case, we do not have the concept of a belief state MDP, so we take
the second approach mentioned above. In particular, we require that dominating convex
combinations exist for nodes of all the local controllers and the correlation device. A trans-
formation of a controller C to a controller D qualiﬁes as a value-preserving transformation
if C ≤D, where ≤is deﬁned below.
Consider correlated joint controllers C and D with node sets ⃗Q and ⃗R, respectively. We
say that C ≤D if there exist mappings fi : Qi →∆Ri for each agent i and fc : Qc →∆Rc
such that
V (s, ⃗q) ≤
X
⃗r
P(⃗r|⃗q)V (s,⃗r)
for all s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q. Note that this relation is transitive as further value-preserving
transformations of D will also be value-preserving transformations of C.
We sometimes describe the fi and fc as a single mapping f : ⃗Q →∆⃗R. Examples
of eﬃcient value-preserving transformations are given in a later section.
In the follow-
ing subsection, we show that alternating between exhaustive backups and value-preserving
transformations yields convergence to optimality.
4.2.3 Algorithmic Framework
The policy iteration algorithm is initialized with an arbitrary correlated joint controller. In
the ﬁrst part of an iteration, the controller is evaluated via the solution of a system of linear
equations. Next, an exhaustive backup is performed to add nodes to the local controllers.
Finally, value-preserving transformations are performed.
In contrast to the single agent case, there is no Bellman residual for testing conver-
gence to ϵ-optimality. We resort to a simpler test for ϵ-optimality based on the discount
rate and the number of iterations so far. Let |Rmax| be the largest absolute value of an
immediate reward possible in the DEC-POMDP. Our algorithm terminates after iteration
t if βt+1|Rmax|
1−β
≤ϵ. At this point, due to discounting, the value of any policy after step t is
less than ϵ. Justiﬁcation for this test is provided in the convergence proof. The complete
algorithm is sketched in Table 5.
Before proving convergence, we state a key lemma regarding the ordering of exhaustive
backups and value-preserving transformations. Its proof is deferred to the Appendix.
108

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Input: A correlated joint controller, and a parameter ϵ.
1. Evaluate the correlated joint controller by solving a system of linear equations.
2. Perform an exhaustive backup to add deterministic nodes to the local controllers.
3. Perform value-preserving transformations on the controller.
4. If βt+1|Rmax|
1−β
≤ϵ, where t is the number of iterations so far, then terminate. Else go
to step 1.
Output: A correlated joint controller that is ϵ-optimal for all states.
Table 5: Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs.
Lemma 1 Let C and D be correlated joint controllers, and let ˆC and ˆD be the results of
performing exhaustive backups on C and D, respectively. Then ˆC ≤ˆD if C ≤D.
Thus, if there is a value-preserving transformation mapping controller C to D and both are
exhaustively backed up, then there is a value-preserving transformation mapping controller
ˆC to ˆD. This allows value-preserving transformations to be performed before exhaustive
backups, while ensuring that value is not lost after the backup. We can now state and prove
the main convergence theorem for policy iteration.
Theorem 2 For any ϵ, policy iteration returns a correlated joint controller that is ϵ-optimal
for all initial states in a ﬁnite number of iterations.
Proof:
Repeated application of exhaustive backups amounts to a brute force search in
the space of deterministic joint policies. Thus, after t exhaustive backups, the resulting
controller is optimal for t steps from any initial state. Let t be an integer large enough that
βt+1|Rmax|
1−β
≤ϵ. Then any possible discounted sum of rewards after t time steps is small
enough that optimality over t time steps implies ϵ-optimality over the inﬁnite horizon.
Now recall the above lemma, which states that performing value-preserving transforma-
tions before a backup provides at least as much value as just performing a backup. By an
inductive argument, performing t steps of policy iteration is a value-preserving transforma-
tion of the result of t exhaustive backups. We have argued that for large enough t, the value
of the controller resulting from t exhaustive backups is within ϵ of optimal for all states.
Thus, the result of t steps of policy iteration is also within ϵ of optimal for all states. 2
4.3 Eﬃcient Value-Preserving Transformations
In this section, we describe how to extend controller reductions and bounded backups
to the multiagent case. We will show that both of these operations are value-preserving
transformations.
4.3.1 Controller Reductions
Recall that in the single agent case, a node can be removed if for all belief states, there is
another node with value at least as high. The equivalent dual interpretation is that a node
109

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
can be removed is there exists a convex combination of other nodes with value at least as
high across the entire state space.
Using the dual interpretation, we can extend this to a rule for removing nodes in the
multiagent case. The rule applies to removing nodes either from a local controller or from the
correlation device. Intuitively, in considering the removal of a node from a local controller
or the correlation device, we consider the nodes of the other controllers to be part of the
hidden state.
More precisely, suppose we are considering removing node qi from agent i’s local con-
troller. To do this, we need to ﬁnd a distribution P(ˆqi) over nodes ˆqi ∈Qi \ qi such that for
all s ∈S, q−i ∈Q−i, and qc ∈Qc,
V (s, qi, q−i, qc) ≤
X
ˆqi
P(ˆqi)V (s, ˆqi, q−i, qc).
where Q−i represents the set of nodes for the other agents. Finding such a distribution
can be formulated as a linear program, as shown in Table 6a.
In this case, success is
ﬁnding parameters such that ϵ ≥0. The linear program is polynomial in the sizes of the
DEC-POMDP and controllers, but exponential in the number of agents.
If we are successful in ﬁnding parameters that make ϵ ≥0, then we can merge the
dominated node into the convex combination of other nodes by changing all incoming links
to the dominated controller node to be redirected based on the distribution P(ˆqi). At this
point, there is no chance of ever transitioning into qi, and thus it can be removed.
The rule for the correlation device is very similar. Suppose that we are considering the
removal of node qc. In this case, we need to ﬁnd a distribution P(ˆqc) over nodes ˆqc ∈Qc \qc
such that for all s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q,
V (s, ⃗q, qc) ≤
X
ˆqc
P(ˆqc)V (s, ⃗q, ˆqc).
Note that we abuse notation here and use ⃗Q for the set of tuples of local controller nodes,
excluding the nodes for the correlation device. As in the previous case, ﬁnding parameters
can done using linear programming. This is shown in Table 6b. This linear program is also
polynomial in the the sizes of the DEC-POMDP and controllers, but exponential in the
number of agents.
We have the following theorem, which states that controller reductions are value-preserving
transformations.
Theorem 3 Any controller reduction applied to either a local node or a node of the corre-
lation device is a value-preserving transformation.
Proof:
Suppose that we have replaced an agent i node qi with a distribution over nodes
in Qi \ qi. Let us take fi to be the identity map for all nodes except qi, which will map to
the new distribution. We take fc to be the identity map, and we take fj to be the identity
map for all j ̸= i. This yields a complete mapping f. We must now show that f satisﬁes
the condition given in the deﬁnition of a value-preserving transformation.
110

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
(a) Variables: ϵ, x(ˆqi)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s, q−i, qc
V (s, qi, q−i, qc) + ϵ ≤
X
ˆqi
x(ˆqi)V (s, ˆqi, q−i, qc)
Probability constraints:
X
ˆqi
x(ˆqi) = 1,
∀ˆqi
x(ˆqi) ≥0
(b) Variables: ϵ, x(qc)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s, ⃗q
V (s, ⃗q, qc) + ϵ ≤
X
ˆqc
x(ˆqc)V (s, ⃗q, ˆqc)
Probability constraints:
X
ˆqc
x(ˆqc) = 1,
∀ˆqc
x(ˆqc) ≥0
Table 6: (a) The linear program to be solved to ﬁnd a replacement for agent i’s node qi.
The variable x(ˆqi) represents P(ˆqi). (b) The linear program to be solved to ﬁnd a
replacement for the correlation node qc. The variable x(ˆqc) represents P(ˆqc).
Let Vo be the value function for the original controller, and let Vn be the value function
for the controller with qi removed. A controller reduction requires that
Vo(s, ⃗q) ≤
X
⃗r
P(⃗r|⃗q)Vo(s,⃗r)
for all s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q. Thus, we have
Vo(s, ⃗q)
=
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)Vo(s′, ⃗q ′)


≤
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)
X
⃗r′
P(⃗r|⃗q)Vo(s,⃗r ′)


111

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
=
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′,⃗r′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)P(⃗r|⃗q)Vo(s,⃗r ′)


for all s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q. Notice that the formula on the right is the Bellman operator
for the new controller, applied to the old value function. Denoting this operator Tn, the
system of inequalities implies that TnVo ≥Vo. By monotonicity, we have that for all k ≥0,
T k+1
n
(Vo) ≥T k
n(Vo). Since Vn = limk→∞T k
n(Vo), we have that Vn ≥Vo. This is suﬃcient
for f to satisfy the condition in the deﬁnition of value-preserving transformation.
The argument for removing a node of the correlation device is almost identical to the
one given above. 2
4.3.2 Bounded Dynamic Programming Updates
In the previous section, we described a way to reduce the size of a controller without
sacriﬁcing value. Recall that in the single agent case, we could also use bounded backups
to increase the value of the controller while keeping its size ﬁxed.
This technique can
be extended to the multiagent case. As in the previous section, the extension relies on
improving a single local controller or the correlation device, while viewing the nodes of the
other controllers as part of the hidden state.
We ﬁrst describe in detail how to improve a local controller. To do this, we choose an
agent i, along with a node qi. Then, for each oi ∈Ωi, we search for new parameters for the
conditional distribution P(ai, q′
i|qi, oi).
The search for new parameters works as follows. We assume that the original controller
will be used from the second step on, and try to replace the parameters for qi with better
ones for just the ﬁrst step. In other words, we look for parameters satisfying the following
inequality:
V (s, ⃗q) ≤
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)V (s′, ⃗q ′)


for all s ∈S, q−i ∈Q−i, and qc ∈Qc. The search for new parameters can be formulated as a
linear program, as shown in Table 7a. Its size is polynomial in the sizes of the DEC-POMDP
and the joint controller, but exponential in the number of agents.
The procedure for improving the correlation device is very similar to the procedure for
improving a local controller. We ﬁrst choose a device node qc, and consider changing its
parameters for just the ﬁrst step. We look for parameters satisfying the following inequality:
V (s, ⃗q) ≤
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)V (s′, ⃗q ′)


for all s ∈S and ⃗q ∈⃗Q.
As in the previous case, the search for parameters can be formulated as a linear program.
This is shown in Table 7b. This linear program is also polynomial in the sizes of the DEC-
POMDP and joint controller, but exponential in the number of agents.
The following theorem states that bounded backups preserve value.
112

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
(a) Variables: ϵ, x(qc, ai), x(qc, ai, oi, q′
i)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s, q−i, qc
V (s, ⃗q, qc) + ϵ
≤
X
⃗a
P(a−i|qc, q−i)[x(qc, ai)R(s,⃗a) +
β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q ′,q′c
x(c, ai, oi, q′
i)P(q′
−i|qc, q−i, a−i, o−i)
· P(⃗o, s′|s,⃗a)P(q′
c|qc)V (s′, ⃗q ′, q′
c)]
Probability constraints:
∀qc
X
ai
x(qc, ai) = 1,
∀qc, ai, oi
X
q′
i
x(qc, ai, oi, q′
i) = x(qc, ai)
∀qc, ai
x(qc, ai) ≥0,
∀qc, ai, oi, q′
i
x(qc, ai, oi, q′
i) ≥0
(b) Variables: ϵ, x(q′
c)
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀s, ⃗q
V (s, ⃗q, qc) + ϵ
≤
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|qc, ⃗q)[R(s,⃗a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′,q′c
P(⃗q ′|qc, ⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)
· P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)x(q′
c)V (s′, ⃗q ′, q′
c)]
Probability constraints:
∀q′
c
X
q′c
x(q′
c) = 1,
∀q′
c
x(q′
c) ≥0
Table 7: (a) The linear program used to ﬁnd new parameters for agent i’s node qi. The
variable x(qc, ai) represents P(ai|qi, qc), and the variable x(qc, ai, oi, q′
i) represents
P(ai, q′
i|qc, qi, oi).
(b) The linear program used to ﬁnd new parameters for the
correlation device node qc. The variable x(q′
c) represents P(q′
c|qc).
113

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
Theorem 4 Performing a bounded backup on a local controller or the correlation device
produces a new correlated joint controller which is a value-preserving transformation of the
original.
Proof:
Consider the case in which some node qi of agent i’s local controller is changed.
We deﬁne f to be a deterministic mapping from nodes in the original controller to the
corresponding nodes in the new controller.
Let Vo be the value function for the original controller, and let Vn be the value function
for the new controller. Recall that the new parameters for P(ai, q′
i|qc, qi, oi) must satisfy
the following inequality for all s ∈S, q−i ∈Q−i, and qc ∈Qc:
Vo(s, ⃗q) ≤
X
⃗a
P(⃗a|⃗q)

R(s, a) + β
X
s′,⃗o,⃗q′
P(⃗q ′|⃗q,⃗a,⃗o)P(s′,⃗o|s,⃗a)Vo(s′, ⃗q ′)

.
Notice that the formula on the right is the Bellman operator for the new controller, applied
to the old value function. Denoting this operator Tn, the system of inequalities implies
that TnVo ≥Vo. By monotonicity, we have that for all k ≥0, T k+1
n
(Vo) ≥T k
n(Vo). Since
Vn = limk→∞T k
n(Vo), we have that Vn ≥Vo. Thus, the new controller is a value-preserving
transformation of the original one.
The argument for changing nodes of the correlation device is almost identical to the one
given above. 2
4.4 Open Issues
We noted at the beginning of the section that there is no known way to convert a DEC-
POMDP into an equivalent belief-state MDP. Despite this fact, we were able to develop
a provably convergent policy iteration algorithm. However, the policy iteration algorithm
for POMDPs has other desirable properties besides convergence, and we have not yet been
able to extend these to the multiagent case. Two such properties are described below.
4.4.1 Error Bounds
The ﬁrst property is the existence of a Bellman residual.
In the single agent case, it
is possible to compute a bound on the distance to optimality using two successive value
functions. In the multiagent case, policy iteration produces a sequence of controllers, each
of which has a value function. However, we do not have a way to obtain an error bound
from these value functions. For now, to bound the distance to optimality, we must consider
the discount rate and the number of iterations completed.
4.4.2 Avoiding Exhaustive Backups
In performing a DP update for POMDPs, it is possible to remove certain nodes from
consideration without ﬁrst generating them. In Section 3, we gave a high-level description
of a few diﬀerent approaches to doing this. For DEC-POMDPs, however, we did not deﬁne
a DP update and instead used exhaustive backups as the way to expand a controller. Since
exhaustive backups are expensive, it would be useful to extend the more sophisticated
pruning methods for POMDPs to the multiagent case.
114

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Input: A joint controller, the desired number of centralized belief points k, initial state
b0 and ﬁxed policy for each agent πi.
1. Starting from b0, sample a set of k belief points for each agent assuming the other
agents use their ﬁxed policy.
2. Evaluate the joint controller by solving a system of linear equations.
3. Perform an exhaustive backup to add deterministic nodes to the local controllers.
4. Retain nodes that contribute the highest value at each of the belief points.
5. For each agent, replace nodes that have lower value than some combination of other
nodes at each belief point.
6. If controller sizes and parameters do not change then terminate. Else go to step 2.
Output: A new joint controller based on the sampled centralized belief points.
Table 8: Heuristic Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs.
Unfortunately, in the case of POMDPs, the proofs of correctness for these methods all
use the fact that there exists a Bellman equation. Roughly speaking, this equation allows us
to determine whether a potential node is dominated by just analyzing the nodes that would
be its successors. Because we do not currently have an analog of the Bellman equation for
DEC-POMDPs, we have not been able to generalize these results.
There is one exception to the above statement, however. When an exhaustive backup
has been performed for all agents except one, then a type of belief state space can be
constructed for the agent in question using the system states and the nodes for the other
agents. The POMDP node generation methods can then be applied to just that agent. In
general, though, it seems diﬃcult to rule out a node for one agent before generating all the
nodes for the other agents.
5. Heuristic Policy Iteration
While the optimal policy iteration method shows how a set of controllers with value arbi-
trarily close to optimal can be found, the resulting controllers may be very large and many
unnecessary nodes may be generated along the way. This is exacerbated by the fact that
the algorithm cannot take advantage of an initial state distribution and must attempt to
improve the controller for any initial state. As a way to combat these disadvantages, we
have developed a heuristic version of policy iteration that removes nodes based on their
value only at a given set of centralized belief points. We call these centralized belief points
because they are distributions over the system state that in general could only be known
by full observability of the problem. As a result, the algorithm will no longer be optimal,
but it can often produce more concise controllers with higher solution quality for a given
initial state distribution.
115

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
5.1 Directed Pruning
Our heuristic policy iteration algorithm uses sets of belief points to direct the pruning pro-
cess of our algorithm. There are two main advantages of this approach: it allows simultane-
ous pruning for all agents and it focuses the controller on certain areas of the belief space.
We ﬁrst discuss the beneﬁts of simultaneous pruning and then mention the advantages of
focusing on small areas of the belief space.
As mentioned above, the pruning method used by the optimal algorithm will not always
remove all nodes that could be removed from all the agents’ controllers without losing
value. Because pruning requires each agent to consider the controllers of other agents, after
nodes are removed for one agent, the other agents may be able to prune other nodes. Thus
pruning must cycle through the agents and ceases when no agent can remove any further
nodes. This is both time consuming and causes the controller to be much larger than it
needs to be.
Like the game theoretic concept of incredible threats1, a set of suboptimal policies for
an agent may be useful only because other agents may employ similarly suboptimal poli-
cies. That is, because pruning is conducted for each agent while holding the other agents’
policies ﬁxed, polices that are useful for any set of other agent policies are retained, no
matter the quality of these other agent policies. Some of an agent’s policies may only be
retained because they have the highest value when used in conjunction with other subop-
timal policies of the other agents. In these cases, only by removing the set of suboptimal
policies simultaneously can controller size be reduced while at least maintaining value. This
simultaneous pruning could further reduce controller sizes and thus increase scalability and
solution quality. While it may be possible to deﬁne a value-preserving transformation for
these problems, ﬁnding a nontrivial automated way to do so while maintaining the opti-
mality of the algorithm remains an open question.
The advantage of considering a smaller part of the state space has already been shown
to produce drastic performance increases in POMDPs (Ji, Parr, Li, Liao, & Carin, 2007;
Pineau, Gordon, & Thrun, 2003) and ﬁnite-horizon DEC-POMDPs (Seuken & Zilberstein,
2007; Szer & Charpillet, 2006). For POMDPs, a problem with many states has a belief
space with large dimensionality, but many parts may never be visited by an optimal policy.
Focusing on a subset of belief states can allow a large part of the state space to be ignored
without signiﬁcant loss of solution quality.
The problem of having a large state space is compounded in the DEC-POMDP case.
Not only is there uncertainty about the state, but also about the policies of the other agents.
As a consequence, the generalized belief space which includes all possible distributions over
states of the system and current policies of the other agents must be considered to guarantee
optimality. This results in a huge space which contains many unlikely states and policies.
The uncertainty about which policies other agents may utilize does not allow belief updates
to normally be calculated for DEC-POMDPs, but as we showed above, it can be done by
assuming a probability distribution over actions of the other agents. This limits the number
of policies that need to be considered by all agents and if the distributions are chosen well,
may permit a high-valued solution to be found.
1. An incredible threat is an irrational strategy that the agent knows it will receive a lower value by choosing
it. While it is possible the agent will choose the incredible threat strategy, it is irrational to do so.
116

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Variables: ϵ, x(ˆqi) and for each belief point b
Objective: Maximize ϵ
Improvement constraints:
∀b, q−i
X
s
b(s)
 X
ˆqi
x(ˆqi)V (ˆqi, q−i, s) −V (⃗q, s)

≥ϵ
Probability constraints:
X
ˆqi
x(ˆqi) = 1 and ∀ˆqi x(qi) ≥0
Table 9: The linear program used to determine if a node q for agent i is dominated at
each point b and all initial nodes of the other agents’ controllers.
As node q
may be dominated by a distribution of nodes, variable x(ˆqi) represents P(ˆqi), the
probability of starting in node ˆq for agent i.
5.2 Belief Set Generation
As mentioned above, our heuristic policy iteration algorithm constructs sets of belief points
for each agent which are later used to evaluate the joint controller and remove dominated
nodes. To generate the belief point set, we start at the initial state and by making assump-
tions about the other agents, we can calculate the resulting belief state for each action and
observation pair of an agent. By ﬁxing the policies for the other agents, this belief state up-
date can be calculated in a way very similar to that described for POMDPs in section 3.1.1.
This procedure can be repeated from each resulting belief state until a desired number of
points is generated or no new points are visited.
More formally, we assume the other agents have a ﬁxed distribution of action choice for
each system state. That is, if we know P(⃗a−i|s) then we can determine the probability any
state results given a belief point and an agent’s action and observation. The derivation of
the likelihood of state s′, given the belief state b, and agent i’s action ai and observation oi
is shown below.
P(s′|ai, oi, b)
=
X
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s
P(s′,⃗a−i,⃗o−i, s|ai, oi, b)
=
P
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s P(⃗o|s, b,⃗a, s′)P(s′, s,⃗a, b)
P(oi, ai, b)
=
P
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s P(⃗o|s,⃗a, s′)P(s′|s,⃗a, b)P(⃗a, s, b)
P(oi, ai, b)
=
P
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s P(⃗o|s,⃗a, s′)P(s′|s,⃗a)P(⃗a−i|a, s, b)P(⃗a, s, b)
P(oi, ai, b)
=
P
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s P(⃗o|s,⃗a, s′)P(s′|s,⃗a)P(⃗a−i|ai, s, b)P(s|ai, b)P(ai, b)
P(oi, ai, b)
117

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
=
P
⃗a−i,⃗o−i,s P(⃗o|s,⃗a, s′)P(s′|s,⃗a)P(⃗a−i|s)b(s)
P(oi|ai, b)
where
P(oi|ai, b) =
X
a−i,o−i,s,s′
P(⃗o|s,⃗a, s′)P(s′|s,⃗a)P(⃗a−i|s)b(s)
Thus, given the action probabilities for the other agents, −i, and the transition and obser-
vation models of the system, a belief state update can be calculated.
5.3 Algorithmic Framework
We provide a formal description of our approach in Table 8. Given the desired number
of belief points, k, and random action and observation selection for each agent, the sets
of points are generated as described above. The search begins at the initial state of the
problem and continues until the given number of points is obtained. If no new points are
found, this process can be repeated to ensure a diverse set is produced. The arbitrary initial
controller is evaluated and the value at each state and for each initial node of any agent’s
controller is retained. The exhaustive backup procedure is exactly the same as the one used
in the optimal algorithm, but updating the controller takes place in two steps. First, for
each of the k belief points, the highest-valued set of initial nodes is found. To accomplish
this, the value of beginning at each combination of nodes for all agents is calculated for each
of these k points and the best combination is kept. This allows nodes that do not contribute
to any of these values to be simultaneously pruned. Next, each node of each agent is pruned
using the linear program shown in Table 9. If a distribution of nodes for the given agent has
higher value at each of the belief points for any initial nodes of the other agents’ controllers,
it is pruned and replaced with that distribution. The new controllers are then evaluated
and the value is compared with the value of the previous controller. This process of backing
up and pruning continues while the controller parameters continue to change.
Similar to how bounded policy updates can be used in conjunction with pruning in the
optimal policy iteration algorithm, a nonlinear programming approach (Amato et al., 2007)
can be used to improve solution quality for the heuristic case. To accomplish this, instead of
optimizing the controller for just the initial belief state of the problem, all the belief points
being considered are used. A simple way to achieve this is to maximize over the sum of
the values of the initial nodes of the controllers weighted by the probabilities given for each
point. This approach can be used after each pruning step and may further improve value
of the controllers.
6. Dynamic Programming Experiments
This section describes the results of experiments performed using policy iteration. Because
of the ﬂexibility of the algorithm, it is impossible to explore all possible ways of implementing
it. However, we did experiment with a few diﬀerent implementation strategies to gain an
idea of how the algorithm works in practice. All of these experiments were run on a 3.40GHz
Intel Pentium 4 with 2GB of memory. Three main sets of experiments were performed on
a single set of test problems.
118

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Our ﬁrst set of experiments focused on exhaustive backups and controller reductions.
The results conﬁrm that value improvement can be obtained through iterated application of
these two operations. Further improvement is demonstrated by also incorporating bounded
updates. However, because exhaustive backups are expensive, the algorithm was unable to
complete more than a few iterations on any of our test problems.
In the second set of experiments, we addressed the complexity issues by using only
bounded backups, and no exhaustive backups. With bounded backups, we were able to
obtain higher-valued controllers while keeping memory requirements ﬁxed. We examined
how the sizes of the initial local controllers and the correlation device aﬀected the value of
the ﬁnal solution.
The third set of experiments examined the complexity issues caused by exhaustive back-
ups by using the point-based heuristic. This allowed our heuristic policy iteration algorithm
to complete more iterations than the optimal algorithm and in doing so, increased solution
quality of the largest solvable controllers. By incorporating Amato et al.’s NLP approach,
the heuristic algorithm becomes slightly less scalable than with heuristic pruning alone, but
the amount of value improvement per step increases. This causes the resulting controllers
in each domain to have the highest value of any approach.
6.1 Test Domains
In this section, we describe three test domains, ordered by the size of the problem rep-
resentation. For each problem, the transition function, observation function, and reward
functions are described. In addition, an initial state is speciﬁed. Although policy iteration
does not require an initial state as input, one is commonly assumed and is used by the
heuristic version of the algorithm. A few diﬀerent initial states were tried for each problem,
and qualitatively similar results were obtained. In all domains, a discount factor of 0.9 was
utilized.
As a very loose upper bound, the centralized policy was calculated for each problem in
which all agents share their observations with a central agent and decisions for all agents are
made by the central agent. This results in a POMDP with the same number of states, but
the action and observation sets are Cartesian products of the agents action and observation
sets. The value of this POMDP policy is provided below, but because DEC-POMDP policies
are more constrained, the optimal value may be much lower.
Two Agent Tiger Problem
The two agent tiger problem consists of 2 states, 3 actions and 2 observations (Nair et al.,
2003). The domain includes two doors, one of which leads to a tiger and the other to a large
treasure. Each agent may open one of the doors or listen. If either agent opens the door
with the tiger behind it, a large penalty is given. If the door with the treasure behind it is
opened and the tiger door is not, a reward is given. If both agents choose the same action
(i.e., both opening the same door) a larger positive reward or a smaller penalty is given to
reward cooperation. If an agent listens, a small penalty is given and an observation is seen
that is a noisy indication of which door the tiger is behind. While listening does not change
the location of the tiger, opening a door causes the tiger to be placed behind one of the
119

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
door with equal probability. The problem begins with the tiger equally likely to be located
behind either door. The optimal centralized policy for this problem has value 59.817.
Meeting on a Grid
In this problem, with 16 states, 5 actions and 4 observations, two robots must navigate on a
two-by-two grid. Each robot can only sense whether there are walls to its left or right, and
their goal is to spend as much time as possible on the same square as the other agent. The
actions are to move up, down, left, or right, or to stay on the same square. When a robot
attempts to move to an open square, it only goes in the intended direction with probability
0.6, otherwise it either goes in another direction or stays in the same square. Any move
into a wall results in staying in the same square. The robots do not interfere with each
other and cannot sense each other. The reward is 1 when the agents share a square, and
0 otherwise. The initial state places the robots diagonally across from each other and the
optimal centralized policy for this problem has value 7.129.
Box Pushing Problem
This problem, with 100 states, 4 actions and 5 observations consists of two agents that
get rewarded by pushing diﬀerent boxes (Seuken & Zilberstein, 2007). The agents begin
facing each other in the bottom corners of a four-by-three grid with the available actions of
turning right, turning left, moving forward or staying in place. There is a 0.9 probability
that the agent will succeed in moving and otherwise will stay in place, but the two agents
can never occupy the same square. The middle row of the grid contains one large box in the
middle of two small boxes. The small boxes can be moved by a single agent, but the large
box can only be moved by both agents pushing at the same time. The upper row of the
grid is considered the goal row, which the boxes are pushed into. The possible deterministic
observations for each agent consist of seeing an empty space, a wall, the other agent, a small
box or the large box. A reward of 100 is given if both agents push the large box to the
goal row and 10 is given for each small box that is moved to the goal row. A penalty of -5
is given for each agent that cannot move and -0.1 is given for each time step. Once a box
is moved to the goal row, the environment resets to the original start state. The optimal
centralized policy for this problem has value 183.936.
6.2 Exhaustive Backups and Controller Reductions
In this section, we present the results of using exhaustive backups together with controller
reductions. For each domain, the initial controllers for each agent contained a single node
with a self loop, and there was no correlation device. For each problem, the ﬁrst action
of the problem description was used. This resulted in the repeated actions of opening the
left door in the two agent tiger problem, moving up in the meeting on a grid problem and
turning left in the box pushing problem. The reason for starting with the smallest possible
controllers was to see how many iterations we could complete before running out of memory.
On each iteration, we performed an exhaustive backup, and then alternated between
agents, performing controller reductions until no more nodes could be removed. For bounded
dynamic programming results, after the reductions were completed bounded updates were
also performed for all agents. For these experiments, we attempted to improve the nodes of
120

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
Two Agent Tiger, |S| = 2, |Ai| = 3, |Ωi| = 2
Iteration
Exhaustive Sizes
Controller Reductions
Bounded Updates
0
(1, 1)
-150 (1,1 in 1s)
-150 (1,1 in 1s)
1
(3, 3)
-137 (3,3 in 1s)
-20 (3,3 in 12s)
2
(27, 27)
-117.8 (15, 15 in 7s)
-20 (15, 15 in 89s)
3
(2187, 2187)
-98.9 (255, 255 in 1301s)
-20* (255, 255 in 3145s)
Meeting on a Grid, |S| = 16, |Ai| = 5, |Ωi| = 4
Iteration
Exhaustive Sizes
Controller Reductions
Bounded Updates
0
(1, 1)
2.8 (1,1 in 1s)
2.8 (1,1 in 1s)
1
(5, 5)
3.4 (5,5 in 7s)
3.8 (5,5 in 145s)
2
(3125, 3125)
3.7 (80,80 in 821s)
4.78* (125,125 in 1204s)
Box Pushing, |S| = 100, |Ai| = 4, |Ωi| = 5
Iteration
Exhaustive Sizes
Controller Reductions
Bounded Updates
0
(1, 1)
-2 (1,1 in 4s)
-2 (1,1 in 53s)
1
(4, 4)
-2 (2,2 in 108s)
6.3 (2,2 in 132s)
2
(4096, 4096)
12.8 (9,9 in 755s)
42.7* (16,17 in 714s)
Table 10: Results of applying exhaustive backups, controller reductions and bounded up-
dates to our test problems. The second column contains the sizes of the controllers
if only exhaustive backups had been performed. The third column contains the
resulting value, sizes of the controllers, and time required for controller reductions
to be performed on each iteration. The fourth column displays these same quan-
tities with bounded updates also being used. The * denotes that a backup and
pruning were performed, but bounded updates exhausted the given resources.
each agent in turn until value could not be improved for any node of any agent. For each
iteration, we recorded the sizes of the controllers produced, and noted what the sizes would
be if no controller reductions had been performed. In addition, we recorded the value from
the initial state and the total time taken to reach the given result.
The results are shown in Table 10. Because exhaustive backups add many nodes, we
were unable to complete many iterations without exceeding memory limits. As expected,
the smallest problem led to the largest number of iterations being completed. Although
we could not complete many iterations before running out of memory, the use of controller
reductions led to signiﬁcantly smaller controllers compared to the approach of just applying
exhaustive backups. Incorporating bounded updates requires some extra time, but is able
to improve the value produced at each step, causing substantial improvement in some cases.
It is also interesting to notice that the controller sizes when using bounded updates are
not always the same as when only controller reductions are completed. This can be seen
after two iterations in both the meeting on a grid and box pushing problems. This can
occur because the bounded updates change node value and thus change the number and
location of the nodes that are pruned. In the box pushing problem, the two agents also
121

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
have diﬀerent size controllers after two steps. This can occur, even in symmetric problems,
when a set of actions is only necessary for a single agent.
6.3 Bounded Dynamic Programming Updates
As we saw from the previous experiments, exhaustive backups can ﬁll up memory very
quickly. This leads naturally to the question of how much improvement is possible without
exhaustive backups. In this section, we describe an experiment in which we repeatedly
applied bounded backups, which left the size of the controller ﬁxed. We experimented with
diﬀerent starting sizes for the local controllers and the correlation device.
We deﬁne a trial run of the algorithm as follows. At the start of a trial run, a size is
chosen for each of the local controllers and the correlation device. The action selection and
transition functions are initialized to be deterministic, with the outcomes drawn according
to a uniform distribution. A step consists of choosing a node uniformly at random from the
correlation device or one of the local controllers, and performing a bounded backup on that
node. After 200 steps, the run is considered over. In practice, we found that values often
stabilized in fewer steps.
We varied the sizes of the local controllers while maintaining the same number of nodes
for each agent, and we varied the size of the correlation device from 1 to 2. For each domain,
we increased number of nodes until the required number of steps could not be completed
in under four hours. In general, runs required signiﬁcantly less time to terminate. For each
combination of sizes, we performed 20 trial runs and recorded the best value over all runs.
For each of the three problems, we were able to obtain solutions with higher value than
with exhaustive backups. Thus, we see that even though repeated application of bounded
backups does not have an optimality guarantee, it can be competitive with an algorithm that
does. However, it should be noted that we have not performed an exhaustive comparison.
We could have made diﬀerent design decisions for both approaches concerning the starting
controllers, the order in which nodes are considered, and other factors.
Besides comparing to the exhaustive backup approach, we wanted to examine the eﬀect
of the sizes of the local controllers and the correlation device on value. Figure 8 shows
a graph of best values plotted against controller size. We found that, for the most part,
the value increases when we increase the size of the correlation device from one node to
two nodes (essentially moving from independent to correlated). It is worth noting that the
solution quality had somewhat high variance in each problem, showing that setting good
initial parameters is important for high-valued solutions.
For small controllers, the best value tends to increase with controller size. However, for
very large controllers, this not always the case. This can be explained by considering how a
bounded backup works. For new node parameters to be acceptable, they must not decrease
the value for any combination of states, nodes for the other controllers, and nodes for the
correlation device. This becomes more diﬃcult as the numbers of nodes increase, and thus
it is easier to get stuck in a local optimum. This can be readily seen in the two agent tiger
problem and to some extent the meeting on a grid problem. Memory was exhausted before
this phenomenon takes place in the box pushing problem.
122

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8: Best value per trial run plotted against the size of the local controllers, for (a)
the two agent tiger problem, (b) the meeting in a grid problem and (c) the box
pushing problem. The solid line represents independent controllers (a correlation
device with one node), and the dotted line represents a joint controller including a
two-node correlation device. Times ranged from under 1s for one node controllers
without correlation to four hours for the largest controller found with correlation
in each problem.
6.4 Heuristic Dynamic Programming Updates
As observed above, the optimal dynamic programming approach can only complete a small
number of backups before resources are exhausted. Similarly, using bounded updates with
ﬁxed size controllers can generate high value solutions, but it can be diﬃcult to pick the
correct controller size and initial parameters. As an alternative to the other approaches, we
also present experiments using our heuristic dynamic programming algorithm.
Like the optimal policy iteration experiments, we initialized single node controllers for
each agent with self loops and no correlation device. The same ﬁrst actions were used as
above and backups were performed until memory was exhausted. The set of belief points
for each problem was generated given the initial state distribution and a distribution of
actions for the other agents. For the meeting on a grid and box pushing problems, it was
123

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
assumed that all agents chose any action with equal probability regardless of state. For the
two agent tiger problem, it was assumed that for any state agents listen with probability 0.8
and open each door with probability 0.1. This simple heuristic policy was chosen to allow
more of the state space to be sampled by our search. The number of belief points used for
the two agent tiger and meeting on a grid problems was ten and twenty points were used
for the box pushing problem.
For each iteration, we performed an exhaustive backup and then pruned controllers as
described in steps four and ﬁve of Table 8. All the nodes that contributed to the highest
value for each belief point were retained and then each node was examined using the linear
program in Table 9.
For results with the NLP approach, we also improved the set of
controllers after heuristic pruning by optimizing a nonlinear program whose objective was
the sum of the values of the initial nodes weighted by the belief point probabilities. We
report the value produced by the optimal and heuristic approaches for each iteration that
could be completed in under four hours and with the memory limits of the machine used.
The nonlinear optimization was performed on the NEOS server, which provides a set of
machines with varying CPU speeds and memory limitations.
The values for each iteration of each problem are given in Figure 9. We see the heuris-
tic policy iteration (HPI) methods are able to complete more iterations than the optimal
methods and as a consequence produce higher values. In fact, the results from HPI are
almost always exactly the same as those for the optimal policy iteration algorithm without
bounded updates for all iterations that can be completed by the optimal approach. Thus,
improvement occurs primarily due to the larger number of backups that can be performed.
We also see that while incorporating bounded updates improves value for the optimal
algorithm, incorporating the NLP approach into the heuristic approach produces even higher
value.
Optimizing the NLP requires a small time overhead, but substantially increases
value on each iteration. This results in the highest controller value in each problem. Using
the NLP also allows our heuristic policy iteration to converge to a six node controller for
each agent in the two agent tiger problem. Unfortunately, this solution is known to be
suboptimal. As an heuristic algorithm, this is not unexpected, and it should be noted that
even suboptimal solutions by the heuristic approach outperform all other methods in all
our test problems.
6.5 Discussion
We have demonstrated how policy iteration can be used to improve both correlated and
independent joint controllers. We showed that using controller reductions together with
exhaustive backups is more eﬃcient in terms of memory than using exhaustive backups
alone. However, due to the complexity of exhaustive backups, even that approach could
only complete a few iterations on each of our test problems.
Using bounded backups alone provided a good way to deal with the complexity issues.
With bounded backups, we were able to ﬁnd higher-valued policies than with the previous
approach. Through our experiments, we were able to understand how the sizes of the local
controllers and correlation device aﬀect the ﬁnal values obtained.
With our heuristic policy iteration algorithm, we demonstrated further improvement by
dealing with some of the complexity issues. The heuristic approach is often able to continue
124

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9: Comparison of the dynamic programming algorithms on (a) the two agent tiger
problem, (b) the meeting in a grid problem and (c) the box pushing problem.
The value produced by policy iteration with and without bounded backups as
well as our heuristic policy iteration with and without optimizing the NLP were
compared on each iteration until the time or memory limit was reached.
improving solution quality past the point where the optimal algorithm exhausts resources.
More eﬃcient use of this limited representation size is achieved by incorporating the NLP
approach as well. In fact, the heuristic algorithm with NLP improvements at each step
provided results that are at least equal to the highest value obtained in each problem and
sometimes were markedly higher than the other approaches. Furthermore, as far as we
know, these results are the highest published values for all three of the test domains.
7. Conclusion
We present a policy iteration algorithm for DEC-POMDPs. The algorithm uses a novel pol-
icy representation consisting of stochastic ﬁnite-state controllers for each agent along with
a correlation device. We deﬁne value-preserving transformations and show that alternating
between exhaustive backups and value-preserving transformations leads to convergence to
125

Bernstein, Amato, Hansen, & Zilberstein
optimality. We also extend controller reductions and bounded backups from the single agent
case to the multiagent case. Both of these operations are value-preserving transformations
and are provably eﬃcient. Finally, we introduced a heuristic version of our algorithm which
is more scalable and produces higher values on our test problems. Our algorithm serves as
the ﬁrst nontrivial exact algorithm for DEC-POMDPs, and provides a bridge to the large
body of work on dynamic programming for POMDPs.
Our work provides a solid foundation for solving DEC-POMDPs, but much work remains
in addressing more challenging problem instances. We focused on solving general DEC-
POMDPs, but the eﬃciency of our approaches could be improved by using structure found
in certain problems. This would allow specialized representations and solution techniques
to be incorporated. Below we describe some key challenges of our general approach, along
with some preliminary algorithmic ideas to extend our work on policy iteration.
Approximation with Error Bounds
Often, strict optimality requirements cause com-
putational diﬃculties. A good compromise is to search for policies that are within some
bound of optimal. Our framework is easily generalized to allow for this.
Instead of a value-preserving transformation, we could deﬁne an ϵ-value-preserving trans-
formation, which insures that the value at all states decreases by at most ϵ. We can perform
such transformations with no modiﬁcations to any of our linear programs. We simply need
to relax the requirement on the value for ϵ that is returned. It is easily shown that using
an ϵ-value-preserving transformation at each step leads to convergence to a policy that is
within
ϵβ
1−β of optimal for all states.
For controller reductions, relaxing the tolerance may lead to smaller controllers because
some value can be sacriﬁced. For bounded backups, it may help in escaping from local
optima. Though relaxing the tolerance for a bounded backup could lead to a decrease in
value for some states, a small “downward” step could lead to higher value overall in the
long run. We are currently working on testing these hypotheses empirically.
General-Sum Games
In a general-sum game, there is a set of agents, each with its own
set of strategies, and a strategy proﬁle is deﬁned to be a tuple of strategies for all agents.
Each agent assigns a payoﬀto each strategy proﬁle. The agents may be noncooperative, so
the same strategy proﬁle may be assigned diﬀerent values for each agent.
The DEC-POMDP model can be extended to a general-sum game by allowing each
agent to have its own reward function. In this case, the strategies are the local policies, and
a strategy proﬁle is a joint policy. This model is often called a partially observable stochastic
game (POSG). Hansen et al. (2004) presented a dynamic programming algorithm for ﬁnite-
horizon POSGs. The algorithm was shown to perform iterated elimination of dominated
strategies in the game. Roughly speaking, it eliminates strategies that are not useful for an
agent, regardless of the strategies of the other agents.
Work remains to be done on extending the notion of a value-preserving transformation
to the noncooperative case. One possibility is to redeﬁne value-preserving transformations
so that value is preserved for all agents.
This is closely related to the idea of Pareto
optimality. In a general-sum game, a strategy proﬁle is said to be Pareto optimal if there
does not exist another strategy proﬁle that yields higher payoﬀfor all agents. It seems that
policy iteration using the revised deﬁnition of value-preserving transformation would tend
to move the controller in the direction of the Pareto optimal set. Another possibility is
126

Policy Iteration for DEC-POMDPs
to deﬁne value-preserving transformations with respect to speciﬁc agents. As each agent
transforms its own controller, the joint controller should move towards a Nash equilibrium.
Handling Large Numbers of Agents
The general DEC-POMDP representation pre-
sented in this paper grows exponentially with the number of agents, as seen in the growth
of the set of joint actions and observations as well as the transition, reward and observation
functions. Thus this representation is not feasible for large numbers of agents. However,
a compact representation is possible if each agent interacts directly with just a few other
agents. We can have a separate state space for each agent, factored transition probabilities,
and a reward function that is the sum of local reward functions for clusters of agents. In
this case, the problem size is exponential only in the maximum number of agents interacting
directly. This idea is closely related to recent work on graphical games (La Mura, 2000;
Koller & Milch, 2003).
Once we have a compact representation, the next question to answer is whether we
can adapt policy iteration to work eﬃciently with the representation. This indeed seems
possible. With the value-preserving transformations we presented, the nodes of the other
agents are considered part of the hidden state of the agent under consideration. These
techniques modify the controller of the agent to get value improvement for all possible
hidden states. When an agent’s state transitions and rewards do not depend on some other
agent, it should not need to consider that agent’s nodes as part of its hidden state. A
speciﬁc compact representation along with extensions of diﬀerent algorithms was proposed
by Nair et al. (2005).
