Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHM SELECTION
Romain Laroche1 and Raphaël Féraud2
1 Microsoft Research Maluuba, Montréal, Canada
2 Orange Labs, Lannion, France
ABSTRACT
This paper formalises the problem of online algorithm selection in the context of
Reinforcement Learning. The setup is as follows: given an episodic task and a
ﬁnite number of off-policy RL algorithms, a meta-algorithm has to decide which
RL algorithm is in control during the next episode so as to maximize the expected
return. The article presents a novel meta-algorithm, called Epochal Stochastic
Bandit Algorithm Selection (ESBAS). Its principle is to freeze the policy updates
at each epoch, and to leave a rebooted stochastic bandit in charge of the algorithm
selection. Under some assumptions, a thorough theoretical analysis demonstrates
its near-optimality considering the structural sampling budget limitations. ESBAS
is ﬁrst empirically evaluated on a dialogue task where it is shown to outperform
each individual algorithm in most conﬁgurations. ESBAS is then adapted to a true
online setting where algorithms update their policies after each transition, which
we call SSBAS. SSBAS is evaluated on a fruit collection task where it is shown to
adapt the stepsize parameter more efﬁciently than the classical hyperbolic decay,
and on an Atari game, where it improves the performance by a wide margin.
1
INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (1998)) is a machine learning framework for optimising
the behaviour of an agent interacting with an unknown environment. For the most practical problems,
such as dialogue or robotics, trajectory collection is costly and sample efﬁciency is the main key
performance indicator. Consequently, when applying RL to a new problem, one must carefully choose
in advance a model, a representation, an optimisation technique and their parameters. Facing the
complexity of choice, RL and domain expertise is not sufﬁcient. Confronted to the cost of data, the
popular trial and error approach shows its limits.
We develop an online learning version (Gagliolo & Schmidhuber, 2006; 2010) of Algorithm Selection
(AS, Rice (1976); Smith-Miles (2009); Kotthoff (2012)). It consists in testing several algorithms on
the task and in selecting the best one at a given time. For clarity, throughout the whole article, the
algorithm selector is called a meta-algorithm, and the set of algorithms available to the meta-algorithm
is called a portfolio. The meta-algorithm maximises an objective function such as the RL return.
Beyond the sample efﬁciency objective, the online AS approach besides addresses four practical
problems for online RL-based systems. First, it improves robustness: if an algorithm fails to terminate,
or outputs to an aberrant policy, it will be dismissed and others will be selected instead. Second,
convergence guarantees and empirical efﬁciency may be united by covering the empirically efﬁcient
algorithms with slower algorithms that have convergence guarantees. Third, it enables curriculum
learning: shallow models control the policy in the early stages, while deep models discover the best
solution in late stages. And four, it allows to deﬁne an objective function that is not an RL return.
A fair algorithm selection implies a fair budget allocation between the algorithms, so that they can
be equitably evaluated and compared. In order to comply with this requirement, the reinforcement
algorithms in the portfolio are assumed to be off-policy, and are trained on every trajectory, regardless
which algorithm controls it. Section 2 provides a unifying view of RL algorithms, that allows infor-
mation sharing between algorithms, whatever their state representations and optimisation techniques.
It also formalises the problem of online selection of off-policy RL algorithms.
Next, Section 3 presents the Epochal Stochastic Bandit AS (ESBAS), a novel meta-algorithm
addressing the online off-policy RL AS problem. Its principle is to divide the time-scale into epochs
1
arXiv:1701.08810v3  [stat.ML]  14 Nov 2017

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
of exponential length inside which the algorithms are not allowed to update their policies. During
each epoch, the algorithms have therefore a constant policy and a stochastic multi-armed bandit
can be in charge of the AS with strong pseudo-regret theoretical guaranties. A thorough theoretical
analysis provides for ESBAS upper bounds. Then, Section 4 empirically evaluates ESBAS on a
dialogue task where it is shown to outperform each individual algorithm in most conﬁgurations.
Afterwards, in Section 5, ESBAS, which is initially designed for a growing batch RL setting, is
adapted to a true online setting where algorithms update their policies after each transition, which we
call SSBAS. It is evaluated on a fruit collection task where it is shown to adapt the stepsize parameter
more efﬁciently than the classical hyperbolic decay, and on Q*bert, where running several DQN with
different network size and depth in parallel allows to improve the ﬁnal performance by a wide margin.
Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with prospective ideas of improvement.
2
ALGORITHM SELECTION FOR RL
2.1
UNIFYING VIEW OF RL ALGORITHMS
Agent
Stochastic
environment
a(t)
o(t + 1)
r(t + 1)
Figure 1: RL framework: after performing action
a(t), the agent perceives observation o(t + 1) and
receives reward r(t + 1).
The goal of this section is to enable information
sharing between algorithms, even though they
are considered as black boxes. We propose to
share their trajectories expressed in a universal
format: the interaction process.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) consists in learning through trial and error to control an agent behaviour
in a stochastic environment: at each time step t ∈N, the agent performs an action a(t) ∈A, and then
perceives from its environment a signal o(t) ∈Ωcalled observation, and receives a reward r(t) ∈R,
bounded between Rmin and Rmax. Figure 1 illustrates the RL framework. This interaction process is
not Markovian: the agent may have an internal memory.
In this article, the RL problem is assumed to be episodic. Let us introduce two time scales with
different notations. First, let us deﬁne meta-time as the time scale for AS: at one meta-time τ
corresponds a meta-algorithm decision, i.e. the choice of an algorithm and the generation of a full
episode controlled with the policy determined by the chosen algorithm. Its realisation is called
a trajectory. Second, RL-time is deﬁned as the time scale inside a trajectory, at one RL-time t
corresponds one triplet composed of an observation, an action, and a reward.
Let E denote the space of trajectories. A trajectory ετ ∈E collected at meta-time τ is formalised
as a sequence of (observation, action, reward) triplets: ετ = ⟨oτ(t), aτ(t), rτ(t)⟩t∈J1,|ετ |K ∈E,
where |ετ| is the length of trajectory ετ. The objective is, given a discount factor 0 ≤γ < 1,
to generate trajectories with high discounted cumulative reward, also called return, and noted
µ(ετ) = P|ετ |
t=1 γt−1rτ(t). Since γ < 1 and R is bounded, the return is also bounded. The trajectory
set at meta-time T is denoted by DT = {ετ}τ∈J1,T K ∈ET . A sub-trajectory of ετ until RL-time t is
called the history at RL-time t and written ετ(t) with t ≤|ετ|. The history records what happened in
episode ετ until RL-time t: ετ(t) = ⟨oτ(t′), aτ(t′), rτ(t′)⟩t′∈J1,tK ∈E.
The goal of each RL algorithm α is to ﬁnd a policy π∗: E →A which yields optimal expected
returns. Such an algorithm α is viewed as a black box that takes as an input a trajectory set D ∈E+,
where E+ is the ensemble of trajectory sets of undetermined size: E+ = S
T ∈N ET , and that outputs
a policy πα
D. Consequently, a RL algorithm is formalised as follows: α : E+ →(E →A).
Such a high level deﬁnition of the RL algorithms allows to share trajectories between algorithms: a
trajectory as a sequence of observations, actions, and rewards can be interpreted by any algorithm
in its own decision process and state representation. For instance, RL algorithms classically rely
on an MDP deﬁned on a explicit or implicit state space representation Sα
D thanks to a projection
Φα
D : E →Sα
D. Then, α trains its policy πα
DT on the trajectories projected on its state space
representation. Off-policy RL optimisation techniques compatible with this approach are numerous in
the literature (Watkins, 1989; Ernst et al., 2005; Mnih et al., 2013). As well, any post-treatment of the
state set, any alternative decision process (Lovejoy, 1991), and any off-policy algorithm may be used.
The algorithms are deﬁned here as black boxes and the considered meta-algorithms will be indifferent
to how the algorithms compute their policies, granted they satisfy the off-policy assumption.
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
2.2
ONLINE ALGORITHM SELECTION
Pseudo-code 1: Online RL AS setting
Data: D0 ←∅: trajectory set
Data: P ←{αk}k∈J1,KK: algorithm portfolio
Data: µ : E →R: the objective function
for τ ←1 to ∞do
Select σ (Dτ−1) = σ(τ) ∈P;
Generate trajectory ετ with policy πσ(τ)
Dτ−1;
Get return µ(ετ);
Dτ ←Dτ−1 ∪{ετ};
end
The online learning approach is tackled in
this article: different algorithms are experi-
enced and evaluated during the data collec-
tion. Since it boils down to a classical explo-
ration/exploitation trade-off, multi-armed ban-
dit (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012) have been
used for combinatorial search AS (Gagliolo &
Schmidhuber, 2006; 2010) and evolutionary al-
gorithm meta-learning (Fialho et al., 2010). The
online AS problem for off-policy RL is novel
and we deﬁne it as follows:
• D ∈E+ is the current trajectory set;
• P = {αk}k∈J1,KK is the portfolio of off-policy RL algorithms;
• µ : E →R is the objective function, generally set as the RL return.
Pseudo-code 1 formalises the online RL AS setting. A meta-algorithm is deﬁned as a function from
a trajectory set to the selection of an algorithm: σ : E+ →P. The meta-algorithm is queried at
each meta-time τ = |Dτ−1|+1, with input Dτ−1, and it ouputs algorithm σ (Dτ−1) = σ(τ) ∈P
controlling with its policy πσ(τ)
Dτ−1 the generation of the trajectory ετ in the stochastic environment.
The ﬁnal goal is to optimise the cumulative expected return. It is the expectation of the sum of rewards
obtained after a run of T trajectories:
(1)
Eσ
" T
X
τ=1
µ (ετ)
#
= Eσ
" T
X
τ=1
Eµσ(τ)
Dσ
τ−1
#
,
with Eµα
D = Eπα
D [µ (ε)] as a condensed notation for the expected return of policy πα
D, trained on
trajectory set D by algorithm α. Equation 1 transforms the cumulative expected return into two nested
expectations. The outside expectation Eσ assumes the meta-algorithm σ ﬁxed and averages over
the trajectory set generation and the corresponding algorithms policies. The inside expectation Eµ
assumes the policy ﬁxed and averages over its possible trajectories in the stochastic environment.
Nota bene: there are three levels of decision: meta-algorithm σ selects algorithm α that computes
policy π that is in control. In this paper, the focus is at the meta-algorithm level.
2.3
META-ALGORITHM EVALUATION
In order to evaluate the meta-algorithms, let us formulate two additional notations. First, the optimal
expected return Eµ∗
∞is deﬁned as the highest expected return achievable by a policy of an algorithm
in portfolio P. Second, for every algorithm α in the portfolio, let us deﬁne σα as its canonical meta-
algorithm, i.e. the meta-algorithm that always selects algorithm α: ∀τ, σα(τ) = α. The absolute
pseudo-regret ρσ
abs(T) deﬁnes the regret as the loss for not having controlled the trajectory with an
optimal policy:
ρσ
abs(T) = TEµ∗
∞−Eσ
" T
X
τ=1
Eµσ(τ)
Dσ
τ−1
#
.
(2)
It is worth noting that an optimal meta-algorithm will unlikely yield a null regret because a large
part of the absolute pseudo-regret is caused by the sub-optimality of the algorithm policies when
the trajectory set is still of limited size. Indeed, the absolute pseudo-regret considers the regret for
not selecting an optimal policy: it takes into account both the pseudo-regret of not selecting the best
algorithm and the pseudo-regret of the algorithms for not ﬁnding an optimal policy. Since the meta-
algorithm does not interfere with the training of policies, it ought not account for the pseudo-regret
related to the latter.
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
2.4
RELATED WORK
Related to AS for RL, Schweighofer & Doya (2003) use meta-learning to tune a ﬁxed RL algorithm
in order to ﬁt observed animal behaviour, which is a very different problem to ours. In Cauwet et al.
(2014); Liu & Teytaud (2014), the RL AS problem is solved with a portfolio composed of online
RL algorithms. The main limitation from these works relies on the fact that on-policy algorithms
were used, which prevents them from sharing trajectories among algorithms (Cauwet et al., 2015).
Meta-learning speciﬁcally for the eligibility trace parameter has also been studied in White & White
(2016). Wang et al. (2016) study the learning process of RL algorithms and selects the best one for
learning faster on a new task. This work is related to batch AS.
An intuitive way to solve the AS problem is to consider algorithms as arms in a multi-armed bandit
setting. The bandit meta-algorithm selects the algorithm controlling the next trajectory ε and the
objective function µ(ε) constitutes the reward of the bandit. The aim of prediction with expert advice
is to minimise the regret against the best expert of a set of predeﬁned experts. When the experts learn
during time, their performances evolve and hence the sequence of expert rewards is non-stationary.
The exponential weight algorithms (Auer et al., 2002b; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006) are designed
for prediction with expert advice when the sequence of rewards of experts is generated by an oblivious
adversary. This approach has been extended for competing against the best sequence of experts by
adding in the update of weights a forgetting factor proportional to the mean reward (see Exp3.S in
Auer et al. (2002b)), or by combining Exp3 with a concept drift detector Allesiardo & Féraud (2015).
The exponential weight algorithms have been extended to the case where the rewards are generated
by any sequence of stochastic processes of unknown means (Besbes et al., 2014). The stochastic
bandit algorithm such as UCB can be extended to the case of switching bandits using a discount
factor or a window to forget the past Garivier & Moulines (2011). This class of switching bandit
algorithms are not designed for experts that learn and hence evolve at each time step.
3
EPOCHAL STOCHASTIC BANDIT
Pseudo-code 2: ESBAS with UCB1
Data: D0, P, µ: the online RL AS setting
for β ←0 to ∞do
for αk ∈P do
πk
D2β −1: policy learnt by αk on D2β−1
end
n ←0, ∀αk ∈P, nk ←0, and xk ←0
for τ ←2β to 2β+1 −1 do
αkmax = argmax
αk∈P
 
xk +
r
ξ log(n)
nk
!
Generate trajectory ετ with policy πkmax
D2β −1
Get return µ(ετ), Dτ ←Dτ−1 ∪{ετ}
xkmax ←nkmaxxkmax + µ(ετ)
nkmax + 1
nkmax ←nkmax + 1 and n ←n + 1
end
end
ESBAS description –
To solve the off-
policy RL AS problem, we propose a novel
meta-algorithm called Epochal Stochastic
Bandit AS (ESBAS). Because of the non-
stationarity induced by the algorithm learning,
the stochastic bandit cannot directly select al-
gorithms. Instead, the stochastic bandit can
choose ﬁxed policies. To comply with this
constraint, the meta-time scale is divided into
epochs inside which the algorithms policies
cannot be updated: the algorithms optimise
their policies only when epochs start, in such
a way that the policies are constant inside each
epoch. As a consequence and since the returns
are bounded, at each new epoch, the problem
can rigorously be cast into an independent
stochastic K-armed bandit Ξ, with K = |P|.
The ESBAS meta-algorithm is formally sketched in Pseudo-code 2 embedding UCB1 Auer et al.
(2002a) as the stochastic K-armed bandit Ξ. The meta-algorithm takes as an input the set of algorithms
in the portfolio. Meta-time scale is fragmented into epochs of exponential size. The βth epoch lasts
2β meta-time steps, so that, at meta-time τ = 2β, epoch β starts. At the beginning of each epoch,
the ESBAS meta-algorithm asks each algorithm in the portfolio to update their current policy. Inside
an epoch, the policy is never updated anymore. At the beginning of each epoch, a new Ξ instance is
reset and run. During the whole epoch, Ξ selects at each meta-time step the algorithm in control of
the next trajectory.
Theoretical analysis –
ESBAS intends to minimise the regret for not choosing the algorithm
yielding the maximal return at a given meta-time τ. It is short-sighted: it does not intend to optimise
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
the algorithms learning. We deﬁne the short-sighted pseudo-regret as follows:
ρσ
ss(T) = Eσ
" T
X
τ=1

max
α∈P Eµα
Dσ
τ−1 −Eµσ(τ)
Dσ
τ−1
#
.
(3)
The short-sighted pseudo-regret depends on the gaps ∆α
β: the difference of expected return between
the best algorithm during epoch β and algorithm α. The smallest non null gap at epoch β is noted
∆†
β. We write its limit when β tends to inﬁnity with ∆†
∞.
Based on several assumptions, three theorems show that ESBAS absolute pseudo-regret can be
expressed in function of the absolute pseudo-regret of the best canonical algorithm and ESBAS short-
sighted pseudo-regret. They also provide upper bounds on the ESBAS short-sighted pseudo-regret.
The full theoretical analysis can be found in the supplementary material, Section B. We provide here
an intuitive overlook of its results. Table 1 numerically reports those bounds for a two-fold portfolio,
depending on the nature of the algorithms. It must be read by line. According to the ﬁrst column:
the order of magnitude of ∆†
β, the ESBAS short-sighted pseudo-regret bounds are displayed in the
second column, and the third and fourth columns display the ESBAS absolute pseudo-regret bounds
also depending on the order of magnitude of ρσ∗
abs(T).
Regarding the short-sighted upper bounds, the main result appears in the last line, when the algorithms
converge to policies with different performance: ESBAS logarithmically converges to the best
algorithm with a regret in O
 log2(T)/∆†
∞

. Also, one should notice that the ﬁrst two bounds are
obtained by summing the gaps. This means that the algorithms are almost equally good and their gap
goes beyond the threshold of distinguishability. This threshold is structurally at ∆†
β ∈O(1/
√
T). The
impossibility to determine which is the better algorithm is interpreted in Cauwet et al. (2014) as a
budget issue. The meta-time necessary to distinguish through evaluation arms that are ∆†
β apart takes
Θ(1/∆†2
β ) meta-time steps. As a consequence, if ∆†
β ∈O(1/
√
T), then 1/∆†2
β ∈Ω(T). However,
the budget, i.e. the length of epoch β starting at meta-time T = 2β, equals T.
Additionally, the absolute upper bounds are logarithmic in the best case and still inferior to O(
√
T) in
the worst case, which compares favorably with those of discounted UCB and Exp3.S in O(
p
T log(T))
and Rexp3 in O(T 2/3), or the RL with Policy Advice’s regret bounds of O(
√
T log(T)).
Table 1: Bounds on ρσESBAS
ss
(T) and ρσESBAS
abs
(T) given various settings for a two-fold portfolio AS.
∆†
β
ρσESBAS
ss
(T)
ρσESBAS
abs
(T) in function of ρσ∗
abs(T)
ρσ∗
abs(T) ∈O(log(T))
ρσ∗
abs(T) ∈O(T 1−c∗)
Θ (1/T)
O (log(T))
O (log(T))
Θ(T −c†), and c† ≥0.5
O(T 1−c†)
O(T 1−c†)
O(T 1−c†)
Θ(T −c†), and c† < 0.5
O(T c† log(T))
O(T c† log(T))
O(T 1−c∗), if c† < 1 −c∗
O(T c† log(T)), if c† ≥1 −c∗
Θ (1)
O
 log2(T)/∆†
∞

O
 log2(T)/∆†
∞

O(T 1−c∗)
4
ESBAS DIALOGUE EXPERIMENTS
ESBAS is particularly designed for RL tasks when it is impossible to update the policy after every
transition or episode. Policy update is very costly in most real-world applications, such as dialogue
systems (Khouzaimi et al., 2016) for which a growing batch setting is preferred (Lange et al.,
2012). ESBAS practical efﬁciency is therefore illustrated on a dialogue negotiation game (Laroche
& Genevay, 2016) that involves two players: the system ps and a user pu. Their goal is to ﬁnd an
agreement among 4 alternative options. At each dialogue, for each option η, players have a private
uniformly drawn cost νp
η ∼U[0, 1] to agree on it. Each player is considered fully empathetic to the
other one. The details of the experiment can be found in the supplementary material, Section C.1.1.
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
(2a) simple vs simple-2
(2c) simple-2 vs constant-1.009
(2e) 8 learners
(2b) simple vs simple-2
(2d) simple-2 vs constant-1.009
(2f) 8 learners
Figure 2: The ﬁgures on the top plot the performance over time. The ﬁgures on the bottom show the
ESBAS selection ratios over the epochs.
All learning algorithms are using Fitted-Q Iteration (Ernst et al., 2005), with a linear parametri-
sation and an ϵβ-greedy exploration : ϵβ = 0.6β, β being the epoch number. Several algorithms
differing by their state space representation Φα are considered: simple, fast, simple-2, fast-2, n-ζ-
{simple/fast/simple-2/fast-2}, and constant-µ. See Section C.1.2 for their full descriptions.
The algorithms and ESBAS are playing with a stationary user simulator built through Imitation
Learning from real-human data. All the results are averaged over 1000 runs. The performance ﬁgures
plot the curves of algorithms individual performance σα against the ESBAS portfolio control σESBAS
in function of the epoch (the scale is therefore logarithmic in meta-time). The performance is the
average return of the RL problem. The ratio ﬁgures plot the average algorithm selection proportions
of ESBAS at each epoch. We deﬁne the relative pseudo regret as the difference between the ESBAS
absolute pseudo-regret and the absolute pseudo-regret of the best canonical meta-algorithm. Relative
pseudo-regrets have a 95% conﬁdence interval about ±6 ≈±1.5 × 10−4 per trajectory. Extensive
numerical results are provided in Table 2 of the supplementary material.
Figures 2a and 2b plot the typical curves obtained with ESBAS selecting from a portfolio of two
learning algorithms. On Figure 2a, the ESBAS curve tends to reach more or less the best algorithm
in each point as expected. Surprisingly, Figure 2b reveals that the algorithm selection ratios are not
very strong in favour of one or another at any time. Indeed, the variance in trajectory set collection
makes simple better on some runs until the end. ESBAS proves to be efﬁcient at selecting the best
algorithm for each run and unexpectedly obtains a negative relative pseudo-regret of -90. Figures
2c and 2d plot the typical curves obtained with ESBAS selecting from a portfolio constituted of a
learning algorithm and an algorithm with a deterministic and stationary policy. ESBAS succeeds in
remaining close to the best algorithm at each epoch and saves 5361 return value for not selecting
the constant algorithm, but overall yields a regret for not using only the best algorithm. ESBAS also
performs well on larger portfolios of 8 learners (see Figure 2e) with negative relative pseudo-regrets:
−10, even if the algorithms are, on average, almost selected uniformly as Figure 2f reveals. Each
individual run may present different ratios, depending on the quality of the trained policies. ESBAS
also offers some curriculum learning, but more importantly, early bad policies are avoided.
Algorithms with a constant policy do not improve over time and the full reset of the K-multi armed
bandit urges ESBAS to unnecessarily explore again and again the same underachieving algorithm.
One easy way to circumvent this drawback is to use this knowledge and to not reset their arms. By
operating this way, when the learning algorithm(s) start(s) outperforming the constant one, ESBAS
simply neither exploits nor explores the constant algorithm anymore. Without arm reset for constant
algorithms, ESBAS’s learning curve follows perfectly the learning algorithm’s learning curve when
this one outperforms the constant algorithm and achieves strong negative relative pseudo-regrets.
Again, the interested reader may refer to Table 2 in supplementary material for the numerical results.
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
5
SLIDING STOCHASTIC BANDIT
In this section, we propose to adapt ESBAS to a true online setting where algorithms update their
policies after each transition. The stochastic bandit is now trained on a sliding window with the last
τ/2 selections. Even though the arms are not stationary over this window, there is the guarantee of
eventually forgetting the oldest arm pulls. This algorithm is called SSBAS for Sliding Stochastic
Bandit AS. Despite the lack of theoretical convergence bounds, we demonstrate on two domains
and two different meta-optimisation tasks that SSBAS does exceptionally well, outperforming all
algorithms in the portfolio by a wide margin.
5.1
GRIDWORLD DOMAIN
Figure 3: gridworld
The goal here is to demonstrate that SSBAS can perform efﬁcient hyper-
parameter optimisation on a simple tabular domain: a 5x5 gridworld
problem (see Figure 3), where the goal is to collect the fruits placed at
each corner as fast as possible. The episodes terminate when all fruits
have been collected or after 100 transitions. The objective function µ
used to optimise the stochastic bandit Ψ is no longer the RL return,
but the time spent to collect all the fruits (200 in case of it did not).
The agent has 18 possible positions and there are 24 −1 = 15 non-
terminal fruits conﬁgurations, resulting in 270 states. The action set is
A = {N, E, S, W}. The reward function mean is 1 when eating a fruit,
0 otherwise. The reward function is corrupted with a strong Gaussian white noise of variance ζ2 = 1.
The portfolio is composed of 4 Q-learning algorithms varying from each other by their learning rates:
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5}. They all have the same linearly annealing ϵτ-greedy exploration.
The selection ratios displayed in Figure 5 show that SSBAS selected the algorithm with the highest
(0.5) learning rate in the ﬁrst stages, enabling to propagate efﬁciently the reward signal through the
visited states, then, overtime preferentially chooses the algorithm with a learning rate of 0.01, which
is less sensible to the reward noise, ﬁnally, SSBAS favours the algorithm with the ﬁnest learning rate
(0.001). After 1 million episodes, SSBAS enables to save half a transition per episode on average
as compared to the best ﬁxed learning rate value (0.1), and two transitions against the worst ﬁxed
learning rate in the portfolio (0.001). We also compared it to the efﬁciency of a linearly annealing
learning rate: 1/(1 + 0.0001τ): SSBAS performs under 21 steps on average after 105, while the
linearly annealing learning rate algorithm still performs a bit over 21 steps after 106 steps.
5.2
ATARI DOMAIN: Q*BERT
Figure 4: Q*bert
We investigate here AS for deep RL on the Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE, Bellemare et al. (2013)) and more precisely the game Q*bert (see
a frame on Figure 4), where the goal is to step once on each block. Then
a new similar level starts. In later levels, one needs to step twice on
each block, and even later stepping again on the same blocks will cancel
the colour change. We used three different settings of DQN instances:
small uses the setting described in Mnih et al. (2013), large uses the
setting in Mnih et al. (2015), and ﬁnally huge uses an even larger network
(see Section C.2 in the supplementary material for details). DQN is
known to reach a near-human level performance at Q*bert. Our SSBAS
instance runs 6 algorithms with 2 different random initialisations of each
DQN setting. Disclaimer: contrarily to other experiments, each curve
is the result of a single run, and the improvement might be aleatory.
Indeed, the DQN training is very long and SSBAS needs to train all the models in parallel. A more
computationally-efﬁcient solution might be to use the same architecture as Osband et al. (2016).
Figure 6 reveals that SSBAS experiences a slight delay keeping in touch with the best setting
performance during the initial learning phase, but, surprisingly, ﬁnds a better policy than the single
algorithms in its portfolio and than the ones reported in the previous DQN articles. We observe that
the large setting is surprisingly by far the worst one on the Q*bert task, implying the difﬁculty to
predict which model is the most efﬁcient for a new task. SSBAS allows to select online the best one.
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Q-Learning with learning rate: 0.001
Q-Learning with learning rate: 0.01
Q-Learning with learning rate: 0.1
Q-Learning with learning rate: 0.5
Figure 5: gridworld ratios (3000 runs).
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
×104
small network
large network
huge network
SSBAS
Figure 6: Q*bert performance per episode (1 run).
6
CONCLUSION
In this article, we tackle the problem of selecting online off-policy RL algorithms. The problem
is formalised as follows: from a ﬁxed portfolio of algorithms, a meta-algorithm learns which one
performs the best on the task at hand. Fairness of algorithm evaluation is granted by the fact that the
RL algorithms learn off-policy. ESBAS, a novel meta-algorithm, is proposed. Its principle is to divide
the meta-time scale into epochs. Algorithms are allowed to update their policies only at the start
each epoch. As the policies are constant inside each epoch, the problem can be cast into a stochastic
multi-armed bandit. An implementation is detailed and a theoretical analysis leads to upper bounds
on the regrets. ESBAS is designed for the growing batch RL setting. This limited online setting is
required in many real-world applications where updating the policy requires a lot of resources.
Experiments are ﬁrst led on a negotiation dialogue game, interacting with a human data-built
simulated user. In most settings, not only ESBAS demonstrates its efﬁciency to select the best
algorithm, but it also outperforms the best algorithm in the portfolio thanks to curriculum learning,
and variance reduction similar to that of Ensemble Learning. Then, ESBAS is adapted to a full online
setting, where algorithms are allowed to update after each transition. This meta-algorithm, called
SSBAS, is empirically validated on a fruit collection task where it performs efﬁcient hyper-parameter
optimisation. SSBAS is also evaluated on the Q*bert Atari game, where it achieves a substantial
improvement over the single algorithm counterparts.
We interpret ESBAS/SSBAS’s success at reliably outperforming the best algorithm in the portfolio as
the result of the four following potential added values. First, curriculum learning: ESBAS/SSBAS
selects the algorithm that is the most ﬁtted with the data size. This property allows for instance to use
shallow algorithms when having only a few data and deep algorithms once collected a lot. Second,
diversiﬁed policies: ESBAS/SSBAS computes and experiments several policies. Those diversiﬁed
policies generate trajectories that are less redundant, and therefore more informational. As a result, the
policies trained on these trajectories should be more efﬁcient. Third, robustness: if one algorithm fails
at ﬁnding good policies, it will soon be discarded. This property prevents the agent from repeating
again and again the same obvious mistakes. Four and last, run adaptation: of course, there has to be
an algorithm that is the best on average for one given task at one given meta-time. But depending on
the variance in the trajectory collection, it did not necessarily train the best policy for each run. The
ESBAS/SSBAS meta-algorithm tries and selects the algorithm that is the best at each run. Some of
those properties are inherited by algorithm selection similarity with ensemble learning (Dietterich,
2002). Wiering & Van Hasselt (2008) uses a vote amongst the algorithms to decide the control of the
next transition. Instead, ESBAS/SSBAS selects the best performing algorithm.
Regarding the portfolio design, it mostly depends on the available computational power per sample
ratio. For practical implementations, we recommend to limit the use of two highly demanding
algorithms, paired with several faster algorithms that can take care of ﬁrst learning stages, and to use
algorithms that are diverse regarding models, hypotheses, etc. Adding two algorithms that are too
similar adds inertia, while they are likely to not be distinguishable by ESBAS/SSBAS. More detailed
recommendations for building an efﬁcient RL portfolio are left for future work.
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
