User-in-the-loop Adaptive Intent Detection for Instructable
Digital Assistant
Nicolas Lair
Inserm & Cloud Temple
France

Clement Delgrange
Cloud Temple
France
David Mugisha
Cloud Temple
France
Jean-Michel Dussoux
Cloud Temple
France
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
INRIA
France
Peter Ford Dominey
Inserm
France
ABSTRACT
People are becoming increasingly comfortable using Digital Assis-
tants (DAs) to interact with services or connected objects. How-
ever, for non-programming users, the available possibilities for
customizing their DA are limited and do not include the possibil-
ity of teaching the assistant new tasks. To make the most of the
potential of DAs, users should be able to customize assistants by
instructing them through Natural Language (NL). To provide such
functionalities, NL interpretation in traditional assistants should
be improved: (1) The intent identification system should be able to
recognize new forms of known intents, and to acquire new intents
as they are expressed by the user. (2) In order to be adaptive to
novel intents, the Natural Language Understanding module should
be sample efficient, and should not rely on a pretrained model.
Rather, the system should continuously collect the training data
as it learns new intents from the user. In this work, we propose
AidMe (Adaptive Intent Detection in Multi-Domain Environments),
a user-in-the-loop adaptive intent detection framework that allows
the assistant to adapt to its user by learning his intents as their
interaction progresses. AidMe builds its repertoire of intents and
collects data to train a model of semantic similarity evaluation that
can discriminate between the learned intents and autonomously
discover new forms of known intents. AidMe addresses two ma-
jor issues – intent learning and user adaptation – for instructable
digital assistants. We demonstrate the capabilities of AidMe as a
standalone system by comparing it with a one-shot learning system
and a pretrained NLU module through simulations of interactions
with a user. We also show how AidMe can smoothly integrate to
an existing instructable digital assistant.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Natural language interfaces;
• Computing methodologies →Natural language process-
ing; Information extraction; Online learning settings; Active learning
settings; Ensemble methods; Neural networks.
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not
for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in 25th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’20), March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377325.3377490.
KEYWORDS
Natural language processing, intent detection, user-in-the-loop,
digital assistant, learning by interaction, multi-domain
ACM Reference Format:
Nicolas Lair, Clement Delgrange, David Mugisha, Jean-Michel Dussoux,
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Peter Ford Dominey. 2020. User-in-the-loop Adap-
tive Intent Detection for Instructable Digital Assistant. In 25th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’20), March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari,
Italy. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377325.
3377490
1
INTRODUCTION
People are becoming increasingly accustomed to interacting with
digital services, through vocal assistant or socialbots. Through cell
phones, chatbot or connected speakers, it is possible to have a small
conversation, to get answers to question or to take control of a
connected device. These digital assistants range from a chatbot
on an e-commerce website, that helps the user to get information
on products, to a conversational agent that allows its user to have
a conversation on topics such as sports, education or medicine.
Natural language holds a huge potential for improving interactions
of users with complex systems on the condition that it can provide
useful features for the users while offering a seamless interaction.
From a user point of view, the experience with a digital assistant
is as much influenced by the quality of the interaction as it is
by the capabilities of the digital assistant. Much work remains to
build a real conversational agent with fluent interaction skills. Two
years ago Amazon launched the Alexa Prize. During the first Alexa
Prize Competition [29], the response error rate of the 15 developed
conversational assistant ranged between 10 and 30%.
In most cases, digital assistants are specialized for certain tasks
and their designers are allowed to maintain a certain quality of
interaction on these specific tasks, entering in what Allen et al. [2]
called set of contexts systems. These virtual assistants are provided
to the users with a full set of doable actions and their designers pro-
vide them with multiple ways to ask the assistant to perform these
preregistered actions. Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and
especially intent detection and slot filling can be achieved by tools
like DialogFlow from Google, Wit.ai from Facebook. These assis-
tants are static (i.e. non-evolving) and domain-specific by design.
The main limitations of these assistants is their inability to adapt
to their users and to learn new tasks from their interaction with
arXiv:2001.06007v1  [cs.HC]  16 Jan 2020

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Lair et al.
users. The few digital assistants [1, 9, 19, 23] that have been pro-
posed to tackle these issues suffer from a weak comprehension
capability: the assistant may experience difficulty in understanding
user requests that are not expressed in the exact learned forms. As
their task repertory grows and depends on the interaction they
have with the user, they cannot rely on the traditional NLU tools
mentioned above. Indeed such tools require the possible user in-
tents to be hard-coded in the system from the beginning, and they
rely on a large corpus of example sentences to train the models.
In this work, we propose AidMe – Adaptive Intent Detection
in Multi-domain Environments – an NLU framework to allow an
instructable assistant to leverage the performance of statistical ma-
chine learning models in the field of semantic similarity, without
sacrificing their learning ability nor needing to engineer corpora
of example sentences. AidMe is what we call a "Half-shot" learning
system (between zero-shot and one-shot learning) able to integrate
new intents from the users and autonomously discover new pat-
terns of known intents as the interaction unfolds. AidMe trains an
internal NLU model based on the collected sentences. In addition,
AidMe is not domain-specific, and can be easily adapted as the NLU
module of any instructable digital assistant. The purpose of AidMe
is to demonstrate that it is possible to build customizable assistants
without compromising on the quality of the interaction.
Contributions.
(1) We propose a NLU module that can be adapted to any Digital
Assistant learning through interaction with a user, allowing
the Digital Assistant to understand new intent from the user;
(2) AidMe is very sample efficient: it is a "half-shot" learning
system;
(3) AidMe is by design a multi-domain NLU module.
(4) We propose a novel method to make use of semantic simi-
larity to detect intent and patterns.
2
RELATED WORK
Our work lies at the crossroads of three domains which we detail
in the following section: intelligent assistant, natural language
understanding and learning by interaction.
2.1
Intelligent assistants
As defined by Hauswald et al. [16], an Intelligent Personal Assistant
is "an application that uses inputs such as the user’s voice, vision
(images), and contextual information to provide assistance by answer-
ing questions in natural language, making recommendations, and
performing actions." These assistants are used in many domains
from medicine to education or e-commerce [14].
While the performance in answering questions, making recom-
mendations, and performing actions is important, the user experience
is paramount. One major limitation in the user experience is due
to the quality of the interaction (e.g. the need for repetition when
the assistant does not understand the request, etc.). Recent pub-
lications in the field of conversational agents attempt to address
the difficulty of having a smooth conversation with an agent on
diverse topics. The introduction of Seq2Seq model [32] and its use
on conversation task [35] followed by [22] have managed to provide
conversational agent that can maintain consistent dialogue with
different individuals.
When they are task-specific, these assistants can be completely
tailored to meet a precisely designated purpose. Many tools such
as DialogFlow from Google or Wit from Facebook allow almost
anyone to quickly create a chatbot.
In the field of robotics, there has been significant research in
advancing the skills of social robots defined as embodied agents [...]
able to recognize each other and engage in social interactions, they
possess histories (perceive and interpret the world in terms of their
own experience), and they explicitly communicate with and learn
from each other. [8]. Similarly as for Intelligent Personal Assistant,
the quality and richness of the interaction between a robot and
human is as important as its capabilities. [13]
2.2
Natural Language Understanding
NLU consists in providing tools to automatically interpret and
understand natural language. The first important task in NLU is
intent detection. It consists in being able to detect the intention
underlying a sentence or a paragraph. It is traditionally seen as a
classification task with a huge number of classes that can prove
to be extremely difficult depending on the number and nature of
possible intents, the type of queries and the domain of application.
For digital assistants, this is of critical importance as a poor intent
detection system will prevent the assistant from providing relevant
responses to the user.
In addition to intent detection, slot filling or argument mapping is
another important task in NLU. Slot filling consists in semantically
labelling each word of a sequence, helping the system to assign
correct values to arguments. A classical example of slot filling with
the sentence Show me the flights from Boston to New York today
is shown in Table 1. While these tasks were previously treated
separately, recent research have shown that joint models capable
of answering to both tasks performed better [11, 39, 40].
Most common techniques are based on word embeddings and
neural networks, especially recurrent neural networks such as
LSTM and Attention based networks. Word embeddings are very
convenient as they are learnt on wide corpora and can be tailored to
a specific domain. Kim et al. [20] showed how enhancing classical
word embeddings such as Glove [28] to better represent similar
and dissimilar words lead to very good performance on classical
datasets with simple models.
A wide diversity of machine learning models have been used
to create intent detection classifiers: ensemble model [10, 11], con-
volutionnal networks [39], recurrent network such as LSTM, bi-
LSTM [12] or attention-based networks [23, 40]. All these methods
perform extremely well, though it appears that attention-based
methods outperform the others.
An essential assumption in these approaches is that the possible
intents are known in advance. However in the case of a digital
assistant that adapts to its user and learn from him, the different
user’s intents are discovered as he interacts with the assistant, not
before. Thus we have access neither to the intents nor to a suitable
train corpus, and training a classifier is not an option.
We should also mention the work of Allen [2] who argue that
using statistical methods to deal with the intent recognition process
is not enough as they lack the ability to reason on the user inputs.

AidMe
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Table 1: Example from ATIS dataset of slot filling:
Show me the flights from Boston to New York today
Intent: flight_search
Sentence
Show
me
the
flights
from
Boston
to
New
York
today
Label
O
O
O
O
O
B.departure
O
B.arrival
I.arrival
B.date
2.3
Learning by interaction
The main limitation of domain-specific assistants is their inability
to process requests that involve multiple domains or applications
and to deal with actions which were not anticipated during sys-
tem conception. To address this issue, Sun et al. [31] developed an
intelligent assistant framework that learns offline from the past
interactions with the user to enable cross-domain usage of applica-
tions by suggesting relevant applications to the user’s request.
Another approach is to build instructable assistants that learn by
interaction and can adapt to the user, such as HILC [19] a user-in-
the-loop system that learns procedures by user demonstrating and
answering follow-up queries posed by the system. The system is
quite promising, but does not address the complimentary problems
of intent detection and argument mapping.
PLOW, developed by Allen et al. [1], converts natural language
sentences into logical forms [18] and thus needs a substantial en-
gineering effort to be able to process sentences expressed with
as much variability as in domain specific assistants. To avoid the
limitations of systems based on grammatical rule engineering, sys-
tems such as LIA [3] rely on data engineering. LIA parses natural
language utterances by using a Combinatory Categorial Grammar
(CCG) trained to associate natural language with a set of primitive
functions. The system is able to derive more complex logical forms
from user inputs, but as the authors pointed out, the system is
hard to scale as it needs to discriminate between users’ specific and
common sense knowledge, which could be collected from different
users to improve the parser.
2.4
Semantic Similarity
SemEval (International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation) offers
competitions each year addressing themes related to the seman-
tic evaluation of language. Between 2012 and 2017, one of these
Semantic Evaluation Similarity (STS) competitions [4] consists in
developing a system capable of scoring the semantic similarity of a
pair of sentences on a scale from 0 to 5, from completely dissimilar
to perfectly similar.
The techniques used are diverse and the results obtained are en-
couraging. Some apply neural network algorithms such as attention
mechanisms [17] or convolutional networks [30]. Others compute
variables from more traditional semantic and syntactic analysis
tools such as alignment measures to feed supervised learning mod-
els [24]. Teams [15, 38] also chose to rely only on an analysis of
semantic tags from WordNet [25] and BabelNet [26]. And finally
most of the teams chose to combine a few of these methods in an
ensemble model.
3
MODELING THE APPROACH
In this section, we propose a general model of assistant that learns
from interaction. As shown in Figure 1, we distinguish between the
Natural Language Interpreter and the Skills Learner to focus in the
rest of the article on the Natural Language Interpreter.
Environment
User
Skills Learner
Ψ
AidMe
Natural Language
Interpreter
Φ
Make
requests
Interpret
the
requests
Watch 
Perform
the
requests
ASSISTANT
Feedback
L
e
a
r
n
Figure 1: General architecture of an assistant learning by in-
teraction: the assistant is divided into the Natural Language
Interpreter and the Skill Learner
3.1
Model of a general assistant learning by
interaction
We focus on systems that can learn to match sentences to actions,
through their interactions with a user, without prior knowledge of
the domain nor the actions. We are then interested in systems that
can fit in the following formalisation :
To interact with the system, the user expresses its intent by using
a sentence. Let L be the set of user’s requests, S ⊂L the set of
encountered sentences, I the set of learned intents, P the set of
discovered patterns and A the set of actions doable by the assis-
tant. Taking the sentence from Table 1, Getting the flight schedule
would be an intent, Show me the flights from Boston to New York
today would be a corresponding sentence, Show me the flights from
DEP to ARR DATE would be the corresponding pattern. We dis-
tinguish between an intent and a pattern as a unique intent can
be expressed using many forms (and many patterns). However,
there is an instantiation function that links a sentence to its pattern:
λ : P × Arдs →L, Arдs being a dictionary of arguments used in
the pattern to instantiate a sentence.
We define two functions Φ : L →I×Arдs, the natural language
interpreter that guesses the intent lying behind a user’s request
and labels the word in the sentence, and Ψ : I × Arдs →A

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Lair et al.
that performs the requested actions depending on the intent and
its arguments. Both Φ and Ψ are learned during the interactions.
We suppose that as the interaction between the system and the
user unfolds, the user is requested to provide some guidance when
the systems fails to fulfill the user’s request. When the failure is
especially due to the Natural Language Understanding module, the
user’s feedback should allow the system to compute the right intent
and pattern.
This formalisation requires specific feedback from the user to be
able to learn from mistakes. Otherwise the system is left purposely
general, no assumptions are made on Ψ so that almost any system
learning from interactions would be compatible. As illustrated by
Figure 1, our contribution aims at providing a general framework
that can be used as the Natural Language Interpreter (Φ) for digital
assistants using its own Skill Learner and Environment.
3.2
The Natural Language Understanding
module
AidMe is a Natural Language Understanding module that is able to
learn to understand the user, meaning that depending on what is
asked by the user, AidMe builds a repertoire of intents that the Skill
Learner can learn to achieve. S, I and P begin as empty sets and
grow as the system interacts with the user. In this model, S can
be considered as an interaction memory, I and P as the learning
memories.
The obvious way to build such a system, would be to ask for the
guidance of the user each time a request cannot be interpreted using
the known patterns P [9]. This would happen in the case where
many patterns match the user’s request or no pattern matches it.
This is however what occurs in most of the interaction as the user
rarely uses the same forms to express his intents. This method
forces the user to always correct his assistant, rendering the system
difficult to use.
4
ADAPTIVE INTENT AND PATTERN
DETECTION
In this section, we introduce AidMe and show how to take advan-
tage of semantic similarity evaluation to perform semi-automatic
intent and pattern identification with much less intervention of the
user, and without sacrificing the learning ability of the assistant.
Figure 2 shows the different steps performed by AidMe to analyze
a user’s request and identify its intent expressed through a new
pattern.
4.1
Similar intent identification
4.1.1
Problem description. Intent identification is generally con-
sidered as a classification problem, each intent being one class. In
the case of an adaptive system, one cannot know in advance the
number of intents that the system will have to learn. Additionally,
multi-class classification with a high number of classes is difficult to
address with traditional classifiers, and computationally expensive
when using neural networks. To avoid these issues, we turn to the
field of semantic similarity and reformulate the intent identification
problem as trying to determine the semantic similarity between
two sentences.
Intent recognition can indeed be seen as an indirect problem
of semantic similarity evaluation: when an unseen sentence is ad-
dressed to the assistant, it is either referring to an already known
intent or a to a completely new intent. The system has to discrimi-
nate between the two options.
4.1.2
Semantic Similarity based Intent Detection. To do so, the sys-
tem can search for the intent that would best describe the user’s
request. We present in Algorithm 1 our semantic similarity based
intent detection process: we compare the user’s request, s ∈L, to
the known sentences and use the closest one to infer the intent
underlying s. We hypothesize that two close requests have a similar
intent. Given a model of evaluation of the semantic similarity (de-
scribed in Section 5) between two sentences Sim : L × L →[0, 1],
we look for
s0 = arg max
s′∈S
Sim(s,s′) s.t. Sim(s,s′) ≥ϵ
where ϵ is a confidence threshold above which the similarity is con-
sidered with high probability. The function Sim can be interpreted
as the inverse of a semantic distance between two sentences in the
sentence space L, even if it does not have all the characteristic of a
mathematical distance.
• If s0 exists, it is the closest sentence to s that can be consid-
ered similar with a high enough probability and therefore
Φ(s0) is the best intent candidate and will be considered as
such by the system. This means that the user’s request refers
to something the assistant has seen before.
• If s0 does not exist, then no sentence seems similar enough
to the unknown one and the system can consider that this
new sentence refers to a new intent from the user. The assis-
tant turns to learning mode and can ask the user to explain
his request.
Algorithm 1: Semantic Similarity based Intent Detection
Input: User request s
Output: Identified intent i ∈I, closest sentence s0
s0 = arg maxs′∈S Sim(s,s′);
i = intent corresponding to s0;
if d(s,s0) ≥ϵ then
return i,s0
else
return ∅, ∅(New intent detected!)
Although such a model would typically require data in order to be
trained, here the data can be gathered through the interaction with
the user, and thus there is no engineering required to pre-specify
the intents, as they are automatically discovered by the assistant.
In addition, we will demonstrate that the sample efficiency is very
good and thus that the performance of the method can rapidly
become satisfactory. Finally the method is completely agnostic to
the type of model and we can easily consider replacing a trained
model by a model that does not need training.
4.2
Similar pattern identification
When the intent of a new request s has been identified, the system
still needs to identify the arguments before carrying out the request.

AidMe
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
        Algorithm 1: Find similar intent
User's request

Scores
Interaction Memory o
- Search the definition of Texas
      Pattern: Search the definition of X
- Set the subject to Meeting
      Pattern: Set the subject to Y

- ...
0.06
0.38
0.9
Compute scores
1
        Algorithm 2: Find similar pattern
User's request

Scores
Instantiated sentences (
, w
)
0
}y
0.86
0.78
0.62
0.74
0.62
0.94
Compute scores

3
        User feedback & update

4
feedback
User
        Algorithm 2: Build ly
=
ly
2

Best candidate pattern:

Pattern y
w}y

Please, write an Z to Bob

Please
write
an

to 
Bob
Figure 2: How AidMe analyzes the user’s request to identify the intent, pattern and arguments in 4 steps: (1) Identify the closest
intent and pattern to a user request, (2) Build all the possible patterns from the user request (3) Identify the most meaningful
pattern, (4) Update according to the user feedback
The idea behind this step is to build the pattern p corresponding to
s as the closest pattern to p0 related to s0. We define the contextual
similarity Sim|arдs between two patterns p1, p2 with respect to a
set of arguments arдs, by the semantic similarity between the two
instantiated sentences:
Sim|arдs(p1,p2) = Sim(λ(p1,arдs), λ(p2,arдs))
This definition is quite natural as it means that two patterns mean
the same thing only if the corresponding sentences of these patterns
mean the same thing.
As described in Algorithm 2, we can build the set
Pc = {(pc,arдsc) | λ(pc,arдsc) = s}
of all possible pairs (patterns, arguments) that instantiate s and
have the same number of arguments as p0. We finally use the model
of evaluation of semantic similarity Sim to measure the contextual
similarity Sim|arдsc between the pattern p0 and the pattern in Pc
with respect to arдsc. The closest candidate pattern top0 is assumed
to be the pattern related to s. The idea behind this algorithm is
that most of the instantiated candidate patterns will not even be
Algorithm 2: Similar Pattern Identification
Input: User request s, closest sentence s0, corresponding
pattern p0
Output: Identified pattern p
Build Pc = {(pc,arдsc) | λ(pc,arдsc) = s} ;
foreach (pc,arдsc) ∈Pc do
sc = λ(p0,arдsc);
d(p0,pc) = Sim(s,sc);
new_pattern = arg maxpc ∈Pc d(p0,pc) ;
return new_pattern
correct sentences and thus have a lower similarity score than correct
sentences and the correct pattern should get the highest similarity
score.
4.3
AidMe Algorithm
4.3.1
Interpreting the user’s request. Using the Algorithms 1 and
2, we can build an algorithm that can identify most of the user’s

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Lair et al.
intents and allow the Skill Learner to carry them out. As shown in
Algorithm 3, the system first tries to interpret the user’s request
using the previous discovered patterns in P. If it fails, the similar
intent detection algorithm can determine if the request is close to
known intent:
• If not, the request is identified as referring to a new intent,
the system has no chance to interpret it correctly and asks
for the user’s guidance, turning to learning mode.
• If a close intent is identified, the system can infer the pattern
corresponding to the request using the similar pattern iden-
tification pattern and then let the Skill Learner carry out the
interpreted request. This case is described in Figure 2 with
an example.
Algorithm 3: AidMe Algorithm
Input: User request s
Output: Identified intent i and pattern p
if Φ(s) is well-defined then
return Φ(s)
else
i,s0 = Algorithm 1(s);
if s0 exists then
p0 : pattern corresponding à s0;
new_pattern = Algorithm 2(s,s0,p0);
return i,new_pattern
else
return ∅, ∅(New intent detected!)
4.3.2
Update of the system. Once the sentence is interpreted, the
systems can get feedback from the user. One can suppose that no
feedback is a positive feedback, meaning the user is satisfied with
the interpretation. If a feedback is given, we suppose that it includes
the true intent and pattern. The system can then update S, I and
P.
In order to improve its performance and to adapt to the user,
AidMe periodically updates its semantic similarity model based on
the collected sentences and intents. AidMe defines the semantic
similarity using each intent as a class of similarity:
Sim(s1,s2) =
(
1,
s1,s2 refer to the same intent.
0,
otherwise.
Using this relation, AidMe can build a corpus of pairs of sentences
and train its semantic similarity model.
We can note that the model does not need to be retrained each
time a new intent is discovered to be able to recognize this new
intent: two sentences can always be compared by the model even if
one of the sentences refer to an intent that was not in the train set.
5
MODEL OF SEMANTIC SIMILARITY
In this section, we detail how we can compute a score of semantic
similarity between two sentences. A model that evaluates the se-
mantic similarity is a function Sim : L ×L →[0, M] where M is an
arbitrary integer. Sim(s1,s2) = 0 means totally dissimilar sentence,
and Sim(s1,s2) = M means perfectly similar sentences. We have
developed such a model based on the works of the most successful
teams in the Task 1 of SemEval 2017 [4], and especially the ECNU
team [34]. The model used is an ensemble model whose sub-models
can be separated into two groups: neural models using pre-trained
word embedding vector representations such as Paragram [36, 37]
and decision tree models based on variables obtained from the anal-
ysis and comparison of each pair of sentences. The model is trained
in a supervised manner on a set of sentences collected during the
interaction of the system with the user.
In this section we describe briefly each of the models and then
evaluate the performance of our simplified model on the STS Bench-
mark dataset 1.
5.1
Neural models
5.1.1
Description of the neural models. We use multi-layer percep-
trons taking a pair of sentences as input data. Each pair is converted
into a vector representation as follows:
(1) Each word of each sentence is converted to its vector repre-
sentation (word embedding);
(2) The embedding of a sentence is obtained by averaging the
word embeddings;
(3) Finally, the embedding of a pair of sentences is computed by
concatenating the Hadamard product (term to term product)
and the L1 −distance between the sentence embeddings.
The vector representations of the pairs then passes through two
or three fully connected layers with rectified linear activation ex-
cept for the last activation which is a softmax. The output layer of
the network provides a distribution-like vector that encodes the sim-
ilarity score. We use Paragram [36, 37] as word embedding which
is specifically engineered to deal with paraphrase and semantic
similarity.
5.1.2
Similarity score encoding. In STS Benchmark used for Se-
mEval competition, the semantic similarity is scored between 0 and
5. We consider two ways of encoding the semantic similarity score.
• binary encoding: The network outputs the probability of
having a perfect similarity and the score is simply scaled
according to the score range. Taking the STS Benchmark, a
network output of 0.8 corresponds a score of 4.
• n-class encoding: Inspired by [21, 33], each class encodes a
degree of similarity and the network outputs a vector of
size n encoding the probability for each class. In that case
the final score is the inner product between the model’s
output and the class vector [0, 1, ...,n-class] (which can be
seen as the score expectation of the computed score dis-
tribution). A score of 2.7 would be encoded in the follow-
ing vector [0, 0, 0.3, 0.7, 0, 0], which can be interpreted as
p(similarity = 2) = 0.3 and p(similarity = 3) = 0.7.
We implemented two neural models, one with a binary score en-
coding and another with a n-class score encoding. The particularity
of these neural models is that they are based on the word meaning
and do not take into account word order, syntax or grammar. We
choose not to rely on model such as Long-Short Term Memory
as their performance were considered disappointing on SemEval
1http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/stswiki/index.php/STSbenchmark

AidMe
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
dataset [34] and may be due to a wide variability between the train-
ing set and test set [33, 37]. In addition, they are much less sample
efficient than perceptrons.
5.2
Tree models
On the contrary, the tree-based models that we use take into account
the syntax and grammar to compute different types of features.
We use two types of ensemble tree models both based on binary
decision trees: a random forest model and an xgboost model [6].
These models use features of two types derived from the pairs of
sentences as inputs:
5.2.1
Distance features. A first type of features that directly mea-
sures a distance or a similarity between the two sentences of the
same pair:
• Measures of translation quality, like the BLEU score [27];
• Several n-gram overlaps on characters and words;
• The Levenshtein distance (minimum number of insertions,
deletions, or substitutions to transform one string into an-
other).
5.2.2
Kernel features. A second type of feature is based on a vector
representation of each sentence and a transformation using kernel
functions. We use a Bag of Words (BoW) embedding on the vocab-
ulary to transform each word into a vector. Each sentence is then
the average of the word embedding weighted by its IDF (Inverse
Document Frequency). The sentences are therefore represented in
relatively large spaces (depending on the size of the vocabulary).
To keep a balance between the different features and to avoid the
curse of dimensionality when the vocabulary grows, each pair is
transformed using the following kernel functions:
• linear kernel: cosine, manhattan distance, euclidean distance;
• statistic measures: Pearson correlation, Spearman correla-
tion, Kendall tau;
• non-linear kernels: sigmoid, RBF (Radial Basis Function),
laplacian.
The choice of a BoW embedding is justified by the natural spar-
sity of BoW which make the computation of the kernel extremely
fast. With dense embedding, like pre-trained embedding as Para-
gram we use for neural networks, the computation of the kernel
features is much more expensive. We experienced with embeddings
like Paragram and Glove [28] and we found that the performance
better than with BoW, but the little gain of performance could not
compensate for the additional computation time and computation
time is a key point for a digital assistant.
5.3
The overall model
We use this four models (Binary perceptron (1), multiclass percep-
tron (2), xgboost (3), random forest (4) in an ensemble model by
averaging the predictions of each model to get the model prediction.
The model is illustrated in Figure 3.
5.4
Model evaluation
Comparison to SemEval baselines. Before applying the model in
the context of AidMe, we have evaluated its performance on the STS
Pair of sentences
Pair embedding
Distance
features
Kernel
Features
Binary
perceptron
Multi-class
perceptron
XGBoost
Random
Forest
Average
Similarity
score
Figure 3: Ensemble Model of evaluation of semantic similar-
ity: two neural networks using sentence embedding as in-
puts and two feature-based regression tree models
Benchmark dataset 2 used for SemEval competition. We evaluate
on the test set a model that was trained on the train set. We show
the results in Table 2 and we report the some of results taken from
Table 14 of the SemEval 2017 Task 1 Evaluation [5]. We report the
results of three of the best teams and two baselines computed by the
organizers: cosine similarity on sentence embedding obtained with
InferSent [7] or by averaging the word embeddings of a pre-trained
word embedding (Paragram [36]). We do not intend to compete with
the best models but to ensure that our model is robust enough, stays
close to the state of the art models while being computationally
efficient. We see that our model is well above simple baselines and
not too far from state of the art performance even though it could
not beat InferSent which is very strong on this dataset. We show
below that InferSent performs much worse on the intent detection
task and we could not use it for AidMe.
Table 2: Comparison on the SemEval dataset between
AidMe, baseline models and the best teams of the
competition
Model
Description
Pearson corr.
ECNU [34]
Competitor
0.81
BIT [38]
Competitor
0.81
HCTI [34]
Competitor
0.78
InferSent
Organizers baseline
0.76
Paragram
Organizers baseline
0.50
AidMe model
0.75
2http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/stswiki/index.php/STSbenchmark

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Lair et al.
6
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present different simulations that prove the per-
formance and adaptability of AidMe. The code of these simulations
is available on https://github.com/nicolas-lair/AidMe
6.1
UserGrammar
6.1.1
Simulation grammar. In order to evaluate AidMe, we build
UserGrammar, a grammar of 153 patterns, 50 intents and a dictio-
nary of arguments. The different intents cover several domains
such as mail, web search, concert booking, travel booking, calendar
management and connected objects. We use this grammar to simu-
late user’s requests on these domains. Table 3 shows some examples
of intent, patterns and instantiated sentences. The first two intents
are identical, but the patterns are different and the sentences are
differently instantiated. The nature of the arguments in the patterns
are of different kinds: device, location, date, person... This is only
used to generate meaningful sentences but AidMe has no idea of the
nature of the arguments. The complete list of patterns and intent is
available in the Supplementary Materials.
6.1.2
Model evaluation on UserGrammar. To get an idea of how our
model would perform on a task close to the user interaction simula-
tion, we have evaluated our semantic similarity model on corpora
generated with UserGrammar. We describe below the evaluation
protocol. We generate a corpus from UserGrammar by generating:
• A train set of 5000 pairs from 150 different sentences and
100 different patterns;
• A test set of 1000 pairs from 100 different sentences and 40
different patterns which were not used to generate the train
set.
We report the F1_score, Precision and Recall of the models trained
on the train set and evaluated on the test set. These metrics are
more relevant than the Pearson correlation or a classic accuracy
metric as the task is like a binary classification task with a highly
unbalanced dataset (proportion of pairs with positive label between
2% and 4%). We repeat the experiment 30 times and report the
average performance of the model in Table 4 along with the standard
deviation. It is important to note that none of the sentences nor
the patterns of the test set were seen during training.
We also report the average performance of each submodel to
show the benefits of the ensemble model. We see that the feature-
based models outperform the neural network on precision but are
outperformed on recall. The ensemble model can make the most of
it by outperforming each of the submodel in every metric. We note
also that the standard deviation is almost half the standard deviation
of the submodels, meaning more stability in the performance. A
good balance between precision and recall is fundamental as good
precision will prevent AidMe from wrong intent detection and a
good recall will prevent AidMe from missing similar intents.
6.2
Simulation of the user’s interaction
6.2.1
Simulation. Using the UserGrammar described above, we
generate multiple sets of user’s requests, one set is approximately
700 sentences and represent 700 interactions between a user and
its assistant. At the beginning of each simulation, AidMe begins
with no idea of what the intents or the patterns can be and the
requests are presented to AidMe in a randomized order. AidMe has
to determine the intent and the associated pattern, when it fails
the simulator gives it the right intent and patterns so that AidMe
can be updated. We illustrate this in Figure 2 on a example where
AidMe analyses a sentence and integrates the user’s feedback to
update. In the simulation, we use ϵ = 0.3 for Algorithm 1. This
hyperparameter can be set depending if one wants to favor new or
known intents detection accuracy.
In each simulation we can see three main phases:
(1) Intent learning phase: Most of the user’s requests refer to
new intents or new patterns;
(2) Pattern learning phase: Most of the user’s requests refer
to known intents but new patterns;
(3) Steady-state regime: Most of the user’s requests refer to
known intents and patterns.
6.2.2
Evaluation. We evaluate two versions of AidMe using the
two main following metrics the intent detection accuracy and pattern
detection accuracy along with two baseline systems:
• AidMe is the algorithm as we describe it above
• AidMe_M is a variant of AidMe where a user request is
always processed using Algorithms 1 and 2. AidMe_M does
not try to match the request on a previously learned pattern.
• OneShotNLU: a one-shot learning system that needs to see
exactly each pattern once to be able to detect them using pat-
tern matching. This system does not discriminate between
intents and patterns and does not have a notion of similar
patterns.
• DFLearner: is a baseline system to compare AidMe with a
system where the intent and pattern detection algorithms
are replaced by another NLU system. We use DialogFlow3
API from Google, starting with a clear instance and adding
intents and examples of sentences as the simulation unfolds.
DFLearner cannot autonomously discover new patterns but
every time new patterns and intents are encountered, they
are added its knowledge base.
6.3
Simulations’ results
We report the results of the following metrics in Table 5: the ac-
curacy in detecting new intents, knwon intents and the overall
accuracy in intent detection. We report the same metrics for the
pattern detection. As OneShotNLU does not make a difference be-
tween intents and patterns their intent detection accuracy and
pattern detection accuracy are the same.
6.3.1
Comparison with DialogFlow. The performance of DFLearner
are quite low as only half of the intent are correctly identified. This
is because DialogFlow is not adapted to this kind of task:
• DialogFlow needs to know the types of the arguments in the
intent. As our system does not need the types of the argu-
ments to detect new patterns and to be fair in the comparison
we did not give the types of the argument to DialogFlow. A

contain more than two non-typed argument. Besides, the
types of arguments needs to be engineered in the system
3https://dialogflow.com/

AidMe
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Table 3: Examples of intent, patterns and sentences from UserGrammar
Intent
Pattern
Example of sentence
Turn on a device somewhere
Can you turn the __device on in __loc
Can you turn the alarm on in Paris
Turn on a device somewhere
Switch on the __device in __loc
Switch on the television in Paris
Get next meeting with someone
When do I have a meeting with __pers
When do I have a meeting with Bob
Get cost for a flight on a day
Get me the cost for a ticket to __loc on __date
Get me the cost for a ticket to Berlin on Monday
Get information
do you know what is a __var
Do you know what is a spider
Table 4: Model evaluation on UserGrammar corpus
Model
F1_score
Precision
Recall
mean
std
Binary Perceptron
0.77
0.09
0.75
0.84
Multi-class Perceptron
0.78
0.08
0.76
0.84
Random Forest
0.82
0.08
0.88
0.77
XGBoost
0.80
0.09
0.85
0.77
AidMe model
0.85
0.05
0.87
0.82
Table 5: Detection accuracy averaged over 10 simulations
Detection Accuracy (%)
Intents
Patterns
Model
New
Known
All
New
Known
All
OneShotNLU
0
80
73
0
100
73
DFLearner
0
56
52
22
53
48
AidMe_M
89
91
90
43
70
61
AidMe
89
91
90
43
100
82
and it is not easy to think of a system that could learn them
from the interaction.
• DialogFlow is based on a combination of a rule-based and ma-
chine learning approaches. We got warning from DialogFlow
that the number of example sentences were too small. This
demonstrates why the indirect approach based on semantic
similarity evaluation is relevant. With n sentences, a direct
classification model can build a corpus of size n while our
approach can build a corpus of size n2.
This experiment demonstrates that traditional NLU modules used
to create dialogue assistants are not adapted to agents that can be
instructed and customized by their user.
6.3.2
Comparison with OneShotNLU. As OneShotNLU detects all
the pattern when they have already been encoutered, the perfor-
mance of OneShotNLU indicates the distribution between new and
known patterns that appear multiple times. New patterns represents
30% of the simulations and in 43% of the cases, AidMe can detect
this new pattern without needing the user’s help. This means that
the user intervention needed by a system using AidMe is almost
halved compared to a system based on one shot learning.
However AidMe_M has a lower pattern accuracy than OneShotNLU.
This is due to the fact that the pattern detection algorithm reaches
an accuracy of 70% on the known patterns to be compared to the
100% of OneShotNLU. This means the best combination is to use
the pattern detection algorithm on new patterns and to perform
pattern matching on known patterns.
6.4
Integration to a digital assistant
We integrate the AidMe algorithm to an existing virtual assistant
described in [9] that learns by GUIs demonstrations and natural
language instructions. The assistant is able to learn mapping of
natural language orders to procedural knowledge in order to accom-
plish tasks on a digital environment composed of web services. The
overall functioning of the system is as follows: the user gives an

tries to find a corresponding procedure. If it does, the argument

otherwise the system request from the user a GUI demonstration
or an explanation of the procedure he wants to carry out.
A major limitation of this system is that the user has to remember
the exact forms he used to teach its agent the new tasks. As an exam-

used to link natural language order to the procedure does not ex-
actly match. The assistant then behaves as if the request referred
to a completely new procedure and the user has to reformulate its
request using the exact same form as during the learning. This can
make the system hard to use.
The AidMe algorithm, once integrated, allows the assistant to
avoid around 40% of these situations by proactively discovering
new forms without behaving as if the request is entirely new. Using
AidMe, the assistant can reformulate by itself the user’s request in
a known form and ask for confirmation to the user. When AidMe is
wrong, in 90% of the cases, it still has identified the intent correctly
and can ask for reformulation. Below is an example of dialogue
between the assistant and the user:
User

User
yes
As new procedures are learned and used, the system will gather
the necessary data to improve the AidMe algorithm. This inte-
gration has improved the system’s robustness to user language
variability with a minimal set of pre-engineered language skills and
still needs to be tested with more extended user experiments.

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Lair et al.
7
DISCUSSION
7.1
Pros and cons of a comparison-based
method
7.1.1
Pros: A significant advantage of this method is that, such a
model does not need to be trained each time a new intent is detected.
Unlike traditional intent detection methods that are trained to recog-
nize intents in a direct way and among a list of possible intents, our
method is indirect as it seeks for a potential known intent without
the assurance to find one. Two sentences can always be compared
using the similarity model and the analysis of the similarity score is
enough to evaluate if two sentences are close enough to be related
to the same intent. On the contrary, a classification model can only
predict classes on which it has been trained. When it discovers a
new intent, a system based on a classification model needs there-
fore to be retrained. This can be an issue depending on the training
time as the system would be unavailable for a while. But above all,
the main challenge would be to maintain a relative balance in the
dataset between classes, otherwise some class could be "ignored"
by the model. When an intent is discovered for the first time, few
data would be available to train on and the performance on the new
class would need time to become satisfactory. Finally this method
is more sample efficient than classification-based method as with
the collection of n sentences, the train dataset set is of size n2.
7.1.2
Cons: The main disadvantage of this method is that the
number of sentences to which a new request have to be compared
grows rapidly. In addition, the pattern matching algorithm is chal-
lenged by very long sentences or sentences with many arguments.
Detection of arguments is certainly a difficult task in NLU as the
more arguments a sentence contains the bigger the number of pos-
sibilities grows. Our methods by comparing all the possible patterns
is also vulnerable to the size of the sentences. As the number of
words grows, the number of possible patterns explodes. We tracked
the performance of AidMe in identifying the patterns depending
on the number of arguments and report the results in Table 6. We
note that it is extremely difficult for AidMe to discover new pattern
that have more than 2 arguments.
Table 6: Pattern detection depending of the number of argu-
ments
Number of arguments
Pattern Detection (%)
1
2
3
New Patterns
55
36
0
Overall Accuracy
80
67
22
Upgrading AidMe to allow it to scale independently from the
size of the collected sentences is part of the future work. One can
think that once a certain number of sentences have been collected
for an intent, it is not necessary to compare a new request to all
of them but only to a small number. On the topic of making the
similar pattern detection algorithm less vulnerable to the number
of arguments and the size of the sentences, the idea that we should
make use of the nature of the possible variables is very promising
and would drastically reduce the combinatoriality of the approach.
7.2
Sharing assistant knowledge across users
As outlined in Section 2.3, agents that learn by interaction gather
data which are often related to a specific user. With a direct map-
ping between sentences and their interpretative function, it is hard ,
then, to share knowledge among users. It is common for a mapping
to be not fully generalized and to hide details in the interpretative

plication 1 while another user uses Application 2 but still say the

Figure 4, users may have different experiences with their agent but
have the opportunity to share the linguistic similarity module to
benefit from other user experiences. This model could be validated
in future works.
Shared semantic
similarity
Interpreter
Intent
User 1
User 2
Pattern/sentence
Figure 4: Shareable semantic similarity
7.3
Enhancing the similar pattern
identification algorithm
The idea behind the pattern matching algorithm is to evaluate a
semantic similarity between patterns by using the semantic simi-
larity between instantiated sentences. In our implementation, we
compare only the similarity between two patterns by instantiating
one sentence for each pattern. We note in our simulations that this
allows the system to infer around 40% of the new patterns correctly.
It would be interesting to evaluate how this can be improved by
evaluating the similarity between patterns by averaging the con-
textual similarity over multiple contexts. Rather than comparing
the similarity between two instantiated sentences, we could com-
pare the average similarity between multiple instantiated sentences.
We would then change the definition of the the contextual pattern
similarity to:
Sim|ARGS(p1,p2) =
1
|ARGS|
Õ
arдs ∈ARGS
Sim(λ(p1,arдs), λ(p2,arдs))

AidMe
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
with ARGS being a set of possible arguments associated with
p1 and p2. We could expect the estimated similarity to be more
accurate and the rate of discovered patterns higher. However, this
needs to be balanced to the additional computation time that would
require.
FUTURE WORK
Along with multiple improvements to AidMe concerning its scaling
abilities, it would be very instructive to test the system with real
users by integrating it with different agents learning by demon-
stration. In addition to giving these assistants the possibility to
autonomously infer the meaning of new sentences, AidMe can cre-
ate novel types of interaction with the user. Able to detect new
intents 90% of the times, AidMe allows the assistant to be proactive
in his interaction by indicating that it knows that the user is about
to teach it a new task. In the same vein, when AidMe can fail to
identify the patterns and but still indicates in more than 90% of the
times that it knows what the user wants but needs help to be able
to perform it. This new type of interaction can make the interaction
with digital assistant more human-like and attractive to the user.
CONCLUSION
We developed AidMe as an NLU module for digital assistants that
allows their users to teach them new tasks through interaction. To
be usable, such a system needs to be extremely sample efficient and
rapidly achieve good performance using only the data collected
during the interactions. In this regard, AidMe achieves excellent
sample efficiency. During the simulations we conducted, the intents
were correctly detected 90% of the times whereas AidMe has no
more than 10 examples of sentences per intent at the end of the
simulation. Additionally, AidMe beats one-shot learning systems
by performing zero-shot learning on 43% of the patterns in our
simulation. AidMe is by design not a domain specific module, the
knowledge that is pre-engineered in the system consists in the
only word embeddings and this allows AidMe to adapt to the user
in any domain. Finally AidMe can offer to the user a new sort of
interaction where the assistants knows it needs the user to fulfill
its request. The next step for AidMe is now to be confronted to real
users by integrating it to real Digital Assistant.
