A deep learning approach to using wearable 
seismocardiography (SCG) for diagnosing aortic valve 
stenosis and predicting aortic hemodynamics 
obtained by 4D flow MRI 
Mahmoud E. Khani1, Ethan M. I. Johnson1, Aparna Sodhi2, Joshua D. Robinson1,2,3, 
Cynthia K. Rigsby1,2,3, Bradly D. Allen1, and Michael Markl1,4 
1Department of Radiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL 60611 
2Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital, Chicago, IL 60611 
3Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL 60611 
4Department of Biomedical Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 
Abstract 
In this paper, we explored the use of deep learning for the prediction of aortic flow metrics 
obtained using 4D flow MRI using wearable seismocardiography (SCG) devices. 4D flow 
MRI provides a comprehensive assessment of cardiovascular hemodynamics, but it is 
costly and time-consuming. We hypothesized that deep learning could be used to identify 
pathological changes in blood flow, such as elevated peak systolic velocity Vmax in 
patients with heart valve diseases, from SCG signals. We also investigated the ability of 
this deep learning technique to differentiate between patients diagnosed with aortic valve 
stenosis (AS), non-AS patients with a bicuspid aortic valve (BAV), non-AS patients with 
a mechanical aortic valve (MAV), and healthy subjects with a normal tricuspid aortic valve 
(TAV). In a study of 77 subjects who underwent same-day 4D flow MRI and SCG, we 
found that the Vmax values obtained using deep learning and SCGs were in good 
agreement with those obtained by 4D flow MRI. Additionally, subjects with TAV, BAV, 
MAV, and AS could be classified with ROC-AUC values of 92%, 95%, 81%, and 83%, 
respectively. This suggests that SCG obtained using low-cost wearable electronics may 
be used as a supplement to 4D flow MRI exams or as a screening tool for aortic valve 
disease. 
Introduction 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a crucial tool in the clinical evaluation of 
cardiovascular diseases. Phase contrast MRI (PC-MRI), specifically four-dimensional 
(4D) flow MRI, has become a routine technique for assessing the functional changes in 
cardiovascular blood flow in patients with heart valve, aortic, or pulmonary diseases [1-
13]. 4D flow MRI provides a comprehensive evaluation of the temporal and spatial 

evolution of cardiovascular hemodynamics by acquiring time-resolved, three-dimensional 
(x-y-z) measurements of blood velocity with 3-directional velocity encoding [14-17]. 
Additionally, various cardiac flow metrics such as peak systolic velocity, regurgitation 
fraction, and wall shear stress can be retrospectively obtained from the measured blood 
velocities [18-29]. Despite the development of efficient 4D flow protocols for clinical 
applications [30-37], this technique is still considered to be costly and time-consuming 
due to the advanced MR sequences and computational demands of the 4D flow analysis. 
To address this, a preliminary evaluation of aortic flow dynamics using a cost-effective 
and efficient method could be valuable in diagnosing abnormalities prior to prescribing a 
comprehensive cardiac MRI. This study aims to investigate the utility of a wearable 
seismocardiography (SCG) device to predict aortic flow metrics similar to those obtained 
using 4D flow MRI and diagnose aortic valve pathologies. 
SCG signals are non-invasive measures of cardiac vibrations obtained at the chest 
surface [38-52]. These vibrations are associated with heart mechanical activities such as 
cardiac contractions, valve closures, and changes in blood momentum [49]. For example, 
the atrial systole has been shown to result in a low-frequency SCG wave component, 
while the ventricular systole produces a high-amplitude wave, and the first and second 
heart sounds generate two high-frequency vibrations [43]. Additionally, simultaneous 
SCG and electrocardiogram (ECG) acquisition has revealed that the timing of various 
physiological events, such as the opening and closure of the mitral and aortic valves and 
their rapid filling or ejection, correspond to various features in the SCG waveforms [45]. 
However, SCG pulses are highly susceptible to inter-subject variations due to differences 
in factors such as body mass index, gender, age, and other demographic and health 
attributes, making it difficult to derive consistent clinical inferences [53]. Additionally, the 
location of the SCG device on the chest can impact the shape of the recorded waveforms. 
Lastly, SCG vibrations have relatively low amplitudes and are easily contaminated by 
subject motion artifacts or respiratory movements, which can lead to misinterpretation of 
diagnostic features [43]. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships between chest vibrations 
measured by SCG and cardiac flow metrics obtained using 4D flow MRI using a new deep 
learning approach. Our technique used ECG-synchronized scalograms of the SCG 
signals as input to a convolutional neural network (CNN) model for the regression or 
classification of cardiac parameters. In addition, we used a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) 
based on demographic attributes such as body mass index, gender, and age to account 
for inter-subject variations in SCG. We hypothesized that this deep learning approach 
could be used to infer pathological changes in blood flow, such as an increased peak 
systolic velocity (Vmax) in patients with aortic valve disease, from SCG pulses. Additionally, 
because the presence of flow abnormalities such as elevated Vmax are indicative of aortic 
valve complications, we hypothesized that this technique could be used to diagnose 
various aortic valve conditions, such as bicuspid or mechanical aortic valves (BAV and 
MAV) and aortic stenosis (AS) and differentiate them from healthy subjects with normal 
tricuspid aortic valves (TAV). 

Methods 
1. Study cohort 
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and informed consent 
was obtained from all participants. We recruited 46 healthy subjects (20 females, age: 
45.9 ± 17.2 years) with no known history of cardiovascular disease and 31 patients with 
aortic valve disease (6 females, age: 32.6 ± 20.9 years). Among the patients, 1 had a 
normal tricuspid aortic valve (TAV), 21 had bicuspid aortic valves (BAV), and 9 had 
mechanical valve implants. In addition, 12 patients were diagnosed with varying degrees 
of aortic stenosis (AS): 2 were mild, 6 were moderate, and 4 were severe. 
2. 4D flow MRI acquisition and analysis 
4D flow MRI was performed using a spatial resolution of 1-3 mm3, time resolution of 30-
40 ms, and velocity encoding (venc) of 150-375 cm/s on a 1.5T or 3T scanner. The MRI 
was performed during free breathing with navigator respiration control and prospective or 
retrospective gating and covered the full volume of the thoracic aorta. 
Pre-processing of the 4D flow data included correction for eddy currents, velocity anti-
aliasing, and application of a deep learning tool to automatically derive a 3D segmentation 
of the thoracic aorta [54]. This segmentation was used to mask the 4D flow velocity data, 
and the ascending aorta (AAo) was manually delineated from its root to the branching 
vessels by placing a plane proximate to the branching vessels, perpendicular to the 
centerline. As shown in Fig. 1(a), peak systolic velocity Vmax in the AAo was computed 
from a volumetric analysis of all voxels in the AAo, with outlier-rejection [55]. All 4D flow 
MRI analyses were performed using a custom code in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, 
USA). 
3. SCG analysis 
We used a custom-designed, wearable cardiac sensor (Fig. 1(b)) incorporating a MEMS 
accelerometer (1 kHz sampling rate, 2 µs/m2 sensitivity) to acquire chest accelerations in 
three directions immediately before MRI. The SCG device was placed on the sternum of 
subjects while they were in the supine position. These acceleration recordings were beat-
by-beat time-referenced to the R-waves within simultaneously acquired ECG signals. 
Figure 1(c) shows an example of the gating ECG signal, while Fig. 1(d-f) show the 
accelerations recorded in the three directions using the accelerometer over a 5 s period. 
At each heartbeat, one SCG pulse was calculated using the net magnitude of the 
accelerations along the three directions., i.e., 
scgi(𝑡) = √acc𝑖,𝑥
2 (𝑡) + acc𝑖,𝑦
2 (𝑡) + acc𝑖,𝑧
2 (𝑡)
(1) 
where subscript 𝑖 represents the heartbeat number, and subscripts 𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑧 represent 
the direction of the measured accelerations. Figure 1(g) shows how the gating of SCG 
signals was performed using the ECG recordings. In this way, multiple SCG signals, each 

corresponding to one R-R period in ECG, one example shown in Fig. 1(h), were measured 
and processed for each subject. It should be noted that the duration of measurement was 
not the same for all subjects, so the number of SCG signals obtained varied for different 
subjects. 
4. Signal conditioning 
The following steps were used to condition SCG signals in MATLAB. First, high-pass 
filtering was applied to remove low-frequency artifacts using a minimum-order elliptic filter 
with an infinite impulse response (IIR) function. The filter had a stop-band attenuation of 
60 dB, a stop-band frequency of 8.4 Hz, a pass-band frequency of 10 Hz, and a pass-
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
    
 
   
             
   
   
0
 
   
     
               
                  
              
         
            
              
 
 
    
                           
R  a e
Figure 1. (a) the derivation of Vmax by AI-based 3D-segmentation of the thoracic aorta within the full 4D 
flow MRI measurements and manual delineation of AAo, (b) the SCG device, (c) an example of ECG 
signal, (d-f) acceleration signals measured in 𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑧 directions, respectively, (g) gating of SCG to 
R-waves within simultaneously acquired ECG signals, (h) an example SCG pulse measured over one 
heartbeat. 

band ripple of 0.1. A Blackman window was used to taper the transition of boundary points 
into zero. Wavelet denoising was performed to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 
the signals. A symlet  a elet  ith four  anishing moments (‘sym4’)  as used, and the 
denoising method employed was the false discovery rate (FDR) with a hard thresholding 
rule. The noise estimate used was level-dependent, and the number of levels of 
decomposition was calculated as the integer part of log2 𝑁, where 𝑁 is the number of 
signal points. Figure 2(a) shows examples of raw and denoised SCG signals. After 
denoising the SCG signals, we used the Signal Quality Index (SQI) to identify and remove 
any outliers. The SQI is a measure of the quality of the signals and is calculated based 
on the distance of each SCG from a reference signal. This step helped ensure that the 
resulting signals were of high quality and accurately represented the subject's physiology. 
Detailed information about the SQI can be found in reference [56]. Briefly, for each 
subject, the SQI of the 𝑖th SCG signal, 𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖(𝑡), was calculated based on its distance from 
𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ (𝑡), given by, 
SQIi = exp (−𝒟(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ )
ℒ(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ )),
(2) 
where  𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ (𝑡) represents the point-wise average of all SCGs for the subject, 𝒟(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ ) 
represents the distance between 𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖 and 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ , and ℒ(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ ) represents the length of 
𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖 and  𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ . Following the approach described in [56], we used dynamic time warping 
(DTW) to calculate 𝒟(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ ). The DTW algorithm was used to find the minimum 
Euclidean distance between two SCG signals, even if they were of different lengths. This 
distance, denoted as ℒ(𝑠𝑐𝑔𝑖, 𝑠𝑐𝑔
̂ ), was calculated by stretching or compressing the 
signals to match their lengths.  A small distance in 𝐷 indicates a high-quality signal, while 
a large distance indicates a poor-quality signal.  
To determine which signals were considered high quality, the SQI scores were calculated 
for each signal. The signals were then ranked in order of their SQI scores, and the top 
95% of signals were selected as the "good" signals. Any signals with an SQI below the 
5% threshold were considered outliers and were removed from further processing. This 
can be seen in Fig. 2(b-c), which shows examples of good SCG signals and the outliers 
for a single subject. The outlier signals are highly fluctuating and do not resemble a typical 
SCG.  
5. Time-frequency representation – SCG scalograms 
To obtain time-frequency representations of the remaining SCG signals, we used the 
continuous wavelet transform (CWT). We defined a CWT filter bank composed of 48 
filters per octave using the analytic Morse wavelet. The filter amplitudes were normalized 
so that the peak magnitude of all passbands was equal to 2. The highest passband 
frequency was designed such that the magnitude falls to half the peak value at the Nyquist 
frequency. 

The absolute value of the CWT coefficients produced a scalogram for each SCG. Figure 
2(d-e) show an example of a denoised SCG and its corresponding scalogram. It can be 
seen that the two main features in the SCG pulse, which occur between 0 and 0.5 
seconds and between 0.5 and 1 second, appear at the same locations in the scalogram. 
In addition, the frequency components of these features, which lie between 10 and 100 
Hz, are shown on the y-axis. These frequency values were directly estimated from their 
corresponding wavelet scales. 
All the scalograms were converted to 256×256 images using bicubic interpolation, with 
each interpolated pixel representing the weighted average of the pixels in its nearest 4×4 
neighborhood. This allows for easy visualization and analysis of the time-frequency 
characteristics of the SCG signals. 
6. Deep learning 
Figure 3(a) shows the deep learning model used for the regression of peak systolic 
velocity. The SCG scalograms were used as input data for a convolutional neural network 
(CNN) model to predict Vmax in the AAo. The CNN architecture consisted of a stack of five 
convolutional blocks, with each block containing a sequence of Conv2D, ReLU (rectified 
linear unit) activation, batch normalization, and max pooling layers. The Conv2D layer 
creates multiple kernels to be convolved with the input data and produces output tensors. 
The kernel weights and bias vectors are adjusted during backpropagation. For all 
convolutional blocks, the kernel size, stride, and padding parameters were set to 3×3, 1, 
             
        
   
   
   
         
   
   
         
            
Figure 2. (a) comparison of a raw and denoised SCG signal, (b-c), the none-outlier and outlier pulses
identified based on SQI scores for a healthy subject, (d) an example SCG pulse composed of two main
features, (e) the scalogram of the signal in (d) representing the absolute value of its CWT coefficients. 

and "same", respectively. The ReLU activation function outputs its input if it is positive 
and outputs zero otherwise. This adds non-linearity to the features learned by the model. 
The batch normalization layer normalizes each batch of data using its mean and standard 
deviation to facilitate backpropagation. Finally, the max pooling layer outputs the largest 
number within each 2×2 window of its input tensor to extract increasingly generic features  
by down-sampling. These layers work together to allow the CNN to efficiently learn and 
extract useful features from the SCG scalograms. The output of the last convolutional 
block was flattened and connected to two fully-connected dense units, with the first unit 
containing a sequence of dense, ReLU activation, batch normalization, and dropout 
layers. The second unit only contained dense and ReLU activation layers.  
To incorporate demographic attributes of the subjects (weight, height, age, and sex) in 
the deep learning model, we created a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with two fully-
connected dense layers. All three continuous attributes were min-max normalized, and 
the participants' gender was one-hot encoded (i.e. female = 1, male = 0) before being fed 
into the MLP.  
The outputs of the MLP and CNN, which both have four nodes, were concatenated and 
fed into a single dense layer followed by a linear activation unit. This final layer regresses 
the desired flow metric, such as Vmax peak systolic velocity, using the combined 
information from both the demographic attributes and the time-frequency characteristics 
of the SCG signals.  
The same model was also used to classify the subjects into different valve conditions: 
non-AS TAV, non-AS BAV, non-AS MAV, and AS. However, as it is shown by Fig. 3(b) 
for the classification task, the number of nodes in the final dense layer was equal to the 
                
 eight   g 
Height  m 
Age  y 
 e   f m 
  
   
       
         
            
             
   
  
  
      
         
            
        
   
 
     
 
       
    
    
   
                    
 eight   g 
Height  m 
Age  y 
 e   f m 
  
   
       
         
            
             
   
  
  
      
         
            
        
   
 
     
 
        
    
       
       
       
  
   
Figure 3. The mixture DNN model composed of a MLP and a CCN to (a) predict the aortic Vmax and (b)
classify the subjects into different valve conditions: non-AS TAV, non-AS BAV, non-AS MAV, and AS, based
on the demographic attributes of the subjects and scalograms of the SCG signals. 

number of valve condition categories, and a SoftMax activation function was used to 
produce the probabilities of the output belonging to each class. This allows the model to 
accurately classify the subjects based on their SCG signals and demographic attributes. 
In both regression and classification models, the training parameters of MLP and CNN 
were optimized simultaneously to minimize the loss function, which was calculated as the 
mean percentage error between the predicted and true velocities for the regression task, 
and the categorical cross entropy for the classification task. The models were 
implemented using Tensorflow 2.6 and Keras libraries in Python 3.8 and were run on a 
GPU node (equipped with a 40 GB Tesla A100 GPU) within the Northwestern University 
Quest Computing Cluster. 
To evaluate the performance of the models, we used a leave-subject-out cross-validation 
approach. This means that for each iteration, we used 80% of the available SCG pulses 
(N = 6249) for training the model and reserved the remaining 20% for testing. Importantly, 
the SCG pulses belonging to each subject were only included in either the training or test 
set, but not both, in order to avoid any potential bias in the performance metrics. We 
repeated this process for 10 iterations, randomly selecting different subjects to be 
included in the training and test sets at each trial. This allowed us to verify that the 
reported performance metrics were not influenced by any specific patterns in the 
distribution of the training and test sets. For each iteration, the model was trained for 150 
epochs. 
To assess the agreement between the values obtained by the DNN and 4D flow, we 
performed correlation and Bland-Altman analyses. The linear relationship between the 
two sets of values was determined using Pearson correlation coefficient, and the limits of 
agreement (LOA) were calculated using the Bland-Altman method. In Bland-Altman plots, 
each sample is represented by the mean of the two measurement techniques on the x-
axis, and the difference between the two techniques on the y-axis. The mean difference 
is an estimate of the bias, the standard deviation (SD) of the difference measures the 
random fluctuations around the mean, and the LOA is defined as 1.96×SD. If the mean 
difference is significantly different from 0, based on a one-sample t-test (significance level 
𝛼 = 0.05), this indicates the presence of a fixed bias. It is important to note that for each 
subject, there were multiple SCG scalograms recorded at different heartbeats. The DNN 
model assigned a Vmax value to each scalogram, and we used the average Vmax value 
over all scalograms for each subject as the representative value for that subject. 
To investigate the performance of the classification model, we used receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curves. The ROC curves were constructed using the probabilities 
assigned by the model to each observation belonging to a particular valve condition 
group. An ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate 
(FPR) at different thresholds chosen from the predicted probabilities, and a higher ROC-
AUC (area under the curve) indicates a better performance by the model. We also used 
the confusion matrix obtained by testing the classification model. In a confusion matrix, 
the diagonal elements represent the number of true positives (𝑇𝑃) in each category, while 

the off-diagonal elements at each row and column respectively show the number of false 
negatives (𝐹𝑁) and false positives (𝐹𝑃). In addition, we calculated and compared the 
precision (
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃) and recall (
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁) rates in diagnosing each valve condition. 
Results 
1. Prediction of Vmax 
The peak systolic velocities predicted by our deep learning model were in good 
agreement with the velocities obtained using 4D flow MRI, as demonstrated by the low 
mean squared error of 0.2 m/s across ten random trials. Figure 4(a) shows the average 
DNN-predicted Vmax values versus the velocities obtained by 4D flow MRI for the test 
subjects. As mentioned earlier, we used the average Vmax value over all scalograms for 
each subject as the representative value. The figure shows a strong linear correlation 
between the estimated and measured Vmax values (y = 0.89x, r = 0.76, p ≪ 0.01). 
Additionally, Figure 4(b) shows the Bland-Altman plot for the Vmax values obtained by the 
DNN model and 4D flow MRI measurements. This plot indicates a low, non-significant 
bias (-0.08 m/s, p = 0.18) and moderate limits of agreement (±0.86 m/s).  
2. Classification of aortic valve condition 
Figure 4(c) shows the results of a classification model that was trained to identify four 
different types of subjects based on their SCG scalograms and demographic attributes: 
non-AS TAV, non-AS BAV, non-AS MAV, and AS. The model was evaluated using 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, which plot the true positive rate (recall) 
against the false positive rate. The solid lines on the ROC curves represent the mean 
performance of the model over 10 random iterations, while the error regions show the 
standard deviation of the performance across the iterations. The ROC-AUC values 
indicate the model's performance on each of the four classes, with values of 91.8±5.3%, 
94.8±5.1%, 81.2±10.8, and 83.1±11.1% for non-AS TAV, non-AS BAV, non-AS MAV, and 
AS subjects, respectively. 
Figure 4(d) shows a confusion matrix, which was used to evaluate the model's 
performance on the test set in one random trial. The rows of the matrix represent the 
ground-truth categories, while the columns represent the categories predicted by the 
model. The precision and recall rates indicate the model's ability to correctly classify 
subjects in each of the four classes. The precision rates for the four classes were 93%, 
82%, 83%, and 49%, while the recall rates were 81%, 94%, 68%, and 86%. 
Discussion and conclusion 
In this study, we evaluated the effectiveness of using deep learning and SCG scalograms 
to predict aortic peak systolic velocity and diagnose patients with various aortic valve 
complications. Our deep learning model accurately predicted peak systolic velocities, with 
MSE = 0.2 m/s and r = 0.76 (p<0.01), compared to velocities obtained using 4D flow MRI. 

Despite the imbalanced distribution of subjects with different types of aortic valve 
pathologies, we achieved high precision rates (over 82% for all categories except non-
MAV) and recall rates (over 81% for all categories except AS) in the diagnosis of these 
conditions. Our results suggest that deep learning and SCG have significant potential as 
a substitute or screening tool for more advanced imaging techniques such as 4D flow 
MRI. 
Deep learning models have been previously applied to extract various types of 
information from SCG signals. For example, a CNN model was developed to continuously 
identify R-peaks from SCG signals with high sensitivity, and it was demonstrated that 
heart rate variability indices obtained using this model from SCG signals were in good 
agreement with those obtained from ECG signals [57]. A study of 36 healthy subjects 
showed that deep learning could accurately map SCG signal segments to whole-body 
ballistocardiograms [51]. A U-Net-based cascaded framework was also proposed for 
estimating respiratory rate from ECG and SCG signals [58]. Other research has 
investigated the use of machine learning and deep learning for detecting heartbeats and 
heartbeat rates from SCG signals [59, 60]. In contrast to these previous works, this paper 
examines the correlation between wearable SCG pulses and cardiac peak systolic 
   
   
0.  (1. 6  )
 0.0 (p 0.1 )
 0. 4( 1. 6  )
                                    
                                      
   
   
11
1 
11 
0
1  
 
0
 6
  
1 1
1 
 0
0
0
1 1
 1 
 4 
6  
 6 
         4  
Recall
 recision
non  A 
non  A 
A 
non  A 
   
Figure 4. Statistical comparison between the Vmax values derived by 4D flow MRI and predicted by DNN 
and scalograms based on (a) correlation and (b) Bland-Altman analysis, (c) the ROC curves (mean±SD)
for classification of non-TAV, non-BAV, non-MAV subjects, and patients with AS, (d) the confusion chart
(at SCG level) of an iteration of training and test of the classification model.  

velocity, whose ground truth was determined using comprehensive 4D flow MRI. This 
study therefore expands the potential use of SCG for diagnosing cardiac abnormalities 
based on blood velocity, rather than just heart rate beats. 
One potential application of the technique described in this work is to improve the 
accuracy of estimating aortic velocity for PC-MRI. A crucial parameter that needs to be 
specified before performing PC-MRI is the venc threshold [61]. This parameter should be 
set to capture the highest expected velocity within the vessel of interest while maintaining 
a sufficient velocity-to-noise ratio. Although the venc value is crucial for proper 
performance of the PC pulse sequence, it is often estimated because its optimal value is 
not known in advance, and sometimes a study needs to be repeated using different vencs 
to obtain the optimal results. The technique presented in this work could potentially be 
used to obtain a reliable estimation of the optimal venc value before imaging, reducing 
MR imaging time and costs. 
A major limitation of the current study was the imbalanced distribution of subjects. In 
predicting peak systolic velocity, the majority of study participants were healthy, resulting 
in only a small percentage (about 20%) of training set samples having a velocity greater 
than 2 m/s. This made it more difficult for the model to accurately predict higher peak 
velocities in the test set, as shown in Fig. 4(a) where the correlation with ground-truth 
values was weaker for higher velocities compared to lower ones. In classifying valve 
conditions, the non-TAV group had 46 subjects, while the non-BAV, non-MAV, and AS 
groups each had only 10, 9, and 12 subjects, respectively. This may have contributed to 
the less accurate predictions of the model in diagnosing non-MAV and AS categories 
compared to non-TAV subjects. Furthermore, while it would have been valuable to further 
stratify AS severity (e.g., mild, moderate, and severe), doing so would likely result in even 
smaller numbers of subjects in each group. Therefore, it is necessary to expand the 
patient cohort to include more subjects with higher aortic velocities and different severities 
of AS in future studies.
