An Ant Colony Optimization Algorithm for
Partitioning Graphs with Supply and Demand
Raka Jovanovica, Milan Tubab, Stefan Voßc
aQatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI), PO Box 5825, Doha, Qatar
bFaculty of Computer Science, Megatrend University, Belgrade, Serbia
cInstitute of Information Systems, University of Hamburg, Von-Melle-Park 5, 20146
Hamburg, Germany
and Escuela de Ingeniera Industrial, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´olica de Valpara´ıso, Chile
Abstract
In this paper we focus on ﬁnding high quality solutions for the problem of max-
imum partitioning of graphs with supply and demand (MPGSD). There is a
growing interest for the MPGSD due to its close connection to problems appear-
ing in the ﬁeld of electrical distribution systems, especially for the optimization
of self-adequacy of interconnected microgrids. We propose an ant colony op-
timization algorithm for the problem. With the goal of further improving the
algorithm we combine it with a previously developed correction procedure. In
our computational experiments we evaluate the performance of the proposed
algorithm on both trees and general graphs. The tests show that the method
manages to ﬁnd optimal solutions in more than 50% of the problem instances,
and has an average relative error of less than 0.5% when compared to known
optimal solutions.
Keywords:
Ant Colony Optimization, Microgrid, Graph Partitioning,
Demand Vertex, Supply Vertex, Combinatorial Optimization
1. Introduction
In recent years the research in the ﬁeld of smart grids has had a signiﬁcant
increase in exploring the concept of interconnected microgrids [1]. This approach
has resulted in novel types of typologies for electrical grids and new aspects of
such systems that should be considered. Some of the most prominent newly
Preprint submitted to Applied Soft Computing
March 4, 2015
arXiv:1503.00899v1  [cs.AI]  3 Mar 2015

emerged problems are the maximizing of self-adequacy [2], reliability, supply-
security [3] and the potential for self-healing [4] of such systems. In many cases
the underlying optimization problems are of a very high complexity and can
not be solved to optimality in polynomial time. Electrical grids are systems of
gigantic size, which makes their optimization very hard from a computational
point of view. Luckily, previous research has shown that for many systems it
is not necessary to use highly detailed models; often simpliﬁed graph ones can
give suﬃciently good approximations to the original problem. The family of
graph partitioning problems has proven to be closely related to power supply
and delivery networks [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
In a system of interconnected microgrids each microgrid is made as inde-
pendent from the rest of the system as possible; this results in many positive
characteristics. Some examples are the lower complexity of the entire grid and
enhanced reliability of each of the microgrids due to the increased resistance
to failures in other parts of the system. The term independent is used for the
case when there is a minimum of power exchange between the connected mi-
crogrids. This property of the system is formally deﬁned as the maximization
of self-adequacy of interconnected microgrids. Recently, research has been con-
ducted in developing algorithms for ﬁnding approximate solutions [2] to this
problem.
Previous research has also explored the closely related problem of
eﬃcient decomposition or islanding of large grids into islands with a balanced
generation/load subject to speciﬁc constraints [10, 11]. Due to the large com-
plexity and size of electrical grids, when attempting to model and optimize
some global properties, it is frequently convenient to use simpliﬁed graph mod-
els. Such models often result in diﬀerent versions of graph partitioning problems
suitable for speciﬁc real life applications. Some examples are having a balanced
partitioning [12], minimizing the number or weight of cuts [13, 14], or by limiting
the number of cuts [15].
The focus of this paper is on the Maximal Partitioning of Graphs with Supply
and Demand (MPGSD). The majority of previous research has been dedicated
to the theoretical aspects of this problem [16, 17, 6, 18]. A signiﬁcant part of the
2

published work is focused on solving this problem for speciﬁc types of graphs like
trees [17, 6, 18] and series-parallel graphs [16]. A method for ﬁnding solutions
with a guarantee of a 2k-approximation for general graphs has been presented
in [9]. Diﬀerent variations of the original problem have been developed, like a
parametric version [19] and one with additional capacity constraints [20].
In this paper we present an ant colony optimization (ACO) [21] approach for
ﬁnding high quality approximate solutions to the MPGSD. ACO has previously
been successfully applied to problems of multiway [22] and balanced [23] graph
partitioning. The same method has also proven to be suitable for the closely
related problems of graph cutting [24] and covering [25, 26] and partitioning of
meshes [27]. The proposed ACO adaptation for our problem of interest is based
on the greedy algorithm presented in [28, 29]. The ACO algorithm is further
improved by combining it with our previously developed correction procedure
[29]. In our tests on general graphs and trees, we show that the newly developed
method frequently manages to ﬁnd optimal solutions and has a small average
error when compared to known optimal solutions.
The paper is organized as follows. In the second section we give the deﬁnition
of the MPGSD. Then we provide a short outline of a greedy algorithm which
is used as a basis for the proposed method. In the third section we present
details of our ACO algorithm. In the subsequent sections we discuss results of
our computational experiments and provide some conclusions.
2. Maximal Partitioning of Graphs With Supply/Demand
The MPGSD is deﬁned for an undirected graph G = (V, E) with a set of
nodes V and a set of edges E. The set of nodes V is split into two disjunct
subsets Vs and Vd. Each node u ∈Vs will be called a supply vertex and will have
a corresponding positive integer value sup(u). Elements of the second subset
v ∈Vd will be called demand vertices and will have a corresponding positive
integer value sup(v). The goal is to ﬁnd a partitioning Π = {S1, S2, .., Sn} of the
graph G that satisﬁes the following constraints. All the subgraphs in Π must be
3

connected subgraphs containing only a single distinct supply node. As a result
we have |Vs| = n. Each of the Si must have a supply greater or equal to its
total demand. Each demand vertex can be an element of only one subgraph, or
in other words it can only receive ’power’ from one supply vertex through the
edges of G.
With the intention of having a simpler notation, we will use strictly negative
values for demand nodes and positive values for supply nodes (note that this
is slightly diﬀerent from the deﬁnition of [16]). The goal is to maximize the
fulﬁllment of demands, or more precisely to maximize the following sum.
D(Π) = −
X
S∈Π
X
v∈S∩Vd
sup(v)
(1)
while the following constraints are satisﬁed for all Si ∈Π
X
v∈Si
sup(v) ≥0
(2)
Si ∩Sj = ∅
, i ̸= j
(3)
Si is connected
(4)
An illustration of the MPGSD is given in Figure 1. It has been shown that
the MPGSD is NP-hard even in the case of a graph containing only one supply
node and having a star structure [16].
3. Outline of Greedy Algorithm
In this section we give a short overview of the greedy algorithm, for which
details can be found in [28], that is used as a base for the ACO method for the
MPGSD. As previously stated, the solution of the problem of interest is a set
of |Π| = n subgraphs where n = |Vs| is the number of supply nodes. In the
initial step of the algorithm we start with n disjunct subgraphs Si, that only
contain one supply node S = {si}. At each of the following steps (iterations)
of the algorithm one vertex v ∈Vd is selected and used to expand a selected
subgraph Si. The selection of both v and Si is performed in a way that the
4

Figure 1: Examples of problem instances for the MPGSD. On the left the square nodes
represent supply nodes and circles demand nodes. Numbers within the nodes correspond to
supply and demand values, respectively. The right side shows the solutions, where the same
color (or connected shaded set) of nodes indicates they are a part of the same partitioning.
newly generated subgraph satisﬁes the constraints of being connected, disjunct
and fulﬁlls Eq. 2.
Let us deﬁne NV as the set of adjacent vertices to v in G using the following
equation
NV (v) = {u|u ∈V ∧(u, v) ∈E}
(5)
The idea is to gradually expand each of the subgraphs Si by adding new
vertices v to them. The set of potential candidates for expansion of subgraph
Si, or in other words vertices that are adjacent to the Si, can be deﬁned using the
extension of NV to subgraphs. It is important to note that as the subgraph Si
will be changed in subsequent iteration, the notation Sk
i will be used to specify
the state of subgraph Si at iteration k. Now we can extend the deﬁnition of
NV with the following equation.
ˆ
N k
i = NV (Sk
i ) = {u|u ∈V ∧∃(v ∈Sk
i )(u, v) ∈E}
(6)
5

It is evident that if the expansion of subgraph Sk
i is done by v ∈
ˆ
N k
i the
newly created subgraph Sk+1
i
will be connected, but it is not necessary that
the other constraints will be satisﬁed. More precisely, the new Sk+1
i
need not
satisfy Eq. 2, or there may exist such an Sk+1
j
that Sk+1
j
∩Sk+1
i
= v for the new
subgraph. This can be avoided if instead of using set
ˆ
N k
i , we use a restricted
set of vertices N k
i that guarantees that the constraints will be satisﬁed when Sk
i
is expanded using v ∈N k
i . We shall ﬁrst deﬁne supk
i as the available supply for
subgraph Si at iteration k in the following equation.
supk
i =
X
v∈Sk
i
sup(v)
(7)
Using supk
i given in Eq. 7, N k
i is deﬁned in the following way.
N k
i = {u|u ∈ˆ
N k
i ∧sup(u) ≤supk
i } \
n
[
j=1
Sk
j
(8)
The sets N k
i are used to specify the greedy algorithm for the MPGSD in
combination with two heuristic functions. More precisely, at each iteration one
heuristic hs is used to select the subgraph Sk
i most suitable for expansion, and
the second heuristic hv will be used to select the best v ∈N k
i to be added to
Sk
i . An extensive analysis of potential heuristics is given in our previous work
given in articles[28, 29]. This procedure will be repeated until it is not possible
to expand any of the subgraphs.
4. Application of Ant Colony Optimization
In this section we present an ACO approach for solving the MPGSD, based
on the greedy algorithm from [28], outlined in the previous section. The gen-
eral idea of ACO algorithms is to perform an ”intelligent” randomization of
an appropriate greedy algorithm for the problem of interest. There are several
variations of ACO, out of which the Ant Colony System [30] is most commonly
used. In it the ”intelligence” comes from experience gained by previously gen-
erated solutions, which is stored in a pheromone matrix. In practice, a colony
6

of n artiﬁcial ants generates solutions using a probabilistic algorithm based on
a heuristic function and the pheromone matrix. As in the case of the greedy
algorithm, an ant generates a solution by expanding a partial one through steps.
The diﬀerence is that instead of using a heuristic function it uses a probabilis-
tic transition rule to decide what is to be added to the partial solution. The
pheromone matrix stores the experience gathered by the artiﬁcial ants. This is
done by applying a global and local update rule to the pheromone matrix. The
global update rule is used after all n ants in the colony have generated a solution
and it reinforces the selection of elements inside of the best found solution or in
some variations of good solutions. The local update is performed after an ant
has applied the transition rule, and its purpose is to diversify the search of the
solution space by avoiding the selection of the same elements of the solution by
all of the ants.
Before deﬁning the ACO algorithm for the MPGSD, we will ﬁrst state some
observations regarding the greedy algorithm and the form of the solution of
the problem. A solution Π of the MPGSD can also be observed as a set of
pairs (s, v), which states that node v is inside subgraph Ss. In this notation
we will include (−1, v) for the case where v is not a member of any subgraph
Ss. From this type of notation we realize that in the algorithm given in the
previous section only the second stage, the selection of node v, directly speciﬁes
the elements of the solution. The purpose of the heuristic in the ﬁrst stage is to
make it possible to perform a good expansion of the partial solution, which is of
signiﬁcant importance when only one solution is generated using a deterministic
algorithm. In case of an ACO algorithm this becomes less important since many
solutions are generated and the ”steering” in the direction of good solutions is,
to a large extent, done by the pheromone matrix.
Because of this, in the proposed ACO algorithm the heuristic function at
this stage will be substituted with a random selection from the set of subgraphs
that can be expanded. In this way the ACO mechanism will only be dedicated
to the selection of expansion nodes.
7

4.1. Algorithm Speciﬁcation
To specify the ACO for the MPGSD we need to deﬁne the transition rule,
global and local update rules. In all of the following equations we will assume
that we have a randomly selected subgraph Ss with index s. We will ﬁrst deﬁne
the transition rule, based on the same heuristic function as in [28], deﬁned in
the following equation.
ηv = hn1(v) = |sup(v)|
(9)
The heuristic function ηv given in Eq.
9 states that vertices with high
demand are considered more desirable. The logic behind this is that it gets
harder to satisfy high demands as the algorithm progresses since the available
supply decreases as new vertices are added to the subgraphs. Because of this it
is better to resolve high demands early.
Using ηv we can deﬁne the transition rule for individual ants. This selection
is done using a combination of deterministic and probabilistic steps. First we
need to include the constraint that only vertices from the set N k
i can be selected.
We specify this constraint using the following equation.
pk
v =



0
, v ̸∈N k
s
probk
i
, v ∈N k
s
(10)
In Eq. 10, pk
v gives us the probability of selecting node v at step k. As
previously stated we only consider v ∈N k
s where s is the selected subgraph, as
a consequence the probability of selecting v /∈N k
s is 0. For the nodes that are
elements of N k
s their selection is done using the following formula.
probk
v =













1
, q > q0 & v = arg max
i∈Nk
s
τisηi
0
, q > q0 & v ̸= arg max
i∈Nk
s
τisηi
τvsηv
P
i∈Nk
s τisηi
, q ≤q0
(11)
In Eq. 11 probk
v gives us the probability of selecting node v at step k. The
values of the pheromone matrix τis correspond to elements of the solution in
the form of a vertex-subgraph pair (i, s). In the same equation parameter q0
8

is used to deﬁne the exploitation/ exploration rate. Connected to it, q ∈(0, 1)
is a random variable which speciﬁes whether the next selected node will be
deterministic or non-deterministic. In the case of the former q > q0, we simply
select the node v with the maximal value of τisηi, which results in a probability
1. If the selection is non-deterministic (q < q0), the probability distribution for
node selection is given in the last row of Eq. 11.
The next component of the ACO method that needs to be speciﬁed is the
global update rule. The proposed ACO algorithm is based on the ant colony
system, in which only the best found solution deposits pheromone after each
iteration of the colony.
This update is formally deﬁned using the following
equations
∆τ = V al(Π′)
(12)
τi = (1 −p)τvs + p∆τ
, ∀(v, s) ∈Π′
(13)
In Eq. 12 Π′ is used to note the currently best found solution. ∆τ is used to
specify the quality of the solution Π′ using function V al for which we will give
details in the implementation subsection. In Eq. 13, the parameter p ∈(0, 1) is
used to specify the inﬂuence of the global update rule. It is important to point
out that Eq. 13 only eﬀects the values of pheromone τvs for (v, s) ∈Π′.
As previously mentioned the local update rule is applied after individual
ants perform the transition rule. In our implementation the local update rule is
applied after an ant i has generated a solution Πi using the following formula
τvs = ϕτvs
, ∀(v, s) ∈Πi
(14)
In Eq. 14 ϕ ∈(0, 1) is used to specify the inﬂuence of the local update rule.
4.2. Implementation
In this section we give details of the implementation of the proposed ACO
algorithm. The ﬁrst necessary step is to deﬁne a suitable quality function V al
9

for the generated solutions. This is done by using the following equations.
T =
X
v∈Vs
sup(v)
(15)
V al(Π) =
1
T −D(Π) + 1
(16)
Eq. 16 states that the quality of the solution will be inversely proportional
to the diﬀerence of T, the total initially available supply in G and the satisﬁed
demand D(Π) of partitioning Π.
To avoid division by zero one is added to
this value. Using this measure, the initial value of all the pheromone matrix
elements tvs is set to the value V al(Πg), where Πg is the solution acquired using
the previously outlined greedy algorithm. More precisely, it corresponds to the
method presented in [28], where the node selection heuristic is the maximal
demand and the subgraph selection heuristic is the maximal available supply.
With the goal of having a better presentation of the proposed method, it is
presented in the form of the following pseudo-code
Generate solution Πg using the greedy algorithm
Initialize the pheromone matrix τ with V al(Πg)
while (Maximal number of iterations not reached) do
for all n ants do
Initialize Π = {S1, .., Sn} , Si = {si}
while Π can be expanded do
Randomly select S, where |NV (S)| > 0
Select v for S using transition rule
Π = Π ∪(v, S)
Update auxiliary structures
end while
Apply correction procedure to Π
Apply local update rule for Π
end for
Apply global update rule for Πbest
end while
10

As illustrated in the pseudo-code, the ﬁrst step is generating a solution using
a greedy algorithm and initializing the pheromone matrix τ. The main loop
performs one iteration for the colony of ants by generating a solution for each of
the n artiﬁcial ants. For each of the ants we start with the initial partitioning
Π. At each iteration of the following loop, we randomly select a subgraph S,
and using the transition rule a node v is selected for expansion. After each such
step it is necessary to update the auxiliary structures, presented in [28], that
are used to make the proposed algorithm computation eﬃcient.
After an ant has generated a solution Π we apply the correction procedure,
presented in [29], which corresponds to a local search to improve its quality.
This is done due to the fact that, in general, ACO algorithms have a problem
with narrowing on local minima. It has been shown that the performance of
such methods can be signiﬁcantly improved if they are combined with a local
search. For the newly acquired solution we apply the local update rule given
in Eq. 14. After all of the ants in the colony have generated their solutions we
apply the global update rule given in Eq. 13 for the best solution Πbest found
by the algorithm for all the previous iterations.
5. Results
In this section we present the results of our computational experiments used
to evaluate the performance of the proposed ACO methods. We give a compar-
ison of the proposed ACO algorithm, with (ACO-C) and without (ACO) the
use of a correction procedure, and the basic greedy algorithm (Gr). All the
algorithms have been implemented in C# using Microsoft Visual Studio 2012.
The source code and the executive ﬁles have been made available at [31]. The
calculations have been done on a machine with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-2630 QM
CPU
2.00 Ghz, 4GB of DDR3-1333 RAM, running on Microsoft Windows 7
Home Premium 64-bit.
To have an extensive evaluation of the proposed algorithm tests have been
conducted on a wide range of graphs. We have used 24 diﬀerent graph sizes
11

having 2-100 supply nodes and 6-2000 demand nodes. For each of the test sizes
40 diﬀerent problem instances have been generated.
We have compared the
average solution and the number of found optimal solutions for each size. With
the goal of observing the potential dependence between the method performance
and graph structure, we have performed tests on trees and general graphs. The
same data sets have been used in the article [29], which can be downloaded
from [31], where speciﬁcs of the method for their generation are presented. It
is important to note that the optimal solutions are known for each of the test
instances due to the algorithm used for their generation.
For each of the 40 problem instances, inside of one graph size, a single run
of the ACO algorithm has been performed for both versions of the method. In
each of the runs the colony had 10 ants and 150 iterations have been performed.
In practice this means that 1500 solutions have been generated for each test
instance.
The parameters for specifying the inﬂuence of the global and the
local update rules had the following values p = 0.1 and ϕ = 0.9.
We have
used the value q0 = 0.1 to deﬁne the exploitation/exploration rate. The chosen
parameters correspond to the commonly used values for the ACO algorithm, for
which our initial tests have shown that they give the best performance.
The results of the conducted computational experiments are presented in
Tables 1, 2 for general graphs and trees, respectively. The values in these tables
represent the average normalized error of the found solutions compared to the
known optimal one, for each of the used methods. More precisely, for each of
the 40 test instances, for each graph size, the normalized error is calculated by
(Optimal −found)/Optimal ∗100, and we show the average value in Tables 1,
2. To have a better comprehension of the performance we have also included
the standard deviation and maximal errors. The last value included in these
tables is the number of found optimal solutions (hits) for each graph size out of
the 40 test instances.
For both types of graphs, there is a very signiﬁcant improvement of the ACO
algorithms when compared to the basic greedy algorithm. In case of the greedy
algorithm the average error varies from less than 1% to even 16%, while for the
12

ACO algorithm the range is between 0-4%, and in case of ACO-C it is within
0-1.5%. The ACO-C method proves to be very robust in the sense that maximal
error has never exceeded 7%, and has been greater than 1% in only 17 out of
the 48 graphs sizes. The basic ACO signiﬁcantly improves the maximal error
when compared with the greedy algorithm but lacks behind ACO-C with the
maximal error never exceeding 12% and being less than 1% in 50% of test sizes.
It is important to note that there is a diﬀerence in performance of the meth-
ods for general graphs and trees. While the greedy algorithm has a slightly
better performance in case of general graphs, in case of the proposed ACO al-
gorithms we have an opposite situation. In case of trees, the ACO had only
twice an average error higher than 1% and never higher than 2.03%. ACO-C
produces even better results with never having an error greater than 1%, and
having an error of less than 0.1% in 19 out of 24 graph sizes.
The results in Tables 1 and 2 show that the greedy algorithm only manages
to ﬁnd optimal solutions in the case of the smallest graphs. On the other hand
the ACO-C manages to ﬁnd the optimal solution for about 50% of the test
instances, while ACO is close to 30%. As in the case of average errors both
ACO methods have a signiﬁcantly better performance for trees than for general
graphs. In case of trees ACO-C has found the optimal solution for 65% of the
test instances, but it would rarely ﬁnd ones for the largest graphs.
Due to the stochastic nature of the ACO algorithm, we have also performed
multiple runs of ACO and ACO-C, with diﬀerent seeds for the random number
generator, on a single problem instance. In case of this type of analysis, for small
problem instances both methods have a very good performance and manage to
ﬁnd the best solution for the vast majority of runs. The interesting cases are
connected to the – harder to solve – large graph sizes. The behavior of both
algorithms is similar for all tested instances in one problem size, because of
which we believe it is suﬃcient to give a graphic illustration only for a single
test instance for general graphs and trees in Figures 2, 3. In case of general
graphs, in Figure 2, we can see that ACO-C has a signiﬁcantly higher speed
of convergence. ACO-C also proves to be signiﬁcantly more reliable, since its
13

Figure 2: Illustration of performance of ACO and ACO-C for 20 runs for a general graph with
50 supply nodes and 250 demand nodes. The graph shows the average error for the 20 runs
at each iteration. The range represents the maximal and minimal error at each step.
maximal error is lower than the minimal error for ACO. We can also see that
both methods have a notable dependence on the selected seed of the random
number generator since the diﬀerence between minimal and maximal error is 2%
and 1% for ACO and ACO-C, respectively. The results in Figure 3, for trees,
show that the advantage of ACO-C is much lower when compared to ACO. The
range of error for both methods is much lower in case of trees.
From the performed tests we can conclude that the proposed ACO algorithm
is a very eﬀective method for solving the MPGSD. The tests have also shown
that, as for many others, in the case of the problem of interest the performance
of the ACO algorithm can be signiﬁcantly improved by adding a local search
method. Finally, the quality of the solutions acquired by the ACO and ACO-C
is to a certain extent dependent on the seed of the random number generator.
Because of this fact, when applying the proposed method it is advisable to
14

Figure 3: Illustration of performance of ACO and ACO-C for 20 runs for a tree with 50 supply
nodes and 1000 demand nodes. The graph shows the average error for the 20 runs at each
iteration. The range represents the maximal and minimal error at each step.
perform multiple runs to get the highest quality of found solutions.
6. Conclusion
In this paper we have presented an ant colony optimization algorithm for
solving the problem of the maximum partitioning of graphs with supply and
demand. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that the ACO
metaheuristic has been applied to this type of problem. The basic ACO algo-
rithm has been combined with a local search to enhance the performance of
the method.
Our computational experiments have shown that the proposed
approach managed to ﬁnd the optimal solutions in more than 50% of the test
problem instances, and had an average relative error of less then 0.5%. The tests
have been performed on trees and general graphs and shown that the method
is more suitable for trees.
15

In the future we plan to adapt the method to a less constrained and a
stochastic version of the problem. This type of research can prove to be very
beneﬁcial for problems appearing in the ﬁeld of electrical distribution systems
especially for the optimization of self-adequacy of interconnected microgrids and
other related problems.
