1
Multi-platform Version of StarCraft: Brood War in
a Docker Container: Technical Report
Michal ˇSustr, Jan Mal´y and Michal ˇCertick´y
Abstract—We present a dockerized version of a real-time
strategy game StarCraft: Brood War, commonly used as a domain
for AI research, with a pre-installed collection of AI developement
tools supporting all the major types of StarCraft bots. This
provides a convenient way to deploy StarCraft AIs on numerous
hosts at once and across multiple platforms despite limited OS
support of StarCraft. In this technical report, we describe the
design of our Docker images and present a few use cases.
I. INTRODUCTION
Games have traditionally been used as domains for Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) research, since they represent a well-
deﬁned challenges with various degrees of complexity. They
are also easy to understand and provide a way to compare
the performance of AI algorithms and that of human players.
After a recent success with popular games like Go [1] and
Poker [2], both of which can now be played by AIs at super-
human skill level, the attention of researchers has turned to
a more complex challenge represented by Real-Time Strategy
(RTS) games. In addition to numerous academic researchers,
commercial companies like Facebook and DeepMind have
recently expressed an interest in using the most popular RTS
game of all time, StarCraft1, as a test environment for their
AI research [3].
Given the recent interest in StarCraft as a testbed for modern
AI techniques, the research community often needs to be
able to deploy multiple instances of the game at once and
combine it with various other tools across different platforms.
Currently, the research applicatons of StarCraft: Brood War
are limited by the fact that the game is only supported
on Microsoft Windows and Mac OS. Mass deployment of
multiple instances tends to run into licensing issues given the
proprietary nature of supported operating systems. There are
a few attempts to address some of these problems, such as
the TorchCraft ML framework [4], but we believe that sim-
ple self-contained Docker containers2 with no accompanying
requirements have a potential to provide a more versatile and
easy-to-use soltion. Our implementation is publicly available
at: https://github.com/Games-and-Simulations/sc-docker
Michal
ˇCertick´y, Jan Mal´y and Michal
ˇSustr are with the Games
& Simulations Research Group (http://gas.fel.cvut.cz/), Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence
Center
at
Faculty
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Czech
Techni-
cal
University
in
Prague.

1StarCraft and StarCraft: Brood War are trademarks of Blizzard Entertain-
ment, Inc. in the U.S. and/or other countries.
2https://www.docker.com
II. STARCRAFT: BROOD WAR AS A TESTBED FOR AI
RESEARCH
In a typical RTS, a subgenre of strategy computer games,
players need to develop an economy by gathering resources,
building structures and researching technologies, train a mili-
tary force and try to defeat their opponents with it. StarCraft
games, placed within a well-knon science-ﬁction universe,
represent a typical example of the RTS genre. Most successful
entry in the StarCraft series is StarCraft: Brood War, released
in 1998 by Blizzard Entertainment. Despite its considerable
age, the game is still immensely popular thanks to its me-
chanics, depth and exceptionally balanced set of rules.
RTS games like StarCraft put additional demands on mod-
ern AI techniques, compared to board game such as Go and
Chess. According to [5] most important differences are:
• In RTS, each player has a small amount of time to decide
the next action, before the game state changes.
• RTS games are simultaneous as players can issue actions
at the same time. On top of that, some actions are durative
and may not be instantaneous.
• RTS games are typically nondeterministic and partially
observable. Sometimes, there is a chance that an action
will fail or has unpredictable consequences. In most
cases, each player can only see a part of the game world.
• The complexity of RTS is estimated to be many orders
of magnitude larger than any of the board game such as
Go or Chess, both in terms of state-space size and in a
number of actions available at each decision cycle.
Additional reason for the popularity of StarCraft: Brood War
in the AI research community is the fact that the performance
of AI algorithms can be directly compared in three StarCraft
AI tournaments: SSCAIT, CIG and AIIDE. More information
about the competitions and their contestants can be found in
[6] and [7].
III. USE CASES
In this section, we provide a few use cases for the docker-
ized version of StarCraft: Brood War. These should be taken as
a mere inspiration. The project has many different applications
in situations, where a user needs to programatically run many
StarCraft AI games, or when StarCraft needs to run on
unsupported operating systems.
• Testing against different bots locally: A bot developer
can easily test his own bot against many different bots
on a single machine with no need to solve their diverse
requirements. Dockerized version of StarCraft contains
pre-installed prerequisites of all the typical kinds of bots.
arXiv:1801.02193v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2018

2
Fig. 1.
A LAN game of four StarCraft AI bots running on one Linux OS
machine. Each bot runs in one Docker container.
User can even use provided scripts that automatically
download and start the newest version of any bot from
SSCAIT tournament using the tournament’s API.3
• Testing with varying system resources: System resources
available to each Docker container are easily conﬁgurable
and can be distributed among the bots fairly. Test results
should therefore be reliable and replicable. Reliability and
replicability of bot’s results are especially important in
research. It can also help competition contestants, who
can test how their bots will perform on the hardware of
speciﬁc tournament.
• Mass deployment for machine learning: Running thou-
sands of games in parallel and as quickly as possible is
vital for training ML-based bots. For example, training a
bot using self-play helped master the game of Go [1].
IV. ARCHITECTURE
The ability to extend other docker images is what makes
Docker powerful. We used this feature for our containers as
well. First, we created Docker image with Wine4 (a com-
patibility layer allowing us to run MS Windows programs
under Unix-like OS). We extended this image to add StarCraft:
Brood War and a bot-coding API called BWAPI [8]. To
support Java bots, we built another container with a pre-
installed Java environment. Finally, we made the last image
with a collection of useful scripts allowing users to run the
games easily.
Each docker container is connected to its host. One can
think of this setup in terms of master/slave communication
model, where docker instances are slaves and host is the
master.
This setup is depicted in Figure 2. The master contains
directories (entitled DIRS in the ﬁgure) with the data read
by the slaves. Directories are mapped through VOLUMES in
slaves. For example, each slave can read StarCraft maps and
3https://sscait.docs.apiary.io/
4https://www.winehq.org
BWAPI related data. Slaves can also write to shared directories
(for logging or machine learning). Shared space is also used
as cache. For example, bots share map analysis cache ﬁles
created by BWTA2 library5.
Fig. 2. Communication between the Docker container and its host.
Our docker container supports two modes of running
StarCraft: Brood War. It is possible to run the game with
a bot in so-called headless mode, which can save some
computational resources by disabling GUI. This mode is useful
for example for self-play. The headful mode, with the GUI
enabled, is useful for debugging. In this case, the host can
connect with its VNC client to VNC server running in each
container as is shown in Figure 2.
V. CONCLUSION
We introduced a self-contained dockerized AI research
environment consisting of StarCraft: Brood War game and a
collection of related AI-development tools. This provides a
convenient way of massive deployment of StarCraft AIs across
multiple platforms. Thanks to our scripts, it is much easier to
test, train and use custom StarCraft AIs. Researchers and AI
developers can beneﬁt from the possibility to specify resources
for container making results more reliable and replicable. We
plan to add new features to our containers as well as support
for OpenBW6 and StarCraft: Remastered. We also consider
extending one of AI benchmark collections represented by
OpenAI Gym [9] with the StarCraft environment.
5https://bitbucket.org/auriarte/bwta2
6http://www.openbw.com

3
