1 
 
An AI-enabled Bias-Free Respiratory Disease 
Diagnosis Model using Cough Audio: A Case 
Study for COVID-19 
Tabish Saeed∗fj, Aneeqa Ijaz∗fj, Ismail Sadiq‡, Haneya N. Qureshi∗, Ali Rizwan§, and Ali Imran∗‡ 
∗AI4Networks Research Center, Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Oklahoma, USA 
§ AI4lyf, Pakistan 
‡James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK 

 
 
 
Abstract—Cough-based diagnosis for Respiratory Diseases 
(RDs) using Artificial Intelligence (AI) has attracted consider- 
able attention, yet many existing studies overlook confounding 
variables in their predictive models. These variables can distort 
the relationship between cough recordings (input data) and 
RD status (output variable), leading to biased associations and 
unrealistic model performance. To address this gap, we propose 
the Bias-Free Network (RBF-Net), an end-to-end solution that 
effectively mitigates the impact of confounders in the training 
data distribution. RBF-Net ensures accurate and unbiased RD 
diagnosis features, emphasizing its relevance by incorporating a 
COVID-19 dataset in this study. This approach aims to enhance 
the reliability of AI-based RD diagnosis models by navigating 
the challenges posed by confounding variables. A hybrid of a 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Long-Short Term 
Memory (LSTM) networks is proposed for the feature encoder 
module of RBF-Net. An additional bias predictor is incorporated 
in the classification scheme to formulate a conditional Generative 
Adversarial Network (c-GAN) which helps in decorrelating the 
impact of confounding variables from RD prediction. The merit 
of RBF-Net is demonstrated by comparing classification perfor- 
mance with State-of-The-Art (SoTA) Deep Learning (DL) model 
(CNN-LSTM) after training on different unbalanced COVID-19 
data sets, created by using a large-scale proprietary cough data 
set. RBF-Net proved its robustness against extremely biased train- 
ing scenarios by achieving test set accuracies of 84.1%, 84.6%, 
and 80.5% for the following confounding variables - gender, 
age, and smoking status, respectively. RBF-Net outperforms the 
CNN-LSTM model test set accuracies by 5.5%, 7.7%, and 8.2%, 
respectively. 
Index Terms—cough, COVID-19, confounding variables, spec- 
trograms, diagnosis, deep-learning, c-GAN, respiratory diseases. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Respiratory diseases (RDs) are among the most common 
chronic diseases, and a primary cause of morbidity and mor- 
tality, imposing an immense burden on health worldwide [1]. 
COPD, acute lower tract infections, asthma, lung cancer, tu- 
berculosis, and the recent COVID-19 infection are considered 
the most common acute respiratory diseases [2]. Millions die 
due to chronic RDs every year because of the lack of timely 
and accurate diagnosis [3]. The reliable diagnostic tests that 
are available for the detection of RDs are mostly laboratory- 
based, expensive, and time-consuming. For instance, a reverse 
fj T. S. and A. I. contributed equally to this paper. 
 
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) test specific 
to SARS-CoV-2 virus is routinely used for reliable detection. 
This test cannot be used for continuous monitoring, since 
it can take up to 2 days for determining the diagnosis [4]. 
Additionally, to rule out the possibility of false negative 
results, repetitive testing may be required. This underscores 
the pivotal need for devising alternative methods for rapid, 
cost-effective, and accurate diagnosis of RDs. Moreover, there 
exists a dearth of reliable instantaneous screening tools that 
can detect the RDs at their onset [5]. Such tools are necessary 
for curbing the spread of the contagious RDs and averting the 
deterioration of public health. 
As a pragmatic solution to this momentous problem, cough- 
acoustic signals can play a crucial role in monitoring and 
detecting RD more effectively. Recent surveys [5], [6] indicate 
that individuals with respiratory illness exhibit distinct features 
in their acoustic signals, representative of the vocal tracts, 
which can be extracted. Hence, features extracted from cough 
can help to continuously monitor and establish the health status 
of individuals at risk of RDs such as tuberculosis, asthma, 
COPD, and COVID-19 [2], [5], [7]. Therefore, a smart, 
accessible, and cost-effective self-monitoring framework for 
continuous cough monitoring and quick disease diagnosis [7] 
can be devised by incorporating the recording of cough sounds 
and implementing AI-based cough processing solutions [8], 
[9]. 
Our seminal work on AI-enabled cough-based disease di- 
agnosis has further triggered this interest, where RDs such 
as COVID-19 can be accurately diagnosed using cough. We 
demonstrated that it is possible to design advanced Machine 
Learning (ML) models to: 1) discern cough from non-cough 
sounds recorded via a smartphone app, and; 2) detect RDs such 
as COVID-19 infection, bronchitis, bronchiolitis, and pertussis 
from cough sounds recorded via the same app [10], [11]. 
In recent years, a large number of independent studies have 
proposed solutions for digital cough monitoring and collection 
for timely diagnosis of RDs [12]–[17]. The current literature 
on the SoTA cough-based RD detection leverages several ML 
and Deep Learning (DL) algorithms that can classify various 
temporal, spectral, and statistical cough features, including 
those that are perceptually indistinguishable to the human 
ear [5]. The cough-acoustic AI-based RD diagnosis models 

2 
 
include traditional methods like support vector machines [18] 
for the classification of croup from pneumonia, asthma, bron- 
chiolitis; random forests model used for COVID-19 diagno- 
sis [19]; logistic regression model for the classification of 
croup and pneumonia [12]; gradient boosting for COVID-19 
classification [20], [21]. Several DL models have also been 
leveraged for cough-based RD diagnosis including CNNs [8], 
[9] for COVID-19 diagnosis and for croup, pertussis, bron- 
chitis, and asthma classification [22]. Deep neural networks 
and spiking neural networks have also been used for the 
classification of COVID-19, asthma, bronchitis, and pertussis 
with remarkable accuracy [16], [23]. Hybrid, e.g. CNN-LSTM, 
and ensemble models are also implemented in recent studies 
for RD diagnosis, achieving high accuracy [17], [24]–[31]. 
In the rapidly advancing field of AI-enabled automated 
cough sound monitoring and digital disease diagnosis, remark- 
able performance metrics have been achieved as evidenced by 
several notable studies [8], [10], [14], [32]–[36]. However, a 
critical concern remains unaddressed in the majority of these 
studies: the potential impact of confounding variables and data 
biases on the performance of the AI models they employ. 
These models tend to overestimate their classification perfor- 
mance and overfit to the training data biases, while falling 
short in terms of proper validation and generalization to unseen 
data. A recent investigation by the University of Cambridge in 
the UK underscored this glaring deficiency within a substantial 
body of research dedicated to accurately detecting and diag- 
nosing COVID-19, highlighting the oversight of confounders 
in the evaluation of AI frameworks [35]. The root issue is 
that confounding variables can distort the apparent relationship 
between input features and diagnostic outcomes, leading to 
erroneous predictions [37], [38]. For instance, studies aiming 
to distinguish individuals with a disease from healthy controls 
often face the challenge of dealing with a substantial age 
difference between the two groups. In such cases, the AI 
model may inadvertently learn associations primarily influ- 
enced by age disparities rather than the genuine disease-related 
biomarkers and features, thus severely hindering its ability to 
generalize its findings. Importantly, these confounding factors 
can include a range of biases, such as those related to age, 
gender, race, and medical history, all of which can introduce 
systemic inaccuracies and pose potential threats to equitable 
healthcare assessments outcomes. Addressing these challenges 
is crucial for improving the reliability and fairness of AI 
models in the context of disease diagnosis and monitoring. 
The findings of our study highlight the importance for future 
studies to consider accounting for the effects of the confound- 
ing variables, similar to RBF-Net, so the reported results are 
a realistic representation of classification expected in a real- 
world scenario. 
To address this limitation in the existing studies on cough- 
based diagnosis, we propose an end-to-end generalized RD 
Bias-Free Network (RBF-Net) and evaluate its efficacy on 
COVID-19 dataset. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this 
is the first study that proposes a framework that is robust 
to the confounding variables for COVID-19 diagnosis; thus, 
providing realistic and generalized performance. The proposed 
RBF-Net framework contains a bias predictor module which 
helps in identifying features from the cough recordings that 
are statistically invariant to confounding effects and mainly 
characterized by the effects of COVID-19, using an adversarial 
learning technique [39]. 
The contributions of this work are summarised as follows: 
• In contrast to the majority of the previous studies that rely 
on the crowd-sourced cough audio databases for training 
AI models, this study curated a cough data set, con- 
taining COVID-19 infection status. For each participant, 
the curated data set includes cough recordings, tagged 
with reliable RT-PCR information, collected in a clinical 
setting. Hence, the data set used has extremely reliable 
ground truth labels, resulting in the accurate training of 
RBF-Net. 
• To demonstrate the impact of confounding variables, we 
train a SoTA DL model on different splits of biased 
training scenarios from the cough data set based on 
gender, age, and smoking status. Moreover, we present an 
insightful analysis on how model performances are often 
overestimated due to the underlying biased distribution of 
the training data and the use of cross-validation technique. 
• To overcome the impact of biases, we present RBF-Net 
that learns features, from the cough recordings, that are 
impacted by the COVID-19. We perform a comparative 
analysis of the existing SoTA CNN-LSTM model with 
RBF-Net and demonstrate the improvement achieved by 
the proposed RBF-Net in terms of different performance 
metrics. 
The remaining contents of this paper are organized as 
follows: Section II discusses the details of the cough data 
acquisition and its pre-processing. Section III presents the pro- 
posed RBF-Net architecture, Section IV describes the method- 
ology adopted for the study. The results for classification on 
data with various biases using the proposed RBF-Net and 
the existing SoTA CNN-LSTM are explained in Section V. 
Section VI discusses the impact of our work, future clinical 
deployment, and acknowledges some limitations of this work. 
Finally, the conclusion for the study is given in Section VII. 
II. COUGH DATA   ACQUISITION   AND   PRE-PROCESSING 
We have collected a corpus of high-fidelity audio data con- 
taining cough acoustics of normal and COVID-19 diagnosed 
patients. The notable feature about the data set is that rather 
than being collected through crowd-sourcing, it was curated to 
have a valid tagged RT-PCR test result for each sample. The 
audio data sample acquisition was performed during the time 
period of Apr - Oct 2020, in collaboration with Dow Medical 
College, Pakistan. For this research, the cough data samples 
were recorded from the subjects through our in-house devel- 
oped AI4COVID app [40], under the supervision of trained 
nurses, using one smartphone model to avoid the impact of 
device variability. Each participant recorded multiple coughs 
in a recording sample, with each recording duration varying 
from 3 to 12 seconds. An informed consent was obtained 
from each participant prior to acquiring the cough data. The 
guidelines to interact with the potential COVID-19 patients 

3 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Bar plots representing the detailed demographic and smoking status statistics for the selected participants after the 
process of data cleaning. A total of 1022 COVID-19 positive participants and 2656 normal participants are finalized. 
 
Fig. 2: Sample waveforms for each target class, i.e. COVID-19 and normal. The waveforms contain information regarding the 
gender, age and smoking status, that can cause a classifier to learn inaccurate representation for a cough recording with respect 
to a target disease label. 
 
recommended by the WHO were strictly followed at all stages 
of the cough data collection. For instance, the healthcare 
professionals wore personal protective equipment (PPE), and 
followed a protocol for the smartphone disinfection, before and 
after the sample was recorded. In total, the data is collected 
from 1094 participants with positive RT-PCR test results, 
labelled as COVID-19 positive, and 3761 participants with 
negative RT-PCR test results, labelled as normal. In addition, 
the anonymity of the users was preserved at all stages during 
the data collection. 
Once the data acquisition process was complete, we per- 
formed the cough sound pre-processing steps, including noise 
removal, using the Audacity software [41]. The mono-channel 
cough data is sampled at 44.10 kHz, before being stored as 
a pulse-code modulation (PCM) WAV file. Silent periods at 
the beginning and at the end of each cough recording were 
clipped out. After the initial pre-processing, only the cough 
recordings that were longer than 2 seconds of duration were 
considered for further analysis. Thus, at the completion of 
the pre-processing step, we had a total of 1022 COVID-19 
positive samples and 2656 normal samples. Fig. 1 provides a 
summary of the demographics for the individuals constituting 
the cough audio data set. It illustrates the number of COVID- 
19 and normal participants with respect to their demographics, 

4 
 
including gender, age, and smoking status. It can be observed 
from the Fig. 1 that both normal samples and COVID-19 
positive samples are skewed towards the male gender, i.e., the 
male cough samples are almost twice as numerous compared 
to the female samples. Similarly the age of the subjects in 
the data set fall in a broad age range from 10 to 85 years, 
with a significant number of the cough samples belonging 
to the younger and middle aged population, 18-50 years 
old. A small fraction of the participants are smokers, 865 
subjects who tested COVID-19 positive and 2355 normal 
participants were non-smokers. On the other hand, there were 
a total of 156 COVID-19 positive smoking participants and 
301 normal smoking participants. Fig. 2, demonstrates the 
sample waveforms from the COVID-19 and normal classes, 
respiratory disease affects the lungs and results in changes 
in the acoustic signature of the cough sound. These changes 
are not always clearly identifiable on inspection. Deep neural 
networks trained on audio data comprising of coughs from 
respiratory disease can learn to identify cough acoustic fea- 
tures characterizing the respiratory disease [5]. In addition 
to disease status the cough waveforms have information like 
gender, age and smoking habits encoded within them that can 
lead the classifier to learn inaccurate representations for the 
disease labels. By incorporating the bias-free mechanism, the 
RBF-Net learns to disassociate the effects of the confounding 
factors like gender, age and smoking status from the disease 
status when classifying the cough recording, further details are 
given in section IV. 
 
III. RBF-NET   ARCHITECTURE 
In this section, we present the detailed architecture of the 
proposed RBF-Net with focus on COVID-19 classification. 
CNN-LSTM model forms the main skeleton of the proposed 
framework architecture. The CNN-LSTM has proven to be the 
SoTA spectrogram-based COVID-19 classification DL model 
and has been widely used for the classification tasks by 
the research community [17], [24]–[31]. We use this SoTA 
DL technique as both the benchmark for our framework 
and also the building block for the feature encoder module 
of the proposed RBF-Net. The architectural details of the 
implemented CNN-LSTM model are shown in Fig. 3.a). 
The CNN-LSTM architecture can primarily be divided into 
two blocks. The first block (feature encoder) uses a CNN ar- 
chitecture which receives grayscale spectrograms, constructed 
from cough recordings, as an input of shape 224x224. Then, 
the most relevant and informative features are extracted by 
the convolutional layers. These features are converted to the 
feature maps, which are passed on to the LSTM block, where 
the deep features that have the high temporal correlation are 
selected to capture the more useful patterns. In the second 
block (COVID-19 classifier), a simple fully connected layer 
is used for the feature learning and COVID-19 classification. 
Both of these blocks are trained through the COVID-19 
classification loss (Lc) which is chosen to be the binary cross- 
entropy loss. The Lc is backpropagated in a manner that the 
model parameters of the feature encoder (∂E) and COVID-19 
classifier (∂C) are tuned to minimize it. 
Although this model works extremely well in learning the 
differences between the two classes in the target variable 
(COVID-19 or normal) as shown in the Results section, it 
can not nullify the impact of the confounding variables. This 
model is prone to be affected by the impact of biases in 
its learned features; thus, the model cannot be truly repre- 
sentative of COVID-19’s impact on the cough sounds. To 
address the underlying biases and confounding variables in 
the data distribution, we make modifications to the CNN- 
LSTM inspired by the recent work in the machine learning 
fairness schemes [39]. An additional bias predictor compo- 
nent is attached to the network architecture that helps the 
encoder module to decorrelate the extracted feature vector 
from the effects of confounding variables, as evidenced by 
the classification results for the RBF-Net framework in the 
Results section. This decorrelation process is based on training 
the feature encoder through an adversarial learning technique 
similar to the conditional GAN (c-GAN). In this iterative 
training process, bias predictor aims to predict the bias value 
from the feature vector created from conditioned subset of 
normal samples from the input and then have an adversarial 
impact on the encoder to learn the features that are bias- 
free. In this manner, the RBF-Net framework learned features 
conditionally independent of the biases and carrying useful 
information for COVID-19 classification. Thus, the overall 
goal to create a bias-free and generalizable RD classifier for 
large-scale clinical deployment can be realized. 
The RBF-Net architecture is composed of three key blocks, 
depicted in Fig. 3.b), each undergoing distinct training phases. 
Initially, the COVID-19 classifier block focuses on precise dis- 
ease classification, dynamically updating its model parameters 
∂C. The gradient, propagated with respect to the COVID- 
19 classification loss LC, refines the encoder parameters 
∂E, ensuring feature extraction that minimizes LC. In the 
subsequent phase, with frozen encoder parameters ∂E, the bias 
predictor module is trained. This involves updating parameters 
∂B to minimize bias prediction loss LB, determined by either 
inverse mean squared error or inverse binary cross-entropy 
based on the bias variable. In the final training step, with ∂B 
frozen,” the feature encoder undergoes training. Adversarial 
back-propagation of gradients from LB fortifies ∂E to extract 
features maximizing LB, establishing a min-max game that 
cultivates bias-invariant features crucial for COVID-19 clas- 
sification. This strategic training paradigm equips RBF-Net 
to accurately classify COVID-19 without succumbing to the 
influence of underlying biased data distributions. 
 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
A. Creation of Cough Spectrograms 
In this first stage of the RBF-Net framework, the cough 
recordings are mapped onto the spectrograms, that depict 
the spectro-temporal correlations in the audio signal as im- 
age. The motivation to use the spectrograms stems from 
the fact that the spatio-temporal features have the ability to 
provide comprehensive description of the respiratory sounds 
(lungs, wheeze, crackles, cough etc.) [42], [43] and to train 
the deep neural networks [44], [45]. The spectrogram is a 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Overview of the architecture of the RBF-Net framework. a) CNN-LSTM model architecture is shown which consists 
of feature encoder (convolutional and LSTM blocks) and a COVID-19 classifier (fully connected layers with ReLU activation). 
b) In the RBF-Net, we have an additional bias predictor module (fully connected layers with ReLU activation) that predicts 
bias from the feature vector. The losses, LC and LB are back-propagated to train the encoder through a min-max game similar 
to c-GAN, so that the extracted features are invariant to the confounding variables. 
 
two dimensional time-frequency representation of the one 
dimensional cough acoustic samples. The COVID-19 coughs 
and normal coughs are transformed into the respective time- 
frequency representations. A spectrogram divides the time 
domain into several regions. The x-axis characterizes the time 
domain while the y-axis represents the frequency domain of 
the signal. The spectrogram is contructed by a short-time 
fourier transform (STFT) with short frame size of 25 ms and 
stride of 10 ms [46]. Then a Hamming window of length 
2048 is employed that divides the acoustic signal into the 
frames. To obtain the spectrogram, a 128-point fast fourier 
transform (FFT) is implemented on each respective frame. 
In order to derive the spectrogram final representation, we 
used the magnitude square of the STFT coefficients. Finally, 
for achieving the computational efficiency, the spectrogram 
coefficients are log transformed to introduce the compressive 
nonlinearity and linearly downsampled onto a 224x224 matrix 
for cough audio signal. 
 
B. Biased Training Data Generation 
To demonstrate how the biases impact the performance of 
SoTA DL models and to best evaluate the robustness of RBF- 
Net framework, we have created multiple training data sets 
with various biases. In these training data sets, different bias 
factors were induced pertaining to the following confounding 
variables: gender, age, and smoking status. In each of these 
sets of training data, the number of COVID-19 positive and 
normal class participants were kept equal, to properly address 
the class imbalance problem. An eminent aspect of this work 
is that after training models using these sets of biased training 
data, we also create sets of unseen testing data for their 
evaluation. The unseen testing data sets were created such that 
they have a balanced number of participants with respect to 
each of the confounding variables. 
1) Gender Bias: We create a gender biased training sce- 
nario where the COVID-19 positive rate greatly differs in both 
male and female gender groups. In this training data set, we 
have 925 participants in each of the classes, i.e., COVID-19 
positive and normal. Although, the total number of participants 
is balanced in both of the classes, the difference lies in the 
number of male and female participants in each of the class 
(gender bias). As shown in Fig. 4, COVID-19 training class 
comprises of a greater number of male participants compared 
to the female participants. On the other hand, normal training 

6 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Distribution of the Gender Biased Training Data. In this data set, there is an over-representation of male participants 
in the COVID-19 class, and there is over-representation of females in the normal class. The age distribution for both the classes 
is identical. Only non-smoking participants are chosen for the creation of this training data set. 
 
 
(a) Age Biased (Group 1) Training Data 
 
(b) Age Biased (Group 2) Training Data 
Fig. 5: Distribution of the Age biased Training Data Groups. In age biased (group 1), there is an over-representation 
of relatively younger population (aged under 40) in the normal class compared to the COVID-19 class. In age biased 
(group 2), there is over-representation of relatively older population in the normal class (aged above 40) compared 
to the COVID-19 class. The gender distribution for both the classes is identical in these two age biased groups. Only 
non-smoking participants are chosen for the creation of both of the training data sets. 
 
class has a greater percentage of female participants. Thus, 
there exists a bias pertaining to the gender variable in the 
training data set. Simultaneously, we keep the impact of age 
and smoking status confounding variables balanced in both 
of the classes as shown in Fig 4. We have roughly the same 
number of COVID-19 and normal participants in each of the 
age bracket. Moreover, we only keep the participants with non- 
smoking status in both of the classes. Therefore, the bias in 
the training data set is only induced through gender and not 
through age and smoking status. 
We also created a corresponding gender-based unseen bal- 
anced testing data set using the total collected data. In this 
testing data set, we have 100 participants in each of the 
classes. We have a balanced number of males and females 
in both of the classes, i.e., 50 males and 50 females in both 
COVID-19 and normal classes. Additionally, we keep a similar 
distribution in this testing data set as the gender biased training 
data set in terms of age and smoking status variables. 
2) Age Bias: To further study the impact of another unique 
confounding variable on the performance of DL models, 
we created the age biased training data sets. For a more 
generalised evaluation, we created two age biased training data 
sets, i.e., age biased group 1 and age biased group 2. In both 
of the groups, we have 765 participants in each COVID-19 
and normal class. The demographics of both of the age bias 
training data sets are shown in Fig. 5. In group 1, the normal 
participants were chosen to be from a relatively younger pop- 
ulation i.e., aged under 40 years. At the same time, COVID- 
19 class in group 1 includes participants from a relatively 
older population. On the contrary, group 2 has different age 

7 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Distribution of Smoking Status Biased Training Data. In this data set, there is an over-representation of non- 
smoking participants in the COVID-19 class, and there is over-representation of smoking participants in the normal class. The 
age distribution for both the classes is identical. Only male participants are chosen for the creation of this training data set. 
 
distributions in both of the classes compared to group 1. In 
group 2, normal class participants were chosen from an older 
population i.e., aged above 40 years. Simultaneously, COVID- 
19 class participants were chosen from a relatively younger 
population as shown in Fig. 5. In both of these groups, the 
entire bias is induced only through the age groups. There 
is no additional bias induced through gender as the number 
of male and female participants is approximately equal in 
each of the classes across both groups. Moreover, only non- 
smoking participants were chosen in these data sets to nullify 
the impact of smoking status. Apart from these two training 
data sets, we also created a corresponding age-based unseen 
balanced testing data set which includes 100 participants in 
each of the classes. Both of these classes in the testing data set 
have identical age distribution; thus, having no underlying age 
bias. Moreover, the testing data set has the same gender and 
smoking status distribution as the training data sets. Therefore, 
overall there is no underlying bias in the unseen balanced 
testing data set. 
3) Smoking Status Bias: For further evaluation of the 
impact of another distinctive bias on the DL models, smoking 
status biased training data sets are also created. Smoking 
status biased training data contains 350 participants in both 
COVID-19 and normal class. Though, the total number of 
participants is balanced in both of the classes, the difference 
lies in the number of smoking and non-smoking participants 
in each of the classes. As shown in Fig. 6, COVID-19 training 
class comprises of greater number of non-smoking participants 
compared to the smoking participants. On the other hand, 
normal training class has a greater percentage of smoking 
participants. Thus, there exists a bias pertaining to the smoking 
status variable in the training data set. Simultaneously, we keep 
the impact of other two confounding variables balanced in both 
of the classes as shown in Fig. 6. We have approximately the 
same age distribution in both classes (COVID-19 and normal). 
Another important aspect of this smoking biased data set is 
that as the majority of the original cough database comprises 
of more male participants compared to the female participants, 
we only kept the male participants in both of the classes of 
the smoking biased training data. Therefore, the bias in the 
training data set is only induced through smoking status and 
not through gender and age. Similar to the other gender and 
age confounding variables, we created an unseen balanced 
testing data set for the smoking status as well. In this data 
set, the number of non-smoking and smoking participants are 
balanced across both of the classes. At the same time, this 
testing data set had the same demographic distribution as the 
smoking status biased training data, which means that there 
is no innate bias in the smoking status-based unseen balanced 
testing data. 
TABLE I: Optimal Training Parameters for RBF-Net 
 
Hyperparameters 
Best Value 
Number of Convolutional 
Blocks 
4 
LSTM Units 
256 
LSTM Activation 
tanh 
CNN Activation 
ReLU 
Epochs 
1000 
Optimizer 
ADAM 
Batch Size 
256 
Learning Rate 
0.0001 
 
 
C. Model Training 
We trained the CNN-LSTM and the RBF-Net models on 
the data distributions described in Section IV-B, to analyze the 
impact of bias in the data distribution on model performance. 
Both models are implemented in Python 3.6 and Tensorflow 
1.21. The training process is accelerated through a high 
performance computing cluster integrated with Nvidia V100 
Tensor Core GPUs. 
To achieve maximum possible accuracy and generalization, 
we performed extensive hyper-parameter tuning on both mod- 
els. The main purpose is to optimize the values of model 
parameters that are not learned during training, but rather set 
before the training process. In case of CNN-LSTM and the 
RBF-Net, the hyperparameters that are searched include the 
learning rate, epochs, batch size, optimizer, and the number 
of layers/nodes. Hyperparameter optimization was performed 

8 
 
TABLE II: Performance comparison on the gender biased training data: Performance evaluation for CNN-LSTM and 
RBF-Net model in terms of accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, F-1 score, and ROC-AUC. 
 
Model 
Accuracy 
Specificity 
Sensitivity 
F-1 Score 
ROC-AUC 
Cross-Validation 
CNN-LSTM 
0.890 
0.913 
0.866 
0.892 
0.893 
Gender Bias 
Unseen Testing Data 
CNN-LSTM 
0.787 
0.860 
0.715 
0.785 
0.787 
RBF-Net 
0.841 
0.887 
0.796 
0.845 
0.846 
TABLE III: Performance comparison on both of the age biased training data sets (Group 1 and Group 2): Performance 
evaluation for CNN-LSTM and RBF-Net model in terms of accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, F-1 score, and ROC-AUC. 
 
Model 
Accuracy 
Specificity 
Sensitivity 
F-1 Score 
ROC-AUC 
Cross-Validation 
CNN-LSTM 
0.887 
0.908 
0.867 
0.894 
0.892 
Age Bias Group 1 
Unseen Testing Data 
CNN-LSTM 
0.774 
0.843 
0.706 
0.775 
0.776 
RBF-Net 
0.845 
0.888 
0.801 
0.845 
0.846 
Cross-Validation 
CNN-LSTM 
0.884 
0.901 
0.867 
0.884 
0.881 
Age Bias Group 2 
Unseen Testing Data 
CNN-LSTM 
0.756 
0.825 
0.687 
0.757 
0.756 
RBF-Net 
0.818 
0.863 
0.774 
0.819 
0.821 
 
by creating small validation data sets having the same data 
distribution as the biased training data sets. We used these 
validation sets and the AutoML optimization tool [47] for 
tuning each model individually. The sensitivity and specificity 
metrics of the validation sets after the 100th epoch of training 
are used to identify the optimal hyperparameter configuration. 
Once these hyperparamters are set, we initiated the training 
process for both of the models. The best combination of 
parameters have been listed in Table. I. These CNN-LSTM 
and RBF-Net models are individually trained using the optimal 
hyperparameter configuration on each of the biased training 
set followed by their performance being evaluated on the 
respective unseen testing sets for a fair comparison. 
 
 
Another crucial aspect of training RBF-Net lies in its con- 
vergence and stability. Since RBF-Net fundamentally mimics 
the c-GAN training scheme for classification of COVID-19 
and normal cough sounds, the convergence and stability of 
the model had to be ensured. The Feature encoder of RBF- 
Net is trained through a min-max game where it aims to 
accurately predict COVID-19 while being invariant to the 
underlying biases. For this reason, the optimal learning rate is 
very small to avoid fluctuations in the objective loss functions 
or accuracy metric while training. Moreover, RBF-Net is 
trained for 1000 epochs during which the performance metrics 
during the training and validation process start to stabilize with 
minimal fluctuations. Once these metrics reach a consistent 
steady state after approximately 650 epochs, the RBF-Net 
effectively converges. While training on all training scenarios, 
the RBF-Net training reaches stability and converges for 
effective COVID-19 prediction without being impacted by 
confounding variables. 
V. RESULTS 
We trained the CNN-LSTM model on all of the biased 
training data sets to analyze the impact of confounding effects 
exist in the data distribution on this particular SoTA DL model. 
We utilized 10-fold cross-validation (CV) on the CNN-LSTM 
model; the data sets are divided into 10 equal folds. In each 
iteration of CV, one of these folds is used as a validation 
set, while the other nine folds are used for the training. This 
process is repeated 10 times, with each fold being used as 
the validation set once. During each iteration of the CV, we 
measured the accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, F1-score, and 
ROC-AUC for the model performance on the validation set. 
After all iterations are completed, the average of each perfor- 
mance metric across all iterations is calculated and reported. 
After this CV technique, the CNN-LSTM model architecture is 
trained on the biased data sets and its performance is evaluated 
on the respective unseen balanced testing data sets to gauge 
if the unrealistic experiment design leads to an inaccurate 
inflation of the model performance. Furthermore, in order to 
evaluate the efficacy of the RBF-Net framework in learning 
the features that are purely extracted through difference in 
cough spectrograms caused by the impact of COVID-19 
respiratory disease, we trained it on the biased training data 
sets as well. We evaluated the performance of RBF-Net on 
the same unseen balanced testing data sets and performed 
a comparative analysis with the CNN-LSTM model. In the 
subsequent subsections, we evaluate the performance of both 
CNN-LSTM and RBF-Net on each of the biased training data 
sets individually. 
 
A. Performance on Gender Biased Training Scenario 
The performance of CNN-LSTM model in COVID-19 de- 
tection is inaccurately inflated under the influence of innate 

9 
 
TABLE IV: Performance comparison on the smoking status biased training data: Performance evaluation for CNN-LSTM 
and RBF-Net in terms of accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, F-1 score, and ROC-AUC. 
 
Model 
Accuracy 
Specificity 
Sensitivity 
F-1 Score 
ROC-AUC 
Cross-Validation 
CNN-LSTM 
0.862 
0.881 
0.844 
0.867 
0.862 
Smoking Bias 
Unseen Testing Data 
CNN-LSTM 
0.723 
0.750 
0.694 
0.727 
0.723 
RBF-Net 
0.805 
0.836 
0.774 
0.811 
0.805 
 
gender bias in the training scenario. From the results obtained 
through CNN-LSTM model using CV technique to the results 
obtained through CNN-LSTM on the unseen testing data 
set, a major decline in performance metrics is observed as 
reported in the Table II. The obtained accuracy drops from 
0.890 to 0.787. This clearly indicates that the CV technique 
leads the CNN-LSTM model to learn the features impacted 
by the gender bias. Thus, the performance of the CNN- 
LSTM model in accurately diagnosing COVID-19 is highly 
overestimated. Another vital observation lies is the difference 
in the obtained specificity (0.860) and sensitivity (0.715) of the 
CNN-LSTM model on the testing data set. Since the samples 
from the normal class participants are over-represented by the 
female participants in the training data, the model tends to 
treat female participants as normal participant. On the other 
hand, the results of the RBF-Net model, when evaluated 
on the unseen testing data set, demonstrated a significant 
improvement over the CNN-LSTM, as measured by the five 
different performance metrics. We have obtained an overall 
accuracy improvement of more than 5% through the RBF- 
Net model. The difference between the obtained specificity 
(0.887) and sensitivity (0.796) is also diminished in the RBF- 
Net model; thus, it is better suited to mitigate the effect of 
gender bias in the training scenario. 
 
B. Performance on the Age Biased Training Scenarios 
Similar to the gender biased data, the performance of CNN- 
LSTM model in COVID-19 detection is overestimated under 
the presence of underlying age distribution in the training 
scenario. Using 10-fold CV, CNN-LSTM model obtains an 
average accuracy of 0.887 and 0.884 in both of the age 
bias groups, respectively as shown in Table III. On the other 
hand, when the CNN-LSTM model is trained on the same 
training data sets and evaluated on the unseen balanced testing 
data set, a substantial decline in the performance metrics 
such as accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, F1-score, and ROC- 
AUC is observed. It achieves an unseen testing accuracy of 
0.774 and 0.756 when trained on both groups, respectively. 
As shown in the previous section, age bias group 1 has an 
over-representation of a relatively younger population (aged 
under 40 years) in the normal participants. This leads the 
model in treating younger participants as normal samples. 
The reasoning accounts for the significant difference between 
specificity (0.843) and sensitivity (0.706) obtained through the 
CNN-LSTM model on the testing data set. Similarly, in age 
bias group 2, the normal participants are over-represented by 
a relatively older population (aged above 40 years). This leads 
the model to treat eldelry participants as normal participants 
which is again shown by the difference in the obtained speci- 
ficity (0.825) and sensitivity (0.687). This clearly indicates 
that CNN-LSTM is prone to learn features directly associated 
with the underlying age bias which led to the overestimation 
of the COVID-19 detection performance. Unlike CNN-LSTM, 
RBF-Net is immune to the impact of biases in the training 
data sets. The results of the RBF-Net model demonstrate a 
major improvement over the CNN-LSTM model in all of 
the performance metrics when evaluated on unseen testing 
data set. An accuracy of 0.845 and 0.818 is achieved across 
both training groups, respectively, and at the same time, the 
difference between sensitivity and specificity is also dimin- 
ished. Thus, it demonstrates that the RBF-Net is also suitable 
to alleviate the age bias in real-world COVID-19 detection 
applications. 
 
C. Performance on the Smoking Status Biased Training Sce- 
nario 
The impact of underlying bias in the smoking status dis- 
tribution on the CNN-LSTM model causing the inaccurately 
inflating COVID-19 detection performance is being analyzed. 
Using 10-fold CV technique, CNN-LSTM model obtained an 
average accuracy of 0.862 as shown in Table IV; whereas, 
when evaluated on unseen testing data, the accuracy drops to 
0.723 which is almost 14% less than the CV technique. This 
clearly shows that CNN-LSTM model learned features directly 
associated with the smoking status bias and its COVID-19 
detection performance is again overestimated. On the contrary, 
RBF-Net shows its ability to eliminate the underlying impact 
of smoking status bias in the training scenario when it is 
evaluated on the unseen smoking status testing data set. The 
results of the RBF-Net model show a major improvement 
over the CNN-LSTM model in all of the performance metrics. 
The obtained accuracy, F1-score, and ROC-AUC is almost 8% 
higher compared to the CNN-LSTM model. 
 
D. Ablation Study 
To further elucidate the novelty of our proposed approach, 
which involves integrating the bias predictor module (B) into 
the CNN-LSTM framework (module A) to address confound- 
ing variables, we conducted an additional experiment. In 
preceding sections, we have methodically demonstrated how 
our RBF-Net (A + B) consistently outperforms the standalone 
CNN-LSTM model when trained on diverse sets of biased 
data. In this  ablation  study, we aim  to  assess the  specific 

10 
 
TABLE V: Results of Ablation Studies on RBF-Net 
 
Model 
Unbiased 
Gender Biased 
Age Biased 
Smoking Status Biased 
CNN (baseline) 
Acc 
F1-Score 
ROC-AUC 
Acc 
F1-Score 
ROC-AUC 
Acc 
F1-Score 
ROC-AUC 
Acc 
F1-Score 
F1-Score 
0.821 
0.822 
0.822 
0.751 
0.751 
0.751 
0.746 
0.741 
0.746 
0.683 
0.679 
0.684 
CNN-LSTM (A) 
0.874 
0.877 
0.874 
0.787 
0.785 
0.787 
0.774 
0.775 
0.776 
0.723 
0.727 
0.723 
RBF-Net (A+B) 
0.879 
0.883 
0.878 
0.841 
0.845 
0.846 
0.845 
0.845 
0.846 
0.805 
0.811 
0.805 
 
influence of the bias predictor module (B) within the RBF- 
Net in comparison to the CNN and CNN-LSTM framework 
(A) under both unbiased and biased training conditions. The 
architecture used for constructing the CNN model is illus- 
trated in [27]. To achieve this, we created a new training 
dataset devoid of any inherent bias related to the confounding 
variables of age, gender, and smoking status. This dataset 
consists of 900 samples for each target class, i.e., COVID- 
19 and normal. The gender distribution, age distribution, and 
smoking status distribution have roughly been kept the same 
across both of these classes; thus, eliminating any form of bias. 
Furthermore, we curated an additional balanced unseen testing 
dataset having 100 samples in both of the classes for evaluating 
the RBF-Net, CNN, and CNN-LSTM on the unbiased training 
data. In Table V below, we present the testing performance 
metrics for the CNN model, CNN-LSTM model (Module A) 
and the RBF-Net (A + B) when trained on the unbiased, 
gender biased, age biased (group 1), and smoking status biased 
training datasets and evaluated on their respective unseen 
testing datasets. This presentation is designed to highlight the 
discernible impact of the bias predictor (Module B) on the 
performance of RBF-Net. 
Feature Encoder module is a shared component in both 
CNN-LSTM and RBF-Net, which plays the fundamental role 
in learning the distinctive features influenced by the presence 
of COVID-19. For this reason, the performance achieved by 
CNN-LSTM and RBF-Net is similar in the unbiased training 
setting. However, the vitality of the bias predictor (module B) 
in the RBF-Net is established when both models are trained 
and evaluated under biased training conditions. In these sce- 
narios, the performance of the CNN-LSTM model experiences 
a significant decline, whereas the RBF-Net remains resilient, 
consistently maintaining its accuracy, as highlighted in the 
preceding sections. Consequently, the incorporation of the bias 
predictor module (module B) within the c-GAN framework 
significantly bolsters the RBF-Net’s capability to learn the 
nuanced impact of COVID-19 features. This enhancement not 
only contributes to its effectiveness but also renders it more 
practical for deployment as a digital testing tool. 
 
VI. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS 
As discussed in the preceding sections, our investigation 
delved into the influence of three pivotal confounding vari- 
ables: gender, age, and smoking status. These variables were 
meticulously considered to assess their impact on the CNN- 
LSTM model’s ability to detect COVID-19. Notably, the 
substantial performance degradation observed in the CNN- 
LSTM model—from the performance achieved during cross- 
validation to its subsequent evaluation on the balanced test- 
ing data—clearly demonstrates the adverse effects of data 
selection bias on the features learned by the model. Thus, 
the underlying demographic bias, that often exists in the 
distributions of real-world clinical data [34], [35], [39], has 
to be addressed in future machine learning schemes, thereby 
making them practical and effective tools for validation by 
healthcare practitioners and clinicians in the realm of digital 
healthcare solutions. 
The RBF-Net model effectively mitigates the influence of 
inherent biases present in training data distributions by extract- 
ing meaningful features from them. This is vividly illustrated 
by the significant performance improvements exhibited by 
the RBF-Net framework when compared to the CNN-LSTM 
model across all confounding variables. The differences in 
performance metrics, including accuracy, specificity, sensitiv- 
ity, F1-score, and ROC-AUC, across various biased training 
groups are depicted in Fig. 7. A noteworthy insight from the 
results is that the RBF-Net model achieved the most substantial 
improvement when dealing with the smoking status biased 
training group. It achieved an approximately 8% increase in 
accuracy, F1-score, and ROC-AUC in this specific scenario. 
The architecture of the feature encoder module within the 
RBF-Net sheds light on the reason behind this remarkable 
improvement. The encoder comprises convolutional blocks 
and an additional LSTM block, which collectively identify 
features that hold spatial and temporal significance. This 
feature extraction capability enables the RBF-Net model to 
effectively discern the impact of COVID-19 on cough spec- 
trogram images, as COVID-19 often manifests respiratory 
symptoms that, in turn, influence the spatio-temporal features 
of these cough spectrograms, as observed in previous stud- 
ies [10]. Simultaneously, smoking also induces changes in 
human cough spectrograms in the spatio-temporal domain. 
This implies that the effect of smoking on the spectrograms 
bears some resemblance to the impact of COVID-19, espe- 
cially when contrasted with the effects of gender and age 
on the spectrograms. Consequently, the RBF-Net framework 
yields the maximum performance increase when mitigating the 
impact of the bias related to smoking status. 
Another standout aspect of our study lies in the high-quality 
data used for training and testing the DL model, enhancing 
the credibility of our results and conclusions. Unlike many 
existing cough-acoustic datasets [27], [29], [35], [48], [49], 
which often rely on crowd-sourced data, the data used n this 

11 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: Improvement in the performance metrics (accuracy, 
specificity, sensitivity, F1-score, and ROC-AUC) achieved by 
the RBF-Net compared to the CNN-LSTM. 
 
paper was meticulously collected within a reputable medical 
facility under the supervision of trained healthcare profes- 
sionals. Furthermore, the cough audio samples were obtained 
on the same day as the COVID-19 labels were assigned 
through standardized RT-PCR tests. This meticulous approach 
minimizes the potential errors stemming from misreporting 
or participants’ lack of awareness regarding their COVID-19 
status at the time of cough recording. 
One limitation of our current scope of work is that the 
efficacy of the RBF-Net framework has thus far been validated 
solely on the COVID-19 cough dataset and has not yet 
been extended to other RDs such as tuberculosis, asthma, 
and COPD. The data collection process for these additional 
conditions is currently underway within a medical facility, 
a process that demands a considerable amount of time and 
resources, while adhering to strict Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) protocols. Additionally, ensuring patient privacy, ob- 
taining ground-truth diagnosis information via gold standard 
tests at the precise moment of cough sound collection, and 
maintaining consistency in the cough sound sample collection 
by minimizing device variability, background noise, and other 
environmental factors are integral to this endeavor. Our im- 
mediate future agenda revolves around evaluating RBF-Net’s 
capability to identify respiratory diseases akin to COVID-19 
based on the acoustic signatures present in cough sounds. This 
assessment will be conducted once the data collection efforts 
are successfully concluded. 
Our upcoming research, will have a bi-fold objective. 
Firstly, we intend to broaden the spectrum of confounding 
variables by incorporating the common influenza virus, a 
respiratory tract ailment. This addition will allow us to explore 
how the presence of the influenza virus might impact the 
performance of our RBF-Net in COVID-19 and other RDs 
detection. By doing so, we can unravel potential interactions 
between these respiratory conditions, thus improving the ac- 
curacy of our models. Secondly, we plan to delve into the 
influence of other common confounding factors, such as race 
and geographical location. These factors can play a pivotal role 
in shaping the prevalence of various diseases and introduce 
biases in data distributions. Examining and accounting for 
these variables will not only bolster the resilience of the RBF- 
Net framework but will also make it adaptable for global- 
scale screening efforts. This comprehensive approach will 
enhance our understanding of the interplay between various 
confounding factors and the performance of our model, ulti- 
mately facilitating more accurate and globally relevant disease 
detection and screening. 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
 
This paper addresses the challenge of mitigating underlying 
bias in training data distributions, which often leads to 
inflated respiratory disease (RD) diagnosis results. We 
introduce modifications to   the   CNN-LSTM   architecture 
to formulate the RBF-Net framework, incorporating an 
additional bias predictor module. This   module   assesses 
the statistical association between the feature vector and 
biases, aiming to reduce correlations between confounding 
variables and RD classification outcomes. To illustrate the 
impact of underlying biases on DL model performance and 
evaluate the RBF-Net’s effectiveness, we utilize multiple 
training datasets with various biases (gender, age, smoking 
status), along with balanced unseen testing datasets. Both 
the state-of-the-art CNN-LSTM and the proposed RBF-Net 
models undergo training and evaluation on these datasets. 
Notably, the RBF-Net framework demonstrates promising and 
realistic results, even in challenging biased training scenarios, 
and without relying on cross-validation techniques. These 
findings suggest the potential of the proposed framework as 
an effective non-invasive tool for RD testing and screening. 
 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T. S., A. I., 
and A. I., A. R.; methodology, T. S. and A. I.; software, T. 
S.; validation, T. S. and A. I., A. R; formal analysis, T. S.; 
investigation, T. S. and A. I., A. I., A. R.; resources, T. S., 
A. I., A. R., and A. I.; data curation, T. S. and A. I.; writing 
draft preparation, T. S. and A. I; writing—review and editing, 
T. S., A. I, I. S., H. N. Q., A. R., and A. I.; visualization, T. 
S. and A. I. All authors have read and agreed to the published 
version of the manuscript. 
Declaration of competing Interest: The authors declare 
that they have no known competing conflict of interests or 
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data Availability Statement: The statistical data presented 
in this study are available in Fig. 1, 3, 4, and 5. The data 
sets used and/or analyzed during the current study can be 
available upon request. These data are not publicly available 
due to privacy and ethical reasons. 
Acknowledgments: This work was not supported by any 
grant. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest. 

12
