Large Collection of Diverse Gene Set Search
Queries Recapitulate Known Protein-Protein
Interactions and Gene-Gene Functional Associations
Neil R. Clark1,2,3, Avi Ma’ayan1,2,3,∗
1Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1215, New York, NY, USA
2Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS)
Data Coordination and Integration Center (DCIC)
3Mount Sinai Knowledge Management Center (KMC) for Illuminating the Druggable Genome (IDG)

Abstract—Popular online enrichment analysis tools from the
ﬁeld of molecular systems biology provide users with the ability to
submit their experimental results as gene sets for individual anal-
ysis. Such queries are kept private, and have never before been
considered as a resource for integrative analysis. By harnessing
gene set query submissions from thousands of users, we aim to
discover biological knowledge beyond the scope of an individual
study. In this work, we investigated a large collection of gene
sets submitted to the tool Enrichr by thousands of users. Based
on co-occurrence, we constructed a global gene-gene association
network. We interpret this inferred network as providing a
summary of the structure present in this crowdsourced gene set
library, and show that this network recapitulates known protein-
protein interactions and functional associations between genes.
This ﬁnding implies that this network also offers predictive value.
Furthermore, we visualize this gene-gene association network
using a new edge-pruning algorithm that retains both the local
and global structures of large-scale networks. Our ability to make
predictions for currently unknown gene associations, that may
not be captured by individual researchers and data sources, is a
demonstration of the potential of harnessing collective knowledge
from users of popular tools in the ﬁeld of molecular systems
biology.
Keywords - gene sets, big data, item set mining
I. INTRODUCTION
Systems approaches to genome-wide molecular data are
increasingly using gene sets, as opposed to individual genes, as
the basic units of analysis. For example, in the ﬁeld of molec-
ular diagnostics, biomarker sets, as opposed to single gene
biomarkers, are increasingly being applied [1]. Beyond molec-
ular diagnostics, genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics
experiments often identify gene sets that are differentially ex-
pressed, or gene sets that contain genetic variations associated
with a phenotype. Using methods such as enrichment analyses
[2]–[4], common biological functions can illuminate prior
knowledge originating from the collection of experimentally
identiﬁed gene sets.
One approach to enrichment analysis is to take a set of
experimentally identiﬁed genes and analyze these genes by
comparing them to a library of gene sets with a known
associated biological theme, e.g., members of cell signaling
pathways, or targets of transcription factors. Enrichr [2] is a
popular online tool we developed to enable users to submit
gene sets for this type of analysis. Since its launch in 2013,
over 900,000 gene sets have been submitted to Enrichr by over
25,000 unique users. These gene sets originate from diverse
experimental platforms, proﬁling genes and proteins at various
regulatory levels of mammalian molecular data.
We hypothesize that the gene set submitted to Enrichr may
contain patterns and structure that could reveal novel associa-
tions between genes, gene modules and molecular biological
mechanisms. The large size of this data set and the diversity of
the scientiﬁc community from which it originates potentially
provide a unique perspective that may reveal new insights.
In combinatorial mathematical terms, the nearly 1 million
gene sets that were submitted to Enrichr comprise a family of
sets, i.e., a collection of subsets from the set of all genes in the
human, mouse and rat genomes. A common approach to the
analysis of this form of data is to treat each set as an item-set in
analogy to a market basket, and identify frequently occurring
combinations of items [5]. An alternative has been proposed in
which item-sets that are logically related are identiﬁed [6]. The
identiﬁcation of logical item-sets is particularly relevant for the
gene sets submitted to Enrichr because this approach takes
into account rare items, and because biological knowledge is
incomplete, logically associated groups of items may only be
partially represented in any given basket. These are important
properties, as we aim to identify functional modules even
for rarely occurring genes. We expect that due to partial
information contained within an individual query, not all
members of a relevant functional module will be present in
any given gene set submitted for analysis with Enrichr. This
partial information is expected to produce high level of false
positive associations. Due to the expected high false positive
rates, a degree of noise-ﬁltering may also improve the accuracy
of such analysis.
Here we provide an interpretable picture of the global
arXiv:1601.01653v1  [q-bio.MN]  7 Jan 2016

properties of a large collection of the lists submitted to Enrichr
by thousands of users. To accomplish this we employ the
method of logical item-set to extract gene modules. As a con-
sequence, we infer a network of relationships between genes
and visualize this network using a novel edge-pruning method
we devised. Next, we examine the degree of compatibility
of our ﬁndings with annotated gene set libraries such as the
Human Gene Atlas or the Gene Ontology (GO), as well as
with known protein-protein interactions.
II. RESULTS
By the middle of 2015, the Enrichr gene set queries con-
sisted of 172,798 gene sets submitted from 5,114 unique in-
ternet protocol (IP) addresses. Our analysis began by applying
a number of ﬁlters. First, we removed any query that did not
correspond to an ofﬁcial gene symbol. Next, we ensured that
no individual users dominated in their contributions to the
data set by removing all entries from users that contributed
many gene sets (see methods for more details). After this
strict cleaning criteria, the result was a family of 19,196 gene
sets, composed of 27,770 genes supplied from 3,308 unique
IP addresses of unique users of Enrichr.
A. Enrichr gene set library metrics
The distribution of gene frequencies is surprisingly complex
(Fig. 1). The distribution approximately decays exponentially
from frequencies greater than
300; however, the lower fre-
quencies are characterized by a bimodal distribution. The
large mode at the lowest frequencies has an overrepresentation
of uncharacterized genes, gene names with no functional
associations or known protein-protein interactions; but even
discounting those genes, this peak remains relatively large.
The lower frequencies are also characterized by a mode at
around 200 occurrences. The frequency of occurrence of genes
in submissions to Enrichr has a characteristic frequency that
decays exponentially, as opposed to being characterized by a
power law. Given the predominance of scale-free distributions,
it is perhaps surprising that there is a deﬁnite scale for
frequencies of gene occurrence in this data set.
The distribution of the lengths of gene sets submitted to
Enrichr approximately ﬁts a power-law, with a notable peak
at about 200 and 400 genes (Fig. 2). The distribution of the
number of submissions to Enrichr per user IP address also
follows a power-law, suggesting that most users submit only
a few lists, but there is a substantial body of heavy users.
B. Gene-gene and gene-set/gene-set network inference
The Enrichr collection of gene set queries can be transposed,
such that for each gene there is an associated set of Enrichr
submission queries. To explore the structure in this data,
and also to potentially form the basis for an informative
decomposition of the data, we can infer networks of similar-
ities between gene pairs and, in addition, networks of Enricr
queries. We employ the methods developed in [6] to infer
noise-ﬁltered networks of associations between these entities.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
10
100
1000
10 4
Enrichr gene freq
Count.
Distribution of gene frequencies
Fig. 1.
The distribution of the occurrences of unique gene symbols in
Enrichr gene set queries.
50
100
500
1000
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
Enrichr line length
Count.
Distribution of query submissions lengths
Fig. 2.
The distribution of the size of each gene set query submitted to
Enrichr.
In order to visualize the network of gene associations, we
employ an edge-pruning algorithm that results in an inter-
pretable representation of the global network structure while
preserving local features of the network topology (Fig. 3a). A
selection of the largest local structures, preserved by the edge
pruning algorithm, is shown in Fig. 3b. One potential use of
this network is to make predictions of novel associations based
on prior knowledge. As an example of this, we highlight genes
known to be associated with Adult Onset Diabetes (KEGG)
(Fig. 3c). Illustrating local network structures that include at
least one of these genes suggests local structures as candidate
novel predictions for genes likely associated with the adult-
onset diabetes pathway.
One of the local structures contains the adult-onset diabetes
Genes MAFA and NEUROG3 (KEGG) along with two other
genes, UTS2R and FLJ45717, that are not identiﬁed in KEGG
as being associated with diabetes. However, UTS2 and its
receptor UTS2R have been reported [7] to be involved in
glucose metabolism and insulin resistance, which lead to the
development of type-2 diabetes in humans. There is no known

a
b
ONECUT1
NR5A2
MAFA
NEUROG3
HNF4G
MNX1
INS
HNF4A
FOXA2
FOXA3
BHLHB8
c
Fig. 3.
The edge-pruned network of gene associations inferred from Enrichr queries. (a) The global view of the network. (b) A selection of the largest local
network structures. (c) As an example of one possible use of this network, we highlight genes known to be associated with adult-onset diabetes (KEGG) and
illustrate the local network structure that includes at least one of these genes.
association of FLJ45717 with diabetes; however, as this gene
forms the center of a star graph local structure, we consider
it a novel candidate for involvement in adult-onset diabetes.
We can also apply the same approach to the network of
associations between gene set queries submitted to Enrichr
(Fig. 4). This network appears to show a degree of clustering
by user; this perhaps reﬂects individual users special research
interests, or a common method of data acquisition.
C. Comparing the clustering of Enrichr networks to random
scale-free networks
The clustering coefﬁcients of the gene and gene-set net-
works are 0.43 and 0.17, respectively. In order to gauge the
signiﬁcance of this, we compared these clustering coefﬁcients
to the typical clustering coefﬁcients for a random scale-free
network generated by the Barabasi-Albert random scale-free
graph model. Artiﬁcial shufﬂed networks of a similar size and
degree distribution generated by the Barabasi-Albert model
have a typical clustering coefﬁcient of 0.0026 and 0.0054
respectively. Hence, we see that the Enrichr queries gene, and
gene-set, networks have a clustering coefﬁcient which is orders
of magnitude greater than would be expected if the networks
were randomly scale-free by the Barabasi-Albert model.
D. Examining the gene network for recovery of known protein-
protein interactions
Next, we asked whether the gene-gene association network
created from the Enrichr queries can be used to predict
physical protein interactions. We used the PSICQUIC database
of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and examined the statis-
tical signiﬁcance of the overlap between the PSICQUIC PPI
network and the gene-gene network inferred from Enrichr sub-
missions. After applying a threshold of 0.3 for the similarity of
a normalized point-wise mutual information for the gene-gene
association network, two binary matrices remained.
In the ﬁrst test of the signiﬁcance of the similarity between
these two binary matrices, we count the number of non-
zero entries in each matrix and the number of elements that
are nonzero in both matrices. Based on a null distribution
whereby the matrices are randomly permuted, we can use the
hypergeometric distribution to quantify the signiﬁcance of the
overlap between the two matrices.
There are n1 = 13, 586 genes that are in both the Enrichr
queries network and the PSICQUIC PPI network. With a
threshold on the normalized point-wise mutual information of
0.05, there are n1 = 99, 758 edges in the Enrichr network and
n2 = 156, 388 known PPIs. There are nk = 2, 763 edges that
are present in both the Enrichr network and the PSICQUIC
PPI network. In this regime, the Poisson approximation to the
hypergeometric distribution is applicable. With a total number

(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.
The edge-pruned network of associations between query submissions to Enrichr. (a) The global view of the network. (b) A selection of the largest
local structures. (c) The gene sets submitted by the ﬁve Enrichr users with the largest number of submissions are highlighted, each with a different color.
of possible edges given by ng(1 −ng), the rate parameter for
the Poisson distribution is given by:
n1n2
ng(1 −ng) = 169.1
(1)
Under the null hypothesis that edges are randomly assigned,
we expect a mean number of shared edges to be 169.1 with the
standard deviation of approximately 13.0. Consequently, the
observed value of nk = 2, 763 is about 200 standard deviations
greater than the expected value. Therefore, under the null
hypothesis, the number of edges present in both the Enrichr
gene network and the PSICQUIC PPI network is extremely
statistically signiﬁcant.
It is conceivable that this result is due to users submitting
gene set queries containing proteins known to have many
interactors, and hence the null distribution we used for the
calculation would be inappropriate and the result invalid.
One way to account for this is to condition the test on the
frequency of each gene. To do this, we perform a separate
hypergeometric test for each gene, and correct for multiple
hypothesis testing. There are 899 proteins that have at least
one interaction that overlaps with the Enrichr network; when
corrected for multiple hypotheses testing, with a False Dis-
covery Rate of 2
Another possible explanation for the apparently signiﬁcant
overlap between edges in the Enrichr gene network and the
PSICQUIC PPI network is that there are a signiﬁcant number
of user queries containing genes with known PPIs. To address
this, we recovered the Enrichr lists that contribute to the
prediction of at least one PPI and counted the number of
proteins in each query list for which there is another protein
in the query with which it interacts. If a user submitted a
list of proteins with known protein interactions, then the ratio
of the counted proteins to the length of the query will be
large. We note that the actual ratio is less than 1%, which
suggests that users are not submitting gene sets with known
PPIs to Enrichr to any signiﬁcant degree. This suggests that
Fig. 5.
The part of the network of the gene-gene associations inferred from
Enrichr that is also supported by known protein-protein interactions from
PSICQUIC.
the signiﬁcant overlap in the edges in the gene network
inferred from Enrichr submissions is predictive of known and
potentially novel protein-protein interactions.
We show the network of edges between genes that are
present in both the Enrichr-inferred gene network and the
PSICQUIC PPI network (Fig. 5).

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mouse Gene Atlas
Human Gene Atlas
Reactome pathways
ChEA
CCLE
OMIM disease genes
KEGG pathways
WikiPathways
Chromosome location
GeneOntology MF
Structural Domains
HMDB Metabolites
NCI60
PPI Hub Proteins
GeneOntology BP
GeneOntology CC
GeneSigDB
CORUM
NURSA
-
IPMS
MGI MP top4
MGI MP top3
BioCarta pathways
KEA
TF PPIs
microRNAs
TF PWMs
VirusMINT
OMIM Expanded
Fraction of gene sets significantly clustered (FDR 1%)
Fig. 6.
The proportion of gene sets in each library that are signiﬁcantly
clustered in the gene-gene association network inferred from queries to
Enrichr.
E. Evaluating the recapitulation of prior knowledge about
gene functions with the gene-gene association network inferred
from Enrichr queries
We took a collection of 28 annotated gene set libraries that
represent prior knowledge of associations between genes and
their functions from a range of biological themes, including
Gene Ontology, mouse phenotypes, protein complexes, histone
modiﬁcations and DNA binding. We addressed the question of
the extent to which the information in these gene set libraries
is recapitulated by the gene-gene association networks inferred
by Enrichr queries.
In order to test this for a single gene set, we mapped the
genes in the set to nodes in the Enrichr queries gene-gene
association network, and then calculated the mean point-wise
mutual information between each pair of genes. In order to
assess the signiﬁcance of this collective measure of similarity,
we numerically calculated a null distribution by randomly
choosing a set of nodes in the Enrichr queries’ network with
the same cardinality as the gene set in question. The random
choice was weighted by the overall frequency of the gene in
the gene set library from which it originates. This is equivalent
to generating a null distribution based on random permutation
of the gene set library repeated many times. By comparing the
actual collective similarity to the null distribution, we calculate
a signiﬁcance p value for the collective similarity of the gene
set in the Enrichr queries’ gene-gene association network. A
small p value indicates that the members of the gene set in
question are signiﬁcantly more similar to each other in the
network inferred by Enrichr queries than would be expected
if the gene set library from which the set was originated was
randomly permuted. We interpret a small p value as indicating
that the network inffered by the Enrichr queries has recovered
the gene set in question. The list of all gene set libraries
examined (Table I).
After correcting for multiple hypotheses testing and setting
a false discovery rate threshold of 1%, we counted the number
of gene sets in each library that are signiﬁcantly recovered in
the Enrichr queries’ gene-gene network (Fig. 6).
We observed that for some libraries, over 30% of the gene
TABLE I
GENE SET LIBRARIES USED TO ASSESS RECOVERY OF FUNCTIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS BY THE NETWORK INFERRED FROM THE ENRICHR
QUERIES.
Gene Set Library
# of Sets
Mean Set Size
BioCarta pathways
249
18
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
967
176
ChEA
240
1456
Chromosome location
386
85
CORUM
1673
5
Gene Ontology Biological Process
941
78
Gene Ontology Cellular Component
205
172
Gene Ontology Molecular Function
402
122
GeneSigDB
2139
127
Genome Browser PWMs
615
275
HMDB Metabolites
3906
47
Human Gene Atlas
84
450
KEA
474
37
KEGG pathways
200
48
MGI MP top 3
71
717
MGI MP top 4
476
202
microRNAs
222
155
Mouse Gene Atlas
96
660
NCI60
93
343
NURSA-IP-MS
1796
158
OMIM disease genes
90
25
OMIM Expanded
187
89
Pfam-InterPro-domains
311
35
PPI Hub Proteins
385
247
Reactome pathways
78
73
TF PPIs
290
79
VirusMINT
85
15
WikiPathways pathways
199
39
sets in the library are recoverable by the Enrichr queries’
gene-gene association network. The libraries containing data
from genome-wide gene expression proﬁling have the most
overlap, followed by ChEA, which has lists of genes associated
with transcription factors from ChIP-seq proﬁling. Next are
pathway libraries such as reactome, KEGG and WikiPathways.
This rank order of libraries likely reﬂects the nature of
most submitted lists to analysis with Enrichr. These query
submissions are likely dominated by differentially expressed
genes from genome-wide mRNA proﬁling. The recovery of
annotated pathways suggests that the inferred gene-gene as-
sociation network likely contains new and more complete
pathway knowledge.
III. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we analyzed for the ﬁrst time, a large collec-
tion of gene set queries submitted by the many users of the
popular enrichment analysis tool Enrichr. We examined the
distribution of occurrence of genes, the length of submitted
gene sets, and the distribution of submissions by individual
users. We show that the distribution of gene occurrence in
queries is complex, with some genes appearing often in
submitted lists. The length of gene set queries peaks at 200-
400 genes per query, and the distribution of submitters follows
a power law. By constructing a gene-gene association network
of co-occurrence, we were able to show that such a network
captures known protein-protein interactions and functional
associations much more frequently than by chance. This means
that the collective data from thousands of queries potentially

holds new knowledge about the local and global structure
of the human functional interactome. As more submissions
accumulate, it is expected that such predictions will be reﬁned
and improved. While experimental validation of these predic-
tions is outside the scope of this present work, the gene-gene
association network resource we developed here can be used to
prioritize predictions for general and speciﬁc hypotheses that
can be tested experimentally and systematically drive rational
research explorations. The reuse of privately submitted gene
sets by the Enrichr users should be handled with caution. The
analysis that we conducted here and the gene-gene association
networks we constructed keep the identities of users private.
Furthermore, we do not provide the gene sets used for our
analysis publicly.
IV. METHODS
A. Data Preprocessing
As of June 25th 2015, 172,798 queries of gene sets were
submitted to Enrichr from 5,114 unique IP addresses. In
order to analyze the global structure of these gene sets,
preprocessing was necessary because the raw data include
multiple instances of the example data set supplied by the
Enrichr website for demonstration purposes, special characters
and strings that cannot be interpreted as gene lists caused by
erroneous input from users, and large collections of queries
from individual users who utilized the Enrichr API. These
entries were removed so that the resulting dataset is repre-
sentative of the entire community of Enrichr users and is not
dominated by any individual user or small subset thereof.
The ﬁrst ﬁlter was applied to retain only word strings that
are members of a reference set of 39920 standard human,
mouse and rat gene names. The resulting sets of genes
corresponding to each user input list was then subjected to
a sequence of subsequent ﬁlters.
Use of the Enrichr API enables programmatic access to
Enrichr. This resulted in a minority of users submitting a large
number of gene lists. In order for the data set to be balanced
and representative of the entire community of Enrichr users,
and not dominated by a small minority of users, we ﬁltered
out gene lists associated with IP addresses from which large
numbers of lists were received.
The results of 11,579 differential expression analyses were
received from the GEO2Enrichr Chrome Extension, which
submits three gene sets for every differential expression com-
putation for analysis with Enrichr: upregulated, down regulated
and combined gene sets, respectively. Only the combined gene
sets were retained in this analysis.
Gene sets that contained more than 2,000 genes were
rejected on the basis that they were non-speciﬁc and incurred
undue computational expense in subsequent analysis.
Finally, all instances of the demonstration gene set from the
Enrichr website were removed. The result was 19,196 gene
sets composed of 27,770 genes supplied from 3,308 unique
IP addresses.
B. Network Inference
We employ the methods described in [6] to reconstruct
networks from the ﬁltered gene sets.
The most basic approach to construct a network from a large
collection of gene sets is to deﬁne a distance matrix between
the gene sets and examine the resulting distance matrix. The
most obvious similarity measure between two gene sets A and
B is the Jaccard index:
J(A, B) = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
(2)
Let the set of all elements be V, and the family of sets be M,
then:
M =

m(n) =
n
m(n)
l
oLn
l=1 ⊂V

(3)
and the co-occurrence counts of pairs of genes is given by:
φ(α, β) =
N
X
n=1
δ(α ∈m(n))δ(β ∈m(n))
(4)
where δ(bool) is a Dirac delta function deﬁned such that:
δ(bool) =
(
1
ifbool = True,
0
Otherwise
The marginal counts are then deﬁned in terms of the co-
occurrence counts as:
φ(α) =
X
β∈G,α̸=β
φ(α, β)
(5)
which is the number of all co-occurrences. Finally, the total
number of co-occurrences is given by:
φ0 = 1
2
X
α∈V
φ(α) = 1
2
X
α∈V
X
β∈V
φ(α, β)
(6)
Then the co-occurrence probability is given by:
P(α, β) = φ(α, β)
φ0
(7)
and the marginal probability is given by:
P(α) = φ(α)/phi0
(8)
The Jaccard index can now be deﬁned in these terms as:
ψjac =
P(α, β)
P(α) + P(β) −P(α, β))
(9)
When the collection of gene set queries is transposed such
that the genes are the labels and the queries are the members
of sets, the Jaccard index can be applied.
We can also use the following distance measures:
• Cosine Distance:
ψcos = P(α, β)/
p
P(α)P(β)
• Point-Wise Mutual Information:
ψpmi = max {0, Log(P(α, β)/P(α)P(β))}
• Normalized Point-Wise Mutual Information:
ψnmi = −ψpmi/(Log(P(α, β)))

We apply a noise ﬁlter by iteratively applying a threshold for
similarity: the pair counts for gene pairs that do not pass
the threshold are set to zero, and the similarity matrix is
recalculated.
Throughout the rest of this analysis, we only use the
normalized point-wise mutual information as a measure of
similarity between genes for the Enrichr queries data.
C. Network visualization
Because the resultant networks are densely connected, direct
visualization of the graph is not interpretable. Edge pruning
has been proposed for the simpliﬁcation of graphs to aid in
generating interpretable visualizations of their structure [8].
We ﬁnd that such edge pruning algorithms, applied to very
large graphs, are able to represent the global structure at the
expense of the local structure. To potentially improve this, we
employed an edge pruning approach that is able to capture
both global and local structure in the graph.
In the initial step, a set of local structures is derived by
varying the threshold for similarity and identifying connected
graph components at the point at which they disconnect from
the giant component. Such point is deﬁned as any connected
component that contains more than 10% of all nodes or has
an absolute number of nodes greater than 100 nodes; this
number is chosen based on the visualizability properties of
the resulting local structures.
The local structures represent local regions of the network
that are distinguishable from the rest of the network at an ap-
propriate scale of similarity. As such, they depict the similarity
relationships between the nodes and their neighborhood in the
network.
Once the local structures have been identiﬁed, we employ
a naive edge-pruning algorithm. We do not prune edges that
are members of the local structures, thereby preserving them
in the ﬁnal simpliﬁed network. The number of edges that are
available to be pruned is equal to the difference between the
total number of edges in the original network, ne, and the
number of edges that are part of the local structures, ne;ls. The
pruning process preserves the connectivity of the network, so
after the maximum degree of pruning, the minimum number
of edges remaining must be equal to:
nls + ne;ls
(10)
Accordingly, the maximum number of edges that can be
pruned while preserving the connectivity of the network is:
ne −ne;ls −nls
(11)
The iterative process by which edges are pruned is as follows:
1) Set a counter i = 0
2) Identify the edge with the lowest similarity measure
3) If removing the edge does not cut the network, then
remove it.
4) i →i + 1
5) If i < γ(ne−ne;ls−nls) then return to step 1; otherwise,
stop.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Dr. Kathleen M. Jagodnik for pro-
viding useful comments and copyediting. Funding: This work
was supported in part by grants from the NIH: R01GM098316,
U54HG008230 and U54CA189201 to AM.
