Machine Learning manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That
Predict and Explain
A. Baskar · Ashwin Srinivasan · Michael
Bain · Enrico Coiera
the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later
Abstract Machine Learning (ML) has emerged as a powerful form of data mod-
elling with widespread applicability beyond its roots in the design of autonomous
agents. However, relatively little attention has been paid to the interaction be-
tween people and ML systems. In this paper we view interaction between humans
and ML systems within the broader context of communication between agents
capable of prediction and explanation. We formalise the interaction model by tak-
ing agents to be automata with some special characteristics and define a protocol
for communication between such agents. We define One- and Two-Way Intelli-
gibility as properties that emerge at run-time by execution of the protocol. The
formalisation allows us to identify conditions under which run-time sequences are
bounded, and identify conditions under which the protocol can correctly imple-
ment an axiomatic specification of intelligible interaction between a human and an
ML system. We also demonstrate using the formal model to: (a) identify instances
of One- and Two-Way Intelligibility in literature reports on humans interacting
with ML systems providing logic-based explanations, as is done in Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP); and (b) map interactions between humans and machines in an
elaborate natural-language based dialogue-model to One- or Two-Way Intelligible
interactions in the formal model.
Keywords Human-Centred ML, Intelligible Interaction, Formal Model, Protocol
A. Baskar
Dept. of Computer Science & Information Systems

Ashwin Srinivasan
Dept. of Computer Science & Information Systems and APPCAIR

Michael Bain
School of Computer Science and Engineering

Enrico Coiera
Centre for Health Informatics, Macquarie University

arXiv:2301.01819v2  [cs.AI]  27 Oct 2024

2
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
1 Introduction
The need for predictions made by machine-constructed models to be intelligible to
a human has been evident for at least four decades. To the best of our knowledge,
the earliest identification of a possible mismatch in the representations used by
humans and machines was by Michie in (Michie, 1982). He describes the notion of
a ‘Human Window’ of comprehension based on constraints on computation and
storage constraints imposed by the biology of the brain. Consequences of machine-
constructed assistance falling outside this human window are examined on syn-
thetic problems (chess endgames) in (Kopec, 1982), who also describe some real-life
disasters arising from the use of machine-constructed assistance for humans oper-
ating in safety-critical areas (the Three Mile Island reactor meltdown being one
such). Assuming the existence of the human window, Michie went on to propose
a classification of machine-learning (ML) systems into three categories (Michie,
1988a). Weak ML systems are concerned only with improving performance, given
sample data. Strong ML systems improve performance, but are also required to
communicate what it has learned in some human-comprehensible form (Michie
assumes this will be symbolic). Ultra-strong ML systems are Strong ML systems
that can also teach the human to improve his or her performance. This categori-
sation has recently informed a similar 3-way categorisation for the use of AI tools
in scientific discovery (Krenn et al., 2022), and to evaluate an Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP) as a form of Ultra-Strong Machine Learning (Ai et al., 2021).
The following aspects of Michie’s characterisation are worth emphasising. Firstly,
it is clearly intended for use in a human-in-the-loop setting, though the human
can be a teacher, student or collaborator. Secondly, the characterisation is about
intelligibility, not intelligence. Intelligibility as stated is a relation between the ML
system (the sender), what the ML system communicates (the message), and the
human (the receiver). Thus, the ML system can employ any representation for
its internal model; all that is needed is that it can communicate the “how” and
“why” in a form that lies within the human window of comprehension.1 Thirdly, it
appears to be a classification of an ML system based on one-way communication
from the machine to the human. It is not apparent what happens in situations
where the communication is from the human to the machine (this may well occur
in collaborative scientific discovery, for example). Symmetry would suggest the
existence of a ‘Machine Window’ and associated requirements of the machine re-
ceiving comprehensible messages, but this is not considered in (Michie, 1988a)2.
Finally, nothing is proposed by way of a quantitative or qualitative assessment for
one-way intelligibility of the machine’s communication (this is addressed by (Ai
et al., 2021), who propose a quantitative measure of how beneficial the machine’s
explanation was to the human).
In this paper, we describe an interaction model between agents that can make
predictions and provide explanations for their predictions. Our focus is not on de-
veloping any specific technique or representation for predictions and explanations
1 The adjective ‘weak’ in the first category does not mean the ML engine’s performance is
poor. It simply indicates that the constraints on the learner mean that it is not required to
communicate its update to the human.
2 Although Michie did refer to his approach as, in some sense, inverting John McCarthy’s
dictum that “In order for a program to be capable of learning something it must first be
capable of being told it” (McCarthy, 1959).

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
3
by agents, but to identify whether the predictions and explanations provided by
any one agent is intelligible to the other. We attempt to do this by examining the
communication between the agents. Specifically:
1. We propose a communication protocol based on transition systems for mod-
elling interactions between agents capable of constructing models for data and
using these to exchange ‘what’ (predict) and ‘why’ (explain) information about
data. We call such agents PEX agents);
2. Based on this protocol we provide definitions for One- and Two-Way Intelli-
gibility. When applied to a human interacting with an ML system, we iden-
tify sufficient conditions to ensure that a derivation of One-Way Intelligibil-
ity using the protocol ensures correctness with the derivation of human- or
machine-intelligibility using a set of ‘intelligibility axioms’. We also identify
conditions under which the protocol is complete with respect to recent work
on viewing explainable AI, or XAI, as a property of execution of an exten-
sive argumentation-based dialogue model from the literature Madumal et al.
(2019); and
3. We provide case-studies of One- and Two-Way Intelligibility from reports in
the literature between human and ML systems, in which one or both agents
employ explanations in symbolic logic, including studies from Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP). This was the original proposal by Michie for Strong and
Ultra-Strong machine learning. The results there suggest that simply adopt-
ing logic-based explanations may not be sufficient for One-Way Intelligibility,
which is consistent with the identification of ‘harmful’ explanations in (Ai et al.,
2021).
2 An Axiomatic Specification of Human-Machine Intelligibility
We motivate the development of a general interaction model between agents capa-
ble of prediction and explanation by looking first at possible criteria for inferring
One-Way Intelligibility of human-machine interaction. These criteria will then in-
form the design of a communication protocol for intelligible interaction in the more
general setting.
Example 1 Consider a research study reported in (Khincha et al., 2020) on the iden-
tification of Covid-19 patients, based on X-ray images. The automated tool described in
the study uses a hierarchical design in which clinically relevant features are extracted
from X-ray images using state-of-the-art deep neural networks. Deep neural networks
are used to extract features (like ground-glass opacity) from the X-rays, and the system
also includes a deep network for prediction of possible disease (like pneumonia). The
outputs from the deep networks are used by a symbolic decision-tree learner to arrive
at a prediction about Covid-19. Explanations are textual descriptions obtained from the
path followed by the decision-tree when classifying an example.
Results reported in (Khincha et al., 2020) describe how this neural-symbolic approach
compares to an end-to-end monolithic neural approach (the predictive results of the
two are comparable). However, our interest here is on the clinical assessment of the
explanations produced by the symbolic model by radiologists. Figure 1 shows an example
of a machine’s explanation and a clinician’s assessment of that explanation.

4
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
X-ray Not Covid because:
The explanation does not mention
Air-space opacification probability is low; and
the right upper lobe air space
Cardiomegaly probability is high; and
opacification consistent with Covid.
Emphysema probability is low; and
Pneumothorax probability is low; and
Fibrosis probability is low.
Machine’s explanation
Radiologist’s feedback
Fig. 1: The machine’s explanation for the classification of an X-ray image and a
senior radiologist’s feedback.
Later (in Section 5) we return to this problem and provide a tabulation of as-
sessments on several “test” images. For the present we note that in the study,
the human either confirms, refutes, or simply ignores a machine’s prediction and
explanation. Of these, only the first two actions could be taken as indicative of
intelligibility (although, as we will see later, even this is not necessarily the case).
Here we attempt to capture this using the following six axioms that are concerned
with communication of information:3
Human-to-Machine. Axioms in this category are concerned with machine-intelligibility
of the information provided by a human to the machine.
1. Machine-Confirmation: If the machine ratifies a human-explanation then the
human’s explanation is intelligible to the machine.
2. Machine-Refutability: If the machine refutes a human-explanation then the
human’s explanation is intelligible to the machine.
3. Machine-Performance: If the human-explanation improves machine-performance
then the human’s explanation is intelligible to the machine.
Machine-to-Human. This concerns the human-intelligibility of explanations pro-
vided by a machine:
4. Human-Confirmation: If the human ratifies a machine-explanation then the
machine’s explanation is intelligible to the human.
5. Human-Refutability: If the human refutes a machine-explanation then the ma-
chine’s explanation is intelligible to the human.
6. Human-Performance: If the machine-explanation improves the human’s per-
formance then the machine’s explanation is intelligible to the human.
For the example in Figure 1, the condition for the Human-Refutability axiom
will hold. And the machine’s explanation will be considered as intelligible for the
Human. We will look at more examples in detail in Section 5. At this point, the
following clarifications may be helpful:
– The axioms are not intended to be a complete specification of machine- or
human-intelligibility. Thus it is possible, for example, that none of the condi-
tions for the machine-to-human axioms hold, and the machine’s explanation
3 We restrict information to be in the form of a prediction accompanied by an explanation.
For simplicity, we refer to both as an explanation in the axioms, and we disentangle these
later in the paper. The constituents of explanations are left open: the axioms only identify
conditions when these constituents are intelligible to the recipient.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
5
may still be human-intelligible; The axioms also do not specify what, if any-
thing, should be done if one or more of them hold. For example, if a machine’s
explanation is refuted, then what should the machine do about it? This is nor-
mal since the axioms are specifications of intelligibility and not of actions to
be done.
– Two aspects of the axioms that might escape attention are: (a) Although in-
dividually, the axioms result in an inference of One-Way Intelligibility, taken
together they allow an inference of Two-Way Intelligibility; and (b) The infer-
ence of intelligibility will depend on the specific human and machine involved
in the interaction.
We can at best take the axioms to be a partial specification for intelligibility
within the context of an interaction model. Below, we describe a general model of
interaction between agents. We will return in Section 4 to the relationship between
the intelligibility defined in interaction model and the axioms here.
3 Modelling Interaction between Agents that Predict and Explain
We describe an interaction model for the more general setting. For clarity, the
description will be semi-formal: a detailed formal treatment is in Appendix A.
3.1 PEX Agents and PEX Automata
We consider interaction between agents that have capabilities for learning (induc-
tion) and explanation (justification).4 We will call such agents PEX agents (short
for Learn-and-Explain). Specifically, we assume that the interaction between PEX
agents will be modelled by communicating finite-state automata, which we will
call PEX automata. A detailed specification of PEX automata is in Appendix A.
For the present, As normal, we will assume that during run-time, the automaton
at any instant is fully specified by its configuration. Specifically, we will assume
that the configuration of a PEX automaton associate with agent am includes: a
hypothesis Hm; and a dataset Dm consisting of 4-tuples {(xi, yi, ei, pi)}N
i=1, where
xi is a data-instance, yi is a prediction given xi; ei is an explanation for yi; and pi
represents the provenance for the prediction and the explanation (that is, details
about the origin of yi, ei for an xi: a simple example is the automaton that sent
the prediction and explanation). Additionally, the PEX agent am has access to the
following functions:
(a) PREDICTm that returns the prediction of a data-instance x using its hypothesis;
(b) EXPLAINm that returns an explanation for a data-instance x using its hypothesis;
(c) LEARNm that learns a possibly new hypothesis given its existing hypothesis,
dataset, and a possibly new data-triple;
(d) MATCHm which is true if a pair of predictions y, y′ match; and
(e) AGREEm that is true if a pair of explanations e, e′ agree with each other.
4 The capacity for inference (deduction) is taken for granted.

6
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
We use the term PEX-functions for the functions (a)–(e) above. PEX agents are cor-
rectly PEX-function, PEX automata pairs. In the rest of the paper, it is understood
that PEX-functions are agent-specific, and we will drop the subscript on the func-
tions unless required for emphasis. Also the PEX automaton defined in Appendix
A use the agent-specific PEX functions to define guarded transition relations, and
we will use the term “PEX automaton” interchangeably with the corresponding PEX
agent, and the agent-specific PEX-functions will be associated with the correspond-
ing automaton. We will also assume a special agent ∆, called the oracle. ∆is a
non-PEX agent, but it will be convenient to model its interaction with other PEX au-
tomata using the same communication protocol used for “normal” PEX automata.
We do not commit at this point to any specific form taken by the predictions
or the explanations. We also leave open what is meant by a pair of predictions
matching or a pair of explanations agreeing: these will depend on the actual form
taken by the predictions and explanations. For example, if PREDICT returns a nu-
meric value, then a pair of predictions could be assumed to match is they are
within some tolerance.5 We assume that MATCH function is commutative (that is if
MATCH(a, b) = true, then MATCH(b, a) = true).
The EXPLAIN and AGREE functions may not be straightforward. However, for
some kinds of agents, like those that provide logic-based explanations it is possible
to identify EXPLAIN with some known descriptors, like proofs and AGREE can be
formulated in terms of well-understood logical operations (see Example 2 below).
For explanations in a less formal setting, like natural language, it is likely that
obtaining a definition of AGREE may require additional effort, and may require
models constructed from data to decide agreement.
Example 2 (Logic-based PEX functions) Let am and an be agents that use a logic-
based representation, for hypotheses and explanations, as is the case in Inductive Logic
Programming, or ILP (Muggleton and De Raedt, 1994). Let Hm be the current hy-
pothesis of am and Hn be the hypothesis for an. Let predictions of a data-instance x
by Hm,n be done by clauses of the form predict(X, C) ←Body, to be read as “The
prediction of any instance X is C if the conditions in Body are true”. Then possible
PEX functions for am (and similarly for an) are;
(a) y = PREDICTm(x, Hm) ≡(Hm ⊢predict(x, y)) (where ⊢is a derivability relation);
(b) LEARNm constructs hypotheses using techniques developed in ILP;
(c) e = EXPLAINm((x, y), Hm) is the clause in Hm used to derive predict(x, y);
(d) If ym is a prediction by am and yn is a prediction by an then MATCHm(ym, yn) :=
(ym = yn);
(e) if em is a (clausal) explanation from am and en is a (clausal) explanation from
an then AGREEm(em, en) := (em =θ en) (where =θ denotes an equivalence relation
based on the θ-subsumption as defined in (Plotkin, 1971)).
(These definitions are illustrative, and not the only ones possible with logic-based agents.)
We will also require that only messages sent by ∆can contain ▲as an expla-
nation and that the following restriction holds on the PEX functions.
Remark 1 For any agent m ̸= ∆and Dm, if Hm = LEARNm(·, Dm) and (x, y, ▲, ∆) ∈
Dm, then MATCHm(PREDICTm(x, Hm), y) = true.
5 However, then the definition of MATCH may not satisfy some intuitive properties of equality
(like transitivity).

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
7
Informally, this assumes the predictions by the oracle are always correct, and
therefore all non-oracular agents have to ensure their predictions are consistent
with the predictions they have received from the oracle.
3.2 Communication between Automata
We focus on sequences of pairwise interactions between PEX automata. Each se-
quence is called a session. Let us informally call a pair of automata compatible
within a session if there is a consensus between them on the prediction- and
explanation-pairs that are the same.6
Within a session automata send each other tagged messages. The messages
consist of the sender, a tag, data-instance, prediction, and explanation. For the
present, we focus on the message-tags. Suppose am an are compatible automata
in a session. If automaton an receives a message from am with prediction ym and
explanation em, then, an sends a message to am either terminating the session
(message tag TERM ), or a message that contains one of 4 tags: RATIFY , REVISE,
REFUTE or REJECT. Formally, each automaton employs a guarded transition
system, in which mutually-exclusive guards are used to identify which message-
tag to choose. We refer the reader to Appendix A for further details.
3.3 PXP: A Communication Protocol for PEX Automata
We adopt a protocol for messages sent by PEX automata. We introduce the protocol
for communication using single instance: This restriction can be easily relaxed by
allowing messages that communicate about multiple instances, their predictions
and explanations.7 Let A denote the set of PEX automata; X the set of instances;
Y the set of predictions; and E the set of explanations. Messages sent by a PEX
automaton are of the form +(m, (t, (x, y, e))), and messages received are of the form
−(m, (t, (x, y, e))); where m ∈A∪{∆}, t ∈{Init, Ratify, Refute, Revise, Reject, Term},
x ∈X, y ∈Y ∪{‘?′}, e ∈E ∪{‘?′, ▲}. Here ‘?’ is to be read as “not known”; and
The explanation ▲is to be read as “oracular statement”.
Figure 2(a) shows the messages sent and received by an automaton for an
agent (other than ∆), and Figure 2(b) shows the corresponding messages sent
and received by ∆. Informally, the figure tells us that every session between a
pair of PEX automata has to explicitly initiated and terminated. The session can
be terminated by either automaton, and an automaton can only initiate a new
session after terminating an existing session. Communication is therefore like a
plain-old-telephone-system (“POTS”).
In Figure 2, we want agents to send ‘?’ for predictions and/or explanations
only when they initiate the sessions. To enforce this restriction, we will make the
following assumptions about the PEX functions: for any agent m, PREDICTm and
6 That is, for automata am and an in a session, if ym = PREDICTm(x) and em = EXPLAINm(x)
is a prediction-explanation pair for x by am and (yn, en) is a prediction-explanation for x by
an, then MATCHm(ym, yn)
=
MATCHn(yn, ym) and AGREEm(em, en)
=
AGREEn(en, em).
More details can be found in Appendix A.
7 The usual representation for this would be using N-dimensional vectors, where N is the
number of instances.

8
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Fig. 2: Messages sent (’+”) and received (’-’) in PXP by: (a) automata for agents
other than the oracle; and (b) the oracle. Here ⊤stands for a guard condition that
is trivially true. RAT, REF, REV and REJ represent the guard conditions used by the
guarded transition system, which are described below.
EXPLAINm will not return ‘?’ and MATCHm and AGREEm will return false if any one
of the arguments is ‘?’.
To specify the PXP protocol fully we need to define the transition system. This is
done in Appendix A.
Remark 2 (Need for PEX Functions and Compatability) The execution of PXP
requires definition of the PEX functions. As is evident from Definition 7 in Appendix
A, transitions have checks and updates that involve significant local computation. The
protocol has been substantially simplified by assuming that the agents involved in the
interaction are compatible. The compatibility is about a shared meaning of when two
predictions are similar, and when two explanations agree. Without this common under-
standing, the communication patterns become complex in general.
Remark 3 (Synchronous Communication) PXP is a synchronous communication
protocol, and interaction between a pair of agents has to be terminated before com-
mencing a new one. More elaborate protocols allowing concurrency may be possible, at
the expense of greater complexity in managing the global configuration of the system.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
9
It may require provenance information to be more detailed (like inclusion of session
identifiers and session indices, along with the sender’s identifier).
Remark 4 (Noise-free Channels) The protocol does not account for noise in the
channel, delays, or cost of communication between agents. Implementations will need
to account for all of these aspects.
Remark 5 (Oracular Communication) A question that arises is this: if the true
label of data-instances can be obtained directly from the oracle, why doesn’t a PEX agent
communicated just with ∆? One aspect we have not considered in developing the com-
munication protocol is the cost of communication. Collaboration between PEX agents
will be worthwhile if: (a) communication to and from ∆is significantly more expen-
sive (in time or money or both) than communication between PEX agents; and (b) the
PEX functions of any one agent can use predictions and explanations from other agents
effectively. Of these, (a) is likely to be the case if the oracle is intended to model the ac-
quisition of real-world data by manipulation and experimentation. The extent to which
(b) holds will depend on whether agents are able to establish some common knowledge,
and fulfil the requirements of compatibility.
Finally, it is common for protocols to have a preliminary (hand-shaking) phase
where some prior information is exchanged. We have not described this aspect
in the paper, but it is the phase where PEX agents can establish some ‘common
ground’ needed for ensuring compatibility. We now turn to the principal motivation
for introducing the protocol, namely as a syntactic basis for identifying intelligible
interaction.
3.4 Intelligibility from Interaction
We now have the pieces to define intelligibility as a syntactic property that follows
from the execution of the PXP(k) protocol. We first give an informal description by
what we propose for one-way intelligibility. For the messages sent from am an to
be intelligible to an, we want the corresponding response by an at each step to be:
(a) one of ratification, refutation or revision; and (b) not a rejection. Additionally,
we also require: (c) an should not refute am at every step.8 Inclusion of (c) allows
a simpler version of (a) in the definition of one-way intelligibility.
Definition 1 (One-Way Intelligibility) Let S be a session between compatible agents
am and an using PXP. Let Tmn and Tnm be the sequences of message-tags sent in a
session S from m to n and from n to m. We will say S exhibits One-Way Intelligibility
for m iff (a) Tmn contains at least one element in {RATIFY , REVISE}; and (b) there
is no REJECT in the sequence Tmn. Similarly for One-Way Intelligibility for n.
(This does not mean REFUTE is unimportant. In PXP, the receipt of a REFUTE
message-tag is one way to initiate a revision, which may then result in a response
with a REVISE tag.)
8 This will restrict what we consider intelligible. For example, suppose am provides a mathe-
matical proof as explanation for its prediction For a data instance x. an refutes the explanation
and terminates the session. With restriction (c), am’s message is not intelligible to an. Purely
by looking at the message tag (here REFUTE) we are unable to distinguish if this is because
an has understood, but disagrees with steps in the proof, or simply cannot understand the
proof.

10
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Definition 2 (Two-Way Intelligibility) Let S be a session between compatible agents
am and an using PXP. Let Tmn and Tnm be the sequences of message-tags sent in a
session S from m to n and from n to m. We will say S exhibits Two-Way Intelligibility
for m, n iff S is One-Way Intelligible for m and S is One-Way Intelligible for n using
PXP(k).
Remark 6 (Strong-Intelligibility Ultra-Strong Intelligibility) Insipired by the
properties of Strong and Ultra-Strong ML in Michie (1988a), we suggest the following:
(a) If every interaction between a human and an ML system is One-Way Intelligible for
the human then we will say the ML system is strongly intelligible for the human; and
(b) If an ML system is strongly intelligible for the human, and there exists at least one
interaction with a REVISE message-tag in the message sequence sent from human to
the ML system, then we will say that the ML system exhibits ultra-strong intelligibility
for the human.
We note that this does not restrict the ML system to provide symbolic explana-
tions, as is required in Michie (1988a). In Sec. 5 we look specifically at some real
use-cases from the literature where one or both of human and machine provide
explanations in symbolic logic. We first illustrate some application of the intelli-
gibility definitions to some hypothetical human-machine interaction.
3.4.1 Human-Interaction With Some Hypothetical ML Systems
We consider sessions about a data-instance x between a human h and a ML system
m. We assume the following: (a) The machine initiates the interaction by sending
the human a prediction and an explanation; (b) The human sends at least one mes-
sage back to the machine before termination; and (b) The human can terminate
the session after one or more messages have been sent or received. None of these
conditions are necessary for PXP, and are adopted here for simplicity. The categori-
sation below is purely expository, and not intended as any kind of classification of
ML engines.
Lucky Machine. Suppose the machine sends a prediction for x that agrees by
chance with the human’s, but the explanation is gibberish. The human refutes
the explanation with a correct one, and terminates the session. The message-tag
sequence is then ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, TERM h⟩. The agent-specific tag-sequences
are Thm = ⟨REFUTE h, TERM h⟩and Tmh = ⟨INIT m⟩This is not One-Way Intelli-
gible for human or machine, and therefore not Two-Way Intelligible. The machine
can continue to be lucky, and revise its hypothesis in a way that continues to
agree with the human, but explanations continue to be nonsense. The interaction
tag-sequence would then extend to be of the form ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, REVISE m,
REFUTE h, REVISE m, · · · , TERM h⟩. This is One-Way Intelligibility for the ma-
chine but not for the human. The session is therefore not Two-Way Intelligible.
Obdurate Machine. We now consider the a variant of the case above, in which the
machine does not (or cannot) revise its model. The sequence ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h,
REFUTE m, REFUTE h, REFUTE m, · · · , TERM h⟩. This is neither One-Way In-
telligible for the human nor the the machine. Obviously, it is also not Two-Way
Intelligible.
Compliant Machine. Suppose the machine is willing to revise its hypothesis to
comply with the human’s prediction and explanation. An example tag sequence is

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
11
⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, REVISE m, RATIFY h, TERM h⟩. This is One-Way Intelligible
for both human and machine, and therefore the session is Two-Way Intelligible.
Extended versions like ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, REVISE m, REFUTE h, REVISE m, · · · ,
RATIFY h, TERM h⟩will similarly be Two-Way Intelligible, and is an example of
the human “teaching” the machine.
Helpful Machine. Suppose the machine’s hypothesis results in the human revising
his or her hypothesis (usually to improve performance). An example tag sequence
is ⟨INIT m, REVISE h, RATIFY m, TERM h⟩. This is One-Way Intelligible for both
human and machine, and therefore the session is Two-Way Intelligible. Extended
versions like ⟨INIT m, REVISE h, REFUTE m, REVISE h, RATIFY m, TERM h⟩will
similarly be Two-Way Intelligible, and constitute an example of the machine teach-
ing the human.
Incomprehensible Machine. The machine sends a message which the human
simply cannot understand (both prediction and explanation). With a reasonable
definitions for MATCH and AGREE, the tag-sequence that results is ⟨INIT m, REJECT h,
TERM h⟩. This is neither One-Way Intelligible for human nor machine.
4 Properties of PXP
4.1 Termination
We construct an abstraction of the set of transitions of PXP in the form of a
‘message-graph’ (for details see Figure 5 in Appendix A). Due to cycles and self-
loops in the message graph, the communication can become unbounded. If we
consider only compatible agents then there will be no cycles in the message graph
(see Proposition 5 in Appendix A). The length of communications might still be
unbounded due to the presence of self-loops in the message graph. We modify
the protocol such that each of the self-loop can occur at most k times. We call
this modified protocol PXP(k). It is straightforward to show that communication
between compatible agents using PXP(k) is bounded.
Proposition 1 (Bounded Communication) Let Figure 5(c) represents the mes-
sage graph of a collaborative session using the PXP(k) protocol. Then any communica-
tion in the session has bounded length.
Proof for this proposition is in Sec. A.3 in Appendix A.
4.2 Correctness wrt the Intelligibility Axioms
We identify conditions under which we can establish correctness of the PXP(k)
protocol wrt to the Intelligibility Axioms in Sec. 2. Here, by correctness we mean
that when One-Way Intelligibility follows from Def. 1 using PXP, we would like to
infer intelligibility from the axioms.
Definition 3 (Actuation Constraints) Let S be an PXP session between human and
machine for a data instance x. Let yh and ym denote the prediction by the human and
machine respectively for x. Let eh and em denote the human’s and machine’s expla-
nation respectively. Let y′
h and y′m denote the human’s and machine’s prediction after

12
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
hypothesis revision using LEARNh and LEARNm respectively. Let e′
h and e′m denote the
human’s and machine’s prediction after hypothesis revision using LEARNh and LEARNm
respectively. We define the following Actuation Constraints on the PEX functions:
AC1h If
MATCHh(yh, ym) ∧AGREEh(eh, em)
=
true then the human ratifies the
machine’s explanation em.
AC1m If
MATCHm(ym, yh)
∧
AGREEm(em, eh)
=
true then the machine ratifies
human’s explanation eh.
AC2h If
MATCHh(yh, ym) ∧AGREEh(eh, em)
=
false and
MATCHh(yh′, ym) ∧
AGREEh(eh′, em) = true then there is improvement in the human’s performance.
AC2m If
MATCHm(ym, yh) ∧AGREEm(em, eh) = false and
MATCHm(ym′, yh) ∧
AGREEm(em′, eh) = true then there is improvement in the machine’s performance.
Proposition 2 Let S be a session between a human and a machine using PXP and the
PEX functions satisfy the Actuation Constraints. If S exhibits One-Way Intelligibility
for h then the antecedent of one of the Machine-To-Human axioms is true. Similarly
if S exhibits One-Way Intelligibility for m then the antecedent of one of the Human-
To-Machine axioms is true.
Proof Let us assume S exhibits One-Way Intelligibility for the human h. Let T be
the sequence of message-tags sent in S from h to m. By the definition of One-Way
Intelligibility, T has either RATIFY , or REVISE. Let yh, ym, eh, em be the predic-
tion of human and machine and explanation of human and machine respectively
before sending this message tag. Let y′
h, y′m, e′
h, e′m be the prediction of human and
machine and explanation of human and machine respectively after revising the
hypothesis.
Suppose T has RATIFY . m sent RATIFY only if MATCHh(yh, ym) is true and
AGREEh(eh, em) is true. Hence m’s explanation is ratified by h by the Actuation
Constraint AC1h; and the/ the antecedent of the Human Confirmation axiom is
true in the Machine-To-Human axioms.
Suppose T has REVISE. It follows from Definition 5 in Appendix A that h
sends REVISE iff MATCHh(yh, ym) ∧AGREEh(eh, em) = false and MATCH(y′
h, ym) ∧
AGREEh(e′
h, em)
=
true. From Actuation Constraint AC2h the human’s perfor-
mance improves, and the antecedent of the Human Performance is true in the
Machine-To-Human axioms.
Similarly for the Machine Confirmation and Machine Performance axioms in the
Human-to-Machine axioms.
■
Thus, the Actuation Constraints are sufficient to establish correctness of PXP
wrt the axioms in Sec. 2.
4.3 Agreement with the Oracle
The oracle ∆has been used as the source of infallible information about the label
for any data instance x. ∆terminates the session with the message +(m, (Term, (x, y,
▲))), where y is the oracle’s prediction for the label of x and ▲denotes that the
explanation is an oracular statement. In our interaction model, ∆never initiates
a session; and never sends any message-tags other than Term.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
13
Proposition 3 Let m, n be compatible PEX agents such that their MATCH functions are
transitive (MATCH(a, b) ∧MATCH(b, c) = true then MATCH(a, c) is true). If either m or n
has an oracular prediction for x and the session ends with m, n reaching a consensus
on prediction and explanation, then both agents will agree with the oracle’s prediction
for x.
Proof Let us assume that m has an oracular prediction y for x which means
(x, y, ▲, ∆) ∈Dm and MATCHm(y, PREDICT(x, Hm)) = true for any hypothesis Hm
constructed by m after receiving the oracular prediction for x (by Remark 1). Let
the session Smn for x ends with m, n reaching a consensus on prediction and ex-
planation with Hm and Hn be the hypothesis for m and n respectively. It means
MATCHm(PREDICT(x, Hm), PREDICT(x, Hn)) = true. Since MATCHm is transitive, we
conclude that MATCHm(y, PREDICT(x, Hn)) = true. Since m and n are compatible,
MATCHn(PREDICT(x, Hn), y) is true. So both the agents will agree with the oracle’s
prediction for x.
Remark 7 It is sufficient for only one of m or n to communicate to ∆about x.
Extending to set of instances X = {x1, x2, . . . , xk}, the cost of communicating to the
oracle can be reduced for both m and n by restricting oracle-communication for each
agent to partitions Xm and Xn respectively.
4.4 Completeness wrt a Dialogue Model
In (Madumal et al., 2019) the authors propose a graphical representation of in-
teractions in a dialogue between a questioner Q and an explainer E. Although in
principle, Q and E could be either human or machine, the interactions are most
easily understood in the context of a human questioner and an machine-learning
system as explainer. The interaction graph is in Figure 3.
Here, we will compare the graph in Fig. 3 9 with the PXP(k) protocol. Let
us denote MMSV without the edge (1, 1) as MMSV−. An example of conversations of
length up to 5 are shown in Table 5. The corresponding PXP(k) transitions are in
Table 5. We show that all bounded length “conversations” allowed in MMSV−have
corresponding finite length interaction using PXP(k). Additionally, we show that
all interactions using PXP(k) are Two-Way intelligible. That is:
Proposition 4 Every path of length l in the graph for MMSV−corresponds to a path of
at most l using PXP(l).
The proof for this proposition is in Appendix B. We note also that not all paths
of length l in the graph for MMSV−map to One-Way or Two-Way Intelligible inter-
actions with PXP(l).
5 Case Studies: Agents Providing Logic-Based Explanations
In this section, we re-cast some reports from the literature involving humans and
ML systems as interactions demonstrating One-Way or Two-Way Intelligibility.
9 we will call MMSV–based on the proposers, was (manually) constructed by examining inter-
action transcripts, and the result clearly reflects constructs identifiable in dialogues between
humans.

14
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
0:Start
1:Ques. Stated
 Q:begin-question
2:Expl. Presented
 E:begin-explanation
 E:return-question
 E:explain/further-explain
 Q:return-question
3:Explainee Affirmed
 Q:affirm
5:Arg. Presented
 Q:begin-argument
8:End
 end-explanation
 Q:return-question
4:Explainer Affirmed
 E:affirm
 end-explanation
 E:further-explain
 end-explanation
6:Arg. Affirmed
 E:affirm-argument
 E:further-explain
7:CounterArg. Presented
 E:counter-argument
 end-argument
 E:further-explain
 end-argument
Fig. 3: The interactions proposed in (Madumal et al., 2019). The node-labels
represent states and edge-labels representing actions (the prefix on the edge-label
denotes the originator of the action). The node-numbering is ours.
We focus specifically on cases where the human or ML system employ logic-based
explanation (ML systems developed in the category of Inductive Logic Program-
ming, or ILP, are in this category). The purpose of this exercise is three-fold. First,
it demonstrates how the interaction model we propose can be applied to charac-
terise the interaction between humans and ML systems. Secondly, it highlights the
difference between human-machine interactions that are One- and Two-Way Intel-
ligible. Thirdly, it shows simply using ML systems capable of symbolic explanation
does not automatically imply Two-way intelligibility.
5.1 Examples of One-Way Intelligibility
Case Study 1. We start by returning to the classification of Covid X-rays in
Section 2. The radiologist’s assessment of the ML model by the radiologist on 30
“test” images is shown in Table 1. For each image, the machine provides a predic-
tion along with a symbolic explanation. We also tabulate a summary of the textual
feedback provided by the radiologist. For this evaluation, we ignore the phase of
model-construction by the ML system, and focus only on the interaction of the
radiologist and the ML system on the test data. In obtaining a mapping of this

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
15
Radiologist’s Opinion about Model’s
Radiologist’s
PXP(k)’s
Prediction
Feedback
Tags
Explanation
Correct
Wrong
Unsure
Sufficient
17
0
0
Clarifies: 17
RATIFY h: 17
Incomplete
1
3
1
Clarifies: 5
REFUTE h: 5
Incorrect
3
2
3
Clarifies: 6
REFUTE h: 6, REJECT h:2
Table 1: Radiologist’s Assessment of machine predictions and explanations for
Covid. Also shown is a summary of the radiologist’s actions and a mapping of
these an PXP(k) message.
interaction to PXP(k) tags in the last column, we have assumed the following: (i) If
the radiologist marks the prediction as correct and the explanation as sufficient,
then this maps to sending a message with a Ratifyh; (ii) If the radiologist marks
the explanation as insufficient (irrespective of the assessment of the prediction)
then this maps to sending a message with a Refuteh tag; (iii) If the radiologist
marks the explanation as incorrect but the prediction as correct or unsure and pro-
vides clarifications as to why the explanation incorrect, then this maps to sending
a message with a Refuteh tag; (iv) If the radiologist marks the explanation and
prediction as incorrect and provides no clarifications, then this maps to sending a
message with a Rejecth tag.
In PXP(k) terms, the radiologist refutes the explanations in 11/30 instances,
rejects 2/30 instances and ratifies them in remaining 17 cases. There is no provision
in the system in (Khincha et al., 2020) for any further interaction (for example,
to revise the machine’s model). Thus the interaction between radiologist and the
ML-system in (Khincha et al., 2020) is characterised by one of 3 tag-sequences:
(a) ⟨INIT m, RATIFY h, TERM h/m⟩(17 cases); (b) ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, TERM h/m⟩
(11 cases); or (c) ⟨INIT M, REJECT H, TERM h/m⟩(2 cases). Here h/m is used to
denote either human or machine. By Definition 1 only the 17 instances in (a) are
One-Way Intelligible for the human.
Case Study 2. As a second illustration of One-Way Intelligibility, we consider in-
formation provided by a human as logical statements provided to an ML system in
the form of relevant domain-knowledge. We re-examine recent results reported in
(Dash et al., 2022, 2019) in the area of drug-design. This is well-known to be a time-
consuming and expensive process, requiring the involvement of significant amounts
of human chemical expertise. ML-based models have been used to assist in this
by constructing models by using chemical structure to predict molecular activity
(like binding affinity, toxicity, solubility and so on). The reported experiments con-
sider the construction of predictive models using relations which are typically used
to construct human-understandable explanations (like known chemical ring struc-
tures, functional groups, motifs and the like). The data provided were in the form
of logical statements constituting “most-specific explanations” for molecules using
the domain-knowledge.10 The authors tabulated predictive performance for two
kinds of deep neural networks (a multi-layer perceptron, or MLP, and a graph neu-
ral network, or GNN). Table 2 lists the number of datasets on which performance
improvements are observed, with the inclusion of the most-specific explanations.
10 These are logical clauses constructed from human-supplied domain-knowledge using a tech-
nique developed in Inductive Logic Programming (Muggleton, 1995)).

16
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Comparative Performance
DNN
(with domain-knowledge)
Type
Better
Same
Worse
MLP
71
0
2
GNN
63
9
1
Table 2: The use of human-supplied domain-knowledge by two kinds of deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs): mult-layer perceptrons (MLPs) and graph-neural networks
(GNNs). Estimates of performance are obtained on 73 different datasets. Here,
“Better” (respectively, “Same” and “Worse”) means the use of domain-knowledge
results in an improvement in performance (respectively, no change, and worse
performance).
In (Dash et al., 2022), the authors recorded a limitation of their approach: the
models constructed by the deep networks are not understandable by a chemist.
So far, we have only described PXP(k) as dealing with a single instance, it would
appear inappropriate to use describe the interaction between human and machine
involving a dataset with many instances. However, there is no reason why this
should be the case. The message from an agent can be about a set of instances,
usually represented by a vector x. In this case, we will take the human as initiating
a message with predictions and explanations (y, ey|x,B) about x.11 For the purpose
of this exercise, we will assume the ML engine already has a model constructed
without the use of background knowledge for the dataset {(xi, yi)}N
1 that matches
predictions in y. One example is the trivial model that simply consists of a lookup-
table of the data and predictions provided.
On receipt of the message from the human, the prediction of the machine’s cur-
rent model for x will correctly be y. That is, MATCHm(·, ·) will be true. The question
is only whether the human’s explanation ey|x,B will match the machine’s explana-
tion, which is denoted by ey|x,∅. If AGREEm(ey|x,∅, ey|x,B) = false, then as per the
definition of PXP(k) the machine will send either a REVISE or REFUTE tag. For
any x if the Actuation Constraints are true and the ML engine can alter its model
to improve performance after receiving the human’s message then the machine
will send a REVISE tag, otherwise the machine will send a REFUTE tag. Here, we
assume LEARNm has some mechanism of estimating improvement in predictive per-
formance. From Table 2 we see that if this assessment is accurate. The PXP(k) tag-
sequence for the MLP will therefore be ⟨INIT h, REVISE m, TERM h/m⟩in 71 out
of 73 datasets, and ⟨INIT h, REFUTE m, TERM h/m⟩in the 2 of 73 cases. One-Way
Intelligibility for the machine only follows in the former cases and not the latter.
The corresponding numbers for the GNN are 63 and 10 respectively. These results
highlight the following: (1) The authors in (Dash et al., 2022, 2019) only point
out unintelligibility of the machine-model for the human. However, with PXP(k),
we can meaningfully talk about intelligibility of the human domain-knowledge for
the machine; and (2) Intelligibility of human-knowledge for the machine depends
11 Each entity is a N-dimensitional vector, where N is the number of instances in x. For
any entry x in x, there are corresponding entries y in y and ey|x,B in ey|x,B, Here y is the
(human)’s prediction of x and ey|x,B is the most-specific explanation for the prediction y given
the human’s background knowledge. y|x, B should be read as y given x and B.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
17
on the machine (here used to include the representation language as well): this is
apparent from the difference in numbers tabulated for the MLP.
The literature also contains studies in which the machine refutes human ex-
planations in logical forms other than most-specific clauses. For example, in the
first report of the of a Robot Scientist in (King et al., 2004), the robot identifies
incompleteness in an existing human explanation of a metabolic network in yeast
that is in the form of a graph. Conversely, it is also possible for a human to revise
his or her predictions on being provided with a machine-constructed logical expla-
nation. For example, in (Ai et al., 2021), the models constructed by an ML system
are shown to improve human predictive performance under some conditions. We
conjecture that these cases can similarly shown to be instances of One-Way Intel-
ligibility using PXP(k) (with tag-sequences ⟨INIT h, REFUTE m, TERM h/m⟩in the
former and ⟨INIT m, REVISE H, TERM h/m⟩in the latter).
5.2 Examples of Two-Way Intelligibility
The most interesting demonstrations of Two-Way Intelligibility arise when inter-
actions between human and machine are sustained beyond a single exchange. We
have selected two such instances from the literature.
Case Study 3. In (Ray and Moyle, 2021), the authors describe an interactive,
human-ML system, called ACUITY, for detecting cyber-attacks. ACUITY is a tool
that allows the identification of malware, using a combination of human-expertise
and machine learning techniques. ACUITY is part of a larger software environment
that allows cybersecurity experts to query, consult and modify a large (cloud-
based) database of security logs, and incorporate specialised knowledge of security
threats. ACUITY itself is an extension of the Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
engine Aleph (Srinivasan, 2001), running in “incremental” mode. In this mode,
interaction commences with the human providing a data instance; followed by
iterations of the ILP engine constructing a hypothesis and the human providing
feedback to correct the hypothesis until the human is satisfied with the result.
Two key assumptions in the work appear to be: (a) that the human’s prediction
is always correct; and (b) there is ‘revision’ by the human of his or her model.
Figure 4 shows a simple text-based version of the options available to the human
when providing feedback to ACUITY.
The reader will recognise that a number of options available to the human
have a close connection to the message-tags in PXP(k) For the purpose of this
exercise, we will assume the following: (a) If the human provides an example in
the top-level menu then this maps the human sending a INIT h tag; Here the
most-specific explanation is as in Case Study 2. (b) If the human chooses to end
the session then this maps to the human sending either RATIFY h, TERM h or
REFUTE h, TERM h tags; (c) If the human selects accept, then this maps to hu-
man sending RATIFY h; (d) If the human selects any one of prune, rebut, pick,
constrain, or the overgeneral/overspecific options then this maps to the human
sending REFUTE H; and (e) Selections extent and db extent are not part of the
PXP(k) protocol.
Each of the choices in (d) results in the ML engine automatically updating
the background B (rebut actually adds counter-examples, but this can be seen as

18
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Top-level menu:
Options:
-> "ok." to accept default example
-> Enter an example
-> ctrl-D or "none." to end
Response [default:none] ?
Second-level menu: (based on providing an example at the top-level menu and reply from
ACUITY)
Options:
-> "accept." to accept clause
-> "prune." to prune clause and its refinements from the search
-> "extent." to show the extent of the proposed hypothesis
-> "db_extent." to show the extent of the proposed hypothesis
with respect to an external database
-> "rebut." add rebuttal to the proposed hypothesis
-> "constrain." add constaints from the proposed hypothesis
-> "pick." add constaints from the most specific hypothesis
-> "overgeneral." to add clause as a constraint
-> "overgeneral because not(E)." to add E as a negative example
-> "overspecific." to add clause as a positive example
-> "overspecific because E." to add E as a positive example
-> any Aleph command
-> ctrl-D or "none." to end
Response?
Fig. 4: Text-based choices available to a human interacting with ACUITY.
adding a constraint to B). An inconsistency in the implementation choices made
by the ILP engine within ACUITY results in a difficulty in exactly modelling the
interaction. The issue is the following: when an example is entered (or re-entered)
at the top-level menu, the ILP engine automatically constructs (or re-constructs)
a hypothesis that agrees with the human’s prediction. However the ILP engine
does not automatically construct (or re-construct) a hypothesis when the human
provides information at the second-level menu. Instead, the hypothesis is only
constructed ‘on-demand’. The reason for this lazy approach is unclear, but it is
thought to be one of efficiency. For our purposes, it is easier to consider a slight
alteration that does not affect correctness, rectifies this, namely: the ILP engine
automatically updates its hypothesis whenever any information is provided by the
human.
With this change, we are able to identify more clearly the PXP(k) message se-
quences resulting from the human’s interaction with ACUITY. Analogous to Case
Study 2, the human providing an example x along with background knowledge B
can be seen as sending an Inith containing the triple (x, yh, eyh|x,B).12 The assump-
tion that the human’s prediction is always correct is reflected in requiring that the
prediction ym made by the machine for x matches the prediction y by the human for
x. Along with the constraint of compatible agents, this means that it will always be
the case that MATCHm(ym, yh) = true and MATCHh(yh, ym) = true. According to the
12 A correct analogy to Case Study 2 would require representing the entries as 1-dimensional
vectors.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
19
Session
Expert Action
PXP(k)
(ACUITY)
Message Tag(s)
Enter example
INIT h, REVISE m
1
rebut
REFUTE h, REVISE m
none
RATIFY h, TERM h or REFUTE h, TERM h
Re-enter example
INIT h, REVISE m
2
extent
–
pick
REFUTE h, REVISE m
none
RATIFY h, TERM h or REFUTE h, TERM h
Table 3: Two sessions with ACUITY. The cybersecurity expert provides an in-
cident in the logs to be explained. The ML system (the ILP engine Aleph, with
the modification described earlier) constructs a hypothesis. In this run, the expert
finds the explanation incorrect. This results in new constraints being added (here
shown through the use of rebut, and pick). The corresponding PXP(k) messages
are shown in the rightmost column.
definition of transitions in PXP(k) it is not difficult to see that these constraints en-
sure: (i) that neither human nor machine ever sends a REJECT tag; (ii) the human
can only send INIT, RATIFY , REFUTE or TERM tags; and (iii) the machine can
only send RATIFY , REVISE or REFUTE tags. It is not difficult to see that there
exist interactions that exhibit Two-Way Intelligibility. Example of message-tag se-
quences with Two-Way Intelligibility are: ⟨INIT h, REVISE m, RATIFY h, TERM h⟩;
and ⟨INIT h, REVISE m, REFUTE h, REVISE m, RATIFY h, TERM h⟩.
We examined logs of sessions with ACUITY.13 The sequence of selections made
by a cyber-security expert for two such sessions is shown in Table 3, along with
the PXP(k) message-tag sequence. Both sessions are classified as being Two Way
Intelligible by Def. 2 when the human ends the session with RATIFY h, TERM h.
In each of the sessions the machine constructs a hypothesis, the human examines
the prediction and refutes its explanation. The machine revises in response. The
interaction is very similar in spirit to a much older logic-based human-machine
system which we consider next.
Case Study 4. To the best of our knowledge, the most direct, long-running real-
world example of human-refutation of the logical explanation constructed by a
machine, which then results in revision of its hypothesis by the machine is from an
early decision-support tool in chemical pathology. PEIRS (Edwards et al., 1993)
was an extremely successful decision-support tool for a pathologist. The machine’s
hypothesis at any point in time was an ordered set of rules. PEIRS relied entirely
on the ability of the pathologist to read, understand and refute the model’s pre-
diction and explanation. The explanation consisted of the sequence of rules used
to arrive at the conclusion. The refutation in turn triggers a revision to the ma-
chine’s hypothesis. PEIRS was the first in a family of tools developed under the
umbrella of “ripple-down rules”, or RDRs, which have continued to be deployed
and used with great commercial success (Compton and Kang, 2021). Interactions
for all such systems consist of iterations of one or the other of the following:
13 Data and annotated ACUITY logs kindly provided by Steve Moyle, Amplify Intelligence
UK and Cyber Security Centre, University of Oxford.

20
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
A. The machine proposes a prediction and an explanation for a data instance, and
the human accepts the prediction and explanation; or
B. The machine proposes a prediction and an explanation for a data instance, the
human refutes the prediction or explanation or both, and provides corrective
feedback. The machine (necessarily) revises its model to be consistent with the
correction (the modification may add a new rule or change an existing one).
It is not difficult to see that the interaction (A) will map to the sequence
⟨INIT m, RATIFY h, TERM h/m⟩; and (B) will map to ⟨INIT m, REFUTE h, REVISE m,
RATIFY h, TERM h/m⟩. More sophisticated implementations can also result in (B)
containing multiple occurrences of iterations of the REFUTE h, REVISE m pair, be-
fore ending in RATIFY h, TERM h/m. Both variants are within the scope of PXP(k)
with a large enough value of k. The reader will recognise that type (A) interac-
tions constitute One-Way Intelligibility for the human; and type (B) interactions
constitute Two-Way Intelligibility.
Quantifiable evidence in PEIRS of type (B) interactions can be obtained from
the results reported in (Edwards et al., 1993), summarised here:
– The machine commenced operation with an initial model. containing approxi-
mately 200 rules
– Over a period of about 120 working days, the machine’s entire model con-
sisting of 950 rules was obtained by interaction with a pathologist with no
prior programming skills, purely by performing type (B) interactions with the
machine.
– The machine-based model’s joint accuracy of prediction and explanation (“right
for the right reasons”) was about 92%. The model was used routinely, inter-
preting around 500 reports a day.
It is evident that the principal interaction mechanism for updating the PEIRS
model can be characterised as demonstrating Two-Way Intelligibility. The tech-
niques developed in PEIRS were commercialised by Pacific Knowledge Systems
and it was later acquired by Beamtree Holdings Limited. In (Compton, 2013),
some details are provided of Beamtree’s RDR system which had acquired about
3000 rules and had interpreted biochemistry reports of about 7 million patients
over a period of about 9 years (by 2013) . The machine-model continued in use
until October 2022, interpreting about 8000 reports a day. The principal mecha-
nism for rule acquisition in this system remains type (B) interaction with a human
expert.14
6 Related Work
In Section 5 we referred to a number of sources that are relevant to one or the
other of the Intelligibility Axioms in Section 2. In this section we turn to some
other relevant work.
From the framework developed in this paper intelligibility can be seen as a
ternary relation involving: the information-provider, the information provided, and
the information-recipient. In the literature on Explainable ML, this has re-emerged
14 Based on data and logs kindly provided by by Lindsay Peters, Beamtree Holdings Ltd;
and Paul Compton, University of New South Wales.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
21
as an important requirement for the acceptability of ML (see (Miller, 2019) for
a recent example citing earlier work (Hilton, 1990), and (Michie, 1988b) for an
early identification of this). Furthermore, the explainer and the explainee can be,
at different times, the same person or agent.
A large literature has built up over recent years addressing the problems of
inscrutable “black box” models generated by some modern machine learning tech-
niques which then require mechanisms for “explainability” (Guidotti et al., 2019).
There are several excellent reviews available on Explainable Machine Learning
(XML), and we refer to the reader to them. More broadly, the origins of XML can
be found in a prominent DARPA project, launched in 2016 titled “Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI)” (DARPA, 2016) which is credited with initiating ef-
forts in XML (Adamson, 2022). In fact, XAI itself can be viewed as a continuation
of pre-existing research trends: earlier approaches in machine learning largely used
models based on knowledge representations developed in artificial intelligence that
were designed to be interpretable (such as rules, decision trees or logical theories),
whereas only recently the drive for accuracy on ever-larger datasets has led to
models that require explanation (Rudin et al., 2022).
The DARPA project used the term “explainability” to denote the use of tech-
niques to generate an explanation for a model (Gunning and Aha, 2019). A dis-
tinction can therefore be made between interpretable models, which are constrained
to work in a way that is (at least, in principle) understandable to humans, and
explainable methods, which are applied to the results obtained from black box
models (Rudin et al., 2022). This difference is similar to the distinction made be-
tween model transparency and post hoc explainability for black box models (Lipton,
2018). However, interpretability is not simply a property of a class of models, but
also of the data, feature engineering, and other factors, and, as such, it may be dif-
ficult to achieve in applications (Lipton, 2018; Rudin et al., 2022). Explainability
by post hoc methods suffers from problems of approximation, since the explainable
model is not usually the model responsible for making the predictions. Recent
criticism of post hoc explainability suggest such methods should not be adopted
for certain medical (Babic et al., 2021) and legal (Vale et al., 2022) applications.
In particular, it appears that such explanations may not be able to satisfy the
legislative requirements for avoidance of discrimination, for example (Vale et al.,
2022).
In presentations of the problem of explainability it is usually assumed there
is a (prototypical) human to which a machine is providing the explanation, in
the terminology we have used in this paper, this means One-Way Intelligibility
for the human. Even in this limited setting, considering only techniques for ex-
planation ignores other issues, like the role of the explainee, for whom the ex-
planation is intended, which is contrary to evidence from social science (Miller,
2019). For instance, the diversity of explainees suggests thinking of explanation in
terms of the understanding of the explainee (Sokol and Flach, 2021). From this
standpoint (Sokol and Flach, 2018, 2021) propose that explanation should be a
bi-directional process rather than a one-off, one-way delivery of an explanation
to a recipient. Therefore explainability is a process involving reasoning over in-
terpretable insights that are aligned with the explainee’s background knowledge.
The proposal is that an explainer should allow explainees to interact and rebut
explanations; in the proposed framework the entire explanatory process is based
on a reasoning system enabling communication between agents. Such a framework

22
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
can be seen as fulfilling many of the requirements in (Wortman Vaughan and Wal-
lach, 2021) for human-centred machine-learning that is intelligible to the (specific)
human.
The natural way to view communication between human agents is as a dia-
logue. We have examined the relation of one such model proposed in (Madumal
et al., 2019) in Sec. 4.4. Full dialogue models between agents attempt to charac-
terise multiple kinds of interaction like questions, explanations, refutations, clari-
fication, argumentation and the like (McBurney and Parsons, 2002). We are aware
of at least two threads of work in the ML literature that recognises some of the
aspects just described, wthout necessarily formulating it as a dialogue model. In
Argument-Based ML, or ABML (Zabkar et al., 2006; Mozina et al., 2007), data
provided by a human to an ML engine includes explanations formulated in terms
of background knowledge shared between human and machine. These explana-
tions constitute ‘arguments’ for the label for data instances, and the ML system
attempts to construct hypotheses that are consistent with the explanations. Learn-
ing from explanations was employed by early ML systems like MARVIN (Sammut
and Banerji, 1986) that performed supervised-learning in the original sense of a
human guiding the construction of hypotheses by a machine. The learning protocol
employed in such systems is naturally interactive, involving human-presentation of
data along with explanations (if any), and revision of hypotheses by machine. The
interaction can result in Two-Way Intelligibility if interactions consist of human
refutation of a machine’s explanations; and the machine revises its hypothesis in
response. However, no refutation of the human’s explanation is envisaged within
ABML nor any revision of his or her hypothesis.
In work on XIL applications to computer vision, where the learner is imple-
mented by a deep network, the key intermediate step of defining “concepts” was
implemented to better communicate with the human to enable any required revi-
sions (Stammer et al., 2021).15
The characterisation predictions and explanations in XIL is similar in spirit
to the categories defined by the guard functions in this paper. As with ABML,
an XIL system demonstrates Two-Way Intelligibility when the human provides
refutations (in XIL, this is done by augmenting the data) and the machine revises
its hypothesis. Also in common with ABML, the machine does not provide refuta-
tions for the human’s prediction and/or explanation, and revision of the human’s
hypothesis is not envisaged. Finally, although not cast either as ABML or XIL,
but nevertheless related to aspects of both are implementations of incremental
learning designed human-machine collaboration. An example of using a combina-
tion of neural and symbolic learning for collaborative decision-making systems for
medical images (Schmid and Finzel, 2020)). We conjecture that techniques such
as this exhibit at least One-Way Intelligibility for the machine, since it relies on
the human providing refutations and the machine improving its performance as a
result.
15 Such concept-based explainability methods have also been applied more widely for deep
learning (Yeh et al., 2022). For example, concept-based explanations have recently been applied
in an attempt to comprehend the chess knowledge obtained by AlphaZero, and concluded that
this approach did reveal a number of relationships between learned concepts and historical
game play, from standard opening moves to tactical skills, as assessed by a former world chess
champion (McGrath et al., 2022).

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
23
7 Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have sought to understand intelligibility requirements on inter-
action between human and machine-learning systems by abstracting to a broader
computational setting of communication between agents that make predictions
and provide explanations. The paper is thus not about developing particular tech-
niques for prediction or explanation, but on the identification of some general
principles for detecting intelligible interaction between agents. This abstraction
necessarily entails some model for interaction. Here, we model agents as automata
with some special characteristics, and their interaction follows a communication
protocol. Intelligibility is then defined as a property defined on the result of exe-
cuting communication the protocol. There are some advantages to adopting this
approach. First, as with any mathematical formalisation, we are able to focus on
a setting where aspects of the bigger questions of what is and is not intelligible
can be answered unambiguously. Secondly, we are able to use the abstraction to
clarify the working of existing implementations. As an examples of the former,
we are able to define concepts of One-Way and Two-Way Intelligibility between
agents purely syntactically from the messages sequences sent by the correspond-
ing automata, and identify conditions (‘Actuation Constraints’) under which this
syntactic property would correctly capture some fairly natural semantic notions
of intelligibile interaction between a human and machine-learning system. As ex-
amples of the latter, we show that we are able to prove that a complex dialogue
model for question-answering using natural language can be mapped to message-
sequences in our model; and separately, provide case-studies of One- and Two-Way
Intelligibility in human-in-the-loop implementations that have used formal logic-
based representations for explanations.
There is broad consensus that intelligible communication between a machine-
learning system and a human depends on the ML engine, the human and infor-
mation sent from one to the other; and a recognition that for complex problems
it is important to consider intelligibility to the machine of information provided
by a human. There is also a long history of formal models for ‘legal’ communica-
tion as a (mathematical) relation between the sender, receiver and the messages
exchanged. Surprisingly, little attention has been paid in bringing these two as-
pects together. There are of course limits to which an approach purely based on
the syntax of messages–such as the one here–can be used to identify a complex
concept like intelligibility. Some of these can be addressed partially by making the
guarded transitions more elaborate, requiring the PEX-functions to capture the se-
mantics, and extending to a multi-valued logic. But it is not coincidental that the
R’s we have identified for detecting intelligibility — REFUTE, REVISE, RATIFY ,
and REJECT — are at the heart of advancing understandability in Science. We
suggest they may play a similar role in evolving a shared understanding of data
by human-machine systems of the kind proposed in Krenn et al. (2022). More
generally, we envisage ‘intelligibility protocols’ like PXP as being an integral part
of the design and analysis of Explainable AI (XAI) systems from the ground-up.
Acknowledgements: AS is a Visiting Professor at Macquarie University, Sydney and a Visiting Pro-
fessorial Fellow at UNSW, Sydney. He is also the Class of 1981 Chair Professor at BITS Pilani, Goa,
the Head of the Anuradha and Prashant Palakurthi Centre for AI Research (APPCAIR) at BITS

24
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Pilani, and TCS Affiliate Professor. MB acknowledges support in part by Rich Data Co. Pty and
the Australian Government’s Innovations Connections scheme (awards ICG001855 and ICG001858).
EC is supported by an NHMRC investigator grant. The authors would like to thank Tirtharaj Dash,
Rishabh Khincha, Soundarya Krishnan, Steve Moyle, Lindsay Peters, and Paul Compton for kindly
providing transcripts of experiments that were used for case studies reported in this paper. AS and
MB owe a debt of gratitude to Donald Michie, who shaped much of their thinking on the views
expressed in this paper.
A Formal Model for PXP
We formalise PXP as a protocol for communicating between PEX agents modelled
as automata. Let Smn(x) denote a session between automata am and an in about
a data-instance.16 We adopt the convention that the session Smn is initiated by
am.
Smn can be represented by the execution of the protocol which results in a
sequence of configurations. ⟨γmn,1, γmn,2, . . . , γmn,k⟩. It is helpful to think of any
configuration γmn,i as being composed of the pair (γm,i, γn,i). Here, γm,i is the
(local) configuration of automaton am and γn,i is the configuration of an.
Definition 4 (Local Configuration) We define γn,i = (sn,i, (Hn,i, Dn,i), µn,i). Here
the s·,i is a state; H·,i is a hypothesis; D·,i is a set of 4-tuples; µ·,i is the message sent
or received. From the grammar rules, messages are of the form +(A, (t, (x, y, e))) or
−(A, (t, (x, y, e)), where A is either m or n (denoting am or an for short); t is a
message-tag, x is a data-instance, y is a label, and e is an explanation. The corre-
sponding local configuration γn,i is similar.
A.1 Guards and Guarded Transitions
Before defining transitions between configurations, we introduce the guards here.
The guard ⊤is trivially true in all configurations. The definitions of non-trivial
guards are the same for all PEX agents, and we define them here for the receiving
automaton (an).
Definition 5 (Guards) Let an be a PEX agent. Let γmn,i = (γm,i, γn,i) be a con-
figuration in a session Smn, where γm,i = (sm,i, (Hm,i, Dm,i), µm,i) and γn,i =
(sn,i, (Hn,i, Dn,i), µn,i). Let µm,i = +(n, (tm, (x, ym, em))), µn,i = −(m, (tm, (x, ym, em))),
yn = PREDICTn(x, Hn,i), and en = EXPLAINn((x, yn), Hn,i). Then we define the guards:
g1: MATCHn(yn, ym) ∧AGREEn(en, em)
g2: MATCHn(yn, ym) ∧¬AGREEn(en, em)
g3: ¬MATCHn(yn, ym) ∧AGREEn(en, em)
g4: ¬MATCHn(yn, ym) ∧¬AGREEn(en, em)
Remark 8 We note the following:
(a) At most one of the four guards can be true in a configuration γmn,i.
16 There may be multiple sessions between am and an involving the same data-instance, and
we would need an additional index to capture this. We ignore this here, and also omit x when
the context is obvious.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
25
(b) The automaton in the CAN SEND state in γmn,i (here an) now checks the guards to
decide on the message-tag;
(c) The guards for all automata use only the PEX functions MATCH and AGREE. However,
since these functions are automaton-specific, the value of the guard function in
one automaton may or may not agree with the corresponding value in a different
automaton. This can result in complex interaction patterns, some of which can be
counter-intuitive. In this paper, we will mainly restrict ourselves to compatible
automata. As will be seen below, this results in a substantial simplification in the
set of messages possible.
To address (c) we focus on the special case where a pair of PEX agents that
agree with each other on their MATCH and AGREE functions within a session.
Definition 6 (Compatible Automata) Let Smn be a session between PEX agents
am and an. Let Ym = {ym : +(n, (·, (x, ym, ·))} be the set of predictions in messages
sent by am to an and Yn = {yn : +(m, (·, (x, yn, ·))} be the set of messages sent by an
to am. Let Em = {em : +(n, (·, (x, ·, em))} be the set of explanations in messages sent
by am to an and En = {en : +(m, (·, (x, ·, en)))} be the set of explanations in messages
sent by an to am. We will say there is a functional agreement on predictions between am
and an in Smn, or am ≃y an in Smn, if for all ym ∈Ym and yn ∈Yn, MATCHm(ym, yn)
= MATCHn(yn, ym). Similarly we will say there is a functional agreement on explanations
between am and an in Smn, or am ≃e an in Smn, if for all em ∈Em and en ∈En
AGREEm(em, en) = AGREEn(en, em). We will say automata am and an are compatible
in session Smn iff am ≃y an and am ≃e an in Smn.
We assume that the oracle ∆is compatible with any PEX agent.
A.2 Interaction Between Automata
Let us assume am sends a message µ to an. The response from an is determined
by the definition of a guarded transition relation. Each element of this relation
contains a guard g. Intuitively, an performs a computation Π on its current con-
figuration γn; evaluates g; and then sends a response µ′ to am. That is, the transi-
tion relation can be specified as a set of 4-tuples (γ, Π, g, γ′), where γ, γ′ are global
configurations, consisting of local configurations for am and an. (γ = (γm, γn) and
γ′ = (γ′m, γ′n)).
The message-tag in µ′ associated with an element in the transition relation are
obtained from the following categorisation:
Explanation
AGREE(en, em)
¬AGREE(en, em)
MATCH(yn, ym)
RATIFY
REFUTE or
Prediction
(A)
REVISE (B)
¬MATCH(yn, ym)
REFUTE or
REJECT
REVISE (C)
(D)
Note that in category (A), guard g1 (see Def. 5) will be true; in category (B),
guard g2 will be true; in category (C), guard g3 will be true; and in category (D),
guard g4 will be true. In addition, a further test (g′ in Def. 7) below will be used
in (B) and (C) to decide on whether a Refute or Revise message-tag is sent.

26
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Trans
µ (received by an)
P
g
µ′ (sent by an)
0.
No message
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Init, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
1.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
2.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
3.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
4.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
5.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
6.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
7.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
8.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
9.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
10.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
11.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
12.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
13.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
14.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
15.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
16.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
17.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
18.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
19.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
20.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
21.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
22.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
23.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
24.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
25.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
26.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
27.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
28.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
29.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧g′
(Revise, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
30.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, ((x, y′
n, e′
n))
31.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
32.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
33.
(Revise, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
34.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
35.
(Init, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
36.
(Init, (x, ?, ?))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Refute, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
37.
(Init, (x, y, ?))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Refute, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
38.
(Init, (x, ?, em))
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Refute, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
39.
(Term, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
⊤
No message
40.
No message
H′
n := Hn
⊤
(Term, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
Table 4: Elements in the set comprising the guarded transition relation.
Definition 7 (Guarded Transition Relation) Let Smn be a session between au-
tomata am and an, where am sends a message to an. The transition relation for Smn is
the set of 4-tuples (γ, Π, g, γ′). Let γ = ((sm, (Hm, Dm), +(n, µ)), (sn, (Hn, Dn), −(m, µ)))
and γ′ = (s′m, ((Hm, Dm), −(n, µ′)), (s′n, (H′n, D′n), +(m, µ′))), where sm = CAN RECEIVE,
sn = CAN SEND; s′m = CAN SEND, s′n = CAN RECEIVE. Let Π = (D′n := Dn∪{(x, ym, em, m)}) ; P ;
yn := PREDICT(x, Hn) ;
en := EXPLAIN((x, yn), Hn) ; y′n := PREDICT(x, H′n) ; e′n :=
EXPLAIN((x, y′n), H′n)). Let g′ = MATCH(y′n, ym) ∧AGREE(e′n, em).
For compactness, we only tabulate µ, P, g, and µ′. This is shown in Table 4.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
27
A.2.1 The Special Case of Compatible Automata
Proposition 5 Let ψ be an execution of the PXP protocol in a session between com-
patible agents am and an.
– The transitions correspond to rows 8,9,10,11 and 12 will not occur in ψ.
– The transitions correspond to rows 20,21,22,23 and 24 will not occur in ψ.
– The transitions correspond to rows 25,26,27,28 and 29 will not occur in ψ.
Proof We assume each of the above transitions represents a communication of the
message µ′ = (t′, (x, y′n, e′n)). Without loss of generality, we assume that n is the
sender and m is the receiver of this communication. We observe that the mes-
sage tag in the above communication is different from Init. So it is immediately
preceded by other transitions. These preceding transitions would represent commu-
nications in which the agent m sends the message µ = (t, (x, ym, en)) and the agent
n receives it. Let Hm and Hn be the hypotheses of m and n before communicating
the message µ, H′m and H′n be the hypotheses of m and n after communicating µ′.
H′n be the updated hypothesis of n after receiving the message m. Also observe
that ym := PREDICT(x, Hm), em := EXPLAIN((x, ym), Hm), y′n := PREDICT(x, H′n) and
e′n := EXPLAIN((x, y′n), H′n).
Hm, ym, em
Hn, yn, en
Hm, ym, em
H′n, y′n, e′n
H′m, y′m, e′m
H′n, y′n, e′n
m sends µ
n receives µ
n sends µ′
m receives µ′
n checks the guards using
MATCHn(yn, ym), AGREEn(en, em)
MATCHn(y′n, ym), AGREEn(e′n, em)
m checks the guards using
MATCHm(ym, y′n), AGREEm(em, e′n)
MATCHm(y′m, y′n), AGREEm(e′m, e′n)
– Let us consider first the transitions 8,9,10,11 and 12 for communicating µ′. It
is clear that the message tag received in each of these transitions is Ratify.
It means the previous transition for communicating µ should be any one of
1,7,13,19 and 25 and all of them have guard g1 = MATCHn(yn, ym)∧AGREEn(en, em)
is true. Since there is no change in the hypothesis of the agent m and this is a
collaborative session, the guard MATCHm(ym, yn) ∧AGREEm(em, en) is also true.
Hence the guards for 8,9,10,11 and 12 are all false and these transitions will
never occur in any collaborative session using the PXP protocol.
– Now let us consider the transitions 20,21,22,23 and 24. It is clear that the
message tag t in each of these transitions is Revise. It means the previous
transition should be any one of 3,5,9,11,15,17,21,23,27 and 29. In all theses
transitions, the guard g′ (which is MATCHn(y′n, ym) ∧AGREEn(e′n, em))) is true.
Since this is a collaborative session, the guard MATCHm(ym, y′n)∧AGREEm(em, e′n)
is also true. Hence the guards for 20,21,22,23 and 24 are all false and these
transitions will never occur in any collaborative session using the PXP protocol.
– Finally, let us consider the transitions 25,26,27,28 and 29. It is clear that
the message tag t in each of these transitions is Reject. It means the pre-
vious transition should be any one of 6,12,18,24 and 30. Also there is no
change in the hypothesis of the agent m and the previous transition’s guard
¬MATCHn(yn, ym) ∧¬AGREEn(en, em) is true. Since this is a collaborative session,

28
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
the guard ¬MATCHm(ym, yn) ∧¬AGREEm(em, en) is also true. Hence the guards
for 25,26,27,28 and 29 are all false and these transitions will never occur in any
collaborative session using the PXP protocol.
■
Remark 9 Let Smn be a session between compatible automata am and an consisting
of a sequence of configurations ⟨γ1, γ2, . . . , γk⟩, where γi = (γm,i, γn,i). Let γm,i =
(·, ·, µm,i), γn,i = (·, ·, µn,i) where µm,1 = +(n, (Init, ·)) and µ·,k = +(·, (Term, ·)).
– If there is an i such that the message tag in µm,i or µn,i is Ratify, then for each
j such that i < j < k, rj = rj−1.
– If there is an i such that the message tag in µm,i or µn,i is Reject, then for each
j such that i < j < k, rj = rj−1.
Remark 10 There are only four transitions are enabled with ‘?’ in the message:
– The transition in which an agent initiate a session with ‘?’ as a prediction and/or
an explanation. For this, the transition in the 0th row (which is enabled as the guard
g is true) is used.
– The transition in which an agent responds to the message which has ‘?’. For this,
the transitions in the 36th row, 37th row and 39th row (which are enabled as the
guard g is true) are used.
As a result of the above two observations, if an agent initiates a session with the
messages (Init, (x, ‘?′, ‘?′)), (Init, (x, ‘?′, e)), and (Init, (x, y, ‘?′), then the agent will
receive the message (Refute, (x, y′, e′)). Here y′, e′ may be different from y, e respec-
tively.
We can construct an abstraction of the set of transitions in the form of a ‘message-
graph’. Vertices in the message-graph represent messages sent or received, and
edges are transitions. The message graph for the set of transitions from Table 4
is given in Figure 5(a): for simplicity, vertex labels are just the message tags, and
edge-labels refer to the row numbers in the Table 4.17 It is evident from the cycles
and self-loops in the graph that communication can become unbounded. But when
we restrict to compatible automata, transitions from mentioned in Proposition 5
are not allowed. The message graph for the remaining set of transitions is given
in Figure 5(b). All non-trivial cycles (other than self loops) got removed in this
message graph. Still the interaction may be unbounded due to the self-loops. To
redress this, we alter the PXP protocol by replacing transitions encoding self-loops.
We will call the modified protocol PXP(k). The corresponding message-graph is in
Figure 5(c).
Definition 8 (PXP(k)) We rename transitions 7, 14, 16 and 30 as 7−k, 14−k, 16−k
and 30 −k respectively to denote that at most k occurrences of the transition can occur
on any execution; and add the transitions 7′, 14′, 16′ and 30′ to allow termination after
k iterations. The modified set of transitions are shown below.
17 Informally, for an edge (v1, v2) in the graph, the label for v1 is the message-tag received,
and the label for v2 is the message-tag sent. The edges are labelled with the corresponding
transition entries in the table in Definition 7. Correctly, the edge-label should be distinguish
between which of an or am is sending, and which is receiving along with the message content.
This level of detail is not needed for what follows.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
29
S.No.
µ
P
g
µ′
7′.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(T erm, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
7-k.
(Ratify, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g1
(Ratify, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
14′.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(T erm, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
14-k.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g2 ∧¬g′
(Refute, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
16′.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(T erm, (x, yn, en))
16-k.
(Refute, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := LEARN(Hn, D′
n)
g3 ∧¬g′
(Refute, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
30′.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(T erm, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
30-k.
(Reject, (x, ym, em))
H′
n := Hn
g4
(Reject, (x, y′
n, e′
n))
A.3 Termination of PXP(k)
It is straightforward to show that communication between compatible automata
using PXP(k) is bounded:
Proposition 6 (Bounded Communication) Let Figure 5(c) represents the mes-
sage graph of a collaborative session using the PXP(k) protocol. Then any communica-
tion in the session has bounded length.
Proof All messages in a session commence with Init and end with Term message-
tags. The result follows straightforwardly from the fact that Figure 5(c) is a DAG
except the self-loops 7-k at Ratify, 14-k and 16-k at Refute, and 30-k at Reject.
But each of these loops can occur at most k times. Therefore any path between
Init and Term is bounded.
■
We note that without the restriction to compatible agents, it is not possible to
guarantee bounded communication (Figure 5(a), which contains several cycles).
B Completeness of PXP(k) wrt to the Dialogue Model MMSV
The graphical representation of the dialogue model in (Madumal et al., 2019) that
was shown Fig. 3.
We note that ‘conversations’ arising from execution of the MMSV protocol are
paths in the directed-graph in Figure 3. As an example, Table 5(a) tabulates all
paths from Start to End upto length 5 and Table 5(b) shows a proposed mapping
to message-tag sequences in PXP(k).
Two points of difference emerge from Table 5. First, there exist message-
sequences that are possible in PXP(k) that do not have counterparts in MMSV: an
example is any PXP(k) sequence containing Revise for the Explainer. Secondly,
there exist paths in MMSV that do not have counterparts in PXP(k): an example
is any path that contains the edge (1, 1) in Figure 3. The former suggests that
MMSV, is not intended for use in situations where either participant in the dialogue
can revise its hypothesis about a data-instance. The latter difference arises be-
cause questions between PEX agents in a session are restricted to the label of the
session’s instance and/or the explanation for the label. In such cases, repeated
further question are not meaningful.18 Let us denote MMSV without the edge (1, 1)
as MMSV−. We note the following:
18 This is a consequence of assuming that MATCH and AGREE are Boolean functions. If this
assumption does not hold, then an agent n may not be able to decide whether or not the
explanation received from agent m agrees with the explanation it’s own hypothesis derives. In
such a situation the equivalent to further questions in MMSV become possible. We do not pursue
this further here.

30
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
Init
Ratify
 1
Refute
 2, 4, 36, 37, 38
Revise
 3, 5
Reject
 6
Term
 35
 7
 8, 10
 9, 11
 12
 31
 13
 14, 16
 15, 17
 18
 32
 19
 20, 22
 21, 23
 24
 33
 25
 26, 28
 27, 29
 30
 34
(a)
Init
Ratify
 1
Refute
 2, 4, 36, 37, 38
Revise
 3, 5
Reject
 6
Term
 35
 7
 31
 13
 14, 16
 15, 17
 18
 32
 19
 33
 30
 34
(b)
Init
Ratify
 1
Refute
 2, 4, 36, 37, 38
Revise
 3, 5
Reject
 6
Term
 35
 7-k
 7', 31
 13
 14-k, 16-k
 15, 17
 18
 14', 16', 32
 19
 33
 30-k
 30', 34
(c)
Fig. 5: Message-graph obtained from: (a) transitions listed in Table 4; (b) the tran-
sitions in the PXP protocol, which is only between compatible agents (transitions
mentioned in Proposition 5 are excluded) and (c) the transitions defined in the
PXP(k) protocol (Definition 8, in which self-loops in PXP are replaced. We do not
show edges where no message is sent or received.

A Model for Intelligible Interaction Between Agents That Predict and Explain
31
MMSV Path
Path Labels
(0,2,8)
[Start]–E:begin-explanation–[Expl. Presented]–end-explanation–[End]
(0,1,2,8)
[Start]–Q:begin-question–[Ques. Stated]–E:explain/further-explain–
[Expl. Presented]–end-explanation–[End]
(0,2,3,8)
[Start]–E:begin-explanation–[Expl. Presented]–Q:affirm–
[Explainee Affirmed]–end-explanation–[End]
(0,1,2,3,8)
[Start]–Q:begin-question–[Ques. Stated]–E:explain/further-explain–
[Expl. Presented]–Q:affirm–[Explainee Affirmed]–end-explanation–[End]
(0,1,1,2,8)
[Start]–Q:begin-question–[Ques. Stated]–E:return-question–
[Ques. Stated]–E:explain/further-explain–[Expl. Presented]–
end-explanation–[End]
(0,2,3,4,8)
[Start]–E:begin-explanation–[Expl. Presented]–Q:affirm–
[Explainee Affirmed]–E:affirm–[Explainer Affirmed]–end-explanation–[End]
(0,2,5,6,8)
[Start]–E:begin-explanation–[Expl. Presented]–Q:begin-argument–
[Arg. Presented]–E:affirm-argument–[Arg. Affirmed]–end-argument–[End]
(a)
MMSV Path
PXP(k) Transitions
PXP(k) Messages
(0,2,8)
(0,40,39)
InitE,TermE
(0,1,2,8)
(0,36/37/38, 32,39)
InitQ,RefuteE,TermE
(0,2,3,8)
(0,1,31,40)
InitE,RatifyQ,TermE
(0,2,32,40)
InitE,RefuteQ,TermE
(0,3,33,40)
InitE,ReviseQ,TermE
(0,1,2,3,8)
(0,36/37/38,13,39)
InitQ,RefuteE,RatifyQ,TermE
(0,36/37/38,15/17,39)
InitQ,RefuteE,ReviseQ,TermE
(0,36/37/38,14-k/16-k,39)
InitQ,RefuteE,RefuteQ,TermE
(0,1,1,2,8)
(0,36/37/38,32,39)
InitQ,RefuteE,TermE
(0,2,3,4,8)
(0,1/2/3/4/5,
InitE,RatifyQ/ReviseQ/RefuteQ,
7/13/14-k/15/16-k/17/19,39)
RatifyE/ReviseE/RefuteE,TermQ
(0,2,5,6,8)
(0,2,13,39)
InitE,RefuteQ,RatifyE,TermQ
(0,2,15/17,39)
InitE,RefuteQ,ReviseE,TermQ
(0,2,14-k/16-k,39)
InitE,RefuteQ,RefuteE, TermQ
(b)
Table 5: (a) MMSV paths of up to length 5 from Start to End with corresponding
node- and edge-labels; and (b) Transitions and messages in PXP(k) corresponding
to the MMSV paths in (a). Here the message-tags in the last column with subscripts
to identify the agent sending the message. We assume k is at least 2, which allows
the PXP(k) message-sequences to contain the 2 consecutive Refute tags for the MMSV
path (0, 2, 3, 4, 8).
Remark 11
– The set of paths in MMSV−is given by the regular expression 0(1 +
ϵ)2(12 + 312 + 342 + 562 + 5672)∗(8 + 38 + 348 + 568 + 5678).
– For every path P of MMSV−, there is a way to decompose path P using edges in
{(0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 2), (2, 1), (2, 3), (2, 5), (3, 1), (3, 4), (5, 6), (2, 8), (3, 8), (4, 8), (6, 8), (7, 8)}
and paths P342, P562, P567, P5672 where P342 is a path with edges (3, 4), (4, 2); P562
is a path with edges (5, 6), (6, 2); P567 is a path with edges (5, 6), (6, 7); and P5672
is a path with edges (5, 6), (6, 7), (7, 2).
– Every path of length l in the graph for MMSV−(Figure 3) corresponds to a path of
at most l in the PXP(l) protocol (Figure 5).

32
Baskar, Srinivasan, Bain, Coiera
We will provide a justification for the last point here. We will provide a message tag
sequence from PXP(k) protocol for edges in {(0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 2), (2, 1), (2, 3), (2, 5), (3, 1), (3, 4),
(5, 6), (2, 8), (3, 8), (4, 8), (6, 8), (7, 8)} and for paths P342, P562, P567, P5672.
Edge
Message tags
Edge
Message tag
(0, 1)
InitQ
(0, 2)
InitE
(2, 1) or (2, 5) or
RefuteQ
(1, 2)
RefuteE
(3, 1)
(2, 3)
RatifyQ/ReviseQ/RefuteQ
(5, 6) or (3, 4)
RatifyE/ReviseE/RefuteE
(2, 8) or (3, 8) or
TermQ/TermE
P342 or P562 or
RefuteE
(4, 8) or (6, 8) or
P567 or P5672
(7, 8)
Now for any path P in MMSV−, there is a message sequence in PXP(l) protocol.
