Scientiﬁc Document Summarization for LaySumm ’20 and LongSumm ’20
Sayar Ghosh Roy, Nikhil Pinnaparaju, Risubh Jain, Manish Gupta∗and Vasudeva Varma
Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India

Abstract
Automatic
text
summarization
has
been
widely
studied
as
an
important
task
in
natural language processing.
Traditionally,
various
feature
engineering
and
machine
learning based systems have been proposed
for extractive as well as abstractive text
summarization. Recently, deep learning based,
speciﬁcally Transformer-based systems have
been immensely popular.
Summarization is
a cognitively challenging task – extracting
summary worthy sentences is laborious, and
expressing semantics in brief when doing
abstractive summarization is complicated. In
this paper, we speciﬁcally look at the problem
of summarizing scientiﬁc research papers
from multiple domains.
We differentiate
between two types of summaries, namely,
(a) LaySumm: A very short summary that
captures the essence of the research paper
in layman terms restricting overtly speciﬁc
technical jargon and (b) LongSumm: A much
longer detailed summary aimed at providing
speciﬁc insights into various ideas touched
upon in the paper.
While leveraging latest
Transformer-based models, our systems are
simple, intuitive and based on how speciﬁc
paper sections contribute to human sum-
maries of the two types described above.
Evaluations against gold standard summaries
using ROUGE (Lin, 2004) metrics prove
the effectiveness of our approach. On blind
test corpora, our system ranks ﬁrst and third
for the LongSumm and LaySumm tasks
respectively.
1
Introduction
Popularity of data science in recent years has led to
a massive growth in the number of published papers
online. This has generated an epochal change in
the way we retrieve, analyze and consume informa-
tion from these papers. Also wider interest in data
science implies even lay persons (readers outside
∗The author also works as a researcher at Microsoft
the data science community) are signiﬁcantly inter-
ested in keeping up with the latest developments.
The readers have access to a huge amount of such
research papers on the web. For a human, under-
standing large documents and assimilating crucial
information out of them is often a laborious and
time-consuming task. Motivation to make a concise
representation of huge text while retaining the core
meaning of the original text has led to the develop-
ment of various automated summarization systems.
These systems provide users ﬁltered, high-quality
and concise content to work with at an unprece-
dented scale and speed. Summarization methods
are mainly classiﬁed into two categories: extractive
and abstractive. Extractive methods aim to select
salient phrases, sentences or elements from the text
while abstractive techniques focus on generating
summaries from scratch without the constraint of
reusing phrases from the original text.
Scientiﬁc papers are large, complex documents
that tend to be geared towards a particular audience.
This is a very small percentage of the population
while majority of individuals are unable to fully
comprehend the contents of long scientiﬁc docu-
ments. Even among the people who are able to
understand the material, the length of such docu-
ments often spanning several pages demand a great
deal of time and attention. Hence, tasks like layman
summarization (LaySumm) and long-form summa-
rization (LongSumm) are of great importance in
today’s world.
Typically scientiﬁc research papers are fairly
structured documents containing standard sections
like abstract, introduction, background, related
work, experiments, results, discussion, conclusion
and acknowledgments. Thus, summarization of
such documents should be aware of such sectional
structure. An intuitive way is to pick a few sen-
tences from each of the sections to be a part of
the summary. But how do we decide how many
sentences to pick from each section? Also, which
arXiv:2101.03553v1  [cs.CL]  10 Jan 2021

sentences to pick? Can we rewrite sentences so
as to obtain a concise abstractive summary? We
investigate answers to these questions in this paper.
Multiple survey papers have provided a detailed
overview of the automatic text summarization
task (Tas and Kiyani, 2007; Nenkova and McK-
eown, 2012; Allahyari et al., 2017). Most of the
practically usable summarization systems are ex-
tractive in nature. Also, most summarization stud-
ies have focused on summarization of news articles.
In this work, we mainly focus on two interesting as-
pects of text summarization: (1) summarization of
scientiﬁc research papers, and (2) summarization
for laymen.
Cohan et al. (2018) propose that section level
processing of scientiﬁc documents is useful. Fur-
ther, Collins et al. (2017) conclude that not all
sections are equally useful. Also, recent papers
have observed that a hierarchical summarization
of scientiﬁc documents is highly effective where
at the ﬁrst level, an extractive summary of each
section is independently generated and at the sec-
ond level, the sectional output is abstracted into
a brief summary (Subramanian et al., 2019; Erera
et al., 2019). (Xiao and Carenini, 2019) observe
that while summarizing, local context is useful,
but global is not. Thus, in our approach at the
sectional level, we use extracted information from
only within the section text to obtain a section’s
extractive summary, ignoring the remaining text of
the entire paper.
For the LaySumm task, we observe that abstract
is the most relevant section of a scientiﬁc paper
from a layman perspective. We therefore feed the
abstract to a Transformer-based model and gener-
ate an abstractive summary for the LaySumm task.
For the LongSumm task, we ﬁrst perform extrac-
tive summarization for each section and choose a
selected number of sentences from each section
into the ﬁnal summary.
On blind test corpora of 37 and 22 papers for
the LaySumm and LongSumm tasks, our proposed
system leads to a ROUGE R1 of 45.94 and 49.46
respectively. These results helped us bag the top
positions on the leaderboards for the two tasks.
2
Related Work
In this section, we discuss related areas including
text summarization and style transfer.
2.1
Automatic Text Summarization
Text summarization focuses on summarizing a
given document and obtaining its key information
bits. There are two types of text summarization
methods: Extractive Summarization and Abstrac-
tive Summarization.
2.1.1
Extractive Summarization
Extractive Summarization deals with extracting
pieces of text directly from the input document. Ex-
tractive Summarization can also be seen as a text
classiﬁcation task where we try to predict whether
a given sentence will be part of the summary or
not (Liu, 2019). Most papers in this area focus on
the summarization of news articles. But several
others focus on speciﬁc domains like summariza-
tion of medical documents, legal documents, sci-
entiﬁc documents, etc. Summarization can also
be performed in a query-sensitive manner or a
user-centric manner. Sentence-scoring methods
include graph-based methods like LexRank (Erkan
and Radev, 2004) or TextRank (Mihalcea and Ta-
rau, 2004), machine learning or deep learning
techniques and position-based methods. Recently,
various deep learning architectures such as HIB-
ERT (Zhang et al., 2019), BERTSUM (Liu and
Lapata, 2019), SummaRuNNer (Nallapati et al.,
2016), CSTI (Singh et al., 2018) and Hybrid Mem-
Net (Singh et al., 2017) have been proposed for
extractive summarization.
2.1.2
Abstractive Summarization
In abstractive summarization, the model tries to
generate the summary instead of extracting sen-
tences or keywords.
As compared to extrac-
tive summarization, this is more challenging and
requires strong language modeling schemes to
achieve good results.
Traditionally, abstractive
summarization techniques have focused on gen-
erating short text such as headlines or titles. But
more recently, there have been efforts on gener-
ation of longer summaries. Older methods have
depended on tree transduction rules (Cohn and La-
pata, 2008) and quasi-synchronous grammar ap-
proaches (Woodsend and Lapata, 2011) for effec-
tive abstractive summarization. Recently, neural
summarization approaches have been found to be
more effective.
Effective neural representative
language models are very important for text gen-
eration tasks. With the recent breakthrough of
Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017) archi-
tectures like BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), T5 (Raffel

0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
Match Scores
Mean R1
Mean R2
Mean RL
Figure 1: ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L over-
laps between paper sections and LaySumm summary
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
Match Scores
Mean R1
Mean R2
Mean RL
Figure 2: ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L over-
laps between paper sections and LongSumm summary
et al., 2019) and BART (Lewis et al., 2019), utiliz-
ing these types of models is crucial for obtaining
good textual representations on the target side for
neural abstractive summarization.
2.2
Text Style Transfer
Neural text style transfer is yet another related area
of work where the document in style A is converted
to style B without any loss of content or seman-
tics (Syed et al., 2020; Vadapalli et al., 2018). This
work leverages Transformer encoder-decoder mod-
els. The text-encoder is used to obtain robust latent
representations while the decoder generates text
with a particular target style.
3
Datasets
We ﬁrst describe the datasets which were provided
by the organizers of the ‘Workshop on Scholarly

3.1
LaySumm Dataset
A dataset of 572 research papers and correspond-
ing gold standard lay-summaries were available for
training, 84 tokens being the average length of a
1https://ornlcda.github.io/SDProc/
sharedtasks.html
summary. A set of 37 research papers were pro-
vided as the blind test data. The LaySumm dataset
comprises of full-text papers with lay summaries,
in a variety of domains (epilepsy, archeology, and
materials engineering), and from a number of jour-
nals. Elsevier made available a collection of lay
summaries from a multidisciplinary collection of
journals, as well as their abstracts and full-texts.
For a small sample dataset, look at LaySumm’s
ofﬁcial GitHub repository2.
3.2
LongSumm Dataset
The corpus for this task includes a training set
that consists of 1705 extractive summaries, and
531 abstractive summaries of scientiﬁc papers in
the domains of Natural Language Processing and
Machine Learning.
The extractive summaries
are based on video talks from associated confer-
ences (Lev et al., 2019) while the abstractive sum-
maries are blog posts created by NLP and ML re-
searchers. The average gold summary length was
767 tokens. The research papers were parsed us-
ing the science-parse3 library. A collection of pdfs
of 22 research papers served as the blind test set.
The LongSumm train and test datasets are publicly
accessible on LongSumm’s ofﬁcial GitHub reposi-
tory4.
4
System Overview
In this section, we present an overview of the pro-
posed systems for the LaySumm and LongSumm
tasks.
4.1
System Overview for LaySumm
We observed that the LaySumm summaries in the
train set were highly abstractive in nature with
a length limit of 150 words. In Fig. 1, we an-
alyze how information from each paper section
contributes to the ﬁnal lay-summary by evaluat-
ing the ROUGE overlap between a paper section
and the available gold summary. This analysis
is performed for the entire dataset. Fig. 1 shows
that the ‘abstract’ was the most signiﬁcant section
followed by the ‘conclusion’. Moreover, a rela-
tively high ROUGE-L overlap indicates some de-
gree of verbatim copying from the abstract onto
2https://github.com/WING-NUS/
scisumm-corpus/blob/master/README_
Laysumm.md
3https://github.com/allenai/
science-parse
4https://github.com/guyfe/LongSumm

the lay-summary. In addition to providing a high
ROUGE overlap, the conclusion section was rel-
atively shorter in length. This indicates that the
conclusion section contains a great degree of use-
ful information in a more condensed fashion.
Note that we picked the paper sections directly
from the paper text without performing any elab-
orate conﬂation on section headers. Conﬂation
in general should not hurt the performance of our
models since a particular paper will contain only
one form of the section heading, e.g., it will con-
tain either “materials and methods” or “methods”.
However, we plan to explore deeper section-wise
analysis using improved conﬂation as part of future
work.
We leveraged pretrained Transformer models for
conditional generation given a set of individual sec-
tions. Our results indicate that using abstract as the
only sequence for conditional generation is a bet-
ter choice as compared to utilizing more sections.
Therefore, the problem at hand is one of captur-
ing salient information as one would expect from
a summarization task, with the additional ﬂavor of
text style transfer.
Abstract
------
------
Introduction
------
------
.
.
.
Conclusion
------
------
Summarized 
Abstract
Summarized 
Introduction
Summarized 
Conclusion
.
.
.
Long 
Summary
.
.
.
Budget 
Module
Figure 3: System Architecture for LongSumm
4.2
System Overview for LongSumm
We performed a similar section-contribution eval-
uation and considered section headings which ap-
peared in at least 5% of all papers in our training
set for the LongSumm task. Fig. 2 shows that the
‘introduction’ is the most important section when it
comes to creating summaries followed by ‘related
work’ and ‘results’.
For our summary generation architecture, we
considered one section at a time without the global
context. As discussed earlier, this was guided by ex-
isting scientiﬁc evidence from (Xiao and Carenini,
2019) which showed that not considering the global
context and focusing purely on the section at hand
is marginally better than doing otherwise. Based on
section-contribution evaluations, we constructed a
budget module to calculate how much weight to
assign to a section for the purpose of combining sec-
tion summaries into the ﬁnal long-summary. Fig. 3
illustrates the broad architecture of our proposed
system.
For summarizing each individual section, we
used SummaRuNNer (Nallapati et al., 2016), a sim-
ple neural extractive summarizer. We pre-trained
SummaRuNNer on the PubMed (Cohan et al.,
2018) dataset to generate paper abstracts from var-
ious paper sections. We show results using varia-
tions in our budget module, setting various cutoff
thresholds for ROUGE-1 overlap in order for a
section to be considered for the summary, i.e., we
ignore a section if overlap is less than the threshold
value. The system performance indicates that even
with a fairly simple neural summarizer at the base,
our architecture is capable of achieving superior
results on a blind test dataset.
5
Experimental Settings
We used Hugging Face’s5 implementation of T5
and BART. We experimented with various length
settings for training and generation. We found that
minimum and maximum sequence lengths of 120
and 140 respectively for generation gave us the
best results. We used Adam optimizer with an ini-
tial learning rate of 5e-5 with learn rate scheduling
based on ROUGE-1 values calculated on the vali-
dation split. In the hyper-parameter tuning phase, a
repetition penalty of 1.8 while generating lay sum-
maries provided the most optimal results.
We used hpzhao’s implementation of Sum-
maRuNNer6 with default hyper-parameter values.
The ‘topk’ parameter was dynamically adjusted to
set the summary length of each section based on
the section-speciﬁc budget.
6
Results
Our system (with the team name: Summaformers)
ranks ﬁrst and third for the LongSumm7 and Lay-
Summ8 tasks respectively. Further details on these
tasks can be found in the shared tasks overview
paper (Chandrasekaran et al., 2020). In this section,
we present detailed results.
5https://huggingface.co/
6https://github.com/hpzhao/SummaRuNNer
7https://aieval.draco.res.ibm.com/
challenge/39/leaderboard/39
8https://competitions.codalab.org/
competitions/25516

Method
R-1 F1
R-2 F1
R-L F1
R-1 recall
R-2 recall
R-L recall
Lead-150 baseline
40.85
17.40
25.01
54.77
22.96
33.34
(abs)+SummaRuNNer
39.89
16.30
24.44
51.73
20.89
31.62
(abs)+T5-base
40.74
15.29
24.13
40.32
14.93
23.74
(abs+conc)+T5-base
40.99
15.21
23.72
40.44
14.82
23.28
(abs+conc+intro)+T5-base
40.94
15.32
23.49
40.36
14.92
23.06
(SummaRuNNer)+BARTL
40.87
14.72
24.31
43.36
15.46
25.77
(small abs)+BARTL
44.81
18.76
26.71
47.61
19.78
28.31
(abs+conc)+BARTL
45.45
19.22
27.24
49.56
20.83
29.61
(abs+conc+intro)+BARTL
45.69
19.07
27.17
50.17
20.90
29.78
(abs+conc+intro+methods)+BARTL
45.61
18.95
27.05
50.50
20.95
29.93
(abs)+BARTL
45.94
19.01
27.43
49.11
20.26
29.23
Table 1: LaySumm Results (Best results are highlighted in bold)
Method
R-1 F1
R-2 F1
R-L F1
R-1 recall
R-2 recall
R-L recall
Section cutoff at R-1=10.0
47.18
14.10
18.37
43.15
12.93
16.80
Section cutoff at R-1=17.5
49.20
16.49
21.03
44.67
15.00
19.07
Section cutoff at R-1=20.0
48.93
16.57
21.07
44.99
15.23
19.36
Section cutoff at R-1=20.0 + Post-Proc
49.46
16.86
21.42
43.87
14.94
18.98
Table 2: LongSumm Results (Best results are highlighted in bold)
6.1
Lay Summary Generation
We experimented with the BART-large-CNN model
which is pre-trained on the CNN/Dailymail summa-
rization dataset and with T5-base in summarization
mode. We ﬁne-tuned the conditional generation
architectures of these models using the available
LaySumm train corpus of 572 documents which we
split into training and validation splits in a 4:1 ratio.
Our initial results proved the superiority of BART-
large-CNN (BARTL) over T5. We experimented
with various generative sources such as abstract
only, abstract + conclusion, abstract + conclusion +
introduction, abstract + conclusion + introduction
+ methods. Furthermore, owing to the structure of
the abstract itself, we considered the ﬁrst, second
and ﬁnal paragraphs of the abstract (also referred
to as “small abs”) as the source. Our results (Ta-
ble 1) show that using the complete abstract as
input to BARTL is the best performing setting for
LaySumm. Since the papers in the dataset were
published in various scientiﬁc journals, the original
abstracts contain highly domain-speciﬁc technical
jargon. The BARTL model captures the salient
points from the abstract in a short 150-word budget
while transferring the text style from scientiﬁc to a
layman style.
After hyper-parameter tuning on the generation
end, we achieved a ROUGE-1 score of 45.94 on
the blind-test corpus. Our generated summaries are
coherent in addition to being highly abstractive in
nature.
For comparison, we also present results for a
na¨ıve “Lead-150” baseline which outputs the ﬁrst
150 tokens of the abstract as the summary. As
shown in Table 1, surprisingly, this simple base-
line leads to impressive results especially on recall
metrics. Running SummaRuNNer on the abstract
leads to results which are worse than the Lead-150
baseline.
6.2
Long Summary Generation
We used the SummaRuNNer (Nallapati et al., 2016)
neural extractive summarization system as our base
section summarizer. We pretrained this on the train-
ing set of the publicly available PubMed dataset
(using GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) 6B 100D
word embeddings) to generate the paper abstract
as closely as possible from any given section. This
grounds the network in a setting where it can easily
capture salient points. We plan to explore pretrain-
ing with other datasets as part of future work.
This was further ﬁnetuned using the LongSumm
train set as follows. The given LongSumm training
dataset was divided into train and validation splits
in a 9:1 ratio. We used the same previous settings
to ﬁnetune on documents in the LongSumm train

split. Now, the pretrained SummaRuNNer model
was conditioned to extract sentences which maxi-
mize the ROUGE-1 overlap with the provided gold
standard long summaries.
Finally, based on our budget module, we assign
a weight to each available section and generate
section summaries of computed lengths which are
further concatenated to generate the ﬁnal summary.
We experiment with various settings in the weight
assignment based on speciﬁed overlap cutoffs in the
budget module as shown in Table 2. The best per-
forming setting corresponds to selecting sections
whose ROUGE-1 overlap with the long summary
is greater than 20.0. Intuitively, this prunes out
irrelevant sections such as ‘abbreviations’ and ‘ac-
knowledgements’. The remaining sections were
assigned weights based on the ROUGE-1 overlap
with the provided long summary. The generated
long summaries are extractive and capture the most
salient pieces of information from the given re-
search papers. The results improve slightly when
we perform ad hoc post-processing using heuristics
like removing paper citations within brackets, re-
moving non-English Unicode characters and math-
ematical notation symbols.
6.3
Case Studies
In the following, we present two cases of lay sum-
maries generated by our system. As we can see,
the generated summaries are highly abstractive and
coherent. They also capture the important aspects
of the paper.
For the article at this URL9, the generated lay
summary was as follows: ‘This paper proposes a
novel approach to support the transformation of
bioinformatics data into Linked Open Data (LOD).
It deﬁnes competency questions that drive not only
the deﬁnition of transformation rules, but also the
data transformation and exploration afterwards.
The paper also presents a support toolset and de-
scribes the successful application of the proposed
approach in the functional genomics domain. Ac-
cording to this approach, a set of competency cri-
teria drive the transformation process. This paper
presents a framework for the development of an
open data management system that can be easily
adapted to different data types.’
For the article at this URL10, the generated lay
9https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.
2020.103495
10https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.
2019.103467
summary was as follows: ‘To foster interaction,
autonomous robots need to understand the envi-
ronment in which they operate. One of the main
challenges is semantic segmentation, together with
the recognition of important objects, which can aid
robots during exploration, as well as when planning
new actions and interacting with the environment.
In this study, we extend a multi-view semantic seg-
mentations system based on 3D Entangled Forests
(3DEF) by integrating and reﬁning two object de-
tectors, Mask R-CNN and You Only Look Once
(YOLO), with Bayesian fusion and iterated graph
cuts. The new system takes the best of its com-
ponents, successfully exploiting both 2D and 3D
data.’
Finally, the following lay summary was gener-
ated by our model for this very paper: ‘In this
paper, we develop a novel system for summarizing
scientiﬁc research papers from multiple domains.
We differentiate between two types of summaries,
namely, (a) LaySumm : a very short summary that
captures the essence of the research paper in lay-
man terms restricting overtly speciﬁc technical jar-
gon and (b) LongSumm a much longer detailed
summary aimed at providing speciﬁc insights into
various ideas touched upon in the paper. While
leveraging latest Transformer-based models, our
systems are simple, intuitive and based on how spe-
ciﬁc paper sections contribute to human summaries
of the two types described above.’
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we studied two scientiﬁc document
summarization tasks: LaySumm and LongSumm.
We experimented with popular text neural models
in a section-aware manner. Our results indicate that
modeling of the document structure with strong
focus on which parts of a research paper to attend
to while composing a summary gives a signiﬁcant
boost to the quality of the resultant output. On blind
test corpora, our system ranks ﬁrst and third for the
LongSumm and LaySumm tasks respectively.
