1
Whole-examination AI estimation of fetal
biometrics from 20-week ultrasound scans
Lorenzo Venturini∗, Samuel Budd∗, Alfonso Farruggia∗, Robert Wright∗, Jacqueline Matthew∗, Thomas G.
Day∗†, Bernhard Kainz∗‡, Reza Razavi∗†, Jo V. Hajnal∗
∗Department of Imaging Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King’s College London
†Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London
‡Department of Computing, Faculty of Engineering, Imperial College London, London
Abstract—The current approach to fetal anomaly screening
is based on biometric measurements derived from individu-
ally selected ultrasound images. In this paper, we introduce a
paradigm shift that attains human-level performance in biometric
measurement by aggregating automatically extracted biometrics
from every frame across an entire scan, with no need for operator
intervention. We use a convolutional neural network to classify
each frame of an ultrasound video recording. We then measure
fetal biometrics in every frame where appropriate anatomy is
visible. We use a Bayesian method to estimate the true value
of each biometric from a large number of measurements and
probabilistically reject outliers. We performed a retrospective
experiment on 1457 recordings (comprising 48 million frames)
of 20-week ultrasound scans, estimated fetal biometrics in those
scans and compared our estimates to the measurements sono-
graphers took during the scan. Our method achieves human-level
performance in estimating fetal biometrics and estimates well-
calibrated credible intervals in which the true biometric value is
expected to lie.
Index Terms—Ultrasound; Fetal imaging; Machine learning;
Bayesian estimation; Biometric measurement
I. INTRODUCTION
Ultrasound (US) imaging is routinely used in many coun-
tries during pregnancy to screen for fetal abnormalities, often
at ~18-22 weeks [1]. Procedures typically involve imaging
of standard planes of fetal anatomy and measurement of
several fetal biometrics. In the UK, requirements for screening
examinations are published in the Fetal Anatomy Screening
Programme (FASP) standard [2].
Fetal biometrics are conventionally measured in single im-
ages: the operator pauses the US image stream on a specified
view, then manipulates calipers to measure the anatomy. Some
guidelines recommend that this whole procedure is repeated
up to three times to ensure reliability [3]. Traditionally, these
measurements have been done manually. Manual measurement
of fetal biometrics displays significant expected-value bias
[4]. Selection bias may also influence the planes used for
measurement. Furthermore, these manual processes display
significant inter-observer variability, ranging from 4.9% to
11.1% depending on the measurement [5].
Recent research has proposed methods for automating the
detection of standard anatomical planes in during live scanning
live scanning [6, 7, 8]and biometric measurements [9]. US
machine manufacturers are increasingly integrating these tools
in their equipment [10]. However, fetal biometry generally
still follows existing workflows that rely on operator selection
of individual images. This does not take full advantage of
the real-time nature of US, where a video stream of tens of
frames per second is acquired. A fully automatic system could
perform plane classification on every frame of the US stream
and biometric measurement using all available data.
Fully automation would reduce human selection bias from
plane selection and expected-value bias during measurement,
potentially improving veracity, reproducibility and reducing
operator dependence. Automating some key operator tasks
could also reduce cognitive load, allowing the sonographer
to focus more on the patient and on identifying signs of
anomalies.
Evaluating every frame in a fully automatic system gener-
ates a very large number of measurements. A key challenge in
making such a system useful for clinical practice, therefore, is
to generate a single estimate from the vast resulting amount of
information. There has been some work in developing methods
to calculate fetal biometry from a video feed. Płotka et al [11]
propose a system to select the best standard planes to extract
biometry, and Lee et al [12] average convolutional neural net-
work (CNN) outputs across a scan to estimate gestational age.
Matthew et al [13] have proposed a system to automatically
classify every frame in a US scan and extract fetal biometrics,
but an operator still needs to select appropriate frames to report
biometrics.
No work has, to our knowledge, sought to obtain an
expected value of the biometry and a credible interval by com-
bining all frame measurements while acknowledging potential
outliers. This would represent a substantial departure from
current clinical practice, which is fully focused on a selection
and measurement of single images.
A. Contributions
We propose a real-time system that can identify standard
planes and estimate fetal biometrics achieving and reporting
progressively reducing uncertainties. The system is designed
to seamlessly link into clinical practice during 20-week US
screening scanning. We build upon Sononet [6] for standard
plane detection, and pair it with automatic biometric estimation
per frame, aggregating these to generate a progressive global
estimate using a Bayesian framework. When used during live
scanning, this results in progressively more reliable central
arXiv:2401.01201v1  [cs.CV]  2 Jan 2024

2
estimates and credible intervals for each biometric. The pro-
posed method has the potential to improve clinical practice
by providing robust measurements free from expectation bias,
while reducing cognitive load on the sonographer.
II. METHODS
A. Datasets
The data for this work is taken from the iFIND project on
fetal US, which recruited mothers attending a routine 20-week
anomaly screening clinic in London, UK. 10000 volunteers
gave consent to have their full 20-week US examinations
(gestational age 18-22 weeks) recorded1.The examinations
were conducted on identical US machines (GE Voluson E8)
by 145 professional sonographers following FASP protocols
between 2015 and 2020. The sonographer identified, labelled,
and saved standard plane images and manually measured
biometrics. To best reflect the screening population, all scans
were included regardless of whether the scan was reported as
normal or abnormal.
Although the same machines were used throughout this
study, software updates during this period changed the video
resolution and the interface presented by the machine. Re-
cordings were split across three resolutions depending on the
date on which they were acquired: 678 × 576, 980 × 784, and
1280 × 1024.
Due to operator error, technical glitches, and patient with-
drawal of consent, not all of these scans could be used in the
dataset: 7309 video recordings of prenatal US scans were used
for this study.
To maintain patient anonymity, personal information was
removed from the scan recordings and each scan was labelled
with a numerical iFIND ID, numbered sequentially. We cre-
ated training/validation/test splits across the dataset assigned
subjects using the trailing digit of their iFIND ID. Scans with
an iFIND ID with a trailing digit between 0-5 were used to
train our models, 6-7 were used for validation, and 8-9 were
held aside for testing and not used during training of any of
our models. The demographic characteristics of patients across
these folds, none of which showed statistically significant
differences, are shown in Table I.
1) Validation dataset : Some of our methods were also
validated using a small number of paired scans from a smaller
study [13]. 23 volunteers were recruited after their 20-week
anomaly scan for a follow-up scan. These ranged in gestational
age from 20+0 to 24+0 gestational weeks (median 23GW),
and had all screened as normal at their anomaly scan. These
subjects had paired scans (encompassing the FASP planes and
biometrics) conducted by separate sonographers on the same
day, using a Philips EpiQ 7 US machine. These scans were
not used to train our models.
B. Data labelling
The iFIND dataset includes full recordings of examinations
that were labelled during scanning with standard planes and
biometrics according to the FASP standard as shown in Table
1www.ifindproject.com
II (note there is an additional background class for all other
planes). These labels are present in the recording and were
extracted automatically. Typically, a sonographer freezes the
video stream once she identifies a suitable standard plane. Text
labels and biometric measurements are then overlaid on the
frame, which is saved for the sonographer’s report. Example
frames with these overlays are shown in Figure 1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.
Example frames with annotations and calipers. Shown are (a) a
Brain-TV image, with annotations for head circumference, biparietal diameter
and posterior ventricle, (b) a femur image, with the femur length measured
and annotated. These frames were acquired and saved by a sonographer.
1) Extraction of standard planes: To find labelled planes
in the recorded examinations, we automatically detected any
pauses and freezes in the recordings, then used OCR software2
to extract any added text labels. The text labels, including
biometric labels (such as the Brain-TV view in Figure 1a) was
then associated with standard planes and manually checked for
consistency.
In the experiments performed in this paper, we removed
segments where the sonographer froze the frame and added
annotations. We did this by finding frames where over 95%
of pixels did not change relative to the previous frame.
This eliminates the sonographer’s own annotations from the
recordings we used to test our methods.
2) Biometrics: In the UK, the FASP standard mandates a
minimum of 5 biometric measurements per scan [2]3. These
are measured across a range of standard planes, as shown in
Table III.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. CaliperNet example heatmap outputs for (a) a femur image, and (b)
a brain-CB image with labels for the cerebellum, cisterna magna and nuchal
fold.
The calipers identifying a biometric are generally connected
by a dotted line, with a text label next to them to identify
2For this project, we used the open-source Tesseract OCR package [14] to
read text labels.
3Other biometrics, such as the nuchal fold (NF), must be measured in
certain circumstances but are not required for every scan.

3
Data fold
Train
Validation
Test
lowest p-value
Total scans
4395
1457
1457
N/A
Abnormalities
528 (12.0%)
155 (10.6%)
163 (11.2%)
0.360
Live birth
4363 (99.2%)
1442 (98.9%)
1450 (99.5%)
0.375
Avg. GA
20w 3d
20w 3d
20w 3d
0.653
Nonwhite
1352 (30.8%)
458 (31.4%)
418 (28.7%)
0.166
Avg. BMI (kg / m2)
24.7
24.9
24.9
0.448
Table I
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS AND METADATA ACROSS THE DATA FOLDS USED FOR MODEL TRAINING. NONE OF THE PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS,
INCLUDING GESTATIONAL AGE (GA), MATERNAL BODY MASS INDEX (BMI), OR PERCENTAGE OF ABNORMAL SCANS WERE SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT
ACROSS THE CHOSEN FOLDS.
Standard plane
Description
Head:
Brain-CB
Transcerebellar view
Brain-TV
Transventricular view
Heart:
3VT
3-vessel + trachea
LVOT
left ventricular outflow tract
RVOT
left ventricular outflow tract
4CH
4-chamber view
Other:
Abdominal
Femur
Lips
Kidneys
axial view
Profile
sagittal view
Spine-cor
coronal view
Spine-sag
sagittal view
Background
Table II
LIST OF STANDARD PLANES RECOMMENDED UNDER FASP. WE ADDED A
‘BACKGROUND’ LABEL FOR FRAMES IN NONE OF THESE VIEWS.
the calipers (see Figure 2). To extract these biometrics, we
trained a simple U-Net based neural network which we called
CaliperNet (see Appendix A for details). We manually labelled
300 images of each biometric with the location of the calipers
and trained a CNN to find calipers, with very good accuracy.
C. Pixel size estimation
The method described in Section III can find biometric
endpoints on an image, but the measurements are given
in pixels rather than millimetres. Moreover, pixel size can
be changed during scanning by varying probe settings and
machine zoom levels.
However, almost every frame shows a standard scale bar
with prominent ticks at intervals dbar = 50mm, with smaller
ticks every 10mm and 5mm [15]. These ticks are at predictable
positions on the screen: they can be seen clearly by looking
at pixel values Xi along the correct scan line (see Figure 3).
Ticks can sometimes blend into bright structures shown on
screen.
A simple, reliable and computationally efficient solution is
to remove likely background signals from Xi by subtracting a
1D Gaussian filter, Gx,with standard deviation σ empirically
selected to be 3px and keeping only positive values:
X
′
i = max (Xi −Xi ∗Gx(σ), 0) ,
(1)
We then computed the autocorrelation RXX of the resulting
filtered pixel values X
′
i along the scan lines corresponding to
the scale bar (see Figure 3):
RXX(n) =
X
i
X
′
iX
′
i+n.
(2)
The first peak of the autocorrelation function corresponds
to the spacing between axis ticks (in pixels). The size of
individual pixels in millimetres Lx is given by
Lx =
dbar
max(RXX(n)).
(3)
To minimise quantisation noise, we estimate pixel size from
the bars with the highest spacing.
D. Biometric measurement
To measure biometrics, we trained a the U-Net segmentation
network using binary cross-entropy loss [9] to predict heat-
maps constructed from the sonographer’s point annotations,
extracted by CaliperNet, convolved with a Gaussian kernel.
Figure 4 shows examples of training labels constructed this
way. A separate CNN was trained for each standard plane,
using the same U-Net architecture for each network and
differing only in training planes and labels.
Biometrics were extracted from unseen images directly from
the predicted heatmaps. For linear biometrics (FL and TCD),
the Euclidean distance between the coordinates of the two
highest maxima was used; For elliptical biometrics (HC and
AC) we fit an ellipse to the heatmap using the least-squares
criterion. The ellipse perimeter was then estimated using
the formula recommended by the British Medical Ultrasound
Society4 [16].
4The exact calculation of the perimeter of an ellipse is an infinite series.
The cited guideline suggests using the first five terms of this series, which has
a relative error of < 0.01% for most biologically plausible ellipse shapes.

4
Biometric
Type
No. of labels
Brain-TV:
HC
Head circumference
Ellipse
8162
BPD
Biparietal diameter
Ellipse axis
8162
Brain-CB:
TCD
Transcerebellar diameter
Linear
6906
Abdominal:
AC
Abdominal circumference
Ellipse
6073
Femur:
FL
Femur length
Linear
5718
Table III
BIOMETRICS MEASURED DURING THE 20-WEEK SCAN ACCORDING TO FASP GUIDELINES, AND THE NUMBER OF SUCH LABELS PRESENT IN THE
IFIND1 DATASET.
0
200
400
600
800
y-coordinate
0
50
100
150
200
250
pixel value
x = 31
x = 38
0
200
400
600
800
distance (px)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Autocorrelation (norm.)
x = 31
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. (a) Part of a scale bar, cropped from an image frame. Two lines are overlaid upon it. (b) The pixel values along those two scan lines for the entire
frame. (c) The autocorrelation of the pixel values of the blue line after it has been processed with a high-pass filter.
Since BPD is mathematically equivalent to the minor axis of
the ellipse used to segment the head, we calculated it directly
from the head circumference label.
E. Whole-scan biometric estimation
In clinical practice, only a few frames are labelled by the
sonographer. Generally, no more than three measurements are
taken of each biometric [2] and the best subjective measure-
ment is reported.
The automated methods described in Section II-D can
extract measurements in all identified frames in which a given
biometric is visible, resulting in hundreds or thousands of
measurements per biometric. These form sample populations
from which we wish to infer a true value and to estimate
confidence intervals.
However, for each biometric there may be erroneous values,
caused by misclassification of the target anatomical planes
or by failure modes of the biometric CNN. Any estimation
needs to reject or at least minimise the effect of these out-
of-distribution measurements to reliably converge on the true
biometric value.
Figure 5 shows our processing pipeline. Every frame from
the US real time image stream is processed by Sononet to
identify and label standard planes. Following Baumgartner et
al [6]:, each frame is resized to a resolution of 288 × 224 and
converted to greyscale.
Any frame identified with > 95% confidence as a stand-
ard plane with a FASP biometric is then processed by our
CNNs to obtain a biometric measurement. The native frame
is subsampled to a 384 × 288 resolution, with interface
elements removed, and converted to greyscale and processed
as described in Section II-D.
A quick check is then applied: if the proposed measurement
is anatomically implausible (lower than the 3rd centile of the
biometric at GA −3 weeks or higher than the 97th centile at
GA + 3 weeks), it is rejected. Furthermore, where the CNN’s
output does not allow an ellipse to be fitted or endpoints
to be returned (for instance, where one distinct maximum is
found, making it impossible to find two endpoints) the output
is discarded.
These two filters (of plane-classification confidence and
biometric measurements) may be undesirable for single-frame

5
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Images used for biometric training showing (a) femur, and (b) head
views. The second row shows the training labels and the third row shows the
CNN output overlaid on the image. For the head image, the HC output is
shown in green and the BPD output in pink.
Acquire new frame
Plane classification: 
SonoNet
Standard 
plane?
Save standard plane
Plausible 
biometric?
Update biometric 
estimate
Biometric 
plane?
Measure biometric: 
U-Net
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Figure 5. The pipeline which each frame in an US scan feed is processed by
to estimate biometrics.
comparisons, as they discard some data. However, when
estimating biometrics across a whole scan several hundred
measurements of each biometric are often recorded: if some
fraction of these are discarded, this only has a small impact
on data availability. Appendix B details the proportion of
biometric measurements discarded.
1) Distribution of measurements: This section describes
how measurements of individual frames are aggregated and
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Measurement (mm)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Frequency
Measurement dist.
Noise dist.
Observed
Figure 6.
Idealised distribution of measurements for a biometric with true
value 30mm. The observed distribution of measurements is a sum of a
measurement distribution and a nuisance distribution of outliers.
outliers are rejected using a Bayesian framework.
Repeated measurements of the same biometric in different
frames should cluster around a mean value. We modelled
this using a normal distribution N
 µ, σ2
, with mean µ
(if unbiased, this should be the true biometric value) and
variance σ2(this depends on the precision of the biometric
measurements).
Misclassified planes also return a biometric measurement
and the biometric measurement process itself may fail even
in a correctly identified plane. Since we have no information
with which to model these failures we treat them as random
and use a uniform distribution U (a, b), over the full biological
limits a and b, outside of which a measurement is rejected.
Thus, the observed distribution Do of measurements will
be a weighted sum of the measurement distribution N
 µ, σ2
(for correct classifications) and a nuisance distribution U (a, b)
(for misclassifications). This can be represented by
Do = PtN
 µ, σ2
+ (1 −Pt)U (a, b) ,
(4)
where Pt represents the proportion of valid measurements.
This equation contains several unknowns Pt, µ, σ2 which
can be estimated iteratively using a Bayesian approach, but
each must be initialised.
2) Estimating truth probability and distribution parameters:
To perform a Bayesian estimation, Ptneeds to be initialised to
a prior probability (in our approach, we set Pt0 = 0.75 for
all biometrics, but it should converge on the true probability
from any starting point other than 0 or 1), along with a prior
weight W05. Prior estimates of the distribution parameters µ0
and σ2
0 need to be set, along with appropriate prior weights
Wµ,0 and Wσ2,0.
For each new measurement xi, we estimate the likelihood
of it being a true measurement T or a nuisance sample T using
Bayes’ rule:
P(T|xi) =
P(xi|T)Pt
P(xi|T)(1 −Pt)
(5)
5The estimate should converge on the true value of Pt regardless of what
W0 is set to, but setting it too high can cause it to converge slowly, while
setting it too low can cause the estimate of Pt to oscillate inappropriately.

6
where P(xi|T) is the value of N
 µ, σ2
at xi, and P(xi|T)
is the value of U (a, b) at value xi. This returns P(T|xi), the
probability that this measurement was sampled from the true
measurement distribution.
Finally, Pt and the distribution parameters µ, σ2 can be up-
dated for this biometric using a weighted cumulative average:
Pti
=
P(T|xi) + Wi−1Pti−1
Wi−1 + 1
(6)
µi
=
xiP(T|xi) + Wµ,i−1µi−1
P(T|xi) + Wµ,i−1
(7)
σ2
i
=
(xi −µi−1)2P(T|xi) + Wσ2,i−1σ2
i−1
P(T|xi) + Wσ2,i−1
(8)
and their weighting factors can be updated using
Wi
=
Wi−1 + 1
(9)
Wµ,i
=
Wµ,i−1 + P(T|xi)
(10)
Wσ2,i
=
Wσ2,i−1 + P(T|xi).
(11)
As the noise distribution is taken to be uniform, there is no
need to update estimates of its terms.
The estimates for µ and σ2 are updated in real time and
independently. At any given moment, the estimate of µ is the
best estimate of the true value of the biometric of interest.
Meanwhile, the estimate of σ2 can be used to calculate the
standard error ,ˆσi, of that estimate to find credible intervals
for the biometric, given by
ˆσi =
σi
pWσ2,i
.
(12)
The 95% credible interval is given by the range µi ± 2ˆσi.
III. EXPERIMENTS
The variability in biometric measurements between two
sonographers arises from two components: image selection
for measurement and caliper placement within each image.
Previous work has shown that 50-80% of variability between
humans can be explained by caliper placement [5], leaving
20-50% of variability accounted for by image selection. The
proposed whole-scan method eliminates this second source of
noise by processing every frame in a scan with no manual
intervention and seeks to reduce the effect of random error in
caliper placement by aggregating measurements from many
individual frames.
We performed three experiments to quantify the reliability
of our biometric estimates:
1) Using our biometric CNNs to independently measure
the same frames that sonographers labelled. This tests
the biometric measurement performance of our CNNs
and compares it to published estimates of inter-rater
differences in caliper placement on a single image.
Note this is still a restricted problem, requiring human
intervention to perform frame selection. For these single-
image experiments, biometrics were estimated automat-
ically in the same frames that sonographers chose to
make their manual annotations. We trained one CNN
per standard plane (from subjects in the training set)
and tested it using the subjects in the test set using the
unannotated copies previously extracted for all frames in
the iFIND test set: 1516 in the brain-TV standard plane,
1360 for brain-CB, 1205 for abdominal, and 1124 for
femur.
2) Aggregating biometric measurements across a whole
recorded scan to obtain global estimates for the scan and
comparing to sonographer manual measurements. This
experiment considers a more unconstrained problem
with no human interaction. It does not control for indi-
vidual frame selection, so our results can be compared
to inter-rater variability in biometric measurement from
different scans. All 1457 recordings in the test set were
used. The final estimate of each biometric, along with
credible intervals, was reported.
3) Conducting a test-retest experiment on the paired scan
data described in Section II-A1. Finally, we conducted a
test-retest experiment on the paired scan data described
in Section II-A1. We ran the full pipeline on paired
scans of the same subject acquired on the same day
using a different scanner from the training dataset. We
then compared biometrics from each scan and measured
test-retest variability of our algorithm. The scans here
were performed on an US machine by a different man-
ufacturer from the training data, which allowed us to
examine domain shift.
All experiments were conducted on a single Nvidia GeForce
RTX 3080 GPU.
A. Validation of distribution choice
Section II-E models the distribution of measurements of
each biometric with a mixture of a uniform distribution and a
Gaussian distribution
D = PtN
 µ, σ2
+ (1 −Pt)U (a, b) .
(13)
This has three parameters Pt, µ and σ which are tuned iter-
atively to incoming data. This model assumes that incoming
measurements follow a Gaussian distribution (if correctly clas-
sified) or a uniform distribution (if noise), which can be tested.
We therefore examined the output biometric measurements to
check the appropriateness of this model.
IV. RESULTS
A. Single-frame biometric estimation
A valid biometric estimate (following the constraints out-
lined in Section II-E) was obtained in approximately 90% of
cases across all biometrics. Table IV shows performance on
the unlabelled copies of the frames labelled by sonographers
in the test dataset.
Using the sonographer measures as the reference point, the
automated single frame performance showed bias of less than
1% and mean square difference (MSD) of less than 5% except
for TCD which showed a MSD of just over 10%. Where
inter-observer data is available for manual measurements, the
automated approach could be seen to have an average of 41%
lower agreement with the human rater.

7
Structure
Bias (mm)
MSD (mm)
Human MSD
HC
+0.11 mm (+0.07%)
4.34mm (2.68%)
2.70mm (1.8%)
BPD
+0.06mm (+0.17%)
1.28mm (3.20%)
N/A
AC
+1.51mm (+0.98%)
5.03mm (3.26%)
4.03mm (2.8%)
FL
0.00mm (0.00%)
1.53mm (4.67%)
1.02mm (2.9%)
TCD
-0.16mm (-0.75%)
2.1mm (10.1%)
N/A
Table IV
COMPARISON OF THE BIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OBTAINED ON THE TEST SET OF THE IFIND DATASET. ‘BIAS’ REFERS TO THE AVERAGE DIFFERENCE
IN MEASUREMENT BETWEEN OUR METHOD AND HUMAN SONOGRAPHERS. ‘MSD’ IS THE MEAN-SQUARED DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PAIRS OF
MEASUREMENTS. THE ‘HUMAN MSD’ COLUMN IS POPULATED WITH VALUES OF INTER-OBSERVER VARIABILITY REPORTED BY SARRIS ET AL [5].
Biometric
Bias
MSD
MAD (mm)
std. err (mm)
within human 95%
HC
-0.30mm (-0.18%)
3.23mm (1.99%)
2.50mm (1.42%)
3.39mm
94.7%
BPD
+0.90mm (+1.89%)
1.86mm (4.65%)
1.11mm (2.31%)
0.95mm
N/A
AC
-0.49mm (-0.31%)
5.55mm (3.60%)
4.23mm (2.74%)
3.26mm
96.6%
FL
-0.51mm (-1.59%)
1.63mm (4.99%)
1.19mm (3.64%)
1.12mm
93.9%
TCD
+0.27mm (+1.32%)
0.91mm (4.37%)
0.68mm (3.28%)
0.47mm
N/A
Table V
COMPARISON OF HUMAN MEASUREMENTS TO MACHINE ESTIMATES TAKEN ACROSS A WHOLE SCAN. ‘MAD’ REFERS TO MEAN ABSOLUTE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN HUMAN AND MACHINE MEASUREMENTS. THE ‘WITHIN HUMAN 95%’ COLUMN SHOWS THE PERCENTAGE OF BIOMETRICS IN THE TEST SET
WHERE THE HUMAN-MACHINE DIFFERENCE IS WITHIN 95% OF HUMAN-HUMAN INTER-OBSERVER DIFFERENCES (TAKEN FROM (author?) [5])
(a)
(b)
Figure 7. Two failure cases of biometric estimation in (a) HC, and (b) FL. The
pink annotation shows the ground truth measurement made by a sonographer,
while the green annotation is the automatic one made by our CNNs.
B. Whole-scan processing
Figure 8 shows how a biometric estimate (in this case
HC) changes over time during one exemplar scan, overlaid
with measurements from individual frames. Initially the prior
dominates, estimating the 50th percentile for the age with wide
error bars. As the number of frames contributing measurement
values increases the overall estimate becomes more stable and
resistant to outliers. Although individual frame measurements
show significant noise, including extreme values (which are
probabilistically discounted by our system), the credible inter-
val progressively shrinks with increasing data. Figure 9 shows
this happening in real time over 3 seconds of scanning.
Figure 10 shows Bland-Altman plots for human and ma-
chine measurement on the same subjects for three biometrics,
with 95th percentile intervals overlaid for three biometrics. The
difference between human measurements6 and machine estim-
6Human measurements were taken from sonographers’ reports after each
scan.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Frame number
160
170
180
190
200
Circumference (mm)
iFIND01579 Head Circumference
Central estimate
Error bars
Frame measurement
Figure 8. Evolution over time of the HC estimate in an individual subject,
overlaid with credible intervals and individual frame measurements.
ates can be compared to inter-rater disagreement measured by
Sarris et al [5]. Our 95th percentile intervals are overall very
similar to human inter-rater variability for HC, AC, and FL.
95.1% of machine-human measurement differences (across
these three biometrics) lie within the 95% range of human
differences.
C. Paired scan data
We also conducted a test-retest experiment to measure
reliability across repeated scans of the same subject.

8
Figure 9.
A still image from a video showing real-time measurement of biometrics and updating of the biometric estimate. In three seconds of real-time
scanning, our system acquired 83 FL measurements and updated its FL estimate from 34mm (the prior, based on the average FL for this gestational age) to
36mm. The full video clip can be found at http://www.ifindproject.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/79/2023/12/realtime.gif
Biometric
MSD
Standard deviation
Human s.d. (full scan)
Number of pairs
HC
2.60mm (1.25%)
1.23%
2.75%
15
BPD
0.79mm (1.36%)
1.17%
N/A
15
AC
4.61mm (2.51%)
2.50%
5.05%
17
FL
0.97mm (2.44%)
2.44%
5.56%
10
TCD
0.57mm (2.33%)
1.62%
N/A
8
Table VI
TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY OF OUR MODEL OUTPUTS FROM PAIRED SCANS OF THE SAME SUBJECT. THE ‘HUMAN S.D.’ COLUMN IS POPULATED WITH
RESULTS BY SARRIS ET AL [5].
Table VI shows the mean-square difference (MSD) and the
standard deviation of the difference in the final biometric
estimates from the test-retest experiment using data from
20 subjects scanned twice on the same day by different
sonographers, as described in Section II-A17. Not all pairs of
scans had sufficient frames visible of each biometric in both
scans: the number of pairs available for analysis is shown in
the table.
D. Measurement distributions
Figure 11(a) shows the distribution of all femur length meas-
urements across the test dataset. The values were demeaned
and then aggregated across all scans.
Figure 11(b) shows the cumulative distribution function
(cdf) of all measurements obtained that way, as well as the
best-fit theoretical model distribution for this data. The global
best-fit parameters for the femur length were Pt = 0.79, µ = 0
and σ = 1.8mm.
Similar curves were found for the other biometrics examined
with comparable goodness of fit.
7We measured percent standard deviation in this table to ensure comparab-
ility with the measurements reported by Sarris et al [5], who reported human
standard deviation. They examined a slightly different gestational age range,
so we report percent standard deviation to normalise for that.
V. DISCUSSION
Our experiments show that the proposed workflow can
improve the accuracy and repeatability of biometric estimation.
In single frames, our models generally produce more variable
biometric estimates than humans. However, when estimating
biometrics across an entire examination, our estimates are in
line with those made by sonographers (machine-human MSD
~ human-human MSD). Paired scan data also shows that our
results are highly repeatable, with little difference across scans
of the same subject. This latter test is a direct analogue of inter-
rater testing by human observers and results were in closer
agreement than for manual measurement.
A. Single-frame biometric estimation
Section IV-A compares our model’s performance in in-
dividual frames to that of a human. We generally find
good agreement with sonographer measurements. Sarris et al
[5] report inter-observer differences when two sonographers
manually place calipers on the same US frame for three
biometrics. When referenced to the corresponding human
measurements, the machine measurements in this experiment
across all biometrics show more divergence than humans do

9
160
170
180
190
200
Average measurement (mm)
10
5
0
5
10
Machine-human difference (mm)
+4.74mm
-6.19mm
-0.30mm
Head circumference
Individual scans
95% CI
Mean difference
130
140
150
160
170
Average measurement (mm)
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
Machine-human difference (mm)
+8.75mm
-9.38mm
-0.49mm
Abdominal circumference
Individual scans
95% CI
Mean difference
25.0
27.5
30.0
32.5
35.0
37.5
40.0
Average measurement (mm)
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
Machine-human difference (mm)
+1.71mm
-3.08mm
-0.51mm
Femur length
Individual scans
95% CI
Mean difference
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Average measurement (mm)
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
Machine-human difference (mm)
+1.82mm
-1.02mm
+0.27mm
Transcerebellar diameter
Individual scans
95% CI
Mean difference
Figure 10.
Bland-Altman plots showing the differences between the sonographer’s measurements and our own across all complete recordings in the test
dataset.
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
Difference from final estimate (mm)
0
1
2
3
4
% of measurements
Femur length
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
Difference from final estimate (mm)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Quantile
Femur length: cumulative distribution function
Observed (population)
Best fit
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.
(a) The histogram of all femur length measurements made in
individual frames in the test set. (b) The cumulative distribution function of
all femur length measurements overlaid with the equivalent distribution for a
fitted model using a mixed Gaussian + uniform distribution.
in a single frame. This appears to be random error: there is
little observed bias.
Part of this difference can be explained by failure modes
of our networks. Figure 7 shows some frames for which the
models give an inaccurate biometric estimate. This typically
occurs when structures of interest are poorly visualised in the
US image, or in some edge cases such as when both femurs
are visible in a frame. These failure modes are uncommon
(divergences of over 20% as shown in Figure 7 are seen in
only 1.5% of segmentations) but they are not mistakes that a
human is likely to make.
There is significant variation in human-machine difference
across biometrics. TCD shows a very large MSD of over 10%,
while other biometrics are significantly more closely aligned
to the human measurement. Human inter-observer variability
in TCD measurements has been reported as being between 3-
5% [17], so the machine method appears to show significantly
greater variability.
B. Whole-scan biometric estimation
The clinical standard for biometric measurement in fetal
US relies on operator selection and annotation of a small
number of individual frames. We take a different approach:

10
we analyse every frame in which the biometry is visible, and
use all available measurements to generate a global estimate
of the biometric. This avoids operator dependence associated
with selection of standard planes, which can be a substantial
contributor to inter-rater variability. Furthermore, it reduces
the impact of random error from caliper placement in any one
plane, which is also a significant source of variability.
The overall estimates of biometrics across a scan show
better agreement with manual measurements than those from
a single image. For instance, the TCD estimates across a
scan show an average MSD with the manual measurement
of 4.37%, compared to 10.1% for individual frames. This is
despite the fact that the frames selected by the sonographers
were removed: aggregating measurements from a diverse and
unselected range of views of the anatomy results in a similar
level of agreement with the sonographer. This value is also
comparable with human inter-observer variability estimates
found in the literature [17].
There are also few extreme outliers, demonstrating that our
system achieves human-level performance. This is despite the
fact that performance of our CNNs on individual frames is
lower than that achieved by humans: our whole-scan estima-
tion method can compensate for the errors introduced by our
single-frame estimation CNNs. We expect that our whole-scan
algorithm could therefore achieve superhuman performance
in biometric estimation if the single-frame estimator can
be improved to human level. The test-retest experiment we
performed in Section IV-C provides support for this, showing
the variability in biometric estimates across scans is much
lower than that between humans.
Furthermore, our method allows us to estimate credible in-
tervals in which a given biometric can be expected to lie. This
is based on the distribution of measurements and the number
of observations, as described in Section II-E. On average, this
is smaller than the MSD by a factor of 1.4. However, the
manual measurement itself displays variability a: assuming
Gaussianity, MSD should be larger than the standard error
by a factor of
√
2 ≈1.4. Therefore, the calculated standard
error is in line with the observed variability in our estimates.
Our credible intervals therefore provide a quantitative measure
of the uncertainty in biometric estimation.
The system discussed in this paper treats single-frame meas-
urements in a US scan as following a Gaussian distribution
(when they are not due to misclassifications). Section IV-D
shows that this is globally an appropriate assumption, with
measurements following the expected distribution. The dis-
tribution of measurements within each scan may be variable,
depending on the operator’s choice of scanning planes, but the
Bayesian estimation method ensures that an optimal estimate
is always achieved given the available data.
Another advantage of this system, when applied in real
time, is that it requires no sonographer interaction to obtain
biometrics. Much of a prenatal US scan is spent acquiring
biometrics, and removing the need for this measurement can
reduce scan time by up to a third [13]. A prospective trial of
this system would be needed to estimate and quantify a time
saving.
C. Whole-scan performance and test-retest reliability
Section IV-C shows results of our models on paired data
from the same scan. Despite a small number of pairs, across
all biometrics our models are more repeatable and consistent
than humans. The standard deviation of the difference between
measurements of the same subject was approximately half of
that between human sonographers. Much of the remaining
difference can likely be explained by the different views of
the relevant biometrics acquired in each scan determined by
sonographer technique and fetal lie. This experiment was
conducted in a sample scanned with a different US scanner
and at a higher gestational age range than the training dataset,
yet the model outputs remained robust to this domain shift.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has demonstrated a novel method using machine
learning to estimate fetal biometrics at the 20-week scan. The
proposed method does not rely on measurements performed
on individual manually-selected standard planes, as is the
norm in both manual measurements and for many commercial
machine assisted systems, but estimates biometrics across
the entire scan. This avoids the biases exhibited by humans
in plane selection and biometric measurement. We further
present evidence that estimates produced using the proposed
methods may be more consistent and repeatable than human
measurements. This approach can also present other benefits
that have not been quantified in this paper: by removing the
need for sonographers to freeze the US stream and perform
measurements, the system can improve sonographer focus
and reduce the time needed to complete a FASP scan. A
prospective trial of this system is in progress to establish
whether this can realise those benefits and improve detection
of fetal abnormalities.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The US scan recordings used to train the CNNs used in this
paper were collected with an ethical requirement for patient
data to remain confidential. As such, the scan data cannot
be made publicly available. The raw and processed CNN
outputs used to construct our results are available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.
