A Framework for Knowledge Management and Automated Reasoning
Applied on Intelligent Transport Systems
Aneta Vulgarakis Feljan1, Athanasios Karapantelakis1, Leonid Mokrushin1, Hongxin Liang1, Raﬁa
Inam1, Elena Fersman1, Carlos R.B. Azevedo2, Klaus Raizer2 and Ricardo S. Souza2
1Ericsson Research, Sweden
2Ericsson Research - ARBB, Brazil

Keywords:
Knowledge model, Reasoning, Ontology, Model transformation, Intelligent Transport Systems
Abstract:
Cyber-Physical Systems in general, and Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) in particular use heterogeneous
data sources combined with problem solving expertise in order to make critical decisions that may lead to some
form of actions e.g., driver notiﬁcations, change of trafﬁc light signals and braking to prevent an accident. Cur-
rently, a major part of the decision process is done by human domain experts, which is time-consuming, tedious
and error-prone. Additionally, due to the intrinsic nature of knowledge possession this decision process cannot
be easily replicated or reused. Therefore, there is a need for automating the reasoning processes by providing
computational systems a formal representation of the domain knowledge and a set of methods to process that
knowledge. In this paper, we propose a knowledge model that can be used to express both declarative knowl-
edge about the systems’ components, their relations and their current state, as well as procedural knowledge
representing possible system behavior. In addition, we introduce a framework for knowledge management and
automated reasoning (KMARF). The idea behind KMARF is to automatically select an appropriate problem
solver based on formalized reasoning expertise in the knowledge base, and convert a problem deﬁnition to
the corresponding format. This approach automates reasoning, thus reducing operational costs, and enables
reusability of knowledge and methods across different domains. We illustrate the approach on a transportation
planning use case.
1
INTRODUCTION
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) present a subclass
of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) due to the inter-
action between physical systems (vehicles) and dis-
tributed information acquisition and propagation in-
frastructure (wired/wireless networks, sensors, actu-
ators, processors and software). They are designed
to offer innovative services to transportation network
users and managers alike, and cover a broad area of
advanced applications, ranging from improving man-
agement and safety of the transportation network, to
infotainment services (Karagiannis et al., 2011). ITS
in general use a vast amount of heterogeneous data
streams and information (e.g., behavioral models) that
need to be analyzed, combined and actioned upon,
which creates a complexity that goes far beyond mere
human management. Hence, automation is a must,
which in its turn requires formalization of knowl-
edge extracted from the different sources such as sen-
sor networks, documents, tools and from system ex-
perts. Moreover, in order to be able to provide sup-
port for information interoperability between applica-
tions, ITS-related information needs to be semanti-
cally enriched in other words identiﬁed, categorized
and described explicitly. Even though standardization
activities have facilitated certain network-level inter-
operability (IEEE Standards Association, 2010) and
Quality of Service (QoS), there are still inconsisten-
cies between ITS groups on how data are modeled on
a semantic level, as each organization (e.g., govern-
ment regulator, commercial provider, academic insti-
tution) has created domain-speciﬁc information mod-
els for its respective ITS applications.
In order to build intelligent systems one needs to
start by modeling and formalizing the knowledge that
exists (such as domain concepts, behaviors and con-
text) and is retrieved from human experts. Knowl-
edge representation and reasoning (KR&R) is a ﬁeld
in artiﬁcial intelligence that aims at building intelli-
gent systems that know about their world and are able
to automatically draw conclusions and act upon them,
arXiv:1701.03000v1  [cs.AI]  11 Jan 2017

as humans do (Baral, 2003). A fundamental assump-
tion in KR&R is that knowledge is represented in a
tangible form (usually via ontologies), suitable for
processing by dedicated reasoning engines. However,
up to today, there is a lack of frameworks for gen-
eral intelligence that will solve several classes of rea-
soning problems, such as planning, veriﬁcation and
optimization. In addition, it is still not clear to the in-
telligent software community how to effectively cope
with the integration of both declarative and procedu-
ral knowledge and some authors advocate for keeping
the behavior descriptions separated from the seman-
tic, static domain knowledge (Ghallab et al., 2014).
In this paper, we present a Knowledge Man-
agement
and
Automated
Reasoning
Framework
(KMARF), which targets multiple reasoning prob-
lems. The purpose for conceiving KMARF is to (a)
reduce system development and deployment time, by
reusing as much knowledge as possible, such as do-
main models, behaviors and reasoning mechanisms,
and (b) reduce operational costs by requiring less hu-
man involvement in system operations. The strong
point of KMARF is that it relies on a knowledge
model that combines both declarative and procedural
knowledge. This combination allows us to do exten-
sive analysis and provide answers to different reason-
ing questions, such as “what is the optimal strategy
for reaching a desired system state?” or “which ac-
tions have led the system to a given state?”. In order
to use problem solvers specialized in solving speciﬁc
classes of reasoning problems, KMARF can be ex-
tended with model transformation rules that translate
from our knowledge model to the targeted problem
solver model.
KMARF is speciﬁcally targeting CPS, but it can
be applied in other areas as well. In this paper, we fo-
cus on one of the CPS domains where KMARF may
be applied – the ITS domain. As an illustration ex-
ample, we consider a transportation planning prob-
lem i.e., transport passengers or goods with a minimal
cost. A cost can be e.g., the traveled distance, the time
needed for transportation of each of the passengers or
goods, or the number of buses or trucks required for
transportation. The answer to the task may be a plan
i.e., a sequence of steps for the system to perform in
order to reach the goal state. In case the task cannot
be performed the answer from KMARF could be a
reason why the task cannot be performed, as well as
the possible solution, which could be to increase the
number of vehicles.
In brief, our contribution is fourfold:
• A model for representing both declarative and
procedural knowledge from CPS and ITS domains
in a machine-readable form (Section 2.1).
State2
is_bus(b25)
is_bus_stop(bs1)
is_passeger(p1)
at(p1, bs1)
at(b25, bs1)
capacity(b25, 23)
waiting(p1, min(5))
State3
is_bus(b25)
is_bus_stop(bs1)
is_passeger(p1)
at(b25, bs1)
at(p1, b25)
capacity(b25, 22)
State1
is_bus(b25)
is_bus_stop(bs1)
is_passeger(p1)
at(p1, bs1)
capacity(b25, 23)
waiting(p1, min(2))
Figure 1: Speciﬁcation of three example states.
• An architecture of a generic framework for
knowledge management and automated reason-
ing (KMARF) (Section 2.2), relying on the intro-
duced knowledge model.
• A taxonomy of ITS domain concepts that can be
used when reasoning about ITS speciﬁc problems
(Section 3).
• A prototype implementation of the KMARF ar-
chitecture (Section 4) and an evaluation of the
beneﬁts of KMARF in terms of reducing the ef-
fort required for formalizing the knowledge and
performing the reasoning based on it (Section 5).
2
KMARF – FRAMEWORK FOR
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
AND AUTOMATED
REASONING
In this section, we introduce our Knowledge Man-
agement
and
Automated
Reasoning
Framework
(KMARF) by showing its architecture and the knowl-
edge model that it relies on.
KMARF is targeting
multiple reasoning problem classes (such as plan-
ning, veriﬁcation and optimization) that can share the
same underlying state representation. This enables
reusability of knowledge and methods across differ-
ent domains.
2.1
The Knowledge Model
Syntax
We model declarative knowledge by de-
scribing discrete states of a system. One such state
may represent the current state, and the others may
describe either previous system states or hypothetical
states that the system may end up in the future. In this
context we do not strictly apply the notion of time,
i.e., the system may change its state instantly. How-
ever, the order of states is important as it describes
how the system evolves and may explain the reasons
behind its progress.
A state is represented by an (implicitly conjunc-
tive) set of predicates {P1,P2,...} expressing the facts

known about the state. Each predicate is a compound
term that has a form of Pi(a1,a2,...,an), where Pi is
a predicate’s functor speciﬁed as a literal, i.e., a se-
quence of characters, and aj|j ∈[1..n] are the argu-
ments.
The number of arguments n is called arity
of the predicate. If n = 0, then Pi denotes a simple
atomic fact. If n > 0, then Pi denotes a factual relation
between its n arguments. The arguments of predicates
may include:
• numbers denoting literal quantity;
• literals denoted by sequence of alphanumeric
characters that start from a lower case character
{a,b,c,...} that represent objects or concepts in
the domain (e.g., car may represent “a car” );
• compound terms of the form Ti(a1,a2,...,an) that
may have one or many arguments, which can
be numbers, literals or compound terms (e.g.,
velocity(car,kmh(50)) may stand for “the veloc-
ity of the car car is 50 km/h”).
An example shown in Figure 1 contains a
state State1 deﬁned using a set of six predicates
{is bus,is bus stop,is passeger,at,capacity,waiting}.
The arguments of the ﬁrst three predicates declare
existence of bus b25, bus stop bs1, and passenger
p1 accordingly.
The fourth predicate states that
passenger p1 is at bus stop bs1. The ﬁfth predicate
indicates that bus b25 has 23 available places. The
last predicate declares a fact that passenger p1 has
been waiting at the bus stop from last two minutes.
The procedural knowledge is modeled as a collec-
tion of speciﬁcations of potential transitions between
states. A transition speciﬁcation consists of a pre-
condition, a computation, and an action. Precondi-
tion and action both have the same syntax as the state,
i.e., they are represented as a set of predicates, except
the following two differences. Variables denoted by
sequences of alphanumeric characters starting from a
capital letter {X,Y,Z,...} are allowed in arguments of
predicates and compound terms in both precondition
and action. The action predicates are restricted to the
set {add,delete}. Intuitively, action predicates de-
note the procedures performed with a state when a
transition is performed. Computation is an ordered
list of effect free function calls, i.e. they do not mod-
ify the state and are only used during the processing
of the transition. The arguments of a function call
may be numbers, literals, variables, and functions. If
a function returns a value, the last argument of a func-
tion call is a variable that holds it. The result of a func-
tion call may be used as an argument in subsequent
function calls of the computation or in the action.
Example in Figure 2 demonstrates speciﬁcation
of a transition Transition1 that allows a system to
Transition1
Precondition
is_bus(B)
is_bus_stop(S)
is_passeger(P)
at(P, S)
at(B, S)
capacity(B, C)
waiting(P, min(Y))
Computation
less_than(Y, 20)
greater_than(C, 0)
decrease(C, 1, NC)
Action
delete(waiting(P, U(Y))
delete(at(P, S))
add(at(P, B))
delete(capacity(B, C))
add(capacity(B, NC))
Figure 2: An example of a transition speciﬁcation.
evolve from state State2 to state State3 deﬁned in Fig-
ure 1. After matching the precondition, the computa-
tion checks if a passenger has been waiting for less
than 20 minutes and if there is enough capacity to on-
board a passenger, it decreases the bus capacity by 1.
The action removes the passenger waiting predicate,
updates passenger location and available bus capacity
value.
Semantics
We formalize semantics of literals, com-
pound terms and predicates by associating meanings
to their symbols. For example, we use the predicate
at(p1,bs1) to model the fact that a passenger p1 is at
the bus stop bs1. We say that the meaning of at is to
represent a close spacial relationship between its two
arguments.
We deﬁne semantics of our knowledge model in
terms of a transition system. Formally, a transition
system is a tuple (S,T,→), where S is a set of states,
T is a set of transition speciﬁcation names, and →is
set of state transitions (i.e., a subset of S×T ×S). The
fact that (State1,Transition1,State2) ∈→is written
as State1
Transition1
−−−−−−→State2, and represents a transi-
tion between a source state State1 and a destina-
tion state State2 by applying transition speciﬁcation
Transition1.
In order for a transition speciﬁcation to be applied
its precondition must match the source state and its
computation must succeed. The semantics of match-
ing the precondition with a state are formalized by
deﬁning a logical uniﬁcation between predicates of
the precondition and the predicates of the state, as fol-
lows. We unify every predicate in the precondition
with all the predicates from the state, and use vari-
ables substitutions in subsequent uniﬁcation of the re-
maining precondition predicates. If the uniﬁcation of
all precondition predicates with the state predicates
succeeds, the computed variable substitution is used
in the computation and the action, as explained be-
low. Obviously, there can be multiple matches of a
precondition with a source state. In this case, every
match will produce a transition in →given that the
corresponding computation succeeds.
The meaning of the computation is evaluation of

Perception Engine
predicates
human
expertise
domain and reasoning 
expertise
Real world
user specified
 goal
sensing
Reasoner
model 
transformation 
rules
Model Checker
...
Interpreter
Knowledge Base
states and
transitions
meta-reasoning
expertise
KMARF
UI
model checker 
problem format
property proof
Inference Engine
Planner
strategy
expected state
Actuation Engine
actuating
state changes
goal query
planner problem
 format
stop
Figure 3: A high level, conceptual view of the architecture of KMARF.
its functions in the order of speciﬁcation. We use de-
notational semantics to deﬁne the meaning of a func-
tion F as a set of ordered tuples
{< a1
1,...,a1
n−1,a1
n >,...,< am
1 ,...,am
n−1,am
n >},
where ai
1,...,ai
n−1 are function arguments, and ai
n is
the value returned by F given those arguments. A
function call F(a1,...,an−1,an) is the process of ﬁnd-
ing such an for given a1,...,an−1 that there is a tuple
< a j
1,...,aj
n−1,aj
n > in the deﬁnition of F for some j.
If there is no such tuple found, the function call fails.
Otherwise, the function call succeeds and the value
of aj
n is assigned to a corresponding variable. If the
returned value an is of boolean type, i.e. it belongs
to the set {true, false}, then the function succeeds if
an = true and fails if an = false. A computation suc-
ceeds if all the function calls in it succeed. Otherwise,
the computation fails.
The semantics of the transition action execution
are deﬁned by two operations. The ﬁrst operation in-
stantiates predicates in the action by applying com-
puted variable substitution to them. This means that
all the variables in the action predicates are replaced
with the corresponding values from the variable sub-
stitution. The second operation copies all the pred-
icates from the source state to the destination state,
and for every predicate in the action we perform the
following procedures on the destination state:
• if the instantiated predicate symbol is add, then its
argument is treated as a predicate, and it is added
to the destination state;
• if the instantiated predicate symbol is delete, then
its argument is treated as a predicate, and it is re-
moved from the destination state.
2.2
Architecture
After introducing the knowledge model, we can move
on describing KMARF. A high-level conceptual view
of the architecture of the framework is depicted in
Figure 3. The main components of KMARF are the
Perception Engine, the Knowledge Base, the Rea-
soner, the Interpreter and the Actuation Engine.
The Knowledge Base is responsible for represent-
ing aspects of the domain under consideration (such
as objects or concepts, instances and states) and their
relations, in well deﬁned, machine processable syn-
tax and unambiguous semantics. The format of the
knowledge stored in the knowledge base complies
with the knowledge model introduced in Section 2.1,
and one of the possible formats is RDF/OWL. In ad-
dition, the knowledge base contains meta-reasoning
expertise, as well as model transformation rules that
are described below.
The Reasoner is used for solving reasoning prob-
lems. By reasoning we mean solving problems re-
lated to planning, veriﬁcation, optimization, etc. By
relating a user query to a meta-reasoning expertise1
stored in the knowledge base the Inference Engine
draws a conclusion about an appropriate method or
a problem solver, and relevant prior knowledge for
solving a given problem. For example, if the user
query is to reach a certain goal, the inference en-
gine will look up the knowledge base and deduce
that a Planner should be used to generate a strat-
egy to reach that goal. Additionally, given that most
1Meta-reasoning is reasoning about reasoning, i.e., it is
comprised of computational processes concerned with the
operation and regulation of other computational processes
within the same entity (Wilson and Keil, 2001).

of the planners accept planning problems in Plan-
ning Domain Deﬁnition Language (PDDL) (Mcder-
mott et al., 1998) as their input, the inference engine
looks up corresponding model transformation rules
that should be applied to formulate the problem in a
format understandable by the selected planner. The
Interpreter takes the generated strategy and maps it to
state changes that it gives to the Actuation Engine, so
that it can perform actuation in the real world.
Since the physical world is not entirely predictable
KMARF needs to take into consideration that there
might be changes in the information stored in the
knowledge base. The Perception Engine is respon-
sible, when needed, to push new knowledge from the
environment (i.e., predicates) in the knowledge base.
Additionally, when executing the strategy the Inter-
preter works tightly with the Reasoner. In case there
are any changes in the expected state of the system the
Reasoner sends a replanning request to the Planner.
3
TAXONOMY OF ITS DOMAIN
CONCEPTS
This section describes the objects or the concepts of
ITS domain and their relation to more generic CPS
domain concepts. The concepts are organized in an
ontology that has multiple layers of abstraction. We
design our ontology by combining high level con-
cepts and cross-domain relationships borrowed from
three areas: CPS; Agent-Based Model (ABM); and
Systems-of-Systems (SoS). The proposed ontology
consists of an Upper Ontology, which contains the
CPS, ABM, and SoS concepts and relations and a
general ITS Domain Ontology. The general ITS Do-
main Ontology can be further referenced from ontolo-
gies that instantiate transport-domain speciﬁc transi-
tions and states, as described in Section 4.
The objective of breaking the ontology into mul-
tiple levels is twofold.
First, this approach allows
to capture and isolate different levels of properties,
attributes and relationships.
Higher layers provide
broader deﬁnitions and more abstract concepts, while
lower layers are less abstract and can support spe-
ciﬁc domains and applications with concepts and re-
lations which might not be present in the upper lev-
els. Second, ontologies are expected to change, grow
and evolve as new domains and techniques are con-
templated in them (Davies et al., 2006). Leaving the
more abstract and general concepts in an upper layer,
and the more speciﬁc ones in lower layers, reinforces
the idea that altering the most general concepts should
be avoided, making them less likely to suffer constant
modiﬁcations that could lead to unnecessary changes
throughout the ontology. This is important because
ontologies often reuse and extend other ontologies.
Updating an ontology without proper care can poten-
tially corrupt the others depending on it and conse-
quently all the systems that use it.
3.1
Upper Ontology
Upper ontologies should be designed to describe gen-
eral concepts that can be used across all domains.
They have a central role in facilitating interoperabil-
ity among domain speciﬁc ontologies, which are built
hierarchically underneath the upper and generic lay-
ers, and therefore can be seen as specialization of the
more abstract concepts.
Figure 4 presents a subset of the proposed up-
per ontology.
Its development was prompted by
our use cases in management and control of com-
plex systems-of-systems, and was inspired by other
ontologies such as SUMO (Suggested Upper Merg-
erd Ontology) (Niles and Pease, 2001), and W3C
SSN (Semantic Sensor Network Ontology) (Compton
et al., 2012).
Some important concepts deﬁned on the proposed
general ontology include System, Cyber-Physical Sys-
tem, Agent and CPS Agent. A System is a set of con-
nected parts forming a complex whole that can also
be used as a resource by other systems. A Cyber-
Physical System is a system with both physical and
computational components.
They deeply integrate
computation, communication and control into phys-
ical systems. An Agent is a system that can act on its
own, sense the environment and produce changes in
the world. When an agent is embedded into a cyber-
physical system it is called a CPS Agent, or cyber-
physical agent.
Important for mathematical desciptions of interre-
lations between systems are the elements Arc, Node
and Graph. Where an Arc is any element of a graph
that connects two Nodes, while a Graph is a set of
Nodes connected by Arcs.
The concept of System can be further expanded by
a number of attributes, such as Capacity, Role and Ca-
pability that can also have relationships among them.
The System itself is represented within the Declara-
tive Knowledge as an Object. Affordance is a prop-
erty the deﬁnes the tasks that can be done on a spe-
ciﬁc System, while Capability deﬁnes the set of tasks
the system can perform. Systems can also have Con-
straints, which in turn are related to KPIs that are used
to measure whether such constraints are satisﬁed.
The higher level of the proposed ontology also
provides deﬁnitions and relationships between the
main Knowlegde Base concepts, the Declarative and

Figure 4: An upper ontology for domain integration.
Figure 5: Knowledge Base representation.
Procedural Knowledge. In our knowledge model, a
Transition is a Procedural Knowledge concept that
determines how to achieve a certain state (Action)
given that an agent observes a particular state (Pre-
condition) as being true in the world and there is an
ordered list of effect free function calls in that state
(Computation). Meanwhile, both Precondition and
Action have a Predicate Set that is directly related to
the concept of State from the Declarative Knowledge.
The Goal State, which is an speciﬁcation of State, is
related to the concepts of Task and Workﬂow from the
Procedural Knowledge. Where a Workﬂow is deﬁned
as sequence of Tasks, which in turn is deﬁned by a
sequence of Goal States assigned to a single Agent.
Figure 5 presents the main elements of the knowledge
base modeling.
3.2
ITS Domain Ontology
With the support of the presented upper ontology
model, in this section we propose an ITS domain spe-
ciﬁc ontology, as depicted in Figure 6. One of the
Figure 6: The ITS Domain Ontology.
central concepts within the ITS domain is the Trans-
port Agent, that extends Agent from the upper ontol-
ogy. The Transport Agent encompasses agents that
are capable of transporting some entity, ranging from
physical goods to virtual data. Some important con-
cepts from the upper layers that apply to the Transport
Agent include Dynamics and Capacity, among others.
Transport Agents in turn are strongly related to the
Abstract concept of Transportation Mode which de-
ﬁnes the type of transportion scenario (e.g., Roads,
Rail, Telco).
Another important concept is the Transportation
Infrastructure which encompasses all elements re-
quired by a Transportation Mode, such as Routes,
Tracks and Transportation Networks. Most elements
within the Transportation Infrastructure are exten-
sions of Graph, Arc and Node, abstract concepts from
the Upper ontology. Therefore, by using high level
graph deﬁnitions it is possible to deﬁne most of the
transportation infrastructure in an ITS Domain.
A
node inside the transportation infrastructure is re-
ferred to as a POI (Point of Interest) and it can be any
desired location within the Transportation Network
(e.g., a crossing, a speciﬁc point in the route, coor-
dinate, a warehouse, a bus stop). A Trafﬁc Semaphore
is modeled as a generic Actuator that is used to con-
trol and regulate trafﬁc and it can be applied in any
transportation scenario.
A Transportable Entity encompasses any element
that can be transported by a Transport Agent, such as
regular Cargo or network Data. A typical Passenger
is also a Transportable Entity and extends the upper
ontology concept of Human.

Knowledge Base
PDDL Executor 
(third party)
Problem and 
Domain File 
Generator
PDDL Planner, PDDL 
Intepreter (third party)
domain_ﬁle.ttl
problem_ﬁle.ttl
Upper.ttl
ITS_Domain.ttl
transition_library.ttl
state_library.ttl
TransportPlanner
TR.ttl
Static Data
Reusable Data
- Transport 
Fleet Planner 
- Model 
Transformation 
Rules (TR) File
States and
Transition Files for
Bus Transport domain
User Data
busTransitions.ttl
busStates.ttl
Reference
Library Entities
Reference
Trigger
Replanning
Fleet Manager API:
Trigger Execution of new Plan
[transition ﬁle, state ﬁle, TR ﬁle]
Knowledge Engineer API:
Create New Transition and State File
with potential reference to reusable
transitions and states
[transition ﬁle, state ﬁle]
Environment: Connected 
Vehicles, Roadside Sensors 
and Actuators, …
Monitor, Actuate
Generated
Plan
Figure 7: Overview of the implemented system. The “.ttl” extension denotes model ﬁles in Turtle format. Components in
dotted rectangles are third-party.
4
IMPLEMENTATION
This section describes current progress towards a pro-
totype implementation of the KMARF architecture il-
lustrated in Figure 3. The implementation targets a
large problem area in ITS known as “transportation
planning”, which we deﬁne as the schedules gener-
ated for a set of vehicles to pickup and alight peo-
ple or cargo along one or more routes, within a given
amount of time (see also Section 1). The transport
planning problem includes a set of connected vehi-
cles, for example buses or trucks, and a central co-
ordinating function that computes the schedule and
transmits it to these vehicles2. In this implementa-
tion we assume that the Inference Engine component
has already deduced that a Planner should be used
to solve the transportation planning problem, using
meta-reasoning expertise and user query data sup-
plied from the Knowledge Base and the user interface
components respectively.
Figure 7 shows the components of the imple-
mented system. One of the components implemented
is the Knowledge Base, which contains model trans-
formation rules for PDDL language as well as states
& transition models that are based on the structure
deﬁned in Section 3 and contain information for the
2Correct interpretation of the schedule rests on the ve-
hicles, which can be partially or completely autonomous or
they may also have human drivers.
particular transport planning problem.
The mod-
els are described using semantic web technologies
and are based on the W3C Web Ontology Language
(OWL) (Hitzler et al., 2012) and stored in Turtle for-
mat (Beckett et al., 2014).
The other component
is a PDDL Generator, which, given the transforma-
tion rules, states & transition ﬁles as input, gener-
ates a problem and domain ﬁle in PDDL language.
PDDL Generator is implemented in Java (James et al.,
2015) and uses Apache Jena (Apache Foundation,
2016) for parsing the Turtle-formatted input from the
knowledge base. Additionally, Eclipse Jetty (Eclipse
Foundation, 2016) provides a Representational State
Transfer (REST) API for triggering PDDL ﬁle gener-
ation, and deﬁning custom states and transition mod-
els. More speciﬁcally:
• The API allows human experts (for example
knowledge engineers) to specify a transport logis-
tics problem, by adding a new initial and goal state
in the knowledge base, in the form of a state ﬁle,
and a set of transitions with precondition, com-
putation and action parts in the form of a transi-
tion ﬁle. These two ﬁles are jointly used by the
PDDL Generator software component in order to
generate a new schedule. The state ﬁle deﬁnes
the agents, vehicles and routes, contains informa-
tion about the initial state of the system (e.g., the
location of agents in the route, the route and its
waypoints, the time required for vehicles to travel

a route, etc.) and deﬁnes goal conditions (e.g., all
agents are serviced). The transitions ﬁle describes
intermediate transitions that are used by the plan-
ner to reach the speciﬁed goal state from the ini-
tial state. An example of such plan can be found
at (KMARF authors, 2016).
• The API also provides means for triggering gen-
eration of a new PDDL problem and domain ﬁle
given the above input on request of a human or
other system.
Typically this request is created
from a customer (e.g., human operator, or an au-
tomated ﬂeet management system).
Once gen-
erated, the ﬁles are assigned Universal Resource
Identiﬁers (URIs). An external system can sub-
sequently perform Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) GET requests using the URI references
to retrieve the ﬁles. An example of such a system
can be a PDDL solver3. For this implementation,
we use a third-party solver named “OPTIC”, orig-
inally developed by Benton et al (Benton et al.,
2012).
The authors have released the current implemen-
tation of the Knowledge Base and PDDL Genera-
tor as open-source, available for the community to
use (KMARF authors, 2016). Currently, there is no
component to support interaction with the real world,
both for triggering the planning process, but also for
actuating real-world connected devices (e.g. buses or
sensors) upon execution of the generated plan, how-
ever this is planned work.
In its current state the
implementation can be used for rapid prototyping of
transportation planning functions. In addition to the
software itself, the “Upper”, “ITS”, “PDDL model
transformation rules” and a set of common reusable
transitions and state ontologies are provided in Turtle
format.
5
EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the implemented system in
terms of reusability. Given the practical limitation of
not having a real or simulated testbed of connected ve-
hicles as described in the previous section, it is not yet
possible to evaluate some aspects of the system (e.g.
efﬁciency, performance, etc.) in realistic conditions.
What we describe instead is an evaluation of the ben-
eﬁts this system brings on “cost-of-design” (COD).
3In its current form, the API does not support adding
of new model transformation rules, which means that only
PDDL language is supported. In the future however, we
plan to expand the functionality by adding support for
“pluggable” problem solving expertise ﬁles, both for PDDL
and Prolog.
Table 1: Knowledge for transport plan generation.
Title
Description
Route Spec-
iﬁcation
Speciﬁcation
of
the
route(s)
graph(s), which includes vertices
(coordinates), edges (roads) and
edge-traversal costs, metrics (e.g.
time to travel, fuel spent, etc.)
Transport
Agents
Number of vehicles, Vehicle IDs
(e.g. VIN codes) and vehicle capac-
ity
Transportable
Entities
Number and ID of transportable en-
tities
Starting
Conditions
Where are the vehicles located,
where are the passengers located
Transition
deﬁnitions
What
transitions
the
transport
vehicles perform (which include
preconditions, optionally compu-
tations and actions) .
There are
currently three actions available
in the library: pickup-agent, drop-
agent, move-to-next-coordinate
Goal condi-
tions
Final state: what criteria needs to
be satisﬁed in order for the transport
service to conclude on the speciﬁed
route (usually this means that all
agents are picked up, off-boarded in
speciﬁc parts of the route).
We deﬁne COD as the effort required for formalizing
the knowledge required in order for the system to start
the automated transport schedule generation process.
Naturally, there exists a direct relationship between
the amount of knowledge to be formalized and the ef-
fort required, meaning that the more the amount of
non-formalized transport plan-related knowledge, the
more the required effort (e.g. in terms of time, human
resource allocation, money etc.). Table 1 shows the
different aspects of knowledge required for the trans-
portation plan. As described in Section 3, we view the
transport network as a graph, with Points of Interest
(POIs) as vertices on the graph and POI-connecting
roads as edges. Note that the table references “trans-
portable entities”. These entities can be passengers
or cargo, depending on the use case. An interesting
observation can be made regarding transitions, which
are similar regardless of the route, number and type
of transport agents (e.g., buses or trucks) and trans-
portable entities.
Therefore, reusing these actions
across different transport planning use cases, and stor-
ing them as part of the “transition library” (see Figure
7), is something that can potentially reduce COD.

To measure gains in COD, we have deﬁned a sim-
ple metric we named “reusability index”. This metric
is the ratio of reused entities, versus the ratio of total
entities in the knowledge input to PDDL Generator
to generate the plan. For the bus use case, this ratio
was 0.364 and for the truck use case, the ratio was
0.251. This means that out of the total number enti-
ties created for each of the bus and truck use cases,
36.4% and 25.1% of them were already available in
the library respectively. We observe that both indices
are relatively signiﬁcant, while the difference between
the two is mainly attributed to the difference of the
route speciﬁcation entities, as agents in both routes
followed different paths.
One observation that we
have made a posteriori to our measurements, is that
the reusability index can be larger, if the route speciﬁ-
cation is part of the PDDL Generator, which can auto-
matically generate the speciﬁcation using data from a
mapping service in conjunction with a routing library.
The knowledge engineer could then only specify the
desired waypoints (e.g., the bus stops), and the routes
and graphs would be generated automatically by the
PDDL Generator. We are currently in the process of
evaluating different mapping services such as Google
Maps and OpenStreetMap and open-source routing li-
braries such as GraphHopper and DirectionsService
for their applicability in our implementation.
6
RELATED WORK
A small number of frameworks exist that support the
formalization of declarative and procedural knowl-
edge. In (Vaquero et al., 2011) the authors present
an overview of tools and methods in KEPS (Knowl-
edge Engineering for Planning and Scheduling) area.
They classify the process of knowledge engineering
into six phases: Requirements Speciﬁcation, Knowl-
edge Modeling, Model Analysis, Deploying Model to
Planner, Plan Synthesis and Plan Analysis and Post-
Design. Then they provide a list of tools and methods
that are used in the literature at each of those phases.
When commenting on these tools, the authors men-
tion that to that moment none of them treated dif-
ferently the knowledge encapsulated in the planning
problem and in the surrounding domain, which makes
it harder to reuse knowledge in other domains. In con-
trast, the goal of KMARF is to exactly support reuse
of knowledge, by relying on a common knowledge
model across different domains.
KEWI (Wickler et al., 2015) is a knowledge engi-
neering tool that has been designed to help the formal-
ization of a procedural knowledge used for planning
problems. The idea is to enable domain experts to en-
code knowledge themselves, rather than using knowl-
edge engineers. The conceptual model of KEWI con-
sists of three main parts: an ontology for describing
entities that occur in the captured domain, a model of
primitive rules (called actions) that can be executed
by the system and high-level methods for accomplish-
ing complex tasks. KEWI is speciﬁcally developed
for planning problems, whereas our framework tar-
gets different classes of reasoning problems by shar-
ing the same underlying state representation, as for-
malized in our knowledge model.
The itSIMPLE tool was ﬁrst proposed in Vaquero
et al. (Vaquero et al., 2005) for supporting the cre-
ation of generic planning systems by integrating do-
main and procedural knowledge, while automatically
generating PDDL (Mcdermott et al., 1998) ﬁles. They
propose using UML for modeling domain knowledge
and Petri Nets for modeling the procedural knowl-
edge regarding feasible state transitions, while us-
ing XML as an internal language.
The tool has
since evolved (Vaquero et al., 2012) and has been
demonstrated in several cross-domain use cases, such
as petroleum plant operations planning (Sette et al.,
2008).
In fact, when developing a framework that in-
tends to combine knowledge engineering with multi-
ple declarative and procedural reasoning classes (such
as semantic reasoning and planning) one important
choice to make is the language (or languages) used
to model problems and the required information for
solving them. In (Anis et al., 2014) the authors com-
pare three classical languages for modeling problems
in the cyber-physical production systems, namely:
Prolog, Timed Automata (Alur and Dill, 1994) and
PDDL. Each language has its pros and cons, and can
be used for solving different reasoning problems. In
KMARF we provide a “glue” knowledge model that
depending on the reasoning problem to be solved is
intended to be translated to other languages, such as
Prolog, Timed Automata or PDDL.
Another related ﬁeld of work is the area of study
dealing with cognitive architectures, which are frame-
works that specify the underlying infrastructure for
an intelligent system and include aspects of a cog-
nitive agent that are constant over time and across
different application domains (Langley et al., 2009).
As such, they often include memory mechanisms for
storing and processing different types of knowledge,
e.g., procedural, semantic and episodic knowledge.
This knowledge is used as the basis for action selec-
tion, which can be reactive, based on planning or a
hybrid of these two. There are many cognitive ar-
chitectures (Samsonovich, 2010), each with its own
strategies and constraints when dealing with plan-

ning, acting, sensing and knowledge management.
Some of the most notorious ones are SOAR (Laird,
2012) and CLARION (Licato et al., 2014).
In
SOAR, for instance, procedural knowledge is repre-
sented by if-then rules in a manner somewhat similar
to the STRIPS (Stanford Research Institute Problem
Solver)/PDDL formalism, while semantic knowledge
about the world is represented in a graph held in work-
ing memory. CLARION on the other hand employs a
hybrid approach by integrating a rule based system
with artiﬁcial neural networks. KMARF has a num-
ber of similarities when compared to cognitive archi-
tectures. For instance, KMARF intends to improve
re-usability across different domains, which is also a
natural feature in biologically-based cognitive archi-
tectures. Another similarity is in knowledge represen-
tation since most cognitive architectures also organize
knowledge into either declarative memory or proce-
dural memory. Finally, intelligent agents based on
cognitive architectures are also known for perform-
ing a range of reasoning tasks such as planning and
veriﬁcation.
In our effort to provide KMARF with the capabil-
ity to reason about problems in different domains, we
have included in it a CPS based ontology which de-
scribes the relationships among CPS concepts. This
approach of using ontologies to increase generality
is well known and improves KMARF’s capability to
reuse knowledge in different domains.
One exam-
ple of related work can be seen in covering Multi-
Agent System (MAS) and CPS, as has been explored
in (Lin et al., 2010), where a MAS-based semantic
modeling approach to CPS in the water distribution
domain was described. The goal was to dynamically
integrate information from sensor networks with se-
mantic services to support real-time decision-making.
Two challenges were effectively addressed when de-
signing the ontology: model accuracy and integration
of physical and cyber components; and pinpointing
inter-dependencies between CPS components.
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented concepts and strate-
gies for creating a model for representing knowl-
edge from CPS and ITS domains in a machine-
readable form, as well as KMARF, a generic frame-
work for knowledge management and automated rea-
soning, integrating this knowledge model. The mo-
tivation behind the creation of the knowledge model
and KMARF is to demonstrate how knowledge and
methods across different domains can be reused to
reduce costs of development, deployment and oper-
ation of such systems. We have illustrated the usage
of parts of KMARF on an implementation of a gener-
ating transport planner, which can be used to rapidly
prototype schedulers of vehicle transport ﬂeets.
There are currently many different abstractions in
the literature for handling the design of complex real-
world systems, including Cyber-Physical Systems,
Agent-Based Model, and Systems-of-Systems engi-
neering, each of them accompanied by their own for-
malisms and theory. Our vision is that we can pro-
vide better support for linking cross-domain use case
applications by integrating the common elements of
those formalisms via our knowledge model.
In the implementation of KMARF we have so far
progressed into the development of an ontology for
the knowledge base using OWL Web Ontology Lan-
guage, and we have used the framework to automat-
ically generate PDDL ﬁles, feed them into a planner,
and create plans. Since, KMARF has a much bigger
vision than solving planning problems, in the future
we plan on studying how our knowledge model can be
correlated to other formalisms e.g., Timed Automata.
As future work, we also plan to study how meta-
reasoning can help KMARF to determine which prior
knowledge and algorithms are relevant when a new,
problem or unforeseen instance arrives. Such instance
corresponds to the current state of the world, along
with all current available sensory information. Ini-
tially, the system only knows how to solve problems it
has seen before and had previously found reductions
that could be solved separately using known proce-
dures. If it can not ﬁnd such a reduction for a new in-
stance, it must recur to space state exploration for gen-
erating a sequence of state transitions that either lead
to the speciﬁed goal state or to a better state in which
either the system knows how to proceed with further
reductions or declares the problem as intractable un-
der its current knowledge.
