1st Proceedings of Alexa Prize (Alexa Prize 2017). 
 
Conversational AI: The Science Behind the Alexa Prize 
 
 
      Ashwin Ram1 
      Rohit Prasad1 
       Chandra Khatri1          Anu Venkatesh1 
   Raefer Gabriel1             Qing Liu1                     Jeff Nunn1            Behnam Hedayatnia1 
      Ming Cheng1            Ashish Nagar1                Eric King1                    Kate Bland1 
  Amanda Wartick1            Yi Pan1                       Han Song1                  Sk Jayadevan1 
                                       Gene Hwang1               Art Pettigrue1 
 
 
 
1Amazon Alexa Prize 

Abstract 
Conversational agents are exploding in popularity. However, much work 
remains in the area of social conversation as well as free-form conversation 
over a broad range of domains and topics. To advance the state of the art in 
conversational AI, Amazon launched the Alexa Prize, a 2.5-million-dollar 
university competition where sixteen selected university teams were 
challenged to build conversational agents, known as “socialbots”, to converse 
coherently and engagingly with humans on popular topics such as Sports, 
Politics, Entertainment, Fashion and Technology for 20 minutes. The Alexa 
Prize offers the academic community a unique opportunity to perform 
research with a live system used by millions of users. The competition 
provided university teams with real user conversational data at scale, along 
with the user-provided ratings and feedback augmented with annotations by 
the Alexa team. This enabled teams to effectively iterate and make 
improvements throughout the competition while being evaluated in real-time 
through live user interactions. To build their socialbots, university teams 
combined state-of-the-art techniques with novel strategies in the areas of 
Natural Language Understanding, Context Modeling, Dialog Management, 
Response Generation, and Knowledge Acquisition. To support the teams’ 
efforts, the Alexa Prize team made significant scientific and engineering 
investments to build and improve Conversational Speech Recognition, Topic 
Tracking, Dialog Evaluation, Voice User Experience, and tools for traffic 
management and scalability. This paper outlines the advances created by the 
university teams as well as the Alexa Prize team to achieve the common goal 
of solving the problem of Conversational AI. 
 
1   Introduction 
Conversational AI is the study of techniques for software agents that can engage in natural 
conversational interactions with humans. Recently, conversational interfaces/assistants such 
as Amazon Alexa, Apple’s Siri, Google Assistant, and others have become a focal point in 
both academic and industry research because of their rapid market uptake and rapidly 
increasing range of capabilities. The first generation of these assistants have been focused on 
short, task-oriented dialogs, such as playing music or asking for information, as opposed to 
longer free-form conversations that occur naturally in social and professional human 
interaction. Achieving sustained, coherent and engaging dialog is the next frontier for 
conversational AI.  

 
 
2
Current state-of-the-art systems are still a long way from being able to have natural everyday 
conversations with humans (Levesque, 2017). There are several major challenges associated 
with building conversational agents: Conversational Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) for 
free-form speech, Natural Language Understanding (NLU) for multi-turn dialogs, 
Conversational Datasets and Knowledge Ingestion, Commonsense Reasoning, Context 
Modeling, Dialog Planning, Response Generation, Natural Language Generation (NLG), 
Sentiment Detection, Inappropriate Response Filtering (e.g. profanity, inflammatory opinions, 
inappropriate 
jokes, 
hate 
speech), 
Personalization, 
Conversation 
Evaluation, 
and 
Conversational Experience Design.  
Although conversational AI is still in its infancy, several leading university research teams are 
actively pushing research boundaries in this area (Weizenbaum, 1966; Sordoni et al., 2015; 
Vinyals et al., 2015). Access to large-scale data and real-world feedback can drive faster 
progress in research. To address this challenge, Amazon announced the Alexa Prize on 
September 26, 2016, with the goal of advancing research in Conversational AI. Through the 
Alexa Prize competition, participating universities were able to conduct research and test 
hypotheses by building socialbots were released to the general Alexa user base. Users 
interacted with socialbots via the “Alexa, let’s chat” experience, engaged in live conversations, 
and left ratings and feedback for teams at the end of their conversations. 
The university teams built socialbots using the Alexa Skills Kit (ASK, Kumar et al., 2017). 
Amazon did the ASR to convert user utterances to text and Text-To-Speech (TTS) to render 
text responses from socialbots in voice for the users. All intermediate steps, including NLU, 
Dialog Modeling, etc., were handled by socialbots, although teams were allowed to leverage 
the standard NLU system that is provided with ASK. Teams were also provided with live news 
feeds to enable their socialbots to stay current with popular topics and news events that users 
might want to talk about. The Alexa Prize team did conversational intent tracking, topic 
detection, offensive speech detection, conversational quality evaluation, traffic allocation, and 
scalability along with the Socialbot Invocation and Feedback Framework to enable live 
deployment to a large user base consisting of millions of Alexa customers.  
For evaluation, we decided not to focus on the Turing Test (Turing, 1950). The goal was not 
to ask users to guess whether they were speaking with an AI agent or to get it to reveal itself 
through clever questioning. Users knew that the conversationalist at the other end was a 
machine; the goal, instead, was to enable users to have the best conversations that they could, 
conversations that were coherent, relevant, interesting, and kept users engaged as long as 
possible. We expect the grand challenge of 20 minute conversations will take multiple years 
to achieve, and the Alexa Prize was set up as a multi-year competition to enable sustained 
research on this problem. 
Despite the difficulty of the challenge, it is extremely encouraging and satisfying to see the 
work the inaugural cohort of the Alexa Prize has done and what they have achieved at the end 
of year one of the competition. This paper describes the scientific and engineering 
advancements brought by university teams as well as the Alexa Prize team over the course of 
the year. Section 2 provides information on the conversational experience that was designed 
for Alexa users to interact with and provide feedback to the socialbots, as well as the developer 
experience for university teams participating in the competition. Sections 3 and 4 describe the 
software frameworks and architecture developed to support the competition. In Section 5 we 
describe the scientific advancements made on several problems in Conversational AI, and 
Section 6 provides results and findings.  
 
2   Customer Experience 
The Alexa Prize team focused on enhancing the customer experience (CX) for two customer 
groups. The first were the Alexa customers, who were the end-users for university socialbots. 
The second was the university teams building the socialbots. This section describes the 
approaches taken to anticipate, meet, and address the needs of each group. 
 
 

 
 
3
2.1   CX for Alexa Users 
While the Alexa Prize had clear scientific goals and objectives, Alexa users played a key role of 
providing feedback on the socialbots and helping us determine which socialbots were the most 
coherent and engaging by rating their interactions. With these users driving the direction and result 
of the competition, it was important for us to make sure the Alexa Prize experience was easy to 
interact with, that we acquired and retained a high volume of users to ensure the teams received the 
data points and feedback needed to improve their socialbots. 
For customer experience, we didn’t want users to individually enable, interact with, and keep track 
of 15 different socialbots. We also needed to set expectations with users that they were interacting 
with early-stage systems that were still in development and not necessarily as polished as a finished 
product would be. In addition, we wanted to be able to randomize socialbots without revealing their 
identity in order to receive unbiased ratings from users. To accomplish these goals, we designed and 
implemented the Alexa Prize skill with a natural invocation phrase that is easy to remember (“Alexa, 
let’s chat”, “Alexa, let’s chat about <topic>”, and common variants). The user heard a short editorial 
that educated them about Alexa Prize and instructed them on how to end the conversation and 
provide ratings and feedback. The editorial changed as needed to keep the information relevant to 
different phases of the competition. We kept it succinct and interesting so we would not lose the 
user’s attention before they even had a chance to speak with a socialbot. The editorial and 
instructions changed as needed to keep the information relevant to the different phrases. For 
example, at the initial public launch on May 8, 2017, when the 15 socialbots were still in their 
infancy, the Alexa Prize skill started with the following editorial: “Hi! Welcome to the Alexa Prize 
Beta. I'll get you one of the socialbots being created by universities around the world. When you're 
done chatting, say stop.”  
After listening to the editorial, the user was handed off to one of the competing socialbots selected 
at random. The socialbots were certified as ASK skills and included in the Alexa Prize skill. 
Socialbots began the conversation with a common introduction phrase (“Hi, this is an Alexa Prize 
socialbot”) without revealing their identity. The user could exit at any time, and was prompted to 
provide a verbal rating (“How do you feel about speaking with this socialbot again?”) and offer 
additional freeform verbal feedback without knowing which socialbot they interacted with. Ratings 
and feedback were provided to individual teams to help them improve their socialbots. 
When the Alexa Prize experience launched, we had to ensure that the socialbots received a high 
volume of usage data to train and improve their models despite the fact that their conversational 
ability was still rudimentary. There was considerable mainstream press and media following the 
announcement of the Alexa Prize on September 26, 2017, and every effort was made by the Alexa 
Prize team to maintain awareness of the challenge and the upcoming opportunity for Alexa users to 
become a partner in the process. Amazon promoted the competition, and Alexa Prize team worked 
to design exit editorials that would encourage users to provide feedback by (initially) asking them 
to help university teams improve their experience and (for semifinals) asking them to help evaluate 
socialbots and select finalists. The Alexa Prize experience was promoted through Alexa customer 

engaged up to the Alexa Prize finals.  
The carefully timed promotions resulted in high traffic during key phases of the completion. We 
provided load testing and scalability tools and assistance to teams to help them scale to high levels 
of production traffic. During the semifinals phase, which took place from July 1 to August 15, 2017, 
Alexa users helped determine which socialbots would advance to the final round based upon their 
feedback ratings. In total, users had over 40,000 hours of conversations spanning millions of 
interactions over the course of the competition from public launch on May 8, 2017, to finalists’ code 
freeze on November 7, 2017.  
 
2.2 
CX for University Teams 
Students and faculty working on the competition were key customers for Alexa Prize, and we 
engaged with them as developer partners. To support socialbot development, the teams were 

 
 
4
provided with unique access to Amazon Alexa resources, technologies, and personnel. The 
resources are outlined below. 
 
2.2.1 
Alexa Prize Summit 
By April 2017, teams had submitted their socialbots for ASK certification after receiving signoff 
from their faculty advisor. Following certification, all Alexa Prize teams were invited to participate 
in an Alexa Prize Summit hosted at the Amazon headquarters in Seattle, WA. The summit included 
keynotes and deep-dive tracks on ML (machine learning) and AI, conversational experience design, 
marketing strategies, and access to senior Alexa leadership, scientists, engineers, designers, and 
marketers as well as invited speakers from Prime Air and NPR. Teams participated in 1:1 
consultations on their socialbots, and attended 14 breakout sessions hosted by teams across Alexa 
and AWS (Amazon Web Services). Social events allowed students and faculty to further develop 
professional relationships with Alexa employees, our Alexa Prize team, and with each other. 
 
2.2.2   Shared Resources and Tools 
Data and engineering resources shared with university teams includes:  
News and current topics:  
• 
Washington Post Live Data API with access to news articles and reader comments, 
including annotated entities (people, places, organizations, and themes) from the articles. 
• 
List of popular and current topics, generated on a nightly basis from a variety of 
information sources.  
• 
CAPC (Common Alexa Prize Chats), a dataset of frequent chats (individual dialog turns) 
that customers have with Alexa Prize socialbots, e.g. “What’s your favorite sport” or “Tell 
me about Game of Thrones”. The chats were anonymized and aggregated across all 
customers, socialbots, and conversations. CAPC was limited to Alexa Prize conversations, 
and includes only anonymized and aggregated information across Alexa users. The dataset 
did not contain any customer- or socialbot-specific information, but instead represented 
frequent topics and interactions that users were having with Alexa Prize socialbots.  
ASR (Automatic Speech Recognition) data: 
• 
Access to tokenized n-best ASR hypotheses (based on our Conversational ASR model) 
from interactions with a socialbot, including confidence scores for each token. 
• 
Blacklist of offensive/profane words based on our profanity detector module.  
Customer feedback data: 
• 
Key metrics including customer ratings of socialbot conversations, median and 90th 
percentile conversation duration, average number of dialog turns per conversation, and an 
anonymized leaderboard with average metrics for all socialbots. 
• 
Transcriptions of freeform user feedback at the end of conversations with the team’s 
socialbot. 
• 
Hundreds of thousands of randomly selected Alexa Prize interactions annotated by trained 
data analysts for correctness, contextual coherence, and interestingness. 
• 
Daily customer experience report cards during the final feedback phase, including metrics 
for turn-level coherence and engagement, user ratings for conversations on various topics 
(e.g. Movies_TV, Sports), and common user experience gaps.  
Infrastructure: 
• 
Free AWS services, including but not limited to: 
o 
GPU-based virtual machines for building models 
o 
SQL/NoSQL databases 
o 
Object-based storage with Amazon S3 
• 
Custom ASR model tuned for conversational data. 

 
 
5
• 
Custom end-pointing and extended recognition timeouts for longer free-form 
conversational interactions with Alexa. 
• 
Load testing and scalability tools and architectural guidance. 
Support: 
In addition to data and infrastructure, we engaged with university teams in several ways to provide 
support and feedback:  
• 
Best practices guidelines for design of engaging conversational experiences. 
• 
An additional Amazon-only internal beta phase, to provide traffic from Amazon employees 
to help inform and improve socialbot performance before general availability to all Alexa 
users. 
• 
Detailed report cards on initial socialbot experiences prior to public launch. These were 
annotated for coherence and engagement, along with the ability of socialbots to maintain 
anonymity of users and themselves, and handle profanity, controversial utterances and 
other inappropriate interactions.  
• 
Biweekly office hours for 1:1 consultations and deep dives with a dedicated Alexa Prize 
Solutions Architect, Product Manager, and members of Alexa Machine Learning science 
teams. 
• 

 
3   Socialbot Management Framework 
3.1   Invocation and Feedback Framework  
The “Alexa, let’s chat” experience connects a user with one of the socialbots competing for the 
Alexa Prize. After the conversation ends, the user is asked to provide a one-to-five star rating as 
well as free-form voice feedback to be shared with the corresponding university team. The welcome 
and feedback systems are implemented as a separate Alexa skills, with handoffs between them 
coordinated through a framework called Links that can be used to seamlessly combine multi-stage 
conversational experiences. The feedback system uses a tuned ASR model to ensure high accuracy 
on user ratings; for semifinals, all ratings were also validated through manual transcription. 
While initially we had planned to collect integer ratings, analysis of rating data showed that many 
users prefer to leave fractional number ratings, such as “three and a half”. To improve the accuracy 
of rating capture, we added support for fractional numbers. Ratings and freeform feedback on each 
conversation were shared daily with teams to drive incremental model improvements.  
 
3.2   Uptime Measurement and Availability Monitoring  
Uptime measurement and availability monitoring are key to delivering a successful experience to 
millions of Alexa users that maintains reliability even if one or more of the socialbots is 
malfunctioning or offline, which was a significant concern given the complexity of many socialbot 
implementations and the volume of live user traffic. We developed a monitoring system that collects 
availability metrics on each socialbot and removes socialbots that are not responding properly to 
user input from the Alexa Prize experience in real time. This was achieved with a combination of 
passive monitoring for failure modes in user traffic, as well as active monitoring via simulated traffic 
to each socialbot. A notification and reminder system, with self-service reactivation, encouraged the 
Alexa Prize competitors to rapidly respond to any issues in their socialbot and bring them back 
online as soon as possible. The system also enabled us to deactivate socialbots that produced 
inappropriate responses. To provide time for issue resolution and testing, socialbots that were taken 
offline were required to wait at least 6 hours before being restored to the Alexa Prize experience.  
 
3.3   Managing Customer Experience (CX) 
During the early feedback phase of the competition, the quality of the 15 socialbots was highly 
variable. In order to ensure that users had a good experience interacting with Alexa Prize, traffic 

 
 
6
was allocated in proportion to the average user ratings over various timescales. In addition, traffic 
was reduced to socialbots who had difficulty in handling the large amount of traffic. We modeled 
and developed a weighted randomized traffic allocation system that enabled us to achieve a 
significantly higher average customer experience than a pure pro rata traffic allocation would 
provide while maintaining sufficient traffic to all socialbots to drive improvements. As socialbots 
improved in quality and scalability, they received more traffic. During semifinals, all socialbots 
received equal traffic for evaluation purposes.  
We also placed proactive guardrails on topics about which socialbots could converse with Alexa 
users. If a user initiated a conversation about an inappropriate topic, such as sex, socialbots 
redirected the conversation by suggesting topics they could chat about. To mitigate risks of 
socialbots trained on potentially problematic data sets with profane or offensive content, such as 
some publicly available datasets on the Internet, we developed a system to monitor conversations 
for profane or offensive responses from socialbots. In such cases, the socialbot was deactivated and 
the notification and reminder system mentioned earlier was used to notify the team and allow them 
to reactivate it after they had addressed the issue. We also encouraged teams to proactively cleanse 
datasets and ensure that they were using sufficiently broad filters in selecting appropriate responses 
to users, minimizing the chance of causing offense. Overall, the frequency of such incidents 
remained low over the course of the competition. 
While our initial content monitoring system was based on a blacklist mechanism, we also made 
initial strides toward building a more sensitive and contextually aware classifier to identify 1) 
profane content, 2) sexual content, 3) racially inflammatory content, 4) other hate speech, and 5) 
violent content. This system will be integrated into future Alexa Prize competitions from the outset 
as they are key to ensuring a positive customer experience for end users. 
 
4   Architecture 
This section describes architectural and design choices made by the university teams in developing 
their socialbots, as well as challenges pertaining to scalability. Our engineers and solutions architect 
worked with the teams to provide guidance on best practices, but teams were free to develop 
alternative approaches if they desired. 
 
4.1   Summary of architectural approaches 
Socialbots were implemented as Alexa skills using the Alexa Skills Kit (ASK). When a user spoke 
with their Alexa device, Alexa ASR was used to create a JSON-formatted payload containing the 
user utterance, and was sent to the socialbot’s AWS Lambda endpoint for further processing (raw 
audio was not shared). Teams could use ASK APIs for NLU and/or develop their own. The socialbot 
generated a response, which was delivered back to ASK, converted to speech using Alexa TTS, and 
played back through the user’s Alexa device. Teams took one of two approaches to generate a 
response to a user’s utterance: 
• 
Functions residing within AWS Lambda were used to do the dialog management and other 
processing to retrieve or generate a response, which was then returned to ASK for TTS 
• 
AWS Lambda served as a proxy for the utterance and response, passing the utterance to 
backend processes for dialog management and retrieval or generation of a response, which 
was then returned to AWS Lambda and back to ASK for TTS 
In both cases, teams built and trained models on GPU instances on Amazon EC2, the elastic compute 
infrastructure for Amazon Web Services. Teams then performed inference using the models on 
either Lambda or directly on an EC2 instance. For teams that used Lambda as a proxy to backend 
processes, the Flask micro-framework for Python (Flask, 2017) was the most common method used 
to receive the utterance and manage the collection and return of the response. 
Many teams took a modular approach to organizing their dialog management by using ensemble of 
groups of one or more Amazon EC2 instances dedicated to a single task (e.g. news retrieval, facts, 
question-answer, weather, etc.). Responses received from these modules were then ranked by a 
dialog manager and returned to ASK in the form of a text response.  In many cases, university teams 

 
 
7
took advantage of Amazon DynamoDB to store session and conversational state, or to provide a 
topic index for retrieving news or other information. 
 
4.2   Scalability challenges 
During the competition, multiple load tests were conducted to evaluate the scalability of socialbots, 
in which a sustained amount of artificial traffic was sent to each with the goal of identifying choke 
points within the system. We developed a load testing tool to specifically target individual socialbots 
at a particular rate per second for each test. Systems that exhibited the best resiliency to failure were 
often those that did the majority of their processing inside Lambda and not on EC2 instances. 
Favoring DynamoDB (a NoSQL database) over traditional SQL databases was also a common 
feature found in teams that were able to stay functional under increased load. One common finding 
during initial load testing was that while Flask made it very easy for teams to proxy requests through 
a web service, Flask didn’t scale well in its default configuration. By using a WSGI web server like 
Gunicorn to serve Flask-developed services, teams were able to use multiple threads and handle a 
significantly higher transaction volume. Some teams employed caching clusters using Memcached 
or Redis to provide responses to common cached utterances without the expense of processing the 
utterance within their system.  
 
5   Science 
Many scientific advancements were made during the competition this year to advance the state of 
Conversational AI. Key contributions are summarized below.  
 
5.1   Conversational Automatic Speech Recognition 
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) is one of the core components of voice based assistants. Sano 
et al., 2017 and Hassan et al., 2015 performed an extensive analysis on identifying the causes of 
reformulation (users repeating if the purpose is not served in past utterance) in intelligent voice 
based assistants, and they found that one of the main causes of errors is ASR. Conversations, or 
free-form speech, do not necessarily fit a command-like structure and the space of plausible word 
combinations is much larger. In addition, social conversations are informal, open-ended, contain 
many topics and have a high out-of-vocabulary rate. Furthermore, production-grade ASR 
approaches must deal with a much wider array of noise and environmental conditions than the 
conditions in normalized research datasets often reported on in the literature in this field, particularly 
with in-home environments where Alexa devices are typically used. All of these challenges make 
Conversational ASR a challenging problem.  
We developed a custom Language Model (LM) targeted specifically at open-ended conversations 
with socialbots and whitelisted teams to use this model for the competition. In addition to using 
publicly available conversational datasets such as Fisher, Switchboard, Reddit comments, 
(Linguistic Data Consortium) LDC news, OpenSubtitles, Yelp reviews, etc., and the Washington 
Post news data provided for the competition, we incrementally added hundreds of thousands of 
Alexa Prize utterances transcribed over the course of the competition to our dataset. Alexa Prize 
transcriptions were also used to tune the LM. Performance of the model improved significantly on 
conversational test sets over the course of the competition. Figure 1 provides the relative 
improvement in word error rate (WER), which reduced by nearly 33% relative to the base model 
over the course of the competition.  
 

 
 
8
 
 
Figure 1 Conversational ASR performance improvement: Relative reduction in WER with respect 
to base model. 
 
5.2   Natural Language Understanding (NLU)  
The following NLU components were developed during the Alexa Prize competition. 
 
5.2.1   Conversation Intent 
In order to connect an Alexa user with a socialbot, we first need to identify if the user’s intent 
is to have a conversation with Alexa. We introduced a “Conversation Intent” within the default 
Alexa NLU model to recognize a range of utterances such as “let’s chat”, “let’s talk”, “let’s chat 
about <topic>”, etc. using a combination of grammars and statistical models. We further expanded 
the experience to other natural forms of conversational initiators such as “what are we going to talk 
about”, “can we discuss politics”, “do you want to have a conversation about the Mars Mission”, 
etc. In production, if an utterance from Alexa user is identified as “Conversation Intent”, one of the 
Alexa Prize socialbots is invoked and the user interacts with that bot till the user says “stop”.  
The remaining components described below formed the core of the conversational agents and were 
developed by Alexa Prize teams using various approaches. The approaches are summarized here; 
details are available in individual papers by the teams. 
 
5.2.2   NLU Techniques for Dialogs 
After the user has initiated a conversation, the socialbot requires an NLU system to identify semantic 
and syntactic elements from the user utterance, including user intent (such as opinion, chit-chat, 
knowledge, etc.), entities and topics (e.g. the entity “Mars Mission” and the topic “space travel” 
from the utterance: “what do you think about the Mars Mission”), user sentiment, as well as sentence 
structure and parse information. A certain level of understanding is needed to generate responses 
that align well with user intent and expectation and maximize user satisfaction. 
 
NLU is difficult because of the complexities inherent in human language, such as anaphora, elision, 
ambiguity and uncertainty, which require contextual inference in order to extract the necessary 
information to formulate a coherent response. These problems are magnified in Conversational AI 
since it is an open domain problem where a conversation can be on any topic or entity and the 
content of the dialog can also change rapidly. Socialbot teams developed several NLU components 
to address these issues:  
• 
Named Entity Recognition (NER): Identifying and extracting entities (names, organizations, 
locations, etc.) from user utterances. Teams used various libraries such as StanfordCoreNLP 
(Manning et al., 2014), SpaCy (Honnibal et al., 2016), Google NLP (Google NLP API, 2017) 
and Alexa’s ASK NLU to perform this task. NER is helpful for retrieving relevant information 
for response generation, as well as for tracking conversational context over multiple turns. 
• 
Intent Detection: Intents represent the goal of a user for a given utterance, and the dialog 
system needs to detect it to act and respond appropriately to that utterance. Some of the teams 

 
 
9
built rules for intent detection or trained models in a supervised fashion by collecting the data 
from Amazon Mechanical Turk or by using open-source datasets such as Reddit Comments 
with a set of intent classes. Others utilized Alexa’s ASK NLU engine for intent detection. 
• 
Anaphora and Co-reference Resolution: Finding expressions that refer to the same entity in 
past or current utterances. Anaphora resolution is important for downstream tasks such as 
question answering and information extraction in multi-turn dialog systems. 
• 
Sentence Completion: Some teams expanded user utterances with contextual information. For 
example, “Yes” can be transformed to “Yes, I love Michael Jackson” when uttered in the 
context of a question about the singer, or “I love Michael Jackson” can be extended to “I love 
Michael Jackson, singer and musician” in a conversation where this entity needs 
disambiguation. 
• 
Topic and Domain Detection: Classifying the topic (e.g. “Seattle Seahawks”) or domain (e.g. 
Sports) from a user utterance. Teams used various datasets to train topic detection models, 
including news datasets, Twitter, and Reddit comments. Some teams also collected data from 
Amazon Mechanical Turk to train these models. 
• 
Entity Linking: Identifying information about an entity. Teams generally used publicly 
available knowledge bases such as Evi (Evi, 2017), FreeBase (Bollacker et al., 2008), Microsoft 
Concept Graph (Concept, 2017), etc. These knowledge bases can also be used to identify related 
entities.  
• 
Text Summarization: Extracting or generating key information from documents for efficient 
retrieval and response generation. Some of the teams adopted this technique for efficient 
response generation. 
• 
Sentiment Detection: Identifying user sentiment. Some teams developed sentiment detection 
modules to help with generating engaging responses. This can also help to better understand a 
user’s intent and generate appropriate responses.   
A robust NLU system simplifies the job for the dialog manager. For the Alexa Prize competition, 
the top performing teams all made extensive use of NLU capabilities. 
 
5.3   Conversational Datasets, Commonsense Reasoning and Knowledge Ingestion  
Currently available conversational data is limited to datasets that have been produced from 
online forums (e.g. Reddit), social media interactions (e.g. Twitter), and movie subtitles (e.g. 
Cornell Movie Dialogs (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lee, 2011), OpenSubtitles). While 
these datasets are useful at capturing syntactic and semantic elements of conversational 
interactions, many have issues with data quality, content (profanity, offensive data), tracking 
query-response pairs, context tracking, multiple users interacting without a specific order, and 
short and ephemeral conversations. To address the limitations mentioned above, we 
emphasized early availability of live user interactions. Through the duration of the 
competition, Alexa users had millions of interactions over more than 40,000 hours of 
conversations with socialbots. Teams used user interactions with their socialbots to evaluate 
and improve the quality of their socialbots iteratively.  
For commonsense reasoning, several teams built modules to understand user intent. Some 
teams pre-processed open source and Alexa Prize datasets and extracted information about 
trending topics and opinions on popular topics, preparing long and short-term memory and 
integrating them within their dialog manager to make the responses seem as natural as 
possible. To complement commonsense reasoning, some of the top teams added user 
satisfaction modules to improve engagement along with coherence of conversations. 
The teams used various knowledge bases including Amazon’s Evi, Freebase, Wikidata 
(Wikidata, 2017), Microsoft Concept Graph, Google Knowledge Graph, and IMDb for 
retrieving general knowledge, facts and news, and for general question answering. Some teams 
also used these sources for entity linking, sentence completion and topic detection. Ideally, a 
socialbot should be able to ingest and update its knowledge base automatically; however, this 
is an unsolved problem and an active area of research. Finally, teams also ingested information 
from news sources such as Washington Post news and CNN to keep current with news events 
that users may want to chat about. 

 
 
10 
5.4   Dialog and Context Modeling  
A key component of a conversational agent is a robust system to handle dialogs effectively. The 
system should accomplish two main tasks: help breakdown the complexity of the open domain 
problem to a manageable set of interaction modes, and be able to scale as topic diversity/breadth 
changes. A common strategy for dialog modeling is a hierarchical architecture with a main Dialog 
Manager (DM) and multiple smaller DMs corresponding to specific tasks, topics, or contexts.  
Some teams, such as Sounding Board, used a hierarchical architecture and added additional modules 
such as an error handler to handle cases such as low-confidence ASR output or low-confidence 
response candidates. Other teams, such as Alquist (Pichl et al., 2017), used a structured topic-based 
dialog manager, where components were broken up by topics, along with intent-based dialog 
modules broken up by intents. Generally, teams also incorporated special-purpose modules such as 
a profanity/sensitivity module to filter a range of inappropriate responses and modules to address 
feedback and acknowledgement and to request clarity/rephrasing from users. Teams experimented 
with approaches to track context and dialog states, and corresponding transitions to maintain dialog 
flow. For example, Alquist and Slugbot (Bowden et al., 2017) modeled dialog flow as a state graph. 
These and other techniques helped socialbots produce coherent responses in an on-going multi-turn 
conversation as well as guide the direction of the conversation as needed. Few teams such as Magnus 
(Prabhumoye et al., 2017) even built Finite State Machines (FSMs) (Wright, 2005) for addressing 
specific modules such as Movies, Sports, etc. For small and static modules FSMs can be useful, 
however using this technique for dynamic components can be challenging as they don’t scale well 
and context switching is harder. 
The top teams focused not just on response generation but also on customer experience, and 
experimented with conversational strategies to increase engagement. Socialbots received an 
obfuscated user hashcode to enable personalization for repeat users, and some teams, such as Edina 
(Damonte et al., 2017), added a level of personalization to their DM to track if a certain topic or 
type of response is doing particularly well with a user. Few teams such e.g. Edina  added engagement 
modules that attempted to lead the conversation through various means like news delivery, 
discussion on opinions, and in some cases, quizzes and voice games. Several teams (e.g. Sounding 
Board (Fang et al., 2017), MILABot (Serban et al., 2017), etc.) implemented a dissatisfaction and 
sentiment module based on user responses. Effective engagement strategies, when deployed 
judiciously along with response generation (see next section), context tracking and dialog flow 
modules, led to significant improvements in user ratings.  
 
5.5   Response Generation  
There are four main types of approaches for response generation in dialog systems: template/rule-
based, retrieval, generative, and hybrid. A functional system can be an ensemble of these techniques, 
or follow a waterfall structure (e.g. rules à retrieval à generative) or use a hybrid approach with 
complementary modules (e.g. retrieval using generative models, generative models to create 
templates for a retrieval or rule-based module, etc.) Most of the teams used AIML, ELIZA 
(Weizenbaum, 1966), or Alicebot (Alicebot, 2017) for rule-based and templated responses. Teams 
also built retrieval-based modules which tried to identify an appropriate response from the dataset 
of dialogs available. Retrieval was performed using techniques such as N-gram matching, entity 
matching, or similarity based on vectors such as TF-IDF, word/sentence embeddings, skip-thought 
vectors, dual-encoder system, etc. 
Hybrid approaches leveraging retrieval in combination with generative models are fairly new and 
have shown promising results in the past couple of years, usually with sequence-to-sequence 
approaches with some variants. Some of the Alexa Prize teams created novel techniques along these 
lines and demonstrated scalability and relevance for open-domain response generation deployed 
models in production systems. MILABot, for example, devised a Hierarchical Latent Variable 
Encoder-Decoder (VHRED) (Serban et al., 2016) model in addition to other Neural Network models 
such as Dual Encoder (Luan et al. 2016) and Skip Thought (Kiros et al. 2015) to produce hybrid 
retrieval-generative candidate responses. Few teams (e.g. Pixie, Adewale et al., 2017) used  a two-
level Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network (Hochreiter et al., 1997) for retrieval. EigenBot 

 
 
11 
(Guss et al., 2017) and Ruby Star (Liu et al., 2017), on the other hand, used Dynamic Memory 
Networks (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015), Character-Level Recursive Neural Networks (RNN) (Sutskever 
et al., 2011) and Word-based Sequence-to-Sequence Models (Klein et al., 2017) for generating 
responses respectively. Alquist used a Sequence-to-Sequence model (Sutskever et al., 2014) 
specifically for their chit-chat module. While the above-mentioned teams deployed the generative 
models in production, other teams also experimented with generative and hybrid approaches offline.  
 
5.6   Ranking and Selection Techniques 
Open-domain social conversations do not always have a specific goal or target, and the response 
space can be unbounded. There may be multiple valid responses for a given utterance; identifying 
the response which will lead to highest customer satisfaction and help in driving the conversation 
forward is a challenging problem. Socialbots need mechanisms to rank possible responses and select 
the best response that is likely to achieve the goal of having coherent and engaging conversations. 
Alexa Prize teams attempted to solve this problem with either rule-based or model-based strategies.  
For teams that experimented with rule-based rankers, the ranker chooses a response from the 
candidate responses obtained from sub-modules (e.g. topical modules, intent modules, etc.) based 
on some logic. For model-based strategies, teams utilized either a supervised or reinforcement 
learning approach, trained on user ratings (Alexa Prize data) or on pre-defined large-scale dialog 
datasets such as Yahoo Answers, Reddit commentaries, Washington Post Live comments, 
OpenSubtitles, etc. The ranker was trained to provide higher scores to correct responses (e.g. follow-
up comments on Reddit are considered correct responses) while ignoring incorrect or non-coherent 
responses obtained by sampling. Alana (Papaioannou et al., 2017), for example, trained a ranker 
function on Alexa Prize ratings data and combined that with a separate ranker function that used 
hand-engineered features. Teams using a reinforcement learning approach developed frameworks 
where the agent is a ranker, the actions are the candidate responses obtained from sub-modules, and 
the agent is trying to maximize the tradeoff between satisfying the customer immediately versus 
taking into account the long-term reward of selecting a certain response. MILABot, for example, 
used this approach and trained a reinforcement learning ranker function on conversation ratings. 
The above components form the core of socialbot dialog systems. In addition, we developed the 
following components to support the competition. 
 
5.7   Conversational Topic Tracker 
Alexa Prize conversational data is highly topical because of the nature of the social conversations. 
Alexa users interacted with socialbots on hundreds of thousands of topics in various domains such 
as Sports, Politics, Entertainment, Fashion, and Technology. This is a unique dataset collected from 
millions of human-conversational agent interactions. We identified the need for a conversational 
topic tracker for various purposes such as conversation evaluation, sentiment analysis, entity 
extraction, profanity detection, and response generation. To detect conversation topics in an 
utterance, we adopted Deep Average Networks (DAN) (Iyyer et al., 2015) and trained a topic 
classifier on interaction data categorized into multiple topics. We proposed a novel extension by 
adding topic-word attention to formulate an attention-based DAN (ADAN) (Guo et al., 2017) that 
allows the system to jointly capture topic keywords in an utterance and perform topic classification. 
We fine-tuned the model on the data collected during the course of the competition. The accuracy 
of the model was obtained to be 82.4% on 26 topical classes (Sports, Politics, Movies_TV, etc.). 
We plan to make this model available to Alexa Prize teams in the next year of the competition.  
  
5.8   Inappropriate and Offensive Speech Detection 
One of the most challenging aspects of delivering a positive experience to end users in socialbot 
interactions is obtaining high quality conversational data. The most commonly used datasets used 
to train dialog models are sourced from internet forums (e.g., Reddit, Twitter) or movie subtitle 

 
 
12 
databases (e.g., OpenSubtitles, Cornell Movie Dialogs). These sources are all conversational in 
structure in that they can be transformed into utterance-response pairs. However, the tone and 
content of these datasets are often inappropriate for interactions between users and conversational 
agents, particularly when individual utterance-response pairs are taken out of context. In order to 
effectively use dialog models based on this or other dynamic data sources, an efficient mechanism 
to identify and filter different types of inappropriate and offensive speech is required. 
We identified several (potentially overlapping) classes of inappropriate responses: 1) profanity, 2) 
sexual responses, 3) racially offensive responses, 4) hate speech 5), insulting responses, and 6) 
violent responses (inducements to violent acts or threatening responses). We explored keyword and 
pattern matching strategies, but these are subject to poor precision (with a broad list) or poor recall 
(with a carefully curated list). We tested a variety of Support Vector Machines and Bayesian 
classifiers trained on N-gram features using labeled ground truth data. The best accuracy results 
were in profanity (>97% at 90% recall), racially offensive responses (96% at 70% recall), and 
insulting responses (93% at 40% recall). More research is needed to develop effective offensive 
speech filters. In addition to dataset cleansing, an offensive speech classifier is also needed for online 
filtering of candidate socialbot responses prior to outputting them to ASK for text-to-speech 
conversion.  
 
5.9   Conversation Evaluation 
Social conversations are inherently open-ended. For example, if a user asks the question “what do 
you think of Barack Obama?”, there are hundreds of distinct, valid, and reasonable responses. This 
makes training and evaluating social, non-task oriented, conversational agents extremely 
challenging.  
The Alexa Prize competition was structured to allow users to participate in the selection of finalists. 
Two finalists were selected purely on the basis of user ratings averaged over all the conversations 
with those socialbots. In addition, one finalist was selected by Amazon based on internal evaluation 
of coherence and engagement of conversations by over a thousand Amazonian employees who 
volunteered as Alexa Prize judges, analysis of conversational metrics computed over the semifinals 
period, and scientific review of the team’s technical papers by senior Alexa scientists.  
Alexa Prize judges had conversations with the 15 socialbots using the same randomized allocation 
to unidentified socialbots as the general public. At the end of the conversation, they were asked to 
rate how coherent and engaging the conversation was. We found a correlation coefficient of 0.93 
between the ranking of socialbots based on ratings provided by general Alexa users and those 
provided by the judges. The average rating across all socialbots was lower by 20% for the judge’s 
pool as compared with the general public.  
We also developed objective metrics (Guo et al., 2017; Venkatesh et al., 2017) for conversational 
quality aligned with the goals of a socialbot (the ability to converse coherently and engagingly about 
popular topics and current events):  
i. 
Conversational User Experience (CUX): Different users have different expectations from 
the socialbots, hence their experience might vary widely since open-domain dialog systems 
involved subjectivity. To address these issues, we used average ratings from frequent users 
as a metric to measure CUX. With multiple interactions frequent users have their 
expectations established and evaluate a socialbot in comparison to others. 
ii. 
Coherence: We annotated hundreds of thousands of randomly selected interactions for 
incorrect, irrelevant or inappropriate responses. Using the annotations, we calculated the 
response error rate (RER) for each socialbot, used to measure coherence. 
iii. 
Engagement: Evaluated through performance of conversations identified as being in 
alignment with socialbot goals. Measured using duration, turns and ratings obtained from 
engagement evaluators (set of Alexa users, who were asked to evaluate socialbots based 
on engagement).  

 
 
13 
iv. 
Domain Coverage: Entropy analysis of conversations against the 5 socialbot domains for 
Alexa Prize (Sports, Politics, Entertainment, Fashion, Technology). Performance targeted 
on high entropy while minimizing the standard deviation of the entropy across multiple 
domains. High entropy ensures that the socialbot is talking about a variety of topics while 
a low standard deviation gives us confidence that the metric is equally well for all the 
domains. 
v. 
Topical Diversity: Obtained using the size of topical vocabulary for each socialbot. Higher 
range of topics within each domain implies more topical affinity. 
vi. 
Conversational Depth: We used the topical model to identify the domain for each 
individual utterance. Conversational depth for a socialbot was calculated as the average of 
the number of consecutive turns on the same topical domain. Conversational Depth 
evaluates socialbot’s ability to have multi-turn conversations on specific topics within the 
five domains. 
We observed that the metrics mentioned above correlate strongly with Alexa user ratings.  We 
observed that a simple combination of the above metrics correlated strongly with Alexa user ratings 
(0.66), suggesting that the so-called “wisdom of crowds” (Surowiecki, 2004) is a reasonable 
approach to evaluation of conversational agents when conducted at large scale in a natural setting. 
To automate the evaluation process, we trained a model using 60,000 conversations and ratings to 
predict user ratings using utterance-level and conversation-level features. Our preliminary analysis 
showed promising results (RMSE = 1.3) on the model trained to predict ratings from 1 to 5. We also 
observed strong correlation (Spearman Correlation = 0.352) between predicted ratings and 
corresponding user ratings for Alexa Prize conversations. These are currently the benchmark results 
in academia and industry.  This model was not used in the competition judging process this year; 
however, we plan to develop it further for possible use next year.  
 
6   Results 
The Alexa Prize was designed as a framework to support research on Conversational AI at scale in 
a real-world setting. The scientific advances described above (and detailed in individual team 
papers) resulted in significant improvements in socialbot quality and a large amount of user 
engagement.  
 
6.1   User Engagement 
Customer engagement remained high throughout the competition. Alexa Prize ranked in the top 10 
Alexa skills by usage with over 40,000 hours of conversations spanning millions of utterances. 
Customers chatted on a wide range of popular and current topics (26 topics) with Movies/TV, Music, 
Politics, Celebs, Business, and SciTech being the highest frequency (most popular) topics. Most 
popular topics from the post-semifinals feedback phase were Movie/TV (with average rating 3.48), 
SciTech (3.60), Travel/Geo (3.51), and Business (3.48). Based on user ratings, the three lowest rated 
topics are Arts (average rating 2.14), Shopping (2.63) and Education (3.03). 
It is still early in the Alexa Prize journey towards natural human conversation, but the high level of 
engagement and feedback demonstrates that users are interested in chatting with socialbots and 
supporting their development. 
 
6.2   Socialbot Quality 
Over the course of the competition, socialbots showed a significant improvement in customer 
experience. The three finalists improved their ratings by 24.6% (from 2.77 to 3.45) over the entire 
duration of competition. All 15 socialbots had an average customer rating of 2.87 along with 
conversation duration 1:35m (median) & 5:43m (90th percentile) by the end of the semifinal phase. 

 
 
14 
Conversation duration of finalists across entire competition was 1:53 min (median) and 8:08 min 
(90th percentile), improving 14.0% and 56.8% respectively from competition start, with 11 turns 
(median) per conversation.  
 
 
Figure 2 Daily Ratings for socialbots during the competition. 
 
 
Figure 3 Conversation Duration Median and 90th Percentile for socialbots during the competition. 
 
 
Figure 4 Conversation Duration 90th Percentile for socialbots during the competition. 
 
We measured Response Error Rate (RER) through manual annotation of a large fraction of user 
utterance-social response pairs by trained data analysts to identify incorrect, irrelevant, or 
inappropriate responses. RER was quite irregular during the first 30 days of the launch from May 
8 to June 8, 2017, fluctuating between 8.5% and 36.7%. This was likely due to rapid 
experimentation by teams in response to initial user data. During semifinals from July 1 to August 
15, 2017, RER was in the range of 20.8% to 28.6%. The three finalists have improved further over 
the post-semifinals feedback phase, and their average RER is at 11.21% (L7D) as they go into 
Finals. 

 
 
15 
 
Figure 5 Response Error Rate (RER) for individual utterance-response pairs for All Socialbots 
and Finalists during the competition. 
 
7   Conclusion and Future Work 
15 teams went live in the inaugural Alexa Prize and customer ratings improved from ~24% over the 
duration of the competition (May 8 to Nov 13). 
Based on the work done by the teams and feedback from customers, we recommend the following 
key components for building an effective socialbot: 1. Dialog Manager (DM) 2. Natural Language 
Understanding Module (NLU) and Knowledge Module 3. Response Generation 4. Conversational 
User Experience (CUX) Handler 5. Ranking and Model Selection Policy Module.  
We analyzed the technical and scientific detail for each team and corresponding ratings and 
correlated it with their performance on Socialbot quality. Following are the findings from our 
analysis: 
• 
Conversational User Experience (CUX) takes least effort to build however it leads to highest 
gains. Building CUX is an essential component and the teams which focused most of their 
efforts on Science and didn’t give much emphasis to CUX were not received as top performers 
by Alexa users.  
• 
A robust NLU system supported by strong domain coverage leads to high coherence. Teams 
which invested in build a strong NLU and Knowledge component had the least Response Error 
Rate leading to high user ratings.  
• 
Different conversation goals call for different response generation techniques implying that 
retrieval, generative and hybrid mechanisms may all be required within the same system. When 
the performance of a socialbot has converged, then generative and hybrid modules combined 
with robust ranking and selection module can lead to great gains. 
• 
A response ranking and selection model greatly impacts socialbot quality. The teams which 
built a strong Model Selection Policy got significant improvement in ratings and average 
number of dialog turns.  
• 
Even if a socialbot has strong response generation and ranker modules, lack of good NLU and 
DM, affects user ratings negatively. 
All the top socialbots have strong NLU, DM and CUX modules and each one of the finalists excelled 
in at least one of the required components mentioned above.  
We have seen significant advancement in science, and in the quality of socialbots as observed 
through customer ratings, but there is a lot more to be achieved. With the help of Alexa users and 
the science community, Alexa Prize 2018 will continue to focus on building socialbots as a vehicle 
to improve the state of conversational AI.
