Phase Transitions of the Typical Algorithmic
Complexity of the Random Satisﬁability Problem
Studied with Linear Programming
Hendrik Schawe1,*, Roman Bleim1, and Alexander K. Hartmann1,&
1Institut f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany

ABSTRACT
Here we study the NP-complete Satisﬁability problem for N Boolean variables, in particular K-SAT, for which the Boolean
formula has the conjunctive normal form with M clauses and K < N possibly negated variables per clause. Although the
worst-case complexity of NP-complete problems is conjectured to be exponential, there exist parametrized random ensembles
of problems where solutions can typically be found in polynomial time for suitable ranges of the parameter. In fact, random
K-SAT, with α = M/N as control parameter, can be solved quickly for small enough values of α. It shows a phase transition
between a satisﬁable phase and an unsatisﬁable phase. For branch and bound algorithms, which operate in the space of
feasible Boolean conﬁgurations, the empirically hardest problems are located only close to this phase transition. Here we study
K-SAT (K = 3,4) and the related optimization problem MAX-SAT by a linear programming approach, which is widely used for
practical problems and allows for polynomial run time. In contrast to branch and bound it operates outside the space of feasible
conﬁgurations. On the other hand, ﬁnding a solution within polynomial time is not guaranteed. We investigated several variants
like including artiﬁcial objective functions, so called cutting-plane approaches, and a mapping to the NP-complete vertex-cover
problem. We observed several easy-hard transitions, from where the problems are typically solvable (in polynomial time) using
the given algorithms, respectively, to where they are not solvable in polynomial time. For the related vertex-cover problem on
random graphs these easy-hard transitions can be identiﬁed with structural properties of the graphs, like percolation transitions.
For the present random K-SAT problem we have investigated numerous structural properties also exhibiting clear transitions,
but they appear not be correlated to the here observed easy-hard transitions. This renders the behaviour of random K-SAT
more complex than, e.g., the vertex-cover problem.
Introduction
The Satisﬁability problem (SAT)1 is to decide whether some Boolean formula is satisﬁable or not, i.e., whether for a given
Boolean formula, there is an assignment of the variables such that the formula evaluates to “true”. SAT is the most-prominent
NP-hard (nondeterministic-polynomial) problem. NP-hard problems1,2 are fundamental to computational complexity, since
NP-hard means that all problems in NP can be mapped in polynomial time to any of them. Despite much effort no algorithm
has been found so far, which is able to solve any NP-hard problem in the worst case in polynomial time, leading to the famous
P-NP problem. Thus, all NP-hard problems are considered so far being hard. SAT is in particular NP-complete3, which means
that given a solution it can be veriﬁed in polynomial time and is therefore member of the class of NP problems. Thus, if one
day someone found a fast algorithm for SAT (which most researcher believe will never happen), one could efﬁciently solve
all problems in NP, especially also all NP-complete problems. Anyway, also to advance knowledge helping to prove that
actually no fast algorithm exist, one wants to understand the reason for the apparent computational hardness. One somehow
empirical approach is to analyse actual (relatively) hard instances of problems. This has attracted much interest in statistical
physics4–6 and correspondingly random ensembles of suitably parametrized problem instances and their typical hardness have
been investigated.
This has been done also for SAT, in particular for a subclass deﬁned as follows: All Boolean formulas can be expressed in
conjunctive normal form (CNF) which is a disjunction of clauses, each being a conjunction of variables or negated variables.
Therefore K-SAT, which is a Boolean formula in CNF with K distinct variables per clause, is a commonly scrutinized version of
the satisﬁability problem. The most prominent random ensemble for SAT is the random K-SAT, where for a set of N variables
M clauses are generated randomly. Each clause contains K distinct variables which are chosen randomly, and each variable
appears negated with probability 0.5. Interestingly, this problem shows a phase transition at some critical value αs of the
density α = M/N7. For large problems at α < αs almost all problems are satisﬁable (also denoted as SAT), above αs almost all
arXiv:1702.02821v2  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  18 Sep 2018

realizations are unsatisﬁable (UNSAT). The occurrence of similar phase transitions has been observed frequently for other
random ensembles of NP-complete problems4–7, for which 3-SAT is the prime example3,8. This incited strong interest in the
K-SAT problem9–12 and many other NP-complete problems13–18 among physicists.
For the SAT-UNSAT transition it was found that the hardest realizations are located near this αs. This can be roughly
understood because it is trivial to ﬁnd some solution for much lower values of α and relatively easy to prove a realization
unsatisﬁable at high values of α.
While this SAT-UNSAT transition is certainly the most scrutinized in the K-SAT problem, there exist more transitions. For
example 3-SAT, where SAT-UNSAT occurs at αs ≈4.269, shows a transition to chaotic behaviour at αχ ≈3.2819, i.e., using
a continuous time deterministic solver20 the trajectory will ﬁnd the solution if one exists, but it will show chaotic transient
behaviour above this threshold resulting in increasing escape rates from attractors. This leads to a higher computational cost
and can therefore be used as a measure of hardness. Furthermore, there exists a clustering transition at αc ≈3.8611,21. This
means that here the organization of the space of the exponentially many degenerate solutions changes from one big cluster
(α < αc) of solutions which are connected in assignment space to a solution space (α > αc) which is fragmented into many
non-connected smaller clusters, one says replica symmetry is broken above this threshold.
Usually algorithms like the branch and bound approach, stochastic search or message passing are used in the statistical-
mechanics literature. These algorithms operate in the space of feasible assignments and approach the optimum solution
from above. Here “optimum” means that the number of unsatisﬁed clauses is minimized (in the sense of MAX-SAT), i.e.,
eventually becomes zero if a satisfying assignment is found. Thus for general minimization problems these algorithms yield
upper bounds until the true minimum solution is found. As empirically studying the computational hardness always tells
something about a problem in conjunction with a speciﬁc algorithm, it is desirable to investigate different algorithms, in
particular approaches which differ fundamentally. The operations-research literature often uses linear programming (LP)22,23,
which operates for combinatorial problems outside the space of feasible solutions, i.e., fundamentally different from the above
mentioned algorithms. Suitable enhanced (see below) LP techniques are often used for real-world applications since they
are versatile and efﬁcient, which means they run typically in polynomial time. For combinatorial problems, e.g., NP-hard
optimization problems, the application of pure LP yields solutions which are not necessarily feasible, which here means
non-integer-valued assignments to the variables, but which establish a lower bound on the objective. Thus LP somehow
approaches for minimization problems the true feasible and optimum solution from below (In this sense the analog solver
of19,20 also operates outside the feasible region). Nevertheless, a key observation is that whenever LP gives a feasible solution,
it must be the true optimum solution of the combinatorial problem. Because of their complementary properties combinations
of LP with other approaches yield powerful methods, such as branch and cut algorithms24. Here cutting planes (CPs) are
employed, which are additional inequalities which decrease LP solution space to help ﬁnding feasible solutions.
Although LP, in combination with other techniques, is an (efﬁcient) optimization algorithm for practical optimization
problems, there are only few studies aiming at understanding the nature of hardness and detecting phase transitions. To our
knowledge, studies of the behaviour of LP have only been conducted for the vertex cover (VC)25 and the travelling salesperson
problem (TSP)26. For these problems there exist regions in parameter space, where feasible and optimal solutions can be
found in polynomial time. For VC, the LP approach yielded solutions up to the percolation transition of the underlying graph
ensemble. Therefore, the problem is easy with respect to LP up to the percolation transition, and hard beyond. For LP improved
with cutting planes, another easy-hard transitions occurs at the point of the onset of replica symmetry breaking16, which here
corresponds to the clustering transition of SAT. Note that this coincides with the percolation threshold for the leaf-removal
core27. This is the point where one would not reasonably expect easy instances anymore. For TSP the easy-hard transitions
detected by the LP approach coincided with structural changes of the optimal tour which can be intuitively understood as
increases in hardness. Since for TSP many more cutting planes exist, which are not yet tested, it is conceivable to use this
technique to ﬁnd more and more easy-hard transitions this way and understand them, leading to deeper insight into the problem.
Since K-SAT is the archetypal NP-complete problem, we wanted to extend those promising results of the mentioned
previous studies. Although K-SAT is by deﬁnition a decision problem and not an optimization problem, as we will show below,
we found also some “easy-hard” transitions. Nevertheless, these transitions occur at much lower values of the parameter α than
the clustering transition, in contrast to VC on random graphs. This result could be related to the fact that K-SAT shows anyway
a richer behaviour11, i.e., several different types of transition, in contrast to VC on random graphs. Anyway, we cannot explain
this result in the moment, and think it will motivate further studies which aim at the origin of the different behaviour.
Note that this study does not aim to present faster methods to solve the SAT problem, but rather tries to study it in a
fundamental sense, aiming at the question “What makes a problem hard”? We pursue this by applying an approach which
is widely-used for many practical combinatorial optimization problems, but less-often studied when considering K-SAT, in
particular in the computational complexity and statistical-physics communities. In fact, we will show that the easy-hard
transitions with respect to the used LP algorithms happen at rather low values of α. Thus, other more specialized algorithms
are preferable for practical K-SAT solving.
2/11

Models and Methods
K-SAT
A realization of K-SAT consists of a Boolean formula over N variables xi (i = 1,...,N). The formula is in conjunctive normal
form, i.e., it is a conjunction of M clauses cj (j = 1,...,M), where every clause is a disjunction of K literals lk j (k = 1,...,K).
A literal is a variable xi or its negation xi. In each clause, each variable may appear only once. As an example for N = 4, M = 2
and K = 3 take
(x1 ∨x2 ∨x3)∧(x1 ∨x3 ∨x4).
(1)
This example is solvable with, e.g., x1 = “true” = 1 and x3 = “false” = 0, and arbitrary assignments for the other variables.
Note that each clause is satisﬁable by 2K −1 out of 2K possible assignments to the variables. Thus, each clause restricts the
space of satisﬁable assignments a bit. Clearly, with more clauses per variable, i.e., a higher amount of constraints, it is more
probable that a random formula is unsatisﬁable. As mentioned before, for random 3-SAT with N →∞there is a critical density
αs = M/N ≈4.269 at which a phase transition from satisﬁable to unsatisﬁable (SAT-UNSAT) happens.
Linear Programming
A linear program (LP) is an optimization problem, which can be expressed by a set of linear constraints and a linear objective
function, which should be optimized. There are fast (polynomial-time) algorithms to solve a linear program, e.g., the ellipsoid
method28 or interior point methods29,30. However, in many sophisticated solvers the simplex algorithm is used, which typically
terminates quickly for real-world problems, despite its exponential worst-case time complexity22,23. Though, as soon as some
variables need to be integer valued, this problem gets computationally hard. In fact, integer linear programming is an NP-hard
problem8.
A K-SAT realization can be expressed as an integer linear program. Therefore every positive literal xi is expressed as an
integer variable xi and every negative literal xi as (1 −xi). Since one or more literals of every clause c ∈C need to be true
for a satisfying assignment, the corresponding integer linear program contains for each clause the constraint that the sum
of the expressions for the included literals must be greater or equal 1. The example from Eq. (1) generates following linear
inequalities.
(1−x1)+x2 +(1−x3) ≥1
x1 +x3 +(1−x4) ≥1
Since an LP is an optimization problem but SAT is merely a decision problem, we can choose an arbitrary objective function
for which to optimize. The simplest objective function is zero, i.e., no optimization.
min.
0
s.t.
∑
xi∈c j
xi + ∑
xi∈c j
(1−xi) ≥1,
∀1 ≤j ≤M
xi ∈{0,1},
∀1 ≤i ≤N
The last constraint ﬁxes the variables to integer values. We will relax this constraint to xi ∈[0,1]. This allows us to apply
a fast LP algorithm to solve the relaxed problem and introduce a measure of hardness for the problem realization. If the LP
relaxation yields a solution consisting of only integer variables, the solution is obtained by a polynomial time method and the
corresponding realization is obviously easy to solve.
A drawback is that additionally to the principal degeneracy of the problem, i.e., there are possibly many assignments that
satisfy the formula, the relaxation leads to a much higher degeneracy. For example, the assignment of all xi = 0.5 is always a
solution of the relaxation. After we performed some simulations for SAT in this way, it became evident that this degeneracy is
a major problem for this decision problem, which is not present in the optimization problems studied with this method25,26.
This degeneracy leads to different behaviour for slight changes in the algorithm. E.g., primal and dual simplex often lead to
different behaviour such that for many instances one version will result in an integer solution while the other does not. We
observed a similar behaviour when considering different pricing strategies or a presolve stage to tighten the LP. This analysis
would therefore only yield information about these technical details and not about the fundamental problem of K-SAT. For
example, the presolver of both Gurobi and CPLEX can solve easy instances up to an critical αpre = 1.640(1), which is the same
threshold up to which the pure-literal rule (also called afﬁrmative-negative rule) which is an integral part of the DPLL31,32
search algorithm, can solve K-SAT realizations, while without presolve the easy-hard transition occurs at a lower value of α –
dependent on technical details of the method. Therefore, we do not present results of LP with zero objective in is study.
3/11

Instead, we will introduce artiﬁcial objective functions to reduce the degeneracy drastically. Further, the choice of the
objective function has an inﬂuence on the prevalence of integer solutions. Though note, only linear objective functions enable
the efﬁcient linear programming techniques. Therefore, non-linear objectives like ∑i xi(1 −xi), which are minimal if all
variables xi are either 1 or 0, are not admissible and in fact generally NP-hard33.
One simple way to replace the zero objective is maximizing the sum over all variables (MV)
max.
N
∑
i=1
xi,
which will on average lift variables which are 0 in the integer solution to larger values like 0.5 and thus suppresses integer
solutions typically.
Note that this and other additional objective functions have no inﬂuence on whether a formula is satisﬁable or not, they
are just meant as a tool to reduce the degeneracy of the problem to make it less dependent on details of the algorithm and to
facilitate ﬁnding integer solutions. Both works out as we will see below. As a third objective we tried maximizing the number
of fulﬁlled literals per clause, which we will call Satisfaction Multiplicity Maximization (SMM). This can be achieved with a
slightly modiﬁed linear program by introducing one new variable zj per clause counting the number of fulﬁlled literals of its
clause and maximizing the sum over all z j.
max.
M
∑
j=1
zj
s.t.
∑
xi∈c j
xi + ∑
xi∈c j
(1−xi) ≥zj,
∀1 ≤j ≤M
xi ∈{0,1},
∀1 ≤i ≤N
z j ≥1,
∀1 ≤j ≤M
The new kind of constraint ensures that zi ≥1, i.e., that every clause contains at least one fulﬁlled literal, such that the
solution assignment satisﬁes the Boolean formula. This type of additional optimization is similar to MAX-SAT, where one
tries to maximize the number of satisﬁed clauses. For MAX-SAT one would instead enforce 0 ≤zj ≤1 ∀j. We also tried this
MAX-SAT approach to solve the K-SAT decision problem. Since this formulation does not mitigate the degeneracy problem,
and because we did not observe any better performance than by using the other approaches, we do not show results for this
approach here.
The SMM objective is an example for a linear objective with a slight preference for integer valued variables, since
assignment of all variables of a clause to 1 or 0 according to their polarity contributes more to the objective function than
assignments of non-integer values. For example a variable which appears more often unnegated will on average be assigned
more often to value 1. This strongly reduces the degeneracy of the solution of the optimization problem, i.e., many of the
solutions where the majority of variables are non-integer, are not optimal under this new objective function. Of course this may
still yield non-integer values for some variables, which occur in conﬂicting clauses.
Note that when using LP, ﬁnding integer solutions may be facilitated in principle by adding cutting planes, which are further
constraints which are added to the problem during run time dependent on the state of the solution process. This allows, e.g, to
add a selected small number of constraints from a set of exponentially many ones, for which it would be infeasible to add them
all. This was previously observed also for ensembles of random instances for the vertex cover25 and the TSP26. Nevertheless,
for the present study this yields no improvement, i.e., no additional phase transitions could be observed, see below. Thus, we do
not describe the cutting-plane approach in this section in detail, but rather just list the the ones we tried and did not lead to an
improvement.
Mapping to Vertex Cover
All NP-complete problems, by deﬁnition, can be mapped onto each other in polynomial time. Thus, it is reasonable to ask,
whether transforming SAT instances to instances of another problem and applying algorithms speciﬁcally suited for the other
problem changes the performance, as measured by the location of the easy-hard transition. Here we used a classical mapping1
of SAT to VC. For each K-SAT instance an equivalent graph G = (V,E) is constructed in the following way: The set V of nodes
contains one pair of nodes i,i for each variable xi (i = 1,...,N), which represents the variable and its negation. Furthermore,
V contains one node (k j) for each literal lk j (k = 1,..,K, j = 1,..,M) in each clause cj, respectively. Therefore V contains
2N +KM nodes. For the set E of edges, for each clause cj a complete subgraph of size K is formed by connecting all pairs of
“literal nodes” (k j) pairwise which correspond to this clause. Also, each “variable node” i is connected with its corresponding
4/11

1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
Figure 1. The graph for the vertex cover problem which is equivalent to the formula shown in Eq. (1). Shown is a vertex
cover of size N +(K −1)M = 4+2×2 = 8, which corresponds to a satisfying assignment x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0, x4 = 1.
“negated variable node” i. Finally, for each literal lk j, if the literal represents a non-negated variable xi, an edge connecting (k j)
with i is included, while if the literal represents a negated variable xi the corresponding literal node (k j) is connected with i.
Thus, E contains MK(K −1)/2+N +MK edges. Now a minimum vertex cover is obtained. This is a subset V ′ ⊂V of nodes
such that for each edge of E at least one of the two endpoints is in V ′. By construction1, G contains a vertex cover of size
N +(K −1)M if and only if the corresponding formula is satisﬁable. In Fig. 1 the graph corresponding to the formula from
Eq. (1) is shown.
Thus, one approach to SAT is to transform each formula into the equivalent graph and use an existing algorithm for VC to
solve it. We applied an LP formulation with cycle cutting planes, see Ref.25 for details. For the previous work, this algorithm
was able to solve VC instances in the parameter-space region, where the solutions were contained basically in one cluster,
corresponding to the replica-symmetric region34.
Results
We sample random 3-SAT instances, where each clause may contain any variable at most once. For up to 14 system sizes
N ∈[128,524288] we simulated n = 5000 realizations for 30 to 100 different values of the density α. For comparison, we also
performed simulations for 2-SAT and 4-SAT, with a smaller range of sizes, see below. All error estimates are obtained by
bootstrap resampling35–37, except for errors of ﬁt parameters shown in the plots, which are gnuplot’s asymptotic standard errors
corrected according to Ref.36. To solve the LP realizations, the implementation of the dual-simplex algorithms of the commercial
optimization library CPLEX38 is used. During the research additionally the primal- and dual-simplex implementations of
Gurobi39 and lp solve40 with multiple pricing strategies were used to ensure that the results are independent from the algorithm
and the details of the implementation.
LP-Transitions with Objective Function
As mentioned before, we observed that non-trivial objective functions can be used to obtain a result independent from the
details of the LP-solver implementation. Though the objective function itself will have an inﬂuence on the position of the
transition point. An objective which prefers variables to be integer will result in more integer solutions at the same value of α,
i.e., yield a transition at a larger value of α.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
α2 = 1
0.6
0.8
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.0
1.2
1.4
128
1024 4096
p
α
512
1024
2048
4096
αmax
N
Figure 2. Solution probability p that SMM yields an integer solution for 2-SAT. The inset shows a extrapolation to large N
for a transition from solvable to unsolvable. The extrapolation is a power law with offset αmax = aN−˜b +α2 and yields a
transition of α2 = 1.011(9) with a goodness of ﬁt χ2
red = 0.6.
5/11

First, we will demonstrate that this method can be used to solve instances of K-SAT efﬁciently for a range of values of α,
and that there exists a phase transition to a hard (or unsolvable) region. For the 2-SAT problem, which is not NP-complete, it
is known that the SAT-UNSAT transition happens at α2 = 141. For 2-SAT there are also exact polynomial time algorithms.
So when applying our linear programming approach, we would assume that in the limit of large N for α < 1, all instances
are easily solvable and for α > 1 not. This test does indeed work out when using the SMM objective function. In Fig. 2 the
probability that a realization is solvable by the LP+SMM approach, i.e., the solution is integer, is shown as a function of the
clause density α. Around α = 1 the behaviour switches from solvable to not-solvable. The decrease in probability to solve is
steeper for larger system sizes N, which is a behaviour typical for phase transitions. The inset shows the positions of maximum
variance, since p is binomial, this corresponds to the positions where half of the realizations are solvable. Therefore, this method
effectively extrapolates the position of the p = 0.5 point, which should be at the transition point for N →∞. We performed
the extrapolation by using a typical ﬁnite-size scaling power-law ansatz αmax = aN−˜b +α2, like in previous work25,26. This
yielded a critical point of α2 = 1.011(9), which is in very good agreement with the expectation, especially considering the
small system sizes used for this extrapolation. Note that without the objective function 2-SAT is also susceptible to the greater
degeneracy and the above mentioned problems become visible, leading to no clear result (not shown here). This result for
2-SAT shows that the method per se is a valid approach to our question.
The same procedure is performed for 3-SAT in Fig. 3. The transition depicted here is an algorithmic transition from easy,
since most realizations are solvable by LP techniques, i.e., in polynomial time, to some harder phase, where the LP does not
yield solutions.
Figure 3. (a) Probability p that SMM yields an integer solution. The smaller system sizes show visible deviations from the
common curves, which is visible in the main plot, where N = 512 does not lie on the other curves at αSMM marked by the
vertical line. Inset: Collapse with b = 0.118(1), αSMM = 2.36(1) for N ≥4096. (b) Variance of the solution probability p for
the SMM objective. Inset: The power-law ﬁt αmax = aN−˜b +αSMM to the position of the peaks αmax. For ﬁxed ˜b = 0.1176 the
ﬁt yields αSMM = 2.35(1) with χ2
red = 1.9.
To estimate αSMM for 3-SAT, we use ﬁnite-size scaling, i.e., rescaling the α axis according to (α −αSMM)Nb, should
result in a collapse of the data points on one curve. To ﬁnd values αSMM and b generating a good collapse the algorithm and
implementation from Ref.42 is used. It yields αSMM = 2.361(7) and b = 0.118(1). The collapse obtained when rescaling with
those values is shown in the inset of Fig. 2. Note that for second-order phase transitions43 the exponent ν = 1/b describes
the growth of correlations in the system and is one of the critical exponents used in statistical physics to characterize phase
transitions according to universality classes.
We could not use the same extrapolation of the peak positions, like for 2−SAT, since the range of αmax was too small to
yield reliable ﬁts. But using the ﬁxed exponent from the collapse, leads to a compatible critical density αSMM = 2.35(1) and a
reasonable ﬁt, with χ2
red = 1.9, as shown in Fig. 2.
Our results for 4-SAT look similar (not shown) and exhibit an easy-hard transition as well. We performed a corresponding
analysis. The resulting exponent b seems to be larger and a ﬁt through the positions of the maxima yields αSMM = 3.60(8),
˜b = 0.5(1) with χ2
red = 0.5.
The other optimization function of this study, MV, i.e., maximizing the sum of all variables, leads to a qualitatively similar
behaviour for 3-SAT as SMM but a transition at lower αMV = 1.25(2) (not pictured due to qualitative similarity, simulations
used smaller system sizes). The lower transition point is plausible, since this maximization prefers variables to be larger than
6/11

zero instead of 0. For this reason, we have not analysed this algorithm for 4-SAT. The best estimates for the transition points
are collected in Tab. 1.
Table 1. Values of critical points. αVC denotes the critical point when mapping SAT to VC and applying an LP + cutting
plane solver used for VC. αMV is the easy-hard transition for LP+MV. αSMM is the easy-hard transition for LP+SMM. αc
denotes the clustering transition11 and αs the SAT-UNSAT transition9,44.
K
αVC
αMV
αSMM
αc
αs
2
–
–
1.011(9)
–
1
3
0.90(3)
1.25(2)
2.361(7)
3.86
4.26
4
–
–
3.60(8)
9.547
9.93
As shortly mentioned above, we also implemented cutting planes (CP), which are additional inequalities which do not
change the nature of any solution but restrict the search space of non-feasible, i.e., non-integer conﬁgurations. In similar
studies on VC25 and the TSP26, the introduction of cutting planes yielded substantially better results. For vertex cover the
introduction of (potentially exponentially many but actually few) CPs even lead to an LP+CP transition at the point where
in the analytic solution replica symmetry breaking, i.e., clustering of solutions appeared34. Unfortunately, this efﬁciency of
CP was not observable during our study for K-SAT. It seems that the cutting planes we tried, namely resolution cuts45 and
clique cuts46, were too weak at the low values of α examined here. Another cutting plane for the SAT problem, the odd cycle
inequalities47 are not directly applicable for K-SAT with K ≥3, since they need clauses with 2 variables to be constructed.
While they are useful as local cuts in a branch and cut procedure, they are never violated in the beginning for K ≥3 and thus
not applicable for this study.
x1
x2
x3
x4
c1
c2
Figure 4. Factor graph representation of the example Eq. (1). Dashed lines represent negative weights, corresponding to
negated variables.
Next, we investigate whether the observed easy-hard transitions correspond to changes of the structure of the problem
instances, as it was previously found for the vertex-cover problem16–18,25. While VC is deﬁned on graphs anyway, for K-SAT
we study the related graph representation as factor graph5,48. This representation is especially useful for belief or survey
propagation approaches49,50 but also useful to study structural properties. In the FG, which is a bipartite graph exhibiting a
node for each variable and a node for each clause, i.e., containing N +M nodes, each variable is connected to the clauses it
occurs in with weights representing whether they are negated or not. The corresponding graph of example Eq. (1) is shown in
Fig. 4. Note that this representation, when disregarding the weights, is equivalent to a hypergraph representation, where every
clause is represented by a hyperedge connecting K variables.
We looked at some known points of the factor graph, where its properties change, which could plausibly inﬂuence the
hardness of the problem. Note that for the NP-complete VC, it was possible to relate the percolation threshold and the
threshold, beyond which the leaf removal heuristic27 does not yield solutions anymore (which coincides with the appearance
of replica-symmetry breaking and solution-space clustering), to the points where the problems turns harder also for special
formulations of the linear programming approach25. We will list the properties for 3-SAT we looked at. Most transitions are
known from the literature, but few not, to our knowledge. For those we numerically investigated the transitions during this
study and present the result shortly here, which also contributes to the characterization of the 3-SAT ensemble.
• The percolation threshold, i.e., the point below which there will be no connected component of size O(N) is at α = 1/65.
This means that below this threshold clauses do typically not share variables and are therefore largely independent, i.e., it
should be rather easy to solve for almost any algorithm.
• The transition where the remaining pure literal core is of order O(N), i.e., the value of α, beyond which the pure literal
rule, which is an integral ingredient for the classical DPLL search, does not lead to solutions anymore is at αpl = 1.636..51.
The pure literal rule is to remove pure variables and their clauses from the problem. Variables are pure, if they are
7/11

appearing only in one polarity and can therefore be always set to fulﬁl all their clauses. Note that for 2-SAT the pure
literal rule works up to the SAT-UNSAT threshold α2 = 151, coinciding with the solvability transition of SMM.
• The unit clause rule shows its transition above the LP+SMM case at αuc = 8/3 ≈2.6652.
• For a naive q-core analysis, where the core is the set of remaining nodes after all nodes with degree lower than q are
iteratively removed, we treated the clause nodes the same as the variable nodes. It yielded a percolation transition, i.e.,
the existence of a q-core of order of graph size at α2-core = 0.223(3) and α3-core = 1.554(1) from our measurements.
• The q-core transitions for a hypergraph approximation of K-SAT, where K nodes are connected by single hyperedges, are
known exactly. Note that the 2-core for this ensemble is equivalent to the pure literal rule according to51. The appearance
of a three core occurs at α3-CORE = 4.2847..51.
• The leaf removal rule, which is a valid heuristic for the related XOR-SAT problem and the vertex cover problem, is
known to have a transition at αlr = 0.81847..53. Interestingly, although not obviously related, this is half of αpl of the
pure literal rule.
• The transition where a biconnected component23,54 appears, i.e., a connected component, in which every pair of nodes
stays in the same connected component if any other node is removed, happens at αbi = 0.190(20). Similarly, the bi-edge-
connected component, from which an arbitrary edge can be removed while staying connected, shows the transition at
αbi-edge = 0.211(7). This value is close to the appearance of our naive 2-core, which is plausible since a 2-core consists
of biconnected components possibly connected by single edges.
The process to determine the transition points for the cases, where we did not ﬁnd literature values, is very similar to the
process shown in Fig. 2. A example for the naive 3-core on the factor graph is shown in Fig. 5. Again we extrapolated the
position of the peaks of the variance to large N using a power law with offset αmax = aN−˜b +α3-core.
When comparing the values of these transitions to the easy-hard transitions points listed in table 1, one observes no
coincidence. Thus, in contrast to the previously studied VC, there exist no coincidence with a “simple” change of the problem
structure, which might serve as an explanation of the observed easy-hard transitions.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
1.48
1.50
1.52
1.54
1.56
102
103
104
S
α
512
2048
8192
32768
131072
αmax
N
Figure 5. Relative size of the naive 3-core of the factor graph at different values of α. The inset shows the positions of the
maxima of the peaks of the variance and an extrapolation according to a power law with offset, resulting in the above listed
values.
Finally, the existence of correspondences between easy-hard transitions and structural percolation transitions for the
vertex-cover problem motivated us to perform the following test: we also used for K = 3 the mapping of K-SAT to VC for
formulas up to N = 10000. Using LP and cycle cutting planes25 the corresponding equivalent instances VC were solved for
various values of α. Again we measured the probability that an instance was solved by an integer solution as a function of
α, for different system sizes. Using an analysis (not shown) as for the previous approaches, we were able to extrapolate an
easy-hard transition for this point. We obtained a critical value of αVC = 0.90(3), which is well below the easy-hard transitions
obtained using the LP-based approaches presented above. Therefore, apparently it does not pay off using a mapping to another
problem, at least for this pair of problems. A mapping to TSP will lead to TSP instances which are quite large for decent SAT
realizations, therefore we did not perform simulations for this.
It is rather intriguing that SAT behaves so differently in comparison to vertex cover, despite their very close relation. While
we can not give the reason for this behaviour, we not only have identiﬁed several easy-hard transitions in this study, but have
8/11

also shed some light on this apparently fundamental difference. In the future, maybe other approaches can yield a better
understanding of this perplexing fact.
Conclusions
We study the solvability of random K-SAT realizations at different values of the clause-to-variable density α using linear
programming. A realization is solved if the LP yields an integer solution. Since there are LP algorithms that run in polynomial
time, this means such a realization is “easy” in regard to this algorithm.
Since SAT is a decision problem, the application of pure LP actually does not involve optimization, which seems to make
the problem less well-behaved. This is probably the reason that also for practical applications LP has not been used widely for
SAT and instead methods like the branch-and-bound approach DPLL dominate. Nevertheless, the investigation of the behaviour
of any algorithm, even not the most efﬁcient one, might lead to a better understanding of the speciﬁc problem structure and of
the sources of computational hardness in general. To allow for an investigation of SAT using LP, we included artiﬁcial objective
functions, which makes the problem numerically better behaved. Note that we also observed that usually more realizations can
be solved when including an artiﬁcial objective function as compared to the trivial objective function.
We were able to identify several easy-hard transitions, depending on the algorithm which was used. The inclusion of
artiﬁcial objective functions lead to higher values of the control parameter α, where solutions can still be found. In contrast to
previous work on VC on random graphs, none of these transitions coincided with the onset of a clustered solution landscape.
The reason might be that K-SAT, or “natural” decision problems in general behave differently. On the other hand, random
K-SAT exhibits several transitions for the structure of the solution landscape anyway, in contrast to VC on random graphs. It
would be interesting to investigate the relation between LP and the solution landscape more thoroughly in the future.
Anyway, from the practical point of view, we wonder if carefully crafted objective functions could be used to improve the
efﬁciency of solving decision problems with an LP approach, such as branch and cut.
Like for the clustering transitions, we were not able to identify other structural transitions coinciding with an observed
easy-hard transition detected by any of the tested LP formulations. Nevertheless, we believe that such a coincidence should
exist, since the properties of a problem should be coded in the graph structure. Therefore, this unknown structural property
seems to be of a more complex type. The fact that the relation between LP-based easy-hard transitions and structural properties
appears to be more complex might also be related to the mentioned richer behaviour of the solution landscape as a function of
the density α (in comparison with VC). Thus, here is still some work to be done.
Furthermore, in contrast to the previously studied vertex cover problem and the travelling salesperson problem, we did not
observe any improvement by applying cutting planes. This could be due to the type of cutting planes used. Finally, we applied
a mapping of SAT to VC and used speciﬁc VC LP+cutting plane algorithm, which is able to solve standard Erd˝os-R´enyi VC
instances just up to the clustering threshold. Nevertheless, for SAT this did not pay off, the easy-hard transition appears to be at
even smaller values of α compared to the MV objective.
