Character Simulation Using Imitation Learning
With Game Engine Physics
Jo˜ao Rodrigues
NOVA LINCS
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Caparica, Portugal

Rui N´obrega
NOVA LINCS
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Caparica, Portugal

Abstract—Creating visual 3D sensing characters that interact
with AI peers and virtual environments can be a difﬁcult task for
those with less experience in using learning algorithms or creating
visual environments to execute an agent-based simulation. In this
paper, the use of game engines as a tool to create and execute
graphic simulations with 3D sensing characters is being explored
with plugins such as ML-Agents for the Unity3D game engine.
This allows the simulation of agents using off-the-shelf algorithms
and using the game engine’s motor for the visualizations of these
agents. We explore the use of these tools to create visual bots for
games, and teach them how to play the game until they reach a
level where they can serve as adversaries for real-life players in
interactive games.
Index
Terms—Interaction,
Games,
ML-Agents,
Imitation
Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Games have always used interactive characters and Non-
Playable Characters (NPCs) to make the game more interest-
ing, appealing and relatable. Agent and Character Simulation
has been used over time for many different purposes [1],
going from scientiﬁc research, such as predicting the spread
of pandemics [2], to leisure [3] with games having NPCs
to add more interactivity or make the game harder. Using
these simulations requires a vast knowledge of the different
AI, machine learning, and deep learning algorithms needed
for these simulations. Additionally, many of these simula-
tions also need graphic environments to show the results
with rendering techniques and physics simulations. All these
techniques require specialized knowledge that for a computer
graphics developer may not be available, specially in the AI
and Machine Learning ﬁelds.
Another factor that is also present in agent simulation, is the
need for create sensing characters. Many of the Agent-Based
Modelling (ABM) and Simulation scenarios require characters
that interact with the environments or with their peers. To
achieve this, the creation of characters that can sense their
surroundings by simulating vision, touch, and distance among
other factors is needed. Creating these senses from scratch also
needs advanced programming knowledge such as ray tracing
for vision and distance, or physics for touch.
All these needs constitute a problem for those who want
to create character simulations but do not have the technical
expertise to develop all the aforementioned technologies. To
solve the problems created by the need for a graphical environ-
ment with sensing characters, it can be interesting to use game
engines to visualize the environment and simulate the senses.
Being in constant development to facilitate the process of
creating games, game engines seem to be a good tool to create
and train characters and environments since they already have
render and physics engines that implement virtual environment
rules sush as ray cast distance, gravity or colisions.
Besides the use of game engines, over the years many
tools have been created to facilitate the creation and execution
of these simulations by providing utilities that facilitate the
testing and sharing of different machine and deep learning
algorithms such as OpenAI Gym [4] and PettingZoo [5]. One
tool that has special interest when considering the use of game
engines is the ML-Agents plugin [3], since it was created
speciﬁcally to integrate with the Unity3D game engine and
aims to ease the creation and learning of game bots.
This last tool, the ML-Agents, contains a utility that can
be helpful in teaching bots how to play which is the demon-
stration recorder. This tool allows recording the steps of a
human playing in the same environment as the bots, collect
the observations the bot would receive during the playtime,
and generate a demo ﬁle that can be later used to teach bots
how to play.
In this paper we propose to create a set of game scenarios
and use them to teach bots how to play. More than this, we will
study the use of human play recordings as a way of teaching
the bots how to play. Afterwards we aim to compare if this
method shows results similar to human level of play.
To have a better grasp of how game engines can be used for
a better graphical interface for agent-based simulation we are
going to look at some of the related work done in these areas
to understand better a few of the concepts of agent simulation,
game engines, and some libraries that can be used as a tool
to connect both. After this, the idea and concepts behind the
work done are going to be exposed for a better understanding
of how ML-Agents works, and how we can use it to improve
learning bots’ performance.
II. RELATED WORK
A game engine’s main use is to produce games by rendering
its graphics, producing music and sound effects, and allowing
arXiv:2301.02123v1  [cs.GR]  5 Jan 2023

external manipulation of the scene by reading inputs from an
input device. Usually, a game engine is made up of Rendering
Engine, Animation Engine, Physics Engine, Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Engine, Network Engine, 3D Sound Engine, and a Map
Editor [6].
Although the main purpose of a game engine is, as its
name says, to create games, its features allow for more uses
such as animations and simulations. The render, animation,
and physics engines can facilitate the production of animation.
With these engines one can just pick up a scene to animate,
code the intended movements, and then just play out the result
which will follow physics without having to animate frame by
frame every movement, and collision [6]. In the same line as
animation, these tools can be used to produce simulations.
What makes the use of a game engine alluring for anima-
tions and simulations is how it allows a user to view these
creations, without having to make low-level code to render
and animate the scene since the game engine deals with this
internally [7]. For agent simulation, it interests the most how
a game engine allows manipulating the motion of the agent’s
models and how to create a simulation environment for the
agents to play out simply by adding game objects to a scene,
and manipulating its properties with no need for extensive
lines of code describing the shape, physics, and motion of
every object in the simulation. Some of the works done in
using game engines for simulations are [8]–[10].
A. Graphical Agent Simulation
Graphical Agent-Based Modeling and simulation is a
paradigm in which simulated humans, animals, or other forms
of beings are modeled as agents that interact with their
peers as well as their environment [11]. In these agent-
based simulations, sometimes called multi-agent simulation,
the environment plays a crucial role since it inﬂuences all the
agents and their interactions and therefore must be carefully
taken into account.
In order to create an agent-based simulation, four elements
have to be taken into consideration: the set of agents, set of
interactions, the environment and the simulation infrastruc-
ture [12].
Self-play reinforcement learning is when agents learn by
exploring and playing with themselves. It has seen success
when applied in many game scenarios, however, the process
for self-play learning is unstable and more sample-inefﬁcient
than general reinforcement learning, especially when used in
imperfect information games [13]. Multi-agents auto-curricula
have been used to solve the various type of multiplayer games
both in classic discrete games, such as Backgammon [14]
and Chess [15], and continuous real-time games like Dota
and Starcraft. Illustrative examples of works done with agents
simulation and self-play reinforcement learning using visual
scenarios are given by [13], [16]–[18].
B. Agent Simulation Libraries
In order to create sensing agents for game engine environ-
ments, it is crucial to ﬁnd a library that allows simulating the
agent’s actions without the need to write complex algorithms.
Luckily, nowadays, there is an increasing number of these that
are open source and allow for indiscriminate integration in
any kind of simulation as long as it complies with the library
speciﬁcations.
Unity Machine Learning Agents [3] (ML-Agents) is a
toolkit that allows games and simulation to serve as environ-
ments for training intelligent agents. This library is speciﬁc
for Unity’s 3D game engine and provides implementations of
state-of-the-art that enable game developers and researchers to
easily train agents for 2D, 3D, and VR/AR games. With ML-
Agents, agents can be trained using reinforcement learning,
imitation learning, neuroevolution, and some other methods
with the provided simple-to-use Python API.
III. SIMULATION AND TRAINING WORKFLOW
As mentioned before, the goal is to get records of humans
playing and using the obtained data to train bots.
In the context of this paper these records will be called
demonstrations. A demonstration is a data structure that saves
the observations humans obtained at each moment, and maps it
to the actions they took, so that it is possible for bots to decide
their actions, by ﬁnding the actions in the demonstrations that
have similar observations to what they have at that point.
To better understand how the demonstration records can be
used to improve the learning speed of bots, ﬁrst it is good to
understand how to create scenarios with learning bots and how
ML-Agents teach them. Creating the scenarios is quite simple
for those with game development experience. The ﬁrst step is
to envision the desired interactive scene, then, build that scene
in Unity3D by placing different game objects and scripts that
control the desired interactions.
After this, each bot connects with the ML-Agents inter-
face, its behaviour takes into consideration the actions that
it receives from the system and the observations from the
environment it interacts with. Each bot sends a set of variables
and values that constitute an observation, and a hit history from
ray-traces from the bot to the world.
Outside of Unity3D, the ML-Agents library is executed
using a conﬁguration ﬁle that deﬁnes: run id, ﬂags and the
speciﬁc training algorithm. The training algorithms can be
split into two categories, the Reinforcement Learning algo-
rithms, and the Imitation Algorithms. For RL algorithms, ML-
Game App
Multiplayer
Component
Demonstration
Recording
Training
Result
Analysis
Fig. 1. Demonstration Record process ﬂowchart

Agents offers Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) for single agent scenarios, Multi-Agent
Posthumous Credit Assignment (MA-POCA) for multi agent
cooperative/competitive scenarios, and self-play which can be
used in both situations.
For the imitation algorithms, the ML-Agents library1 of-
fers Behavioral Cloning and Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) which use the demonstration records to
perform imitation learning. These algorithms can be used
together as a better way to reinforce the imitation learning, and
can also be used with RL Algorithms as a way to learn past
the demonstrations and use them only as a base for learning.
Now that a broad look at how ML-Agents can be used to
create self-learning bots in Unity3D was seen, we can focus
on the question of how can demonstration records help bots
learn. First, let’s look at what exactly are these demonstration
records. With the ML-Agents package in unity, it is possible
to attach a demonstration recorder to an agent. When attached,
this recorder will save a data structure with all the actions the
humans who are playing did mapped to all the variables and
ray trace hits provided as observations at each action point.
This forms a demonstration for imitation learning because the
agents can then use these data structures to decide what actions
to take, by comparing their observations with the observations
present on the demo ﬁle, and see which one looks the most
similar and perform the action took with that observation on
the demo. This means that to generate demos that can be used
for learning, we can have human users playing the scenarios
and complete the tasks to serve as inspiration for the bots.
This is possible because the ML-Agents interface allows an
heuristic function which can be used to create human controls
for the bots.
The idea with this is that for more complex scenarios
that take very long for bots to learn, and that the tuning of
the conﬁguration ﬁle becomes harder, we can take advantage
of these demonstrations to accelerate the process and create
usable bots faster. For this, ﬁrst we have to create a game
that is designed for both the agents and users to play it out.
We also need to deﬁne the observations and rewards the agent
gets. If this game involves multiple agents simultaneously it
1ML-Agents,
https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/ML-
Agents/blob/main/docs/Training-ML-Agents.md
Fig. 2. Capture the Flag Scene where players have to capture enemy ﬂag and
retrieve it to their own ﬁeld
has to support multiplayer so multiple users can also play it
out simultaneously. After all this is done, we proceed to have
users play the game to record the demonstrations. The more
users and the more time the better. Upon collecting all the
demonstrations, the training of the bots can be started. Then
the ﬁnal result of the bots can be analyzed, and if it’s still not
up to expectations, the process can be repeated to collect more
demonstrations with the possibility of using the current bots
as adversaries to the users. A ﬂowchart of this process can be
seen in Figure 1.
To test this idea of using demonstration records to improve
the learning speed of bots we decided the use a game of
capture the ﬂag in a 3vs3 player competitive environment as
seen in Figure 2. This game was chosen because we wanted
a simultaneously competitive/cooperative game, with a decent
amount of complexity, so that the performance level differ-
ences are easily distinguishable, but also it’s not extremely
hard for bots and humans to learn how to play the game.
In this game, 2 teams (team Blue and team White) compete
to try and capture the enemy ﬂag, and take it all the way back
to their teams ﬁeld location. Each iteration of capturing a ﬂag
and retrieving it to the teams ﬁeld is, for training purposes,
considered a round. In addition to this, the ﬁeld is spread with
a few walls to create obstacles for the players, and balls the
players can catch and throw to attempt to hit other players.
If a players gets with while holding a ﬂag, they will drop
it and be stunned for 3 seconds. While a ﬂag is dropped
out of place, both teams can attempt to catch it, to either
recapture it or make it go back to spawn depending if it is
the enemy or ally ﬂag respectively. An image illustrating the
described game can be seen in Figure 2. This game supports
that multiple users play at the same time, meaning that it
is necessary to implement a multiplayer component for this
game. This is needed so that the human users can play and
record demonstrations at a competitive level by playing other
humans.
IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
For this initial experiment, 3 play sessions with human
users were played to record demonstrations. During these play
sessions a total of 10 demonstrations were obtained. After the
recording sessions the bots were trained several times using
different numbers of demos.
Fig. 3. Game-play screenshot displaying all Network Objects

In these initial results, it was possible to see that the bots
got better as more demonstrations were used. The amount of
time needed to complete each round of the game dropped from
an average of 517 seconds with bots trained using 1 demo to
165 seconds when 10 demos were used. The number of draws
(when neither team is able to win after 1000 seconds) also
lowers as more demos are used, having a ratio of 20% of
games drawn with 1 demo and only 7% of games drawn with
10 demos.
During the recording sessions, it was noted that the team
playing the left side of the ﬁeld (Blue team) won overall 68.9%
of all rounds played, having more rounds won in all three of
the play sessions. This dominance was also translated to the
bots and had increased strength as more demonstrations were
used. When only 1 demo was used to train the bots, the blue
team won 57% of games having a slight superiority, but when
the 10 demonstrations were used to train the bots, the blue
team won 81% having a huge superiority, even bigger than
the one the human blue team had.
Looking back at times per round, we analyzed how quickly
each of the teams ﬁnished the game in their winning rounds.
Against expectations, on their wins the White team had an
average of 50 seconds and were able to ﬁnish the game, 50
seconds faster than the Blue team which had an average time
on wins of 100 seconds. A ﬁrst explanation for this event is
that the White team is only able to win on ideal circumstances,
while the blue team can ﬁnd ways to win even if the game
drags a bit longer.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we present a method to create game engine
self-learning bots in Unity3D that use imitation algorithms.
This technique was achieved using the described ML-Agents
plugin. Then we focused on the hypothesis that imitation
learning methods using demonstration records can be a good
way to create bots for games with complex environments. For
this, we created a 3vs3 game of capture the ﬂag and had
multiple human users record demonstrations simultaneously.
With the results obtained we conclude that imitation learn-
ing can be a good way to train game-ready bots and that
further investigation is necessary. Firstly, the recording of
many more demonstration recordings is needed so that it is
possible to analyze the level of the bots when a big sample of
demonstrations is available and compare it to the human level
by games between humans and bots. Following the increase
in the sample size, it will also be interesting to see the results
if a more balanced set of results is used and see if then both
teams have a similar win ratio or if one team keeps dominating
regardless. Lastly, it is left to expand this method of teaching
to other games and see the results and the level of trained
bots in games with varying levels of complexity and see what
variables tend to facilitate or difﬁcult the bots learning process
through imitation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by NOVA.ID.FCT/NOVA LINCS
(UIDB/04516/2020)
