Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. XAI
©ESO 2023
January 5, 2023
Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence
Brandon Panos1, 2, Lucia Kleint1, 2, and Jonas Zbinden1, 2
1 University of Geneva, 7, route de Drize, 1227 Carouge, Switzerland
2 Astronomical Institute of the University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern
Received 29 August; Accepted 24 December 2022
ABSTRACT
The prediction of solar ﬂares is of practical and scientiﬁc interest; however, many machine learning methods used for this prediction
task do not provide the physical explanations behind a model’s performance. We made use of two recently developed explainable
artiﬁcial intelligence techniques called gradient-weighted class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) and expected gradients (EG) to
reveal the decision-making process behind a high-performance neural network that has been trained to distinguish between Mg ii
spectra derived from ﬂaring and nonﬂaring active regions, a fact that can be applied to the task of short timescale ﬂare forecasting.
The two techniques generate visual explanations (heatmaps) that can be projected back onto the spectra, allowing for the identiﬁcation
of features that are strongly associated with precursory ﬂare activity. We automated the search for explainable interpretations on the
level of individual wavelengths, and provide multiple examples of ﬂare prediction using IRIS spectral data, ﬁnding that prediction
scores in general increase before ﬂare onset. Large IRIS rasters that cover a signiﬁcant portion of the active region and coincide with
small preﬂare brightenings both in IRIS and SDO/AIA images tend to lead to better forecasts. The models reveal that Mg ii triplet
emission, ﬂows, as well as broad and highly asymmetric spectra are all important for the task of ﬂare prediction. Additionally, we
ﬁnd that intensity is only weakly correlated to a spectrum’s prediction score, meaning that low intensity spectra can still be of great
importance for the ﬂare prediction task, and that 78% of the time, the position of the model’s maximum attention along the slit during
the preﬂare phase is predictive of the location of the ﬂare’s maximum UV emission.
Key words. Sun: ﬂares; chromosphere — line: proﬁles — methods: data analysis; statistical
1. Introduction
A solar ﬂare is a sudden release of energy due to magnetic
reconnection, resulting in an enhancement across the entire
electromagnetic spectrum (Carmichael 1964; Sturrock 1966;
Hirayama 1974; Kopp & Pneuman 1976; Low 1982). For large
ﬂares this energy can reach an order of ∼1032 ergs (Aulanier
et al. 2013), and is used to accelerate charged particles toward
and away from the solar surface. The energy dissipates over
stages with timescales that vary from seconds to hours (e.g.,
Fletcher et al. 2011). The outward bound material ﬁlls the
interplanetary medium with high-energy particles and perturbs
the heliospheric magnetic ﬁeld (Rouillard et al. 2016), both
of which interact with Earth’s magnetosphere. These events,
if directed toward Earth, can trigger power grid blackouts and
adversely aﬀect communication systems (e.g., Boteler 2006;
Schrijver et al. 2014), which in today’s technologically saturated
environment comes with a high socioeconomic cost, making
their prediction critical.
Machine learning has provided us with a set of powerful al-
gorithms that can be used to attempt to predict whether an active
region (a patch on the Sun associated with enhanced magnetic
activity), will produce a ﬂare or not. One of the most successful
algorithms for such a task is the so-called neural network (NN)
(Rosenblatt 1958), which is a computational graph-like structure
that draws inspiration directly from the mammalian brain. Just as
an organic brain, these networks automatically program them-
selves through experience (e.g., Goodfellow et al. 2016) and can
generalize what they have learned to make informed decisions
about new observations (e.g., Vidyasagar 2003).
The majority of ﬂare prediction eﬀorts rely on full photo-
spheric vector magnetograms recorded by the Helioseismic and
Magnetic Imager (HMI, Scherrer et al. 2012; Hoeksema et al.
2014) onboard the Solar Dynamic Observatory (SDO, Lemen
et al. 2012). These photospheric magnetic data are typically fed
into a machine learning algorithm such as a NN (e.g., Bobra &
Couvidat 2015; Florios et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Soós et al.
2022). In terms of the true skill statistic (TSS), the standard met-
ric for evaluating a model’s predictive performance (1 being op-
timal and -1 being adverse), the expected baseline TSS using
data from SDO is around ∼0.7, regardless of the sophistica-
tion of the machine learning algorithm (Jonas et al. 2018). This
indicates an apparent bottleneck and limit to the utility of photo-
spheric magnetic data.
As a way to overcome this bottleneck, researchers have
started experimenting with novel parameterizations of the HMI
magnetic data using topological data analysis to codify their rich
spatial features (Deshmukh, Varad et al. 2020; Deshmukh et al.
2022). Moreover, additional information from complementary
data sources such as soft X-ray, ﬂare history, and AIA photo-
spheric, chromospheric, and coronal images have been incorpo-
rated in an attempt to improve model performance (Nishizuka
et al. 2017; Jonas et al. 2018).
New evidence suggests that high resolution spectral data
can be used to predict solar ﬂares at least on short subhour
timescales. Panos & Kleint (2020) created two classes of Mg ii
spectra captured by NASA’s Interface Region Imaging Spectro-
Article number, page 1 of 21
arXiv:2301.01560v1  [astro-ph.SR]  4 Jan 2023

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
graph (IRIS) (De Pontieu et al. 2014). The ﬁrst class consisted of
spectra from active regions that did not lead to solar ﬂares (here-
after referred to as the AR class), and the second one consisted
of spectra collected from active regions 25 minutes before ﬂare
onset (referred to as the preﬂare PF class). It was demonstrated
that a simple feed forward fully connected NN could distinguish
between spectra from either class with an 80% accuracy, pre-
cision, and recall. Furthermore, the network’s performance in-
creased monotonically when successively feeding spectra from
t = 30 to t = 0 minutes before the onset of a large X1.6-class
ﬂare, albeit over a restricted region of the slit. It is not, however,
clear why the network performed so well at the classiﬁcation
task, and on what grounds it based its decisions. Nevertheless,
these results open up the possibility of not only improving the
current performance of our models, but due to the high diag-
nostic capabilities of spectra (e.g., Leenaarts et al. 2013), could
also provide critical information about the state of the preﬂare
atmosphere, and any necessary conditions that might facilitate a
solar ﬂare (e.g., Yang 2019), thus shifting the focus from model
performance to physical understanding.
Along these lines, and in an attempt to explain the above
results, a recent study made use of a clustering technique to
identify common spectroscopic precursors and atmospheric
conditions that might facilitate ﬂare triggering events (Woods
et al. 2021). It was found that single-peak emission in both the
Mg ii h&k lines as well as the pair of subordinate lines located
at ∼2798.8 Å appeared most commonly, but not exclusively,
within the study’s PF dataset. Inversions of these single-peaked
proﬁles using the STiC inversion code (de la Cruz Rodríguez
et al. 2019) indicate enhanced chromospheric temperatures and
electron densities. Similar to previous ﬁndings (e.g., Cheng
et al. 1984; Machado et al. 1988; Harra et al. 2001; Panos &
Kleint 2020), the authors speculate this to be a consequence of
small-scale heating events possibly driven by reconnection as
far back as 40 minutes before ﬂare onset. Since this clustering
approach of identifying important PF spectra is manually inten-
sive and time-consuming, a recent study automated the process
via the use of multiple instance learning (MIL) (Huwyler &
Melchior 2022). In addition to high accuracies on the AR/PF
classiﬁcation task, their models automatically identiﬁed spectra
that were judged to be important for ﬂare prediction, conﬁrming
the results found in Woods et al. (2021). Their work however
does not indicate the particular features of each spectrum that
are responsible for high model scores.
For this study, we made use of the same Mg ii dataset from
the original paper. We then trained a powerful "visual" NN called
a convolutional neural network or ConvNet on the AR/PF binary
classiﬁcation problem. Once the model learned to distinguish be-
tween AR and PF spectra, we used a class of techniques, col-
lectively referred to as Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
(Barredo Arrieta et al. 2019) to derive direct explanations from
the ConvNet without having to perform intermediate manual
steps. These techniques allowed us not only to automatically
discover which spectra are important, but which features of the
spectra are most critical for predicting solar ﬂares.
2. Data
The data used in this study are composed of Mg ii spectra cap-
tured by the IRIS satellite. For consistency, the dataset is iden-
tical to that used in Panos & Kleint (2020). As before, we se-
lected a spectral window spanning 2794.14 −2805.72 Å, which
includes both the Mg ii h&k lines as well as the triplet emission
around 2798.77 Å. We then partitioned observations into two
classes based on the GOES soft X-ray ﬂux: The ﬁrst partition
is called the AR class, and is composed of roughly 2.5 million
spectra derived from 18 observations and extracted from a 25
minute window at the start of each observation. An observation
here means a period with a predeﬁned observing scheme, which
can last several hours. The only criterion for an observation in
this class was that a large ﬂare (M- or X-class) did not appear
over the entire duration of the IRIS observation, as veriﬁed by
the GOES X-ray ﬂux. This does not preclude smaller ﬂares such
as C-class and lower. Since this study probes short timescales
(as apposed to the normal 24 hour margins used in ﬂare predic-
tion studies), it is not guaranteed that the active region did not
produce a large ﬂare after the IRIS observation’s time window
ended, leading to a possible weak mixing of the classes.
The second partition is called the PF class and consists of
2.4 million spectra taken from 19 observations in a time window
25 minutes (sometimes shorter if IRIS was not recording) before
each X- or M-class ﬂare’s onset as deﬁned by the NOAA catalog
ﬂare start time (Table 1 of the same study). Like previous studies
(e.g., Jonas et al. 2018; Angryk et al. 2020), we do not consider
small ﬂares (<M-class) as targets for prediction, but rather as
a set of important features whose frequency could help predict
larger events, meaning that smaller ﬂares were not necessarily
precluded from the 25 minute analysis window for both the AR-
and PF class.
An example of a PF (top) and AR (bottom) observation can
be seen in Fig. 1. The gray regions indicate the 25 minute time
windows over which Mg ii spectra were collected with the time
in minutes on the x-axis. As indicated by the GOES 1 −8 Å
ﬂux (solid blue curve) and ﬂare class along the y-axis, a large
M-class ﬂare occurs in the PF observation directly after the sam-
pling region, while the AR observation is ﬂat and then slightly
raises to a C-class level towards the end of the observation. It is
important to remember that GOES integrates the X-ray ﬂux from
the entire solar disk while IRIS observes only a small patch of
the sun (a maximum of 175 × 175 arcsec2 for the slit-jaw imager
and 130 × 175 arcsec2 for its spectrometer), therefore, although
the large ﬂares were visually conﬁrmed to be within IRIS’s ﬁeld
of view (and indeed at some future point crossing the spectro-
gram), the X-ray signals in the AR class could have occurred
somewhere else on the solar disk. Each interval between the ver-
tical black dotted lines indicates the completion of a single IRIS
raster. If the observation is a sit-and-stare, meaning no spatial
rastering of the spectrogram, as in the AR example, then the
intervals indicate the individual exposure times. For context, a
SJI accompanies each ﬁgure and was rendered roughly around
the time indicated by the vertical blue dashed lines. The blue re-
gions within each SJI indicate the spatial extent of the IRIS raster
which is spanned by steps of equal size. Each ﬂare was assigned
a number in the title for future reference.
After sampling the spectra using the above prescriptions, a
series of additional processing steps were performed on the al-
ready preprocessed IRIS level 2 data to make it amenable to
machine learning methods. These steps were as follows: 1) All
spectra were interpolated to a grid size of 240 λ-points. 2) Each
spectral proﬁle was normalized by its maximum value, eﬀec-
tively placing precedence on the shape of the Mg ii spectra in-
stead of their intensity. It is important to keep in mind that the
intensity is still weakly encoded into the spectral shape, since
high intensity proﬁles, once normalized, will result in spectra
with ﬂat continuum emission. To avoid noisy and corrupt data,
entire spectra were replaced with nan’s if they met any of the fol-
lowing conditions: Missing data →If a spectrum (within our se-
Article number, page 2 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
Fig. 1. Example of data collection for a single PF (top) and AR (bottom) observation. Mg ii spectra in both cases were extracted from the gray
time interval with the interval between each vertical dashed line indicating the completion of a single raster. For context a SJI is included for each
observation at the time roughly indicated by the vertical dashed blue line. The blue curves in the time plots indicate the integrated GOES ﬂux in
the 1−8 Å channel, while the blue regions in the SJI indicate the span of the raster, with a four step raster for the PF observation and a sit-and-stare
for the AR observation.
lected wavelength window) contained at least one value < −100.
Overexposure →If 10 consecutive intensity values were equal
to the maximum intensity value. This is quite a high threshold
and in retrospect should be decreased, however, for the sake of
continuity with previous results we maintain this setting. Poor
signal-to-noise →Any spectra that remained below a 10 DN/s
threshold. Cosmic rays →If the maximum intensity value ap-
peared outside of a small window surrounding both the h&k-
cores, or if the k/h-ratio exceeded the theoretical limits of 2:1 or
1:1 by a value of 0.3, that is spectra with ratios exceeding 2.3 or
less than 0.7 were excluded. Additionally, the reconstruction er-
ror of a variational autoencoder trained on quiet Sun spectra was
used as a way to dynamically mask spectra that are typically as-
sociated with quiescent Sun observations, see Panos et al. (2021)
for details.
3. Model development
In this section, we build up the intuition necessary to understand
how our machine learning algorithm predicts whether a spectrum
comes from a nonﬂaring or ﬂaring active region by introducing a
general set of machine learning principles and training etiquette.
We then discuss our particular case, including a description of
the model that we use (a ConvNet), and how IRIS data in combi-
nation with the search for quality explanations in addition to high
performance, forces us to modify the standard training practice.
3.1. Problem outline
Our goal is to create a function/model FΘ(x) →ˆy, that is pa-
rameterized by a set of arguments {θ | θ ∈Θ}, and can take as
input a raw spectrum x ∈X from the dataset, and produce an
output probability ˆy ∈[0, 1] representing the model’s guess as
to whether the spectrum belongs to either the AR (output closer
to zero) or PF class (output closer to one). The objective is to
ﬁnd a set of parameters {θ}, referred to as the model’s weights,
that generates the closest match between the actual set of labels
{yn} and the predicted set of labels {ˆyn}, for example, we want a
model that can correctly predict the class of as many spectra as
possible. This type of problem is referred to as a binary classiﬁ-
cation problem and can be solved using any number of methods.
The optimal parameterization is usually found by introducing a
loss function L(y, ˆy, Θ), that when minimized, guides the model
parameters in a controlled manner to their optimal values {θ∗}.
This process of incrementally adjusting the model’s weights is
referred to as training and is achieved via gradient descent, that
is, by taking the derivative of the loss function ∂θL(θ) with re-
spect to the weights, and adjusting those parameters in small in-
crements in the direction that results in the largest decrease to
the loss. Since the objective is simply to have a model make as
many correct label predictions as possible, the loss function de-
pends on the true and predicted labels as well as its internal set
of parameters. To train our models we made use of the binary
cross-entropy (BCE) loss function (with regularization)
L(y, ˆy, Θ) = −1
N
N
X
n=1
n
yn log FΘ(xn)
+ (1 −yn) log [1 −FΘ(xn)]
o
+ λ
M
X
m=1
θ2
m,
(1)
which is a measure of dissimilarity between the true set of labels
{yn} and the predicted set of labels {ˆyn}. If the diﬀerences be-
tween these two sets is large, then the loss is also large, and vice
versa. In terms of information theory, the BCE is the average
Article number, page 3 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
number of bits required to decode a signal using an estimated
distribution rather than the true distribution. It is also equivalent
to maximizing the log-likelihood of the data under {θ} and is
identical to the KL-divergence up to an additive constant, where
the KL-divergence is a pseudo metric used to measure the dis-
similarity/distance between two probability distributions.
With large datasets, it is computationally expensive to only
update the weights after computing the sum of the loss over ev-
ery training example (a single epoch). For this reason, we use
a variant of gradient descent called stochastic gradient descent
(Saad 1999), which updates the weights based on a pseudo loss
that is estimated by randomly sampling a subset of spectra in-
stead of all spectra. In our case, N only runs over 64 spectra for
each update.
The last term in Eq. 1 is not part of the deﬁnition of the BCE-
loss but is added to penalize the weights and help the model gen-
eralize to new data. This is necessary since our true objective is
not simply to maximize the number of correct predictions with
the data the model was trained on, but to develop a robust model
that can correctly label new data. The prefactor λ is called a reg-
ularization parameter and dictates the trade-oﬀbetween model
performance and robustness, with larger values generally leading
to poorer performance on the training set but better generaliza-
tion to new instances. If we do not regularize the model, gradient
descent would most likely converge to a set of weights that are
overly optimized on the training data.
To get a true measure of a model’s performance, it is impor-
tant to test the model with data that it has not encountered during
training. It is standard practice to therefore split the data into a
training, validation, and test set. While the weights are adjusted
using data from the training set, the hyperparameters such as the
model architecture as well as the regularization term λ are ad-
justed on the validation set. The test set then serves as the gold
standard to judge a model’s performance and ability to general-
ize.
The quality of the model can then be judged by analyzing
the behavior of the loss (or accuracy) as a function of epoch
(training time) on both the training and test set. During training,
these two losses trace out curves collectively known as learning
curves (as seen in Fig. 2), whose joint dynamics can be used
to identify unwanted behavior such as under or overﬁtting the
training data, as well as the optimal training time (either red or
blue vertical lines). The model with the lowest loss on the test
set is usually selected as optimal.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Epoch
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
Loss
Learning curves obtained during training
best test
best av
train Loss
test Loss
Fig. 2. Example of learning curves obtained during training. The black
and gray curves indicate the performance (in terms of loss) of a model
on both the training (black) and test (gray) set. The best model could
either be the model that scored the lowest loss on the test set (red dashed
line), or the average lowest loss on both the training and test sets (blue
dashed line). Notice that after about 50 epochs the test loss starts to
increase, indicating a possible overﬁtting of the training data.
3.2. Convolutional neural network
Optimization problems such as these are commonly parameter-
ized by NN’s, meaning that the function FΘ is replaced by a NN.
A ConvNet is typically composed out of two sections as seen in
Fig. 3. A feature extraction segment, inspired from the organi-
zation of an animal visual cortex (Hubel & Wiesel 1968), which
derives high level interpretable features via the use of stacked
convolutional modules (e.g., Goodfellow et al. 2016), and the
classiﬁcation segment, composed of multiple fully connected
dense layers that are responsible for interpreting those features
and mapping them to a binary classiﬁcation output (AR/PF). For
a detailed description of the fully connected component see ap-
pendix A.
ConvNets provide several desirable advantages over sim-
ple fully connected networks, most importantly, they provide a
means to automatically search for useful features in the input that
may help minimize the loss function and lead to better classiﬁ-
cations (LeCun et al. 1995). This implies that the convolutional
section of the network generates a potential set of "reservoirs"
for extracting explanations. Our particular ConvNet contains six
such reservoirs referred to as feature maps Ak, indicated by black
vertical lines in Fig. 3. Each feature map is constructed via a suc-
cession of simple layered operations as indicated in Fig. 4.
Firstly, a ﬁlter/ kernel, sweeps across the input with a pre-
deﬁned number of steps between each stride. In this case, the
ﬁlter has a visual ﬁeld of three units and a stride of one unit. At
each step, the network takes the dot-product of the input and the
kernel (a convolution), to produce the set of numbers seen in the
next layer. It is important to note that at this stage two critical
attributes are injected into the ConvNet that distinguish it from
its fully connected counterpart. Firstly, each output node is con-
nected to only three input pixels, unlike a fully connected layer
where every neuron is connected to the entire visual ﬁeld of the
input, and secondly, the parameters of the ﬁlter (in this example
scalar values [−1, 0, 1]) are reused for each convolution across
the entire input. This means that not only do we have fewer con-
nections between the layers, but those connections that we do
have are restrained to share similar sets of weights {θ}, resulting
in a drastic improvement in computational eﬃciency.
The output vector resulting from these convolutions is then
passed through a ReLU activation function which introduces a
nonlinearity by replacing any negative numbers by zero. The
resulting feature map can optionally be further reduced in size
by applying a layer that extracts global statistics, such as a max
pooling layer that maintains the largest of two numbers when
sweeping over the feature map in strides of two. Pooling layers
such as these make the network’s output invariant to small shifts
or rotations in the input, since only general information across
multiple pixels is retained. Additionally, these layers help allevi-
ate overﬁtting and further reduce the number of parameters fed
into the fully connected layers.
Returning back to Fig. 3, each vertical black line represents
a feature map that has been obtained using a diﬀerent ﬁlter. The
values of each ﬁlter also contribute to the set of parameters {θ}
that deﬁne the network, and are updated in kind via backprop-
agation (a NN equivalent of gradient descent) in order to mini-
mize the loss function in Eq. 1. This means that each map tries to
identify useful features to serve as an optimal basis for the fully
connected layers.
During training, the kernel of each feature map alters its pa-
rameters, in order to strengthen responses to particular input pat-
terns. For instance, one of the feature maps could be dedicated to
identify triplet emission. If a spectrum has large triplet emission,
Article number, page 4 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
max pooling
convolutional + relu
(240)
(2, 74)
(4, 22)
(4, 11)
(44)
(5)
(2)
fully connected
Fig. 3. Schematic of a ConvNet. This network is a hybrid between a set of convolutional layers and a fully connected feed forward network. The
convolutional layers contain kernels that scan through the input and extract feature maps (vertical black solid lines). Each layer forms successively
more abstract and sophisticated maps, with each ﬁlter being sensitive to a particular feature that the network deems important for the classiﬁcation
task. The high level features which the network automatically generates are then passed through a max pooling layer (gray vertical lines), which
take summary statistics of the maps, reducing the number of parameters and promoting generalization. The ﬁnal content is then fed into the fully
connected layers which behave as described in Fig. A.1, and are responsible for classifying the spectrum into either the AR or PF class. It is
important to note that the weights and kernels are updated during training, meaning that the ConvNet adaptively searches for a set of features that
is most helpful for distinguishing between AR and PF spectra.
Input Spectrum
Filter
Feature map
ReLU
Max Pooling
Fig. 4. Schematic for the generation of a single feature map. A ﬁl-
ter/kernel consisting of a visual ﬁeld of three pixels scans over the input
in strides of one. At each position, the dot-product between the input
and kernel is taken to form a single output in the next layer. This pro-
cess is referred to as a convolution. The resulting output is then passed
through a ReLU activation function which introduces a nonlinearity into
the network by setting all negative values to zero. The feature map Ak
i
can then optionally be passed through a max pooling function, which
scans across the map in strides of two and maintains only the largest
value. The convolution process makes the network eﬃcient by promot-
ing sparse connections and weight sharing, while the pooling layer fur-
ther reduces the number of parameters and promotes invariance of the
network output to small shifts and rotations of the input.
then this ﬁlter will become very active and initiate a strong sig-
nal to the fully connected layers. This is demonstrated in Fig. 5,
which shows the actual activations of our trained network for
each feature map in Fig. 3. In order to see what feature each map
is searching for, we have projected the activations back onto the
input spectrum, with darker regions indicating importance.
The ﬁrst convolutional layer contains two maps that diﬀer
only slightly from the input. These maps are then convolved
in the second layer to produce more abstract and sophisticated
features. We can see that in the ﬁnal layer, the feature map A1
has understood that the input spectrum contains triplet emission,
and furthermore, that this is important for the classiﬁcation task.
Map A3 on the other hand is searching for the presence, or lack
of pseudo-continuum emission. We therefore see that the con-
volutional layers act as a type of translator, identifying the most
suitable language for the fully connected layers to interpret, and
Conv1
Conv2
Fig. 5. Diagram showing the actual activations of each feature map in
response to an input spectrum x. These maps correspond to the 6 vertical
black solid lines in Fig. 3. Darker shades show what part of the spectrum
each map is identifying.
furthermore, that the ﬁnal convolutional layer contain the most
sophisticated understanding of the spectrum.1
The details of our ConvNet can be seen in Fig. 3. The raw
spectrum enters into the network, is convolved with two ﬁlters
that have strides of 3 and visual ﬁelds of 20 pixels each. The
convolved outputs are passed through a ReLU activation func-
tion to produce two maps of dimension 74 each (We note that
any remaining pixels after taking the modulus of the convolution
are dropped). These two maps serve as inputs for the generation
of four more abstract maps that were obtained using ﬁlters of
stride 3 and visual ﬁelds of 10 pixels. The contents of these ﬁl-
ters are then reduced via a max pooling layer (stride 2 kernel size
2), ﬂattened into a single vector of size 44, and then fed into the
fully connected layers for classiﬁcation. For reasons discussed in
section B of the appendix, this parameterization of the ConvNet
represents a minimalistic architecture that proves suﬃcient for
our classiﬁcation problem.
4. Explainable AI techniques
In this section, we brieﬂy describe two diﬀerent methods,
Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) and
Expected Gradients (EG) for extracting features from Mg ii that
1 The spatial coherency seen in the feature maps is shattered when
passed through the fully connected layers.
Article number, page 5 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
are important for ﬂare prediction, while their detailed description
can be found in the appendix. Both of these methods are applied
to our ConvNet after it has been trained (post-hoc), and produce
visual explanations in the form of saliency maps, which are sim-
ple heatmaps that can be projected back onto the input spectrum
to indicate the most critical features that were responsible for the
network’s decision. The most important features of an input are
often referred to as the discriminant region, because this is the
region that the network focused on to discriminate between the
PF/AR classes. If the network was trained to distinguish between
spectra from active regions that did not lead to a ﬂare, and active
regions that resulted in a ﬂare, then the heatmaps will highlight
any hidden features of the spectral line that are particularly as-
sociated with preﬂare activity.
4.1. Grad-CAM
Since ConvNets are pattern recognition tools that store spatially
coherent high-level representations of the input within their fea-
ture maps, much work has gone into understanding and visu-
alizing the internal content of these special units (e.g., Mahen-
dran & Vedaldi 2015; Dosovitskiy & Brox 2016). It was re-
cently demonstrated that the last layer of feature maps in a Con-
vNet have the ability to behave as object detectors when sim-
ply trained on binary classiﬁcation tasks (Zhou et al. 2014).
Further research showed that the addition of a global pooling
layer (GAP) directly before the softmax classiﬁcation layer, al-
lowed researchers to simplify the network enough to project the
weights of the feature maps back into the image space to ex-
tract the precise discriminant region responsible for a particular
classiﬁcation (Zhou et al. 2015). Their technique called class ac-
tivation mapping (CAM) had a distinct disadvantage in that it re-
quired an oversimpliﬁcation of the models architecture to work,
which might lead to compromises in the performance of the net-
work.
Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM)
(Selvaraju et al. 2017) represents an improvement on CAM in
that it requires fewer architectural constraints. It has recently
been used to automatically identify important features in HMI
full-disk magnetograms for ﬂare prediction (Yi et al. 2021).
Grad-CAM evaluates the importance of the patterns identiﬁed
by the feature maps in the ﬁnal convolutional layer, by monitor-
ing the eﬀect that small perturbations to these maps have on the
output prediction score for a particular input spectrum. A low
resolution saliency map is then constructed by taking a weighted
linear sum of the feature maps, with more weight assigned to
those maps that eﬀect the output most. The saliency map is then
extrapolated to the dimension of the input and projected back
onto the spectrum. One weakness of Grad-CAM is that the qual-
ity of the explanation depends strongly on the selection criterion
of the network’s architecture. For a detailed description of this
method see appendix B.
4.2. Expected gradients
Expected gradients (EG) does not require special convolutional
layers, although the same network used to generate explanations
for Grad-CAM can be reused. Instead of perturbing components
within the network to evaluate the importance of patterns, EG
works directly at the resolution of the input by removing pix-
els/wavelength points and evaluating the net eﬀect on the pre-
diction score (Gabriel et al. 2021). To ensure the fair distribution
of pixel importance, EG makes use of a game theoretic quantity
call the Shapley value φi (Shapley 1951), which was originally
constructed to fairly distribute rewards over coalitions of players.
Under this formalism, the importance φλ(FΘ) of a single inten-
sity point with the current model is obtained by calculating the
average diﬀerence between the prediction score under all combi-
nations of pixel coalitions with and without the pixel in question.
Since this requires taking many subsets over the input, the for-
malism has to be adapted to be amenable for NNs, which require
information to be pumped continuously through each pixel. In-
order to generate pseudo-subsets, EG "turns pixels oﬀ" by ﬂood-
ing them with information from the actual dataset, such that the
expected value from these pixels after many passes results in a
net-zero eﬀect on the output prediction score.
Unlike Grad-CAM, the saliency maps generated from EG are
often less smooth. Since it is sensible to require that the variance
in importance between proximal pixels be small, EG can incor-
porate the attributions into the training procedure as a diﬀeren-
tiable prior that often leads to smoother saliency maps and faster
convergence (Gabriel et al. 2021). We however use the attribu-
tions derived in Grad-CAM as a guide for applying a post-hoc
smoothing after training. For a detailed description of EG see
appendix C.
5. Testing our architecture and XAI
implementations on an artiﬁcial dataset
Only a few examples of attribution methods exist for one-
dimensional inputs such as spectra (e.g., Wang et al. 2016), we
therefore had to test our implementation of the ConvNet’s archi-
tecture and XAI methods in a controlled environment. We note
here that both XAI methods returned similar results (as will be
shown in section 7.2), and as such, we only show the outputs
derived from Grad-CAM.
Our artiﬁcial dataset consisted of 700k randomly selected
Mg ii spectra from several solar ﬂares. From these spectra, we
constructed two classes, the ﬁrst class was composed out of the
original ﬂare spectra, while the second (positive) class consisted
of an identical copy of the ﬁrst except for a small artiﬁcial pertur-
bation inserted at the center of each spectrum, as seen in the top
panel of Fig. 6. The task of the ConvNet is exactly the same as
our present task, namely to solve the binary classiﬁcation prob-
lem of correctly labeling the class of each spectrum. Since both
classes are identical except for the perturbation, the only way for
the ConvNet to distinguish between spectra from the two classes
is to focus all of its attention on the perturbation.
This is exactly what we see in the remaining panels of Fig. 6,
which show how the ConvNet adjusts its focus during training.
From top to bottom, each panel shows the heatmap derived from
the Grad-CAM procedure outlined in the previous section (EG
results are equivalent), with warmer colors (oranges, reds) rep-
resenting wavelengths that the network has deemed important
for its classifying task. The batch number associated with each
of the plots indicates how many spectra the network has trained
on (1 batch is equal to 240 spectra, and each batch represents a
single adjustment to the weights). The weights of the network,
both in the fully connected layers and the six ﬁlters, are initiated
randomly, and as a consequence, the second panel indicates
that the network has not discovered any important features.
After batch 50, gradient descent has allowed the ﬁlters to start
identifying a portion of the central perturbation. With increasing
training time, eventually all of the network’s attention is focused
on the artifact, resulting in a classiﬁcation accuracy of 100%.
This implies that 1) we have a satisfactory network architecture
Article number, page 6 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
Fig. 6. Grad-CAM as a function of training time. A single batch means
that the network has trained on 240 spectra from the artiﬁcial dataset.
Initially the ConvNet focuses randomly on the left wing of the k-line
core, before pooling all of its attention onto the artifact, resulting in a
classiﬁcation accuracy of 100%. Grad-CAM allows us to deduce that
the most important feature for the network’s decision making was ex-
clusively the artifact, which by design was the only way to distinguish
the two classes of spectra.
at least for solving simple problems, and 2) that our attribution
method highlights the feature that distinguishes the two classes.
There is however an important caveat which is not explored
by this example. As it turns out, once the network has discovered
a portion of the artifact its classiﬁcation score saturates rapidly,
and there exists very little motivation for the network to further
adjust its weights to make the perturbation its central focus. This
results in saliency maps (as seen in Fig. 7) that highlight residues
of unimportant features, such as the h&k-line cores, and partly,
or asymmetrically cover the artifact. To be clear, the saliency
maps shown in Fig. 7 were derived from fully trained ConvNets,
which in both cases performed perfectly on the classiﬁcation
task.
Fig. 7. Grad-CAM after two separate training runs. Both ﬁgures show
saliency maps derived from fully trained ConvNets on the artiﬁcial
dataset. In both cases, the models achieve near perfect classiﬁcation
scores, however, the central artifact is asymmetrically covered by the
network’s attention, and residual unimportant features such as the line
cores still show nonzero contributions.
The problem here can possibly be attributed to a ﬂat/wide
global minimum within the loss space as depicted in Fig. 8. In
this hypothetical loss space, each of the white circles represent
a convergent set of parameters {θ1, θ2} found by training diﬀer-
ent randomly initiated models via gradient descent. Although
each converged white circle represents an optimal solution given
the loss function L(θ), such as those found in Fig. 7, it does
not represent the optimal or most intuitive explanation. In other
words, when trying to derive explainable solutions we are forced
to solve two optimization problems. The ﬁrst is simply the loss
given by Eq. 1, which promotes accurate predictions, while the
second loss is harder to formulate and represents the solution that
delivers the maximum amount of explanatory power. Given the
simple conﬁguration of this test, we know that the best expla-
nation is to have the network symmetrically highlight only the
central artifact. This would represent the solution at the center of
the well in Fig. 8.
Since the meaning of "explainable" is not easily formulated
mathematically, we cannot construct an additional term in the
loss function that gives the ConvNet a set of instructions to auto-
matically transverse the degenerate space of solutions towards its
center. We can however locate the center by means of a Monte
Carlo approach, by taking advantage of the randomness of the
initial states, and then appealing to the law of large numbers.
Our course of action is therefore to generate a "swarm" of mod-
els, whose solutions populate the perimeter of the degenerate
minima, and then take the average saliency map of the entire
ensemble
¯Mc =
X
Θ∈Ω
(FΘ →Mc)/|Ω|,
(2)
where FΘ as usual is our function parameterized by a ConvNet
with unique weights Θ, and Mc is the attribution map produced
by a particular model under the Grad-CAM formalism. The ﬁnal
weight solutions are part of a larger set of possible weights Ω.
The results of this method which we call the ensemble method,
can be seen in Fig. 9.
Although the line cores still occupy a residual focus of the
network, the central minimum is indeed the focus of attention
Article number, page 7 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
Fig. 8. Schematic indicating the problem of obtaining the optimal solu-
tion both in terms of model performance and explanatory power. The x-
and y-axis represent the parameters of a ﬁctitious two parameter model.
Adjusting the model parameters aﬀects the loss, which we ideally want
to minimize (lighter regions). Gradient descent allows us to converge
to the global minimum in a controlled manner, however, there might be
multiple solutions (as indicated by the white circles) that have the same
loss. Although these points are degenerate in terms of model perfor-
mance, they do not all have the same explanatory power. We postulate
that the best explanation is located at the center of gravity of this de-
generate space. This point must be located stochastically by initiating
several models and then taking the average.
Fig. 9. Grad-CAM results after averaging over an ensemble of fully
trained models. Although the residual attention in the cores has not
fully drained to the artifact, taking the average saliency map from multi-
ple converged runs results in a symmetric covering of the perturbation,
indicating that the ensemble method oﬀers a possible mechanism for
identifying the most intuitive explanation.
and symmetrically covered. The unwanted attention attributed to
the cores (as seen by the turquoise coloring) can possibly be re-
moved in several ways 1) by including more models into the en-
semble, 2) by using a smart optimizer such as Stochastic Weight
Averaging (SWA) (Izmailov et al. 2018) that allows the solution
to stochastically wander around the central minimum before tak-
ing the average of the model weights, or 3) by implementing a
sort of annealing by randomly perturbing the weights around the
minimum and reducing the importance of those weights which
aﬀect the model’s accuracy least. We selected the ﬁrst option of
including more models, although this is computationally more
expensive, it has the least amount of unknowns. It should also
be pointed out that in eﬀect, the attribution prior (and less so the
post-hoc smoothing) used in EG and discussed in section 4.2, is
an attempted mechanism for traversing the degenerate minima
to the center of gravity.
In conclusion, the need for explainable models places a
precedence on the degenerate solution space, since although all
solutions have the same performance, they do not have the same
explanatory power. We make the assumption that the optimal so-
lution, both in terms of performance and explanation, is located
at the center of gravity of the degenerate minimum. Due to the
nonmathematical formalization of "explanation," this center of
gravity cannot be searched for via controlled optimization tech-
niques, but must be located stochastically via a Monte Carlo ap-
proach. It is not clear to what degree the problems encountered
here carry over into the real AR/PF dataset, however, we expect
that the loss surface will not be as degenerate, allowing the resid-
ual attention to naturally drain with increased training time. Fur-
thermore, it is diﬃcult to imagine why the tenants and practices
derived here would not hold in more complex scenarios.
6. Creating train and test sets
Our data, as well as the objective of obtaining not only high
performance classiﬁers, but also explanations from our network,
complicates the training procedure outlined in section 3.1.
The last section has clariﬁed that we need to train multiple
randomly initiated models simultaneously to derive the most
intuitive set of explanations. Although we remain true to the
general tenants already outlined, such as minimization of our
loss function and splitting our data into a training and test
set, it is not immediately obvious how one selects the data
that should be in each of these sets. We also note that we do
not optimize our model’s hyperparameters with the intent of
increasing performance metrics. This implies that a validation
set is unnecessary. In this section, we explain the method and
logic behind our particular choice of data partitioning.
Our main objective is not simply to discover that spectra
from a single PF region are diﬀerent from spectra from a sin-
gle AR. This might be the case, but it also might simply be a
peculiarity of the two selected observations. In such a circum-
stance, the results would not serve our purpose of understanding
general ﬂare precursory behavior, and would represent a type of
overﬁtting. We instead wish to extract only those diﬀerences that
persist over many observations. It is clear then that we require
many IRIS observations, and furthermore, that we test the model
on data that was not used during training. Additionally, to avoid
another potential form of overﬁtting, spectra from the same IRIS
observations cannot be both in the training and test sets, since
the models could then learn particulars about the observations
themselves, thus suppressing the model’s ability to extract gen-
eral precursory ﬂare behavior.
To decide how to partition the 19 PF and 18 AR observations
into two sets, we had to make an experimental design decision. 1)
We could either randomly partition the observations, 2) perform
a computationally expensive k-fold validation technique which
averages over many partitions, or 3) select the partition that leads
to the highest model performance. We dismissed the ﬁrst option
on the grounds that it could result in an unfortunate partitioning
given the low number of observations, thus ﬂooring the entire
experiment. The second option, although thorough, is extremely
computationally expensive and has the potential of suppressing
common preﬂare signatures. The computational costs of this op-
tion can easily be appreciated if we consider that for every fold,
one has to train multiple models to obtain optimal explanations.
These models then need to generate a collection of saliency maps
at a nonnegligible expense that are then averaged. These aver-
aged maps themselves have to be averaged over all k-folds.
We therefore selected the third option based on the follow-
ing logic: If a common ﬂare triggering mechanism exists and is
Article number, page 8 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
noticeable in the UV, then it would be presumptuous to expect
that it exists in every observation, and furthermore, even if it
did, IRIS’s slit may sometimes miss the preﬂare signatures ow-
ing to its limited ﬁeld of view. Therefore, to give our models the
best chance of isolating a frequent preﬂare signature, the parti-
tioning that leads to the highest model performance would likely
coincide with a partitioning that divides observations with this
mechanism into both sets.
To determine this optimal partitioning, we trained the Con-
vNet in Fig. 3 for 50 random splittings of observations, assign-
ing 5 AR and 5 PF observations to the test set and the remaining
observations to the training set for each split. Since each obser-
vation contains a diﬀerent number of spectra, we ensured AR/PF
balance by undersampling the majority class. We note that mis-
representing the natural frequency of the classes could result in
an inﬂated false positive rate (Woodcock 1976; Bloomﬁeld et al.
2012; Deshmukh et al. 2022), however, we found no signiﬁcant
eﬀects due to undersampling. We also enforced a 3/2 split for
the ﬁnal training and validation sets, meaning we had 50% more
data for training than testing. For each of the 50 splits, we al-
lowed the ConvNet to train over 100 epochs and for each case
extracted the model with the lowest loss on the test set, as seen
in Fig. 2. The statistics for the TSS scores of all 50 partitions can
be seen in the boxplot of Fig. 10, which shows that the models in
general perform skilfully on the binary classiﬁcation task (a TSS
> 0 is better than a random guess). We then selected the partition
corresponding to the red dot, which resulted in one of the highest
TSS scores.
We note that the number of spectra contributed by each ob-
servation although similar is not identical, with some observa-
tions contributing more than others. To ensure our models were
not biased to a particular set of observations, we tested their per-
formance when iteratively removing single observations from
the training and test set. We noted little change to the overall
TSS, which supports the generality of our results.
7. Training a swarm of models on the partition
The high TSS score associated with the chosen data partition
in the last section increases the chance that the model learns a
meaningful and common set of preﬂare signatures that is worth
extracting using our XAI techniques. From section 5, we know
that the optimal explanation is most likely obtained using Monte
Carlo methods by training a large number of models in concert
and then taking the average attributions. We therefore trained
a 50 model ensemble on spectra from the training set, with all
models achieving TSS scores around ∼0.8 on the test set.
7.1. Downsampling the swarm
Applying the full 50 model ensemble to each spectrum of
the combined PF/AR dataset is computationally expensive. We
therefore manually selected a subsample of 9 models that best
preserved the average attributions/heatmaps of the entire swarm,
resulting in drastic reductions to the computational time. To test
the validity of the reduced model selection, we ran tests over
several hundred randomly sampled spectra, and compared the
heatmaps derived from the full 50 model swarm and those de-
rived from the 9 representative models. We noted little to no
loss of explainability. The perceived continuity of generated
heatmaps under a smart subsampling of models can be inter-
preted as selecting a minimum of critical points that when av-
eraged result in a point at the center of gravity of the loss land-
scape. For instance, if the loss function was that seen in Fig. 8,
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
TSS
TSS for all 50 partitions
all other splits
selected split
Fig. 10. Boxplot of the ConvNet’s performance in TSS for all 50 random
partitions of the observations. The red mark represents the performance
of the selected model, while the blue dots are the scores from the re-
maining partitions. The vertical red line is the median score of all splits,
while the edges of the gray box outline the ﬁrst and third quartiles, the
whiskers at the end denote the min and max values while anything out-
side of this limit is considered to be an outlier. The plot shows that the
model easily achieves a high skill on the binary classiﬁcation task.
Fig. 11. Attributions derived using Grad-CAM (top) and Expected Gra-
dients (bottom). Both techniques are equivalent up to an additive con-
stant as they highlight the spectrum in a similar way. In this case, the
model indicates that red wing enhancements are important signs of im-
pending ﬂares.
then one could achieve the same result by densely populating the
circumference of the minimum with many models, or just sim-
ply two critical models whose parameters converge to positions
opposite one another.
7.2. Equivalence of Grad-CAM and EG
We now investigate whether the Grad-CAM and EG formalisms
are equivalent, in other words, whether the vector that both meth-
ods produce are similar. Figure 11 shows a spectrum taken from
the PF dataset and fed through the ensemble of representative
models. The upper and lower panels show the derived model at-
tributions (colors) using Grad-CAM and EG respectively. Both
Explainable AI techniques highlight the spectrum in a similar
way, however, the heatmap from Grad-CAM has been scaled
up by an additive constant. The similarity between attributions
across techniques appears consistent over diﬀerent samples of
spectra. We therefore conclude that the Grad-CAM and EG tech-
niques are equivalent for our purposes up to an additive constant.
In this particular case, it appears that the explanation is not opti-
mal since the ConvNet focuses most of its attention on the k-line
for its decision rather than distributing the importance evenly
over both cores. This may be a consequence of the high degree
of symmetry between the line core shape, such that is the net-
Article number, page 9 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
Fig. 12. Four spectrograms (labeled A-D) in black and white and their associated saliency maps as calculated using Expected Gradients. Darker
shades in the spectrograms indicate higher intensities, while warmer colors, such as reds and oranges in the attribution maps are linked to features
that the model believes are important for ﬂare prediction. Each attribution map was normalized such that their colors are comparable. The position
of the h&k-line cores, as well as the red wing subordinate line are indicated by horizontal black dashed lines in the attribution maps. Panel A
through D shows that triplet emission, downﬂows, broad line cores, and highly asymmetric spectra respectively, are indicative of forthcoming
ﬂares according to the model.
work need not analyze both cores for its decision as discussed in
section 5. We do however stress that these explanations are lo-
cal, meaning they are particular to each spectrum, and that many
times the network does treat the cores on an equal footing.
Having established this equivalence we decided to use EG
for the remainder of the analysis because of its favorable ax-
iomatic property of completeness. This property states that
P
λ φ(xλ) = FΘ(x), that is, the sum of attribution values across
a spectrum’s wavelengths is equivalent to the prediction score of
that spectrum after being passed through the ConvNet. This al-
lows us to create an equivalence between integrated attributions
and prediction scores eﬀectively folding the one onto the other.
It also means that attributions are only useful at the scale of the
wavelength.
8. Results and discussion
In this section, we present the results of applying our ConvNet
and XAI methods to the AR/PF dataset. After processing the data
each spectrum becomes associated with 1) a single scalar value,
which is the ConvNets prediction score ˆy indicating whether it
believes the spectrum is from the PF class (closer to 1), or the
AR class (closer to 0), as well as 2) a vector which redistributes
the total prediction score across the spectrum, functioning as our
heatmap to indicate which features are most responsible for the
total score. We then analyze these outputs at several progres-
sive resolutions, ﬁrstly at the level of single spectra and spectro-
grams, then across the IRIS slit in time, and ﬁnally over entire
observations in relation to the ﬂare start time.
8.1. Attributions over single spectra and spectrograms
In order to quickly analyze what the model found important
throughout the entire dataset, we compiled each spectrum into a
compact representation known as a spectrogram. Spectrograms
are concatenations of single spectra in time along pixels from
IRIS’s slit. Four examples of spectrograms can be seen in the
black and white images of Fig. 12. We note that a single verti-
cal slice from a spectrogram corresponds to a single spectrum,
whose shape is encoded as an intensity map (darker here means
more intense). This compactiﬁcation left us with 59026 PF and
33316 AR spectrograms instead of millions of single spectra.
We then ordered the spectrograms according to their mean pre-
diction scores and manually scanning through the results with
the highest scores, that is, those spectrograms that were strongly
associated with ﬂare precursory activity. Within these spectro-
grams we found consistent patterns that are well represented by
the four examples shown in Fig. 12.
Each of the four panels labeled A-D consist of the original
spectrogram (with darker colors indicating more intense emis-
sion) and its associated saliency map. The saliency map con-
sists of stacked single spectrum attributions like those in Fig. 11.
The y-axis (left) is always wavelength (measured in Angstroms)
while the x-axis is the raster number of the original IRIS obser-
vation, which implicitly encodes time as a function of the raster’s
cadence. For clarity, a minute interval is demarcated by a black
horizontal line in the attribution maps. Since all of these observa-
tions span 25 minutes and terminate with a solar ﬂare, the lengths
of the markers are equivalent. The y-axis (right) tracks the pre-
diction score which is traced out by white lines in the saliency
maps. The position of the vacuum Mg ii h&k-line cores as well
as the red wing triplet emission are demarcated by black dashed
horizontal lines.
The scores and attributions are encoded into the attribution
maps as follows: The average score assigned to each spectrum
(at each raster) from the ensemble of representative models en-
codes the transparency of the map, such that darker regions are
seen to be more important for ﬂare prediction. EG then takes
Article number, page 10 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
these raw scores and fairly distributes them across the wave-
lengths turning scores into attributions. Regions of high attribu-
tions are colored with warmer colors and indicate those features
which are seen as important for ﬂare forecasting. All panels were
normalized with an arbitrary value to make their respective col-
ors comparable.
Fig. 13. Attributions of individual spectra associated with the saliency
maps in Fig. 12. Each spectrum is a slice from the attribution maps
from the locations indicated by the vertical dashed red lines. The y-
axis is normalized intensity and the x-axis is wavelength in angstroms
(Å). Red, orange and turquoise colors indicate features that the model
associates with precursory ﬂare activity.
Panel A shows that triplet emission is strongly indicative of
preﬂare activity, since EG highlights the portion of the spec-
trogram (in red) where this emission can be seen to become
enhanced. When the triplet emission subsides, the model’s at-
tention synchronously dissipates (colors turn from red to blue).
Similarly, panel B indicates that velocity ﬂows in the form of red
wing enhancements are also indicative of preﬂare activity as can
be seen starting around raster 112. It is important to note that up-
ﬂows are regularly ﬂagged as important but are not shown in the
ﬁgure. The spectra in Panel C appear to become substantially
broader around raster 44, and are consequently highlighted or-
ange and red, indicating a positive relationship between preﬂare
features and broad spectra. Finally, panel D shows extremely
broad asymmetric spectra that are ﬂagged as strong predictors.
An example spectrum from each panel can be seen in Fig. 13,
each of which were extracted from their corresponding spec-
trogram from the locations indicated by the red vertical dashed
lines.
We note that the prediction scores, as traced out by the white
lines in the attribution maps of Fig. 12, are saturated close to
the maximum PF prediction score of one. This is because these
maps represent some of the highest scoring maps in our dataset,
while other maps scored much lower.
8.2. Attributions over IRIS slits
The location of high attributions (warm colors) within the 25
minute windows of each saliency map appear to be randomly
distributed, and do not display a monotonic increase in predic-
tion score closer to ﬂare onset as was found for the case of the
X1.6-class ﬂare observed by IRIS on 2014 September 10 (Panos
& Kleint 2020). It is important to note that for the September
10 event, the authors restricted the pixels of the sit-and-stare to
those associated with enhanced activity within the SJIs. To con-
clude whether or not there is any general tendency for prediction
scores to increase during ﬂares, we have to integrate over the
entire IRIS slit.
Figure 14 shows two positive instances that demonstrate ap-
proximate monotonic increases in prediction score with time (for
a comparison with nonﬂare events see Fig. D.1). Here we have
taken the mean attribution score of each spectrum, that is, we
integrated over wavelengths to produce saliency maps over the
entire IRIS slit. The black and white panels indicate the intensity
along the slit at diﬀerent times with darker colors being more in-
tense than lighter colors. The black curves show the GOES X-ray
ﬂux with ﬂare class indicated on the y-axis on the right. Below
each of these images are their associated saliency map which as
usual indicates the most important regions along the slit in time
using the same color code (warmer colors are more important
for prediction). The white curves indicate the prediction score in
time integrated over all pixels, not just a subset that was used
in (Panos & Kleint 2020). The upper left panel of Fig. 12 is in-
fact a spectrogram taken from a single pixel of the upper panel
in Fig. 14, while the lower panel is of a new PF observation en-
tirely. The vertical black line indicates the end of the PF period
and the start of the ﬂare according to the GOES catalog. The in-
tensity and attribution maps were normalized separately across
both sides of this divide, to ensure that the details of the PF pe-
riod were not drowned out by the relatively much higher intensi-
ties and attributions during the ﬂare. We ﬁnd that in roughly 105
out of 135 slits from the 19 PF observations, the location of the
maximum attribution along the slit is predictive and aligned with
the maximum UV emission later during the ﬂare. Another good
example of this can also be seen in Fig. D.2 in the supplementary
material.
In both cases shown in Fig. 14, we see that there is a gen-
eral tendency for high prediction scores to be associated with
enhanced intensities, even though the intensities are only implic-
itly encoded into our models after the normalization. If an ener-
getic event occurs within the chromosphere, the excess emission
from the line cores typically vastly outcompete the gains in the
continuum, leading to a pseudo continuum that appears ﬂat after
normalizing the spectra by their maximum values, see section 2
for details.
To examine the relationship between intensity and prediction
score in more detail we plotted the mean attribution score of ev-
ery PF spectrum as a function of DN’s per second in Fig. 15.
Larger average attributions imply spectra that the model be-
lieves is more useful for ﬂare prediction. In the high intensity
regime right of the dashed orange line, the intensities appear to
Article number, page 11 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
Fig. 14. Attributions over IRIS slits. The top panel shows an intensity
map (black and white) over the pixels of one of IRIS’s slit positions in
time, with darker colors indicating more intense emission. The corre-
sponding saliency map can be seen below, with warmer colors (orange,
red etc.) indicating regions that are seen by the models to be important
for ﬂare prediction. The black curve in the intensity map corresponds to
the GOES-curve whose ﬂare level is indicated on the right axis, while
the white curve in the attribution map is the mean prediction score as a
function of time along the slit (score seen on the right axis). The bottom
panel is the same but for a diﬀerent observation. Both examples have an
increasing prediction score closer to ﬂare onset.
be positively correlated with the attributions, with higher inten-
sity spectra being associated with higher attributions, however,
towards the "low intensity" regime, the coupling between attri-
bution score and intensity is only weak to nonexistent, and it is
possible to have low intensity spectra that are critical for ﬂare
prediction.
8.3. Global explanations
Because the explanations derived from Grad-CAM and EG are
local, that is, speciﬁc for each spectrum, we aim to derive global
explanations so that we can investigate PF features in general. To
do so, we evaluated the distribution of attributions for the high-
est scoring PF spectra, that is, those spectra that had prediction
scores between 0.9 and 1. We then determined the position and
magnitude of each spectrum’s maximum attribution score and
summed the results, allowing us to track the aggregate impor-
tance of each wavelength for the model’s decisions. The result-
ing distribution can be seen in the top panel of Fig 16 together
with an arbitrarily scaled PF spectrum (red) and active region
spectrum (blue) for reference. The vertical dashed lines mark the
position of the Mg ii h&k line cores as well as the Mg ii triplet
emission. The histogram makes it clear that in general, the model
focuses on regions to the left and right of the k-core, with some
attention given to the cores themselves, the triplet emission, as
well as three metallic lines. This oﬀers statistical support for the
observational claims made in section 8.1 in relation to Fig 12, in-
dicating that features such as triplet emission, ﬂows in the form
of red and blue wing enhancements, as well as broad cores all
contribute positively to the network’s prediction score. The large
Fig. 15. Scatterplot of the average attribution using (EG) for each spec-
tra in the PF dataset as a function of intensity (DN/s). The plot is divided
into a low and high intensity regime by a dashed vertical line. The red
lines in either regime represents the best linear ﬁts, and the correspond-
ing R2 values are provided in the upper part of each regime. We see
that "low intensity" spectra can still be critical for ﬂare prediction, and
that very high intensity spectra are more strongly correlated with higher
prediction scores.
focus given to wavelengths on the left of the k-core is not ex-
clusively due to upﬂows, with the model also using these wave-
lengths to identify broad spectral cores such as those indicated in
the third panel of Fig 13. In fact, upon visual inspection, down-
ﬂows are far more prominently given attention than upﬂows in
our dataset.
The model appears to also place focus on particular
absorption lines in the pseudo continuum corresponding to
Ni i, Cr ii, and Mn i. To explain the model’s focus on these
metallic lines, we randomly plotted many samples of spectra
that coincided with high attributions around these wavelengths.
We found no evidence of emission in these lines, however, we
know that the continuum height acts as a proxy for intensity
(high intensity leads to ﬂat continuum after normalization)
and therefore we assume that the model uses these absorp-
tion lines to determine the "ﬂatness" of the continuum and
thereby the intensity of the spectra. This is supported by a PF
observation where the highest attribution scores of the models
are clustered around the metallic lines. An example spectrum
and its associated attributions is shown in the lower panel Fig 16.
Interestingly, the second panel of Fig. 14 shows large in-
creases in attributions from pixels 50−100 towards the end of the
PF period where the GOES curve is relatively ﬂat. Something to
note is the decrease in prediction score, which went from maxi-
mum values of 1 in Fig. 12, to values around 0.4 in Fig. 14. This
decrease in prediction score is a direct consequence of integrat-
ing over the entire slit, where many of the slit’s pixels are sam-
pling inactive regions of the Sun. The dependence of the score on
arbitrary integrations shows that under this current framework,
we have to reevaluate our metric and method of predicting ﬂares
in real-time.
Article number, page 12 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
Fig. 16. Global explanations. Upper panel: Distribution (black bars)
showing where the model focuses most of its attention on aggregate
for the spectra that have high prediction scores. For context, a red and
blue spectrum from the PF and AR class have been plotted respectively,
with vertical black dashed lines indicating the positions of the line cores
and triplet. Flows that show up left and right of the k-core are important
as well as emission in the triplet line. Bottom panel: The model focuses
on the metallic absorption lines as a proxy for intensity, since intense
spectra after being normalized lead to ﬂat pseudo continuum.
8.4. Monotonicity
The problem of ﬂare prediction is best framed as a two part prob-
lem. The ﬁrst part is relatively insensitive to the time domain,
and is only concerned with the performance of a model on a bi-
nary classiﬁcation task. This is the approach that the majority of
ﬂare literature addresses, and it is not principally concerned with
how these data are distributed in time or at what point within the
time window the ﬂare will occur. The second part concerns itself
with how the prediction score evolves over time. The identiﬁca-
tion of monotonic trends in features and or monotonic increases
in predictions are key to deploying practical ﬂare forecasting
strategies.
One can imagine a scenario where triplet emission is critical
for distinguishing two classes (AR/PF) because this emission is
high for all PF observations and low for all AR observations,
however, it might be the case that the triplet emission, although
a greater indicator of class, does not signiﬁcantly vary within the
PF observations themselves, so that it has a very weak predictive
utility along the time dimension. In summary, we need to iden-
tify features that not only tell us if a ﬂare will occur, but also
when it will occur. There is also no a priori reason to believe that
these two sets of features need be the same.
8.5. Attributions over entire IRIS rasters
Following the above discussion, it is also possible for the IRIS
slit at a particular step during the raster to be positioned oﬀof the
active region. When this happens, the prediction score does not
monotonically increase, but can randomly ﬂuctuate and even de-
crease with time. By calculating scores in intervals averaged over
each raster of IRIS, we can set a fair baseline prediction for each
observation. Since this average score is arbitrarily predicated on
the active region itself as well as IRIS’ coverage of the region,
the baseline of one observation is not comparable to the base-
line of another observation, however the trends of the prediction
curve in time as well as its inclination do become comparable.
Figure 17 condenses the behavior of our entire PF (top panel)
and AR (bottom panel) dataset within a single ﬁgure. The upper
panel shows a heatmap, where the y-axis indicates PF observa-
tion, whose number corresponds to Table A1, and the x-axis is
time in minutes before ﬂare onset. Again the warmer colors indi-
cate periods of time that are seen by the models as important for
predicting ﬂares. In other words, redder colors imply stronger
warning signals that a ﬂare will occur.
To derive these heatmaps, each ﬂare observation was placed
on a uniform time grid with intervals of 1 second and spanning
the PF period of 25 minutes. A matrix of size (19×1500), corre-
sponding to 19 PF observations and 1500 seconds, was then in-
crementally populated with the average prediction score over an
entire raster for each observation. Since most observations typi-
cally have cadences of more than two seconds, the initial high ca-
dence grid (and corresponding matrix) was only sparsely popu-
lated. Missing values were then ﬁlled in by linearly interpolating
across the calculated scores within each observation. Each of the
19 rows of the matrix were then normalized by their maximum
value so that observations with relatively high baseline predic-
tion scores did not drown out the behavior of prediction curves
from observations with lower baseline scores. Furthermore, the
observations were purposefully ordered both within Table A1
and the matrix, such that observations with similar normalized
prediction curves would appear close together, thus aiding the
identiﬁcation of patterns across the dataset. The exact same steps
were also carried out for the AR observations seen in the bottom
panel.
We note that the PF dataset shows much more structure than
its AR counterpart which appears to have normalized predic-
tion curves that randomly evolve with time. The PF observations
as seen in the upper panel, can be divided into two regimes (a
strong and weakly predictive regime) depending on the behavior
of their prediction curves. Above the black horizontal line, we
see that 13 of the 19 observations tend to have prediction curves
that increase as we approach each observations ﬂare onset. Fur-
thermore, the prediction envelope with time smooths out as we
move down from PF observation 1 to 13. Below the horizontal
black line we have six PF observations that do not appear to dis-
play any coherent behavior with time.
To understand why some ﬂares are easier to predict than oth-
ers, we analyzed the SJI and AIA movies in every available pass-
band for all PF observations. We found that within the strongly
predictive regime, either the span of the rasters or the position
of the sit-and stares covered a region that was associated with
small brightenings as seen in Fig 18. In contrast, many observa-
tions within the weakly predictive regime had poor coverage of
the major preﬂare activity. Additionally, in the high prediction
regime, 77% of observations were large rasters (10 of 13 obser-
vations) with only 3 sit-and stare observations, this is in contrast
to the low prediction regime where only 33% (2 of the 6 ob-
servations) were rasters, implying that more spatial coverage of
the active region could lead to more reliable increases in predic-
tion score with time. Furthermore, as indicated in the bottom two
panels of Fig 18, those sit-and-stares that were in the strongly
predictive regimes had the IRIS slit positioned directly over the
regions of most preﬂare activity. Our small sample also appears
to indicate that M-class ﬂares are easier to predict than X-class
ﬂares, however, this could simply be due to the way these obser-
vations were sampled. A notable exception is the X-class ﬂare
on March 29, 2014 (PF obs 14), which despite having excel-
lent coverage from IRIS nevertheless had a prediction curve that
decreased before ﬂare onset. The ﬂare was possibly triggered
by an erupting ﬁlament which showed increased chromospheric
Article number, page 13 of 21

A&A proofs: manuscript no. XAI
Fig. 17. Attributions for all observations. The top and bottom panel indicate the variation across all pixels and rasters of the models prediction score
with time for all PF and AR observations respectively. Each row is normalized by its maximum value, and corresponds to a single observation.
Higher relative prediction scores are indicated by warmer colors. We see that the PF observations (top) are much more structured and tend to
predict ﬂares more strongly closer to ﬂare onset, while the AR scores (bottom), result in a heatmap that is far more sporadic in time. The numbers
on each panels y-axis correspond to the observation numbers listed in Table A1.
Doppler velocities at least an hour before ﬂare onset, as well as
plasma heating 15 minutes prior to the ﬁlament eruption (Kleint
et al. 2015). A possible explanation for the poor predictive per-
formance, despite the good IRIS raster coverage and physical
precursory activity, is that spectra sampled from the ﬁlament are
out of the models learned distribution, since the ﬁlament erup-
tion is rare in the training dataset. Furthermore, the prediction
curve might be saturated in the 25 minutes analyzed and might
therefore drop to lower values further away from ﬂare onset.
9. Conclusions
We applied a powerful visual network known as a Convolutional
Neural Network to IRIS Mg ii spectra with the objective of ﬁnd-
ing diﬀerences between spectral shapes sourced from preﬂare
regions and active regions that did not lead to a ﬂare. Our model
was capable of distinguishing spectra from both these classes
with a TSS around 0.8, and a large variance depending on how
the training and testing datasets were split.
We then obtained visual explanations using two comple-
mentary explainable artiﬁcial intelligence techniques called
Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping and Expected Gra-
dients. These techniques allowed us to automatically discover
which features of individual spectra were seen by the model to
be most important for the task of ﬂare prediction, representing
the highest possible resolution of explanations on the level of
the individual wavelengths.
The techniques accomplished this by monitoring the sensi-
tivity of the predictions to either small variations within the net-
work’s internal components, or variations over input pixels di-
rectly. In both cases the techniques returned similar results up
to an additive constant, and allowed us to project heatmaps onto
the spectra, with warmer colors (reds, oranges, etc.) indicating
more important features than cooler colors (blues) for ﬂare pre-
diction. These heatmaps could then be applied to spectrograms
of IRIS in-order to automatically highlight critical regions that
could possibly indicate a ﬂare triggering event.
We found that in addition to high triplet emission and core
intensity, irregularly shaped proﬁles, broad spectral cores, and
single peaked spectra, ﬂows in the form of extended red and blue
wing emissions were also consistently ﬂagged by the model as
important precursory features, and that 78% of the time, high at-
tribution scores along the IRIS slit were predictive of the location
of the ﬂare’s maximum UV emission.
The possible importance of increased turbulence as an early
warning sign and potential ﬂare triggering mechanism has been
noted in the literature (Harra et al. 2001), with an example of
a rise in nonthermal velocity taking place 11 minutes before
ﬂare onset, possibly stimulated by rising ﬂux. Furthermore, even
though high scoring regions are typically associated with en-
hanced intensities, there are several instances where prediction
scores increase while both intensity and the GOES-curve remain
constant, once again consistent with the ﬁndings of Harra et al.
Article number, page 14 of 21

Brandon Panos et al.: Identifying preﬂare spectral features using explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
Fig. 18. Selected images of diﬀerent PF observations in the strongly pre-
dictive regime of Fig 17. The PF observation numbering corresponding
to Table A1, as well as the ﬁlter wavelength is indicated in the top left
and right hand corners of each image, respectively. The green vertical
lines indicate the span of the IRIS raster. The ﬂares that are easiest to
predict based on spectra have the slit directly over regions where bright-
enings occur.
(2001), and indicating the importance of spectral analysis for
ﬂare prediction at a high resolution.
We note that any practical deployment of a ﬂare prediction
strategy for small ﬁeld of view spacecrafts like IRIS with mul-
tiple programmable observational settings (exposure time, ca-
dence, raster mode etc.) is unlikely. The reasons for this are as
follows: If we use the prediction score (number of spectra scored
conﬁdently by the network as PF), as a "ﬂare warning signal,"
then the absolute value of the score becomes meaningless due to
arbitrarily variations in active region coverage, which depends
on the size of the active region itself, as well as programmatic de-
cisions such as IRIS’s slit length and area spanned by the raster.
All these free variables can either artiﬁcially drive the prediction
scores up or down. Additionally, features that were important
for the binary classiﬁcation task of separating AR/PF spectra,
are not necessarily equally important for telling us when a ﬂare
will occur in time. All these considerations imply that the ac-
tual objective for IRIS spectral based ﬂare prediction, is not to
achieve high TSS scores, but to identify monotonically increas-
ing predictions that have steep inclinations, while disregarding
the absolute value of these curves.
We found that on aggregate, the prediction curves increased
for the majority of our PF observations closer to ﬂare onset, how-
ever, there were several exceptions that did not show any coher-
ent increase in prediction score, and some observations whose
scores actually decreased in time. An extensive analysis of each
PF observation over all SJI and AIA ﬁlters revealed that ﬂares
were easier to predict when IRIS sampled a large spatial region
or had its slit positioned directly over small brightenings.
Although practical and reliable ﬂare prediction with IRIS is
unlikely, the methods developed here could easily be exported to
new instruments that can extract spectroscopic data from entire
active regions with multi-slit girds, such as NASA’s new MUSE
mission that has a multi, 37 slit EUV coronal spectrograph
(Pontieu et al. 2019).
Acknowledgements. All ConvNets and XAI techniques were programmed us-
ing the deep learning library of PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2019) and TensorFlow
(Abadi et al. 2015). For the implementation of the k-means algorithm, we used
the Scikit-Learn module (Pedregosa et al. 2011). The pre-processing was accom-
plished with IRISreader, a library speciﬁcally developed for handling large vol-
umes of IRIS data (Huwyler 2018). This work was supported by a SNSF PRIMA
grant. We are grateful to LMSAL for allowing us to download the IRIS database.
IRIS is a NASA small explorer mission developed and operated by LMSAL with
mission operations executed at NASA Ames Research Center and major contri-
butions to downlink communications funded by ESA and the Norwegian Space
Centre.
