arXiv:1601.07358v1  [quant-ph]  27 Jan 2016
Quantum machine learning with glow for episodic tasks and decision games
Jens Clausen and Hans J. Briegel
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
(Dated: September 4, 2018)
We consider a general class of models, where a reinforcement learning (RL) agent learns from
cyclic interactions with an external environment via classical signals. Perceptual inputs are encoded
as quantum states, which are subsequently transformed by a quantum channel representing the
agent’s memory, while the outcomes of measurements performed at the channel’s output determine
the agent’s actions. The learning takes place via stepwise modiﬁcations of the channel properties.
They are described by an update rule that is inspired by the projective simulation (PS) model and
equipped with a glow mechanism that allows for a backpropagation of policy changes, analogous to
the eligibility traces in RL and edge glow in PS. In this way, the model combines features of PS
with the ability for generalization, oﬀered by its physical embodiment as a quantum system. We
apply the agent to various setups of an invasion game and a grid world, which serve as elementary
model tasks allowing a direct comparison with a basic classical PS agent.
PACS numbers:
07.05.Mh, 87.19.lv, 02.50.Le, 03.67.-a, 03.67.Ac
Keywords:
learning agents, decision making, artiﬁcial intelligence, reinforcement learning, projective simu-
lation, quantum machine learning, quantum information and computation, quantum open systems
I.
INTRODUCTION
A.
Motivation
If we consider the development of new technologies as
a collective learning process, we can distinguish between
diﬀerent interlaced processes. While basic research fo-
cuses on exploration characterised by a search for poten-
tial alternatives to established methods, the more promis-
ing an approach appears, the more likely it becomes sub-
ject to subsequent exploitation, where it is optimised and
matured with the ultimate hope to supersede what is
available. An example of explorative activity are early ef-
forts to solve problems by artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), such
as inventing unconventional heuristic techniques. AI has
recently regained interest [1, 2], which may be a conse-
quence of new approaches to computation [3, 4] as well
as improved capacities of classical computing and net-
working. The present work aims at drawing a connec-
tion between the recently suggested scheme of PS [5, 6]
and quantum control theory [7, 8], restricting attention
to example problems analogous to those considered in
the basic classical PS schemes [5, 6, 9, 10], rather than
a treatment of practically relevant but large-scale appli-
cations of, e.g., machine learning. A discussion of scala-
bility, quantum speed up, or practical implementability
[11–13] is beyond the scope of this work.
We consider a class of schemes, where a quantum agent
learns from cyclic interactions with an external environ-
ment via classical signals. The learning can be considered
as an internal quantum navigation process of the agent’s
“hardware” or “substrate” that forms its memory of past
experience. For notational convenience, we describe the
memory operation as a unitary ˆU involving (information
carrying and other) controllable and uncontrollable de-
grees of freedom (such as a “bath”), where the latter
are not necessarily identical with the environment, on
which the agent operates. While conceptually, the mem-
ory may hence be seen as an open quantum system [14],
the numerical examples considered in the present work
restrict to closed system dynamics. This navigation of
agent memory ˆU must be distinguished from the evolu-
tion of quantum states in which, following external or
internal stimulus, the memory is excited [5, 11]. Learn-
ing as an internal navigation process corresponds to the
colloquial notion of a learner desiring to quickly “make
progress” rather than “marking time”. For the agent’s
internal dynamics, we talk of a navigation process rather
than a navigation problem that is to be solved, since ul-
timately, the agent responds to its environment that is
generally unknown and subject to unpredictable changes.
While the proposed PS-model is characterised by an
episodic & compositional memory (ECM), we here ig-
nore the clip network aspect and restrict attention to
a parameter updating that is motivated from the basic
scheme [5, 6], which we apply to simple learning tasks in-
volving an agent equipped with a quantum memory. We
speciﬁcally reconsider some of the examples discussed in
[5, 9, 10] in order to investigate to what extent the results
can be reproduced. In contrast to the classical scheme,
where the parameters are weights in a clip network, we
here refrain from ascribing a particular role, they could
play (e.g., in a quantum walk picture mentioned in [5]).
Here, the parameters are simply controls, although in
our examples, they are deﬁned as interaction strengths
in a stack of layers constituting the agent memory ˆU.
This choice of construction is however not essential for
the main principle. From the viewpoint of the network-
based classical PS, drawing a connection to quantum con-
trol theory opens the possibility to apply results obtained
in the latter ﬁeld over the last years [15]. On the other
hand, classical PS is similar to RL [16, 17], which con-
siders a type of problems, where an “agent” (embodied
decision maker or “controller”) learns from interaction
with an environment (controlled system or “plant”) to

2
achieve a goal.
The learning consists in developing a
(generally stochastic) rule, the agent’s “policy”, of how
to act depending on the situation it faces, with the goal
to accumulate “reward” granted by the environment. In
RL, the environment is anything outside of control of this
decision making. The reward could describe for example
pleasure or pain felt by an individual.
It is generated
within the individual’s body but is beyond it’s control,
and therefore considered originating in the agent’s envi-
ronment. Historically, RL, which must be distinguished
from supervised learning, originates from merging a trait
in animal psychology with a trait in control theory. Al-
though dynamic programming as the basis of the latter
is well understood, limited knowledge of the environment
along with a vast number of conceivable situations, an
RL-agent may face, render a direct solution impossible
in practice. Analogous to RL growing out of dynamic
programming by reﬁning the updates of values, in a quan-
tum context, one could think of reﬁning quantum control
schemes with algorithmic elements that enhance their re-
source eﬃciency.
Another aspect is embodiment. A historical example
is application-speciﬁc classical optical computing with a
4F-optical correlator. A more recent eﬀort is neuromor-
phic computing, which aims at a very-large-scale integra-
tion (VLSI)-based physical implementation of neural net-
works, whose simulation with a conventional computer
architecture is ineﬃcient. This becomes even more cru-
cial for quantum systems, which may be implemented
as superconducting solid state devices, trapped ions or
atoms, or wave guide-conﬁned optical ﬁelds. Given the
availability of a controllable quantum system, it is hence
tempting to transform quantum state-encoded sensory
input and select actions based on measurement outcomes.
While the parameter update is typically done by some
standard linear temporal diﬀerence (TD)-rule, the se-
lection of actions is in classical algorithms governed by
a separate stochastic rule that tries to balance explo-
ration and exploitation. This stochastic rule is described
in terms of a policy function, that determines, how the
probabilities for choosing the respective actions depend
on the value functions in RL, edge strengths in PS, or
controls in direct policy approaches. Examples are the
ε-greedy and the softmax-rule. The quantum measure-
ment here serves as a direct physical realisation of an
action-selection, whose uncertainty allows to incorporate
both exploration and exploitation [15]. In our context,
the resulting measurement-based (and hence eﬀectively
quadratic) policy forms an intermediate between the lin-
ear stochastic function used in [5] and the exponential
softmax-function applied in [9]. A measurement-based
policy can moreover be tailored on demand by the way
in which classical input is encoded as a quantum state.
One could, e.g., apply mixtures of a pure state and a max-
imally mixed state to mimic an ε-greedy policy function,
or one could use thermal input states to mimic an expo-
nential function. In contrast to the value function-based
RL, our approach amounts to a direct policy search,
where the agent-environment interaction employs a gen-
eral state preparation →transformation →measurement
scheme, that reﬂects the kinematic structure of quantum
mechanics.
B.
RL as a reward-driven navigation of the agent
memory
Consider the speciﬁc task of mapping input states |si⟩
by means of a controllable unitary ˆU to outputs |ai⟩.
Under the (restrictive) assumption, that for each input
there is exactly one correct output, the task is to learn
this output from interaction with an environment.
In
our context, the |si⟩(|ai⟩) are regarded as encoded per-
cepts (actions), while ˆU acts as memory of the learned
information and can ﬁnally accomplish the mapping as
an embodied “ad hoc” computer or an “oracle”, which is
similar to learning an unknown unitary [18].
Consider (i) the case where there is only one possible
input state |s⟩. If the task is the navigation of the output
state ˆ̺= ˆU|s⟩⟨s| ˆU † by means of ˆU to a desired destination
state |a⟩, a learning agent has to realize the maximisation
of the conditional probability p(a|s) = ⟨a|ˆ̺|a⟩by tuning
ˆU. The intuition behind this is that p is bounded and
if ˆU(h) depends analytically on some control vector h,
the gradient with respect to h must vanish at the max-
imum of p. To give a simple example, we assume that
ˆU(t) depends (rather than on h) on a single real param-
eter t in a continuous and diﬀerentiable way such that
it obeys the Schr¨odinger equation
d
dt ˆU = −i ˆH ˆU with the
state boundary conditions ˆ̺(0)=|s⟩⟨s| and ˆ̺(tF)=|a⟩⟨a|.
This gives
dp(t)
dt
= 2Re⟨a|
 d
dt
ˆU

|s⟩⟨s| ˆU †|a⟩
(1)
= 2Im⟨a| ˆH ˆ̺(t)|a⟩,
(2)
so that indeed
dp(t)
dt |t=tF = 2Im⟨a| ˆH|a⟩= 0.
(3)
Any algorithm that results in a ˆU such that p approaches
1 accomplishes this task.
Assume now that (ii) we are required to transform a
given orthonormal basis (ONB) {|si⟩} into another given
ONB {|ai⟩} of a vector space of same dimension, but we
are not told which state is to be transformed into which
other state. We could build a quantum device that imple-
ments some unitary ˆUT such that |ai⟩= ˆUT|si⟩. Preparing
the system in state |si⟩and measuring in the second basis
gives outcome |ai⟩. One may consider the problem as a
(trivial) learning task, namely that of an identical map-
ping of the state-indices i. However, if we do not know
from the beginning what kind of mapping the solution
is, we have to learn it. In our quantum device, we would
tune ˆU until it gives the desired measurement statistics.
Inspired by [5], we call this task “invasion game”. To

3
solve it, we initialize the device in states |si⟩chosen ran-
domly from the given ONB, while the measurement is
done in the second ONB formed by the |ai⟩. The algo-
rithm will drive ˆU to some unitary ˆU ′
2 ˆUT ˆU1, where ˆU1
( ˆU ′
2) are undetermined unitaries which are diagonal in
the basis {|si⟩} ({|ai⟩}).
If (iii) the percept states are random, this phase free-
dom is removed up to a global phase. In the simplest
case, we draw the initial states of the device from an
“overcomplete” basis, where the set of all possible states
is linearly dependent. For a n-level system, this can be
accomplished by (randomly) choosing n SU(n)-unitaries.
During each state initialisation, we then take one ˆUR from
this set, a random |si⟩from our ﬁrst ONB, and then pre-
pare the device in a state ˆUR|si⟩. Consequently, the mea-
surement is done in a transformed basis formed by the
ˆUT ˆUR ˆU −1
T |ai⟩rather than the |ai⟩themselves.
In this sense, the navigation of (i) a given input state,
(ii) a given ONB, and (iii) random states can be described
as a navigation of unitaries ˆU with a varying amount of
freedom. While formally, all three cases (i)-(iii) can be
considered as special cases of a navigation of ˆU(h) to
a point (C11), where a percept statistics-based ﬁdelity
(C9) becomes maximum, practically they can be accom-
plished in RL by means of the mentioned reward signal,
independently of the availability of analytic solutions. In
what follows, we consider ˆU as a memory of an RL-agent,
that solves tasks arising from its interaction with an en-
vironment.
II.
A CYBERNETIC PERSPECTIVE
The scheme is depicted in Fig. 1. The agent is equipped
with some quantum channel that acts as its memory
whose properties can be modiﬁed by control parameters
denoted by a vector h. Examples of memory structures
are listed in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2 and in what follows, we
refer to the memory operation by means of some unitary
ˆU for notational simplicity. Since any quantum process
can be treated as unitary on an enlarged space, this is
not a conceptual restriction. The agent interacts with
an external environment in discrete cycles t. At the be-
ginning of a cycle, the agent receives (via sensors) some
percept s, which it encodes as a quantum state ˆ̺(s), in
which its memory is prepared. After transformation of
ˆ̺(s) by the memory channel, a quantum measurement is
performed, where we assume for simplicity that the pos-
itive operator valued measure (POVM) {ˆΠ} describing
this measurement is ﬁxed. Depending on the outcome of
this measurement, an action a is selected and performed
on the environment (via actuators), which completes the
cycle. The environment reacts with a new percept and
a reward r, which are perceived by the agent during the
following cycle. Depending on the reward, some adjust-
ments are made on the control parameters, which modify
the properties of the memory channel (i.e., its “hard-
at
st
rt
δht
st+1
rt+1
ˆ̺(st)
ˆΠ(at)
Memory(ht)
Environment
Agent
planning
NO
FIG. 1. Agent-environment interaction as a feedback scheme.
The s are percepts, which initialise the agent’s memory in a
quantum state ˆ̺(s). Choice of an action a is made by a mea-
surement process as described by a given POVM ˆΠ. Depend-
ing on the rewards r given by the environment, the memory
is updated at the end of each cycle t. The memory can also
be modiﬁed by internal loops based on a numerical objective
NO (dotted line) or measurements (dash-dotted line).
(a)
ˆ̺S
ˆUS
ˆΠS
(b)
ˆ̺SB
ˆUSB
ˆΠS
(c)
ˆ̺SA
ˆUSA
ˆΠA
(d)
ˆ̺SAB
ˆUSAB
ˆΠA
FIG. 2. Examples for the agent’s memory as shown in Fig. 1.
(a) unitary evolution of the percept states, (b) open system
evolution due to interaction with a bath B, (c) composite
memory with coupled subsystems for percept (S) and action
(A) variables, (d) extends (c) to an open system evolution
analogous to (b) extending (a). Further ancilla systems may
be added (not shown), to account for, e.g., emotion degrees
of freedom introduced in [5].
ware”). This feedback loop is adapted from the classical
schemes in [16] and [17], where the percepts s in Fig. 1
correspond to the states in [16].
The agent’s interac-
tion with the environment is here considered classical in
the sense that percepts, actions and rewards are classical
signals. The environment itself is not speciﬁed, it could
represent, e.g., an experiment performed on a quantum
system. Note that the environment in Fig. 1 is not to
be confused with the bath in Fig. 2, which aﬀects the

4
memory channel but is not considered part of the agents
“habitat”.
In addition to the external loop, we may also equip the
agent with two types of internal feedback loops, which
allow the agent to undertake what corresponds to “plan-
ning steps” in RL and “reﬂection” in PS. One type is
similar to the external loop in that it involves state ini-
tialisations and measurements on the memory channel,
but exploits that percepts, actions and rewards can be
recorded and reproduced as a consequence of their clas-
sicality. The second type of internal loop does not involve
state evolutions but requires some mathematical model of
the memory channel itself, which is used to directly cal-
culate a numerical objective (NO), whose value is used to
alter the control parameters. Fig. 1 does not imply that
all of these loops need to be simultaneously present, they
are rather thought of either subprocesses within an over-
all agent scheme or possible modes of its operation. The
numerical examples in this work will exclusively apply
the external loop.
All three loops involve a parameter update δh. In a
“ﬁrst-order” update, δh is proportional to some quan-
tity that depends on the gradient ∇ˆU of ˆU with respect
to h.
This gradient can either be computed directly
from a memory model ˆU(h) (i.e., from some symbolic ex-
pression of ∇ˆU if available) or estimated from measure-
ments. These “measurements” can be physical (POVM
in Fig. 1) or numerical (NO in Fig. 1). For the estima-
tion, one varies the components of h by a small amount
and records the changes in the measured POVM or com-
puted NO. Here are some elementary examples: (1a) A
simulation of an external loop with a given model-based
(i.e. analytic) ∇ˆU is performed in Sec. V A 1 (Fig. 5)
for the case Fig. 2(c), in Sec. V A 2 (Figs. 7-8) for the
case Fig. 2(a), and in Sec. V B (Figs. 11 and 12) for the
case Fig. 2(c).
(1b) A simulation of an external loop
with a POVM measurement-based ∇ˆU is carried out in
[19] (Fig.
6) for the case Fig. 2(b).
(2) A NO-based
internal loop with a model-based ∇ˆU is considered in
[20] for the case Fig. 2(b) and in [19] (Figs.2-4) for the
case Fig. 2(a).
(3) The POVM-based internal loop in
Fig. 1 can be used to estimate ∇ˆU in the absence of a
model ˆU(h) of the agent memory. To this end, one of
the agent’s possibilities consists in inserting a number of
internal cycles between each external cycle, where it re-
peatedly prepares its memory in the latest percept state
and observes how a variation δh aﬀects the measurement
statistics. A discussion of this will be given in Sec. VI.
Beyond these examples, all three loops can be interlaced
with each other in various ways, analogous to the wealth
of approaches reviewed in [16].
III.
UPDATE RULE IN PARAMETER SPACE
For the cycle-wise update of the control parameters h
of the memory channel ˆU, we apply a rule
h′ = h + κ(h∞−h) + αr
t−1
X
k=0
(1 −η)kDt−k,
(4)
inspired by the basic model of PS [5, 6]. The number of
components hk can range from one (h scalar) to inﬁnity
(h may represent a function or a vector of functions), and
the hk can be assumed to be real-valued without loss of
generality. In [5, 6], the components of h are the edge
strengths of a directed graph representing a network of
clips (the graph’s vertices). While these clips are consid-
ered sequences of remembered percepts and actions, the
network itself abstracts from the clip’s internal contents.
Our view of h as a control vector is one further simpli-
ﬁcation and generalization that may allow for but does
not require the view of the memory as a network.
In (4), h and h′ are the control vectors before and after
the update at cycle t, respectively. α ≥0 is a (typically
small) learning rate, and r is the reward given at cycle
t.
κ ∈[0, 1] is a relaxation rate towards some equilib-
rium value h∞in the absence of rewards. This allows for
what corresponds to the “forgetting” process suggested
in [5, 6] to account for dissipation in an embodied imple-
mentation and deal with time-dependent environments.
A natural possibility is to identify the value h0, with
which the memory is initialised before the ﬁrst cycle, with
h∞. This could be the zero vector h0 = 0 yielding, e.g.,
the identity, ˆU0 = ˆU(h0) = ˆI. The learning process will
then be a reward-driven and generally stochastic naviga-
tion in parameter space {h} away from the zero vector 0.
Lifted to ˆU(h), this navigation starts at the identity ˆU0
= ˆI, that relaxes back to it in the prolonged absence of
rewards. In this work, we consider static environments
as in [9], and hence always set κ = 0. Dt is a diﬀerence
vector. While some options for ﬁnite diﬀerence choices
of D are outlined in Sec. VI, in all numerical examples
within this work we restrict to the case, where Dt = ∇t
is a short-hand notation for the gradient
∇t = ∇p(a|s)t = 2Re

 ˆU † ˆΠ(a)∇ˆU

t,
(5)
p(a|s) = Tr
 ˆU ˆ̺(s) ˆU † ˆΠ(a)

=

 ˆU † ˆΠ(a) ˆU

,
(6)
with components ∂p(a|s)
∂hk
at cycle t. p(a|s) is the prob-
ability of the obtained measurement outcome a under
the condition of the respective cycle’s percept state ˆ̺(s),
where ⟨· · · ⟩≡Tr[ˆ̺(s) · · · ] denotes the expectation value
with respect to this state, and ˆΠ(a) is the member of
the POVM that corresponds to measurement outcome a.
The latter determines the action performed by the agent,
and we use the same symbol for both. (1 −η) describes
a backward-discount rate, which we have deﬁned via a
parameter η ∈[0, 1] to allow comparison with the glow
mechanism introduced in [6]. As mentioned above, the

5
unitary transformation of the respective percept states
ˆ̺(st) by the memory ˆU = ˆU(ht) at cycle t in (6) refers in
general to a larger (dilated) space. The dynamical semi-
group of CPT maps proposed in [5] is included and can
be recovered by referring to Fig. 2(d) [or alternatively
Fig. 2(b)] and the assumption that
ˆ̺(st)
(≡ˆ̺SAB) = ˆ̺SA(st) ⊗ˆ̺B,
(7)
TrB
h
ˆU ˆ̺(st) ˆU †i
= eLSA∆T (mem)
t
ˆ̺SA(st),
(8)
where the physical memory evolution time ∆T (mem)
t
may
depend on the cycle t for a chosen parametrisation ˆU(h)
and must be distinguished from the agent response time
that can additionally be aﬀected by the potential involve-
ment of internal loops in Fig. 1. The superoperator L =
LSA, whose eﬀect on ˆ̺ = ˆ̺SA is deﬁned as a sum
Lˆ̺ = −i[ ˆH, ˆ̺] + Lˆ̺,
(9)
generates in [5] a quantum walk and is given by a Hamil-
tonian ˆH = P
{j,k}∈E λjk(ˆckj + ˆc†
kj) + P
j∈V ǫjˆcjj and a
Lindbladian Lˆ̺ = P
{j,k}∈E κjk(ˆckj ˆ̺ˆc†
kj −1
2{ˆc†
kjˆckj, ˆ̺}),
with ˆckj = |ck⟩⟨cj| performing transitions between clip
states |cl⟩∈HSA along a graph G = (V, E) consisting
of a set V of vertices and a set E of edges.
Since on
the one hand, we here do not intend to necessarily rep-
resent ˆU by a clip network, and on the other hand do
not want to exclude from the outset situations involv-
ing time-dependent or non-Markovian bath eﬀects [21],
we use the dilated ˆU for simplicity instead. The set of
all probabilities p(a|s) in (6), i.e, the whole conditional
distribution then deﬁnes the agent’s policy.
A reward given by the environment at time t raises
the question of the extent to which decisions made by
the agent in the past have contributed to this respective
reward. A heuristic method is to attribute all past deci-
sions, but to a lesser degree the further the decision lies
in the past. (Considering the agent’s life as a trajectory
of subsequent percepts and actions, we could imagine the
latest event trailing a decaying tail behind.) A detailed
description of this idea is presented in [16] in form of the
eligibility traces, which can be implemented as accumu-
lating or replacing traces. In the context of PS, a similar
idea has been introduced as glow mechanism that can
be implemented as edge or clip glow [6, 9]. In our con-
text (4), we realise it by updating the control vector by
a backward-discounted sum of gradients ∇t−k referring
to percepts and actions involved in cycles that happened
k steps in the past. A sole update by the present gra-
dient is included as limit η = 1, for which (4) reduces
to h′ = h + αr∇p(a|s).
This special case is suﬃcient
for the invasion game, which we will consider in Sec. V,
because at each cycle, the environment provides a feed-
back on the correctness of the agent’s decision by means
of a non-zero reward. After that, we apply the general
update (4) to a grid world task, where the agent’s goal
cannot be achieved by a single action, and where the long
term consequences of its individual decisions cannot be
foreseen by the agent.
IV.
RELATION TO EXISTING METHODS
In this section, we ignore the embodied implementa-
tion of our method as a quantum agent and brieﬂy sum-
marise and compare the update rules of the methods con-
sidered from a computational point of view. It should
be stressed that RL is an umbrella term for problems
that can be described as agent-environment interactions
characterised by percepts/states, actions, and rewards.
Hence all methods considered here are approaches to
RL-problems.
For notational convenience however, we
here denote the standard value function-based methods
as “RL” in a closer sense, keeping in mind that alterna-
tives such as direct policy search deal with the same type
of problem. The standard RL-methods successively ap-
proximate for each state or state action pair the expected
return Rt =P∞
k=0 γkrt+k+1, i.e., a sum of future rewards
r, forward-discounted by a discount rate γ ∈[0, 1], that
the agent is trying to maximise by policy learning. Cor-
rections to the current estimates can be done by shifting
them a bit towards actual rewards observed during an
arbitrarily given number n of future cycles, giving rise to
“corrected n-step truncated returns” R(n)
t
= rt+1 + γrt+2
+. . .+γn−1rt+n +γnVt(st+n), where V is the value func-
tion of the respective future state st+n (analogous consid-
erations hold for state action pairs). A weighted average
of these gives the λ-return Rλ
t = (1 −λ) P∞
n=1 λn−1R(n)
t
,
where λ ∈[0, 1] is a parameter. In an equivalent “mecha-
nistic” backward view, this gives rise to so-called eligibil-
ity traces. Since the glow mechanism of PS is closely re-
lated to this, we base our comparison on the λ-extension
of one-step RL. λ=0 describes the limit of shallow sample
backups of single-step learning, whereas the other limit λ
= 1 refers to the deep backups of Monte Carlo sampling,
cf. Fig. 10.1 in [16].
It would be a futile task to try a mapping of the numer-
ous variations, extensions, or combinations with other
approaches that have been discussed or are currently de-
veloped for the methods mentioned, such as actor-critic
methods or planning in RL, or emotion, reﬂection, com-
position, generalization, or meta-learning in PS. In par-
ticular, our notion of basic PS implies a restriction to
clips of length L = 1, which reduces the edge strengths
in the ECM clip network Fig. 2 in [5] to values h(s, a)
of state-action pairs. Furthermore, in this section, we re-
strict attention to the basic versions that are suﬃcient to
treat the numerical example problems discussed in this
work. We may think of tasks such as grid world, where
actions lead to state transitions, until a terminal state
has been reached, which ends the respective episode, cf.
Sec. V.

6
A.
Tabular RL
In tabular RL, the updates are performed according to
e ←(e+)1
[for s or (s, a) visited],
(10)
U ←U + α [r + γU ′ −U] e
= (1 −αe)U + αer + αγeU ′,
(11)
e ←γλe,
(12)
where U = V (s) is a state value function in TD(λ), cf.
Fig. 7.7 in [16], whereas U = Q(s, a) is an action value
function in SARSA(λ), cf. Fig. 7.11 in [16]. U ′ = V (s′)
[or U ′ = Q(s′, a′)] refers to the value of the subsequent
state or state action pair. e = e(s) [e = e(s, a)] denote
the eligibility trace in TD(λ) [SARSA(λ)]. They can be
updated by accumulating (e ←e + 1) or replacing (e ←
1) them in (10) (ignoring other options such as clearing
traces [16]). α is a learning rate, r is the reward, and γ the
discount rate. Note that there are alternatives to (10)-
(12). One of them is Q-learning, which can be derived
from SARSA=SARSA(λ = 0) by updating Q(s, a) oﬀ-
policy, which simpliﬁes a mathematical analysis. Since a
Q(λ)-extension of Q-learning is less straightforward, and
there are convergence issues with respect to the gradient-
ascent form discussed below (cf. Sec. 8.5 in [16]), while
the methods discussed here update on-policy, we restrict
attention to (10)-(12).
B.
Gradient-ascent RL
Tabular RL is a special case of gradient-ascent RL,
where U is in the latter deﬁned as in (10)-(12), except
that it is given by a number of parameters θk, which are
combined to a vector θ.
This parametrisation can be
done arbitrarily. In the linear case, the parameters could
be coeﬃcients of, e.g., some (ﬁnite) function expansion,
where the functions represent “features”.
Hence U =
U(θ), and the components of the gradient ∇U are
∂U
∂θk ,
giving rise to a vector e of eligibility traces. The updates
(10)-(12) now generalize to
e ←γλe + ∇U,
(13)
θ ←θ + α [r + γU ′ −U] e,
(14)
cf. Sec. 8 in [16]. While the eligibility traces are ini-
tialised with zero, the value functions (by means of their
parameters) can be initialised arbitrarily in tabular and
gradient-ascent RL.
C.
PS
Classical PS is a tabular model. By tabular we mean
that the percepts and actions (and ultimately also clips of
length L > 1 in the ECM) form discrete (i.e., countable)
sets, with the consequence, that the edge strengths h can
be combined to a table (matrix).
Let us hence write
the updates as summarised in App. A in a form allowing
comparison with (10)-(12):
g ←1
[for (s, a) visited],
(15)
h ←h + λg + γ(heq −h)
= (1 −γ)h + λg + γheq,
(16)
g ←(1 −η)g.
(17)
In (15)-(17), we intentionally adopted the notation of PS.
The glow parameter g in (15)-(17) corresponds to a re-
placing trace e in (10)-(12), with (1 −η) in (17) cor-
responding to γλ in (12), and λ in (16) corresponds to
the reward r in (11). The discount rate γ in (10)-(12)
must not be confused with the dissipation or damping
rate γ ∈[0, 1] in (16). To avoid confusion, we denote the
former by γdisc and the latter by γdamp for the remainder
of this paragraph. If we disregard the absence of a learn-
ing rate in (15)-(17) [we may set α = 1 in (10)-(12)], we
can obtain PS from tabular SARSA(λ) by replacing the
action value function Q(s, a) with the connection weight
h(s, a), and the update of h corresponding to the r.h.s.
of (11),
(1 −g)h + λg + γdiscgh′ = h + λg + (γdisch′ −h)g, (18)
with the update of h given by the r.h.s. of (16),
(1−γdamp)h+λg+γdampheq=h+λg+γdamp(heq−h). (19)
In (10)-(12), RL is equipped with forward- and backward-
discounting mechanisms, as becomes apparent in the
product γdiscλ in (12).
Disabling the accumulation of
forward-discounted future rewards (that give rise in RL
to the return mentioned above) by setting γdisc = 0 re-
duces (18) to (1 −g)h+ λg, while setting heq = 0 reduces
(19) to (1 −γdamp)h + λg. These expressions are very
similar, except that in PS, the constant γdamp has taken
the place of g in RL, so that (1 −γdamp) determines the
range of backward-discounting in (A3). Since in (A3),
it is the respective past excitations (glowing rewards) rt
= gtλt, rather than the rewards λt themselves, which is
summed up, damping and glow play a similar role. On
the other hand, the factor (1 −η) takes in PS the place
of γdiscλ in (12), which becomes zero together with γdisc,
as mentioned.
D.
Method presented here
The update rule (4) is implemented as
e ←(1 −η)e + ∇p(a|s),
(20)
h ←h + αre + κ(h∞−h),
(21)
which can be obtained from gradient-ascent SARSA(λ)
by replacing in (13)-(14) the action value function Q(s, a)
with the conditional probability p(a|s), renaming θ as h,
replacing γλ in (13) with (1 −η), and replacing in (14)
the term α

γp(a′|s′) −p(a|s)

e with κ(h∞−h).
The

7
latter replacement is similar to the change from (18) to
(19), where κ in (21) corresponds to γ in (16). Analogous
to the comments following (18) and (19), in the case γ =
0, the update corresponding to the r.h.s. of (14) becomes
(h −αpe) + αre, whereas for h∞= 0, the r.h.s. of (21)
reduces to (1 −κ)h + αre. Similar to the tabular case,
the constant damping rate κ has in our method taken the
place of αpe in gradient-ascent RL.
E.
Can PS be recovered from our approach?
Our method (20)-(21) replaces a value function with a
conditional probability (6), whereas the edge strengths in
PS remain value function-like quantities. While tabular
RL can be recovered from gradient-ascent RL, one hence
cannot expect to recover the basic PS update rule (15)-
(17) as a special case of our scheme, despite replacements
analogous to (18)-(19). To understand the diﬀerence, we
restrict attention to an invasion game - like case as shown
in Fig. 3 as the simplest example, cf. also Sec. V for de-
tails. Since here, each episode lasts one cycle, we disable
s1
s2
· · ·
s|S|
hkl
a1
a2
· · ·
a|A|
FIG. 3. Transition strengths hkl for an invasion game-like task
with states (which are here synonymous to percept-clips) sk
and action clips al. The strengthening of a rewarded tran-
sition (here h22) is in an update (26) based on the gradient
of p(aj=2|si=2) accompanied by a weakening of the respective
transitions to the remaining actions (here h21 and h23), which
is absent in PS, cf. (27).
both the eligibility trace/glow mechanism by setting η
= 1 in (20)-(21) and (15)-(17). As shown in Fig. 3, we
are given a set of states {s1, s2, . . . , s|S|}, each of which
allows one out of a set of actions {a1, a2, . . . , a|A|}. Con-
sider a cycle, where from state si, an action aj is selected.
If the transition probabilities
pij = p(aj|si) = Π(hij)
ci
,
ci =
X
j
Π(hij),
(22)
are given by some policy function Π, then the components
of the r.h.s. of (20) read
ekl|ij = ∂pij
∂hkl
= δikΠ′(hkl)
c2
i

δjlci −Π(hij)

,
(23)
with which the components of the update (21) become
hkl ←(1 −κ)hkl + αrekl|ij + κheq
kl,
(24)
where we have renamed h∞as heq. An observer ignorant
of the transitions i →j and the corresponding probabili-
ties pij notices no change,
X
ij
ekl|ij = 0.
(25)
In the special case Π(hkl) = hkl, we can simplify (23) to
ekl|ij = 1
ci

δikδjl −hij
ci
δik

.
(26)
From (26) we see that in the gradient method, the
strengthening of the hij-edge is accompanied with a
weakening of those edges hkl connecting the respective
state k =i with diﬀerent actions l ̸=j. As a consequence,
the hkl may become negative, even if Π(hkl) = hkl and
the rewards are non-negative. This weakening is absent
in basic PS (16), where the corresponding update is in-
dependent of the policy function Π and given by
hkl ←hkl −γ(hkl −heq
kl) + λδikδjl
= (1 −γ)hkl + λδikδjl + γheq
kl.
(27)
Hence, hkl≥0 as long as the rewards are non-negative. In
any case, choice of a non-negative policy function Π(hkl)
renders the methods independent of a need of positive
edge strengths. [Note that a similar problem occurs if the
parameters in a memory consisting of alternating layers
such as ˆU = · · · e−it3 ˆ
H(1)e−it2 ˆ
H(2)e−it1 ˆ
H(1), cf. App. B 2,
refer to non-negative physical quantities tk. In [19], this
has been solved by using an exponential function such as
tk = ehk for parametrisation in terms of the controls hk.
In this work, we identify the hk directly with the tk for
simplicity, which, if the hk are to be interpreted as non-
negative quantities, doubles the set of physically applied
Hamiltonians from { ˆH(1,2)} to {± ˆH(1,2)}.]
F.
Discussion
The relations between the diﬀerent methods are sum-
marised in Fig. 4. If one considers the ECM as the core el-
ement of PS rather than a speciﬁc update rule, one could
alternatively adopt, e.g., the tabular SARSA(λ)-update
rule. The picture of a random walk in clip space does not
contradict the general framework of RL-problems. One
may understand the clips as the agent’s states (which
must be distinguished from the percepts).
The same
holds for the gradient-ascent generalization, which, in
physical terms, could be considered as “continuous vari-
able RL”. On the one hand, we could equally well apply,
e.g., the gradient-ascent SARSA(λ)-update instead of our
rule. On the other hand, before trying to create algorith-
mic extensions such as those mentioned at the beginning
of this section for tabular RL and PS, one should ﬁrst
investigate whether and how such extensions are accom-
plished in any existing gradient-ascent RL variants.

8
tabular RL
generalization gradient-ascent
RL
basic PS
method
considered here
analogous replacements
Sec. IV E
FIG. 4. Tabular RL (10)-(12) is a special case of gradient-
ascent RL (13)-(14). Replacing updates based on values of
subsequent states with updates based on a physical damp-
ing term yields basic PS (15)-(17) and the method presented
here (20)-(21), which however uses a conditional probability
(6) instead of a value function, hence the basic PS update
rule cannot be recovered from our approach, as explained in
Sec. IV E.
V.
EXAMPLES
A.
Invasion game
In what follows, we consider a simple invasion game as
treated in [5]. An attacker randomly chooses one out of
two possible symbols {⇐, ⇒} which signals the direction
in which it intends to move.
The chosen symbol may
represent, e.g., a head turn and is visible to the defender,
whose task is to learn to move in the same direction,
which is required to block the attacker.
We approach
this learning task as an external loop in Fig. 1 with a
closed system (i.e., bath-less) memory [cases (a) and (c)
in Fig. 2], described within a 4-dimensional Hilbert space.
The control parameters are updated according to (4) in
the absence of relaxation (κ = 0) and gradient glow (η
= 1). The update is done with an analytic ∇ˆU as de-
scribed in App. B 2, where the memory consists of alter-
nating layers, ˆU = · · · e−ih3 ˆ
H(1)e−ih2 ˆ
H(2)e−ih1 ˆ
H(1), with a
given number of controls h1, . . . , hn. At the beginning of
the ﬁrst cycle, the memory is initialised as identity. For
the two Hamiltonians ˆH(1) and ˆH(2), we distinguish (I)
a general case, where ˆH(1) and ˆH(2) are two given (ran-
domly generated) 4-rowed Hamiltonians acting on the
total Hilbert space and (II) a more specialised case, in
which they have the form
ˆH(1) = ˆH(1)
S
⊗ˆIA + ˆIS ⊗ˆH(1)
A ,
(28)
ˆH(2) = ˆH(2)
S
⊗ˆH(2)
A ,
(29)
where ˆH(1)
S , ˆH(1)
A , ˆH(2)
S , ˆH(2)
A
are four given (randomly
generated) 2-rowed Hamiltonians acting on the percept
(S) and action (A) subsystems, respectively, with ˆI de-
noting the identity. The latter case (II) refers to a physi-
cal implementation of Fig. 2(c) as a bath-mediated inter-
action of the S and A subsystems that is obtained from
the setup Fig. 2(d) by eliminating the bath [19]. It has
been included here to demonstrate that this special struc-
ture as considered in [19] may be applied in the present
context, but this is not mandatory. While the Hamil-
tonians have been chosen in both cases (I) and (II) at
random to avoid shifting focus towards a speciﬁc physi-
cal realization, in an experimental setup, the respective
laboratory Hamiltonians will take their place (assuming
that they generate universal gates in the sense of [22],
which is almost surely the case for a random choice).
1.
2 percepts →2 actions
We start with a basic version of the game with 2 pos-
sible percepts (the two symbols shown by the attacker)
and 2 possible actions (the two moves of the defender).
For each percept, there is hence exactly one correct ac-
tion, which is to be identiﬁed. The memory applied is
shown in Fig. 2(c), and the diﬀerent input states are
ˆ̺ = ˆ̺S ⊗ˆ̺A,
ˆ̺S = |s⟩⟨s|,
(30)
ˆ̺A = pcoh|ϕ⟩⟨ϕ| + (1 −pcoh) 1
dA
ˆIA,
(31)
|ϕ⟩=
1
√dA
X
a
|a⟩,
(32)
where dA =dimHA =2 is given by the number of actions.
|s⟩and |a⟩can both be one of the two orthonormal states
|0⟩or |1⟩of the S and A subsystem, respectively. The
POVM consists of the elements
ˆΠ(a) = ˆIS ⊗|a⟩A⟨a|.
(33)
Choosing the correct (wrong) action [i.e. a = s (a ̸= s) in
(33) and (30)] returns a reward of r = +1 (r = −1).
Fig. 5 shows the average reward r received at each cy-
cle, where the averaging is performed over an ensemble
of 103 independent agents. (r +1)/2 is hence an estimate
of the defender’s probability to block an attack. Refer-
ring to pure states in (31), Fig. 5(a) shows the increase of
learning speed with the number of controls. Signiﬁcant
learning progress begins only after some initial period of
stagnation.
From the viewpoint of control theory, the
identity, in which the memory is initialised, may lie on
a “near-ﬂat ground” (valley), which must ﬁrst be left
before progress can be made [23]. Asymptotically, per-
fect blocking can be achieved once the memory becomes
controllable, i.e., if the number of controls equals (or ex-
ceeds) the number of group generators. Fig. 5(b) demon-
strates the need of a pure input state ˆ̺A in (31) of the
action subsystem A rather than an incoherent mixture.
After the agent in Fig. 5(b) had some time to adapt to
the attacker, the meaning of the symbols is suddenly in-
terchanged, and the agent must now learn to move in the
opposite direction. This relearning diﬀers from the pre-
ceding learning period in the absence of the mentioned
initial stagnation phase, which supports the above hy-
pothesis of the proposed valley, the agent has left during
the initial learning. This plot is motivated by Fig. 5 in [5]
describing classical PS. Although the diﬀerent behaviour
in the classical case suggests that this is an eﬀect speciﬁc

9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
(a)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
(c)
FIG. 5.
Average reward r as a function of the number of
cycles for an invasion game (2 symbols, 2 moves), learning
rate α = 10−3, with a reward of +1 (-1) for a correct (false)
move, averaged over 103 agents. The input states and POVM
are given by Eqs. (30) and (33), respectively. (a) The 6 graphs
from bottom to top correspond to 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 16 controls,
respectively, with pcoh =1 in (31). (b) 16 controls, where after
4 · 103 cycles the meaning of the symbols is reversed. The 5
graphs from bottom to top correspond in Eq. (31) to pcoh= 0,
0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1, respectively. (c) applies 32 controls and
pcoh = 1, but refers to case (II) described by (28) and (29),
whereas Figs. 5(a,b) refer to case (I).
to quantum control, the phenomenon, that a dynami-
cally changing environment can facilitate learning in later
stages appears to be more general [24]. While Figs. 5(a,b)
refer to case (I) described before (28), Fig. 5(c) refers to
the restricted case (II), which appears to impede learn-
ing. In the simulations of the following Sec. V A 2, which
all refer to case (II), this is resolved by applying a 10
times larger negative reward for each wrong action. This
demonstrates the ﬂexibility in approaching RL problems
oﬀered by the freedom to allocate rewards in a suitable
way.
2.
4 percepts →4 or 2 actions
We now consider a version with 4 percepts, referring
to an attacker presenting each of its two symbols in two
colors at random.
Since we want to keep the Hilbert
space dimension unchanged (rather than doubling it by
adding the color category) for better comparison of the
eﬀect of the number of controls on the learning curve,
we must apply a memory as shown in Fig. 2(a). The 4
percepts are encoded as tensor products of orthonormal
projectors
ˆ̺jk = |j⟩⟨j| ⊗|k⟩⟨k|,
(34)
where j = 0, 1 (k = 0, 1) refers to the symbol (color). The
POVM operators are the 4 projectors
ˆΠjk = ˆUTˆ̺jk ˆU †
T,
(35)
where ˆUT is a given (randomly generated) 4-rowed tar-
get unitary acting on the total system. The memory in
Fig. 2(a) is hence still composed of two subsystems refer-
ring to the two percept categories ‘symbol’ and ‘color’,
but both subsystem’s initial state depends on the respec-
tive percept, and both are measured afterwards.
The
diﬀerences between the setup discussed in the previous
Sec. V A 1 and the two setups discussed in the present
Sec. V A 2 are summarised in Fig. 6.
(a)
ˆ̺S
ˆ̺A
symbol
move
ˆU
ˆΠ(a)
(b)
ˆ̺jk
symbol
color
ˆU†
T
j
k
ˆU
ˆΠjk or ˆΠj
(c)
ˆ̺S
ˆ̺C
ˆ̺A
symbol
color
move
ˆU
ˆΠ(a)
FIG. 6. Setups for the invasion game as investigated numeri-
cally in Sec. V A. Setup (a) involves 2 percepts (symbols) and
2 actions (moves) as discussed in Sec. V A 1 (Fig. 5). Setup
(b) involves 4 percepts consisting of 2 two-colored symbols
and 2 measurements yielding 4 diﬀerent outcomes described
by (j, k = 0, 1) as discussed in Sec. V A 2 and determining
either 4 [Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 8] or – if outcome k is ignored –
2 [Fig. 7(b)] possible actions (moves). While setup (a) refers
to Fig. 2(c), setup (b) must refer to Fig. 2(a), if we want to
keep the same Hilbert space dimension of 4 for both setups,
which allows better comparison of the eﬀect of the number
of controls on the learning curve. Setup (c) involves a con-
tinuum of percepts consisting of 2 arbitrary-colored symbols
and 2 actions (moves) as discussed in Sec. V A 3 (Fig. 9). In
setup (c), separate subsystems are used for all 3 categories,
hence it refers to Fig. 2(c), and the Hilbert space dimension
becomes 8.
Fig. 7 shows the average reward r received at each
cycle, where the averaging is performed over an ensemble

10
of 103 independent agents, analogous to Fig. 5. Note that
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
−10
−9
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
(a)
1
3
2
4
8
32
16
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
−4
−3.5
−3
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(b)
1
2
3
4,8
16
32
FIG. 7.
Average reward r as a function of the number of
cycles for an invasion game (2 symbols in 2 colors), learning
rate α = 10−2, with a reward of +1 (-10) for a correct (false)
move, averaged over 103 agents. The input states and POVM
are given by Eqs. (34) and (35), respectively.
The graphs
correspond to 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 16, and 32 controls, as marked
on the right. (a) Out of 4 possible moves, the defender must
learn the correct one for each symbol and color. After 5 · 103
cycles, the meanings of the symbols as well as the colors are
reversed.
(b) Out of 2 possible moves, the defender must
learn the correct one for each symbol, whereas the color is
irrelevant. For the ﬁrst 5 · 103 cycles, only symbols in a single
color are presented, whereas for the remaining cycles, they
are shown randomly in both colors.
in this Sec. V A 2, all ﬁgures refer to case (II) described
by (28) and (29), where S and A now denote symbol and
color, respectively. To account for this [cf. the comments
on Fig. 5(c) above], a reward of r = −10 (instead of -1)
is now given for a wrong action.
The estimate of the
defender’s probability to block an attack is hence now
(r + 10)/11.
In Fig. 7(a), the defender can choose between 4 moves,
where for each percept, there is exactly one correct action
[i.e., detecting ˆΠjk (ˆΠj′k′ ̸= ˆΠjk) for ˆ̺jk in (35) and (34)
returns a reward of r=+1 (r=−10)]. After 5·103 cycles,
symbol j and color k are read as symbol 1 −j and color
1 −k, respectively, similar to the manipulations in Fig.
5 in [5]. In Fig. 7(b), the defender can choose between 2
moves, where for each symbol (relevant category), there
is exactly one correct action, irrespective of its color (ir-
relevant category) [i.e., detecting ˆΠj = P1
k=0 ˆΠjk (ˆΠj′ ̸=
ˆΠj) for ˆ̺jk in (35) and (34) returns a reward of r = +1
(r = −10)]. The second color is added only after 5 · 103
cycles, analogous to Fig. 6 in [5]. [Note that the men-
tioned initial stagnation phase in Fig. 5 is not visible in
Fig. 7, which is attributed to the choice of parameters
(rewards), accelerating the initial learning.]
Figs. 5(b) and 7 are all motivated by Figs. 5 and 6 in [5]
and conﬁrm that the agent’s adaptation to changing en-
vironments is recovered in our quantum control context.
In addition, Figs. 5(a) and 7 show the behaviour of an
underactuated memory, where the number of controls is
insuﬃcient for its full controllability. Since a U(n)-matrix
is determined by n2 real parameters, and a global phase
can be disregarded (so that we can restrict to SU(n)-
matrices), n2 −1 controls are suﬃcient, i.e., 15 for our
invasion game, as mentioned above.
In (35), the measurements are made in a basis rotated
by a randomly given unitary ˆUT, which serves two pur-
poses. On the one hand, it is required to ensure that
the agent starts at the beginning of the ﬁrst cycle with a
policy that does not give exclusive preference to certain
actions that follow from symmetries of the (identity-) ini-
tialised memory. This is a ﬂaw of Fig. 2(a) and can be
overcome by using Fig. 2(c) instead (cf. a more detailed
discussion in the grid world example below).
On the
other hand, ˆUT serves as a given target in our discus-
sion Sec. I B, where we consider the agent learning as a
navigation of its memory ˆU, cf. also Fig. 6(b). Fig. 8
compares the case, where the agent is always fed with
percept states drawn from one single ONB deﬁned via
(34) with the case, where the percept states are drawn
randomly, i.e., taking ˆURˆ̺jk ˆU †
R with a random unitary
ˆUR as explained in Sec. I B instead of (34). Note that
in Fig. 8, we generate a new random ˆUR at each cy-
cle, although a ﬁxed set of dimH (4 in our case) such
ˆUR is suﬃcient as mentioned in Sec. I B. Fidelity F and
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
(a)
r
multi ONB
single ONB
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b)
F
multi ONB
single ONB
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
(c)
D
multi ONB
single ONB
FIG. 8.
(a) Reward r, (b) ﬁdelity F deﬁned in (C2), and
(c) squared distance D deﬁned in (C1), where the overline
denotes the ensemble average over 103 agents for the setup as
in Fig. 7(a) (i.e., 4 percepts and 4 actions) with 16 controls but
without the reversal of meaning. The initial memory states
are drawn from either a single or multiple orthonormal bases.
squared distance D are deﬁned in (C2) and (C1), where
ˆU represents the agent memory and ˆUT the target uni-
tary. Each cycle’s update constitutes a single navigation
step in the unitary group [U(4) in our example]. If, for a
single ONB, after a number of cycles, the average reward
has approached unity, ˆU has reached a close neighbour-
hood of any unitary of the form ˆU ′
2 ˆUT ˆU1, where ˆU ′
2 =
ˆUT ˆU2 ˆU †
T with ˆU1 and ˆU2 being undetermined 4-rowed
unitary matrices diagonal in the common eigenbasis of
the ˆ̺jk (i.e., the “computational basis”). Fig. 8(a) shows
that for a solution of the invasion game, a ﬁxed ONB is
suﬃcient. Drawing the percept states randomly, so that
the set of all percept states is linearly dependent, does

11
not aﬀect the agent’s ability to achieve perfect blocking
eﬃciency, but slows down the learning process. The sin-
gle ONB case allows for a larger set of ˆU = ˆU ′
2 ˆUT ˆU1 with
respect to ˆUT, as becomes evident in Fig. 8(b), so that
navigation of ˆU from the identity to a member of this set
takes less time (as measured in cycles). The only freedom
left in the case of multiple ONBs is a global phase of ˆU,
which remains undeﬁned: navigation of ˆU towards ˆUT
with respect to the squared Euclidean distance D is not
required for the learning tasks discussed, as evidenced by
Fig. 8(c).
3.
Neverending-color scenario
In Sec. V A 2 we considered the case, where the sym-
bols are presented in two diﬀerent colors, as depicted in
Fig. 6(b). The original motivation for introducing colors
as an additional percept category was to demonstrate
the agent’s ability to learn that they are irrelevant [5].
In contrast, [10] present a “neverending-color scenario”,
where at each cycle, the respective symbol is presented
in a new color. It is shown that while the basic PS-agent
is in this case unable to learn at all, it becomes able to
generalize (abstract) from the colors, if it is enhanced by
a wildcard mechanism. The latter consists in adding an
additional (wildcard “#”) value to each percept category,
and inserting between the input layer of percept clips and
the output layer of action clips hidden layers of wildcard
percept clips, in which some of the percept categories at-
tain the wildcard value. The creation of these wildcard
clips follows predeﬁned deterministic rules, and the tran-
sitions from percept to action clips take then place via
the hidden layers. (The notion of layers in the general
ECM clip network Fig. 2 in [5] follows from restricting
to clips of length L = 1).
Since the use of wildcard clips is an integrated mecha-
nism within PS (inspired by learning classiﬁer systems),
the question is raised how similar ideas could be imple-
mented in our context. For a memory Fig. 2(c), we could,
e.g., attribute one of the levels (such as the respective
ground state) of the quantum system of each percept
category Si to the wildcard-level |#⟩i, so that the per-
cept space HS =⊗HSi is enlarged to HS =⊗(HSi ⊕H#i),
where the H#i are one-dimensional.
Instead of this, let us simply make use of the built-
in generalization capacity of a quantum agent resulting
from its coding of percepts as quantum states, which is
much in the sense of Sec. 8 in [16], where the percepts can
be arbitrarily real-valued rather than being drawn from a
countable or ﬁnite value set. Consider the setup shown in
Fig. 6(c), whose percept system includes a symbol and a
color category and refers to a memory structure Fig. 2(c).
To allow for inﬁnite colors, we could apply a color quan-
tum system with inﬁnite levels H∞(such as an oscillator-
type system), which is initialized at each cycle in a new
state drawn from a ﬁxed ONB (such as a higher number
state for an oscillator-type system). While such a scheme
becomes more challenging to control, because the control
vector h has an inﬁnite number of components [we may
replace it with a continuous control function h(t)], it still
ignores the fact that colors (as most percept categories
in general) are not countable. With this in mind, we can
take the notion of colors literally and, to put it simply,
code them in some appropriate color space such as RGB,
where three parameters correspond to the red-, green-,
and blue-signals of the agent’s eye sensors. This suggests
to encode a color as a mixed state of a two-level system,
which is also given by three real-valued parameters (de-
termining its location in the Bloch ball). The generaliza-
tion from two colors to all RGB-colors then corresponds
to the generalization from a classical to a quantum bit. In
our setup, it is hence suﬃcient to apply a two-level system
for the color category and initialize it at each cycle in a
randomly chosen mixed state ˆ̺C (for neverending colors)
rather than a (pure) state randomly drawn from a single
ONB (for two colors), whereas no changes are required on
the agent’s memory conﬁguration itself. Fig. 9 demon-
strates the learning process. Similar to Fig. 8, random
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x 10
5
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
(a)
r
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x 10
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(b)
|h|
FIG. 9. (a) Reward r and (b) length |h| of the control vec-
tor as a function of the number of cycles for a single agent
Fig. 6(c) playing an invasion game with 2 symbols, presented
in a continuum of neverending colors, and 2 moves. A reward
of +1 (-10) is given for each correct (false) move. The agent
applies 64 controls with a learning rate of α = 10−2 in an
alternating layer scheme App. B 2 deﬁned by two (Schmidt-
orthonormalized) 8-rowed random Hamiltonians.
initialization slows down the learning process, so that we
restrict to a single agent in Fig. 9, rather than an en-
semble average. As illustrated in Fig. 9(a), the agent’s
response becomes near-deterministic after about 106 cy-
cles, irrespective of the color. Fig. 9(b) illustrates in the
example of the Euclidean length of the control vector
|h| =
√
hT · h, that the navigation, which starts at h0 =
0, eventually comes to rest. While the random ˆ̺C are
drawn such that a positive probability is attributed to
every volume element in the Bloch ball, we did not care
about drawing them with a uniform probability density,
since mapping of an RGB-space of color (as a perceptual
property) to the Bloch ball is not uniquely deﬁned.
The ability to learn to distinguish between relevant Srel
and an arbitrary number of irrelevant percept categories
Sirr as discussed in [10] is of particular relevance for a
quantum agent, where the irrelevant percept categories
can be understood as adopting the role of a bath as shown
in Figs. 2(b) and (d). Here, a formal solution consists in

12
a decoupled ˆUSA = ˆUSrelA ⊗ˆUSirr.
B.
Grid world
In what follows, we consider an arrangement of 8 grid
cells as shown in Fig. 10. The agent’s task is to ﬁnd the
S
G
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0.20
0.26
0.46
0.08
0.10
0.47
0.23
0.21
0.05
0.49
0.04
0.41
0.12
0.26
0.36
0.27
(0.98)
(0.55)
(0.43)
(0.99)
(1)
FIG. 10.
(3 × 3)-grid world with an obstacle (black cell).
The arrows show the optimal policy for the shortest path to
G, and the numbers present the policy numerically obtained
with the agent Fig. 11(d) after 104 episodes. The red numbers
in parentheses are the relevant diﬀerent values obtained after
105 episodes, if the agent starts each episode from a random
cell, rather than always at S.
shortest route to a goal cell G, where at each step, only
moves to an adjacent cell in four directions (left, right,
up, down) are allowed. If the agent hits a boundary of
the grid or the black cell, which is considered an obstacle,
its location remains unchanged.
This external classical navigation task constitutes a
learning problem, because situations/percepts (present
location) must be mapped to decisions/actions (direc-
tion to go). The agent only perceives whether or not it
has arrived at the goal cell. It has no access to a “bird’s
perspective” which would allow immediate exact location
of the goal. It also has no access to a measure of goal
distance or ﬁdelity (as in the case of the internal NO-
based loop regarding its own quantum memory in Fig. 1),
which prevents the use of external gradient information
that could be obtained by testing the nearest neighbour-
hood of the present location. One can thus distinguish
two objectives: (a) locating the goal and (b) ﬁnding a
shortest route to it.
This task constitutes a RL type
problem, whose composite “two-objective” structure is
approached by nesting iterations. The individual action
selections, i.e., choices of moves, correspond to the cy-
cles in Fig. 1. Sequences of cycles form episodes, which
are terminated only once objective (a) has been solved.
Objective (b) is solved by sequences of episodes, which
allow the agent to gradually solve objective (a) more eﬃ-
ciently and ﬁnd an optimal policy. In Fig. 10, the policy
consists of a set of four probabilities for each cell, with
which a corresponding move should be made from there.
The optimal policy corresponding to the shortest route
to G is indicated by the arrows in Fig. 10.
This grid world extends the above decision game in
two aspects: (a) The optimal policy is in contrast to
the decision game not deterministic, as indicated by the
double arrows in the upper left and middle cell in Fig. 10.
(b) Depending on where the agent starts, more than a
single move is required to reach G in general, preventing
the agent from obtaining an immediate environmental
feedback on the correctness of each individual move it
makes. This second aspect leads to the mentioned notion
of episodes. In what follows, we always place the agent
at a ﬁxed start cell S at the beginning of each episode,
which is suﬃcient for learning the shortest path from S
to G. While in the invasion game, episodes and cycles are
synonyms, here, an episode is longer than a single cycle,
since at least four moves are required to reach G from S.
When designing the agent’s memory structure in the
sense of Fig. 2, we must take into account that the uni-
tarity of the state transformation ˆUS in Fig. 2(a) places
restrictions on the percept-encodings and the action-
measurements, since ˆUS maps an ONB into another one.
If we encode in Fig. 10 each cell location as a member of
a given ONB in an 8-dimensional system Hilbert space
H8 and perform a naive symmetric H8 = H2 ⊕H2 ⊕H2
⊕H2 -measurement for action selection, where the four
2-dimensional subspaces correspond to right, down, left
and up moves, we cannot properly ascribe the upper left
and upper middle cells, because the right and downward
pointing actions are already ascribed to the remaining 4
white cells. One may either try to construct a learning
algorithm that exploits the fact that the two mentioned
cells are oﬀthe optimal path from S to G so that the
agent quickly ceases to visit them or construct a new
POVM such as a H8 =H1 ⊕H3 ⊕H3 ⊕H1-measurement,
where two 3-dimensional subspaces correspond to right
and down, and two 1-dimensional subspaces correspond
to left and up moves. These possibilities require insight
into the speciﬁcs of this problem and are not generaliz-
able. In addition to that, Fig. 2(a) requires initialisation
of the agent memory in a random unitary to ensure it
starts with a policy that does not give exclusive prefer-
ence to certain actions that follow from symmetries of
the initial ˆUS (such as the identity ˆUS = ˆIS). If we want
to avoid invoking a bath as in Fig. 2(b), we hence must
resort to Fig. 2(c), which here implies a factorisation H=
HS ⊗HA of H into an 8-dimensional HS for encoding the
grid cells and a 4-dimensional HA for encoding the four
actions. If we encode the cells and actions as members of
some ONB in S and A, then initialising the agent’s mem-
ory as identity, ˆUSA = ˆISA, and the initial action states
as in (32) ensures that the agent starts at the beginning
of the ﬁrst episode with a policy that assigns the same
probability to all possible actions.
In Figs. 11 and 12 we investigate the episode length
which is deﬁned as the number of cycles per episode.

13
Rather than performing an ensemble average, we consider
individual agents. These agents are described by (4) with
a learning rate of α = 10−1, absence of relaxation (κ =
0), and varying amounts of gradient glow (η ≤1). The
number of episodes equals the number of times the agent
is allowed to restart from S, whereas the time passed
equals the sum of episode lengths. The episode length
can be inﬁnite but not smaller than four, the length of
the shortest path from S to G.
Fig. 11 shows evolutions of episode lengths with the
number of episodes, where we have set a maximum of
104 episodes. As explained, each episode starts at S and
ends only when G has been reached. Fig. 11(f) shows
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
(a)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
(b)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
(c)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
(e)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(f)
FIG. 11.
Episode lengths as a function of the number of
episodes for the (3 × 3)-grid world as shown in Fig. 10. The
plots illustrate the eﬀect of gradient glow for single histories
of individual agents. (a) The agent receives a reward r = 1
when it has found the goal, without gradient glow (η = 1).
(b) As in (a), but with gradient glow enabled (η = 0.01). (c)
In addition to receiving a reward r = 1 when it has found the
goal, the agent is punished with a reward r = −10, when it
has hit a boundary, without gradient glow (η = 1). (d) As
in (c), but with gradient glow enabled (η = 0.7). (e) As in
(d), but with gradient glow prolonged further (η = 0.5). (f)
Learning is disabled by always setting the reward to 0. The
agent performs a random walk through the grid with average
length 54.1 which is included as dashed line in Figs. 11 and
12.
for comparison the lengths of 104 random walks through
the grid of an agent whose learning has been disabled by
always setting the reward to 0. The average number of
54.1 steps to reach G from S is shown in Figs. 11 and
12 as a dashed line for comparison. In Figs. 11(a-e), a
positive reward of r = 1 is given for hitting G. While in
Fig. 11(a), the reward is always zero before G has been
hit, in Fig. 11(c) hitting a boundary is punished with a
negative reward of r = −10, which slightly improves the
agent’s performance. [Note that all plots are speciﬁc to
the respective learning rate (here α = 10−1), which has
been chosen by hand to observe an improvement within
our 104 episode-window and at the same time minimis-
ing the risk of oversized learning steps. While in gen-
eral, the learning rate is gradually decreased (cf.
the
conditions Eq. (2.8) in [16] to ensure convergence), this
is not strictly necessary. In our numerical examples we
have kept α constant for simplicity. Implementation of
a dynamic adaptation of the learning rate as was done
in [20] and [19] in the present context is left for future
work.] The transitions Fig. 11(a→b) and Fig. 11(c→d)
show the eﬀect of enabling gradient glow, i.e. (η = 1) →
(η < 1) in (4). Gradient glow provides a mechanism of
gradual backpropagation of the policy change from the
nearest neighbourhood of G to cells more distant from G
as the number of episodes increases. In Fig. 11, the agent
settles in the optimal policy in cases (b), (d) and (e).
The
policy
resulting
after 104
episodes
in
case
Fig. 11(d) is given in Fig. 10, where the numbers in each
cell present the probability to move in the respective di-
rection. While the agent ﬁnds the optimal policy for all
cells forming the shortest path, it remains ignorant for
the remaining cells. As the agent ﬁnds and consolidates
the shortest path, then episode over episode, it soon vis-
its the oﬀ-path cells less frequently, so that the transition
probabilities from these cells do not accumulate enough
iterations and are “frozen” in suboptimal values. This is
characteristic of RL and can also be observed in learning
to play games such as Backgammon [16], where it is suﬃ-
cient to play well only in typical rather than all possible
constellations of the game. Since for large games, the
former often form a small subset of the latter, this can
be seen as a strategy to combat with large state spaces
(such as number of possible game constellations). To ﬁnd
an optimal policy for all cells in Fig. 10, we may start
each episode from a random cell, analogous to initialising
the agent in an overcomplete basis as explained in Fig. 8.
The red numbers in parentheses shown in Fig. 10 present
a new policy obtained after 105 episodes in this way. In
contrast to the old policy, it is optimal or nearly opti-
mal for all cells, with the diﬀerence between 1 and the
sum of these numbers quantifying the deviation from op-
timality for each cell (
<
=0.02). Since on average, the agent
starts from a given cell only in 1/7-th of all episodes, the
learning is slowed down, analogous to Fig. 8(a).
Fig. 12 summarises the eﬀect of gradient glow illus-
trated in Fig. 11 for the two rewarding strategies. To
limit the numerical eﬀort, we have averaged the episode
lengths over the last 500 episodes in Fig. 11 for individual
agents as a “rule of thumb”-measure of the agent’s perfor-
mance for the strategy chosen. For a deterministic calcu-
lation we must instead average the length of each episode
(and for each η) over a suﬃciently large ensemble of inde-

14
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
⟨c⟩500
η
no rewards (f)
positive rewards and
boundary punishment
only positive
rewards
minimum
a
b
c
d
e
FIG. 12. Episode lengths c averaged over the last 500 episodes
in Fig. 11, i.e., episodes 9.5∗103 −1∗104 of single histories of
individual agents in the (3×3)-grid world as shown in Fig. 10.
The data points distinguish various rewarding strategies and
values of gradient glow η as explained in Fig. 11. The upper
and lower dashed lines reﬂect a random walk and the shortest
path, respectively, and the letters (a)-(f) correspond to the
respective plots in Fig. 11. The optimum value of η depends
on the details of the rewarding strategy.
pendent agents for as many episodes as needed to reach
convergence. Despite these shortcomings, the results in-
dicate a qualitatively similar behaviour as Fig. 4(a) in
[9]. Figs. 11 and 12 demonstrate that gradient glow im-
proves the agent performance, irrespective of whether or
not it receives information on false intermediate moves
by means of negative rewards, although the latter reduce
the required length of glow. It is expected that for an
ensemble average, an optimal value of η can be found,
with which the fastest convergence to the shortest path
can be achieved. Fig. 11 distinguishes two qualitatively
diﬀerent modes of convergence. If η is larger than opti-
mal, a gradual improvement is observed, as seen by the
damping of spikes in Fig. 11(d).
If η is smaller than
optimal, then an abrupt collapse to the optimal policy
without visible evidence in the preceding statistics that
would provide an indication is observed, cf. Fig. 11(e). If
η is decreased further, this transition is likely to happen
later, to the point it will not be observed within a ﬁxed
number of episodes. This results in the steep increase in
episode length shown in Fig. 12, which would be absent
if the ensemble average was used instead. This sudden
transition as shown in Fig. 11(e) can also be observed
for individual agents in [9] (not shown there), which ap-
plies a softmax-policy function along with edge glow. It
is surprising that the quadratic measurement-based pol-
icy simulated here exhibits the same phenomenon. Note
however, that convergence does not imply optimality. In
tabular RL and PS, such an abrupt transition can be
observed if the λ-parameter and hence the “correlation
length” is too large (in RL) or if the η-parameter is too
small, so that the glow lasts too long (in PS). The policies
obtained in this way are typically sub-optimal, especially
in larger scale tasks such as bigger grid worlds, for which
the agent learns “fast but bad” in this case. It is hence
expected that a similar behaviour can be observed for
our method if we increased the size of the grid.
VI.
FINITE DIFFERENCE UPDATES
This work’s numerical experiments rely on a symbolic
expression (B7) for the gradient ∇t in (5) for simplic-
ity, which is usually not available in practice, also keep-
ing in mind the variety of compositions Fig. 2, so that
the agent’s memory ˆU(h) is generally unknown. As ex-
plained in the discussion of Fig. 1, the agent may then
apply a measurement-based internal loop by repeatedly
preparing its memory in a state that corresponds to the
last percept st, and register whether or how often the
last measurement outcome at can be recovered.
This
approach can be done with either inﬁnitesimal or ﬁnite
changes in the control vector h, where we can distin-
guish between expectation value- and sample-based up-
dates, depending on how many internal cycles are per-
formed between consecutive external cycles. It should be
stressed that the external cycles in Fig. 1 represent the
agent-environment interaction, resulting in sequences of
state-action pairs and corresponding rewards. While in
an elementary optimal control problem, a given objective
is to be optimized, here the environment poses at each ex-
ternal cycle a separate and generally unpredictable con-
trol problem, all of which must be addressed by the agent
simultaneously.
Due to the small learning rate α, the update rule (4)
is in all cases local in parameter space, which reﬂects
the assumption, that a physical agent cannot completely
reconﬁgure its “hardware” in a single instant. While it
is then consistent to apply a gradient Dt = ∇t as a local
quantity in (4), from a computational perspective, it has
a few drawbacks, however. One is that the direction of
steepest accent at the current control vector ht does not
need to coincide with the direction Dt =h∗
t −ht towards
the optimum h∗
t , as illustrated in Fig. 13.
h∗
t
ht
∇t
Dt
FIG. 13. Following the direction ∇p(at|st) of steepest ascent
(dashed line) does not necessarily lead to the shortest route
Dt = h∗
t −ht from a given control vector ht at cycle t to a
location h∗
t , for which p(at|st) becomes maximum.
Another aspect is the vanishing of the gradient. Con-

15
sider for example the initialisation of the action system in
a mixed state (31) as done in Fig. 5(b). In particular, the
graph with pcoh =0 does not display any learning ability.
Substituting the corresponding ˆ̺A = ˆIA/2 in (31) and ˆU
= ˆI into (B7), we see that the reason is the vanishing gra-
dient, ∇k =ImTr[ˆ̺S ˆΠ(a) ˆHk]=0. On the other hand, the
corresponding setup Fig. 6(a) reveals that in this case,
substituting a SWAP-gate between S and A for ˆU pro-
vides an optimal solution (along with an X-gate if the
meaning of the symbols is reversed) for any ˆ̺A, that is
obviously not found in Fig. 5(b). This failure occurs de-
spite the fact that the agents explore, as indicated by the
ﬂuctuations in Fig. 5(b). To understand the diﬀerence,
note that we may generate an ε-greedy policy function
by replacing in (6) an (arbitrarily given) state ˆ̺(s) with
ˆ̺(s)+εˆI
1+εd , where 0 < ε ≪1 and d = TrˆI. The term with ˆI
then gives to (6) a contribution ∼TrA ˆΠ(a), that is inde-
pendent of s. At the same time, it does not contribute in
(B7) to the gradient, ∇k = 0. If Dt = ∇t = 0 for all t in
(4), the agent’s learning comes to rest, however. Finite
diﬀerence and sample-based updates here oﬀer a possi-
bility to explore in parameter space the neighbourhood
of the present location ht (or, colloquially, the “state”)
of the agent’s memory, as a consequence of asymmetries
in the control landscape or statistical ﬂuctuations in the
samples.
Of particular relevance is a ﬁnal ﬁxpoint (C11). Intu-
itively, one would assume that (despite the compactness
of the (S)U(n)-groups, that is in contrast to the poten-
tially unbounded values of U in RL or h in PS) once an
agent has settled in a point (C11), due to the vanishing
gradient, it won’t be able to react quickly, if the environ-
ment suddenly changes its allocation of rewards (without
confronting the agent with percepts it has not perceived
before).
However, the learning curves for controllable
memories (16 and 32 controls) in Fig. 7(a) demonstrate
that relearning after 5·103 cycles is not aﬀected. A study
of individual agents with 32 controls in Fig. 7(a) reveals
that the Euclidean length of the numerical gradient rises
from 10−14 at cycle 5000 to a value > 1 in only 15 cy-
cles. Better understanding of this is left for future study.
In what follows, we outline the mentioned alternatives in
some more detail.
A.
Expectation value-based updates
If the time consumed by the internal cycles is uncrit-
ical with respect to the external cycles, the agent can
obtain estimates of p(at|st) from a suﬃciently large num-
ber of internal binary measurements.
With these, it
can either approximate the components ∇kp(at|st; hj)
≈[p(at|st; hj + δjkδhk) −p(at|st; hj)]/δhk of the local
gradient ∇t = ∇p(at|st; ht), which is then substituted
as Dt = ∇t into (4).
Alternatively, it can perform a
global search for the location h∗
t of the maximum of
p(at|st). A possible algorithm for the latter is diﬀerential
evolution, which relies on deterministic values p(at|st; h)
rather than noisy samples. Once an estimate for h∗
t has
been found, the diﬀerence Dt = h∗
t −ht is used in (4).
B.
Sample-based updates
Reliance on expectation values may give away poten-
tial speed gains oﬀered by a quantum memory, which
poses the question, whether a ﬁnite number of sample
measurements is suﬃcient. Since individual updates in
(4) are made with a small fraction α of the whole Dt,
the assumption is that the individual statistical errors in
the sampled Dt cancel out in the long run.
As for the expectation value-based updates discussed
above, samples can be used to either create discrete esti-
mates ∇kp(at|st; hj) ≈[s(hj + δjkδhk) −s(hj)]/2 for the
components k of the local gradient ∇t = ∇p(at|st; ht),
where s = s(ht) = ±1 depending on whether the out-
come of the binary measurement (at|st; ht) is positive or
not. Alternatively, for ﬁnite diﬀerence updates, one may
consider a neural gas [25] inspired approach depicted in
Fig. 14. In this approach, the diﬀerences
h+
1
h−
2
h+
3
h+
4
h−
5
h−
6
h+
7
ht
FIG. 14. Internally generated random cloud of sample con-
trols hk around a given control vector ht at cycle t for which
binary measurements “given st, detect at or not” are carried
out between external cycles, yielding positive (h+
k ) or negative
(h−
k ) outcomes.
D(n)
t
= 1
n
n
X
k=1
skhk = n −1
n
D(n−1)
t
+ 1
nsnhn
(36)
between the sampled centers of positive [sk =s(hk)=+1,
i.e., hk = h+
k ] and negative outcomes (sk = s(hk) = −1,
i.e., hk = h−
k ) of the binary measurements (at|st; hk) are
then applied in (4). Although one could store a current
estimate D(n)
t
for each observed state-action pair (at|st)
and merely update it according to (36) with each new
measurement point sn+1hn+1, this would give away the
generalization capability described in Sec. V A 3.
One
would hence need to perform n internal cycles with the
POVM-based internal loop between each external cycle.

16
The hk could be drawn, e.g., from a Gaussian centered
around the respective ht. The variance of this Gaussian
could be gradually decreased with the number of external
cycles to increase the locality (local resolution) of the
cloud.
Fig. 13 gives the misleading impression that ﬁnite dif-
ference updates are superior to gradient-based methods.
To give an illustrative counterexample, one could think
of a two-dimensional h=(hx, hy) and a control landscape
p(h) modelled by the monotonically increasing height
p(l) along the length l of a tape of paper bent into a
spiral and placed onto the dashed line in Fig. 13, such
that one end with p(0)= 0 is located at ht and the other
one at h∗
t . Here, a gradient-based method would safely
follow the long path on the tape’s upper edge, whereas a
ﬁnite diﬀerence method would trade a potential speedup
with the risk of missing the paper at all trials. Since a
comparison of state of the art optimal control methods
based on noisy samples for the agent’s learning would go
beyond the scope of this work, we here restrict ourselves
to these sketchy lines of thought, whose numerical study
is pending, and leave open the question of what the best
method is for a given task.
A characteristic shared by the loops of Fig. 1 and opti-
mal control setups is the need of an experimental “mas-
termind” who controls the controls. An agent which is
supposed to act autonomously would be required to ac-
complish this by itself, ideally in a “natural” or “organic
computing” sense. An elementary example from every-
day life are “desire paths” which form or dissipate, de-
pending on their usage and without a designated planner.
VII.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
In summary, we have adopted an update rule from the
basic PS scheme, equipped it with gradient glow, and ap-
plied it to small-scale invasion game and grid world tasks.
The numerical results show that similar results can be
obtained for a quantum agent, as long as the memory
is not underactuated.
This is not obvious, because of
the fundamental diﬀerence in the number of free param-
eters. If S and A denote the number of possible percepts
and actions, respectively, then in classical tabular action
value RL-methods, the estimated values of all percept-
action pairs are combined to a (S × A)-matrix, i.e., we
have (SA) real parameters. If we encoded in our scheme
each percept and action category by a separate subsys-
tem, whose dimensionalities correspond to the number of
values, the respective category can adopt, then ˆU is an
at least U(N = SA)-matrix for which we are faced with
(SA)2 real parameters. Note that this work is unrelated
to the reﬂecting PS agents, which are discussed in [11].
While the scheme [11] allows a proof of quantum speedup,
our approach complements the latter in that it is simple,
ﬂexible in its construction, and does not involve speciﬁc
analytic quantum gates. The learning of a good policy
only for percepts which are “typical” and have thus been
encountered suﬃciently often in the past shares features
with “soft computing”, where it is suﬃcient to ﬁnd a
good rather than an exact solution, which would here
consist in a policy that is optimal for all possible per-
cepts.
One may think of, e.g., simplifying a symbolic
mathematical expression: while all transformation steps
themselves must be exact, there are no strict rules, as far
as the best way of its formulation is concerned. In future
work, it may be worth to incorporate recent extensions
of the classical PS scheme such as generalization [10].
Appendix A: Classical PS update rule
Classical PS in its general form is based on a discrete
network of clips that form its ECM. In the examples con-
sidered in [5, 6, 9], after each discrete time step (external
cycle), a local edge is updated according to
ht+1 = ht −γ(ht −heq) + rt,
(A1)
where the instantaneous excitation rt = gtλt is the prod-
uct of the edge’s current glow value gt and the respective
non-negative reward λt given at this time step. The glow
values dampen according to gt+1 = (1 −η)gt with g0 =
0, where η ∈[0, 1] is a glow parameter, and are reset
to 1 if the edge was visited during a cycle. γ ∈[0, 1] is
a damping parameter towards an equilibrium value heq
in the absence of rewards (e.g., 1). Starting from some
given h0 (e.g., heq), this gives
ht = (1 −γ)th0 + [1 −(1 −γ)t]heq +
t−1
X
k=0
(1 −γ)krt−k−1
= h0 +
t−1
X
k=0
rt−k−1
(γ = 0),
(A2)
ht ≈heq +
t−1
X
k=0
(1 −γ)krt−k−1
(γ > 0),
(A3)
where the approximation as a backward-discounted sum
(A3) holds for times suﬃciently large so that (1 −γ)t ≪
1 or exactly for h0 = heq. Note that due to the absence
of damping, (A2) diverges in general if t grows without
limit.
Appendix B: Updating the memory ˆU
In App. B we focus on a model-based (i.e., symbolic)
determination of the gradient ∇ˆU(h). The exact form
of the gradient depends on the parametrization. For ex-
ample, if ˆU(h) = e−i ˆ
H(h) is given by some Hermitian ˆH,
then
∇ˆU =
Z 1
0
e−ix ˆ
H(−i∇ˆH)e−i(1−x) ˆ
Hdx.
(B1)

17
For small ˆH, we can expand the exponentials in ˆH to
lowest order, and the approximation ∇ˆU ≈−i∇ˆH holds.
In case of a continuous time dependence, the vector h
can be replaced by a function h(t), with which a unitary
propagator from time t1 to time t3 is given as a positively
time ordered integral
ˆU(t3, t1) = Te−i R t3
t1 dt2h(t2) ˆ
H(t2),
(B2)
and
δ ˆU(t, 0)
δh
(t1) = −i ˆU(t, t1) ˆH(t1) ˆU(t1, 0).
(B3)
If ˆH(t)=P
k ˜hk(t) ˆHk is expanded in terms of some ﬁxed
Hamiltonians ˆHk, then with hk = h˜hk, (B2) becomes
ˆU(t3, t1) = Te−i
R t3
t1 dt2
P
k hk(t2) ˆ
Hk, and (B3) is replaced
with
δ ˆU(t,0)
δhk
(t1) = −i ˆU(t, t1) ˆHk ˆU(t1, 0).
Navigation on
unitary groups becomes discretized if only a restricted
(ﬁnite) set of Hamiltonians ˆHk can be implemented at a
time rather than an analytically time-dependent Hamil-
tonian ˆH(t), so that only one of the ˜hk is non-zero for a
given t. A known example is the alternating application
of two ﬁxed Hamiltonians [22], ˆH2k = ˆH(2) and ˆH2k+1 =
ˆH(1) (k = 0, 1, 2, . . ., ⌊n
2 ⌋), for a set of times to be deter-
mined from the target unitary [26]. In this discrete case
as deﬁned by a piecewise constant normalized ˆH in (B2),
the function h(t) can be replaced with a vector h, and
the functional derivatives with respect to h(t) reduce to
gradients with respect to h.
1.
Adding layer after layer
We can update the present unitary ˆU by multiplying
it from the left with a new layer ˆU(δh) after each cycle,
ˆU ←ˆU(δh) ˆU.
(B4)
If ˆU(δh) = e−i P
k δhk ˆ
Hk is a small modiﬁcation close to
the identity, then the mentioned approximation of (B1)
gives (∇ˆU)k ≈−i ˆHk ˆU. This is of advantage if the agent
or its simulation is able to store only the present ˆU and
not the history of updates (layers). The components of
(5) then become
∂p(a|s)
∂hk
= 2Im

 ˆU † ˆΠ(a) ˆHk ˆU

.
(B5)
2.
Fixed number of layers
In our numerical examples we consider a discretized
memory model, for which (B2) reduces to a product of n
unitaries
ˆU = ˆUn · · · ˆU2 ˆU1,
ˆUk = e−ihk ˆ
Hk,
(B6)
which
simpliﬁes
the
determination
of
the
gradi-
ent,
since
(∇ˆU)k = −i ˆU ˆHk(tk),
where
ˆHk(tk) =
( ˆUk · · · ˆU1)† ˆHk( ˆUk · · · ˆU1), so that the components of (5)
now become
∂p(a|s)
∂hk
= 2Im

 ˆU † ˆΠ(a) ˆU ˆHk(tk)

.
(B7)
In this work, we use alternating layers deﬁned by two
ﬁxed Hamiltonians ˆH(1) and ˆH(2) as mentioned at the
beginning of this section.
Appendix C: Numerical and measurement-based
objectives
1.
Distance and uniformly averaged ﬁdelity
Consider an n-level system and two unitary operators
ˆU and ˆUT, where ˆU = ˆU(h) depends on an (unrestricted)
external control ﬁeld h(t), and ˆUT is a desired target.
Their (squared) Euclidean distance as induced by the
Hilbert-Schmidt dot product is given by
D ≡∥ˆU −ˆUT∥2 = Tr

( ˆU −ˆUT)†( ˆU −ˆUT)

= 2n −2ReTr( ˆU †
T ˆU) ∈[0, 4n].
(C1)
If ˆU(h) is controllable in the sense that at least one
h(t) exists such that ˆU(h) = ˆUT, then (C1) has the set
{0, 4, . . ., 4n} as possible extremal values (i.e,
δD
δh = 0),
where the values 0 and 4n are attained for ˆU = ± ˆUT,
while the remaining extrema are saddle points [27]. A
measure insensitive to global phases ˆU = eiϕ ˆUT is the
average ﬁdelity deﬁned by
F ≡|⟨Ψ| ˆU †
T ˆU|Ψ⟩|2 = n + |Tr( ˆU †
T ˆU)|2
n(n + 1)
,
(C2)
where the overline denotes uniform average over all |Ψ⟩
[28, 29]. Note that F ∈[(n + 1)−1, 1] for n > 1, and F =
1 for n = 1. Both (C1) and (C2) are determined by the
complex
cos ∢
  ˆU, ˆUT

≡
Tr( ˆU †
T ˆU)
q
Tr( ˆU † ˆU)
q
Tr( ˆU †
T ˆUT)
= Tr( ˆU †
T ˆU)
n
,
(C3)
which is conﬁned to the complex unit circle and whose
expectation

| cos ∢( ˆU, ˆUT)|2
=n−1 for uniform random
ˆU drops to zero with growing n.
If in (C2), the averaging is restricted to a d-dimensional
subspace P, we must replace (C2) with
FP ≡|⟨Ψ| ˆ
M|Ψ⟩|2
(P)
= Tr( ˆ
M † ˆ
M) + |Tr( ˆ
M)|2
d(d + 1)
,
(C4)
where ˆ
M = ˆP ˆU †
T ˆU ˆP, with ˆP being the projector onto P.
Note that FP ∈[ max(0,2d−n)
d(d+1)
, 1] for n > 1 [since Tr( ˆ
M † ˆ
M)

18
= Tr( ˆPT ˆPU) ∈max(0, 2d −n) with ˆPT = ˆUT ˆP ˆU †
T, ˆPU =
ˆU ˆP ˆU †], and FP=1 for n=1. While for a one-dimensional
ˆP =|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|, (C4) reduces to FΨ=|⟨Ψ| ˆU †
T ˆU|Ψ⟩|2, the other
limit d = n recovers (C2).
If in (C4), ˆU = ˆUSB couples the quantum system S to a
bath B, then we deﬁne a projector ˆΠ= ˆUT ˆP|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| ˆP ˆU †
T⊗
ˆIB and generalize (C4) to
FP ≡TrSB
 ˆU ˆP|Ψ⟩ˆ̺B⟨Ψ| ˆP ˆU † ˆΠ
(P)
(C5)
=
*
TrS( ˆ
M † ˆ
M) + (TrS ˆ
M)†(TrS ˆ
M)
d(d + 1)
+
B
,
(C6)
where ⟨· · · ⟩B ≡TrB[ˆ̺B(· · · )] with a ﬁxed bath state ˆ̺B.
Replacing
ˆU|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| ˆU †
in
(C2)
with
the
output
M(|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|) of a quantum channel generalizes (C2) to [28]
F = ⟨Ψ| ˆU †
TM(|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|) ˆUT|Ψ⟩= n + P
k |Tr( ˆU †
T ˆGk)|2
n(n + 1)
,
(C7)
where ˆGk are the Kraus operators of the decomposition of
the channel map M(ˆ̺)=P
k ˆGk ˆ̺ ˆG†
k. Note that a change
ˆG′
k = P
j Vkj ˆGj of the Kraus operators as described by a
unitary matrix V leaves (C7) invariant.
2.
Percept statistics-based ﬁdelity
The uniform average in (C7) can be generalized to
an arbitrary distribution p(|Ψk⟩) of possible input states
|Ψk⟩,
ˆ̺in =
X
k
p(|Ψk⟩)|Ψk⟩⟨Ψk|,
(C8)
that reﬂects the statistics of their occurrence in diﬀerent
instances of applications of the device (external cycles in
a control loop). This generalizes (C7) to
Fˆ̺in ≡p( ˆUT) =
X
k
p( ˆUT||Ψk⟩)p(|Ψk⟩),
(C9)
p( ˆUT||Ψk⟩) = ⟨Ψk| ˆU †
TM(|Ψk⟩⟨Ψk|) ˆUT|Ψk⟩,
(C10)
which is just the total probability p( ˆUT) of correctly
detecting a ˆUT-transformed pure (but unknown) input
state drawn from a distribution (C8). Once p( ˆUT) = 1,
the channel’s eﬀect is indistinguishable from that of ˆUT
for the set of possible inputs |Ψk⟩, (i.e. those for which
p(|Ψk⟩)>0). The case p( ˆUT)
<
≈1 is relevant from a numer-
ical and experimental point of view. Rare inputs |Ψk⟩,
for which 0 < p(|Ψk⟩) ≪1, will hardly aﬀect p( ˆUT) in a
control loop, which relaxes the demands on the channel
compared to the uniform average (C7). The channel op-
timization itself is thus economized in the sense that it is
required to perform well only on typical rather than all
inputs.
Here, we consider a navigation of ˆU in the above-
mentioned discretized case, ˆU = ˆU(h), that starts at
the identity ˆU(h = 0) = ˆI and from there undertakes a
gradient-based maximization of p( ˆUT) as deﬁned in (C9)
to a point where
∇p( ˆUT) = 0.
(C11)
The control vector h typically represents system variables
and not those of the bath. Rather than solving for the
parameters [26] for which the scheme [22] yields a desired
given unitary, we search parameters, for which the uni-
tary, whose speciﬁc form we are not interested in, solves
a given task.
3.
Optimal memory navigation and constrained
optimization
While here we have discussed and compared con-
crete types of algorithms, a more fundamental question
concerns the optimality and derivation of general (e.g.,
speed) limits of the learning process. Although the phys-
ical time is given as the sum of the agent and environment
response times over each cycle, one may restrict to count-
ing the number of (a) memory cycles in total, (b) exter-
nal cycles only (c) episodes or (d) parameter updates δh
of the memory ˆU(h), depending on what the most criti-
cal criterion is. Not only should the navigation of ˆU from
the identity to a point (C11) follow an optimal trajectory,
but also the navigation of the percept states by a given
ˆU should be such that the individual physical memory
evolution times become minimum. Such demands may
conﬂict with restrictions on the practical implementabil-
ity and complexity of the memory. Since these questions
are beyond the scope of this work, in what follows we
restrict ourselves to outline a connection to constrained
optimisation as a possible formal approach.
Assuming the Schr¨odinger equation
d
dt ˆU =−i ˆH ˆU and a
ﬁxed energy-type constraint ∥d
dt ˆU∥2 = Tr( ˆH2)
!= E2, the
length of a curve in the space of unitaries becomes
L =
Z T
0

d ˆU
dt

dt
!= ET,
(C12)
where T is the arrival (or protocol) time, ˆU(t = T ) =
ˆUT [30, 31]. (A “protocol” refers to a prescription for
the time dependence of h, ˆH, or ˆU.) In addition to (or
instead of) the protocol time T , we may also consider
C ≡
Z T
0

d ˆH
dt

dt
(C13)
as a measure of the complexity of the protocol that in-
tegrates the changes that have to be made on ˆH via the
control ﬁelds.
If the optimization problem comprises two objectives
such as minimising a distance D or maximising a ﬁdelity

19
F with minimum amount of (C12) or (C13), then an ap-
proximate approach consists in ﬁrst ﬁnding an h(t) that
optimizes an objective function J1 under a ﬁxed con-
straint J2. Here, J1 represents D or F, while J2 may
represent L or C. This can be formulated as an Euler-
Lagrange equation
δJ1
δh −λδJ2
δh = 0,
(C14)
where the Lagrange multiplier λ must ﬁnally be substi-
tuted with the given constant such as L or C. This op-
timisation is then repeated with stepwise decreased L or
C, until the deterioration of the achievable J1 exceeds
a certain threshold.
Equivalently, (C14) may also be
thought of optimizing J2 under the constraint of con-
stant J1. Eq. (C14), which contains both derivatives in
a symmetric way, merely states the linear dependence of
the functional derivatives at an extremal point h in the
function space {h}.
In the discrete case, the time integrals in Eqs. (C12)
and (C13) reduce to sums over time intervals with con-
stant ˆH, and in (C13) we assume that each jump of
ˆH gives a ﬁxed ﬁnite contribution. To gain some intu-
ition into the meaning of C, we may think of navigating
through a classical rectangular grid. There is a set of
shortest paths connecting the diagonal corners, but they
are not equivalent with respect to the number of turns
the navigator has to make along its way. In the quan-
tum context, the number of switches equals the number
of intervals with constant ˆH, which may be thought of
“gates”. In contrast to an analytical design of quantum
circuits, the circuit is here generated numerically, how-
ever.
Since each switch to a diﬀerent ˆH changes the
instantaneous eigenbasis, we may thus think rather of
“layers” drawing an analogy to classical artiﬁcial neural
networks [32].
