566 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Dynamic 'frees: A Structured Variational Method Giving Efficient 
Propagation Rules 
Amos J Storkey 
Institute of Adaptive and Neural Computation 
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 
5 Forrest Hill, Edinburgh UK 

Abstract 
Dynamic trees are mixtures of tree struc­
tured belief networks. They solve some of 
the problems of fixed tree networks at the 
cost of making exact inference intractable. 
For this reason approximate methods such as 
sampling or mean field approaches have been 
used. However, mean field approximations 
assume a factorised distribution over node 
states. Such a distribution seems unlikely in 
the posterior, as nodes are highly correlated 
in the prior. Here a structured variational 
approach is used, where the posterior distri­
bution over the non-evidential nodes is itself 
approximated by a dynamic tree. It turns 
out that this form can be used tractably and 
efficiently. The result is a set of update rules 
which can propagate information through the 
network to obtain both a full variational ap­
proximation, and the relevant marginals. 
The propagation rules are more efficient than 
the mean field approach and give noticeable 
quantitative and qualitative improvement in 
the inference. The marginals calculated give 
better approximations to the posterior than 
loopy propagation on a small toy problem. 
1 
Introduction 
The main subject matter of this paper is the dy­
namic tree model, which was introduced in [12] as 
a model of images. The dynamic tree is a particu­
larly versatile hierarchical generative model. It offers 
improvements on fixed tree belief networks such as 
quadtree networks. Quadtree networks have proven 
useful for image segmentation, and allow exact proba­
bilistic inference using belief propagation [13, 2]. How­
ever quadtrees suffer from model non-homogeneity: 
quadtrees produce blocky artefacts due to the fact that 
two (spatially) adjacent leaf nodes might only be path­
connected through a vertex far up the tree hierarchy. 
Dynamic trees reduce this problem by removing the 
constraints of the fixed structure. They allow each 
node of the network to 'choose' its parent. The result 
is a mixture of tree networks. Because of this mixture, 
exact inference is no longer feasible; its computational 
cost is exponential in the number of nodes. 
Dynamic tree-like structures have also been used for 
hierarchical clustering [11], and can be considered for 
use in any situation where tree structured belief net­
works are used, but are considered to be too rigid. 
2 
Dynamic Trees 
2.1 
Theory 
There are two components to a dynamic tree model: 
a prior distribution of possible tree architectures, and 
the conditional probabilities of each node given its par­
ents and the tree architecture. For the standard dy­
namic tree model the nodes are arranged in layers, and 
each node 'chooses' its parent from those in the layer 
above. Nodes are given positional values, and prospec­
tive parents closer to a given node are given higher 
probabilities of being chosen by that node. The nodes 
themselves are given discrete states, which are used to 
denote which particular object is being represented, 
and to ultimately determine what pixel configuration 
is seen at the leaf nodes of the network. 
Consider a set V of nodes i = 1, 2, . .. , nand a setS of 
possible states 1, 2 . . .  , m of each node. Let Z = { Zij} 
denote the set of possible directed tree structures over 
these nodes, where Zij is an indicator. Zij = 1 denotes 
the fact that node j is the parent of node i. Finally 
let X = { xf} represent the state of the nodes: xf = 1 
if node i is in state k, and is zero otherwise. 
A dynamic tree can then be represented by a prior 
over the possible trees P(Z), and a prior over the net­
work states given a particular tree structure P(XIZ). 
We assume that the prior over Z factorises: each 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
567 
node 'chooses' a parent from a set of possible par­
ents, and chooses independently of other nodes. Hence 
P(Z) = Tiij p:ji, where Pij is the probability that node 
i chooses parent j. In defining P ( Z) here, we order the 
nodes into layers; nodes can only choose a parent from 
the layer above. 
The prior over the network states is given by the con­
ditional probability tables of the network. Whatever 
the value of Z, the conditional probability of one node 
given another is always the same if they are connected. 
The conditional probability Pi·1 defines the probability 
of moving from a state l to state k when traversing a 
network link from j to i. 
With these prior forms, the joint prior distribution can 
be written as 
n 
P(Z, X) = II P:? rr[Pmx7x}z;; 
(1) 
i,j=l 
kl 
where the indicator variables are simply used to pick 
out the correct probabilities. 
The nodes (vertices) are split into a set VE and 
a set VH of evidential and non-evidential (hidden) 
nodes respectively. Likewise the corresponding node 
state indicator variables are denoted by X E and X H 
respectively. 
The posterior distribution of the dy­
namic tree can then be written as P(Z, XHjXE) = 
P(Z, X)/ P(XE). Usually the evidential nodes are the 
leaf nodes of the network. 
Given some data, which we use to instantiate the leaf 
(evidential) nodes of the network, we want information 
about the posterior distribution of the tree structures 
and the nodes of the network. Calculating these poste­
rior probabilities exactly is infeasible because it would 
involve a belief propagation for each tree in the mix­
ture, and the number of trees scales exponentially in 
the square of the number of nodes. Therefore we will 
need to resort to approximate methods, such as those 
outlined in section 3 
Note that this prior is a mixture of trees. The Z vari­
ables can be integrated out to get another belief net­
work representation of this prior, one where each node 
is the child of all the nodes in the layer above. Some­
times it will be useful to think in these terms, and 
henceforth this form will be referred to as the multi­
parent belief network representation. 
2.2 
Intuition behind dynamic trees 
Dynamic trees are predominantly used as models for 
images. They take their impetus from a generative 
approach. Instead of primarily looking for features 
or characteristics within an image, and then trying 
to use this information for segmentation, recognition 
or some other purpose, a generative approach starts 
with asking what we know about how the image came 
about. This gives us some prior knowledge of what 
we might expect to see in an image. We use this prior 
knowledge to build what is called a 'generative model'. 
The perceived image is then used to refine that prior 
knowledge to provide a reasonable model (or set of 
models) for that particular image. 
Images can be seen as being constructed from many 
different objects. These objects often have compo­
nent parts, and these parts contain other substructures 
and so on. The image is a two dimensional pixellation 
of the scene described by these various structural ele­
ments. 
Given this, it would appear sensible to model objects 
hierarchically. A simple deterministic model will not 
capture the variability in object structure between dif­
ferent images or parts of images, thus a probabilistic 
model is more appropriate. 
Using a tree-structured directed graph (see figure 1) 
is a good way to define a hierarchical probabilistic 
model. In such a structure, nodes are used to represent 
the different variables, and the probability of a node 
being in some state is given in terms of the possible 
states of its parent (each directed edge of the graph 
goes from a parent node to a child node). In other 
words whether the parent is in a certain state or not 
affects the state probability of the child node. This is 
reasonable as any dependence between objects would 
only occur through the component-subcomponent re­
lationship. Hence distinct unrelated objects would be 
probabilistically independent in the model. 
 
•• 
Figure 1: A disjointed tree structured directed graph 
The problem with using a fixed tree structure is that 
the inherent organisation of different object scenes 
would not be correctly represented by the same hi­
erarchical relationships. Hence the prior image model 
must incorporate some method of combining a host of 
sensible tree structures. Dynamic trees do just that. 
They adopt a method of forming a mixture of trees 
which is both flexible, but also encodes the require­
ment that the component parts of an object must be 

568 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
in some way spatially local to that object. 
This last characteristic is the primary feature of dy­
namic trees. And while this component is vital for 
such an approach to modelling images, its introduction 
prevents the use of belief propagation for tractable ex­
act probabilistic inference. That intractability is the 
problem with which this paper is involved. 
2.3 
Inference 
How should inference in dynamic trees be tackled? Us­
ing simulated annealing to find the maximum a pos­
teriori tree Z* = argmaxP(Z\XE) was discussed in 
[12]. This was compared with the mean field approach 
in [1]. The mean field approach seemed to give better 
approximations to the posterior, while being signifi­
cantly faster. However the mean field approach suffers 
from an unlikely choice of approximating distribution; 
it requires that the posterior be well represented by 
a factorised distribution over the nodes. Because the 
tree structure imposes strong conditional dependencies 
between connected nodes, we would also expect these 
dependencies to occur in the posterior. Though the 
mean field is able to capture some correlation between 
nodes by biasing the mean values towards the same 
class, it cannot capture these conditional dependen­
cies. 
Variational approximation methods have been dis­
cussed in [7, 4] and elsewhere. The mean field is the 
simplest form of variational approximation, but if it 
is tractable to use a more general form of distribution 
then it might be possible to capture more of the struc­
ture of the posterior distribution. 
Loopy propagation is a different way of performing 
inference in belief networks. Its origin is in the be­
lief propagation approach which Pearl advocated for 
singly connected networks [6]. Belief propagation ex­
actly calculates marginal probabilities in singly con­
nected networks. Theoretically, though, it is inappro­
priate to use it in multiply connected graphs. However 
Pearl noted that reasonable results could be achieved 
by doing just that. Since then various authors [9, 8, 3] 
have investigated the properties of loopy propagation 
and elaborated on its workings and accuracy. Loopy 
propagation could well be applied to networks such as 
the dynamic tree. 
In this paper a more general variational form than the 
mean field approximation is proposed. Instead of ap­
proximating the posterior with a factorised distribu­
tion over the nodes, the whole posterior is represented 
by a dynamic tree. It turns out that this approach can 
be followed tractably and efficiently. It also captures 
many of the conditional dependencies in the posterior, 
and provides a closer approximation to the true pos-
terior than both mean field and loopy propagation. 
Whatever approximation method we choose, there are 
three important requirements. First we need some way 
of getting a measure of the likelihood of the model. 
This is vital for learning. Second we require some in­
dication of the posterior distribution over tree struc­
tures. This will enable the image structure to be cap­
tured. Lastly we need some idea of the probabilities of 
finding different object labels at different parts of the 
structure. 
2.4 
Learning in dynamic trees 
Because the variational method provides a lower 
bound to the log probability, we can use an 
expectation-maximization (EM) approach for learning 
the parameters of P such as that described in [5]. The 
parameters of P are chosen to minimize the sum of 
the variational free energies over all the elements of a 
dataset. This (local) minimization is straightforward 
because all the relevant derivatives can be calculated. 
3 
Variational approaches 
Here we will quickly outline the general variational ap­
proach, and more specifically, the mean field method. 
The mean field approach for dynamic trees has been 
described in more detail in [1]. 
3.1 
General outline 
Explicit calculation of the posterior distribution is not 
viable. Therefore it seems sensible to find some reason­
able approximation to the posterior instead. Suppose 
we denote this approximate distribution by Q(Z, X H). 
The variational approach says that the parameters of 
the distribution Q(Z, X H) should be adjusted to min­
imize the Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence between 
the Q distribution and the true posterior. If the Q dis­
tribution becomes identical to the true posterior then 
the KL divergence is zero. Otherwise the KL diver­
gence is greater than zero. The KL divergence is given 
by 
KL(Q\\P) 
= (log Q(Z,XH) -logP(Z,XH\ XE))Q(Z,XH) 
= (log Q(Z, XH) -log P(Z, X))Q +log P(XE) (2) 
where (.) denotes an expectation. Because P(XE) 
is constant with respect to changes in Q, minimizing 
the KL divergence corresponds to minimizing the first 
term on the right hand side of (2), called the vari­
ational free energy. Furthermore, because the KL di­
vergence is always positive, this variational free energy 
gives an upper bound to -logP(XE). This is a major 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
569 
benefit of the variational framework as it means that 
any parameters of the P distribution can be updated 
using a form of EM algorithm [5]. 
A general approach to variational methods was dis­
cussed in [10]. However this approach produced vari­
ational approximations that scaled exponentially with 
the size of the largest clique. Unfortunately for this 
(and many other) models, the clique size can be very 
large. Here, for a network of n nodes, the largest clique 
can contain about n/4 nodes (if each child chooses 
from all nodes in the layer above). Hence the largest 
clique will have at least 2n/4 states. Here we need 
some other approach which will still give tractable in­
ference while keeping approximating models with large 
cliques. 
The mean field is the simplest variational method. For 
dynamic trees, the mean field approach involves ap­
proximating the posterior with a distribution of the 
form Q(Z)Q(XH), where Q(Z) = fLj 1-<? factorises, 
and Q(XH) takes the factorising form Q(XH) 
= 
f1(mf}x7. Here Jlij and mf are parameters which need 
to be adapted to best fit the approximating distribu­
tion to the true posterior. 
This mean field approximation causes problems. In 
[1] it was shown that spontaneous symmetry break­
ing polarises the distribution of the nodes far from 
the data. This occurs because many large conditional 
posterior dependencies are not captured by the form 
of Q(XH), and the resulting error has a significant 
effect on the approximate posterior distribution over 
tree structures. 
3.2 
A structured variational approach 
It would seem appropriate to try to use some more 
general approximate form for Q(XH) in order to cap­
ture the conditional dependencies. Unfortunately with 
any significant structure in Q(X H) the variational cal­
culation is not easily expressed or computed: for each 
node, it would involve expression and computation of 
the pairwise joint marginals of Q(XH) for all node 
pairs connected in some Z. If we want to make any 
improvement, we will have to go back to the begin­
ning, and remove the assumption that Q factorises into 
Q(Z)Q(XH). 
A new approach is needed. Instead of assuming that Q 
factorises into two parts, we use another dynamic tree 
(DT) as an approximating distribution. Though this 
might seem like a rather complicated approximation, 
it is in fact tractable. 
In detail, the approximating Q has the form 
Q(Z, XH) = Q(Z)Q(XHjz) where Q(Z) = f1ij J-L:ji 
is the same form of factorising distribution (with pa-
rameter p, to be optimised), but now the distribution 
over X is dependent on the choice of tree and has the 
form 
Q(XHjZ) = II IT[Q¸j]x:x;z;; 
(3) 
ijEVH kl 
where the parameters Q¸j are conditional probabili­
ties, and need to optimised. 
This form of distribution, though significantly more 
general than the mean field, is still less general than 
the posterior, which would not have a factorised 
P(ZjXE), for example. However it is both possible 
to use it as a variational approximation, and possible 
to calculate its marginal distributions. So it satisfies 
our requirements for a more general but usable distri­
bution. 
3.3 
Determining the parameters 
To choose good parameters for the approximating dis­
tribution, the Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence be­
tween the Q(Z, XH) distribution and the true poste­
rior should be minimised. The KL divergence is of the 
form KL(QIIP) = logP(XE) + Vz(Q(Z)) + V(Q, P) 
where Vz(Q(Z)) = L z Q(Z)[logQ(Z)-logP(Z)] and 
"' 
H 
Q(XHjZ) 
V(Q, P) = L..t Q(Z)Q(X \Z) log P(XjZ) 
Z,XH 
When written out explicitly, 
Vz(Q(Z)) 
Lij Jlij log(J-tij / Pij). 
Now let m¸ denote the 
mean values (under Q(Z, X)) of the indicator x¸ 
for non-evidential nodes. 
For notational convenience we let m¸ equal the in­
stantiated xf for the evidential nodes i, and propose 
additional degenerate connections for the same eviden­
tial nodes. The conditional probability matrix Qij for 
such a connection from evidential node i to some node 
j will take the form xi 1*. In other words the ab ele­
ment of matrix Qij takes value x't whatever the values 
of b and j. This simply says that these connections 
will always generate the data regardless of the state of 
the nodes in the layer above. These connections are 
fixed; they are not optimised over. When these addi­
tional nodes are incorporated into the variational free 
energy calculation, it can be seen that they make no 
contribution. 
Having introduced these connections, we find that 
V ( Q, P) can be written in terms of its parameters more 
simply as a sum over all the nodes: 
V ( { Q}, {p}) = L /1ij [2: Q¸j m¹ log -	] 
ijEV 
Q 
R 
where the m's are fully determined by the Q's. 

570 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
In the next few paragraphs the methods for optimis­
ing the Q's and the f..l'S are outlined. These methods 
depend on the fact that any change in a connection 
parameter only impacts on the means of the state vari­
ables for nodes below that connection. This enables us 
to decompose the KL divergence into simple parts. 
Optimising Q To obtain the best parameters we 
look at the derivatives of the KL divergence with re­
spect to each of them. Considering the Q parameters 
first of all, 
where 
8K L 
8Vst 
"' 8Vd1s) amj 
8Qab 
= 8Qab 
+ 
4 amk 8Qab 
st 
st 
k 
s 
st 
Vii ( Qij, /-lij, mi) = L /-lij [Qkm; log] 
kl 
•J 
and vdls)(f..lij,mj,{Q(i,j)ji < r(s)}) = 
L L l-lii[Qijm;(logQfj -logPim1)] 
iEd(s),j kl 
(4) 
Here d( s) denotes the set of nodes in layers below s 
(i.e. the descendants of s in the multi-parent belief 
network representation). The m; terms are entirely 
dependent on the mj and the Q's. 
Most of the derivatives in ( 4) are straightforward to 
compute. The exception is a:I:>. This can be ob-
vm. 
tained by propagating the derivatives from the layer 
below. 
8Vns) 
= 
amk s 
"' (aVes + "' 8Voc) amg) 
4 
8mk 
4 amg amp 
cEc(s) 
8 
P 
(5) 
where c(s) denotes the set of nodes in the layer imme­
diately below s (i.e. children of s in the multi-parent 
belief network representation) The Q's are updated 
from the bottom layer to the top layer by first propa­
gating the derivatives (5): 
Tk 8Vd(s) 
"' "' 
Qgk(l Qq; Tg) (6) 
8 
= amk 
= 4 4 1-lcs cs og P.gk 
+ c 
s 
cEc(s) g 
cs 
and secondly optimising aK {;bJIP) with Lagrange mul-
•• 
tipliers to encode the probabilistic constraints on the 
Q's. This gives 
P8Wb exp(-T:) 
Q ab _ ==-':..:._....,--'-
-,-
-':;_;.__-,.. 
st -
b 
L:a psr exp( -Tsa) 
(7) 
for non leaf nodes s. Defining Aj to be exp( -T;), and 
substituting the above form for Q in to (6), we obtain 
(8) 
In fact we get the same form for the A values propa­
gated up from the leaf nodes if we initialise each leaf 
node i with Ai = mi. 
Propagating these A values up the network allows us 
to find all the conditional probabilities Qij. These in 
turn can be used to calculate the means: 
(9) 
If we write mj = aj1r; Aj, then we obtain from (7) 
k "' 
pkt 1 As 
1rs 
= tf..lst st 1ft ):.I 
tl 
st 
with Auj given by ai L:k Pimb Ai fai. 
This result is very similar to belief propagation in 
trees. The whole Q distribution and marginals m 
(given the f..l values) can be calculated in two passes. 
The A values are propagated up the network and this 
gives the Q distribution. Then the means m can be 
propagated down the network. In the special case of 
/-lij = 1 for only one value of j, and 1-lii = 0 otherwise 
(this defines a simple tree structured belief network) 
the above algorithm reduces to Pearl belief propaga­
tion. This can be seen by noticing that in Pearl prop­
agation the constants of proportionality are given by 
ai = tXj = P(XE), and by observing that with the 
above assumption about f..L, 
and hence 
Ati = L Pimb Af and At = II Ati 
k 
j 
7rX = L Pt/?Tj II Avk 
tb 
k=f-j 
These are the standard Pearl propagation rules for a 
tree-structured belief network. 
Optimising f..L The f..l terms can be optimised in a 
similar sort of way. 
{)K L 
= 8Vst + L 8Vn:) amj 
Of..lst 
Of..lst 
k oms Of..Lst 
(10) 
8;'W is the T8k given by (6). The rest of the terms are 
straightforward to compute and give us 
1-lst <X Pst exp(-L Qwxmalog Qwx -log p:tl + r.k]) 
kl 
which simplifies to 
f..lst <X Pst exp(L mHlog L PN Aw]) 
(11) 
l 
k 
where the proportionality constants are obtained 
through normalisation. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
571 
The complete process Putting all this together, 
the procedure for optimising the parameters of the ap­
proximating distribution is as follows. 
1. For each evidential node, initialise the A) to the 
instantiated value of x). 
2. Propagate the A values up the network using (8). 
3. Calculate the conditional Q distributions using (7) 
and propagate the means down the dynamic tree using 
(9). 
5. Optimise the li-st using (11) and the A's and m's 
already calculated. 
6. Repeat until suitable convergence in the KL diver­
gence. Convergence is guaranteed because the KL di­
vergence is reduced at each step and is bounded below 
by zero. The point of convergence is a local turning 
point of the KL divergence, because at that point all 
the relevant partial derivatives are zero. 
4 
Experimental comparison with 
loopy belief propagation 
It has already been mentioned that in the single parent 
limit, this variational approach becomes belief propa­
gation, and hence gives the correct exact result. This is 
promising, because it suggests that in situations where 
there is one dominant structural interpretation of the 
image (a peaked Z distribution), then the probability 
distribution over the node states should be accurate. 
In addition to noting the belief propagation limit case, 
it could well be instructive to compare the results of 
this variational method with the results of loopy prop­
agation. Loopy propagation also has the same one 
parent limit, but gives different propagation rules. 
This variational approach has many advantages over 
loopy propagation. First and foremost it allows us to 
obtain a lower bound on the log probability of the data. 
This can be used to learn the various parameters of the 
P distribution. Second the variational approach pro­
vides a full joint distribution. This allows conditional 
and joint probabilities to be calculated. For example 
the probability of certain nodes for specific choices of 
structure can be calculated. Third, because the form 
and method of the approximation are explicit, it is 
possible to have some intuition about when the ap­
proximation will be good. 
Loopy propagation has none of these features. How­
ever it is known to be good at calculating marginal 
probabilities, despite its approximate nature. Vari­
ational methods can be relatively poor at producing 
good marginals. This is because even if the joint dis­
tribution is a good approximation, this distribution 
corresponds to one minima of the KL divergence. Gen-
erally with this form of KL divergence, the approxi­
mation tends to be 'narrower' than the true posterior, 
picking out one preferred 'interpretation' of the data, 
but possibly ignoring others. When the marginals are 
calculated the other variables are only integrated out 
over this one interpretation, possibly skewing the re­
sulting value for the marginal. 
It is therefore a good test of this method to see how it 
fares in terms of calculation of the marginals. To do 
this a simple problem is set up. In order to make it 
nontrivial, we ensure that the data is chosen so that 
the posterior structure will not have a peaked posterior 
over tree structures. 
A four layer network, with four nodes in each layer 
is defined, with each node taking one of three states. 
Each node in the first three layers has two possible 
parents in the layer above, one directly above, and 
one (rotationally) to the right of that. The node di­
rectly above is preferred (p = 0.6). The conditional 
probability tables were chosen randomly, with a strong 
diagonal (normalise(3I + R) where R is matrix with 
uniform(O,l) elements). The bottom nodes were in­
stantiated. 
Because this network is small the exact posterior can 
be accurately calculated through importance sampling 
(1000 samples were used). In addition the loopy prop­
agation marginals and the variational marginals were 
calculated. A typical example of the results is given in 
table (1). Generally the structural variational method 
performs better than loopy propagation. The vari­
ational method is in fact, reasonably accurate: usu­
ally correct to within one decimal place for every 
probability. Marginal KL divergence calculations over 
a number of different runs (and structures) do con­
firm that the variational method does calculate bet­
ter marginals, for varying conditions. The marginal 
KL divergences were summed over each node, and av­
eraged over 50 different runs. The resulting average 
KL diverences between each approximation and the 
true distribution were 5.5 and 7.0 for the variational 
method and for loopy propagation respectively. 
In conclusion then, this variational procedure does 
produce reasonable marginals, as well as providing the 
necessary joint distributions and bounds to the likeli­
hood of any parameters of P. 
5 
Experimental comparison with 
mean field method 
In order to compare the structured variational ap­
proach with the mean field method, tests were done us­
ing a 6 layer, one dimensional dynamic tree, where we 
represent the two possible node states by the colours 
black and white. 

572 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
True Marginals 
0.772 
0.126 
0.101 
0.293 
0.211 
0.495 
0.101 
0.543 
0.355 
0.484 
0.366 
0.148 
0.481 
0.280 
0.238 
0.464 
0.234 
0.300 
0.270 
0.302 
0.427 
0.396 
0.319 
0.284 
Variational Marginals 
Loopy Marginals 
0.742 
0.160 
0.097 
0.877 
0.063 
0.058 
0.273 
0.268 
0.457 
0.399 
0.150 
0.450 
0.067 
0.563 
0.369 
0.099 
0.482 
0.418 
0.451 
0.390 
0.157 
0.488 
0.392 
0.119 
0.450 
0.308 
0.241 
0.632 
0.208 
0.159 
0.435 
0.279 
0.284 
0.566 
0.168 
0.265 
0.252 
0.321 
0.425 
0.271 
0.260 
0.468 
0.385 
0.328 
0.286 
0.384 
0.340 
0.274 
Table 1: Comparison of the true marginals (for the 
middle two rows of the network) with those found by 
loopy propagation or by a DT-variational method. 
150 cases of one dimensional data were independently 
generated from a simple Markovian process, and inde­
pendent noise was added. This enables us to do a pre­
liminary test of how well the model deals with blocky 
data structures. For data generated from the prior 
very similar results are obtained. The prior probability 
of the choice of a parent was given by a Gaussian de­
cay over the distance (horizontally) between the node 
and the prospective parent. The positional structure 
of the nodes can be seen in figure 3. These Gaussians 
simply had standard deviations of three times the dis­
tance between the nodes on the parent layer. This 
ensured significant prior probability of connecting to 
the nearest 3 possible parents, with a small probability 
of connecting further afield. The conditional probabil­
ity matrices had 0.9 down the diagonal and hence 0.1 
on the off-diagonal. 
The implementation of the mean field method was sim­
ilar to that in [1] with 20 iterations of the Q(X) pass 
for each recalculation of Q(Z). For the structured vari­
ational approach, 5 passes were made through the up­
date procedure. Any speed comparisons given here are 
only indicative. However because the Q values can be 
calculated exactly in one pass, given the p, values, con­
vergence of the structured variational approach works 
out to be significantly faster (convergence was assumed 
if the KL divergence changed by less than 0.01 on the 
current step). 
To compare the mean field and DT-structured meth­
ods, we compare the variational free energies between 
the distributions found by each method and the true 
distribution. A lower variational free energies implies 
a lower KL divergence, and hence a better match to 
the true posterior. The results of this are in figure 2. 
These results indicate that the DT -structured method 
gives a better approximation to the posterior than the 
mean field method. 
KL divergence differences: mean field v structured 
40,---C::___-D--E--F---, 
35 
;• 
: :··· . 
,,··;:·.-: 
B:. :::?:· 
.:·;P_:··.• 
:·?.· 
... 
·'··· 
20 
structured 
Figure 2: Comparison of the variational free energy 
for the DT -structured and mean field approaches 
It is also instructive to look at the form of solutions 
which the two methods produce. First it should be 
noted that the mean field result is a special case of 
the DT-structured approximation. If the structured 
distribution has Q¸j = m¸ for all j, l, it is identical 
the mean field distribution. When the DT-structured 
approach is optimised, however, we find that the Q do 
not resemble this degenerate form. Instead they tend 
to be highly diagonal, and are therefore incorporat­
ing some of the conditional dependencies between the 
nodes. 
It is interesting to see what types of structures are 
produced by the different methods. Figure 3 gives an 
example of the highest probability trees under the ap­
proximating distributions for both the mean field and 
the DT-structured approaches. The highest posterior 
tree is calculated from the distribution over tree by se­
lecting the Z structure which maximises Q(Z). Note 
this choice is for illustration purposes only. We have 
(and want) posterior distributions over trees. 
The highest probability trees for the two methods 
are comparable, but not always identical. For the 
mean field method there are problems with sponta­
neous symmetry breaking, which cause the higher level 
nodes to polarise to one or other state. This has the 
appearance of 'flattening out' the tree structures re­
lating to the other state variables in the highest pos­
terior tree (see [1] for more details). This effect can be 
seen in figure 2b. The nodes in the third layer from 
the top are all dominated by a single class. This pre­
vents the tree structures relating to the 'black' nodes 
from utilising this layer. This effect is not apparent 
for the DT -structured approximation (figure 2a), and 
is a possible reason for fact that higher posterior trees 
are found by it. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
573 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3: Comparison of the highest probability trees 
found by the (a) DT-structured approximation, and 
(b) the mean field approximation. 
6 
Conclusions 
The mean field method was found to be useful for mod­
elling dynamic trees. However it does not allow any 
conditional dependency structure in the distribution 
over the nodes. To overcome this limitation, the DT­
structured variational approach has been proposed. 
Such an approach provides a more sophisticated model 
for the network node states, a model which incorpo­
rates the mean field as a special case. 
The tests done in this paper suggest that the DT­
structured approach succeeds in capturing the poste­
rior distribution over the nodes better than the mean 
field. The evidence for this comes from both the di­
agonal nature of the conditional probability matrices, 
and the improvement in the KL divergence between 
the approximation and the true posterior. This varia­
tional method recovers the exact solution in the single 
tree limit, and hence for most real image situations, 
where a dominant structural interpretation would be 
expected, the approximation should be good. 
In addition to the above, preliminary experiments sug­
gest this approach finds accurate marginal probabili­
ties. These marginals appear to be better than those 
calculated using loopy propagation, if the results of 
a toy demonstration are representative. The varia­
tional technique has advantages which are not avail­
able through the use of loopy propagation. These ad­
vantages are vital for the use of the dynamic tree, and 
include the provision of a lower bound to the log prob­
ability and the provision of joint distributions. The 
variational approach also provides the required distri­
bution over tree structures. Finally, there are speed 
gains from using this method rather than the mean 
field. These gains come from the fact that only two or­
der n passes are needed to update the Q and m values; 
the equivalent step in the mean field involves an itera­
tive process. The main limitation of the DT-structured 
approach is that the approximating distribution over 
the Z variables still takes a factorised form.
