Distance formulas capable of unifying Euclidian space and 
probability space 
Ph.D. Zecang Gu1  

 
 
 
   Ling Dong 

Abstract. For pattern recognition like image recognition, it has become 
clear that each machine-learning dictionary data actually became data 
in probability space belonging to Euclidean space. 
However, the distances in the Euclidean space and the distances in the 
probability space are separated and ununified when machine learning is 
introduced in the pattern recognition. There is still a problem that it is 
impossible to directly calculate an accurate matching relation between 
the sampling data of the read image and the learned dictionary data. 
In this research, we focused on the reason why the distance is changed 
and the extent of change when passing through the probability space 
from the original Euclidean distance among data belonging to multiple 
probability spaces containing Euclidean space. By finding the reason of 
the cause of the distance error and finding the formula expressing the 
error quantitatively, a possible distance formula to unify Euclidean 
space and probability space is found. 
Based on the results of this research, the relationship between 
machine-learning dictionary data and sampling data was clearly 
understood for pattern recognition. As a result, the calculation of 
collation among data and machine-learning to compete mutually 

between data are cleared, and complicated calculations became 
unnecessary. 
Finally, 
using 
actual 
pattern 
recognition 
data, 
experimental 
demonstration of a possible distance formula to unify Euclidean space 
and probability space discovered by this research was carried out, and 
the effectiveness of the result was confirmed. 
Keywords: distance formula; probability space; Euclidean Space; 
artificial intelligence 
1 
Introduction 
With AlphaGo triumphing over all human players, deep learning is once again on 
the rise around the world. However, when using neural networks such as deep 
learning, for each input data and the desired output, a huge number of parameters 
need to be training to get an inference result. This comes at a terrible price. The 
combination and filtering of the parameters need to be done in the digital universe, 
which has been proved to be an unsolvable NP problem for Turing machines. 
However, at present, some people take a risk to solve the problem against this 
theorem with huge expenses of the hardware system, which leads to the huge cost to 
use Artificial Intelligence, the incapability of the industrialization and the threaten 
from “black box”. Running AlphaGo needs 1000 CPUs, 200 GPUs and 200000 
watts of power. Can the heavy load of the artificial intelligence be unloaded? 
How to implement machine learning without combination? How to abandon the 
supervised learning and the training of the huge number of parameters? How to turn 
reactive power into intelligent active power? How to set up a new generation of 
models of artificial intelligence with unsupervised learning? 
The main work of this paper is as follows. When classification or pattern 
recognition for several probability distribution data is needed in machine learning, if 
a new distance formula which unifies the distances in the Euclidean space and the 

probability spaces is find to define the distance relationship of the data in various 
probability distributions, then the complicated mathematical calculation can be 
avoided and the probability distribution data can be processed directly. Thus the 
heavy load of the machine learning in artificial intelligence can be unloaded and the 
new model keeps away from the threaten of “black box” and the backward situation 
of big data, big compute and large model. 
2 
The distance problem 
Deep learning mainly cares about solving the optimal classification problem as in 
Figure 1. There are probability distribution W with the center point w and 
probability distribution V with the center point v in the Euclidean space E. Given a 
point r in the space between w and v, either w or v is closer to the point r? This is 
the most classical problem in pattern recognition. If the distance problem related to 
w and v is solved, it is clear that the problem won’t have the heavy load and can be 
solved using unsupervised learning. Therefore, the distance between probability 
distributions has been in the center of attention at present
［16］[17][19]. 
 
Fig. 1. Sketch of the distance between two probability distributions 
 
Before introducing the distance between probability distributions, the traditional 
distance scale should be defined first. A traditional distance scale should satisfy 

1. Non-negativity: ∀w, v, d(w，v)≥ 0, 
2. Non-degeneracy: d(w，v)＝0, only if w＝v, 
3. Symmetry: ∀w, v, d(w，v)＝d(v，w), 
4. Triangle inequality: ∀w, r, v, d(w，v)≤d(w，r)＋d(r，v). 
To define the distance between two center points w and v of the probability 
distributions W and V, the most intuitive distance formula at present is the 
Kullback-Leibler distance (KL distance)[7]:  
 
Where w(x) and v(x) are, respectively, the density function of the probability 
distributions W and V. 
The KL distance is consistent with the characteristics of the Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation. In addition, the KL distance has the property of the 
Riemannian geometry[1] and is a high-accuracy approximation solution formula[2,3,4] 
since it is inferred from the density rate. 
However, the 
KL distance has the property 
of 
non-negativity and 
non-degeneracy, but does not satisfy symmetrical property and the triangle 
inequality[18]. 
It can be seen from the KL distance formula that the KL distance from w to v 
depends on the ratio of the density functions w(x)/v(x), whereas the KL distance 
from v to w depends on the ratio v(x)/w(x). The missing of the symmetry makes KL 
distance do not meet with the definition of the traditional distance, and one may 
think it is better to find a new formula with symmetrical property. However, this 
kind of thoughts come from the lack of understanding of the distance between 
probability spaces and is bound by the traditional ideas. It can be proved that the 
asymmetry of the distance between probability spaces is even more important than 
the distance formula itself. Moreover, the distance is defined between two arbitrary 
probability spaces exist in Euclidean space rather than in a probability space. 
Another problem is that the distance between two probability spaces usually passes 
through the Euclidean space. Kullback Leibler did not give a more detailed 

description and there is no strict formula for the distance between probability 
spaces. 
Strictly speaking, as mentioned above, the KL distance is not a “distance”. The 
computation of the KL distance takes a long time, this is because the logarithmic 
function has very strong nonlinear property and singularity will appear[5,6] when 
v(x)=0. On account with these problems, it is generally recognized that the 
calculation of the KL distance is not stable. 
An even bigger problem is that the probability spaces are small spaces in the 
Euclidean space. The data of general machine learning exists in both the Euclidean 
space and the probability spaces, which requires the probability distance to fit in 
with the distance in the Euclidean space. The KL distance does not fit this 
requirement, thus it can not be applied to the unsupervised learning of the artificial 
intelligence. 
The following is the Pearson distance (PE distance) between probability spaces, a 
more practical distance compared with the KL distance:  
 
The PE distance has similar properties as the KL distance. The PE distance also is 
a high-accuracy approximation solution formula since it is inferred from the density 
rate.  
Specifically, the PE distance contains a squares function. Therefore it has the 
properties of the least square method. Meanwhile, there is no logarithmic function 
in the PE distance formula. Thus there is no need to do complex nonlinear 
calculation and the PE distance can be calculated directly. The calculation is stable 
and the formula is practical. 
The remaining problem of the PE distance is that the ratio of the density 
functions is infinity when v(x)=0. Besides, the PE distance also does not satisfy 
symmetrical property and the triangle inequality. 
The PE distance can not solve the problem that the probability distance does not 
fit in with the distance in the Euclidean space, which is a problem must be solved. 

However, due to the analysis based on the Riemannian geometry, using the 
derivation of the Wasserstein distance with the transmission theory, people feel 
desperate since only approximate solution can be obtained and there seems to be no 
algorithm more practical than the PE distance.  
In this situation, inspired by the definition of the distance in Euclidean space, 
Japanese scholars gave a simple definition of the distant between the probability 
spaces, that is, the definition of the L2 distance[14]: 
 
The L2 distant satisfies not only the symmetrical property and non-degeneracy, 
but also the triangle inequality. Thus the L2 distance is the “distance” in the 
mathematical sense. Moreover, w(x)-v(x) is finite if the probability density 
functions w(x) and v(x) are finite. The calculation of the L2 distance is simple and 
the solution is stable, so it is widely believed that the L2 distance is more practical. 
However, as mentioned above, the authors think that it is a big mistake to define 
a distance between probability spaces which has the property of symmetry and 
non-degeneracy. We should be thankful that the KL distance and the PE distance 
both do not have the symmetrical property, which keep us from going astray. The 
probability spaces essentially have directions, thus the distance with symmetrical 
property is not suitable for the probability spaces. What remains is the problem to 
fit in with the distance in the Euclidean space. 
3 
A new distance formula 
With strict analysis, the KL distance and the PE distance have proved that the 
probability spaces have directions. Considering the consistent with the distance in 
the Euclidean space, there is a hypothesis that the difference value between the 
Euclidean distance and the distance between the probability spaces has a strict 
formula. Fix the Euclidean distance with this formula, we can define a distance 
between the probability spaces that fit in with the distance in the Euclidean space. 
Then the distance can be directly used for unsupervised learning. 

As shown in Figure 1, there are probability distribution W with the center point w 
and probability distribution V with the center point v in the Euclidean space E or in 
two different probability spaces in the Euclidean space. The distance from w to v 
which goes through both the Euclidean space and the probability spaces is 
 
 
 
 
 
Here,       is the original formula,Δ(V) is the distance error generated in the 
probability space V in the direction from w to v. The superscript (V) in Δ(V)  means 
that the distance error is the error generated when w goes through the Euclidean 
space to the probability distribution V, which means that Δ(V) is related to the 
position of w going through the probability distribution V and has nothing to do 
with that in the probability distribution W. 
The occurrence of probability events in each probability space in the Euclidean 
space is independent and the occurrence has the uniqueness property, which means, 
when you observe a probability event in a probability space, the other probability 
event in the probability space does not exist. For example, when observing the 
distance from a point w in the Euclidean space or in a probability space in the 
Euclidean space to a point v in the Euclidean space or in another probability space 
in the Euclidean space, the probability events of the point w can not exist at the 
same time, thus the probability distribution W at the point w does not exist and the 
position of w is in the Euclidean space. The probability distribution at the point w 
does not affect the distance from w to v. The distance is only dependent on the 
probability in the probability distribution V. 

On the other side, when considering the distance from a point v in the Euclidean 
space or in a probability space in the Euclidean space to a point w in the Euclidean 
space or in another probability space in the Euclidean space, the probability events 
of the point v can not exist at the same time, thus the probability distribution V at 
the point v does not exist and the position of v is in the Euclidean space. The 
probability distribution at the point v does not affect the distance from v to w. The 
distance is only dependent on the probability in the probability distribution W. 
The physical significance of this distance formula is: When coming into a 
probability space in the direction from w to v, if the Euclidean distance between w 
and v is less than or equal to the error Δ(V), the distance is 0. Otherwise, if the 
Euclidean distance is larger than the error Δ(V), modify the distance with this 
distance formula. When the probability distribution does not exist, which means 
Δ(V)=0, the distance is equal to the Euclidean distance. Thus this distance formula is 
compatible with the Euclidean distance and is very practical. Moreover, it is an 
important distance formula between different probability spaces that satisfies 
unsupervised machine learning. 
4 
Competitive learning model based on the new distance formula 
In adversarial learning of image recognition, unsupervised learning deals with the 
problem as shown in Figure 2: Given two probability distribution data fv1j∈FV1 and 
fv2j∈FV2 of the eigenvector giving by machine learning and a characteristic element 
svj(j＝1,2,…,e) in the eigenvector SV, find which eigenvector the identification 
target belongs. 
For an element fv11 in the eigenvector FV1 given by machine learning, the first 
scale of fv11 is Scl11(1), the second scale of fv11 is Scl12(1), the third scale of fv11 is 
Scl13(1), the central value of fv11 is Scl10(1). The first scale of fv12 is Scl21(1), the 
second scale of fv12 is Scl22(1), the third scale of fv12 is Scl23(1), the central value of 
fv12 is Scl20(1). The first scale of fv1e is Scle1(1), the second scale of fv1e is Scle2(1), the 
third scale of fv1e is Scle3(1), the central value of fv1e is Scle0(1).  

Similarly, for an element fv21 in the eigenvector FV2 given by machine learning, 
the first scale of fv21 is Scl11(2), the second scale of fv21 is Scl12(2), the third scale of 
fv21 is Scl13(2), the central value of fv21 is Scl10(2). The first scale of fv22 is Scl21(2), the 
second scale of fv22 is Scl22(2), the third scale of fv22 is Scl23(2), the central value of 
fv22 is Scl20(2). The first scale of fv2e is Scle1(2), the second scale of fv2e is Scle2(2), the 
third scale of fv2e is Scle3(2), the central value of fv2e is Scle0(2).  
Then, the characteristic element sv1 of the identification target is between the 
probability scales Scl11(2) and Scl12(2) of the characteristic element fv21 of the 
eigenvector FV2, the characteristic element sv2 of the identification target is 
between the probability scales Scl22(1) and Scl23(1) of the characteristic element fv21 
of the eigenvector FV1. By that analogy, the characteristic element sve of the 
identification target is between the probability scales Scle1(2) and Scle2(2) of the 
characteristic element fv2e of the eigenvector FV2. The position between two scales 
means the probability distribution values of the corresponding characteristic 
element. The probability distribution value is dependent on the distance between 
probability spaces which is given below. 
For a characteristic element svj in the identification target eigenvector SV, 
assume that the probability value of svj in the probability distribution of the 
characteristic element fv1j in the recorded identification target eigenvector FV1 is 
spj(fv1j)∈SP(FV1), the probability value of svj in the probability distribution of the 
characteristic element fv2j in the recorded identification target eigenvector FV2 is 
spj(fv2j)∈SP(FV2)(j=1,2,…,e). 
Assume that the amount of the probability scales svj goes through before it arrives 
at the center of the probability distribution of fv2j is mv2j, the amount of the 
probability regions svj goes through before it arrives at the center of the probability 
distribution of fv2j is mj(fv2j)＝mv2j＋1, the distance between the probability scales of 
the probability distribution of fv2j is Dij, the probability that a point in the region Dij 
is in the probability distribution is Pij(fv2j)(i=1,2,…, mj(fv2j)).       

Then the distance between the identification target vector SV and the eigenvector 
data FV1 in the direction of FV1 which goes through both the Euclidean space and 
the probability spaces is  
 
where 
 
The distance between the identification target vector SV and the eigenvector data 
FV2 in the direction of FV2 which goes through both the Euclidean space and the 
probability spaces is  
 
               
 
where 
 
Then the adversarial formula of the identification target vector SV belongs to the 
eigenvector data FV2 is 
C  ＝ G（SV，FV2）／G（SV，FV1）     (7) 
If C≤1, the identification target vector SV belongs to the eigenvector data FV2. If 
C>1, the identification target vector SV belongs to the eigenvector data FV1. 

Then we prove 
 
Assume that the probability that a point in the region D＝D1j＋D2j＋,…,Dmj is in 
the probability distribution is 1. Then the distance between probability spaces in the 
region D is 0. Since probability space is a measure space, which means the 
probability distribution value in different regions is additive, the formula (8) is 
proved. 
         
 
    
fv11
fv21
(2)
Scl 
13
(2)
Scl 
12
(2)
Scl 
11
(2)
Scl 
10
(1)
Scl 
11 Scl 
12
(1)
Scl 
10
(1)
fv12
fv22
(2)
Scl 
22
(2)
Scl 
21
(2)
Scl 
20
(1)
Scl 
21 Scl 
22
(1)
Scl 
20
(1)
sv1
sv2
(2)
Scl 
23
fv1e
(1)
Scl 
e1 Scl 
e2
(1)
Scl 
e0
(1)
fv2e
sve
(2)
Scl 
e2
(2)
Scl 
e1
(2)
Scl 
e0
(2)
Scl 
e3
FV2
FV1
Scl 
13
(1)
Scl 
23
(1)
Scl 
e3
(1)
 
Fig. 2. Sketch of the pattern recognition model of ultra-deep adversarial learning 
5 
Conclusion 
In order to show the distance which goes through both the Euclidean space and 
the probability spaces simply with specific numbers, the information of the 
probability distribution of the eigenvalue of the pattern recognition should be fully 

utilized to improve the accuracy of pattern recognition. Table 1-3 shows the data of 
three pattern recognition. Each table shows the Euclidean distance and the distance 
in the probability spaces between the nearest eigenvector fv1j∈FV1 and fv2j∈FV2 
with probability distribution for a sample eigenvalue svj∈SV. 
 
Table 1. Example 1 of the pattern recognition data  
  
 
Table 2. Example 2 of the pattern recognition data 
   
 
Table 3. Example 1 of the pattern recognition data 
  
 
Table 4-6 show the comparison between the adversarial result using the 
Euclidean distance and the adversarial result using the distance that goes through 
both the Euclidean space and the probability spaces. It can be seen from Table 4-6 
that the adversarial result using the Euclidean distance may be mistaken while the 
adversarial result using the distance that goes through both the Euclidean space and 
the probability spaces is always right. 
The results in Table 5 are right for both the Euclidean distance and the distance 
between the probability spaces. However, when using the distance between the 

probability spaces, the ratio of the distance between the sample data SV and the 
eigenvalue FV1 to the distance between the sample data SV and the eigenvalue FV2 
increases from 1.26 of the Euclidean space to 1.68, which is the characteristic of the 
increasing of the recognition rate. 
Table 4. The result of example 1 
 
Table 5. The result of example 2 
 
Table 6. The result of example 1 
 
This research proposed a new distance formula which unifies the Euclidean 
distance and the distance between the probability spaces in view of the urgent needs 
of the artificial intelligence machine learning. The effectiveness of the formula has 
been verified with practical data. 
6
