Machine learning meets network science: dimensionality reduction 
for fast and efficient embedding of networks in the hyperbolic space 
Josephine Maria Thomas1,†, Alessandro Muscoloni1,2,†, Sara Ciucci1,3, Ginestra Bianconi4 and 
Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci 1,* 
1Biomedical Cybernetics Group, Biotechnology Center (BIOTEC), Center for Molecular and Cellular 
Bioengineering (CMCB), Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 47/49, 01307 Dresden, Germany 
2School of Science, ALMA MATER STUDIORUM - Università di Bologna - Via Zamboni, 33 - 40126 
Bologna, Italy 
3Lipotype GmbH, Tatzberg 47, 01307 Dresden, Germany 
4School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom 

†The first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors 
 
 
Complex network topologies and hyperbolic geometry seem specularly connected 
(Papadopoulos et al. 2012), and one of the most fascinating and challenging problems of 
recent complex network theory is to map a given network to its hyperbolic space. The 
Popularity Similarity Optimization (PSO) model represents - at the moment - the climax 
of this theory (Papadopoulos et al. 2012). It suggests that the trade-off between node 
popularity and similarity is a mechanism to explain how complex network topologies 
emerge - as discrete samples - from the continuous world of hyperbolic geometry 
(Papadopoulos et al. 2015). The hyperbolic space seems appropriate to represent real 
complex networks. In fact, it preserves many of their fundamental topological 
properties, and can be exploited for real applications such as, among others, link 
prediction and community detection. Here, we observe for the first time that a 
topological-based machine learning class of algorithms - for nonlinear unsupervised 
dimensionality reduction - can directly approximate the network’s node angular 
coordinates of the hyperbolic model into a two-dimensional space, according to a similar 
topological organization that we named angular coalescence. On the basis of this 
phenomenon, we propose a new class of algorithms that offers fast and accurate 
coalescent embedding of networks in the hyperbolic space even for graphs with 
thousands of nodes. 
 

Significant progress has been achieved in the last fifteen years in unveiling the universal 
properties of complex networks. Nevertheless, characterizing the large variety of real network 
structures which are coming from the ‘Big Data explosion’ remains an important challenge of 
network science.  Network geometry aims at making a paradigmatic shift in our understanding 
of complex network structures by revealing their hidden metric (Boguñá et al. 2008; 
Papadopoulos et al. 2012; Higham et al. 2008; Kuchaiev et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2015; Bianconi 
& Rahmede 2015; Cannistraci et al. 2013a; Cannistraci et al. 2013b; Daminelli et al. 2015). 
This field has a large number of applications ranging from brain networks (Cannistraci et al. 
2013a) to routing packets in the Internet (Bianconi 2015). In this context there is increasing 
evidence that the hidden metric of many complex networks is hyperbolic. However, the 
science that studies and designs algorithms to test this hypothesis and to reveal the hidden 
hyperbolic metric of real complex networks, is in its dawning. To this purpose, here we 
propose advanced algorithms that combine network geometry, manifold theory and machine 
learning with the PSO model. 
The PSO model suggests that real networks have a congruous geometrical representation in a 
hyperbolic space, where each network node is mapped according to the angular and the radial 
coordinates of a polar system (Papadopoulos et al. 2012). The node similarities are related 
with the angular distances in the hyperbolic space: the higher the similarity between two 
nodes, the closer their angular coordinates. On the other hand, the node degree is related with 
the intrinsic popularity of the node: the higher the node degree, the higher its popularity in the 
network and the lower its radial coordinate in the hyperbolic space. 
Manifold machine learning for unsupervised nonlinear dimensionality reduction are an 
important sub-class of topological machine learning. They learn nonlinear similarities (or 
distances) between points (samples) distributed over a hidden manifold in a multidimensional 
feature space, in order to preserve, embed (map) and visualize them in a two-dimensional 
reduced space (Cannistraci et al. 2010). They are inspired by a three-step procedure. First, 
they approximate the shape of the hidden manifold reconstructing a nearest-neighbourhood 
graph between the points in the high-dimensional space. Second, they use the reconstructed 
network to estimate pairwise topological similarities (or distances) between the points that lie 
on the manifold, and store these nonlinear estimations in a kernel (or distance matrix). In a 
third and last step, they apply a matrix decomposition to the kernel to perform dimensionality 
reduction, usually in a space of two-dimensions. If the network is already given in the form of 
an unweighted adjacency matrix, the same algorithm works neglecting the first step and thus, 
in practice, performs a network embedding that preserves the node similarities. These 

methods are already used in network biology for instance to predict node similarities in 
protein interaction networks (Kuchaiev et al. 2009; Cannistraci et al. 2013b), therefore it was 
likely for us to envisage their usage for network embedding in the hyperbolic space. 
In Fig. 1B-D, we show that the Isomap algorithm (ISO), which is the progenitor of manifold 
dimension reduction techniques, starting from the unweighted adjacency matrix offers an 
embedding of the network nodes that is organized according to a circular pattern (Fig. 1B), 
that follows the angular coordinates of the original PSO model. Unexpectedly, for an 
algorithm named noncentered minimum curvilinear embedding (ncMCE) (Cannistraci et al. 
2013b) (Fig. 1E-F), the circular pattern is linearized (Fig. 1E) and the nodes are ordered 
(respecting the node similarities) on the second dimension of embedding. In fact, if we 
accommodate the node points on the circumference following the same ordering of the second 
dimension of embedding (Fig. 1E) we can again recover an unbroken circular pattern (Fig. 
1F) that respects the angular coordinates of the original PSO model. Surprisingly, ncMCE is 
the only algorithm - between the ones tested - able to learn, unfold and linearize along just 
one dimension an intrinsic nonlinear (circular) pattern. It compresses the information in one 
unique dimension because it learns nonlinear similarities by means of the minimum spanning 
tree. In fact, ncMCE provides a hierarchical-based mapping that is fundamentally different 
from the manifold-based of ISO. The capability to embed nonlinear variability information 
exclusively in one dimension is highly valued in machine learning because demonstrates the 
power of dimension reduction techniques to linearize nonlinear patterns (Cannistraci et al. 
2010; Roweis & Saul 2000) (see Methods). However, the utility of a computational technique 
varies in relation to the designed target to reach. ncMCE is based on a general nonlinear 
similarity learning theory called Minimum Curvilinearity (Cannistraci et al. 2010; Cannistraci 
et al. 2013b) that offers an advantage over manifold approaches when the purpose is 
unsupervised pattern detection and linearization. In fact, in that case the goal is to perform 
embedding of the points of a multidimensional datasets, and the graph that connects the points 
and approximates the manifold is unknown (see Methods). Conversely, when the task is to 
embed a network in the hyperbolic space, the graph that approximates the manifold is already 
given, and the goal of embedding is to retain - and not to linearize - the circular node 
similarity pattern in the two-dimensional space. Therefore the manifold-based techniques, 
compared to the minimum-curvilinear-based, should offer a better approximation of the 
angular coordinates which represent the network node similarities; especially for high 
temperatures of the PSO model, when the tree-like network organization and the related 
hyperbolic geometry degenerate. 

The rationale of our approach is all contained here. We tried many combinations of different 
network similarities and matrix decompositions. And, in brief, we reached the same consistent 
finding: the arising in the two-dimensional embedding space of a common node aggregation 
pattern which we named angular coalescence, and that was circularly or linearly ordered 
according to the angular coordinates of the hyperbolic model. This represents the first 
important discovery of our study. Consequently, we decided to coin the expression coalescent 
embedding to indicate the class of algorithms that exhibit angular coalescence in the two-
dimensional network embedding. In our case we detected the angular coalescence 
phenomenon as embedding result of topological-based machine learning for nonlinear 
unsupervised dimension reduction. Indeed, the evidence that even MCE and ncMCE are able 
to exhibit coalescent embedding may theoretically suggest that this is an epiphenomenon that 
in general characterizes topological-based machine learning for nonlinear dimension 
reduction when applied to this task.  
In the end, for this study we decided to select a representative group of nonlinear 
unsupervised dimensionality reduction approaches among the ones with the highest 
performance. Three manifold-based: Isomap (ISO) (Tenenbaum et al. 2000), noncentered 
Isomap (ncISO) (Cannistraci et al. 2013b), Laplacian eigenmaps (LE) (Belkin & Niyogi 
2001). Two minimum-curvilinearity-based: minimum curvilinear embedding (MCE) 
(Cannistraci et al. 2010; Cannistraci et al. 2013b) and noncentered minimum curvilinear 
embedding (ncMCE) (Cannistraci et al. 2013b). An important note for practical applications 
is that all these approaches are unsupervised (node or edge labels are not required) and 
parameter-free (external tuning setting of algorithms’ parameters is not required).  
In Fig. 2, we propose a novel general algorithm - based on the coalescent embedding principle 
- for network embedding in the hyperbolic space. In order to build a general algorithm we 
started by noticing that the problem to compute the embedding on an unweighted adjacency 
matrix would be simplified by having a ‘good guess’ of the edge weights that suggest the 
connectivity geometry. Thus, there was a clear margin to improve the coalescent embedding 
performance by pre-weighting the network links using a convenient strategy to suggest 
topological similarities between the connected nodes. We devised two different pre-weighting 
strategies. The first adopts what we called the repulsion-attraction rule (RA). The idea is that 
links that are between nodes with high degree should be geometrically far because they 
represent hubs, and big hubs - according to the theory of navigability of complex networks 
presented by Boguñá et al. (Boguñá et al. 2008) - tend to dominate geometrically distant 
regions: this is the repulsive part of the rule. On the contrary, links between nodes that share a 

high number of common neighbours should be geometrically close because they most likely 
share many similarities: this is the attractive part of the rule. Thus, the RA (see Fig. 2 for the 
precise mathematical formula) is a simple and efficient approach that quantifies the trade-off 
between hub repulsion and common-neighbours-based attraction. It pre-weights the network 
links adding up the adjacent nodes’ degrees and their cross term (the product), and then 
dividing by the number of common neighbours. Suppl. Fig. 1 is giving a visual example of 
how the RA pre-weighting rule is improving the angular coalescence effect in respect to the 
same methods adopted without pre-weighting in Fig. 1. Inspired by the same rationale, the 
second strategy makes a similar pre-weighting of the links using the edge-betweenness-
centrality (EBC) to obtain geometrical distances between nodes and regions of the networks. 
Furthermore, we were not convinced that preserving the final angular distances between 
adjacent nodes (Fig. 2B) was the best strategy to re-organize the nodes over the disk 
circumference. Most likely the reciprocal angular distances between adjacent nodes on the 
circumference were affected by local noise. Thus we devised a new strategy to re-organize the 
nodes on the circumference (Fig. 2B) that we called equidistant adjustment (EA): the nodes 
are equidistantly re-organized on the circumference according to their original order learned 
by the coalescent embedding. Fig. 2A-C offers an example of the process of equidistant 
adjustment for the LE embedded nodes. 
The results for the best dimension reduction methods are reported in Fig. 3A. The 
performance was evaluated as Pearson correlation between all the pairwise hyperbolic 
distances of the network nodes in the original PSO model and in the reconstructed hyperbolic 
space. The plots report the average correlation over the 100 synthetic networks that have been 
generated for each different PSO model parameter combination. It is evident that the 
coalescent embedding techniques pre-weighted with RA and adjusted according to EA are 
outperforming the Hypermap algorithm that is the state of the art, and this is the second key 
discovery of our study. RA performed similarly to EBC, and in general both the pre-
weighting strategies are effective (Suppl. Fig. 2-6). However, RA is computational more 
efficient. Obviously, all the methods reduce their performance for increasing temperature 
(reduced clustering), because the networks assume a more random structure. 
Another alluring result, pointing out a very subtle problem, is that without EA all techniques 
significantly reduce the performance, as it is shown in Fig. 3B. Looking at Fig. 3A-B and the 
Suppl. Fig. 2-6, EA makes a difference especially for low temperatures (high clustering), 
while for high temperatures its improvement is vanishing. This is particularly evident for LE 
that in Fig. 3B at low temperatures has a significantly worse performance compared to Fig. 

3A where EA is applied. Imposing an equidistant adjustment might be counterintuitive, but 
our simulations suggest that this sub-optimal strategy is better than passively undergo the 
local embedding uncertainty. On the other hand, once the temperature is increased, the global 
embedding uncertainty also increases and the techniques are less efficient to recover the 
global node order. In practice, for high temperatures the global noise overcomes the local 
noise and the EA reduces its effectiveness. The significant improvement offered by EA is 
evident also in link prediction simulations on real world networks (see Table 1), where EA-
based coalescent embedding techniques offers the best precision, confirming that adjustment 
of local embedding uncertainty is crucial for effective coalescent embedding also in real 
applications. Taken all together our results suggest that the idea to connect manifold learning 
theory with network geometry is a promising direction of research. In fact, the coalescent-
embedding-based algorithms combine important performance improvement with a spectacular 
speed up - both on in-silico and real tests - in respect to Hypermap (see Fig. 4 and Table 1). 
To conclude, we hope that this letter will contribute to establish a new bridge at the interphase 
between physics of complex networks and computational machine learning theory, and that 
future extended studies will dig into real applications revealing the impact of coalescent 
network embedding for instance in network medicine or social science predictions.  
 
Methods 
 
Generation of synthetic networks by the PSO model  
The synthetic networks used in the simulations have been created according to the PSO model 
(Papadopoulos et al. 2012), which describes how random geometric graphs grow in the 
hyperbolic space. The model has four input parameters:  > 0, which defines the average 
node degree  = 2,  ∈(0, 1], defining the exponent  = 1 + 1/ of the power law degree 
distribution,  ≥0, which controls the network clustering, and  = √− > 0, where  is the 
curvature of the hyperbolic plane. The network clustering is maximized at  = 0, it decreases 
almost linearly for  = [0,1) and it becomes asymptotically zero if  > 1. 
Building a network of  nodes on a hyperbolic plane with curvature  = −1 requires the 
following steps: (1) Initially the network is empty; (2) At time  = 1, 2, … ,  a new node  
appears with radial coordinate  = 2 ln() and angular coordinate   uniformly sampled from 
[0,2!]; all existing nodes " <  increase their radial coordinates according to $() = $ +
(1 −) in order to simulate popularity fading; (3) The new node picks a randomly chosen 
existing node and connects to it with probability %&ℎ$( = 1/(1 + )*%((ℎ$ −+)/2) ), 

where + =  −2 ln -
./&0123(435) 67(8)(
9:;(/<)=(01>) ? is the current radius of the hyperbolic disk, ℎ$ =

and node " and  $ = ! −I! −J  − $JI is the angle between these nodes. Step (3) is 
repeated until the new node  is connected to  nodes. (4) The growing process stops when  
nodes have been introduced. 
In this model networks evolve optimizing a trade-off between node popularity, abstracted by 
the radial coordinate, and similarity, represented by the angular coordinate, and they exhibit 
many common structural and dynamical characteristics of real networks. 
  
HyperMap 
HyperMap (Papadopoulos et al. 2015) is a method based on Maximum Likelihood Estimation 
to map a network into its hyperbolic space. It replays the hyperbolic growth of the network 
and at each step it finds the polar coordinates of the added node by maximizing the likelihood 
that the network was produced by the E-PSO model (Papadopoulos et al. 2015). 
For curvature  = −1 the procedure is as follows: (1) Nodes are sorted decreasingly by 
degree and then labeled  = 1, 2, … ,  according to the order; (2) Node  = 1 is born and 
assigned radial coordinate 0 = 0 and a random angular coordinate  0 ∈[0, 2π]; (3) For each 
node  = 2, 3, … ,  do: (3.a) Node  is added to the network and assigned a radial coordinate 
 = 2 ln(); (3.b) The radial coordinate of every existing node " <  is increased according to 
$() = $ + (1 −); (3.c) The node  is assigned an angular coordinate by maximizing 
the likelihood M = ∏
%(ℎ$)O8P(1 −%(ℎ$))01O8P
QR$S
, where  and %(ℎ$) are the same as in 
the PSO model and *$ is the adjacency matrix. The maximization is done by numerically 
trying different angular coordinates in steps of 2!/ and choosing the one that leads to the 
biggest M. 
  
Radial coordinates 
A Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the sequence according to which nodes appeared in the 
networks indicates that the higher the degree of the node, the earlier it appeared 
(Papadopoulos et al. 2015). Therefore, nodes are sorted by descending degree and then 
labeled  = 1, 2, … ,  according to this order. Considering  = −1, the radial coordinates are 
computed as follows (Wang et al. 2016):  = 2( ln  + (1 −) ln ). The parameter  is 
computed as  = 1/( −1). The exponent  of the power law degree distribution has been 
fitted 
using 
the 
MATLAB 
script 
plfit.m, 
an 
algorithm 
published 
at 

http://www.santafe.edu/~aaronc/powerlaws/, Copyright (C) 2008-2012 Aaron Clauset (Santa 
Fe Institute). It is distributed under GPL 2.0. 
 
Manifold-based embedding  
The first type of topological-based unsupervised machine learning for nonlinear dimension 
reduction adopted in this study are Isomap (ISO) (Tenenbaum et al. 2000) and Laplacian 
Eigenmaps (LE) (Belkin & Niyogi 2001). These two methods are manifold-based machine 
learning because, in classical dimension reduction of multidimensional datasets, they 
approximate the sample data manifold using a proximity graph, and then they embed the 
sample distances in a two-dimensional space by matrix decomposition. In our application the 
proximity graph is already given, representing an important advantage, because the 
topological connections (similarities) between the nodes are already known. In fact, the 
problem to infer a proximity graph is not trivial and generally requires the introduction of at 
least a tuning parameter, for instance in the procedure to learn a nearest-neighbour graph 
(network) that approximate the manifold. Furthermore, there is not a clear strategy to 
unsupervisedly tune these kinds of parameters to infer the proximity graph. 
ISO is based on extracting a distance matrix (or kernel) that stores all the network shortest 
path distances (also named geodesic distances) that approximate the real distances over the 
manifold. Then the kernel is centred and in this work singular value decomposition (SVD) is 
applied to embed the nodes in the two-dimensional space. We also propose the noncentered 
version of the same algorithm, named ncISO, in which the kernel centering is neglected. 
Consequently, the first dimension of embedding is discharged because, since it points toward 
the center of the manifold, is not useful. For more computational details on the 
implementation of ISO please refer to (Tenenbaum et al. 2000; Cannistraci et al. 2013b). 
LE is a different type of manifold machine learning. In fact, the inference of a distance kernel 
(for instance the shortest path kernel for ISO) starting from the network structure is not 
required in this algorithm, which makes it faster than ISO. Indeed, the idea behind LE is to 
perform the eigen-decomposition of the network’s Laplacian matrix, and then to perform two-
dimensional embedding of the network’s nodes according to the eigenvectors related to the 
second and third smallest eigenvalues. The first smallest eigenvalue is zero, thus the related 
eigenvector is neglected. In order to implement a weighted version of this algorithm we used, 
as suggested in the original publication (Belkin & Niyogi 2001), the ‘heat-function’ (instead 
of the pre-weighting values as they are in their original scale): 
*T$ = )1
U8PV
W  

Where *$ is the original pre-weighing value for the link i,j, and t is a scaling factor fixed as 
the mean of all the network’s pre-weighting values. For more computational details on the 
implementation of LE please refer to (Belkin & Niyogi 2001). 
 
Minumum Curvilinearity and Minimum curvilinear embedding  
The centered and noncentered versions of the minimum curvilinear embedding algorithm – 
respectively named MCE and ncMCE - are based on a general nonlinear similarity learning 
theory called Minimum Curvilinearity (Cannistraci et al. 2010; Cannistraci et al. 2013b). 
These approaches compress the information in one unique dimension because they learn 
nonlinear similarities by means of the minimum spanning tree, providing a hierarchical-based 
mapping. This is fundamentally different from the previous algorithms (ISO and LE), which 
are manifold-based. If we would consider the mere unsupervised machine learning standpoint, 
we would notice that manifold-based techniques in this study showed two main weaknesses: 
i) they offer less compression power because two orthogonal dimensions of representation, 
instead of one, are needed; ii) the node similarity pattern remains nonlinear (circular) also in 
the embedded space, thus the goal of the nonlinear dimension reduction to linearize a (hidden) 
nonlinear pattern in the embedding space is missed. In unsupervised tasks where the objective 
is to discover unknown and unexpected sample stratifications - for instance the discovery of 
unforeseen groups of patients with undetected molecular-based disease variations – the 
linearization of a pattern along one unique embedding dimension can offer an undisputed help 
to recognize hidden and hierarchical organized subgroups (Roweis & Saul 2000; Cannistraci 
et al. 2010). Interestingly, MCE and ncMCE were theoretically designed according to a 
previous theory of Boguñá, et al. (Boguñá et al. 2008). When the last author of this article, 
read at the beginning of 2009 for the first time the article “Navigability of complex networks” 
(Boguñá et al. 2008), he had an intuition. This article was clearly explaining that to efficiently 
navigate a network (and thus approximate geodesic/curvilinear pairwise node connections 
over the hidden manifold) it was not necessary to know the complete information of network 
topology at the starting point of the navigation. A greedy routing process (thus, based on the 
neighborhood information) was enough to efficiently navigate the network. This triggered an 
easy conclusion: to approximate curvilinear distances between the points of the manifold it 
was not necessary to reconstruct the nearest-neighbour graph. Just a greedy routing process 
(that exploits a norm, for instance Euclidean) between the points in the multidimensional 
space, is enough to efficiently navigate the hidden network that approximates the manifold in 
the multidimensional space. In a few words, learning nonlinear distances over the manifold by 

navigating an invisible and unknown network was possible, because the navigation process 
was instead guided by a greedy routing. And a preferable greedy routing strategy, was the 
minimum spanning tree (MST). The only hypothesis of application of this approach was that 
the points were not homogenously distributed in a lattice regular structure, or a similar 
degenerative condition. Thus, the minimum curvilinearity kernel is the matrix that collects all 
the pairwise distances between the points (or nodes) computed over the MST. And the 
ncMCE is the embedding of the noncentered minimum curvilinear kernel by means of the 
SVD. The reason why to exploit the ncMCE - noncentered version of MCE (Cannistraci et al. 
2013b) - is discussed in a second article (Cannistraci et al. 2013b) that presents how to use 
this approach for link prediction in protein interaction networks. The main difference between 
MCE and ncMCE is that in general MCE linearizes the hidden patterns along the first 
dimension of embedding while ncMCE along the second dimension (since it is noncentered 
the first dimension of embedding should be generally neglected because points towards the 
center of the manifold). To conclude this part, MCE/ncMCE are conceptually different from 
all the other approaches because they are among the few (maybe the only, to the best of our 
knowledge) dimensionality reduction methods that performs hierarchical embedding, and 
they exploit the MST as a highway to navigate different regions of the network. Although 
they exploit a small fraction of the network links – practically only the MST, which consists 
of N-1 links in a network with N nodes - the reason why they work efficiently to infer the 
angular coordinates of networks that follow the PSO model is well explained in the article of 
Papadopoulos et al. (Papadopoulos et al. 2015), thus we take the advantage to report the full 
paragraph: << This work shows that random geometric graphs in hyperbolic spaces are an 
adequate model for complex networks. The high-level explanation of this connection is that 
complex networks exhibit hierarchical, tree-like organization, while hyperbolic geometry is 
the geometry of trees. Graphs representing complex networks appear then as discrete samples 
from the continuous world of hyperbolic geometry. >> 
However, the problem to compute the MST on an unweighted adjacency matrix is that we do 
not have a norm that suggests the hidden connectivity geometry. Thus, there was a clear 
margin to improve the performance of MCE/ncMCE by pre-weighting the links in the 
network (and the adjacency matrix) using a convenient strategy to suggest topological 
distances between the connected nodes. In fact, in Fig. 3 and Table 1 we notice that the pre-
weighting strategy significantly boosts MCE/ncMCE performance.  
 
 

Real network datasets 
Information on the real networks used in the link prediction evaluation are provided in Suppl. 
Info.  
 
Hardware and software details 
MATLAB code was used for all the methods and simulations, which were carried out on a 
Dell workstation under Windows 7 professional with 192 GB of RAM and 2 Intel(R) 
Xenon(R) X5550 processors with 2.66 and 2.67 GHz.
