Enhancing Semantic Word Representations by Embedding 
Deeper Word Relationships 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Word representations are created using analogy context-based 
statistics and lexical relations on words. Word representations are 
inputs for the learning models in Natural Language Understanding 
(NLU) tasks. However, to understand language, knowing only the 
context is not sufficient. Reading between the lines is a key 
component of NLU. Embedding deeper word relationships which 
are not represented in the context enhances the word representation. 
This paper presents a word embedding which combines an analogy, 
context-based statistics using Word2Vec, and deeper word 
relationships using Conceptnet, to create an expanded word 
representation. In order to fine-tune the word representation, Self-
Organizing Map is used to optimize it. The proposed word 
representation is compared with semantic word representations 
using Simlex 999. Furthermore, the use of 3D visual 
representations has shown to be capable of representing the 
similarity and association between words. The proposed word 
representation shows a Spearman correlation score of 0.886 and 
provided the best results when compared to the current state-of-the-
art methods, and exceed the human performance of 0.78. 
Keywords 
Word Embedding; Semantic representation; Conceptnet. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Most Natural Language Understanding (NLU) models use word 
representations for their inputs [3]. Word representations are used 
for question answering [5] [6], machine translation [7], dialog 
systems [8],  text understanding [9], and named entity recognition 
[10]. 
The commonly used word representations are those created using 
semantic representation and the lexical information of the local 
context and the global context [3]. A semantic word representations 
can demonstrate, “King to queen is to man to woman”, (king-
queen=man-woman) [11]. GloVe [12] and Word2Vec[1] are the 
more commonly used word embeddings, due to their capability of 
holding a semantic relationship. GloVe uses a global word co-
occurrence count, which uses the statistic of the corpus and the 
semantics of the words in the corpus to create a vector for the words 
[12]. Word2Vec, a predictive model, uses the context words to 
predict the target word. Word2Vec uses a feedforward network [1] 
for the prediction. Both GloVe and Word2Vec use large text corpus 
to create the context-derived word representations. 
NLU relies on understanding the context by using information not 
expressed in the context, which normally requires reading between 
the lines. Communication requires more information than the 
current context which is believed to be known by the listener [13].  
Retaining more information in a learning model is shown to 
improve performance over models that do not retain information 
[14]. Conceptnet is a general knowledge graph comprising of words 
and their relationships [15]. It contains the knowledge that can be 
provided for better word representations. However, there is a 
limitation on containing the semantic knowledge, which is also 
important in word embedding. 
This paper presents a model which combines semantic knowledge 
and knowledge-graph extracted knowledge for a given word to 
create word representations. The resulting word representation 
contains more relationships and knowledge than semantic models. 
A higher weight is given to the semantic word representation to 
avoid over-generalization of the final word representation. The 
proposed model is evaluated using SimLex-999 [16]. Furthermore, 
to illustrate the capability of differentiating association and 
similarity, the word embedding is represented in 3D graphs as 
presented in this paper.  
The contributions of the paper are to i) provide a method to generate 
a word representation that combines Semantic knowledge and 
knowledge-graph information, ii) evaluate and demonstrate the 
ability of such a word representation in capturing both similarity 
and association between words. 
2. BACKGROUND 
Word representations have moved from lexical based to semantic-
based to provide information-rich word representations. The early 
word representations, Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) hold the 
statistical representations on the corpus. LSA is a low-dimensional 
word representation based on the term-document frequency. These 
models fail at co-occurrences with general words (e.g. and, a, the, 
etc.). 
Later, Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (PPMI) [17] and 
Hellinger Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [18] were used to 
generate vector representations for words. The word representation 
was generalized and could be used for many natural language 
processing tasks. However, these cannot be used for language 
understanding [19]. The semantic-based vector representations 
have shown the potential for improving the understanding of 
learning models [5].  The semantic word representations produce 
dimensions of meaning and hold the distributed representation for 
the words. Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBoW) and skip-gram 
model shows linguistic patterns as linear relationships between the 
word vectors. This linear relationship is used to demonstrate the 
related words in a word representation. Learning based natural 
language processing applications using this representation would 
not receive the full meaning representation of the words since it 
does not use the co-occurrence statistics of the corpus. 
GloVe addresses the problems faced by the skip-gram model which 
did not focus on the statistics of the corpus. In addition, GloVe has 
the capability of achieving analogy tasks. Therefore, based on the 
context,  GloVe supports a higher level of meaning representation 
[12]. Word2Vec also uses the co-occurrence statistics from the 
corpus  [20] and the semantics of the corpus. Word2Vec and GloVe 
Anupiya Nugaliyadde, Kok Wai Wong, Ferdous Sohel and Hong Xie 
School of Engineering and Information Technology, Murdoch University, Western Australia. 

are contexts depended. Therefore, depending on the context the 
vector representation has drastic changes. The word representations 
and the relationships are based only on the textual context. The 
word representation does not hold information that is not available 
in the context. 
Conceptnets’ knowledge graph is used to create word 
representation [21] and language understanding [14]. Furthermore, 
to support language understanding, Conceptnet is used for word 
representations, using PPMI and expanded retrofitting [22]. The 
PPMI creates the term-term matrix from the corpus text. The 
context of a term would be the terms that appear nearby in the text 
by using sparse matrices. The sparse matrices are used to derive 
word embedding. The expanded retrofitting using Concepnet uses 
the multilingual connections to learn English words from language 
translation. However, the word representations do not consider 
context-based statistics and analogy. Therefore, it loses the 
information embedded in a textual context.  
Semantics is a key element to provide an understanding of the 
textual context. However, understanding context does not rely only 
on the textual context [23]. NLU requires the capability of 
understanding analogy and corpus statistic. However, to gain 
further knowledge and understanding deeper relationships that are 
not visible in the context but known by the listener is required. 
Conceptnet was developed with the intention of providing the 
general knowledge for natural language understanding tasks [15]. 
Conceptnet provides related words and relationships connected to 
a given the word. These connected words and relationships provide 
hidden knowledge on the textual context. However, the Conceptnet 
does not provide complete information such as corpus statistic to 
provide complete natural language understanding. Therefore, it is 
the aim of this paper to propose a better word embedding. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
This section discusses word embedding that takes into account the 
semantic relationships and the relationships which are not visible 
in the textual context. GloVe and Word2Vec use word embedding 
based on semantic relationships. However, the word embedding is 
context dependent. To avoid context dependencies and to allow a 
general representation, Conceptnet and Word2Vec are combined. 
This combination makes it possible of expressing similarity and 
association for word embedding which is not available in 
Word2Vec and GloVe.  
The proposed word embedding gives the word w with a final vector 
representation of 𝑣𝑓, which encompass more complete relationship 
of 𝑤 with a deeper relationship with other words. 𝑣𝑓 combines a 
semantic representation and a context independent representation 
for a given word. Therefore, this embedding is capable of 
representing the embedded meaning even though it is not visible in 
the textual context.  
The embedding creates a 300-row vector for each word 
representation. 300-row vector was chosen as it presented the best 
results from the experiments that were conducted by comparing 50, 
100, 300, and 500 vector sizes. The embedding consists of the 
following two main embedding; semantic word embedding, and 
generalized word embedding. 
The semantic and knowledge-graph embedding are combined to 
create one-word embedding, representing both a semantic and 
general word representation. These two embeddings are necessary 
to clearly understand words in a given context. Figure 1 presented 
a summary of the steps that will be described as follows. 
3.1 Semantic Word Embedding  
Semantic word embedding is used to embed the meaning expressed 
through the textual context. Semantic word embedding is generated 
through Word2Vec. Equation (1) gives the word (𝑤) is embedded 
using Word2Vec to create an initial word embedding which holds 
the word similarity. The vector (𝑣)  holds the word similarity 
depending on the context the word appears. 
𝑣= 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑2𝑉𝑒𝑐(𝑤) 
 
 
 
(1) 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 

ICIET '17, January 10-12, 2017, Tokyo, Japan 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4803-4/17/01…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3029387.3029392 
 
Figure 1. Overall methodology and data flow for the word 
embedding. The word 𝒘 is passed on to Conceptnet and 
Word2Vec. Word2Vec creates the word embedding 𝒗. The 
words extracted from Conceptnet 𝒘𝒄𝒏 are passed on to a 
pre-trained Word2Vec to generate 𝒗𝒄𝒏and combine with v 
using ∑
𝒗c𝒊
𝒏
𝒊=𝟏
. 𝒗, to generate 𝒗cm . 𝒗cm is reshaped to a 2D 
matrix. The 2D matrix is passed to a SOM and the generated 
matrix is then passed on to PCA for dimensional reduction 
and transformed to the final vector 𝒗f. 

However, the semantic approach only addresses the similarity 
between words fail to handle the association between words. 
Association between words is not visible through the context. To 
address associations as well as similarities that are not visible in 
context, Conceptnet [21]  is used. The set of n related words 𝑤𝑐𝑛 to 
the word w , are extracted from Conceptnet 1 . Equation (2) 
demonstrates the results drawn from the Conceptnet for the word 
𝑤 and generates related words 𝑤𝑐𝑛 . 
𝑤𝑐𝑛= 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑤)  
 
 
(2) 
which consists of 𝑛 related words extracted from Conceptnet for 
the given word w since each word w from Conceptnet would hold 
20 related words on average, i.e. n=20. The extracted words  𝑤𝑐𝑛 
are converted into vectors 𝑣𝑐𝑛 using a pre-trained Word2Vec. The 
pre-training of Word2Vec pre-training was done on the Wikipedia 
dataset and create 300 row vector for each word. Each of the 
extracted words is used to create its own vector (3). The model 
creates 𝑣𝑐𝑛, which is a set of n vectors for each word w, and each 
one of these n vectors consists of 300 elements as presented in 
Word2Vec. The vectors 𝑣𝑐1 to 𝑣𝑐𝑛are added together. 
𝑣𝑐𝑛= 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑2𝑉𝑒𝑐(𝑤𝑐𝑛 )  
 
 
(3) 
3.2 Embedding Similarity and Association 
Adding the extracted vectors ∑
𝑣𝑐𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 for the words 𝑤𝑐𝑛 creates a 
generalized 300 row vector representation to the 𝑤. The combined 
                                                                
1  The related words can be extracted using Conceptnet API. 
http://api.conceptnet.io/c/en/ 
vector representation is vcn. Extracting words from Conceptnet, 
would contain similar words and associated words with 𝑤 [15]. 
Therefore, adding the vector representations together would 
generate a generalized vector representation, which holds 
association and similarity relationships with 𝑤. Therefore, 
embedding the associated words and similar words through the use 
of Conceptnet generates a word embedding which is generalized.  
However, a higher weight should be given to semantic word 
representation directly from the word, w. For this, a Word2Vec 
representation v  is created for the word w  directly as well. 
Equation (4), the v  is separately multiplied with the word 
embedding created through Conceptnet. The vector representation 
( vcm) holds both similarity representation (through the Word2Vec 
and Conceptnet) and the association representation (through 
Conceptnet). Therefore, vcm holds deeper relationships that extend 
the semantic relationships that are extracted and generated from the 
available context. Therefore, vcm   for w  would be hold the 
association relationships and similarity relationships.  
𝑣cm = ∑
𝑣c𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
. 𝑣  
 
 
 
(4) 
The 𝑣cm  is scaled in order to have the word embedding in a 
reasonable distribution. 𝑣cm  is further enhanced to generate the 
final vector representation (𝑣f ) using Self Organizing Maps (SOM) 
[24] that clusters words for the nearest neighbor. The nearest 
neighbor is identified using the Euclidean distance between the 
words. The SOM stage is mainly used to optimize the distribution 
 
 
Figure 5. The proposed word representation for the context and 
the question “Mary moved to the bathroom. John went to the 
hallway. Where is Mary?” 
Figure 6. Word2Vec representation for the context and 
question “Mary moved to the bathroom. John went to the 
hallway. Where is Mary?” 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Proposed word embedding 3D 
representation for the words “dog, 
mouse, chair, table, car, bus, man, queen, 
woman, king”.  
Figure 3. Word2Vec word embedding 
3D representation for the words “dog, 
mouse, chair, table, car, bus, man, 
queen, woman, king”.  
Figure 4. Conceptnet word embedding 3D 
representation for the words “dog, mouse, 
chair, table, car, bus, man, queen, woman, 
king”. 

by using SOM. The word embedding could produce a closer 
relationship within neighbors. The 𝑣cm 300-row vector is reshaped 
to a 2D metrics to pass it to the SOM. 𝑣cm is considered a center 
and the four nearest neighbors based on the Euclidean distance is 
passed through the SOM. In order to map 𝑣cm to the Kohnen’s 
layer, the vector 𝑣cm  is reshaped into a 2D matrices. The Kohnen’s 
layer would run for 500 iterations, with a learning rate (a) of 0.005. 
This would produce a new 2D representation for each word. The 
2D representation will be transformed into a vector 𝑣f  using PCA. 
Through the use of PCA the dimension reduction is applied to the 
2D metric to create the final 𝑣f. The 𝑣f  is calculated for each word 
representation 𝑤𝑐𝑛 as shown in (5). 
𝑣f = ∑
[𝑣𝑐𝑚+ 𝑎(𝑣𝑐𝑖−𝑣𝑐𝑚)
𝑛
𝑖=1
]  
 
(5) 
𝑣f  creates a clear distinction between similar words compared to 
associated words. 
4. RESULTS 
SimLex-999 is a resource to evaluate models which generate 
meanings of words and concepts [16]. SimLex-999 captures the 
similarity between words rather than the relatedness and 
association. In order to perform achieve a high score, the word 
embedding should be able to capture similarity independently to the 
relatedness and association. Therefore, SimLex-999 has shown to 
be a challenging evaluation model compared to WordSim-353 [25]. 
The proposed word embedding demonstrates the capability of 
                                                                
2 https://commoncrawl.org/ 
differentiating similarity from association and relatedness which is 
reflected in table 1. The context to create the word embedding in 
order to test on SimLex-999 is created based on Common Crawl 
data2.The proposed word embedding is evaluated using SimLex-
999 [16]. SimLex-999 dataset to Spearman’s ρ correlation between 
words is calculated and presented in Table 1. Table 1 compares the 
proposed model with [1] , [2] and [4].  The Spearman’s correlation 
shows that the proposed model is achieving higher Spearman’s 
correlations compared to the semantic word representations. This 
also shows that the proposed model can differentiate the similarity 
and association, as the proposed model uses Conceptnet to support 
generalization and Word2Vec to provide a semantic similarity. We 
have extended the normal 2D word embedding representation [12] 
into a 3D word representation using the existing distant measure. 
The proposed word embedding in a 3D representation is shown in 
Figure 2 for “dog, mouse, chair, table, car, bus, man, queen, 
woman, king”. The proposed 3D word representations places 
humans on one plane, vehicles on another plane and objects are 
placed in another plane with animals but closer to the plane 
representing humans. Furthermore, the similarities between man to 
woman is less than queen to king. The proposed word embedding 
capture more than the gender representation unlike Word2Vec (see 
Fig. 3). Figure 4 shows the general vector representation created 
through Conceptnet. This shows a clear representation and is 
capable of distinguishing association and similarity of the words 
[16]. 
3D comparison between the Word2Vec (Fig. 3) and Conceptnet 
based word embedding (Fig. 4) is shown. The relationship between 
king to queen and man to woman are similar, but the similarities 
between them are different as shown in Figure 2 when compared to 
the word representation using Word2Vec as shown in Figure 3 or 
using Conceptnet as shown in Figure 4. The vector representation 
created using only Conceptnet is not context dependent shows a 
general representation which does not capture similarity between 
words. This also shows that similarity, association or relatedness 
cannot be captured by pre-determined relationships which the 
words hold with each other. 
To demonstrate the application of the word representation, for 
sentences a sample context from the bAbI dataset is used [26]. 
“Mary moved to the bathroom. John went to the hallway. Where is 
Mary?” is represented in 3D word representation using Word2Vec 
shown in Figure 5 and the proposed word representation shown in 
Table 1. Performance on SimLexc-999. The proposed word 
embedding is created using on Wikipedia data. The proposed 
word embedding and [1] use ≈ 1000m, [2] uses ≈ 990m and [4] 
uses≈ 852m tokens. 
Models 
Spearman’s 
Correlation 
Word2Vec [10] 
0.414 
Deep Neural Networks with multitask learning 
0.268 
Semantic similarity of words using concept 
networks [24] 
0.76 
Human Performance [16] 
0.78 
Proposed word embedding 
0.886 
 
(a) One sentence  
 
(b) two sentences  
 
(c) Three sentences 
Figure 7. The word representation is dynamic. “Cat ran fast. Cat has legs. Cat jumps high”. Sentences added one sentence at a time. 
Capability of achieving similarity and association based on the semantics of the sentences. Word2Vec the semantic representation 
is captured and Conceptnet generalize vector representation in order to enhance the vector representation. (a) to (c) the vector 
representation changes with new context. Final representation (c) separation of words in each axis according to the relationship. 

Figure 5. Observing the proposed models 3D representations in 
Figure 5 “Mary” and “bathroom” are closer in the vector space. 
Figure 6 demonstrates that Word2Vec places “John” is closer to the 
bathroom compared to “Mary”. Therefore, the proposed word 
embedding demonstrates that it supports one factor based question 
answering tasks. The sentences “cat ran fast. Cat has legs. Cat 
jumps high.” The movement of words in the 3D space when added 
more sentences shows the dynamics nature of proposed word 
representation (Figure 7). 
5. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a word embedding that uses context-based 
statistics, analogy and deeper related meaning of words to create 
word representations. The proposed word embedding holds both 
context-based information via Word2Vec and deep related words 
via Conceptnet on the words. The word representation uses a higher 
weight to the context-based information to create the word 
representation 
preventing 
over 
generalization. 
The 
word 
representation is evaluated using SimLex-999 which achieved a 
Spearman’s correlation of 0.886. Furthermore, the proposed word 
representations are displayed in 3D representation to show the 
capability of distinguishing the associated words to similar words 
based on context. The proposed word embedding is similar to the 
human performance of word similarity and association by 
achieving a Spearman’s correlation of 0.886 given a human can 
achieve 0.78 [16].
