arXiv:2201.04596v1  [cs.AI]  12 Jan 2022
MeTeoR: Practical Reasoning in Datalog with Metric Temporal Operators
Dingmin Wang1, Pan Hu1,2, Przemysław Andrzej Wałęga1, Bernardo Cuenca Grau1
1Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK

2School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract
DatalogMTL is an extension of Datalog with operators from
metric temporal logic which has received signiﬁcant attention
in recent years. It is a highly expressive knowledge represen-
tation language that is well-suited for applications in temporal
ontology-based query answering and stream processing. Rea-
soning in DatalogMTL is, however, of high computational
complexity, making implementation challenging and hinder-
ing its adoption in applications. In this paper, we present
a novel approach for practical reasoning in DatalogMTL
which combines materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining) with
automata-based techniques. We have implemented this ap-
proach in a reasoner called MeTeoR and evaluated its perfor-
mance using a temporal extension of the Lehigh University
Benchmark and a benchmark based on real-world meteoro-
logical data. Our experiments show that MeTeoR is a scalable
system which enables reasoning over complex temporal rules
and datasets involving tens of millions of temporal facts.
Introduction
Temporal data is ubiquitous in many application scenar-
ios, such as stock trading (Nuti et al. 2011), network ﬂow
anomaly detection (Munz and Carle 2007), and equipment
malfunction monitoring (Doherty, Kvarnström, and Heintz
2009). In order to represent knowledge and subsequently
reason in the presence of such temporal data, Brandt et al.
(2018) proposed DatalogMTL—an extension of Data-
log (Ceri, Gottlob, and Tanca 1989) with operators from
metric temporal logic (Koymans 1990) interpreted over
the rational timeline. DatalogMTL is a powerful KR lan-
guage, which has found applications in ontology-based
query answering (Brandt et al. 2018; Kikot et al. 2018;
Kalaycı et al. 2018; Koopmann 2019) and stream reason-
ing (Wałęga, Kaminski, and Cuenca Grau 2019). For exam-
ple, the following DatalogMTL rule can be used to analyse
equipment data:
⊟[0,1]ExcHeat(푥) ←⊟[0,1]Temp24(푥) ∧x[0,1]Temp41(푥).
The rule states that a device 푥has been under excessive heat
continuously within a past interval of length 1 (⊟[0,1]) if the
temperature recorded in this interval was always above 24
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
degrees (Temp24) and also, at some point in this interval
(x[0,1]), the temperature was above 41 degrees (Temp41).
Reasoning in DatalogMTL is, however, of high com-
plexity, namely ExpSpace-complete (Brandt et al. 2018) and
PSpace-complete with respect to data size (Wałęga et al.
2019), which makes reasoning in practice challenging. Thus,
research has recently focused on establishing a suitable trade-
oﬀbetween expressive power and complexity of reasoning,
by identifying lower complexity fragments of DatalogMTL
(Wałęga et al. 2020b; Wałęga, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau
2021) as well as studying alternative semantics with more
favourable computational behaviour (Wałęga et al. 2020a;
Ryzhikov, Wałęga, and Zakharyaschev 2019).
The design and implementation of practical reasoning al-
gorithms for the full DatalogMTL language, however, re-
mains a largely unexplored area—something that has pre-
vented its widespread adoption in applications. In particular,
the only implementation we are aware of is the prototype
by Brandt et al. (2018), which is limited to non-recursive
DatalogMTL programs. This is in stark contrast with plain
Datalog, for which a plethora of systems have been de-
veloped and successfully deployed in practice (Motik et al.
2014; Carral et al. 2019; Bellomarini, Sallinger, and Gottlob
2018).
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst practical reasoning al-
gorithm for the full DatalogMTL language, which combines
materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining)and automata-based
reasoning. On the one hand, materialisation is the reason-
ing paradigm adopted in most Datalog systems (Bry et al.
2007); to check fact entailment in this setting, one ﬁrst com-
putes in a forward chaining manner all facts logically en-
tailed by the input program and dataset, and then veriﬁes
whether the input fact is included amongst the entailed facts.
A direct implementation of materialisation-based reason-
ing in DatalogMTL is, however, problematic since forward
chaining may require inﬁnitely many rounds of rule appli-
cations (Wałęga, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau 2021). On the
other hand, Wałęga et al. (2019) introduced a decision proce-
dure for DatalogMTL which relies on constructing Büchi au-
tomata and checking non-emptiness of their languages. This
procedure has been introduced for obtaining tight complex-
ity bounds, and not with eﬃcient implementation in mind; in
particular, the constructed automata are of exponential size,
which makes direct implementations impractical.

Our new algorithm deals with these diﬃculties by pro-
viding an eﬀective way of combining the scalability of
materialisation-based reasoning and the completeness guar-
anteed by automata-based procedures, thus bringing to-
gether ‘the best of both worlds’. To achieve this, our algo-
rithm aims at minimising reasoning workload by resorting
to materialisation-based reasoning whenever possible while
minimising the use of automata. Furthermore, we propose
a suite of optimisation techniques aimed at reducing the
workload involved in rule application during materialisation-
based reasoning, as well as in Büchi automata construction
and the subsequent non-emptiness checks.
We have implemented our approach in a new rea-
soner called MeTeoR (https://meteor.cs.ox.ac.uk), which
supports fact entailment over arbitrary (i.e., potentially re-
cursive) DatalogMTL programs and large-scale temporal
datasets. We have evaluated the performance of our rea-
soner on an extension of the Lehigh University Bench-
mark (Guo, Pan, and Heﬂin 2005) with temporal rules and
data, as well as on a benchmark based on a real-world me-
teorological dataset (Maurer et al. 2002). Our results show
that MeTeoR is a scalable system that can successfully rea-
son over complex recursive programs and datasets including
tens of millions of temporal facts; furthermore, it consistently
outperformedthe approach by Brandt et al. (2018) when rea-
soning over non-recursive programs.
Preliminaries
We recapitulate the standard deﬁnition of DatalogMTL, in-
terpreted with the standard continuous semantics over the
rational timeline (Brandt et al. 2018).
Syntax.
A relational atom is a function-free ﬁrst-order
atom of the form 푃(s), with 푃a predicate and s a tuple
of terms. A metric atom is an expression given by the follow-
ing grammar, where 푃(s) is a relational atom, and x, |, ⊟,
⊞, S, U are MTL operators indexed with positive rational
intervals 휚(i.e., containing only non-negative rationals):
푀F ⊤| ⊥| 푃(s) | x휚푀| |휚푀|
⊟휚푀| ⊞휚푀| 푀S휚푀| 푀U휚푀.
A rule is an expression of the form of
푀′ ←푀1 ∧· · · ∧푀푛,
for 푛≥1,
(1)
with each 푀푖a metric atom, and 푀′ a metric atom not
mentioning operators x, |, S, and U; metric atom 푀′ is
the rule’s head and the conjunction 푀1 ∧· · ·∧푀푛is its body.
A rule is safe if each variable in its head also occurs in its
body; a program is a ﬁnite set of safe rules. An expression
(metric atom, rule, etc.) is ground if it mentions no variables.

atom and 휚a rational interval; a dataset is a ﬁnite set of

and 휚2 intervals that are either adjacent or have a non-empty

and 휚2. The grounding ground(Π, D) of a program Π with
respect to a dataset D is a set of all ground rules obtained by
assigning constants from Π and D to variables in Π.
ℑ, 푡|= ⊤
for each 푡
ℑ, 푡|= ⊥
for no 푡
ℑ, 푡|= x휚푀
iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀for some 푡′ with 푡−푡′ ∈휚
ℑ, 푡|= |휚푀
iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀for some 푡′ with 푡′ −푡∈휚
ℑ, 푡|= ⊟휚푀
iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀for all 푡′ with 푡−푡′ ∈휚
ℑ, 푡|= ⊞휚푀
iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀for all 푡′ with 푡′ −푡∈휚
ℑ, 푡|= 푀1S휚푀2 iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀2 for some 푡′ with 푡−푡′ ∈휚
and ℑ, 푡′′ |= 푀1 for all 푡′′ ∈(푡′, 푡)
ℑ, 푡|= 푀1U휚푀2 iﬀℑ, 푡′ |= 푀2 for some 푡′ with 푡′ −푡∈휚
and ℑ, 푡′′ |= 푀1 for all 푡′′ ∈(푡, 푡′)
Table 1: Semantics of ground metric atoms
The dependency graph of a program Π is the directed
graph 퐺Π, with a vertex 푣푃for each predicate 푃in Π and
an edge (푣푄, 푣푅) whenever there is a rule in Π mentioning
푄in the body and 푅in the head. Program Π is recursive
if 퐺Π has a cycle. A predicate 푃is recursive in Π if 퐺Π
has a path ending in 푣푃and including a cycle (the path can
be a self-loop). Furthermore, for a predicate 푃, a rule 푟is
푃-relevant in Π if there exists a rule 푟′ in Π mentioning 푃
or ⊥in the head and a path in 퐺Π starting from a vertex
representing the predicate in the head of 푟and ending in
a vertex representing some predicate from the body of 푟′.
Intuitively, 푃-relevant rules may be used for deriving facts
about 푃or ⊥(i.e., inconsistency).
Semantics.
An interpretation ℑspeciﬁes, for each ground
relational atom 푀and each time point 푡∈Q, whether 푀
holds at 푡, in which case we write ℑ, 푡|= 푀. This extends
to metric atoms with MTL operators as shown in Table 1.

all 푡∈휚. An interpretation ℑsatisﬁes a ground rule 푟if,
whenever ℑsatisﬁes each body atom of 푟at a time point
푡, then ℑalso satisﬁes the head of 푟at 푡. An interpretation
ℑsatisﬁes a (non-ground) rule 푟if it satisﬁes each ground
instance of 푟. An interpretation ℑis a model of a program
Π if it satisﬁes each rule in Π, and it is a model of a dataset
D if it satisﬁes each fact in D. A program Π and a dataset
D are consistent if they have a model, and they entail a fact

that dataset D represents interpretation ℑD.
Canonical Interpretation.
The immediate consequence
operator 푇Π for a program Π is a function mapping an in-
terpretation ℑto the least interpretation containing ℑand
satisfying the following property for each ground instance
푟of a rule in Π: whenever ℑsatisﬁes each body atom of 푟
at time point 푡, then 푇Π(ℑ) satisﬁes the head of 푟at 푡. The
successive application of 푇Π to ℑD deﬁnes a transﬁnite se-
quence of interpretations 푇훼
Π (ℑD) for ordinals 훼as follows:
(i) 푇0
Π(ℑD) = ℑD, (ii) 푇훼+1
Π
(ℑD) = 푇Π(푇훼
Π (ℑD)) for 훼an
ordinal, and (iii) 푇훼
Π (ℑD) = Ð
훽<훼푇훽
Π (ℑD) for 훼a limit or-
dinal. The canonical interpretation ℭΠ,D of Π and D is the

interpretation 푇휔1
Π (ℑD), with 휔1 the ﬁrst uncountable ordi-
nal. If Π and D have a model, the canonical interpretation
ℭΠ,D is the least model of Π and D (Brandt et al. 2018).
Reasoning.
The main reasoning tasks in DatalogMTL are
fact entailment and consistency checking. The former is to
check whether a program and dataset entail a given fact,
and the latter is to check whether a program and dataset
are consistent. These problems are reducible to the comple-
ment of each other; both of them are ExpSpace-complete
(Brandt et al. 2018) and PSpace-complete in data complex-
ity (i.e. with respect to the size of a dataset) (Wałęga et al.
2019).
Materialisation vs. Automata-based Reasoning
Materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining) is a standard rea-
soning technique used in scalable implementations of plain
Datalog, which consists of successive rounds of rule appli-
cations to compute all consequences of an input program
and dataset (Motik et al. 2019; Bry et al. 2007). The result-
ing set of facts represents the canonical model over which all
queries can be answered directly. As in plain Datalog, each
consistent pair of a DatalogMTL program Π and a dataset D
admits a canonical model ℭΠ,D deﬁned as the least ﬁxpoint
of the immediate consequence operator 푇Π capturing a sin-
gle round of rule applications. The use of metric operators
in rules, however, introduces two main practical diﬃculties.
First, DatalogMTL interpretations are intrinsically inﬁnite
and hence a materialisation-based algorithm must be able to
ﬁnitely represent (e.g., as a dataset) the result of each individ-
ual round of rule applications. Second, reaching the least ﬁx-
point of the immediate consequence operatorin DatalogMTL
may require an inﬁnite number of rule applications; hence,
a direct implementation of materialisation-based reasoning
is non-terminating. In contrast, materialisation is guaranteed
to terminate for non-recursive programs, thus providing a
decision procedure (Brandt et al. 2018).
Wałęga et al. (2019) provided an automata-based decision
procedure for consistency checking applicable to unrestricted
DatalogMTL programs. This approach relies on reducing
consistency checking of an input program Π and dataset D
to checking non-emptinessof two Büchi automata. These au-
tomata are responsible for accepting parts of a model located,
respectively, to the left of the least number mentioned in D,
and to the right of the greatest number in D. Thus, Π and D
have a model if and only if both automata have non-empty
languages. States of these automata are polynomially repre-
sentable in the size of D, so the reduction yields a PSpace
data complexity bound for consistency checking. The idea
behind the reduction is based on splitting a model witnessing
consistency of Π and D into fragments correspondingto seg-
ments of the timeline; automata states describe metric atoms
holding in such segments and the transition functions guar-
antee that atoms from successive fragments do not violate the
semantics of metric operators. Although this automata-based
approach provides tight complexity bounds, it does not yield
a practical decision procedure since the automata contain a
large (exponential in the size of D) number of states.
A Practical Decision Procedure
In this section, we present our approach to practical reasoning
in the full DatalogMTL language. Our algorithm decides fact
entailment, that is, checks whether a given fact is entailed by
a given program and dataset. To this end, we optimise and
combine materialisation—which is a scalable technique, but
is not guaranteed to terminate—, and the automata-based
approach—which is terminating in general, but less eﬃcient
in practice. The key novelties of our approach are as follows:
– an optimised implementation of the materialisation ap-
proach, which aims at applying the immediate conse-
quence operator eﬃciently and storing a succinct repre-
sentation of the fragment of the canonical interpretation
constructed thus far;
– an optimised implementation of the automata-based rea-
soning approach of Wałęga et al. (2019), which aims at
minimising the size of the automata; and
– an eﬀective way of combining materialisation with
automata-based reasoning that aims at reducing reasoning
workload and achieving early termination.
In the remainder of this section we will discuss each of these
components in detail.
Optimising Materialisation
The key component of materialisation-based reasoning is
an eﬀective implementation of the immediate consequence
operator capturing a single round of rule applications. Our
implementation takes as input a program Π and a dataset D
and computes a dataset D′ representing the interpretation
푇Π(ℑD) obtained by application of 푇Π to the least model of
D. Thus, it addresses one of the diﬃculties associated to
materialisation-based reasoning by ensuring that the result
of a single round of rule applications is a ﬁnite object.
To facilitate the presentation of our rule application proce-
dure, we ﬁrst brieﬂy discuss details regarding the represen-
tation and storage of datasets. We associate to each ground
relational atom a list of intervals sorted by their left end-
points, which provides a compact account of all facts men-
tioning this ground relational atom. Moreover, each ground
relational atom is indexed by a composite key consisting of its
predicate and its tuple of constants. This layout is useful for
fact coalescing and fact entailment checking; for instance, to

by ﬁrst scanning the sorted list of intervals for 푀using the
index and checking if 휚is a subset of one of these intervals.
Additionally, each ground relational atom is also indexed by
each of its term arguments to facilitate joins. Finally, when
a fact is inserted into the dataset, the corresponding list of
intervals is sorted to facilitate subsequent operations.
We perform a single round of rule applications with a
procedure ApplyRules presented in Algorithm 1. To con-
struct a representation of 푇Π(ℑ퐷), for an input program
Π and a dataset D, our algorithm performs two main
steps. The ﬁrst step is performed for each ground rule
in ground(Π, D) (Line 2), where rule grounding is per-
formed using a standard index nested loop join algorithm

(Garcia-Molina, Ullman, and Widom 2009) since facts in D
are indexed. Then, the ﬁrst step consists of extending D with
all facts that can be derived by applying 푟to D (we also add
⊥to D if some rule leads to inconsistency). Hence, the new
dataset D′ represents the interpretation 푇{푟}(ℑ퐷) (Line 3).
To implement the ﬁrst step, we modiﬁed the completion rules
for normalised programs deﬁned by Brandt et al. (2018, Sec-
tion 3)—our approach is suitable for arbitrary DatalogMTL
rules and thus not only for rules in the aforementioned nor-
mal form, which disallows nested MTL operators, the use
of | and x in rule bodies, and the use of ⊞and ⊟in rule
heads (Brandt et al. 2018). Since our approach does not re-
quire program normalisation as a pre-processing step, we
avoid the computation and storage of auxiliary predicates
introduced by the normalisation. Furthermore we implement
an optimised version of (temporal) joins that is required to
evaluate rules with several body atoms. A naïve implemen-
tation of the join of metric atoms 푀1, . . . , 푀푛occurring in
the body of a rule would require computing all intersections

constructed dataset, for each 푖∈{1, . . . , 푛}. Since each 푀푖
may hold in multiple intervals in the dataset, the naïve ap-
proach is ineﬀective in practice. In contrast, we implemented
a variant of the sort-merge join algorithm: we ﬁrst sort all 푛
lists of intervals correspondingto 푀1, . . . , 푀푛, and then scan
the sorted lists to compute the intersections, which improves
performance. Our approach to temporal joins can be seen as
a generalisation of the idea sketched by Brandt et al. (2018,
Section 5), which deals with two metric atoms at a time but
has not been put into practice.
Algorithm 1: ApplyRules
Input: a program Π and a dataset D
Output: a dataset
1 D′ ≔D;
2 for each rule 푟∈ground(Π, D) do
3
D′ ≔representation of ℑD′ ∪푇{푟}(ℑD);
4 for each ground metric atom 푀appearing in D′ do
5

6
Merge 휚1, . . . , 휚푛into 휚′
1, . . . , 휚′
푚;
7

푚in D′;
8 Return D′;
The second step of Algorithm 1consists of coalescing facts
in the so-far constructed dataset (Lines 4–7). Conceptually,

To achieve this in practice, for each ground relational atom
occurring in D′ we iterate through the corresponding sorted
list of intervals and merge them as needed (Lines 5–6). Re-
placing intervals with coalesced ones reduces memory us-
age while preventing redundant computations in subsequent
rounds of rule applications. Finally, in Line 8, Algorithm 1
returns a dataset, which represents 푇Π(ℑ퐷).
Optimising Automata-based Reasoning
We have implemented an optimised variant of the automata-
based approach for checking consistency of a program Π and
dataset D introduced by Wałęga et al. (2019), which is based
on verifying non-emptiness of two Büchi automata. States of
these automata are of size polynomial in D and exponential
in the combined size of Π and D, which makes automata
construction and the non-emptiness checks hard in practice.
To address this diﬃculty, our implementation introduces a
number of optimisations and we next highlight two of them.
First, instead of directly checking consistency of Π and
D, our implementation checks consistency of Π and the
‘relevant’ part of D, namely the subset D′ of facts in D
mentioning predicates occurring in the bodies of rules in Π.
This optimisation is based on the straightforwardobservation
that Π and D are consistent if and only if Π and D′ are. In
practice, D′ can be signiﬁcantly smaller than D, with the
subsequent reduction in the size of the constructed automata.
Second,we have optimised the constructionof states of the
automata when searching for accepting runs. Since automata
states represent fragments of a model, we can exploit the
semantics of MTL operators to restrict possible locations
of metric atoms holding in the same state. For example, if
⊞[0,∞)푃holds at a time point 푡, then it needs to hold in all time
points greater than 푡; similarly, if |[0,∞)푃holds at 푡, then it
needs to hold at all time points smaller than 푡, and analogous
statements hold for metric atoms with past operators ⊟and
x. We have incorporated a suite of such restrictions, which
resulted in a more eﬃcient construction of automata states.
Combining Materialisation and Automata
Our approach aims at minimising the reasoning workload
by considering only relevant parts of the input during rea-
soning, and by resorting to materialisation-based reasoning
whenever possible while minimising the use of automata.
Given as input a program Π, a dataset D, and a fact

marised in Algorithm 2. The algorithm starts by checking

case True is returned in Line 1. As already discussed, this
check can be realised very eﬃciently using suitable indexes.
In Line 2, we identify (using the program’s dependency
graph 퐺Π) the subset Π푃of 푃-relevant rules in Π, that can be

This allows us to disregard a potentially large number of ir-
relevant rules during reasoning, optimise automata construc-
tion, and also identify cases where materialisation naturally
terminates and automata-based reasoning is not required. In
particular, if Π푃is non-recursive, fact entailment can be de-
cided using only materialisation (Lines 3–8), namely rules

detected (Line 6) or a ﬁxpoint of the immediate consequence
operator is reached (Line 7).
Even if Π푃is recursive, we can still beneﬁt from using
materialisation. For this, we start by performing a ‘pre-
materialisation’ step (Lines 10–16), where we materialise
until all facts mentioning non-recursive predicates in Π푃have

Algorithm 2: Practical fact entailment

Output: A truth value

2 Π푃≔the set of all 푃-relevant rules in Π;
3 if Π푃is non-recursive then
4
loop
5
D′ ≔ApplyRules(Π푃, D);
6

7
if D′ = D then Return False;
8
D ≔D′;
9 else
10
loop
11
D′ ≔ApplyRules(Π푃, D);
12

13
if D′ = D then Return False;
14
D ≔D′;
15
if all facts with non-recursive predicates are
derived then break;
16
Dpre ≔D;
17
run two threads in parallel:
18
Thread 1:
19
loop
20
D′ ≔ApplyRules(Π푃, D);
21

22
if D′ = D then Return False;
23
D ≔D′;
24
Thread 2:
25

26
Return negation of AutomataProcedure(Π′, D′);
been derived, in which case we break the pre-materialisation
loop and continue to the next stage. Upon completion of
the pre-materialisation step, we run two threads in parallel,
where the ﬁrst thread continues applying materialisation on a
best-eﬀort basis (Lines 18–23) and the second thread resorts
to automata (Lines 24–26); the algorithm terminates as soon
as one of the threads generates an output truth value.
The second thread reduces fact entailment to inconsistency
of a new program Π′ and dataset D′ using the reduction
from the literature (Brandt et al. 2018; Wałęga et al. 2019)
and then runs the automata-based procedure for consistency
checking described in the previous section. Our reduction
from entailment to inconsistency (Line 25) uses the set of
relevant rules Π푃instead of Π, which reduces the size of the
automata; furthermore we use the pre-materialised dataset
Dpre instead of the input dataset D to optimise the non-
emptiness tests for the constructed automata. Indeed, with
Dpre we can determine entailment of all facts with non-
recursive predicates, and this allows us to reduce the search
space when checking existence of accepting runs of the au-
tomata.
Algorithm 2 is clearly sound and complete. Furthermore,
it is designed so that, on the one hand, the majority of en-
tailment tests are handled via materialisation and, on the
other hand, the recursive program passed on as input to the
automata-based approach is small. These features of the al-
gorithm will be empirically conﬁrmed by our experiments
described in the following section.
Implementation and Evaluation
We have implemented a prototype DatalogMTL reasoner,
called MeTeoR, which exploits our practical decision proce-
dure from Algorithm 2 to decide fact entailment. Our imple-
mentation uses existing libraries in the Python 3.8 eco-system
without depending on other third-party libraries. To the best
of our knowledge,no reasoning benchmarkis currently avail-
able for DatalogMTL1, so to evaluate the performance of
MeTeoR we have designed two new benchmarks.
LUBM
Benchmark.
We
obtain
the
ﬁrst
bench-
mark by extending the Lehigh University Benchmark
(LUBM) (Guo, Pan, and Heﬂin 2005) with temporal rules
and data. To construct temporal datasets we modiﬁed
LUBM’s data generator, which provides means for generat-
ing datasets of diﬀerent sizes, to randomly assign an interval
to each generated fact; the rational endpoints of each interval
belong to a range, which is a customised parameter. We used
the same approach to generate input query facts for entail-
ment checks. In addition, we extended the 56 plain Datalog
rules obtained from the OWL 2 RL fragment of LUBM with
29 temporal rules involving recursion and mentioning all
metric operators available in DatalogMTL. We denote the
resulting DatalogMTL program with 85 rules as Π퐿.
MeteorologicalBenchmark.
For this benchmark,we used
a freely available dataset with meteorological observations
(Maurer et al. 2002); in particular, we used a set D푊of 397
millions of facts from the years 1949–2010.We then adapted
the DatalogMTL program used by Brandt et al. (2018) to
reason with DatalogMTL about weather, which resulted in a
a non-recursive program Π푊with 4 rules.
Machine Conﬁguration.
All experiments have been con-
ducted on a Dell PowerEdge R730 server with 512 GB RAM
and two Intel Xeon E5-2640 2.6 GHz processors running Fe-
dora 33, kernel version 5.8.17. Our ﬁrst experiment tests the
scalability of MeTeoR; the second experiment compares the
performance of MeTeoR and the approach of Brandt et al.
(2018) when reasoning over non-recursive programs. In both
experiments, each test was conducted once.
Experiment 1: Scalability of MeTeoR
In Experiment 1a, to evaluate the scalability of MeTeoR, we
used the recursive program Π퐿from our LUBM benchmark
and four datasets (obtained with LUBM’s data generator)
D1
퐿, D2
퐿, D3
퐿, and D4
퐿of increasing size, which consist
of 5, 10, 15, and 20 million facts, respectively. As already
mentioned, input query facts are randomly generated. We
hypothesise that performance critically depends on the type
of these input query facts and, in particular, on which block
within Algorithm 2 the answer is returned.
1The datasets used by Brandt et al. (2018) to test their reasoning
approach for non-recursive programs are not publicly available.

T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
D1
퐿0.6s(푐= 0.6s,푛= 0) 70.1s(푐= 2.1s,푛= 1.7)
66.9s(푐= 4.1s,푛= 1.9)
97.8s(푐= 3.2s,푛= 21.4)
7.6min(푝= 2.7s)
D2
퐿0.8s(푐= 0.8s,푛= 0) 152.5s(푐= 8.9s,푛= 1.5) 167.9s(푐= 11.2s,푛= 3.1)229.3s(푐= 10.2s,푛= 17.1) 50.2min(푝= 10.5s)
D3
퐿1.9s(푐= 1.9s,푛= 0)201.4s(푐= 13.1s,푛= 1.6)269.2s(푐= 18.3s,푛= 2.9)284.8s(푐= 27.3s,푛= 11.1) 92.1min (푝= 19.7s)
D4
퐿2.5s(푐= 2.5s,푛= 0)301.2s(푐= 21.3s,푛= 1.8)341.9s(푐= 26.1s,푛= 2.6) 312.5s(푐= 41.3s,푛= 7.8) 172.6min (푝= 28.6s)
Table 2: Results of Experiment 1a
To check our hypothesis we have identiﬁed ﬁve disjoint
types of input query facts for an input program Π and dataset
D, depending on where in the execution of Algorithm 2 an
answer is returned. In particular, Algorithm 2 terminates in
– Line 1 for facts of type T1, so these facts are already
entailed by the input dataset D;
– Lines 6 or 7 for facts of type T2, so these facts are not
entailed by D and mention a predicate whose relevant
rules in Π are non-recursive;
– Line 13 or 22 for facts of type T3, so materialisation
of the relevant (recursive) subprogram reaches a ﬁxpoint,
and the fact is not entailed by the resulting materialisation;
– Line 12 or 21 for facts of type T4, so these facts have a
recursive relevant subprogram and are found to be entailed
after ﬁnitely many rounds of rule application; and
– Line 26 for facts of type T5, so the entailment of these
facts is checked using automata.
The results of Experiment 1a are reported in Table 2,
where we have generated 10 facts of each type and recorded
the average runtime of MeTeoR for such sets of 10 facts;
additionally, we have stated in brackets how much time was
consumed for fact coalescing (푐) and how many rounds of
rule applications (푛) were performed on average. In the case
of type T5 we report, instead, the time consumed by the
pre-materialisation step (푝). The experiment shows that the
performance of MeTeoR is dependent on the type of an in-
put fact, and in particular, on whether the system can verify
it using materialisation only (types T1–T4) or automata are
needed (type T5). As expected, runtimes increase with the
size of the dataset and the number of rounds of rule appli-
cations needed. Furthermore, although materialisation was
more eﬃcient, it is worth noting that the automata-based ap-
proach could also be successfully applied to such large-scale
datasets. Finally, coalescing times were relatively small, and
so were pre-materialisation times for facts of type T5.
If the majority of input facts can be veriﬁed using ma-
terialisation only, then we can expect robust and scalable
performance; we hypothesise that this is likely to be the case
in many practical situations. To verify this hypothesis on our
benchmark, we have generated 1, 000 random facts for each
of the datasets D1
퐿–D4
퐿and calculated the percentageof facts
that belong to each of the types T1–T5 (with respect to the
considered dataset and the program Π퐿). We found that in
46.0% cases the facts were of type T1, 28.3% of type T2,
16.6% of type T3, 8.3% of type T4, and only 0.8% of type
T5. This supports our hypothesis that input facts requiring
the use of automata may rarely occur in practice.
Finally, in Experiment 1b, we have stress tested MeTeoR.
To this end, we proceeded as in Experiment 1a, but we keep
constructing bigger datasets, until the average run times ex-
ceed 40 minutes. Note that this threshold is already exceeded
by facts of type T5 in Experiment 1a, whereas facts of type
T1 do not require rule applications. Therefore,in Experiment
1b we focused on types T2, T3, and T4. Our results, which
are shown in Figure 1, suggest that MeTeoR scales very well
and it is capable of handling datasets containing up to 150
million temporal facts using materialisation.
50
70
90
110
130
150
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
Size of a dataset (in millions)
Run time (in seconds)
T2
T3
T4
Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1b
Experiment 2: Comparison with Baseline
We performed two experiments to compare the performance
of MeTeoR and the baseline approach of Brandt et al. (2018)
for reasoning with non-recursive programs. The approach
by Brandt et al. (2018) is based on query rewriting—-given
a target predicate 푃and an input program Π the algorithm
generates a SQL query that, when evaluated over the in-
put dataset D, provides the set of all facts with maximal
intervals over 푃entailed by Π and D. To the best of our
knowledge there is no publicly available implementation of
this approach; thus, we have produced our own implemen-
tation. Following Brandt et al. (2018), we used temporary
tables (instead of subqueries) to compute the extensions of
predicates appearing in Π on the ﬂy, which has two impli-
cations. First, we usually have not just one SQL query but
a set of queries for computing the ﬁnal result; second, simi-
larly to MeTeoR, the approach essentially works bottom-up
rather than top-down. The implementation by Brandt et al.
(2018) provides two variants for coalescing: the ﬁrst one uses
standard SQL queries by Zhou, Wang, and Zaniolo (2006),
whereas the second one implements coalescing explicitly.
For our baseline we adopted the standard SQL approach,
which is less dependent on implementation details. Finally,

we used Postgresql 10.18 for all our baseline experiments.
In each test, we could verify that the answers returned by
MeTeoR and the baseline coincided.
In Experiment 2a, we compared the performance of our
system with that of the baseline using three target predi-
cates from our LUBM benchmark program Π퐿, whose rele-
vant sets of rules constitute non-recursive programs Π1
퐿, Π2
퐿,
and Π3
퐿consisting of 5, 10, and 21 rules, respectively. For
each program Π1
퐿–Π3
퐿and each dataset D1
퐿–D4
퐿from our
benchmark, we used the baseline approach and MeTeoR to
compute all facts over the target predicates entailed by the
corresponding program and dataset—this was achieved by
MeTeoR using materialisation only since these programs are
non-recursive. As a result, MeTeoR computed a representa-
tion of the entire canonical model, and not just the extension
of the target predicates.As shown in Table 3, both approaches
exhibit good performance and scalable behaviour as the size
of the data increases, with our system consistently outper-
forming the baseline.
Π1
퐿
Π2
퐿
Π3
퐿
baseline MeTeoR baseline MeTeoR baseline MeTeoR
D1
퐿160.3s
51.3s
345.9s
146.8s
523.9s
213.4s
D2
퐿331.8s
90.5s
747.8s
321.9s
1118.5s 455.2s
D3
퐿503.2s
114.2s
1154.0s 425.8s
1688.5s 760.1s
D4
퐿683.0s
170.3
1575.6s 582.7s
2254.6s 953.4s
Table 3: Results of Experiment 2a
In Experiment 2b, we performed similar tests as in Ex-
periment 2a, but using the meteorological benchmark. We
chose two target predicates from the program Π푊which
correspond to non-recursive programs Π1
푊and Π2
푊, each
with two rules. In addition, we constructed subsets D푖
푊of
the entire meteorological dataset D푊, where the superscript
푖indicates the number of years covered by the dataset; in
particular D62
푊is the full dataset covering all 62 years, so
D62
푊= D푊. The results, as presented in Table 4, show that
MeTeoR consistently outperforms the baseline approach.
Π1
푊
Π2
푊
baseline
MeTeoR
baseline
MeTeoR
D10
푊
376.9s
141.8s
38.8s
34.8s
D20
푊
761.3s
324.0s
78.5s
77.9s
D30
푊
1059.5s
430.8s
119.4s
101.8s
D40
푊
1406.5s
782.8s
163.23s
140.6s
D50
푊
1765.1s
929.2s
203.7s
171.8s
D62
푊
2234.0s
1050.8s
258.5s
240.4s
Table 4: Results of Experiment 2b
Although in Experiments 2a and 2b the performance of
the baseline was comparable to that of MeTeoR, we hy-
pothesised that the performance gap would signiﬁcantly in-
crease (in favour of MeTeoR) as the number of temporal
joins involved during reasoning increases. This is because
computing temporal joins requires intersecting intervals—
something for which databases do not seem to be optimised.
In contrast, we anticipate that the performance of MeTeoR is
more robust due to the way we implement joins (by ﬁrst sort-
ing the sets of intervals involved in a join and then linearly
scanning these sets to compute the relevant intersections).
To verify this hypothesis we performed Experiment 2c
which is similar to Experiments 2a and 2b, but we consid-
ered only one target predicate from the LUBM benchmark
with the corresponding (non-recursive) program Π1
퐿, and
datasets D200
퐿, D1000
퐿
, D2000
퐿
, D3000
퐿
, and D4000
퐿
, which, for
each relational atom, contain increasing number of facts. In
particular, these datasets contain facts mentioning 7, 082 re-
lational atoms—D200
퐿
has 200 facts for each of these atoms
(so in total 1, 416, 400 facts); whereas D1000
퐿
, D2000
퐿
, D3000
퐿
,
and D4000
퐿
have 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 facts, respec-
tively. In general, the larger is the numberof facts mentioning
the same relational atom, the larger the number of temporal
joins involved in reasoning. Thus, our hypothesis is that, as
we progress from D200
퐿
towards D4000
퐿
, we will see a larger
performance gap between baseline and MeTeoR.
The results of Experiment2c are shown in Figure 2. As an-
ticipated, the performance of the baseline quickly degrades as
the number of temporal joins needed for SQL query evalua-
tion increases, whereas the performance of MeTeoR remains
stable. We see these results as empirical validation for the
need of specialised temporal join algorithms, which are not
provided oﬀ-the-shelf by SQL engines.
퐷200
퐿
퐷1000
퐿
퐷2000
퐿
퐷3000
퐿
퐷4000
퐿
0
500
1,000
1,500
Run time (in seconds)
baseline
MeTeoR
Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2c
Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented the ﬁrst practical algorithm and scal-
able implementation for the full DatalogMTL language. Our
system MeTeoR eﬀectively combines optimised implemen-
tations of materialisation and automata-based reasoning, and
was able to successfully decide fact entailment over complex
recursive programs and large-scale datasets containing tens
of millions of temporal facts.
We see many exciting avenues for future research. First,
Cucala et al. (2021) have recently extended DatalogMTL
with stratiﬁed negation as failure—a very useful feature
for applications—and provided an automata-based deci-
sion procedure. It would be interesting to extend MeTeoR
to support stratiﬁed negation, which will require a non-
trivial revision of our algorithm since materialisation within

each separate stratum may be non-terminating. Second, it
would be interesting to explore incremental reasoning tech-
niques (Wałęga, Kaminski, and Cuenca Grau 2019), which
are especially relevant to stream reasoning applications.
Third, we aim to explore additional optimisations to further
improve scalability and also to apply MeTeoR in real-world
applications in collaboration with our industrial partners.
