Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
– A review with special emphasis on the symmetric group –
Patrick Krüger1,2* and Hanno Gottschalk1,2
1*Department of Mathematics and Science, University of
Wuppertal, Gaussstr. 20, Wuppertal, 42110, Germany.
2IZMD, University of Wuppertal, Liese Meitner Str. 27-31,
Wuppertal, 42110, Germany.

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks revolutionized computer vision and na-
trual language processing. Their eﬃciency, as compared to fully con-
nected neural networks, has its origin in the architecture, where convo-
lutions reﬂect the translation invariance in space and time in pattern
or speech recognition tasks. Recently, Cohen and Welling have put this
in the broader perspective of invariance under symmetry groups, which
leads to the concept of group equivaiant neural networks and more
generally steerable neural networks. In this article, we review the archi-
tecture of such networks including equivariant layers and ﬁlter banks,
activation with capsules and group pooling. We apply this formalism
to the symmetric group, for which we work out a number of details
on representations and capsules that are not found in the literature.
Keywords: Group equivariant neural networks, steerable neural networks,
symmetic group
MSC(2020). 68T07, 68T45.
1
arXiv:2301.03019v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2023

2
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
1 Introduction
Neural networks are machine learning algorithms that are used in a wide vari-
ety of applications, for example in image recognition and language processing.
There are many applications, among them automated communication in the
service sector, perception for self driving cars and the interpretation of medi-
cal images in healthcare. In many machine learning problems, it is desirable to
make the predictions of a network invariant to certain transformations of the
input. This means that, for instance in image classiﬁcation, we want an image
that was transformed by a rotation by some angle to still be classiﬁed with the
same label: A picture of a cat rotated by 90 degrees is still a picture of a cat.
An important step towards learning these invariant representations was made
by the introduction of convolutional neural networks by LeCun et al. for
image classiﬁcation of handwritten digits [1, 2]. These networks rely on the
mathematical convolution operation to achieve higher eﬃciency by parameter
sharing, as well as equivariance to translations. Equivariance means that a
shift in the input data in some direction will be carried through all but the
ultimate fully connected layers of the network and result in a similar shift in
further deep layers, which can then be used to achieve translation invariant
representations.
While convolutional neural networks thus yield some of the desired invari-
ance, their performance still decreases when the data is transformed by other
symmetries, e.g. rotations or reﬂections. While this can be avoided by data
augmentation, another compelling approach is to extend the translation
equivariance of convolutional networks to a wider class of transformations.
This is realized by group equivariant neural networks, or, in short, G-CNNs,
which were introduced by Cohen & Welling in [3]. G-CNNs use group theory
to generalize the convolution operation of conventional CNNs to group convo-
lution, which then yields equivariance not only to translations, but to a wider
group of transformations G of e.g. compositions of translations, reﬂections
and rotations. These G-CNNs are again generalized by steerable CNNs (Co-
hen & Welling, [4]) which, instead of modifying the convolution operation,
instantiate equivariant ﬁlter banks and steerable feature spaces by making use
of the theory of group representations. They thereby achieve a more general
and versatile concept of group equivariance.
The aim of this article is to give an overview of the theory of equivariant
networks. For this, some understanding of the mathematical theory of groups
and group representations is needed, which we provide in chapter 3.
Chapter 4 will then be concerned with the theory of equivariant networks.
After a short introduction on conventional, fully connected networks in section
4.1, basic knowledge about convolutional neural networks is provided in section
4.2 by explaining the core concepts of feature maps, ﬁlters, the convolution op-
eration and the translation equivariance resulting from it, as well as parameter
sharing. In section 4.3, we will explain how a modiﬁcation of the conventional

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
3
convolution operation leads to G-CNNs and how these thereby achieve equiv-
ariance to groups of transformations. The more general theory of steerable
CNNs will then be presented in section 4.4. We will furthermore recapitulate
how steerable CNNs are in fact a direct generalization of G-CNNs by explain-
ing the equivalence of the latter to a special case of the former. The second
aim of this article is to give some contributions by applications of G-CNNs and
steerable CNNs for the symmetric group. This will be the focus of chapter 5.
2 Related Work
Steerable CNNs have besides [4] been investigated by several other publi-
cations. Weiler et al. ([5]) discuss 3D-steerable CNNs, i.e. networks which
process volumetric data with domain R3. In [6], Cohen et al. give a more ab-
stract approach to intertwiners in steerable CNNs and it is shown that layers
of an equivariant network in fact need to transform according to an induced
group representation. A more general theory of steerable CNNs on homoge-
neos spaces is discussed by the same authors in [7], showing that linear maps
between feature spaces are in one-to-one correspondence to convolutions with
equivariant kernels. E2-equivariant steerable CNNs that are equivariant to
isometries of the plane R2 in the form of continuous rotations, reﬂections and
translations are discussed in [8]. Furthermore, gauge equivariant networks,
which enable equivariance not just to global symmetries, but also to local
transformations, are discussed by Cohen et al. in [9].
G-CNNs, i.e. networks that implicitly or explicitly rely on the regular repre-
sentation of their respective group have also been studied several times. In
[10], Gens & Domingos present symnets, which are a framework for networks
with feature maps over arbitrary symmetry groups. Kanazawa et al. present
in [11] a way to learn scale invariant representations while keeping parameter
cost low. Dielemann et al. discuss exploiting rotation symmetry to predict
galaxy morphology in [12] and expand their work to cyclic symmetries in
[13]. Another network architecture that relies on regular representations is
given by scattering networks, which were deﬁned by Mallat et al. in [14] for
compact groups, as well as for the Euclidean group in [15] and [16].
Another important part of research concerning neural networks in general and
equivariant networks speciﬁcally is the development of universal approxima-
tion theorems. Many of these have been proved for diﬀerent kinds of networks
in varying levels of generality, with some of the ﬁrst being [17] and [18]. Gen-
erally speaking, all approximation theorems state that neural networks can,
under certain conditions, approximate any function from a predeﬁned function
space with arbitrary precision. In particular, it was proved by Leshno et al.
in [19] that multilayer feedforward networks can approximate any continuous
function as long as non-polynomial activation functions are used.
Petersen and Voigtlaender showed in [20] that fully connected feedforward

4
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
networks can under minimal conditions be translated into convolutional (i.e.
translation equivariant) networks, thereby enabling the application of most
approximation theorems for the former to the latter. For group equivariant
maps, Kumagai & Sannai ([21]) also employ a conversion theorem from
feedforward networks to CNNs to establish a method for obtaining universal
approximation theorems for group equivariant convolutional networks.
3 Mathematical Preliminaries
In this section, some algebraic concepts that will be used and referenced
throughout this thesis will be explained.
Secondly, we brieﬂy recall the representation theory of ﬁnite groups.
Lastly, a short summary of the explicit representation theory of Sn, the
symmetric group of n letters, is presented.
3.1 Semidirect Products
We deﬁne the core mathematical concepts needed for the theory of equivariant
networks, starting with deﬁnitions of semi-direct products. While this section
is kept quite short, there exist many introductions to this topic, see g.g. [22]
or [23].
Deﬁnition 1
Let (G, ◦) be a group and X be some set. A (left) action of G on X is a binary
operation
· : G × X →X, (g, x) 7→g · x,
(1)
such that the following requirements are met:
i) e · x = x ∀x ∈X, with e being the neutral element of G.
ii) (g ◦h) · x = g · (h · x) ∀g, h ∈G, x ∈X.
A group action is also often interpreted as a map
φG : G →Aut(X) = {f : X →X | f is bijective }, g 7→φg.
(2)
Then, the two conditions above translate to the following:
i) φe = id
ii) φg ◦φh = φgh ∀g, h ∈G.
Deﬁnition 2
Let (H, ◦H) and (N, ◦N) be two groups and let furthermore φH : H →Aut(N) be
a group action of H on N. Then, we can construct the outer semidirect product
(N ⋊H, •) by setting the cartesian product N × H as the group’s underlying set and
deﬁning the group operation as follows:
• : N ⋊H →N ⋊H,
(n1, h1) • (n2, h2) = (n1 ◦N φH(h1)n2, h1 ◦H h2).
(3)

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
5
With this operation, H ∼= {(eN, h) | h ∈H} and N ∼= {(n, eH) | n ∈N} become
subgroups of (N ⋊H), with the latter being a normal subgroup as
(n, h) • (n′, e) = (n ◦N φ(h)n′ ◦N n−1, e) • (n, h) ∀(n, h) ∈N ⋊H, (n′, e) ∈N. (4)
The neutral element is given by (eN, eH) and we have (n, h)−1 = (φH(h−1)n−1, h−1)
for any (n, h) ∈H⋊N. Furthermore, using above isomorphisms, any element (n, h) ∈
N ⋊H can be written as a unique product
(n, h) = (n, eH) • (eN, h).
(5)
As N ∩H = (eN, eH) holds trivially, the outer semidirect product thus has all
properties of the inner semidirect product with respective isomorphic subgroups.
Example 1
I shall name two explicit examples for semidirect product groups and their respective
actions here. These examples will be referenced in later parts of this article.
i) The group p4 of compositions of rotations and translations of the square grid
Z2 is the semidirect product of Z2 and C4, the group of 90-degree-rotations
around any origin. Elements of p4 can be parametrized by 3 × 3 matrices
depending on a rotational coordinate r ∈{0, 1, 2, 3} and two translational
coordinates (u, v) ∈Z2:
g(r, u, v) =


cos( rπ
2 ) −sin( rπ
2 ) u
sin( rπ
2 )
cos( rπ
2 )
v
0
0
1


(6)
p4 now acts on points x = (u′, v′) ∈Z2 by matrix multiplication from the
left, after adding a homogenous coordinate to x, i.e. x = (u′, v′) 7→(u′, v′, 1).
ii) The group p4m of compositions of rotations, mirror reﬂections and trans-
lations of Z2 is the semidirect product of Z2 and D4, which is the group
of 90-degree-rotations and reﬂections about any origin. Elements of this
group can be parametrized similarly to p4, with the diﬀerence of adding a
reﬂection coordinate m:
g(m, r, u, v) =


(−1m) cos( rπ
2 ) −(−1m) sin( rπ
2 ) u
sin( rπ
2 )
cos( rπ
2 )
v
0
0
1


(7)
p4m then acts on Z2 analogously to p4.
In section 5, we will investigate steerable CNNs that rely on the semidi-
rect product of the symmetric group Sn and Zn. For this, some preliminary
deﬁnitions shall also be given here.

6
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
Deﬁnition 3
i) The symmetric group Sn is the group of permutations of n letters, i.e.
Sn = {σ : {1, .., n} →{1, .., n} | σ is bijective},
with the group operation being deﬁned by composition of elements, i.e.
functions.
ii) For r ≤n, a r-cycle is an element of σ ∈Sn, such that there exist
x1, .., xr ∈{1, .., n} with
σ(x1) = x2, σ(x2) = x3, .., σ(xr−1) = xr, σ(xr) = x1,
σ(xk) = xk ∀xk /∈{x1, .., xr}.
An r-cycle as above is often denoted (x1 x2 .. xr). We call this the cycle
notation, and we call r the cycle length of σ.
iii) We obtain an action of Sn on Zn for any n ∈N by letting σ ∈Sn permute
the coordinates of x = (x1, .., xn) ∈Zn:
σ ◦(x1, .., xn) = (xσ(1), .., xσ(n))
(8)
Example 2
With above action, we can construct the outer semidirect product Zn ⋊Sn of prod-
ucts tσ of translations t and coordinate permutations σ. This group can now be
parameterized and made to act on Zn in analogy to example 1 by n + 1 × n + 1 ma-
trices with the upper left n×n block being a permutation matrix representing σ and
a translation vector t ∈Zn in the ﬁrst n entries of the last column. Two examples
for n = 2 and n = 3 shall be given here:
g2(((12), (3, 3))) =


0 1 3
1 0 3
0 0 1

, g3(((123), (1, 2, 2))) =




0 0 1 1
1 0 0 2
0 1 0 2
0 0 0 1




(9)
3.2 An Introduction to Representation Theory of Finite
Groups
Deﬁnition 4
Let G be a group.
i) A representation (V, ρ) of G consists of a vector space V , together with a
group homomorphism ρ : G →GL(V ) from G to the general linear group
of V , i.e. the group of invertible linear maps from V to V , such that:
ρ(gh) = ρ(g)ρ(h) ∀g, h ∈G.
(10)
The dimension or degree of the representation is deﬁned as the dimension
of its vector space V .

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
7
ii) A subrepresentation of a representation (V, ρ) is a subspace W
⊆V
which is G-invariant, meaning ρ(g)w ∈W for all g ∈G, w ∈W. The
subrepresentation is then denoted by (W, ρ ↾W ), and we have
ρ ↾W (g) = ρ(g) ↾W .
(11)
Any representation (V, ρ) always has at least two subrepresentations: Itself
and {0}.
iii) If a representation (V, ρ) with V
̸= {0} has no subrepresentations ex-
cept itself and {0}, it is called irreducible. Otherwise, it is called reducible.
Throughout this thesis, we will often refer to irreducible representations as
irreps.
iv) For two representations (V1, ρ1) and (V2, ρ2) of G of respective degrees n1
and n2 we can deﬁne the direct sum of representations, (V1 ⊕V2, (ρ1 ⊕ρ2)),
with
(ρ1 ⊕ρ2)(g)(v, w) = (ρ1(v), ρ2(w)). This is again a representation of G and
has degree n1 + n2.
Example 3 (The Quotient Representation)
Given the quotient space (or quotient group) G/H of a group G and some subgroup
H ⊆G, we deﬁne the quotient representation (Vquot, ρquot) by associating a basis
vector with every coset in G/H:
Vquot = ⟨{egH | gH ∈G/H}⟩
(12)
and deﬁne ρquot using the action of G on cosets:
ρquot(g′)egH = eg′gH ∀g′ ∈G, ∀egH ∈Vquot.
(13)
As this representation just permutes the basis vectors, this time corresponding to
cosets, this can also be realized by permutation matrices. If we choose H = e, and
thus receive G/H = G, this yields the so-called regular representation which permutes
basis vectors eg for each g ∈G.
Deﬁnition 5
Let (V1, ρ1) and (V2, ρ2) be two representations of some group G and let f : V1 →V2
be a linear map.
i) f is called an intertwiner between ρ1 and ρ2, if
f(ρ1(g)(v)) = ρ2(g)(f(v)), ∀g ∈G, ∀v ∈V1.
ii) ρ1 and ρ2 are called equivalent or isomorphic, if there exists an intertwiner
f : V1 →V2 between them, which also is a vector space isomorphism, i.e. an
invertible linear map. We then often write V1 ≃V2 or ρ1 ≃ρ2.
iii) The condition in i) is linear in f, thus any linear combination of intertwiners
between representations ρ1 and ρ2 is again an intertwiner. We hence receive
a vector space of intertwiners between ρ1 and ρ2, denoted HomG(ρ1, ρ2).

8
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
Theorem 1 (Schur’s Lemma)
Let (V1, ρ1) and (V2, ρ2) be irreducible representations of G.
i) IﬀV1 and V2 are not isomorphic, then dim HomG(ρ1, ρ2) = 0, ie the only
intertwiner between ρ1 and ρ2 is the zero map.
ii) IﬀV1 and V2 are isomorphic, then dim HomG(ρ1, ρ2) = 1, and all maps
intertwining ρ1 and ρ2 are scalar multiples of the identity map.
Theorem 2
i) Any ﬁnite dimensional representation (V, ρ) of a ﬁnite group can be decom-
posed into a direct sum of irreducible representations:
(V, ρ) ∼(⊕Vi, ⊕ρi),
where (Vi, ρi) are irreps of G.
ii) The irreps of G are uniquely determined up to isomorphism, and there are
ﬁnitely many of them.
Proof See [24], section 1.4, Theorem 2 for i) and section 2.5, Theorem 7 for ii).
□
Deﬁnition 6
Let Irr(G) be the set of nonisomorphic irreducible representations of G. Then, any
(Vi, ρi) ∈Irr(G) can occur in the decomposition of some ﬁnite dimensional repre-
sentation (V, ρ) any number of times. A list of integers mρi(ρ) ≥0 corresponding to
the multiplicity of each irrep (Vi, ρi) in (V, ρ) is called the type of ρ. Representations
are uniquely determined up to isomorphism by their types, meaning that if two
representations have the same type, then they are isomorphic and that isomorphic
representations always have the same type.
4 The Theory of Equivariant Networks
In this section, the general theory behind convolutional neural networks is ex-
plained. We cover three types of convolutional networks which are subsequent
generalizations of each other. In section 4.1, We give a brief overview on how
non-convolutional, fully connected networks work. Section 4.2 will then cover
the basics on standard translation equivariant convolutional networks. Key
concepts, such as feature maps, ﬁlters, convolutional layers and the convolution
operation, as well as activation and pooling layers is discussed. In section 4.3,
we elaborate the generalization of convolutional networks to group equivariant
networks (G-CNNs). All concepts from the previous section are suitably gener-
alized, such as e.g. G-feature maps and group convolution will be touched on,
and it will be shown how the resulting networks have a “more general” form of

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
9
equivariance. Lastly, in section 4.4, we introduce steerable convolutional net-
works, which use representation theory to yield a more eﬃcient and versatile
way to deﬁne group equivariant networks where the group acts on ﬁbers of
feature maps, also called ﬁlter banks. It should be noted that while G-CNNs
and steerable CNNs can be realized for many kinds of groups, the sections 4.3
and 4.4 will focus on networks that use split groups, i.e. groups that are con-
structed as a semidirect product. Explicitly, we will consider networks on p4
and p4m, which were deﬁned in example 1, iv) and v). However, the concepts
can easily be generalized to other split groups. A G-CNN that does rely on a
non-split group will be covered in section 5.
4.1 Fully Connected Neural Networks
Deep neural networks describe a wide range of computing systems in the do-
main of machine learning that are meant to loosely resemble the human brain
by using interconnected layers, indexed in the following by l = 1, ..., L, of
neurons. Each neuron N l
i, i = 1, ..., Kl at each layer l of the network can be
thought of as a simple unit that holds a number, usually referred to as its ac-
tivation, and which is connected to all of neurons of the next layer. Therefore,
this kind of network is often called fully connected. Each of these connections
is determined by a weight and a bias. We denote by ωl
i,j and bl
i,j the weight
and bias that connect the ith neuron of layer l, N l
i, to the jth neuron N l+1
j
of
layer l + 1. In the so-called forward propagation step of a network, starting at
l = 1, each neuron is updated in the following way:
N l
i = σl


Kl−1
X
j=1
ωl−1
j,i N l−1
j
+ bl−1
j,i

,
(14)
where σ is some non-linear activation function. These will be discussed in
4.2.5 This process is then repeated sequentially for all remaining l = 2, ..., L,
until the ﬁnal layer is reached. This output layer consists of one neuron for
each possible label of the classiﬁcation problem at hand. The output neuron
with the highest activation is returned as the networks predicted label for the
given input.
To train a deep neural network, a training dataset with inputs that are already
labeled with their respective classiﬁcations is needed. During the training
phase, after each forward pass, the (initially large) error of the network, i.e.
the diﬀerence between the model’s prediction and the actual labels of the
training data is quantiﬁed by a loss function which takes as inputs the weights
and biases of the network. A backpropagation algorithm then produces the
gradients of this loss function with respect to its variables (i.e. the weights
and biases), which are often called the parameters of the networks. After
obtaining the gradients, an optimization algorithm, the most used one being

10
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
stochastic gradient descent ([25]), is used to modify the networks parameters,
thereby slightly optimizing the loss function. This training process of forward
pass and backpropagation is now repeated until the error is suﬃciently small.
Then, the backpropagation step is no longer needed and the network can be
used to classify unlabeled data. The reader interested in a more thorough
introduction to feedforward networks is referred to chapter 6 of [26].
4.2 Basics on Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a powerful tool in machine learn-
ing, mainly used for pattern recognition and classiﬁcation of certain input
data. They can be used on a variety of data, for example sound signatures
(one-dimensional data) and 2D and/or 3D Images. Just as fully connected net-
works, CNNs work in layers, in each of which a set of ﬁlters representing certain
features to look for in the input data is convolved with stacks of so-called fea-
ture maps. After application of certain operations known as nonlinearities and
pooling, this yields a new set of feature maps, which is then convolved with a
new set of ﬁlters in the next layer. A core feature of CNNs is the equivariance
to translation of their convolutional layers. This means that shifting the input
data of a convolutional Layer will result in a similar shift that layer’s out-
put, allowing us to detect features independent of their location. In the next
few paragraphs we will explain these terms in more detail. We use a Network
operating on 2D black and white images, i.e. an input feature map with one
channel as example.
4.2.1 Feature Maps and Filters
Feature maps
Feature maps are mathematical functions used to describe the input data,
as well as the outputs of each convolutional layer. Depending on the type
of the input, their domain can vary. In image recognition, the domain of a
feature map usually is the two-dimensional pixel grid Z2. In our example
of a black and white image, an input-level feature map f : Z2 →R simply
returns the grey-value at each pixel x ∈Z2. In a coloured image, the function
would instead be of the form f : Z2 →R3, returning a vector consisting of
the color channel values at each pixel coordinate. Since images are bound in
size, a feature map is usually said to just return zero everywhere outside of a
certain subdomain of pixels. Since layers of convolutional networks contain
more of one feature map most of the time, it is often also spoken of ’stacks’
of feature maps f j : Z2 →RK, j = 1, .., n, whereby the index is often omitted
for simplicity.
Filters
Filters are used to extract certain characteristic patterns in our data by con-
volving them with feature maps, which will be described in the next paragraph.
Mathematically, they are also described as functions. For convolution to work,

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
11
it is important that these functions share the domain and image space of the
feature maps that they are to be convolved with. In our example, a one-channel
ﬁlter looking for diagonal lines (top left to bottom right) could look like this:
ψ : Z2 →R;
ψ(x) =
(
1
x ∈{(−1, 1), (0, 0), (1, −1)}
0
elsewhere.
(15)
The support, i.e. the non-zero domain of ﬁlters is usually much smaller than
that of the feature maps, with usual widths being 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 squares cen-
tered at the origin. While classical computer vision used handcrafted ﬁlters
as in the above example, CNN based computer vision uses learnable ﬁlters
ψ = (ψi,j))i,j=−s,...,s, s = 1, 2. The values ψi,j are the learned parameters of
the network. As will elaborated in 4.2.4, this drastically reduces the parame-
ter cost of CNNs in comparison to fully connected networks.
4.2.2 The Convolution Operation
The core building block of regular CNNs are the so called convolutional layers.
In each of these layers, a stack of feature maps f : Z2 →RK is convolved with
a set of ﬁlters ψ : Z2 →RK, producing a new feature map which will then be
used in the next layer. The convolution operation is mathematically deﬁned
as follows:
f ⋆ψ : Z2 →R;
[f ⋆ψ](x) =
X
y∈Z2
K
X
k=1
fk(y)ψk(y −x)
(16)
While this may look complicated at ﬁrst glance, it can be interpreted as sim-
ply sliding our small ﬁlter window over the domain of the image or feature
map and summing up the element-wise products of the ﬁlter’s values and the
feature map’s values lying “under” them at each output channel k and each
respective position x of the ﬁlter. To demonstrate this further, we can inter-
pret our example ﬁlter ψ from (15), as well as a feature map f as matrices.
The feature map and ﬁlter, as well as the result of the convolution operation
of said elements is illustrated in ﬁgure 1.
Here, as in all following ﬁgures throughout this thesis, black pixels represent
one, grey pixels zero and white pixels represent minus one.
Recall that, even though the domain of f and ψ is inﬁnite, both functions just
return 0 everywhere outside of the depicted areas.
Convolving a feature map with a ﬁlter yields a new feature map
f ⋆ψ : Z2 →R, describing how well the feature described by the ﬁlter ﬁts at
diﬀerent positions x ∈Z2 in the image.
As announced, we will from now on often omit the summation over channels

12
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
2
3
3
0
1
1
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
⋆
=
f
ψ
=
f ⋆ψ
Figure 1: A feature map f representing the letter “V” is convolved with a
ﬁlter detecting diagonal edges from top left to bottom right, yielding a new
feature map f ⋆ψ.
in (16) for simplicity and pretend to have feature maps and ﬁlters with just
one channel, as this will not harm any arguments made in the following para-
graphs.
4.2.3 Translation Equivariance
An important property that makes CNNs such powerful tools, for example in
image recognition, is their equivariance to translations of the input at each
layer. Roughly speaking, this means that a CNN is able to detect features in
an image (or other data) regardless of their speciﬁc position, without requiring
additional parameters. To be more precise, we deﬁne a translation of a feature
map mathematically:
[Ttf](x) = f(t−1x) = f(x −t); x, t ∈Z2
(17)
A feature map f is hence transformed by a translation t ∈Z2 by looking up the
value of f at the point t−1x = x −t and moving it to the position x, resulting
in the t-transformed feature map Ttf. Visually, this translates to a shift of the
patterns of a given input by the respective horizontal and vertical coordinates
of t. For an illustration, see the left side of ﬁgure 2. The underlying concept
of a group action of Z2 on itself is also used by the convolution operation
itself: In (16), ﬁlters are transformed by Tx when calculating the output of the
convolution at position x, representing a shift of said ﬁlter to that position.
Equivariance to translations in CNNs now means that applying a translation
t to a feature map f, followed by a convolution with a ﬁlter ψ yields the same

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
13
result as convolving f with ψ ﬁrst and then applying the translation:
[[Ttf] ⋆ψ](x) =
X
y∈Z2
f(t−1y)ψ(x−1y)
=
X
y∈Z2
f(y −t)ψ(y −x)
=
X
y∈Z2
f(y)ψ(y + t −x)
=
X
y∈Z2
f(y)ψ(y −(x −t))
=
X
y∈Z2
f(y)ψ((t−1x)−1y)
= [Tt[f ⋆ψ]](x).
(18)
⋆ψ
⋆ψ
Tt
Tt
f
Tt(f)
Tt(f ⋆ψ)
f ⋆ψ
Figure 2: A translation equivariant convolution. Here, the feature maps are
transformed by t = (−2, 1) and the diagram commutes.
4.2.4 Parameter Sharing
In comparison to conventional, fully connected neural networks (section 4.1),
convolutional neural networks increase the eﬃciency of their parameters by
utilizing the convolution operation to achieve parameter sharing across layers.
In fully connected layers of a conventional neural network, each neuron is

14
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
connected to the neurons of the next layer by an individual connection con-
sisting of a weight and a bias, which together make up the parameters of
the network. Each of these connections is modiﬁed individually to achieve
the best possible classiﬁcation result. In image recognition for instance, one
can view each pixel of the input image as a neuron, and each of these is
connected via individual parameters to the neurons of the subsequent layer.
As layers are stacked on top of each other, one can imagine that the number
of connections, and thus of parameters will grow quite large.
For convolutional neural networks, consider each channel f k′
l , k′ = 1, .., Kl
of a feature map fl : Z2 →RKl with Kl output channels in a given layer l.
Each of these channels is obtained by convolving a small ﬁlter patch ψk′ of
size s × s × Kl−1 with the stack of feature maps f k
l−1 of the previous layer.
Here, k = 1, .., Kl−1 denotes the individual channels and Kl−1 is the number
of channels of the feature map of layer l −1. All values f k′
l (x) of an output
channel k′ ∈{1, .., Kl} for each x ∈Z2 are thus obtained from the same ﬁlter,
evaluated at diﬀerent spatial coordinates, and hence share the same s2Kl−1
parameters. For the whole layer l, this then amounts to s2Kl−1Kl parameters.
For comparison, as each pixel would need its own parameters, a fully con-
nected layer processing the same data would need around Kl−1KlZl−12Zl2
parameters with Zl−1 and Zl being the spatial extend of the non-zero do-
mains of the feature maps fl−1 and fl, which is substantially larger than s2,
with s usually being 7 or smaller.
4.2.5 Nonlinearities and Pooling
Nonlinearities
The convolutional layers of a CNN are interspersed with non-linear layers.
Such a layer operates by applying a non-linear function to the input is needed
to enhance the expressive power of CNNs, since hardly any phenomenon that
CNNs are meant to observe can be described by linear functions. Various
universal approximation theorems, for instance in [19] and [20, 27], prove
that (feedforward and convolutional) networks can approximate almost any
function with arbitrary levels of precision, as long as non-polynomial nonlin-
earities are used.
One of the most prominent examples for a nonlinearity is the rectiﬁed linear
unit ReLU:
ReLU(x) := max(x, 0)
(19)
This function has empirically been proven to be the most eﬃcient choice in
many cases, as its computation is faster than most other non-linear functions
and it is less prone to plateaus in the training process of the network.
Note that ReLU is applied element-wise, meaning that if a multi-channel
feature map f : Z2 →RK is given, ReLU is evaluated at each output channel

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
15
fk(x), k = 1, .., K, individually. There are other forms of ﬁber-wise nonlinear-
ities, which will be touched on in section 4.4.
Pooling
In CNNs, convolutional layers are often interspersed with so called pooling
layers, with one of the ﬁrst examples being [28]. In these layers, a pooling
operation is performed on a given set of feature maps. The main goal of this
operation is to cut out superﬂuous information, reducing data size by slightly
reducing locational precision. This can be done because a CNN usually does not
require the exact location of a feature to function properly. There are several
diﬀerent pooling operations, one of the most frequently used is max pooling:
P : Z2 →R;
Pf(x) :=
max
x′∈U(x)f(x′),
(20)
where f is a feature map and U(x) is some neighbourhood of x in Z2, in
this case usually being a small square with center x. The pooling operation
thus works by ﬁnding the highest activation in said neighbourhood. Average
pooling, which is another frequently used operation, would ﬁnd the average of
all activations in the pooling window.
To actually reduce the size of the feature map, pooling needs to be performed
with a stride, meaning that P is not evaluated on every point in the base space,
but only on points of certain distance to each other. For example, a stride of 2
would mean that in (20), P is only evaluated at points in 2Z2 = {2x : x ∈Z2},
while the neighbourhoods U(x) remain subsets of Z2.
4.3 Group Equivariant CNNs
4.3.1 Motivation
We can interpret convolutional networks from section 4.2 as already being
G-CNNs with G the group of translations, Z2. Our convolution operation
[f ⋆ψ](x) basically returns the activation of ψ, transformed under the action
of the group element x, i.e. a translation. HGFor a general G-CNN, one would
like to ﬁnd a way to replace the underlying group of the network with some
other group G, containing more transformations than just translations, for
example rotations and reﬂections, and still have equivariance of convolution
with respect to every element of G.
4.3.2 Group Convolution, Feature Maps and Equivariance
We ﬁrst establish the action of the group G. The convolution operation from
equation (16) is modiﬁed in two steps. First, we consider the initial convolu-
tional layer of the network, i.e. where the image f : Z2 →R is convolved with

16
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
the ﬁrst set of ﬁlters:
f ⋆ψ : G →R;
[f ⋆ψ](g) =
X
y∈Z2
f(y)ψ(g−1y)
(21)
Two things should be noted: First, g ∈G again transforms feature maps (or
ﬁlters) via a group action on the domain of said maps:
[Tgf](x) = f(g−1x); x ∈Z2, g ∈G.
(22)
Speciﬁcally for G = p4 or G = p4m, g ∈G transforms f(x) by moving its out-
put from x ∈Z2 to the pixel at g−1x under the actions deﬁned in example 1.
Secondly, it should be noted that the convolution operation f ⋆ψ itself now
yields a function on the group G instead of Z2, thus requiring ﬁlters in the
subsequent layer to also be functions on G, yielding yet another slightly
diﬀerent convolution operation:
f ⋆ψ : G →R;
[f ⋆ψ](g) =
X
h∈G
f(h)ψ(g−1h)
(23)
As one might notice, the transformation of feature maps and ﬁlters by G is
again slightly diﬀerent:
[Tgf](h) = f(g−1h); h, g ∈G.
(24)
Hence, the output of f at a point h ∈G of the domain (which also is just G)
is moved to the point g−1h, which is obtained by the canonical action of G on
itself by its group operation.
While it is easy to imagine feature maps f : Z2 →R simply as images
sampled on a pixel grid, feature maps with base space G might not be as
intuitive. For G = p4, a feature map f : G →R can be imagined as a graph
with four patches, of which each corresponds to one of the four rotations
C4 = {e, r, r2, r3}. Each pixel now has a rotational coordinate, corresponding
to the patch in which it appears, and two translational coordinates specifying
its position in the respective patch. These coordinates do also coincide with
the semidirect product structure of p4, enabling us to write any element
g ∈p4 as a product g = tr, t ∈Z2, r ∈C4.
The rotation r for instance now acts on this graph by moving each patch
along the arrows indicated in ﬁgure 3, and by also rotating each of the patches
themselves by 90 degrees, as is also shown in ﬁgure 3.
The convolution operation of the ﬁrst layer (21) and the convolution operations
of the subsequent layers (23) are now not only equivariant to translations, but
to all transformations from the group G, expanding translational equivariance

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
17
e
r3
r2
r
e
r3
r2
r
Figure 3: A p4 feature map (left) and its rotation by r (right).
by e.g. compositions of translations and rotations for p4 and by compositions
of translations with rotations and reﬂections for p4m:
[[Tuf] ⋆ψ](g) = [Tu[f ⋆ψ]](g) ∀u, g ∈G.
(25)
For higher layer convolutions, this is derived in complete analogy to (18), this
time using the fact that uG = G ∀u ∈G and thus substituting uh ∈G for
h, again keeping the overall sum the same. At the same point for ﬁrst layer
convolutions, we use an analogous argument gZ2 = Z2 ∀g ∈G, as G acts
transitively on Z2, meaning that any point in the pixel grid can be reached
from any other point by a transformation from G.
4.3.3 Group Pooling and Equivariant Nonlinearities
Equivariance to element-wise nonlinearities
Element-wise nonlinearities ν : R →R can be used in G-CNNs without
restriction, as post-composing them with a feature map preserves the equiv-
ariance to pre-compositions with group transformations:
Let ν : R →R be an element-wise nonlinearity such as e.g. ReLU, and deﬁne
the post-composition, i.e. the application of such a function to a feature map
f:
Cν(f(g)) = [ν ◦f](g) = ν(f(g)).
Let Tg be the left transformation operator from (22) or (24). As Tg is realized
by pre-composition with f and Cν by post-composition, these actions commute
and we get
CνTgf = ν ◦[f ◦g−1] = [ν ◦f] ◦g−1 = TgCνf.
(26)
Group Pooling
As in Regular CNNs, convolutional layers of a G-CNN are often followed by a

18
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
pooling layer. As we no longer need to have the simple pixel grid Z2 as base
space, we need to deﬁne the notions of pooling and stride for the more general
case of the base space being a group G. To simplify the process, we split it into
two steps, namely the pooling step, which is performed without stride, and the
subsampling step which can then realize any notion of stride, if desired. In the
ﬁrst step, the max pooling operation for instance becomes
P : G →R;
Pf(g) := max
x∈gU f(x).
(27)
Here, gU := {gu | u ∈U} is some g-transformed neighbourhood U of the
identity element in G. In Z2, this would correspond to a square around the
origin that is moved across the images by translations t ∈Z2. This operation
is now equivariant to G:
PThf(g) = max
k∈gU Thf(k)
= max
k∈gU f(h−1k)
= max
hk∈gU f(k)
=
max
k∈h−1gU f(k)
= Pf(h−1g)
= ThPf(g)
(28)
The arguments behind these equations are as follows: The ﬁrst two equations
are just the deﬁnitions of group pooling (27) and the left transformation of
feature maps (24), respectively. In the third line, we substitute k for hk using
the fact that taking the maximum of f(h−1k) over k ∈gU is the same as
taking the maximum of f(k) with k such that hk is in gU. In the fourth line
we use that this is again the same as taking k ∈h−1gU, which can be seen by
just multiplying both sides with h−1. The last two lines are then obtained by
just resubstitutuing the deﬁnitions of group pooling and Th.
Any stride could now be realized in the second step by subsampling the
pooled feature map over a subgroup H ⊆G, i.e. evaluating just on points
h ∈H instead of all g ∈G. However, a feature map subsampled in this way
would not anymore be equivariant to all of G, but only to H. As we wish to
maintain equivariance to the whole group G, this form of stride is usually not
used in practical G-CNN applications.
Instead, to preserve G-equivariance throughout the network, one can use coset
pooling by choosing the pooling neighbourhood U in the ﬁrst step to be itself
a subgroup H of G. The resulting transformed pooling regions then are the
non-overlapping cosets of H in G which are either disjoint or equal for any gH
and g′H. Because of this, any element of each of the distinct cosets can then

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
19
be chosen as a representative to subsample on. The resulting pooled feature
map can then be interpreted as a map on the quotient space G/H, which can
then be acted upon by G similar to (24) by utilizing the general action of G on
its quotient spaces from example 1, preserving equivariance as shown in (28):
Tg′f(gH) = f((g′−1g)H), g′ ∈G, gH ∈G/H
(29)
As an example of this, consider a p4-feature map that is pooled over the group
of rotations, C4 = {e, r, r2, r3}. Visually (see ﬁgure 4), this equates to checking
the four rotational outputs of each pixel coordinate x ∈Z2 and choosing the
one with the highest activation as representative for the coset {x, xr, xr2, xr3}.
The resulting feature map is then of domain p4/C4 = Z2 and thus transforms
in the same way as an input feature map in (22).
e
r3
r2
r
max
x∈(−2,2)C4
f(x)
(−2, 2)
(−2, 2)r3
(−2, 2)r2
(−2, 2)r
(−2, 2)C4
Figure 4: Coset pooling by H = C4 of a p4 feature map. A single coset
((−2, 2)C4) is highlighted.
4.3.4 Implementation
G-Convolution can be implemented rather easily, at least for so-called split
groups. By exploiting this property, we can just use a standard convolution
routine with an expanded ﬁlter bank, which will be described shortly.
Recall that a group being split means that any element g ∈G can be written
as a product g = ts. For p4 and p4m, t ∈Z2 would be a translation, and s
would be a transformation from the stabilizer group H = C4 or H = D4 that
leaves the origin invariant, i.e. a rotation or roto-reﬂection around the origin.
This, together with TtTs = Tts for the action of G allows us to rewrite the

20
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
deﬁnition of G-convolution as follows:
f ⋆ψ(g) = f ⋆ψ(ts) =
X
x∈X
f(x)Tt[Tsψ(x)]
(30)
with X = Z2 in layer one and X = G in subsequent layers, thus allowing us to
precompute the transformed ﬁlters Tsψ for all transformations of the stabilizer
and then convolve them with the input using a fast planar convolution routine.
The set of untransformed ﬁlters at some layer l can be sorted in an array F
of shape Kl × Kl−1 × Sl−1 × n × n. Here, Kl−1 denotes the number of input
channels, Kl is the number of output channels i.e. the number of distinct
ﬁlters, and n×n denotes the spatial extend of the ﬁlters. Furthermore, Sl−1 is
the size of the stabilizer group, i.e. the number transformations of G that ﬁx
the origin in the base space of the feature maps that F is to be convolved with.
Each transformation Ts now “acts” on F by permuting the scalar entries
of each of the Kl × Kl−1 distinct “ﬁlter blocks” of shape Sl−1 × n × n. If
Sl transformations are applied, this leads to an extended array of shape
Kl × Sl × Kl−1 × Sl−1 × n × n.
The permutations themselves can be realized by implementing an invertible
map g which yields the group element corresponding to an index from the
array of shape Sl−1 × n × n, represented as matrices. For example, for p4 this
map would be the following, as was described in example 1, iv):
g(s, u, v) =


cos( sπ
2 ) −sin( sπ
2 ) u
sin( sπ
2 )
cos( sπ
2 )
v
0
0
1


(31)
We then set
F +[i, s′, j, s, u, v] = F[i, j, ¯s, ¯u, ¯v]
(32)
with
(¯s, ¯u, ¯v) = g−1(g(s′, 0, 0)−1g(s, u, v)).
(33)
To use F + in a planar convolution routine, we exploit the fact that X in (30)
involves a sum over the stabilizer, again allowing us to to rewrite the equation
as
X
x∈X
f(x)Tt[Tsψ(x)] =
X
x∈Z2
Sl−1Kl−1
X
k=1
fk(x)Tt[Tsψk(x)].
(34)

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
21
We can now reshape F + into an array of shape SlKl ×Sl−1Kl−1 ×n×n which
can then be applied to similarly reshaped feature maps in a planar convolution
routine.
4.4 Steerable CNNs
4.4.1 Motivation
It was shown how G-CNNs achieve group equivariance by expanding the do-
main of the feature maps and ﬁlters. The magnitude of the expansion depends
on the size of the stabilizer group of the origin. Thus, larger groups lead to
larger expansions, which in turn lead to a proportionally increasing computing
cost.
Steerable CNNs are a generalization of G-CNNs which achieve equivariance by
deﬁning ﬁlter banks as intertwiners, which are morphisms between group rep-
resentations, through which feature spaces become G-steerable. For a classical,
unrestricted ﬁlter bank to be an intertwiner, it needs to satisfy an equivariance
constraint, which depends on the representations that it is meant to inter-
twine. Thus, while G-CNNs achieve equivariance by expanding arbitrary ﬁlter
banks, Steerable CNNs achieve it by restricting the space of available ﬁlters,
thus decoupling the required computational power from the size of the group.
4.4.2 Feature Spaces, Fibers and Steerability
We once again consider 2D signals f : Z2 →RK with K channels. These can
be added, as well as multiplied by scalars and therefore form a vector space,
often also called feature space, which we will denote by Fl. The layer index l
will often be omitted for simplicity.
Given a group G acting on Z2, we are able to transform signals f ∈F0:
[π0(g)f](x) = f(g−1x).
(35)
π0(g) : F0 →F0 is then a linear map ∀g ∈G that furthermore satisﬁes
π0(gh) = π0(g)π0(h) ∀g, h ∈G,
(36)
yielding a group homomorphism π0 : G →GL(F0). A vector space such as
F0, together with a map such as π0 that satisﬁes (36) fulﬁlls the conditions of
a group representation deﬁned in deﬁnition 4. It shall be denoted by (F0, π0).
Oftentimes we will just call π0 (or πl) a representation, if the nature of F0
(Fl) is clear. As will be explained later, the representations πl transforming
higher layer feature spaces Fl might look slightly diﬀerent than in (35). Nev-
ertheless, they will always satisfy (36).
While in most other deep learning publications some f ∈F is usually consid-
ered as a stack of K feature maps fk : Z2 →R, k = 1, .., K, it is useful for

22
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
the theory of steerable CNNs to consider another decomposition: Instead of
splitting the feature space “horizontally” into one-dimensional planar feature
maps, it can be decomposed into ﬁbers Fx, one of which being located at each
“base point” x ∈Z2. Each ﬁber consists of the K-dimensional vector space
representing all channels at the given position. f ∈F is therefore comprised
of feature vectors f(x) ∈Fx. See ﬁgure 5 for an illustration.
Figure 5: The decomposition of F into stacks of feature maps (left), and into
ﬁbers (right). A single ﬁber is highlighted.
Let F, F′ be two feature spaces, and let π : G →GL(F) be a group homomor-
phism, such that (F, π) is a group representation. Let furthermore Φ describe
a convolutional layer of a network, i.e.
Φ : F →F′;
Φ(f) = f ⋆Ψ ∀f ∈F
(37)
for some ﬁlter bank Ψ : Z2 →RK.
We now say F′ is steerable w.r.t. G, if there exists another function
π′ : G →GL(F′) transforming F′ such that
Φπ(g)f = π′(g)Φf ∀g ∈G,
(38)
meaning that transforming the input by π(g) yields the same result under Φ
as transforming the output of Φ by π′(g). The following equation shows that
this condition implies that π′ : G →GL(F′) is also a group homomorphism,
and thus (F′, π′) is also a group representation:
π′(gh)Φf = Φπ(gh)f = Φπ(g)π(h)f = π′(g)Φπ(h)f = π′(g)π′(h)Φf.
(39)
Note that (39) only implies the desired property of π′ for the span of the image
of Φ. However, this is enough for our purposes, as any features in F′ that are

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
23
transformed by π′ result from applying a convolutional layer, i.e. lie in said
image.
4.4.3 The Equivariance Constraint on Filter Banks
Filterbanks are arrays of shape K′ × K × s × s, where K′ denotes the number
of output channels, i.e. the number of distinct ﬁlters that are to be convolved
with the input. Each of those K′ ﬁlters then has the shape K × s × s, where
K is the number of input channels, and s denotes the spatial extent, i.e. the
support/non-zero domain of the ﬁlter, usually being 3 × 3 or 5 × 5, though
other sizes are possible.
Assuming inductively that such a ﬁlter bank Ψ is applied to a steerable fea-
ture space (F, π), we need it to be an H-Intertwiner between π and ρ, i.e. to
satisfy the equivariance constraint with respect to H, in order for the output
of the convolution to be steerable:
ρ(h)Ψ = Ψπ(h) ∀h ∈H.
(40)
This means that Ψ applied to a feature map that was transformed by π(h) has
to yield the same result as applying a ﬁber representation ρ to the ﬁber that
results from applying Ψ to the untransformed image, as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.
π0(r)
ρ(r)
Ψ
Ψ
Figure 6: A H-equivariant ﬁlter bank Ψ. Here, ρ represents the rotation r
by cyclicly permuting the channels in each ﬁber. For Ψ to be equivariant, this
diagram needs to commute for any element of the considered group. Note that
in this ﬁgure, we have K = 1 and K′ = 4.
Two things should be noted at this point:
Firstly, ρ does not act on a feature space (or on a ﬁlter, equivalently) as π0
does in 35, but on individual ﬁbers F′
x ∈RK′. Formally, a ﬁber representation
is thus just a K′-dimensional representation (RK′, ρ) of the stabilizer group
H. In section 4.4.5, it will be explained how a G-representation acting on a

24
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
full feature space can be induced from the H-representation ρ.
Secondly, the equivariance constraint needs only to be fulﬁlled for all h ∈H,
thus excluding translations. This is because translations would be able to
move patterns out of the receptive ﬁeld of single ﬁbers (see ﬁgure 7). This
is relevant, as for the equivariance calculations we interpret the action of
π(h) on F for h ∈H as the equivalent action of π(h−1) on the ﬁlters. Full
G-equivariance will then be achieved by the induced representation.
π0(r)
π0(t)
Figure 7: Elements of the stabilizer group H (top) do not shift patterns out
of the receptive ﬁelds of ﬁbers, while translations (bottom) do, thus making
full G-equivariance of ﬁlter banks impossible.
The equivariance constraint is linear in Ψ, meaning that any linear combination
P λiΨi of intertwiners again satisﬁes (40) and thus is an intertwiner itself. We
thus obtain a vector space of intertwiners, denoted HomH(π, ρ).
4.4.4 The Space of Intertwiners
To better understand the construction of HomH(π, ρ), we consider an example:
Let F0 be the space of 3 × 3 ﬁlters with one channel, i.e. functions ψ : Z2 →R
which return zero outside of the 3 × 3 square around the origin. As these
functions, just like feature maps, can be added and multiplied by scalars, F0
is a vector space of dimension 9 (or Ks2 for arbitrary spatial extends and
numbers of channels). H can act on this space via π0 from (35) in the same
way as it acts on feature maps:
π0(h)ψ(x) = ψ(h−1x)
(41)
and, as mentioned in the previous section, transforming a patch from a feature
map that ψ is evaluated on by h ∈H is the same as transforming ψ with h−1.
Staying with the example, (F0, π0) is a 9-dimensional group representation of
H. The canonical Basis for this space is shown in ﬁgure 8.
Furthermore, an example for the transformation of a C-linear combination of
basis ﬁlters is depicted in ﬁgure 9.

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
25
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
C = {
}
Figure 8: The canonical Basis of (F0, π0).
Irrep
Basis Filters
e
r
r2
r3
m
mr
mr2
mr3
A1
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
A2
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[−1]
[−1]
[−1]
[−1]
B1
[1]
[−1]
[1]
[−1]
[1]
[−1]
[1]
[−1]
B2
[1]
[−1]
[1]
[−1]
[−1]
[1]
[−1]
[1]
E

1 0
0 1


0 −1
1
0
 
−1
0
0
−1

0
1
−1 0
 
−1 0
0
1
 
0 1
1 0


1
0
0 −1
 
0
−1
−1
0

Table 1: The irreducible decomposition of (F0, π0)
However, as explained in section 3.2, F0 can be decomposed into irreducible
representations, i.e. subspaces V ⊆F0, that are uniquely determined up to
isomorphism (i.e. change of basis), and are H-invariant, meaning
π0(h)V ⊆V ∀h ∈H.
(42)
For G = p4m the irreducible decomposition of (F0, π0) for the stabilizer group
H = D4 is shown in table 1.
As depicted, the group H = D4 has ﬁve distinct irreps, which are character-
ized by the way in which π0(h) acts on them for diﬀerent h ∈H. For instance
(see ﬁgure 11), π0(h) acts trivially on A1-ﬁlters, as rotating or reﬂecting has
no eﬀect on them, while π0(r) acts by multiplication by [−1] on B1-ﬁlters.
To obtain the irreducible decomposition of π0, use a simpliﬁed character
formula ([29],[24]):
mρi(π0) =
1
|H|
X
h∈H
χπ0(h)χρi(h).
(43)
The characters, which are just the traces of the representing matrices eval-
uated at each h ∈H, can be obtained from table 1. For other groups, such
π0(r)
Figure 9: π0(r) acting on a C-linear combination.

26
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
character tables are also available in literature. To determine the traces of
π0(h) for h ∈H, one can look at the canonical basis of F0 (ﬁgure 8) and
how the individual vectors of it transform under π0. The trace χπ0(h) of any
representation matrix corresponding to π0(h) is then just the number of basis
vectors of C that are left unchanged by its action. Thus, for instance, we receive
χπ0(e) = 9, as any representation evaluated at the neutral element always acts
as the identity matrix, and χπ0(m) = 3. The latter is visualized in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10: The canonical basis C of (F0, π0) (top) is transformed by the
reﬂection π0(m) (bottom). The invariant vectors are highlighted.
π0 turns out to have type (3, 0, 1, 1, 2) (see deﬁnition 6), meaning that there
are 3 copies of A1, i.e. 3 H-invariant one-dimensional subspaces with exactly
the transformation properties of this irrep. Furthermore, there is one copy of
each of B1 and B2, and two copies of the two-dimensional irrep E.
Decomposing (F0, π0) also makes π0(h) block diagonal for any h ∈H, after
applying a change of basis matrix A that is constructed from the basis ﬁlters
shown column two of table 1. The same matrix A block diagonalizes π0(h)
for all h ∈H simultaneously and the elements on the diagonal are the irrep
matrices shown in the third to last columns of table 1, with their respective
multiplicities. For instance, for h = r, we have:
π0(r)
π0(r)
ψ1 =
= [1] · ψ1,
ψ4 =
= [−1] · ψ4
Figure 11: A rotation acting trivially on an A1 basis element (left), and as
[-1] on a B1 basis element (right).

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
27
Aπ0(r)A−1 = block_diag([1], [1], [1], [−1], [−1], [0, −1; 1, 0], [0, −1; 1, 0])
(44)
To get an intuition for HomH(π, ρ), we also need to look at the ﬁber represen-
tation ρ, which itself also has a decomposition into irreps and thus a type. In
fact, ρ would theoretically just be chosen by picking an arbitrary set of inte-
gers (m1, .., mn) as multiplicities for the irreps (n = 5 for D4), as well as some
basis A ∈RK′×K′. However, the choice of a basis is made obsolete later, when
nonlinearities and capsules are discussed. The number of output channels, i.e.
the size of the ﬁber Fx that ρ can act upon is also determined by the irreps:
K′ =
n
X
i=1
mi dim ρi.
(45)
For the sake of this example, let ρ be of type (2, 1, 1, 1, 1). Then, K′ =
P5
i=1 mi dim ρi = 7, thus ρ acts on seven-dimensional ﬁbers Fx ∈R7, for
instance as
ρ(r) = A−1block_diag([1], [1], [1], [−1], [−1], [0, −1; 1, 0])A,
(46)
i.e. a block diagonal matrix (after change of basis) with the corresponding
matrices from column “r” of table 1 on the diagonal. The ﬁrst channel now
transforms by A1, the second by A2, and so on.
As the number of output channels K′ equals the number of “distinct ﬁlters”
that are convolved with the input, a ﬁlter bank Ψ intertwining π0 and ρ must
consist of seven ﬁlter units of shape K × s × s, i.e. 3 × 3 in this case. Schur’s
Lemma (theorem 1) now determines which basis elements of F0 can be used
to construct each of the individual ﬁlters. According to the lemma, the in-
tertwiner space of two irreps HomH(ρi, ρj) is either zero, or one-dimensional
iﬀρi and ρj are isomorphic. It follows that each individual ﬁlter can only
be constructed from the basis elements in F0 that transform under the same
irrep as said ﬁlter’s output channel.
To ﬁnish the example, consider again the type of ρ. There are two A1-
channels in the ﬁber, i.e. two distinct ﬁlters that need to be A1-equivariant.
These ﬁlters can be constructed independently from one another, using the
three basis elements in F0 that span the three A1-subspaces, yielding six
parameters in total. There is one A2-channel, yet there are no basis elements
in F0 that transform according to A2, thus this ﬁlter is simply zero, adding
no additional dimensions. While the B1- and B2-ﬁlters are obtained in the
same way as for A1, each yielding one independent parameter, there also is a
copy of the two-dimensional irrep E in ρ. While this irrep therefore has two

28
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
channels, these do not transform independently from one another, but are
multiplied by two-dimensional matrices, which are given in the last row of
table 1. Thus, sets of two E2-basis ﬁlters in F0 (of which there also are two)
have to share one parameter, yielding two parameters in total. An illustration
of this construction is given by ﬁgure 12.
A1
A1
A2
B1
B2
E
E
m1 = 3
m2 = 0
m3 = 1
m4 = 1
m5 = 2
(F0, π0)
m′
1 = 2
m′
2 = 1
m′
3 = 1
m′
4 = 1
m′
5 = 1
Figure 12: The construction of an equivariant ﬁlter bank. The basis elements
connected by the dotted lines must share a parameter to preserve equivariance.
There are seven output channels.
The process demonstrated in this example can be generalized to intertwiner
spaces HomH(π, ρ) for arbitrary representations of respective types (m1, .., mn)
and (m′
1, .., m′
n), where π is the feature space representation that transforms
feature maps and ﬁlters and ρ is the ﬁber representation for the next layer.
As mentioned before, π might act on on the feature space (and thus on ﬁlters)
in a slightly diﬀerent way than π0 (35) used in this example. The reason for
this will be explained in the next section. We receive the following formula for
the dimension of of said intertwiner spaces, i.e. for the number of parameters
required by any given layer:
dim HomH(π, ρ) =
X
mim′
i.
(47)

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
29
4.4.5 Generating Steerable Feature Spaces
What is left to be shown is how H-steerability of individual ﬁbers F′
x leads
to steerability of the whole feature space F′ with respect to all of G. To
derive this, we use the induced representation of H on G and we show that
the transformation law that is imposed on an output space F′. By con-
volving a transformed signal π(g)f, f ∈F with an equivariant ﬁlter bank
Ψ ∈HomH(π, ρ) we obtain the formula for the induced representation. While
the following paragraphs again give the computations the explicit groups p4
and p4m, the arguments used can be made in complete analogy for any other
semidirect product G = N ⋊H.
Points x ∈Z2 can be interpreted either as a point (e.g. when looked at as a
pixel in the base space of feature maps), or as a translation. To make this
interpretation explicit, we denote x as ¯x when we interpret it as a translation.
Translation equivariant convolution of Ψ with f can then be deﬁned as
[f ⋆Ψ](x) = Ψ[π(¯x)−1f],
(48)
for translations ¯x ∈Z2, with π acting on F as described in (35).
We now utilize the semidirect product structure of G (deﬁnition 2), which
enables us to write any element g ∈G as a product g = th where t ∈Z2 is
a translation and h ∈H is an element from the stabilizer group, i.e. some
rotation from C4 or rotation-ﬂip from D4 for p4 or p4m, respectively. It is
useful to look at an explicit matrix representation of G. We can write any
element of G as
g = th =

I T
0 1
 
R 0
0 1

=

R T
0 1

.
(49)
Here, R is a matrix representation of h ∈H, for instance a 2 × 2 rotation or
roto-reﬂection matrix for p4 or p4m, and T is the translation vector represent-
ing t. With this form of representation, a translation ¯x ∈Z2 then amounts to
¯x =

I x
0 1

.
(50)
It is furthermore useful to make the diﬀerence between the action of G on
itself by group operation and the action of G on Z2 visible, thus we will use
gh for g, h ∈G for the former and g · x for g ∈G, x ∈Z2 for the latter.

30
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
Applying th to f via π before convolving with ψ then yields:
[Ψ ⋆[π(th)f]](x) = Ψπ(¯x−1)π(th)f
= Ψπ(¯x−1th)f
= Ψπ(hh−1¯x−1th)f
= Ψπ(h)π(h−1¯x−1th)f
= ρ(h)Ψπ(h−1t−1¯xh)f
= ρ(h)Ψπ(((th)−1 · x)
−1)f
= ρ(h)[Ψ ⋆f]((th)−1 · x).
(51)
The justiﬁcations for these equations are as follows: In the ﬁrst line, we use the
deﬁnition of convolution (48). In the second to fourth line, we use hh−1 = e,
thus multiplying by one and the fact that π is a group homomorphism, i.e.
π(gg′) = π(g)π(g′) ∀g, g′ ∈G. The equivariance constraint (40) is then used
in the ﬁfth line, and the argument of π is inverted. In line six we use the fact
that h−1t−1¯xh = ((th)−1 · x)
−1. This can be veriﬁed via the representation
matrices presented in (49). Finally, the deﬁnition of the convolution operation
is applied backwards.
We can now deﬁne π′ by
[π′(th)f](x) := ρ(h)[f((th)−1x)],
(52)
yielding Ψ ⋆π(g)f = π′(g)Ψ ⋆f, thus giving us the desired steerability of F′
with respect to all of G.
Comparing π (35) and π′ (52), one notices that they only diﬀer in the factor
ρ(r) which permutes the individual ﬁbers after they have been moved from x
to (th)−1x. This kind of action characterizes π′ as the aforementioned induced
representation of ρ (of H) on G, often also denoted as IndG
H(ρ). While there
exists extensive knowledge about this concept, for instance in [30] and [31], for
our purpose it suﬃces to know that induced representations transport ﬁbers
to new locations and then transform them via ρ, the representation induced
from π′
Furthermore, any representation of any subgroup of G can induce a rep-
resentation on G, allowing us to freely choose ﬁber representations when
constructing ﬁlter banks. The representation π0 from (35) without any factor
permuting the ﬁbers can also be seen as being induced from the trivial repre-
sentation, which acts as the identity matrix for all h ∈H.
It should also be noted that the content of section 4.4.4, which is using the
decomposition of the trivially induced representation π0, can also be applied

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
31
to induced representations π′ = IndG
H(ρ). When investigating the action of
such a representation π′ on basis ﬁlters to determine its trace, one just has to
include the factor of ρ, i.e. the ﬁber-permutation that is applied additionally.
Further layers can now be added to the network by choosing a new repre-
sentation ρ′ of H to act on the ﬁbers of the next output space and compute
HomH(π′, ρ′) for π′ restricted to H.
4.4.6 Commutation with Nonlinearities via Capsules
We have now seen how the convolutional layers of steerable CNNs are built
and how their equivariance to group transformations is achieved. In particular,
it was shown that only the basis independent type of the input and output
representations is relevant for the parameter count of a ﬁlterbank, i.e.
dim HomH(π, ρ) = dim HomH(π, A−1ρA) ∀A ∈GL(Rdim ρ).
However, when considering nonlinearities, the choice of the basis becomes
relevant, which we shall demonstrate with a small example:
Consider the classical ReLU function and let g = (12) ∈S2:
ρ(g) =

1 −1
0 1

and ρ′(g) = A−1ρ(g)A =

3
1
−4 −1

for A =

1 1
2 1

a change of basis. ρ(g), and thus ρ′(g) correspond to a representation of S2.
But, e.g. for x = (−2, 5)T and x′ = A−1x = (7, −9)T we have:
ReLU(ρ(g)(x)) = ReLU(

−7
5

) =

0
5

̸= ReLU(ρ′(g)(x′)) = ReLU(

12
−19

) =

12
0

.
Thus, diﬀerent bases can lead to diﬀerent results under non linear activation,
even though the underlying type of the representation is the same. To eﬃ-
ciently tackle this problem, the concept of capsules is introduced:
A ρ−capsule (RK, ρ, B) is deﬁned as a representation of the stabilizer group
(RK, ρ) with a ﬁxed basis B of RK. By doing this, the representation matrices
ρ(h) also become ﬁxed, which allows us us to realize them as matrices, which
will help in obtaining equivariance of nonlinearities, as will be explained in the
following. In practice, capsules are typically held relatively low-dimensional,
rarely exceeding the size of the stabilizer group, |H|. In the following a capsule
will often just be denoted by ρ, omitting the speciﬁed Basis B and simply
assuming that it is chosen in a way that yields a certain structure for the

32
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
representation matrices.
Just like a convolutional layer, a nonlinearity layer must be equivariant to the
group G, which is realized by guaranteeing ﬁber-wise equivariance ﬁrst and
then “inducing” feature space equivariance afterwards.
We deﬁne an element-wise nonlinearity ν : R →R, or a ﬁber-wise nonlinearity
ν : RK →RK′ to be admissible for an input representation ρ, iﬀthere exists
an output capsule ρ, such that
νρ(h) = ρ′(h)ν ∀h ∈H,
(53)
i.e. transforming input ﬁbers by ρ before applying ν is the same as trans-
forming the nonlinearity’s output by ρ′. We call ρ′ the post-activation capsule
corresponding to ρ and denote it by Actνρ.
Given an admissible nonlinearity ν and corresponding pre- and post activation
capsules ρ and ρ′ = Actνρ such that (53) holds, feature space equivariance to
the respective induced representation is derived as follows:
ν([IndG
Hρ](th)f)(x) = ν(ρ(r)f((th)−1x))
= ρ′(r)ν(f((th)−1x))
= ρ′(r)ν(f)((th)−1x)
= [IndG
Hρ′](th)ν(f)(x)
(54)
Instead of building a layer by choosing multiplicities of irreps for a ﬁber rep-
resentation, one now chooses multiplicities mi ≥0, i = 1, .., n corresponding
to a set of predeﬁned capsules ρ1, .., ρn. The chosen capsules are then con-
catenated into a ﬁber of dimension P mi dim ρi, which is then acted upon by
ρ = L miρi, i.e. the block diagonal representation with mi copies of ρi on the
diagonal. Due to this block diagonal structure, capsules are disentangled, i.e.
channels of one capsule do not mix with channels belonging to other capsules
during transformations.
When it comes to ﬁnding explicit pairs of capsules and corresponding admis-
sible nonlinearities, one needs not only to look at the irrep type of a capsule’s
underlying representation, but also at the individual form of the representa-
tion matrices ρ(g) which, as stated, diﬀers not only depending on the choice
of irreps, but also on the choice of basis for the individual representation
spaces. Below, we will name the most prominent choices of capsules. For a
more extensive list, the reader is referred to [8].
First, any capsule ρ which can be realized by permutation matrices will be
compatible with any element-wise nonlinearity. Element-wise means that
instead of acting on a whole feature vector f(x) = (f1(x), .., fK(x)), the

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
33
nonlinearity transforms each element fi(x), i = 1, .., K, individually. The
most prominent example for such a nonlinearity is the ReLU function (see
(19)). The most frequently used capsules that are realizable by permutation
matrices are regular capsules, i.e. feature vectors that transform according
to the regular representation from example 3. While regular capsules have
been shown to work very well in practice ([3],[4]), they have the drawback of
leading to relatively high dimensional feature spaces, as each capsule has to
span |H| channels.
A possible ﬁx for the high dimensionality of regular capsules is given by
quotient capsules, in which the feature vectors transform according to the
quotient representation (example 3) of H by some (normal) subgroup K.
Quotient capsules have the advantage of requiring |H|
|K| instead of |H| channels.
If K is normal, the features represented by such capsules become not just
equivariant, but invariant to the symmetries of K:
ρquot(k)ehK = ekhK = ekKh = eKh = ehK.
(55)
Hence, performance can be improved by reducing parameter cost and feature
size through the use of H/K quotient capsules if the K-invariant patterns
are prevalent in the input data. On the other hand, quotient capsules can
also severely harm performance if the patterns are not found in the data or
irrelevant to the learning task at hand. It should furthermore be noted, that
quotient representations can also be obtained from non-normal subgroups. In
that case, the features need not be necessarily invariant under K, but can
perform diﬀerently. An example for this, as well as some visual intuition for
quotient features in general, is given in appendix C of [8].
A second class of representation matrices are monomial matrices, which have
the same structure as permutation matrices, but also allow for entries of
minus one instead of just one. Given a representation that is fully realized
by monomial matrices, all concatenated nonlinearities will be admissible. A
concatenated nonlinearity is deﬁned as evaluating an element-wise nonlinear-
ity on an element x and also on −x. For instance, the concatenated ReLU
function is deﬁned as
CReLU(x) := (ReLU(x), ReLU(−x)).
(56)
Trivially, regular and quotient capsules will be compatible with concatenated
nonlinearities. Also, many irreps can be realized (through a suitable basis) by
monomial matrices, thus allowing for low dimensional irrep capsules.
The third class of examples is given by orthogonal matrices characterized
by the fact that they preserve the norm (length) |x| of vectors that they
act upon. Capsules of this kind will be compatible with norm nonlinearities,

34
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
which only act on the norm of any given feature vector (hence do not act
element-wise), but not on its orientation. A norm nonlinearity can generally
be written in the following form:
νnorm : RK →RK,
f(x) 7→η(|f(x)|) f(x)
|f(x)|
(57)
Here, η : R≥0 →R≥0 describes a non-linear function that is to act on the
feature vectors norms. A prominent example of this would be Norm-ReLUs,
with
η(|f(x)|) = ReLU(|f(x)| −b),
(58)
with b being a learned bias. Amongst others, Norm-ReLUs were used in [32].
The advantage of these nonlinearities is their broad compatibility, as any
representation of any ﬁnite group can be made orthogonal, by choosing an or-
thogonal change of basis. Further subclasses of norm nonlinearities, such as
gated and squashed nonlinearities are mentioned in [33] and [5], respectively.
4.4.7 A Remark on Pooling and Group Pooling in Steerable
CNNs
As far as the literature on steerable CNNs ([4],[5],[8]) is concerned, pooling
operations are, if at all, applied ﬁber- or capsule-wise. This means that,
instead of conventional pooling with stride, i.e. subsampling the feature map
on a subgroup of Z2, thereby reducing equivariance of the network to that
subgroup, each copy of a capsule located at each point x ∈Z2 is searched for
the maximal activation (in the case of max pooling), which is then set as the
output of the pooling operation. Thus, pooling operations of this nature in
steerable CNNs can be interpreted as nonlinearities, which were discussed in
the previous section, and hence also need to satisfy an equivaraince constraint
that is analogue to 53.
Let P : RK →R be a pooling operation such as max pooling or average
pooling, performed on a K-dimensional capsule ρ. For G-equivariance to be
maintained, we need the pooling operation to be H-equivariant, i.e.
Pρ(h) = ρ′(h)P ∀h ∈H.
(59)
The choices of compatible capsules ρ, ρ′ is quite limited here, as they must not
alter the numeric value of the feature vectors on which the pooling operation is
performed, or the result of the pooling operation. Therefore, any input capsule
ρ that is to commute with P has to be realized by permutation matrices, as
taking the maximum (or average) value of a vector with permuted entries still
yields the same result. Furthermore, ρ′ needs to be the trivial representation,
i.e. ρ′(h) = [1] ∀h ∈H as otherwise equivariance could again be broken, for

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
35
instance when the result is multiplied by [-1], as e.g. by the irrep A2 in table
1. The most common choices for ρ therefore are regular capsules, quotient
capsules, as well as irrep capsules that are realized by permutation matrices.
As an exception to the choice of ρ′ which was, to our knowledge, not yet
discussed in the literature, one can implement an equivalent of coset pooling
from 4.3.3. This will especially make sense taking into account that regular
steerable CNNs are equivalent to G-CNNs in section 4.4.9. Suppose a sub-
group K ⊆H is given, yielding a quotient space H/K. Setting the input
capsule as the regular representation of H and the output capsule as the
quotient representation of H/K, we can deﬁne quotient pooling as follows:
Pquot : R|H| →R|H/K|, Pquot(f(x)) =
M
hK∈H/K
max
h′∈hKf(xh′).
(60)
This means that for each of the outputs max
h′∈hNf(xh′), Pquot only looks at the
coordinates f(xh) of f(x) that correspond to the the elements of the respective
coset that is being pooled over. This process is repeated |H/K| times, i.e. for
each coset. The individual results are then added into a |H/K|-dimensional
vector that then transforms according to the quotient representation of |H/K|.
4.4.8 Reduction of Parameters and Implementation
By the use of steerable ﬁlter banks, the parameters of steerable CNNs are
utilized several times more eﬃciently than the parameters of regular con-
volutional networks. As was shown in section 4.4.4, an equivariant ﬁlter
bank Ψ intertwining representations π and ρ has a parameter cost of dim
HomH(π, ρ) = P mim′
i, depending on the irrep multiplicities mi and m′
i of π
and ρ, respectively. A non-equivariant ﬁlter bank of the same size, i.e. same
ﬁlter width s × s and same number of input/output channels K/K′ (which is
also determined by the dimensions of π and ρ), would instead have a parame-
ter cost of dim π · dim ρ = s2 · K · K′.
Thus, the parameter eﬃciency of a steerable ﬁlter bank in comparison to a
conventional ﬁlter bank is expressed as follows:
µ =
dim π · dim ρ
dim HomH(π, ρ).
(61)
For eﬀective network architectures, this value usually lies around |H|, i.e. the
size of the stabilizer group. For instance, we have µ = 8 for H = D4, meaning
that a p4m-steerable CNN’s convolutional layer uses its parameters eight
times more eﬃciently than a layer of the same size in a conventional CNN.
Eﬃciency is further increased by the fact that the representations π and ρ
in each convolutional layer have a block-diagonal structure, i.e. consisting of

36
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
direct sums of distinct, disentangled and lower-dimensional capsules. Because
of this, an intertwiner Ψ between said representations will also have a certain
block structure:
For this, let π = π1 ⊕... ⊕πp and ρ = ρ1 ⊕... ⊕ρr. An intertwiner then is a
matrix Ψ of shape K′ × Ks2, with K′ = Pr
i= dim ρi and Ks2 = Pp
i=1 dim πi,
and has the following block structure:


h11 ∈HomH(π1, ρ1) · · · hp1 ∈HomH(πp, ρ1)
...
...
...
h1r ∈HomH(π1, ρr) · · · hpr ∈HomH(πp, ρr)


(62)
Here, each subblock hij ∈HomH(πi, ρj) is itself an intertwiner between the
capsules πi and ρj. In many implementations, the same capsule is used sev-
eral, or even all the times, allowing to compute many or all of the hij using
the same intertwiner basis, thus drastically reducing computational cost.
Ordering the individual capsules such that equivalent capsules are adjacent to
each other then leads to superblocks Hij of shape mi dim πi × mj dim ρj, with
mi, nj being the respective multiplicities of the two capsules of Hij. The su-
perblock itself is then ﬁlled with the subblocks hij of shape dim πi × dim ρj.
In practice, when a list of capsules ρi and corresponding lists of post-activation
capsules Actνρi (depending on the nonlinearity) are given, the induced rep-
resentations πi = IndG
HActνρi, as well as the bases for the intertwiner spaces
HomH(πi, ρj) for all pairs i, j are computed oﬄine. The bases are stored as
matrices ψij of shape dim πi · dim ρj × dim HomH(πi, ρj). After that, a list
of input multiplicities mi and output multiplicities nj provided by the user
is put into a parameter matrix Φi,j of shape dim HomH(πi, ρj) × minj and
the aforementioned superblocks Hij are obtained by matrix multiplication of
ψijΦi,j. After all superblocks are obtained, Ψ is reshaped to K′ × K × s × s
and can then be convolved with the input.
4.4.9 On the Equivalency of G-CNNs and Regular Steerable
CNNs
It was mentioned before that steerable CNNs are a direct generalizations of G-
CNNs from section 4.3. To be precise, this means that G-CNNs are equivalent
to steerable CNNs with regular capsules. To see this, ﬁrst consider the feature
maps of the respective architectures:
fG : G →RKG,
fsteer : Z2 →RKs.
(63)
In G-CNNs, all feature maps except the input image are functions on a group
G, which in the cases that were considered here has Z2 as a normal subgroup.
Equivariance is achieved by modifying the domain of the convolution opera-
tion, leading to G-convolution (23) as described in section 4.3.2. On the other

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
37
hand, the feature maps of steerable CNNs keep the domain of Z2 in all layers
and achieve equivariance by restricting the space of ﬁlter banks, as explained
in detail in the sections 4.4.2 to 4.4.5.
To understand the equivalence, we ﬁrst look at how fG transforms under
actions of G. For this, we again use the example of a p4-feature map (ﬁgure
3). A generalization to other groups is easily done. The group p4 consists of
unique tuples x = (t, r) with t ∈Z2 and r ∈C4 = {e, r, r2, r3}. We can thus
interpret a p4-feature map as a map on Z2, which returns four “rotational
coordinates” at each point t ∈Z2, corresponding to the elements e, r, r2, r3, as
is depicted in ﬁgure 13, which gives a visualization of this slightly diﬀerent,
but equivalent interpretation of a p4-feature map. When being acted upon by
another element x′ = (t′, r′) ∈p4, the Z2-pixel coordinate t of x and its rota-
tional outputs are moved to x′−1t. Simultaneously, the rotational coordinates
are permuted by r′.
e
r2
r
r3
e
r2
r
r3
Figure 13: The transformation of a single pixel x ∈Z2 by the rotation r ∈C4
(top), and the permutation of that pixel’s four rotational outputs (bottom).
In steerable CNNs, all feature maps and ﬁlters are functions on Z2. The equiv-
alent of the rotational outputs of G-CNNs is realized by the channels of the
regular representation of C4, which has a dimensionality of |C4| = 4, thus
consisting of one channel per element of C4. As the transformation law of
the regular representation on these four channels is deﬁned by the group’s
action on itself by composition, they transform in exactly the same way as
the rotational outputs of a G-CNN. The induced representation Indp4
C4ρreg of
this regular representation lastly ensures that the respective pixel coordinates
t ∈Z2 transform in the same way in both cases, as can be checked by compar-
ison of the equations (22) and (24) with (35) and (52). Hence, we receive the
desired equivalence of G-CNNs and regular steerable CNNs. As stated, these
arguments can be generalized to any semidirect product group G′ = N ⋊H
instead of Z2 ⋊C4, as the regular representation behaves in the same way for

38
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
any ﬁnite stabilizer group H. In any case, one channel of a G-feature map in
a layer of a G-CNN equates to one regular capsule, and thus to |H| channels
in the equivalent regular steerable CNN.
5 Steerable CNNs on Zn ⋊Sn
In this section, possible applications of the theory of equivariant networks
to the symmetric group Sn will be explored. As G-CNNs are equivalent to
a special case of steerable CNNs, this chapter will stay in the more general
language of the latter.
As in example 2, one can build semidirect product groups Zn ⋊Sn, with the
most practical use cases likely being n = 2, for instance for 2D-images and
n = 3 for volumetric data, as for instance in [5]. One use case is given by
interpretation of street scenes by one neural network based on the input of
two redundant camera sensors that are installed at nearby positions. The
signal of these sensors can be considered to be equivalent, but not necessarily
equal, as one camera sensor could be disturbed by dirt, but not the other.
These networks will be very similar to the ones discussed before, with the
diﬀerence that Sn is used as the stabilizer group instead of C4 or D4.
5.1 Steerable Feature Spaces and Filter Banks for Zn ⋊Sn
Zn ⋊Sn (see example 2) acts on functions on Zn in a similar way to the
product groups p4 and p4m by compositions of translations and coordinate
permutations. Hence, the theory of steerable CNNs from section 4.4 can be
applied for Zn ⋊Sn in near complete analogy. In this section, we will never-
theless summarize the process of obtaining steerable feature spaces and ﬁlter
banks. We also highlight the key diﬀerences, which lie in representation the-
ory, such as in basis ﬁlters for intertwiner spaces, as these depend on the irreps
of the underlying group. When discussing concrete examples, we will conﬁne
to S2 and S3, for visualization purposes. However, the general procedure of
constructing steerable CNNs on Zn ⋊Sn for any n ∈N becomes apparent.
Feature Spaces
We again deal with feature spaces Fl of functions f : Zn →RKl with Kl
output channels in each layer l, which transform by a representation πl
analogously to (35) for l = 0 and (52) in higher layers:
[π0(t, σ)f](x) = f((tσ)−1x) = f(σ−1(x −t)), t ∈Zn, σ ∈Sn
(64)
[πl+1(t, σ)f](x) = ρl(σ)[f((tσ)−1x)], t ∈Zn, σ ∈Sn.
(65)
In (65), ρl is the ﬁber representation from the previous layer from which
πl+1 = IndZn⋊Sn
Sn
ρl is induced, and with respect to which ﬁlter banks Ψ ∈

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
39
Irrep
Basis Filters
e
(12)
id
[1]
[1]
sgn
[1]
[−1]
Table 2: The irreducible decomposition of (FS2
0 , π0) for S2.
HomSn(πl, ρl) of layer l must be equivariant:
ρl(σ)Ψ = Ψπl(σ) ∀σ ∈Sn.
(66)
Equivariant Filter Banks
The symmetric group of 2 elements has two distinct irreps: The trivial repre-
sentation, id, and the sign representation sgn, both of them have dimension
one. By restricting π0 from (64) to S2 and letting it act on 3×3 ﬁlters with one
channel, we once again receive a nine-dimensional representation (FS2
0 , π0).
One now obtains the irrep decomposition of π0 by applying the character
formula for χid and χsgn:
mπ0(id) =
1
|S2|
X
σ∈S2
χπ0(σ)χid(σ) = 1
2(χπ0(e)χid(e) + χπ0((12))χid((12))) = 6.
(67)
While χid(e) and χid((12)) can be looked up from table 2, it is useful for χπ0
to consider the canonical basis vectors of (FS2
0 , π0) in ﬁgure 8 and how π0(e)
and π0((12)) transform them. The representation matrix for the identity
element is always the identity matrix for any representation, hence we receive
χπ0(e) = 9. On the other hand, π0((12)) swaps the coordinates of each pixel
in each basis element, thus only leaving the third, ﬁfth, and seventh ﬁlter
invariant, leading to χπ0((12)) = 3.
Since there is only one other possible irrep, we immediately get mπ0(sgn) = 3.
With this, we have the full irreducible decomposition of (FS2
0 , π0), which is
depicted with an exemplary set of basis ﬁlters in table 2.
For S3 and Z3, we have one extra dimension for the base of feature spaces and
ﬁlters, hence leading to an increase in dimensionality of the space of ﬁlters
when looking at the S3-equivalent of (FS2
0 , π0). Instead of 3 × 3 ﬁlters, we
now have 3 × 3 × 3 ﬁlters, leading to a representation (FS3
0 , π0) of degree 27.
The canonical basis for the space FS3
0
is depicted in ﬁgure 14.

40
Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
We next determine the irreducible decomposition of π0 in FS3
0 . While the
characters of the three irreducible representations of S3 are given in table 3,
it might look tedious at ﬁrst to determine the character of π0. However, this
becomes quite easy if one again looks at which basis elements from CS3 (ﬁgure
14) are left invariant by each group element of S3. As always, π0(e) leaves
every element invariant, thus yielding χπ0(e) = 27. For the other elements,
it is helpful to identify each basis vector with the coordinates of its non-zero
entry (i.e. the black cube in each ﬁlter), e.g. the ﬁrst vector with (−1, 1, 1),the
second with (0, 1, 1) and the fourth with (−1, 1, 0).
Any of the transpositions, i.e. 2-cycles (12), (23), (13) ∈S3 ﬁx all vectors
of which the two non-zero coordinates that are permuted are equal, e.g.
{(x1, x1, x2) | x1, x2 ∈{−1, 0, 1}} for (12). Thus, each transposition ﬁxes
9 elements, so we have χπ0((12) = χπ0((23) = χπ0((13) = 9. The same
argument can be used for the two 3-cycles. Each of them ﬁxes the same 3
vectors of which all three non-zero coordinates are equal, hence we have
χπ0((123)) = χπ0((132)) = 3.
Figure 14: Some canonical basis elements of CS3 of (FS3
0 , π0). As always,
entries of one are black and entries of zero are grey.
Plugging these results into the character formula now yields
mπ0(id) =
1
|S3|
X
σ∈S3
χπ0(σ)χid(σ) = 1
6(27 + 3 · 9 + 2 · 3) = 10,
mπ0(sgn) =
1
|S3|
X
σ∈S3
χπ0(σ)χsgn(σ) = 1
6(27 + 3 · (9 · (−1)) + 2 · 3) = 1,
mπ0(Vs) =
1
|S3|
X
σ∈S3
χπ0(σ)χVs(σ) = 1
6(27 · 2 + 3 · (9 · 0) + 2 · (3 · (−1))) = 8.
(68)
Thus, the type (i.e. the multiplicities of irreps) of π0 is (10, 1, 8) for the
trivial representation id, the sign representation sgn and the two-dimensional
standard representation Vs, respectively. The basis of this irreducible decom-
position is depicted in ﬁgure 15. As one can verify, these ﬁlters transform
under π0(σ) for σ ∈S3 by multiplication with the representation matrices for
the respective group element, which are given in table 3.

Equivariant and Steerable Neural Networks
41
id
sgn
Vs
Figure 15: The basis vectors for the irrep decomposition of (FS3
0 , π0). The
reader may verify that these vectors transform under π0 by the respective
matrices given in table 3. Again, grey and transparent entries count as zeros,
black entries as one and white entries as minus one.
Irrep
e
(12)
(13)
(23)
(123)
(132)
id
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
sgn
[1]
[−1]
[−1]
[−1]
[1]
[1]
Vs
"
1 0
0 1
#
"
1
0
−1 −1
#
"
−1
1
0
−1
#
"
0 1
1 0
#
"
−1 1
−1 0
#
"
0
1
−1 −1
#
Table 3: The representation matrices of π0 for the basis ﬁlters of the irrep
decomposition of (FS3
0 , π0).
Equivariant ﬁlter banks and steerable feature spaces are now obtained in
analogy to the sections 4.4.4 and 4.4.5. Given some list of output multiplicities
(mid, msgn, mVs) (or just (mid, msgn) for S2) of some ﬁber representation ρ,
the ﬁlter bank Ψ ∈HomH(π0, ρ) is constructed by linearly combining the irrep
basis ﬁlters from ﬁgure 15 for S3 or from table 2 for S2 in the same way as is
depicted (for p4m) in ﬁgure 12, i.e. by only combining ﬁlters that correspond
to the irrep that each of the respective output channels is transformed by.
5.2 Capsules, Nonlinearities and Pooling for Zn ⋊Sn
As was explained in the sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7, certain requirements have to
be fulﬁlled for a layer (realized by a concatenation of capsules as before) to
commute with ﬁber-wise nonlinearities and pooling. A layer is thus not built
by choosing multiplicities for the irreps directly, but by choosing copies of

42
