Detection of extragalactic Ultra-Compact Dwarfs and Globular Clusters using Explainable
AI techniques
Mohammad Mohammadia,1,∗, Jarvin Mutatiinaa,1, Teymoor Saifollahib,1, Kerstin Buntea
Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
aBernoulli Institute for Mathematics, Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
bKapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, the Netherlands
Abstract
Compact stellar systems such as Ultra-compact dwarfs (UCDs) and Globular Clusters (GCs) around galaxies are known to be
the tracers of the merger events that have been forming these galaxies. Therefore, identifying such systems allows to study galaxies
mass assembly, formation and evolution. However, in the lack of spectroscopic information detecting UCDs/GCs using imaging
data is very uncertain. Here, we aim to train a machine learning model to separate these objects from the foreground stars and
background galaxies using the multi-wavelength imaging data of the Fornax galaxy cluster in 6 ﬁlters, namely u, g, r, i, J and
Ks. The classes of objects are highly imbalanced which is problematic for many automatic classiﬁcation techniques. Hence,
we employ Synthetic Minority Over-sampling to handle the imbalance of the training data. Then, we compare two classiﬁers,
namely Localized Generalized Matrix Learning Vector Quantization (LGMLVQ) and Random Forest (RF). Both methods are able
to identify UCDs/GCs with a precision and a recall of > 93% and provide relevances that reﬂect the importance of each feature
dimension for the classiﬁcation. Both methods detect angular sizes as important markers for this classiﬁcation problem. While it is
astronomical expectation that color indices of u−i and i−Ks are the most important colors, our analysis shows that colors such as g−r
are more informative, potentially because of higher signal-to-noise ratio. Besides the excellent performance the LGMLVQ method
allows further interpretability by providing the feature importance for each individual class, class-wise representative samples and
the possibility for non-linear visualization of the data as demonstrated in this contribution. We conclude that employing machine
learning techniques to identify UCDs/GCs can lead to promising results. Especially transparent methods allow further investigation
and analysis of importance of the measurements for the detection problem and provide tools for non-linear visualization of the data.
Keywords: galaxies: clusters: individual (Fornax), galaxies: star clusters, techniques: photometric, Machine Learning,
explainable AI, ensemble learning
1. Introduction
Based on the current theories of galaxy formation and evolu-
tion (Mo, van den Bosch and White, 2010), galaxies are formed
hierarchically from the merger of low-mass galaxies that were
formed earlier. In this picture, the dense stellar structures such
as Ultra-Compact Dwarf (UCD) galaxies and Globular Clusters
(GCs), which are mostly found around galaxies and the core
of galaxy clusters, are known to be the tracers of such merg-
ing events (Beasley, 2020). However, extragalactic UCDs and
GCs around other galaxies than the Milky Way look like stars
(point-sources), due to their distance and current limitations of
observational equipment. Therefore identifying them through
imaging is challenging (Jord´an et al., 2009). To ﬁnd these ob-
jects, it is necessary to measure their distances, which is only
possible using spectroscopy and measuring their radial veloc-
ity. The Hubble-Lemaˆıtre Law (Hubble, 1929; Lemaˆıtre, 1931)
∗Corresponding author

URL: www.cs.rug.nl/~kbunte (Kerstin Bunte)
1These authors contributed equally.
says that more distant galaxies move faster away from us and
thus astronomers measure the distance of galaxies by measuring
their radial velocity. The latter can be measured using Doppler
shifts of the absorption lines in the spectroscopic observations.
Spectroscopy of astronomical objects, however, needs longer
exposure times than imaging. In other words, spectroscopy for
all the star-like objects (point-sources) is unfortunately not fea-
sible in practice (Voggel et al., 2020).
The recent advances in astronomical instrumentation and ob-
servations, without doubt, have provided us with a large amount
of data to explore. Traditionally, the possible UCDs/GCs candi-
dates are identiﬁed by multi-wavelength observations in a few
optical ﬁlters (Cantiello et al., 2018). Once the candidates are
found follow-up spectroscopy for selected nominees is carried
out to measure the radial velocity and therefore the distance
to conﬁrm the identity of the objects (Pota et al., 2018). This
implies that a more accurate UCD/GC selection makes the ob-
servation time shorter. Recently, Mu˜noz et al., 2014 has shown
that a combination of optical/near infrared ﬁlters improves the
quality of identifying UCDs/GCs. However, this approach was
not used until very recently, mostly because deep observations
Preprint submitted to Astronomy and Computing
January 10, 2022
arXiv:2201.01604v3  [astro-ph.GA]  7 Jan 2022

in the near-infrared are not as easy as the optical. In the case of
Fornax galaxy cluster, the second closest galaxy cluster to us,
recent observations of optical and near-infrared have been avail-
able, which makes it possible to identify UCDs/GCs within the
galaxy cluster. The optical part of the data has been used earlier
to identify GCs in the cluster using various techniques such as
Bayesian Mixture Models, Growing Neural Gas model and K-
nearest neighbours (D’Abrusco et al., 2016; Prole et al., 2019;
Angora et al., 2019; Cantiello et al., 2020; Saifollahi et al.,
2021).
Due to the sheer amount of astronomical data, automated
tools for analysis are highly desirable.
Therefore, machine
learning techniques get more and more attention among as-
tronomers recently, and they have been popularly explored for
astronomical applications. The Random Forest (RF) has been
used to build a classiﬁer for quasar identiﬁcation (Carrasco
et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2009) and the Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM) has been employed to estimate the redshift (Jones
and Singal, 2017). Other techniques used are k-nearest neigh-
bor classiﬁer for active galactic nuclei (AGN) detection (Li
et al., 2008), Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) for GC
detection (Mohammadi et al., 2019), Multi Layer Perceptron
(MLP) for estimating star formation rate (Delli Veneri et al.,
2019), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) for identiﬁcation
of galaxy mergers (Nevin et al., 2019), and Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANN) for galaxy morphological classiﬁcation and
AGN detection (Ball et al., 2004; Barchi et al., 2020; Xiao et al.,
2020). Thus, a pletora of machine learning methods have been
successfully applied in varying astronomical applications signi-
fying a growing interest and mutually beneﬁcial synergy.
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) generally includes
techniques which provide output that can be interpreted by a
human.
Two examples of XAI techniques for classiﬁcation
are Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) and Random Forest
(RF) (Breiman, 2001). The latter bags an ensemble of decision
trees (DTs) for classiﬁcation. The trees within, are constructed
from bootstrap examples that are sampled independently with
replacement and random feature selection, following a common
distribution while growing to maximum depth with no pruning
until all leaves are pure. The label for a given input is pre-
dicted according to the most popular predicted label among all
trees. The stochastic ensemble strategy is robust to outliers and
improves the performance, because of the law of large num-
bers from combination of rather low performing/weak DT clas-
siﬁers (Breiman, 2001). LVQ comprises a well-known fam-
ily of prototype-based classiﬁers that can eﬃciently distinguish
potentially high dimensional multi-class problems. One of the
main advantages of LVQ classiﬁers is the interpretability of the
adaptive parameters. The learned prototypes, for example, can
be investigated as typical representatives of the classes. While
the original formulations of the LVQ family, such as General-
ized learning Vector Quantization (GLVQ) (Sato and Yamada,
1995) use the Euclidean distance, more complex extensions,
such as Generalized Matrix LVQ (GMLVQ) and the localized
version LGMLVQ (Schneider et al., 2009b,a) employ adaptive
distance metrics. The latter algorithms also allow further in-
sights by visualization of the decision boundaries after training
(Bunte et al., 2012; Bunte, 2011).
In this contribution, we use an ensemble of LGMLVQ and
RF to classify three astronomical structures, namely foreground
stars, UCDs/GCs and background galaxies, based on their
optical (u, g, r, i) and near-infrared (J, Ks) measurements
of the Fornax Deep Survey, VISTA Hemisphere Survey and
ESO/VISTA archive. The LVQ and RF methods construct non-
linear decision boundaries and the former allows to evaluate the
importance of features for each class individually. One major
issue often faced in astronomical problems is the imbalance of
the classes. The total number of known UCDs and GCs in the
Fornax cluster identiﬁed in the data is just over 500, whereas
the majority class contains about 5 times more instances. To
tackle this challenge we apply over-sampling techniques, such
as Synthetic Minority Oversampling (SMOTE) (Chawla et al.,
2002) and Borderline SMOTE (Han et al., 2005). In contrast to
previous works we have both optical and near-infrared ﬁlters in
the dataset. We use an ensemble of LGMLVQ and RF to de-
tect the classes of objects in large amounts of high dimensional
astronomical data, compare the performances and analyse the
results, by detailing important features and visualization.
The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we describe
the dataset followed by the explanation of classiﬁers in section
3. Afterwards, in section 4 we describe the experiments and
discuss the results. Finally we conclude in section 5 and provide
inspirations for future work.
2. Astronomical Data and Preprocessing
The data used in this research is extracted from multi-
wavelength wide astronomical surveys obtained from a com-
bination of 6 ﬁlters, i.e optical ﬁlters (u, g ,r and i) and near-
infrared ﬁlters (J and Ks). The optical u, g, r, i data was ob-
tained from Fornax Deep Survey (FDS) using the ESO VLT sur-
vey telescope (VST), J from VISTA Hemisphere Survey (VHS,
McMahon et al., 2013) using the VISTA telescope and Ks from
the ESO/VISTA archival data. The imaging data in u, g, r, i,
J, Ks has 5σ limiting magnitude (point-source detection with
signal to noise ratio S/N = 5) about 24.1, 25.4, 24.9 and 24.0,
20.7, 18.4 mag respectively. The limiting magnitudes in op-
tical (ugri) and near-infrared (JKs) are expressed in AB and
Vega magnitude systems. The data set provides photometric in-
formation in the direction of the Fornax galaxy cluster and is
described in detail in Saifollahi et al. (2021).
Here we use the catalogue of the spectroscopically conﬁrmed
objects referred to as KNOWN catalogue in Saifollahi et al.
(2021), that consists of sources with existing radial velocity
value in the literature. After excluding larger objects likely to
be galaxies in the Fornax cluster or slightly more distant and re-
moving UCDs/GCs that are closer than 60 arcsec to the bright-
est Fornax cluster galaxies, mainly NGC1399 (to avoid larger
uncertainties in colours and magnitudes), any observed object
in the dataset belong to one of the following 3 classes:
class 1: consists of 2826 background galaxies further away
than the galaxies in the Fornax cluster,
class 2: denotes the class of interest consisting of 512 UCDs
and GCs, and
2

class 3: contains 4399 nearby foreground stars located in our
own galaxy, the Milky Way.
In the absence of spectroscopic data, these classes are diﬃcult
to distinguish for two main reasons: (1) the UCD and GC (class
2) observations are faint and ambiguous as they are engulfed
between the two other classes, and (2) there is only a small
number of conﬁrmed examples of them.
The labelled data consists of 23 features. The coordinates of
the objects in the sky are given in right ascension (RA) and dec-
lination (DEC) as a degree of point of observation from earth
and illustrated in Fig. 1(c).
Features FWHM∗g, FWHM∗r,
FWHM∗i, FWHM∗u, FWHM∗j and FWHM∗k, also known
as the Full width half maximum, are the proxies for the angular
sizes of the objects as seen from the corresponding ﬁlters. Fol-
lowed by u −g, u −r, u −i, u −J, u −Ks, g −r, g −i, g −J,
g −Ks, r −i, r −J, r −Ks, i −J, i −Ks and J −Ks, which
are colour indices indicating the emission of the astronomical
object in logarithmic scale, known as magnitude and correlated
to physical properties like age and metallicity. The FWHM∗
parameter constitutes an alternative way to estimate the com-
pactness of sources and consequently it is similar to the other
measures, such as the concentration index. The data used in our
analysis consists of 7737 complete observations in total.
Figure 1(b) shows the Eigenvalue proﬁle of the data obtained
using the unsupervised Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
The two major Eigenvalues explain 88% of the data’s variance
and the corresponding two-dimensional projection is depicted
in panel (a). The large areas of overlap and imbalance of the
classes is clearly visible. Especially the latter states a problem
for most classiﬁcation techniques and thus re-sampling tech-
niques, such as Synthetic Minority Over-sampling (SMOTE)
(Chawla et al., 2002) and Borderline-SMOTE (Han et al.,
2005), are investigated as preprocessing steps.
SMOTE in-
creases the population of the minority classes by generating
synthetic samples as weighted convex combination between
random samples and its nearest neighbours. Instead of choosing
random samples Borderline-SMOTE speciﬁcally takes points
near the boundaries between the classes which are more likely
to be misclassiﬁed. In this contribution we investigate and com-
pare both methods as preprocessing to balance the classes.
3. Methods
In this section, we introduce the state-of-the-art methodol-
ogy used, with focus on localized adaptive distance metrics in
Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ), and corresponding inter-
pretability. Moreover, we present a comparison between Ran-
dom Forest (RF) (which is an ensemble of Decision Trees) and
an ensemble of the Learning Vector Quantization models.
3.1. Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ)
We assume {(ξi, yi)}n
i=1 denote the training set, where ξi ∈RN
and yi ∈{1, · · · ,C} represent i-th data point and its class la-
bel, respectively. An LVQ classiﬁer models the distribution of
classes via a set of labelled prototypes {(ωj, c(ω j))}m
j=1, where
c(ω j) is the label of the respective prototype. These prototypes
tessellate the data space into smaller regions, called Voronoi
cells, enclosing data points for which the respective prototype
is closer than any other. Classiﬁcation follows a nearest pro-
totype scheme, meaning any data point (including new ones) is
assigned the class label of the nearest prototype. To ﬁnd proto-
type positions that minimize the classiﬁcation error E, General-
ized learning Vector Quantization (GLVQ) (Sato and Yamada,
1995) introduced the following cost function, aiming at large
margin optimization for better generalization:
E =
n
X
i=1
Φ(µi)
with
µi = d(ξi, ωJ) −d(ξi, ωK)
d(ξi, ωJ) + d(ξi, ωK) ,
(1)
with Φ being a monotonically increasing function. We used
the identity Φ(x) = x throughout this contribution. Further-
more, d(ξi, ωJ) denotes the distance of the data point ξi from the
closest prototype with the same label yi = c(ωJ) and d(ξi, ωK)
the distance to the closest prototype with a diﬀerent class label
yi , c(ωK). The value of µi ∈[−1, 1] can be understood as a
measure of conﬁdence for the classiﬁcation of sample ξi. The
closer µi is to -1, the smaller the distance to the closest proto-
type with the same label compared to the distance to the closest
prototype with a diﬀerent label, i.e. d(ξi, ωJ) ≪d(ξi, ωK), the
more certain the classiﬁcation of ξi. More formally, one can
compute the probability of a sample ξi to belong to class j,
based on the distances to the prototypes, using the softmax:
P( j|ξi) =
exp (−d(ξi, ω j))
PC
k=1 exp (−d(ξi, ωk))
.
(2)
The cost function is non-convex and typically gradient tech-
niques, such as stochastic gradient descent (Schneider et al.,
2009a; Bunte, 2011), are utilized to minimize the costs Eq. (1).
From the cost function Eq. (1) it is clear that the the distance
measure d plays a major role for the performance of LVQ clas-
siﬁers. While the Euclidean distance is a common choice all di-
mensions contribute equally in it, which has drawbacks in cap-
turing underlying data semantics in noisy high-dimensional and
heterogeneous data spaces (Schneider et al., 2009a). As such it
is not capable to reﬂect if features diﬀer in importance for the
classiﬁcation task at hand. Therefore, Hammer and Villmann
(2002) proposed to incorporate a weighting factor for each fea-
ture dimension that is adapted during training:
dΛ(ξi, ωj) = (ξi −ω j)⊤Λ(ξi −ω j) ,
(3)
where the weight matrix Λ, also referred to as relevance matrix,
is a diagonal matrix with 0 in the oﬀ-diagonals and λi on the di-
agonal with P
i λi = 1. These relevance weights indicate the
discriminative contribution of each feature dimensions, which
could facilitate decreasing inﬂuence or pruning of redundant,
noisy or ambiguous feature dimensions. This concept can be
further extended to more complicated metric tensors with adap-
tive oﬀ-diagonal elements, namely Generalized Matrix LVQ
(GMLVQ) (Schneider et al., 2009b,a), Limited Rank Matrix
LVQ (LiRaM LVQ) (Bunte et al., 2012; Bunte, 2011) and local-
ized versions with prototype-wise or class-wise matrices called
Localized GMLVQ (LGMLVQ) (Schneider et al., 2009b). All
3

0
5
10
15
20
0
5
-10
-5
0
5
10
15 a) PCA projection 
background galaxies
UCDs/GCs
foreground stars
b) Eigenvalue Profile 
0
5
10
15
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
52
54
56
58
52
54
56
58
RA [deg]
-38
-37
-36
-35
-34
-33
-32
DEC [deg]
c) Object positions in the sky 
Figure 1:
The position of the objects in the sky in right ascension (RA) and declination (DEC) (panel c). PCA-projection of the data colouring the background
galaxies, UCDs/GCs and foreground stars, and its corresponding Eigenvalue proﬁle (panel a and b), respectively.
algorithms are made publicly available in Matlab and can be
found at https://github.com/kbunte/LVQ_toolbox.
The overlapping class regions as shown in the PCA projec-
tion Figure 1(a) intuitively suggest non-linear class boundaries
and hence the localized adaptive metrics are more suitable and
therefore the focus for this paper. Local metric tensors allow to
learn localized dissimilarities with respect to the speciﬁc class
prototypes using a local transformation matrix Ωj thus deﬁn-
ing the non-linear decision boundaries. The localized distance
metric is deﬁned as:
dΛj(ξi, ω j) = (ξi −ω j)⊤Λj(ξi −ωj) ,
(4)
where Λj = Ωj⊤Ωj using the adaptive matrix Ωj ∈RM×N with
M ≤N to guarantee that Λj is positive semi-deﬁnite. The cost
function therefore reads as follows:
ELGMLVQ =
n
X
i=1
Φ(µi
local)
where
µi
local = dΛJ −dΛK
dΛJ + dΛK
(5)
where dΛJ and dΛK are the distances of the point ξi from the
closest correct and incorrect prototypes respectively. The up-
date rules are described in detail in Schneider et al. (2009a);
Bunte (2011). Besides allowing non-linear decision boundaries
and therefore learning of more complex classiﬁcation problems,
the localized matrices furthermore enable the investigation of
localized or class-wise relevances, marked on each diagonal of
Λj, identifying features that are important for the classiﬁcation
of each class respectively (Schneider et al., 2009b).
3.2. Ensemble methods
With increasing complexity, classiﬁers get more powerful
showing impressive performance in practice. However, at the
same time they often show overﬁtting eﬀects in which the per-
formance on training data is near perfect but it decreases fac-
ing new data samples not seen before. This decreased general-
ization performance is often tackled using ensemble methods,
which combine several classiﬁers to assign a class label to a new
data instance to overcome the limitations of a single model. In
order to see the eﬀect of ensemble learning and to facilitate a
fair comparison with RF we explore an ensemble of LGMLVQ
models. For exact comparison with RF the ensemble of LGM-
LVQ models is constructed from the same training bootstrap
samples used in each decision tree in the random forest. This
will result in as many LGMLVQ models as the number of deci-
sion trees for each cross validation fold. The results are then ag-
gregated through majority voting (Ranawana and Palade, 2006).
3.3. Interpretability
For many applications it is crucial for machine learning mod-
els to be interpretable, such that the domain expert is able to
examine the signiﬁcance of the resulting trained model and its
suitability for classiﬁcation tasks. Intrinsic model interpretabil-
ity can be understood as how understandable the internals of
a model and its output are to users (Gilpin et al., 2018). It
is furthermore suggestively explained by Backhaus and Seif-
fert (Backhaus and Seiﬀert, 2014) through a three-fold criteria
of the model’s 1) feature selection capability, 2) ability to de-
ﬁne class representatives, such as prototypes and 3) encoding
of classiﬁcation boundary information. Interpretability for the
random forest is achieved through random permutation of a fea-
ture’s observations (Breiman, 2001; Strobl et al., 2007) for the
out of bag samples and estimating the corresponding decision
tree’s accuracy with the permuted features. Here, more dis-
criminative features are easily identiﬁed, since they have sig-
niﬁcant eﬀect on the classiﬁcation error. The out of bag pre-
dictor importance uncovers the individual impact of the fea-
tures and the information could similarly be used for feature
selection and understanding the random forest’s classiﬁcation.
On the other hand, the adaptive LVQ methods satisfy all three
criteria by: 1) Feature selection by means of the diagonal of
the metric tensors, Λ from GMLVQ and the local Λj in LGM-
LVQ, that represents individual feature contribution that could
be used as feature pruning criteria. 2) Prototype feature val-
ues used to classify novel observations are learned during the
4

model training, which subsequently become typical representa-
tives of their corresponding classes. 3) The decision boundaries
for classiﬁcation can be extracted and visualised, for example
by linear projection of the data samples and the resulting class
prototypes using Ωfrom GMLVQ. Nonlinear visualizations us-
ing the localized variants LiRaMLVQ and LGMLVQ are also
possible and the latter is outlined in the following.
3.4. Nonlinear visualization with charting
Visualization can be useful to get a holistic view of the data
and identify diﬃcult instances. From the deﬁnition of Λj =
Ωj⊤Ωj in Eq. (4), we see that the distance metric ﬁrst transforms
data points using the following local linear projections:
Pj : ξ →Ωj⊤(ξ −ω j) .
For speciﬁc cases M ∈{2, 3}, the projected data points can be
visualized, which can be used for discriminant visualization of
the data based on the space the classiﬁcation takes place in.
However, since the localized metric provides several projec-
tions for each sample, it is challenging to study the outputs
directly. In order to tackle this problem, (Bunte et al., 2009)
proposed a post-processing step which combines local projec-
tions using charting (Brand, 2003) to form a global nonlinear
embedding of the data:
ξ →
X
j
p j(ξ)Bj(P j(ξ)) .
Here, Bj(.) : RM →RM is an aﬃne transformation and pj(ξ) is
the responsibility of local transformation ω j for the data sam-
ple ξ with P
j pj(ξ) = 1.
More details about how to com-
pute prototypes’ responsibilities and aﬃne transformations can
be found in (Bunte et al., 2009) with the code made available
at https://github.com/kbunte/LVQ_toolbox. Using this
nonlinear embedding we can easily project data to 2 (or 3) di-
mensions for further investigation of the overlapping regions
and diﬃcult samples.
4. Experiments and Discussion
This section shows the results and discussion of the exper-
iments conducted with the localized adaptive distance metric
LVQ method (LGMLVQ) coupled with presence or absence of
resampling as a pre-processing step. The performance and fea-
ture importance is compared with Random Forest (RF). The
corresponding feature relevances are examined and discussed
in comparison with conventional astronomical expectations.
4.1. Experimental setup and Evaluation Measures
The experiments are set up with a 10-fold cross validation
where the data observations are divided up into a 90/10 ran-
dom but stratiﬁed training and test splits with each individual
class preserving its sample frequency. For the distance based
classiﬁers, such as LGMLVQ, each training set is normalised
via Z-score transformation, i.e. zero mean and unit standard
deviation, with the same parameters used to transform the re-
spective test set. Decision trees and RF are not distance based
and build instead rules on the features directly and therefore
do not require transformative pre-processing in general. How-
ever, the RF is very sensitive to class imbalance, which should
be handled before training. Therefore, resampling of the train-
ing data can be introduced to reduce or eliminate the imbal-
ance of the classes. In this contribution we compare two strate-
gies, namely the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique
(SMOTE) and Borderline-SMOTE, creating new feature vec-
tors using the training samples of each minority class until their
amount matches the size of the majority class. The created syn-
thetic minority samples lead to balanced classes to be used for
training of the classiﬁcation models.
The diﬀerent models have diﬀerent hyper-parameters. In the
experiments we train the RF with 100 decision trees, sampling
with replacement of 0.75 fractions of the training set and using
the bagging aggregation method (Breiman, 2001). The LVQ
models provide several hyper-parameters to control the meth-
ods complexity, such as the number of prototypes, number of
metric tensors and their rank determining the projection dimen-
sion saving memory and enabling visualization. Due to the non-
linearity of the problem we use the localized, most powerful
version of the LVQ family, namely LGMLVQ (Schneider et al.,
2010) with one prototype per class and regularization of 10−5.
In order to choose the lower dimensional projection dimension
we train the method using full metric tensors constructed using
Ωj ∈RM×N with M = N. Subsequently, an Eigenvalue decom-
position of the trained Λj = U jΣ jU j(−1) with diagonal matrices
Σ j
ii = σ j
i provides information about the intrinsic dimension-
ality of the classiﬁcation problem by counting the Eigenvalues
M = maxj
PN
i=1[σ j
i > ϵ] signiﬁcantly larger than zero. Sub-
sequently, a model is than trained with the rank M reduced to
maximal number obtained from the matrices. Since the RF is an
ensemble of decision trees, we also build an ensemble of LGM-
LVQ models using the same training sets, and the resulting label
for a given sample is determined by majority vote among the
LGMLVQ models. Model performances are averaged across
the cross-validation runs and evaluated with focus on the class
of interest, namely UCDs/GCs Class 2.
For evaluation output statistics are generated after prediction
with the models, i.e. training and test errors, and their standard
deviations. Since this is a multi-class classiﬁcation problem and
the major interest is in Class 2 UCD/GC objects, we extract the
evaluation measures for each class and build the macro aver-
aged accuracies to evaluate the performance across the diﬀer-
ent classes and eliminate bias of the majority class. We also
report binary class measures, such as Purity and Complete-
ness (also known as Precision/Positive Predictive Value and Re-
call/Sensitivity), for the class of interest versus all others classes
combined, to represent the algorithms performance in classify-
ing the unseen test data. The confusion matrix as illustrated
in Table 1 can be used to evaluate the classiﬁcation perfor-
mance providing detailed information about the accuracy for
each class and the nature of misclassiﬁcations. From it one can
extract the binary measures, namely false positives (FP), true
positives (TP), false negatives (FN) and true negatives (TN) as
5

Table 1: Three-class confusion matrix and formulae to obtain the False Nega-
tives, True Positives, False Positives and True Negatives (FPb, TPb, FPb and
TNb) to calculate Purity and Completeness with respect to class b.
aaaaaaa
Actual
Predicted
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 1
C11
C12
C13
Class 2
C21
C22
C23
Class 3
C31
C32
C33
FNb = P3
f=1
f,b
Cbf
FPb = P3
f=1
f,b
C fb
TNb = P3
f=1
f,b
P3
q=1
q,b
C fqx
TPb = Cbb
Purity =
TPb
TPb+FPb
Compl. =
TPb
TPb+FNb
(6)
Table 2: Average performance (standard deviation) for techniques {∅|B|R}T{∅|E},
i.e. LGMVLQ (T=LM) and Random Forest (T=RF), with no resampling,
SMOTE, Borderline-SMOTE and Ensembling (abbreviated by ∅, R, B and E).
Purity
Compl.
F1 score
Train accur.
Test accur.
L2
0.969 (.012)
0.930 (.021)
0.947 (.014)
0.985 (.001)
0.984 (.004)
RL2
0.935 (.020)
0.963 (.020)
0.948 (.016)
0.983 (.001)
0.982 (.005)
BL2
0.889 (.026)
0.950 (.027)
0.912 (.016)
0.971 (.005)
0.971 (.006)
RLE
2
0.937 (.019)
0.962 (.020)
0.948 (.000)
0.983 (.001)
0.983 (.005)
RRFE 0.950 (.018)
0.964 (.018)
0.968 (.011)
0.999 (.000)
0.986 (.005)
shown below Table 1 in Eq. (6). Additionally, the false positive
rate and true positive rate of the test set are plotted on a Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve (Fawcett, 2006). This
curve shows the model’s discriminative ability and the Area
Under the Curve (AUC) summarizes the overall performance
for the classiﬁcation of the class of interest.
4.2. Discusssion
In this section we summarize the results of the methods on
the astronomical classiﬁcation problem. The hyperparameter
settings for the techniques LGMLVQ (T=LM, with the sub-
script M indicating the rank for the local metric tensors) and
Random Forest (T=RF) is abbreviated by {∅|B|R}T{∅|E}. Here the
preprocessing is marked by letters R and B for resampling with
SMOTE or Borderline-SMOTE or no resampling (leaving the
preﬁx empty: ∅), and the superscript E denotes the results of
an ensemble consisting of 100 models. The performance of
the LGMLVQ models averaged across the 10 cross-validation
folds is excellent already with an intrinsic dimensionality of
M = 2 even without resampling, as evident from the Purity
and Completeness of the minority class shown in Table 2. Re-
sampling improves the correct classiﬁcation for the minority
class as demonstrated by 3.3% increase in the Completeness.
However, the Purity reduces indicating that there are more false
positives brought about by SMOTE resampling, which is an ac-
ceptable trade-oﬀ.
Figure 2 panel a) and b) show the test performance of RL2
with only 3 false negatives for the minority class 2 of UCDs
and GCs. Contrary to our expectations Borderline-SMOTE re-
sampling does not perform better. This could be caused by the
1
2
3
Predicted Class
1
2
3
True Class
273
2
3
5
48
5
5
1
431
3.5%
5.9%
1.8%
96.5%
94.1%
98.2%
1.8%
17.2%
1.4%
98.2%
82.8%
98.6%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
false positive rate
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
true positive rate
Test ROC, UCDs/GCs Vs. all others
AUC = 0.99387
data1
Figure 2: Panel (a) shows the test confusion matrix for the RL2 model and
panel (b) shows the corresponding ROC curve of minority class 2 vs. all the
other classes and the corresponding AUC value of 0.99387.
1e−03
1e+00
1e+03
proj. 1
proj. 2
proj. 3
log distance
a) Wrongly classified
1e−03
1e+00
1e+03
proj. 1
proj. 2
proj. 3
log distance
background galaxies
UCDs/GCs
foreground stars
b) Correctly classified
Figure 3: Wrong (a) and correct (b) classiﬁcation of two minority class obser-
vations. Each shows the distances of all samples projected using the local Ωj of
each prototype, highlighting the samples with corresponding label j in colour.
The black points exemplify the distances of a correct and misclassiﬁed sample.
overlap of the classes which increases the diﬃculty to deﬁne a
clear boundary and hence boundary resampling becoming inef-
fective. In summary the RF and LVQ models show comparable
performance. However, especially the latter is less complex and
provides further insights into the results of the classiﬁcation,
which will be discussed in the following.
As mentioned before the LVQ models are intrinsically inter-
pretable and transparent in many regards. We can for exam-
ple interpret the certainty of the classiﬁcation by investigating
the distance of each sample to all prototypes. To demonstrate
this we project all samples and all prototypes with the local
transformations Ωj and compute the distance to each prototype
in the transformed space. Figure 3 visualizes these distances
highlighting the samples with the same respective class label
j in colour and of diﬀerent classes in grey. We furthermore
highlight in black the distances of an observations consistently
misclassiﬁed in repeated training runs (panel a) and a correctly
classiﬁed sample (panel b). The wrongly classiﬁed minority
sample in (a) is within the boundary region where the classes 2
and 3 overlap as indicated by very similar distances to the pro-
totypes of these classes. Panel (b), on the other hand, shows
a typical example of a very certain correct classiﬁcation where
the sample is much closer to prototype 2 compared to the oth-
ers. A similar conclusion can be drawn from Figure 4. It visual-
izes the probabilities P( j|ξi) Eq. (2) as stacked barplot for each
minority class sample (ξi with yi = 2) for each class j, and high-
lights the same samples as depicted in black in Figure 3. While
the classiﬁer is certain about the label of the correctly classi-
ﬁed example, it is not the case for the misclassiﬁed one. This
6

correct
wrong
0
1
cumulative distribution
class 1
class 2
class 3
Figure 4: Stacked barplot of probabilities P(j|ξi) (Eq. 2) of UCDs/GCs samples
for each class. We highlight the probabilities of the same (in)correctly classiﬁed
examples as speciﬁed in Figure 3, which are [0,1,0] ([0,0.378,0.622]).
a) Manifold charting projection grouping
background galaxies
UCDs/GCs
foreground stars
Misclassified UCD/GCs
1
2
3
4
u-i
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
i-Ks
b) Color-color diagram u-i vs i-Ks
Figure 5: a) Manifold charting projection of the data by LGMLVQ (RL2) with
a misclassiﬁed UCD/GC sample circled in black as reference for Figure 7. b)
conventional color-color diagram used in photometric selection by Astronomy.
transparently informs the user how sure the LGMLVQ classi-
ﬁer is with the assignment of a class label for each observation,
which may also indicate samples with potentially controversial
current label identiﬁcation given the data at hand, marking them
as candidates for further investigation.
Moreover, the local linear projections Ωj ∈RM×N can be
used for nonlinear visualization for M ∈{2, 3} using manifold
charting as outlined in section 3.4. Hence we report very good
performance for LGMLVQ using the rank M = 2, we show the
resulting projected data of RL2 to complement the data analysis
in Figure 5 panel a. The more distinctive separation provided
by the LGMLVQ model, especially for the minority class, ex-
plains the eﬃciency and nuance of the method’s classiﬁcation
performance as compared to the traditional astronomical color-
color diagram as shown in panel b. This visualization shows
the diﬃcult regions and can be used to identify diﬃcult obser-
vations, such as the circled class 2 sample in panel a, in the now
reduced overlapping areas.
As mentioned before the RF and LGMLVQ models allow to
extract the importance of the measurements for the classiﬁca-
tion problem. However, the Random Forest method is expen-
sive in terms of memory costs and shows a clear tendency to
overﬁt as seen in the test error being higher than the training
error. Panel (b) in Figure 6 shows the dominance of the angu-
lar size features FWHM∗u, FWHM∗g, FWHM∗r, FWHM∗i,
FWHM∗J and FWHM∗Ks in importance for the Random For-
est classiﬁer. In contrast to RF the LGMLVQ classiﬁer extracts
the feature relevances for each prototype and hence we can dis-
cuss also the relevance of the measurements for the classiﬁca-
tion of each class of objects in our astronomical data.
Figure 6(a) shows the class-wise normalized feature impor-
tance proﬁles sorted by value of contribution with varying top
relevant features further explaining the non-linearity and moti-
vation for choice of local metric tensors. The top relevant fea-
tures for classifying the minority class of UCDs and GCs from
this experiment dominantly consist of the angular size param-
eters, namely FWHM∗g, FWHM∗i, FWHM∗u and FWHM∗r
and their pairwise correlation plots are visualized in panel (c)
in Figure 6. Similarly panel (d) provides additional information
in form of a violin plot for the 6 features most important for the
classiﬁcation of class 2, showing the distributions of the mea-
surements of each class together with the value the class pro-
totype exhibits after training. To examine further the diﬃcult
misclassiﬁed UCD/GCs example circled in Figure 5a), we vi-
sualize in Figure 7(b) and (d) the diﬀerence between the feature
values of the example to the closet correct/incorrect prototypes
(i.e. ξi −ωJ and ξi −ωK). The 6 most important measure-
ments for the classiﬁcation are provided by the class-speciﬁc
relevance proﬁle (a and c) on top of each prototype deviation
panel and marked in green as before. Panels (b) and (d) show
that the diﬀerence between features of the example to those of
the foreground stars prototype (for the class-wise most impor-
tant 6 features) is smaller, which explains the misclassiﬁcation.
Such examples require more accurate measurements sizes (us-
ing deeper observations) to investigate whether the object in-
deed belongs to the expected class.
The angular size features are important for separating the ma-
jority of objects in class 1, whose objects are larger, from class
2 and 3 that have small sizes. The astronomical expectation is
that the angular size cannot discriminate class 2 and 3 as illus-
trated by the model. The reason is, that the majority of objects
of class 2 (UCDs/GCs) have sizes smaller than 10 pc. There-
fore, these objects at the distance of Fornax cluster (20 Mpc)
are expected to appear as point-sources and exhibiting a simi-
lar FWHM∗value as the objects of class 3 (foreground stars).
In this case, FWHM∗would not be an informative parameter
in separating class 2 and 3 objects. However, in contrary to
astronomical expectation, the angular sizes are found to be im-
portant to distinguish class 2 and 3 by both the LGMLVQ and
RF, as shown in Figure 6. The disparity can be attributed to
the measurement biases: The minority class 2 objects are faint
(and lower in signal-to-noise ratio) and hence angular size mea-
surements happen to be larger than the actual size which could
introduce a bias to the data. Therefore, their angular size prox-
ies, i.e. FWHM∗g, FWHM∗i, FWHM∗u and FWHM∗r, could
possess more discriminating information than colour indices.
Based on (Munoz et al., 2013), in the combined optical/near-
infrared observations, the color indices of u −i and i −Ks are
expected to be the most important features. In a simple view,
the u −i color is more sensitive to the age of an object while
i −Ks represents the metallicity (the amount of metals heavier
than Helium) of the object. Other color indices, such as g −i,
g −r, r −J etc. could also partially carry these information but
degenerate. In contrary, the observations in the u and Ks are
harder to be carried out and often have a lower signal-to-noise
ratio compared to the other ﬁlters. This makes the expected
feature importance of u−i and i−Ks relatively uncertain. Values
of g −r and g −i on the other hand are notably accurate.
7

LGMLVQ: Background galaxies - 66.26%
fwhm*rr-i
i-Ksu-r
g-Ks
fwhm*J
J-Ks
r-Ks
fwhm*i
fwhm*uu-gr-Jg-iu-J
fwhm*g
u-Ksg-ru-ii-J
fwhm*Ksg-J
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
relevance value
LGMLVQ: UCDs/GCs - 86.33%
fwhm*g
fwhm*i
fwhm*ug-ig-r
fwhm*rr-Jg-Ji-J
r-Ks
u-Ksu-Ju-g
fwhm*J
i-Ks
g-Ks
fwhm*Ksu-rr-i
J-Ksu-i
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
LGMLVQ: Foreground stars - 79.24%
fwhm*g
fwhm*J
fwhm*rg-r
fwhm*i
r-Ks
i-Ksi-Jg-i
g-Ksg-Jr-J
fwhm*Ksu-gr-i
fwhm*uu-i
u-Ks
J-Ksu-ru-J
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Random forest - 48.03%
fwhm*u
fwhm*g
fwhm*r
fwhm*i
fwhm*J
fwhm*Ksu-gg-rr-ii-J
i-Ksu-ru-iu-J
u-Ksg-ig-J
g-Ksr-J
r-Ks
J-Ks
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
#
# #!


#
 ! 
&
&




 ! "!
	
	  
  "   !
  %
! $
	
	
!  
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6: Panel (a): class-wise feature relevance proﬁles of LGMLVQ RL2 marking the top 6 in green and their corresponding percentage of contribution to the
respective class and (b) the Random Forest (RF) feature relevance proﬁle. Panel (c): pairwise plots of the RL2 top 6 features for the UCDs/GCs class 2 (red markers)
with focus on the area covered by that class, and (d) corresponding violin plots with prototype positions relative to the feature value distribution for minority class 2.
a) UCD/GCs Relevance profile
0
0.2
relevance value
b) Difference to the UCD/GCs prototype
-1
0
1
features diffrences
c) Foregound stars Relevance profile
0
0.2
relevance value
d) Difference to the foreground stars prototype
fwhm*u
fwhm*g
fwhm*r
fwhm*i
fwhm*J
fwhm*Ks
u-g
g-r
r-i
i-J
i-Ks
u-r
u-i
u-J
u-Ks
g-i
g-J
g-Ks
r-J
r-Ks
J-Ks
-1
0
1
features diffrences
Figure 7: Class-wise relevance proﬁles of the closest correct and incorrect pro-
totype (panel a and c) to the diﬃcult UCD/GCs example marked in Figure 5a),
with the 6 most relevant features coloured green. Panels (b) and (d) show the
diﬀerence between the sample and the prototypes (i.e. ξi −ωJ and ξi −ωK).
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we explore and compare two interpretable ma-
chine learning techniques, namely Localized General Matrix
LVQ (LGMLVQ) and Random Forest (RF), for the analysis
and classiﬁcation of foreground stars and background galax-
ies versus UCDs and GCs. Due to the class of interest be-
ing highly underrepresented compared the former objects we
also investigate the inﬂuence of Synthetic Minority Oversam-
pling TEchnique (SMOTE) and its borderline extension on the
classiﬁcation performance. Localized distances allowing non-
linear decision boundaries within the data improves the classi-
ﬁcation in LGMLVQ, even in this situation where the classes
largely overlap. LGMLVQ is also highly interpretable in the
form of prototype class representatives and feature relevances
which attach values to the contribution of a feature to classi-
ﬁcation. Additionally, the experiments uncover classiﬁcation
patterns in terms of feature relevances, which serve as discrim-
inative markers for the classiﬁcation.
The u −i and i −Ks colors are expected to be the most rele-
vant colors for classiﬁcation since they carry physical informa-
tion on ages and metallities of astronomical objects. However,
higher signal-to-noise ratio colors such as g−i and r−J in LGM-
LVQ and u−g and g−r in Random Forest are found to be more
important for the data-driven classiﬁcation. The importance of
other colors compared to u−i and i−Ks, that have almost 0 rele-
vance contribution, implies that this disparity may be attributed
8

to astronomically expected features having uncertain measure-
ments, but also the correlation across the features, meaning that
they partially contain the same critical information. Further-
more, angular size features FWHM∗g, FWHM∗i, FWHM∗u
are identiﬁed by both methods independently as the most im-
portant features for the classiﬁcation. We discuss that this out-
come is due to a measurements biases of the faint sources of
class 2 (UCDs/GCs).
In this work we showed that existing machine learning tech-
niques can be used to identify UCDs/GCs in big astronomical
data. These methods can handle the imbalance in the data and
classify sources with a good performance. Subsequent analy-
sis of the transparent techniques allows further insight and can
provide valuable information for the astronomical experts to in-
form about possible biases in the data set. A future deeper data
set with more accurate size and color measurements will most
likely increase the performance of the automated classiﬁcation
even further.
