Transductive-Inductive Cluster Approximation
Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
Shriprakash Sinha
Tu Delft, Dept. of Mediamatics, Faculty of EEMCS, Mekelweg 4,
2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands

Abstract. Approximating adequate number of clusters in multidimen-
sional data is an open area of research, given a level of compromise made
on the quality of acceptable results. The manuscript addresses the is-
sue by formulating a transductive inductive learning algorithm which
uses multivariate Chebyshev inequality. Considering clustering problem
in imaging, theoretical proofs for a particular level of compromise are
derived to show the convergence of the reconstruction error to a ﬁnite
value with increasing (a) number of unseen examples and (b) the num-
ber of clusters, respectively. Upper bounds for these error rates are also
proved. Non-parametric estimates of these error from a random sample
of sequences empirically point to a stable number of clusters. Lastly, the
generalization of algorithm can be applied to multidimensional data sets
from diﬀerent ﬁelds.
Keywords: Transductive Inductive Learning, Multivariate Chebyshev
Inequality
1
Introduction
The estimation of clusters has been approached either via a batch framework
where the entire data set is presented and diﬀerent initializations of seed points
or prototypes tested to ﬁnd a model of cluster that ﬁts the data like in k-means
[9] and fuzzy C-means [2] or an online strategy clusters are approximated as
new examples of data are presented one at a time using variational Dirichlet
processes [7] and incremental clustering based on randomized algorithms [3].
It is widely known that approximation of adequate number of clusters using a
multidimensional data set is a open problem and a variety of solutions have been
proposed using Monte Carlo studies [5], Bayesian-Kullback learning scheme in
mean squared error setting or gaussian mixture [19], model based approaches [6]
and information theory [17], to cite a few.
This work deviates from the general strategy of deﬁning the number of clus-
ters apriori. It deﬁnes a level of compromise, tolerance or conﬁdence in the
quality of clustering which gives an upper bound on the number of clusters gen-
erated. Note that this is not at all similar to deﬁning the number of clusters. It
only indicates the level of conﬁdence in the result and the requirement still is to
arXiv:1101.3755v2  [cs.CV]  19 Jun 2012

2
Sinha
estimate the adequate number of clusters, which may be way below the bound.
The current work focuses on dealing with the issue of approximating the number
of clusters in an online paradigm when the conﬁdence level has been speciﬁed.
In certain aspects it ﬁnds similarity with the recent work on conformal learning
theory [18] and presents a novel way of ﬁnding the approximation of cluster with
a degree of conﬁdence.
Conformal learning theory [15], which has its foundations in employing a
transductive-inductive paradigm deals with the idea of estimating the quality of
predictions made on the unlabeled example based on the already processed data.
Mathematically, given a set of already processed examples (x1, y1), (x2, y2), ...,
(xi−1, yi−1), the conformal predictors give a point prediction ˆy for the unseen
example xi with a conﬁdence level of Γ ε. Thus it estimates the conﬁdence in
the quality of prediction using the original label yi after the prediction has been
made and before moving on to the next unlabeled example. These predictions are
made on the basis of a non-conformity measure which checks how much the new
example is diﬀerent from a bag of already seen examples. A bag is considered
to be a ﬁnite sequence Z (z1, z2, ..., zi−1) of examples, where zi = (xi, yi). Then
using the idea of exchangeability, it is known from [18], under a weaker assump-
tion that for every positive integer i, every permutation π of {1, 2, ..., i}, and
every measurable set E ⊂Zi, the probability distribution P{(z1, z2, ...) ∈Z∞
: (z1, z2, ..., zi) ∈E} = P{(z1, z2, ...) ∈Z∞: (zπ(1), zπ(2), ..., zπ(i)) ∈E}. A pre-
diction for the new example xi is made if and only if the frequency (p-value) of
exchanging the new example with another example in the bag is above certain
value.
This manuscript ﬁnds its motivation from the foregoing theory of online
prediction using transductive-inductive paradigm. The research work applies the
concept of coupling the creation of new clusters via transduction and aggregation
of examples into these clusters via induction. It ﬁnds its similarity with [15] in
utilizing the idea of prediction region deﬁned by a certain level of conﬁdence. It
presents a simple algorithm that diﬀers signiﬁcantly from conformal learning in
the following aspect: (1) Instead of working with sequences of data that contain
labels, it works on unlabeled sequences. (2) Due the ﬁrst formulation, it becomes
imperative to estimate the number of clusters which is not known apriori and
the proposed algorithm comes to rescue by employing a Chebyshev inequality.
The inequality helps in providing an upper bound on the number of clusters
that could be generated on a random sample of sequence. (3) The quality of
the prediction in conformal learning is checked based on the p-values generated
online. The current algorithms relaxes this restriction in checking the quality
online and just estimates the clusters as the data is presented. (4) The foregoing
step makes the algorithm a weak learner as it is sequence dependent. To take
stock of the problem, a global solution to the adequate number of cluster is
approximated by estimating kernel density estimates on a sample of random
sequences of a data. Finally, the level of compromise captured by a parameter in
the inequality gives an upper bound on the number of clusters generated. In case
of clustering in static images, for a particular parameter value, theoretical proofs

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
3
show that the reconstruction error converges to a ﬁnite value with increasing (a)
number of unseen examples and (b) the number of clusters. Empirical kernel
density estimates of reconstruction error over a random sample of sequences
on toy examples indicate the number of clusters that have high probability of
low reconstruction error. It is not necessary that labeled data are always present
to compute the reconstruction error. In that case the proposed algorithm stops
short at density estimation of approximated number of clusters from a random
sequence of examples, with a certain degree of conﬁdence.
Another dimension of the proposed work is to use the generalization of mul-
tivariate formulation of Chebyshev inequality [1], [10], [11]. It is known that
Chebyshev inequality helps in proving the convergence of random sequences of
diﬀerent data. Also the multivariate formulation of the Chebyshev inequality fa-
cilitates in providing bounds for multidimensional data which is often aﬄicted by
the curse of dimensionality making it diﬃcult to compute multivariate probabil-
ities. One of the generalizations that exist for multivariate Chebyshev inequality
is the consideration of probability content of a multivariate normal random vec-
tor to lie in an Euclidean n-dimensional ball [14], [13]. This work employs a more
conservative approach is the employment of the Euclidian n-dimensional ellip-
soid which restricts the spread of the probability content [4]. Work by [9] and
[16] provide motivation in employment of multivariate Chebyshev inequality.
Eﬃcient implementation and analysis of k-means clustering using the mul-
tivariate Chebyshev inequality has been shown in [9]. The current work diﬀers
from k-means in (1) providing an online setting to the problem of clustering (2)
estimating the number of clusters for a particular sequence representation of the
same data via convergence through ellipsoidal multivariate Chebyshev inequal-
ity, given the level of conﬁdence, compromise or tolerance in the quality of results
(3) generating global approximations of number of clusters from non-parametric
estimates of reconstruction error rates for sample of random sequences represent-
ing the same data and (4) not ﬁxing the cluster number apriori. It must be noted
that in k-means, the solutions may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent initializations for a
particular value of k but the value of k as such remains ﬁxed. In the proposed
work, with a high probability, an estimate is made regarding the minimum num-
ber of clusters that can represent the data with low reconstruction error. This
outlook broadens the perspective of ﬁnding multiple solutions which are upper
bounded as well as approximating a particular number of cluster which have sim-
ilar solutions. This similarity in solutions for a particular number of cluster is
attributed to the constraint imposed by the Chebyshev inequality. A key point
to be noted is that using increasing levels of compromise or conﬁdence as in
conformal learners, the proposed work generates a nested set of solutions. Low
conﬁdence or compromise levels generate tight solutions and vice versa. Thus
the proposed weak learner provides a set of solutions which are robust over a
sample.
This manuscript also extends the work of [16] on employment of multivariate
Chebyshev inequality for image representation. Work in [16] presents a hybrid
model based on Hilbert space ﬁlling curve [8] to traverse through the image.

4
Sinha
Since this curve preserve the local information in the neighbourhood of a pixel,
it reduces the burden of good image representation in lower dimensions. On the
other side, it acts as a constraint on processing the image in a particular fashion.
The current work removes this restriction of processing images via the space
ﬁlling curves by considering any pixel sequence that represents the image under
consideration. Again, a single sequence may not be adequate enough for the
learner to synthesize the image to a recongnizable level. This can be attributed
to the fact that in an unsupervised paradigm the number of clusters are not
known apriori and also the learner would be sequence dependent. To reiterate,
the proposed work addresses the issues of • recognizability, by deﬁning a level of
compromise that a user is willing to make via the Chebyshev parameter Cp and
• sequence speciﬁc solution, by taking random samples of pixel sequences from
the same image. The latter helps in estimating a population dependent solution
which would be robust and stable synthesis. Regularization of these error over
approximated number of clusters for diﬀerent levels of compromise leads to an
adequate number of clusters that synthesize the image with minimal deviation
from the original image.
Thus the current work provides a new perspective in approximation of clus-
ter number at a particular conﬁdence level. To test the propositions made, the
problem of clustering in images is taken into account. Generalizations of the al-
gorithm can be made and applied to diﬀerent ﬁelds involving multidimensional
data sets in an online setting. Let I be an RGB image. A pixel in I is an ex-
ample xi with N dimensions (here N = 3). It is assumed that examples appear
randomly without repetition for the proposed unsupervised learner. Note that
when the sample space (here the image I) has ﬁnite number of examples in it
(here M pixels), then the total number of unique sequences is M!. When M
is large, M! →∞. Currently, the algorithm works on a subset of unique se-
quences sampled from M! sequences. The probability of a sequence to occur is
equally likely (in this case 1/M). RGB images from the Berkeley Segmentation
Benchmark (BSB) [12] have been taken into consideration for the current study.
2
Transductive-Inductive Learning Algorithm
Given that the examples (zi = xi) in a sequence appear randomly, the challenge
is to (1) learn the association of a particular example to existing clusters or (2)
create a new cluster, based on the information provided by already processed
examples. The current algorithm handles the two issues via (1) evaluation of a
nonconformity measure deﬁned by multivariate Chebyshev’s inequality formula-
tion and (2) 1-Nearest Neighbour (NN) transductive learning, respectively. The
multivariate formulation of the generalized Chebyshev inequality [4] is applied
to a new example using a single Chebyshev parameter. This inequality tests the
deviation of the new example from the mean of a cluster of examples and gives a
lower probabilistic bound on whether the example belongs to the cluster under
investigation. If the new random example passes the test, then it is associated
with the cluster and the mean and covariance matrix for the cluster is recom-

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
5
Algorithm 1 Unsupervised Learner
1: procedure Unsupervised Learner(img, Cp)
2:
[nrows, ncols] ←size(img)
3:
M ←nrows × ncols
▷Total no. of unseen examples
4:
ptcntr ←0
▷Number of examples encountered
5:
ptidx ←{1, 2, ..., M}
▷Total no. of indicies of unseen examples
Initialize Variables
6:
clustercntr ←0
▷Number of clusters
7:
CumErrval ←0
▷Cummulative value
8:
Err1 ←[]
▷Error rate as no. of examples increase
9:
Err2 ←[]
▷Error rate as no. of clusters increase
10:
while Card(ptidx) examples remain unprocessed do
▷ptidx ⊂{1, 2, ..., M}
11:
Choose a random example xi s.t. i ∈ptidx
12:
ptcntr ←ptcntr + 1
13:
Update ptidx i.e ptidx ←ptidx −{i}
14:
CRITERION ←[]
15:
Errval ←0
16:
∀q clusters were q ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., clustercntr}
17:
Errval ←Pℓ
k=1(xk −Eq(x))2
▷x means all examples in cluster q
18:
CumErrval ←CumErrval + Errval
19:
Compute D ←(xi −Eq(x))T Σ−1
q (xi −Eq(x))
20:
If Dq < Cp
▷Cp is Chebyshev parameter
21:
CRITERION ←[CRITERION; Dq, q]
22:
If more than one cluster that associates to xi, i.e length(CRITERION) ≥1
23:
Associate xi to selected cluster q with minimum Dq
24:
Err1 ←[Err1, Errval/ptcntr]
25:
If xi is not associated with any cluster, i.e sum(FOUND) == 0
26:
Err2 ←[Err2, Errval/ptcntr]
27:
clustercntr ←clustercntr + 1
28:
Using 1-NN ﬁnd xj closest to xi s.t. j ∈ptidx
29:
Update ptidx i.e ptidx ←ptidx −{j}
30:
Form a new cluster {xi, xj}
31:
end while
32: end procedure
puted. In case there exists more than one cluster which qualify for association,
then the cluster with lowest deviation to the new example is picked up for asso-
ciation. It is also possible to assign the new example to a random chosen cluster
from the selected clusters to induce noise and then check for the approximations
on the number of cluster. This has not been considered in the current work for
the time being. In case of failure to ﬁnd any association, the algorithm employs
1-NN transductive algorithm to ﬁnd a closest neighbour of the current example
under processing. This neighbour together with the current example forms a new
cluster.
Several important implications arise due to the usage of a probabilistic in-
equality measure as a nonconformal measure. These will be elucidated in detail
in the later sections. An important point to consider here is the usage of 1-NN

6
Sinha
algorithm to create a new cluster. Even though it is known that 1-NN suﬀers
from the problem of the curse of dimensionality, for problems with small dimen-
sions, it can be employed for transductive learning. The aim of the proposed
work is not to address the curse of dimensionality issue. Also, note that in the
general supervised conformal learning algorithm, a prediction has to be made
before the next random example is processed. This is not the case in the cur-
rent unsupervised framework of the conformal learning algorithm. In case the
current random example fails to associate with any of the existing clusters, un-
der the constraint yielded by the Chebyshev parameter, the NN helps in ﬁnding
the closest example (in feature space) from the remaining unprocessed sample
data set, to form a new cluster. Thus the formation of a new cluster depends on
the strictness of the Chebyshev parameter Cp. The procedure for unsupervised
conformal learning is presented in algorithm 1. It does not strictly follow the
idea of ﬁnding conﬁdence on the prediction as labels are not present to be tested
against. The goal here is to reconstruct the clusters from a single pixel sequence
such that they represent the image. The quality of the reconstruction is taken
up later on when a random sample of pixel sequences are used to estimate the
probability density of the reconstruction error rates. Note that in the algorithm,
Eq(x) represents the mean of the examples x in the qth cluster and Σp is the
covariance matrix of ND feature examples of the qth cluster.
3
Theoretical Perspective
Application of the multivariate Chebyshev inequality that yields a probabilistic
bound enforces certain important implications with regard to the clusters that
are generated. For the purpose of elucidation of the algorithm, the starﬁsh image
is taken from [12].
3.1
Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
Let X be a stochastic variable in N dimensions with a mean E[X]. Further,
Σ be the covariance matrix of all observations, each containing N features and
Cp ∈R, then the multivariate Chebyshev Inequality in [4] states that:
P{(X −E[X])T Σ−1(X −E[X]) ≥Cp} ≤N
Cp
P{(X −E[X])T Σ−1(X −E[X]) < Cp} ≥1 −N
Cp
(1)
i.e. the probability of the spread of the value of X around the sample mean
E[X] being greater than Cp, is less than N/Cp. There is a minor variation for
the univariate case stating that the probability of the spread of the value of
x around the mean µ being greater than Cpσ is less than 1/C2
p. Apart from
the minor diﬀerence, both formulations convey the same message about the
probabilistic bound imposed when a random vector or number X lies outside
the mean of the sample by a value of Cp.

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
7
Fig. 1. A random sequence of Starﬁsh Image segmented via unsupervised conformal
learning algorithm. (Cp, NoClust, TRErr) represent the tuple containing the Cheby-
shev paramenter (Cp), number of clusters generated (NoClust) while using Cp and
the total reconstruction error of the generated image from the original image (TR-
Err)(a) (3, 1034, 17.746), (b) (5, 271, 36.32), (c) (7, 159, 54.71), (d) (9, 45, 40.591), (e)
(11, 31, 62.606), (f) (13, 29, 66.061), (g) (15, 33, 65.424), (h) (17, 24, 64.98).
3.2
Association to Clusters
Once a cluster is initialized (say with xi and xj), the size of the cluster depends
on the number of examples getting associated with it. The multivariate formalism

8
Sinha
of the Chebyshev inequality controls the degree of uniformity of feature values
of examples that constitute the cluster. The association of the example to a
cluster happens as follows: Let the new random example (say xt) be considered
for checking the association to a cluster. If the spread of example xt from Eq(x)
(the mean of the qth cluster {xi, xj}), factored by the covariance matrix Σq,
is below Cp, then xt is considered as a part of the cluster. Using Chebyshev
inequality, it boils down to:
P{(xt −Eq[xi, xj])T Σ−1
q (xt −Eq[xi, xj]) ≥Cp} ≤N
Cp
P{(xt −Eq[xi, xj])T Σ−1
q (xt −Eq[xi, xj]) < Cp} ≥1 −N
Cp
(2)
Satisfaction of this criterion suggests a possible cluster to which xt could be
associated. This test is conducted for all the existing clusters. If there are more
than one cluster to which xt can be associated, then the cluster which shows
the minimum deviation from the new random point is chosen. Once the cluster
is chosen, its size is extended to by one more example i.e. xt. The cluster now
constitutes {xi, xj, xt}. If no association is found at all, a new cluster is initialized
and the process repeats until all unseen examples have been processed. The
satisfaction of the inequality gives a lower probabilistic bound on size of cluster
by a value of 1−(N/Cp), if the second version of the Chebyshev formula is under
consideration. Thus the size of the clusters grow under a probabilistic constraint
in a homogeneous manner. For a highly inhomogeneous image, a cluster size
may be very restricted or small due to big deviation of pixel intensities from the
cluster it is being tested with.
Once the pixels have been assigned to respective decompositions, all pixels in
a single decomposition are assigned the average value of intensities of pixels that
constitute the decomposition. Thus is done under the assumption that decom-
posed clusters will be homogeneous in nature with the degree of homogeneity
controlled by Cp. Figure 1 shows the results of clustering for varying values of
Cp for the starﬁsh image from [12].
3.3
Implications
In [?] various implications have been proposed for using multivariate Chebyshev
inequality for image representation using space ﬁlling curve. In order to extend
on the their work, a few implications are reiterated for further development.
The inequality being a criterion, the probability associated with the same gives
a belief based bound on the satisfaction of the criterion. In order to proceed,
ﬁrst a deﬁnition of Decomposition is needed.
Deﬁnition 1. Let D be a decomposition which contains a set of points x with
a mean of Eq(x). The set expands by testing a new point xt via the Chebyshev
inequality P{(xt −Eq(x))T Σ−1
q
(xt −Eq(x)) < Cp} ≥1 −N
Cp .

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
9
The decomposition may include the point xt depending on the outcome of the
criterion. A point to be noted is that, if the new point xt belongs to D, then D
can be represented as (xt −Eq(x))T Σ−1
q
(xt −Eq(x)).
Lemma 1. Decompositions D are bounded by lower probability bound of 1 −
(N/Cp).
Lemma 2. The value of Cp reduces the size of the sample from M to an upper
bound of M/Cp probabilistically with a lower bound of 1 −(N/Cp). Here M is
the number of examples in the image.
Lemma 3. As Cp →N the lower probability bound drops to zero, implying large
number of small decompositions D can be achieved. Vice versa for Cp →∞.
It was stated that the image can be reconstructed from pixel sequences at a
certain level of compromise. From lemma 2, it can be seen that Cp reduces the
sample size while inducing a certain amount of error due to loss of information
via averaging. This reduction in sample size indicates the level of compromise
at which the image is to processed. This reduction in sample size or level of
compromise is directly related to the construction of probabilistically bounded
decompositions also. Since the decompositions are generated via the usage of
Cp in equation 1, the belief of their existence in terms of a lower probability
bound (from lemma 1) suggests a conﬁdence in the amount of error incurred
in reconstruction of the image. For a particular pixel, this reconstruction error
can be computed by squaring the diﬀerence between the value of the intensity
in the original image and the intensity value assigned after clustering. Since
a somewhat homogeneous decomposition is bounded probabilistically, the re-
construction error of pixels that constitute it are also bounded probabilistically.
Thus for all decompositions, the summation of reconstruction errors for all pixels
is bounded. The bound indicates the conﬁdence in the generated reconstruction
error. Also, by lemma 2, since the number of decompositions or clusters is upper
bounded, the total reconstruction error is also upper bounded. It now remains
to be proven that for a particular level of compromise, the error rates converge
as the number of processed examples and the number of clusters increase.
In algorithm 1, three error rates are computed as the random sequence of ex-
amples get processed. For each original pixel xi ∈RN in the image, let xR
i be the
intensity value assigned after clustering. Then the reconstruction error for pixel
xi is norm-2 ||xi −xR
i ||2. Since a pixel is assigned to a particular decomposition
Dq, it gets a value of the mean of the all pixels that constitute the decomposition
Dq. Thus the reconstruction error for a pixel turns out to be ||xi −Eq(x)||2. For
each cluster q, the reconstruction error is ErrDq = Pn
i=1 ||xi −Eq(x)||2. Note
that the error also indicates how much the examples deviate from the mean of
their respective cluster. As new examples are processed based on the information
present from the previous examples, the total error computed at after processing
the ﬁrst ptcntr examples in a random sequence is Errval = Pclustercntr
q=1
ErrDq.
The error rate for these ptcntr examples is Err1 = Errval/ptcntr. Finally, an
error rate is computed that captures how the deviation of the examples from

10
Sinha
Fig. 2. Error rate Err1 for a particular sequence with increasing number of examples
with Cp = 7.
their respective cluster means happen, after the formation of a new cluster. This
error is denoted by Err2. The formula for Err2 is the same as Err1 but with
a minute change in conception. The Errval are divided by the total number of
point processed after the formation of every new cluster.
Theorem 1. Let Zi be a random sequence that represents the entire image I.
If Zi is decomposed into clusters via the Chebyshev Inequality using the unsuper-
vised learner, then the reconstruction error rate Err1 converges asymptotically
with a probabilistically lower bound or conﬁdence level of 1 −N/Cp or greater.
Proof. It is known that the total reconstruction error after ptcntr examples have
been processed, is Errval = Pclustercntr
q=1
ErrDq. And the error rate is Err1 =
Errval/ptcntr. It is also known from equation 1 that an example is associated to
a particular decomposition Dq if it satisﬁes the constraint (xt −Eq(x))T Σ−1
q
(xt−Eq(x)) < Cp. Since Cp deﬁnes level of compromise on the image via lemma 2
and the decompositions Dq is almost homogeneous, all examples that constitute
a decomposition have similar attribute values. Due to this similarity between
the attribute values, the non-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix in the
inequality above approach to zero. Thus, Σ−1
q
≈det|Σ−1
q |I, were I is the identity
matrix. The inequality then equates to:
(xt −Eq(x))T det|Σ−1
q |I(xt −Eq(x)) ⪅Cp
det|Σ−1
q |(xt −Eq(x))T I(xt −Eq(x)) ⪅Cp
(xt −Eq(x))T I(xt −Eq(x)) ⪅
Cp
det|Σ−1
q |

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
11
||xt −Eq(x))||2 ⪅
Cp
det|Σ−1
q |
(3)
Thus, if xi = xt was the last example to be associated to a decomposition, the
reconstruction error ||xi −Eq(x)|| for that example would be upper bounded be
Cp
det|Σ−1
q
|. Consequently, the total error after processing ptcntr examples is also
upper bounded, i.e.
Errval =
clustercntr
X
q=1
ErrDq
=
clustercntr
X
q=1
n
X
i=1
||xi −Eq(x)||2
⪅
clustercntr
X
q=1
n
X
i=1
Cp
det|Σ−1
q |
⪅
clustercntr
X
q=1
n
X
i=1
Cp
det|Σ−1
q |
(4)
Thus the error rate Err1 = Errval/ptcntr is also upper bounded. Diﬀerent de-
compositions may have diﬀerent Σ−1
q , but in the worst case scenario, if the
decomposition with the lowest covariance is substituted for every other decompo-
sitions, then the upper bound on the error is
Cp
det|Σ−1
lowest|×ptcntr Σclustcntr
q=1
Σn
i=1(1)
which equates to
Cp
det|Σ−1
lowest|.
⊓⊔
It is important to note that this error rate converges to a ﬁnite value asymptot-
ically as the number of processed examples increases. This is because initially
when the learner has not seen enough examples to learn and solidify the knowl-
edge in terms of a stable mean and variance of decompositions, the error rate
Err1 increases as new examples are presented. This is attributed to the fact
that new clusters are formed more often in the intial stages, due to lack of prior
knowledge. After a certain time, when large number of examples have been en-
countered to help solidify the knowledge or stabilize the decompositions, then
addition of further examples does not increment the error. This stability of clus-
ters is checked via the multivariate formulation of the Chebyshev inequality in
equation 2. The stability also casues the error rate Err1 to stabilize and thus in-
dicate its convergence in a bounded manner with a probabilistic conﬁdence level.
Thus for any value of ptcntr, there exists an upper bound on reconstruction error,
which stabilizes as ptcntr increases.
For Cp = 7, the image (c) in ﬁgure 1 shows the clustered image that is gener-
ated using the unsupervised conformal learning algorithm. Pixels in a cluster of
the generated image have the mean of the cluster as their intensity value or the
label. This holds for all the clusters in the generated image. The total number
of clusters generated for a particular random sequence was 159. The error rate
Err1 is depicted in ﬁgure 2.

12
Sinha
Fig. 3. Error rate Err2 for a particular sequence with increasing number of clusters
and Cp = 7.
Theorem 2. Let Zi be a random sequence that represents the entire image I.
If Zi is decomposed into clusters via the Chebyshev Inequality using the unsuper-
vised learner, then the reconstruction error rate Err2 converges asymptotically
with a probabilistically lower bound or conﬁdence level of 1 −N/Cp or greater.
Proof. The error rate Err2 is the computation of error after each new cluster is
formed. The upper bound on Err2 as the number of clusters or decompositions
increase follows a proof similar to one presented in theorem 1..
⊓⊔
Again for the same Cp = 7, the image (c) in ﬁgure 1, the error rate Err2 is
depicted in ﬁgure 3. Intuitively, it can be seen that both the reconstruction error
rates converge to an approximately similar value.
The theoretical proofs and the lemmas suggest that, for a given level of
compromise Cp there exists an upper bound on the reconstruction error as well as
the number of clusters. But this reconstruction error and the number of clusters
is dependent on a pixel sequence presented to the learner. Does this mean that
for a particular level of compromise one may ﬁnd values of reconstruction error
and number of clusters that may never converge to a ﬁnite value, when a random
sample of pixel sequences that represent an image are processed by the learner?
Or in a more simpliﬁed way, is it possible to ﬁnd a reconstruction error and the
number of clusters at a particular level of compromise that best represents the
image? This points to the problem of whether an image can be reconstructed at
a particular level of compromise where there is a high probability of ﬁnding a
low reconstruction error and the number of clusters, from a sample of sequences.

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
13
Fig. 4. The probability density estimates for (a) Err1 (b) Err2 and (c) the number of
clusters obtained via the unsupervised conformal learner, generated over 1000 random
sequences representing the same image with Cp = 10.
The existence of such a probability value would require the knowledge of the
probability distribution of the reconstruction error over increasing (1) number
of examples and (2) number of clusters generated. In this work, kernel density
estimation (KDE) is used to estimate the probability distribution of the recon-
struction error Err1 and Err2. To investigate into the quality of the solution
obtained, the error rates were generated for diﬀerent random sequences and a
KDE was evaluated on the observations. The density estimate empirically point
to the least error rates with high probability. It was found that the error rates
Err1, Err2 and the number of clusters, all converge to a particular value, for a
given image.

14
Sinha
Fig. 5. Behaviour of reconstruction error (via KDE) and number of cluster or decom-
positions (via KDE) based on increasing values of Cp.
For Cp = 10, the probability density estimates were generated using the den-
sity estimates on error rates and the number of clusters obtained on 1000 random
sequences of the same image. It was found that the error rates Err1, Err2 and
the number of clusters converge to 33.1762, 35.9339 and 38, respectively. Figure
4 shows the graphs for the same. It can be seen from graphs (a) and (b) in ﬁgure
4, that both Err1 and Err2 converge nearly to the similar values.
It can been noted that with increasing value of the parameter Cp, the bound
on the decomposition expands which further leads to generation of lower number
of clusters required to reconstruct the image. Thus it can be expected that at
lower levels of compromise, the reconstruction error (via KDE) is low but the
number of clusters (via KDE) is very high and vice versa. Figure 5 shows the
behaviour of these reconstruction error and number of clusters generated as
the level of compromise increases. High reconstruction error does not necessarily
mean that the representation of the image is bad. It only suggests the granularity
of reconstruction obtained. Thus the reconstruction of the image can yield ﬁner
details at low level of compromise and point to segmentations at high level of
compromise. Regularization over the level of compromise and the number of
clusters would lead to a reconstruction which has low reconstruction error as
well as adequate number of decompositions that represent an image properly.
There are a few points that need to be remembered when applying such
an online learning paradigm. The reconstructed results come near to original
image only at a level of imposed compromise. As the size of dataset or the
image increases, the time consumed and the number of computations involved for
processing also increases. To start with, the learner would perform well in clean
images than on noisy images. Adaptations need to be made for processing noisy
images or the pre-processing would be a necessary step before application of such
an algorithm. Other inequalities can also be taken into account for multivariate
information online. It would be tough to compare the algorithm with other

TI Cluster Approximation Via Multivariate Chebyshev Inequality
15
powerful clustering algorithms as the proposed work presents a weak learner and
provides a general solution with no tight bounds on the quality of clustering.
Nevertheless, the current work contributes to estimation of cluster number
in an unsupervised paradigm using transductive-inductive learning strategy. It
can be said that for a ﬁxed Chebyshev parameter, in a bootstrapped sequence
sampling environment without replacement, the unsupervised learner converges
to a ﬁnite error rate along with the a ﬁnite number of clusters. The result in
terms of clustering and the error rates may not be the most optimal (where the
meaning depends on the goal of optimization), but it does give an aﬃrmative
clue that image decomposition is robust and convergent.
4
Conclusion
A simple transductive-inductive learning strategy for unsupervised learning paradigm
is presented with the usage of multivariate Chebyshev inequality. Theoretical
proofs of convergence in number of clusters for a particular level of compromise
show (1) stability of result over a sequence and (2) robustness of probabilistically
estimated approximation of cluster number over a random sample of sequences,
representing the same multidimensional data. Lastly, upper bounds generated
on the number of clusters point to a limited search space.
