Neural Storage: A New Paradigm of Elastic Memory
Prabuddha Chakraborty and Swarup Bhunia
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Abstract—Storage and retrieval of data in a computer
memory plays a major role in system performance.
Traditionally, computer memory organization is ‘static’
– i.e., they do not change based on the application-
speciﬁc characteristics in memory access behaviour
during system operation. Speciﬁcally, the association
of a data block with a search pattern (or cues) as well
as the granularity of a stored data do not evolve. Such
a static nature of computer memory, we observe, not
only limits the amount of data we can store in a given
physical storage, but it also misses the opportunity for
dramatic performance improvement in various applica-
tions. On the contrary, human memory is characterized
by seemingly inﬁnite plasticity in storing and retrieving
data – as well as dynamically creating/updating the
associations between data and corresponding cues. In
this paper, we introduce Neural Storage (NS), a brain-
inspired learning memory paradigm that organizes the
memory as a ﬂexible neural memory network. In NS,
the network structure, strength of associations, and
granularity of the data adjust continuously during sys-
tem operation, providing unprecedented plasticity and
performance beneﬁts. We present the associated stor-
age/retrieval/retention algorithms in NS, which inte-
grate a formalized learning process. Using a full-blown
operational model, we demonstrate that NS achieves
an order of magnitude improvement in memory access
performance for two representative applications when
compared to traditional content-based memory.
I. Introduction
Digital memory is an integral part of a computer system.
It plays a major role in deﬁning system performance.
Memory access behaviour largely depends on the nature of
the incoming data and the speciﬁc information-processing
tasks that operate on the data. Applications ranging
from wildlife surveillance [2] to infrastructure damage
monitoring [3], [4] that collect, store and analyze data
often exhibit distinct memory access (e.g., storage and
retrieval of speciﬁc data blocks) behaviour. Even within
the same application, such behaviour may change with
time. Hence, these systems with variable and constantly
evolving memory access pattern can beneﬁt from a mem-
ory organization that can dynamically tailor itself to meet
the requirements. Furthermore, many applications deal
with multi-modal data (e.g., image and sound) [5], [6] and
in such applications, the data storage/access requires spe-
cial considerations in terms of their temporal importance
and inter-modality relations. A data storage framework
which can eﬃciently store and retrieve multi-modal data
is crucial for these applications.
Many computing systems, speciﬁcally the emergent
internet of things (IoT) edge devices, come with tight
Fig. 1: Neural Storage: A new paradigm of elastic memory.
constraints on memory storage capacity, energy and com-
munication bandwidth [7]. These systems often deal with
a huge inﬂux of data with varying degree of relevance to
the application. Hence, storing and transmitting less useful
data at higher quality may not be optimal. Due to these
requirements, it is important for a memory framework to
be eﬃcient in terms of energy, space and transmission
bandwidth utilization by focusing on what is important
for the speciﬁc application.
Based on these observations, an ideal data storage
framework for these applications should be:
• Flexible and dynamic in nature to accommodate for
the constantly evolving application requirements and
scenarios.
• Able to emulate a virtually inﬁnite memory that
can deal with a huge inﬂux of sensor data which is
common in case of many IoT applications.
• Able to eﬃciently handle multi-modal data in the
context of the application-speciﬁc requirements.
• Geared towards increasing storage, transmission and
energy utilization eﬃciency.
arXiv:2101.02729v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2021

Traditional memory frameworks [1] (both address-
operated and content-operated) are not ideal for meeting
these requirements due to lack of ﬂexibility in their mem-
ory organization and operations. In an address-operated
memory, each address is associated with a data unit. And
for a content-operated memory, each data-search-pattern
(cue/tag) is associated with a single data unit. Hence, in
both cases, the mapping is one-to-one and does not evolve
without direct admin/user interference. Data in a tradi-
tional memory is also stored at a ﬁxed quality/granularity.
When a traditional memory runs out of space, it can
either stop accepting new data or remove old data based
on a speciﬁc data replacement policy. All these traits of
a traditional memory are tied to its static nature which
makes it not suitable for modern applications that have
evolving needs and requirements as established earlier. For
example, let us consider a wildlife image-based surveillance
system which is geared towards detecting wolves. Any
image frame that does not contain a wolf is considered to
be of lower importance than any frame containing at least
one wolf. However, a traditional memory, due to lack of
dynamism in terms of data granularity management, will
store the image frames at the same quality regardless of
their importance to the application. Additionally, due to
lack of dynamism in memory organization, searching for a
wolf image will take the same eﬀort/time as it would take
for searching any rarely accessed and unimportant image.
To meet the requirements of many modern applications,
it is attractive to incorporate ﬂexibility and dynamism in
the digital memory which we believe can be best achieved
through statistics-guided learning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are widely used to solve
diﬀerent problems where static algorithms are not ideal.
Similarly, meeting the dynamic memory requirements can
not be possible using static algorithms. Hence incorpora-
tion of intelligence may be an ideal solution for addressing
current digital memory limitations.
We draw inspiration from human biological memory
which has many useful properties which can be beneﬁcial
for a digital memory as well. A human brain due to
‘plasticity’ [8], [9], undergoes internal change based on
external stimuli and adapts to diﬀerent scenarios presented
to it. Data stored in a human brain is lossy in nature and
are subject to decay and feature-loss. However, important
memories decay at a slower rate and repetition/priming
can lead to prolonged retention of important mission-
critical data [10], [11]. Human memory also receives and
retains data from multiple sensory organs and intelligently
stores this multi-modal data for optimal performance [10].
If these intelligence guided human memory properties can
be realized in a digital memory with the help of ML, then
it would be ideal for the emergent applications.
With this vision in mind, we put forward a paradigm-
shifting
content-operated
memory
framework,
Neural
Storage (NS) which mimics the intelligence of human brain
for eﬃcient storage and speedy access. In NS, the memory
storage is a network of cues (search-patterns) and data,
we term Neural Memory Network (NMN). Based on the
feedback generated from each memory operation we use
reinforcement learning to (1) optimize the NMN data/cue
organization and (2) adjust the granularity (feature qual-
ity) of speciﬁc data units. NS is designed to have the same
interface as any traditional Content Addressable Memory
(CAM). This allows NS to eﬃciently replace traditional
CAMs in any application as shown in Fig. 1. Applications
which are resistant to imprecise data storage/retrieval and
deals with storing data of varying importance will beneﬁt
the most from using NS.
For quantitatively analyzing the eﬀectiveness of using
NS as a memory system, we implement a NS memory
simulator with an array of tunable hyperparameter. We
run diﬀerent real-life applications using NS and observe
that the NS framework utilizes orders of magnitude less
space, and exhibits higher retrieval eﬃciency while incur-
ring minimal impact on the application performance.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1) We present a new paradigm of learning computer
memory, called NS, that can track data access pat-
terns to dynamically organize itself for providing
high eﬃciency in terms of data storage and retrieval
performance. We describe the learnable parameters
and the learning process, which is incorporated into
the store, retrieve and retention operations.
2) For quantitatively analyzing the capabilities of NS,
we present a memory performance simulator with an
array of tunable hyperparameters.
3) We present a formal process to select and customize
NS for a target application. We also provide a com-
prehensive performance analysis of NS using two sep-
arate datasets representative of real-life applications
and demonstrate its merit compared to traditional
memory.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II discusses diﬀerent state-of-the-art digital memory
frameworks and provides motivations for the proposed
intelligent digital memory design. Section III describes in
details the proposed memory framework. Section IV quan-
titatively analyzes the eﬀectiveness of the NS framework
through multiple case-studies. Section V concludes the
main paper. Appendix A provides additional details about
the proposed hyperparameters. Appendix B provides de-
tailed algorithms for diﬀerent NS operations/procedures
referenced in the main paper. Appendix C provides de-
tails about the experimental setup and hyperparameters
used during the case studies. Appendix D analyzes the
dynamism of NS in greater depth. Appendix E discusses
diﬀerent applications which may beneﬁt from using NS.
II. Background and Motivation
In this section, we shall ﬁrst discuss the major diﬀer-
ence between our propose memory framework (NS) and
existing similar technologies. After that, we will provide
motivations that led to the development of NS.

TABLE I: Comparison between NS and traditional memory frameworks. The dynamic nature of NS, guided by
continuous reinforcement learning, makes it adaptable to the application requirements and the usage scenarios.
Dynamism
Associativity
Memory Organization
Learning
Data
Resolution
Association
<Cue, Data> <Data, Data> <Cue, Cue>
Space
Eﬃciency
Address Operated Memory
N/A
Fixed
User deﬁned
N/A
N/A
N/A
Low
BCAM, TCAM, Associative
N/A
Fixed
User deﬁned
One-to-One
N/A
N/A
Low
NS (Proposed)
Continuous Changes Based on
Access Pattern
Changes Based on
Access Pattern
Many-to-Many
Many-to-Many Many-to-Many
High
A. Computer Memory: A Brief Review
Computer memory is one of the key components
of a computer system [12]. Diﬀerent types of memory
have been proposed, implemented and improved over the
decades. However, digital memories can still be can be
broadly divided into two categories based on how data
is stored and retrieved: (1) address operated and (2)
content operated [1]. In an address operated memory (for
example a Random Access Memory or RAM [12], [13]),
the access during read/write is done based on a memory
address/location. During data retrieval/load, the memory
system takes in an address as input and returns the
data associated with it. Diﬀerent variants of RAM such
as SRAM (Static Random Access Memory) and DRAM
(Dynamic Random Access Memory) are widely used [12].
In a content operated memory, on the contrary, memory
access during read/write operations is performed based on
a search pattern (i.e. content).
Fig. 2: Taxonomy of content operated memory used in
computer systems. The proposed memory organization
falls under the content-addressable memory category and
is suitable for diverse application domains as shown.
A COM (Content Operated Memory) [14], [1] does
not assign any speciﬁc data to a speciﬁc address during
the store operation. During data retrieval/load, the user
provides the memory system with a search pattern/tag
and the COM searches the entire memory and returns
the address in the memory system where the required
data is stored. This renders the search process extremely
slow if performed sequentially. To speed up this process of
content-based searching, parallelization is employed which
generally requires additional hardware. And adding more
hardware makes the COM a rather expensive solution lim-
iting its large-scale usability. A COM can be implemented
in several ways as shown in Fig. 2, each with its own set of
advantages and disadvantages. In an associative memory,
the data are stored with a varying degree of restrictions.
In a direct-mapped memory, each data can only be placed
in one speciﬁc memory location. The restriction is less
stringent in case of set-associative memory and in-case of
fully associative memory, any data can reside anywhere in
the memory. On the other hand, Neuromorphic associative
memory behaves in a similar way as the standard associate
memory at a high level but at a low-level, it exploits device
properties to implement neuronal behaviour for increased
eﬃciency [15]. A CAM (Content-Addressable Memory) is
similar to an associative memory in regards to its read and
write behaviour however the implementation is diﬀerent.
In COM, there is a requirement for replacing old data units
with new incoming data units in-case the memory runs out
of space. The data unit/block to replace is determined
based on a predeﬁned replacement policy. CAM is the
most popular variant of COM and is being used for decades
in the computing domain but the high-level architecture
of a CAM has not evolved much. Instead, researchers have
mostly focused on how to best physically design a CAM
to improve overall eﬃciency. SRAM bitcells are used as
a backbone for any CAM cell [14], [1]. Extra circuitry
is introduced to perform the parallel comparison between
the search pattern and the stored data. This is typically
implemented using an XOR operation. The high degree of
parallelism increases the circuit area and power overheads
along with the cost. Cells implemented using NAND gates
are more energy-eﬃcient at a cost of speed. NOR gate
based cells are faster but more energy-intensive.
Traditional CAMs are designed to be precise [1]. No data
degradation happens over time and in most cases, a perfect
match is required with respect to the search pattern/tag
to qualify for a successful retrieval. This feature is essential
for certain applications such as destination MAC address
lookup for ﬁnding the forwarding port in a network device.
However, there are several applications in implantable,
multimedia, Internet-of-Things (IoT) and data mining
which can tolerant imprecise storage and retrieval. Ternary
Content Addressable Memory (TCAM) is the only COM
which allows partial match using a mask and are widely
used in layer 3 network switches.
NS and CAM are both content operated memory frame-
works. However, there are several diﬀerences between a
traditional CAM and NS and some of the important
ones are highlighted in Table I. For both Binary Content
Addressable Memory (BCAM) and Ternary Content Ad-
dressable Memory (TCAM): (1) there are no learning com-
ponents, (2) data resolution remains ﬁxed unless directly

Fig. 3: Memory organization of NS with two memory hives. Data neurons (DN) store data and cue neurons (CN)
store cues/tags. Each memory hive stores a speciﬁc data type (e.g., image, sound etc.). Localities are designed to store
data consisting of speciﬁc features. We refer to this memory organization, the weighted graph of DN(s) and CN(s), as
Neural Memory Network (NMN).
manipulated by the user, (3) associations between search-
pattern (tag/cue) and data remain static unless directly
modiﬁed, (4) only a one-to-one mapping relation exists
between search-pattern/cue and data units. Consequently,
space and data fetch eﬃciency is generally low and we
provide supporting results for this claim in Section IV.
Apart from standard computer memory organizations,
researchers have also looked into diﬀerent software level
memory organizations for eﬃcient data storage and re-
trieval. Instance retrieval frameworks are some such soft-
ware wrappers on top of traditional memory systems
that are used for feature-based data storage and retrieval
tasks [16]. These systems are mostly used for storing and
retrieving images. During the training phase (code-book
generation), visual words are identiﬁed/learned based on
either SIFT features or CNN features of a set of im-
age data. These visual words are, in most cases, cluster
centroids of the feature distribution. Insertion of data in
the system follows and is generally organized in a tree-
like data structure. The location of each data in this
data structure is determined based on the visual words
(previously learned) that exist in the input image. During
the retrieval phase, a search-image is provided and in an
attempt to search for similar data in the framework, the
tree is traversed based on the visual words in the search
image. If a good match exists between the search image
and a stored image, then that speciﬁc stored image is
retrieved. The learning component in an instance retrieval
frameworks is limited to the code-book generation phase
which takes place during initialization. Furthermore, once
a data unit is inserted in the framework, no more location
and accessibility change is possible. No association exists
between data units and granularity of data units do not
change. On contrary, the overall dynamism and possibili-
ties of a NS framework are much more.
Another software level memory organization proposed
by Niederee et. al. outlines the beneﬁt of forgetfulness
in a digital memory[17]. However, due to the lack of
quantitative analysis and implementation details, it is
unclear how eﬀective this framework might be.
B. Motivation: Taking Inspiration from Human Memory
Computer and human memory are both designed to per-
form data storage, retention and retrieval. Although the
functioning of human memory is far from being completely
formalized and understood, it is clear that it is vastly
diﬀerent in the way data is handled. Several properties
of the human brain have been identiﬁed which allows it to
be far more superior than traditional computer memory in
certain aspects. We believe that if some of these proper-
ties can be realized in a digital computer memory then
many applications can beneﬁt greatly. In the following
subsections, we will look into some of the most important
properties of the human brain and envision their potential
digital counterparts.
1) Virtually Inﬁnite Capacity: The capacity of the hu-
man brain is diﬃcult to estimate. John von Neumann, in
his book “The computer and the brain” [18], estimated
that human brain has a capacity of 1020 bits with the
assumptions: (1) All the inputs to the brain in its entire
lifetime are stored forever, and (2) there are 1010 neu-
rons in our brain. Researchers now even believe that our
working memory (short-term memory) can be increased
through “plasticity”, provided certain circumstances. Ac-
cording to L¨ovd´en et al., “... increase in working-memory
capacity constitutes a manifestation of plasticity ...” [9].
On top of that, due to intelligent pruning of unnecessary
information, a human brain is able to retain only the key
aspects of huge chunks of data for a long period of time.
If a digital memory can be designed with this human
brain feature, then the computer system, through intel-
ligent dynamic memory re-organization (learning-guided

plasticity) and via pruning features of unnecessary data
(learned from statistical feedback), can attain a state
of virtually inﬁnite capacity. For example, in a wildlife
image-based surveillance system which is geared towards
detecting wolves, the irrelevant data (non-wolf frames)
can be subject to compression/feature-loss to save space
without hampering the eﬀectiveness of the application.
2) Imprecise/Imperfect Storage and Access: The idea of
pruning unnecessary data, as mentioned in the previous
section, is possible because the human brain operates in
an imprecise domain in contrary to most traditional digital
memory frameworks. Human brain retrieval operation is
imprecise in most situations[10] but intelligent feature
extraction, analysis, and post-processing almost nullify the
eﬀect of this impreciseness. Also, certain tasks may not
require precise memory storage and recall. For these tasks
only some high-level feature extracted from the raw data
is suﬃcient.
Hence, supporting the imprecise memory paradigm in a
digital memory is crucial for attaining the virtually inﬁnite
capacity and faster data access. For example, a wildlife
image-based surveillance system can operate in the impre-
cise domain because some degree of compression/feature-
reduction of images will not completely destroy the high-
level features necessary for its detection tasks. This can
lead to higher storage and transmission eﬃciency.
3) Dynamic Organization: We have mentioned that
plasticity can lead to increased memory capacity but it
also provides several other beneﬁts in the human brain.
According to Lindenberger et al., “Plasticity can be deﬁned
as the brain’s capacity to respond to experienced demands
with structural changes that alter the behavioural reper-
toire.” [8]. Hence plasticity leads to better accessibility
of important and task-relevant data in the human brain.
And the ease-of-access of a particular memory is adjusted
with time-based on an individual’s requirements. This idea
is also similar to priming [11] and it was observed that
priming a human brain with certain memories helps in
quicker retrieval.
If we can design a digital memory which can re-organize
itself based on data access patterns and statistical feed-
back, then there will be great beneﬁts in terms of reducing
the overall memory access eﬀort. For example, a wildlife
image-based surveillance system which is geared towards
detecting wolves will have to deal with retrieval requests
mostly related to frames containing wolves. Dynamically
adjusting the memory organization can enable faster ac-
cess to data which are requested the most.
4) Learning Guided Memory Framework: Ultimately,
the human brain can boast of so many desirable qualities
mainly due to its ability to learn and adapt. It is safe to
say, the storage policies of the human brain also vary from
person to person and time to time [10]. Depending on the
need and requirement, certain data are prioritized over
others. The process of organizing the memories, feature
reduction, storage and retrieval procedure changes over
time based on statistical feedback. This makes each human
brain unique and tuned to excel at a particular task at a
particular time.
Hence, the ﬁrst step towards mimicking the properties
of the human brain is to incorporate a learning component
in the digital memory system. We envision that using this
learning component, the digital memory will re-organize
itself over time and alter the granularity of the data to
become increasingly eﬃcient (in terms of storage, retention
and retrieval) at a particular task. For example, a wildlife
image-based surveillance system which is geared towards
detecting wolves will greatly beneﬁt from a memory sys-
tem which can learn to continuously re-organize itself
to enable faster access to application-relevant data and
continuously control the granularity of the stored data
depending on the evolving usage scenario.
III. Neural Storage Framework
To incorporate dynamism and embody the desirable
qualities of a human brain in a digital memory, we have
designed NS. It is an intelligent, self-organizing, virtually
inﬁnite content addressable memory framework capable of
dynamically modulating data granularity. We propose a
novel memory architecture, geared for learning, along with
algorithms for implementing standard operations/tasks
such as store, retrieve and retention.
A. Memory Organization
The NS memory organization can be visualized as a
network and we refer to it as “Neural Memory Network”
(NMN). The NMN, as shown in Fig. 3 consists of multiple
hives each of which is used to store data of a speciﬁc
modality (type). For example, if an application requires
to store image and audio data, then the NS framework
will instantiate two separate memory hives for each data
modality. This allows the search to be more directed based
on the query data type. It is hypothesized that human
memories are grouped up together to form small localities
based on data similarity. We capture this idea by creating
small memory localities within each hive that are designed
to store similar data. The fundamental units of the NMN
are (1) cue neurons and (2) data neurons. Each cue neuron
stores a cue (data search pattern or tag) and each data
neuron stores an actual data unit. Each data neuron is
associated with a number denoting its ‘memory strength’
which governs the data feature details or quality of the
data inside it. A cue is essential a vector representing a
certain concept and it can be of two types: (1) Coarse-
grained cue and (2) Fine-grained Cue. Coarse-grained cues
are used to navigate the NMN eﬃciently while searching
(data retrieve operation) for a speciﬁc data and while
navigating, the ﬁne-grained cues are used to determine the
data neuron(s) which is/are suitable for retrieval. A cue is
a vector representing a particular concept but for the sake
of simplicity, we shall use speciﬁc words when referring
to certain cues. For example, in a wildlife surveillance
system, cue neurons may contain vectors corresponding
to a “Wolf”, “Deer”, etc but when talking about these

cue-neurons we shall refer to them directly with the name
of the concept they represent. The data neurons, for this
example, will be image frames containing wolves, deer,
jungle background, etc. Furthermore, if the system is
designed to detect wolves, then the NS framework can be
conﬁgured to have a memory locality for wolf-frames and
one for non-wolf frames.
Each hive comes with its own Cue Bank which stores
cue neurons arranged as a graph. The cue neuron and
data neuron associations (<cue neuron, cue neuron>
and <cue neuron, data neuron>, <data neuron, data
neuron>) change with time, based on the memory ac-
cess pattern and framework hyperparameters. To facilitate
multi-modal data search, connections between data neu-
rons across memory hives are allowed. For example when
searched with the cue “Wolf” (the visual feature of a wolf),
if the system is expected to fetch both images and sound
data related to the concept of “Wolf”, then this above-
mentioned ﬂexibility will save search eﬀort.
It is important to note that, the entire memory orga-
nization can be viewed as a single weighted graph where
each node is either a data neuron or a cue neuron. The
associations in the NMN are strengthened and weakened
during store, retrieve and retention operations. With time,
new associations are also formed and old associations
may get deleted. The data neuron memory strengths are
also modulated during memory operations to increase
storage eﬃciency. The rigidity provided by hives, localities
and cue-banks can be adjusted based on the application
requirements.
B. Parametric Space
We propose several parameters for NS to help modulate
how it functions. These parameters are of two types: (1)
Learnable Parameters which changes throughout the
system lifetime guided by reinforcement-learning and (2)
Hyperparameters which are determined during system
initialization and changed infrequently by the memory
user/admin.
1) Learnable Parameters: We consider the following
parameters as learnable parameters for NS:
1) Data
Neuron
and
Cue
Neuron
Weighted
Graph: The weighted graph (NMN) directly impacts
the data search eﬃciency (time and energy). The
elements of the graph adjacency matrix are considered
as learnable parameters. If there are D number of
data neuron and C number of cue neuron at any given
point of time, then the graph adjacency matrix will
be of dimension (D + C, D + C) .
2) Memory Strength Array: The memory strengths
of all the data neurons are also considered as learnable
parameters. They jointly dictate the space-utilization,
transmission eﬃciency and retrieved data quality.
These parameters constantly evolve based on the system
usage via a reinforcement learning process. We will do a
deeper dive into the learning process in Section III-C.
2) Hyperparameters: We have also deﬁned a set of
hyperparameters which inﬂuences the NS memory organi-
zation and the learning guided operations. These hyperpa-
rameters can be set/changed by the user during the setup
or during the operational stage. The ﬁrst hyperparameter
is the number of memory hives and we propose the
following hyperparameters for each hive:
1) Number of localities: Each locality is used to store
a speciﬁc nature of data. It is an unsigned integer
value.
2) Memory decay rate of each locality: Controls
the rate at which data neuron memory strength and
features are lost due to inactivity.
3) Association decay rate of each locality: Controls
the rate at which NMN associations losses strength
due to inactivity.
4) Mapping between data features and localities:
This mapping dictates the segregation of application
relevant data and their assignment to a locality with
a low decay rate.
5) Data features and cue extraction AI (Artiﬁcial
Intelligence) models: These models are used to
obtain more insights about the data. They should be
selected based on the application and data-type being
processed.
6) Data neuron matching metric: Used during re-
trieve operation for ﬁnding a good match and during
store operation for data neuron merging. For example,
this metric can be something like cosine similarity.
7) Neural elasticity parameters: Determines the ag-
gressiveness with which unused data neurons are com-
pressed in-case of space shortage.
8) Association weight adjustment parameter: Used
as a step size for increasing/decreasing association
weights inside the NMN. A higher value will increase
the dynamism but lower the stability.
9) Minimum association weight (ε): It is an unsigned
integer which limits the decay of association weight
beyond a certain point.
10) Degree of impreciseness (ϕ): Limits the amount of
data feature which is allowed to be lost due to memory
strength decay and inactivity. It is a ﬂoating-point
number in the range [ 0 - 100 ]. 0 implies data can get
completely removed if needs arise.
11) Frequency of retention procedure (N): NS has a
retention procedure which brings in the eﬀect of age-
ing. This hyperparameter is a positive integer denot-
ing the number of normal operations to be performed
before the retention procedure is called once. A lower
value will increase dynamism at a cost of overall
operation eﬀort (energy and time consumption).
12) Compression techniques: For each memory hive
we must specify the algorithm to be used for com-
pressing the data when required. For example, we can
use JPEG [19] compression in an image hive.
More details can be found in Appendix A.

Fig. 4: The proposed reinforcement learning architecture
used to incorporate learning in the NS framework. Each
memory operation generates a feedback (E), which is used
to modify and optimize the NMN by changing its current
state S to the newly computed state S’.
C. Learning Process
The learnable parameters, governing the NMN of NS
are updated based on feedback from memory operations.
The goal/objective of learning is to:
1) Reduce space requirement while maintaining data
retrieval quality and application performance. This
should be achieved by learning the granularity at
which each data neuron should be stored. Less im-
portant data should be compressed and subject to
feature-loss for saving space while more important
data should be kept at a good quality. Hence this
learning should be driven based on the access-pattern.
2) Increase memory search speed by learning the right
NMN organization given current circumstances and
access-pattern bias.
In Fig. 4, we propose an external stimulus guided reac-
tional reinforcement learning (RL) architecture for incor-
porating intelligence in NS. The NS framework consists of
two main components: (1) The Neural Memory Network
(NMN) and (2) The NS Controller which manages the
NMN.
The initial state (S0) of the NMN consists of no data-
neuron (DN) and no cue-neuron (CN). During an opera-
tion when a new cue is identiﬁed (not present in the cue
bank), a new cue-neuron (CN) is generated for that cue.
Similarly, when an incoming data cannot be merged with
an existing data-neuron (DN), a new DN is created. Each
new DN is initialized with a memory strength of 100%
(this parameter dictates the data granularity/details for
the DN). When a new DN or CN is created, the new neu-
ron is connected with all other exiting neurons (DNs and
CNs) with an association weight of ε (a hyperparameter
selected by the system admin/user). So in any state, all
DNs and CNs form a fully connected weighted graph.
At the end of each operation, a feedback (E) is generated
and sent to the NS Controller module along with the snap-
shot of the current state of the NMN (S). S (essentially
the Learnable Parameters) has two components:
1) S →A: The adjacency matrix for the entire NMN.
2) S →M: The list of memory strengths of each data
neuron.
For an NMN with n total neurons (DNs and CNs) and
m number of DNs:
S →A =


a11
a12
a13
...
a1n
a21
a22
a23
...
a2n
...
...
...
...
...
an1
an2
an3
...
ann


S →M =
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
...
sm

S and E, along with the learning goals/objectives (O)
drives the reaction function f(O, E, S). The outputs of this
function are:
1) An association weight adjustment matrix (∆A) of
dimension (n, n).
2) A memory strength adjustment vector (∆M) of di-
mension (1, m).
These 2 components constitute ∆S = {∆A, ∆M}.
∆A =


δa11
δa12
δa13
...
δa1n
δa21
δa22
δa23
...
δa2n
...
...
...
...
...
δan1
δan2
δan3
...
δann


∆M =
δs1
δs2
δs3
δs4
δs5
...
δsm

We compute S′ as follows:
S′ →A =


max(ε, a11 −δa11)
...
max(ε, a1n −δa1n)
max(ε, a21 −δa21)
...
max(ε, a2n −δa21)
...
...
...
max(ε, an1 −δan1)
...
max(ε, ann −δan1)


S′ →M =


min(100, max(ϕ, s1 −δs1))
min(100, max(ϕ, s2 −δs2))
...
min(100, max(ϕ, sm −δsm))


Where, ϕ (degree of impreciseness, a hyperparameter se-
lected by the system admin/user) is the minimum memory
strength a data-neuron can have.
The memory state is updated with the newly computed
one (S′). The function f(O, E, S) for computing ∆M and
∆A can be realized in many diﬀerent ways depending on
the implementation. The updates made to the matrices
for a given state, S can be made local in nature to reduce
unnecessary computations and updates. The periodicity
of the state update can also be controlled. For the cur-
rent implementation of NS used for performing the case-
studies, the reaction function is jointly implemented using
Algo. 1, Algo. 2 and Algo. 4. The algorithms are discussed
in Appendix B and the high level concept is provided in
Fig.5 (a).

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5: (a) Flowcharts illustrating the major steps of store, retrieve and retention operations in NS. (b) Visualization
of the NS memory structure during a sequence of operations. (c) Visualization of a traditional CAM for an identical
sequence of operations.
D. Memory Operations
We have designed three fundamental NS memory opera-
tions (Store, Retrieve, and Retention) which are analogous
to similar operations that exist in any traditional CAM.
The learning process is directly embedded as parts of these
operations. The ﬂowcharts of these operations are shown
in Fig. 5 (a) and the implementation level details can be
found in Appendix B.
1) Store: The store operation (as shown in Fig. 5 (a))
starts by reading the input data (D) and insertion cues
(C). Before storing the input data using a new data
neuron, the NS framework attempts to merge it with
an existing data neuron with similar content. This sub-
operation (merge attempt) is designed to eliminate storing
similar data multiple times. During the merge attempt, a
set of candidate data neurons (selected based on accessi-
bility with respect to the insertion cues, C) are examined
for a good match and the data neurons that do not match
are penalized by being made less accessible in the NMN.
If a data neuron having a good match with the input data

(D) is found, then that matching data neuron is assigned a
higher memory strength and made more accessible in the
NMN. After the merge attempt, if a good match is not
found, a new data neuron is instantiated for the input data
(D). If a new cue (not present in the cue bank) is found
among C, then a new cue-neuron is instantiated for it.
Depending on the merge attempt success/failure, the new
data neuron or the matching data neuron respectively is
associated (if already associated, then strengthened) with
the insertion cues (C).
The learning aspect of this operation is guided by the
input data (D) and cues (C) provided. The candidate data
neurons for merging are selected using a graph traversal
starting from the insertion cues (C). The graph traversal is
guided by the NMN structure, hence wrong candidate data
neuron selections are penalized by making those candidate
data neurons less accessible (by NMN modiﬁcation). On
the other hand, selecting a candidate data neuron with a
good match, with respect to the input data, is rewarded
by making that candidate data neuron more accessible (by
NMN modiﬁcation). Association of the insertion cues (C)
with the matching data neuron or the new data neuron
can also be considered as a learning process.
2) Retrieve: The retrieve operation (as shown in Fig. 5
(a)) starts by reading the search cues (C). The search cues
consist of a set of coarse-grained cues (C1) and, optionally,
a set of ﬁne-grained cues (C2). Based on C1, a set of
candidate data neurons are selected and are checked for
an acceptable match with respect to the ﬁne-grained cues.
The candidate data neurons that do not match with any
ﬁne-grained cue in C2 are made less accessible in the NMN
and if a candidate data neuron matches with any ﬁne-
grained cue in C2, then it is made more accessible in the
NMN. At the end of the search attempt, if a matching
data neuron is located, then it is provided as output and
it also gets associated with all the search cues (C) inside
the NMN. In absence of C2, the retrieve operation returns
the ﬁrst accessed candidate data neuron during the search
phase.
Similar to the store operation, the learning in this
operation is also driven by the candidate data neuron
selection, which is primarily based on the NMN organiza-
tion/structure. A wrong candidate selection is penalized
and a good candidate selection is rewarded by making
necessary NMN state modiﬁcations. Association of search
cues (C) with the matching data neuron is also a part of
the learning process.
3) Retention: In a traditional CAM, data retention
involves maintaining the memory in a ﬁxed state. NS, on
the other hand, allows the NMN to change and restructure
itself to show the eﬀect of ageing as shown in Fig. 5 (a). All
the data neurons not accessed in the last N-operations (N
is a hyperparameter selected by the system admin/user),
are weakened. Weakening a data neuron leads to data
feature loss. This sub-operation is a form of reinforcement
learning which considers the access pattern and determines
which data neurons to shrink for saving space. The next
sub-operation is also learning-driven, where the accessibil-
ity of unused data neurons are reduced based on the access
pattern.
E. Dynamic Behaviour of NS
In comparison to traditional CAM, NS is dynamic in
several aspects. The NMN of NS changes after every
operation and the eﬀect of ageing is captured using the
retention procedure. In Fig. 5 (b), we illustrate the dy-
namic nature of NS by displaying how the NMN changes
during a sequence of operations. Accessibility of diﬀer-
ent data neurons are changed and memory strength of
data neurons increase or decrease based on the feedback-
driven reinforcement learning scheme. In contrast, as seen
in Fig. 5 (c), the traditional CAM does not show any
sign of intelligence or dynamism to facilitate data stor-
age/retrieval. In Appendix D, a more detailed simulation-
accurate depiction and description of NS’s dynamism are
provided.
F. NS Simulator
In order to quantitatively analyze the eﬀectiveness of NS
in a computer system, we have designed and implemented
a NS simulator. It has the following features:
• It can simulate all memory operations and provide
relative beneﬁts with respect to traditional CAM in
terms of operation cost.
• The framework is conﬁgurable an array of hyperpa-
rameters introduced in Section III-B2.
• The NS simulator can be mapped to any application
which is designed for using a CAM or a similar
framework.
• The simulator implements the learning paradigm as
shown in Fig. 5 and more details can be found in
Appendix B.
• The NS simulator is scalable and can simulate a
memory of arbitrarily large size.
• To ensure correctness, the simulator software is vali-
dated through manual veriﬁcation of multiple random
case studies with a large number of random opera-
tions.
We deﬁne operation cost as the amount of eﬀort it
takes to perform a particular operation. It is clear that
the iterative search-section of the NS operations (Fig. 5),
dominates over the remaining sub-operational steps in
terms of eﬀort. Hence, we approximately consider the
operation cost for NS to be the number of times the search-
section is executed for both store and retrieve operations.
For the traditional CAM, we consider the operation cost
to be the number of data entries searched/looked-up. For
both traditional CAM and NS, we do not consider any
parallelism while searching to ensure fairness. Also, the
cost of writing the data to the memory for both NS
and traditional CAM is not considered as a part of the
operation cost. For NS, the eﬀort of writing the data to
the memory is less than or equal (in the worst case, due
to data merging) to that of the traditional CAM.

Fig. 6: Results for the wildlife surveillance application which prioritizes deer images (scenario 1). (a) This plot shows the
memory growth for traditional CAM and NS. The NS memory growth is logarithmic in nature, while the Traditional
CAM space utilization grows linearly. (b) The zoomed-in portion of the memory growth plot shows the space utilization
ﬂuctuation due to access-pattern driven learning guided data compression in NS framework. (c) This plot shows the
memory quality factor for NS and Traditional CAM at diﬀerent memory size limits. It is clear that NS can operate
more eﬃciently in space-constrained scenarios. (d,e) Shows the retrieval operation costs for the NS and the traditional
CAM. NS appears to be far superior due to dynamism.
Fig. 7: Results for wildlife surveillance application which prioritizes fox/wolf images (scenario 2). We show similar plots
and highlight similar results as Fig. 6. In summary, NS appears to be more eﬃcient than traditional CAM.
G. Desirable Application Characteristics
Any application using a CAM or a similar framework
can be theoretically replaced with NS. However, certain
applications will beneﬁt more than others. The two main
traits of an application which will enhance the eﬀectiveness
of NS are described below.
1) Imprecise Store & Retrieval: Although NS can be
conﬁgured to operate at 100% data precision, it is rec-
ommended to use the framework in the imprecise mode
for storage and search eﬃciency. Assume D = Set of data
neurons in the Memory at a given instance. For a given
data Di ∈M, if Di is compressed (in lossy manner) to
Di
′ and (size(Di) = size(Di
′) −ϵ1), then in order for the
application to operate in the imprecise domain, it must be
that (Quality(Di
′) = Quality(Di
′)−ϵ2). Where size(X) is
the size of the data neuron X and Quality(X) is the quality

of the data in the data neuron X, in light of the speciﬁc
application. ϵ1 and ϵ2 are small quantities. For example,
in a wildlife surveillance system, if an image containing a
wolf is compressed slightly, it will still look like an image
with the same wolf.
2) Notion of Object(s)-of-Interest: NS works best if
there exists a set of localities within each hive which
are designated to store data containing speciﬁc objects.
Each locality can be conﬁgured to have diﬀerent memory
strength decay rate based on the importance of the data
which are designated to be stored in the respective locality.
Note that the deﬁnition of an object in this context implies
speciﬁc features of the data. For example, in case of an
image data, the object can be literal objects in the image
but for a sound data, the objects can be thought of as
a speciﬁc sound segment with certain attributes. Assume
that D is a new incoming data which must be stored in
the Memory and OL = objects in data D. Then there
may be situations where, ∃O1, O2 ∈OL | Imp(O
1) >
Imp(O
2). Where Imp(O
i) denotes the importance of
the object O
i for the speciﬁc application. For example,
in wildlife surveillance designed to detect wolves, frames
containing at least one wolf should be considered with
higher importance.
IV. Case Study
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of NS, we choose two
image datasets from two representative applications: (1)
wildlife surveillance system and (2) a UAV-based security
system. For both applications, traditional CAM can be
used for eﬃcient data storage and retrieval. We performed
a comparative study between NS and traditional CAM
for these datasets in terms of several key memory access
parameters. To model NS behaviour for the target dataset,
we use the simulator as described in Section III-F, while
traditional CAM behaviour is modelled based on standard
CAM organization [20]. Next, we present a quantitative
analysis on the beneﬁts of using NS over traditional CAM.
The hyperparameters and conﬁguration details of the
NS simulator used in the case studies are described in
Appendix C.
A. Wildlife Surveillance
Image sensors are widely deployed in the wilderness for
rare species tracking and poacher detection. The wilder-
ness can be vast and IoT devices operating in these regions
often deal with low storage space, limited transmission
bandwidth and power/energy shortage. This demands ef-
ﬁcient data storage, transmission and power management.
Interestingly, this speciﬁc application is resistant to impre-
cise data storage and retrieval because compression does
not easily destroy high-level data features in images. Also,
in the context of this application, certain objects such as
a rare animal of a speciﬁc species are considered more
important than an image with only trees or an unim-
portant animal. Hence this application has the desirable
characteristics suitable for using NS and will certainly
beneﬁt from NS’s learning guided preciseness modulation
and plasticity schemes. Informed reduction of unnecessary
data features will also lead to less transmission bandwidth
requirements. Memory power utilization is proportional to
the time required to carry out a store, load and other
background tasks. And NS, due to its eﬃcient learning-
driven dynamic memory organization, can help reduce
memory operation time and consequently can reduce over-
all operation eﬀort. Furthermore, transmitting the optimal
amount of data (instead of the full data) will lead to lesser
energy consumption as transmission power requirement is
often much higher than computation [21].
1) Dataset Description: To emulate a wildlife surveil-
lance application, we construct an image dataset from
a wildlife camera footage containing 40 diﬀerent animal
sightings. The details, of this dataset, are located at the
publicly available dataset repository that we have released
[22]. We construct two diﬀerent scenarios for carrying out
experiments on this dataset:
• Scenario 1: The system user wishes to prioritize
deer images and perform frequent deer image retrieval
tasks.
• Scenario 2: The system user wishes to prioritize
fox/wolf images and perform frequent fox/wolf image
retrieval tasks.
2) Eﬀectiveness of NS in Comparison to Traditional
CAM: Both the NS framework and the traditional CAM
are ﬁrst presented with all the images in the dataset
sequentially and then a randomly pre-generated access
pattern (based on the scenario) is used to fetch 10,000 im-
ages (non-unique) sampled from the dataset. For scenario-
1, as can be seen in Fig. 6 (a), NS has a clear advantage
over traditional CAM in terms of total space utilization.
We also observe in the zoomed-in graph, Fig. 6 (b), the
NS total space utilization ﬂuctuates and slowly decreases
after the end of the store phase. This is due to access
pattern guided optimal data granularity learning resulting
in compression/feature-loss of less important data. In
Fig. 6 (d) and Fig. 6 (e), we plot the operation cost (as
described in Section III-F) during the ﬁrst 50 retrieve
operations for traditional CAM and NS respectively. We
observe that the operation cost for the NS in comparison
to traditional CAM is signiﬁcantly lower.
In Table II, we present the numerical details of all
the experiments. The average operation cost (store and
retrieve combined) for NS is about 165 times less than
that of traditional CAM. It is worth noting that the
PSNR (Peak signal-to-noise ratio) and SSIM (Structural
similarity) of the fetched images during retrieve operations
for NS have similar values as that of traditional CAM. This
ensures that using the NS framework for this application
will not aﬀect the eﬀectiveness of the application. We
next perform the same experiments with locality-0 tuned
to store only fox/wolf frames (scenario-2). In Fig. 7 and
Table II, we observe similar trends.
3) Eﬀectiveness of NS in Constrained Settings: Most of
the image sensors used in a wildlife surveillance system are
deployed in remote locations and must make eﬃcient use

Fig. 8: Results for UAV-based car surveillance application which prioritizes car images. We show similar plots and
highlight similar observations as Fig. 6. In summary, it appears that NS is more eﬃcient than traditional CAM in
terms of both storage and retrieval eﬃciency.
TABLE II: Simulation results for diﬀerent case-studies showing the relative eﬀectiveness of NS with respect to
traditional CAM. Judging by the PSNR and SSIM of the retrieved images, it is clear that NS provides similar
performance in terms of the quality of retrieved data with respect to traditional(Trad.) CAM. This leads us to believe
that, the application performance will not be hampered from using NS. At the same time, NS is utilizing much less
space and average operation cost is far lower in comparison to traditional CAM.
Wildlife Surveillance: Emphasis on Deer (Scenario-1)
Mem. Type
PSNR
SSIM
Avg. Retrieval Op. Cost
Avg. Store Op. Cost
Avg. Op. Cost
Final Memory Size (MB)
Trad. CAM
37.65
0.79
5573.93
0
2786.96
2688.79
NS
38.39
0.82
5.51
28.23
16.87
89.46
Wildlife Surveillance: Emphasis on Fox (Scenario-2)
Mem. Type
PSNR
SSIM
Avg. Retrieval Op. Cost
Avg. Store Op. Cost
Avg. Op. Cost
Final Memory Size (MB)
Trad. CAM
37.11
0.75
3306.83
0
1653.41
2688.79
NS
38.52
0.79
4.39
22.96
13.67
97.40
UAV-based Surveillance for Safety: Emphasis on Car
Mem. Type
PSNR
SSIM
Avg. Retrieval Op. Cost
Avg. Store Op. Cost
Avg. Op. Cost
Final Memory Size (MB)
Trad. CAM
30.57
0.71
1870.41
0
935.20
801.14
NS
32.42
0.78
6.03
22.67
14.355
34.67
of bandwidth and storage space without sacriﬁcing system
performance. NS is designed to excel in this scenario
and to verify this, we limit the total memory size (X-
axis) and plot the memory quality factor (Y-axis) in
Fig. 6 (c) (scenario-1) and Fig. 7 (c) (scenario-2). The
memory quality factor is deﬁned in Eqn. 1. In both the
scenarios we observe that NS is capable of functioning at a
much lower memory capacity in comparison to Traditional
CAM. Lower space utilization also translates to less trans-
mission bandwidth consumption, in-case the system has to
upload the stored data to the cloud or other IoT devices.
Also, note that the quality factor of the NS framework
increases exponentially with the increase in memory size
limit whereas the quality factor of the traditional CAM
increases at a much slower pace.
Quality
Factor = PSNR + (100 ∗SSIM)
(1)
B. UAV-based Security System
UAV-based public safety monitoring is a critical ap-
plication which is often deployed in remote areas with
limited bandwidth and charging facilities. Additionally,
UAVs by design must deal with small battery life and
limited storage space. Hence, this application operates in
a space, power and bandwidth constraint environment.
However, this application is resistant to imprecise stor-
age and retrieval because it deals with images which
retain most of the important features even after compres-
sion/approximation. And, a UAV roaming over diﬀerent
regions captures plenty of unnecessary images which may
not be important for the application’s goal/purpose. Hence
there is a notion of object(s)-of-interest. All these charac-
teristics and requirements, make this application ideal for
using NS.

1) Dataset Description: To capture the application sce-
nario, we have created a dataset containing UAV footage
of a parking-lot [22]. The UAV remains in motion and
captures images of cars and people in the parking lot. We
construct the experiments with the assumption that the
system user wishes to prioritize car images and perform
frequent car image retrieval tasks.
2) Eﬀectiveness of NS in Comparison to Traditional
CAM: We notice a similar trend as observed for the
wildlife surveillance system. The memory space utilization
graph in Fig. 8(a), shows that the NS framework is much
more space-eﬃcient than traditional CAM. In the zoomed-
in portion, Fig. 8(b), we observe that the memory space
utilization decays after the store phase, due to compression
of data which are not being accessed. In Fig. 8(d-e), we
observe that NS is more eﬃcient in terms of retrieval
operation cost due to its learning guided dynamic memory
organization (operation cost is estimated as described in
Section III-F). From Table II, we observe that NS is about
65x more eﬃcient in terms of average operation cost (store
and retrieve combined). Furthermore, in Table II, we note
that the PSNR and SSIM of the fetched images during
retrieve operations are similar for NS and traditional
CAM. So it evident that the NS framework is equally
eﬀective as a traditional CAM in terms of serving the
application.
3) Eﬀectiveness of NS in Constrained Settings: The
UAV-based surveillance system may require to operate in
resource-constrained environment. In Fig. 8(c), we observe
that the NS framework is much more suitable when it
comes to functioning at extremely low memory space. On
the other hand, the quality factor (deﬁned in Eqn. 1) of the
traditional CAM is much lower and increases very slowly
as the storage space limitation is relaxed.
V. Conclusion
We have presented NS, a learning-guided memory
paradigm, which can provide a dramatic improvement
in memory access performance and eﬀective storage ca-
pacity in diverse applications. It draws inspiration from
the human brain to systematically incorporate learning
in the memory organization that dynamically adapts to
the data access behaviour for improving storage and ac-
cess eﬃciency. We have presented the retrieve, store and
retention processes in details that integrate and employ
data-driven knowledge. We have developed a complete per-
formance simulator for NS and compared its data storage
behaviour with traditional content-based memory. Quanti-
tative evaluation of NS for two representative applications
shows that it vastly surpasses the storage and retrieval
eﬃciency of traditional CAM. By dynamically adapting
data granularity and adjusting the associations between
data and search patterns, NS demonstrates a high-level of
plasticity that is not manifested by any existing computer
memory organization. While we have worked with high-
level memory organizational parameters here, our future
work will focus on the physical implementation of NS.
We believe, the proposed paradigm can open up avenues
for promising physical realizations to further advance
the eﬀectiveness of learning and can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt
from the data storage behaviour of emergent non-silicon
nanoscale memory devices (such as resistive or phase
change memory devices).
