Visual Story Generation Based on Emotion and Keywords
Yuetian Chen, Ruohua Li, Bowen Shi, Peiru Liu, and Mei Si
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th street, Troy, New York 12180

Abstract
Automated visual story generation aims to produce stories
with corresponding illustrations that exhibit coherence, pro-
gression, and adherence to characters’ emotional develop-
ment. This work proposes a story generation pipeline to co-
create visual stories with the users. The pipeline allows the
user to control events and emotions on the generated content.
The pipeline includes two parts: narrative and image genera-
tion. For narrative generation, the system generates the next
sentence using user-speciﬁed keywords and emotion labels.
For image generation, diffusion models are used to create
a visually appealing image corresponding to each generated
sentence. Further, object recognition is applied to the gener-
ated images to allow objects in these images to be mentioned
in future story development.
Introduction
Storytelling has been an important way of communication,
entertainment, and even making sense of the world. Stories
can be told with just text or using the visual median. The use
of visualizations can make stories more expressive and en-
gaging. In this work, we propose a visual story co-creation
system that leverages the power of large language models
and diffusion models to create short visual stories with a
user. 1
The example short stories we have in mind are from the
ROCStories, a popular dataset for commonsense reason-
ing and narrative understanding (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016)
named Story Cloze Test. Each story is composed of ﬁve sen-
tences and follows a character through a series of events
to an ending event or situation. When the data were col-
lected, the crowdsource workers were instructed that “the
story should read like a coherent story, with a speciﬁc be-
ginning and ending, where something happens in between”
(Mostafazadeh et al. 2016). These instructions make them
good examples of meaningful short stories. While the sto-
ries in the dataset only have text, our proposed system aims
to help people create similar stories with visualization.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1GitHub repository: https://github.com/Stry233/Visual-Story-
Generation-Based-on-Emotional-and-Keyword-Scheme.
To co-create visual stories, the proposed system aims to
provide plausible suggestions for story development while
allowing users to override using their own suggestions. Fig-
ure 1 shows the overall pipeline of the system. The system
is iterative in nature. Based on the existing partial story, the
system can suggest the characters’ emotions and keywords
included in the next sentence, such as an object, a loca-
tion, etc. The user can accept them as defaults or provide
their own. The system will then generate the sentence be-
low based on the input parameters and the previously gen-
erated story. The user will then be presented with several
visualizations for the new sentence and must choose one to
proceed. Finally, the generated images will be subjected to
object recognition so that the system can extract additional
keywords and recommend their use in future storytelling.
Related Work
Automatic story generation has long been a challenging
task in natural language processing, and such efforts date
back to the 1970s (Meehan 1977). Earlier attempts, such
as symbolic planning systems (Riedl and Young 2010),
utilize planning techniques to create plausible and coher-
ent plots for stories. In addition, case-based or analogi-
cal modeling systems generate new narratives based on
adapted existing stories (Gerv´as et al. 2005). However, while
these approaches can create stories with impressive coher-
ence and consistency, they often require extensive knowl-
edge engineering and restrict to a limited domain. To ad-
dress the issue, large crowd-sourced corpora of stories are
used to help generate stories (Swanson and Gordon 2012;
Li et al. 2013). Modern approaches based on neural lan-
guage models have been explored to generate plot-driven
stories (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018). Moreover, (Yang
et al. 2019) incorporates commonsense knowledge into the
generator using a novel memory mechanism and utilizes ad-
versarial training to improve the diversity and originality
of essay generation. (Tambwekar et al. 2019) leverages re-
ward strategies during the generation to guide the language
model toward generating a coherent story. (Liu et al. 2020)
proposes a character-centric story-generation model that can
produce stories consistent with characters’ proﬁles.
In contrast to previous work, we propose an interactive

Categorical Emotion Inference
Existing Story
Billy decided to buy a drink for himself.
Next Sentence Gener ation
Im age Gener ation
Object Detection
Augmented Keywords
Keywords Extraction
Anticipation
Joy
Trust
Anticipation
Joy
Anticipation
Joy
Trust
Person
Bottle
Backpack
Billy swallowed the drink contents 
and felt awake for school.
Billy
A dr ink
Him self
Person
Bottle
Backpack
Billy
A dr ink
Him self
Em otion 
Pr ompt
Selection
Nam ed Entity Recognition (NER)
Billy decided to buy a dr ink  for him self.
YOLOv5
Faster  R-CNN
Keywor d 
Pr ompt 
Selection
Alter native 
Im age Choice
T5-finetuned-stor yCom m onsense
Disco/Stable Diffusion
Em otion Pr obablity 
Distr ibution
BERTNext_em o
Figure 1: Generation Pipeline.
visual story generation pipeline in which the user can specify
keywords and emotions that will appear in the next sentence.
The system generates the sentence and associated images for
the user based on this information.
Visual Story Co-creation Pipeline
This section describes our approach to story generation
pipelines and their interactive workﬂow, as shown in Fig-
ure 1. The pipeline is divided into two sections: next-
sentence generation and image generation. The next sen-
tence generation is in charge of producing a plausible story
based on speciﬁed keywords and emotions, whereas image
generation is in charge of producing visualization for the
generated story. We can mine the generated images for addi-
tional keywords to include in future story development when
it operates interactively.
Next Sentence Generation
To begin the co-creation process, the pipeline must be fed
with the ﬁrst sentence of the story. It will then suggest emo-
tions for the characters as well as keywords for the next sen-
tence, inviting the user to edit them. This process is repeated
iteratively by the pipeline to build the entire story.
We trained a next-sentence emotion prediction model us-
ing the Story Commonsense dataset (Rashkin et al. 2018).
Here, the existing story text was used as input, while the
emotion labels from the next sentence were used as labels.
We ﬁne-tuned a BERTBASE model (Devlin et al. 2018), here-
inafter noted as BERTNEXT EMO, for this task. We provide the
objects recognized from the generated images as the default
for keyword suggestions.
To enable the system to generate a sentence with the
suggested keywords and emotions, we ﬁne-tuned a pre-
trained T5BASE (Raffel et al. 2020) model using the
ROCStories dataset(Mostafazadeh et al. 2016). The T5
model was pre-trained using the CommonGen dataset (Lin
et al. 2019), which enabled it to generate a sentence
with a set of given keywords(hereinafter denoted as
T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN). Fine-tuning it with the ROC-
Stories dataset enabled the T5 model to further learn about
the story writing styles in ROCStories.
Keywords Extraction
For training the model and evaluation, we extract key-
words from the original ﬁve-sentence stories. We used the
SceneGraphParser() from (Wu et al. 2019) to parse
sentences (in natural language) into scene graphs. The enti-
ties in the scene graphs become the keywords. For example,
for the following sentence:
S1: I brought the movie home and
watched the whole thing.
We are expected to generate the following result:
’I, the movie, the whole thing’
Categorical Emotion Inference
We use Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions as our basic model of
characters’ emotions. The wheel includes eight emotions in

joy
trust
fear
surprise
sadness
disgust
anger
anticipation
Figure 2: Plutchik basic emotions
pairs: joy/sadness, trust/disgust, fear/anger, and surprise/an-
ticipation (Plutchik 1980) as shown in Figure 2. We de-
ﬁne emotion entries in a sentence as a real-valued, low-
dimensional vector ⃗C.
∀⃗C ∈D, ⃗C =


e1
e2
...
e8

, e ∈[0, 1]
(1)
Given the context of a story, i.e., all previous sentences ⃗X =
{x1, x2, x3, . . . , xm}, the goal is to predict the emotions ⃗Ci
that will appear in the next sentence.
For example, for the following input sequence of sentence
S1 that serves as context, the model may predict the emo-
tions in the next sentence to be joy, anticipation,
and trust.
S1: He was hoping this year to be tall
enough for the coaster.
For preparing the training data, we obtained 17,910 pairs
of story context and next-sentence emotions from the Story
Commonsense dataset. The dataset was divided into training
and validation sets in the ratio of 6:4. We then ﬁne-tuned the
BERTNEXT EMO model using the task of multi-label classiﬁ-
cation. The story context is the input, and the next-sentence
emotions are the output. The maximum input length of the
tokenizer was set to 120. The batch size was set to 16, and
the learning rate was set to 6e−6. We ran 16 epochs for train-
ing, which took about 45 minutes on a Tesla P100-PCIE-
16GB GPU. The model achieved a Macro ROC-AUC score
of 0.69 on prediction. The prediction results are not perfect.
However, they are only used as suggestions, and the user can
always overwrite them.
Next Sentence Generation with Prompts
An overview of our story generation model is given in Fig-
ure 3. We constructed our training data using the stories from
both the ROCStories and Story Commonsense datasets (de-
noted as Stotal hereinafter).
For a sample story from ROCStories – ⃗S ∈Stotal, we
deﬁne it as a 5-dimensional vector ⃗S = {s1, . . . , s5} where
each si represents the corresponding sentence in the story.
For training our system to generate the next sentence,
sj+1 is fed into the emotion classiﬁer as well as the key-
word extractor for identifying the emotions and keywords in
the next sentence. Based on story context and the additional
knowledge input, T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN is trained on
a triad of data: context, keyword, and emotion labels.
In addition, we used the following prompting structure in
both the training as well as inference processes:
Generate next sentence based on following
<extra_id_0>KEYWORDS: [...]
<extra_id_0>CONTEXT: [...]
<extra_id_0>EMOTION: [...]
We adopt T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN as the base lan-
guage model for the training process. The CommonGen
dataset contains pairs of sentences and keywords. The task is
to generate a meaningful sentence that contains all the given
keywords. The T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN is a T5 model
ﬁne-tuned using this dataset. For example, given the follow-
ing input:
X1: <’Mike’, ’tree’, ’ground’, ’hole’>
T5FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN may generate:
Y1: [Mike]
X0
is digging a [hole]
X3
in the
[ground]
X2
near a [tree]
X1
.
By ﬁne-tuning T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN based on the
emotions and the keyword information as prompts, the
model can more effectively capture hidden information in
the story and thus improve the accuracy and variety of sen-
tences. Compared to the baseline model ﬁne-tuned only with
context information, we found that, due to the lack of a pri-
ori knowledge of the link between emotions and events, the
baseline model is highly susceptible to confounding empa-
thy problems arising from different behavioral motivations.
As shown in Table 1, the baseline model could not use the
context effectively and correctly without the prompts. It gen-
erated repeated sentences. Further, it is unclear why the char-
acter – Mary – would feel happy about her situation.
generated - prompt
generated - no prompt
Mary had been feeling de-
pressed lately.
Mary had been feeling de-
pressed lately.
she decided to go see a
psychiatrist.
She decided to go to a psy-
chiatrist.
Psyched, her psychiatrist
diagnosed her with depres-
sion and sent her to see.
She was diagnosed with
schizophrenia.
Medicant took her to get
an antidepressant and pre-
scribed her.
She was very happy.
Thankfully
it
eventually
made her feel better again.
She was very happy.
Table 1: An example comparing the baseline model and
model with emotion and keywords prompting
In terms of implementation, we used the previous format

Story Commonsense
T5 Finetuned CommonGen
Prompt Format
World Background Of The Story
Prompts List
Story Generation
Context
Next Sentence
Context
Next Sentence
Context
Next Sentence
...
Keywor ds 
Extr action
Next 
Sentence 
Em otion 
Pr ediction
Context
Keywor ds
Em otion
Generated 
Next 
Sentence
Generate next sentence based 
on following
<extra_id_0>KEYWORDS: [? ]
<extra_id_0>CONTEXT: [? ]
<extra_id_0>EMOTION: [? ]
TRAIN
I wanted to do a different thing than the usual.
joy, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
I, my car, road
I, blockbuster video store
I, movie
I, movie, whole thing
I got into my car  and went on the r oad.
I stopped at a blockbuster  video stor e.
I went inside and rented a m ovie.
I brought the m ovie home and watched 
the whole thing.
INFERENCE
Figure 3: Training and inference pipeline for Next Sentence Generation.
to create a dataset with 18,680 entries. In an 8:2 ratio, we
divided it into a training set and a validation set. The max-
imum lengths of the source and output text are set to 512
and 50, respectively. To control the diversity of the output
content, we use top-K search in the decoding process, with
k = 3, and set the repetition penalty and length penalty to
2.6 and 1.0, respectively, for the same reason. In the train-
ing process, we set the batch size and learning rate to 10 and
5e-4, respectively, and introduced the early stop mechanism
to prevent overﬁtting. We ran 16 epochs, and the training
phase of the language model took about 10 hours on a Tesla
P100-PCIE-16GB platform.
Image Generation
When image generation is added to text-based stories, it in-
creases ﬂexibility and creates a sense of immersion in the
generated story plot. As a result, in addition to the text
pipeline, we implement an image pipeline that generates ad-
ditional keywords based on images as suggestions, poten-
tially pushing the story forward in different directions. We
separate the pipeline into two parts: image generation and
object detection. We experimented with both Stable Dif-
fusion (Rombach et al. 2022) and Disco Diffusion as our
primary method for image generation, as they can produce
fairly relevant ﬁgures with artistic quality. For object detec-
tion, we chose YOLOv5 (Jocher et al. 2022) and Faster R-
CNN (Ren et al. 2015) as our models. The generated key-
words will serve as suggestions for users to select from, as
well as hints to guide the subsequent generation process.
Image Generation
To create images for the generated sentences, we utilize
Disco Diffusion, a tool that combines both Diffusion, a
mathematical process for removing noise from an image,
and CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), a model for labeling images.
Image generation is an iterative process in Disco Diffusion,
in which CLIP evaluates the intermediate image based on
the text prompt and provides a guideline for Diffusion to
process at each step.
Disco Diffusion has been extensively researched as a
means of generating creative art. In practice, however, we
found it difﬁcult to create a good image based solely on one
line of a story. Although Disco Diffusion has a portrait gen-
erator, the model ﬁnds it difﬁcult to generate images that
describe actions in the format of ”someone is doing some-
thing.” To address this, we include user-speciﬁc keywords in
the text prompt, including the artist’s name and background
information. For example, we added ”Carl Spitzweg” as the
artist and ”country view” as the background information in
our example. Disco Diffusion can generate images that are
consistent with the artist’s artistic styles, such as shadow,
color, and strokes, by including the artist’s name in the text
prompt. Furthermore, we ﬁll in background information that
can add more relevant elements to the generated image. As
shown in Figure 4, the prompt ”Ray gathered his friends to
tell them a funny joke he heard” will only produce a picture
of several people who appear to be talking, whereas adding
”country view” to the text prompt generates an image with
explicit yet magniﬁcent scenery in the background. Users

(a) Prompt without adding
“country view”
(b) Prompt adding “country
view”
Figure 4: Prompt: “Ray gathered his friends to tell them a
funny joke he heard,” generated using Disco Diffusion
can change the artist’s name and background information
based on their preferences.
Once Disco Diffusion is able to generate images with rea-
sonably appropriate information based on the text prompt,
we use it as a source of common sense knowledge to sug-
gest additional keywords for the sentence that follows. For
instance, consider the prompt, ”a boy is picking up shells on
a beach.” This generates an image of a boy with a bag pick-
ing up shells on a beach with an ocean backdrop, as shown
in Figure 5. While the image contains requested elements
such as ”boy,” ”shells,” and ”beach,” it also introduces new
but highly relevant elements such as ”bag” and ”ocean.” This
is similar to how when people read stories, they frequently
ﬁll in details based on their imagination. The extra elements
from the generated images are used to add an ”imagination”
component to the story generation pipeline. Object detec-
tion algorithms are used to detect potential keywords from
generated images, which are then presented to users as sug-
gestions for creating the next part of the story.
Figure 5: Prompt “a boy is picking up shells on a beach,”
generated using Disco Diffusion
Implementation
There are about 115 parameters in Disco
Diffusion. We mainly focus on settings that directly impact
our output images.
Clip guidance scale: This variable tells the model how
strongly CLIP will follow the prompt. We set it to 5,000 as
recommended.
Steps: Each step (or iteration) involves the model looking
at a subset of images called “cuts” and calculating the “di-
rection” in which the images should be guided so that the
generated results are relevant to the prompt. We set this to
250.
n batches: We generate three images for each prompt.
Users can choose which one is ideal for that story.
Item
Number
Conﬁdence
level
▷horse
5
0.729
▷bird
2
0.719
▷person
42
0.694
▷handbag
2
0.656
▷...
...
...
Table 2: The table includes items detected based on images
generated through Disco Diffusion with their corresponding
number detected and conﬁdence level.
Key Object Detection
We explored using YOLOv5 and Faster R-CNN (Ren et
al. 2015) for object detection. In general, YOLOv5 outper-
forms Faster R-CNN in inference speed due to its smaller
model size. On the other hand, faster R-CNN with ResNet-
50 FPN (Lin et al. 2016) backbone can provide better per-
formance in terms of mAP (i.e., mean average precision)
improvement. Both models are pre-trained with the COCO
dataset (Lin et al. 2014). Although these models are only
trained on real-world images, they perform impressively on
the paintings generated by Disco Diffusion. We suspect this
is due to the fact that, as long as the artistic style isn’t too
abstract, the objects in the generated images share charac-
teristics with real-world objects.
With the same prompt, Disco Diffusion can generate a
batch of images. We process all images created for object
detection and summarize a corresponding dictionary of the
detected object with their conﬁdence levels. As a result, the
user will have a better sense of potential objects associated
with the current story and will be more likely to include them
in the text prompt.
Implementation
We use YOLOv5x because it produces
the best mAP results among the YOLOv5 family. The
COCO dataset is used to pre-train YOLOv5 and Faster R-
CNN, resulting in approximately 80 detectable objects. To
improve the reliability of the results, we set the Faster R-
CNN threshold to 0.4. The ﬁnal result is sorted using the
conﬁdence score IOU (Intersection over Union).
Example Outputs
Figure 6 demonstrates a story generation example using var-
ious keywords and emotions using our pipeline. The pipeline
can generate a reasonable story based on the provided in-
formation by modifying the input prompts of the last two
sentences (i.e., the twist and ending parts of the story) in
both examples. This demonstrates both the capability of our
pipeline and its sensitivity to emotion and keywords. In addi-
tion, we demonstrate a full visual storytelling report in Fig-
ure 7 by combining generated images provided by the image
generation pipeline.

Sentence 1
Sentence 2
Sentence 3
Sentence 4
Sentence 5
Auto-
generated 
Story
Story
I wanted to do a different 
thing than the usual.
I got into my car and went on 
the road.
I stopped at a blockbuster 
video store.
I went inside and rented a 
movie.
I brought the movie home 
and watched the whole thing.
Emotion
N/A
joy, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
Custom 1
Story
I wanted to do a different 
thing than the usual.
I got into my car and went on 
the road.
I stopped at the supermarket.
I picked up a carrot.
I went home and made a hot 
soup.
Emotion
N/A
joy, anticipation
joy, anticipation
joy, anticipation
joy, anticipation
Custom 2
Story
I wanted to do a different 
thing than the usual.
I got into my car and went on 
the road.
I stopped at a blockbuster 
video store.
I was forced to watch a 
movie.
Thankfully I got home safely.
Emotion
N/A
joy, anticipation
joy, trust, anticipation
sadness, anger, fear
joy, trust, surprise
Figure 6: Several generated stories based on the same background sentence. The underlined words in orange indicate the
keywords entered
Sentence 4
Sentence 5
Picture
Named 
Entity
Emotion
Story
Sentence 1
Sentence 2
Sentence 3
N/A
N/A
Ethan tur ned the 
oven on.
he, a potato, 
the oven
joy, tr ust, 
anticipation
He put a potato 
in the oven.
It, an hour
joy, tr ust, 
anticipation
It cooked for  an 
hour.
He, it
joy, tr ust, sur pr ise, 
anticipation
He, it, dinner
joy, tr ust, anticipation
User Modified Tag
He ate it for  dinner.
He,  it,  dinner
sadness, disgust, 
anger
After war ds, he r uined 
dinner.
He pulled it out.
He, it
sadness, fear
Suddenly, he sm elled it 
bur ning.
Auto-generated Tag
Figure 7: Story fragments generated by the proposed method with two prompt conﬁgurations.
Evaluation and Discussion
To assess the efﬁcacy of a controlled story generation frame-
work based on categorical emotion and keywords, we com-
pared our approach to a baseline model ﬁne-tuned solely
based on the existing story. We trained another BERT-based
model, hereinafter referred to as BERTCUR EMO, to gener-
ate sensible emotion keywords as input. This model is a
ﬁne-tuned emotion predictor based on the 11,129 emotion-
sentence pairs in the Story Commonsense dataset. This
model, unlike the BERTNEXT EMO mentioned in the Categor-
ical Emotion Inference section, aims to detect emotion in-
formation for a given (current) sentence. The macro AUC-
ROC score reached 0.78 during training, leading us to be-
lieve that BERTCUR EMO is adequate for identifying and ex-
tracting emotions from sentences. To ensure that the mod-
els can apply prior knowledge to the inference process of
story generation, both our pipeline and the baseline will use
the same T5BASE FINE-TUNED COMMONGEN and adapt the inputs
to the prompt format used in the corresponding ﬁne-tuning
phase.
In order to obtain the validity of the prompts we added
to the input, we used the average of BLEU (Lin and Och
2004) scores with n-grams ranging from 1 to 4 and BERT-
scores (Zhang et al. 2019) as basic metrics in our evaluation.
In addition, we use METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie 2005)
and SacreBLEU(Post 2018) as supplements to compensate
for the lack of stemming and synonym matching, as well as
standard exact word matching, when comparing the gener-
ated content with the ground truth.
We present the experimental results in Figure 8 and ﬁnd
that, compared to the baseline model, which relies solely
on story context for inference, our pipeline shows consis-
tent improvements in all metrics under the same model by
introducing emotions and keywords as prompts.
Story generation methods based on emotion and key-
words can present statistically higher upper bounds, regard-

2nd
3rd
4th
5th
sentence
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
METEOR
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
sentence
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
BERT
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
sentence
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
BLEU-average
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
sentence
0
20
40
60
80
100
SacreBLEU
Figure 8: Performance distribution of the baseline model and
the prompt-optimized model in 3,748 sets of experiments
under different metrics The blue box on the left side of each
ﬁgure represents our method, and the orange on the right
side represents the baseline model.
less of how the metrics are implemented or what is tested. As
shown in Figure 8, for BLEU-average scores, our approach
improves the story generation task by an average of 62%. It
also reduces the number of samples with zero BERT scores
signiﬁcantly. The average increase in BERT scores is also
6.7%, and the rate of score ﬂuctuation is reduced. This im-
plies that our approach has the potential to improve many
aspects of story generation signiﬁcantly.
Future Work
We are interested in making several improvements in the fu-
ture. We hope to ﬁnd a better prompt format to fully utilize
the potential of language models for the generation task. We
hope that, with the assistance of Chain of Thought Prompt-
ing (Wei et al. 2022), the model will be able to generate a
story with more sophisticated reasoning and causal relation-
ship. The resulting story will then feel more natural and log-
ical. Another area that can be improved is the emotion clas-
siﬁer. At the moment, the model for predicting emotions in
the following sentence can only achieve around 60% accu-
racy for each of Plutchik’s emotion categories which can be
further improved.
The image pipeline has the potential to improve as well.
Disco Diffusion, in particular, has difﬁculty producing im-
ages of creatures when conﬁgured incorrectly. While we can
generate reasonable images by incorporating artists who fre-
quently include corresponding objects and creatures in their
paintings as a result of CLIP’s recognition capabilities, the
Diffusion model will produce nonsense if we do not pro-
vide a ”reference” artist to paint. Furthermore, because they
are only pre-trained with the COCO dataset and real-world
objects, YOLOv5 and Faster R-CNN can detect a limited
number of objects. In the future, we can use YOLOv5 or
Faster R-CNN to implement few-shot learning to increase
the number of detected objects (Ibrahim et al. 2022).
Conclusion
We present a novel pipeline for creating visual stories based
on Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions model of emotional knowl-
edge and keyword information. This method assists visual
narrative designers in creating and iterating stories in a con-
trolled manner. Our method also includes a complete nar-
rative text-to-image generation pipeline. Experiments show
that stories generated by using keywords as prompts have
a higher level of grammatical and logical consistency, as
well as being more consistent with human writing habits.
This work, we believe, is an important step toward a more
comprehensive and functional language model-based story-
telling tool.
