An Introduction to Autoencoders
Umberto Michelucci

January 12, 2022
In this article, we will look at autoencoders. This article covers the math-
ematics and the fundamental concepts of autoencoders. We will discuss what
they are, what the limitations are, the typical use cases, and we will look at
some examples. We will start with a general introduction to autoencoders,
and we will discuss the role of the activation function in the output layer
and the loss function. We will then discuss what the reconstruction error
is. Finally, we will look at typical applications as dimensionality reduction,
classiﬁcation, denoising, and anomaly detection.
1
Introduction
Neural networks are typically used in a supervised setting. Meaning that
for each training observation xi we will have one label or expected value
yi. During training, the neural network model will learn the relationship
between the input data and the expected labels. Now suppose we have only
unlabeled observations, meaning we only have our training dataset ST, made
of the M observations xi with i = 1, . . . , M
ST = {xi|i = 1, . . . , M}
(1)
Where in general xi ∈Rn with n ∈N. Autoencoders were ﬁrst intro-
duced1 by Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams in 1986 with the goal of learning
1You can check Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E. Williams, R.J.: Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, Vol.
1.
Chap.
Learning
Internal Representations by Error Propagation, pp. 318-162, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA (1986).
1
arXiv:2201.03898v1  [cs.LG]  11 Jan 2022

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
to reconstruct the input observations xi with the lowest error possible2.
Why would one want to learn to reconstruct the input observations? If
you have problems imagining what that means, think of having a dataset
made of images. An autoencoder would be an algorithm that can give as
output an image that is as similar as possible to the input one. You may be
confused, as there is no apparent reason of doing so. To better understand
why autoencoders are useful we need a more informative (although not yet
unambiguous) deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1 An autoencoder is a type of algorithm with the primary
purpose of learning an "informative" representation of the data that
can be used for diﬀerent applicationsa by learning to reconstruct a set
of input observations well enough.
aBank, D., Koenigstein, N., and Giryes, R., Autoencoders, https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2003.05991
To better understand autoencoders we need to refer to their typical ar-
chitecture, visualized in Figure 1. The autoencoders’ main components are
three: an encoder, a latent feature representation, and a decoder. The en-
coder and decoder are simply functions, while with the name latent feature
representation, one typically intends a tensor of real numbers (more on that
later). Generally speaking, we want the autoencoder to reconstruct the input
well enough. Still, at the same time, it should create a latent representation
(the output of the encoder part in Figure 1) that is useful and meaningful.
For example, latent features on hand-written digits3 could be the number of
lines required to write each number or the angle of each line and how they
connect. Learning how to write numbers certainly does not require to learn
the gray values of each pixel in the input image. We humans do not certainly
learn to write by ﬁlling pixels with gray values. While learning, we extract
the essential information that will allow us to solve a problem (writing dig-
its, for example). This latent representation (how to write each number)
can then be very useful for various tasks (for instance feature extraction that
can be then used for classiﬁcation or clustering) or simply understanding the
essential features of a dataset.
2In this article we will discuss at length what we mean with error here.
3Consider for example the MNIST dataset: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
2

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 1: General structure of an autoencoder.
In most typical architectures, the encoder and the decoder are neural
networks4 (that is the case we will discuss at length in this article) since they
can be easily trained with existing software libraries such as TensorFlow or
PyTorch with backpropagation. In general, the encoder can be written as a
function g that will depend on some parameters
hi = g(xi)
(2)
Where hi ∈Rq (the latent feature representation) is the output of the en-
coder block in Figure 1 when we evaluate it on the input xi. Note that we
will have g : Rn →Rq. The decoder (and the output of the network that
we will indicate with ˜xi) can be written then as a second generic function f
of the latent features
˜xi = f (hi) = f (g (xi)) .
(3)
Where ˜xi∈Rn. Training an autoencoder simply means ﬁnding the functions
g(·) and f(·) that satisfy
arg min
f,g < [∆(xi, f(g (xi))] >
(4)
where ∆indicates a measure of how the input and the output of the au-
toencoder diﬀer (basically our loss function will penalize the diﬀerence be-
tween input and output) and < · > indicates the average over all observa-
tions. Depending on how one designs the autoencoder, it may be possible
4For example, if the encoder and the decoder are linear functions, you get what is called
a linear autoencoder. See for more information Baldi, P., Hornik, K.: Neural networks
and principal component analysis: Learning from examples without local minima, Neural
Netw. 2(1), 53-58 (1989).
3

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
to ﬁnd f and g so that the autoencoder learns to reconstruct the output
perfectly, thus learning the identity function. This is not very useful, as we
discussed at the beginning of the article, and to avoid this possibility, two
main strategies can be used: creating a bottleneck and add regularization in
some form.
Note We want the autoencoder to reconstruct the input well enough.
Still, at the same time, it should create a latent representation (the
output of the encoder) that is useful and meaningful.
Adding a "bottleneck," (more on that later) is achieved by making the latent
feature’s dimensionality lower (often much lower) than the input’s. That is
the case that we will look in detail in this article. But before looking at this
case, let’s brieﬂy discuss regularization.
1.1
Regularization in autoencoders
We will not discuss regularization at length in this article, but we should at
least mention it. Intuitively it means enforcing sparsity in the latent feature
output. The simplest way of achieving this is to add a l1 or l2 regularization
term to the loss function. That will look like this for the l2 regularization
term:
arg min
f,g (E [∆(xi, g(f (xi))] + λ
X
i
θ2
i )
(5)
In the formula the θi are the parameters in the functions f(·) and g(·) (you
can imagine that in the case where the functions are neural networks, the
parameters will be the weights). This is typically easy to implement as the
derivative with respect to the parameters are easy to calculate. Another trick
that is worth mentioning is to tie the weights of the encoder to the weights
of the decoder5 (in other words make them equal). Those techniques, and
a few others that go beyond the scope of this book, have fundamentally the
same eﬀect: add sparsity to the latent feature representation.
We turn now to a speciﬁc type of autoencoders: those that build f and g
with feed-forward networks that use a bottleneck. The reason for this choice
is that they are very easy to implement and are very eﬀective.
5For an example in Keras you can check the following page: http://adl.toelt.ai/C
hapter25/Your_first_autoencoder_with_Keras.html
4

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
2
Feed Forward Autoencoders
A Feed-Forward Autoencoder (FFA) is a neural network made of dense lay-
ers6 with a speciﬁc architecture, as can be schematically seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: A typical architecture of a Feed-Forward Autoencoder. The number
of neurons in the layers at ﬁrst goes down as we move through the network
until it reaches the middle and then starts to grow again until the last layer
has the same number of neurons as the input dimensions.
A typical FFA architecture (although it is no mandatory requirement)
has an odd number of layers and is symmetrical with respect to the middle
layer. Typically, the ﬁrst layer has a number of neurons n1 = n (the size
of the input observation xi). As we move toward the center of the network,
the number of neurons in each layer drops in some measure. The middle
layer (remember we have an odd number of layers) usually has the smallest
number of neurons. The fact that the number of neurons in this layer is
smaller than the size of the input, is the bottleneck we mentioned earlier.
6A dense layer is simply a set of neurons that gets their inputs from the previous layer.
Each neuron in a dense layer gets as input the output of all neurons in the previous layer.
5

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
In almost all practical applications, the layers after the middle one are
a mirrored version of the layers before the middle one.
For example, an
autoencoder with 3 layers could have the following numbers of neurons: n1 =
10, n2 = 5 and then n3 = n1 = 10 (supposing we are working on a problem
where the input dimension is n = 10). All the layers up to and including
the middle one, make what is called the encoder, and all the layers from and
including the middle one (up to the output) make what is called the decoder,
as you can see depicted in Figure (25.2). If the FFA training is successful,
the result will be a good approximation of the input, in other words ˜xi ≈xi.
What is essential to notice is that the decoder can reconstruct the input by
using only a much smaller number (q) of features than the input observations
initially have (n). The output of the middle layer hi are also called a learned
representation of the input observation xi.
Note The encoder can reduce the number of dimensions of the input
observation (n) and create a learned representation (hi)of the input that
has a smaller dimension q < n. This learned representation is enough
for the decoder to reconstruct the input accurately (if the autoencoder
training was successful as intended).
2.1
Activation Function of the Output Layer
In autoencoders based on neural networks, the output layer’s activation func-
tion plays a particularly important role. The most used functions are ReLU
and sigmoid. Let us look at both and look at some tips on when to use which
and why you should choose one instead of the other.
2.1.1
ReLU
The ReLU activation function can assume all values in the range [0, ∞]. As
a remainder, its formula is
ReLU (x) = max (0, x) .
(6)
This choice is good when the input observations xi assume a wide range
of positive values. If the input xi can assume negative values, the ReLU
is, of course, a terrible choice, and the identity function is a much better
choice.
6

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Note ReLU activation function for the output layer is well suited for
cases when the input observations xi assume a wide range of positive
real values.
2.1.2
Sigmoid
The sigmoid function σ can assume all values in the range ]0, 1[. As a re-
mained its formula is
σ (x) =
1
1 + e−x.
(7)
This activation function can only be used if the input observations xi are
all in the range ]0, 1[ or if you have normalized them to be in that range.
Consider as an example the MNIST dataset. Each value of the input obser-
vation xi (one image) is the gray values of the pixels that can assume any
value from 0 to 255. Normalizing the data by dividing the pixel values by 255
would make each observation (each image) have only pixel values between 0
and 1. In this case, the sigmoid would be a good choice for the output layer’s
activation function.
Note The sigmoid activation function for the output layer is a good
choice in all cases where the input observations assume only values
between 0 and 1 or if you have normalized them to assume values in
the range ]0, 1[.
2.2
Loss Function
As with any neural network model, we need a loss function to minimize. This
loss functions should measure how big is the diﬀerence between the input xi
and output ˜xi. If you remember the explanations at the beginning, you will
realize that our loss function will be
E [∆(xi, g(f (xi))] .
(8)
Where for FFAs, g, and f will be the functions that are obtained with
dense layers, as discussed in the previous sections. Remember that an autoen-
coder is trying to learn an approximation of the identity function; therefore,
7

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
you want to ﬁnd the weights in the network that gives you the smallest diﬀer-
ence according to some metric (∆(·)) between xi and ˜xi. Two loss functions
are widely used for autoencoders: Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Binary
Cross-Entropy (BCE). Let us have a more in-depth look at both since they
can only be used when speciﬁc requirements are met.
2.2.1
Mean Square Error
Since an autoencoder is trying to solve a regression problem, the most com-
mon choice as a loss function is the Mean Square Error (MSE):
LMSE = MSE = 1
M
M
X
i=1
|xi −˜xi|2
(9)
The symbol | · | indicates the norm of a vector7, and M is the number of
the observation in the training dataset. It can be used in almost all cases,
independently of how you choose your output layer activation function or
how you normalize the input data. It is easy to show that the minimum of
LMSE is found for ˜xi = xi. To prove it, let us calculate the derivative of
LMSE with respect to a speciﬁc observation j. Remember that the minimum
is found when the condition
∂LMSE
∂˜xj
= 0
(10)
is met for all i = 1, . . . , M. To simplify the calculations, let us assume that
the inputs are one dimensional8 and let us indicate them with xi. We can
write
∂LMSE
∂˜xj
= −2
M (xj −˜xj)
(11)
Equation 1 is satisﬁed when xj = ˜xj as can be easily seen from Equation
(25.1), as we wanted to prove. To be precise, we also need to show that
∂2LMSE
∂˜x2
j
> 0
(12)
7The norm of a vector is simply the square root of the sum of the square of the
components.
8If we did not make this assumption, one would have to calculate the gradient of the
loss function instead of the simple derivative.
8

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
This is easily proved as we have
∂2LMSE
∂˜x2
j
= 2
M
(13)
sthat is greater than zero, therefore conﬁrming our assumption that for xj =
˜xj we indeed have a minimum.
2.2.2
Binary Cross-Entropy
If the activation function of the output layer of the FFA is a sigmoid function,
thus limiting neuron outputs to be between 0 and 1, and the input features are
normalized to be between 0 and 1 we can use as loss function the binary cross-
entropy, indicated here with LCE. Note that this loss function is typically
used in classiﬁcation problems, but it works beautifully for autoencoders.
The formula for it is
LCE = −1
M
M
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
[xj,i log ˜xj,i + (1 −xj,i) log(1 −˜xj,i)]
(14)
Where xj,i is the jth component of the ith observation.
The sum is over
the entire set of observations and over all components of the vectors. Can
we prove that minimizing this loss function is equivalent to reconstructing
the input as well as possible? Let us calculate where LCE has a minimum
with respect to ˜xi. In other words, we need to ﬁnd out what values should
˜xi assume to minimize LCE. As we have done for the MSE, to make the
calculations easier, let us consider the simpliﬁed case where xi and ˜xi are
one-dimensional and let us indicate them with xi and ˜xi.
To ﬁnd the minimum of a function, as you should know from calculus, we
need the ﬁrst derivative of LCE. In particular we need to solve the set of M
equations
∂LCE
∂˜xi
= 0
for
i = 1, . . . , M
(15)
In this case it is easy to show that the binary cross-entropy LCE is minimized
when xi = ˜xi for i = 1, . . . , M. Note that strictly speaking, this is true only
for xidiﬀerent than 0 or 1 since ˜xi can be neither 0 nor 1. To ﬁnd when the
9

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
LCE is minimized we can derive LCEwith respect to a speciﬁc input ˜xj
∂LCE
∂˜xj
=
−1
M
xj
˜xj
−1 −xj
1 −˜xj

= −1
M
xj (1 −˜xj) −˜xj (1 −xj)
˜xj −˜x2
j

=
=
−1
M
xj −˜xj
˜xj −˜x2
j

(16)
Now remember that we need to satisfy the condition
∂LCE
∂˜xj
= 0
(17)
That can happen only if xj = ˜xj as can be seen from Equation (25.2). To
make sure that this is a minimum we need to evaluate the second derivative.
Since the point for which the ﬁrst derivative is zero is a minimum only if
∂2LCE
∂˜x2
j
> 0
(18)
We can calculate the second derivative at the minimum point xj = ˜xjeasily
∂2LCE
∂˜x2
j

xj=˜xj
= −1
M
"
xj (2˜xj −1) −˜x2
j
 1 −˜x2
j

˜x2
j
#
xj=˜xj
= 1
M
"
˜xj (1 −˜xj)
 1 −˜x2
j

˜x2
j
#
(19)
Now remember that ˜xj ∈]0, 1[. We can immediately see that the denominator
of the previous formula is greater than zero. The nominator is also clearly
greater than zero since 1 −˜xi > 0. Dividing two positive numbers gives a
positive number, thus we have just proved that
∂2LCE
∂˜x2
i
> 0
(20)
The minimum of the cost function is reached when the output is exactly
equal to the inputs, as we wanted to prove.
Note an essential prerequisite for using the binary cross-entropy loss
function is that the inputs must be normalized between 0 and 1 and
that the activation function for the last layer must be a sigmoid or
softmax function.
10

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
2.3
Reconstruction Error
The reconstruction error (RE) is a metric that gives you an indication of how
good (or bad) the autoencoder was able to reconstruct the input observation
xi. The most typical RE used is the MSE
RE ≡MSE = 1
M
M
X
i=1
|xi −˜xi|2
(21)
That can be easily calculated. The RE is used often when doing anomaly
detection with autoencoders, as we will explain later. There is an easy intu-
itive explanation of the reconstruction error. When the RE is signiﬁcant, the
autoencoder could not reconstruct the input well, while when it is small, the
reconstruction was successful. Figure 3 shows an example of big and small
reconstruction errors when an autoencoder tries to reconstruct an image.
2.4
Example: reconstruction of hand-written digits
Let us now see how an autoencoder performs with a real example, using the
MNIST dataset. This dataset9 contains 70000 hand-written digits from 0
to 9. Each image is 28 × 28 pixels with only gray values, that means that
we have 784 features (the pixel gray values) as inputs. Let us start with an
autoencoder with 3 layers with the numbers of neurons in each layer equal to
(784, 16, 784). Note that the ﬁrst and last layers must have a dimension equal
to the input dimensions. For this example, we used the Adam optimizer10, as
loss function the cross-entropy11 and we trained the model for 30 epochs with
a batch size of 256. In Figure 4 you can see two lines of images of digits. The
line at the top contains ten random images from the original dataset, while
the ones at the bottom are the reconstructed images with the autoencoder
we just described.
It is impressive that to reconstruct an image with 784 pixels, 10 classes
and 70000 images only 16 features are needed to have a result that, although
9More information on the dataset can be found here: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
mnist/.
10You can ﬁnd the entire code at the address https://adl.toelt.ai.
11In this case we normalized the input features to be between 0 and 1.
11

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 3: An example of big and small reconstruction error when an autoen-
coder tries to reconstruct an image.
not perfect, allows us to understand almost entirely what digit was used
as input.
Increasing the middle layer’s size to 64 (and leaving all other
parameters the same) gets a much better result as you can see in Figure 5.
Figure 5: n the top line you can see the original digits from the MNIST
dataset. While the line below are the digits reconstructed by the autoencoder
with number of neurons equal to (784, 64, 784).
This tells us that the relevant information on how to write digits is con-
12

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 4: In the top line, you can see the original digits from the MNIST
dataset. In contrast, the line below contains the digits reconstructed by the
autoencoder with number of neurons equal to (784, 16, 784).
tained in a much lower number of features than 784.
Note An autoencoder with a middle layer smaller than the input di-
mensions (a bottleneck) can be used to extract the essential features of
an input dataset creating a learned representation of the inputs given
by the function g (xi). Eﬀectively an FFA can be used to perform di-
mensionality reduction.
The FFA will not recreate the input digits well if the number of neurons in the
middle layer is reduced too much (if the bottleneck is too extreme). Figure
6 shows the reconstruction of the same digits with an autoencoder with only
8 neurons in the middle layer. With only 8 neurons in the middle layer, you
can see that some reconstructed digits are wrong. As you can see in Figure
6 the 4 is reconstructed as a 9 and a 2 is reconstructed to something that
resembles a 3. In Figure 7, you can compare the reconstructed digits by all
Figure 6: In the top line you can see the original digits from the MNIST
dataset. In contrast, the line below contains the digits reconstructed by the
autoencoder with number of neurons equal to (784, 8, 784).
13

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
the FFAs we have discussed. From Figure 7 you can see how, increasing the
RECONSTRUCTION WITH
FFA (784,8,784)
ORIGINAL IMAGES
RECONSTRUCTION WITH
FFA (784,16,784)
RECONSTRUCTION WITH
FFA (784,64,784)
Figure 7: In the top line, you can see the original digits from the MNIST
dataset. The second line of digits contains the digits reconsructed by the
FFA (784,8,784), the third by the FFA (784,16,784), and the last one by the
FFA (784,64,784).
middle layer’s size, the reconstruction gets better and better, as we expected.
For these examples, we have used the binary cross entropy as loss function,
but the MSE would have worked also well, and results can be seen in Figure
2.4.
Figure 8: In the top line, you can see ten random original digits from the
MNIST dataset. The second line of digits contains the digits reconstructed
with an FFA with 16 neurons in the middle layer and the binary cross-
entropy as the loss function. The last line contains images reconstructed
with the MSE as loss function.
14

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
3
Autoencoders Applications
3.1
Dimensionality Reduction
As we mentioned in this article, using the bottleneck method, the latent
features will have a dimension q that is smaller than the dimensions of the
input observations n. The encoder part (once trained) does naturally (by de-
sign) dimension reduction producing q real numbers. One can use the latent
features for various tasks, such as classiﬁcation (as we will see in the next
section) or clustering. We would like to point out some of the advantages of
dimensionality reduction with an autoencoder compared to a more classical
PCA approach. The autoencoder has one main beneﬁt from a computational
point of view: it can deal with a very big amount of data eﬃciently since its
training can be done with mini-batches, while PCA, one of the most used
dimensionality reduction algorithms, needs to do its calculations using the
entire dataset. PCA is an algorithm that projects a dataset on the eigenvec-
tors of its covariance matrix12, thus providing a linear transformation of the
features. Autoencoders are more ﬂexible and consider non-linear transforma-
tions of the features. The default PCA method uses O (d2) space for data in
Rd. This is, in many cases, not computationally feasible, and the algorithm
does not scale up with increasing dataset size. This may seem irrelevant,
but in many practical applications, the amount of data and the number of
features is so big that PCA is not a practical solution from a computational
point of view.
Note The use of an autoencoder for dimensionality reduction has one
main advantage from a computational point of view: it can deal with a
very big amount of data eﬃciently since its training can be done with
mini-batches.
Equivalence with PCA
It is not a very known results, but one worth
to mention, that a FFA is equivalent to PCA if the following conditions are
met:
12Akshay Balsubramani, Sanjoy Dasgupta, and Yoav Freund. The fast convergence of
incremental pca. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 3174–3182,
2013.
15

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
• We use a linear function for the encoder g(·)
• We use a linear function for the decoder f(·)
• We use the MSE for the loss function
• We normalize the inputs to
ˆxi,j =
1
√
M
 
xi,j −1
M
M
X
k=1
xk,j
!
(22)
The proof is long and can found in the notes by M.M. Kahpra for the
course CS7015 (Indian Institute of Technology Madras) at this link http:
//toe.lt/1a.
3.2
Classiﬁcation
3.2.1
Classiﬁcation with Latent Features
Let us now suppose that we want to classify our input images of the MNIST
dataset. We can simply use all the features, in our case, the 784 pixel values of
the images. We can simply use an algorithm as kNN for illustrative purposes.
Doing it with 7 nearest neighbors on the training MNIST dataset (with 60000
images) will take around 16.6 minutes13 (ca.
1000 sec) and gets you an
accuracy on the test dataset of 10000 images of 96.4%14. However, what
happens if we use this algorithm not with the original dataset, but with the
latent features g (xi)? For example, if we consider an FFA with 8 neurons
in the middle layer and again train a kNN algorithm on the latent features
g (xi) ∈R8 we get an accuracy of 89% in 1.1 sec. We get a gain of a factor
of 1000 in running time, for a loss of 7.4% in accuracy15 (see Table 1).
Using 8 features allow us to get a very high accuracy in just one second.
We can do the same analysis with another dataset, the Fashion MNIST16
dataset (a dataset from Zalando very similar to the MNIST one, only with
13The examples have been run on Google Colab.
14Note that for these examples the accuracy is calculated applying the trained model
on the test dataset, while the running time is the time needed to train the algorithm on
the training dataset.
15You can run those tests yourself going to article 25 at https://adl.toelt.ai.
16https://research.zalando.com/welcome/mission/research-projects/fashion-mnist/
16

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Input Data
Accuracy
Running Time
Original data xi ∈R784
96.4%
1000 sec. ≈16.6 min.
Latent Features g(xi) ∈R8
89%
1.1 sec.
Table 1: the diﬀerent in accuracy and running time when applying the kNN
algorithm to the original 784 features or the 8 latent features for the MNIST
dataset.
clothing images instead of hand-written digits) for illustrative purposes. The
dataset has, as the MNIST one, 60000 training images and 10000 test ones.
In Table 2 you can see the summary of the results of applying kNN to the
testing portion of this dataset.
It is exciting to note that with an FFA
Input Data
Accuracy
Running Time
Original dataxi ∈R784
85.4%
1040 sec. ≈16.6 min.
Latent Features enc (xi) ∈
R8
79.9%
1.2 sec.
Latent Features enc (xi) ∈
R16
83.6%
3.0 sec.
Table 2: the diﬀerence in accuracy and running time when applying the kNN
algorithm to the original 784 features with a FFA with 8 neurons and with
a FFA with 16 neurons for the Fashion MNIST dataset.
with 16 neurons in the middle layer, we reach an accuracy of 83.6% in just
3 sec. When applying a kNN algorithm to the original features (784), we
get an accuracy only 1.8% higher but with a running time ca. 330 times
longer.
Note Using autoencoders and doing classiﬁcation with the latent fea-
tures is a very viable technique to reduce the training time by several
order of magnitude while incurring a minor drop in accuracy.
3.2.2
Curse of dimensionality – a small detour
Is there any other reason why we want to do dimensionality reduction before
doing any classiﬁcation? Reducing running time is one reason, but another
important one plays a signiﬁcant role when the input dimension is very large,
17

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
i.e., the datasets that have a very high number of features: the curse of di-
mensionality. To understand why we need to make a quick detour in the
problem of high dimensionality classiﬁcation and discuss the curse of dimen-
sionality. Let us consider the unit cube [0, 1]d with d an integer and m points
in it distributed randomly. How big should be the length l of the smallest
hyper-cube to contain at least 1 point? We can easily calculate it as
ld ≈1
m →l ≈
 1
m
1/d
(23)
We can easily calculate this value of l for various values of d. Let us suppose
that we consider m = 1000 and summarize the results in Table 3.
d
l
2
0.003
10
0.50
100
0.93
1000
0.99
Table 3: Length l of the smallest hyper-cube to contain at least 1 point from
a population of randomly distributed m points.
Furthermore, as you can see the data becomes so sparse in high dimen-
sions that you need to consider the entire hyper cube to capture one single
observation. When the data becomes so sparse the number of observations
you will need to train an algorithm properly becomes much bigger than the
size of existing datasets. We could look at this diﬀerently. Let us consider
now a small hypercube of side l = 1/10. How many observations we will ﬁnd
on average in this small portion of the hypercube? This is easy to calculate
and is given by
m
10d
(24)
You can see that this number is very small for high values of d. For example,
if we consider d = 100 is easy to see that we would need more observations
than atoms in the universe17 to ﬁnd at least one observation in that small
portion of the hypercube.
17https://www.universetoday.com/36302/atoms-in-the-universe/
18

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Note Doing dimensionality reduction is a very viable method for re-
ducing dramatically running time while incurring in an only small drop
in accuracy. In high dimensionality datasets this becomes fundamental
due to the curse of dimensionality.
3.3
Anomaly Detection
Autoencoders are often used to perform anomaly detection on the most dif-
ferent datasets. The best way to understand how anomaly detection works
with autoencoders is to look at it with a practical example. Let us consider
an autoencoder with only three layers with 784 neurons in the ﬁrst, 64 in the
latent feature generation layer, and again 784 neurons in the output layers.
We will train it with the MNIST dataset and in particular with the 60000
training portion of it as we have done in the previous sections of the article.
Now let us consider the Fashion MNIST dataset. Let us choose an image
of a shoe (see Figure 9) from this dataset and add it to the testing portion
Figure 9: one random image from the Zalando MNIST dataset.
of the MNIST dataset. The original testing portion of MNIST has 10000
images. With the shoe we will have a 10001 images dataset. How can we use
an autoencoder to ﬁnd the shoe automatically in those 10001 images? Note
that the shoe is an "outlier", an "anomaly" since it is an entirely diﬀerent
19

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
image class than hand-written digits. To do that we will take the autoen-
coder we trained with the 60000 MNIST images and with it we will calculate
the reconstruction error for the 10001 test images.
The main idea is that since the autoencoder has only seen hand-written
digits images, it will not be able to reconstruct the shoe image. Therefore we
expect this image to have the biggest reconstruction error. We can check if
that is the case by taking the top 2 reconstruction errors. For this example,
we have used the MSE for the reconstruction error. You can check the code
of this example at https://adl.toelt.ai.
The shoe has the highest
reconstruction error: 0.062. The autoencoder is not able to reconstruct the
image as it can be seen from Figure 10.
Figure 10: The shoe and the autoencoder’s reconstruction trained on the
60000 hand-written images of the MNIST dataset. This image has the biggest
RE in the entire 10001 test dataset we built with a value of 0.062.
The second biggest RE is slightly less than one third of that of the shoe:
0.022, indicating that the autoencoder is doing quite a good job in under-
standing how to reconstruct hand-written digits. You can see the image with
the second biggest RE in Figure 11. This image could also be classiﬁed as an
outlier, as is not completely clear if it is a 4 or an incomplete 9. The readers
with most experience may have noticed that we trained our autoencoders
on a dataset without any outliers and applied it to a second dataset with
outliers. This is not always possible as very often the outliers are not known
20

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 11: the image with the second biggest RE in the 10001 test dataset:
0.022.
and are lost in a big dataset. In general, one wants to ﬁnd outliers in a single
big dataset without any information on how many there are or how they look
like. Generally speaking, anomaly detection can be done following the main
steps below.
• One train an autoencoder on the entire dataset (or if possible, on a
portion of the dataset known not to have any outlier).
• For each observation (or input) of the portion of the dataset known to
have the wanted outliers one calculates the RE.
• One sorts the observations by the RE.
• One classiﬁes the observations with the highest RE as outliers. Note
that how many observations are outliers will depend on the problem at
hand and require an analysis of the results and usually lot of knowledge
of the data and the problem.
Note that if one train the autoencoder on the entire dataset at disposal, there
is an essential assumption: the outliers are a negligible part of the dataset
and their presence will not inﬂuence (or will inﬂuence in an insigniﬁcant way)
how the autoencoder learns to reconstruct the observations. This is one of
21

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
the reasons why regularization is so essential.
If the autoencoders would
learn the identity function, anomaly detection could not be done. A classic
example of anomaly detection is ﬁnding fraudulent credit card transactions
(the outliers). This case usually presents ca. 0.1% fraudulent transactions
and therefore this would be a case that would allow us to train the au-
toencoder on the entire dataset.
Another is fault detection in industrial
environment.
Note If one train the autoencoder on the entire dataset at disposal,
there is an essential assumption: the outliers are a negligible part of
the dataset and their presence will not inﬂuence (or will inﬂuence in
an insigniﬁcant way) how the autoencoder learns to reconstruct the
observations.
3.3.1
Model Stability – a short note
Note that doing anomaly detection as described in the previous section seems
easy, but those methods are prone to overﬁtting and give often inconsistent
results. This means that training an autoencoder with a diﬀerent architecture
may well give diﬀerent REs and therefore other outliers. There are several
ways of solving this problem, but one of the simplest ways of dealing with
instability of results is to train diﬀerent models and then take the average of
the REs. Another often used technique involves taking the maximum of the
REs evaluated from several models.
Note Anomaly detection done with autoencoders is prone to problems
as overﬁtting and unstable results. It is essential to be aware of these
problems and check the results coming from diﬀerent models to inter-
pret the results correctly.
Note that this section serves to give you some pointers and is not meant to
be an exhaustive overview on how to solve this problem. Like autoencoders
ensembles18, more advanced techniques are also used to deal with problems
of instable results coming, for example, from small datasets.
18See for example https://saketsathe.net/downloads/autoencode.pdf.
22

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
3.4
Denoising autoencoders
Denoising autoencoders19 are developed to auto-correct errors (noise) in the
input observations. As an example, imagine the hand-written digits we con-
sidered before where we added some noise (for example Gaussian noise) in
the form of changing randomly the gray values of the pixels. In this case
the autoencoders should learn to reconstruct the image without the added
noise. As a concrete example, consider the MNIST dataset. We can add
to each pixel a random value generated by a normal distribution scaled by
a factor (you can check the code at https://adl.toelt.ai in article 25).
We can train an autoencoder using as input the noisy images, and as output
the original images. The model should learn to remove the noise, since it is
random in nature and have no relationship with the images. In Figure 12
you can see the results. In the left column you see the noisy images, in the
middle the original ones and on the right the de-noised images. It is quite
impressive how well it works. Figure 12 has been generated by training a
FFA autoencoder with 3 layers and 32 neurons in the middle layer.
4
Beyond FFA – autoencoders with convolu-
tional layers
In this article we have described autoencoders with a feed-forward architec-
ture. There is no rule and autoencoders with convolutional layers works as
well, and often (especially when dealing with images) are much more eﬃ-
cient. For example, in Figure 13 you can see a comparison of the results
of a FAA (with architecture (784,32,784)) and of a Convolutional Autoen-
coder (CA) (with architecture ((28x28), (26x26x64), (24x24,32), (26x26x64),
(28x28); keep in mind the layers are convolutions, so the ﬁrst two numbers
indicate the tensor dimensions and the third the number of kernels, that in
this example had a size of 3x3). The two autoencoders have been trained
with the same parameters (epochs, mini-batch size, etc.). You can see how a
CA gives better results than a FAA, since we are dealing with images. To be
fair, note that the feature generating layer is only marginally smaller than
19Vincent, P., Larochelle, H. Bengio, Y. Manzagol, P.A.: Extracting and composing
robust features with denoising autoencoders. In: Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’08, pp. 1096-1103. ACM, New York, NY USA
(2008)
23

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
the input layer in this example. The purpose of this example is only to show
you how also convolutional autoencoders are a viable solution that works
very well in many practical applications.
Another important aspect is that the feature generating layer could be a
convolutional layer but could also be a dense one. There is not ﬁx rule and
testing is required to ﬁnd the best architecture for your problem and how you
want to model your latent features: as a tensor (multi-dimensional array) or
as a one-dimensional array of real numbers.
5
Code Examples
On https://adl.toelt.ai you will ﬁnd examples of autoencoders, anomaly
detection with autoencoders and denoising with autoencoders as described
in this article.
6
Further Readings
• Deep Learning Tutorial from Stanford University
http://ufldl.stanford.edu/tutorial/unsupervised/Autoencod
ers/
• Building autoencoders in Keras
https://blog.keras.io/building-autoencoders-in-keras.html
• Introduction to autoencoders in TensorFlow
https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/generative/autoencode
r
• Bank, D., Koenigstein, N., and Giryes, R., “Autoencoders", arXiv e-
prints, 2020,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05991
• R. Grosse, University of Toronto, Lecture on autoencoders
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~rgrosse/courses/csc321_2017/sl
ides/lec20.pdf
24

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 12: Results of a denoising FFA autoencoder with 3 layers and 32
neurons in the middle layer. The noise has been generating adding a real
number between 0 and 1 taken from a normal distribution. For details see
the code at https://adl.toelt.ai.
25

INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
Figure 13:
Comparison of the results of a FAA (with architecture
(784,32,784)) and of a Convolutional Autoencoder (CA) (with architecture
((28x28), (26x26x64), (24x24,32), (26x26x64), (28x28); keep in mind the lay-
ers are convolutions, so the ﬁrst two numbers indicate the tensor dimensions
and the third the number of kernels, with kernel size 3x3). The two autoen-
coders have been trained with the same parameters. You can check the code
at https://adl.toelt.ai.
26
