1
A Specific Task-oriented Semantic Image
Communication System for substation patrol
inspection
Senran Fan, Haotai Liang, Chen Dong*, Xiaodong Xu, Geng Liu
Abstract—Intelligent inspection robots are widely used in
substation patrol inspections to identify potential safety haz-
ards by patrolling substations and sending back scene images.
However, in areas with weak signals, the scene images may
not be successfully transmitted, thereby reducing the quality of
the robots’ work. To reliably transmit high quality inspection
images in weak signal areas, a Specific Task-oriented Semantic
Communication System for Images (STSCI) is proposed. This
system involves the extraction, transmission, restoration, and
enhancement of semantic features to obtain clearer images sent
by intelligent robots under weak signals. Inspired by the fact
that only specific details of the image are required in substation
patrol inspection tasks, we propose a new paradigm of semantic
enhancement to ensure the clarity of key semantic information
under low signal-to-noise ratio conditions. Experiments demon-
strate that our STSCI generally outperforms traditional image-
compression-based and channel-coding-based as well as other
semantic communication systems in substation patrol inspection
tasks under low signal-to-noise ratio conditions.
Index Terms—Semantic Communication, substation patrol
robot, STSCI
I. INTRODUCTION
S
Ubstation inspections are critical in ensuring the safe
and reliable operation of the power grid. However, weak
signal areas within substations pose a significant challenge
for inspection, as they can severely affect the quality of
the inspection images. This is a common issue faced by
most power utilities and can be caused by various factors
such as signal obstruction from metal equipment, signal
attenuation due to channel fading, weather conditions, and
equipment aging. Thus, addressing this issue is of paramount
importance, and many studies have attempted to tackle the
relevant problem, such as [1], [2]. However, these studies
were all based on traditional communication methods. The
traditional communication system is reaching Shannon’s Limit
Senran Fan, Haotai Liang are with the State Key Laboratory of Network-
ing and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-

Xiaodong Xu is with the State Key Laboratory of Networking and
Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China, and also with the Department of Broad-band Communica-

Geng Liu is with the Beijing Smart-chip Microelectronics Technology

*Chen Dong is the corresponding author and with the State Key
Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing Univer-

in physical layers, and the channel coding method relied
upon by traditional communication systems performs poorly
under low signal-to-noise conditions, leading to unsatisfactory
transmission performance, especially in weak signal areas.
To
overcome
this
challenge,
we
propose
a
Specific
Task-oriented Semantic Communication System for Images
(STSCI), which fully utilizes the characteristics of specific
inspection tasks, such as fixed image sources, fixed channel
conditions and focusing on the key semantic content in the
images. The STSCI combines semantic communication, deep
learning, and Joint Source-Channel Coding(JSCC) [3] to ad-
dress the problem of normal inspection in weak signal areas
of substations.
Semantic communication systems are considered a new
and promising direction in the communication fields. First
mentioned in Shannon and Weaver’s paper [4], semantic-based
communication systems achieve extreme data compression
by only focusing on key semantic information. In specific
communication scenarios, a large amount of task-irrelevant
information is involved in transmitting information, leading to
a waste of communication resources. Particularly for the task
of intelligent substation patrol inspection, what really matters
are only the key semantic contents, such as the areas with
key units of the image. As introduced in [5], [6], the semantic
communication system achieves highly efficient communica-
tion by using semantic feature extraction, transmission, and
reconstruction to compress the image while retaining the key
semantic information.
Deep learning can extract the semantic features from the
image. Semantic segmentation networks [7]–[9] as well as
target detection networks [10]–[13] are powerful in seman-
tic features extracting and analysis. Additionally, thanks to
the sophisticated design of adversarial loss functions, GAN
networks [14] are capable of generating images based on
semantic features. In unsupervised fields, the auto-encoder
[15] is an inspiring architecture for semantic feature extraction
as it compresses high-dimensional data into a low-dimensional
encoding that is used for data reconstruction. By combing
GAN networks and the structure of auto-encoder, the system
can decrease distortion in semantic contents of images during
the process of extreme compression as well as transmission.
The traditional communication systems rely on source cod-
ing and channel coding. We propose replacing the source
coding with GAN networks and using Joint Source-Channel
Coding (JSCC) [3], [16] to resist noise in channels. By leading
the simulated-channel models into the training process of
arXiv:2301.03331v2  [cs.CV]  13 Apr 2024

2
Figure 1. The framework of STSCI. STSCI consists of two systems, the base system and the semantic enhancement system. The base system consists of a
semantic encoder, a semantic decoder, and a simulated-channel model (trained only), with the process indicated by black lines. The semantic enhancement
system with the process indicated by red lines, on the other hand, includes a YOLONet for identifying key semantic content and an enhancement CNN
network that utilizes extra information to enhance the transmission quality of the key semantic information. The simulated-channel model is only used during
the model training process to simulate a real-world wireless channel. This process is indicated by blue lines.
deep networks, the networks can perform better in real-world
channel conditions especially under low signal-to-noise ratio
situations.
In fact, a layer-based semantic communication system for
images (LSCI) proposed in [17] combines semantic com-
munication techniques with GAN network to encode and
decode information, demonstrating excellent performance in
image transmission. This served as a great inspiration for our
research.
Building upon the above studies, the STSCI has more pow-
erful network architectures and fully utilizes the characteristics
of specific inspection tasks, which can achieve highly effient
communication while minimizing the loss of key semantic
information even under low signal-to-noise conditions. The
system is a GAN-based auto-encoder-structured network using
RRDB blocks as well as tricks from conditional GAN [18]
for image compression, transmission, and reconstruction. In
addition, a YOLONet is involved to locate the image’s specific
semantic contents, which will then be embedded and sent
to the enhancement CNN model to improve the transmission
quality of the important semantic contents of the images, to
make sure there are no errors or missing when making security
checks with the transmitted images. The key contributions of
this paper are summarized as follows.
(1) A specific task-oriented semantic communication system
for image is proposed for the transmission of images
obtained by intelligent robots in the substation patrol
inspection task. A new paradigm of key semantic contents
extraction and preservation for such specific tasks is
proposed. A YOLONet is involved to locate the key
semantic contents, which are then sent to an enhancement
CNN model to improve the transmission quality of those
areas.
(2) A GAN-based auto-encoder structure network is de-
signed. Combined with RRDB blocks, ChannelNorm,
idea of conditional GAN and some other tricks, the
network can extremely compress the images into the
semantic feature encoding and reconstruct them after the
transmission.
(3) Through simulations and experiments, this paper demon-
strates the efficacy of the semantic communication system
in handling the specific tasks. The results demonstrate
that the STSCI outperforms traditional communication
systems in tasks with fixed image source and fixed chan-
nel conditions. Specifically, the STSCI provides better
transmission quality, especially under low signal-to-noise
ratio channel conditions. This significantly expands the
effective signal coverage area, which ensures the proper
functioning of the intelligent robots when patrolling the
weak signal areas of the substation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an
overview of the the Specific Task-oriented Semantic Com-
munication System for Images (STSCI), including the system
workflow, model architectures and training flow path for the
two parts of the STSCI. In Section III, we present a direct
comparison between the STSCI and other image communica-
tion systems to quantify the performance of the STSCI using
the proposed method. Finally, we draw conclusions in Section
IV.
II. SPECIFC TASK-ORIENTED SEMANTIC COMMUNICATION
SYSTEM
As shown in Fig. 1, the Specific Task-Oriented Semantic
Communication System for Images (STSCI) consists of two
parallel parts: the base system and the semantic enhancement
system.
The base system is a GAN-based auto-encoder network,
containing a semantic encoder at the transmitting end and a se-
mantic decoder at the receiving end. The encoder compresses
the captured inspection images into a semantic encoding
containing semantic features, which is transmitted over the

3
Figure 2. The architecture of the base system, including the encoder at transmitting end and the decoder at receiving end. The modules with green background
describes the process of image transmission. During training, a simulated-channel model is added for source-channel joint encoding, as well as a discriminator
in the GAN model to assist in training the generator, which is the decoder. The networks in the diagram are represented by several rectangular blocks, with
the number of blocks matching the number of network layers. Blocks of different colors represent different network layers.
channel to the receiving end and then reconstructed into a
image by the decoder.
Meanwhile, the semantic enhancement system consists of
a YOLONet at the transmitting end to identify areas with
key semantic contents in the image and an enhancement CNN
model at the receiving end that generates high-quality images
and improves the clarity and quality of areas with key semantic
contents.
The two parts together form the communication system for
encoding, transmitting and decoding the inspection images.
The overall workflow of the system is shown in Fig. 1,
the inspection images captured by the robot are first fully
processed by the basic system, encoded into semantic encoding
by the encoder, transmitted to the receiving end via the
wireless channel, and reconstructed into an image by the
GAN-based decoder at the receiving end. At the same time,
at the transmitting end, the YOLONet is used to identify and
locate key semantic content areas in the image, the located
areas will be encoded and transmitted separately through the
basic system. Therefore, the transmitting end will obtain not
only the complete inspection image, but also the sub-image
corresponding to the key semantic content areas. Then the
enhancement CNN model takes these two images as input and
outputs a complete image with the key semantic parts more
precise and clear.
In the following text, both parts of the STSCI will be
introduced in detail.
A. Base System
As shown in Fig. 2, the base system is a deep neural network
consisting of an encoder network, simulated-channel models,
and a GAN-based decoder network. At the transmitting end,
the encoder compresses the obtained inspection images into
semantic encoding that are transmitted through the channel
and reconstructed by the decoder at the receiving end. The
simulated-channel models and the discriminator in GAN-based
decoder network are only used during the training process.
The key design of the base system is using a GAN network
to reconstruct the image from the semantic encoding instead of
a traditional CNN model in a general auto-encoder structure.
GAN networks utilize adversarial training to guide the gener-
ator to effectively learn the image distribution and approach
the real images. Their wide application in image enhancement
tasks such as image denoising and super-resolution [19], [20]
has proven their extraordinary performance in high-quality
reconstruction.
The generator backbone uses Residual-in-Residual Dense
Blocks (RRDBs), inspired by ESRGAN [20], a seminal work
in single image super resolution with excellent generated
results. RRDB combines the advantages of residual learning
and dense connections. Each RRDB contains multiple densely
connected residual blocks, which enables features to be fully
reused and propagated efficiently within each RRDB to ex-
tract richer features and utilize correlations between channels.
Compared to standard residual blocks, RRDB achieve superior
performance with significantly fewer parameters.
The system employs ChannelNorm in the generator, first
mentioned in [21], it performs normalization across the chan-
nel dimension instead of the batch or spatial dimensions like
Batch Norm and Instance Norm. It encourages competition
between channels, leading to more discriminative feature rep-
resentations. The richer channel-wise feature representations
significantly benefit high-resolution image generation tasks.
Inspired by [21], the discriminator shares the structure of
that in conditional GAN. The discriminator receives not only
the generated images and real images but also the corre-
sponding semantic encoding, forcing attention the connections
between the semantic encoding and the image as well as the
difference between images with different semantic encoding.
This helps the adversarial loss covers more useful information
to improve reconstruction quality.
Considering that the structure of the auto-encoder involved
in the semantic communication system is highly consistent

4
with the information communication process, Joint Source-
Channel Coding (JSCC) was proposed in [3]. Instead of using
additional channel coding like LDPC, JSCC resists noise in
channels by adding noise through simulated-channel models
when training auto-encoder networks. This forms an anti-
noise communication system that ensures high-quality image
transmission under low signal-to-noise ratio conditions. JSCC
methods have limitations in being constrained by fixed data
sources and channel conditions, which lead to the lack of gen-
eralization in deep-based semantic communication systems.
However, such constraints can be ignored in this task since
the information source and channels are fixed.
Regarding the loss functions that play a decisive role in
training the networks, Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss and
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) loss are
chosen to measure the distortion between the original images
and the generated ones. MSE loss measures the difference per
pixel and shows their distance in the high-dimensional space,
which helps maintain the similarity. Meanwhile, LPIPS loss
proposed in [22] is calculated through a VGG-net that has
been trained previously. The pre-trained VGG-net gives more
attention to the structure and texture of the images and does
well in telling such differences between images. LPIPS loss
helps fill this gap and makes the generated images closer to
the original ones in visual.
According to all the above introductions and the structure
shown in Fig. 2, the complete process of the base system is
as follows.
The image 𝑋to be transmitted is sent in to the encoder first
to get the semantic features 𝑌,
𝑌= 𝐸(𝑥).
(1)
The nearest neighbor quantization operation is then performed
on the extracted semantic features 𝑌,
𝑌𝑞(𝑖) = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑗||𝑌𝑖−𝐼𝑗||.
(2)
Where the set 𝐼of quantization centers is:
𝐼= {𝐼0, 𝐼1, ..., 𝐼𝑗, ..., 𝐼𝑙}.
(3)
According to JSCC, then the quantized semantic feature 𝑌𝑞is
sent to the simulated-channel models. In this paper, AWGN
model is chosen as the simulated-channel model,
𝑌𝑞
′ = ℎ· 𝑌𝑞+ 𝑛.
(4)
In this formula, ℎrepresents the channel gain, while 𝑛repre-
sents the independent identically distributed Gaussian noise.
Such model simulates the feature’s distortion transmitted in
the real-world channel and gives the base system the ability
to resist the noise.
The image 𝑋
′ is generated by the generator(the decoder
network) from the processed latent 𝑌𝑞
′ at the receiving end,
𝑋
′ = 𝐺(𝑌𝑞
′).
(5)
The encoder maps the source image 𝑋to a specific distribution
𝑃𝑋. The generator G tries to map samples 𝑌from a fixed
known distribution 𝑃𝑌to 𝑃𝑋, while the discriminator D is
learned to tell the difference between such two distributions
using the sampled data 𝑋and the generated 𝑋
′. A properly
trained discriminator helps the generator to find and simulate
the distribution 𝑃𝑋more preciously. Involving the idea of
conditional GANs as mentioned before, the adversarial loss
is as follows.
𝐿𝐺= −𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐷(𝑋
′,𝑌𝑞
′)),
(6)
𝐿𝐷= −𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 −𝐷(𝑋
′,𝑌𝑞
′)) −𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐷(𝑋,𝑌𝑞
′)).
(7)
Besides, when optimizing the encoder and the generator, the
MSE loss and the LPIPS loss are also involved to measure the
texture and perception distance between the source image X
and the generator image 𝑋
′. Moverover, helping to initialize
these two networks, these two kinds of loss guide the generator
and discriminator to be trained on the right direction. So the
final loss for the encoder and the generator are as follows.
In the initial training:
𝐿𝐸𝐺= ||𝑋−𝑋
′|| + 𝛼𝐿𝑃𝐼𝑃𝑆(𝑋, 𝑋
′).
(8)
In the final training:
𝐿𝐸𝐺= ||𝑋−𝑋
′||+𝛼𝐿𝑃𝐼𝑃𝑆(𝑋, 𝑋
′)+𝛽[−𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐷(𝑋
′,𝑌𝑞
′)]. (9)
Where 𝛼and 𝛽are coefficient weights used when calculating
the loss function, to adjust the influence of different loss
functions on the total loss function.
B. Semantic Enhancement System
The semantic ehancement system is designed to improve
the transmission quality of the key semantic content that is
important for specific tasks, such as the panels or electrical
insulators in intelligent substation patrol inspections. The
system consists of two parts: a YOLONet that locates the area
with key semantic content, which will be sent to the base
system, and an enhancement CNN model that generates high-
quality images at the receiving end using the transmitted image
and the areas with key semantic content as input.
Target detection network YOLONet is involved in our
system to locate the key semantic contents instead of semantic
segmentation networks such as U-net or FCN, as used in
some other semantic communication systems like [17]. For
the reason that the pre-trained YOLONet has the ability to
find and locate objects that need to be captured during the
patrol task, so this network can not only locate and mark the
area containing key semantic information during the semantic
communication process, but can also help the intelligent robots
to determine whether there are objects in the patrol list that
need to be captured, and how to adjust the position, angle,
and focal length of the camera to obtain a sharper image.
Considering the constraint of storage space in the patrol robot,
using YOLONet, which can perform multiple tasks, is a cost-
effective choice.
In this paper, YOLOv5s is used, which has the advantages
of being faster, smaller, and more accurate compared to the

5
Figure 3. The process of the semantic enhancement system. The YOLONet is used to locate areas in the image that contain key semantic information. Those
areas are then cropped into sub-images and transmitted to the receiving end through the basic system. This portion, serving as additional information, is
combined with the complete image transmitted from the basic system and input into the enhancement CNN model to obtain the final image.
previous versions of YOLO. The ”s” in YOLOv5s stands
for ”small”, indicating that this variant has a smaller model
size and is optimized for running on devices with limited
computational resources. Despite its smaller size, YOLOv5s
still achieves high accuracy in object detection tasks.
As shown in Fig. 3, semantic enhancement system’s process
is as follows.
The area 𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏with key semantic contents is located by the
YOLONet with input of source image 𝑋,
𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏= 𝑌𝑂𝐿𝑂𝑁𝑒𝑡(𝑋).
(10)
After sent into the base system, 𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏is encoded, transmitted
and finally reconstructed as the 𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏
′ at the receiving end,
𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏
′ = 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚(𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏).
(11)
At the same time, the whole image 𝑋is transmitted through
the base system to get another area 𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏1
′ with key semantic
contents cut from the reconstructed image 𝑋
′. The difference
between these two sub-images is calculated as follows.
𝑋𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓= 𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏1
′ −𝑋𝑠𝑢𝑏
′.
(12)
The DIFF image is sent to the enhancement CNN model whose
job is to balance the difference between two sub-image to
make full use of these extra information to let the transmitted
image as close as the original one in the area with key semantic
contents,
𝑋𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓
′ = 𝐸𝑛ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐶𝑁𝑁𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙(𝑋𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓).
(13)
The final image is formed as follows.
𝑋𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙= 𝑋
′ + 𝑋𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓
′.
(14)
In this task, the similarity between the final image 𝑋𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
and the original image 𝑋is focused on, which can help
decrease the possibility of errors or missing during analyzing
the images. So we choose the MSE loss and SSIM loss to
optimize the enhancement CNN models, and parameters in
the YOLONet as well as the base model are fixed during the
optimization,
𝐿𝑒𝑛ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡= ||𝑋−𝑋𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙|| + 𝛼𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑀(𝑋, 𝑋𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙).
(15)
Where 𝛼is coefficient weights used when calculating the loss
function, to adjust the influence of different loss functions on
the total loss function.
The details of networks involved in the STSCI is shown in
Table I and Table II.
Table I
BASE SYSTEM
Model
Layers
Encoder
Conv2d,kernel=(7,7),stride=(1,1)
Conv2d,kernel=(3,3),stride=(2,2) x 4
Conv2d,kernel=(3,3),stride=(1,1)
Decoder
Conv2d,kernel=(3,3),stride=(1,1)
RRDB+channelNorm x 9
ConvT,kernel=(3,3),stride=(2,2) x 4
Conv2d,kernel=(7,7),stride=(1,1)
Discriminator
For latent Y: nearest neighbor upsampling 16x
concat[upsampled latent Y, input image X or X’]
Conv2d,kernel=(3,3),stride=(2,2) x 4
Conv2d,kernel=(1,1),stride=(1,1)
Table II
ENHANCEMENT CNN MODEL
Model
Layers
Enhancement
Conv2d,kernel=(7,7),stride=(1,1)
Conv2d,kernel=(3,3),stride=(1,1) x 8
Conv2d,kernel=(7,7),stride=(1,1)

6
According to STSCI’s system architecture and training
process, STSCI is not only suitable for inspecting key com-
ponents in substations, but also, thanks to its flexible system
capabilities, it can be used for monitoring and inspection tasks
that focus on specific semantic information in fixed channel
conditions. By changing the training data, STSCI can easily
change the semantic features it focuses on. For example, by
using images of safety facilities such as fire equipment, emer-
gency exits, etc., to fine-tune the system, it can be trained to
focus on whether the safety devices are functioning properly.
Furthermore, to a certain extent, the system can pay attention
to multiple specific semantic elements, such as simultaneously
detecting the key components of the substation and ensuring
the normal operation of safety equipment. Moreover, STSCI
is not limited to the substation scenario. By collecting real
channel information from different scenarios to modify the
parameters of the simulated-channel model, the system can be
adapted to different plant area scenarios.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section is mainly introduced the relevant testing set-
tings, including the dataset for STSCI’s train and test, the
introduction of baseline as well as evalation metrics and the
performance for the STSCI in different metrics.
Discription and figures are given to show how the STSCI
surpass the traditional image communication system or other
semantic system under some specific situations.
A. Dataset for train and test
The training dataset is formed of 10000 images sampled
from the COCO2014 dataset while 200 images of substation
are used to fine-tune the base system to improve the STSCI’s
performance in the intelligent substation patrol inspection task.
During the testing process, the images from COCO2014
testset which are not involved in training process are sampled
to measure the metrics of the communication systems.
B. Baseline and Evaluation metrics
JPEG and JPEG2000, are used as baselines for image
compression. JPEG is a widely used image compression
standard that is commonly employed in image transmission
and storage. On the other hand, JPEG2000 is an advanced
image compression standard known for its higher compression
efficiency and improved image quality.
The LSCI proposed in [17] is also used as benchmarks
in the comparison, which is a novel generalized semantic
communication system. Comparing STSCI and LSCI can
demonstrate the superiority of STSCI in handling specific tasks
and showcase the effectiveness of the structural optimizations
made by STSCI for specific tasks, such as semantic enhance-
ment systems.
Meanwhile, the Low-density Parity-check(LDPC) channel
coding is used to make comparison with JSCC methods un-
der simulated-channel conditions of the wireless transmission
channels, as LDPC codes are powerful error-correcting codes
known for their excellent error correction performance and are
widely used in digital communication systems.
Structural Similarity Index(SSIM) as well as Peak Signal-to-
Noise Ratio(PSNR) is chosen as evaluation metrics to measure
both the quality of images at the receiving end and the
similarity between the transmitted and original ones. PSNR
can directly measure the performance of images in terms of
signal-to-noise ratio, making it a useful metric in applications
that require high fidelity. SSIM considers factors such as image
structure and contrast more comprehensively, making it a more
suitable metric for applications that require attention to image
details. Both metrics can help comprehensively describe the
performance of the communication system.
C. Analysis for results in image compression
We visualize the outcome of the comparison between JPEG,
JPEG2000, LSCI and STSCI in image compression task in Fig.
4. The x coordinate represents the average bits per pixel (bpp)
on the images, while the y coordinate individually show the
value of metrics of SSIM and PSNR.
From the Fig. 4, it’s obvious that STSCI is always preferred
to other image compression methods at equal bitrates. In the
bitrate around 0.15, the STSCI is 0.75 higher than the LSCI
and JPEG2000 in value of SSIM and 0.75 is a enormous
number which means the reconstructed image gained by
STSCI is more resemble to the original ones.
And that is extatly the truth, visual examples presented in
Fig. 5 shows how clear the imge compressed by the STSCI.
Even using only half bpp of JPEG2000 and one of three bpp
of JPEG, image handled by STSCI is 0.1 higher in SSIM
and around 8dB higher in PSNR metrics. It’s esay for us to
see noises and distortions in images compressed by JPEG and
JPEG2000, compared to which, the STSCI’s job is better. Such
results in compressing and transmitting the image shows that
STSCI can be equal to the specific patrol task with higher
quality and less bpp.
Considering that the base system is fine-tuned with some
substation and industral images, and that’s why in this visual
sample, the STSCI’s SSIM and PSNR metrics are higher than
the average values in 0.13bpp. Indeed, in the substation patrol
task, the images of substation can be collected continuously to
fine-tune or even retrain the networks of Base system, which
can leads to better performance in the specific task.
D.Analysis for semantic enhancement system
For example, taking the panel as the key semantic informa-
tion, a YOLONet is trained with 200 images of panels. Both
the details and the example of trained YOLONet is shown in
Fig. 6.
With pre-trained checkpoints involved, after 200 images’
training, the YOLONet is precious enough for the daily patorl
task with making errors or missing in low frequency.
Meanwhile Fig. 7 shows the effect of the enhancement CNN
model. The enhanced area in Fig. 7 has the high SSIM at 0.946
and PSNR at 34.4dB. Through the enhancement CNN model,
we can still see the direction of the hand on the panel, which
is of great meaningful information for the patrol task.
To accurately test the effectiveness of the semantic en-
hancement system, we conducted experiments using images
containing substation units, and limited the bpp of each system

7
Figure 4. The performance of the reconstructed image of JPEG, JPEG2000, LSCI and STSCI with different bpp. The metrics SSIM and PSNR(dB) measure
the distortion performance.
Figure 5. Visual example of images produced by LSCI along with the corresponding results for JPEG and JPEG2000. STSCI has higher metric value in a
lower bpp than JPEG and JPEG2000. The image compressed by STSCI is more realistic and the details are clearer.
Figure 6. Training details and visual example of the YOLONet. The YoloNet
is fine-tuned using images that include instrument panels. The key semantic
content area identified by the YoloNet in the test image is highlighted with
yellow bounding boxes.
to around 0.15. The results were presented in Table III, which
shows the average SSIM and PSNR indicators of the output
images of each system. The data in Table III indicates that the
Figure 7.
Visual example of the enhancement CNN model. After passing
through the enhancement CNN model, the key semantic content areas of the
image exhibit improved image metrics. Moreover, visually, the directions of
the pointer on the panel is clearly visible.
semantic enhancement system is able to improve the image
restoration quality and fidelity of the enhanced area compared
to the non-enhanced area, and significantly outperformed
traditional JPEG and JPEG2000 image compression methods.
These findings demonstrate the protective effect of the se-
mantic enhancement system on key semantic information. By
using additional information to perform semantic enhancement
operations, the system was able to preserve important semantic
information while maintaining a low compression ratio.

8
Table III
COMPARISON OF IMAGE METRICS BETWEEN SYSTEMS
Model
SSIM
PSNR(dB)
STSCI(Enhanced Area)
0.942
32.1
STSCI(Non-enhanced Area)
0.887
30.6
JPEG
0.714
23.9
JPEG2000
0.806
29.4
E.Simulated results for channel communication
In the experiments, we compress the image with bpp around
0.1 and choose AWGN channel as well as Rayleigh fading
channel to make channel simulation. The AWGN channel
model approximates the noise conditions when the signal
is transmitted without obstacles, while the Rayleigh channel
incorporates scattering and reflection effects, simulating multi-
path and signal fading in wireless channels. These two channel
models are widely used for performance evaluation in com-
munication systems, so utilizing these channel models allows
for reliable results that validate the system’s reliability and
adaptability in different channel environments.
As shown in Fig. 8, under both AWGN channel and rayleigh
fading channel conditions, when the SNR is larger than 5dB,
the value of SSIM and PSNR gained by STSCI+LDPC is
a litter higher than STSCI+JSCC, but when the channel
conditions gets bad and the SNR is close or even lower than
0db, the quality of image transmitted through JSCC metheds
doesn’t decrease very fast and becomes higher than that of
LDPC methods, which is desirable for the specific task. One of
the most importance mission for STSCI in this task is to ensure
the quality of image sent back by robots when patrolling
some marginal areas with low signal-to-noise ratio channel
conditions. And unlike LSCI whose encder and decoder is not
optimized when involving the noise by using channel slice
models, STSCI’s performance in good channel conditions can
get closer and closer to the LDPC metheds.
F.System parameter count, computational power require-
ments, and running speed
According to Table IV, we can obtain the parameter counts,
total computational power, and running speed for each model
in the system. The experiments were conducted on an Nvidia
Orin at the transimtting and an Nvidia P100 GPU at the
receiving end, with image size set to 512x512 pixels(enhanced
Figure 8. Comparison between STSCI and LSCI with JSCC or channel slice models and traditional channel coding LDPC with SSIM and PSNR metrics in
AWGN channel and Rayleigh fading channel. STSCI with JSCC achieves high image metrics and exhibits minimal degradation in performance under low
signal-to-noise ratio conditions, maintaining a high level of image transmission quality.

9
area are 80x80 pixels).
Considering the scenario where the transmitter is an edge
device with relatively limited computing power, Nvidia Orin
is adopted to perform computational testing on the models
deployed at the transmitting end. Nvidia Orin is a chip
designed specifically for edge computing, with advantages
such as small size and low power consumption, and is widely
used in the Internet of Things field, matching the requirements
of the scenario.
In the model design, we considered that the computational
power is limited at the transimtting end while relatively
stronger at the receiving end. Therefore, in the design, the
complexity of the model is reduced at the transmitting end
and improved the ability of the model at the receiving end
with more convolutional layers and connections. According to
Table IV, the total parameters and flops of the two models at
the transimtting end are smaller than those of the models at
the receiving end.
Figure 9. The process of signal transmission and reception in hardware. The
transmitting end is located on the right side, while the receiving end is on the
left side. The experimental hardware used is the YunSDR Y750.
G.Hardware Signal Transmission, Reception, and Real
Channel Experiments
To further validate the effectiveness and reliability of the
system, we deployed the system at both the transmitting and
receiving end and conducted real-channel image transmission
using hardware. As shown in Fig. 9, YunSDR Y7501 devices
were used at both the transmitting and receiving ends, with the
bitstream employing OFDM modulation and a bpp parameter
1Introduction website : https://www.v3best.com/y750s
Table IV
SYSTEM COMPUTATIONAL POWER PARAMETERS
Model
Params(M)
Flops(G)
Speed(ms)
Nvidia Orin
YOLOv5s
7.2
16.50
22.6
Encoder
6.0
34.46
50.00
Nvidia P100
Decoder
6.3
49.54
19.66
Enhancement
CNN
Model
12.5
80.37
12.48
of 0.1. The measured SNR of the wireless channel was approx-
imately 0dB. After completing the transmission, the average
performance metrics of the received images are presented in
Table V.
Table V
HARDWARE EXPERIMENT RESULTS METRICS
SSIM
PSNR(dB)
Final Image
0.83
27.83
Enhannced Area
0.88
28.77
At a bpp value of 0.1 and an SNR of around 0, the image
metrics obtained from the hardware experiment exhibit fluc-
tuations around the results obtained from software simulation.
In such low SNR scenarios, our STSCI still performs well
both in terms of image metrics and visual effects. The average
values are slightly lower but very close to the results from the
software simulation.
Meanwhile, Fig. 10 provides a visual example of hardware
transmission along with its corresponding image metrics. Ac-
cording to Fig. 10, even at SNR around 0dB, the image metrics
of the final image are still relatively high, without significant
distortion or deformation. In contrast to the blurry and unclear
version of the dial without enhancement, the enhanced version
maintains clear visibility of the pointers and readings on the
dial.
These results demonstrate that STSCI is capable of perform-
ing well in real hardware deployment and transmitting over
real channels. It also confirms the reliability of the software
simulation results obtained earlier.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a specific task-oriented semantic image com-
munication system STSCI is proposed for intelligent substa-
tion patorl inspection. It consists of a base system and a
semantic enhancemant system that work together to compress
and transmit images with high quality, while preserving the
key semantic information. The STSCI utilizes a GAN-based
network for image compression, a YOLONet for semantic
localization, and an enhancement CNN model to improve the
clarity of key semantic areas. JSCC technology is also involved
to improve the system’s performance under low signal-to-noise
ratio channel conditions.
Experimental results show that with all metheds taken, the
STSCI has the ability to solve the specific task of intelligent
substation patrol inspection, making it a promising technology
for future applications in this field.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported in part by the National Key R&D
Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2902102. The work
of is supported by The Academician expert Open Fund of Bei-
jing Smart-chip Microelectronics Technology Co., Ltd under
project SGITZXDTKJJS2201045, in part by the Fundamen-
tal Research Funds for Central Universities(Project Number:
2482021RC01).

10
Figure 10.
Visual examples for hardware signal transmission, reception, and real channel experiments. On the left side, the original image at the transmitting
and the final image at the receiving end are displayed. On the right side, the original sub-image of the key semantic region, the transmitted sub-image without
enhancement, and the enhanced sub-image are shown. The table contains the image metrics for each section.
