AN ONTOLOGY DESIGN PATTERN FOR REPRESENTING
RECURRENT SITUATIONS
A PREPRINT
Valentina Anita Carriero
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Bologna
Mura Anteo Zamboni 7, 40126 Bologna, Italy

Aldo Gangemi
Digital Humanities Advanced Research Centre
Department of Classical Philology and Italian Studies
University of Bologna
Via Zamboni 32, 40126 Bologna, Italy

Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese
Semantic Technologies Laboratory
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies
Italian National Research Council
Via San Martino della Battaglia 44, 00185 Rome, Italy

Valentina Presutti
Department of Modern Languages, Literatures, and Culture
University of Bologna
Via Cartoleria 5, 40124 Bologna, Italy

January 5, 2021
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an Ontology Design Pattern for representing situations that recur at regular
periods and share some invariant factors, which unify them conceptually: we refer to this set of
recurring situations as recurrent situation series. The proposed pattern appears to be foundational,
since it can be generalised for modelling the top-level domain-independent concept of recurrence,
which is strictly associated with invariance. The pattern reuses other foundational patterns such as
Collection, Description and Situation, Classiﬁcation, Sequence. Indeed, a recurrent situation series is
formalised as both a collection of situations occurring regularly over time and uniﬁed according to
some properties that are common to all the members, and a situation itself, which provides a relational
context to its members that satisfy a reference description. Besides including some exemplifying
instances of this pattern, we show how it has been implemented and specialised to model recurrent
cultural events and ceremonies in ArCo, the Knowledge Graph of Italian cultural heritage.
1
Introduction
In this paper, we investigate the concept of recurrence as applied to a series of situations, which recur, i.e. they occur
periodically or repeatedly, either by design (e.g. a festival), or by featuring similar attributes (e.g. a bird migration
pattern); hence the name recurrent situations. Recurrence is associated with invariance. We typically recognise
something as a known entity when it is invariant under appropriate transformations (in time, space, context, etc.). This
is a basic biological competence, typically starting in human babies at two months of age. As we recognise an invariant
object, we can also recognise an invariant situation, when multiple sets of related objects feature similar patterns. While
this ability in humans develops into foundational concepts such as permanence, similarity and difference, type, etc., and
arXiv:2101.00286v1  [cs.AI]  1 Jan 2021

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
is well investigated in cognitive science (see e.g. [1] for links between current cognitive science theories and knowledge
representation), recurrence is less studied in ontology design. In particular, recurrence under time transformation is not
fully addressed and captured by state-of-the-art patterns and ontologies.
In this paper, we deal with constructed and natural recurrence of situations under time transformation. By constructed
we mean a recurrence created by social norms (e.g. elections or festivals) or emerging and established in local or even
individual behavioral patterns (e.g. social meetings or daily routines). By natural we mean a recurrence observed in
nature (e.g. the raising of the sun, species migrations). By situation we mean any eventuality or structure that someone
intends to talk about (consider, refer to, mention), e.g. a conference, a system conﬁguration, a trial.
Existing ontologies mostly model recurrent situations as a special type of event, which represents its (repeatable)
occurrences as generic parts of a more general event, neglecting their belonging to a series, intended as a collection,
whose members are temporally ordered. This is relevant and characterises the ontological nature of such a unifying
entity.
The Recurrent Situation Series Ontology Design Pattern (ODP), explained in the rest of this paper, addresses this issue.
This pattern models collections of situations, in which the member situations: (i) are ordered in a temporal sequence,
(ii) are separated by time intervals that obey some function (that is in principle computable), and (iii) share at least
one invariance, unifying factor (e.g. a name, a topic, a purpose, etc.). Unifying factors make a recurrent situation
series distinct from others. This is a foundational pattern, since it models the top-level, domain-independent concept of
recurrence, as applied to a series of situations.
The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces the problem addressed; Section 3 describes the pattern at an
abstract level; Section 4 presents two actual implementations of the pattern; Section 5 provides two usage examples.
Finally, Section 6 reports the state of the art and Section 7 concludes the paper envisaging future work.
2
Problem addressed: recurrent situations
The Palio di Siena is a horse race held twice each year on predeﬁned dates in Siena, Italy. Preceded by other events,
e.g. an historical costume parade, the race itself involves ten horses and riders and consists of three laps of Piazza del
Campo. The ﬁrst horse that crosses the ﬁnish line, even without its rider, is declared the winner and awarded a banner
of painted silk (palio). Indeed, by riding bareback, more than one rider is usually thrown off his horse each year during
the turns.
The Palio held on 2 July 2019 and the fall of the jockey Brigante from his horse during that Palio are both situations.
Here, we refer to the notion of situation as a generalisation over any relational concept, e.g. events, states, actions. Both
situations show a kind of repetition: indeed, every year the Sienese horse race occurs, and, most likely, the same can be
said for the riders thrown off their horses. Nevertheless, it is possible, at both common-sense and philosophical level,
associate only the ﬁrst situation with a notion of recurrence that is strictly related to invariance: in recurrent situations,
we can recognise a pattern in the iteration, at periodic intervals, of some properties that occur in each situation. While
the Palio is explicitly designed, based on a plan, to iteratively occur at speciﬁc dates and following regulations (e.g.
ten participants, crossbred horses), the falls of the jockeys during the horse race have a high probability, which can
be empirically observed, to occur frequently, possibly at each race, but this observation is statistical in nature and is
based on neither a plan nor a rule that regulates and assures its repetition with speciﬁc characteristics and at regular
time intervals. Therefore, the annual race is designed as part of a series with an inherent continuity, while the fall of a
speciﬁc jockey is perceived as an episode.
There are two main distinctions that can be made between different types of recurrent situations, based on the origin of
the regular recurrence: (i) natural vs social, (ii) unplanned vs planned.
Natural recurrent situations are not constructed by social norms or practices: humans can observe them in very different
ways, but their occurrence is not caused by the mere acceptance of social rules. For example, morning sunrise, evening
sunset, heartbeat, periodic migration of groups of animals from a region to another for feeding or breeding, changing
seasons during the calendar year. We can be aware or not, we can provide alternative theories, but those things are not
happening because we decree they should exist.
Social situations instead are man-made situations that have a speciﬁc purpose in a social setting, whose recurrence is set
by humans: a world day, a train schedule, festivals, religious holidays, awards, sporting events, parliamentary elections,
etc.
Planned situations are those deﬁned by a clear plan, which regulates how the things involved in that plan shall be carried
out; on the contrary, unplanned situations have not a predeﬁned setting, and their properties are typically observed after
some occurrences.
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
When we informally (in conversations) refer to a regular repetition of a situation (e.g. an edition of the Palio), the term
recurrent event is often used, as we are talking about an event with invariant properties that occurs repeatedly. The term
event however may cause confusion as it is attributed in literature several different and very speciﬁc meanings. The
concept situation generalises over them, addressing the large spectrum of possible entities that can recur, either for
construction or by nature.
Going back to our example, the Palio di Siena is a series of consecutive situations that belong, as members, to a
collection characterised by some unifying factors, i.e. properties that give those situations a unity.
3
The Recurrent Situation Series Ontology Design Pattern
In this section, we describe the abstract model of recurrent situation series, which is represented as an Ontology Design
Pattern, according to OWL constructs.
Recurrent situation series.
A recurrent situation series is a set of situations repeating regularly over time. It is
intended as a collection, since it can be seen as a social object that depends on the collected items, i.e. its members [2].
A recurrent situation series is a particular type of collection where all the members are situations: entities ﬂowing in
time, either in the physical or social world, located in place, and involving some objects. The members of a recurrent
situation series, i.e. the recurring situations, must all play at least the role of ‘being a member of a recurrent situation
series’, and share one or more common properties.
At the same time, a recurrent situation series is a situation itself, intended as a context in which a set of entities is
contextualized based on a description or “frame”. A recurrent situation series is similar to a plan, which deﬁnes how the
things involved in that plan (i.e. the speciﬁc situations) shall be carried out, or follow some not completely predeﬁned
rules, e.g. where the situations are located, in which time of the year, etc.
Unifying criteria.
The individual (re)occurring situations, while preserving their identity, are kept together and form
a new entity, i.e. a recurrent situation series. In [2], collections of items are conceptually uniﬁed by unity criteria. A
unity criterion is a concept, a social object created for collecting existing entities, representing a role that can be played
by different entities. Therefore, a recurrent situation series is a collection, whose members are uniﬁed by at least one
unifying factor, i.e. organized according to one (or more if it evolves through time) recognizable pattern shared by all
members. For example, unifying factors of Palio di Siena may be its name and the holding of a horse race in Piazza del
Campo. A set of situations can be perceived as a unitary collection when at least one element or property occurs in each
situation member of the series, making all the situations ascribable to a homogeneous collection. For instance, all the
situations member of a recurrent situation series can be placed in the same location, be about the same topic, be inspired
by the same theme, establish certain activities, involve the same community, etc. A recurrent situation series must have
at least one unifying factor. Considering that, in theory, according to the Description and Situation ODP [3], every
situation satisﬁes some description. We can expect that all members of a recurrent situation series satisfy the same
description. Therefore, we can assert that it exists a description that plays the role of unifying factor for a recurrent
situation series. This description is the one satisﬁed by all situation members of the series.
A description is a socially-created object that provides a conceptualisation or a view on a situation. A recurrent situation
description (RSD hereafter) either deﬁnes speciﬁc concepts, e.g. repetition interval, or (re)uses existing ones,
e.g. location, which are supposed to classify the entities involved in the recurrent situation, e.g. 6 months for
repetition interval or Siena for location.
A RSD looks like a plan for recurrent situations: it uniﬁes the recurrent situations series, describes its member situations,
and is satisﬁed by these situations: this implies that at least some concepts in the RSD classify the entities (e.g. 6
months, Siena) involved in the situations.
These unifying factors may be more or less ﬂexible in unifying the recurrent situation series: properties that usually
occur in all the situations member of the same collection can undergo change under particular conditions. For instance,
yearly recurring situations may be usually held on a speciﬁc month of the year, but they still remain members of
the same series even if one member situation takes place in another period of the year due e.g. to unusual climatic
conditions. E.g., the FIFA world cup has always been in May/June/July since 1930, but in Qatar 2021 edition it will be
held in December, since the summer is too hot in Qatar. Moreover, a collection of situations recurring on an annual
basis remains the same entity even if one speciﬁc edition is cancelled due to exceptional events.
Temporal sequence.
As opposed to other types of collections, a partly predictable temporal interval holds between
the members of a recurrent situation series. The members of the collection are all consecutive situations, thus creating a
temporally-ordered sequence, so that each situation may have either previous situations, or next situations, or both,
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
Table 1: Competency questions answered by the Recurrent Situation Series ODP.
ID
Competency question
CQ1
Which are the situations of a recurrent situation series?
CQ2
Which is the time period elapsing between two situations of a recurrent situation series?
CQ3
When is the next situation of a recurrent situation series scheduled?
CQ4
What are the unifying criteria of a recurrent situation series?
CQ5
Which is the temporal validity of a unifying factor of a recurrent situation series?
CQ6
Which is the description satisﬁed by all the situations of a recurrent situation series?
CQ7
Which is the (immediate) next situation in a recurrent situation series?
CQ8
Which is the (immediate) previous situation in a recurrent situation series?
unless the recurrent situation series, planned to be a series of at least two situations, is interrupted after the ﬁrst situation,
or is never instantiated.
In the context of this pattern, the temporal interval is relevant only between members of the same recurrent situation
series, while the sequence between a member situation and any other situation is out of the scope of this pattern.
Regular time period.
A collection of situations can be deﬁned recurrent if its members occurrence are separated by
regular time periods. As for natural situations, this time period is observed in nature, while social situations usually
deﬁne the recurrence in a plan, explicitly. The time period concept works as a parameter that classiﬁes typical sets
of values: for example, a “yearly” time period classiﬁes approximated time intervals, e.g. between 11 and 13 months
instead of exactly 12.
Even considering approximation, there is a difference between the estimated time period, i.e. the time interval that
is planned (for social and planned situation series) or foreseen (for natural and unplanned situation series) when the
recurrent situation series starts, and the actual time period, i.e. the time interval that can be observed after the series
has been instantiated and has multiple members. For instance, to a planned time period of “approximately 2 years”
corresponds a measured time interval that represents the average of time intervals actually occurring between the
situations, and can vary signiﬁcantly if e.g. some yearly situations are postponed or canceled. This measurement could
be especially relevant to recurrent situations series, when the time period is a requirement to satisfy (e.g. a periodical
journal), or when a time period different from the expected is due to negative external causes (e.g. natural climate
changes).
4
Implementations of the Recurrent Situation Series ODP
The abstract pattern, as described in Section 3, can be formalised and possibly implemented as an Ontology Design
Pattern (ODP), in order to be reused in different contexts. In this section, we report as an example two implementations
of this pattern: the ODP that has been published on the ODP portal1 [4], and an implementation speciﬁc to the Cultural
Heritage (CH) domain, in the context of the ArCo2 ontology network [5].
4.1
ODP catalogue
The Recurrent Situation Series pattern3 reuses ﬁve existing Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs): Collection4, Situation5,
Description and Situation6, Classiﬁcation7, Sequence8. These patterns have been extracted from DOLCE+DnS Ultra-
lite9 foundational ontology, a lighter version of DOLCE+DnS [6], thus our ODP is also aligned to it. Moreover, all
reused ODPs are annotated with the OPLa ontology [7], which facilitates future reuse of this pattern by supporting the
process to understand and explore the ODP. For instance, OPLa allows us to express that a pattern in a local ontology is
a specialisation or a generalisation of another pattern.
1http://ontologydesignpatterns.org
2https://w3id.org/arco/ontology/arco
3rss: http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/recurrentsituationseries.owl#
4http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Collection
5http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Situation
6http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/descriptionandsituation.owl
7http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Classiﬁcation
8http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Sequence
9dul: http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl#
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
The ODP, as submitted to the ODP portal, can be found at http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/
Submissions:RecurrentSituationSeries. A diagram depicting the pattern is shown in Figure 1, and the Compe-
tency Questions (CQs) this pattern can answer are reported in Table 1. The general pattern provides a reusable template
for modelling recurrent situation series. For the concepts of situation and time period, which are not native to this
pattern, it reuses the semantics associated with: d0:Eventuality, from the foundational ontology DOLCE-Zero10, as
a top-level concept for any situation, event or activity, and the formalisation of time periods as deﬁned by the Time
Period ODP11. In the following, we describe classes and properties of the pattern.
Figure 1: Pattern for Recurrent Situation Series, in Graffoo notation (https://essepuntato.it/graffoo/speciﬁcation/). A
recurrent situation series is related to: its member situations, which are temporally ordered in sequence; one or more
unifying factors; one or more unifying situations, which involve unifying factors and their temporal validity; the
estimated and measured time period between two consecutive situations. At least one unifying factor of the series is a
description that is satisﬁed by each situation member of the series. Moreover, the series satisﬁes a description deﬁning
the concepts characterising recurrent situation series.
RecurrentSituationSeries.
Recurrent
situations
are
represented
as
individuals
of
the
class
:RecurrentSituationSeries, which is modeled as the intersection of the classes dul:Collection and
:Situation (axiom 1): a recurrent situation series is both a collection of situations, and a situation on its turn,
extending along the time in which its members occur (see below).
RecurrentSituationSeries
⊑
dul:Collection ⊓Situation
(1)
hasMemberSituation.
The membership for a collection of recurring situations (a :RecurrentSituationSeries)
is restricted to situations only (axiom 2), and a speciﬁc object property :hasMemberSituation is provided as a
pattern vocabulary item. Its inverse property is :isSituationMemberOf. A recurrent situation series may also have 0
members, in order to envision series that are never instantiated (axiom 3). As aforementioned, the concept of situation is
not native to this pattern, thus we introduce a generic class :Situation as a subclass of d0:Eventuality (axiom 4).
10d0: http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/d0.owl#
11http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:TimePeriod
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
RecurrentSituationSeries
⊑
∀hasMemberSituation.Situation
(2)
RecurrentSituationSeries
⊑
⩾0 hasMemberSituation.Situation
(3)
Situation
⊑
d0:Eventuality
(4)
UnifyingFactor.
:UnifyingFactor is modelled as a subclass of dul:Concept, since it is a social object for
collecting situations. The :RecurrentSituationSeries is related to the invariant unifying factors by means of
the object property :hasUnifyingFactor. An existential axiom (axiom 5) states that it exists a dul:Description
playing as unifying factor for a recurrent situation series. This description deﬁnes concepts (dul:defines) that
conceptualise all the situations that are member of the series, thus it dul:isSatisfiedBy them. Therefore, it works as
a unifying criterion for the whole series. Moreover, the recurrent situation series itself satisﬁes another description,
which deﬁnes all the concepts conceptualising a recurrent situation series (e.g. the general concept of unifying factor,
the concept of time period, etc.).
RecurrentSituationSeries
⊑
∃hasUnifyingFactor.dul:Description
(5)
UnifyingSituation, isValidIn.
The validity of a unifying factor can be limited to a speciﬁc time interval, for criteria
that unify the series for a limited period of time, due to their ﬂexibility or external causes. For modelling the temporal
validity of a unifying factor, we need a temporally-indexed situation (:UnifyingSituation) involving a unifying
factor (axiom 6). The relation between this unifying situation and the time interval of its validity is expressed through
the :isValidIn object property (axiom 7).
UnifyingSituation
⊑
∃involvesUnifyingFactor.owl:Thing
(6)
UnifyingSituation
⊑
∃isValidIn.dul:TimeInterval
(7)
hasNextSituation, hasPreviousSituation.
It is possible to represent which is the previous and the next situation of a
particular member of the series by means of the object properties :hasPreviousSituation and :hasNextSituation.
The two properties are further specialised into :hasImmediatePreviousSituation and :hasImmediateNext
Situation, respectively, in order to associate the situations with their immediate next and previous situations in the
sequence.
These properties express a sequential relation between situations that are members of the same recurrent situation series,
while they do not relate a situation to any other previous or next situation. This intended restriction cannot be expressed
in OWL 2 DL [8], because this requires a “diamond” construction with explicit coreferent variables. However, it is
possible to check the local integrity of an instantiation of a :RecurrentSituationSeries by using inference rules.
A situation (member of a recurrent situation series) can be linked by the property :hasNextSituation to another
situation, which is also member of a recurrent situation series, if both situations are member of the same collection.
For instance, let us consider the following SPARQL query. A triple asserting a local inconsistency between the two
recurrent situation series will be generated, if they are not the same or if there is not an identity relation (owl:sameAs)
between the two recurrent situation series. Similar SPARQL queries can be executed for the related constraints (e.g.
situations connected by :hasPreviousSituation object property). These queries can be embedded in the RDF
model via SPIN12 or SHACL13.
PREFIX rss: <http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/
recurrentsituationseries.owl#>
CONSTRUCT {?re1 rss:isLocallyInconsistentWith ?re2}
WHERE {
?rss1 rss:hasMemberSituation ?sit1 .
?rss2 rss:hasMemberSituation ?sit2 .
?sit1 rss:hasNextSituation ?sit2 .
filter not exists {?rss1 owl:sameAs+ ?rss2}
filter (?rss1 != ?rss2)
filter (?sit1 != ?sit2)
}
12https://spinrdf.org/
13https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
The datatype property :isTheLastSituation, with range xsd:boolean, expresses whether a situation is the last of
the series or not, while :situationNumber represents the number of the situation within the sequence (e.g. “2” for
the 2nd situation).
TimePeriod.
While the time period is a core element of this pattern, it can be modelled in different ways, depending
on the local requirements. Thus, we introduce a generic class :TimePeriod. Nevertheless, we propose a possible
solution for implementing the pattern, by reusing the class tp:TimePeriod from the TimePeriod ODP14 in our
usage examples (see Section 5). A tp:TimePeriod is related to a measurement unit and a measurement value. The
collection of situations is related to the recurrent time period with the object property :hasTimePeriod (axiom
8), which is deﬁned as a property chain [:hasMemberSituation ◦:hasTimePeriodBeforeNextSituation].
The object property :hasTimePeriodBeforeNextSituation relates a situation, member of a recurrent situation
series, to the approximate (e.g. yearly, monthly, etc.) time period that typically elapses before the next situation,
and is different from the actual time interval between two speciﬁc situations of the series, which can be derived
from the time intervals measured between any two members. :hasTimePeriod is indeed further specialised into
:hasEstimatedTimePeriod and :hasMeasuredTimePeriod.
RecurrentSituationSeries
⊑
∃hasTimePeriod.TimePeriod
(8)
TimePeriodMeasurementUnit.
The
tp:TimePeriod
is
related
to
the
unit
for
measuring
it,
tp:TimePeriodMeasurementUnit
(e.g.
year,
month,
week),
by
means
of
the
object
property
tp:hasTimePeriodMeasurementUnit, and to the time value through the datatype property tp:timePeriodValue,
with range xsd:integer.
4.2
ArCo: the Italian cultural heritage Knowledge Graph
A second implementation of the pattern is given in ArCo (Architecture of Knowledge)15, the Italian Cultural Heritage
(CH) knowledge graph [5]. We have been working on formally representing recurrent situations while developing this
KG, which consists of an ontology network and facts on Italian cultural properties, based on the General Catalogue
(GC) maintained by the Italian Institute of the General Catalogue and Documentation (ICCD-MiBAC). ArCo adopts
an agile and iterative, pattern-based and test-driven ontology development methodology, called eXtreme Design (XD)
[9]. Its requirements are provided in the form of user stories, as scenarios and real use cases, by a growing community
of customers, including ICCD. In particular, two modelling issues led us to implement a solution for representing
situations recurring regularly over time.
In the GC catalogue records, which describe Italian cultural properties, it is possible to ﬁnd information about events
(title, place, organizer) involving cultural properties, such as exhibitions. While there is no explicit information about
possible recurrent cultural events, by analyzing the data, it is clear that there are many cases of collections of recurrent
events (e.g. “third exhibition", “tenth painting award").
The second use case concerns a particular type of intangible cultural heritage: ceremonies, customs and celebrations
related to the year cycle (e.g. Carnival, Ramadan) or to the season cycle (e.g. popular belief, science, myth, phenomena
related to speciﬁc periods of the year), which recur regularly and whose periodicity is explicitly referred to in the GC
catalogue records (e.g. annual, every two years, three times a year).
The Recurrent Situation Series ODP has been indirectly reused (i.e. has been reused as a template) in the Cultural
Event16 ontology module. It has been specialised in order to represent collections of situations that are cultural events
(cis:CulturalEvent17) and exhibitions (a-ce:Exhibition).
5
Use cases
In this section we introduce two use cases, and show how they can be addressed by the Recurrent Situation Series ODP.
The ﬁrst example is a workshop, planned to occur periodically; the second example concerns a collection of recurrent
situations observed in nature: annual animal migrations.
14tp: http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/timeperiod.owl#
15https://w3id.org/arco
16a-ce: https://w3id.org/arco/ontology/cultural-event
17cis: http://dati.beniculturali.it/cis/
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
5.1
Artiﬁcial recurrent situation series: the Workshop on Ontology Design and Patterns
The Workshop on Ontology Design and Patterns (WOP) is a series of workshops that are co-located with ISWC
(International Semantic Web Conference). ISWC started in 2002, WOP in 2009. Both the conference and the workshop
recur yearly, between October and November, hence there is a time period of about one year between two situations
of the same series. Nevertheless, it can happen that one edition is skipped: indeed, WOP has not been held in 2011.
The location of these events may change every year. Usually, 3 geographical regions are involved: Europe, America,
Asia/Oceania are sequentially alternated. However, unforeseen conditions can alter this pattern: in 2020, due to
COVID-19 pandemic, they are organised as virtual events. The Workshop on Ontology Design and Patterns can be seen
as a unitary collection on account of many (more or less) invariant factors: it is co-located with ISWC, its main topic is
modular and pattern-based design, it involves a community mostly formed by computer scientists and ontologists, it is
organised by the Ontology Design and Patterns Association (ODPA), etc. Some factors are common to a subset of the
situations member of the series, e.g. the name of the workshop changed 3 times: (i) Workshop on Ontology Patterns
from the ﬁrst edition to 2012, (ii) Workshop on Ontology and Semantic Patterns from 2013 to 2016, and (iii) Workshop
on Ontology Design and Patterns since 2017. Moreover, the workshop recurs regularly: its estimated time period is of
about 1 year, but the measured time period slightly differs, since it was not held in 2011, and its dates are not predeﬁned.
Figure 2 depicts how WOP can be modelled by reusing this ODP. In Subﬁgure 2a, the series collecting the annual
workshops is an instance of :RecurrentSituationSeries, and is related to its members (e.g. WOP 2009, WOP
2010 and WOP 2012). The sequential relations between these (immediate) consecutive situations are modelled by
hasNextSituation and hasImmediateNextSituation, and their inverses. Since the beginning of the series, three
unifying factors have been valid: the topic of the workshops (ex:pattern-based-design), the organising committee
(ex:wop-organisation), and being held as joint event of ISWC (ex:co-location-iswc). So far, these unifying
factors do not necessarily need the speciﬁcation of a temporal validity. Differently, the name of the workshops can be
considered a unifying factor, however it has changed over time. This can be modelled by introducing a :Unifying
Situation to specify the time interval in which e.g. the current name of the series is valid (ex:2017-present). The
series is related to its estimated time period of ex:1year.
Subﬁgure 2b depicts the description satisﬁed by the members of the ex:wop-series, i.e. ex:wop-description.
This description deﬁnes a number of concepts (the topic, the role of chair) that can be used for classifying the entities
involved in the member situations (each workshop edition). For instance, the concept ex:topic classiﬁes the entity
ex:pattern-based-design, which is the main topic of the workshop(s). Indeed, the factors unifying the whole series
may be classiﬁed by some or all the concepts deﬁned in this description. Finally, the WOP series satisﬁes a description
that deﬁnes the core concepts of recurrent situation series (ex:recurrent-situation-series-description), such
as the time period, the role of being a situation member of a series, the unifying factor.
5.2
Natural recurrent situation series: the migrations of the Arctic terns
Animal migration is the regular long-distance movement of animals, on an annual or seasonal basis, that may be caused
by local climate, the season of the year, and food availability. The Arctic tern (Sterna paradisaea) is a long-distance
migrant seabird: it is famous for periodically ﬂying from the northern hemisphere, where it breeds, to the Southern
Ocean and back again each year. In this way, it lives two summers a year. It departs the breeding site (Arctic) around
August and starts its ﬂight back from the Antarctic around March. The migration of the Arctic tern is a unitary collection
of situations since its member situations involve all the members of a speciﬁc bird species, happen along the North-South
axis, depend on the season of the year in a speciﬁc place, etc.
Figure 3, depicts how the migration of the Arctic ster is modelled with this ODP. The ex:arctic-tern-migration
is an instance of :RecurrentSituationSeries, and represents the annual migration of the seabird. The series
includes as members all the annual migrations, e.g. the ex:arctic-tern-migration-2019 is the member situation
representing the migration from North to South and back again happened in 2019. This situation actually consists
in two parts (dul:hasPart), which are also situations: the ﬂight from North to South in August 2019 (ex:arctic-
tern-migration-ns-2019) and the ﬂight from South to North in March 2019 (ex:arctic-tern-migration-sn-
2019). These situations are in turn members of two separate recurrent situation series, also with an annual time
period: the collection of all the ﬂights from North to South and the collection of the ones from South to North. The
ex:arctic-tern-ns-migration and the ex:arctic-tern-sn-migration are series part of the annual arctic tern
migration series.
8

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
(a) The Workshop on Ontology Design and Patterns (WOP) is a recurrent situation series and is related to its ﬁrst three consecutive
situations; three unifying factors and one unifying situation with a limited temporal validity; the estimated time period between two
consecutive events.
(b) The situations member of the WOP series satisfy a description; this description deﬁnes the concepts (topic, chair) characterising
each workshop, and provides a unifying factor to the series. The series, in turn, satisﬁes a description deﬁning the core concepts
(time period, unifying factor, series member) of recurrent situation series.
Figure 2: The Workshop on Ontology Design and Patterns (WOP) is a recurrent situation series.
6
Related work
Most work about recurrence in situations focuses on different types of recurrent situations and of constraints that bound
a recurrent situation. [10] and [11] investigate calendar-based periodic situations, e.g. repeating time intervals such
as “the ﬁrst Friday each month”. [12] distinguishes between strongly periodic events, intermittent events and nearly
periodic events, with respect to the strength and the regularity of intervals between different occurrences. [13] deﬁnes a
periodic pattern as the repetition of a component (e.g. an event) over time, such as daily glucose measurements. Both
local (referring to a single component, e.g. the duration of one event of the pattern) and periodic (referring to the set of
9

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
Figure 3: The Arctic tern migration is a recurrent situation series, with the annual migrations of the Arctic terns as
members. Each annual migration consists in two parts, the migration from North to South and the migration from South
to North, which are situations members of two separate recurrent situation series. Finally, these recurrent situation
series are part of the annual Arctic tern migration.
repeating events, e.g. the duration of the whole pattern) constraints can be applied to periodic patterns, which can be
also split into sub-patterns applied only to a subset of the repeating events. Constraints related to single members of the
periodic series and to the series as a whole are also considered in [14].
The Recurrent Situation Series pattern follows the approach adopted by [14], where repeated events are considered as
collections of events of the same type, and can be inﬁnite in case no duration of the collection has been deﬁned. Here,
the notion of recurrent situation is related to the idea of a coherent series of events that become part of a pattern by
means of their iteration, at regular but not necessarily equal time intervals.
The concept of collection is studied in [2], but the focus of the authors is on collections of endurants, i.e. entities that
are directly localised in space such as objects and substances, while they do not deal with the properties peculiar to a
collection of situations, as entities directly localised in time (perdurants).
There exist some examples of ontologies modelling recurrent situations, but in most cases they are modeled as a
particular type of event, rather than as a collection of situations or events.
In DBpedia18, recurrent situation series such as annual ﬁlm award ceremonies are represented as events, and DBpedia
ontology19 models concepts such as dbo:Olympics, dbo:Tournament and dbo:MusicFestival as subclasses of
dbo:Event, with an overlap between the series and its different editions. For instance, the Palio di Siena20 is an instance
of dbo:SportsEvent, and there are no links to speciﬁc resources representing its periodic editions. DBpedia ontology
also derives classes from YAGO ontology, which in turn are automatically derived from Wikipedia and WordNet, such
as yago:WikicatRecurringEventsEstablishedIn189521, where the semantics of recurrence is only implied by
the name of the class. DBpedia instances of recurrent situations are usually related to their frequency (e.g. “biennial,
every two years”) through the dbp:frequency22 datatype property.
18https://dbpedia.org/
19dbo: http://dbpedia.org/ontology/
20http://dbpedia.org/resource/Palio_di_Siena
21yago: http://dbpedia.org/class/yago/
22dbp: http://dbpedia.org/property/
10

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2021
Wikidata deﬁnes the concept of recurring event (wd:Q1527571923), “event recurring at an interval”, as a speciﬁc type
of event with an associated time period (wdt:P225724) e.g. 4 years for the Olympic Games. wd:Q15275719 is further
specialised based on its frequency (e.g. biennial event) or its category (e.g. recurring sporting events). Wikidata relates
different editions to their recurring event through the object property part of (wdt:P361). Being this property transitive,
a sub-event that is part of a speciﬁc edition (e.g. a talk by an author of a scientiﬁc paper that is part of an edition of an
annual conference), would also be considered part of the annual conference as a recurring situation.
A mereological approach is less clear in distinguishing typical features of recurrence, e.g. a recurrent situation may
have no members at all and still be a recurrent situation, but, in this case, a mereological whole would be empty, i.e.
without parts, which is both formally and intuitively impossible. Moreover, the intermittent presence of the situation
would make it a part of a maximal continuous situation, which is not the same as a collection of speciﬁcally identiﬁed
situations. In other words, if we admit that recurrence is a temporal mereological concept, we need also to admit
maximal mereological wholes for any set of situations that have some temporally ordered similarity, which in the
considered use cases would be an overcommitment.
As part of the pending section25 schema.org deﬁnes the class schema:EventSeries26: “a collection of events that
share some unifying characteristic”, modelled as a subclass of schema:Event and schema:Series. Included events
are linked with the series using the schema:superEvent property, which expresses a part-whole relation, thus, as
in Wikidata, both the series and the related events are modelled as events, being the latter part of the former. Even
if the comment of the class cites the theme, location and organisers as typical examples of unifying characteristics,
these are not modelled in the ontology. schema:eventSchedule associates a series of repeating events with a
schema:Schedule, which is the core class for deﬁning the recurrence of an event series, i.e. its repeating time period.
schema:repeatFrequency deﬁnes the frequency (schema:Duration) at which the events will occur according to a
schedule, while schema:repeatCount represents the number of times a recurring event will take place.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we explained an abstract pattern to represent situations that recur regularly over time, in a temporal
sequence, and are members of a unitary collection since they share some invariant properties. This pattern can be
generalised in order to represent the more general concept of recurrence. We also discuss two implementations of this
pattern as an Ontology Design Pattern (ODP), a small ontology to be reused in different contexts. This pattern has been
created for addressing the requirement of modeling cultural events, exhibitions, traditional ceremonies, festivals, etc.
However, it seems to be useful for representing all recurring situations, which can be distinguished depending on the
origin of their regular intermittence: (i) not artiﬁcial situations whose regular recurrence can be observed in nature by
humans, but has a natural origin (e.g. the sunrise every morning or periodic migrations of animals); (ii) man-made
situations where the regular repetition and the unifying factors are set by humans (e.g. a world day or a train schedule);
(iii) situations created by humans with a periodicity regulated by a clear purpose, as part of a workﬂow (e.g. a medical
prescription deﬁning time intervals to take a medicine or periodical supply of services).
In our future work, we plan to study all types of recurrent situations, to thoroughly investigate the general concept of
recurrence, identifying possible new features to be represented, and to experiment and evaluate other possible patterns
for recurrent situations, alternative to the one presented in this paper.
