The Algonauts Project 2023 Challenge: How the 
Human Brain Makes Sense of Natural Scenes
Alessandro T. Gifford1,*, Benjamin Lahner2, Sari Saba-Sadiya3, Martina G. Vilas3, Alex 
Lascelles2, Aude Oliva2, Kendrick Kay4, Gemma Roig3,5, Radoslaw M. Cichy1,*
1 Department of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
2 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, USA
3 Department of Computer Science, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Germany
4 Center for Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR), University of Minnesota, USA
5 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI), Darmstadt, Germany
The sciences of biological and artificial intelligence 
are  ever  more  intertwined.  Neural  computational 
principles inspire new intelligent machines, which are 
in turn used to advance theoretical understanding of 
the brain. To promote further exchange of ideas and 
collaboration  between  biological  and  artificial 
intelligence  researchers,  we  introduce  the  2023 
installment of the Algonauts Project challenge: How 
the  Human  Brain  Makes  Sense  of  Natural  Scenes 
(http://algonauts.csail.mit.edu).  This  installment 
prompts  the  fields  of  artificial  and  biological 
intelligence  to  come  together  towards  building 
computational models of the visual brain using the 
largest  and  richest  dataset  of  fMRI  responses  to 
visual scenes, the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD). NSD 
provides  high-quality  fMRI  responses  to  ~73,000 
different  naturalistic  colored  scenes,  making  it  the 
ideal  candidate  for  data-driven  model  building 
approaches  promoted  by  the  2023  challenge.  The 
challenge is open to all and makes results directly 
comparable  and  transparent  through  a  public 
leaderboard  automatically  updated  after  each 
submission, 
thus  allowing  for  rapid  model 
development. We believe that the 2023 installment will 
spark  symbiotic  collaborations  between  biological 
and  artificial  intelligence  scientists,  leading  to  a 
deeper understanding of the brain through cutting-
edge  computational  models  and  to  novel  ways  of 
engineering  artificial  intelligent  agents  through 
inductive biases from biological systems.
Keywords: artificial  intelligence;  vision;  human 
neuroscience;  scene  understanding;  fMRI; 
prediction; challenge; benchmark
Introduction
In the last decade the deep learning revolution has 
profoundly impacted scientific research endeavors 
(Sejnowski, 2018; Baldi, 2021). During this time the 
quest for solving intelligence in both its artificial and 
biological  form  has  made  remarkable  progress: 
deep learning algorithms, originally inspired by the 
visual system of the mammalian brain (Fukushima & 
Miyake,  1982),  are  now  both  state-of-the-art  AI 
agents  (Krizhevsky  et  al.,  2017)  and  scientific 
models of the brain itself (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016; 
Cichy  &  Kaiser,  2019;  Kietzmann  et  al.,  2019; 
Richards  et  al.,  2019;  Saxe  et  al.,  2021).  Thus, 
research  in  artificial  and  biological  intelligence  is 
ever more intertwined. Furthermore, this synergy is 
accelerated by the release of large neural datasets 
that allow training deep learning models end-to-end 
on  brain  data  (Allen  et  al.,  2022;  Gifford  et  al., 
2022),  and  by  challenges  that  exploit  these  and 
other neural datasets to develop better models of 
intelligence (Schrimpf et al., 2020;  Willeke et al., 
2022).
We  contribute  to  the  symbiosis  between 
biological  and  artificial  intelligence  with  the  third 
installment of the Algonauts Project challenge, titled 
“How  the  Human  Brain  Makes  Sense  of  Natural 
Scenes”. The 2023 installment continues the spirit of 
the 2019 and 2021 editions of the Algonauts Project 
in  its  goal  of  predicting  human  visual  brain 
responses through computational models (Cichy et 
al., 2019; Cichy et al., 2021). Yet, it goes beyond the 
previous challenges in that it is based on the largest 
and richest dataset of neural responses to natural 
scenes, the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD) (Allen et 
al., 2022). We focus on visual scene understanding 
since  vision  is  an  unresolved  problem  in  the 
sciences of artificial and biological intelligence alike 
(Szegedy et al, 2014; Gheiros et al., 2019; DiCarlo 
et  al.,  2012),  and  one  of  the  areas  where 
collaboration  between  these  two  fields  has  been 
most  fruitful  (Yamins  &  DiCarlo,  2016;  Li  et  al., 
2019; Safarani et al., 2021; Dapello et al., 2022).
We believe that the Algonauts Project will lead to 
significant advances in both the understanding of 
the  brain  through  artificial  intelligence  models 
(Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016;  Cichy and Kaiser, 2019; 
Kietzmann et al., 2019;  Richards et al., 2019) and 
the  engineering  of  better  AI  agents  through 
biological intelligence constraints (Hassabis et al., 
2017; Sinz et al., 2019; Ullman, 2019; Yang et al., 
2022;  Toneva  &  Wehbe,  2019;  Li  et  al.,  2019; 
Safarani et al., 2021;  Dapello et al., 2022), thus 
contributing to the ever stronger symbiosis between 
the sciences of biological and artificial intelligence.

1

Figure 1. Challenge data. (a) Exemplar NSD stimuli images. All images consist of natural scenes taken from the COCO 
database. (b) Depiction of the cortical surface vertices used in the challenge (purple).
Materials and Methods
Challenge goal. The goal of the Algonauts 2023 
Project challenge is to promote the development of 
cutting-edge  encoding  models  that  predict  neural 
responses  to  visual  stimuli,  and  to  provide  a 
common  platform  that  catalyzes  collaborations 
between  the  fields  of  biological  and  artificial 
intelligence.
Primer on encoding models. Encoding models are 
algorithms that predict how the brain responds to 
(i.e., encodes) certain stimuli (Naselaris et al., 2011; 
van  Gerven,  2017).  In  visual  neuroscience,  an 
encoding model typically consists in an algorithm 
that takes image pixels as input, transforms them 
into model features, and maps these features onto 
brain data (e.g., fMRI activity), effectively predicting 
the neural responses to images.
Challenge data. In this challenge participants will 
leverage the unprecedented size of NSD (Allen et 
al., 2022) to build encoding models of the visual 
brain. NSD is a massive 8-subject dataset of high-
quality  7T  fMRI  responses  to  ~73,000  different 
natural  scenes  (presented  during  central  fixation) 
from  the  Common  Objects  in  Context  (COCO) 
database (Lin et al., 2014) (Fig. 1a). The challenge 
uses  preprocessed  fMRI  responses  (BOLD 
response amplitudes) from each subject that have 
been  projected  onto  a  common  cortical  surface 
group  template  (FreeSurfer's  fsaverage  surface). 
Brain surfaces are composed of vertices, and the 
challenge  data  consists  of  a  subset  of  cortical 
surface vertices in the visual cortex (a region of the 
brain  specialized  in  processing  visual  input)  that 
were  maximally  responsive  to  visual  stimulation 
(Fig.  1b).  We  provide  the  data  in  right  and  left 
hemispheres.  Further  information  on  NSD 
acquisition  and  preprocessing  is  provided  on  the 
challenge website1 and in the  NSD paper2. Since 
1 http://algonauts.csail.mit.edu
2 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41593-021-00962-x
model building requires independent data splits for 
training  and  testing,  we  partitioned  the  challenge 
data  into  non-overlapping  train  and  test  splits 
coming  from,  respectively,  the  publicly  released 
NSD data and the last three NSD scan sessions 
from each subject (which are not publicly available).
Train split. For each of the 8 subjects we provide 
[9841, 9841, 9082, 8779, 9841, 9082, 9841, 8779] 
images, along with the corresponding fMRI visual 
responses, z-scored within each NSD scan session 
and averaged  across image  repeats.  These data 
can be used to train encoding models.
Test split. For each of the 8 subjects we provide 
[159, 159, 293, 395, 159, 293, 159, 395] images 
(different  from the train images) but  withhold the 
corresponding  fMRI  visual  responses.  Challenge 
participants are asked to use their encoding models 
to predict the fMRI responses of these test images.
ROI  indices. The  visual  cortex  is  divided  into 
multiple areas having different functional properties, 
referred to here as regions-of-interest (ROIs). Along 
with  the  fMRI  data,  we  provide  ROI  indices  for 
selecting vertices belonging to specific visual ROIs; 
challenge participants can optionally use these ROI 
indices at their own discretion (e.g., to build different 
encoding models for functionally different regions of 
the  visual  cortex).  However,  the  challenge 
evaluation  metric  is  computed  over  all  available 
vertices, not over any single ROI.
Development kit. We provide a  Colab tutorial3 in 
Python where we show how to: (i) load and visualize 
the  fMRI  data,  its  ROIs  and  the  corresponding 
stimulus images; (ii) build and evaluate linearizing 
encoding models (Naselaris et al., 2011) using a 
pretrained AlexNet (Krizhevsky, 2014) architecture; 
(iii) prepare predicted brain responses of the test 
images in the right format for challenge submission.
3 https://colab.research.google.com/drive/
1bLJGP3bAo_hAOwZPHpiSHKlt97X9xsUw?usp=sharing
2

Challenge submission and evaluation metric. To 
quantify accuracy of encoding models, participants 
submit their fMRI predictions for the test images. For 
each NSD subject and hemisphere, we will correlate 
the  fMRI  predicted  data  with  the  corresponding 
ground truth (withheld) data at all vertices (across 
images), square the resulting correlation scores and 
normalize  them  with  respect  to  the  noise  ceiling 
(reflecting the total predictable variance given the 
level of noise in the data). The resulting values will 
indicate how much of the predictable variance has 
been  accounted  for  by  the  models.  The  overall 
challenge  evaluation  metric,  which  quantifies  the 
performance of each participant's submission, is the 
mean  noise-normalized  squared  correlation  score 
over all vertices from all subjects (Fig. 2):
where  v is the index of vertices (over all subjects 
and hemispheres), t is the index of the test stimuli 
images,  G and  P correspond to, respectively, the 
ground truth and predicted fMRI test data, Ḡ and P̄  
are the ground truth and predicted fMRI test data 
averaged  across  test  stimuli  images,  R is  the 
Pearson correlation coefficient between  G and  P, 
and NC is the noise ceiling.
Baseline model. The baseline model score of the 
challenge  reflects  a  linearizing  encoding  model 
(Naselaris  et  al.,  2011)  built  using  a  pretrained 
AlexNet.  Its  mean  noise-normalized  prediction 
accuracy  over  all  subjects,  hemispheres  and 
vertices is 40.48% of the total predictable variance.
Rules. To  encourage  broad  participation,  the 
challenge  has  a  simple  submission  process  with 
minimal rules. Participants can use any encoding 
model derived from any source and trained on any 
type of data, and can make a limited number of 
submissions  per  day  (the  leaderboard  is 
automatically  updated  after  each  submission). 
However,  using  the  test  split  for  training  (in 
particular  brain  data  generated  using  the  test 
images)  is prohibited.  To  promote  open  science, 
participants  who  wish  to  be  considered  for  the 
challenge contest will have to submit a report to a 
preprint server describing their encoding algorithm. 
Furthermore, the top three entries are required to 
make their code openly available and, along with 
other prizes, will have the chance to present their 
winning  encoding  models  through  a  talk  at  the 
Cognitive  Computational  Neuroscience  (CCN) 
conference in 2023.
3
Figure 2. Challenge evaluation metric. Once participants 
submit their predictions of the fMRI responses to the test 
images  of  all  8  subjects  (s1,  …,  s8),  we  evaluate 
prediction accuracy using the withheld fMRI test data. In 
detail, we concatenate the predicted data vertices (V1, V2, 
…, VN) of all subjects and hemispheres, correlate them 
with the corresponding withheld data vertices (across the 
test stimuli images), and square the correlations, resulting 
in one squared correlation score (C1, …, CN) for each 
vertex.  The  challenge  evaluation  metric  is  the  mean 
noise-normalized  squared  correlation  score  across  all 
vertices

Discussion
Relation  to  similar  initiatives. The  Algonauts 
project  relates  to  initiatives  such  as  Brain-Score 
(Schrimpf et al., 2020) and Sensorium 2022 (Willeke 
et al., 2022), which also establish benchmarks and 
leaderboards.  However,  the  Algonauts  Project 
differs  from  these  complementary  efforts  by 
emphasizing human data, by focusing on colored 
images  of  complex  naturalistic  scenes  including 
multiple  object  concepts,  by  leveraging  a  whole-
brain  fMRI  dataset  that  extensively  samples 
stimulus variation (Allen et al., 2022; Naselaris et al., 
2021),  and  by  incorporating  educational 
components  (hands-on  computational  modeling 
tutorial; talks by the top three challenge winners; 
panel  discussion  on  challenges)  at  a  dedicated 
session at CCN in 2023.
Prediction vs. explanation. Having a model that 
perfectly predicts a phenomenon does not by itself 
explain the phenomenon. However, prediction and 
explanation are related goals and complement each 
other  (Cichy  &  Kaiser,  2019).  First,  successful 
explanations  must  also  provide  successful 
predictions  (Breiman,  2001;  Yarkoni  &  Westfall, 
2017). Second, prediction accuracy can shed light 
on  properties  that  make  particular  models 
successful,  allowing  testing  or  generating 
hypotheses and guiding future engineering steps. 
Finally, predictive success as an evaluation criterion 
circumvents  the  challenges  of  evaluation  on 
qualitative or subjective grounds.
From artificial to biological intelligence. During 
the last decade, interactions between biological and 
artificial  intelligence  have  profoundly  affected 
neuroscientific  discovery,  and  machine/deep 
learning  algorithms  have  become  state-of-the-art 
models of the brain (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016; Cichy 
& Kaiser, 2019; Kietzmann et al., 2019; Richards et 
al., 2019; Saxe et al., 2021). However, due to their 
large parameter number, these algorithms require 
massive  amounts  of  data  to  properly  train 
(Russakovsky et al., 2015). We addressed this by 
basing the 2023 installment of the Algonauts Project 
on  the  NSD  dataset  (Allen  et  al.,  2022).  The 
unprecedented  scale  of  NSD,  along  with  its 
extensive sampling of stimulus variation, allows for 
data-driven  model  building  approaches  such  as 
training deep learning architectures end-to-end to 
predict neural responses to visual stimuli (Allen et 
al., 2022;  St-Yves et al., 2022;  Khosla & Wehbe, 
2022,  Gifford et al., 2022). Directly infusing deep 
learning  models  with  brain  data  enables a  novel 
type of interaction between biological and artificial 
intelligence,  which  in  our  opinion  will  catalyze 
breakthroughs in neuroscientific research.
From biological to artificial intelligence. Artificial 
intelligence too can benefit from interactions with 
biological intelligence. Biological systems constitute 
a proof of principle for how a complex computational 
problem  can  be  solved,  and  thus  can  guide  the 
engineering  of  new  artificial  intelligence  models 
(Hassabis et al., 2017;  Sinz et al., 2019;  Ullman, 
2019; Yang et al., 2022). This research direction is 
especially promising for improving artificial agents in 
domains at which biological agents excel (e.g., out-
of-domain  generalization,  transfer  learning, 
adversarial robustness, few-shot learning), and even 
for endowing artificial agents with cognitive faculties 
idiosyncratic to humans (e.g., planning, creativity, 
imagination). Artificial intelligence researchers have 
been  successfully exploring  these possibilities for 
decades. As an example, the structure of the current 
state-of-the-art artificial intelligence algorithms, deep 
neural networks, has been inspired by the structure 
of  the  visual  system  of  the  mammalian  brain 
(Fukushima  &  Miyake,  1982).  Furthermore,  a 
growing amount of literature has started to exploit 
neural data representations to train natural language 
processing  and  computer  vision  algorithms, 
resulting in models with improved performance and 
adversarial robustness (Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Li 
et al., 2019;  Safarani et al., 2021;  Dapello et al., 
2022). The Algonauts Project fosters this exciting 
area of research by promoting interactions between 
the fields of artificial and biological intelligence.
The future of the project. We hope that the 2023 
installment of the Algonauts Project will continue to 
inspire  new  challenges  and  collaborations  at  the 
intersection  of  artificial  and  biological  intelligence 
sciences.  We  believe  that  both  communities  will 
benefit from jointly tackling open questions on how 
perception and cognition are solved in brains and 
machines. We welcome researchers interested in 
initiating similar initiatives or collaborating with the 
Algonauts Project to contribute ideas and datasets.
