Effective Representation to Capture Collaboration Behaviors between
Explainer and User
Arjun Akula, Song-Chun Zhu
UCLA

Abstract
An explainable AI (XAI) model aims to pro-
vide transparency (in the form of justiﬁcation,
explanation, etc) for its predictions or actions
made by it. Recently, there has been a lot of
focus on building XAI models, especially to
provide explanations for understanding and in-
terpreting the predictions made by deep learn-
ing models. At UCLA, we propose a generic
framework to interact with an XAI model in
natural language.
1
Introduction
Most work on XAI typically focuses on black-box
models and generating explanations about their per-
formance in terms of, e.g., feature visualization and
attribution (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Ramprasaath
et al., 2016; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014). However,
solely generating explanations, regardless of their
type (visualization or attribution) and utility, is not
sufﬁcient for increasing understandability and pre-
dictability. Current works on XAI generate ex-
planations about their performance in terms of,
e.g., feature visualization and attention maps (Sun-
dararajan et al., 2017; Ramprasaath et al., 2016;
Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Smilkov et al., 2017; Kim
et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2018). However, solely
generating explanations, regardless of their type
(visualization or attention maps) and utility, is not
sufﬁcient for increasing understandability and pre-
dictability (Jain and Wallace, 2019)
In our UCLA lab, our focus is on the Explainer
module. Explainer takes a natural language ques-
tion from the user and identiﬁes the intention be-
hind it. Explainer is also responsible for control-
ling the dialog ﬂow with the user. Explainable
performer provides the important evidences that
are necessary to answer user’s question. Atomic
Performer assists Explainable performer in identi-
fying the evidences. Explainer uses this evidence
to generate most acceptable and convincing ex-
planation. We control the dialog ﬂow inside the
Explainer using discourse model called Rhetorical
Structure Theory (RST). In general, RST would
be an efﬁcient and simplest way to track contex-
tual information. Since explanations are context-
dependent, we believe that RST would be the right
model to capture contextual information in the Ex-
plainer (Akula and Zhu, 2019a; Akula et al., 2020a;
Akula and Zhu, 2019b; Akula et al., 2021c,d,b).
Given a user’s question, we ﬁrst identify the
dialog act of the question. We then identify the
question type (contrast type) and explanation type
as mentioned in the next section. Based on the
explanation type, we generate the explanation and
present it to the user (Akula et al., 2013, 2018,
2021a; Gupta et al., 2016; Akula et al., 2019b;
Akula, 2021; Akula et al., 2019a, 2020b).
Questions posed by the user to obtain explana-
tions from an XAI model are typically contrastive
in nature. For example, questions such as "Why do
the model think the people are in sitting posture?",
"Why do you think two persons are sitting instead
of one?", need contrastive explanations. In order
to generate a convincing explanation, XAI model
needs to understand the implicit contrast that it pre-
supposes (Agarwal et al., 2018; Akula et al., 2019c;
Akula, 2015; Palakurthi et al., 2015; Agarwal et al.,
2017; Dasgupta et al., 2014).
Explainer’s knowledge using the question types
such as NOT-X, NOT-X1-BUT-X2, NOT-X-BUT-
Y. Question types such as DO-X, DO-NOT-X and
DO-X-NOT-Y are used by the user as intervention
techniques. We now propose the following seven
types of explanation types that are motivated from
an algorithmic approach rather than on theoretical
grounds.
1. Direct Explanation: Explaining based on de-
tection scores
2. Part-based Explanation: Explaining based on
the evidences of detected parts for the concept
asked
arXiv:2201.03147v1  [cs.HC]  10 Jan 2022

3. Causal Explanation, Temporal Explanation:
Explaining based on the constraints from the
spatiotemporal surround
4. Common-sense Explanation:
Explaining
based on the common-sense knowledge of the
concept domain
5. Counter-factual Explanation:
Explaining
based on the evidences provided for the
counter-factual questions asked by the Ex-
plainer
6. Discourse Entailment based Explanation: Ex-
plaining based on the discourse relations
among various objects/frames in the con-
cept/videos (Akula et al., 2020c; R Akula
et al., 2019; Pulijala et al., 2013; Gupta et al.,
2012).
2
Explainable AI models using Discourse
relations
Given a document (or a paragraph), discourse rela-
tion tell us how two segments (or sentences) in the
document are logically connected with each other.
To be more speciﬁc, discourse relations (often rep-
resented as a tree) tell us what is the function of
each segment of the document, plausible reason for
the presence of a segment, role of each segment
w.r.t other segments, etc. In a nutshell, it provides
explanation of the coherence of document/text.
In this work, we aim to propose the idea of the
discourse phenomenon for videos. The intuition
behind this is simple: any video can be mapped
to a document (or a group of sentences). And dis-
course can be used to explain coherence of any
document. Therefore we can use discourse to ex-
plain coherence of a video. We believe that obtain-
ing discourse cues from videos would help us in
generating better context-sensitive explanations.
We are trying to learn the mapping from videos
to its corresponding discourse representation (i.e.
discourse tree) using end-to-end learning models.
There are quite a few methods in the literature that
try to map video/image to text. Also, there are few
approaches that aim to extract hierarchical structure
from the videos using unsupervised methods. How-
ever none of these approaches try to understand the
discourse phenomenon in the videos.
We are currently working on two different ap-
proaches to learn the mapping from videos to its dis-
course representation. In the ﬁrst approach, we map
input videos to a sequence of vectors. We ﬂatten
the output discourse trees to a paragraph and then
we use hierarchical RNN (two-levels). Basically
the ﬁrst level RNN captures intra-sentence depen-
dencies and the second level RNN captures inter-
sentence dependencies. In the second approach, we
would like to use multi-task learning i.e. a com-
bination of unsupervised and supervised methods.
We plan on using Variational Auto-encoder as an
unsupervised method and hierarchical RNN as a
supervised method.
We plan on using TACoS-MultiLevel dataset:
It contains 185 long videos (6 minutes on aver-
age) ﬁlmed in an indoor environment. Descrip-
tions are manually annotated for each video. The
videos are closed-domain, containing different ac-
tors, ﬁne-grained activities, and small interacting
objects in daily cooking scenarios. There are about
280 sentences in each video description on an av-
erage. Moreover, to obtain the discourse trees for
the above dataset, we can use an off-the-shelf dis-
course tagger (like RST tagger) to map the video
descriptions to discourse trees.
We believe that an And-Or graph (AOG) rep-
resentation is efﬁcient to capture the underlying
evidences used by the XAI model in making a
prediction. We aim to show that the AOG rep-
resentation facilitates the XAI model in generating
context based explanations. We are working on
building a rule-based algorithm to predict the most
appropriate explanation type for a given user ques-
tion. We plan to evaluate our approach on two
explanation datasets: Visual Question Answering
Explanation dataset (VQA-X) and Action Explana-
tion dataset (ACT-X). We believe that the proposed
question and explanation categories are sufﬁcient
enough to represent all the variations of questions
and explanations in the datasets. We also plan on
demonstrating that AOG representation is the key
in generating most appropriate explanation for a
given user question.
We plan to evaluate the effectiveness of our ex-
planation interface and the dialogue. Extending
principles identiﬁed in [Kulesza 2015], we will
apply different evaluation metrics based on the fol-
lowing evaluation criteria (Smilkov et al., 2017;
Sundararajan et al., 2017; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014;
Kim et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2018):
1. Correctness in recognizing the type of intents
of users’ explanation requests. Different types
of intention will require different types of ex-

planations. Precision/recall/F1 measures will
be applied on intention recognition.
2. Relevancy of explanations. The provided ex-
planation needs to satisfy the user’s intention.
Accuracy will be used to measure the rele-
vancy. We will also measure the generated
explanations (e.g., language) with the ground-
truth explanations using metrics such as ME-
TEOR and CIDEr [Hendricks 2016].
3. Fidelity to the interpretable model’s behaviors.
This metric estimates how well X-pg matches
STC-pg. Standard costs or similarity of match-
ing graphs will be used for estimating ﬁdelity.
Low ﬁdelity between the two parse graphs
may be justiﬁed in some cases, e.g., when the
Explainer has to summarize fragments in the
STC-pg and hence avoid overwhelming the
User with detailed explanations.
