Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
Jiaoyan Chen
University of Oxford

Xi Chen
Jarvis Lab Tencent

Ian Horrocks
University of Oxford

Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz
City, University of London
University of Oslo

Erik B. Myklebus
Norwegian Institute for Water
Research
University of Oslo

ABSTRACT
The usefulness and usability of knowledge bases (KBs) is often
limited by quality issues. One common issue is the presence of er-
roneous assertions, often caused by lexical or semantic confusion.
We study the problem of correcting such assertions, and present
a general correction framework which combines lexical matching,
semantic embedding, soft constraint mining and semantic consis-
tency checking. The framework is evaluated using DBpedia and an
enterprise medical KB.
KEYWORDS
Knowledge Base Quality, Assertion Correction, Semantic Embed-
ding, Constraint Mining, Consistency Checking
1
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge bases (KBs) such as Wikidata [42] and DBpedia [2]
are playing an increasingly important role in applications such as
search engines, question answering, common sense reasoning, data
integration and machine learning. However, they still suffer from
various quality issues, including constraint violations and erroneous
assertions [11, 31], that negatively impact their usefulness and us-
ability. These may be due to the knowledge itself (e.g., the core
knowledge source of DBpedia, Wikipedia, is estimated to have an
error rate of 2.8% [44]), or may be introduced by the knowledge
extraction process.
Existing work on KB quality issues covers not only error detec-
tion and assessment, but also quality improvement via completion,
canonicalizaiton and so on [31]. Regarding error detection, erro-
neous assertions can be detected by various methods, including
consistency checking with defined, mined or external constraints
[18, 33, 39], prediction by machine learning or statistics methods
[7, 22, 32], and evaluation by query templates [19]; see Section 2.1
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
for a more details. However, the detected erroneous assertions are of-
ten eliminated [6, 27], and few robust methods have been developed
to correct them.
Lertvittayakumjorn et al. [20] and Melo et al. [21] found that most
erroneous assertions are due to confusion or lexical similarity leading
to entity misuse; for example confusion between Manchester_United
and Manchester_City, two football clubs based in Manchester, UK,
can lead to facts about Manchester_United being incorrectly asserted
about Manchester_City. Such errors are common in not only those
general KBs like DBpedia and Wikidata but also those domain KBs
like the medical KB used in our evaluation. Both studies proposed
to find an entity to replace either the subject or the object of an
erroneous assertion; however, subject replacement used a simple
graph metric and keyword matching, which fails to capture the
contextual semantics of the assertion, while object replacement relies
on Wikipedia disambiguation pages, which may be inaccessible or
non-existent, and again fail to capture contextual semantics.
Other work has focused on quality improvement, for example by
canonicalizing assertions whose objects are literals that represent
entities (i.e., entity mentions); for example, the literal object in the
assertion ⟨Yangtze_River, passesArea, “three gorges district”⟩. Re-
placing this literal with the entity Three_Gorges_Reservoir_Region
enriches the semantics of the assertion, which can improve query
answering. Such literal assertions are pervasive in wiki-based KBs
such as DBPedia [2] and Zhishi.me [29], and in open KBs extracted
from text; they may also be introduced when two KBs are aligned
or when a KB evolves. According to the statistics in [15], DBpedia
(ca. 2016) included over 105,000 such assertions using the property
dbp:location alone. Current methods can predict the type of the
entity represented by the literal [15], which is useful for creating
a new entity, and can sometimes identify candidate entities in the
KB [4], but they do not propose a general correction method; see
Section 2.2 for a more details.
In this paper, we propose a method for correcting assertions whose
objects are either erroneous entities or literals. To this end, we have
developed a general framework that exploits related entity estima-
tion, link prediction and constraint-based validation, as shown in
Figure 1. Given a set of target assertions (i.e., assertions that have
been identified as erroneous), it uses semantic relatedness to identify
candidate entities for substitution, extracts a multi-relational graph
from the KB (sub-graph) that can model the context of the target
assertions, and learns a link prediction model using both semantic
arXiv:2001.06917v1  [cs.AI]  19 Jan 2020

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Jiaoyan Chen, Xi Chen, Ian Horrocks, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Erik B. Myklebus
embeddings and observed features. The model predicts the asser-
tion likelihood for each candidate substitution, and filters out those
that lead to unlikely assertions. The framework further verifies the
candidate substitutions by checking their consistency w.r.t. property
range and cardinality constraints mined from the global KB. The
framework finally makes a correction decision, returning a corrected
assertion or reporting failure if no likely correction can be identified.
Briefly this paper makes the following main contributions:
• It proposes a general framework that can correct both erro-
neous entity assertions and literal assertions;
• It utilizes both semantic embeddings and observed features to
capture the local context used for correction prediction, with
a sub-graph extracted for higher efficiency;
• It complements the prediction with consistency checking
against “soft” property constraints mined from the global
KB;
• It evaluates the framework with erroneous entity assertions
from a medical KB and literal assertions from DBpedia.
2
RELATED WORK
We survey related work in three areas: assertion validation which
includes erroneous assertion detection and link prediction with se-
mantic embeddings and observed features, canonicalization, and
assertion correction.
2.1
Assertion Validation
In investigating KB quality, the validity of assertions is clearly an
important consideration. One way to identify likely invalid assertions
is to check consistency against logical constraints or rules. Explic-
itly stated KB constraints can be directly used, but these are often
weak or even non-existent. Thus, before using the DBpedia ontology
to validate assertions, Topper et al. [39] enriched it with class dis-
jointness, and property domain and range costraints, all derived via
statistical analysis. Similarly, Paulheim and Gangemi [33] enriched
the ontology via alignment with the DOLCE-Zero foundational on-
tology. Various constraint and rule languages, including the Shapes
Constraint Language (SHACL) [18], Rule-Based Web Logics [1]
and SPARQL query templates [19], have also been proposed so that
external knowledge can be encoded and applied in reasoning for
assertion validation.
With the development of machine learning, various feature ex-
traction and semantic embedding methods have been proposed to
encode the semantics of entities and relations into vectors [43]. The
observed features are typically indicators (e.g., paths) extracted for
a specific prediction problem. They often work together with other
learning and prediction algorithms, including supervised classifi-
cation (e.g., PaTyBRED [21]), autoencoder (e.g., RDF2Vec [36]),
statistical distribution estimation (e.g., SDValidate [32]) and so on.
PaTyBRED and SDValidate directly detect erroneous assertions,
while RDF2Vec utilizes graph paths to learn intermediate entity
representations that can be further used to validate assertions via
supervised classification.
In contrast to observed features, which often rely on ad-hoc fea-
ture engineering, semantic embeddings (vectors) can be learned by
minimizing an overall loss with a score function for modeling the
assertion’s likelihood. They can be directly used to estimate the
assertion likelihood with the score function. State-of-the-art meth-
ods and implementations include DistMult [46], TransE [3], Neural
Tensor Network [37], IterE [47], OpenKE [16] and so on. They can
also be combined with algorithms such as outlier detection [7] and
supervised classification [25] to deal with assertion validation in
specific contexts.
On the one hand, the aforementioned methods were mostly devel-
oped for KB completion and erroneous assertion detection, and few
have been applied in assertion correction, especially the semantic
embedding methods. On the other hand, they suffer from various
shortcomings that limit their application. Consistency checking de-
pends on domain knowledge of a specific task for constraint and
rule definition, while the mined constraints and rules are often weak
in modeling local context for disambiguation. Semantic embedding
methods are good at modeling contextual semantics in a vector space,
but are computationally expensive when learning from large KBs
[30] and suffer from low robustness when dealing with real world
KBs that are often noisy and sparse [35].
2.2
Canonicalization
Recent work on KB canonicalization is relevant to related entity
estimation in our setting. Some of this work focuses on the cluster-
ing and disambiguation of entity mentions in an open KB extracted
from textual data [12, 41, 45]; CESI [41], for example, utilizes side
information (e.g., WordNet), semantic embedding and clustering to
identify equivalent entity mentions. However, these methods can-
not be directly applied in our correction framework as they focus
on equality while we aim at estimating relatedness, especially for
assertions with erroneous objects. The contexts are also different as,
unlike entity mentions, literals have no neighbourhood information
(e.g., relationships with other entities) that can be utilized.
Chen et al. [4] and Gunaratna et al. [15] aimed at the canoni-
calization of literal objects used in assertions with DBpedia object
properties (whose objects should be entities). Instead of correct-
ing the literal with an existing entity, they focus on the typing of
the entity that the literal represents, which is helpful when a new
entity needs to be created for replacement. Although the work in
[4] also tried to identify an existing entity to substitute the literal,
their approach suffers from a number of limitations: the predicted
type is used as a constraint for filtering, which is not a robust and
general correction method; the related entity estimation is ad-hoc
and DBpedia specific; and the type prediction itself only uses entity
and property labels, without any other contextual semantics.
2.3
Assertion Correction
We focus on recent studies concerning the automatic correction of
erroneous assertions. Some are KB specific. For example, Dimou et
al. [9] refined the mappings between Wikipedia data and DBpedia
knowledge such that some errors can be corrected during DBpedia
construction, while Pellissier et al. [34] mined correction rules from
the edit history of Wikidata to create a model that can resolve con-
straint violations. In contrast, our framework is general and does not
assume any additional KB meta information or external data.
Regarding more general approaches, some aim at eliminating
constraint violations. For example, Chortis et al. [5, 38] defined and
added new properties to avoid violating integrity constraints, while

Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Melo [6] removed sameAs links that lead to such violations. These
methods ensure KB consistency, but they can neither correct the
knowledge itself nor deal with those wrong assertions that satisfy the
constraints. Lertvittayakumjorn et al. [20] and Melo et al. [21] both
aimed at correcting assertions by replacing the objects or subjects
with correct entities. The former found the substitute by either key-
word matching or a simple graph structure metric (i.e., the number
of commonly connected objects of two entities), while the latter first
retrieved candidate substitutes from the Wikipedia disambiguation
page (which may not exist, especially for KBs that are not based
on Wikipedia) and then ranked them by a lexical similarity score.
Both methods, however, only use simple graph structure or lexical
similarity to identify the substitute, and ignore the linkage incom-
pleteness of a KB. In contrast, our framework utilizes state-of-the-art
semantic embedding to model and exploit the local context within a
sub-graph to predict assertion likelihood, and at the same time uses
global property constraints to validate the substitution.
3
BACKGROUND
3.1
Knowledge Base
In this study we consider a knowledge base (KB) that follows Se-
mantic Web standards including RDF (Resource Description Frame-
work), RDF Schema, OWL (Web Ontology Language)1 and the
SPARQL Query Language [10]. A KB is assumed to be composed of
a TBox (terminology) and an ABox (assertions). The TBox usually
defines classes (concepts), a class hierarchy (via rdfs:subClassOf),
properties (roles), and property domains and ranges. It may also use
a more expressive language such as OWL to express constraints such
as class disjointness, property cardinality, property functionality and
so on [14].
The ABox consists of a set of assertions (facts) describing con-
crete entities (individuals), each of which is represented by an Uni-
form Resource Identifier. Each assertion is represented by an RDF
triple ⟨s,p,o⟩, where s is an entity, p is a property and o is either an
entity or a literal (i.e., a typed or untyped data value such as a string
or integer). s, p and o are known as the subject, predicate and object
of the triple. An entity can be an instance of one or more classes,
which is specified via triples using the rdf:type property. Sometimes
we will use class assertion to refer to this latter kind of assertion and
property assertion to refer to assertions where p is not a property
from the reserved vocabulary or RDF, RDFS or OWL.
Such a KB can be accessed by SPARQL queries using a query
engine that supports the relevant entailment regime (e.g., RDFS or
OWL) [13]; such an engine can, e.g., infer ⟨e0 rdf:type c2⟩, given
⟨e0 rdf:type c1⟩and ⟨c1 rdfs:subClassOf c2⟩. In addition, large-scale
KBs (aka knowledge graphs) often have a lookup service that en-
ables users to directly access its entities by fuzzy matching; this
is usually based on a lexical index that is built with entity labels
(phrases defined by rdfs:label) and sometimes entity anchor text
(short descriptions). DBpedia builds its lookup service2 using the
lexical index of Spotlight [23], while entities of Wikidata can be
retrieved, for example, via the API developed for OpenRefine and
OpenTapioc [8].
1There is a revision of the Web Ontology Language called OWL 2, for simplicity we
also refer to this revision as OWL.
2https://wiki.dbpedia.org/lookup
3.2
Problem Statement
In this study, we focus on correcting ABox property assertions
⟨s,p,o⟩where o is a literal (literal assertion) or an entity (entity asser-
tion). Note that in the former case correction may require more than
simple canonicalization; e.g., the property assertion ⟨Sergio_Agüero,
playsFor, “Manchester United”⟩should be corrected to ⟨Sergio_Agüero,
playsFor, Manchester_City⟩.
Literal assertions can be identified by data type inference and reg-
ular expressions as in [15], while erroneous entity assertions can be
detected either manually when the KB is applied in downstream ap-
plications or automatically by the methods discussed in Section 2.1.
It is important to note that if the KB is an OWL ontology, the set of
object properties (which connect two entities) and data properties
(which connect an entity to a literal) should be disjoint. In practice,
however, KBs such as DBpedia often do not respect this constraint.
We assume that the input is a KB K, and a set E of literal and/or
entity assertions that have been identified as incorrect. For each
assertion ⟨s,p,o⟩in E, the proposed correction framework aims at
either finding an entity e from K as an object substitute, such that
e is semantically related to o and the new triple ⟨s,p,e⟩is true, or
reporting that there is no such an entity e in K.
4
METHODOLOGY
4.1
Framework
As shown in Figure 1, the main components of our assertion correc-
tion framework consist of related entity estimation, link prediction,
constraint-based validation and correction decision making. Related
entity estimation identifies those entities that are relevant to the ob-
ject of the assertion. Given a target assertion t = ⟨s,p,o⟩, its related
entities, ranked by the relatedness, are denoted as REt . They are
called candidate substitutes of the original object o, and the new
assertions when o is replaced are called candidate assertions. We
adopt two techniques — lexical matching and word embedding — to
measure relatedness and estimate REt . Note that the aim of this step
is to ensure high recall; precision is subsequently taken care of via
link prediction and constraint-based validation over the candidate
assertions.
Link prediction estimates the likelihood of each candidate as-
sertion. For each entity ei in REt , it considers a target assertion
t = ⟨s,p,o⟩and outputs a score that measures the likelihood of
⟨s,p,ei⟩. To train such a link prediction model, a sub-graph that con-
tains the context of the correction task (i.e., E) is first extracted, with
the related entities, involved properties and their neighbourhoods;
positive and negative assertions are then sampled for training. State-
of-the-art semantic embeddings (TransE [3] and DistMult [46]), as
well as some widely used observed features (path and node) are used
to build the link prediction model.
Constraint-based validation checks whether a candidate assertion
violates constraints on the cardinality or (hierarchical) range of the
property, and outputs a consistency score which measures its degree
of consistency against such constraints. Such constraints can be
effective in filtering out unlikely assertions, but modern KBs such
as DBpedia and Wikidata often include only incomplete or weak
constraints, or do not respect the given constraints as no global
consistency checking is performed. Therefore, we do not assume
that there are any property cardinality or range constraints in the

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Jiaoyan Chen, Xi Chen, Ian Horrocks, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Erik B. Myklebus
KB TBox,3 but instead use mined constraints, each of which is
associated with a supporting degree (probability).
Correction decision making combines the results of related entity
estimation, link prediction and constraint-based validation; it first
integrates the assertion likelihood scores and consistency scores,
and then filters out those candidate substitutes that have low scores.
Finally, it either reports that no suitable correction was found, or
recommends the most likely correction.
4.2
Related Entity Estimation
For each target assertion t = ⟨s,p,o⟩in E, related entity estimation
directly adopts o as the input if o is a literal, or extracts the label of o
if o is an entity. It returns a list REt containing up to k most related
entities; i.e., |REt | ≤k. Our framework supports both a lexical
matching based approach and a word embedding based approach;
this allows us to compare the effectiveness of the two approaches on
different KBs (see Section 5.2).
For those KBs with a lexical index, the lexical matching based
approach can directly use a lookup service based on the index, which
often returns a set of related entities for a given phrase. Direct lookup
with the original phrase, however, often misses the correct entity,
as the input phrase, either coming from the erroneous entity or the
literal, is frequently noisy and ambiguous. For example, the DBpedia
Lookup service returns no entities with the input “three gorges dis-
trict” which refers to the entity dbr:Three_Gorges_Reservoir_Region.
To improve recall, we retrieve a list of up to k entities by repeating en-
tity lookup using sub-phrases, starting with the longest sub-phrases
and continuing with shorter and shorter sub-phrases until either k
entities have been retrieved or all sub-phrases have been used. The
list of each lookup is ordered according to the relatedness (lexical
similarity) to the original phrase, while all the lists are concatenated
according to the above lookup order. To extract the sub-phrases,
we first tokenize the original phrase, remove the stop words and
then concatenate the tokens in their original order for sub-phrases of
different lengths. For those KBs without an existing lexical index,
the lexical matching based approach adopts a string similarity score
named Edit Distance [26] in order to calculate the relatedness of an
entity with its label.
The word embedding based approach calculates the similarity
of o against each entity in the KB, using vector representations of
their labels (literals). It (i) tokenizes the phrase and removes the stop
words, (ii) represents each token by a vector with a word embedding
model (e.g., Word2Vec [24]) that is trained using a large corpus,
where tokens that are out of the model’s vocabulary are ignored, (iii)
calculates the average of the vectors of all the tokens, which is a
widely adopted strategy to embed a phrase, and (iv) computes the
distance-based similarity score of the two vectors by e.g., the cosine
similarity.
Compared with lexical matching, word embedding considers the
semantics of a word, which assigns a high similarity score to two syn-
onyms. In the above lookup example, “district” becomes noise as it
is not included in the label of dbp:Three_Gorges_Reservoir_Region,
but can still play an important role in the word embedding based
approach due to the short word vector distance between “district”
3Any property range and cardinality constraints that are defined in the TBox, or that
come from external knowledge, can be easily and directly injected into the framework.
and “region”. However, in practice entity misuse is often not caused
by semantic confusion, but by similarity of spelling and token com-
position, where the lexical similarity is high but the semantics might
be quite different. Moreover, lexical matching with a lexical index
makes it easy to utilize multiple items of textual information, such as
labels in multiple languages and anchor text, where different names
of an entity are often included.
4.3
Link Prediction
Given related entities REt of a target assertion t = ⟨s,p,o⟩, link
prediction is used to estimate a likelihood score for the candidate
assertion ⟨s,p,ei⟩, for each entity ei in REt . For efficiency in dealing
with very large KBs, we first extract a multi-relational sub-graph for
the context of the task, and then train the link prediction model with
a sampling method as well as with different observed features and
semantic embeddings.
4.3.1
Sub-graph. Given a KB K and a set of target assertions
E, the sub-graph corresponding to E is a part of K, denoted as
KE = ⟨E, P,T⟩, where E denotes entities, P denotes object prop-
erties (relations) and T denotes assertions (triples). As shown in
Algorithm 1, the sub-graph is calculated with three steps: (i) extract
the seeds — entities and properties involved in the target assertions
E, as well as related entities of each assertion in E; (ii) extract the
neighbourhoods — directly associated assertions of each of the seed
properties and entities; (iii) re-calculate the properties and entities
involved in the assertions. Note that |= means an assertion is either
directly declared in the KB or can be inferred by the KB. The state-
ments with |= can be implemented by SPARQL: Line 13 needs |P|
queries each of which retrieves the associated assertions of a given
property, while Line 14 needs 2 × |E| queries each of which retrieves
the associated assertions of a given subject or object.
Algorithm 1: Sub-graph Extraction (K, E, REt )
1 Input: (i) The whole KB: K, (ii) The set of target assertions: E, (iii)
The related entities of each target assertion: REt , t ∈E
2 Result: The sub-graph: KE = ⟨E, P, T ⟩
3 begin
4
% Step 1: Extract the seeds
5
SE = {s |⟨s, p, o⟩∈E} % extract subject entities
6
P = {p |⟨s, p, o⟩∈E} % extract target properties
7
RE = ∪t ∈EREt % The union of related entities
8
E = SE ∪RE
9
foreach ⟨s, p, o⟩in E do
10
if o is an entity then
11
E = E ∪{o} % add object entity
12
% Step 2: Extract the neighbourhoods
13
T = {⟨s, p, o⟩|p ∈P ∧K |= ⟨s, p, o⟩}
14
T = T ∪{⟨s, p, o⟩|o ∈E ∧s ∈E ∧K |= ⟨s, p, o⟩}
15
% Step 3: Re-calculate entities and properties
16
E = E ∪{s |⟨s, p, o⟩∈T } ∪{o |⟨s, p, o⟩∈T }
17
P = P ∪{p |⟨s, p, o⟩∈T }
18
return KE = ⟨E, P, T ⟩

Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Target Assertions
e.g.,
<Yangtze_River, passesArea,
“three gorges district">
<Sergio_Agüero, playsFor, 
Manchester_United>
Related Entities
(Candidate Substitutes)
Sub-graph & Samples
Soft Property Constraints
(Cardinality and Range)
SPARQL 
Query
Related Entity 
Estimation
Link Prediction 
Model
Embeddings & 
Observed Features
Assertion
Likelihood Scores
Consistency
Scores
Candidate 
Assertions
Correction Decisions
e.g.,
<Yangtze_River, passesArea, 
Three_Gorges_Reservoir_Region>
< Sergio_Agüero, playsFor, 
Manchester_City>
Decision Making 
(Filtering & 
Ensemble)
Consistency 
Checking
Knowledge Base
Constraint
Mining
Figure 1: The Overall Framework for Assertion Correction
4.3.2
Sampling. Positive and negative samples (assertions)
are extracted from the sub-graph KE = ⟨E, P,T⟩. The positive
samples are composed of two parts: Tpos = Tsp ∪Tpr , where
Tsp refers to assertions whose subjects and properties are among
SE (i.e., those subject entities involved in E) and P respectively
(Tsp = {⟨s,p,o⟩|s ∈SE ∧p ∈P ∧⟨s,p,o⟩∈T }), while Tpr refers
to those assertions whose objects and properties are among RE
(i.e., those related entities involved in E) and P respectively (Tpr =
{⟨s,p,o⟩|p ∈P ∧o ∈RE ∧⟨s,p,o⟩∈T }).Tsp andTpr are calculated
by two steps: (i) extract all the associated assertions of each property
p in P from T; (ii) group these assertions according to SE and RE.
Compared with an arbitrary assertion in T, the above samples are
more relevant to the candidate assertions for prediction. This can
help release the domain adaption problem — the data distribution
gap between the training and predicting assertions.
The negative samples are composed of two parts as well: Tneд =
˜Tsp ∪˜Tpr , where ˜Tsp is constructed according toTsp by replacing the
object with a random entity in E, while ˜Tpr are constructed according
toTpr by replacing the subject with a random entity in E. TakeTsp as
an example, for each of its assertion ⟨s,p,o⟩, an entity ˜e is randomly
selected from E for a synthetic assertion ˜t = ⟨s,p, ˜e⟩such that K ⊭˜t,
where ⊭represents that an assertion is neither declared by the KB
nor can be inferred, and ˜t is added to ˜Tsp. In implementation, we
can get K ⊭˜t if ˜t < T, as T is extracted from the KB with inference.
Tpr is constructed similarly. Note that the size of Tpos and Tneд is
balanced.
4.3.3
Observed Features. We extract two kinds of observed
features — the path feature and the node feature. The former rep-
resents potential relations that can connect the subject and object,
while the latter represents the likelihood of the subject being the
head of the property, and the likelihood of the object being the tail of
the property. For the path feature, we limit the path depth to two, for
reducing computation time and feature size, both of which are expo-
nential w.r.t. the depth. In fact, it has been shown that paths of depth
one are already quite effective. They outperform the state-of-the-art
KB embedding methods like DistMult, TransE and TransH, together
with the node feature on some benchmarks [40]. Meanwhile the
predictive information of a path will vanish as its depth increases.
In calculation, we first extract paths of depth one: FP1so and FP1os,
where FP1so represents properties froms too (i.e., {p0|⟨s,p0,o⟩∈T }),
while FP1os represents properties from o to s (i.e., {p0|⟨o,p0,s⟩∈T }).
Next we calculate paths of depth two (ordered property pairs) in two
directions as well: FP2so = {(p1,p2)|⟨s,p1,e⟩∈T ∧⟨e,p2,o⟩∈T },
FP2os = {(p1,p2)|⟨o,p1,e⟩∈T ∧⟨e,p2,s⟩∈T }. Finally we merge
these paths: FP = FP1so ∪FP1os ∪FP2so ∪FP2os, and encode them into
a multi-hot vector as the path feature, denoted as f p. Briefly we col-
lect all the unique paths from the training assertions as a candidate
set, where one path corresponds to one slot in encoding. When an
assertion is encoded into a vector, a slot of the vector is set to 1 if
the slot’s corresponding path is among the assertion’s paths and 0
otherwise.
The node feature includes two binary variables: f n = [vs,vo],
where vs denotes the likelihood of the subject while vo denotes the
likelihood of the object. Namely, vs = 1 if there exists some entity
o′ such that ⟨s,p,o′⟩∈T and vs = 0 otherwise. vo = 1 if there exists
some entity s′ such that ⟨s′,p,o⟩∈T and vo = 0 otherwise.
Finally we calculate f p and f n, and concatenate them for each
sample in Tpos ∪Tneд, and train a link prediction model with a basic
supervised classifier named Multiple Layer Perception (MLP):
Mpn
classifier e.g., MLP
←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Tpos∪Tneд

f p, f n
.
(1)
We also adopt the path-based latent feature learned by the state-
of-the-art algorithm RDF2Vec [36], as a baseline. RDF2Vec first
extracts potential outstretched paths of an entity by e.g., graph walks,
and then learns embeddings of the entities through the neural lan-
guage model Word2Vec. In training, we encode the subject and object
of an assertion by their RDF2Vec embeddings, encode its property
by a one-hot vector, concatenate the three vectors, and use the same
classifier MLP. The trained model is denoted as Mr2v.
4.3.4
Semantic Embeddings. A number of semantic embed-
ding algorithms have been proposed to learn the vector representa-
tion of KB properties and entities. One common way is to define a
scoring function to model the truth of an assertion, and use an overall
loss for learning. We adopt two state-of-the-art algorithms — TransE
[3] and DistMult [46]. Both are simple but have been shown to be
competitive or outperform more complex alternatives [3, 17, 46].
For high efficiency, we learn the embeddings from the sub-graph.

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Jiaoyan Chen, Xi Chen, Ian Horrocks, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Erik B. Myklebus
TransE tries to learn a vector representation space such that o is
a nearest neighbor of s + p if an assertion ⟨s,p,o⟩holds, and o is
far away from s + p otherwise. + denotes the vector add operation.
To this end, the score function of t = ⟨s,p,o⟩, denoted as д(t),
is defined as d(es + ep,eo), where d is a dissimilarity (distance)
measure such as L2 norm, while es, ep and eo are embeddings of s,
p and o respectively. The embeddings have the same dimension that
is configured, and are initialized by one-hot encoding. In learning, a
batch stochastic gradient descent algorithm is used to minimize the
the following margin-based ranking loss:
L =
Õ
t ∈T,t→˜t

γ + д(t) −д(˜t)

+
(2)
whereγ > 0 is a hyper parameter, [·]+ denotes extracting the positive
part, and ˜t represents a negative assertion of t, generated by randomly
replacing the subject or object with an entity in E.
DistMult is a special form of the bilinear model where the non-
diagonal entries in the relation matrices are assumed to be zero.
The score function of an assertion ⟨s,p,o⟩is defined as eTp (es ◦
eo), where ◦denotes the operation of pairwise multiplication. As
TransE, the embeddings are initialized by one-hot encoding, with
the a dimension configured. A similar margin-based ranking loss as
(2) is used for training with batched stochastic gradient descent.
In prediction, the likelihood score of an assertion can be calculated
with the corresponding scoring function and the embeddings of its
subject, property and object. We denote the link prediction model by
TransE and DistMult as Mte and Mdm respectively.
4.4
Constraint-based Validation
We first mine two kinds of soft constraints — property cardinality
and hierarchical property range from the KB, and then use a consis-
tency checking algorithm to validate those candidate assertions.
4.4.1
Property Cardinality. Given a property p, its soft cardi-
nality is represented by a probability distribution Dp
car (k) ∈[0, 1],
where k ≥1 is an integer that denotes the cardinality. It is calculated
as follows: (i) get all the property assertions whose property is p,
denoted as T(p), and all the involved subjects, denoted as S(p), (ii)
count the number of the object entities associated with each subject
s in S(p) and p: ON(s,p) = |{o|⟨s,p,o⟩∈T(p)}|, (iii) find out the
maximum object number: ONp
max = max {ON(s,p)|s ∈S(p)}, and
(iv) calculate the property cardinality distribution as:
Dp
car (k) = |{s ∈S(p)|ON(s,p) = k}|
|S(p)|
,k = 1, ...,ONp
max,
(3)
where |·| denotes the size of a set. Specially ONp
max = 0 if T(p)
is empty. Dp
car (k > n) is short for ÍON p
max
i=n+1
Dp
car (k = i), denoting
the probability that the cardinality is larger than n. In implementa-
tion, T(p) can be accessed by one time SPARQL query, while the
remaining computation has linear time complexity w.r.t. |T(p)|.
The probability of cardinality k is equal to the ratio of the subjects
that are associated with k different entity objects. For example,
considering a property hasParent that is associated with 10 different
subjects (persons) in the KB, if one of them has one object (parent)
and the remaining have two objects (parents), then the cardinality
distribution is: Dcar (k = 1) = 1/10 and Dcar (k = 2) = 9/10. Note
that although such constraints follow Closed Word Assumption and
Unique Name Assumption, they behave well in our method. On
the one hand, probabilities are estimated to represent the supporting
degree of a constraint by the ABox. One the other hand, they are used
in an approximate model to validate candidate assertions instead of
as new and totally true knowledge for KB TBox extension.
4.4.2
Hierarchical Property Range. Given a property p, its
range constraint consists of (i) specific range which includes the
most specific classes of its associated objects, denoted as Cp
sp, and
(ii) general range which includes ancestors of these most specific
classes, denoted as Cp
дe, with top classes such as owl:Thing being
excluded. A most specific class of an entity refers to one of the most
fine grained classes that the entity is an instance of according to class
assertions in the KB. Note that there could be multiple such classes
as the entity could be asserted to be an instance of multiple classes
for which there is no sub-class relationship. General classes of an
entity are those that subsume one or more of the specific classes as
specified in the KB via rdfs:subClassOf assertions.
Each range class c in Cp
sp (Cp
дe resp.) has a probability in [0, 1]
that represents its supporting degree by the KB, denoted as Dp
sp(c)
(Dp
дe(c) resp.). Cp
sp, Cp
дe and the supporting degrees are calculated by
the following steps: (i) get all the object entities that are associated
with p, denoted as OE(p); (ii) infer the specific and general classes of
each entity oe in OE(p), denoted as Csp(p,oe) and Cдe(p,oe) respec-
tively, and at the same time collect Cp
sp as ∪oe ∈OE(p)Csp(p,oe) and
Cp
дe as ∪oe ∈OE(p)Cдe(p,oe); (iii) compute the supporting degrees:


Dp
sp(c) = |{oe |oe ∈OE(p),c ∈Csp(p,oe)}|
|OE(p)|
,c ∈Cp
sp,
Dp
дe(c) = |{oe |oe ∈OE(p),c ∈Cдe(p,oe)}|
|OE(p)|
,c ∈Cp
дe.
(4)
The degree of each range class is the ratio of the objects that are
instances of the class, as either directly declared in the ABox or
inferred by rdfs:subClassOf. The implementation needs one time
SPARQL query to get OE(p), and |OE(p)| times SPARQL queries
to get the specific and ancestor classes. The remaining computation
has linear time complexity w.r.t. |OE(p)|. As property cardinality,
the range cardinality is also used for approximating the likelihood
of candidate assertions, using a consistency checking algorithm
introduced bellow.
4.4.3
Consistency Checking. As shown in Algorithm 2, con-
straint checking acts as a model, to estimate the consistency of an
assertion against soft constraints of hierarchical property range and
cardinality. Given a candidate assertion t = ⟨s,p,e⟩, the algorithm
first checks the property cardinality, with a parameter named maxi-
mum cardinality exceeding rate σ ∈(0, 1]. Line 5 counts the number
of entity objects that are associated with s and p in the KB, assuming
that the correction is made (i.e., t has been added into the KB). Note
that 1 ≤n ≤ONp
max + 1. Line 6 calculates its exceeding rate r
w.r.t. ONp
max, where r ∈(−∞, 1]. In Line 8, ONp
max = 0 indicates
that p is highly likely to used as a data property in the KB. This is
common in correcting literal assertions: one example is the property
hasName whose objects are phrases of entity mentions but should
not be replaced by entities. In this case, it is more reasonable to
report that the object substitute does not exist, and thus the algorithm
sets the cardinality score ycar to 0.

Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Another condition of setting ycar to 0 is r ≥σ. Specially, when σ
is set to 1.0, r ≥σ (i.e., ONp
max = 1 , n = 2) means that p is a object
property with functionality in the KB but the correction violates this
constraint. Note that n can exceed ONp
max by a small degree which
happens when ONp
max is large. For example, when σ is set to 0.5,
r = 0.25 (i.e., ONp
max = 4 and n = 5) is allowed. Line 11 to 16
calculate the property cardinality score ycar as the probability of
being a functional property (n = 1), or as the probability of being
a none-functional property (n > 1). Specially, we punish the score
when n > ONp
max (i.e., r > 0) by multiplying it with a degrading
factor 1 −r: the higher exceeding rate, the more it degrades.
Line 17 to 21 calculate the property range score yran, by comb-
ing the specific range score yran,c and the general range score
yran,д with their importance weights ωc and ωд. Usually we make
the specific range more important by setting ωc and ωд to e.g.,
0.8 and 0.2 respectively. Line 19 computes yran,c and yran,д: the
score is higher if more classes of the objects are among the range
classes, and these classes have higher range degrees. For example,
considering the property bornIn with the following range cardinal-
ity: Cp
sp = {City,Town, Place}, Cp
дe = {Place}, Dp
sp(City) = 0.5,
Dp
sp(Town) = 0.4, Dp
sp(Place) = 0.05 and Dp
дe(Place) = 0.95, we
will have (i)yran,c = 1−(1−0.5)(1−0.05) = 0.525 andyran,д = 0.95
if C(e) = {City, Place}, (ii) yran,c = 0.05 and yran,д = 0.95 if
C(e) = {Villaдe, Place}, and (iii) yran,c = 0 and yran,д = 0 if
C(e) = {Prof essor, Person}. The order of the consistency degree
against the property range is: {City, Place} > {Villaдe, Place} >
{Prof essor, Person}.
The algorithm finally returns the property cardinality score ycar
and the property range score yran. The former model is denoted
as Mcar while the letter is denoted as Mran. According to some
empirical analysis, we can multiply or average the two scores, as the
final model of consistency checking, denoted as Mcar+ran.
4.5
Correction Decision Making
Given a target assertion t in E, and its top-k related entities REt , for
each entity ei in REt , the correction framework (i) calculates the
assertion likelihood score yl
i with a link prediction model (Mpn,
Mte or Mdm), and the consistency score yc
i with Mcar , Mran or
Mcar+ran; (ii) separately normalizes yl
i and yc
i into [0, 1] according
to all the predictions by the corresponding model for E; (iii) ensem-
bles the two scores by simple averaging: yi = (yl
i + yc
i )/2; (iv) filters
out ei from REt if yi < τ. Note ei is always kept if t is a literal
assertion and its literal is exactly equal to the label of ei. The related
entities after filtering keep their original order in REt , and are de-
noted as RE′
t . τ is a parameter in [0, 1] that needs to be adjusted with
a developing data set. It eventually returns none, which means there
is no entity in the KB that can replace the object of t, if RE′
t is empty,
and the top-1 entity in RE′
t as the object substitute otherwise. The
ensemble of the link prediction score and constraint-based validation
score is not a must. Either of them can make a positive impact inde-
pendently, while their ensemble can make the performance higher in
most cases, as evaluated in Section 5.4.
Algorithm 2: Consistency Checking (Mran, Mcar )
1 Input: (i) A candidate assertion: t = ⟨s, p, e ⟩, (ii) property cardinality
constraint: ⟨Dp
car, ON p
max ⟩, (iii) the maximum cardinality
exceeding rate: σ ∈(0, 1], (iv) hierarchical property range
constraint: ⟨Dp
sp, Dp
дe, Cp
sp, Cp
дe ⟩, (v) weights of the specific
range and general range: ⟨ωc, ωд ⟩
2 Result: ycar : score that t is consistent with the property cardinality;
yran: score that t is consistent with the property range
3 begin
4
% count the number of object entities
5
n = |{o |K |= ⟨s, p, o⟩, o is entity} ∪{e }|;
6
r = (n−O N p
max )
O N p
max
; % calculate the exceeding rate
7
% no object entities are associated with p in the KB, or the
cardinality exceeds the maximum by a specific rate
8
if ON p
max = 0 ∥r ≥σ then
9
ycar = 0;
10
else
11
if n = 1 then
12
% probability as a functional property
13
ycar = Dp
car (k = 1);
14
else
15
% probability as a none-functional property
16
ycar =
(
Dp
car (k > 1),
if r ≤0
(1 −r) · Dp
car (k > 1),
else
17
C(e) = {c |K |= ⟨e, rdf:type, c ⟩}; % get the object’s classes
18
% calculate the constraint score of specific and general ranges
19


yran,c = 1 −Î
c∈Cp
sp ∩C(e)(1 −Dp
ran(c)),
yran,д = 1 −Î
c∈Cp
дe ∩C(e)(1 −Dp
ran(c));
20
% calculate the overall range constraint score
21
yran = ωc · yran,c + ωд · yran,д;
22
return ycar , yran
5
EVALUATION
5.1
Experiment Settings
5.1.1
Data. In our experiment, we correct assertions in DBpe-
dia [2] and in an enterprise medical KB whose TBox is defined by
clinic experts and ABox is extracted from medical articles (text) by
some open information extraction tools (cf. more details in [28]). DB-
pedia is accessed via its official Lookup service, SPARQL Endpoint4
and entity label dump (for related entity estimation with Word2Vec).
The medical KB contains knowledge about disease, medicine, treat-
ment, symptoms, foods and so on, with around 800 thousand entities,
7 properties, 48 classes, 4 million property assertions. The data are
representative of two common situations: errors of DBpedia are
mostly inherited from the source while errors of the medical KB are
mostly introduced by extraction.
Regarding DBpedia, we reuse the real world literal set proposed
by [4, 15]. As our task is not typing the literal, but substituting it with
an entity, literals containing multiple entity mentions are removed,
while properties with insufficient literal objects are complemented
with more literals from DBpedia. We annotate each assertion with
4http://dbpedia.org/sparql

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Jiaoyan Chen, Xi Chen, Ian Horrocks, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Erik B. Myklebus
a ground truth (GT), which is either a correct replacement entity
from DBpedia (i.e., Entity GT) or none (i.e., Empty GT). Ground
truths are carefully checked using DBpedia, Wikipedia, and multi-
ple external resources. Regarding the medical KB, we use a set of
assertions with erroneous entity objects that have been discovered
and collected during deployment of the KB in enterprise products;
the GT annotations have been added with the help of clinical experts.
For convenience, we call the above two target assertion sets DBP-Lit
and MED-Ent respectively.5 More details are shown in Table 1.
Assertions (with Entity GT) #
Properties #
Subjects #
DBP-Lit
725 (499)
127
668
MED-Ent
272 (225)
7
200
Table 1: Some statistics of DBP-Lit and MED-Ent.
5.1.2
Settings. In the evaluation, we first analyze related entity
estimation (Section 5.2) and link prediction (Section 5.3) indepen-
dently. For related entity estimation, we report the recall of Entity
GTs of different methods with varying top-k values, based on which
a suitable method and a k value are selected for the framework. For
link prediction, we compare the performance of different semantic
embeddings and observed features, using those target assertions
whose Entity GTs are recalled in related entity estimation. The re-
lated entities of a target assertion are first ranked according to the

and MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank)6 are calculated.
Next we evaluate the overall results of the assertion correction
framework (Section 5.4), where the baselines are compared with,
and the impact of link prediction and constraint-based validation is
analyzed. Three metrics are adopted: (i) Correction Rate which is the
ratio of the target assertions that are corrected with right substitutes,
among all the target assertions with Entity GTs; (ii) Empty Rate
which is the ratio of the target assertions that are corrected with none,
among all the target assertions with Empty GTs; (iii) Accuracy which
is the ratio of the truly corrected target assertions by either substitutes
or none, among all the target assertions. Note that accuracy is an
overall metric considering both correction rate and empty rate. Either
high (low resp.) correction rate or empty rate can lead to high (low
resp.) accuracy. With the overall results, we finally analyze the
constraint-based validation with more details.
The reported results are based on the following setting (unless
otherwise specified). In related entity estimation, Word2Vec [24]
trained using the Wikipedia article dump in June 2018 is used for
word embedding. In link prediction, the margin hyper parameter γ
is set by linear increasing w.r.t. the training step, the embedding size
of both entities and properties is set to 100, and the other training
hyper parameters such as the number of epochs and MLP hidden
layer size are set such that the highest MRR is achieved on an eval-
uation sample set. Regarding the baseline RDF2Vec, pre-trained
versions of DBpedia entities with different settings by Mannheim
University7 are tested, and the results with the best MRR are re-
ported. In constraint-based validation, σ, ωc and ωд are set to 1.0,
5DBP-Lit data and its experiment codes: https://github.com/ChenJiaoyan/KG_Curation
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_reciprocal_rank
7https://bit.ly/2M4TQOg
0.8 and 0.2 respectively, according to the algorithm insight. Some
other reasonable settings explored can achieve similar results. The
embeddings are trained by GeForce GTX 1080 Ti with OpenKE
[16], while the remaining is computed by Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU

5.2
Related Entity Estimation
We compare different methods and settings used in related entity
estimation with the results presented in Figure 2, where the recall
of Entity GTs by top-k related entities are presented. First, we find
that the lexical matching based methods (Lookup, Lookup∗and Edit
Distance) have much higher recall than Word2Vec, on both DBP-
Lit and MED-Ent. The reason for DBP-Lit may lie in the Lookup
service provided by DBpedia, which takes not only the entity label
but also the anchor text into consideration. The latter provides more
semantics, some of which, such as different names and background
description, is very helpful for recalling the right entity. The reason
for MED-Ent, according to some empirical analysis, is that the
erroneous objects are often caused by lexical confusion, such as
misspelling and misusing of an entity with similar tokens. Second,
our Lookup solution with sub-phrases, i.e., Lookup∗, as expected,
outperforms the original Lookup. For example, when both curves
are stable, their recalls are around 0.88 and 0.81 respectively,
The target of related entity estimation in our framework is to
have a high recall with a k value that is not too large (so as to avoid
additional noise and limit the size of the sub-graph for efficiency).
In real application, the method and k value can be set by analyzing
the recall. According to the absolute value and the trend of the recall
curves in Figure 2, our framework uses Lookup∗with k = 30 for
DBP-Lit, and Edit Distance with k = 76 for MED-Ent.
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Lookup
Lookup*
Word2Vec
top-𝒌
Recall
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Edit Distance
Word2Vec
top-𝒌
Recall
DBP-Lit
MED-Ent
Figure 2: The recall of Entity GTs by top-k related entities
5.3
Link Prediction
5.3.1
Impact of Models. The results of different link predic-
tion methods are shown in Table 2, where the sub-graph is used
for training. The baseline Random means randomly ranking the re-
lated entities, while AttBiRNN refers to the attentive bidirectional
Recurrent Neural Networks that utilize the labels of the subject,
property and object. AttBiRNN was used in [4] for literal object
typing, with good performance achieved. First of all, the results
verify that either latent semantic embeddings (TransE and DistMult)
or observed features with Multiple Layer Perception are effective

Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
WWW, April 2020, Taipei

dramatically improved in comparison with Random and AttBiRNN.
We also find that concatenating the node feature and path feature
(Node+Path) achieves higher performance than the node feature
and the path feature alone, as well as the baseline RDF2Vec which
is based on graph walks. For DBP-Lit, the outperformance over

respectively.
Meanwhile, Node+Path performs better than TransE and Dist-
Mult for DBP-Lit, while for MED-Ent, TransE and DistMult out-
performs Node+Path. For example, considering the metric of MRR,
Node+Path is 71.3% higher than DistMult for DBP-Lit, but DistMul
is 108.8% higher than Node+Path for MED-Ent. One potential reason
is the difference in the number of properties and sparsity of the two
sub-graphs. DBP-Lit has 127 properties in its target assertions and
1958 properties in its sub-graph; while MED-Ent has 7 properties
in its target assertions and 19 properties in its sub-graph. The small
number of properties for MED-Ent leads to quite poor path feature,
which is verified by its independent performance (e.g., the MRR
is only 0.09). In the sub-graph of DBP-Lit, the average number of
connected entities per property (i.e., density) is 150.7, while in the
sub-graph of MED-Ent, it is 2739.0. Moreover, a larger ratio of prop-
erties to entities also leads to richer path features. According to these
results, we use Node+Path for DBP-Lit and DistMult for MED-Ent
in our correction framework.
Methods
DBP-Lit
MED-Ent
MRR

MRR

Random
0.199
0.100
0.275
0.027
0.013
0.066
AttBiRNN
0.251
0.126
0.348
0.255
0.111
0.414
TransE
0.342
0.173
0.518
0.744
0.652
0.862
DistMult
0.424
0.300
0.536
0.752
0.694
0.806
RDF2Vec
0.419
0.320
0.492
—
—
—
Node
0.495
0.379
0.604
0.338
0.171
0.514
Path
0.473
0.356
0.578
0.090
0.028
0.133
Node+Path
0.586
0.461
0.716
0.360
0.200
0.525
Table 2: Link prediction results based on the sub-graph.
5.3.2
Impact of The Sub-graph. We further analyze the im-
pact of sub-graph usage in training the link prediction model. The
results of some of the methods that can be run over the whole KB
with limited time are shown in Table 3, where Node+Path (DBP-Lit)
uses features extracted from the whole KB but samples from the
sub-graph. One the one hand, in comparison with Node+Path trained
purely with the sub-graph, Node+Path with global features actually
performs worse. As all the directly connected properties and entities
of each subject entity, related entity and target property are included
in the sub-graph, using the sub-graph makes no difference for node
features and path features of depth one. Thus the above result is
mainly due to the fact that path features of depth two actually makes
limited contribution in this link prediction context. This is reason-
able as they are weak, duplicated or even noisy in comparison with
node features and path features of depth one. One the other hand,
learning the semantic embeddings with the sub-graph has positive
impact on TransE and negative impact on DistMult for MED-Ent.
However the impact in both cases is quite limited. Considering that
the sub-graph has only 36.9% (11.2% resp.) of the entities (assertions
resp.) of the whole medical KB, which reduces the training time of
DistMult embeddings from 46.7 minutes to 19.0 minutes, the above
performance drop can be accepted.
Cases
MRR

TransE (MED-Ent)
0.713 (-.031)
0.608 (-.044)
0.834 (-.028)
DistMult (MED-Ent)
0.766 (+.014)
0.721 (+.027)
0.822 (+.016)
Node+Path (DBP-Lit)
0.504 (-.082)
0.384 (-.077)
0.611 (-.105)
Table 3: Link prediction results based on the whole KB, and their out-
performance (gap) over those based on the sub-graph
5.4
Overall Results
Figure 3 presents the correction rate, empty rate and accuracy of our
assertion correction framework with a ranging filtering threshold
τ. Note that lexical matching without any filtering is similar to the
existing method discussed in related work [20]. On the one hand,
we find that filtering with either link prediction (LP) or constraint-
based validation (CV) can improve the correction rate when τ is
set to a suitable range. This is because those candidate substitutes
that are lexically similar to the erroneous object but lead to unlikely
assertions are filtered out, while those that are not so lexically similar
but lead to true assertions are ranked higher. As the empty rate is
definitely increased after filtering (e.g., improved from 0.252 to
0.867 by Lookup∗+ LP + CV for DBP-Lit), the accuracy for both
DBP-Lit and MED-Ent is improved in the whole range of τ. On the
other hand, we find that averaging the scores from link prediction
and constraint-based validation is effective. It leads to both higher
correction rate and accuracy than either of them for some values of
τ, such as [0.05, 0.1] for DBP-Lit and [0.85, 0.95] for MED-Ent.
Table 4 presents the optimum correction rate and accuracy for
several settings. Note that they are achieved using a suitable τ setting;
in real applications this can be determined using an evaluation data
set. Based on these results, we make the following observations.
First, the optimum results are consistent with our above conclusions
regarding the positive impact of link prediction, constraint-based
validation and their ensemble. For example, the optimum accuracy of
DBP-Lit is improved by 32.6% using constraint-based validation in
comparison with the original related entities using lexical matching.
The correction rate of MED-Ent provides another example: REE
+ LP + CV is 1.5% higher than REE + LP, and 121.4% higher than
REE + CV.
Second, lexical matching using either Lookup (for DBP-Lit) or
Edit Distance (for MED-Ent) has a much higher correction rate
and accuracy than Word2Vec, while our Lookup with sub-phrases
(Lookup∗) has even higher correction rate than the original Lookup
of DBpedia. These overall results verify the recall analysis on related
entity estimation in Section 5.2. Meanwhile, we find that the overall
results on observed features (Mnp) and latent semantic embeddings
(Mdm and Mte) are also consistent with the link prediction analysis

WWW, April 2020, Taipei
Jiaoyan Chen, Xi Chen, Ian Horrocks, Ernesto Jimenez-Ruiz, and Erik B. Myklebus
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Correction Rate
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Empty Rate
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Lookup*
Lookup* + LP
Lookup* + CV
Lookup* + LP + CV
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Correction Rate
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Empty Rate
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
EditDistance
EditDistance + LP
EditDistance + CV
EditDistance + LP + CV
Figure 3: Overall results of the correction framework for DBP-Lite
[Above] and MED-Ent [Below]. + LP and + CV represent filtering with
link prediction and constraint-based validation respectively, with the
filtering threshold τ ranging from 0 to 1 with a step of 0.05.
in Section 5.3: Mnp has a better filtering effect than Mdm and Mte
for DBP-Lit, but worse filtering effect for MED-Ent.
Methods
DBP-Lit
MED-Ent
C-Rate
Acc
C-Rate
Acc
Lexical Matching
0.597
0.611
0.149
0.123
Lookup∗
0.635
0.516
—
—
Word2Vec
0.553
0.410
0.089
0.076
REE + LP (Mnp)
0.677
0.677
0.360
0.327
REE + LP (Mdm)
0.635
0.628
0.600
0.588
REE + CV (Mran)
0.671
0.668
0.271
0.239
REE + CV (Mcar )
0.639
0.622
0.164
0.147
REE + CV (Mran+car )
0.677
0.684
0.271
0.246
REE + LP + CV
0.701
0.690
0.609
0.599
Table 4: Optimum correction rate (C-Rate) and accuracy (Acc). For
Lexical Matching, DBP-Lit uses the original DBpedia Lookup while
MED-Ent uses Edit Distance. REE denotes Related Entity Estimation:
DBP-Lit uses Lookup∗while MED-Ent uses Edit Distance.
5.5
Constraint-based Validation
Besides the positive impact on the overall results mentioned above,
we get several more detailed observations about constraint-based
validation from Table 4. On the one hand, the property range con-
straint plays a more important role than the property cardinality
constraint, while their combination is more robust than either of
them, as expected. Considering the assertion set of MED-Ent, fil-
tering by Mran, for example, leads to 62.6% higher accuracy than
filtering by Mcar , while filtering by Mran+car has 2.9% higher
accuracy and equal correction rate in comparison with Mran.
On the other hand, we find constraint-based validation performs
well for DBP-Lit, with higher accuracy and equal correction rate
in comparison with link prediction, but performs much worse for
MED-Ent. This is mainly due to the gap between the semantics of the
two target assertion sets and their corresponding KBs: (i) the mined
property ranges of DBP-Lit include 404 hierarchical classes, while
those of MED-DB have only 8 classes in total and these classes have
no hierarchy; (ii) 23 out of 127 target properties in DBP-Lit have pure
functionality (i.e., Dp
car (k = 1) = 1.0) which plays a key role in the
consistency checking algorithm, while none of the target properties
of MED-Ent has such pure functionality. The second characteristic
is also a potential reason why filtering by constraint-based validation
with property cardinality only achieves a very limited improvement
over Edit Distance for MED-Ent as shown in Table 4.
We additionally present some examples of the mined soft property
constraints in Table 5. Most of them are consistent with our common
sense understanding of the properties, although some noise is evident
(e.g., the range Person and Agent of dbp:homeTown), most likely
caused by erroneous property and class assertions.
Property
Cardinality
Specific Range
General Range
dbp:homeTown
1 : 0.415
2 : 0.422
3 : 0.163
Location: 0.801,
City: 0.280,
Country: 0.268,
Person: 0.228, ...
PopulatedPlace:
0.821, Place:
0.821, Settlement:
0.299, Agent:
0.259, ...
dbp:finalteam
1 : 1.000
BaseballTeam:
0.493,
SportsTeam:
0.154,
SoccerClub:
0.015, ...
Agent: 0.688,
Organization:
0.665,
SportsTeam:
0.510, ...
Table 5: Soft constraints of two property examples
6
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper we present a study of assertion correction, an important
problem for KB curation, but one that has rarely been studied. We
have proposed a general correction framework, which does not rely
on any KB meta data or external information, and which exploits
both both deep learning and consistency reasoning to correct erro-
neous objects and informally annotated literals (entity mentions).
The framework and the adopted techniques have been evaluated
by correcting assertions in two different KBs: DBpedia with cross-
domain knowledge and an enterprise KB from the medical domain.
We discuss below several more observations of the study as well as
possible directions for the future work.
Entity relatedness. Our method follows the principle of correct-
ing the object by a related entity rather than an arbitrary entity that

Correcting Knowledge Base Assertions
WWW, April 2020, Taipei
leads to a correct assertion. Relatedness can be due to either lexical or
semantic similarity. Currently, the recall for DBP-Lit and MED-Ent
is 0.882 and 0.797 respectively, which is promising, but still leaves
space for further improvement. One extension for higher recall but
limited noise and sub-graph size is incorporating external resources
like Wikipedia disambiguation pages or domain knowledge about
the errors.
KB variation. Although both constraint-based validation and
link prediction improve overall performance, their impact varies
from DBpedia to the medical KB. The effectiveness of constraint-
based validation depends on the richness of the KB schema, such as
property functionality, the complexity of property range, etc. The
more complex the schema is, the better performance constraint-
based validation achieves. The impact of link prediction is more
complicated: the path and node features perform better on DBpedia
which has many more properties than the medical KB, while the
semantic embeddings by DistMult and TransE are more suitable
for the medical KB which has less properties but higher density.
Integrating link prediction and constraint-based validation, even
with simple score averaging, can improve performance, but further
study is needed for a better integration method that is adapted to the
structure of the given KB.
Property constraints. On the one hand, the evaluation indicates
that the mined property constraints are effective for assertion vali-
dation and can be independently used in other contexts like online
KB editing. On the other hand, unlike the link prediction model,
the constraints as well as the consistency checking algorithm are
interpretable. One benefit is that explicitly defined or external TBox
constraints can easily be injected into our framework by overwriting
or revising the constraints. For example, the mined specific range
Person: 0.228 in Table 5, which is inappropriate for the property
dbp:homeTown, can be directly removed.
