Is Big Data Sufﬁcient for a Reliable Detection of
Non-Technical Losses?
Patrick Glauner∗, Angelo Migliosi∗, Jorge Augusto Meira∗, Petko Valtchev∗†, Radu State∗and Franck Bettinger‡
∗Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust, University of Luxembourg
2721 Luxembourg, Luxembourg

†Department of Computer Science, University of Quebec in Montreal,
H3C 3P8 Montreal, Canada

‡CHOICE Technologies Holding S`arl
2453 Luxembourg, Luxembourg

Abstract—Non-technical losses (NTL) occur during the distri-
bution of electricity in power grids and include, but are not lim-
ited to, electricity theft and faulty meters. In emerging countries,
they may range up to 40% of the total electricity distributed. In
order to detect NTLs, machine learning methods are used that
learn irregular consumption patterns from customer data and
inspection results. The Big Data paradigm followed in modern
machine learning reﬂects the desire of deriving better conclusions
from simply analyzing more data, without the necessity of looking
at theory and models. However, the sample of inspected customers
may be biased, i.e. it does not represent the population of all
customers. As a consequence, machine learning models trained
on these inspection results are biased as well and therefore lead
to unreliable predictions of whether customers cause NTL or
not. In machine learning, this issue is called covariate shift and
has not been addressed in the literature on NTL detection yet.
In this work, we present a novel framework for quantifying and
visualizing covariate shift. We apply it to a commercial data set
from Brazil that consists of 3.6M customers and 820K inspection
results. We show that some features have a stronger covariate
shift than others, making predictions less reliable. In particular,
previous inspections were focused on certain neighborhoods or
customer classes and that they were not sufﬁciently spread among
the population of customers. This framework is about to be
deployed in a commercial product for NTL detection.
Index Terms—Bias, big data, covariate shift, machine learning,
non-technical losses.
I. INTRODUCTION
Losses in power grids can be grouped into technical losses
and non-technical losses. Technical losses occur naturally,
which are mainly caused by internal electrical resistance of
infrastructure components. Non-technical losses (NTL) appear
during power distribution and include, but are not limited to,
the following causes [1], [2]:
• Meter tampering in order to record lower consumptions
• Bypassing meters by rigging lines from the power source
• Arranged false meter readings by bribing meter readers
• Faulty or broken meters
• Technical and human errors in meter readings, data
processing and billing
Fig. 1. Example of spatial bias: The large city is close to the sea, whereas
the small city is located in the interior of the country. The weather in the
small city undergoes stronger changes during the year. The subsequent change
of electricity consumption during the year triggers many inspections. As a
consequence, most inspections are carried out in the small city. Therefore,
the sample of customers inspected does not represent the overall population
of customers.
In practice, NTLs primarily consist of electricity theft
and cause major problems to electricity providers, including
ﬁnancial losses and a decrease of stability and reliability.
Furthermore, NTLs lead to an extra use of limited natural
resources which in turn increases pollution. They can range
up to 40% of the total electricity distributed in countries such
as Brazil, India, Malaysia or Lebanon [3], [4].
The predominant research direction reported in the recent
literature is the use of machine learning/data mining methods,
which learn anomalous behavior from customer data and
known irregular behavior that was reported through inspection
results. However, carrying out inspections is expensive, as
it requires physical presence of technicians. It is therefore
important that the trained models make accurate predictions.
For about the last ﬁfteen years, the Big Data paradigm
followed in machine learning has been to gather more data
rather than improving models. Hence, one may assume that
having simply more customer and inspection data would help
to detect NTL more accurately. However, in many cases, the
data is biased as depicted in Fig. 1. Concretely, the customers
978-1-5090-4000-1/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
arXiv:1702.03767v2  [cs.LG]  25 Jul 2017

inspected are a sample of the overall population of customers.
In this example, there is a spatial bias. Hence, the inspections
do not represent the overall population of customers. As a
consequence, when learning from the inspection results, a
bias is learned, making predictions less reliable. In technical
terms, this bias is called covariate shift or sampling bias [5].
Aside from spatial covariate shift, there may be other types of
covariate shift in the data, such as the meter type, connection
type, etc.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• We present a novel framework for quantifying and visu-
alizing covariate shift at different hierarchical levels.
• We investigate the importance of covariate shift to NTL
detection in Big Data approaches and show that it leads
to unreliable NTL predictors.
• We report the covariate shift of different features in a real
world data set consisting of 3.6M Brazilian customers and
820K inspection results.
• We visualize how different local areas are affected by
covariate shift at different hierarchical levels.
To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any
previously published research that addresses this topic for NTL
detection. We are convinced that an accurate study of this topic
is necessary in order to advance NTL detection by reducing
the covariate shift in data sets in the future.
II. RELATED WORK
From an electrical engineering perspective, energy balance
methods [6] can be applied to the detection of NTL. How-
ever, this requires topological information of the distribution
network and does not reﬂect a change of network. In practice,
the network topology undergoes rapid changes in emerging
countries, i.e. the countries in which NTL is a particular issue.
The predominant methodology used in the literature is
employing artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to this anomaly detection
problem. Historically, AI has been based on rule-based expert
systems that incorporate expert knowledge. However, in many
cases, describing a problem domain is challenging due to its
complexity and temporal dynamics. Therefore, over the years,
the ﬁelds of machine learning and data mining have become
more popular. These methods learn models from data without
being explicitly programmed.
A data set of ~22K customers is used in [7] for training
a neural network. It uses the average consumption of the
previous 12 months and other customer features such as
location, type of customer, voltage and whether there are meter
reading notes during that period. On the test set, an accuracy
of 0.8717, a precision of 0.6503 and a recall of 0.2947
are reported. Consumption proﬁles of 5K Brazilian industrial
customer proﬁles are analyzed in [8]. Each customer proﬁle
contains 10 features including the demand billed, maximum
demand, installed power, etc. In this setting, a support vector
machine slightly outperforms k-nearest neighbors and a neural
network, for which test accuracies of 0.9628, 0.9620 and
0.9448, respectively, are reported.
We have extensively reviewed the state of the art in our pre-
vious work and identiﬁed the open challenges in NTL detec-
tion [2]. We have previously addressed the class imbalance and
evaluation metric selection, when we showed that a large-scale
machine learning approach outperformed rule-based Boolean
and fuzzy logic expert systems [9]. Furthermore, we have
shown that the neighborhood of customers yields signiﬁcant
information in order to decide whether a customer causes a
NTL or not [10], [11].
III. COVARIATE SHIFT
In this paper, we address the challenge of covariate shift. It
refers to the problem of training data (i.e. the set of inspection
results) and production data (i.e. the set of customers to
generate inspections for) having different distributions. This
fact leads to unreliable NTL predictors when learning from
this training data. In this section, we describe how to quantify
it. Historically, covariate shift has been a long-standing issue
in statistics. For example, The Literary Digest sent out 10M
questionnaires in order to predict the outcome of the 1936 US
Presidential election. They received 2.4M returns. Nonethe-
less, the predicted result proved to be wrong. The reason for
this was that they used car registrations and phone directories
to compile a list of recipients. In that time, the households that
had a phone or a car represented a biased sample of the over-
all population. In contrast, George Gallup only interviewed
3K handpicked people, which were an unbiased sample of
the population. As a consequence, Gallup could predict the
outcome of the election very well [12].
A. Deﬁnition
Customers previously inspected are a sample of the overall
population of customers. However, that sample may be biased,
i.e. it does not represent the population of all customers,
as visualized in Fig. 1. A reason for that is that previous
inspections were largely focused on certain criteria and were
not sufﬁciently spread among the population. The problem of
training data and production data having different distributions
has initially been addressed in the ﬁeld of computational learn-
ing theory [13], which also calls it covariate shift, sampling
bias or sample selection bias. It can be deﬁned in mathematical
terms as follows [5]:
• Assume that all examples are drawn from a distribution
D with domain X × Y × S,
• where X is the feature space,
• Y is the label space,
• and S is {0, 1}.
Examples (x, y, s) are drawn independently from D. s =
1 denotes a selected example, whereas s = 0 denotes the
opposite. The training is performed on a sample that comprises
all examples that have s = 1. P(s|x, y) = P(s|x) implies that
s is independent of y given x. In this case, the selected sample
is biased but the bias only depends on the feature vector x.
This problem is called covariate shift [5].

B. Big Data
In the past ﬁfteen years, the Big Data paradigm followed can
be summarized: “It’s not who has the best algorithm that wins.
It’s who has the most data.” [14] Concretely, this approach
reﬂects the desire of deriving better conclusions from simply
analyzing more data, without the necessity of looking at theory
and models. However, taking covariate shift into account, just
having more data is not sufﬁcient. In this case, having less
data that is more representative seems to be the answer.
C. Affected Classiﬁers
It has been shown that some machine learning algorithms
are not affected by covariate shift, whereas others are [5].
1) Local learner: The prediction of the learner depends
asymptotically only on P(y|x). Hence, it is not affected by
covariate shift. Examples are logistic regression and hard-
margin support vector machine (SVM).
2) Global learner: The prediction of the learner depends
asymptotically on both, P(y|x) and P(x). Hence, it is affected
by covariate shift. Example: Decision tree learners such as ID3
or C4.5 [15] recursively split the input space by choosing the
remaining most discriminative feature of a data set. To predict,
the learned tree is traversed top-down. Other examples are
naive Bayes and soft-margin SVM.
D. Quantiﬁcation
The Kullback-Leibler divergence is a measure of the differ-
ence of two probability distributions. However, it is challeng-
ing (1) to adapt this measure to multi-dimensional data that
is a combination of discrete and continuous features, which is
common in machine learning, and (2) to deﬁne criteria when
a distance is an indicator for a covariate shift.
Therefore, a preferred methodology for quantifying covari-
ate shift is: First, we add a feature s and assign the values 1
or 0 to the training data (s = 1) or production data (s = 0),
respectively. These data sets are furthermore merged into one
data set. This latter is split into a training set X1 (with no
relation to the original training set) and a test set X2. The
objective is to develop a supervised learning method capable
of predicting the feature s using X1. The performance of
the classiﬁer on X2 is then quantiﬁed using the Matthews
correlation coefﬁcient (MCC)
TP × TN −FP × FN
p
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
,
(1)
which measures the accuracy of binary classiﬁers taking into
account the imbalance of both classes, ranging from −1 to +1
[16]. The greater the MCC, the greater the covariate shift. A
concrete threshold for covariate shift depends on the problem,
however 0.2 has been proposed [17]. Though a low MCC
does not automatically imply the lack of a covariate shift, a
signiﬁcant MCC value is an indicator of covariate shift.
We extend this methodology in Algorithm 1 by introducing
the following novelties:
1) Tree classiﬁer: Decision tree learning is affected by
covariate shift. Decision trees scale to very large data
sets while they allow to learn non-linearities. Soft-
margin SVMs are also global learners, however, for large
data sets only a linear kernel is learnable in a feasible
amount of time.
2) Model selection: We want to ﬁnd a model which is able
to distinguish between both distributions. Thus maximiz-
ing the MCC on the test set is equivalent to ﬁnding the
best two-class classiﬁcation between production data and
original training data. For this, we optimize the ﬁve most
important tree model parameters by randomly drawing
from probability distributions: Max. number of leaves,
max. number of levels, measure of the purity of a split,
min. number of samples required to be at a leaf and min.
number of samples required to split a node.
3) Cross-validation: We also split the data set into k folds
in order to reduce the overﬁtting. This leads to a more
reliable model for covariate shift quantiﬁcation. The
MCC per model, denoted by MCC, is the average of
the MCCs of the k test sets. The standard deviation of
the k test MCCs serves as the reliability of MCC. The
lower the standard deviation, the more reliable MCC.
Note: The inspection results are not taken into account as
covariate shift only concerns the distributions of the inputs.
Algorithm 1 Quantifying covariate shift.
1: result ←0
2: reliability ←0
3: selected ←train data.add feature(s, 1)
4: not selected ←prod data.add feature(s, 0)
5: data ←selected ∪not selected
6: folds ←cv folds(data, k)
7: for model in get model candidates() do
8:
mccs ←list()
9:
for fold in folds do
10:
Xtrain, Xtest, ytrain, ytest ←fold
11:
classifier ←DecisionTree(model)
12:
classifier.train(Xtrain, ytrain)
13:
ypred ←classifier.predict(Xtest)
14:
mccs.append(MCC(ytest, ypred))
15:
end for
16:
mcc mean ←mean(mccs)
17:
if mcc mean > result then
18:
result ←mcc mean
19:
reliability ←std(mccs)
20:
end if
21: end for
22: return result, reliability
IV. EVALUATION
A. Data
The data used in this paper comes from an electricity
provider in Brazil. First, it consists of 3.6M customers. A
complete list of the customer master data used in the following
experiments is depicted in Table I. The categorical features

TABLE I
ASSESSED FEATURES.
Feature
Possible values
Class
Power generation infrastructure, residential,
commercial, industrial, public,
public illumination, rural, public service,
reseller
Contract status
Active, suspended
Location
Longitude and latitude
Meter type
22 different meter types
Number of wires
1, 2, 3
Voltage
≤2.3kV, >2.3kV
class, voltage, number of wires, contract status and meter type
are converted to one-hot coding. Second, the data contains
820K inspection results, such as inspection date, presence of
fraud or irregularity, type of NTL and inspection notes. 620K
customers have been inspected at least once and the remaining
~3M customers have never been inspected. Third, there are
195M meter readings from 2011 to 2016 such as consumption
in kWh, date of meter reading and number of days between
meter readings.
B. Implementation Notes
All computations were run on a server with 24 cores
and 128 GB of RAM. The entire code was implemented in
Python using scikit-learn [18] for machine learning.
scikit-learn allows to distribute the training of the
cross-validated classiﬁers among all cores. The maps were
plotted using cartopy [19]. In total, all results and plots
reported in this paper were computed in 12 hours using this
infrastructure. Our implementation is available as open source:
http://github.com/pglauner/SpatialBiasNTL.
C. Model Parameters
In the following experiments, we use k = 10-fold cross-
validation. In each experiment, we train 1K trees, which are
100 different tree models trained on each of the 10 folds. We
optimize the ﬁve tree model parameters by randomly drawing
from predeﬁned uniform probability distributions depicted in
Table II. We have chosen these ranges based on best practice
recommendations and our own experience. Furthermore, the
two classes (s = 1 and s = 0) are imbalanced, i.e. there
are more examples of the non-inspected customers than the
inspected ones. In order to take this into account during
training, we associate weights with the classes such that the
examples of the minority class have stronger impact.
D. Global Covariate Shifts
In the following experiments, we compute different global
types of covariate shift by using all customers in each exper-
iment. We therefore do not split the customers into different
geographical areas.
We have previously presented the customer master data
features available in Table I. We compute the global covariate
TABLE II
TREE MODEL PARAMETERS.
Parameter
Range
Max. number of leaves
[2, 20)
Max. number of levels
[1, 20)
Measure of the purity of a split
{entropy, gini}
Min. number of samples required to be at a leaf
[1, 20)
Min. number of samples required to split a node
[2, 20)
TABLE III
GLOBAL COVARIATE SHIFT OF SINGLE FEATURES.
Feature
MCCmax
σ
Location
0.22367
0.03453
Class
0.16255
0.01371
Number of wires
0.14111
0.00794
Meter type
0.13158
0.00382
Voltage
0.07092
0.02375
Contract status
0.03744
0.09183
Location
Class
Number of wires
Meter type
Voltage
Contract status
Contract status
Voltage
Meter type
Number of wires
Class
Location
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Fig. 2. Global Covariate Shift of Compound Features.
shift of each of these features. We report our results in
Table III. MCCmax denotes the maximum average of the
MCCs of the k = 10 test sets among all 100 tree models
trained on a feature. σ denotes the standard deviation of those
k = 10 MCC test scores, which is a reliability measure of
MCCmax.
Overall, the strongest covariate shift is in the location with a
MCC value of 0.22367. This means that previous inspections
are mostly biased towards the location of customers. The
location is also the only feature that is beyond the threshold
of 0.2 mentioned in Section III-D. The features class, number
of wires and meter type are below the threshold but are
greater than 0.1. There is almost no covariate shift of previous
inspections towards the voltage and contract status features.
The standard deviation of the MCCs is the greatest for the
contract status. The reason for this is a strong overﬁt in one
of the folds. All other MCCs have a much lower standard

TABLE IV
GLOBAL COVARIATE SHIFT OF COMPOUND FEATURES.
Feature
MCCmax
σ
All
0.27325
0.03014
Location + number of wires
0.26206
0.03676
Location + class
0.25796
0.03540
Location + meter type
0.25479
0.03884
Location + voltage
0.22944
0.03544
Location + contract status
0.22335
0.03454
Class + number of wires
0.17501
0.00468
Class + meter type
0.16472
0.00309
Class + voltage
0.16322
0.01400
Number of wires + meter type
0.15283
0.00274
Class + contract status
0.15158
0.00992
Number of wires + voltage
0.14156
0.00800
Number of wires + contract status
0.14111
0.00794
Meter type + voltage
0.13165
0.00381
Meter type + contract status
0.13155
0.00382
Voltage + contract status
0.08213
0.08301
deviation, making them more reliable.
Next, we create compound features that are composed
of multiple features. Due to the great number of possible
combinations, we assess all 2-combinations as well as the 6-
combination of all features. We visualize the MCCs for all
2-combinations in Fig. 2 and reported the MCCs in Table IV.
For the 6-combination comprising all features, we computed
MCCmax = 0.27325, which is the maximum covariate shift
of all compound features. Therefore, the spatial covariate shift
contributes to this covariate shift the most, however, the other
covariate shifts contribute a fraction as well.
E. Local Covariate Shifts
We now entirely focus on spatial covariate shift since it is
the strongest one among the different types of covariate shift.
In the following experiments we compute local covariate shifts
by splitting the customers in different locations. The data set
provides the following divisions in the following hierarchical
order:
1) 9 regions
2) 261 municipalities
3) 1,380 localities
4) 19,026 neighborhoods
We plot the local spatial covariate shifts of these four
levels of granularity in Fig. 3. All customers are located in
one Brazilian state. We observe that spatial covariate shift
is smoothened for regional level in Fig. 3a. It becomes in-
creasingly more granular at municipal, local and neighborhood
levels in Figs. 3a through 3d, respectively. We also notice that
the spatial covariate shifts at lower levels tend to increase,
which is depicted by increasing upper limits of the color bars.
F. Discussion
We have shown that covariate shift exists in our real world
data set. The features of the customer data that are most
(a) Regional level.
(b) Municipal level.
(c) Local level.
(d) Neighborhood level.
Fig. 3.
Spatial covariate shift at different levels of granularity. For each
division, we compute the median location of the respective customers and
assign MCCmax to it. We then use nearest interpolation to generate the
local covariate shift maps. Note: The maps only visualize a fraction of all
political divisions. This is because we have cropped the computed maps in
this paper due to privacy purposes.

affected by covariate shift are the location, followed by class,
number of wires and meter type. Classiﬁers that use other
features such as the voltage or contract status instead tend
to be more reliable. We have also shown that the spatial
covariate shift exists on different levels of granularity and that
municipalities and localities with very strong covariate shifts
exist. Subsequently, these local covariate shifts have signiﬁcant
impact on the covariate shifts on higher levels or even globally
on the entire data set. Therefore, using all inspection results
of the data set for training a NTL predictor from a Big Data
perspective leads to biased models that may not reliably detect
NTL. As a consequence, reducing the spatial covariate shift in
the data set must be a priority in order to learn reliable NTL
predictors.
However, the ﬁner the hierarchical granularity, the more
divisions cannot be used for the computations for the following
reasons. First, using k = 10-fold cross-validation, training is
only possible if a division has at least k customers. Second,
the k −1 folds used for training must have examples of
both classes. Third, the MCC can only be computed for
denominator ̸= 0, which is the case for (TP > 0 ∧TN >
0)∨(FP > 0∧FN > 0). If the test MCC cannot be computed
for a fold of a model, only the MCCs of the remaining folds
are used in cross-validation. If no MCCs can be computed for
a division, we skip it in the plotting. For instance, this effect
has become most apparent at neighborhood level in the west
of that state due to the low population density.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Covariate shift is the problem of training data and produc-
tion data having different distributions. In this work, we have
proposed a novel framework for quantifying and visualizing
covariate shift in spatial data sets. In the context of non-
technical loss (NTL) detection, we showed that there is a
covariate shift between the inspected customers and the overall
population of customers. We used a real world data set from
Brazil that consists of 3.6M customers and 820K inspection
results. We showed that some features have a stronger covari-
ate shift than others. In particular, the spatial covariate shift
is the strongest and appears in different hierarchical levels.
Subsequently, machine learning models trained on this data
will lead to unreliable NTL predictions. Our contribution will
allow domain experts to model more reliable rules for NTL
predictors.
Next, we will use and amend spatial point processes [20]
for reducing the spatial covariate shift in our data set in order
to train more reliable NTL predictors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Lautaro Dolberg, Diogo Duarte
and Yves Rangoni from CHOICE Technologies Holding S`arl
for contributing many good ideas to our discussions. This
work has been partially funded by the Luxembourg National
Research Fund.
