IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
1
Highly comparative feature-based time-series
classiﬁcation
Ben D. Fulcher and Nick S. Jones
Abstract
A highly comparative, feature-based approach to time series classiﬁcation is introduced that uses an extensive
database of algorithms to extract thousands of interpretable features from time series. These features are derived
from across the scientiﬁc time-series analysis literature, and include summaries of time series in terms of their
correlation structure, distribution, entropy, stationarity, scaling properties, and ﬁts to a range of time-series models.
After computing thousands of features for each time series in a training set, those that are most informative of the
class structure are selected using greedy forward feature selection with a linear classiﬁer. The resulting feature-based
classiﬁers automatically learn the differences between classes using a reduced number of time-series properties, and
circumvent the need to calculate distances between time series. Representing time series in this way results in orders
of magnitude of dimensionality reduction, allowing the method to perform well on very large datasets containing long
time series or time series of different lengths. For many of the datasets studied, classiﬁcation performance exceeded
that of conventional instance-based classiﬁers, including one nearest neighbor classiﬁers using Euclidean distances
and dynamic time warping and, most importantly, the features selected provide an understanding of the properties of
the dataset, insight that can guide further scientiﬁc investigation.
Index Terms
time-series analysis, classiﬁcation, data mining
I. INTRODUCTION
Time series, measurements of some quantity taken over time, are measured and analyzed across the scientiﬁc
disciplines, including human heart beats in medicine, cosmic rays in astrophysics, rates of inﬂation in economics,
air temperatures in climate science, and sets of ordinary differential equations in mathematics. The problem of
extracting useful information from time series has similarly been treated in a variety of ways, including an analysis
of the distribution, correlation structures, measures of entropy or complexity, stationarity estimates, ﬁts to various
linear and nonlinear time-series models, and quantities derived from the physical nonlinear time-series analysis
B. D. Fulcher is with the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK and the Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,
UK.

N. S. Jones is with the Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, UK.
May 12, 2014
DRAFT
arXiv:1401.3531v2  [cs.LG]  9 May 2014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
2
literature. However, this broad range of scientiﬁc methods for understanding the properties and dynamics of time
series has received less attention in the temporal data mining literature, which treats large databases of time series,
typically with the aim of either clustering or classifying the data [1]–[3]. Instead, the problem of time-series
clustering and classiﬁcation has conventionally been addressed by deﬁning a distance metric between time series
that involves comparing the sequential values directly. Using an extensive database of algorithms for measuring
thousands of different time-series properties (developed in previous work [4]), here we show that general feature-
based representations of time series can be used to tackle classiﬁcation problems in time-series data mining. The
approach is clearly important for many applications across the quantitative sciences where unprecedented amounts
of data are being generated and stored, and also for applications in industry (e.g., classifying anomalies on a
production line), ﬁnance (e.g., characterizing share price ﬂuctuations), business (e.g., detecting fraudulent credit
card transactions), surveillance (e.g., analyzing various sensor recordings), and medicine (e.g., diagnosing heart
beat recordings).
Two main challenges of time-series classiﬁcation are typically: (i) selecting an appropriate representation of the
time series, and (ii) selecting a suitable measure of dissimilarity or distance between time series [5]. The literature on
representations and distance measures for time-series clustering and classiﬁcation is extensive [1], [5], [6]. Perhaps
the most straightforward representation of a time series is its time-domain form, then distances between time series
relate to differences between the time-ordered measurements themselves. When short time series encode meaningful
patterns that need to be compared, new time series can be classiﬁed by matching them to similar instances of time
series with a known classiﬁcation. This type of problem has traditionally been the focus of the time series data mining
community [1], [5], and we refer to this approach as instance-based classiﬁcation. An alternative approach involves
representing time series using a set of derived properties, or features, and thereby transforming the temporal problem
to a static one [7]. A very simple example involves representing a time series using just its mean and variance,
thereby transforming time-series objects of any length into short vectors that encapsulate these two properties. Here
we introduce an automated method for producing such feature-based representations of time series using a large
database of time-series features. We note that not all methods ﬁt neatly into these two categories of instance-based
and feature-based classiﬁcation. For example, time-series shapelets [8], [9] classify new time series according to the
minimum distance of particular time-series subsequences (or ‘shapelets’) to that time series. Although this method
uses distances calculated in the time-domain as a basis for classiﬁcation (not features), new time series do not need
to be compared to a large number of training instances (as in instance-based classiﬁcation). In this paper we focus
on a comparison between instance-based classiﬁcation and our feature-based classiﬁers.
Feature-based representations of time series are used across science, but are typically applied to longer time
series corresponding to streams of data (such as extended medical or speech recordings) rather than the short
pattern-like time series typically studied in temporal data mining. Nevertheless, some feature-based representations
of shorter time series have been explored previously: for example, Nanopoulos et al. used the mean, standard
deviation, skewness, and kurtosis of the time series and its successive increments to represent and classify control
chart patterns [10], M¨orchen used features derived from wavelet and Fourier transforms of a range of time-series
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
3
datasets to classify them [11], Wang et al. introduced a set of thirteen features that contains measures of trend,
seasonality, periodicity, serial correlation, skewness, kurtosis, chaos, nonlinearity, and self-similarity to represent
time series [12], an approach that has since been extended to multivariate time series [13], and Deng et al. used
measures of mean, spread, and trend in local time-series intervals to classify different types of time series [14].
As with the choice of representations and distance metrics for time series, features for time-series classiﬁcation
problems are usually selected manually by a researcher for a given dataset. However, it is not obvious that the
features selected by a given researcher will be the best features with which to distinguish the known data classes—
perhaps simpler alternatives exist with better classiﬁcation performance? Furthermore, for many applications, the
mechanisms underlying the data are not well understood, making it difﬁcult to develop a well-motivated set of
features for classiﬁcation.
In this work, we automate the selection of features for time-series classiﬁcation by computing thousands of
features from across the scientiﬁc time-series analysis literature and then selecting those with the best performance.
The classiﬁer is thus selected according to the structure of the data rather than the methodological preference of the
researcher, with different features selected for different types of problems: e.g., we might discover that the variance
of time series distinguishes classes for one type of problem, but their entropy may be important for another. The
process is completely data-driven and does not require any knowledge of the dynamical mechanisms underlying the
time series or how they were measured. We describe our method as ‘highly comparative’ [4] and draw an analogy to
the DNA microarray, which compares large numbers of gene expression proﬁles simultaneously to determine those
genes that are most predictive of a target condition; here, we compare thousands of features to determine those
that are most suited to a given time-series classiﬁcation task. As well as producing useful classiﬁers, the features
selected in this way highlight the types of properties that are informative of the class structure in the dataset and
hence can provide new understanding.
II. DATA AND METHODS
Central to our approach is the ability to represent time series using a large and diverse set of their measured
properties. In this section, we describe how this representation is constructed and how it forms a basis for
classiﬁcation. In Sec. II-A, the datasets analyzed in this work are introduced. The feature-vector representation of
time series is then discussed in Sec. II-B, and the methodology used to perform feature selection and classiﬁcation
is described in Sec. II-C.
A. Data
The twenty datasets analyzed in this work are obtained from The UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation/Clustering
Homepage [15]. All datasets are of labeled, univariate time series and all time series in each dataset have the
same length. Note that this resource has since (late in 2011) been updated to include an additional twenty-ﬁve
datasets [16], which are not analyzed here. The datasets (which are listed in Tab. I and described in more detail in
Supplementary Table I), span a range of: (i) time-series lengths, N, from N = 60 for the Synthetic Control dataset,
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
4
compute distances between time series
A
Instance-based classiﬁcation
High throughput, feature-based classiﬁcation
i. Time series
ii. Extensive
feature vector
iii. Reduced
feature vector
for classiﬁcation
1000s features
selected features
selected features
1000s features
B
compare sets of extracted features
Fig. 1.
A visual comparison of two different approaches to comparing time series that form the basis for instance-based and feature-
based classiﬁcation. A Instance-based classiﬁcation involves measuring the distance between pairs of time series represented as an ordered
set of measurements in the time domain. In the upper portion of the plot, the two time series, x1 and x2, are offset vertically for clarity, but
are overlapping in the lower plot, where shading has been used to illustrate the distance between x1 and x2. B An alternative approach, that
forms the focus of this work, involves representing time series using a set of features that summarize their properties. Each time series, x, is
analyzed by computing a large number of time-series analysis algorithms, yielding an extensive set of features, f, that encapsulates a broad
range of its properties. Using the structure of a labeled training dataset, these features can then be ﬁltered to produce a reduced, feature-based
representation of the time series, ˜f, and a classiﬁcation rule learned on ˜f can then be used to classify new time series. In the ﬁgure, feature
vectors are normalized and represented using a grayscale color map, where black represents low values and white represents high values of a
given feature.
to N = 637 samples for Lightning (two); (ii) dataset sizes, from a number of training (ntrain) and test (ntest) time
series of ntrain = 28 and ntest = 28 for Coffee, to ntrain = 1 000 and ntest = 6 164 for Wafer; and (iii) number
of classes, nclasses, from nclasses = 2 for Gun point, to nclasses = 50 for 50 Words. The datasets are derived from
a broad range of systems: including measurements of a vacuum-chamber sensor during the etch process of silicon
wafer manufacture (Wafer [17]), spectrograms of different types of lightning strikes (Lightning [18]), the shapes of
Swedish leaves (Swedish Leaf [19]), and yoga poses (Yoga [20]). All the data is used exactly as obtained from the
UCR source [15], without any preprocessing and using the speciﬁed partitions of each dataset into training and test
portions. The sensitivity of our results to different such partitions is compared for all datasets in Supplementary
Table II; test set classiﬁcation rates are mostly similar to those for the given partitions. We present only results for
the speciﬁed partitions throughout the main text to aid comparison with other studies.
B. Feature vector representation
Feature-based representations of time series are constructed using an extensive database of over 9 000 time-
series analysis operations developed in previous work [4]. The operations quantify a wide range of time-series
properties, including basic statistics of the distribution of time-series values (e.g., location, spread, Gaussianity,
outlier properties), linear correlations (e.g., autocorrelations, features of the power spectrum), stationarity (e.g.,
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
5
StatAv, sliding window measures, prediction errors), information theoretic and entropy/complexity measures (e.g.,
auto-mutual information, Approximate Entropy, Lempel-Ziv complexity), methods from the physical nonlinear time-
series analysis literature (e.g., correlation dimension, Lyapunov exponent estimates, surrogate data analysis), linear
and nonlinear model ﬁts [e.g., goodness of ﬁt estimates and parameter values from autoregressive moving average
(ARMA), Gaussian Process, and generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models], and
others (e.g., wavelet methods, properties of networks derived from time series, etc.) [4]. All of these different types
of analysis methods are encoded algorithmically as operations. Each operation, ρ, is an algorithm that takes a time
series, x = (x1, x2, ..., xN), as input, and outputs a single real number, i.e., ρ : RN →R. We refer to the output
of an operation as a ‘feature’ throughout this work. All calculations are performed using Matlab 2011a (a product
of The MathWorks, Natick, MA). Although we use over 9 000 operations, many groups of operations result from
using different input parameters to the same type of time-series method (e.g., autocorrelations at different time
lags), making the number of conceptually-distinct operations signiﬁcantly smaller: approximately 1 000 according
to one estimate [4]. The Matlab code for all the operations used in this work can be explored and downloaded at
www.comp-engine.org/timeseries.
Differences between instance-based time-series classiﬁcation, where distances are calculated between the ordered
values of the time series, and feature-based time-series classiﬁcation, which learns a classiﬁer using a set of features
extracted from the time series, are illustrated in Fig. 1. Although the simplest ‘lock step’ distance measure [5]
is depicted in Fig. 1A, more complex choices, such as dynamic time warping (DTW) [21], can accommodate
unaligned patterns in the time series, for example [5]. The method proposed here is depicted in Fig. 1B, and
involves representing time series as extensive feature vectors, f, which can be used as a basis for selecting a
reduced number of informative features, ˜f, for classiﬁcation. Although we focus on classiﬁcation in this work, we
note that dimensionality reduction techniques, such as principal components analysis, can be applied to the full
feature vector, f, which can yield meaningful lower-dimensional representations of time-series datasets that can be
used for clustering, as demonstrated in previous work [4], and illustrated brieﬂy for the Swedish Leaf dataset in
Supplementary Fig. 1.
In some rare cases, an operation may output a ‘special value’, such as an inﬁnity or imaginary number, or it
may not be appropriate to apply it to a given time series, e.g., when a time series is too short, or when a positive-
only distribution is being ﬁt to data that is not positive. Indeed, many of the operations used here were designed
to measure complex structure in long time-series recordings, such as the physical nonlinear time-series analysis
literature and some information theoretic measures, that require many thousands of points to produce a robust
estimate of that feature, rather than the short time-series patterns of 100s of points or less analyzed here. In this
work, we ﬁltered out all operations that produced any special values on a dataset prior to performing any analysis.
After removing these operations, between 6 220 and 7 684 valid operations remained for the datasets studied here.
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
6
C. Feature selection and classiﬁcation
Feature selection is used to select a reduced set of features, ˜f = { ˜fi}, from a large initial set of thousands,
f = {fi}, with the aim of producing such a set, ˜f, that best contributes to distinguishing a known classiﬁcation of
the time series. Many methods have been developed for performing feature selection [22]–[24], including the Lasso
[25] and recursive feature elimination [26]. In this work we use a simple and interpretable method: greedy forward
feature selection, which grows a set of important features incrementally by optimizing the linear classiﬁcation rate
on the training data [27]. Although better performance could be achieved using more complex feature selection and
classiﬁcation methods, we value transparency over sophistication to demonstrate our approach here. The greedy
forward feature selection algorithm is as follows: (i) Using a given classiﬁer, the classiﬁcation rates of all individual
features, fi, are calculated and the feature with the highest classiﬁcation rate is selected as the ﬁrst feature in the
reduced set, ˜f1. (ii) The classiﬁcation rates of all features in combination with ˜f1 are calculated and the feature
that, in combination with ˜f1, produces a classiﬁer with the highest classiﬁcation rate is chosen next as ˜f2. (iii) The
procedure is repeated, choosing the operation that provides the greatest improvement in classiﬁcation rate at each
iteration until a termination criterion is reached, yielding a reduced set of m features: ˜f = { ˜f1, ˜f2, ..., ˜fm}. For
iterations at which multiple features produce equally good classiﬁcation rates, one of them is selected at random.
Feature selection is terminated at the point at which the improvement in the training set classiﬁcation rate upon
adding an additional feature drops below 3%, or when the training set misclassiﬁcation rate drops to 0% (after
which no further improvement is possible). Our results are not highly sensitive to setting this threshold at 3%; this
sensitivity is examined in Supplementary Fig. 3.
To determine the classiﬁcation rate of each feature (or combination of features), we use a linear discriminant
classiﬁer, implemented using the classify function from Matlab’s Statistics Toolbox, which ﬁts a multivariate normal
density to each class using a pooled estimate of covariance. Because the linear discriminant is so simple, over-
ﬁtting to the training set is not problematic, and we found that using 10-fold cross validation within the training
set produced similar overall results. Cross validation can also be difﬁcult to apply to some datasets studied here,
which can have as few as a single training example for a given class. For datasets with more than two classes,
linear classiﬁcation boundaries are constructed between all pairs of classes and new time series are classiﬁed by
evaluating all classiﬁcation rules and then assigning the new time series to the class with the most ‘votes’ from
this procedure.
The performance of our linear feature-based classiﬁer is compared to three different instance-based classiﬁers,
which are labeled as: (i) ‘Euclidean 1-NN’, a 1-NN classiﬁer using the Euclidean distance, (ii) ‘DTW 1-NN’, a
1-NN classiﬁer using a dynamic time warping distance, and (iii) ‘DTW 1-NN (best warping window, r)’, a 1-NN
classiﬁer using a dynamic time warping distance with a warping window learned using the Sakoe-Chiba Band (cf.
[28]). These results were obtained from The UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation/Clustering Homepage [15]. Results
using a 1-NN classiﬁer with Euclidean distances were veriﬁed by us and were consistent with the UCR source [15].
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
7
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
Training (100 time series)
Test (100 time series)
Test (100)
Training (100)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
‘Decrease-increase-decrease-increase’ motif frequency
A
B
C
D
Training (1000 time series)
Test (6164 time series)
Trace dataset
Wafer dataset
trev (τ = 3)
Fig. 2.
For some datasets, single extracted features separate the labeled classes accurately. In this way, the dimensionality of the problem
is vastly reduced: from the ordered set of N measurements that constitute each time series, to a single feature extracted from it. We show two
examples: A and B show the feature trev (τ = 3) for the Trace dataset, and C and D plot the proportion of local maxima in time series from
the Wafer dataset. The distribution of each feature across its range is shown for each of the labeled classes in the training (upper panels) and test
(lower panels) sets separately. The classes are plotted with different colors, and selected time series (indicated by purple circles) are annotated
to each distribution.
III. RESULTS
In this section, we demonstrate our highly comparative, feature-based approach to time-series classiﬁcation. In
Sec. III-A we illustrate the method using selected datasets, in Sec. III-B we compare the results to instance-based
classiﬁcation methods across all twenty datasets, and in Sec. III-C we discuss the computational complexity of our
method.
A. Selected datasets
For some datasets, we found that the ﬁrst selected feature (i.e., ˜f1, the feature with the lowest linear misclas-
siﬁcation rate on the training data) distinguished the labeled classes with high accuracy, corresponding to vast
dimensionality reduction: from representing time series using all N measured points, to just a single extracted
feature. Examples are shown in Fig. 2 for the Trace and Wafer datasets. The Trace dataset contains four classes of
transients relevant to the monitoring and control of industrial processes [29]. There are 25 features in our database
that can classify the training set without error, one of which is a time-reversal asymmetry statistic, trev(τ = 3),
where trev(τ) is deﬁned as
trev(τ) =
⟨(xt+τ −xt)3⟩
⟨(xt+τ −xt)2⟩3/2 ,
(1)
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
8
where xi are the values of the time series, τ is the time lag (τ = 3 for this feature), and averages, ⟨·⟩, are performed
across the time series [30]. This operation with τ = 3 produces distributions for the four classes of the Trace dataset
as shown in Figs. 2A and B for the training and test sets, respectively. Simple thresholds on this feature, learned
using a linear classiﬁer, allow new time series to be classiﬁed by evaluating Eq. (1). In this way, the test set of
Trace is classiﬁed with 99% accuracy, producing similar performance as DTW (which classiﬁes the test set without
error) but using just a single feature, and circumventing the need to compute distances between pairs of time series.
A second example is shown in Figs. 2C and 2D for the Wafer dataset, which contains measurements of various
sensors during the processing of silicon wafers for semiconductor fabrication that are either ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’
[17]. As can be seen from the annotations in Figs. 2C and 2D, each class of time series in this dataset is quite
heterogenous. However, the single feature selected for this dataset simply counts the frequency of the pattern
‘decrease-increase-decrease-increase’ in successive pairs of samples of a time series, expressed as a proportion of
the time-series length. A simple threshold learned on this feature classiﬁes the test set with an accuracy of 99.98%,
slightly higher than the best instance-based result of 99.5% for Euclidean 1-NN, but much more efﬁciently: using
a single extracted feature rather than comparing all 152 samples of each time series to ﬁnd matches in the training
set.
Feature-based classiﬁers constructed for most time-series datasets studied here combine multiple features. An
example is shown in Fig. 3 for the Synthetic Control dataset, which contains six classes of noisy control chart
patterns, each with distinctive dynamical properties: (i) ‘normal’ (dark green), (ii) ‘cyclic’ (orange), (iii) ‘increasing
trend’ (blue), (iv) ‘decreasing trend’ (pink), (v) ‘upward shift’ (light green), (vi) ‘downward shift’ (yellow) [31]. In
statistical process control, it is important to distinguish these patterns to detect potential problems with an observed
process. As shown in Fig. 3A for greedy forward feature selection, the misclassiﬁcation rate in both the training
and test sets drops sharply when a second feature is added to the classiﬁer, but plateaus as subsequent features are
added. The dataset is plotted in the space of these ﬁrst two selected features, ( ˜f1, ˜f2), in Fig. 3B. The ﬁrst feature,
˜f1, is named PH ForcePotential sine 10 004 10 median, and is plotted on the horizontal axis of Fig. 3B. This
feature behaves in a way that is analogous to performing a cumulative sum through time of the z-scored time series
(the cumulative sum, St, is deﬁned as St = Pt
i=1 xi), and then returning its median (i.e., the median of St for
t = 1, 2, ..., N)1. This feature takes high values for time series that have a decreasing trend (the cumulative sum
of the z-scored time series initially increases and then decreases back to zero), moderate values for time series
that are approximately mean-stationary (the cumulative sum of the z-scored time series oscillates about zero), and
low values for time series that have an increasing trend (the cumulative sum of the z-scored time series initially
decreases and then increases back to zero). As shown in Fig. 3B, this feature on its own distinguishes most of
the classes well, but confuses the two classes without an underlying trend: the uncorrelated random number series,
1In fact, this operation treats the time series as a drive to a particle in a sinusoidal potential and outputs the median values of the particle
across its trajectory. However, the parameter values for this operation are such that the force from the potential is so much lower than that of
the input drive from the time series that the effect of the sinusoidal potential can be neglected and the result is, to a very good approximation,
identical to taking a cumulative sum.
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
9
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
 
 
t: 1-NN DTW with
best warping window
t: 1-NN DTW
t: 1-NN Euclidean
test
training
Number of features selected
Test set linear misclassification rate (%)
−4000
−2000
0
2000
4000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Feature 1: Measure of trend direction (14.7%, 15.7%)
Feature 2: measure of low-mid frequency power (51.7%, 52.3%)
 
 
B
A
Fig. 3.
Feature selection for the Synthetic Control dataset. A The training and test set misclassiﬁcation rates as a function of the number
of selected features. Our feature selection method terminates after two features (shown boxed) because the subsequent improvement in training
set classiﬁcation rate from adding another feature is less than 3%. Misclassiﬁcation rates for instance-based classiﬁers are shown as horizontal
lines for comparison (cf. Sec. II-C). B The training (circles) and test (squares) data are plotted in the space of the two features selected in A
(shown boxed), which are described in the main text. The test set misclassiﬁcation rate of each individual feature is indicated in parentheses
in the form (training, test). The labeled classes: ‘normal’ (dark green), ‘cyclic’ (orange), ‘increasing trend’ (blue), ‘decreasing trend’ (pink),
‘upward shift’ (light green), and ‘downward shift’ (yellow), are well separated in this space. A selected time series from each class has been
annotated to the plot and background shading has been added manually to guide the eye.
‘normal’ (green), and the noisy oscillatory time series, ‘cyclic’ (orange). The second selected feature, ˜f2, named
SP basic pgram hamm power q90mel, is on the vertical axis of Fig. 3B and measures the mel-frequency at
which the cumulative power spectrum (obtained as a periodogram using a Hamming window) reaches 90% of its
maximum value2. This feature gives low values to the cyclic time series (orange) that have more low-frequency
power, and high values to the uncorrelated time series (dark green). Even though this feature alone exhibits poor
classiﬁcation performance (a misclassiﬁcation rate of 52.3% on the test data), it compensates for the weakness
of the ﬁrst feature, which confuses these two classes. These two features are selected automatically and thus
complement one another in a way that facilitates accurate classiﬁcation of this dataset. Although DTW is more
accurate at classifying this dataset (cf. Fig. 3A), this example demonstrates how selected features can provide an
understanding of how the classiﬁer uses interpretable time-series properties to distinguish the classes of a dataset
(see Supplementary Fig. 2 for an additional example using the Two Patterns dataset). Furthermore, our results follow
dimensionality reduction from 60-sample time series down to two simple extracted features, allowing the classiﬁer
2The ‘mel scale’ is a monotonic transformation of frequency, ω, as 1127 log(ω/(1400π) + 1).
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
10
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
10
20
30
40
50
Test set linear misclassification rate (%)
 
 
1-NN DTW with best warping window
1-NN DTW
1-NN Euclidean
test
training
Number of features selected
Fig. 4.
Feature selection for the OSU Leaf dataset. Training and test set misclassiﬁcation rates are plotted as a function of the number
of features learned using greedy forward feature selection. Misclassiﬁcation rates for three instance-based 1-NN classiﬁers are shown using
horizontal lines for comparison. The number of features in the classiﬁer is chosen at the point the improvement in classiﬁcation rate on adding
another feature drops below 3%, which is ﬁve features for this dataset (shown with a gray rectangle).
to be applied efﬁciently to massive databases and to very long time series (cf. Sec. III-C).
For many datasets, such as the six-class OSU Leaf dataset [32], the classiﬁcation accuracy is improved by
including more than two features, as shown in Fig. 4. The classiﬁcation rates of all three 1-NN instance-based
classiﬁers (horizontal lines labeled in Fig. 4) are exceeded by the linear feature-based classiﬁer with just two features.
The classiﬁcation performance improves further when more features are added, down to a test set misclassiﬁcation
rate of just 9% with eleven features (the test set classiﬁcation rate plateaus as more features are added while the
training set classiﬁcation rate slowly improves, indicating a modest level of over-ﬁtting beyond this point). The
improvement in training-set misclassiﬁcation rate from adding an additional feature drops below 3% after selecting
ﬁve features, yielding a test set misclassiﬁcation rate of 16.5% (shown boxed in Fig. 4), outperforming all instance-
based classiﬁers by a large margin despite dimensionality reduction from 427-sample time series to ﬁve extracted
features.
B. All results
Having provided some intuition for our method using speciﬁc datasets as examples, we now present results for
all twenty time-series datasets from The UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation/Clustering Homepage (as of mid-2011)
[15]. For these datasets of short patterns whose values through time can be used as the basis of computing a
meaningful measure of distance between them, DTW has been shown to set a high benchmark for classiﬁcation
performance [33]. However, as shown above, it is possible for feature-based classiﬁers to outperform instance-based
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
11
classiﬁers despite orders of magnitude of dimensionality reduction. Results for all datasets are shown in Table I,
including test set misclassiﬁcation rates for three instance-based classiﬁers and for our linear feature-based classiﬁer.
The ﬁnal two columns of Table I demonstrate extensive dimensionality reduction using features for all datasets,
using an average of nfeat = 3.2 features to represent time series containing an average of N = 282.1 samples. A
direct comparison of 1-NN DTW with our linear feature-based classiﬁer is shown in Fig. 5 for all datasets. Both
methods yield broadly similar classiﬁcation results for most datasets, but some datasets exhibit large improvements
in classiﬁcation rate using one method over the other. Note that results showing the variation across different
training/test partitions (retaining training/test proportions) are shown in Supplementary Table II for Euclidean 1-NN
and our linear feature-based classiﬁer; results are mostly similar as shown here for ﬁxed partitions. Across all
datasets, a wide range of time-series features were selected for classiﬁcation, including measures of autocorrelation
and automutual information, motifs in symbolized versions of time series, spectral properties, entropies, measures
of stationarity, outlier properties, scaling behavior, and others. Names of all features selected for each dataset, along
with their Matlab code names, are provided in Supplementary Table III.
As with all approaches to classiﬁcation, a feature-based approach is better suited to some datasets than others
[34]. Indeed, we found that feature-based classiﬁers outperform instance-based alternatives on a number of datasets,
and sometimes by a large margin. For example, in the ECG dataset, the feature-based classiﬁer yields a test set
misclassiﬁcation rate of 1.0% using just a single extracted feature, whereas the best instance-based classiﬁers
(Euclidean 1-NN and DTW 1-NN using the best warping window) have a misclassiﬁcation rate of 12.0%. In the
Coffee dataset, the test set is classiﬁed without error using a single extracted feature, whereas the best instance-
based classiﬁers (both using DTW) have a misclassiﬁcation rate of 17.9%. In other cases, instance-based approaches
(including even the straightforward Euclidean 1-NN classiﬁer) performed better. For example, the 50 Words dataset
has a large number of classes (ﬁfty) and a large heterogeneity in training set size (from as low as 1 to 52 training
examples in a given class), for which matching to a nearest neighbor using instance-based methods outperforms
the linear feature-based classiﬁer. The Face (four) dataset also has relatively few, quite heterogenous, and class-
unbalanced training examples, making it difﬁcult to select features that best capture the class differences; instance-
based methods also outperform our feature-based approach on this dataset. The ability of DTW to adapt on a pairwise
basis to match each test time series to a similar training time series can be particularly powerful mechanism for some
datasets, and is unavailable to a static, feature-based classiﬁer, which does not have access to the training data once
the classiﬁer has been trained. This mechanism is seen to be particularly important for the Lightning (seven) dataset,
which contains heterogenous classes with unaligned patterns—DTW performs well here (misclassiﬁcation rate of
27.2%), while 1-NN Euclidean distance and feature-based classiﬁers perform worse, with misclassiﬁcation rates
exceeding 40%. Our feature-based classiﬁers are trained to optimize the classiﬁcation rate in the training set, and thus
assume similar class proportions in the test set, which is often not the case; by simply matching instances of time
series to the training set, discrepancies between class ratios in training and test sets are less problematic for instance-
based classiﬁcation. This may be a contributing factor to the poor performance of feature-based classiﬁcation for the
50 Words, Lightning (seven), Face (four) and Face (all) datasets. A feature-based representation also struggles when
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
12
TABLE I
MISCLASSIFICATION RATES FOR CLASSIFIERS APPLIED TO ALL TWENTY TIME-SERIES DATASETS ANALYZED IN THIS WORK.
RESULTS ARE SHOWN FOR THREE INSTANCE-BASED 1-NN CLASSIFIERS, AND OUR LINEAR FEATURE-BASED CLASSIFIER, LABELED
‘FEATURE-BASED LINEAR’, IN WHICH TIME SERIES ARE REPRESENTED USING A SET OF EXTRACTED FEATURES, TRAINED BY GREEDY
FORWARD FEATURE SELECTION USING A LINEAR CLASSIFIER FROM A DATABASE CONTAINING THOUSANDS OF FEATURES. ALL
PERCENTAGES IN THE TABLE ARE TEST SET MISCLASSIFICATION RATES. RESULTS USING DYNAMIC TIME WARPING (DTW) WERE
OBTAINED FROM The UCR Time Series Classiﬁcation/Clustering Homepage [15]. ‘WARPING WINDOW’ HAS BEEN ABBREVIATED AS ‘WW’
IN THE THIRD COLUMN, AND THE PARAMETER r IS EXPRESSED AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE TIME-SERIES LENGTH. THE CLASSIFIER WITH
THE LOWEST MISCLASSIFICATION RATE FOR EACH DATASET IS PRINTED IN BOLDFACE. THE FINAL TWO COLUMNS LIST THE NUMBER OF
SAMPLES, N, IN EACH TIME SERIES IN THE DATASET, THAT ARE USED IN INSTANCE-BASED CLASSIFICATION, COMPARED TO THE NUMBER
OF FEATURES, nfeat, CHOSEN FROM FEATURE SELECTION. THE DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION FROM USING FEATURE SELECTION IS
LARGE, WHILE CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE IS OFTEN COMPARABLE OR SUPERIOR (CF. FIG. 5). NOTE THAT RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT
TRAINING/TEST PARTITIONS OF THE DATASETS ARE MOSTLY SIMILAR TO THOSE SHOWN HERE, AND ARE IN SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE II.
Dataset
Euclidean
DTW
DTW 1-NN
Feature-based,
N (samples)
nfeat
1-NN (%)
1-NN (%)
best WW [r] (%)
linear (%)
Synthetic Control
12.0
0.7
1.7 [6]
3.7
60
2
Gun point
8.7
9.3
8.7 [0]
7.3
150
2
CBF
14.8
0.3
0.4 [11]
28.9
128
2
Face (all)
28.6
19.2
19.2 [3]
29.2
131
5
OSU Leaf
48.3
40.9
38.4 [7]
16.5
427
5
Swedish Leaf
21.1
21.0
15.7 [2]
22.7
128
5
50 Words
36.9
31.0
24.2 [6]
45.3
270
7
Trace
24.0
0.0
1.0 [3]
1.0
275
1
Two Patterns
9.3
0.0
0.2 [4]
7.4
128
2
Wafer
0.5
2.0
0.5 [1]
0.0
152
1
Face (four)
21.6
17.0
11.4 [2]
26.1
350
3
Lightning (two)
24.6
13.1
13.1 [6]
19.7
637
2
Lightning (seven)
42.5
27.4
28.8 [5]
43.8
319
4
ECG
12.0
23.0
12.0 [0]
1.0
96
1
Adiac
38.9
39.6
39.1 [3]
35.5
176
5
Yoga
17.0
16.4
15.5 [2]
22.6
426
3
Fish
21.7
16.7
16.0 [4]
17.1
463
6
Beef
46.7
50.0
46.7 [0]
43.3
470
5
Coffee
25.0
17.9
17.9 [3]
0.0
286
1
Olive Oil
13.3
13.3
16.7 [1]
10.0
570
2
only a small number of heterogenous training examples are available, as with the 50 Words, Lightning (seven),
and CBF datasets. In this case it can be difﬁcult to select features that represent differences within a class as ‘the
same’, and simultaneously capture differences between classes as ‘different’. Although we demonstrate improved
performance on the Adiac dataset, with a misclassiﬁcation rate of 35.5%, this remains high. We note that the
properties of this dataset provide multiple challenges for our method, that may also contribute to its difﬁculty with
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
13
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
Synthetic Control
Gun Point
CBF
Face (all)
OSU Leaf
Swedish Leaf
50 Words
Trace
Two Patterns
Wafer
Face (four)
Lighting (two)
Lighting
(seven)
ECG
Adiac
Yoga
Fish
Beef
Coffee
Olive Oil
1-NN DTW: test set misclassification rate (%)
Feature-based linear classifier: test set misclassification rate (%)
DTW performs
better
Features
perform better
Fig. 5.
Test-set misclassiﬁcation rates of a 1-NN DTW instance-based classiﬁer compared to a feature-based linear classiﬁer. The
dotted line indicates the threshold between better performance using features (datasets labeled orange) and using DTW (datasets labeled green).
Feature-based classiﬁcation uses an average of nfeat = 3.2 features compared to an average of N = 282.1 samples that make up each time
series (see Table I).
instance-based approaches, including a small number and large variation in the number of examples in the training
set (between 5 and 15 examples per class), a negative correlation between training set size and test set size (where
our method assumes the same class proportions in the test set), and a large number of classes (37), which are
relatively heterogenous within a given class, and visually quite similar between classes.
Despite some of the challenges of feature-based classiﬁcation, representing time series using extracted features
brings additional beneﬁts, including vast dimensionality reduction and, perhaps most importantly, interpretable
insights into the differences between the labeled classes (as demonstrated in Sec. III-A). This ability to learn
about the properties and mechanisms underlying class differences in the time series in some sense corresponds
to the ‘ultimate goal of knowledge discovery’ [11], and provides a strong motivation for pursuing a feature-based
representation of time-series datasets where appropriate.
C. Computational complexity
In this section, the computational effort required to classify time series using extracted features is compared to
that of instance-based approaches. Calculating the Euclidean distance between two time series has a time complexity
of O(N), where N is the length of each time series (which must be constant). The distance calculation for dynamic
time warping (DTW) has a time complexity of O(N 2) in general, or O(Nw) using a warping window, where w
is the warping window size [5]. Classifying a new time series using a 1-NN classiﬁer and sequential search (i.e.,
sequentially calculating distances between a new time series and all time series in the training set) therefore has a
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
14
time complexity of O(Nntrain) for Euclidean distances and either O(N 2ntrain) or O(Nwntrain) for DTW, where
ntrain is the number of time series in the training set [5]. Although the amortized time complexity of the distance
calculation can be improved using lower bounds [1], [5], [35], and speedups can be obtained using indexing [36]–
[38] or time-domain dimensionality reduction [39], the need to calculate many distances between pairs of time
series is fundamental to instance-based classiﬁcation, such that scaling with the time-series length, N, and the size
of the training set, ntrain, is inevitable. While the use of shapelets [8], [9] addresses some of these issues, here we
avoid comparisons in the time domain completely and instead classify time series using a static representation in
terms of extracted features. Time-domain classiﬁcation can therefore become computationally prohibitive for long
time series and/or very large datasets.
In contrast to instance-based classiﬁers, the bulk of the computational burden for our feature-based method is
associated with learning a classiﬁcation rule on the training data, which involves the computation of thousands of
features for each training time series, which can be lengthy. However, this is a one-off computational cost: once
the classiﬁer has been trained, new time series are classiﬁed quickly and independent of the training data. For most
cases in this work, selected features correspond to simple algorithms with a time complexity that scales linearly
with the time series length, as O(N). The classiﬁcation of a new time series then involves simply computing nfeat
features, and then evaluating the linear classiﬁcation rule. Hence, if all features have time complexities that scale as
O(N), the total time complexity of classifying a new time series scales as O(Nnfeat) if the features are calculated
serially (we note, of course, that calculating each of the nfeat features can be trivially distributed). This result is
independent of the size of the training dataset and, importantly, the classiﬁcation process does not require any
training data to be loaded into memory, which can be a major limitation for instance-based classiﬁcation of large
datasets.
Having outlined the computational steps involved in feature-based classiﬁcation, we now describe the actual time
taken to perform classiﬁcation using speciﬁc examples. First we show that even though the methods used in this
work were applied to relatively short time series (of lengths between 60 and 637 samples), they are also applicable to
time series that are orders of magnitude longer (indeed many operations are tailored to capturing complex dynamics
in long time-series recordings). For example, the features selected for the Trace and Wafer datasets shown in Fig. 2
were applied to time series of different lengths, as plotted in Fig. 6. Note that the following is for demonstration
purposes only: these algorithms were implemented directly in Matlab and run on a normal desktop PC with no
attempt to optimize performance. The ﬁgure shows that both of these operations have a time complexity that scales
approximately linearly with the time-series length, as O(N). Feature-based classiﬁcation is evidently applicable to
time series that are many orders of magnitude longer than short time-series patterns (as demonstrated in previous
work [4])—in this case a 100 000-sample time series is converted to a single feature: either trev(τ = 3), or the
decrease-increase-decrease-increase motif frequency, in under 5 ms. Note that although simple O(N) operations
tended to be selected for many of the datasets studied in this work, other more sophisticated operations (those
based on nonlinear model ﬁts, for example) have computational time complexities that scale nonlinearly with the
time-series length, N. The time complexity of any particular classiﬁer thus depends on the features selected in
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
15
general (however, in future computational constraints could be placed on the set of features searched across, e.g.,
restricting the search to features that scaled linearly as O(N), as discussed in Sec IV).
Next we outline the sequence of calculations involved in classifying the Wafer dataset as a case study. We
emphasize that in this paper, we are not concerned with optimizing the one-off cost of training a classiﬁer and
simply calculated the full set of 9 288 features on each training dataset, despite high levels of redundancy in this
set of features [4] and the inclusion of thousands of nonlinear methods designed for long streams of time-series
data. In future, calculating a reduced set (of say 50 features) could reduce the training computation times reported
here by orders of magnitude. The calculation of this full set of 9 288 features on a (152-sample) time series from
the Wafer dataset took an average of approximately 31 s. Performing these calculations serially for this very large
training set with ntrain = 1 000, this amounts to a total calculation time of 8.6 hours. This is the longest training
time of any dataset studied here due to a large number of training examples; other datasets had as few as 24 training
examples, with a total training time under 15 min. Furthermore, all calculations are independent of one another and
can be trivially distributed; for example, with as many nodes as training time series, the total computation is the
same as for a single time series, ∼30 s in this case (or, furthermore, with as many nodes as time series/operation
pairs, the total computation time is equal to that of the slowest single operation operating on any single time series,
reducing the computation time further). For the Wafer dataset, feature selection took 6 s, which produced a (training
set) misclassiﬁcation rate of 0% and terminated the feature selection process. Although just a single feature was
selected here, more features are selected in general, which take ∼6–10 s per feature to select. It then took a total
of 32.5 s to load all 6 164 test time series into memory, a total of 0.1 s to calculate the selected feature and evaluate
the linear classiﬁcation rule on all time series on a basic desktop PC. The result classiﬁed 6 163 of the 6 164, or
99.98%, of the test time series correctly.
In summary, the bulk of the computational burden of our highly comparative feature-based classiﬁcation involves
the calculation of thousands of features on the training data (which could be heavily optimized in future work).
Although instance-based methods match new time series to training instances and do not require such computational
effort to train, the investment involved in training a feature-based classiﬁcation rule allows new time series to be
classiﬁed rapidly and independent of the training data. The classiﬁcation of a new time series simply involves
extracting feature(s) and evaluating a linear classiﬁcation rule, which is very fast (≈3×10−8 s per time series
for the Wafer example above), and limited by the loading of data into memory (≈5×10−3 s per time series
for the Wafer dataset). In general, calculation times will depend on the time-series length, N, the number of
features selected during the feature selection process, nfeat, and the computational time complexity of those selected
features. Performing feature-based classiﬁcation in this way is thus suited to applications that value fast, real-time
classiﬁcation of new time series and can accommodate the relatively lengthy training process (or where sufﬁcient
distributed computational power is available to speed up the training process). There are clear applications to
industry, where measured time series need to be checked in real time on a production line, for quality control, or
the rapid classiﬁcation of large quantities of medical samples, for example.
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
16
0
200 000
400 000
600 000
800 000
1 000 000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Calculation time (s)
Time series length, N (samples)
 
 
trev(τ=3)
down-up-down-up
motif frequency
Fig. 6.
Scaling of two features with time-series length, N. The features are those selected for (i) the Trace dataset: trev(τ = 3), and (ii)
the Wafer dataset: the normalized frequency of the decrease-increase-decrease-increase motif (labeled ‘down-up-down-up motif frequency’ in
the plot), cf. Fig. 2. Both operations have a time complexity that scales approximately linearly with the time-series length, N. Calculation times
were evaluated on Gaussian-distributed white noise time series and each point represents the average of 100 repeats of the calculation on a
basic desktop PC, along with a standard deviation either side of the mean. Unlike instance-based classiﬁcation that requires the calculation of
distances between many pairs of time series, this feature-based approach can be applied to much longer time series, where the time taken to
reduce a time series of 100 000 samples, for example, to one of these relevant features, is of the order of milliseconds.
IV. DISCUSSION
In summary, we have introduced a highly comparative method for learning feature-based classiﬁers for time
series. Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) Previous attempts at feature-based time-series classiﬁcation in the data mining literature have reported small sets
of (∼10 or fewer) manually selected or generic time-series features. Here, for the ﬁrst time, we apply a diverse
set of thousands of time-series features and introduce a method that compares across these features to construct
feature-based classiﬁers automatically.
(ii) Features selected for the datasets studied here included measures of outlier properties, entropy measures,
local motif frequencies, and autocorrelation-based statistics. These features provide interpretable insights into the
properties of time series that differ between labeled classes of a dataset.
(iii) Of the twenty UCR time-series datasets studied here, feature-based classiﬁers used an average of 3.2 features
compared to an average time-series length of 282.1 samples, representing two orders of magnitude of dimensionality
reduction.
(iv) Despite dramatic dimensionality reduction and an inability to compare and match similar patterns through time,
our feature-based representations of time series produced good classiﬁcation performance that was in many cases
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
17
superior to DTW, and in some cases by a large margin.
(v) Unlike instance-based classiﬁcation, the training of a feature-based classiﬁer incurs a signiﬁcant computational
expense. However, this one-off cost allows new time series to be classiﬁed extremely rapidly and independent of the
training set. Furthermore, there is much scope for optimizing this training cost in future by exploiting redundancy
in our massive feature set.
To introduce the highly comparative approach, we have favored the interpretability of feature selection and
classiﬁcation methods over their sophistication. Feature selection was achieved using greedy forward selection, and
classiﬁcation was done using linear discriminant classiﬁers. Many more sophisticated feature selection [22]–[24]
and classiﬁcation [27] methods exist (e.g., that allow for more robust and/or nonlinear classiﬁcation boundaries) and
should improve the classiﬁcation results presented here. This ﬂexibility to incorporate a large and growing literature
of sophisticated classiﬁers operating on feature vectors, including decision trees and support vector machines or even
k-NN applied in a feature space, is a key beneﬁt of our approach [27]. Considering combinations of features that are
not necessarily the result of a greedy selection process (e.g., classiﬁers that combine features with poor individual
performance have been shown to be very powerful on some datasets [23]), should also improve classiﬁcation
performance. However, we note that complex classiﬁers may be prone to over-ﬁtting the training data and thus may
require cross-validation on the training data to reduce the in-sample bias. However, cross-validation is problematic
for some of the datasets examined here that have small numbers of training examples (as low as just a single
training example for a class in the 50 Words dataset). We used the total classiﬁcation rate as a cost function
for greedy forward feature selection to aid comparison to other studies, even though many datasets have unequal
numbers of time series in each class and different class proportions in the training and test sets, thus focusing
the performance of classiﬁers towards those classes containing the greatest number of time series. In future, more
subtle cost functions could be investigated, that optimize the mean classiﬁcation rate across classes, for example,
rather than the total number of correct classiﬁcations. In summary, the simple classiﬁcation and feature selection
methods used here were chosen to demonstrate our approach as clearly as possible and produce easily-interpretable
results; more sophisticated methods could be investigated in future to optimize classiﬁcation accuracies for real
applications.
Because we used thousands of features developed across many different scientiﬁc disciplines, many sets of
features are highly correlated to one another [4]. Greedy forward feature selection chooses features incrementally
based on their ability to increase classiﬁcation performance, so if a feature is selected at the ﬁrst iteration, a highly
correlated feature is unlikely to increase the classiﬁcation rate further. Thus, the non-independence of features
does not affect our ability to build successful feature-based classiﬁers in this way. However, strong dependencies
between operations can mean that features selected using different partitions of the data into training and testing
portions can be different (or even for the same partition when two or more features yield the same classiﬁcation
rate and are selected at random). For homogenous datasets, features that differ for different data partitions are
typically slight variants of one another; for example, the second feature selected for the Synthetic Control dataset
(cf. Sec. III-A) is a summary of the power spectrum for some partitions and an autocorrelation-based measure
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
18
for others—both features measure aspects of the linear correlation present in the time series and thus contribute
a similar understanding of the time series properties that are important for classiﬁcation. The selection of either
feature yields similar performance on the unseen data partition. We also note that this redundancy in the feature
set could be exploited in future to produce a powerful reduced set of approximately independent, computationally
inexpensive, and interpretable features with which to learn feature-based classiﬁers for time series. Future work
could also focus on adding new types of features found to be useful for time-series classiﬁcation (or comparing
them to our implementation of existing methods, cf. [4]), as our ability to construct useful feature-based time-series
classiﬁers is limited by those features contained in our library of features, which is currently comprehensive but far
from exhaustive. Together, these reﬁnements of the feature set could dramatically speed up the computation times
reported here, improve the interpretability of selected features, and increase classiﬁcation performance.
Many features in our database are designed for long, stationary streams of recorded data and yet here we apply
them to short and often non-stationary time series. For example, estimating the correlation dimension of a time-
delay embedded time series requires extremely long and precise recordings of a system [40]. Although the output
of a correlation dimension estimate on a 60-sample time series will not be a robust nor meaningful estimate
of the correlation dimension, it is nevertheless the result of an algorithm operating on a time series and may
still contain some useful information about its structure. Regardless of the conventional meaning of a time-series
analysis method therefore, our approach judges features according to their demonstrated usefulness in classifying
a dataset. Appropriate care must therefore be taken in the interpretation of features should they prove to be useful
for classifying a given dataset.
Although feature-based and instance-based approaches to time-series classiﬁcation have been presented as op-
posing methodologies here, future work could link them together. For example, Batista et al. [41] used a simple
new feature claimed to resemble ‘complexity’, to rescale conventional Euclidean distances calculated between time
series, demonstrating an improvement in classiﬁcation accuracy. Rather than using this speciﬁc, manually-selected
feature, our highly comparative approach could be used to ﬁnd informative but computationally inexpensive features
to optimally rescale traditional Euclidean distances.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In 1993, Timmer et al. [42] wrote: “The crucial problem is not the classiﬁcator function (linear or nonlinear), but
the selection of well-discriminating features. In addition, the features should contribute to an understanding [...].” In
this work, we applied an unprecedented diversity of scientiﬁc time-series analysis methods to a set of classiﬁcation
problems in the temporal data mining literature and showed that successful classiﬁers can be produced in a way that
contributes an understanding of the differences in properties between the labeled classes of time series. Although the
datasets studied here are well suited to instance-based classiﬁcation, we showed that a highly comparative method for
constructing feature-based representations of time series can yield competitive classiﬁers despite vast dimensionality
reduction. Relevant features and classiﬁcation rules are learned automatically from the labeled structure in the dataset,
without requiring any domain knowledge about how the data were generated or measured, allowing classiﬁers to
May 12, 2014
DRAFT

IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING
19
adapt to the data, rather than attempting to develop classiﬁers that work ‘best’ on generic datasets. Although the
computation of thousands of features can be intensive (if not distributed), once the features have been selected and
the classiﬁcation rule has been learned, the classiﬁcation of new time series is rapid and can outperform instance-
based classiﬁcation. The approach can be applied straightforwardly to time series of variable length, and to time
series that are many orders of magnitude longer than those studied here. Perhaps most importantly, the results
provide an understanding of the key differences in properties between different classes of time series, insights that
can guide further scientiﬁc investigation. The code for generating the features used in this work is freely available
at http://www.comp-engine.org/timeseries/.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Sumeet Agarwal for helpful feedback on the manuscript.
