A Deep Q-Learning based Smart Scheduling of EVs for De-
mand Response in Smart Grids 
Viorica Rozina Chifu, Tudor Cioara*, Cristina Bianca Pop, Horia Rusu and Ionut Anghel  
Computer Science Department, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Memorandumului 28,  

Abstract: Economic and policy factors are driving the continuous increase in the adoption and usage 
of electrical vehicles (EVs). However, despite being a cleaner alternative to combustion engine ve-
hicles, EVs have negative impacts on the lifespan of microgrid equipment and energy balance due 
to increased power demand and the timing of their usage. In our view grid management should 
leverage on EVs scheduling flexibility to support local network balancing through active participa-
tion in demand response programs. In this paper, we propose a model-free solution, leveraging 
Deep Q-Learning to schedule the charging and discharging activities of EVs within a microgrid to 
align with a target energy profile provided by the distribution system operator. We adapted the 
Bellman Equation to assess the value of a state based on specific rewards for EV scheduling actions 
and used a neural network to estimate Q-values for available actions and the epsilon-greedy algo-
rithm to balance exploitation and exploration to meet the target energy profile. The results are prom-
ising showing that the proposed solution can effectively schedule the EVs charging and discharging 
actions to align with the target profile with a Person coefficient of 0.99, handling effective EVs sched-
uling situations that involve dynamicity given by the e-mobility features, relying only on data with 
no knowledge of EVs and microgrid dynamics. 
Keywords: Deep Q-Learning; EVs scheduling; Vehicle to Grid; Demand Response; Reinforcement 
Learning; Model Free Optimization. 
 
1. Introduction 
The ongoing transition towards various economic sectors' decarbonization enables 
fossil energy supply substitution with renewable energy. However, the rapid adoption of 
small-scale renewable at the edge of the grid makes the smart grid management process 
more complex and exposed to uncertainty related to renewable production [1, 2]. The dig-
itization and decentralization principles bring to the forefront the energy demand flexi-
bility as a key support to accommodate high shares of variable renewable energy [3, 4]. 
Leveraging local flexibility is possible to maintain a balance between supply and demand 
at lower costs using the energy assets of the citizens rather than the ones owned by the 
grid operator that are more expensive to operate [5-7].   
The challenges are even more evident and difficult to tackle in the context of the in-
creased adoption of electrical vehicles (EVs) [8]. In that respect grid management should 
closely cooperate and interact within a low latency context with EVs coordination and 
aggregation services to procure their energy scheduling flexibility to support local net-
work balancing or to achieve self-sufficiency [9, 10]. However, EVs usage has several 
shortcomings such as the limited battery range, relatively short battery lifespan, averaging 
10-20 years or up to 150,000 miles, and the lack of existing infrastructure for charging 
electric vehicles. Other major issues refer to the impact of EVs on the power grid, encom-
passing factors such as the rise in short-circuit currents, deviations in voltage levels be-
yond standard limits, and the potential impact on the lifespan of equipment due to in-
creased power demand [11]. Studies have shown that fully charging an electric vehicle 

 
2 of 16 
 
uses the same energy needed to power a home during peak energy use times and nowa-
days the energy grid cannot deal with a major or sudden spike in EVs usage [12]. Moreo-
ver, it is not only a problem related to the quantity of electricity consumed by EVs but also 
the timing of their usage [13]. If many electric vehicles were to be charged in the evening, 
the grid could experience significant strain, potentially leading to blackouts.  
To address the challenges of EVs coordination for smart grid management, solutions 
are being proposed to convince people to change their behavior [14]. Dynamic traffic for 
electricity is well discussed in the literature as a solution to move the charging schedules 
of EVs to moments of the day with extra solar energy [15]. However, it still faces open 
challenges related to the complexity of the pricing structure that involves hourly or time-
of-use rates, making EV owners reluctant to engage in or the fact that requires EV owners 
to adapt their behavior based on fluctuating electricity prices [16]. Other solutions are lev-
eraging on the setup of Demand Response (DR) programs for EVs aiming to manage and 
modify their charging or discharging patterns based on grid conditions [17]. However, 
this presents a major challenge: the need to balance energy production and consumption 
in the face of intermittent and non-programmable energy sources which are strongly in-
fluenced by atmospheric conditions, making it difficult to predict [2]. Many existing state-
of-the-art approaches consider the EVs participation in DR as a model-based constraint 
satisfaction problem [18]. They achieve good results; however, their main drawbacks are 
related to the model’s assumptions and structure, which need to be continuously updated 
to meet the actual conditions [19]. Moreover, the model solving is computationally com-
plex, being less suitable for large-scale dynamic features involved in EVs scheduling [20]. 
In this paper, we address the limitations by proposing a model-free solution for EVs 
participation in DR programs, leveraging Deep Q-Learning. Our objective is to schedule 
the charging and discharging activities of EVs within a microgrid to align with a target 
energy profile provided by the distribution system operator for a specific interval. The 
Deep Q-Learning solution determines optimal EV scheduling actions based only on the 
current state, which is represented by the state of charge of EVs and the availability of 
charging stations in the microgrid. We have adapted the Bellman Equation that plays a 
crucial role in assessing the value of a specific state considering specific rewards for EV 
scheduling actions and Q-values to evaluate the effectiveness of each action. The method-
ology typically involves the estimation of Q-values for available EVs scheduling actions 
and then the selection of the actions with the highest reward. Traditionally, the Q-function 
is implemented as a look-up table, updated after each transition. However, in dynamic 
scenarios with a multitude of complex states, rendering a table insufficient, thus we opt 
for representing the Q-function using a neural network the input variables signify the 
state, and the output provides the Q-value for every possible action. For action selection, 
we have employed the epsilon-greedy algorithm to balance the exploitation of the current 
best action or explore new possibilities for EVs scheduling to meet the target DR energy 
profile. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature on EVs 
scheduling and coordination solutions; Section 3 presents our Deep Q-Learning solution 
for EVs participation in DR programs; Section 4 provides experimental validation, demon-
strating the approach's effectiveness in meeting target energy profiles and evaluating the 
quality of the learned EVs scheduling solutions. Section 5 concludes the paper and pre-
sents future work. 
2. Related work 
Reinforcement learning-based approaches (RL) for EV scheduling have been studied 
in the literature to optimize the charge and discharge decisions in a dynamic and uncer-
tain environment. Wen et al. [21] schedule electric vehicles for charging and discharging 
using a Deep Q-Learning-based method that considers both the mobility of electric vehi-
cles and the random charging behavior of users. The EV’s scheduling is made by consid-
ering a distribution model for user charging times, a model for charging demand, a 

 
3 of 16 
 
dynamic model for EV state-of-charge, and a model for travel locations. A dynamic re-
ward function, the electricity price, the charging and discharging cost, and the battery 
degradation cost are employed to optimally schedule EVs’ such that the economic oper-
ating cost is reduced, and the efficiency of the charging/discharging process is improved. 
However, the method suffers from a drawback, namely the dynamic reward function 
doesn’t accurately reflect the benefits of charging/discharging operations, when user be-
havior deviates from the assumptions made in the travel locations model.  Lee et.al. [22] 
also propose a deep RL-based method for EVs charging and discharging in real time. The 
aim is to minimize the EVs’ charging cost and to reduce grid loads during peak hours. To 
model the usage patterns of charging stations, a parametric density function estimation is 
used that allows the learning agents to make optimal charging and discharging decisions. 
The effectiveness of the approach has been demonstrated through simulation, and the re-
sults demonstrated that a significant reduction of the energy cost and the grid load is ob-
tained. Wan et. al. [23] combines a representation network with deep RL to schedule the 
charging and discharging of electric vehicles in a domestic setting such that the EVs’ 
charging/discharging cost is minimized. The representation network (i.e., LTSM network) 
is used to extract features from historical electricity prices that together with EV’s battery 
SoC, and user-driving pattern (i.e., the arrival and departure times) are given as inputs to 
the Q-learning network to estimate the optimal action-value function. Like in the previous 
work, the effectiveness of the approach has also been demonstrated through simulation. 
In their work, Viziteu et.al. [24] use Deep Q- learning to schedule EV's for charging by 
considering the battery SoC, the battery capacity, the longest trip distance, the distance 
between EV’ current location and the charging station, the waiting time until the next 
charging slot is available, and the charging station power. The aim is to manage electric 
vehicle congestion by scheduling them in advance at charging stations and optimizing 
drivers' journeys. Like in the case of previous approaches, the approach's effectiveness 
has been demonstrated through simulations. Cao et. al. [25] address the problem of sched-
uling electrical vehicles for charging, aiming to reduce carbon emission costs and peak 
loads in a community. The proposed approach integrates three algorithms: an offline 
scheduling algorithm that considers EV profiles, the EVs’ random arrivals, and power 
constraints to minimize the carbon emission cost, an online heuristic rolling-based sched-
uling algorithm that considers EVs’ arrival times and SoC to take carbon emission deci-
sions, and an actor-critic RL scheduling algorithm that updates the EV carbon emission 
actions. The approach has been tested through simulation. Liu et al. [26] schedule the EVs 
for charging, to minimize the cost of charging the EVs and stabilizing the voltage of the 
distribution network. The scheduling and voltage control problems are modeled as a Mar-
kov decision process that considers the uncertainty introduced by the charging behavior 
of electric vehicle drivers and uncontrolled load, as well as fluctuations in energy prices 
and renewable energy production. The deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm is 
used to return discrete and continuous control actions. The reward function is defined to 
ensure a balance between the EV charging and voltage stability. Paraskevas et.al. [27] in-
troduce a win–win Strategy based on deep Q-learning (DLR) aiming to maximize both the 
charging station’s profits and drivers’ charging demands. The DRL agent’s decisions are 
taken in real-time by considering the uncertainties due to future EV arrivals distribution 
and electricity prices. Wang et.al. [28] proposes an improved rainbow-based deep RL 
strategy for the optimal scheduling of charging stations. The charging process involving 
the matching between EV charging demand and CS equipment resources is modeled as a 
finite Markov decision process. To schedule EVs’ at charging stations under uncertain 
conditions due to EV arrival and departure times, a DQN-based rainbow algorithm is 
used. Li et al. [29] propose an approach for the optimal scheduling of electric vehicles for 
charging/discharging to minimize charging costs and to ensure full charging of electric 
vehicles. The EV charging/discharging scheduling problem is defined as a constrained 
Markov decision process where the constraints are full charging of EVs and minimization 
of charging cost and is solved using a secure deep RL strategy. An electric vehicle 

 
4 of 16 
 
aggregator (EVA) is proposed in [30] as the decision-making authority for scheduling elec-
tric vehicles for charging. Scheduling is done considering uncertainty related to renewable 
energy generation and user demand and has as its main objectives, minimizing the cost 
of EVA and fluctuations in power exchange of the microgrid. The EV charge scheduling 
problem is modeled as a Markov decision-making process based on deep RL and is solved 
using a twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm. Heendeniya et.al. [31] 
introduce a DRL technique based on actor-critical architecture for optimal charging of 
electric vehicles. The aim is to minimize both charging time and expected voltage viola-
tions. The proposed technique can learn an optimal policy by considering the voltage 
magnitude measurements and improve the scalability by imposing partial observability. 
Shi et.al. [32] propose a RL-based approach for managing a community’s electric vehicle 
fleet that offers ride-hailing services to residents. The aim is to minimize the clients’ wait-
ing time, the electricity cost, and vehicles’ operational costs. To solve the problem of dis-
patching the electric vehicle fleet, decentralized learning is combined with centralized de-
cision-making. Decentralized learning allows EVs to share their knowledge and learned 
models to estimate the state-value function, while centralized decision-making assures EV 
coordination to avoid scheduling conflicts. Li et. al. [33] propose a strategy for charging 
EVs aiming at the main goal of EVs charging cost minimization. The strategy uses JANET 
to extract regular variability in energy price and deep RL to adjust the charging strategy 
of EVs based on variability in energy price. Ding et.al. [34] also proposes a strategy for 
charging electric vehicles to increase the profit of distribution system operators while en-
suring the correct use of distribution networks to avoid potential voltage problems. A 
model based on Markov decision-making is defined to describe the uncertainty of EV user 
behavior, and a learning algorithm based on deterministic political gradients is used to 
solve the model. Park et.al [35] solve the problem of scheduling EV for charging through 
a deep learning-based method of multi-agent reinforcement, in which the training stage 
is centralized, and the execution stage is decentralized. The aim is to minimize the oper-
ating costs of charging stations and to ensure the amount of energy specified for charging 
the EV. 
However, even though the model-free reinforcement learning solutions are promis-
ing for EVs scheduling and smart grid management, they have some challenges partially 
addressed in this paper. Reinforcement learning algorithms require many samples, epi-
sodes, and action simulations to learn the optimal EVs scheduling policies. The conver-
gence of rewards and loss to desirable values even in our solution was a process that took 
a considerable number of learning episodes. Moreover, in most cases, achieving a good 
balance between exploration (i.e., trying new EVs scheduling actions) and exploitation 
(i.e., leveraging on known actions) is rather challenging. We have addressed it by employ-
ing an epsilon greedy strategy and fine-tuning the delicate balance between exploitation 
and exploration EV scheduling search space. Another challenge in the studied literature 
is the reward function design for the objectives of the EVs scheduling.  We have ad-
dressed it by adapting the Bellman Equation to evaluate the EVs scheduling state from an 
energy perspective and defined a Q-function to determine the EVs scheduling effective-
ness for the DR program. Finally, the state and action spaces in EV scheduling can be high-
dimensional and complex, making it challenging for the Q-learning network to efficiently 
learn the optimal policy for DR, thus requiring fine-tuning of the learning and network 
architecture parameters.  
3. Materials and Methods 
The objective of the EVs scheduling is to be able to participate collectively in demand 
response programs (DR) used to balance the supply and demand of electricity in the smart 
grid [36]. We have considered V2G-enabled EVs (Vehicle to Grid) [37] that can respond to 
grid operator signals by modifying their energy consumption or generation patterns. We 
formalize a DR program as:  
 

 
5 of 16 
 
𝐷𝑅=< 𝑃= 𝐸𝑉𝑠, 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑇) >                                              (1) 
 
where 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 is a goal energy curve provided to the participant EVs. A Q-learning algo-
rithm determines the collective response of EVs.  
In Q-learning one popular assumption is that the environment in which the agent 
learns is described as a Markov decision process. We will use this simplifying assumption 
which means that the future state of the environment depends only on the previous state 
and actions of the agent. We formally define the environment in which the agent acts as: 
 𝐸= < 𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑟, 𝜋>                                                                (2) 
where, 𝑆= {𝑆𝑘} is the state space representing the set of possible states that the agent 
might be in, 𝐴 is the action space representing the set of all possible actions that the agent 
can take when it is in each state, 𝜋  is the policy that the agent learns, and 𝑅 are the re-
wards given to the agents as results of his actions. 
The state space represents all possible mapping of EVs on charging stations over the 
demand response program interval 𝑇. We model it as a matrix with the dimensions 𝑁𝑥𝑇  
 𝑆𝑘= [
𝑠11
𝑠12
…
𝑠1𝑇
𝑠21
𝑠22
…
𝑠2𝑇
…
…
…
…
𝑠𝑁1
𝑠𝑁2
…
𝑠𝑁𝑇
]                                         (3) 
where 𝑁 is the number of available charging stations and 𝑇 is the number of timeslots 𝑡 
for DR. An element of the matrix stores the identified of the EV which is assigned to a 
charging station at specific timeslot or zero otherwise:  
 𝑠𝑖𝑡= { 0,               𝑖𝑓 𝑛𝑜 𝐸𝑉 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑐𝑠𝑖 𝑎𝑡 𝑡 
𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷, 𝑖𝑓 𝐸𝑉 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑐𝑠𝑖 𝑎𝑡 𝑡                           (4) 
For each environment state the equivalent energy state is determined and stored in a 
HashMap 𝐻 in which the set of keys 𝐾 are the individual timeslots in the DR program 
interval 𝑇 and the list of values 𝑉𝐸 represent the energy charged or discharged at each 
charging point:  
𝐻𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦: 𝐾𝑇→𝐿𝑖𝑠𝑡< 𝑉𝐸>                                                   (5) 
The amount of energy charged or discharged in total by all charging stations in the 
microgrid per a time slot 𝑡 is determined as:  
(∀) 𝑡∈𝐾𝑇, 𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡) = ∑
𝐿𝑖𝑠𝑡< 𝑉𝐸>
𝑣𝑒∈𝑉𝐸
                                (6) 
The initial state of the agent exploration process is represented by a matrix with zero 
values, indicating that no EVs are assigned to any charging station within the interval 𝑇. 
The agent will explore and learn by performing actions, receiving rewards based on these 
actions, and updating the Q-values. An action corresponds to assigning an electric vehicle 
𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷 to a charging station 𝑐𝑠𝑖 in a certain timeslot 𝑡: 
𝑎= (𝑐𝑠𝑖, 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷, 𝑡, ∇)                                   (7) 
When the agent performs an action, it results in a new state, which is represented as 
a new matrix containing the new configuration of electric vehicles assigned to charging 
stations. This iterative process allows the agent to learn the optimal policy for assigning 
electric vehicles to charging stations while considering the specific constraints and the ob-
jective defined for our problem.  
In the defined environment we have considered several constraints on the set of ac-
tions the agent may consider driven by the physical limitations of the energy 

 
6 of 16 
 
infrastructure. The type of action for an EV at a charging station at a time slot can be either 
a charge or a discharge: 
𝐶1: ∇= {𝐶, 𝐷}, 𝑎𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷= 𝐶∨𝑎𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷= 𝐶                                       (8) 
An EV will be considered for scheduling only if its current state of charge falls within 
a predefined range based on its capacity, and it is corelated with the types of actions as-
sociated: 
𝐶2: 𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷
𝑀𝐼𝑁< 𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷≪𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷
𝑀𝐴𝑋→ 𝑎𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷= 𝐶                                (9) 
𝐶3: 𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷
𝑀𝐼𝑁≪𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷< 𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷
𝑀𝐴𝑋→ 𝑎𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷= 𝐷                             (10) 
The electric vehicle will only be eligible for charging is its 𝑆𝑜𝐶 is significantly less 
than the maximum capacity and for discharging if the 𝑆𝑜𝐶 is significantly higher than the 
minimum capacity.  
Two different EVs 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑖 and 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑗 cannot be scheduled at the at the same charging 
station 𝑐𝑠 in the same time slot 𝑡: 
𝐶4: (∀) 𝑐𝑠, 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑖, 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑗 →𝑎(𝑐𝑠, 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑖, 𝑡, ∇) ∨𝑎(𝑐𝑠, 𝑒𝑣𝐼𝐷𝑖, 𝑡, ∇)                 (11) 
Finally, the amount of energy charged or discharged by EVs at a timeslot 𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡) 
must not exceed the target energy provided by the grid operator in the DR program:  
𝐶5: 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑡) ≥𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡)                                  (12) 
The goal of the agent is to find new environmental states by successively simulating 
the execution of actions such that the distance between the target energy curve and the 
amount of energy charged and discharge by EVs is minimized over the DR program in-
terval 𝑇:  
min (
𝑇
𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡−𝐸𝐸𝑉)                                (13) 
Moreover, the agent goal is to learn an optimal policy, 𝜋: 𝑆⟶𝐴 that maximizes the 
cumulative reward obtained by executing a sequence of actions in the defined environ-
ment. To find optimal policy, the agent explores the environment, observes the rewards 
obtained when taking specific actions in each state, and uses this experience to update his 
knowledge of the best actions taken in different states. The optimal policy has associated 
an optimal 𝑄−𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 that represents the maximum return that can be obtained from 
a state 𝑆𝑘, taking an action 𝑎 and subsequently following the optimal policy:  
𝜋: 𝑆⟶𝐴, 𝜋= {(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎)|𝑄∗(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎)  𝑖𝑠 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑙 , 𝑆𝑘∈𝑆∧ 𝑎∈𝐴}            (14)  
The optimal action-value function 𝑄∗(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) is described by the Bellman equation 
which establishes a link between the optimal action value of one state-action pair and the 
optimal action value of the next state-action pair. 
𝑄∗(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) ←(1 −𝛼) ∗𝑄(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) + 𝛼∗(𝑟(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) + 𝛾∗𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎′𝑄(𝑆𝑘′, 𝑎′)     (15) 
where 𝑄∗(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) is the new Q-value calculated for the action 𝑎, 𝛼 is the learning rate, 
𝑟(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) is the immediate reward, 𝛾 is the discount rate, and 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎′𝑄(𝑠′, 𝑎′) is the maxi-
mum Q-value selected from all Q -values obtained by executing all possible actions in the 
next state 𝑆𝑘′. In our model we have set the initial Q-value of a pair (𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) is usually 
initialized with an arbitrary fixed value before learning begins. 
The immediate rewards assigned to a state-action pair is: 
𝑟(𝑆𝑘, 𝑎) = {
𝑀𝐴𝑋𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦, 𝑖𝑓𝑎 ¬𝐶1 ∨¬𝐶2¬𝐶3 ∨¬𝐶4
100 ∗|𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑇) −𝐸𝑉(𝑇)|,   𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝐸𝑉(𝑇) 𝑖𝑠 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑆𝑘               (16) 

 
7 of 16 
 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the Q-Learning model defined for EVs coordination 
for DR participation. 
 
Figure 1. The Q-Learning model. 
The 𝑄−𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 is modeled using a deep neural network (Q-network) having as 
input the states (i.e., EVs mapping to charging stations and time slots states) and outputs 
the associated Q-value. To train the neural network we use the 𝜀-greedy algorithm [38] to 
ensure that the exploration-exploitation strategies are balanced. It helps to balance the 
trade-off between exploring unknown actions and exploiting the ones with the best Q-
values. Figure 2 shows the structure of the Q-network used. 
 
Figure 2. Q-network used for Q-function approximation. 
The Q-network architecture comprises five hidden dense layers with ReLU activa-
tion: four layers with 512 neurons and one with 256 neurons. It also includes two dropout 
layers, each with a dropout rate of 0.5 to prevent overfitting. There's an input layer match-
ing the size of the state space and an output layer matching the size of the action space, 
representing the Q-value for each possible action in the environment. 

 
8 of 16 
 
  
In the learning process we also have used a target Q-network (TQ-network) with the 
same architecture as the Q-network. Its weights are updated more slowly and periodically 
with the weights from the Q-network. The TQ-network is used for stabilizing the learning 
process and improving the algorithm’s efficiency by updating the network after a certain 
number of iterations instead of after every episode. Both the Q-network architecture and 
the target Q-network will be initialized with the same randomly generated weights. 
Algorithm 1: Deep Q-learning for EVs scheduling 
Inputs: S - state space, A - action space, CS – the of charging stations, EV – the set of 
electrical vehicles, T- the time slots, N - the number of epochs for model train-
ing, 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑇) – DR program target curve  
Outputs: 𝜃 the weights of TQ-network 
Q-network parameters: 𝜃− weights of the network, 𝜀−  epsilon parameter, D – 
replay memory, m - target network update frequency, 𝜂 -learning rate, 𝛾−
 discount factor 
Begin 
1. 𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘, 𝑇𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 ←𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠 
2.    𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ =  1 𝑡𝑜 𝑁 𝑑𝑜 
3.       𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 ←𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑇), 𝐶𝑆, 𝐸𝑉)) 
4.       𝑆𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡= 𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 
5.       𝜀 = 1, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒 =  𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 
6.       𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑒 (¬𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒) 𝑑𝑜 
7.          𝑖𝑓 (𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚 (0,1) <  𝜀) 𝑑𝑜 
8.             𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =  𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡_𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝐴) 
9.          𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒 
10.             𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =  𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘(𝑆𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡)) 
11.          𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑓 
12.          𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡= [𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒= 𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛), 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 (𝑆𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)] 
13.          𝐷. 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑 (𝑆𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑, 𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒)  
14.          𝑆𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡= 𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 
15.       𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑒 
16.       𝑖𝑓 (|𝐷| >  𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒) 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑛 
17.          𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖_𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ =  𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒_𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ (𝐷, 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒) 
18.          𝑇𝑄−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠 =  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖_𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ, 𝛾, 𝑇𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘) 
19.          𝑄−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠 =  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖_𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ, 𝛾, 𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘) 
20.          𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 =  𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛_𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 (𝑇𝑄−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠, 𝑄−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠) 
21.          𝜃= 𝜃−𝜂∗∇𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝜃)   
22.          𝑖𝑓 (𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ % 𝑚 == 0) 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑛  
23.             𝑇𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 ← 𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑦𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠(𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘) 
24.       𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝑖𝑓 
25.       𝜀 =  𝜀∗𝜀𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑦 
26.    𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝑓𝑜𝑟  
27. 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝜃 𝑜𝑓 𝑇𝑄−𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 
End 

 
9 of 16 
 
The deep Q-learning model for EVs scheduling in demand response is presented in 
Algorithm 1. The Q-network architecture and the TQ-network are initialized, and the net-
work weights are randomly generated (lines 1-5).  
The replay memory is initialized and updated in the learning process with the tuples 
containing the transitions from one state to another, as well as the rewards given to these 
transitions. A Boolean variable is defined for situations in which the training episode is 
over: either when all electric vehicles have been assigned to a charging station in a specific 
time slot or when two electric vehicles have been assigned to the same charging station at 
the same time slot. The batch size variable is used to determine how many entries from 
the replay memory are randomly selected to be used for training the model. 
After completing the initialization, the model training process starts, and the agent 
interacts with the defined scheduling environment. Initially, it reads the initial state of the 
environment before the scheduling (line 3-4) which includes the scheduling matrix of elec-
tric vehicles at the charging stations, together with the DR program target energy profile. 
An action is selected based on the ϵ-greedy method to ensure the balance between explo-
ration and exploitation for model training (lines 7-11). A random number between 0 and 
1 is generated and then compared to the value of the hyperparameter 𝜀 originally initial-
ized with 1. In case the random value is smaller than 𝜀, the action is chosen randomly, 
without considering the reward obtained. If the value is greater than 𝜀, the action with 
the biggest Q-value for the current state is selected. The action selected by the agent is 
executed by updating the scheduling matrix. The reward is calculated, and the next state 
is updated with the current EV planning matrix (line 12) and the information is stored in 
the replay memory. Since the size of the resume memory is fixed, when the number of 
transitions in memory exceeds its size, the oldest value is removed.  
Then for the training process we randomly extract a mini-batch sample of transitions 
from the replay memory D of the size of the batch (lines 16-24). This step is only done once 
there are enough transitions in the memory to cover the batch size. The Q-values from 
TQ-network are determined from stored transitions from the previous step and the Q-
values from the Q-network are determined based on the original network (18-19). After-
ward, we determine the loss by using the mean squared difference between the TQ-values 
and Q-values and calculate the loss gradients relative to the Q-network weights (lines 20-
21). The new weights of the model are determined considering η a hyper-parameter rep-
resenting the learning rate of the network in which the weights are updated. The weights 
of the Q-network are updated based on the calculated gradients and after each m episode, 
the weights of the current Q-network are copied to the target Q-network to improve the 
accuracy of the target network for future training (lines 22-23). Finally, the value of the ϵ 
parameter is updated via a constant decay rate, and the TQ-network parameters are re-
turned. 
4. Evaluation results 
To evaluate and demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our scheduling 
method, we have used a data set of EVs. For each EV in the data set, the following data 
are available: vehicle ID, model, battery power expressed in kW, the battery capacity ex-
pressed in kWh, the connector type, and the state of charge of battery expressed in per-
centages.  The following types of EVs are considered: (a) Renault ZOE with a battery 
capacity of 22 kWh and a maximum charge power of 22 kW; (b) Renault ZOE with a bat-
tery capacity of 41 kWh and a maximum charge power of 22kW and (c) Nissan LEAF with 
a battery capacity of 24 kWh and a maximum charge power of 7 kW.  
We started the evaluation process by first setting up the configuration environment (see Ta-
ble 1). In our study, we considered two scenarios: one for charging electric vehicles when 
the microgrid has excess energy and the other for discharging electrical vehicles when 
there is a shortage of energy in the microgrid. In both scenarios, we considered 6 charging 
stations, 30 electric vehicles and a scheduling interval of 5 time slots. 
 

 
10 of 16 
 
Table 1. Environment configuration and scheduling operation type. 
Model id 
Environment configuration 
Scheduling Operation Type 
L1 
# Charging stations = 6, # EVs = 30, DR 
program period T=5 / t=1 
Charge 
L2 
Discharge 
 
We then generated the curves for energy demand and for renewable energy produc-
tion that need to be balanced through electric vehicle (EV) scheduling. The two curves 
were generated by simulation. 
Next, we moved on to Deep Q-Network (DQN) training. In the training process we con-
sidered the following input features for model learning: the number of available charging 
stations, the number of EVs waiting for charging/discharging, the time slots for schedul-
ing, the state of charge (SoC) of each EV, the capacity of each EV, and the energy available 
in each time slot representing the energy available for scheduling during that specific 
hour. This energy value dynamically updates every hour, by: (i) subtracting the energy 
needed to charge electric vehicles allocated to charging stations at that hour from the ini-
tial target energy value provided by the network operator in the case of charging opera-
tion or (ii) adding the energy discharged from electric vehicles allocated to charging sta-
tions at that hour to the initial target energy value provided by the network operator in 
the case of discharging operation. In the training process, the DQN relies on the replay 
memory which stores the agent's past experiences. After completing each episode, the 
agent selects a batch of experiences from this memory and uses it to train the network. 
The training process of Deep Q-Network (DQN) involves adjusting several hyperparam-
eters in the learning process, namely memory size, learning rate, epsilon decay and batch 
size. To identify the optimal values of these hyperparameters we used a trial-and-error 
approach that involves testing different values for these parameters, observing their im-
pact on model performance, and selecting the values that produced the best results. Table 
2 shows the configurations tested and the results obtained in terms of minimum loss and 
maximum reward for 160000 episodes for each considered configuration. 
Table 2. Configuration of network hyperparameters and obtained results 
Hyperparameters Tunning 
Results 
Memory Size 
Batch size 
𝜺𝒅𝒆𝒄𝒂𝒚 
𝜼 
Loss 
Reward 
50000 
1000 
0.99996 
0.001 
43860637 
-107799 
50000 
700000 
0.9995 
0.001 
4693810 
-106921 
500000 
15000 
0.99996 
0.001 
49102022 
-102242 
50000 
700000 
0.99996 
0.005 
88181132 
-104005 
50000 
700000 
0.99996 
0.01 
252101836 
-103339 
50000 
700000 
0.9997 
0.001 
82704 
-3852 
600000 
30000 
0.99996 
0.001 
78076 
-4050 
700000 
50000 
0.99996 
0.001 
14587 
654 
 
In the case of memory size, we started with a small memory size, which we gradually 
increased and looked at how it influenced the agent's learning capacity. In the case of a 
small size, the number of experiences the agent can store is limited, and as a result, due to 
insufficient space exploration, the policy learned is suboptimal. In the case of a large 
memory size, the agent accumulates a wide range of experiences, which leads to an im-
provement in exploration and a reduction in the occurrence of the phenomenon of over-
fitting. However, too large values lead to increased computational costs. Based on these 
findings and considering the dimension of the environment in which the agent learns, 
we've settled the value for memory size of 700,000.  
The epsilon decay value was chosen as 0.99996 to promote exploration at the begin-
ning of training and progressively reduce random decisions as the model learns. Using 

 
11 of 16 
 
this value, the agent does more exploration in the initial episodes, thus gathering a wide 
range of transition experiences. As more episodes pass, epsilon decay gradually decreases, 
meaning that over time, the agent takes fewer random actions and begins to make deci-
sions based on information learned from the neural network. The learning rate (η) value 
of 0.001 was chosen because smaller updates to model weights lead to more stable learn-
ing in complex environments, even though more training episodes are required to con-
verge to optimal policy.  
The batch size value was chosen equal to 50000 as it gives the best results for loss and 
reward metrics. A higher value implies a learning process that converges more slowly (i.e. 
longer training time) and also does not effectively improve the accuracy of the results, 
while a smaller value would imply a learning process that converges faster but gives re-
sults less accurately. 
After establishing the optimal configuration for network hyperparameters we pro-
ceeded to evaluate the quality of the training model. To validate the training model, we have 
used two metrics, namely the average rewards and the loss function. Figure 3 shows the 
evolution of average rewards during L1 and L2 model training for charging and discharg-
ing operations. In the case of L1 model for charging we can see that the average rewards 
of the learning model stabilize around 140000 episodes, then at 150000 there is a tempo-
rary worsening of the received rewards, followed by a return and stabilization of the re-
wards starting from 16000 episodes. This situation may be due to the complex environ-
ment in which the agent operates, which may face situations in which its performance 
temporarily degrades until it adapts to the new conditions. In the case of the L2 model, a 
significant increase in rewards is observed between 40 000 and 100 000 episodes, followed 
by a smaller increase between 100 000 and 120 000 episodes. Starting from episode 120 
000, the reward stabilizes, registering only a few small fluctuations. Like the L1 model, 
these small fluctuations are due to the complexity of the environment in which the agent 
operates and exploration vs. exploitation trade-off. 
 
 
Figure 3. Average rewards for L1 and L2 models training. 
Looking at the loss evolution presented in Figure 4, we observe a common trend fol-
lowed by both the L1 and L2 models. At first the loss decreases as the models learn, and 
then after many episodes it starts to stabilize. More precisely, in the case of the L1 model, 
the loss starts to stabilize around 57,000 episodes, and in the case of the L2 model, around 
37,000 episodes. The need for many episodes to stabilize loss derives both from the com-
plexity of the environment in which the agent operates and from the trade-off of explora-
tion versus exploitation. The agent needs more episodes to accumulate learning experi-
ences and strike the right balance between exploration and exploitation.  
 

 
12 of 16 
 
 
Figure 4. Average loss for L1 and L2 models. 
Finally, during DQN testing, we assessed the quality of the learned policy. For this, we 
examined the percentage of allocations of electric vehicles at charging stations with max-
imum value of the reward, in relation to the total number of EVs allocations per time in-
terval and epochs variations. We have also, examine the similarity between the curve de-
rived from scheduling of electric vehicles at charging stations and the target energy curve 
provided by the grid operator using the Pearson correlation coefficient:  
𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛(𝐸𝑀𝐺(𝑇), 𝐸𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒(𝑇)) =
∑
(𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑡𝑖)− 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅)(
𝑛
𝑖=1
𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡𝑖)−𝐸𝐸𝑉
̅̅̅̅̅̅)
√∑
(𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑡𝑖)−𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅)2
𝑛
𝑖=1
∗ √∑
(𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡𝑖)−𝐸𝐸𝑉
̅̅̅̅̅̅)2
𝑛
𝑖=1
  (17) 
In formula 17,  n is the number of energy values corresponding to the time interval 
during which the EVs’ scheduling is performed, 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑡𝑖) and 𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡𝑖) are the energy 
data points in the goal energy curve and the curve resulted by scheduling EV at charging 
station,  𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ and 𝐸𝑆𝑉
̅̅̅̅̅ are energy sample means computed as:  
𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ =
1
𝑛∑
(𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(𝑡𝑖))
𝑛
𝑖=1
                                   (18) 
𝐸𝐸𝑉
̅̅̅̅̅ =
1
𝑛∑
(𝐸𝐸𝑉(𝑡𝑖))
𝑛
𝑖=1
                                     (19) 
Figure 5 presents the percentage of optimal allocations of EVs versus sub-optimal 
ones for the two learned policies corresponding to the charging and discharging scenarios. 
In the case of the charging scenario, we observe that in 70.8% of cases, all vehicles are 
optimally allocated (that is, the trained model optimally manages EVs), in 17.5% of cases 
1 EV is suboptimal allocated, and in 5.6% of the cases, two EVs are suboptimal allocated. 
Only a small percentage of cases features more EVs suboptimal allocations (i.e., 6.1%). 
This means that the learned model makes good decisions, since it can optimally allocate 
EVs in most cases. Even when suboptimal allocations occur, their frequency is relatively 
low, indicating that the model has learned a policy that works well for this scenario. In 
the case of L2 model, in 82.9% of cases EVs are optimally allocated to charging stations, in 
14.4% of cases there is only one suboptimal allocation, and in the case of 2.5% there are 
two suboptimal allocations. As in the case of the L1 scenario, the policy learned in the case 
of the L2 scenario can make optimal decisions in most cases regarding the allocation of 
electric vehicles to the charging stations. 

 
13 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The percentage of optimal / sub-optimal allocations of EVs for the two policies. 
The tracking of the evolution of the percentage of optimal allocations of electric vehicles 
over episodes is shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  The evolution of the percentage of optimal allocations of electric vehicles over episodes 
for L1 and L2 model. 
Examining the results obtained in the case of the L1 model, we noticed that after 9,500 
episodes, the algorithm can optimally allocate EVs in 35.7% of cases, reaching an optimal 
allocation of 70.8% after 160,000 episodes. Similarly, for the L2 model, 82.9% optimal EVs 
allocation begins after 160,000 episodes. Consequently, in both models, the percentage of 
optimal allocations for EVs increases with each passing episode throughout the learning 
process, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the learned policies. 
The final step of learned policy evaluation involved assessing the effectiveness of EV 
allocations at charging stations in each time slot throughout the scheduling period. Figure 
7 presents the curve resulted by scheduling EVs at charging stations together with the 
target energy curve provided by the grid operator as well as the baseline curve in the case 
of charge and discharge scenarios. Analyzing these graphs, we noticed that for both 
learned models (i.e., L1 and L2), the curve obtained from scheduling EVs closely follows 
the target energy curve provided by the grid operator. Also, when we schedule the charg-
ing/discharging of electric vehicles with our method, the resulting energy curve is much 
closer to the target energy curve. EV scheduling for charging/discharging significantly 
improves charging/discharging capacity compared to the baseline scenario where EV 
charging/discharging is done without any prior appointment. 
 In the charging scenario, the variation between the energy required to charge elec-
tric vehicles and the energy supplied by the network operator in each time slot does not 
exceed a maximum deviation of 6 kW, indicating an optimal allocation of electric vehicles 
at charging stations. This high level of alignment between the two curves is reflected by 
the value of the Pearson correlation coefficient of 0,9926, which indicates a strong similar-
ity between the energy curves. In the discharge scenario, the situation is similar. In this 

 
14 of 16 
 
case, the Pearson correlation coefficient shall be 0,9937 and the variation between the en-
ergy discharged by electric vehicles and the network operator's energy requirements dur-
ing each time slot does not exceed a maximum deviation of 4 kW.  
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison between the microgrid energy curve and the resulting curve after scheduling 
the EVs in the case of M5 model. 
5. Conclusions 
In this paper, we have proposed a Deep Q-Learning solution for enabling EVs to co-
ordinate and participate in DR programs by scheduling the EVs charge and discharge 
actions to meet a target energy profile. We have adapted the Bellman Equation to evaluate 
the EVs scheduling state and defined a Q-function to determine the action's effectiveness 
in terms of rewards. We have represented the Q-function using a neural network to learn 
from for dynamic EVs scheduling scenarios by successively training the available actions 
and using Epsilon-greedy algorithm balances exploitation and exploration of the state 
space. 
Our proposed solution offers a promising approach to EVs participation in DR pro-
grams, which can result in significant benefits for both the distribution system operator 
and EV owners. The results show that the EVs are scheduled to charge and discharge 
effectively their collective energy profile following accurately with a Person coefficient of 
0.99 the energy profile provided as a target in DR. Moreover, the rewards and loss con-
verge to good values, showing the effectiveness of the quality of the learning policy de-
fined for EVs scheduling as well as of the Q-function in improving the agent's decision-
making in the defined microgrid environment. Finally, a limitation of our approach is the 
fact that the learning process needs a substantial number of episodes to achieve loss and 
rewards because of the complexity of the environment. There are many states to navigate 
to gather learning experience due to scheduling combinations of EVs, charging stations, 
and trade-offs between exploration and exploitation. 
As future work, we intend to investigate new EVs scheduling solutions by consider-
ing iteratively each time slot in the DR program window and not the entire interval as in 
the current approach. This type of solution may reduce the number of episodes needed 
for loss and reward convergence while improving the agent responsiveness to changes in 
the defined EVs scheduling environment and promoting greater dynamism in decision-
making. In addition, we plan to investigate alternative Deep Q-learning network architec-
tures to allow the agent to learn and adapt more efficiently with fewer episodes. 
 
Acknowledgments: This work has been conducted within the DEDALUS project grant number 
101103998 funded by the European Commission as part of the Horizon Europe Framework Pro-
gramme. 
 

 
15 of 16
