Knowledge-Enhanced Top-K Recommendation in Poincar´e Ball
Chen Ma *1, Liheng Ma *1, Yingxue Zhang 2, Haolun Wu *1, Xue Liu 1 and Mark Coates 1
1 McGill University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab Montreal

Abstract
Personalized recommender systems are increasingly
important as more content and services become avail-
able and users struggle to identify what might interest
them. Thanks to the ability for providing rich informa-
tion, knowledge graphs (KGs) are being incorporated
to enhance the recommendation performance and inter-
pretability. To effectively make use of the knowledge
graph, we propose a recommendation model in the hy-
perbolic space, which facilitates the learning of the hier-
archical structure of knowledge graphs. Furthermore, a
hyperbolic attention network is employed to determine
the relative importances of neighboring entities of a cer-
tain item. In addition, we propose an adaptive and ﬁne-
grained regularization mechanism to adaptively regular-
ize items and their neighboring representations. Via a
comparison using three real-world datasets with state-
of-the-art methods, we show that the proposed model
outperforms the best existing models by 2-16% in terms

Introduction
With the rapid growth of Internet services and mobile de-
vices, personalized recommender systems play an increas-
ingly important role in modern society. They can reduce
information overload and help satisfy diverse service de-
mands. Such systems bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts to at least
two parties. They can: (i) help users easily discover products
from millions of candidates, and (ii) create opportunities for
product providers to increase revenue.
To provide a more accurate and interpretable recommen-
dation service, knowledge graphs (KGs) are being incorpo-
rated into recommender systems. A KG is a heterogeneous
graph, where nodes function as entities and edges represent
relations between the entities. This is an effective data struc-
ture to model relational data, e.g., two movies directed by
the same director. Several recent works have integrated KGs
into the recommendation model, and the approaches can be
divided into two branches: path-based (Hu et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2018) and regularization-based (Zhang et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2019c). Path-based methods extract paths from
*Work done as interns at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab in Montreal.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
the KG that carry the high-order connectivity information
and feed these paths into the predictive model. To handle the
large number of paths between two nodes, researchers have
either applied path selection algorithms to select prominent
paths or deﬁned meta-path patterns to constrain the paths.
By contrast, regularization-based methods devise additional
loss terms that capture the KG structure and use these to reg-
ularize the recommender model learning.
Although many effective models have been proposed, we
argue that there are still several avenues for enhancing per-
formance. First, previous works learn the KG representa-
tions in the Euclidean space. As has been observed in other
application domains, this may not effectively capture the hi-
erarchical structure that is known to exist within KGs (Sala
et al. 2018). Second, methods like CKE (Zhang et al. 2016),
CFKG (Ai et al. 2018), and RippleNet (Wang et al. 2018)
do not distinguish between neighboring entities, adjusting
according to their relative importance and informativeness,
when learning the representation of each entity. This may
lead to undesirable blurring of information from relations in
the KG and an incomplete understanding of an entity. Third,
all the regularization-based methods adopt a ﬁxed hyper-
parameter. We argue that the regularization degree should
be adaptive, taking on different values for different enti-
ties according to the relevance and value of the informa-
tion from the knowledge graph. Furthermore, different train-
ing phases may need different magnitudes of regularization
power values, so the hyper-parameter values should evolve
during training.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose a
knowledge-enhanced recommendation model in the hyper-
bolic space, namely Hyper-Know, to tackle the top-K rec-
ommendation task. In particular, we map the entity and rela-
tion embeddings of the KG as well as user and item embed-
dings to the Poincar´e ball model. This allows us to capture
the hierarchical structure in the KG. We incorporate an at-
tention model in the hyperbolic space, and use the Einstein
midpoint for aggregation, in order to form a representation
of the neighborhood of each item in the knowledge graph.
We then use a regularization term to encourage the repre-
sentation of an item to remain close to the representation
of its neighborhood (in the hyperbolic space). This transfers
the relational and structural information from the knowledge
graph to the recommendation model. To adaptively control
arXiv:2101.04852v2  [cs.IR]  29 Jan 2021

the regularization effect, we model the learning of adaptive
and ﬁne-grained regularization factors as a bilevel (inner and
outer) optimization problem (Sinha, Malo, and Deb 2018).
We build a proxy function to explicitly link the learning of
the regularization related parameters with the outer objec-
tive function. We extensively evaluate our model on three
real-world datasets, comparing it with many state-of-the-art
methods using a variety of performance validation metrics.
The experimental results not only demonstrate the improve-
ments of our model over other baselines but also show the
effectiveness of the proposed components.
To summarize, the major contributions of this paper are:
• To model the hierarchical structure of KG, we map the en-
tity and relation embeddings of the KG into the Poincar´e
ball along with user and item embeddings. To the best
of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst work to consider
knowledge-enhanced recommendation in the hyperbolic
space.
• To transfer the knowledge from the KG to the recommen-
dation model, we incorporate hyperbolic attention and use
the Einstein midpoint to aggregate the neighboring entities
of an item to form a neighborhood representation.
• To learn the adaptive regularization factors, we cast
the learning process as a bilevel optimization prob-
lem and build a proxy function to explicitly update the
regularization-related parameters.
• Experiments on three real-world datasets show that
Hyper-Know signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods for the top-K recommendation task.
Related Work
General Recommendation
Early recommendation studies largely focused on explicit
feedback (Sarwar et al. 2001; Koren 2008). The recent re-
search focus is shifting towards implicit data (Tran et al.
2018). Collaborative ﬁltering (CF) with implicit feedback
is usually treated as a Top-K item recommendation task,
where the goal is to recommend a list of items to users that
users may be interested in. It is more practical and challeng-
ing (Pan et al. 2008), and accords more closely with the real-
world recommendation scenario. Early works mostly rely on
matrix factorization techniques (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky
2008; Rendle et al. 2009) to learn latent features of users
and items. Due to their ability to learn salient representa-
tions, (deep) neural network-based methods (He et al. 2017;
Sun et al. 2019; Ma, Kang, and Liu 2019) are also adopted.
Autoencoder-based methods (Wu et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2018,
2019) have also been proposed for Top-K recommendation.
In (Lian et al. 2018; Xue et al. 2017), deep learning tech-
niques are used to boost the traditional matrix factorization
and factorization machine methods. Recently, some methods
are also conducted in the hyperbolic space. HyperML (Tran
et al. 2020) conducts metric learning in the hyperbolic space
and outperforms Euclidean counterparts. Feng et al. (2020)
propose to tackle the next Point-of-Interest recommendation
task in the hyperbolic space.
Knowledge Graph Enhanced Recommendation
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are an important means to rep-
resent side information of recommender systems and have
proven to be helpful to improve the recommendation perfor-
mance. For example, Zhang et al. (2016) propose to apply
the TransR method (Lin et al. 2015) to learn the KG repre-
sentation as well as the item embeddings in the KG. Ai et al.
(2018) integrate users and items with the KG and jointly
learn the recommendation and KG part. Wang et al. (2019a)
propose a multi-task feature learning approach for knowl-
edge graph enhanced recommendation, where these two
parts are connected with a cross-and-compress unit to trans-
fer knowledge and share regularization of items. Another
track of research tries to perform propagation over the KG
to assist in recommendation. Speciﬁcally, RippleNet (Wang
et al. 2018) extends the user’s interests along KG links to
discover her potential interests by introducing preference
propagation, which automatically propagates users’ poten-
tial preferences and explores their hierarchical interests in
the KG. KPRN (Wang et al. 2019d) constructs the extracted
path sequence with both the entity embedding and the re-
lation embedding. These paths are encoded with an LSTM
layer and the preferences for items in each path are predicted
through fully-connected layers. KGCN (Wang et al. 2019b)
studies the utilization of Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) for computing embeddings of items via propagation
among their neighbors in the KG. Recently, KGAT (Wang
et al. 2019c) recursively performs propagation over the KG
via a graph attention mechanism that reﬁnes entity embed-
dings. Several subsequent works (Chen et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020) focus on optimizing the negative sampling pro-
cedure in knowledge-enhanced recommendation. In this pa-
per, we report results for our proposed method using a
vanilla negative sampling strategy, so that we can focus on
the performance impact of the novel aspects: learning in the
hyperbolic space, using hyperbolic attention with Einstein
midpoint aggregation, and introducing adaptive regulariza-
tion. But the advanced negative sampling strategies can also
be incorporated into our proposed method to provide a fur-
ther performance improvement.
Our proposed model distinguishes itself from previous
models by learning knowledge-enhanced recommendation
in the Poincar´e ball model. In addition, we employ a hyper-
bolic attention model in the hyperbolic space to assign dif-
ferent degrees of importance to the neighboring entities of
a certain item. We introduce a bilevel optimization formula-
tion of the learning task to achieve an adaptive regularization
mechanism that controls the regularization effect.
Preliminaries
Problem Formulation
The knowledge-based recommendation considered in this
paper takes as inputs the user implicit feedback and the item
knowledge graph. The implicit feedback is represented by a
number of user-item pairs D = (u, v) ⊆U × I, where U is
the user set and I is the item set. The item knowledge graph
G = (h, r, t) ⊆E × R × E can be formulated as a set of

triples, each consisting of a relation r ∈R and two entities
h, t ∈E, referred to as the head and tail of the triple.
Then the top-K recommendation task in this paper is for-
mulated as: given the training item set Su of user u, and the
non-empty test item set Tu (requiring that Su∪Tu = Du and
Su ∩Tu = ∅) of user i, the model must recommend an or-
dered set of items Xu such that |Xu| ≤K and Xu ∩Su = ∅.
Then the recommendation quality is evaluated by a match-

Hyperbolic Geometry of the Poincar´e Ball
The Poincar´e ball model is one of ﬁve isometric models of
hyperbolic geometry (Cannon et al. 1997), which is a non-
Euclidean geometry with constant negative curvature. For-
mally, the Poincar´e ball
 Bd
c, gB
of radius 1/√c, c > 0
is a d -dimensional manifold Bd
c =

x ∈Rd : c∥x∥2 < 1
	
equipped with the Riemannian metric gB which is conformal
to the Euclidean metric gE = Id with the conformal factor
λc
x = 2/
 1 −c∥x∥2
, i.e., gB = (λc
x)2 gE. The distance be-
tween two points x, y ∈Bd
c is measured along a geodesic
(i.e. a shortest path between the points) and is given by:
dB(x, y) = 2
√c tanh−1  √c ∥−x ⊕c y∥

,
(1)
where ∥· ∥denotes the Euclidean norm and ⊕c represents
M¨obius addition (Ganea, B´ecigneul, and Hofmann 2018):
x ⊕c y =
 1 + 2c⟨x, y⟩+ c∥y∥2
x +
 1 −c∥x∥2
y
1 + 2c⟨x, y⟩+ c2∥x∥2∥y∥2
.
(2)
Methodology
In this section, we introduce the proposed model, Hyper-
Know, which integrates the knowledge graph with the rec-
ommendation task in the hyperbolic space. We ﬁrst intro-
duce the user preference learning in the hyperbolic space.
Then we illustrate the hyperbolic attention mechanism that
is used to distinguish items’ neighboring entities in the
knowledge graph. We next explain how to adaptively learn
the recommendation objective and knowledge graph by a
bilevel optimization formulation. Lastly we introduce the
training and prediction procedure of the proposed model.
Learning User Preference
User preference modeling lies at the core of recommender
systems. Recently, distance metric learning has been widely
applied to measure the user preference on items, yielding
substantial performance gains (Hsieh et al. 2017). In this ap-
proach, the distance dB(u, v) between user u and item v is
used to measure the user preference on a certain item. To
learn the user preference, we apply the Bayesian Personal-
ized Ranking loss (Rendle et al. 2009) to capture the pair-
wise preference of a user u for an item v that the user has
accessed compared to a randomly sampled item v′:
LR(u, v, v′; Θ) = −ln σ (dB(u, v′) −dB(u, v)) ,
(3)
where u, v, and v′ ∈Bd
c, σ is the sigmoid function, and d is
the dimension of the manifold. Θ represents the parameters
of the recommender model.
Regularizing Neighboring Entities
Knowledge graphs (KGs), consisting of (head entity, rela-
tionship, tail entity) triples, are efﬁcient data structures for
representing factual knowledge and are widely used in ap-
plications such as question answering (Zhang et al. 2018).
Recently, KGs have been applied in recommender systems
to not only enhance the recommendation performance but
also provide interpretable recommendation results.
To effectively exploit KGs in recommender systems, we
treat them as relational inductive biases (Battaglia et al.
2018) between items. During the learning process, the rela-
tions in the KG can be used as regularizers; if two items link
to a common entity or multiple common entities in the KG
which suggests that a user might have similar preferences for
the items. However, an item can link to multiple entities in
the KG and the relative importance of different entities can
differ greatly. Moreover, the entities can contribute in differ-
ent ways to the description of the item. This motivates us to
propose an attention mechanism in the Poincar´e ball model.
Considering an item v, we use Nv = {(v, r, t)|(v, r, t) ∈
G} to denote the set of neighboring triples for which v is
the head entity. Then we apply a TransE-style (Bordes et al.
2013) scoring function (||h+r−t||) to calculate the match-
ing score between an item and its neighboring entity in Nv:
α(v, t) = exp
 −dB(v ⊕c r, t)

.
(4)
The usual way to aggregate multiple attentions in the Eu-
clidean space is weighted midpoint aggregation. The corre-
sponding operation in the hyperbolic space is not immedi-
ately obvious, but fortunately, the extension to hyperbolic
space does exist in the form of the Einstein midpoint. It has
a simple form in the Klein disk model (Cannon et al. 1997):
nv = fK→B
 X
t∈Nv
α(v, t)γ(t)
P
t′ α(v, t′)γ(t′)fB→K(t)
!
,
(5)
where the elements of γ(t) =
1
√
1−c||t||2 are the Lorentz
factors and fB→K(·) is the function to transform the coordi-
nates from the Poincar´e ball model to the Klein disk model.
The Klein model is supported on the same space as the
Poincar´e ball, but the same point has different coordinates
in each model. Let xB and xK denote the coordinates of the
same point x in the Poincare and Klein models correspond-
ingly. Then the following transition formulas hold:
xK = fB→K(xB) =
2xB
1 + c||xB||2 ,
xB = fK→B(xK) =
xK
1 +
p
1 −c||xK||2 .
(6)
We call nv in (5) the neighborhood representation of item
v. During the training process we add a regularizing term
that encourages the neighborhood representation nv to be
close to the item’s representation v. The goal is to transfer
the inductive bias in KG to the item representation:
LK(v; Θ) = dB(v, nv) .
(7)
Combining with the user preference learning objective
LR, the overall knowledge-enhanced objective can be:
L(u, v, v′; Θ) = LR(u, v, v′; Θ) + βLK(v; Θ) ,
(8)
where β is to balance the effect from the KG.

User & Item
Embeddings
Θ
KG Control
Parameters
β
Jinner(Θ, β)
Proxy Function
˜Θ(β) := Θ −α∇ΘJinner(Θ, β)
Jouter
 ˜Θ(β)

→forward pass
→gradient backward (inner loss)
→gradient backward (outer loss)
Θ ←OPTΘ (Θ, ∇ΘJinner(Θ, β))
β ←−OPTβ

β, ∇βJouter
 ˜Θ(β)

Figure 1: The procedure of the bilevel optimization to control the learning of ﬁne-grained parameters β.
Adaptive and Fine-grained Regularization
Previous works (Wang et al. 2019c, 2018; Zhang et al. 2016)
that derive information from a KG in the recommender set-
ting use a single and ﬁxed number for β in Eq. 8 to train
the overall objective. However, employing a single ﬁxed
value for β can have several drawbacks. First, different
datasets may require different impact levels of regularization
from KGs. Treating β as a ﬁxed value requires extra hyper-
parameter searching procedure for each dataset to better re-
alize the power of KGs. Second, different items may need
different degrees of regularization. Using the same value for
every item would limit the achievable performance improve-
ment that can be derived from the KG information. Third, in
different training phases, the model may need different mag-
nitudes of regularization power.
To address the problems outlined above, we propose an
adaptive regularization scheme to apply different strengths
of regularization to each item and to adjust the strength
throughout training. We formulate Eq. 8 as:
L(u, v, v′; Θ, β) = LR(u, v, v′; Θ) + σ(βv)LK(v; Θ) ,
(9)
where βv is v-th value of β ∈R|I| and σ(βv) ∈(0, 1)
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Unfortunately, directly
minimizing this objective function is not able to achieve the
desired purpose of adaptively controlling the regularization.
The reason is that, considering βv explicitly appears in the
loss function, constantly decreasing the value of βv is the
straightforward way to minimize the loss. As a consequence,
instead of reaching optimal values for the model, all βv will
end up with very small values close to zero, leading to un-
satisfactory results.
To tackle the above problem, we model the learning of
recommendation models and the adaptive regularization of
KG as a bilevel optimization problem (Colson, Marcotte,
and Savard 2007):
min
β
Jouter (Θ∗(β)) :=
X
(u,v)∈D∧(u,v′)̸∈D
LR
 u, v, v′; Θ∗(β)

s.t. Θ∗(β) = argmin
Θ
Jinner(Θ, β)
:=
X
(u,v)∈D∧(u,v′)̸∈D
L(u, v, v′; Θ, β) .
(10)
Here Θ contains the model parameters u, v, r and t. The ob-
jective function Jinner attempts to minimize L with respect
to Θ with β ﬁxed. Meanwhile, the objective function Jouter
optimizes LR with respect to β through Θ∗(β), considering
Θ∗(β) as a function of β.
Algorithm 1: Iterative Training Procedure
Initialize optimizers OPTΘ and OPTβ ;
while not converged do
Θ Update (ﬁx βt):
Θt+1 ←−OPTΘ (Θt, ∇ΘtJinner(Θt, βt)) ;
Proxy:
˜Θt+1(βt) := Θt −α∇ΘtJinner(Θt, βt) ;
β Update (ﬁx Θt):
βt+1 ←−
OPTβ

βt, ∇βtJouter
 ˜Θt+1(βt)

;
end
As most existing models use gradient-based methods
for optimization, a simple approximation strategy with less
computation is introduced as follows:
∇βJouter (Θ∗(β)) ≈∇βJouter (Θ −α∇ΘJinner(Θ, β)) .
(11)
In this expression, α is the learning rate for one step of inner
optimization. Related approximations have been validated
in (Rendle 2012; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Ma et al.
2020). Thus, we can deﬁne a proxy function to link β with
the outer optimization:
˜Θ(β) := Θ −α∇ΘJinner(Θ, β) .
(12)
For simplicity, we use two optimizers OPTΘ and OPTβ
to update Θ and β, respectively. The iterative procedure is
shown in Alg. 1.
Training and Prediction
After incorporating a parameter regularization term to avoid
overﬁtting, the overall loss function is:
min
β
Jouter (Θ∗(β))
s.t. Θ∗(β) = argmin
Θ
Jinner(Θ, β) + λ||Θ||F ,
(13)
where λ is a hyper-parameter. When minimizing the objec-
tive function, the partial derivatives with respect to all the
parameters can be computed by gradient descent with back-
propagation. We apply the Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015) al-
gorithm to automatically adapt the learning rate during the
learning procedure.

Recommendation Phase. For user u, we compute the
distance dB(u, v) between the user u and each item v in the
dataset. Then the items that are not in the training set and
have the shortest distances are recommended to user u.
Evaluation
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the experimental set-up.
We then report the results of the conducted experiments and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed modules.
Datasets
The proposed model is evaluated on three real-world
datasets from various domains with different sparsities:
Amazon-book, Last-FM and Yelp2018, which are fully
adopted from (Wang et al. 2019c). The Amazon-book
dataset is adopted from the Amazon review dataset (He and
McAuley 2016) with the book category, which covers a large
amount of user-item interaction data, e.g., user ratings and
reviews. The Last-FM dataset is collected from last.fm mu-
sic website, where the tracks are viewed as the items. A
subset of data from Jan. 2015 to Jun. 2015 is selected. The
Yelp2018 dataset is adopted from the 2018 edition of the Yelp
challenge, where local businesses like restaurants and bars
are viewed as the items.
All the above datasets follow the 10-core setting to ensure
that each user and item have at least ten interactions. For
Amazon-book and Last-FM, items are mapped into Freebase
entities via title matching if there is a mapping available. For
Yelp2018, the item knowledge from the local business in-
formation network (e.g., category, location, and attribute) is
extracted as KG data. The data statistics after preprocessing
are shown in Table 1.
For fair comparison, these three datasets in our experi-
ments are exactly the same as those used in (Wang et al.
2019c). For each dataset, 80% of interaction data of each
user is randomly selected to constitute the training set, and
we treat the remaining 20% as the test set. From the training
set, 10% of interactions are randomly selected as validation
set to tune hyper-parameters. The experiments are executed
ﬁve times and the average result is reported.
Table 1: The statistics of the datasets.
Amazon-book
Last-FM
Yelp2018
#Users
70,679
23,566
45,919
#Items
24,915
48,123
45,538
#Interactions
847,733
3,034,796
1,185,068
#Entities
88,572
58,266
90,961
#Relations
39
9
42
#Triplets
2,557,746
464,567
1,853,704
Evaluation Metrics

percentage of her rated items emerge in the top K recom-

counted cumulative gain at K, which takes the position of
correctly recommended items into account.
Methods Studied
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our model, we compare
to the following recommendation methods:
• FM (Rendle 2010), a classical factorization model, which
incorporates the second-order feature interactions be-
tween input features.
• NFM (He and Chua 2017), a state-of-the-art factorization
model, which subsumes FM under a neural network.
• CKE (Zhang et al. 2016), a representative regularization-
based method, which exploits semantic embeddings de-
rived from TransR (Lin et al. 2015) to enhance the matrix
factorization.
• CFKG (Ai et al. 2018), a model that applies TransE (Bor-
des et al. 2013) on the uniﬁed graph including users,
items, entities, and relations, casting the recommendation
task as the prediction of (u, Interact, i) triplets.
• RippleNet (Wang et al. 2018), a model that combines
regularization- and path-based methods, which enrich
user representations by adding those of items within paths
rooted at each user.
• GC-MC (van den Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2017), a model
designed to employ a graph convolutional network on
graph-structured data. Here the model is applied on the
user-item knowledge graph.
• KGAT (Wang et al. 2019c), a state-of-the-art KG en-
hanced model, which employs a graph neural network and
an attention mechanism to learn from high-order graph-
structured data for recommendation.
• Hyper-Know, the proposed model, which learns the
knowledge-enhanced recommendation in the Poincar´e
ball and applies hyperbolic attention for distinguishing
neighboring entities and bilevel optimization for adaptive
regularization, respectively.
Experiment Settings
In the experiments, the latent dimension of all the models is
set to 64. The parameters for all baseline methods are initial-
ized as in the corresponding papers, and are then carefully
tuned to achieve optimal performances. The learning rate is
tuned amongst [0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.005, 0.01], and we
search for the coefﬁcient of L2 normalization over the range
[0.0001, ..., 0.1]. To prevent overﬁtting, the dropout ratio is
selected from the range [0.0, 0.1, ..., 0.9] for NFM, GM-MC,
and KGAT. The dimension of attention network k is tested
over the values [16, 32, 64]. Regarding NFM, the number of
MLP layers is set to 1 with 64 neurons according to the orig-
inal paper. For RippleNet, we set the number of hops and the
memory size as 2 and 8, respectively. For KGAT, we set the
depth as 3 with hidden dimension 64, 32, and 16, respec-
tively. The network architectures of the above methods are
conﬁgured to be the same as described in the original papers.
For Hyper-Know, the curvature c is set to 1 and the batch
size is set to 4096. The hyper-parameters are tuned on the
validation set. Our experiments are conducted with PyTorch
running on GPU machines (NVIDIA Tesla V100).

boldfaced. The underlined number is the second best performing method. * indicates the statistical signiﬁcance for p <= 0.01
compared to the best baseline method based on the paired t-test.
FM
NFM
CKE
CFKG
RippleNet
GC-MC
KGAT
Hyper-Know
Improv.

Amazon-book
0.1345
0.1366
0.1343
0.1142
0.1336
0.1316
0.1489
0.1534*
3.23%
Last-FM
0.0778
0.0829
0.0736
0.0723
0.0791
0.0818
0.0870
0.0949*
9.08%
Yelp2018
0.0627
0.0660
0.0657
0.0522
0.0664
0.0659
0.0712
0.0683
N/A

Amazon-book
0.0886
0.0913
0.0885
0.0770
0.0910
0.0874
0.1006
0.1075*
6.86%
Last-FM
0.1181
0.1214
0.1184
0.1143
0.1238
0.1253
0.1325
0.1533*
16.70%
Yelp2018
0.0768
0.0810
0.0805
0.0644
0.0822
0.0790
0.0867
0.0897*
3.46%
Performance Comparison
The performance comparison results are shown in Table 2.
Observations about our model. First, the proposed
model—Hyper-Know, achieves the best performance for
most evaluation metrics on three datasets, which illustrates
the superiority of our model. Second, Hyper-Know outper-
forms KGAT on the Amazon-book and Last-FM datasets.
Although KGAT adopts the attention model to distinguish
the entity importance in the knowledge graph, it may not ef-
fectively capture the hierarchical structure between entities,
which can be well-modeled by learning the entity and rela-
tion embeddings in the hyperbolic space. One possible rea-
son why Hyper-Know does not outperform KGAT for the

the entities in this KG are linked according to whether they
have the same attributes, such as HasTV. Most of these at-
tributes are very generic, which means that the KG provides
information of limited value. As a result, much of the trans-
fer that Hyper-Know performs from the KG to the recom-
mendation part for the Yelp2018 dataset is likely to be noise.
Third, Hyper-Know achieves better performance than GC-
MC and RippleNet. Although GC-MC and RippleNet can
model high-order connectivities, they fail to identify the im-
portant entities that would make a difference in recommen-
dation. On the other hand, Hyper-Know employs an atten-
tion model in the hyperbolic space to learn the neighborhood
representation of an item and transfers the knowledge from
the KG to the item representation via regularization. Fourth,
Hyper-Know obtains better results than CKE. One possible
reason is that CKE adopts a ﬁxed power of regularization
during the whole training process. By contrast, Hyper-Know
performs ﬁne-grained regularization to regularize the item
and its neighborhood. Fifth, Hyper-Know outperforms FM
and NFM. One reason may be that using a distance as the
scoring function can capture more ﬁne-grained user prefer-
ence.
Other observations. First, KGAT outperforms GC-MC
and RippleNet. KGAT is capable of exploring the high-
order connectivity in an explicit way and applies a graph
attention model to aggregate the neighbors in the user-item
knowledge graph in a weighted manner. Second, FM and
NFM achieve better performance than CFKG and CKE in
most cases. One major reason is that FM and NFM capture
the second-order connectivity between users and entities,
whereas CFKG and CKE model connectivity on the granu-
larity of triples, leaving high-order connectivity untouched.
Third, RippleNet achieves better performance than FM. This
may verify that incorporating two-hop neighboring items is
of importance to enrich user representations. Fourth, NFM
performs better than FM. One major reason is that NFM has
stronger expressiveness, since the hidden layer allows NFM
to capture the nonlinear and complex feature interactions be-
tween user, item, and entity embeddings.
Table 3: The ablation analysis. Att denotes the attention
model, Avg denotes the embedding average operation, E de-
notes the Euclidean space, and H denotes the hyperbolic
space.
Architecture
Amazon-book
Last-FM

(1) BPR+E
0.1017
0.0729
0.0604
0.1112
(2) BPR+H
0.1167
0.0833
0.0656
0.1191
(3) BPR+Att+E
0.1121
0.0812
0.0746
0.1319
(4) BPR+Att+H
0.1447
0.1025
0.0885
0.1453
(5) BPR+Avg+H
0.1250
0.0897
0.0775
0.1358
(6) Hyper-Know
0.1534
0.1075
0.0949
0.1533
Ablation Analysis
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed model in the
Poincar´e ball, the hyperbolic attention model, and the adap-
tive regularization mechanism, we conduct an ablation study
in Table 3. This demonstrates the contribution of each mod-
ule to the Hyper-Know model. In (1), we use the Euclidean
distance to measure the user preference optimized by the
BPR loss. In (2), we apply the distance in the Poincar´e ball
to measure users’ preferences and optimize using Eq. 3. In
(3), we integrate the TransE-style attention on the top of (1)
in the Euclidean space. In (4), we add hyperbolic attention
to (2). In (5), we replace the attention model in (4) with an
average operation in the hyperbolic space. In (6), we present
the overall Hyper-Know model to show the effectiveness of
the adaptive regularization mechanism.
From the results shown in Table 3, we make the following
observations. First, comparing (1) and (2), we can observe
that measuring the user preference by calculating distance in
the hyperbolic space achieves better performance than cal-
culating distance in the Euclidean space. This conﬁrms the
results reported in (Tran et al. 2020). Second, from (2) and

(3), we observe that incorporating the hyperbolic attention
model signiﬁcantly improves the model performance. Third,
in (3) and (4), we compare the performance of the attention
model in both the Euclidean and hyperbolic space. From the
results, we can observe that the attention model achieves
better results in the hyperbolic space than in the Euclidean
space. Fourth, from (1), (2), (3) and (4), we can observe that
equipping the recommendation model with the KG either
in the Euclidean space or hyperbolic space can improve the
recommendation performance. Fifth, from (4) and (5), we
observe that by distinguishing the importance of each neigh-
bour of an item through attention, we achieve considerable
improvement compared to a simple average. Comparing (4)
and (6), we can observe that the adaptive regularization can
provide the ﬁne-grained regularization power.
Table 4: Training time comparison.
CKE
CFKG
KGAT
Hyper-Know
Amazon-book
55s
22s
457s
15s
Last-FM
53s
27s
137s
22s
Yelp2018
63s
37s
352s
20s
Training Efﬁciency
In this section, we compare the training efﬁciency with other
state-of-the-art KG-enhanced methods in terms of the train-
ing speed. We compare the time taken for one epoch of
training. From the results reported in (Chen et al. 2020),
these compared methods take a similar number of epochs
to converge as well as our proposed method. RippleNet is
not computation-efﬁcient and takes much longer to train, we
omit the comparison with RippleNet. All the experiments
are conducted on a single GPU of an NVIDIA Tesla V100.
All the compared methods are executed for 20 epochs and
we report the average computation time, which is shown in
Table 4. The training time comparison shows that Hyper-
Know is more computationally efﬁcient than other state-of-
the-art methods, and the reason follows. Compared to CKE,
Hyper-Know has a smaller number of learnable parameters
(8.3 million v.s. 11.4 million on the Last-FM dataset). Com-
pared to KGAT and CFKG, Hyper-Know does not incorpo-
rate the users into the KG, which makes the scale of the KG
much smaller.
0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
β
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11

(a) β on Amazon-book
0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
β
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16

(b) β on Last-FM
Figure 2: The variation of β.
Inﬂuence of Hyper-parameters
The value of β that regularizing the item embedding with
its neighborhood is an important hyper-parameter if not us-
ing the adaptive regularization mechanism. Its effect on the
Amazon-book and Last-FM datasets is shown in Figure 2.
From the results in Figure 2, we observe that the value
of β does affect the recommendation performance, with per-
formance deteriorating by as much as 10 percent if a sub-
optimal value is chosen. Furthermore, there is no ﬁxed value
that achieves performance that is as good as the performance
obtained by using the proposed adaptive mechanism. These
results demonstrate that the ﬁne-grained and adaptive regu-
larization beneﬁts the recommendation task, which conﬁrms
the results reported in (Rendle 2012).
(a) Entity-48130
(b) Entity-97468
Figure 3: The embedding visualization of selected entities.
Embedding Visualization
To verify whether the learned embedding in the Poincar´e
ball can capture the hierarchical structure in the knowledge
graph, we train Hyper-Know in the 2D space on the Last-FM
dataset and visualize the entities in the 2D hyperbolic space.
We randomly select two nodes and their two-hop neighbors
to visualize. The visualization is shown in Figure 3. The
biggest dot denotes the selected entity, the less biggest dot
denotes the ﬁrst-hop neighbor of the selected entity, and the
smallest dot denotes the second-hop neighbor.
From Figure 3, we can observe that these three kinds of
nodes may form the hierarchical patterns in Poincar´e ball
and the learned embeddings in the hyperbolic space can rep-
resent the hierarchical relationships.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a knowledge-enhanced recommen-
dation model in the hyperbolic space (Hyper-Know) for top-
K recommendation. Hyper-Know learns the user and item
embeddings as well as the knowledge graph representation
in the Poincar´e ball model to capture the hierarchical struc-
ture in the knowledge graph. In addition, we incorporate hy-
perbolic attention to select the most important neighboring
entities of each item. To adaptively control the regulariza-
tion effect, a bilevel optimization mechanism is proposed to
generate a ﬁne-grained regularization effect between recom-
mendation and the knowledge graph. Experimental results
on three real-world datasets clearly validate the performance
advantages of our model over multiple state-of-the-art meth-
ods and demonstrate the effectiveness of each of the pro-
posed constituent modules.
