Wayﬁnding and cognitive maps for pedestrian
models
Erik Andresen, David Haensel, Mohcine Chraibi, and Armin Seyfried
Abstract Usually, routing models in pedestrian dynamics assume that agents have
fulﬁlled and global knowledge about the building’s structure. However, they neglect
the fact that pedestrians possess no or only parts of information about their position
relative to ﬁnal exits and possible routes leading to them. To get a more realistic
description we introduce the systematics of gathering and using spatial knowledge.
A new wayﬁnding model for pedestrian dynamics is proposed. The model deﬁnes
for every pedestrian an individual knowledge representation implying inaccuracies
and uncertainties. In addition, knowledge-driven search strategies are introduced.
The presented concept is tested on a ﬁctive example scenario.
1 Introduction
Microscopic simulations of pedestrian trafﬁc ﬂow are a suitable tool for designing
both escape routes in buildings and pedestrian areas, e.g. malls, train and bus sta-
Erik Andresen
Faculty of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Bergische Universit¨at Wuppertal, Pauluskirchstr. 7,

David Haensel

Mohcine Chraibi

Armin Seyfried
J¨ulich Supercomputing Center, Forschungszentrum J¨ulich GmbH, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany
Faculty of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Bergische Universit¨at Wuppertal, Pauluskirchstr. 7,

1
arXiv:1602.01971v1  [cs.AI]  5 Feb 2016

2
E. Andresen et al.
tions, etc.. Besides, simulations are used to investigate and analyze security risks in
advance.
In the literature many elaborated microscopic pedestrian trafﬁc ﬂow models can
be found. For a ﬁrst overview see [10]. These models try to describe the locomotive
actions of pedestrians, e.g. basic movement towards a certain location in space or
steering (around obstacles to a certain destination).
However, they neither include the choice between currently accessible targets nor
the planning of proceeding destinations (wayﬁnding tasks). These tasks are covered
by the tactical level of pedestrian trafﬁc ﬂow modeling (see for example [6, 2]).
A majority of models concerning the tactical level assume the pedestrians to have
a comprehensive knowledge about the spatial structure of their environment. Thus,
the agents possess the ability to localize desired destinations in advance. They are,
further more, able to evaluate or rather compare the quality of the routes which
lead to the destinations. In many cases their evaluations are based on shortest path
calculations or travel time optimization.
The assumption that all pedestrians are provided with comprehensive global
knowledge about a building’s structure is a rough approximation, for example when
pedestrians are not familiar with the facility. Even less, they are able to evaluate
metric information about multiple routes so that an exact comparison is possible. In
fact, the knowledge status of a group of pedestrians vary according to the number of
visits and the capability to learn the spatial structure of new environments.
Human wayﬁnding is a complex process which includes the use of (in some cases
inaccurate and incomplete) spatial memories [14] , the use of signs and maps [14],
search strategies and herding phenomena.
Although there are already approaches to represent wayﬁnding aspects including
directional knowledge and uncertainties [7] there is room for improvements and
continuations.
In this work we introduce a modeling approach enabling agents to make exit
choice decisions based on inaccurate and incomplete knowledge about their envi-
ronment and destinations.
1.1 The cognitive map
Although many mechanisms of perception and cognition enabling successful wayﬁnd-
ing are still unacquainted it is known that the hippocampal formation (part of the
limbic system of the human brain) is mainly responsible to store and retrieve spatial
memories which are essential to solve wayﬁnding issues [9]. John O’Keefe [9] and
Maybritt and Edvard Moser [8] discovered place cells and grid cells in rats’ brains
that are involved in the formation of the so-called cognitive map. Similar systems of
place-like and grid-like cells were discovered in many mammals’ brains including
the human brain [3].
The term cognitive map has been introduced by Tolman [13]. It depicts the men-
tal representation of the spatial relationships between essential points, places, ob-

Wayﬁnding and cognitive maps for pedestrian models
3
jects, etc. of our environment and possible connections between them [5]. Despite
the prevailing opinion rats can only respond to stimuli Tolman [13] conducted some
experiments which gave evidence about the fact that rats possess clues about spe-
ciﬁc objects’ positions relative to each other gathered from previous visits of the
environment.
In the best case the cognitive map provides the possibility to locate the relative
position to a speciﬁc destination and enables us to ﬁnd or to plan a route leading to
this destination [5, 4].
However, there is evidence that people get lost in several situations due to the
fact that their cognitive maps are inaccurate, incomplete, distorted, or even wrong
[5, 4].
Nevertheless, the cognitive map, although it does not provide detailed and much
less accurate metric information, successfully helps us to ﬁnd our way in most situa-
tions, especially in environments visited multiple times before. This results from the
fact that humans possess the ability to store topological relations in a more accurate
way [5, 4].
1.2 Generalized knowledge
In many cases a wayﬁnding problem is not merely solved by information about the
relations of explicit points or objects (the cognitive map). Additional knowledge
called generalized knowledge is used as well. Human beings classify their environ-
ments and retrieve information, implications and expectations about the according
classes, for example train stations, libraries, ofﬁce buildings, etc. [1, 12]. Gener-
alized knowledge does not concern the explicit set-up of the speciﬁc environment
itself but information about the environment’s type or rather classiﬁcation.
Within buildings we differentiate between two types of rooms (enclosed areas).
On the one hand there are rooms serving the building’s circulation or rather en-
abling people to reach efﬁciently their destination areas. Corridors, entrances, lob-
bies, stairs, ramps, etc. belong to this group of rooms. On the other hand there are
rooms allotted to an explicit usage excluding the circulation. Concerning the second
type of rooms we mention functional rooms, common rooms (ofﬁces, living rooms,
cafeterias, etc.), store rooms, etc. as examples. We assume the majority of people
to be capable to distinguish between both mentioned types due to their generalized
knowledge about spatial structures.
Generalized knowledge provides the basis for various search strategies. To men-
tion an example we consider a person to be located somewhere in a completely
unfamiliar ofﬁce building. The person is going to leave the building and is therefore
looking for an exit. Due to knowledge about the purpose of circulation rooms he/she
prefers to use them to reach the exit. Preferring circulation rooms instead of others is
a simple but expedient and efﬁcient strategy compared to a simple room exploration
and thus facilitates the search for the exit severely.

4
E. Andresen et al.
2 Modeling cognitive map knowledge
Following the ﬁndings mentioned in Sec. 1.1 we assume a simulated person to
possess a cognitive map consisting of uncertain, inaccurate information. Thus, the
agents possess only a vage idea of the exact (sub-)goals’ position. For this purpose
the inaccurate memories of the goals are not restricted to a point location but are
represented by ellipses (see Fig. 1).
We assume that the agent searches a route leading him, preferably following the
beeline, to the exit area. Therefore he chooses a doorway leading him as closely
as possible to the destination area. Due to the fact that the agent has no knowledge
about the remaining structure of the building his decision is only made by consider-
ing position and shape of the actual room (and its doors) and the ellipse representing
the approximate position of the exit. Further rooms or rather their walls or obstacles
beyond the actual room are not familiar to the agent. Hence, they are not taken into
account within the decision making.
To determine the doorway which takes the agent as closely as possible to the
ellipse the (lengths of the) shortest paths between every accessible doorway and the
ellipse are calculated (see Fig. 1). The shortest path calculation is only performed
under the consideration of the current room’s walls (as obstacles). Even if the made
assumption of an empty area beyond the current room may be inaccurate in most
cases, this procedure will ﬁnd the most appropriate doorway to come closer to the
exit area if no spatial information of proceeding areas is available.
Exit
Exit
Fig. 1 On the left: The ﬁgure shows the layout of a ﬁctional building’s ﬂoor. The agent’s actual
room is highlighted. The ellipse represents the agent’s inaccurate idea of the exit’s position. On
the right: The ﬁgure shows the agent’s actual room and the ellipse without exception. The lines
indicate possible routes to the exit region ignoring the spatial structure beyond the actual room.
The shortest path from a doorway of the room to the exit area is shown dashed.

Wayﬁnding and cognitive maps for pedestrian models
5
Depending on the length of their paths compared to paths from other possibilities
the doorways are weighted differently. The doorway related to the shortest one of
all shortest paths will be preferred by the pedestrian (see Fig. 1, right, dashed line).
If the agent has arrived at the target area (is located inside the ellipse) and there
is still no exit in sight he has to rely on other information or strategies to look for
the continuative way to the exit.
3 Examples
In the next section we demonstrate how the model presented performs in simple
scenarios with respect to different degrees of spatial knowledge.
In every scenario an agent is situated in a room at the left lower corner of a
ﬁctional building (see Fig. 2) and searches a way to the outside. The entrance / exit
can be found at the right lower corner.
3.1 Scenario 1: Cognitive map knowledge
With the help of this scenario we investigate the effects of using the modeling ap-
proaches concerning explicit cognitive map knowledge (see. Sec. 2). The agent sup-
poses the exit to be somewhere in the area depicted by the ellipse in the right lower
region. At every choice point he decides to move to the direction taken him closer
to the assumed area location of the exit.
Having started his journey the agent crosses the ﬁrst corridor (lower left corner)
heading to the opposing doorway as it is obviously the best choice to come closer to
the exit area, assuming the lack of knowledge about the structure beyond the doors.
However, as the agent recognizes that he is located in a dead end he turns around
trying to reach the exit area by moving through the crossing to the adjacent room.
Eventually, he arrives at the corridor located in the middle of the building which
enables him to travel to the right lower region of the building. Inside the ellipse
depicting the exit area the agent proceeds to ﬁnd the exit by exploring the rooms in
the surrounding. He starts by heading to the nearest doorway. After having explored
three further rooms within the exit area the agent ﬁnally reaches the exit.
3.2 Scenario 2: Combination of generalized and cognitive map
knowledge
Scenario 2 comprises the combination of generalized and cognitive map knowl-
edge. To highlight the effects of this combination the agent is simultaneously pro-
vided with the ability to distinguish between common rooms and circulation rooms

6
E. Andresen et al.
Exit area
Fig. 2 Trajectories of an agent situated in a ﬁctional ofﬁce building. The agent has access to cog-
nitive map knowledge depicted with the help of the ellipse.
and with a directional sense of the exit’s location. For this purpose the color coded
rooms are indicated as circulation rooms. Doorways leading to these rooms will be
preferred by the agent. Further more, the agent is following the procedure explained
in Sec. 2.
We assume the strategy to move to or to stay on a circulation room to be more
expedient as to keep the direction to the destination. Following this assumption, the
pedestrian will use circulation rooms even though he has to depart seriously from
the beeline to the exit area.
Leaving the starting room the agent proceeds to the corridor in the middle of
the building as it is the only adjacent corridor. Being located in the middle corridor
the agent has to choose between three corridors. Obviously, the corridor in the right
lower corner is the best possibility to come closer to the exit area. Within the exit
area the agent again prefers the only proceeding corridor taking him eventually to
the outside.
In this example scenario the agent is moving to the destination without making
any detours. Hence, the search strategy (go to and stay on circulation rooms) and a
vage idea about the location of the destination are sufﬁcient in this example case.

Wayﬁnding and cognitive maps for pedestrian models
7
Exit area
Fig. 3 Trajectories of an agent situated in a ﬁctional building. The agent has access to both cogni-
tive map knowledge and generalized knowledge.
4 Summary and Outlook
The modeling approaches introduced in this paper provide simulated agents with
restricted information about their environment instead of granting them access to
global comprehensive knowledge about every part of the environment’s structure.
Additionally, the restricted information consists of uncertainties and inaccuracies.
The information status of agents can be manipulated by modifying position and size
or shape of ellipses modeling its actual cognitive map. In addition, it is conceivable
to vary the knowledge degree of an agent compared to other agents by differing
modiﬁcations.
Based on two examples we demonstrated the effects of different knowledge de-
grees. The ﬁrst example showed that the agent does not instantly ﬁnd an appropriate
route to the outside by simply heading to the exit area. In the second example (Sec.
3.2) it has been shown that a vage, inaccurate idea of the destination’s location in
combination with the use of a search strategy is sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a route leading
directly (without detours) to the desired destination.
Proceeding work implies the creation of a continuative framework modeling the
human wayﬁnding process. On the one hand the framework is supposed to contain
further mechanisms of the cognitive map, for example the involvement of landmarks
and self localization procedures. On the other hand it is supposed to include search
strategies, recognition of signs and herding effects.

8
E. Andresen et al.
The afﬁliation of further models representing factors which contribute to exit
choice decisions beside the wayﬁnding process is possible. Concerning further fac-
tors we mention sensory input models according to the evaluation of congestions
[6] and smoke propagation [11].
Acknowledgements This research is founded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
contract No. GZ: SE 17894-1.
