arXiv:2201.01559v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2022
Monitoring Energy Trends through Automatic Information Extraction
Dilek K¨uc¸ ¨uk
T ¨UB˙ITAK Energy Institute
Ankara–Turkey

Abstract
Energy research is of crucial public importance but the use of computer science technologies like automatic text processing and data
management for the energy domain is still rare. Employing these technologies in the energy domain will be a signiﬁcant contribution to
the interdisciplinary topic of “energy informatics”, just like the related progress within the interdisciplinary area of “bioinformatics”.
In this paper, we present the architecture of a Web-based semantic system called EneMonIE (Energy Monitoring through Information
Extraction) for monitoring up-to-date energy trends through the use of automatic, continuous, and guided information extraction from
diverse types of media available on the Web. The types of media handled by the system will include online news articles, social
media texts, online news videos, and open-access scholarly papers and technical reports as well as various numeric energy data made
publicly available by energy organizations. The system will utilize and contribute to the energy-related ontologies and its ultimate
form will comprise components for (i) text categorization, (ii) named entity recognition, (iii) temporal expression extraction, (iv)
event extraction, (v) social network construction, (vi) sentiment analysis, (vii) information fusion and summarization, (viii) media
interlinking, and (ix) Web-based information retrieval and visualization.
Wits its diverse data sources, automatic text processing
capabilities, and presentation facilities open for public use; EneMonIE will be an important source of distilled and concise information
for decision-makers including energy generation, transmission, and distribution system operators, energy research centres, related in-
vestors and entrepreneurs as well as for academicians, students, other individuals interested in the pace of energy events and technologies.
Keywords: energy informatics, energy ontology, information extraction, natural language processing
1.
Introduction
Energy is so an indispensable asset today that we cannot even think of being deprived of it. It is one of the important
topics that inﬂuence both individuals and governments to great extents. Therefore, results of the research and trends on
conventional and sustainable/renewable energy resources; on energy production, transmission, distribution, conversion,
utilization, and forecast as well as that of recent research topics like energy efﬁciency and smart electricity grids have
important implications on the society in general. To facilitate public access to recent energy trends, events, and research
topics; the resources, algorithms, and tools offered within the discipline of computer science and information technologies
can be customized, redesigned, and employed and this will be an important contribution to the interdisciplinary area of
“energy informatics”.
In this paper, we propose a Web-based semantic system called EneMonIE (Energy Monitoring through Information
Extraction) which facilitates monitoring up-to-date energy trends, events, and related energy research through the use of
automatic, continuous, and guided (targeted) information extraction from diverse media available on the Internet.
After daily polling, ﬁltering, and collection of data from these data sources, the system will apply several information
extraction techniques on the collected data to extract and distil semantic information for indexing these media. Upon
the completion of the information extraction procedure, the system will align, cluster, fuse, and summarize the collected
data based on the extracted semantic information to arrive at up-to-date energy trends and research topics in addition to
energy data. Furthermore, the system will enrich the social media texts by associating with them automatically determined
opinions, through its sentiment analysis component.
The types of media to be handled by the system include:
1. News articles available online
2. Social media texts like tweets and blog posts
3. News videos available online
4. Open-access papers in scholarly journals, openly available academic theses, and technical reports available on preprint
servers
5. Open numeric and textual data publicly provided by energy-related organizations
1

EneMonIE will have a modular and extensible architecture with pluggable information extraction and other text processing
components. Thereby, if need be, upon the completion of EneMonIE, newer information extraction tools can be integrated
into the system without the need for considerable effort, provided that these tools comply with the corresponding software
interfaces of the overall system.
To the best of our knowledge, no semantic system similar to EneMonIE has been described in the literature. Yet, there
are systems that have some common features to EneMonIE: the fully-automated and semi-automated systems described
in (K¨uc¸¨uk and Yazıcı, 2011) and (K¨uc¸¨uk and Yazıcı, 2013) have utilized information extraction techniques to facilitate
semantic news video retrieval. Within these systems news videos and news articles are processed, yet other types of media
within the scope of EneMonIE, such as social media, are not considered. Another difference between EneMonIE and
the aforementioned two systems is that, these systems are also proposed for the generic domain of news. Additionally,
these systems lack other important text processing components like those for sentiment analysis and summarization while
EneMonIE will comprise these components to enrich its output and presentation.
We should also note the existence of related websites like OpenEI1, reegle2, and SETIS3. OpenEI is a website hosting
its collaboratively-managed energy-related resources and energy data sets which aims to serve this data as linked open
data to public use. Reegle, on the other hand, is a clean energy information portal enabling its users to search for clean
energy and energy efﬁciency information that it includes. Finally, SETIS (Strategic Energy Technologies Information
System) is a portal for hosting studies and reports for energy-related decision makers, particularly to help implement and
monitor the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET-Plan) in European Union countries. These three systems
have features mainly related EneMonIE’s feature on open energy and energy-related documents and news, but EneMonIE’s
main contribution of semantic processing of the ubiquitous, external, and independent diverse media is not available through
these systems. Lastly, in (Woon et al., 2014) keyword-based methods have been utilized on scholarly articles to determine
the research trends in renewable energy papers as keyword taxonomies. The main contribution of this paper is similar to a
feature of EneMonIE on scholarly articles which will be handled by its text categorization component. Hence, EneMonIE
will be a larger full-ﬂedged system having –among others- this feature as well.
News Sites 
Serving News Articles 
News Sites 
Serving News Videos 
Social Media Sites
Web Sites of Energy 
Organizations 
Web Sites Serving 
Open Energy Data
Preprint Servers
Open-access Articles 
at Scientific Portals
Media Sources
Text 
Categorization
Information 
Fusion and 
Summarization
Sentiment
Analysis
Server Side 
Application 
Software
Energy
Ontologies
Web-based 
Information 
Retrieval and 
Visualization
Lexical 
Resources
Social Network 
Construction
Media 
Interlinking
EneMonIE
Database
EneMonIE
Named Entity 
Recognition
Temporal 
ExpressIon 
Extraction
Event 
Extraction
Information Extraction 
Components
Figure 1: The EneMonIE Architecture
2.
EneMonIE Architecture
The pipelined architecture of EneMonIE is demonstrated in Figure 1 together with its data (media) sources.
Func-
tional components and resources (database, ontologies, and lexical resources) are shown with different colours to
facilitate the distinction. For illustrative purposes, all information extraction components (named entity recognizer, tem-
poral expression extractor, and event extractor) are shown as a single component, under the name of Information Extraction.
The main information extraction components of EneMonIE will be:
1https://openei.org
2https://www.reeep.org/reegleinfo
3https://setis.ec.europa.eu/
2

1. Named entity recognition: This task is usually deﬁned as the extraction and classiﬁcation of proper names such as the
names of people, locations, and organizations in natural language texts. It is a long-studied topic of natural language
processing (NLP) with recent work being mostly on unconventional texts like social media texts such as the study
describing a system for named entity recognition on tweets (Ritter et al., 2011). We will develop a named entity
recognition system tailored to the energy domain targeting at both the aforementioned basic named entity types and
proprietary name classes for the energy domain (such as the names of power plants, feeders, governmental or public
energy organizations) which will be able to process both formal and informal texts.
2. Temporal expression extraction: Temporal expressions, such as date and time expressions (particularly when normal-
ized to actual dates), are crucial to pinpoint the exact time of events mentioned in natural language texts. Hence,
EneMonIE will include a temporal expression extractor to obtain this information from the media texts. For this pur-
pose, existing state-of-the-art temporal expression extractors such as HeidelTime (Str¨otgen and Gertz, 2010) can be
employed and customized accordingly.
3. Event extraction: Extraction of events, regarding security and health, from news articles have long been studied and
similar to the case of named entity recognition, recent proposals target informal texts like the study described in
(Ritter et al., 2012). Energy-related events occurring all over the world are of public importance. Examples of these
events include small or large-scale power outages like blackouts or brownouts that may affect the lives of many people,
installation of new power plants with many public or environmental implications, or the invention of a new technology
concerning renewable energy production. EneMonIE will have an event extractor particularly tailored to the energy
domain to monitor these energy events.
Other functional components of the system will be tools for the following tasks:
1. Text categorization: This module will be based on the employed energy ontologies and will ﬁlter the data sources to
determine energy-related textual content. Hence, this categorization stage is the very ﬁrst operation of EneMonIE on
the incoming data stream. The documents passing this ﬁltering stage will then be subject to the information extraction
and other data processing stages of the system.
2. Social network construction: This component will be applied to the extracted named entities within the documents to
reveal mainly the co-occurrence and coreference relationships between the extracted entities. These social networks
can further be employed to determine relationships between the documents as well.
3. Sentiment analysis: Sentiment analysis (or, opinion mining) is a relatively new research topic in NLP which attracts
considerable research attention (Pang and Lee, 2008). EneMonIE’s sentiment analysis component will be applied to
the social media texts to automatically determine the opinions of people on energy-related posts. We believe that this
will be an important feature of EneMonIE, as the public opinions on energy events and technologies may affect the
related decision-making processes.
4. Media interlinking (alignment): This component will utilize the ﬁndings of the named entity recognition and social
media construction modules to interlink different media documents reporting the same topic or event. As it is hard to
make sure that this alignment procedure is always highly precise, we will provide percentages denoting the degrees of
conﬁdence of this procedure to present these fuzzy results to the users.
5. Information fusion and summarization: This component will combine the results of the aligned documents and pro-
vide informative and concise summaries of the related documents, making use of the text summarization techniques
both on conventional formal texts like news articles and on informal texts as exempliﬁed with the study on tweets
(Chakrabarti and Punera, 2011). Thereby, the information to be presented to the users are prepared at this stage.
6. Web-based information retrieval and visualization: Finally, Web-based user interface of EneMonIE will facilitate
access to the extracted and distilled information regarding energy trends, events, scientiﬁc and technological devel-
opments, together with the corresponding links to the original data sources whenever applicable. Several signiﬁcant
statistical analysis results regarding this energy information compiled by EneMonIE’s functional pipeline will be
demonstrated with convenient visualization capabilities.
The system will also comprise ontologies and other resources like lexicons that the system components make use of.
There are existing ontologies on topics within the energy domain such as the ontology for electrical power quality
(K¨uc¸¨uk et al., 2010), the wind energy ontology (K¨uc¸¨uk and Arslan, 2014; K¨uc¸¨uk and K¨uc¸¨uk, 2018), and more recently
the electrical energy ontology (K¨uc¸¨uk, 2015), to name a few. All of these ontologies are publicly available online for
research purposes. Before their prospective employment within EneMonIE, these ontologies will be extended and revised
to cover the larger domain of energy. The building processes of the ontologies and lexicons will be a blend of manual
engineering and automatic machine learning approaches. EneMonIE will also make use of community-created resources
3

like Wikipedia to enrich its semantic data sources, through automated means. Finally, the system outputs will be stored in
a central relational database.
EneMonIE will be in operation for media in Turkish and English languages. We plan to ship our ﬁrst operational prototype
system supporting Turkish media. Next, together with the lessons learnt during the building of the ﬁrst prototype, we will
grossly increase the scope of EneMonIE by extending it to be applicable to media in English as well. Nevertheless, we
plan to turn it into a multilingual system as a plausible direction of future work.
In order to ensure the feasibility of EneMonIE, existing open-source software and libraries for the functional components
will be considered for adaptation in the ﬁrst place. In case we cannot ﬁnd a viable candidate for a particular task, we will
consider building components from scratch through automatic learning, manual engineering, or hybrid methods combining
the best practices. The existing knowledge resources like the aforementioned publicly available ontologies and community-
created open knowledge bases like Wikipedia will enable us to have a good basis to build our semantic EneMonIE system.
3.
Contributions of EneMonIE
The main contributions of our Web-based semantic monitoring system for the energy domain, EneMonIE, are listed below:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst semantic system making heavy use of information processing technolo-
gies, particularly those of NLP, information retrieval, and knowledge-based systems, proposed for the high-impact
topic of energy. As we have pointed out before, energy is a common asset affecting directly or indirectly the lives of
every human being in the world. Therefore, automatic extraction, distillation, fusion and enrichment of energy-related
trends, events as well as scientiﬁc and technological developments from the Internet and serving this information for
public use is a considerable interdisciplinary (broadly combining energy (with related disciplines) and computer sci-
ence) contribution. It can be considered as a signiﬁcant accomplishment within the recent research topic of “energy
informatics”.
• EneMonIE will be a fully-automated system, the components of which will run continuously on the Internet, sim-
ilar in nature to the open-domain continuous learning systems such as NELL (Carlson et al., 2010), DeepDive
(Niu et al., 2012), and Knowledge Vault (Dong et al., 2014) although our system will be a targeted closed-domain
one for the energy domain. Hence, the system will continuously extract valuable energy information, then will store
this information after associating them with their original sources, and will present the extracted information to the
interested parties, including decision-makers, in convenient presentation and visualization formats.
• When building the text processing systems for the energy domain, we will pinpoint the challenges of this adaptation
and development process. We will discover genuine and novel ways to tackle these challenges, will come up with
efﬁcient solutions, and eventually realize these solutions as efﬁcient software systems.
• EneMonIE is also signiﬁcant for its set of diverse data sources, hence can be considered as a multimedia system.
Different media types like news articles, news videos, social media texts, blog posts, scholarly articles and technical
reports, and open energy data (may be available as linked open data) are all within the scope of the data sources of
EneMonIE. Upon the implementation of EneMonIE, diverse documents from these sources will be processed, they
will be interlinked, processed to extract important information, sentiments, and social networks, and ﬁnally the fused
results will be presented for public use. Yet, we should note that only textual data processing is planned for the data
sources, therefore, for media like videos, only associated video texts will be processed.
• EneMonIE will be a bilingual system, operational on media in Turkish and English languages. But it will also have
a modular structure allowing plugging in new components provided that these components comply with the related
system interfaces. Therefore, EneMonIE will be an extensible system which can be turned into a multilingual system
by equipping it with language-speciﬁc text processing tools.
• Together with the automatic acquisition of open energy data and information obtained through scholarly articles and
technical reports regarding the recent scientiﬁc and technological developments on energy, EneMonIE will also act as a
hub promoting energy research with its facilities to showcase scientiﬁc and technological trends. Interested researchers
will be able to carry out deeper analysis of the compiled data and information available through EneMonIE to derive
valuable research results.
• Wits its diverse data sources, automatic text processing capabilities, and presentation facilities; EneMonIE will be
an important source of distilled and concise information for decision-makers including energy generation, transmis-
sion, and distribution system operators, energy research centres as well as academicians, students, other individuals
interested in the pace of events about energy all over the world.
4

4.
Conclusion
In this paper, we present the architecture of a semantic system, called EneMonIE, proposed for monitoring energy trends
using open data sources available online. EneMonIE will be built as large-scale Web-based semantic system for monitoring
up-to-date energy trends through the use of automatic, continuous, and guided information extraction from diverse media
available on the Web. Here, with the term trend, we mean all energy-related events such as scientiﬁc and technological
developments; events with social, ﬁnancial, and environmental impacts; and national and international policy changes.
Additionally, EneMonIE will be a hub for open energy information and data published by related energy organizations or
researchers. During the building process of EneMonIE, we aim to pinpoint the challenges of the adaptation and development
of text processing tools for the energy domain, to come up with novel and efﬁcient solutions to these challenges, and realize
these solutions as efﬁcient pieces of software components.
5.
