Trusting Machine Learning Results from Medical Procedures in the Operating
Room
Ali El-Merhi1,2, Helena Odenstedt Herg´es1,2, Linda Block1,2, Mikael Elam3, Richard Vithal1,2,
Jaquette Liljencrantz3, Miroslaw Staron4
1Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,
2 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden,
3 Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
4 Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers | University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Abstract
Machine learning can be used to analyse physiologi-
cal data for several purposes. Detection of cerebral is-
chemia is an achievement that would have high im-
pact on patient care. We attempted to study if collec-
tion of continous physiological data from non-invasive
monitors, and analysis with machine learning could de-
tect cerebral ischemia in tho different setting, during
surgery for carotid endarterectomy and during endovas-
cular thrombectomy in acute stroke. We compare the re-
sults from the two different group and one patient from
each group in details. While results from CEA-patients
are consistent, those from thrombectomy patients are
not and frequently contain extreme values such as 1.0
in accuracy. We conlcude that this is a result of short
duration of the procedure and abundance of data with
bad quality resulting in small data sets. These results
can therefore not be trusted.
1
Introduction
Collecting patient data and using it for medical diagnoses by
applying artiﬁcial intelligence has gained a lot of popularity
in the last decade (Komorowski 2019). Machine learning al-
gorithms can identify patterns in data which are, otherwise,
difﬁcult to observe by a physician (Carra et al. 2020). An
example of such situation is using artiﬁcial intelligence to
detect cerebral ischemia, brain injury due to low blood ﬂow,
based on changes in heart rate variability (Odenstedt Herg`es
et al. 2021). Several databases have been developed to pro-
vide the community with the reusable data sets, in turn pro-
viding better generalizability of results (Saeed et al. 2011).
The performance of the machine learning model is based
on the quality of the data collected. In the case of measure-
ments performed outside of the operating room, there is usu-
ally enough time to set up sensors and check the quality of
the signals before collecting data. However, in some cases,
there is not enough time and therefore the quality of the sig-
nals can vary – one of such procedures is thrombectomy,
where a blood clot is removed from patient’s brain.
In this paper, we explore the differences in results from
two procedures – carotid endarterectomy (CEA), which al-
lows for data quality control before data collection and en-
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
dovascular thrombectomy (”thrombectomy”), which allows
only for set-up due to the limited time. Our data collec-
tion methods are the same; we use ECG, EEG, NIRS, and
RESP signals, which we quantify, featurize and use as input
to machine learning algorithms CART, RandomForest and
AdaBoost, support vector machines. The data was collected
as part of a research project aiming to study if cerebral is-
chemia can be detected in real time by analysing data from
bedside non-invasive monitors (Block et al. 2020).
Our results show that the results from the thrombectomy
cases vary in terms of accuracy. What we discovered is that
the results with the highest accuracy cannot be trusted as
they can capture dependencies in the data which do not exist.
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows Sec-
tion 2 presents the context of our work – CEA and thrombec-
tomy. Section 3 presents the results of comparison between
these two groups of patients and a discussion around the re-
sults. Finally, Section 4 presents conclusions.
2
Context – CEA, Thrombectomy, and
Collected Signals
Stroke is a brain injury due to inadequate blood ﬂow to the
affected region, called cerebral ischemia. The most com-
mon cause of stroke is a blood clot in a brain artery. These
clots can originate from plaques in larger arteries, such as
the internal carotid artery (ICA). The ICA supplies blood
to the anterior part of the brain. If a plaque is detected
and identiﬁed as the cause of stroke, it has to be surgically
removed. This procedure is called carotid endarterectomy.
During CEA, the surgeon needs to cross-clamp the ICA in
order to be able to remove the plaque. Clamping the ICA
cuts the blood ﬂow to that side of the brain and causes re-
duced blood ﬂow to the brain cells to various degrees de-
pending on blood ﬂow from the ICA of the opposite side.
Thus, ischemia can occur.
A stroke can be treated during the acute phase. A
novel and effective treatment is endovascular thrombec-
tomy.(Powers et al. 2015) Thrombectomy is the mechani-
cal removal of the blood clot from the affected artery. The
earlier trombectomy is performed, the more brain cells are
salvaged, and the better the outcome for the patient. Time
is brain. Onset of thrombectomy can be as fast as minutes
after diagnosis, making it challenging to connect the desired

monitoring for research. The duration of the procedure can
vary between minutes and over an hour.
We collected high frequency physiological time series
data from several signals, of which the most interesting are
described below. The monitored period is divided in phases
or events and labelled accordingly. The labels were pre-
deﬁned with regards to the depth of anaesthesia, which by
affecting the blood circulation and brain activity, is expected
to alter the input signals differently. Labels of interest are
“clamp”, which refers to clamping of the ICA during CEA,
and “Flow”, which refers to the time after a blood clot have
been removed during a thrombectomy resulting in restora-
tion of blood ﬂow.
The following signals and features were used in the anal-
ysis:
• Electrocardiogram(ECG) – A recording of the elec-
trical activity of the heart. Features extracted are inter-
beat-interval, which is inversely related to heart rate, and
several time domain heart rate variability (HRV) features.
HRV is, independent of the heart rate, a biomarker reﬂect-
ing activity in the central and autonomous nervous sys-
tems.(Shaffer and Ginsberg 2017) HRV has been shown
to be affected in several diseases, such as strokes and my-
ocardial infarctions, and is associated with increased mor-
tality. Our hypothesis is that HRV changes occur fast after
cerebral ischemia and could thus be used for its detection.
• Electroencephalogram(EEG) – EEG is a recording of
the electric activity of the superﬁcial part of the brain, the
cerebral cortex. The signal is quantiﬁed in the frequency
domain resulting in 4 variables for each channel. CEA pa-
tients are monitored using 6 channels and thrombectomy
patients using 2 channels. Cerebral ischemia can be de-
tected on EEG (Foreman and Claassen 2012), but sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity are not optimal. EEG can be used to
detect ischemia during CEA, and it is considered standard
of care in some centres.
• Near−infraredspectrometry(NIRS) – Measures the
oxygen saturation of the superﬁcial parts of the frontal
brain.
• Other variables include arterial blood pressure (ABP),
oxygen saturation in blood (SpO2), and respiratory rate.
During a monitoring session, we use the Moberg CNS
monitor to collect the data. This device is capable of taking
in data from all other patient monitoring devices in a time-
synchronized fashion. After a monitoring session is ﬁnished,
the data is exported from the Moberg monitor and cleaned
from artefacts manually on a PC. The cleaned data is then
exported in matlab-format and processed for machine learn-
ing analysis using Python.
We quantiﬁed all the data per minute and labelled each
minute (data point) according to the phase of the surgery.
This provided us with a data set that was used to train a ma-
chine learning model. We then evaluated the performance of
different machine learning models in classifying the labels.
3
Results and Discussion
Subj.
Data
points
UE
AB
acc.
CART
acc.
Random
forrest
acc.
SVM
acc.
Logistic
regression
acc.
C001
132
6
0.78
0.78
0.93
0.74
0.78
C004
105
7
0.76
0.67
0.9
0.71
0.71
C005
86
6
0.61
0.72
0.61
0.44
0.72
C007
92
7
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.58
0.63
C008
109
7
0.64
0.59
0.86
0.77
0.73
C009
149
6
0.83
0.9
0.93
0.87
0.6
C010
68
4
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.79
0.36
T001
5
2
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
T002
32
3
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
T003
24
2
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.8
T005
18
2
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.75
T006
30
2
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.83
T010
18
2
0.75
0.75
1.0
0.0
1.0
Table 1: Results of the machine learning analysis for each
patient. UE – Unique Events; AB – AdaBoost; acc. – accu-
racy.
Figure 1: Bar plot showing the amount of data points in each
patients data set, overlayed of line plots showing accuracy
results of each algorithm for each patient.
After including 10 patients to each group, 7 CEA patients
and 6 thrombectomy patients were eligible for further anal-
ysis. In six out of seven exclusions, the reason was related
to inadequate quality of one or several signals. Results are
presented in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 1.
There are clear differences between results of CEA pa-
tients and thrombectomy patients. First, the data sets of the
CEA patients were larger than those of the thrombectomy
patients. This is a result of CEA being a several hour long
procedure, whereas thrombectomies are usually done within
an hour. Another cause for this discrepancy in the number of
data points, is the quality of data recorded. CEA is a planned
procedure. This means that there is time to prepare The pa-
tient, the equipment and the OR. Quality control of all the
signals is done after all the monitors are connected to the
patient, and any signal that is sub-optimal can usually be
corrected. Thrombectomies are urgent procedures where the
patient is constantly surrounded by medical personnel deliv-
ering care. This poses a great challenge on doing research.
No intervention can be allowed to delay a thrombectomy.
Therefore, attaching the EEG and NIRS-electrodes have to

Figure 2: Number of data points for each label in the data set
of patient C009
be done parallel to all other work, and without being in the
way. We manage to do that in under 60 seconds. Yet the
issue is that quality of the signal can be controlled ﬁrst a
few minutes later, and by that time, the patients head will be
under the X-ray ﬁeld and not approachable. So electrodes
and wires cannot be adjusted until the procedure is ﬁnished,
leaving us with signals of sub-optimal quality for the major-
ity of the procedure. This time period with artefacts will be
removed during data cleaning resulting in small data sets.
There is also a clear difference in the performance of the
algorithms between CEA and thrombectomy patients. The
algorithms performance is more consistent for CEA patients
in comparison with thrombectomy patients, both between
patients and between algorithms for each patient. To un-
derstand what causes these differences, we will discuss one
patient from each group in detail. For CEA patient C009,
the total recorded time was 430 minutes. After data clean-
ing, the data set for this patient included 149 data points
(minutes). This means that even where we have a controlled
environment for data collection, the majority of data was
excluded. The reason for so much data loss is artefacts in
the EEG-signal caused by electrocautery, a surgical tool that
uses electric current to burn tissue. Unfortunately, there is
no way around this problem. Yet, even if a large amount of
data is excluded, there still remains a large data set that can
be used to train and test different ML-algorithms. As we can
see in Table 1, the results are satisfactory and consistent be-
tween different algorithms.
Since CEA is a much longer procedure than thrombec-
tomy, the timeline can be divided into more phases or
events. For C009, there were 6 unique events, or labels
- see Figure 2. This should make the results more trust-
worthy, since the events then can have true unique pro-
ﬁles. For example, if you compare the event CLAMP,
with anaesthesia pre-surgery, where the depth
of anaesthesia is different, or post-op, where the pa-
tient is awake, one might expect an algorithm to be able
Figure 3: Confusion matrix of the results of running a ran-
dom forest model on C009 data set.
to differentiate between these events, since there are so
many signals that would clearly be different. So much
that even a human anaesthesiologist would be able to
make this differentiation. If one on the other hand com-
pares the events surgery pre-clamp, CLAMP, and
surgery post-clamp, the only difference between
these events is the clamping of the ICA. Therefore, it is more
impressive when an algorithm can make this distinction - see
Figure 3.
For thrombectomy patient T002, the total recording
time was 117 minutes. After data cleaning, 32 remained
for analysis. There are 3 unique events - see Figure 4,
Anaesthesia NoFlow, where the patient is under gen-
eral anaesthesia before the removal of the blood clot,
Anaesthesia Flow, where the patient is still under gen-
eral anaesthesia but the blood clot has been removed and
blood ﬂow to the affected part of the brain restored, and
Awake Flow, which stands for the period of observation
after the patient have been awakened from anaesthesia.
In theory, the thrombectomy timeline could also be di-
vided in more types of events, but because of the few avail-
able data points in total, it would be impractical. In the case
of T002 for example, there are only 7 data points labelled
Anaesthesia NoFlow. Apart from being the event with
ongoing cerebral ischemia, it is also where anaesthesia and
therapy to control blood pressure is started, before reach-
ing a steady state, meaning that this can be expected to be
different from the next event simply because it occurs ﬁrst
chronologically.
It is indeed interesting that the algorithms frequently gives
accuracy values in the extremes for thrombectomy patients.
For patient T002, all the models had an accuracy of 1. These
results can clearly not be trusted because they are due to

Figure 4: Number of data points for each label in the data set
of patient T002
overﬁtting. The overﬁtting problem in this case is a result of
a small data set.
It is unclear if there is a feasible way around the prob-
lem of small data sets in the thrombectomy cases. One idea
is to increase the amount of data points by quantifying the
data per thirty seconds instead of one minute. This doubles
the amount of data points. It would still, however, the con-
founding and bias problems discussed above.
To make the results more trustworthy, we need larger data
sets from longer recordings, especially prior to the removal
of the clot. Using our current set-up, this would practically
be impossible due to the unplanned nature and urgency of
the procedure. Starting simpler monitoring with ECG in the
ambulance might be possible and would gain longer record-
ings (up to 1 hour). This approach poses logistic challenges
and requires resources which may not be justiﬁed to answer
this particular research question.
Another possible solution is to exclude one or more sig-
nals, as the majority of the excluded data is due to artefacts
in the EEG. Excluding EEG would even give longer record-
ings, but with information loss – the signal cannot be de-
rived from other ones. EEG is the signal that is by far the
most sensitive to disturbances and as EEG takes time to at-
tach to a patients head and is not mobile, it can only be done
once the patient is on the operating table. ECG on the other
hand can be recorded using a small battery driven device that
takes only seconds to attach. It yields a stable signal that is
resistant to disturbances, increasing the amount of data in
the data set.
4
Conclusions
Using the same setup of equipment and pipeline for data col-
lection, cleaning, and analysis yields different results when
comparing CEA and thrombectomy settings. The difference
in duration and urgency of each procedure has major ef-
fects on the results. What is even more interesting, is that
the high accuracy of some of the analyses is not justiﬁed
by the number of data points or the procedure, but can be
caused by noise. This means that we need to complement
these analyses with deeper scrutiny – especially in the areas
where the intervention (thrombectomy) cannot be structured
around the data collection.
For CEA, where the procedure is planned and there is time
for preparation, and where the procedure takes several hour,
a large data set is produced. The machine learning models
performs well on these data sets.
The acute setting in which a thrombectomy is performed,
causes time deﬁciency and signals with bad quality, which
in turn produces small data sets. The results of the machine
learning models on these data sets cannot be trusted.
