1 
Facilitating Evolution during 
Design and Implementation 
Richard McClatchey 
Centre for Complex Cooperative Systems, UWE, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK 

 
Abstract: The volumes and complexity of data that companies need to handle are increasing at an 
accelerating rate. In order to compete effectively and ensure their commercial sustainability, it is 
becoming crucial for them to achieve robust traceability in both their data and the evolving designs 
of their systems. This is addressed by the CRISTAL software which was originally developed at 
CERN by UWE, Bristol, for one of the particle detectors at the Large Hadron Collider, which has 
been subsequently transferred into the commercial world. Companies have been able to 
demonstrate increased agility, generate additional revenue, and improve the efficiency and cost-
effectiveness with which they develop and implement systems in various areas, including business 
process management (BPM), healthcare and accounting applications. CRISTAL’s ability to 
manage data and its semantic provenance at the terabyte scale, with full traceability over extended 
timescales, together with its description-driven approach, has provided the flexible adaptability 
required to future proof dynamically evolving software for these businesses. 
Background to the CRISTAL System 
Organisations of many types increasingly operate within environments that dictate 
unforeseeable changes. Systems need to be able to evolve dynamically in response to 
changes in technology and consequently there must be full traceability between the 
design and the evolving system specification. Research at UWE’s Centre for Complex 
Cooperative Systems (CCCS) from 1997 onwards (see [1] and [2]), has addressed the 
need to be able to develop software whose specifications evolve beyond its design phase 
and may have no definite endpoint. CCCS has developed an approach that allows systems 
to reconfigure themselves dynamically, enabling software to be versioned and rolled out 
into production to sit seamlessly alongside existing live systems without designer 
intervention. Following such a semantic-based approach it has been shown [2] that 
flexibility, interoperability, adaptability and simplicity of maintenance can be optimized. 
This approach has been applied, in collaboration with CERN (Switzerland) and CNRS 
(France), to the creation of a new software development environment called CRISTAL 
for CERN’s CMS (Compact Muon Solenoid) experiment [3], to address that experiment’s 
software needs over its extended design timeline. 

2 
Item
Workflow
History
Current versions
pointed to
Properties
Name
State
Type
Collection
Typed
Slot
Typed
Slot
Item
Item
Outcome
Viewpoint
Activity
Event
Generates
Contains
Legend
Container
Object
Simple Value
Event
Viewpoint
Activity
Outcome
Collection
 
 
Figure 1. The components of adescription-driven Item in CRISTAL 
CRISTAL embodies a “description-driven” approach [2]: all logic and data structures are 
described by metadata, whose semantics are captured in a model which can be modified 
and versioned online as the design of the system (in this case the experiment’s particle 
detector) changes (see figure 1). Our research has shown that the creation of a flexible 
system can be facilitated by modelling the metadata: the resulting software is reusable 
across applications and can handle complexity, version control and system evolution. 
CRISTAL was used to calibrate CMS and helped in its apparent discovery of the Higgs 
Boson in 2012 (figure 2). The advantages of separating design, implementation and 
instantiation further vindicate the use of such “meta-models” (see [4] and [5]).  
 
Fig 2: CMS at CERN part of whose construction was managed by CRISTAL (CERN Photo). 

3 
During the construction period of the CMS Electromagnetic Calorimeter (ECAL [3]) 
from 1999 to 2008, over 70,000 individual lead tungstate crystals were characterised 
(each yielding 3-5 Mbytes of data) and their data provenance captured in CRISTAL with 
only minimal interruptions to round-the-clock operation. CRISTAL only needed to be 
upgraded seven times during this period of  near-continuous operation, and of those only 
one was a required update that effected end-users. The underlying semantic model used to 
store CMS construction data evolved many times between 2000 and 2008 but CRISTAL 
provided uninterrupted data taking for the scientists and ease of system maintenance.  
After the production-oriented workflows of CMS, CRISTAL was targeted at capturing 
and storing scientific data provenance and workflow orchestration [6] in the EC-funded 
neuGRID project (2008-2011) and its follow up neuGRIDforUsers project (N4U, 2012-
2015). Clinical researchers in Italy, Netherlands and Sweden have been using CRISTAL 
on the neuGRID infrastructure to support ongoing studies of Alzheimer’s Disease 
biomarkers using CRISTAL to orchestrate their analysis procedures and to log outcomes 
as part of their “Virtual Laboratory” (shown in Figure 3). The richness of the CRISTAL 
model in terms of its knowledge representation enables the integration of heuristic-based 
searches and the potential for the use of machine learning techniques for the optimization 
of analysis procedures in clinical research.  
 
Fig 3: The N4U Virtual Laboratory with CRISTAL supported provenance. 

4 
Transfer to Industry 
The development of CRISTAL for managing workflows and product-related data was 
conducted in close consultation with user communities – initially physicists and engineers 
at CERN and latterly health practitioners. CRISTAL was made available by UWE to the 
CMS ECAL user community from 2003; it also became the basis for a programme of 
external exploitation by M1i, France, in Business Process Management (BPM). At M1i it 
has demonstrated its ability to be responsive to changing user requirements and to support 
on-the-fly system evolution over extended product lifecycles, due to the flexibility of its 
underlying model. This has enabled M1i to supply its customers with guaranteed system 
response and the ability to cater for changing requirements as well as flexibility in data 
management and simplicity in system support. CRISTAL can handle the complexity of 
data-intensive systems and provide the flexibility to adapt to the changing scenarios 
typical of any production management system, or indeed any process in which workflow 
and data traceability is crucial, including those employing AI solutions. 
Via the product name Agilium it has been sold by M1i into the retail, finance and 
manufacturing sectors of European industry, for use in the area of Business Process 
Management (BPM) (see figure 3). Agilium used the CRISTAL kernel for workflow and 
process traceability, and also for the integration and co-operation of multiple business 
processes – especially in business-to-business applications. The M1i product enables 
business processes to be harmonised and orchestrated in operation using a CRISTAL 
database. It tracks their workflows and integrates multiple potentially heterogeneous 
processes, such as order processing, stock control, sales management and business 
logistics thus providing enterprise-wide data and information management. This has 
found application in real-world industrial contexts, for example the systems used by 
Nexcis for photovoltaic cell production, by the Ville de Lyon (France) for managing its 
purchasing /ordering and operational procedures, and by the STTS specialist aerospace 
painting/sealing for managing its internal business process controls. In particular Agilium 
enables these customers to trace their data across applications and to adapt to system 
evolution with little or no disruption to their live systems. 
CRISTAL-Agilium also integrates the management of data coming from different sources 
and unites Business Process Management with Business Activity Management (BAM) 
and Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) through the capture and management of 
their designs in the CRISTAL database. This has been applied at the Bayer Group, where 
CRISTAL-Agilium has enabled Bayer customers to conduct and handle business-to-
business transactions and to facilitate the management of targeted application domains 
(e.g. logistics, retail and government domains). Other CRISTAL-Agilium clients of M1i 
include Dynastar, GDP Vendome, the ski resorts of Tignes and Meribel, Photowatt 

5 
Techniologies, SoTRADEL and Midor. The software is used to manage the business 
processes of and between these commercial companies enabling M1i to gain a unique 
position in the BPM market (as recognised by the Gartner Group, 2009). Income 
generated by CRISTAL-Agilium licence sales by M1i in 2008-2013 top €1.6M. 
Further Exploitation 
CRISTAL has been recently further exploited by the Technoledge start-up company in 
Switzerland. Starting early 2012, Technoledge has been working closely with UWE to 
adapt CRISTAL to domains outside of BPM. Amongst other things, application of 
CRISTAL by Technoledge has demonstrated, for the first time, full traceability from raw 
materials to final product facilitated by the use of CRISTAL in manufacturing execution 
systems. This has led to the following outcomes: 
• Building on the way CRISTAL was used for experiment at CERN to integrate 
different data structure versions together, Technoledge have deployed it to provide the 
support environment for the development of production lines to manufacture next-
generation sustainable fuel cells for future electric vehicles.  
• Technoledge has exploited CRISTAL to integrate previously outsourced software 
packages for a major French accountancy firm, taking advantage of CRISTAL’s 
ability to manage several contrasting models in the same workspace. 
• Since 2008 CRISTAL has been used by the neuGRIDforUsers (N4U) project to 
provide a system for clinicians investigating complex 3D-imaging techniques to study 
cortical thickness as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease. They have used CRISTAL 
to track the analysis of complex algorithms and large data sets to help identify patients 
who may be susceptible to mild cognitive impairment that could lead to the onset of 
dementia. Early identification of such conditions is enabling doctors in medical 
centres across Europe to diagnose Alzheimer’s Disease and thereby to prescribe 
suitable drug therapies to slow its onset. CRISTAL plays an essential role in providing 
a ‘Virtual Laboratory ’ as shown in figure 3 for supporting and logging the ongoing 
developments in Alzhemier’s Disease research (see [6] and [7]). CRISTAL has 
enabled them to systematically manage their semantic data and processes in a 
maintainable, more flexible and evolvable, and thus profitable, manner. 
CRISTAL is being released in Q3 of 2014 under a LGPL V3.0 Open Source licence. The 
software is available from the CRISTAL-ISE project web pages at www.cristal-ise.org or 
via contact with the author of this paper. The software will be supported by an Open 
Source community of users who are free to develop its Kernel or application ‘modules’ 
that use the Kernel for any domain. It is planned that this community of users will openly 
share developments under the LGPL licencing arrangements. 

6 
Futures 
CRISTAL-iSE is an ongoing (2012-2016) project about fostering collaboration between 
industrial partners and academia and the development of individual researchers in the 
project. The partners involved in the project are from UWE, M1i (Annecy, France) and 
Alpha-3i (Rumilly, France) [8]. At the end of the project it is foreseen that there will be 
three final pieces of software developed. These will be a new open source version of 
CRISTAL, a new version of Agilium based on this version of CRISTAL and Cimag-RA 
(Alpha3i) which will be built upon both the work developed by UWE and M1i. In the 
Cimag-RA application, both the new versions of Aglium and CRISTAL will be used to 
create a Resource Allocation application. From the large datasets that are available 
already, a PROV-compliant provenance model will be created to foster collaboration 
between the wider provenance research communities in order to maximise the 
commercial impact of the CRISTAL developments. 
Acknowledgements : The development of CRISTAL has been made possible by the support of 
CERN, CNRS and UWE and colleagues therefrom and in the context of projects supported by the 
European Commission.
