105 
On the Semi-Markov Equivalence of Causal Models 
Benoit Desjardins 
University of Pittsburgh 

Abstract 
The variability of structure in a finite Markov 
equivalence class of causally sufficient mod­
els represented by directed acyclic graphs has 
been fully characterized. Without causal suf­
ficiency, an infinite semi-Markov equivalence 
class of models has only been characterized 
by the fact that each model in the equiva­
lence class entails the same marginal statis­
tical dependencies. In this paper, we study 
the variability of structure of causal models 
within a semi-Markov equivalence class and 
propose a systematic approach to construct 
models entailing any specific marginal statis­
tical dependencies. 
Key words: causal modeling, latent variables, semi­
Markov equivalence. 
1 
Introduction 
One of the most central problems in scientific research 
is the search for explanations to some aspect of nature. 
This often involves a cycle of data gathering, theo­
rizing, and experimentation. In many scientific fields 
data comes in the form of statistical distribution infor­
mation, representing the value of different features for 
a sample in a population. One of the tasks in research 
is to discover some structure in that data. In partic­
ular, one is interested in finding something about the 
causal processes explaining the statistical data, in the 
form of a theory or a model of the aspect of nature 
under study. Such causal model can then be used as a 
basis for explanation and experimentation. 
Although traditional statistical approaches are excel­
lent for finding statistical dependencies in a body 
of data, they prove inadequate at finding the causal 
structure in the data [8, 11]. New graphical algorith­
mic approaches have been proposed to automatically 
discover the causal structure in a body of data, given 
certain hypotheses [2, 5, 6, 9, 12, 14]. Graph the­
ory [17] has now emerged as a mathematical language 
for causality. Graphs provide a strong notational sys­
tem for concepts and relationships not easily expressed 
by equations and probabilities, and there has been an 
increased understanding of the fundamental relation­
ships between graphs, causality, and probability. 
Constraint-based approaches [9, 14] use the condi­
tional independence relations present in a body of 
statistical data to graphically infer the causal struc­
ture present in the data. Based on strong connections 
between graph theoretic properties and statistical as­
pects of causal influences, fundamental assumptions 
about the data (the Markov condition and the faithful­
ness condition) are used to infer a graphical structure, 
which represents statistical dependency relations on a 
set of variables. Such (marginal) dependency graph is 
used to construct models describing the exact causal 
relations in the data. Since causal relations cannot be 
inferred from statistical data alone, a marginal depen­
dency graph is entailed by a possibly infinite equiv­
alence class of models representing competing causal 
alternatives. 
Under the assumption of causal sufficiency, there is a 
one to one correspondence between statistical depen­
dency and direct causal relation. Two causal mod­
els without latents which entail the same statistical 
dependencies are called (local) Markov equivalent. 
Every Markov equivalence class of models is finite, and 
the variability of structure of models within the same 
Markov equivalence class is very limited. Indeed any 
two Markov equivalent causal models always share the 
same causal connections between their variables, but 
the direction of the causal influences can vary [1, 7, 16]. 
If the data contains correlated errors, the assumption 
of causal sufficiency fails, and latent variables must be 
introduced in models to explain the causal structure in 
the data [13]. Two causal models with latent variables 
which entail the same marginal dependencies are called 

106 
Desjardins 
semi-Markov equivalent. However marginal statis­
tical dependency does not entail direct causal connec­
tion. Given a model M with latent variables, the set 
of competing semi-Markov equivalent alternatives is 
not only large, it is infinite. One can indeed always 
add new latent variables to a model without chang­
ing the pattern of statistical dependencies between the 
measured variables. Although there is a well defined 
test to determine the semi-Markov equivalence of two 
causal models with latent variables (they must entail 
the same marginal dependency graph) (14, 15], there 
is currently no systematic approach for exploring the 
variability of structure within a semi-Markov equiva­
lence class of causal models. 
In this paper, given an infinite semi-Markov equiva­
lence class of models entailing a marginal dependency 
graph G, we present a finite subset of that class which 
captures the essential variability of causal structure 
within the equivalence class, and offer graphical rules 
for systematically constructing from G any model in 
that finite subset. After demonstrating that current 
attempts at generating semi-Markov equivalent alter­
natives to any given model using local graphical trans­
formation rules are too limited, we show that our 
graphical rules can also be used for that purpose. 
2 
Formal preliminaries 
Causal models are best represented by graphs. We first 
introduce all the important graph theoretical elements 
required in this paper (14, 17]. We assume that the 
reader is already familiar with the very basic concepts 
from graph theory. 
A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a pair (V, E) 
such that V is a non empty finite set of elements called 
vertices (or variables), E is a finite set of ordered pairs 
of elements of V called edges, and in which there 
are no cycles. If (V1, V2) E E, then there is an edge 
from V1 into V2, represented as V1 -+ V2. Figure 1 
(left) shows an example of such a DAG. y conven­
tion latent variables are represented by cucles, and 
obsrvables by squares. A causal graph is a directed 
acyclic graph in which for each (V1, V2) E E, V1 is a 
direct cause of V2. A causal model is a structure 
M =< G, P >,where G is a causal graph over a set of 
variables V, and P is a probability distribution over 
V. We often identify causal models with their causal 
graphs in situations not involving P specifically. 
The expression I(A, C, B) represents the conditional 
independence relation of variable A and B given the 
variables in set C. A causal model < G, P > satis­
fies the Markov condition if every variable in G is 
conditionally independent of its non-parents and non­
descendants given its parents. < G, P > satisfies the 
faithfulness condition if all and only the conditional 
independence relations true in P are entailed by the 
Markov condition applied to< G, P >. 
A collider on a path U is a variable V (excluding 
the endpoints of U) receiving causal edges from both 
its two adjacent variables on U (-+ V f-). 
In a 
causal graph, two different variables vl and v2 are 
d-separated given a set of (other) variables W if and 
only if there is no undirected path u between vl and 
v2 such that every collider on u has a descendent in 
W and no other variable on U is in W. They are d­
connected if and only if they are not d-separated. An 
important theorem is: in a causal model M, if variables 
vl and v2 are d-separated given a set of variables w 
then I(V1, W, V2) (9]. 
An inducing path (relative to a set S of variables) 
from variable vl to variable v2 in a causal graph is a 
path U from V1 into V2 (V1 . . .  -+V2, V1 # V2) such that 
every variable in S \ { V1 , V2} is a collider on U, and 
every collider on u is an ancestor of either vl or v2. 
There is an inducing path from variable V1 to variable 
V2 if and only if V1 and V2 are not d-separated given 
any subset of S \ {V1, V2}. An inducing path represents 
a statistical dependency implied by a causal model on 
a marginal distribution. 
The inducing path graph (IPG) entailed by a causal 
model M relative to a subset S of the varial;>les in M 
is a DAG with two kinds of edges: (1) V1 V V2, in­
dicating that there is an inducing path in M relative 
to S between V1 and V2 into V2, but not into Vt, and 
(2) V1  V2, indicating that the inducing path is also 
into V1 (Figure 1 right). The lPG of a model M reğre­
sents all the dependencies implied by M on a  margmal 
distribution over a subset S of its variables (S usually 
corresponds to the set of observables in M). From each 
model M one can compute the corresponding induc­
ing path graph IPG(M), by determining the induc­
ing paths in M between its observable variables. The 
IPGs of any two semi-Markov equivalent causal mod­
els share the same adjacencies, but might not share 
the same edge orientations. The marginal depen­
dency graph (MDG) entailed by a causal model M 
(also called partially oriented lPG (POIPG) or par­
tial ancestral graph (PAG)), is a graph which has the 
Figure 1: A DAG (left), with observables A, B, C, D 
and latent L, and its entailed lPG (right). 

On the Semi-Markov Equivalence of Causal Models 
107 
same adjacencies as IP G ( M), but contains only edge 
orientations that are common to the IPGs of all mod­
els semi-Markov equivalent toM. Missing orientations 
are indicated by small circles. 
3 
Variability of causal models 
Current constraint-based causal model discovery algo­
rithms do not discover causal models from data. They 
rather discover marginal dependency graphs [14], rep­
resenting an infinite equivalence class of semi-Markov 
equivalent causal models. We seek to study the vari­
ability of structure of models in that equivalence class, 
and to offer an approach to construct these models. 
A marginal dependency graph G represents a finite set 
S of semi-Markov equivalent IPGs entailing G, and 
contains only edge orientations that are common to 
all the IPGs in S. A semi-Markov equivalence class 
of models can thus be finitely partitioned into infinite 
subclasses of models, the models within each subclass 
entailing the same IPG. Each IPG inS is a completion 
of G. Any completion of G must obey certain rules to 
represent an IPG: it must be acyclic, and must respect 
certain internal consistency rules, indicated in the fol­
lowing theorem (proved in appendix): 
Theorem 1 Let G be an acyclic graph with !.!+ edges 
and  edges. Let RI be the following rule: if in G 
. 
6 
6 
there zs an edge A -=t B and an edge B f+ C and B 
is an ancestor of C in G, then there must be an edge 
A  C in G. RI must hold in all IPGs. Let R2 be 
the following rule: if in G there is a path of  edges 
between variables A and B, and every variable on that 
path is an ancestor of A or B, then there must be an 
edge A  B in G. R2 must hold in all IPGs. An 
extended DAG containing  edges is an IPG if and 
only if it is closed under the set of rules {RI, R2}. 
Given a marginal dependency graph G, the finite set of 
all of its acyclic completions closed under rules RI and 
R2 is the set of all semi-Markov equivalent IPGs entail­
ing G. Without causal sufficiency, any given IPG Gi 
is entailed by an infinite set Si of semi-Markov equiva­
lent causal models. We seek to identify a finite subset 
of Si capturing the essential variability of causal struc­
ture in Si by expanding Pearl's [9] notion of "minimal 
models" to models with latent variables. 
3.1 
Minimal models 
In [9], Pearl intuitively defines a causally sufficient 
minimal model as a graph in which every proper sub­
graph does not satisfy the Markov condition. We now 
extend this definition to models with latents [3]. 
Let SI be the set of all DAGs. Let M be in SI. Let e be 
in E, the set of all edges of M. Let VI , v2 be in V, the 
set of all vertices of M. The operator REe () : S I --+ S 1 
is defined such that REe(M) is the same DAG as M, 
but with edge e removed. The operator CVv1,v2 () : 
SI --+ SI is defined such that CV v1,v2 (M) is the same 
DAG as M, but with variable v2 substituted for VI in 
all edges of M, and all self-pointing edges removed. 
Thus VI and v2 become collapsed in the new DAG. 
RE stands for "remove edge" and CV for "collapse 
variables" . 
Let M be a model. Let OI be the set of all possible 
operators REe(), where e is an edge in M. Let 02 
be the set of all possible operators CV v1 ,v2 (), where 
VI and v2 are distinct variables in M. A reducing 
transformation R is a finite composition of operators 
in OI U 02. If there is a reducing transformation R 
such that IPG(R(M)) = IPG(M), then the model 
R( M) is a reduction of M. The model is minimal 
(or irreducible) if for every reduction R(M) of M, we 
have R(M) = M. 
In other words, a minimal model is a model in which 
it is not possible to remove an edge or to collapse two 
variables in its graph without always ending up with a 
new model which has a different inducing path graph. 
Although minimal models are defined in terms of in­
ducing path graphs for practical reasons, this turns out 
to be equivalent to a definition using conditional inde­
pendence relations (as in the causally sufficient case) 
if only latent variables are allowed to be collapsed. 
An edge in a causal model M is an essential edge 
if it cannot be removed without changing the induc­
ing path structure of M. Minimal models have only 
essential edges, and are the simplest models satisfying 
a causal theory. Minimal models do not imply simple 
models, but rather simplest models. They can be quite 
complex and contain many latent variables, including 
embedded and causally related latents. The essential 
variability of an infinite set of semi-Markov equivalent 
causal models is fully captured by its finite subset of 
minimal models [4], although a formal proof of this 
fact is beyond the scope of this paper. 
3.2 
Constructing causal models 
We now clarify the relation between IPGs and causal 
models. Consider a causal model M over the set V 
of variables { V1 , ... , Vn}. The IPG of M over the sub­
set V' of the observable variables in V is a graph G 
with variables V'. In G, if there is a directed edge 
A  B, then either A is a direct cause of B, or there 
is an indirect inducing path between A and B in M. 
As a reminder, an inducing path between A and B 
relative to V' is a path U from A into B involving a 

108 
Desjardins 
combination of variables in V' (observables) and vari­
ables in V" = V \ V' (latents). Variables in V' on U 
must all be colliders and ancestors of A or B. Vari­
ables in V" on U can be pretty much anything, but if 
they are colliders, they must be ancestors of A or B. 
So the causal relations between observable variables in 
the causal model are strongly determined by the edges 
in the lPG, while the causal relations involving latent 
variables are not as constrained. In G, if there is a 
bidirected edge A  B, then by acyclicity, there must 
be a latent common cause T between A and B. This 
might be a direct common cause, or a common cause 
of some other pair of variables (that could include A or 
B), which spreads to A and B through the structure 
of the inducing paths. 
Let G be an lPG. We show that each model M in the 
set of semi-Markov equivalent minimal models entail­
ing G is a systematic graphical transformation of G. 
An expansion M; of IPG G is a graphical transforma­
tion of G made by replacing in G every edge of the form 
iP. 
A --'+ B by the causal edge A --+ B, and every edge of 
iP. 
the form A ABby a latent path A f-LAB --+ B, pos-
sibly combined with a hidden edge A --+ B or B --+ A 
(making sure the hidden edge does not create new in­
ducing paths or cycles). Each M; is a causal model 
entailing G and is uniquely determined by the choice 
of hidden edges in G. 
Graphical operators RE() and CV() have already 
been defined. We now define two additional operators. 
First, the operator ELv,,v,,v,,l, () : S1 --+ S1 is defined 
such that ELv,,v2,v3,z, (M) has the same causal graph 
as M, but if there is a pattern [ v1 --+ v2, l1 --+ v2, l1 --+ 
v3] in the model where l1 is a latent variable and v1, 
v2 and v3 are observable variables, it is replaced by 
the pattern [v1--+ l1,h--+ v2,h--+ vs,l2--+ v2,l2--+ 
v3], where l2 is a new latent. Second, the operator 
CLz,,t,,v() : S1--+ S1 is defined such that CLt,,z,,v(M) 
has the same causal graph as M, but if there is a pat­
tern ll1 --+ v, l2 --+ v] in the model where h and l2 are 
latent variables and v is an observable variable, it is 
replaced by the pattern [l1 --+ l2, l2 --+ v]. The first 
operator produces embedded latents (EL stands for 
"embed latent"), while the second produces causally 
connected latents ( CL stands for "connect I a tents"). 
Note that the EL() operator introduces a new latent, 
because of the fact that minimal models with embed­
ded latents can have in some rare cases more latent 
variables than the number of  edges in the lPG [4]. 
In most cases in practice, a simpler version EL*() is 
used, which does not introduce a new latent. We now 
have the following important theorem (the algorithm is 
sketched in appendix, and the full proof can be found 
in [4]): 
· 
Theorem 2 Let G be an IPG. Every minimal model 
M; entailing G is a well defined graphical transforma­
tion of an expansion of G using operators RE, CV, 
ELand CL. 
We not only have the tools to construct a minimal 
model entailing a given marginal dependency graph, 
but we have the tools to construct all such minimal 
models. The computational complexity of minimal 
model construction is on average O (n3) per model, 
where n is the number of variables in the marginal 
dependency graph [4]. Given a marginal dependency 
graph G, the number of minimal models entailing G 
increases exponentially with the number of edges in G, 
and strongly depends on the number of missing orien­
tations in G. For marginal dependency graphs with 
many missing orientations, one can most efficiently 
constrain the set of IPGs (and therefore the number 
of minimal models) by using background know ledge on 
the observable variables. 
4 
Constructing equivalent alternatives 
In the causally sufficient case, it has been formally 
demonstrated that any model Markov equivalent to 
some model M can be constructed from M by a se­
quence of edge reversal operations using only local 
constraints [1, 7, 16]. A natural approach with semi­
Markov equivalent models is to extend this set of local 
graphical rules to take into account latent variables. 
This is what Pearl attempts in [10]. In this paper, 
Pearl uses B edges in causal graphs to indicate corre­
lated errors between two variables. He then proposes 
two graphical transformation rules to construct linear 
semi-Markov equivalent models: 
Rule 1: X --+ Y is interchangeable with X B Y if 
every neighbor (variable connected by a B edge) or 
parent of X is adjacent to Y. 
Rule 2: X --+ Y can be reversed into X f- Y if every 
neighbor or parent of Y (excluding X) is adjacent to 
X, and every neighbor or parent of X is adjacent to 
Y. 
These rules are unfortunately flawed (for both general· 
models and linear models). Let M be a causal model, 
in which every latent variable has no parent and is the 
common parent of two observable variables. In such 
models, subpaths A t- L --+ B can be replaced by 
edges A B B, representing correlated errors. Pearl 
uses such models with B edges in his study of semi­
Markov equivalence. We now include a counterexam­
ple to Pearl's rule 2. A counterexample to Pearl's rule 
1 can be easily produced using the same principles. 
Consider the following causal model M1 of Figure 2, 
where B B C indicates a correlated error between B 

On the Semi-Markov Equivalence of Causal Models 
109 
Figure 2: Model M1 (left) and a (falsely) semi-Markov 
equivalent causal model M2 (right). 
and C. In this specific case, this also corresponds to a 
hidden common latent cause of B and C. 
According to Pearl's rule 2, the edge C-+ D can be re­
versed into C +- D to produce semi-Markov equivalent 
model M2, since the parent B of D is adjacent to C, 
and the neighbor B of C is adjacent to D. But M2 is 
not semi-Markov equivalent to M1. Indeed since B is 
an ancestor of C in M2, there is now an inducing path 
from A to C in M2, which is not present in M1. Since 
M1 and M2 do not entail IPGs of same adjacencies, 
they cannot be semi-Markov equivalent. 
Pearl's rules may be flawed, but they can be trans­
formed into more specialized rules, which are not 
flawed. 
Rule 1': X -+ Y is interchangeable with X f+ Y if 
every neighbor of X is a neighbor of Y, and every 
parent of X is a parent of Y. 
Rule 2': X -+ Y can be reversed into X f- Y if every 
neighbor of Y is a child of X, every neighbor of X is 
a child of Y, and every parent of X is a parent of Y. 
These rules are sufficient, but neither is necessary. 
This set can be complemented by many additional suf­
ficient and specialized rules. Such large sets of special­
ized sufficient rules enable the construction of a hand­
ful of models semi-Markov equivalents to any given 
model. But this approach fails to consider the exten­
sive variability of graphical structure in sets of semi­
Markov equivalent causal models. 
Consider the two models in Figure 3, which are semi­
Markov equivalent. M1 contains a latent common 
Figure 3: Two semi-Markov equivalent causal minimal 
models: M1 (left) and M2 (right). 
cause of three different observable variables, while M2 
contains an embedded latent. In M2, observables B 
and D are neither connected directly nor through a 
common latent. One cannot construct M2 from M1 
using simple edge replacement or edge reversal oper­
ations. Any single edge transformational approach to 
generating semi-Markov equivalent causal models is 
thus too limited. A larger and more powerful set of 
graphical operators is required. The set of operators 
proposed in the previous section turns out to be suffi­
cient for that purpose. We now offer an approach to 
generate models semi-Markov equivalent to any model 
M by first determining the marginal dependency graph 
of M, and then constructing minimal models entailing 
the same marginal dependency graph. 
In [14, 15], it is formally demonstrated that two causal 
models with latent variables are semi-Markov equiva­
lent if and only if they entail the same marginal de­
pendency graph. In order to find models semi-Markov 
equivalent to some causal model M, we first extract 
from M it's marginal dependency graph. This is a two 
step process: (1) determine the lPG forM, and (2) ex­
tract the marginal dependency graph of this lPG. The 
first step is a well defined graphical transformation of 
M. The second step is unfortunately an open prob­
lem, which we do not attempt to solve in this paper. 
Instead, we use a modified version of the TETRAD al­
gorithm of Spirtes, et al. [14] to reconstruct it in three 
steps: (1) remove all edge orientations from the lPG, 
(2) let A, B and C be any triple of vertices such that 
A is adjacent to B and B is adjacent to C, but A is not 
adjacent to C in the lPG; if there is no set Z of observ­
able variables in M such that A and C are d-separated 
by B U Z, then make B a collider between A and C, 
otherwise make B a definite non-collider between A 
and C, and (3) use the TETRAD orientation rules to 
determine as many missing orientations as possible. 
The problem is open because it is not formally proven 
that TETRAD's set of orientation rules is complete. 
Once the marginal dependency graph G is determined, 
it suffices to use the already introduced graphical ma­
chinery to generate any causal model entailing G. All 
such models are semi-Markov equivalent toM. 
4.1 
Example 
Figure 4 illustrates how the two semi-Markov equiva­
lent minimal models of Figure 3 are constructed from 
their common marginal dependency graph (MDG): 
two self-consistent semi-Markov equivalent inducing 
path graphs are constructed (IPG1 and IPG2), by 
performing different completions of the missing orien­
tations (small circles). The non minimal expansions 
EX Pt and EX P2 are then produced from the respec­
tive inducing path graphs by replacing correlated er-

110 
Desjardins 
rors by common latents causes and choosing which hid­
den causal edges to include: no hidden causal edge for 
EXP1 and hidden edge C--+ D for EXP2. Note that 
a hidden edge D --+ C would not be allowed in EX P2, 
as it would entail the inducing path E $. C, which is 
not present in I P G2. Then M1 is constructed from 
EX P1 by collapsing its three latents into a single la­
tent L, and M2 is constructed from EX P2 by remov­
ing the non essential causal edge B --+ D (since the 
path B --+ C t- L --+ D generates the inducing path 
B $.D) and embedding L between A, C and D. 
To perform the inverse operation (dotted arrows) and 
construct the marginal dependency graph from each 
minimal model, it suffices to compute the inducing 
path graph for each model, and then use the Tetrad 
algorithm to compute their common marginal depen­
dency graph. 
The same example is used to illustrate how to con­
struct semi-Markov equivalent alternatives to any 
given model: by first determining the marginal de­
pendency graph, and then making choices of missing 
orientations and hidden edges to produce IPG expan­
sions, which are then reduced by graphical transfor­
mations to produ.ce different minimal models. There 
are obviously finitely many different IPG expansions 
produced from a marginal dependency graph. It is 
formally demonstrated in [4) that the total number 
of semi-Markov equivalent minimal models entailing 
a marginal dependency graph is also finite. The en­
tire set of such minimal models can be efficiently con­
structed using our approach, whose main computa­
tional advantage is the important restriction of the 
search space of models. 
5 
Conclusion 
These results are part of a larger study on the theoret­
ical limits to reliable causal inference [ 4). Constraint­
based causal models discovery algorithms determine 
marginal dependency relations between variables, and 
implicitly represent sets of semi-Markov equivalent 
models by a single graphical structure. In this paper, 
we provided the formal tools to generate causal mod­
els entailing this graphical structure. Neither Markov 
equivalence nor semi-Markov equivalence entail distri­
bution equivalence. By explicitly capturing the essen­
tial variability of graphical structure within a semi­
Markov equivalence class of models, insights can be 
obtained about the formal properties of these mod­
els, and methods can be proposed to experimentally 
or observationally discriminate between non distribu­
tion equivalent models within the same semi-Markov 
equivalence class [4). 
These results have also practical usefulness. Using our 
approach, a researcher using causal models can now, 
given any model satisfying a body of statistical data 
over a set of observable variables, automatically and 
systematically generate any simple alternative model 
explaining the data. Such alternatives might prove a 
valuable source of explanatory insight. 
T•tr•dz'f 
.. 
.. 
.,• 
complete 
• 
REI 

 lPG 
+ 
Figure 4: Construction of the two minimal models of 
Figure 3 from a marginal dependency graph and from 
each other. 

On the Semi-Markov Equivalence of Causal Models 
111 
6 
Appendix: Proofs 
Theorem 1 Let G be an acyclic graph with $ edges 
and  edges. Let R1 be the following rule: if in G 
there is an edge A $ B and an edge B  C and B 
is an ancestor of C in G, then there must be an edge 
A $ C in G. R1 must hold in all IPGs. Let R2 be 
the following rule: if in G there is a path of  edges 
between variables A and B, and every variable on that 
path is an ancestor of A orB, then there must be an 
edge A  B in G. R2 must hold in all IPGs. An 
extended DA G containing  edges is an IPG if and 
only if it is closed under the set of rules {R1, R2}. 
To prove the theorem, we first prove this short lemma: 
Lemma 3 Let M be a causal model with IPG G. If 
there is a directed path from variable A to variable B 
in G, then A is an ancestor of B in M. 
• 
iP. 
iP. 
iP. 
Proof: Let U be the directed path A -=+ V1 -=+ . . . -=+ 
Vn $ B in G. Each inducing path Vk $ Vk+l in G 
corresponds to a path Uk in M that is out of Vk, and 
in which every collider is an ancestor of either Vk or 
Vk+l· Let Wk be the first collider on Uk starting at 
Vk. By acyclicity Wk must be an ancestor of Vk+l and 
not of Vk. Therefore Vk must be an ancestor of Vk+l 
in M. Since this applies to every edge on U, then A 
must be an ancestor of B in M. 
0 
The theorem can now be proven. 
iP. 
Proof: Assume M entails IPG G. An edge A -=+ B 
in G implies that there is an inducing path U1 from 
A into B in M, and by the previous lemma that A is 
an ancestor of B in M. An edge B  C in G implies 
that there is an inducing path U2 between A and B 
into both B and C in M. By concatenating the two 
paths U1 and U2 at B into a new path U, B becomes 
a collider on U, and is an ancestor of C. Thus U is 
an inducing path from A into C. So R1 holds in every 
iP. 
iP. 
iP. 
iP. 
IPG. Let A B vl B . . .  B Vn B B be a path between 
A and B in G, with each Vk ancestor of A or B (by 
convention A and B are ancestors of themselves). The 
edge Vk  Vk+1 in G implies that there is an induc­
ing path uk between vk and vk+l into both vk and 
Vk+l in M, with every collider being an ancestor of Vk 
or Vk+l, and therefore of A or B by hypothesis. The 
concatenation of all these Uk creates a path in which 
every observable is a collider, and every collider is an 
ancestor of either A or B, thus an inducing path into 
A and into B. So R2 holds in every IPG. Closure un­
der R1 and R2 is therefore necessary in an IPG. Since 
any observable in an inducing path (except the end­
points) must be a collider, the only other combination 
of inducing paths not already covered that creates a 
new inducing path is A $ V1  . . .   Vn  B, with 
each Vk ancestor of A or B, which implies the induc-
ing path A .$ B. But by acyclicity V1 is necessarily 
ancestor of B, thus each Vk is ancestor of B, which 
implies by R2 the path V1  B. But then R1 with 
A$ V1  B implies A$ B. Thus closure under R1 
and R2 is sufficient. 
0 
Theorem 2 Let G be an IPG. Every minimal model 
M; entailing G is a well defined graphical transforma­
tion of an expansion of G using operators RE, CV, 
ELand CL. 
Here we only provide a sketch of the model construc­
tion algorithm. The full detailed proof, which is quite 
long and involves the reverse construction of minimal 
models of decreasing complexity, can be found in (4]. 
Proof: Given an expansion of G, the following sets of 
minimal models of increasing complexity are sequen­
tially generated: those involving only external latents, 
those also involving embedded latents, and those also 
involving connected latents. All generated models en­
tail the same IPG G. 
First, given an expansion M1 of G, all non essential 
edges A -+ B (A, B observables) are removed from 
M1 to produce model M2 entailing the same IPG G. 
A non essential edge A-+ B is easily identified in M1 
by a simple graphical rule (lemma 4), and removing 
any such non essential edge from M1 does not make an 
initially non essential edge become essential. Hidden 
edges are treated as special edges in the processing. 
The next step is to remove all non-essential latents 
L from M2 (equivalent to removing two non-essential 
edges per latent) to produce model M3 entailing the 
same IPG. All non essential latents in M2 are identified 
using simple graphical rules. Unfortunately removing 
a non-essential latent L can occasionally make some 
other non-essential latent L '  become essential. The 
order of removal of non-essential latents is therefore 
important, and M3 is usually not unique, but rather 
represents a very small set of alternatives. 
Next, for each model M3, collapsibility of latents is as­
sessed using simple graphical rules, and latents are col­
lapsed to produce minimal model M4. Unfortunately, 
collapsing two latents can make two initially collapsi­
ble latents become non-collapsible. The order of col­
lapsibility is therefore important, and M4 is again not 
unique, but represents a finite set of alternatives. The 
entire set of minimal models with external latents is 
generated using the previous few steps. 

112 
Desjardins 
Next, for each model M4, embeddability of latents is 
assessed using simple graphical rules, and latents are 
embedded to produce minimal model M5. Many com­
bination of embeddings can be performed, with the 
result still being a minimal model. Thus M5 is not 
unique. This generates the entire set of minimal mod­
els with embedded latents entailing the same lPG. 
Finally, for each model M5, connectibility of latents 
is assessed using simple graphical rules, and latents 
are connected to produce minimal model M6• Many 
combination of latent connections can be performed, 
with the net result still being a minimal model. Thus 
M6 is not unique. But this generates the entire set of 
minimal models entailing the same lPG. 0 
In the algorithm, simple graphical rules are used to as­
sess features of variables or edges. Most of the power of 
the algorithm comes from the simplicity of such rules. 
Here as an example is the rule for determining the non­
essentiality of edges in M1. A complete description of 
the other rules can be found in [4] 
Lemma 4 Let E = A -+ B be a non hidden edge in 
the expansion M1 of IPG G. E is non essential {in 
all models of G) if and only if there is a path U1 
A-+ C +- L-+ B in M1 with C ancestor of B. 
Proof: Assume there is such a path U1 in G1. U1 is 
an inducing path from A into B in M1 not involving 
E, so E is non essential. For the converse, assume that 
E is non essential. Then there must be an inducing 
path U between A and B into B in M1. Then U starts 
with A -+ C for some observable C and continues with 
alternating latent common causes and observable col­
liders. Since by acyclicity C cannot be an ancestor of 
A, it is an ancestor of B. Every collider on U is an 
ancestor of A or B, thus every collider is an ancestor 
of C or B and therefore of B. This implies the ex­
istence of an inducing path between C and B that is 
into both C and B. Thus there is a C  B edge in 
G and therefore there is an A -+ C +- L -+ B path in 
M1, with C ancestor of B. 
0
