1 
 
 
Artificial Learning in Artificial Memories 
John Robert Burger 
Professor Emeritus 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
25686 Dahlin Road 
Veneta, OR 97487 

Abstract – Memory refinements are designed below to detect those sequences of actions that 
have been repeated a given number n.  Subsequently such sequences are permitted to run 
without CPU involvement.  This mimics human learning.  Actions are rehearsed and once 
learned, they are performed automatically without conscious involvement.  
 
Introduction  
This paper is written from the perspective of designing artificial brains that are modeled after 
human brains.  This architectural work pays attention to human psychology including the 
interplay between short and long term memory, the realization of which is assumed 
constrained by circuit and system theory.  This paper is a humble attempt, but at least it has an 
original aspect.  My fellow engineering stereotypes tend to ignore human psychology; worse 
yet, scientists in life sciences, seem unaware of the constraints imposed by working circuits and 
systems.  Although their products such as long term potentiation are impressive at first sight 
and sometimes work in cyberspace, they are most unpromising for practical humanoid 
realizations.   
 
Learning is much more than random or mathematical optimization leading to a successful 
sequence of actions, although no doubt successful actions need to be discovered.  The 
discovery of successful actions ought to be termed searching or investigating, anything but 
learning.  Learning is a specific attribute beyond mere memory that implies a long term physical 
modification of underlying circuitry such that, in the big picture, human efficacy increases.  
Computers today obviously cannot be modified in any fundamental way by their own 
programming.  Consequently, the envisioned learning, as below, is unrelated to the field of 
machine learning.  Machine learning is traditionally limited to the programming of structured, 
fundamentally unalterable computers (Sun & Giles, 2001; Alpaydin 2010).   
 
There are times when we might benefit from artificial learning in everyday life.  For example, a 
person might perform certain keystrokes over and over; one opens a mail server, the inbox is 

times per year.  Yet today’s best personal computers will not learn even this!   
 
This paper is not about the programming of artificial neural networks (Haykin 1994).  The 
training of artificial neural networks using, for example, gradient descent, has been construed 
as learning, but properly this is not learning at all.  It is an exercise in mathematical optimization 
without biological underpinning.     

2 
 
 
Learning Modeled After Biology 
Learning may be viewed in the biological sense as an internalization process that detects, 
remembers and reproduces successful sequences.  Learning results in performing an action, or 
possibly several actions concurrently without cognitive effort or thinking, meaning without 
conscious involvement.    
 
Memory hardware is designed below to learn repeated actions, analogous to rehearsal when 
humans learn.  Much of what we learn is a sequence of actions, for examples, proper 
components of walking, reciting a poem or reproducing a musical tune.  Such things are 
memory-mapped actions and may be performed without CPU effort (analogous to thinking) 
once they have been learned, and this is a key point.  Properties of artificial learning for 
memory-mapped sequences are summarized in Table 1. 
 
Table 1   Artificial Learning  
1 A result of rehearsal 
2 Occurs within long term memory  
3 Enables long term modification of underlying circuitry 
4 Permits action without CPU effort 
5 Permits action without CPU delays 
6 Permits action without CPU memory usage 
7 Independent sequences may run concurrently 
 
Overview of a Memory System 
Artificial human memory has been modeled as employing cues in a routine to find matches 
within associative memory (Burger 2009).  One may envision an anthropomorphic system of 
dynamic (short term) working memory as in Fig. 1.  Working memory has been modeled as 
orchestrating long term memory (Burger Aug 30, 2010).  Long term memory in humans is 
analogous to PROM (programmable read only memory that may be programmed exactly once).  
In humans, the contents of working memory are known (via consciousness) but all else, 
including editing processes are hidden.   
 
An important albeit neglected attribute of any memory system is its ability to “learn.”  Learning 
is definitely not memorization.  Learning here means an ability to run a sequence of memory 
words without controls from working memory (or CPU).  This ability occurs only if the sequence 
is sufficiently rehearsed and only if a word of the sequence has been addressed by working 
memory.  This type of learning has been termed “state machine” learning.     
 
Artificial Leaning for Artificial Memories 
A word of long term memory is assumed to hold components for images or actions.   Each word 
in a practical system can be diagramed as in Fig. 2.  The signals and commands held by the word 
are released by activating the enable.  Once the signals and commands have all been 
discharged, there is a done signal.   

3 
 
 
To learn something that is being practiced, a timing filter is required to detect a repeated 
sequence.  For example the filter must detect whenever a certain word is enabled immediately 
after another given word is done.  A suitable digital filter to detect a sequence exploits the 
delay between active words, specified to be Delay 1 as in Fig. 3.  Part (a) of the figure indicates 
that a done signal from Word 1 is held for a time Delay 1.  Implementation of Delay 1 is not 
shown but is straightforward using elements of short term memory.  When a second done 
signal arrives in a timely way from some other word, say from Word 2, the AND gate is 
activated to make X1 true.   
 
X1 results in the generation of a single spike.  The spike operates a shift register of set-only D-
latches identified as D1, D2 . . . Dn-1, Dn.  All D-latches initially are set to Boolean zero (cleared).  
Each time the 1-2 sequence occurs, a true signal shifts to the left one place in the shift register.   
 
Latch details appear in part (b) of the Fig. 3.   Note that the D-latches can be set true only once 
in this plan, since learning, once it occurs, is assumed long term.  The spike generator in part (c) 
of the figure uses a standard XOR (exclusive OR) to produce a brief spike on the leading edge of 
signal X1.  Spike width is determined by DELAY 2.  Spike width is just enough to move the 
Boolean signal X1 only one step along the shift register.  AND, OR and XOR gates are readily 
available both in brain neurons and in hardware (Burger Apr 2010).    
 
The design in Fig. 4 supports possible state transitions from any given word to any other given 
word in a block of n words within long term memory.  The maximum number of possible 
sequences is n!  Fig. 4 shows only three words, although many more can be used.  In an attempt 
to gain focus, consider the sequence 1-3-2 that has been used, say, ten times so that it is well 
learned.  Then, whenever Word 1 is addressed (associatively) by short term memory a minor 
miracle occurs.  After a time equal to Delay 1, Word 3 is addressed directly by Word 1.  Then 
after another time equal to Delay 1, Word 2 is addressed directly by Word 3.  This will 
accomplish a three-step procedure without CPU involvement.  
 
Note that switches Sij (1 ≤ i ≤ K, 1 ≤ j ≤ K, i ≠ j) enable the state machine.  For example, a switch 
S13 applies the done signal from Word 1 to the delayed enable of Word 3.  Switches are viewed 
by neuroscientists as synaptic connections promoted by interneurons, but computer engineers 
create contacts artificially with a FET (Field Effect Transistor).     
 
In general for K words and an arbitrary sequence that may go forward or backward, K (K-1) 
timing filters are needed.  This implies a like number of bus lines for the filter outputs and a like 
number of switches Sij (1 ≤ i ≤ K, 1 ≤ j ≤ K, i ≠ j).  Also there must be K lines for memory word 
outputs and K lines for memory word inputs.  The overhead is reasonable for systems with 
complexity such as humanoid memory.   
 
Limitations of Artificial Learning 
A pitfall is that once a learned action is activated, it executes asynchronously.  In practical 
memory, as in human memory, it is always possible to override learning.  In this case, one 

4 
 
simply opens the Sij circuit using another series switch (not shown).  This returns control to 
working memory same as it does in humans.   
 
Learning cannot be erased easily, so if the learning is wrong, a correct version must be re-
learned.  This is also true of human learning. 
 
A limitation of any state machine is that states (words) must be distinguishable.  This means 
that a learned sequence cannot repeat a given word in a sequence.  For example, one cannot 
learn the sequence 1-3-1-2 because state 1 is repeated.  However, different versions of a 
repeated word are readily possible, permitting for example, 1a-2-1b-3.  Looping is not 
automatic since it would involve repeating a word, for example, 1-2-3-1-2-3….  In this system a 
given sequence may be repeated by only a call from working memory. 
 
Conclusions 
Learning is largely important both to humans and to intelligent robots.  Survival matters, which 
hinges on reflexive actions concurrent with quick thinking, especially when there is no time to 
ponder the pros and cons of a response.  From another view, learning enables multitasking in 
the sense that while learned actions are being performed one may think about something else.  
One may read music and also play the violin, for instance.     
 
Learning as above depends on timing filters that anyone can build and verify.  These filters 
detect and remember a sequence that is rehearsed a given number of times (n).  Learned 
sequences, once called, run automatically within long term memory.  CPU effort is not required.  
Obviously, this frees central processing for more important work while a sequence is running.  
More importantly, long term memory is freed from the constraints of CPU control.  
Consequently artificial learning creates the possibility of parallel processing since many learned 
sequences may run simultaneously assuming they involve independent memory words. 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
Fig. 1   Short term (working) memory (consciousness) provides cues that are edited 
subliminally while recalls from associative long term memory are tested unconsciously before 
refreshing working memory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Word
(done)
(enable))
 
 
Fig. 2   Symbol for a word of long term memory with controls 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
Learning (Digital) Filter
Word1(done)
Q
Dn-1
Dn
X2
Example Data Latch D1
X1
Ck Bus
Ck
Delay2 < Delay1
X1
D2 D1
Word 2 (done)
Delay1
(a)
(b)
(c)
X1
Ck
 
 
 
Fig. 3   Learning filter showing how rehearsal technically results in permanent learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
.
.
.
Wd 1
Wd 2
Wd 3
Wd K
1-2 Flt
1-3 Flt
2-1 Flt
2-3 Flt
3-1 Flt
3-2 Flt
(done)
(enable))
(done)
(enable))
(done)
(enable))
(done)
(enable))
3-2      3-1     2-3     2-1     1-3     1-2
DIG FLTS
Q12
3 2 1
3 2 1
S12
S13
S21
S23
S31
S32
D
D
D
D=Delay1
 
 
Fig. 4   Embedded state machine to learn an arbitrary  sequence of words
